





CONTENTS.
PREFACE.
*1 3355/ F 9yoy
Introductory Yerses by John Neill.
CHAPTER I.
The First Breath op War in a New Land.
CHAPTER 11.
An Embarrassment and an Agreeable Surprise.
■o
CHAPTER 111.
A Disconsolate Home. Just Before Dawn.
■o
CHAPTER IY.
Darkness and Light.
CONCLUSION.




PREFACE.
Never before in the history of New South Wales has
the public mind been so unanimously favourable to a project
as that of the Soudan expedition.
It is true that many dissentients of high judicial and
literary attainments have attacked the sudden and novel
measure with a force, talent, and ingenuity that commands
the greatest reverence and respect; but it is also an
established fact that the opponents, however far-seeing and
diplomatic in their discouragements, have been utterly
paralysed, either from a want of zest in their humanitarian
cause to prevent, or from the power of an innate spirit now
kindled and actuating the masses with a fervour of resolu-
tion, the embodiment of which partakes of and is explained
in the soulful expressions of loyalty, patriotism, love, free-
dom, and enthusiasm.
It is not the mission of this pamphlet to uphold in
the slightest degree the wisdom or injudiciousness of this
popular movement, but with little reflection indeed, one
fact seems to stand out in bold relief—the fact that the
men have volunteered freely, and have gone to the seat of
war in defiance of all opposition.
The following, founded in the main on fact, simply
pourtrays a living instance of the marvellous determination
and unswerving resolution pervading our youthful society
which may be explained, philosophised, parabled, praised or
condemned as the conclusions of the reader will direct.


A Retrospect and Valediction to the New South 1
Contingent on their Departure for the Soudan.
Air—“ Scots wha hae.”
Lo by brave Leonidas led,
Six hundred Spartans nobly bled,
And each man found a gory bed
Ere he the Pass would yield.
Two thousand years have rolled away
Since that eventful, glorious day,
Yet still thy name Thermopylae
Is famed, thou classic field.
Six hundred Britons, heroes all,
’Mid deadly storm of shell and ball
Intrepid faced the serried wall
Of Russian steel and flame.
And Fame still trumpets far and wide
The glories of that daring ride.
And British hearts beat high with pride
At Balaclava’s name.
Go, then, ye braves, to victory go,
With Britons front the savage foe ;
The Southern Cross will ruddier glow
To light you on your way.
First in the strife at honour’s call,
First in the breach at Khartoum wall,
Be victors, or, like heroes, fall.
Advance Australia ! *
John Neill, Hopewell street, May 7
* The above stirring lines appeared in the Echo of March 7, 1885, and
inserted it- by the kind permission of the author.
Wales
are here


CHAPTER I.
The First Breath of War in a New Land.
The offer of troops had been telegraphed to England,
but, as we anticipated, merely a courteous refusal in the
reply, from the tone and opinion of those that ought to
know , we only joked when the question arose as to our
likelihood of ever seeing the Soudan, or grappling with the
murderers of Gordon.
There was, however, a fanciful reality of trudging over
the sands of Sahara, and an indescribable co-mingling of
pyramids, sphinx, Bedouins, and historic vistas at the very
mention of Egypt—that ancient, mysterious, and holy land
—and as our thoughts reverted nearer home—to the leaving
of our friends, and the march down the familiar streets of
dear old Sydney (perhaps for the last time) —we were
drifted almost into the reality of foreign service, and
were counting our steps as ones never to be retraced until
the precincts of Suakim and Khartoum had been visited.
Having been born, bred, and confined to Sydney all
my life, great men, as well as important places in the city,
had graven their channels of association deep, unmistakable,
and unerring.
At the mention of Sir Hy. Parkes, his well-known
face would appear, with all the characteristics of natural
ability—a man risen to much distinction through few
advantages, Our good philanthropists and politicians,
aldermen, pressmen, actors, and athletes, were met and
looked for as part of a day’s routine ; but prominent above
all distinguished lights §tood out one alone, revered,
respected, and acknowledged as the representative critic of
the letters and literature of our nation. The name of
Dailey was inseparable from oratory, eulogy, compliment,
and poetry; and no one could have dreamt that under that
delicate and well-known fragrant posey lurked the heart
and valour of a soldier. Yet, strange as it was, this man,
our authority in taste and culture, was, curiously enough,
destined to lay the foundation of our standing army.
I had been set thinking on this matter, and was
mentally drawing comparisons between poets, soldiers and


statesmen when my eyes accidentally wandered to the book-
case, and there, like an inspiration, I read the title of
Pope’s Homer’s Iliad.
It were indeed useless to speculate further. The
greatest and most glorious relic of human inspiration had
poured forth in themes to the Trojan wars. Byron, Scott,
Burns, passed in the haze before me, and the immortal
Milton shed the acme of sublime terror in his falling host.
I had never been aroused to such facts before, and confessed
within myself that the soft and dulcet melody of the poet
held within the pith of that spirit to command and to
defend. I was considerably impressed with the new
idea, and the whole great island seemed to have been sud-
denly lifted into importance through an enchantment.
The real accomplishment, however, seemed impossible,
the first alarm was over, and improbability seemed to have
settled the question, first as erratic, then as ridiculous
altogether.
Two days had passed away; the little flutter of en-
chantment was fast recoiling into the usual humdrum
of cricket matches and boat races, and as no Parliament
was sitting at this time, the politicians and newspapers were
alike powerless to arouse from apathy the ordinary local
quietude.
1 had just awakened, and the flood of glaring sunlight
streaming through the blinds warned me of an approaching
hot day, and likewise to the fact that I had over-slept my-
self. I had forgotten all about the offer of colonial troops
and the chances of war, and my thoughts were equally
divided between swallowing my breakfast and catching the
tram, when my door was suddenly thrown open by (I must
here disguise my personages) Tom Stirling shouting, as he
waved the infallible newspaper in front of him,
“New South Wales Troops accepted”!
“Nonsense” said I, while I felt my cheeks warm with a
mixture of fright and surprise.”
“ Nonsense, indeed ; it is quite true ; look here !”
“ Is it possible T
I gasped and trembled, and at once forgot all about
tram, breakfast, and other responsibilities, and was eagerly
devouring the large headings of the telegrams, hardly


realising that what I saw before me in almost poster type
could really be true.
Tom was a thorough soldier, although only a volunteer
private. The lustre and excitement of joy in his manly
eye was a reflexion of his martial soul, dormant once, but
now kindled to flame with the unexpected news. Mars had
never more truly released a son to the field of glory. He
was already like a hound held in the slips, impatient to give
in his name and volunteer his services in the African
expedition.
I was (as it happened, from some unforeseen reason)
a single man ; my parents also were dead (I reverently bow
my head at the recollection), and consequently one of those
fortunate individuals (without incumbrance), I was fit for
anything, with the consoling passport that if lost I would
sink into oblivion unknown, to leave behind no mourners.
Being well aware of this fact, and acting under dutiful
considerations for those less fortunate, I at once accepted
Tom Stirling’s invitation, and we were both enlisted (subject
to medical test) to serve in conjunction with Her Majesty’s
troops in the Soudan. Our occupation in the city had been
from the very first sight of “ acceptance,” no more. Our
destinies now only rested on the hazard of physical unfitnes,
and that was remote indeed.
Why were we going 1 ? What had we to gain? Did we
realize the severity of an African sun, or the terrors of a
guerilla campaign in a dry country ?
Could we leave our friends and home ? Could we have
given any answer to the torrent of queries and discourage-
ments raging like the furies around us? Was it loyalty,
quest of glory, patriotism, rashness, or what ?
We could have given no explanation to such questions,
but we knew and felt an inward and insatiable impulsion
to go forward and obey the fiat that now vibrated through
and electrified society with a new life and resolute, unbridled
spirit.
Perhaps the only and true reason for our anxious and
unanimous response lay in the simple fact that we were,
and had been, for years volunteers. The spirit that then
actuated to the peaceful ranks was the same that now
reddened to the ruddy tints of action—as much a part of


our system and existence as the willing hands that were
about to bear the rifle to the fray ; or, from an advanced
Darwinean standpoint it might have been—
Perchance a burst of evolutionary duty
To that nation
That honours to maintain a manhood’s cause ;
That helps all nations to its own sweet liberty,
And tends to make the whole great globe one—
—England.
CHAPTER 11.
An Embarrassment, and an Agreeable Surprise.
But circumstances so favourably devoid of restraint as
mine did not fall to the lot of all volunteers at this sudden
and unexpected call from home.
Our mutual friend, companion, and volunteer in the same
company had attachments the severance of which would
require that courage that I, as a unit, knew little of.
Will. Stuart, the third incur trio, was surrounded with
a crowd of brothers and sisters, and being of a soft and
affectionate temperament was endeared with associations
and home ties whose very thought of estrangement would
be as severe as the realisation of the dark omens and
prophesies so plentifully vouchsafed to his coming career by
his relations and friends.
It was almost impossible (notwithstanding these im-
pediments) for us not to solicit Will. Stuart to accompany
us to the land of the Pharaoh’s. He had been the director
of all our fishing, camping out, and yachting schemes, and
an entertainer with marvellous stories and strange philo-
sophies. His arguments on the extreme theories of radical-
ism were unanswerable, and his wit and flights of fancy
irresistable.
How he would be able to recount the storming of
Khartoum; the victorious rout of 50,000 Arabs, and the
capture of the Mahdi.


We concluded that Australia would lose a represen-
tative hero in the absence of Will. Stuart—he must be
persuaded, despite all his relations.
That evening Will’s mother answered the door to our
accustomed call, and addressing us as she still held the
door ajar, exclaimed in a voice full of emotion and appre-
hension as she viewed our regimentals, “ I hope you have
not called for Will T Upon any other occasion the words
would have been beyond explanation, for our visits had
been regular, and our freedom as much understood as the
roving commission of her own children.
But conscience choked us mutually dumb, and she
recovering herself in our embarrassing interval left us to
choose between our usual course, or retreating under the
silence of unutterable guilt.
We were still standing at the door, not exactly knowing
what to do, when our awkward situation was interrupted
by a most sudden and happy occurrence. It was the sound
of a well-known footstep, and casting our eyes up and down
the long walk, we noticed no less a personage than the
veritable Will Stewart.
He had not noticed us at all, so that it was the effect of a
start and surprise that brought forth the ejaculation —
“ Ah, how are you 1 you —You have sent in your applica-
tions, eh 1 ?”
“ Have you,” broke in both of us, being too anxious and
fearful to answer his question.
“ Yes, of course. Don’t you see how late lam to-night.
I have been detained. There are hundreds waiting.”
“ They do not know at home,” queried Stirling, in an
undertone, as he significantly turned his head towards the
house.
“Ho, no. It cannot be helped. It is a case of duty
—a case of professional test as volunteers, apart from one’s
self altogether. I could not, even though I wished it
otherwise.”
His words were hurried and broken, and as he clasped
our hands with a firm, warm, and sustained grip, we
could see that any explanation as to our own proceedings
was needless. He had drank in the whole situation.
We had, however, soon related to Will Stewart how


we had acted, but his conduct had quite raised the Colonial
Military Status in our estimation, and given to our already
good heart an extra impetus in the project.
We had reckoned on the expediency of persuasion,
while he, like ourselves, had stepped into the breach on
the impulse of soldierly enthusiasm, duty, and chance of
adventure.
We were heartily glad of Will’s voluntary determina-
tions, but were yet fearful of the power of home ties on his
dutiful yet susceptible and poetic nature.
We did not accompany him further that evening.
There was a feeling of unpleasantness associated with our
last experience; besides, our wishes had been fully realised,
and we knew that Will Stewart’s mountains of obstruction
would best be removed alone with his own.
The unison of three young men, of the many, was now
complete—their hearts full of hope and adventure, and the
world before them.
CHAPTER 111.
A Disconsolate Home—Just Before Dawn.
It was a great shock that came with those few words—
“Australian Troops Accepted.”
A shock felt throughout the warless land like an earth-
quake.
It vibrated in ten thousand chords of joy, of hope, and
of sadness nigh unto death.
It was the latter chord that trembled and shattered to
despair the home of Will Stewart. His father had sought
in vain to discourage with a disdainful flippancy. His
mother had coaxed through sobs and supplication her son
to withdraw from his final enlistment, while his brothers
availed themselves of calling his attention to every adverse
criticism of Press correspondence ; until all finding their


entreaties futile, they first raged wild in hysterical despair,
then broke down into a silent and unutterable melancholy.
His father refused to eat—the regularity of a systematic
home had lost its guide; and his mother, now fairly broken-
hearted, felt happier in her appeals to the Unseen than to
any implorings to her wayward son.
Day after day passed on, and as the time of the
departure of the troops grew shorter the roar of the project
grew louder and louder. The blood of the populace was
rising to feverheat, and the Quay was thronged daily,
absorbing somewhat amongst its scenes of preparation the
overwrought tension of public excitement.
Every passage between the hetereogeneous masses of
baggage, ambulance waggons, and merchandise, was packed
with the eager sightseers ; and the clanking of the running
chains, and the clatter of the Donkey engines, bespoke an
activity of determination and despatch never before dreamt
of in our proverbial sleepy hollow.
The whole Press had now nearly excluded their usual
routine pars.; and casualities and their columns recorded
nothing but the progress of the Commissariat, country en-
rollment, and war telegrams; while the Barrack Square re-
echoed from sunrise to sunset with valedictory God speeds
to
Australia’s First Contingent to the Field.
Everybody was in arms ; and now the sanctity of the
Sabbath gave time for many reflections.
The soldiers for the Soudan were to start from Port
Jackson on Tuesday, the 3rd of March, eighteen hundred
and eighty-five.
One day more, and the zenith of excitement would
arrive—one day more, and that memorable day is over;
but when; ah ! when will this thrill of commotion subside?
Who can tell ?—A wave set circling on the flood of time to
lave (in ebb and flow) the shores of centuries.


CHAPTER IV.
But oh ! it is a deathly sable pall
That hallows in the hush of midnight’s hour ;
A gloomy curtain shaddowing over all,
A sacred mourning for the day that’s o’er.
From Darkness to Light.
The last night had arrived, and every thought throhed
to the expectations of the morrow. The executive of the
country had held its last meeting, and the family council at
the home of Will Stuart had decided on the last pre-emptory
step to arrest from what they considered the sacrifice of a
living son to death.
They must detain by peace, if possible, or if not, by an
inexorable power of physical force.
The decision was already in operation, and now with
one more and last terrific appeal—mother, father, sisters,
brothers, and all kneel and implore their William to stay.
“It is to late ; too late, now.”
“ Ho, no !”
Resistance was impossible.
“You shall not go.”
“ You must be hidden from this seething intoxication.
You shall and must not go.”
He is pressed forward, and now carried along amidst
entreaties ; he gives way before the overwhelming current
of love and affection.
His resolves, wishes, and reluctances clamour for
supremacy. He is dazed in the din, and is partly led and
partly driven almost unconsciously through a dark passage,
down a fight of steps, and there secured and supplicated to
remain until his comrades have embarked. A crude ex-
pedient, certainly ; but the most natural that the urgency
of the moment could suggest.
He had bidden a last farewell the night before to
many ; but there had been one parting, a parting with one
almost as dear as life, but that farewell above all others,
sacred and secret, shall not be further recounted here.
He had given his word to go.


Was the word of an Australian to falter on the
threshold of its introduction to the world with the brand of
a deserter ?
It was a sad, burning, and momentous thought.
He is now known to no one. No enquiries are
answered. The family have departed to strenuously avoid
every accident of interogation. He is alone.
He has gone ; no one knows where.
This night of all seems doubly dark. He has been
anxiously listening for the bugle sound; he has heard it
for the last time—his comrades have been called together,
perhaps, for the last sleep in their native Sydney; and now
that all his hushed, he tries to imagine the remarks of his
companions at his absence, and falls wearied into a restless
and fitful sleep.
It is morning, and the hum thickens with the
increasing crowd as it pours forth into every position of
vantage. The wheel traffic is suspended so that the steady
and increasing roar swells only in the bustle of the moving
throng, and on the sound of human voices.
********
There is a small grating in Will’s solitary cell (the only
opening in the chamber), and it abuts on the main thorough-
fare. Through it, as he looks upwards, nothing can be seen
but an occasional passing cloud through a break in the
shade of the gathering mass, and ever and anon, the
flickering stream of morning sunlight falling pure and
rippling, strikes the floor at his feet. He is shut out from
the world, and resignation steals slowly on his mind as his
eyes peering through the darkness rests on the only oasis of
his solitude—that bright and sunlit spot,
Tom Stirling has been knocking at the main entrance,
but having had no reply, now turns his footsteps at the last
moment full of misgivings, mystery, and disappointment,
and as the recruiting office has been deluged with applica-
tions for the service, poor Will or anyone else might rest at
peace from any alarm of anthorative force or restraint.
Free at the last moment to go or to stay.
But time wears on. Every house has given forth its
inmates to swell the mighty pulse of expectation.
The time has now arrived. There is a rush of the


struggling crowd, the grating is crushed with spectators,
the drum is heard in the distance, and the heaving hearts
of a Great City give vent to tears and rounds of vociferous
cheering to the defiant tramp and sound of the band.
Will’s small shaft of daylight has long been obscured, he is
in darkness, but clutches the bars as he pants to the echoing
cheers.
They are here ! and the deafening scuffle, the swinging
and jubilant roll of the march, and the measured beat on
the street rises every soul in the unison of one great chord
that seems in its martial dignity to command with a voice
of majesty supreme,
AUSTRALIA FORWARD.
The torrent is past, and sound though quickly receding,
still rises in waves as the procession advances.
The grating is suddenly vacated, and the hands of Will
Stuart impelled with a palpitating soul bursts forth the bars
into the street, and the imprisoned is free.
He is quickly surrounded by the curious, but in his
blindness he heeds but one preliminary. Quick as thought,
he replaces the grating, and in the next moment is marching
with his contingent, amidst the shouts, and the rattle of
the drum.
********
It was not until nightfall that the precincts of that lonely
apartment were visited. The cell was searched and
re-searched in silence, and a mystery hung about it that
hallowed it like the sanctity and reverence of the tomb.
One week, two weeks passed, and after the first shock
had faded, silence seemed to have wedded itself to
mystery and melancholy.
Over a month had elapsed. The day was as bright
again as when the eyes of Will Stuart were rivited to his
lonely sunbeam.
The sound of horses hoofs and a sharp rap at the main
entrance, announces the delivery of a Telegram.
The clouds disperse with the breaking of that seal, and
the sunbeam now dances with a joy of gladness in every
eye, as clustering round the unexpected missile, the once


sorrowing family read the following brief message,
“ Dear Mother , I have arrived safely at Suakirn.”
“ We have been heroically received , and have given three
cheers for our Aquatic Champion at home.”
********
The news fell like the crash of a bursting storm, and
as the decreasing peal reverberating on the events of the
past slumbered into silence, peace and approbation alone
lighted every countenance. Their hearts were too full to
give utterance. Their ‘ Stuart ’ was with the brave.
Darkness had blossomed into light,
The Dead had come to life.
CONCLUSION.
Whatever may happen to the Contingent, we have the
satisfaction (through a stern and persistent opposition) of
knowing that all has been undertaken through the medium
of wholesome caution and sincere consideration.
Thus all can await results with good wishes and no
reflections, while we have had the good fortune of guaging
the spirit of a new race, in a new land without a history
and without traditional embitterings.
We have so far proved the existence of an indomitable
desire of emulation, that will expand (wherever opportunity
presents) to the highest aims and most brilliant attainments,
and have, moreover, demonstrated beyond doubt that our
people (though obscured from the world in a remote Colony)
will dissipate from their minds all risk, danger, and
obstruction for the achievement of ennobling acts and
meritorious distinctions in the world’s great competitive
Roll of Fame.


BceLro
A/ cry^f
H. Solomon,
Caxton Printing Office,
114 J Pitt Street,
Sydney.




