



I wish to acknowledge with many thanks the kindness of
the Rev. E. C. Spicer, M.A., in revising this lecture after
it was delivered.
a E. DROUGHT.


FROM BABEL TO BILLINGSGATE.
H Xccture.
Ladies and Gentlemen, —I have been for some time engaged during
my leisure hours in taking notes for a work on “ Shams.” But I have
begun to conclude, like Kenelm Chillingly, that a greater take-in than
myself I have not yet encountered. But as a red-hot poker throws out
sparks, so shams may throw out scintillations—they themselves
shamlets, or little shams. And I own at once—and probably some of
you will have perceived it to be the case already—that the title of this
lecture is a sham. Still, like other shams, it is easily seen through. I
am not going to give an account of an actual journey from Babel to
Billingsgate. I never was at Babel, as far as I can remember; and,
fond though I am of fish, Billingsgate was a part of London that
presented few attractions to me, so I kept away from it. At once,
then, I admit that my lecture is not on travel, but purports to indulge
in a few thoughts on language. However, the title of the lecture will
serve to illustrate my method of dealing with the subject. The distance
from Babel to Billingsgate is long: the topic of language is a wide
one. We might take different routes from Babel to Billingsgate : so
we might select different streams of investigation regarding language in
order to trace them from their source to their termination. And again,
were there but one stream—one route—we might travel in very
different methods along that route. We might go slow or fast, or
neither slow nor fast. In a foreign country partially colonized by
English people (wherein I resided for some years) it was customary for
the English to return home for three months’ holiday every three years.
They had to pass on their journey some of the most interesting cities
and historical sites in Europe; but I assure you the majority of these
individuals saw not, nor cared to see, anything of these places. There
is a French proverb which runs—
“ Gardez la langue, ouvrez les yeux,
Si vous etre heureux. ”
As to the first injunction—that of holding the tongue—my quondam
acquaintances thoroughly recognized it; they were taciturn Oornishmen.
But as to keeping their eyes open—well, they didn’t ; and so they saw


nothing and said nothing. And thus they kept half the advice of the
proverb and disobeyed the other half, and were in consequence very
harmless creatures, dwelling in a region somewhere near contentment,
which, possibly, resembles the Buddhist Nirvana—a state neither very
happy nor unhappy. Their hearts were centred in some remote village
in England where dwelt wife or sweetheart, and mouldering ruins or
monumental records of renown presented no interest to them. So they
made their journey in the shortest possible time. These people
reminded me of one of John Buskin’s sayings—l quote from memory—
“ It does a bullet no good to go fast, and so it does a man no harm to
go slow, for his greatness consists not in going but in being.” Now, I
would not have you imitate these people. I hope I may keep your eyes
open, and if you gardez la langue —keep quiet—we shall, perhaps, see a
few sights on our journey which may at least invite further investiga-
tion at some future time.
In our journey to-night we might take a northern course ; by doing
so we should touch upon the Zend-Avesta of the Zoroastrians, and,
curving gradually towards the west, we might linger awhile amid the
ruins of Giant-worship in Sweden and Norway, and trace the effects of
that worship on language. We might take a trip to Iceland and
recapitulate, and, if possible, enlarge on some of the thoughts of
Professor Irving’s delightful lecture concerning Woden and Tiu and
Thor. Or, taking a more direct route to the west, we might seek to
decipher those weird documents buried for thousands of years in
Egyptian tombs ; and, crossing the JEgean Sea, we might listen to the
Muses rolling out in the rich rhetoric of Greece those sweet classic
tales which blend the sentimental and the imaginary with the conven-
tional and the practical, and tinge with a halo of romance the toilsome-
ness of linguistic investigation. Thence we could cross to Borne and
dive into the catacombs, and discover amid the relics of a mighty faith
the symbolism of sign language employed in those epitaphs by which
the last resting-places of the saints were made known to posterity.
Pushing on, we might pick our way through the Gallic and Bomanesque
remains which abound in France, or peep into Spain and catch a faint
sound of the Iberian and Cantabrian idioms. We might do this, and a
great deal more, ere arriving at our terminus—the neological vocabulary
of slang. Such a journey actually and bodily made would occupy
some months, and if we were to take it mentally, it would occupy us
some hours; and, you know, we must be out of this room at any rate
before nine to-morrow morning. So I crave the privilege of a pioneer
to lead you as I like. We shall loiter for a few moments here and
there on our journey, at places I have looked into myself. When I
feel inclined, we shall pull down the blinds and pass over tracts of
ground at a tremendous rate, merely peering out with a cursory glance
at spots which I may think interesting.
And now let us imagine ourselves at Babel, either a long time ago,
or roaming amid its excavations to-day. You know that once upon a
time all the inhabitants of the earth spoke the same language. This
we are told in the 11th of Genesis; which also informs us that the
confusion of tongues took place at Babel, and that the meaning of the


word Babel is confusion ; hence our word hobble , a highly suggestive
word, reminding one of the Hindustanee name for a talkative person
a “ bobberiewollah.” Now, the site of Babel has been discovered. 3
have little doubt but that, during this age of research and development
and evolution, it will ere long be discovered somewhere else. But, as
an unenlightened conservative, I accept what I have read, and also am
content with the supposition that Babel was built in the time of the
mighty hunter Nimrod.
Some of you may possibly suppose that Babel and Babylon were
built on the same spot, and are identical. This is not, however, exactly
the case. Their sites are adjacent. This fact has been brought to light
through the discovery by Sir Hartford Jones, in 1862, of Nebuchad-
nezzar’s celebrated inscription. That inscription, written in cuneiform
characters on a square block of basalt of the dimensions of 1 metre a? 1
metre a; 10 centimetres, is nowin the British Museum. lam not going
to inflict a translation of that inscription on you. Suffice it to say that
it commences with the words “ Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, the
mighty lord, the chosen of Merodach, the worshipper of Nebo, the king
vicar, who judges without injustice” —and so on ; and that, amid a great
deal of egotistical boasting, the sentence “ I have built Babylon” occurs
so often that you would get quite tired of Nebuchadnezzar and Ins
conceit. I may call your attention en passant to the fact that, in the
list of musical instruments which were played at the dedication of the
golden image, the trumpet is not included. The truth is, Nebuchad-
nezzar didn’t need one —or else he reserved it for the dedication of his
inscription. But one sentence from this inscription will aid us in
arriving at what lam just now seeking. It runs : —“Nebuchadnezzar,
. who has thought day and night for the rebuilding of the
pyramid and tower, and has spread abroad the glory of Babylon and
Borsippa.” Again, there have been discovered in the kasr, or palace,
at Babylon bricks of a pale yellow colour and of the best possible
quality, and all of these bricks are stamped with the name and titles of
Nebuchadnezzar. Talking of bricks tempts me into a parenthetical
recollection of a small discovery I made myself. Some ago I
visited, in company with some scientific explorers, the excavations of
the old’ Roman city of Silchester. As we were passing from the baths
to the forum I happened to pick up a brick, and had no difficulty in
reading the name Bergilius upon it. This was an interesting circum-
stance, for more reasons than one. It exhibited to me the habit people
indulged in of writing their names on bricks, as now they write them on
trees—it showed how the very stones might cry out in attestation of some
truth; and in the name, too, spelt with aB, there was a still further
interest, for about that time there was a dispute as to whether the
author of the “ iEneid” spelt his name with aßor aV. I didn’t take
away the brick, but copied the name as nearly as possible as it had
been written 2,000 years before with a mason’s trowel, and showed the
copy to a Cambridge senior classic who was writing a book. If you
ever come across that book, and read something to the effect “ A friend
of mine, &c., &c., found Virgil to be spelt with a B,” you’ll know who
the modest friend is. Forgive me this digression. Revenons.


What do we gather from Nebuchadnezzar’s statement that he built
Babylon, and intended to rebuild something else called a tower, and
from the facts that bricks with his name are found at Babylon, and
that he mentions Borsippa ? Probably this, that Borsippa is the site of
ancient Babel. Now, there is a place called Birs-Nimrud which is
generally allowed to be the same place as Borsippa, where further
discoveries have been made. Birs-Nimrud is a few miles from Babylon,
on the west bank of the river Euphrates. And I want to tell you of
the relics of a tower which have been exhumed there. There is an
immense building of an oblong shape, whose circumference is 762 yards,
or nearly half an English mile. On the east side it is about 60 feet
high, and on the west 198 feet high, rising upwards in a conical shape.
On the summit is a solid pile of bricks 37 feet high, and 28 feet broad.
These bricks have been found to be fire-burnt, and some of them have
very ancient hieroglyphics on them. Now, I j ust throw out the suggestion
that this description of Birs-Nimrud corresponds with the narrative we
have in the 11th of Genesis, where we read, “And it came to pass, as
they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of
Shinar; and they dwelt there. And they said one to another, ‘Go to,
let us make brick, and burn them throughly .’ And they had brick for
stone, and slime had they for mortar. And they said, ‘Go to, let us
build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let
us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the
whole earth.’” Now, if we admit that Birs-Nimrud and Babel are one
and the same place, and that, had the tower been symmetrically finished
in a conical shape, so that the height would be two-thirds of the
circumference, it would eventually be 1,524 feet high. Ladies and
Gentlemen, —If the spire of our Melbourne Cathedral will be even half
that height, we shall have people flocking from all parts of the world to
see it.
I have been so far calling out favete Unguis —lend me your ears
lend me your minds. I have been doling out statistics from old guide-
books, interlarded with comments of my own. May I now ask you to
lend me your imaginations for a few minutes 1 There is an advantage
in employing the imagination betimes. Though not necessarily logical,
it sometimes makes good hits in its aim, and its dreams are often
bright, if unreal. Besides, we know that if some of the men of history
had not very fertile imaginations they’d never have been known beyond
the frontier of their lives here. Well, I don’t ask of you very fertile or
fantastic imaginations; only put up the opera-glass of fancy so as to
draw near and give colouring to the rigid sternness of fact which ages
have petrified beneath the sparsely-inscribed tombstone of the mighty
past. Well, then, imagine a vast plain—the plain of Shinar—through
which a stately river—the river Euphrates—flows. Like so many ant-
hills, hundreds of tents are scattered far and wide; camels are browsing
on the tranquil pasturage ; mules and asses are laving themselves in the
rich waters. The heat is very great, for, besides the glowing sun,
furnaces here and there blaze fiercely with the lurid glare of red-hot
bricks. Thousands of people—men, women, and children—are all
busily employed in various ways—hewers of wood, drawers of water,


mixers of slime, stokers, carpenters, blacksmiths, masons—(l wonder
were they the original freemasons!) —engaged in building an enormous
tower, such as was never seen on earth before. The stately pile
gradually rises; scaffoldings are thrown up ; ladders are erected ; boys
swarm up the sides of the tower, carrying hods of mortar and the
bricks burnt at some adjacent furnace ; the foremen give their orders ;
the tradesmen plum and fix and hammer away ; and King Nimrod
looks on, and his heart swells with pride, and his flattering satellites
tell him that his glory will be eternal, and that ere long the tower will
touch the clouds, and he feels that he will ascend to the top, and step
therefrom to a chair among the divinities of the skies. Yes! the build-
ing is very mighty, and hope is very bright, and the prospect sublime.
But a series of extraordinary circumstances takes place, which frustrates
all. One man asks another a question ; the other doesn’t know what
he says—and he says so; but the first cannot make out what the
second says; and then each thinks the other is making fun of him; and
each, of course, gets angry. And this sort of thing is happening every-
where; and everybody is beginning to think that everybody else is gone
mad. Perhaps a sharp-nosed mason turns to a sallow urchin with the
words—
‘‘ 0 daimonie, proselthe :
Deomai gar ti sou.”
And to his astonishment the answer he receives is—
“Bocca truciata mosca no cientra.”
Or we can fancy a yellowish overseer with Chinese eyes calling out—
“ Dzau shun-goa hung nee Hooee,”
And his surprise when a broad-faced Teutonic-looking fellow responds
with—
“Na schafskopf was willst du haben?”
Or, again, a dark-eyed bachelor whispers to a red-haired spinster—
“Son tus labios dos cortinas
De color de carmesi.
Y entre cortina y cortina
Estoy esperando el si.”
And what is his amazement when she retorts with a box in the ear, and
replies, “Faugh a ballagh.” And so there was a he d'akeon here, and
a Tytyre tn there ; a babble-babble here, and a clatter-clatter there; a
bow-wow here, and a pooh-pooh there ; and we may not draw too much
on our imaginations if we suppose the whole of the plains of Shinar
somewhat resembled “My father’s farm-yard.” Perhaps you will think
all this very far-fetched. At any rate, something did occur to cause the
people round Babel not to understand one another, and so to stop their
work, and to separate them on the face of the earth.
And here I would call your attention to a passage in Jeremiah (xxv.
26), which throws some light on Babel, and at the same time denotes an


interesting peculiarity known to the Hebrew scribes in their method of
writing. In Hebrew the consonants alone are written in the form of
letters, the vowels are denoted by points. Now, take the second letter
of the Hebrew twice, and the twelfth letter once, and you have Beth,
Beth, Lamed ; or, putting their English equivalents, B, B, L. Supply the
vowel points and you read Babel. Again, invert the Hebrew grammar
and take the second letter twice, and the twelfth once, and you have
Shin, Shin, Calf; that is, Sh, Sh, C. Supply the vowel points and you
read Sheshach, or Babel inverted. What, then, you may ask, did
Jeremiah mean when he wrote, “ The King of Sheshach shall drink
after them”! Just this—that Babel, the mighty tower, is Babel no
longer. It is inverted, changed, stripped of its glory; it is turned
upside down, and now Sheshach. This method of writing—an exten-
sion of the acrostic system—is termed Athbash, from A the first letter,
Th the last, B the second, and Sh the second from the end.
And now we come to the question, What was the language spoken at
Babel when the people understood one another 1 What was the-
language spoken by the antediluvians—by Noah and Enoch, or by
Adam 1 On this point there has been a variety of opinions. A Dutch-
man named Goropius published an article in 1580, in which he-
maintained that Dutch was the language of Paradise. If so, I don’t
think it was very difficult for Eve to scold her husband. Another
writer has asserted that the Basque language—or that spoken along
the coast of the Bay of Biscay—was the original language. If so, I fancy
Adam had some trouble in teaching it to Eve. I myself heard it
spoken, and tried to learn it, but gave it up in despair. Indeed, there is
a legend told by the Biscayans that the devil spent seven years in the
Pyrenees trying to master it, and that at the end of that time he could
only say “ I’m off,” and he left. I have not investigated all the treatises
on this subject. Had I done so, I am sure that I should have found
that some learned professor of Trinity College, Dublin, had proved
without a doubt that Irish was the language spoken before the flood,
and preserved by the one solitary woman who, it is well known,
escaped its destruction in an open boat to the Emerald Isle of the-
western world. Again, it has been affirmed that Hebrew was the
primitive language. This was recognized as an undisputed fact by the
early writers of Christianity. Probably the cause of this belief was
that Hebrew was the language of the chosen people of God, and that
the Old Testament was written in that tongue. However, the great
genius Leibnitz, who lived in the time of Newton—and was only
second to him as a mathematician—showed that Hebrew is a branch,
not a stem. And philologists since the time of Leibnitz have generally
allowed that Hebrew is one of the languages derived by the confusion
of tongues. So we may no more believe that Hebrew was the
primitive language than the quaint fable that God spoke to Adam in
Pamdise in Swedish, that Adam replied in Danish, and that the serpent
whispered to Eve in French. I wonder that English was not attributed
to the serpent, for it is one of the most sibilant or hissing languages*
extant. Had I time, and were it within the province of this lecture, I
should like to enumerate and discuss the theories bearing on the-


question how it was that language came into existence at all. The
principal of these theories have been reduced to two—the how-wow or
onomatopoeic, and the pooh-pooh or interjectional. The former asserts
that language commenced by the effort to imitate sounds in nature,
such as the quacking of a duck, the roaring of a lion, the cackling of
hens, the booming and crashing of thunder. The latter makes the
emotions the source of language, as when we say ah, oh, alas, dear me,
just as pain and pleasure make animals cry out. But as our starting
point is Babel, where there was a recognized language, distinct and
idiomatic, further discussion on the probable origin of language would
be irrelevant. However, let me observe that I have heard that in all
languages the first sound which an infant utters is ma, via ; and it has
in consequence been assumed that ma is one of the syllables of the
original language. Further than this, it has been asserted that ma is a
root of those words signifying love in almost all languages. Hence we
may perceive that in its first babbling efforts of articulation every baby
pi’oclairas a recognition of filial affection, and reminds us of the source
of language, as of all else that is good—the eternal Being of Him whose
name is Love.
Let me now illustrate the gradual change and growth of languages
thus: —A father begets children, who bear a family likeness to him—
some more, some less. These children grow up and beget children too.
The likeness to their parents is about as close as that of the first genera-
tion to the grandfather. The resemblance of grandchild to grandparent
is not so strong. Then come great-grand and great-great-grandchildren,
and the likeness in most cases wanes, though at times a passing and
very strong expression may be left to the parent stem. After some
centuries, perhaps, a male descendant of one branch marries a female
descendant of another branch, and the likeness in their children to the
old boy increases. For instance, suppose a cavalier in the time of the
Henries to have had a terrific Roman nose and a tremendous pair of
eyes, he might bestow his nose as an heirloom on one line of his
descendants and his eyes on the other; and if, after some generations,
these families united in wedlock, they might have both the eyes and
the nose again ; and so a child might bear a closer resemblance to his
ancestor than either his father or mother would to' that same ancestor.
If a picture of the cavalier were hung up in some ancient hall, the
owner of the mansion would say of his heir, “ Well, the boy hasn’t a
cocked nose, like his mother—he belongs to my side of the family
and the mother might retort, “ Well, at least, I’m glad he’s without his
father’s fox eyes, and takes after me there.” these thoughts to
language. Take any language of the present day—select a word in it
—where does it come from? You find it; go back to the next source,
and trace it as far as you can. Then get another word —it comes from
this other parent. You think, therefore, it has no relationship to the
first word ; but trace it back, and you find that it came in a different
line of languages from the same stem. These tracings back of words led
to the classification of languages under different names. How, with all
the investigations made about him, the description of the old gentleman
who disappeared at Babel is a vague one. People don’t quite know his
name: no tombstone records it.


I shall not delay our journey too long by references to the Aryan,
Semitic, and African families of language, but shall assume that this
old gentleman might go by the biform appellation of Inclo Germanico.
When the confusion of tongues took place, Indo-Germanico left some
children behind him—the two eldest of whom were Sclavo-Teutonico
and Ai yo-Gneco. After travelling about awhile Sclavo-Teutonico
begat the damsel Lithuania and the boy Sclavonico, and these in their
turn became parents of other children. Meanwhile Aryo-Grieco having
started in a different direction begat Aryano and Gneco-Italo, and
these begat Keltico, Italiana, Albaniana, Iraniano, and Indiano. So
you see that if this begetting would go on we should have in three or
four generations forty or fifty languages, great-grandchildren of Indo-
Germanico. And just as children grow gradually up to manhood and
womanhood, and then to old age and death, so was it with languages.
First they may have appeared in the shape of different dialects—
climate, difference of pursuits, convention, disposition in the long lapse
of years brought them to the status of distinctly-formed vernaculars.
And we may see how great a difference there may be in what is termed
accent or dialect, for example, in England itself. All English people
are supposed to speak English, but how many different dialects are
there in England ? Cockney, Somerset, Cornwall, Lancashire, and so
on. Indeed, I once knew a Cornishman and a Yorkshireman who
spoke so differently that they had to get a Spaniard to interpret what
each said to the other, Now, suppose the descendants of such men to
have no communication with each other, to read no books, and to be
engaged in different pursuits—the one in farming, the other in com-
merce—why, in a few centuries the result would be not only a difference
in dialect, but also a distinction between a great many of their words.
I fancy it would be somewhat interesting to trace the pronunciations of
different words in different parts of England, I suppose you have
heard of the Berkshire damsel who was not unwilling to accept the
proposal of a young swain who was constantly demonstrating his
affection by casting ardent glances from a distance. He was too
bashful to say, “ Will you ? ” She was too modest to speak first on the
important question. So she wrapped up a sheep’s eye in some of its
wool and sent it to her lover. He understood her—he read “ Eye-
wool’’—a phonetic change for “I will,” and the result of casting
sheep’s eyes in this case was as decisive and satisfactory as the most
ardent lover could desire. Max Muller gives an example of phonetic
change in the case of niggers in America. This is a sentence some one
heard spoken by one of them, “ Sh’ urn gwine crick for ketch crab.”
It would be a little difficult to interpret this at once into “See them
going to the creek to catch crabs.” And, indeed, if Niggerish were to
make such strides we’d need a Niggerish-English dictionary after a
few years. If, then, English can change into many dialects, deepening
and widening into different languages when opportunity offers, how
much greater might we expect the change of Indo-Teutonic to be ere
printing was known, and when the elbow-room of the world was very
much more ample than it is to-day 1 I might here discuss the question
as to how some languages are more guttural, or labial, or liquid than


are others, but I shall not. However, let me mention that I asked a
punning friend, the other day, how it was that in some warm countries
the languages are often guttural or labial ? His reply was—“ Why,
don’t you see that in warm countries the liquids disappear.”
And now, as I have endeavoured to show you the natural cause of
the existence of different languages, let us take an imaginary express
train from Babel, shut up the windows, get to the sea, and then by
boat at once to the shores of Mei'ry England. I trust you will not feel
ill from this swift voyage. And we ask—How have we the English
language spoken as it is, or ought to be spoken at the present time, and
what are its sources? Well, you know that the English people come
from different stocks—from Piets and Scots, and Celts and Romans,
and Danes and Saxons, and Normans, and crowds of other nations.
These intermarried, and so did their languages; and the English baby-
language, fed by different hands, gradually grew up into the fine, manly,
laconic fellow he is now, I quote the following about English—“ It
contains 43,566 words; of which 29,853 are classical, 13,230 Teutonic,
and the rest from various sources. Of these, a very uneducated country
bumpkin would use about 300; a well educated person who read his
Bible, his Shakespeare, and the Times , 3,000 or 4,000; while accurate
thinkers and eloquent speakers may command as many as 10,000.
Milton’s works are built up with 8,000 words ; while Shakespeare, who
probably displayed a greater variety of expression than any writer in
any language, produced all his plays with about 15,000 words.”
You will permit me, as an old resident in Spain, to illustrate what
the English language consists of, by giving a recipe of a dish of which
I have partaken in that country; the recipe will be somewhat analogous
to that which may define our language. The dish is called an olla
podrida. It is made of various ingredients—flour, water, bread, meat,
pork, potatoes, onions, garlic, frogs, salt, oil, lettuce, vinegar, and a
heap of others, all stirred up in a big bowl, and, I assure you, if you
were very hungry you would enjoy it. Now let us make a linguistic
olla podrida. Get a large Albion bowl, put in it some preserved
meat labelled from Rome, interlarded with some sardines caught off
the Greek coast and nicely chopped up; add a few thick slices of
Saxon pork, an Irish potato, two French frogs, over which sprinkle
some crumbs of Danish bread ; to this add a sliced Spanish onion
grown in Castille, a taste of Italian garlic, a pinch of Malay salt, as
much Hindustani mustard as would fit on the end of an egg-spoon, and
a few drops of Chinese vinegar. Now, warily sprinkle this mixture
with a little Hebrew oil, and let all float for a few centuries in the
fluctuating water of convention. Then, with your stout Anglo-Saxon
arm briskly stir all up, using the ladle of necessity, having the London
trade-mark on it, and you have the olla podrida of the English
language.
The chief ingredients of the English language, however, are Saxon
allied to Low German and Norman allied to French. And one effect
of this bilingualism is that many words in our language have the same
meaning. A German and a Frenchman may learn English—the former
using almost all Saxon words, the latter nearly all Norman words; and


though you and I would understand both, yet they would fail to under-
stand each other. And a curious result of the Norman conquest is
seen in the fact that our meat is called by one name when alive, and by
another when dead. For example : sheep, cow, pig, deer —all Saxon
words—become mutton, heef, pork, venison, all Norman words. And
we gather, further, that the lordly Norman barons made the Saxons
their slaves. The Saxons called the animals they tended by their
Saxon names. The Normans knew nothing of their commissariat till
it was placed on their tables.
I shall now tell you a little story, and then take the words of it in
order and derive them, so as to exemplify some of the sources of
English words. The story is this—it’s an old, old one, at least the first
sentence is—“A.man loved a woman. She called him her lord; he
called her his lady. They were married by the clergyman of the parish
as bachelor and spinster. One day he felt sardonic and cynical, and
she sarcastic and satirical. She called him a boor, and he called her a
flirt.” Let us take the words as they come. Man is a very ancient
being, and in English he retains one of his ancient appellations almost
unchanged from its primary signification. Mann in Sanskrit is to
measure. The Greek men —the moon—comes from this, and signifies
that the moon is the measurer of time in the heavens. So man means
the measurer with his mind, or the thinker.
“ The mind’s the measure of the man.”
Woman has her origin in man. This is expressed in the following
epigram —the production of a Frenchman, and, I’m sure, a misogunistic
bachelor :
“Waking in Eden, Adam quick descried
By his side sleeping what was once his side—
Flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone, so close—
And his first sleep became his last repose. ”
However, it is but fair to add the following—a woman’s derivation of
herself. A lady once asked a male acquaintance the meaning of the
word woman. “Woman,” he replied ungallantly, “is Woe to man.”
“ Pardon me,” said another fair listener, “ Woman is double you, 0
man.” But, apart from these plays upon words, woman is compounded
of wo and man. Wo is an abbreviation from woof, akin to weave. So
the original idea of a woman was the thinker who stayed at home and
wove or spun. And you know that our ancestresses were generally
engaged in spinning and weaving, and doubtless thinking how long the
time seemed while their lords were hunting in the forests. Lord is of
Saxon origin. It used to be written hlaf-ord. Now hid/ is a loaf, and
ord the source or origin. Hence lord meant the source of bread —the
bread-winner —who had plenty to eat. Again, Lady is also Saxon. It
was originally hloef-dige, or hloefdie. Hlcef is, as before, a loaf, and
dige is to serve. So the primitive idea of a lady was that person whose
duty it was to cut up and serve out the bread. So you perceive that
the custom for ladies to preside at the tea and bread and butter is a
very old, as well as a very nice, one. Marry is from the Latin maritus,


a husband. I suppose the fair sex in those days used to propose—the
custom lingers, I believe, in Leap-year—and that to marry meant to get
a husband, as it now means to get a wife. Clergyman is from the
Latin clericus —our cleric —and is further from the Greek kleros, a lot.
I do not wish to descant on the mode by which clergy, and especially
bishops—the first order of the clergy—are now elected. But you
perceive how the word clergy brings us back to the election of the
first bishop after the Ascension, when the Apostles prayed and then
“ gave forth their lots ; and the lot fell upon Matthias ; and he was
numbered with the eleven Apostles.” Parish is from the French
paroche, the Latin parochia, or the Greek paroikos —dwelling near,
and means a community of people dwelling near each other. Bachelor
is from the Celtic bachgen (which is compounded of bach, little, and
geni, to be born) —a boy, or from baches, a little darling. Spinster is
a female who spins; it is a word synonymous with woman. The
woman has the man, the husband, with her; but the spinster is
unprotected. Possibly she spins and weaves devices by which she
may become wholly a woman. Day is from the Anglo-Saxon dceg.
The four adjectives sardonic, cynical, sarcastic, satirical come next.
They are not, as some of you may suppose, synonymous, and their
derivations are widely different. Sardonic comes in this way ; There
is a plant which grows in Sardinia, called the Sardonia. If you ate
this plant it would cause your mouth to widen into a grimace, like
a harsh, unpleasant laugh. Hence a sardonic person means one who
laughs in a bitter, nasty, sneering way. Cynical is from the Greek
kuon, a dog. A dog is supposed to snarl. So the cynic philosophers
were those misanthropical snarlers who, I fear, have some disciples
to-day. Sarcastic is from the Greek sarkazo, to wound, or tear the
flesh — S arx being Greek for flesh —and denotes a disposition to wound,
or make writhe with scorn. Satirical came, in the first instance, from
the Latin satis, enough ; hence satura (whence our saturate), a full
dish. Then came the meaning of the drama, a full representation of
men’s actions. The drama exposes and ridicules vice and folly ; hence
our word. It might be well for those who feel a little angry betimes,
and inclined to be of a disposition denoted by one of the first three of
these adjectives, to remember their derivations. Boor is a Dutch word,
in which it means a settler. The Boers, for instance, who lately beat
the English in South Africa, are the settlers on the farms there—
descendants of Dutch emigrants. Now, a farmer or countryman has
sometimes been unfavourably compared with a dweller in a city. The
city man is supposed to be courteous, urbane, a wearer of well-cut
clothes and frills. The countryman is supposed to be ill-dressed and
unpolished; hence boor came to mean a fellow from the country —a lout
—a churl.
And now, Ladies, I am sure you want me to get on and tell you the
origin of the word jlirt. I have one which I fancy you won’t find in
any of your dictionaries. The possibly accepted origins are these : —The
Anglo-Saxon jieardian, to trifle; the Scotch Jtird, to flutter; or the
Spanish jlorear* to dally with. But I deal with it thus: Fleur is French
for a flower; hence came an obsolete French verb Jleureter, to skim,


like a bee or butterfly from flower to flower. So in Sanskrit bhramara
means both a bee and a lover; and papillon vieux is French for an
old butterfly and an old dandy. Well, from Jleureter came a fieurt, a
Jlirt, or a member of the gentle sex, who, after humming and cooing
over that noble flower called man, and sipping up all his sweetness,
goes on to the next, and flits from him to yet another, till at last she
leaves so many sapless petals of male humanity to wither on the arid
stems of broken hearts.
And now, Ladies and Gentlemen, I must conduct you toward the
terminus of our journey in somewhat an abrupt and hurried manner.
I have come to the conclusion that the journey I proposed is rather too
long to be taken all at once. There are many, many views which we
have not seen at all—many we had but time merely to glance at. If
any philologist present will be good enough to volunteer to be pioneer
in a retrograde movement for a shorter distance over a portion of the
ground we have traversed, I shall be an attentive follower. Were I
to ask you to go into the slums of Billingsgate, even a cursory peep
here and there would take up too much of our time. Still, allow me
some minutes more, during which we shall stand, as it were, on the
precincts of the celebrated market. I think you’d rather not accompany
me further. Let us now just listen to a little street urchin telling an
•event of the previous night to a companion. Try and remember that
it is he who speaks, and not I. His words are “ Say, mate, some our n
eockneys chum met with ’em Melbourne larrikins at yon booze-ken.
Flash coves, blacklegs, and welchers that they be, they lushed like
old’ Arry till one on ’em nigh kicked the bucket. They told a bobby
that coomed by as they was gents. ‘ That’s all my heye and Betty
Martin,’ says he—and he slips on the darbies and brought ’em to
quod.”
How, all this is very vulgar, and we feel inclined to turn away from
the nasty little chap ; but wait one minute and we shall see that some
of his words at least are of respectable origin—some a little ludicrous.
You may not all know the derivation of cockney, so I’ll tell you. It is
this :—A Londoner paid his first visit to the country. Hearing a horse
neigh, he exclaimed, “ How that horse laughs ! ” “We call that
neighing,” said a country cousin. Next morning the Londoner heard
the cock crowing. “ How that cock neighs ! ” said he. “ Cock neigh !
cried the cousin, with surprise and contempt; and the appellative word
stuck to the Londoners ever since. lam aware that this is considered
a far-fetched derivation, and that one writer has derived cockney from
Cockaygne, the lubber-land, the Eutopia of luxury, such as London is
supposed to be; and another from the French coqueliner, to pamper.
Chum is of Anglo-Saxon origin, from cuma, a guest. Larrikin is
-essentially Australian, and springs out of the pronunciation of an Irish
policeman, who said to some badly-behaved boys in Bourke-street,
“What are ye larrikin about here fori” Booze-ken is a low public-
house, and hooze is from the Dutch huy-zen, to tipple. Cove, a slight
corruption of the north of England word cuif, a stupid fellow. Black-
leg, or more shortly leg, is a low betting man who cheats, and is derived
from the custom of jockeys (some of whom had not a high reputation


for honesty) wearing long black boots. Welsher —that is, a man who
bets, and doesn’t pay if he loses—is from the nursery rhyme—
“ Taffy was a Welshman, Taffy was a thief.”.
Lush, to drink, claims its origin from a Mr. Lushington, a large London
brewer, as tramway comes from Mr. Entrain, their inventor. The devil
has various slang terms to designate him. When the urchin called him
“old Harry,” it wasn’t because his name was Henry. No; it came
from descriptions of this being. He is said to wear horns, to have a
cloven foot, and to be covered with hair. Hence he was termed “ old
Hairy,” which changed into “ old Harry.” He was also called “ old
Hornie,” as Burns writes :
“ 0 thou, whatever title suit ye,
Old Hornie, Satan, Nick, or Clootie,
Wha in yon cavern, grim and sootie,
Spairged under hatches, &c.,
Hear me, old Hangie, for a wee !”
So “ old Nick” is not from Nicholas, but from Knickar, the Scandinavian
god of evil. And “ the deuce ”is a slight modification of Deus or of
Zeus, Jupiter, known to the Greeks, curiously enough, as the Prince of
the Power of the Air. Bobby has the same origin as Peeler, both
springing from Sir Robert Peel, the inventor of Irish policemen. To
kick the bucket is to die. It came about from a strange method by
which a Yorkshireman managed to die. He put a rope round his
neck, stood on a bucket, tied the rope to a rafter and kicked the bucket
away, and died. When the policeman said, “ All my eye and Betty
Martin,” to imply his doubt about the chums being gents, I don’t
suppose he was aware that he was slightly misquoting a prayer to St.
Martin which had fallen into ridicule at the Reformation, and which
commenced “O mihi, beate Martine”—“ Pray for me, blessed Martin.”
Even the introduction of h before eye brought it nearer the original.
Nor did he understand why he called handcuffs by the name of darbies.
This word is derived from the pathetic story of Darby and Joan, who
affectionately clung closely together. So a pair of-handcuffs were called
Darby and Joan, because they bound people by a tie hard to break.
In compliment to the fair sex Joan was let go, and Darby remained in
the plural darbies. Quod is an abbreviation of the quadrangle of a
prison.
And, now, Ladies and Gentlemen, we have come to the terminus of
our journey. But let us not part yet. Let us, ere we say good-night
and go to our homes, have a quiet retrospect of what we have seen,
which may lead us in thought far beyond the Babel of the past and the
Billingsgate of the present. I have endeavoured to throw a little light
here and there on the subject of language. The effort, even were I—
what I don’t pretend to be—an adept in philology, must be imperfect,
for even an epitome needs partial elimination. The subject is too wide,
too immense, to be condensed into the space of a lecture, during the
delivery of which the eyes of the audience would keep open. But let


ns take home for contemplation a few thoughts on language. See the
greatness of this science. It is in this that we are so peculiarly
superior to the brute creation. Brutes have their senses as we have—
some of them much more powerfully developed than are ours. Brutes
have sensations of pleasure and pain—they have memories and wills,
and they can reason in a way of their own. For example, a monkey in
the Royal Park had one day a nut thrown to him —it was outside the
bars, two inches beyond his reach ; he walked thoughtfully round his
cage, found an old raisin stem, and, coming back, hooked in the nut and
ate it. Animals can love or hate, or be indifferent and lukewarm in
their feelings. Aye, more, they can evidence a sense of shame or of
pride. Indeed, I can tell you of a horse I was accustomed to ride,
which, if I might use a Hibernicism, was a most conceited donkey. I
lived in a large town in Andalusia, and used sometimes to ride out into
the country. My horse, when in the country, showed few particular
paces ; he would trot away in ordinary style, but as soon as he got into
the town, and knew people were looking at him, he’d draw himself up and
regularly strut like a peacock, thinking, doubtless, I was there merely
to show him off, as Pope says :
‘ ‘ See the proud steed you pompously bestride
Shares with his lord the pleasure and the pride,
Yes, and I assure you brutes have a consciousness of justice. It was
only the other day that I observed two hens fighting in a poultry-yard.
As they commenced the battle a duck wobbled up, and stood quietly
near to see fair play. Aye, and they give signs of being religious
even —they can be actually verts in religion. I heard of a number
of birds which frequented a Presbyterian church turning Anglicans,
•chirping and twittering around the adjacent Church of England as if
they wanted to help the choir. The vicar of this church expressed a
fear that as they had begun to roam they would not be content with
the Establishment, but go across to a Roman Catholic church hard by.
But the birds that do so are generally sparrows, and can be spared. But
brutes have no definite language, for we would not estimate at any value
the few words a parrot can prattle, for to it they are meaningless, or
nearly so. Language is, then, one of the mighty barriers which distin-
guish men from brutes ; and herein lies its greatness. “We cannot tell
as yet what language is,” writes Max Muller. “It may be a production
of nature, a work of human art, or a divine gift. But to whatever
sphere it belongs, it would seem to stand ursurpassed—nay, unequalled
—in it by anything else. If it be a production of nature, it is her last
■and crowning production, which she reserved for man alone. If it be a
work of human art, it would seem to raise the human artist almost to
a level of a Divine Creator. If it be the gift of God, it is God’s
greatest gift; for through it God spake to man and man speaks to God
in worship, prayer, and meditation.” And springing from these
thoughts there is yet another. The Old Testament tells of the separa-
tion of man from man by the growth of diverse languages owing to
j)ride. But what is the first act of the Christian Church on its birthday


—the day of Pentecost 1 A few poor fisherman stood up to assert the
■cause of the great new religion which had taken root in men’s souls by
the waters of Jordan and amid the lilies of Galilee. Uneducated,
unendowed by human means, they could speak but the vulgar Aramaic
patois. But the great Spirit was there, and the sound of the mighty
rushing wind was heard, and that vast concourse of many-tongued
nations—Partisans, and Medes, and Elamites, and Mesopotamians,
and Cappadocians, and Pontians, and Pamphylians, and Phrygians, and
Cretans, and Romans, and Arabians —all listened to an account of
the wonderful works of God, each in his own tongue. Evidence,
indeed, that God would ratify the Apostle’s statement, “ God hath
made of one blood all nations of men.” And see the humanizing
influence of Christianity brought out in the compliance with the
command, “G$ ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every
nation.” The command necessitated the learning of different languages,
and this learning of them invited a comparison of them and a tracing
of them backward, and the tracing backward at last showed they
had but one common source. And so the study of language riveted
the bonds of the great fraternity of the human race, and with Christian
liberty equality began to assert her rights, and the mighty commune
arose and flourished, and was ratified and confirmed.
And we can derive many a practical lesson from our contemplations
on language. Lord Bacon well says, “ Men believe that their reason
is lord over their words, but it happens, too, that words exercise a
reciprocal and reactionary power over our intellect.” “Words, as a
Tartar’s bow, shoot back upon the understanding of the wisest, and
mightily entangle and pervert the judgment.” If, then, our words
have such an influence, should we not cull the best of them for our use 1
And for this cause alone ought we to be prompted to cultivate and cherish
accuracy and refinement in what we say. Speak not for speaking’s sake,
but regard speech as an expression of thought; then if thought be pure and
pregnant, so will speech —“ for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh.” If I may, let me advise the younger members of our
union to avoid slang as much as possible, and among themselves not to
use words which they wouldn’t like to use in the society of ladies. By
following this rule they will be the better fitted for, and happier in,
whatever society they should move best for their own welfare. And
besides this, science itself hints that each word we speak may be pre-
served amid the ear-shaped leaves of some silently-listening tree, or may
cause the ethereal atoms to quiver throughout endless space. And
if Nature and Infinity thus retain, they may hereafter bring back our
words, and so science helps to endorse the solemn decree —“ Every idle
word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of
judgment,” And in another verse of the Bible the very highest gift
that man can have is connected in contrast with language. He who
learned his early lessons at the feet of the sage Gamaliel, and heard
afterwards the rich rhetoric of Greece—aye, and listened to the notes of
the seraphim’s song—also wrote, “ Though I speak with the tongues of
men and of angels, but have not love, I am become sounding brass or a
clanging cymbal.” With that gift, as a mighty telephone, we may be


raised in hope far beyond the limits of earthly sounds. What is the
world but, as it were, a Babel or a Billingsgate—a hive, round which
the murmur and din of voices are ever heard 1 those voices ever chang-
mg; their cadences dying away and commencing anew, amid timers
ever-varying undulations. But the hum and stir of this World-Babel
shall at last be quite still—for another mon is to succeed, when all nations
and tribes and languages shall gather from different ages and lands and
vocations, toward the Restitution of all things. And as the streamlets
ot hie here shall flow into and swell the River of the Waters of Life
there, so may it be that the manifold tongues of men shall blend in rich
harmony to strengthen heaven’s language in its praise to Him who is
called the Word, and when but one language shall be left to learn—the
language of the New Song before the Throne.
BtBUO
Walker, May, and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop Street, Melbourne.
