

From
Labourer to Landlord
An Immigrant's
SUCCESS IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
Issued by
THE GOVERNMENI IMMIGRATION A ND TOURIST BUREAU
CHALLIS HOUSE
SYDNEY
Percy Hunter
DIRECTOR




From Labourer
to Landlord
An Emigrant’s Success in
New South Wales.
The individual successes achieved
by farmers engaged in almost every
branch of the agricultural industry,
many of whom began with no other
capital than health and a virile
Reward for
industry.
determination, and some of them immigrants
who carried the additional handicap of their
unfamiliarity with the conditions of a strange
country, are incidents in the stirring story of
steady, solid prosperity, which is the history of
the development of New South Wales. And the
two things are complementary. New South Wales,
an immense territory of 198,000,000 acres, equal
to two and a half times the size of the United
Kingdom, has such a wide range of rich soils and
congenial climate, that it can produce practically
every crop, fruit, flower, or domestic animal. So
the man with brain and muscle only needs to
start in this country with a resolute mind, to win
a quick and ample reward.
THE BRUNSKILL FAMILY.


If efficient,
sufficient.
A GOOD CROP.
Such a man is Anthony Bnmskill,
whose career bears out this truth.
From humble beginnings as a farm
worker, Bnmskill, who emigrated to
Xew South Wales from the north of
England, by dint of industry and perseverance,
won such a measure of success that he is now the
owner of Alien by, a splendid holding in the Wagga
Wagga district, and unsurpassed in the State as a
mixed farm. Mr. Bninskill’s case is not singular.
It has its counterparts in Xew South Wales,
but it is a most striking illustration of what a
good farmer may achieve. The town of Wagga
Wagga lies 300 miles from Sydney the Capital,
on the main southern railway, connecting Sydney
with Melbourne, the Capital of the neighbouring
State of Victoria. It is one of the most im-
portant country towns, and is the centre of a
large extent of flat and fertile country of rich
chocolate soils, eminently suitable for the cultiva-
tion of wheat. The average raiiiu.i : f the locality,
estimated from calculations extending over a
period of twenty years, is 241 inches per annum.
For a long while the district was given over
almost entirely to grazing pursuits, but of late
years, the areas brought under the plough have
steadily increased, and to-day the agricultural
interests of Wagga Wagga show abundant
promise, and will strengthen, with the passing of
each yi.u
11l the year 1877 after a tempes-
tuous salvage of over one hundred
days, the Aberdeen clipper “ Peri-
cles ” entered Sydney Harbour, bear-
ing to New South Wales among its
Brunskill's
arrival.
passengers, George Bnmskill, a farmer from the
North of England, with his wife and four sons.
Bnmskill and his boys began work soon after
arrival on a dairy farm at Kiarna on the South
Coast of Xew Smith Wales, where they remained
for twelve months At the end of that term


they went to Wagga Wagga. Here the father and
his eldest son. Anthony, then nineteen years old,
assisted in completing the railroad link between
Melbourne, the capital of the neighbouring State
of Victoria, and Sydney, which was then being
laid down in the vicinity.
When the season came round, the
father and Anthony and another son
went harvesting. In those days farm-
ing machinery was not in general use,
and Brunskill senior mowed the crop
As farm
labourer.
with a scythe and cradle, in the use of which his
experience at home had made him an adept, while
the two boys tied up the sheaves. The three men
in this way reaped about 2-| acres each day.
So successful were they in this occupation, that
at the end of the season they had accumulated
ALLONBY TEAMS WITH CHAFF.
sufficient capital to lease a small farm of 200
acres. This area is located at Uranquinty, about
2 miles from Wagga Wagga. In a short while
Brunskill senior purclia-ed it outright, and lived
on it with the family until his death in 1892.
His widow, who is hale and hearty, still resides
upon it.
Brunskill’s
experiment.
This holding was worked by father
and sons with varying success for a
number of years. In the early
period of its occupation, many diffi-
culties presented themselves, and the
ploughing for a short time had to be carried on
with a horse and cow in double harness. But during
these years at Uranquinty, of hard toil, of success
and failure, Anthony Brunskill gained a solid all


round experience, studying the conditions of
farming in this new country, and acquiring much
information that was useful to him later on.
At this time, and indeed for many years after,
the Wagga Wagga district was given over
almost entirely to grazing pursuits, and par-
ticularly to the pasturage of sheep. There
were few farmers, and the largest area culti-
vated for wheat did not exceed 100 acres. People
ridiculed the idea that wheat could be grown
successfully on the flats of the Murrumbidgee
River, which, spreads its waters through Wagga
Wagga and hundreds of miles beyond it.
Anthony Brunskill held a different opinion, and
in sprite of all opposition, in 1880 he started
operations with a capital of £100, which lie had
saved. He leased 60 acres and put it under
wheat with a single-furrow plough, sowed by
hand and harrowed with a home-made wooden
implement. While the crop was growing lie did
not idle away his time, hut carted wood to Wagga
Wagga for sale.
Its success
makes him
Landlord.
Hi- (xpcimi. nt was in the highest
< 1*-”i• -i mtst.i. torv. and at harvest
time ue was rewarded by a good
crop which lie cut with a scythe.
The haj’ proved to he of splendid
quality, and sold sowed that next year he was able
to buy hoi m and rent more land. He continued
to sow t tile flats with wheat, with such
splendid 1 cbuub, that five years later he found him-
self in a position to conduct operations on a much
larger scale. In 1886 he crowned his success by pur-
chasing t,Boo acres at £4 per acre close to Wagga
W.-ce; paving a • a-h de| u-it equal to a quarter
ot u - \ Hue—thus in.a,mum Ids own landlord, after
a resilience of only nine years in Xew South Wales.
Shortly after, he met with a severe
reverse, owing to extraordinary cir-
cumstances. The financial crisis that
Australia was then passing through
A severe
reverse.
TEAMS TAKING CHAFF FROM FARM TO RAILWAY.


ONE OF THE FIELD BEDROOMS.
had its effect upon him, and he found he could not
hold out. The general depression was severely
felt, and prices fell abnormally. In speaking
of the state of things at this time, Brunskill
said; ‘‘l have seen draught horses that should
bring £45 sold for £6, and sheep sold for
is. 6d. each, worth 12s. now. I saw one mob
of 200 cattle one year old sold for 12s 6d. per
head.” Through pressure of events over which
he had no control he was forced to quit the
holding.
Quite undaunted, confident in him-
self and, in the potentialities of the
country, he made a fresh start. In
189 J he leased an area of 1,600 acres
at Forest Hill, near Wagga Wagga,
A New
Beginning.
which had been, given up by other farmers on
account of the low prices for wheat then ruling.
He put in a crop which gave a good yield,
and, as the price of wheat had advanced
100 per cent, he realised a sum sufficient to
enable him to meet all his liabilities, and
to dear himself of debt. He worked this
leasehold area for some years, and as the prices
of wheat maintained a high level, he did so well
that in 1898 he purchased portion of it outright.
Benefiting by experience, that sapient teacher, he
resolved never to again purchase more land than
he had cash to pay- for.
Thus for the second time he be-
came his own landlord, and, on this
area, his now line property of Allonby
found its beginnings. It has been
added to year by year, till to-day it
Allonby’s
Foundation.
comprises 4,800 acres of some of the richest wheat
land in Australia, owned by Anthony Brunskill,
with every stick and stone and blade of grass upon it.
The 1901 crop was exceptionally heavy, and
half the yield being held till the following year,
the lucky owner in 1902 found himself in


possession of 3,600 tons of fodder, which in that
dry season was worth £6 ss. per ton. He fed
45,000 sheep from different stations for three
months during this year, and many a Riverina
sheep-run was indebted to Anthony Brunskill’s
foresight for the preservation of its stud stock.
From this onward, Allonby, under the unremitting
supervision of its master has flourished, until now
it has a permanent establishment of 40 farm hands,
70 horses, and is equipped with thousands of
pounds’ worth of valuable modern machinery. The
farm is one, of the most progressive and up-to-date
in the State, and is a model mixed farm, especially
in regard to its organisation and in the advanced
methods employed for its practical working.
On the crown of a gentle knoll,
facing the setting sun, and com-
manding fine views of the country
for miles, stands Allonby Home-
stead, a magnificent residence of
The
Homestead.
FARM LABOURERS' QUARTERS.
twenty rooms. Spreading- northward are the vine-
yard and orchard, whose bounteous crops keep
the farm supplied with many varieties of choice
fruits. Clustering at the foot of the orchard is
the little hamlet of workmen’s homes, store rooms
and farm buildings. There is a row of substan-
tially built cottages, containing sleeping accom-
modation for forty men, with dining-room, kitchen,
sitting-room and bathrooms, and pervading all is
a feeling of homeliness and comfort. Across the
way are the commodious storage sheds for farm
implements and harvesting machinery. In other
large barns are stored chaff-cutting machines, trac-
tion engines, drays, waggons and light carts,
buggies, and sulkies. Long rows of stables house
the working horses on the farm, and the valuable


blood stock for which Allonby is noted. The
two-storied fodder loft with shoots running down
to the feeding troughs, an advanced method for
the handling of horse feed in bulk, stands at the
end of the stables. Beyond the stables are the
sheep-yards, killing-yards, and woolshed, which is
used only once a year for shearing purposes, being
utilised at other times as a store for grain.
A Highly-
improved
Holding.
Allonby is divided into thirty-four
paddocks, eighteen of which are
secured with wire netting. This form
of fence has been found to be most
satisfactory where strong sheep, such
as the Lincolns, are depastured. Water is im-
pounded everywhere, no fewer than forty dams
having been built with water tables feeding them.
The water is raised into large overhead tanks for
the use of the homestead and men, and for numer-
ous other purposes. The convenience and utility
of such a scheme of water supply cannot be over-
estimated. To water cattle or stock, or fill one
of the wheeled tanks which keep the steam chaff-
cutters supplied, is but the work of a moment' —
the turning of a tap. Even all these up-to-date
appurtenances, however, do not satisfy the mind
of Allonby’s master, a man full of enterprise and
restless for new improvements. He has worked
upwards from a labourer, and never for a moment
does he forget it. His endeavour is to treat men
as he would have been treated in his labouring
clays. Xew plans have been prepared for another
building to be erected shortly, for the accommoda-
tion of forty men. It will be of the latest and
most approved design, with twenty bedrooms,
each to provide for two men.
The principal output from Allonby
is chaff. Finding that a steady mar-
ket existed for this commodity, the
output of wheat for grain was allowed
to gradually decrease, and the crop
Chaff the
Principal
Output.
FALIOW LAND.


is now taken off for hay, and then cut
into chaff as required. The principal wheats
grown are Lammas, Dart’s Imperial, Australian
Talavera, and Crown Purple. All of these
varieties grow a succulent stalk, rich green
right down to the butt. They are sown about
60 lb. to the acre in a late sowing; or 52 lb.
if the sowing is earlier. In the 1909-10 season,
of the area sown, 800 acres of wheat and 600
of oats were cut for hay, and stacked in the
paddocks. About 500 acres were also sown
with rape, and 800 acres with lucerne. The
two latter crops were not harvested, but fed
off to the stock. The Allonby chaff is of
such excellent character that it generally realises
ss. per ton over market rates. Not a bag
of it finds its way under the auctioneer’s
hammer. It is eagerly sought for and goes
out to fulfil orders from all parts of the State.
The net amount placed on the trucks at Wagga
Wagga for 1909 was 58,880 bags, weighing about
2,560 tons, which realised an average price of
£3 15s. 6d. per ton, whilst the average yield per
acre for the same year was 2 tons 8 cwt. For the
same season the sales of wheat and oats in grain
realised £743.
The cost of sowing and reaping a
crop of Allonby hay, and cutting it
into chaff, in an average season is as
follows: —
A few
Figures.
Ploughing. —A man with 4 horses ploughs 4
acres a day at a cost of 4s. id. per acre.
Seeding. — A man with 3 horses sows 10 acres a
day at a cost of 6s. id. per acre.


Keapmg and Binding.—A man with a machine
and 3 horses cuts 10 acres a day at a cost
of ss. yd. per acre.
Stooking.—A man stocks 8 acres a day at a
cost of is. per acre.
Carting and Stacking.—Five men cart and stack
11 acres per day at a cost of 4s. pd. per
acre.
Chaff-cutting. —Seven men cut 7 acres per day
at a t ost of £1 as. per acre
The cost of carting the chaff to the railway
station, 10 miles distant, and incidental expenses,
brings the total cost per acre to £2 19s. 6d.
Allonby in a normal season yields 2 tons of chaff
to the acre, and selling at £3 15s. 6d. per ton,
realises fy ns. per acre, or a net profit of
£4 ns. 6d. per acre.
The haystacks are dealt with
systematically. Standing at the
homestead, as far as the eye can see,
stretch broad acres of wheat pad-
docks. At intervals of a few hun-
Modern
Methods.
dred yards large stacks are securely built
with well-thatched tops; and round each has
been ploughed fire-breaks about 50 feet wide.
In due course a traction engine, drawing lie-
hind it the chaff-cutting and other machinery,
is driven to the stacks. The sheaves are fed
into a long tube, through which a carrying
belt is running, and into which at the same
time a jet of steam is forced. The steam
softens the stalks, and allows the knives to shear
clean through the sheaf, without breaking the
stalks or dispelling any of their nutritious pro


perties in dust. The chaff drops down through
sieves and cleaners over the elevators into the
bagger, and is then loaded promptly on to the
waggons and taken to Wagga Wagga for trucking.
Large buildings, each with a storage capacity of
500 tons, have been erected. Should insufficiency
of trucks delay the transport of the chaff, it is
placed in the store, and the cutting plants are
taken from stack to stack, thus being kept in con-
stant occupation almost throughout the whole year.
Lucerne thrives very well in this
district under natural conditions, if
the ground is kept loose. Of course
without an adequate rainfall or a
Paddocks of
Lucerne.
scheme of irrigation, the wonderful productivity
of the Hunter River or the Coastal districts of
the State and other places cannot be expected.
PANORAMA OF ALLONBY HOMESTEAD AND ORCHARD SHOWING THE
The first crop sown at Allonby averaged about
15 cwt. to the acre, but subsequent crops have
yielded a much heavier return. The lucerne area
is subdivided into grazing paddocks for the stud
stock, this being found the most economic method
of feeding them.
Only pedigree stock are reared on
Allonby. A flock of about 2,800 pure-
bred Lincoln ewes, with 2 per cent,
of rams, is kept for breeding purposes.
High-class
Stock.
The annual increase reaches about 2,000 hoggets,
which generally top the market at the stud sales.
In 1909 Allonby yearling rams averaged about
4 |.
guineas per head, whilst stud ewes to the
value of £763 were sold. Besides the stock sales
the clip, a matter of sixty-four bales of wool,
brought nearly £4OO. To maintain the high stan


dard of the sheep, new blood is infused every year,
the purchases for 1909 amounting to about £360.
Allonby horses are of the finest
class bred in New South Wales.
Seventy-two horses are employed all
the year round, in favourable seasons,
and about twenty draught mares are
Fame of
Allonby
Horses.
kept for breeding purposes. The sales of horses
last year amounted to £432. The same care is
exercised in maintaining the standard of excellence
in horses as in sheep, and a three-year old Clydes-
dale stallion was recently imported at a high
figure for this purpose. Other stock, such as pigs,
cattle, and killing sheep, are raised only for home
consumption, but this is done on such a thorough
scale that over /too worth of stock is sold annually
from this source. Not the least important record
AGNIFICENT SWEEP OF WHEAT LANDS. ALLONBY'S AREA IS 4,800 ACRES.
in the office at Allonby is the complete series of
stud books kept. These are very much the same
for sheep and horses, and show the name of the
dam, brand, foaling date, breeder, description,
pedigree, service date, sire, and other minutiae.
Anthony Brunskill, unlike some
other farmers, does not depend on
one crop alone. The fact that some
men in this neighbourhood have made
fortunes out of wheat-growing alone,
More than
one Bow-
string.
is no proof that they would not have done still
better by extending their resources: and this
portion of the Riverina, and, indeed, the whole of
the wheat belt of New South Wales, is distinctly
suited for the development of the varying and
profitable possibilities of mixed farming. Almost
every month has its profitable commodity to market.


What
Organization
Means.
Furthermore, with differing sources
of revenue, the possibility arises of
keeping a farm staff constantly at
work throughout the whole year.
If wheat or sheep farming is cn-
gaged in alone, large bodies of men are required
only at set periods of the year, for work such
as ploughing and harvesting, or shearing.
Very few men are required in the interval,
so that a farmer’s labourers are changed every
year. Only second-rate labour may be obtained
on this account, since men naturally prefer
constant employment. With a mixed farm,
however, each month calls for its own labour. In
the Napoleonic administration of Allonby’s owner,
organisation has reached such a pitch of excellence
that its permanent staff of 40 men is closely
engaged throughout the whole of the year. His
four sons are his lieutenants: the eldest has charge
of the horse-breeding; the next of sheep, cattle,
and pigs; the remaining two have the care of the
crops and machinery. At certain times of the
year, the whole army, augmented by casual labour
at certain periods is engaged in the chief operation
of cliaffcutting. Thus, when the psychological
moment arrives to cut the hay, stack and thatch
it, the whole work is carried out smoothly and
scientifically. A similar system is followed in
regard to shearing, ploughing, and sowing. So
that, instead of engaging a large number of men
especially to cut the chaff, the traction and other
engines when not engaged in ploughing or harvest-
ing are occupied the whole year round, going from
stack to stack, cutting and bagging. The chaff


cutting staffs thus become expert, and economic
handling naturally follows. On a farm of such
magnitude, plenty of indoor occupation can be
found on wet days. A mechanic is constantly
employed, either in the forge or carpenter’s shop,
and he can engage quite a number of assistants
to help him when weather conditions preclude
outdoor occupation. Others clean and oil the
harness —no inconsiderable job on Allonby. Yards,
sheds, and stables also get a thorough overhaul
and clean-up. Bags are mended, and the seed
wheat is carefully gleaned and graded in readiness
for the next sowing. It is not to be wondered,
therefore, that Mr. Brunskill’s sons have no liking
for the city. Their ambition is to have farms
like their father’s, and he has spared no expense
in allowing them to have experience amongst
stock, to attend agricultural colleges and shows,
where scientific farming, veterinary surgery, and
such useful knowledge is imparted. They have
been brought up with the broad mind of the real
tiller of the soil —not to believe that what they
breed or produce is better than everyone else’s;
and when their stock was beaten at the Royal
Agricultural Show, the father was almost gratified,
maintaining that it did them good to occasionally
get a licking, so that they might be encouraged
to put forth greater effort.
That this is an advertising age
applies equally as much to a farm of
this magnitude as to any other busi-
ness concern. Allonby’s owner at a
very early stage saw that to get the
Success at
Shows.
best prices for his valuable stock and produce,


ONE FO THE DAM AND WOODSHED.
they must be made known, and accordingly he
has sent the best of his output to the shows in all
parts of New South Wales. The Wagga Show has
been his pride, and in 1907 the Allonby exhibits
there comprised 430, and in 1908 the number
reached 732 separate items. The products of this
farm form a notable contribution to the District
Exhibit at the Royal Agricultural Show held
annually in Sydney at Easter time. This farm in
1907 won the first prize of £5O for the best farm
in the Southern districts in a competition instituted
by the Sydney Mail newspaper. Blue labels, with
the magic inscription “ First Prize,” sufficient to
cover the walls of a fair-sized room may be seen
at the homestead, telling that its stock and
produce had been successfully displayed at Jnnee,
Grenfell, Lockhart, Germanton, Albury, Corowa,
Narrandera, Cowra, Young, Henty, Coolah,
Temora, Wagga Wagga, and Sydney. The convey-
ance of stock to the different shows is managed on
well organised and systematic lines. Specially con-
structed crates convey the valuable sheep) to all
parts of the State, and they are generally disposed
of by auction after the show; no exhibit being
shown a second time.
Allonby is the farm labourer’s para-
dise. As before related, the owner
las risen by bis own exertions as a
farm labourer, and has never forgotten
the fact. He believes that success
The Farm
Labourer’s
Lot.
has followed him on account of his judgment in
the selection of his labourers. It is a great
misfortune for any farm labourer at Allonby to
“ get the sack,” The sleeping accommodation is
well ventilated and comfortable in the extreme.
The long dining-room is airy and well lighted.


Attached to it is a sitting-room, where there is
always a stock of newspapers, periodicals, and
well selected books on hand. The kitchen, presided
over by a thorough!}/ competent cook, provides
meals quite as good as those enjoyed by the
owner himself. Breakfast at 6 o’clock, consists
of fresh beef or mutton, with fried vegetables,
porridge, abundance of milk, tea, or coffee, and
“ brownie ” (currant loaf), with jam and butter —
() o’clock, spell with a snack, and “ smoke-oh.” —
Noon —lunch brought out to the place where the
men are working. At 3 o’clock, afternoon tea
and “ smoke-oh.” 6 o’clock —hot dinner at the
homestead dining-room. The produce of the
Allonby orchard is never sold; it goes to the
tables of master and men.
British
Immigrants
at Allonby.
Mr. Brunskill came from Cumber-
land and is a typical north-country
Englishman. On several occasions
when batches of new arrivals were
assembled in the Immigration Office
GOOD SORTS.
in Sydney, he has caught the sound of his boyhood
tongue, and fortunate indeed were the farm
labourers selected by him. Quite a number of
immigrants are employed, and several of the illus-
trations show them at work. Engaged at £1
per week and keep, they have all been surprised
to find on first pay-day that the money received
was 30s. per week. Of course they had proved
themselves efficient farm labourers. When it is
considered that some of these men travelled from
London to Sydney in a fast and commodious


YEARLING RAMS.
modern liner of 12,000 tons, with plenty of good
food, airy cabins, for a sum as low as £6 ; the
contrast with the experience of their employer’s
voyage, over thirty years previous, when three hun-
dred and fifty men were closely packed into one
of a sailing ship’s holds, is a striking one. In those
days the new arrival did as best he could: to-day
selected male immigrants who are agriculturists
of the right type, are met at the steamer, their
belongings are collected and passed through the
Customs by the expert and courteous officials of
tlie Immigration Bureau. Each one is personally
interviewed by these officers, who rapidly form an
estimate of the immigrant’s capabilities and am-
bitions. On the day of his arrival the immigrant
finds himself speeding off to the country, with
full instructions for travel, and an employer to
meet him upon arrival.
Riverina, in which division of New
South Wales the Wagga Wagga
District is situated, is to use the
words of Mr. Brunskill, solid and
prosperous, and the best yet lies
Go thou and
do likewise.
before it. In common with other divisions within
the wheat belt of New South Wales, miles of good
agricultural land still wait for the first kiss of the
ploughshare. The large estates that pioneered
Australia are rapidly being resumed by the Govern-
ment or sold privately by the owners. In both
instances the land is subdivided into suitably sized
farms, and easier terms tor payment are not offered
in the whole world. The greater part of Allonby
was purchased at £4 10s. per acre, and hundreds of
its acres returned more than that amount of profit
for several years in succession. Similar land can


be bought to-day for £6 per acre: it has for the
most part been ringbarked and cleared of fallen
timber, so that very little more than burning off
the dead wood requires to be done before a smiling
mixed farm can be evolved.
The Most
Attractive
Field.
Vast as are the agricultural possi-
bilities of Xew South Wales, wheat-
farming offers the most attractive
field to the new-comer. In this great
branch of rural activity, there is
room, for almost limitless expansion. Only during
recent years has serious attention been given to
the cultivation of wheat in New South Wales, but
such success was at once achieved, and the suita-
bility of its soils for wheat-growing so completely
demonstrated that the increase in the areas brought
under the plough, and in the output of the cereal
has progressed, steadily and solidly year by year.
But to-day in New South Wales, a rich territory
of 310,700 square miles, equal to 198,400,000 acres,
only about 3,000,000 acres are under cultivation.
More than half of this cultivated area is under
wheat. New South Wales manifestly wants
farmers to develop its broad silent spaces, and
in return it offers a full reward.
There are seven good reasons why
success should attend the wheat-
farmer in Xew South Wales:—
( a) Land on easy terms and
conditions.
Seven Good
Reasons.
(L) A wide range of rich loamy soils.
(c) A propitious climate and rainfall.
(d) Low cost of ploughing, sowing, and har-
vesting.
(e) The assurance of good yields.
(/) Light transport charges from, farm to
market.
(g) A certain market and good prices.
ONE OF THE BEST.


Good wheat land, situated in dis-
tricts with an ample rainfall, may be
bought at prices ranging from £i ios.
to £b per acre for unimproved farms,
and up to £5 and £lO per acre
The Price
of Land.
for improved areas. Prices vary according
to districts, the state of the land, and its
distance from market. There are plenty of
openings for the wheat farmer in search of
land to secure a sufficient area, in a desirable
district. Land in private subdivisions is pro-
curable on easy terms and conditions, and at
reasonable prices. Generally the purchaser makes
a deposit of from a tenth to a quarter of the
capital value of the land and pays off the balance
over a term of years with 5 per cent, interest 011
the amount outstanding. All over the State good
land may be bought from private vendors, 111
LEICESTER STUD RAMS.
areas of ample size and in splendid districts.
Suitable Crown lands and lands re-purchased by the
Government under the Closer Settlement Act, are
also available. On these purchases also, a small
deposit is made and the payments of the balance
of purchase money are spread over a series of years.
The climate of New South, Wales
is one of the lies! in the world. For
temperateness and equability it is
unexcelled. Extremes of heat and
cold arc unknown. There is no
Climate and
Rainfall.
1 littm winter season. Very few of the inhabitants
have ever seen snow. The winter season extends
from ]une to August, and at this time the normal
conditions are bracing atmosphere and genial
sunshine. So the wheat farmer is fortunately


placed. He will not be hampered by weather-
conditions in ploughing and harvesting. The
wheat ripens evenly, permitting the cheapest
methods of harvesting to be employed.
Area Avail-
able in Rain-
fall Belt.
An ample rainfall for successful
wheat-farming is from 20 to 25 inches.
The area available within this rain-
fall belt comprises 100,000,000 acres
of which probably one-fourth is
suitable for the profitable production of wheat.
Actual results have proved the industry to be
highly profitable in districts with less than 20
inches—a yield of over 37 bushels has been ob-
tained with less Ilian 19 inches in the year. What
is of more importance than the actual inches of
rain received is the period when it falls. Rain is
most beneficial in the early autumn, to lacilitatc
-ploughing, and in the spring, at the time when
the wheat is heading and flowering; and ialls at
such times assure an abundant harvest. The
wheat district's of the State are fortunate in
benefiting by rain at these particular periods.
The very dryness of the wheat districts in
summer, which at one time was considered fatal
to their suitability for wheat, is now rightly
considered one of their advantages, for such
dryness is favourable for the production of high-
class grain, and because of it rust need only be
feared in unusually wet years, hay-making is
facilitated, and the crop for grain can be left in
the field until thoroughly ripe, when it can be
h 1. with special machinery and bagged
ri.nh an market.
Good -paying yields of wheat are
assured in Xew South Wales. Only
once during the last ten years has
the crop failed. In the succeeding
Paying
Yields
Assured.
THE CHAFF-CUTTING PLANT.


Year.
Area.
Yields.
Value,
acres.
bushels.
£
I901
1,530,609
16,173,771
2.051,297
1902
1,392,070
14,808,705
2,517,480
1903
1,279,760
1,585,097
507,231
1904
1,561,111
27,334,141
3,974,840
I90S
1.775,955
16,464,415
2,428,500
1906
1,939,447
20,737,200
2,920,500
1907
1,866.253
21,817,938
2,943,150
1908
1,390,171
9,155,884
1,831,180
1909
1,394,056
15,483,276
2,774,000
1910
1,990,180
28,532,029
*
STRIPPERS AND BINDERS.
year the average yield was 17 bushels. Last
year it was 14 bushels. In many individual
cases yields up to 30 bushels per acre are not
uncommon. It has been found that if the farmer
sells his wheat for 2s. 6d. per bushel it will leave
him a profit. But wheat may be considered at
bed-rock value when it brings that amount. The
selling price of wheat has been much more than
that for ten years past. In 1909, all through the
year it was worth 4s. 2d. per bushel. The following
table gives the area, yield, and value of wheat
crops during the years between 1899 and 1907: —
*Xot yet available.
A considerable number of farms,
and particularly the large ones, are
worked on what is known as the
" shares ” system. Under this sys-
Farming
on Shares.
tem a farmer possessing the necessary
team and implements arranges with the land-
holder to crop a certain area for a season or for a
number of seasons. The usual form of agreement
provides that the land-owner shall provide land,
seed, two-thirds of the manure (where manure is


used), and bags for his share; the farmer on his
part must perform all the operations of cultivation
and harvesting in a workmanlike manner, and at
seasonable times, using his own plant for the pur-
pose. He must also provide one-third of the
manure (where manure is used), and bags for his
share. Up to a specified yield of the crop, the
owner and farmer take equal shares: any excess
becomes the property of the farmer as a bonus to
encourage good and thorough farming. Special
arrangements are often made to suit local con-
ditions. This method of working large areas is
invariably a success where the arrangement is
drawn up on a truly co-operative basis, and is one
of the most satisfactory ways of working large
estates. At landra, the birth-place of this
system in New South Wales, some 18,000 acres
are planted on the shares system. Share-farming is
CHAFF-CUTTING IN FULL SWING.
admittedly not so desirable a condition as that in
which every man farms his own land, but such a
system is one by which large properties can be
successfully handled, and one by which a man
who has no land of his own may accumulate
enough means to buy some. That it has done
this is proved by the cases of farmers who now'
have comfortable properties of their own. but
who commenced as share farmers. To suitable'
men, without capital or plant, some land-owners
have advanced sufficient capital to enable men to
buy plant and make a start. In some cases the-
owner places a price on the land, and gives the
share-farmer the option of purchasing his area at
that price after five years. Such terms as these-
when they are available, are very advantageous,
for the new settler with little money at his
disposal.


The Government, recognising that
in many districts any large increase,
111 area under''crop can only’ be
brought about through close settle-
ment and the construction of light
Future
Prospects.
lines of railways, are pursuing a vigorous closer
settlement policy. New line -: of railway to tap
the districts containing arable land are being con-
structed and other lines are being considered.
New South Wales fanners have demonstrated
that wheat-growing returns solid profits, and no
country in the world offers better inducements to
enable a farmer to acquire land and become estab-
lished on a farm of his own. The early settlers
started with little or no capital, little practical know-
ledge, and no experience to guide them. Now there
is the experience of a century to guide the present
farmers, and, in addition, the work of the Agri-
cultural Department is yearly adding to the
information already obtained regarding the most
suitable and profitable methods of cultivation. A
branch of it is also breeding new wheats especially
suitable for Australian conditions and methods.
With a plentiful supply of suitable land still
available, with more accurate information relating
to the principles underlying wheat cultivation,
with better methods of cultivation and handling,
with better wheals, there must be and there are
immense future possibilities before the wheat-
growing industry in New South Wales.
Persons desiring to emigrate to New South
Wales will be furnished with full particulars regard-
ing the country, and the cost of assisted pa c sages,
on application to the Agent-General for New South
Wales, 123-125 Cannon-street, London, E.C.
THE THIRD TIME ROUND.
SYDNEY t WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULIICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.


From
Labourer to
Landlord
An Immigrants
SUCCESS IN
NEW SOUTH WALES
'lssued by
THE GOVERNMENT IMMIDSaiION-»»TOUBI5T BUREAU ,
CHALUS HOUSE
BIRECTOR
