

- - : : ,v;Xv:. :«,v-?:?■ ,
; i
■ft- ' ;
J "di? v , 1,..\ I'M-,; * ! \ v v » fE&wyji
v.-■■ >■: . . ■.••.-■■ :•;• .;■■ -• .
ry ;ii: y ! y ■, '.i.y.V' ': M 'y' : ' Ml
; = ■ . = .-Tir-:i:;=-'-= I"!:: -ri "'M.- M
Jiy i;y./ : : '/■ I';:; Mi:-; y ;; ; ; : .::y •>-y, : yy■ '




FROM BARK HUT TO PULPIT


First Edition 1924
Made and Printed in Great Britain


r $
V * ui -
£j~ £j * «» :
< >;v;'C Si gill 8 ' jt\ /.'i^'!«
>_ q: 9 § 1 " g -—... „ J
2 * #iw ffJy^isy/fM
2Z 1%. i laiwii/l *&.*.? 1/ *5Crl
° 5 *-s«HrJ* ®1
;•-- : - ;* " HP *i «
M SI J| : ©
Kff\ .-,'
r 41HRKmj.


FROM BARK HUT
TO PULPIT
G. WARREN PAYNE
Xon&on
THE EPWORTH PRESS
J. ALFRED SHARP




PREFACE
The writer, yielding to the solicitation of friends
who were familiar with a series of sketches, drawn
from his experiences during more than forty years
of ministerial life, and published in Australian religious
papers, has put in order the following pages. An
innate repugnance to writing of himself led to a de-
parture from recognized lines of autobiography which
he hopes may be forgiven. He has ventured to substi-
tute a series of sketches culled from personal experiences
through successive years. These sketches are written
in the third person, as though detailing experiences
in the life of another. He hopes that what appears
to him the too kind judgement of certain literary
friends may be justified by the reception accorded
to the volume. It is certain that if readers find as keen
pleasure in perusing, as the writer has done in recalling
and describing, incidents and experiences recorded,
they will find some compensation for the time spent
upon it.
THE AUTHOR.
Turramurra, Sydney, Australia.




CONTENTS
I. BEGINNINGS 9
11. CALL TO THE MINISTRY . . . 15
111. THE PREACHER'S WOOING . . l 8
IV. HORSES 30
V. ' BREATH OF GOD ' ... 36
VI. ' WHEN IT IS FINISHED ' . . 40
VII. THE TORNADO .... 43
VIII. ITINERATING .... 52
IX. TO 'THE HERBERT "... 55
X. TROPICS PROPER .... 60
XI. PIONEERING 65
XII. ' NIGGERS ' 69
XIII. PROVIDENCE AND A DOG . . 76
XTV. THE ALLIGATOR .... 80
XV. 'HE HEARETH US ' ... 85
XVI. NUNDAH 89
XVII. OVER THE DOWNS .... 92
XVIII. ' THE FORMER RAIN ' 96


XIX. DEATH BREW
XX. THE STOCKMAN
XXI. PIONEER CYCLING
XXII. THE MIDNIGHT SE
THE MIDNIGHT SERVICE . . . 123
XXIII. THE ' CAIN ' STAII
THE ' CAIN ' STAIN . . . 128
XXIV. WHEN PROVIDENC]
WHEN PROVIDENCE SLEPT . . 138
XXV. THE TEAMSTER'S I
THE TEAMSTER'S BABY . . . 146
XXVI. THROUGH THE VAI
THROUGH THE VALLEY . . . 155
AGAIN THE SEA .... 160
XXVII. AGAIN THE SEA
' JUST TRUST ' . . . . 166
XXVIII. ' JUST TRUST '
XXIX. IN ' PARLOUS WAY
IN 'PARLOUS WAYS' . . . 169
XXX. INVERELL
INVERELL 177
GRAVITATING CITY-WARDS . . 180
XXXI. GRAVITATING CITY
XXXII. THE PARSONAGE T.
THE PARSONAGE TRIO . . . 186


CHAPTER I
Beginnings
THEY lie back in dim vistas of memory, fading to
nothing, over three-score years agone. An adventurous
immigrant and his young wife, landing a year or so
before on the scantily-peopled shores of Moreton Bay,
made their home in a slab and bark hut, on a reach of
the Brisbane river where the populous town of Ipswich
now stands. The man was a young Suffolk farmer ;
the woman a resident of Cambridge, refined, educated,
only fitted by her brave true heart for the experiences
which lay ahead of them in that new rough land.
They tarried long enough for the babe's advent. Six
weeks later they left by bullock wagon, the man's
own property, purchased by his year's savings, for the
' Darling Downs,' where they hoped to make a home.
The man knew little of bullocks and less of bullock-
teams, though an expert among horses. But he was
of that plucky adventurous type which believes
anything possible to the man who tries hard enough,
and long enough. He quickly made a success of
bullock-driving. His wagon-load of stores for War-
wick, far away on the Condamine, represented nearly
£lOO in freight. The wife and children —there were


two of them, the preacher and a brother, two years
older—added but little to the load.
One would need to listen, as the teamster in later
days grew reminiscent, to understand the hardships,
perils, and romance of such a trip in those distant
years. Far away rose rugged mountain ranges, soft
in the blue haze, or cloud-rimmed as drizzling showers
crept along the summit. Miles of virgin forest stretched
between, including the dread Rosewood scrub, with
its single track cut through dense cedar and pine
brush, the rich soft loam seamed with wheel-ruts, an
impassable bog in time of rain, wherein teams have
lain hopelessly bogged for months at a stretch. Where-
in, too, there lurked a tribe or tribes of ' blacks '
(aborigines) ready with spear and nulla for unwatchful
white men in charge of things worth looting. Some
stories the teamster, in his old age, would tell, grim
with tragedy, of experiences incurred traversing that
region. And beyond the apparently interminable
forest rose abrupt shoulders of the great range, and
the difficult and perilous mountainous pass known as
Cunningham's Gap, through which the route led out
upon the famous Darling Downs. Here the teams,
double-banked, would groan and sweat and struggle
to make half-a-mile climbing by the end of day.
Through all this' the preacher ' passed on that occasion,
sublimely indifferent. Home for him was the soft
clasp of a mother's arms and the gentle heave of a
woman's breast. And through all the years, till his
own frizzy locks rivalled in whiteness the crown of


glory on her placid brow, the truest vision of God
and heaven has been to him the light of love shining
in the deeps of her clear gray eyes, and revealing itself
in the thousand selfless ministries of the home.
His own memories begin in hazy visions of a slab
and bark cottage in a bend of Glengallon Creek. Acres
of wheat, green in the flush of spring, golden in the
whispering autumn fullness, tasselled maize rustling
and flashing in summer sunshine, shut in by dark
mysterious ' scrub,' a forest of pine and cedar and giant
eucalypts, ' sixty feet without a limb,' interlaced with
flowering hibiscus, fronded tree-ferns, climbing vines
starred with orchids—memory glimpses it in fleeting
visions that maturer years alone can analyse and
appreciate. And there was life that left its echoes
trailing all the years, its splendours flashing across the
gray of life's eventide. Moonlit nights when dingoes
foregathered in the outer edge of the clearing, their
weird howling sending chills down the spine of the
baby brothers peering through the open shutter of the
tiny chamber in which they were cribbed, terrified
yet fascinated. Bright days when the sky filled with
sulphur-crested cockatoos, bent on raiding maize
or wheat-field, and flocks of gorgeous parrots swept
through the open, vivid screeching streaks of mingled
crimson, green, and gold. Or other days when with
tossing heads, and gleaming horns and cracking whips
and shouts of men, and yelp of dogs, droves of insurgent
bush cattle were mustered for station paddocks,
miles away across the open downs. Or those most weird


of all days when aborigines gathered in hundreds on
the little plain, sheltered by a curve in the scrub,
almost surrounded by the winding water-course.
There were glimpses of dark-skinned ochre-painted
bodies, groups of native warriors passing to and from
corroboree and strange rites, held in jealously-hidden
places known to themselves alone. There was the
cautious creeping through growing wheat to lie hidden
in the fringe of bracken commanding glimpses of
crouching natives, ready with poised spear and club,
as a shrieking, yelling crowd of both sexes scoured the
inner scrub, starting wild game in hurried flight towards
the quiet, but to them, more deadly perilous outer
brush.
That environment left indelible imprint on the
infantile mind. Some instincts leaped into activity
never to be erased. That, for instance, almost uncanny
faculty for knowing the right direction to find a given
point, which afterwards stood by the preacher during
many long rides through unknown territory. The
first consciousness of its imperious call remains a
vivid vignette of his babyhood. Two babes of four
(the preacher) and six (his elder brother), warned of
the peril and dire consequences of entering the gloomy,
fascinating, mysterious scrub, naturally found in
menace and mystery an irresistible lure. Watching
a favourable opportunity they crept through growing
corn into its outer fringe. A moment or two more
and they were immersed in dim cool twilight, though
dazzling noon reigned without. Excited, curious,


adventurous, they crept on, till a rustle of living
things, invisible, yet moving stealthily round them,
stirred fearsome memories of those howling dingoes
of the moonlit open. They would escape back to the
safety of the comforting sunshine. But the elder
babe persisted in going in one direction, and the younger
insisted upon going in exactly an opposite one. For-
tunately for both, what the younger lacked in age
and strength he made up in vigour and vim, and the
elder, vanquished, yielded, weeping and wailing,
to force majeure. In a few minutes the sunlit maize-
field opened to view, and the babes, as babes do,
straightway forgot tears and fears in other absorbing
interests. In later years the preacher sometimes
allowed logic to dominate instinct in such matters,
yet so far as memory serves now, never failed to
regret having done so.
The permanent home was not on that selection by
Glengallon Creek. A disastrous drought smote the
district. Other difficulties plagued the hardy pioneer,
and a bad attack of gold fever brought the climax.
He would migrate to the goldfields of New South
Wales. So our preacher's childhood plumped into
the crude settlement on auriferous areas round the
head of the Hunter river. Educational facilities
were minus. Maternal tuition, during set hours,
became a substitute. A few dairy cattle depastured
among the gullies, guarded by day and tailed home at
night, provided employment for the lads. Once the
little community suffered a raid by Thunderbolt,


a bushranger of ill-repute. Meanwhile the preacher
and his brother became expert in bush-craft and bird-
craft and little else. Their sire's golden dreams
failed to materialize. On a day vividly impressed upon
the child's memory the gold-seeker definitely abandoned
that calling. It was early morning. The sun had not
risen. Mother and children stood in a group saying
goodbye. The father and husband, with rolled
blankets on his back, turned resolutely towards the
coast two hundred miles eastward, seeking fresh
avenues of usefulness, wherein he might win a home
and livelihood for those dependent upon him. Their
last pound had been divided, he taking five shillings,
and leaving them the remaining fifteen. On a hill-top
a mile away, he turned for a look and wave of the hand,
ere dropping out of sight. Limned against the sunrise
memory visualizes him still, loyal, strong, brave,
standing as he ever stood between loved ones in the
home and want that threatened them. Not till he
finally disappeared behind the knoll did the brave
heart left behind visibly yield to her grief. She would
not betray to him what that parting cost, lest his
heart should be made the heavier. Through it all,
too, they were assured that God would not fail them.
Their confidence was in Him, and that confidence
was abundantly justified by subsequent experiences.


CHAPTER II
Call to the Ministry
' MOTHER, I have secured a fair start now, and as you
and Dad can do without me, I am thinking of making
a home for myself.'
The preacher had come to manhood. He had just
classified satisfactorily, as a teacher under the Depart-
ment of Education. He was home for the vacation,
and stood leaning over his mother's chair as they
talked in the moonlit verandah.
' Why, Boy, I didn't know you had any particular
girl friend.'
' No, Mother, I said nothing about it in my letters,
knowing I should be home soon. I expect to bring
her along before the holidays close. She is a good
girl, and quite alone. Her father and mother died
some years ago, and her sister, with whom she lived
after their death, died a few weeks back. The only
thing I can do is to make a home for her as soon as
possible.'
' Well, Boy, may you and she be very happy !
But it is necessary I should mention something I
never intended speaking of, believing that God would
bring it about in His own way. When you were two


hours old I dedicated you to the ministry of His
gospel. I believed then that God accepted you. I
believe so still. Think seriously, and pray over it
too, before you settle permanently in any other way
of life.'
' I have thought much and prayed some, Mother.
But I cannot bring myself to offer for the ministry.
What call I am conscious of as a preacher, I propose
obeying by continuing vigorously the work of a ' local'
on the circuit plan. I never intend to preach for a
living, or, to put it another way, to live by preaching.'
' Well, Boy, you must do as you think best. God
over-rules our ways when they conflict with His
purposes. If He wants you in the ministry, the way
will yet open. When it does, do not let your inde-
pendent nature turn you from the door He has opened.'
Much more heart-to-heart talk followed, for this
mother and son were all to each other. But the preacher
went his way. In due course the home he dreamed
of and planned for opened to him and his young wife.
Ten months later it closed for ever to him. Sorrow,
bitter and black, overwhelmed his soul. A grave
yawned in his pathway. The form he had loved was
hidden in its depths. The sweet strong spirit it
enshrined passed on to that great mystery mortal
intelligence never penetrates.
His scholastic career was abandoned. Mounting
a horse, he rode away, undetermined as to the future,
vainly striving by ceaseless movement to ease the
gnawing consciousness of bereavement and irreparable


Loss. Into this brooding melancholy came the call
of the Church. Having definitely abandoned the life
he had planned, would he offer as a candidate for the
ministry ? Grave, with the insistence of prophetic
insight, came to him again his mother's plea; ' when
it does do not let your independent nature turn you
from the door He has opened.' And to the joy and
glory of all later years the preacher did not turn away-
Absorbing new interests, the insistent claims of
theological studies and multifarious obligations of a
Wesleyan probationer in charge of a circuit, blunted
the poignancy of his grief, and relieved the sense
of loss. Later God gave him the love of another
woman—one who became a matchless comrade for
the forty years of his ministry, mother of his children
and general benediction of his life.


CHAPTER 111
The Preacher's Wooing
THE preacher sat on the bare root of a dry stump
facing the morning sun from the eminence of a little
knoll, at the foot of which stood a comfortable farm-
house, with fields of young wheat sloping gently east,
west, north and south. It was early spring. Eared
blades of grass shot up amid white clover blooms on
the sunny side of the knoll, and the drone of bees
rose in the fragrance round him. Carolling magpies
filled the near distance with liquid music, flashing
their gleaming white and black plumage in the sun-
shine, whilst every bush and shrub fluttered with
twittering birdlings. Immediately in front lay a
depression, down the centre of which a trickle of water
began a lazy pilgrimage to the western rivers. Just
behind the knoll a gully runlet moved more rapidly
towards the eastward Mulwaree, for he was midway
of the southern table-land. But neither the spring
morning, nor the babble of running water, nor the
bird calls and other music of the season, penetrated
his thoughts. Even the pocket Testament and
Thomas 'A Kempis had slipped from his listless
fingers, as he sat brooding. Truth to say, he was ill


at ease, and his wandering glance betrayed the. cause.
An active, graceful girl stepped frequently from a
detached kitchen to the breakfast-room of tlie farm-
house below, busied in preparations for the morning
meal. Now she had paused, stooping to strain hot
water out of some vessel. The sun rays kissed and
glistened in masses of red-brown hair, and as the
preacher gazed he was thinking of the comely smiling
face and eyes of hazel-gray, full of latent mischief,
beneath that glistening coronet. For this was a
romping, almost reckless, lassie in some moods, yet
one who never lost the charm of highly sensitive
womanly modesty. People never thought of her as
beautiful, save as now and again they caught glimpses
of a deep spirituality which glorified her countenance.
The winsomeness and charm radiating from a generous
and affectionate nature within, won universal favour
among all acquaintances. And this lassie of the red-
brown hair and merry eyes sadly disturbed the
preacher's peace of mind. He awakened that spring
morning to the fact that a much deeper emotion
than friendly interest had quickened within him towards
the maiden, and he was settling his right course of
action. His probation had not yet ended. Was it
right to seek a pledge from any girl until he had success-
fully passed the final tests ? Was it right, that even
in so personal a matter as this, he should move without
some distinct guidance from above ? He believed in
the reality of such guidance; was he not in duty bound
to seek and wait for it ? Yet the mere thought of


missing the chance of her companionship was un-
bearable ; and it was patent to all that a number of
worthy lads had grown as conscious of the maiden's
charm as he.
Meanwhile the unconscious object of his troubled
thoughts tripped out and in, the lilt of her singing,
or ripple of her laughter, floating through the air
to him with tantalizing frequency. He decided
finally to do nothing. If he were worthy of her God
could bring them together. So it came about that
the preacher said nothing, whatever may have been
betrayed to feminine intuition, of the thoughts which
perplexed him.
That night the family gathered as usual in the
large living-room, used on important occasions as a
dining-room. A cheerful wood fire glowed on the
hearth, for the nights were still cold enough in that
altitude to make it welcome. Three or four sons,
men grown, and as many daughters, the youngest
verging on her 'teens, together with the good old
North of Ireland local preacher and his wife, constituted
the group. The preacher was a familiar visitor, and
was treated with the freedom and negligence accorded
to such. All were occupied; some in sewing, others
reading, one or two in writing, the rest in chatting.
The preacher and the maid with red-brown hair were
each busied upon entries in their diaries, the latter
at a small table beside the fire-place. This diaiy-
writing was the result of a suggestion to keep a record
of personal religious experiences, with a view to


strengthening the spiritual life, adopted by members
of a devotional meeting held on Friday nights.
' Should I be very rude if I begged a peep into
your diary, Miss T ? ' The preacher had drawn
a seat near to the maiden beside the fire.
' I'd much rather take a peep into yours,' was the
smiling retort.
' Well! I'm game if you are.' And the preacher
offered his own diary to the girl.
' I did not mean that,' she replied, with a touch of
embarrassment. ' But I feel sure that what you have
written would help any one.'
' Then why not make an exchange till to-morrow
night ?' he coaxed. 'Of course both must allow for
the fact that they were intended for private perusal
only.'
' You have less reason to hesitate, Mr. P , than
those of us not so used as you to putting our thoughts
into writing,' replied the girl.
' I wish you would make the exchange, Miss T ,'
he pleaded, seating himself on a hassock at her feet.
' I'm sure your religious experiences must help any
who are privileged to read them.'
The girl gazed thoughtfully into the fire before
replying, and then with heightened colour said, ' I
might be tempted to lend you my diary as a bribe to
obtain the loan of yours, Mr. P ; only you must
let me remove a few inconsequential leaves from mine
first.'
' Oh, if you feel troubled at all about the matter,


Miss T , think no more of it,' answered the preacher
quickly. ' You are perfectly welcome to glance
through mine, though Heaven alone knows what you
may find in it.'
' Thank you ! I should feel mean if I did that.
There are just a few pages that contain things I in-
tended no one but myself to see. If you are content
to take a mutilated diary in exchange, it will be quite
all right.'
So it came to pass that in his next morning medita-
tions, the diary of a lassie with red-brown hair took
the place of Thomas 'A Kempis, and, if truth must be
told, of his pocket Testament also. The reflections
and experiences recorded therein surprised and de-
lighted him. They revealed a depth of spirituality
more mature and beautiful than even he had suspected.
Then a paragraph arrested and thrilled him because
of its personal interest. His own name occurred.
' Mr. P has visited us again,' he read. ' The
service was delightful. But I was most thankful to
find that my battle has been won. I was able to meet
him with perfect ease of mind, and to regard him as
Ido any other friend. The experience confirms me
in the opinion that any girl may secure grace from God
to conquer awakening sentiment towards one of the
opposite sex.'
He had caught the significance of the sentence ere
hastily closing the diary.
'So that was it,' he said to himself. ' And I never
suspected.'


A feeling of exultant gladness swept over him at
thus stumbling upon the girl's secret, and finding
it fraught with so much that touched his future well-
being. Her consistent attitude of casual interest
towards him betrayed no inkling of kindlier feeling,
and of late had become so casual as to trouble him.
But what should he do about his discovery ? The girl
had evidently missed this passage when making her
excisions. She must inevitably discover that fact.
To return the diary without comment would imply
an indifference upon his part humiliating in the ex-
treme to one so sensitive and modest. Yet he loved
this girl with a fervour intensified by the glimpse
of her inner life which that tell-tale diary had revealed.
Then a swift query flashed upon him at which he caught
eagerly. Was this the Providential leading for which
he had been waiting ? The girl had removed, as she
thought, all reference to the matter, yet had missed
that one small entry. In the mass of writing, dipping
here and there into the pages, he might easily have
missed the fateful passage. The thought was too
good to be dismissed. He would accept it as a token
and act. Thereafter he feverishly sought opportunity
to speak with the maid alone. It did not come until
after the evening meal, for she left early on a visit,
returning accompanied by a lad from the home in
which she had been a guest for the day.
' I came across a passage in your diary to-day about
which I should like to consult with you, Miss T ,'
said the preacher, quietly, seating himself on a hassock


near the big chair in which the maiden reclined, intent
upon the contents of the preacher's diary still in her
possession.
The preacher placed her own diary, open at the
passage of so much moment to him, upon her knee.
He had inserted a slip of paper on which was written,
' I love you with all my soul. Give me an oppor-
tunity of speaking with you alone.'
He watched anxiously the bewilderment with which
his missive was read, and the changing colour as she
scanned the entry in her diary underscored by him.
For one brief moment a troubled glance met his,
then her eyes drooped and were not raised again.
A pencil in her fingers touched a blank space in his
own diary, writing firmly and briskly. Then without
word or glance, returning the diary to him, the maiden
rose quietly, leaving the room.
' You must not act hastily in this thing, brother,'
he read. ' You are only at the beginning of your
ministry. You will meet many better educated and
better fitted by social position and gifts to be a minister's
wife than a simple country girl can possibly be. I
had forgotten having written the lines you have read.
Forget that you saw them. You have, and shall
always have, my best wishes, and may I add prayers ?
for your future success and well-being.'
The preacher's heart misgave him as he read this
message; and yet it was not inconsistent with a
deeper feeling than it expressed. He resolved to
find out the truth before the next day closed. But the


maiden had a word to say in this. The afternoon
had half gone and no opportunity had been found
for the conversation he so anxiously sought. Growing
desperate at length, he walked into the kitchen, where
the maid and an elder sister were emptying an oven
of the final batch of cookery for Sunday consumption.
' Could you spare time for a chat, Miss T ? '
he begged.
' Chat away, Mr. P . I am listening.' The
smile accompanying the answer was full of raillery
and mischief.
' But I want to speak about your diary,' he urged.
' For your life don't mention E 's diary in public,
Mr. P ,' interrupted the sister. ' She almost
went into hysterics a night or two back because Marg.
started reading it.'
' I have to bring a few turnips from the vegetable
patch for to-morrow's dinner. You may carry the
basket if you wish,' replied the maiden, indicating
an open basket in the kitchen corner, and moving
towards the door as she spoke.
' First to the rails,' she cried, running swiftly down
the track. ' Slow-coach ! ' she rallied, ' you couldn't
catch me.' A gleam of hidden meaning and mischief
flashed in the glance that greeted his tardier approach.
' I haven't tried yet,' he retorted. ' When Ido I
shall be very much in earnest about it. But please
don't frivol. The matter is serious.'
' As if I ever frivolled,' she pouted.
' Well! You know what I mean.'


Waiting until they had passed within the enclosure,
he said, ' About that diary
' Forget it,' she interrupted. ' I meant what I
said last night. That must be to you as though it
had not been.'
' But the thing in it has been and is.'
' Are you quite sure of that last tense, sir ? '
The raillery in her speech disconcerted him, and the
merry mocking eyes, steadily meeting his, failed to dis-
close any hint of what might be hidden in their depths.
' I am going to find out, ' he answered, after momen-
tary hesitation. ' I repeat what I said last night.
I love you. Is it possible for you to care for me
in that way ? It seems you did care at one time.'
He had moved nearer, attempting to possess himself
of her hands. But his purpose was anticipated;
the girl springing forward a pace or two, turned lightly
to face him smiling, both hands behind her back.
' You look wofully solemn when you try to be senti-
mental, Mr. P , she laughed. ' Better be nice
and practical all the time.'
The preacher was puzzled and a trifle hurt. This
mood of the girl was new to him. Turning quickly,
she tripped lightly down the path, a snatch of song
drifting carelessly back to him as she sped away.
Was she really as unconcerned as she seemed, or was
her casual mood assumed to hide deeper feeling ?
' Take the fork,' she ordered gaily, as he again stood
by her side,' ' and as you loosen the earth I will draw
them out.'


The necessary quantity being secured, the girl
placed them in the basket held by the preacher.
' There, I've given you turnips. That was what
Jim says Dolly S gave Tom Bates. I wonder
what Jim meant ? ' The roguish face looked saucily
up into his; then, noting the look of real trouble
in his eyes, became instantly sympathetic.
' I suppose we may as well have it out and be done
with it,' she said, seating herself on a projection of
the log fence at her back.
The preacher stood contemplating the glowing face
and inscrutable eyes.
' What answer will you make ? ' he asked gravely,
rejoiced to find her serious at last.
' You must not think I do not value what you have
said, Mr. P . But have you not been hasty in
speaking at all ? You have study and work to think of.
A love episode can only distract and worry you. And
how can you, or I either, know what our feelings
toward each other may be a year or two hence ?'
' That is scarcely an answer, Miss T ,' he replied,
smiling slightly. ' What lam eager to know is whether
you care for me in the way I do for you ? '
' And if I should say I really do not know ? '
she flashed back at him.
' Would that be true ? ' he retorted.
' You are a most difficult young man,' she sighed.
' Suppose we agree to be just friends,' she suggested,
as an after thought. ' I wouldn't mind even writing
a friendly letter now and then.'


' Thank you, I want you for my own particular
friend,' he replied eagerly.
' Don't misunderstand, I am willing to correspond,
but cannot pledge anything with you, or let you
pledge anything with me till at least you have
seen more of your world.' The girl had hesitated
ere completing the sentence, as if in difficulty in
choosing words.
' Hurrah ! That means you have not ceased to care.'
There was a swift movement. The maid felt
herself lifted in a sudden grip of enfolding arms. The
exclamation rising to her lips was smothered. For
a few blissful moments self-abnegation and prudential
resolves were forgotten.
' Don't! oh don't, Mr. P ,' she expostulated
at length, breathlessly releasing herself, clutching
instinctively at folds of red-brown hair falling loose.
' Forgive me, dear! I had to do it. I love you !
I love you ! And thank Heaven ! you love me back,
though you will not say it.'
' I admit nothing,' she retorted. But as the tell-tale
eyes glanced up at him they dazzled him with their
shining.
' If you did not love me you would have me hounded
from the place, and I should deserve it,' he answered
triumphantly.
' You must promise something, if I forgive you,'
said the maiden, no longer veiling the love-light in
her eyes.
' I'll promise anything except to give up loving you.'


1L. ./ l v pB iJW. w\
I S-
ip . W 1 flMff $
jEr Sfe '- 1 I'Jt
The Treacher and the ' Maid with red-brown hair.'


' Well then, promise that if, in years to come,
you meet a woman better fitted to be a minister's
wife, you will tell me at once, and not make yourself
and me victims of a mistaken sense of loyalty.'
' I promise, Queen of my heart! The woman does
not exist, and cannot exist, of whom that would be
true.'
' You are utterly incorrigible, sir,' and the maiden
turned and fled.
That is all a generation ago. To-day, the sedate
wife of an elderly preacher cherishes among her
treasures a pocket edition of Thomas 'A Kempis,
on the flyleaf of which is inscribed :
Love is a sacred sympathy;
Love is MV heart to thee:
Love is a breathing from above;
Breath of the Everlasting Love;
Promise of Heaven in Earth's dull clod;
Finding its fullness in LOVE IS GOD.
To my Sweetheart, 1884.


CHAPTER IV
Horses
FORTY years ago the circuit minister needs must
ride. There were places in most circuits to which
he could drive the four-wheeler, affected in those days.
But, for such service as this preacher and others of
his type were called upon to render, horse and saddle
were indispensable. Fortunately he had ' grown up
on horse-back.' Like most bush-bred Australians,
he could ' sit anything with four legs.' From early
times in his ministry he took to ' breaking in ' his own
steeds, usually calling in the assistance of the best
expert in horsemanship the district provided. Ab-
dallah, Coquette, Croydon and Timor, mottled creamies
under fourteen hands, Silver and Kitty, a taffy pair,
Billy and Jacky, bays just twelve hands, were among
the gems of his four-footed comrades of the road.
How the names bring the whinnying, capering, spirited,
often prankish ghosts, out of the past! Strong, swift,
affectionate, sometimes tricky, friends of toilsome
glorious years. It is difficult to believe that so much
intelligence, and capacity, and friendliness, have evapor-
ated into nothingness. Did not the seer of Patmos
behold horses on the plains of heaven ? Was the
Indian hunter so far astray, when he reckoned upon


finding his favourite steed again in the Happy Hunting-
grounds of his dreams ?
Of equine comrades who take pre-eminence of others,
Coquette may merit first mention, as being associated
with the preacher's last year of probation and the
first of ordained and married status. Coquette was a
thorough-bred, had in fact carried colours round the
Goulburn race-course as a three-year-old. The
preacher had seen her whilst on a visit to the maid
of the red-brown hair, and had voiced in her hearing
a longing for just such an animal, with which to do
his circuit riding.
Two months later came a note, saying the maid had
purchased the filly ; would he come for her ? Would
he not ? He had been transferred in the interval to
Lithgow, in the heart of the Blue Mountains, a delight-
ful change from the monotonous levels of the west
and north-west; and what was still more delightful
to the preacher, an easy horse-back journey from the
farm-stead on the Cullarin Range. Coquette had
failed to win a place in her race. In the chagrin of
defeat and the bitterness of betting losses, her owner
sold her for a price within range of the preacher's
pocket. She was a beautiful creature, a deep bay,
with a coat like velvet, graceful as a deer, gentle as a
kitten, and of rare intelligence. The preacher had a
special four-wheeler, dubbed by the irreverent a
' pram,' built for her. It combined the elements of
lightness and strength. In it the maid with red-brown
hair went honey-mooning with the preacher for the


last month of his term in a probationer's circuit.
In it they journeyed from Merriwa, through trackless
bush, over the range to McDonald's on the Goulburn
river, en route to their appointment at Rylstone.
She has not yet forgotten the descent down a roadless
gully to the station boundary fence, a descent so steep
that the vehicle must go straight down or roll over,
and indeed, threatened repeatedly to topple forwards
upon the mare and the preacher leading her. Nor
how she followed, laden with articles scattered by the
swaying buggy in its headlong downward rush. There
was one supreme moment when the preacher and horse
stood poised on a ledge, previously invisible. A scarp
of rock traversed the hill horizontally, quite two feet
deep in its shallowest part. No evasion was possible.
Even hesitation, for more than a second or two, was
prohibited by pressure from above. The intelligent
mare gathered herself and crept, rather than leaped,
down. Succeeding moments were a blind rush and
breathless scamper, ending on a little level at the
bottom of the gully. Not a buckle was broken, nor
a strap out of place. The thrill and excitement
were worth the risk, the woman enjoying it as heartily
as the preacher. But it would scarcely have been
possible with any other horse. The five-wire fence
was no obstacle to a bush bred man, and they were
soon enjoying the wonderful hospitality of an Austra-
lian station homestead.
The ' Creamies' must receive special mention
before this chapter on horses ends. They belong to


this period, for they succeeded ' Coquette ' about two
years later than the episode mentioned above. The
preacher had been appointed to Moruya, on the South
Coast. The circuit included Araluen, an alluvial
gold-field, nearly fifty miles back through the coast
ranges, and other preaching-places, within thirty
to the north and fifty to the south. It meant horses,
fast-going, hardy, easily kept. There was but one
type to meet that necessity, light-built ponies, and
the ponies were there. A retired grazier, an officer
of his church, hearing the preacher express a wish
to find a pair of staunch ponies, unbroken ones pre-
ferred, introduced him to the Creamies and their
owner. They were full brothers, a four and three-
year old, the latter unbroken. Their sire, Croydon,
was & steeple-chaser of some renown, their dam a
clean-limbed Timor pony, a family pet. They were
perfectly matched in colour, a rich cream with dark
dapples showing through the satiny coat, dark manes
and muzzles, dark tails and points, with a dark mule-
mark from withers to the root of the tail. They stood
just under fourteen hands, with limbs clean as a deer,
muscles hard as bone, true pony heads, wide-spaced
between the eyes. They were fizzing with life and
spirit, full of courage and unusually intelligent.
' Well! What do you think of them ? ' queried the
grazier when they were yarded.
' Can you see a flaw in them anywhere ? ' was the
preacher's enthusiastic answer. And the question
was justified.


Beautiful, fiery intelligent mates of the road! How
they heave and plunge on the bit still, tearing home-
wards, down the steep mountain road, through air
heavy with the odour of flowering wattles and climbing
clematis, at the day's end ! How the supple swing
and bound of their beautiful limbs and lithe bodies,
beneath the saddle, on some crisp morning, as the rider
yielded to his own and the pony's desire for a gallop,
sends the blood coursing wildly through the veins
yet! How the tossing heads glisten in the lamplight,
as they spring side by side through the impenetrable
blackness of a stormy rain-filled night, with hearts
devoid of fear, and spirits that never flagged, even
with mire inches deep on an uphill track ! How on
that day, when they flung round a corner descending
a mountain pass, and found an eight-horse wagon so
blocking the way, that one wheel of the buggy must
skirt the very edge of the masonry rimming a drop
of forty feet, the preacher, sure of their courage and
intelligence, flashed safely by whilst the teamster Stood
speechlessly marvelling. Or how, in the early morning,
with drenching dew on the foot-long pasturage, a
kindly farmer insisted upon catching or yarding the
ponies, refusing to credit the preacher's assurance
that none but he could catch those ponies in the open.
How, for nearly two hours father and son, assisted
by trained dogs, galloped vainly to and fro, until the
preacher intervened. How, when all others left the
paddock the preacher walked into the open, calling
his pets by name, waiting as they gambolled round him,


till the youngest and wildest trotted up, thrusting a head
under his arm, to be led away, his mate following
meekly at his heels.
And now muscle of steel, eye of fire, intelligence
almost human, nay super-human in some things,
have dissipated into dust, and whatsoever else is
possible for the inextinguishable thing in them. Like
so much in life that is precious beyond computation,
they too have become but a memory flitting hither now
and again out of the shadowy past.


CHAPTER V
' Breath of God '
' WESLEY is dangerously ill, Mr. P . Double
pneumonia set in last night. The doctor warned us
as he left this morning that the dear lad's condition
was as serious as it could be. We know what he
meant us to understand.'
A sob choked further utterance, and the preacher
took the mother's hand, striving to find reassuring
words with which to cheer and sustain her. She was
the kindly hostess with whom he stayed when visiting
Ilford, on the old coach road to Mudgee. For more
than a generation her home had been the rendezvous
for Wesleyan ministers en route to Circuit, District
Meeting, or Conference. He was to conduct service
in the little church on the coming Sabbath, and purposed
spending a day or two in visitation of the homes
scattered over the country-side.
The youth roused as he entered the room. One
glance at the flushed face and fever-bright eyes con-
firmed the seriousness of the lad's condition.
' Sorry to find you so ill, Wesley,' said the preacher
gently, laying a cool hand upon the heated palm,
tremblingly extended in greeting.
' Yes, Mr. P I am very sick,' gasped the lad.
' I think it is the finish.'


' Oh! we trust not, Wesley,' hastily interjected
the preacher. ' You are in good hands, and God can
soon restore you to health. Just leave yourself to
Him and trust utterly. Don't worry about it.'
' I'm not worrying,' smiled the lad, trying to force
speech through his terrible pantings for breath. ' But
it's no use blinking facts.'
The preacher spoke cheeringly to the lad and his
mother, commending both in prayer to God, ere he
left to keep an appointment for a week-night service
some miles further along the Capertee road. He had
promised to return next day. Before morning dawned
the lad's spirit had left its pain-stricken tenement.
Two days later the preacher conducted the burial
service over his remains, announcing at the grave-side
a service for that night in the little church at Ilford.
The death of this lad cast a shadow over the hamlet.
His going was one of those mysteries human hearts
find it so difficult to reconcile with a beneficent over-
ruling Providence. Bright, gifted, good, brimming
over with robust manliness, a career of great happiness
and usefulness seemed assured for him. An over-
heated frame, a severe chill in the raw winter air,
sudden pneumonia, and he had gone, almost before
his loved ones realized what was happening. His
last intelligible speech was a testimony of peace with
God, and quiet but complete triumph in the supreme
moment which was upon him.
The hush of this happening was over the congrega-
tion when it came together through the wintry star-


light, The little church was well filled. Most of the
young people of the neighbourhood were present.
The hush deepened as the service proceeded. When
the time came for the sermon the preacher substituted
a talk on the event for the theme he had prepared.
He referred to the funeral, to the simple manly good-
ness of the lad they had all known, tracing the qualities
they admired in him to the faith which inspired them,
and the grace of God which generated that faith.
It was an easy transition to the characters and needs
of those present. He spoke of their longings for the
best kind of life here, and that a future existence
might hold in reserve. He reminded them of defeats
incurred, for lack of just that Divine touch which had
glorified the simple manhood of this lad from their
midst. As the service progressed the hush and tension
deepened. It was easy to proclaim the living present
Saviour, as One able to impart that which would
achieve for them the best they could imagine or
desire for the present, and to ensure for them the best
in the life that is to be. In closing his address, the
preacher appealed, especially to the young people,
for a definite surrender of the whole being to the Christ
of the Calvary hill and of the Unseen Holy. A gracious
and mighty constraint came upon all. Stepping from
the pulpit the preacher invited those who wished
to consecrate themselves to the service of Christ to
meet him at the Communion-rail in a dedicatory
prayer. Quietly, as by one impulse, the congregation
rose, crowding the communion-rail and filling the


adjacent seats with penitent praying people. A
strange hush rested upon them still. Suppressed
prayers murmured through the building. The preacher
and his wife moved to and fro, giving counsel or prayer,
as occasion demanded. Not one in the congregation
failed to receive a blessing that night. ' The Breath
of God ' rested upon all with comforting, sin-cleansing
grace.
That experience lies far back in the years, but its
memory sweeps like a breath from the paradise of
God across desert wastes, in these later days.


CHAPTER VI
' When it is Finished '
' WHEN it is finished bringeth forth death.' The
fragment echoed through the preacher's soul, insistent,
dirge-like. He had just topped Cherry Tree Hill
on the old Mudgee road, and drew rein to inhale deep
breaths of the fresh mountain air, and enjoy for a
moment the placid beauty of the landscape. It was
a glorious prospect. At the foot of the hill lay the
Running Stream, once a busy hamlet, now deserted.
The rivulet from which the place took its name wound
round the hill, its willow-lined course marked in green
curves until lost to view, where the landscape sank
away into rugged valleys, opening out to the Capertee
river. A patch of tasseled maize glistened green and
gold in the sunshine, adding an exquisite touch of
colour to the shallow valley at the hill-foot.
The ruined hostel on the road-side across the stream
called up the sombre fragment of Scripture in the
preacher's mind. It had been a notorious groggery
and rendezvous for strange characters in the old
coaching days. Its career ended in tragedy that
leaped ever into the preacher's mind as he passed
that way. A spot in the road where it widened towards
the verandah of the old-time groggery possessed a
curious fascination for him. On that spot a wretched


drink maniac had been shot dead by the publican who
had plied him with strong liquors until madness
supervened.
It was the familiar sordid story of those days, with
an abrupt and startling climax. A shearer, travelling
to his home on the coast, carrying a carefully hoarded
cheque, proceeds of his last' cut out,' intent on evading
Just such man-traps as this innocent-looking hostel,
had been snared. After nearly a week of intoxication,
he was brought to partial sobriety, told that his
cheque had been ' knocked down,' and that it was
time 'to get.' Half-mad with alcohol, morose and
suspicious (the latter mood being quite Justified)
he brooded over his folly and loss, until resentment
blazed with sullen, consuming, murderous fury. In
the gray dawn after a night of delirium, he attacked
the door of the chamber in which the publican and his
wife lay sleeping, with an axe caught up from the wood-
heap. Roused by the sudden fury of the onset,
startled and terrified by the livid face and wild eyes
gleaming through the rapidly splintering door, the
publican seized a loaded gun standing near, and fired
at the madman. The man reeled, staggered back
into the road, fell, and died as he lay.
There was a magisterial enquiry resulting in a
verdict of ' justifiable homicide.' But the matter
did not end with that verdict. The perpetrator
of the deed was arraigned at the bar of his own con-
science. The knowledge that the dead man had been
lured, by his ingenuity into the liquor bar, and


maddened by drink he had provided, scourged the
publican. He came to hate his calling and to loathe
the place, and finally left, purchasing a small grazing
property in a beautiful valley on the Goulburn river,
a hundred miles away. But remorse journeyed with
him. A livid face and maniac eyes haunted his
thoughts waking and sleeping. During one of his
periodic visits to collect rent from the man who had
leased the groggery, this torture became unbearable.
He tried to find relief in self-destruction. In a grim
mood of expiatory remorse, he went out in the gray
dawn, and shot himself on the spot on which his
victim died. The double tragedy, with its story of
haunting ghosts, caused the hostel to lose popularity
among its rough clientele. A railway track to Mudgee,
via the head of Capertee valley, destroyed any chance
of trade recovery. And so the old groggery lay a
neglected, deserted ruin, a sinister blot on that lovely
landscape, testifying mutely to the truth hidden in
that sombre fragment of Holy Writ, ' When it is
finished, bringeth forth death.'


CHAPTER VII
The Tornado
IT was only a tornado in miniature compared with
some, yet it was convincing and satisfying. The
preacher did not hunger for acquaintance with one
more extensively staged. The demonstration of des-
tructive fury in one that scarcely occupied half-an-hour,
and covered a radius of less than three miles, quenched
any lurking desire for intimate acquaintance with
tornadoes during the remainder of his life. Yet in
some aspects it was so wonderful that life, for him,
would have been distinctly poorer without the ex-
perience.
The preacher and his wife, and their wee firstling
of less than three months, were homed in quaint
little Moruya, on the south coast, a dairying and
agricultural district, with an alluvial diggings or two
in the ranges west and north. The Chairman of
District was officially visiting Bega and Moruya
circuits. Fifty-two miles south lay Tilba and Cobargo,
northern outposts of Bega circuit. The preacher was
to meet the Chairman at the former place, and, bringing
him on to Moruya, pass him through Araluen to
Braidwood, en route for Goulburn. The preacher
drove a pair of half-tamed ponies, colts full of fire


and apparently inexhaustible energy, the ' Creamies '
he so loved to fondle and talk of. They had been in
harness but a few weeks. With fifty-two miles to
run and return over next day, he left early, that the
pace might be made as leisurely as the impatient
colts would permit. It was a beautiful morning in
early summer, and no lovelier scenery can be found
than in that stretch of south coast. Rugged ranges
rise, forest-clad, at an average of twenty miles to the
westward. Spurs from these mountains jut sea-ward
in places almost to the ocean beach, and undulating
hills break the spaces between.
The road led round beautiful Coila lake to the
valley of the Tuross river, with the lovely lakelet
of the same name at the river mouth. Well-kept farms,
with paddocks of luscious green pasture lands, broken
by patches of primaeval forest, opened at every bend
of the road. Herds of the famous south-coast dairy
cattle grazed in every paddock, or gathered in the
milking-yards. Wild geese, ducks, waders, and aquatic
birds of many types, littered the lakes, lagoons, and
river courses by the way. Every belt of forest echoed
to bird-calls, from the screech of parrots and laugh
of goburra to the tinkle of bell-birds and coo of wood-
pigeons. Little wonder that the soul of the preacher,
as he sat behind the champing, prancing, eager ponies,
inhaling an atmosphere laden with perfume from
forest and ravine, over-flowed with exultant joy.
It was good to be alive in the midst of such conditions.
At the twenty-six mile-peg, a lofty fold of the coast


range shut them in. Immediately ahead the road
ascended by a steep grade along a cutting scored into the
mountain side. It was two miles up that cutting to a
point where the road passed over the range, descending
through ferny gullies to the spreading farm lands of
Tilba Tilba, still twenty miles ahead. The last seven
miles of his way had led through barren, untenanted
bush. The preacher had been looking for some
suitable spot in which to rest and feed his ponies and
boil a ' billy ' for himself. In the mouth of the narrow
valley made by the mountain curve, he noted a de-
serted hut, with the remains of a stockyard behind it.
The place was ideal for his purpose. A few hasty
touches would make the enclosure secure for the
half-broken colts, whilst the hut threw a shadow
sufficient to shelter himself from the midday glare
of the sun. A tiny mountain stream crossed the road
not twenty paces away.
The preacher groomed and fed his ponies, boiled his
billy, and, spreading a rug, sat down to investigate
the contents of a hamper, packed by his good wife
that morning. Afterwards he lay drowsing, anxious
that the "ponies should secure the advantage of a long
rest, ere they faced the remaining score of miles.
A peal of thunder, sharp, menacing, startled him into
sudden activity. A glance up the valley revealed a
bulging mass of black cloud tumbling in agitated waves
over the western end of the gorge. Towering mountain
masses had hitherto hidden all indications of the
gathering tempest. As he gazed the cloud mass was


riven by a stream of flame. Almost at the same
instant came a second and louder crash of thunder.
Instantly he decided that his best course was to
get over the range on to the eastward and more sheltered
slope ; and the storm seemed far enough away to admit
of that procedure. But this was no ordinary thunder-
storm, as the preacher was soon to discover.
Swiftly the drowsing ponies were harnessed and
hurried up the western slope of the mountain pass.
But more swiftly still great billows of cloud surged
overhead. They had traversed less than half the
distance to the summit, when the storm broke into
the valley they had just vacated ; and swept furiously
towards them. The preacher looked down upon the
wild flurry of wind, rain, flying debris, and flaming
lightning, and back at the excited half-broken colts
pulling hard on the bit. Swiftly the thought flashed
into his brain, ' A moment or two, and I may be face
to face With my Maker. Am I ready ? '
He breathed a prayer for the perfect cleansing
God alone can give, and which constitutes the only
fitness possible to human hearts; and then gave
himself to the urgent need for action. Drawing the
trembling ponies close to the inner bank of the cutting,
he steadied them with soothing words and firm touch ;
and waited the on-fall of the storm. He calculated
that the outer scarp of the roadway would break the
impact of gusts already sweeping upwards from the
lower slopes, and that the bank itself would aid in
preventing the light vehicle from turning over.


A few hundred yards below them, a great spotted
gum writhed in the swirl of on-coming gusts. Suddenly
limbs, branches, and foliage scattered up the slope,
leaving the great bole, stripped and rent, rocking in
the wind. Next moment, in a crashing roar of wind
and thunder and falling trees, the storm leaped upon
them. As the preacher had hoped, the masonry
of the outer edge broke the impact of the blow, creating
a fierce eddy in the wind which swept harmlessly
overhead. Sticks and gravel from the roadway
pelted them mercilessly. The light vehicle heaved and
rocked, but the main fury of each gust shot upwards
from the walled embankment, passing overhead.
Great trees crashed on the mountain slope above and
below. Branches flew in all directions, yet nothing
larger than light twigs struck the preacher or ponies.
The latter quivered and whinnied nervously, seeming
to find comfort in the presence and encouraging words
and touch of their human comrade. Keeping close
to the inner face of the cutting, the preacher guided
them slowly through sheeted rain and hurtling tempest,
towards the mountain-top. A tree crashed so that
its crest choked the roadway in front. Steadying
the ponies and soothing them by word and touch, the
preacher alighted, chocked the wheels, and taking a
small axe from the tool-box under the seat, cut a
passage through. Pelted with flying debris of the
storm, controlled only by the quiet word spoken
from time to time, those half-tamed ponies stood
alert and patient, the while. Repeating this process


many times, the preacher slowly progressed upwards.
The storm had spent its worst fury ere he reached the
top of the pass. At the first curve in the descent a
stringy-bark tree lay from the top of the cutting
across the road. This also must be chopped in twain,
and again the ponies stood, alert, curious, patient.
Then they were free to trot brightly down to the
sheltered eastern forest and gullies.
' Oh, you beautiful, wise, brave little beggars,'
ejaculated the preacher, caressing the wind-blown
manes of his pets, ere he climbed for the last time
into the driving seat.
And well they merited his affectionate outburst.
To this day their steadiness and absence of fear, in the
conditions prevailing, is a marvel and mystery to him.
And into the preacher's soul had stolen an exquisite
sense of safety and peace, amidst all the turmoil
and peril, that remains an exceedingly precious
memory through the years. Yet, is it not written in
the Word that never fails, 'He shall give His angels
charge over thee in ALL thy ways ? '
Thereafter the journey was without incident. The
preacher arrived at Farmer C 's comfortable home,
Tilba Tilba, midway of the afternoon amid clearing
showers shot through with gleams of returning sunshine.
Rev. K. A. C , Chairman of District, reached
there next day, in time for breakfast, having been
delayed by the storm. He was town-bred, refined,
scholarly, nervous of horses. The 'Creamies' were
lively after a night's rest and in the nip of the clear


cool morning. His trepidation was very marked
as they leaped into the collar for the first sprint on the
home track. An hour or two later as they were
moving briskly though less exuberantly, the travellers
arrived at the scene of the previous day's experiences.
It was too early for the maintenance men to have
discovered the obstructions left by the tempest.
Tree-trunks and heavy branches, severed by the
preacher's axe, lay as he had left them. The Chairman
had paid slight heed to the preacher's casual statement
that he had passed through ' a bit of a blow,' the day
before. Now as his gaze rested upon storm-wreckage
strewn over the mountain slopes and roadway, his
amazement was unbounded.
' I should have collapsed utterly, brother,' he
exclaimed, ' had I been compelled to go through
that.'
' Probably that was why Providence kept you out
of it, sir,' was the quiet answer. ' God has a fashion
of shaping the load to the shoulders that have to carry
it.'
At risk of making this chapter somewhat prolix,
the writer must add another episode, occurring a few
days later, associated still with the Chairman and the
' Creamies,' possibly a last reference to the latter
to be made in this book. The preacher and his friend
were traversing the wildly beautiful gorge through
which the Moruya river breaks from the Araluen
valley to the sea-coast. Mountain masses littered with
luxuriant jungle and forest growth walled the gorge


on either side. A narrow winding road scored the
cliff face, and rounded elbows of the broken range,
often with forty to two hundred feet sheer of masonry
or cliff, down to the steep slant of bush below. Round-
ing an elbow on the descent into the valley, they saw,
on an opposite and lower shoulder, across the inter-
vening ravine, a small flock of sheep travelling coast-
wards. The ponies had never seen a flock of sheep
before. Their astonishment and excitement became
instantly manifest. The inner loop of the curving
road provided the best spot for passing, yet even
the preacher recognized how difficult, and possibly peri-
lous, the situation might become. A stone culvert passed
under the road where it curved round the head of
the ravine, draining a water-course that broke the cliff
above, and widening the road at that point considerably.
Putting the ponies' heads towards the water-course in the
cliff face, thus preventing them from watching the woolly
terror timidly approaching in their rear, the preacher
waited. The Chairman, hastily alighting* retreated to a
safe distance on the upward track. There was an exciting
moment when the sheep, after much hesitation, sud-
denly took to their heels streaming past the rear of
the vehicle in a panic rush. The ponies pawed at the
sloping cliff face, swung right then left in frantic
efforts to break from the grip which held them, and,
at a guiding touch and relaxed rein, dashed headlong
down the now cleared roadway. Soothing words
and a steady hand on the rein soon checked the pace, until
they stood snorting and pawing, waiting for the


Chairman to overtake and re-enter the vehicle. He
was white and trembling.
' Brother, I was praying for you all the while,'
he said, clutching nervously at the guard-iron, as the
ponies again leaped into their pace.
'Thank you, sir. Perhaps it was needed,' was the
quiet answer.


CHAPTER VIII
Itinerating
METHODIST ministers are itinerants. In Australia
forty years ago they were very much so. The preacher
was as itinerant as his brethren, if anything more so.
He had spent two years in the lovely little coast
circuit, when Conference unexpectedly transferred
him to Townsville, in tropical Queensland, more than
a thousand miles north. Queensland had just been
constituted a separate Conference. Some ministers
over that side of the border were anxious to return to
New South Wales. Many on this side were reluctant
to go, fearing difficulties in the matter of return under
changed conditions. Two years previously, when
changing circuits, the preacher happened to express
a desire for a Queensland appointment. It was a
desire due to sentimental associations of childhood,
and, after his appointment to Moruya, forgotten by
him. Someone remembered it, and, in the difficulty
of filling the Station sheet, suggested his name. So
there opened for the preacher an interesting and not
unprofitable term of service in the northern State.
The journey involved a sea-trip of a week's duration,
one half of it along the Queensland coast inside the
Barrier Reef. The cyclone season had passed. Inside


the reef the sea was smooth as. a land-locked lake.
As they entered the tropics the sea became a rich
cobalt blue, that deep tint which daring artists have
ventured to paint a dark-toned purple, on which
the steamer's wake lay like bubbling tossing snow.
On such a sea the Northumberland Islands floated
into the dawning day, beautiful beyond description,
mostly cones of rich green, luxuriant because of the
rainy season just ended, Uttered with palms or pines,
or both combined, set against the purple and gold
of the coming day. The preacher saw them many
times in after days, in varying seasons, always beautiful
yet never again floating amid sea-tints so wonderful.
Followed in due course, Magnetic Island, Cleveland
Bay, and Townsville, with its ' Castle Hill' towering
like some huge mediaeval fortress in the background,
the ramshackle city clambering about its base and
spilt along the fore-shores. The loyal, affectionate,
energetic people they soon learned to know and love
gave the preacher and his wife a foretaste of their
energy and cordiahty, ere the Aramac made the
anchorage. A speciaUy chartered tender steamed
round the vessel, whilst a welcoming band played
' Home Sweet Home,' and finally took possession of
the wayfarers.
How genuinely loyal they were! Memory recalls
anxious perplexities over property debts, solved by
their wise counsels, self-sacrificing gifts, and devoted
service. Seasons vibrant with spiritual zeal when
revivals swept the circuit, and they thronged to open-air


Gospel meetings, eager to scatter the blessing every-
where. And that other season, too, when the preacher
journeyed so near to the unseen, that his life-long
comrade, herself prostrate through long nursing and
anxious vigils, despaired of his return, —How, waking
from a heaven-sent sleep one midnight, a sleep the
first after many dreary hours of tortured delirium,
he found at his bedside the senior local preacher,
watching whilst wearied nurses rested, and was told
in response to an anxious question that all services
were provided for, everything was going well, and that
he had nothing to do but sleep and get better.
The preacher's anxiety was warranted, in a way.
Shortage of ministers had robbed him of a colleague
for a time. The nearest minister of the church was
in Charters Towers, over-burdened with the respon-
sibilities of that great mining centre. But those
splendid laymen had taken hold of everything that
the fevered brain and nerveless fingers of the preacher
failed to grasp and hold. When returning strength
made it possible, those same splendid laymen bundled
the preacher, his wife and bairns, away for a long
holiday, adding the burden of circuit management
to their own business and professional toil, and doing
it so well that no vital interest suffered. Such men
form a brotherhood in which it is a delight to find
fellowship.


-- -.
T .. 1 '■» '■ in miiiiujißiin,imm.
_J ' " mMMI
, , , .... _
1. Landing at Palm Island.
2. Tropics proper.
3. A glimpse of jungle road.
4. Month of Montya River, looking in from the sea ( see p. 43).


CHAPTER IX
To 'The Herbert'
PART of the preacher's official duty was to make
periodic visits to Home Mission stations on the Herbert
and Murray rivers, the latter a short tidal stream
north of Cardwell. These stations were reached either
by a rough track along the coast, or by small trading
steamers traversing coastal waters. The mild winter
of those latitudes, coupled with its almost invariably
fine weather, tempted the preacher to essay the land
journey on his first visit, taking his wife and their
wee girlie of two, for company.
' I think we had better cross and camp under those
oaks yonder, sweetheart.'
The preacher spoke to his wife still seated in the
buggy which had brought them from Townsville,
distant now more than twenty miles. The Herbert
River was sixty-two miles farther on. In the eighty-
two miles of the total journey there were eighty-six
creeks to cross, most of them subject to tidal influence
and all to be forded. The road was formed for eighteen
miles on the Townsville side, and for about ten from
the Herbert River end. The rest of the way was a
bush track. To make the tidal crossings on that
first day at convenient hours necessitated leaving at


daybreak, and breakfasting at a homestead en route.
Midday found them at the last of the tidal crossings
to be negotiated that day. A runlet of fresh water,
and the ample shade of an apple-tree, caused the
preacher to alight, with a view to the midday camp
and rest. A glance at the tidal creek made him
hesitate. Quite two feet of water covered the rocky
crossing and a murky tide flowed strongly up-stream.
A pool of fresh water shimmering under the shadow
of fringing oaks, half a mile beyond, offered all they
needed.
' Tuck your feet up on the seat,' he continued,
at the same time lifting their portmanteaux to the
back seat, ere he again took the reins.
'ls it deep ? ' queried his wife, glancing appre-
hensively at the turbid stream.
' Not so deep as it will be in another hour,' he replied
smiling. ' The wash of the tide may sweep across the
floor of the buggy, nothing more.'
With his foot on the step the preacher paused,
and laying the reins in the hands of his wife, turned
again to the stream.
' I had better examine the crossing a bit closely,'
he explained. ' The water is so muddy that one may
easily mistake the depth.'
But the crossing received very cursory attention.
The preacher's glance swept keenly down the water-
course. A dry limb protruding as from a submerged
log arrested his gaze. With a crooked finger in his
lips the preacher whistled shrilly. The dry snout


sank instantly out of sight, and the preacher knew
it for the protruding snout of an alligator, with eyes
just above water-line, stealthily viewing movements
on the bank at the crossing.
' What did you whistle for ? '
' To discover whether the cleric of to-day is as clever
as the larrikin of ten years ago,' he laughed back at her.
Though courageous almost to rashness about most
perils, he knew her to be morbidly nervous concerning
the slimy saurian of these tropical waters.
' There ought to be a good echo from yonder hill-
face,' he continued. ' Listen whilst I wake it up.'
So saying the preacher emitted a prolonged yell,
midway of an Australian coo-ee and an Indian war-
whoop. He knew that if alligators lurked near a
Crossing carrying more than two feet of water, the wise
traveller made a big noise before entering the stream.
His freakish outbreak rather puzzled his wife at first.
When he threw a largish stone into the pool below
the crossing sudden illumination flashed upon her.
' Are there alligators about ? ' she exclaimed.
' If there are, they will be making quick time for a
deep pool,' he replied, diplomatically evading her query.
Without further comment he took the reins, driving
quickly through the creek, and into the shade of the
oak clump beside the lagoon. To relieve the mare
of her harness, slip on a nose-bag, and prepare a
quick fire for the billy, occupied but little time. Whilst
the light of the parsonage home toddled and prattled
among the grass, the buggy rug was spread, the hamper


opened by the wife, and an appetizing repast arranged.
' See that humpy away on the butt of the range
ahead ? ' remarked the preacher, as they sat enjoying
their repast. ' I had thought of making that our
destination for to-day. The Mitchell's live there.
They have batched together for nearly four years.
It should do them good to have a woman and a kiddy
round even for a single night, but I have an odd sort
of feeling that we ought to make for' 'Bullocky Tom's "
instead. Perhaps he in some way needs us, at least,
that is the conviction shaping itself in my mind now.'
After further deliberation the longer journey was
decided upon. Between four and five o'clock that day
the buggy was descending the bank of a swift-flowing
stream. In a clearing on the opposite bank stood the
dwelling in which they expected to spend the night.
Dogs leaped to greet them barking loudly. A man
ran bare-headed from the cottage.
' Thank Gawd ! There's a woman."
The ejaculation reached them plainly as they splashed
through the ford.
' Oh 1 hurry, missus, my wife's terrible bad ! '
There was a frantic note in the appeal, and the
woman's quick wit divined the situation instantly.
With a swift movement she placed her sleeping child
in the preacher's arms, and before he realized the
significance of her movements, was speeding indoors
with a woman's help for a woman in her greatest hour
of need.
' You see, mister,' the man continued excitedly.


'it all happened unexpected like, and the nearest
neighbour is ten miles away, and I couldn't leave her.
Ever since she took bad I've been praying Gawd
A'mighty to send some one along. Mrs. is to be
here to-morrow. We didn't expect to really need her
till next week.*
'No need to worry longer, Tom. My wife is as good
as a nurse, and will stay till your nurse arrives.'
' Well, thank Gawd, anyhow.'
' Amen ! ' responded the preacher, thinking of the
impulse which had added fourteen miles to that day's
journey.
It remains but to say that on their return journey,
fourteen days later, the preacher, to quote the settler,
' made a Wesleyan ' of as rowdy a young rascal as any
parent might rejoice to own, the while his mother looked
on with that chastened tender pride, seen only in
the countenance of one who has stepped down to the
brink of the grave, that she might bring back the
immortelle to be plucked only there.


CHAPTER X
Tropics Proper
THE preacher arrived in due time at Ingham on the
Herbert River, making his home with the missionary
in charge. There was visitation of Kanaka night
schools, where South-Sea Islanders, indentured
labourers from the plantations, gathered for instruction.
There were services in the churches, addresses during
lunch-hour to workers in the sugar mills, and visitation
of homes among the plantations. There remained
a further journeying to the Murray River Mission,
fifty or sixty miles to northward, a trip to be made
only in the saddle.
' How far do you reckon Cardwell along the coast track?'
The preacher stood on the verandah of the mission-
ary's home. He must decide at once upon that north-
ward trip, if it were not to be deferred until his next
visit. Urgent requests for the appointment of an
agent of the church, accompanied by pledges of
financial help, had been received from settlers beyond
the little town of Cardwell, on the beautiful Hinchin-
brook Channel. He was deputed to inspect and report.
Two ways of reaching the locality, land-routes, offered.
One involved a long journey inland, the other lay
along the trackless foreshore of the coast. He pro-
posed traversing the latter, borrowing saddle and bridle
and using his buggy mare. Hence his inquiry.


' Some thirty miles,' replied the missionary. ' I
went through six months ago visiting the H 's.
You may reckon it a good six hours' ride. There is
no track. You just go ahead, keeping midway of the
channel and the range.'
An hour later the preacher was riding between
clumps of plantain and rows of twisted sugar-cane
towards a low range of hills rimming the loamy flats of the
Herbert River on the north. His host accompanied
him to the gap from which the preacher obtained
his first glimpse of Hinchinbrook Channel with the
rugged mountain island mass along its further shore.
' Watch out for blacks,' warned the missionary as
he shook hands in parting. ' They have a bad repu-
tation both on the island and the mainland. Keep
out of range of their spears.'
The morning was clear, although heavy masses of
cloud hung on the sky-line ahead, and the preacher
speculated uneasily on the chance of rain. In that
region every shower was a deluge whilst it lasted,
and numerous water-courses led from the mountains
to the sea. But transitory misgiving was replaced
by an unalloyed delight as the landscape opened before
him. On his right lay a continuous fringe of wild
banana, ferns, palms, and flowering jungle, merging
into a green expanse of mangrove, edged by the
purple blue waveless tide of the great channel. Beyond
that rose the mountain mass which constitutes Hinchin-
brook Island, every gorge of which was choked with
pine and cedar, enmeshed in clinging vines and climbing


palms. On his left was the broken scarp of the coast
range. That too was faced with pine and cedar scrub,
matted with all the varied growths peculiar to the
tropic jungle. Comparatively open grass land occupied
the space between. A break in the mangroves exposed
a mudbank left bare by the receding tide, upon which
a curious collection of drift logs attracted his attention.
As he gazed one of the logs moved, elevating a blunt
end in the air, and he realized that the drift logs were
alligators sunning themselves. For a few moments
the upraised snout remained motionless, sensing the
taint on the breeze made by the passing horseman.
Then the huge corrugated length slid into the murky
tide, followed instantly by the others of the group.
Not a ripple was visible as the huge forms sank stealthily
from sight, a characteristic marvel of their movement
in their native element.
The first and only thrill of the ride occurred midway
of the journey. The preacher had been compelled
to deviate some distance up a hollow, in the bed of
which storm-waters had cut an impenetrable trench.
Having found a crossing, he was on the point of
emerging from the depression, when he drew rein
sharply. A short distance away a large party of
natives was engaged in stalking game. The hollow
had screened him from their view. They were intent
upon their task, and fortunately, moving away from
him towards the water front. Pressing his horse
back till only the top of his own head appeared above
the edge of the depression, he became an interested


spectator, himself for a time unseen. The elderly
men, some of whom were white-haired, formed a
base line, moving in unison slowly down the gentle
slope, which at the place was covered with tussocky
grass. On either side of the base-line, forming three
sides of a square, were ranged the younger men, each
armed with native weapons, and each the embodiment
of taut alertness. These were practically nude,
and as they crept and crouched in concerted movement,
flexible muscles showed in every limb. A slight
exclamation passed along the base line. A tussock
or two swayed, gently responding to some stealthy
movement beneath. Two men in the wings imme-
diately opposite each other, bent inwards in attitudes
of concentrated attention. With a swift movement
one leaped to the centre, striking with a short club
at some object invisible to all but himself, the next
moment jerking the still quivering body of a ' paddy-
melon ' in triumph from its covert. That moment
also sharp eyes descried the preacher, for at some
word or signal the whole company faced round, gazing
in his direction. Striking spurs to his [horse the
preacher rode rapidly on to the level. The farthest
line of young men straggled hastily out in an effort
to intercept him. Swerving away from them the
preacher easily outdistanced pursuit, and as the
runners stopped, slackened his speed. Ten minutes
later he rode through their camp, tenanted only by
gins and piccaninies.
About four in the afternoon he passed the first


cottage in the little town of Cardwell. It was poised
grotesquely on its roof, ground-plates and sleepers
being turned to the sky. Two months before Cardwell
had been the centre of a ' blow.' Other buildings in a
distressful condition lined the further roadway. The
hotel, though minus its verandah, remained otherwise
intact. Thither the preacher made his way, finding
a cordial welcome and considerable comfort for himself,
and good stabling for his horse. That evening whilst
the bar shut down, he conducted service in the parlour
to an appreciative audience. Then he discussed the
projected route of the morrow with the landlord.
' You may find the creeks pretty full,' said the
latter. ' They had a bit of shower that way yesterday.'
' A shower yesterday should leave little of its effect
by to-morrow,' replied the preacher. ' All creeks are
short and empty quickly.'
' I don't know so much about that. They had
twenty-seven inches.'
The preacher wondered. ' A bit of a shower,'
giving twenty-seven inches, would doubtless prove
something to speculate over. His suspicion that the
landlord was ' taking a lift' out of a new-comer was
dissipated at the first runlet crossed next morning.
Above his head, quite fifteen feet from the ground,
masses of flood-drift hung dripping from the branches.
Other indications of a phenomenal deluge abounded,
and he devoutly trusted his present adventure might
end without having to encounter a ' bit of a shower.'


CHAPTER XI
Pioneering
IT was past midday. There had been no vestige
of road after the first three miles from Cardwell.
The preacher had settled his course by the mountain
mass on his left. Dense scrub smothered all its sea-
ward face and sent protruding tongues of tangled
growth out into the open grass-land over which he
rode. The air was sickly with humid heat. Late
summer, with an occasional deluge of rain, lingerings
of the wet season just passing away, accounted for
both. Vainly he scanned the landscape for some
sign of civilized life. Neither friendly smoke nor
gleaming roof nor even a stray herd of cattle broke the
line of interminable grass and scrub and mountain.
Tussocks of sword-grass, ever increasing in density
and height, impeded progress. When the ground
beneath his horse's feet grew soggy, and the tussocks
obliterated all view save the blue sky overhead, the
preacher reined up. Raising himself in the stirrups,
he searched the landscape again. A giant crane here
and there crossed his vision, disturbed into flight by
his advent. A couple of eagles poised motionless
far overhead. He had so far kept in the open, expect-
ing thereby to obtain some glimpse of the homestead
he sought. The bog under foot precluded further
advance, and he retraced his way. Then, acting on an
65 5


impulse, he rode diagonally across the open to the
nearest tongue of scrub. A recent wheeltrack skirted
its edge, welcome sign of civilized human presence.
He followed the track with quickened pace. Rounding
a second jungle promontory, he found himself close
to a comfortable bush homestead, and a cry of baying
hounds broke the silence as he dropped the reins.
Something sinister in the cry made him spring hastily
to his saddle again—a needless precaution, for, as he
rounded the garden fence, riding for a stockyard in
the rear, he saw three fierce dogs straining on stout
chains which held them fast.
He had reached the home of Isaac H y, one-time
dairy farmer in far-distant Illawarra, now turned pioneer
grazier in wonderful North Queensland. He glanced
curiously at the house, a substantial wooden structure
constructed of cedar throughout, with wide drooping
verandahs on every side of it. The inmates hurried
out at the cry of the hounds, hastening to bid him
welcome.
' Why didn't you let us know you were coming ? '
was the grazier's greeting. ' One of the boys would
have met you in Cardwell.'
' I understand Mr. T r had sent word, and only
discovered he had not done so on my arrival at the
Herbert River,' replied the preacher. ' Then it was
too late to get a message ahead of myself.'
'We are glad to see you, anyway. Come right in.
The boys will see to your horse and bring in your valise.'
How heartily all the family seconded this welcome !


The motherly matron fixed up a guest chamber with
spotless linen and every other adjunct of comfort.
Two girls, one a woman grown, the other just in
that delightful dawn of womanhood when girlish
grace and freedom is merging into womanly reserve
and reticence ; and four boys, youngest of whom was
a lanky seventeen-year-old, made up a family life
full of chatter and frolic. They were all healthy,
well-grown specimens, and their education at distant
seminaries and grammar schools had furnished their
naturally intelligent minds with necessary knowledge.
Intimate association with the home life for two weeks
only deepened the favourable impression first received.
It was a home life permeated by practical common-
sense religion.
' I noted a singular absence of fencing as I rode out
to-day.'
The preacher was chatting with his host after dinner,
as they waited on the cool verandah for the call to
evening prayers.
'We fence very little here,' was the reply, ' The
scrub is a secure fence on one side. Nothing bigger
than a bandicoot could burrow more than thirty or
forty yards into that. The very ' niggers' go on
all fours through runs like wallabies. The swamps
and foreshore shut in the other side. We run an odd
line just to close up an end.'
' Cattle must grow wild and difficult to muster under
such conditions.'
' Not at all. Eight of us are constantly riding about


among them. We are draf ting'calves for branding, all fats
for the market, or cutting out breeding stock, every day.'
' But you must lose heavily. Young stock are bound
to make into the scrub.'
' Our only losses are caused by ' nigger' raids or
alligators. What I have said is literally true. Nothing
big can penetrate our scrub. I'll show you to-morrow.'
A call to family prayer interrupted the conversation ;
but next day, after vainly essaying to penetrate the
scrub immediately in the rear of the horse-paddock,
the preacher endorsed the grazier's judgement. The
gleam and fragrance of flowering orchids lured him to
repeated efforts ; but ropes of climbing palms interlaced
every tree, and masses of jungle and fern packed the
spaces between. It was impossible without brush-hook
and axe to force an entrance anywhere.
After prayers the household adjourned to the
spacious verandahs for rest and chat, during which
the preacher became familiar with many episodes in
pioneering life, full of charm and something of thrill.
And what a delight it was on a still night, to sit under
the shadowed verandah, whilst a blaze of stars gleamed
from the drooping azure overhead; and echoes of the
myriad-voiced night life of the forest drifted round
them from the distance, and fire-flies flickered in the
outer darkness, and a droning and sighing of night
winds fell from lofty pine and cedar inundating all.
There was poetry and magic in those tropical late sum-
mer nights, exquisitely delightful, and the soul of the
preacher revelled in it all.


CHAPTER XII
' Niggers'
' How did you come by that chap ? ' The preacher
indicated a fullgrown native at the moment carrying
a bucket of milk from the cow-bails to the house.
' Rather a dismal story, belonging to the days of
first settlement,' replied the grazier to whom the query
had been addressed. 'ln those days " niggers"
were very troublesome.' (The preacher knew that
nigger was the term which distinguished uncivilized
natives of the wild bush from the semi-civilized groups
who frequented the white settlements). 'We were
at our wits' end to know how to restrain or check them.
They raided our cattle, spearing numbers out of wanton
cruelty, fired and looted the homesteads, occasionally
murdering the inmates. No form of legal redress
was possible, and, in desperation at last the settlers
determined to rid the neighbourhood of wild blacks.
My brother and I refused to join them ; but one day
a score of armed men rode up. Their scouts had
located a camp of niggers in the thick scrub back
of our holding. Their method of cleaning up a nigger


camp could not be hidden from us under the circum-
stances. They resolved, therefore, to take us with
them, voluntarily if we could be persuaded to lay
aside our scruples, by compulsion if necessary. After-
wards they would be prepared to make affidavits
that we were willing participants if, as they put it,
we " squeaked." Whilst refusing to take part in
the dreadful remedy they applied, neither of us could
suggest an effective substitute. This consideration more
than their threats induced us to acquiesce passively
in the action. Neither I nor James carried a weapon.
It was the first time we went and the last. It was a
ghastly business, and so horrified James and me that
we resolved to report anything of the kind attempted
again to the authorities, and warned the men concerned
of our purpose. The band of natives destroyed that
night were supposed to be the party concerned in
the murder of an aged settler and his wife, upon
whose bodies a cannibal feast had been made. Some
measure of justice was admitted; but the mode of
punishment was out of proportion to the offence;
and we knew that a cattle raid was regarded by the
settlers as complete justification for similar action
at any time.
' The settlers waited till night-fall. As a rule
niggers will not leave their camp fire after dark.
Though these blacks must have heard our stealthy
approach, they only huddled closer about their fires
and gunyahs. Our party surrounded the camp. Then
the guns were loosed in repeated volleys until nothing


living could be seen. The party searched the camp
to ensure that none escaped. I leaned against a tree,
utterly nauseated by the horrible business. Someone
jerked a piccaninny of two or three years old from a
hiding-place. I just had time to prevent him from
knocking the little chap on the head. That is how
I got Paddy. He alone of all that camp was left
alive.'
' And did the killing of blacks by the settlers cease ? '
' There was less of it, and we were kept carefully
ignorant of any that happened. Fortunately the
terror inspired by the affair I described emptied this
whole region of wild blacks for years.'
' What you have told me, Mr. H y, convinces
me more strongly than ever that we ought, as a nation,
to do something to civilize and Christianize the Abori-
gines.'
' What could we do ? The native is a mere nomad
of the scrub, here to-day and gone to-morrow. He has
no permanent place of abode. If Government could
round them up into some suitable location, compelling
them to remain there, something might possibly be
done.'
' Why not open a mission on this coast ? Natives
are always to be found somewhere along it.'
' Of what use would your mission be, unless natives
were compelled to locate within easy reach of it ?
Did not the Moravians try that plan out to a finish
on our south coast long ago ? I know one or two
of those old missionaries. They sought to collect


native tribes in settlements round their central station,
yet every temporary success was followed by defeat.
Some whim or some superstition took possession of
them, and whole settlements would be evacuated in a
single day or night. Those missionaries, finding it
impossible to hold the natives round a Mission centre,
left all, and lived with the natives, hoping thereby
at least to get hold of the children. In the end they
were driven out, fleeing for life from the superstitious
malignity of the black-fellow. The last and most
heroic of the band escaped in the night, with a hostile
spear-head in his thigh, travelling more than twenty
miles through the bush, pursued by native warriors
intent upon murdering him. Nothing can ever be
done towards civilizing and Christianizing them until
they are located. In fact one wonders at times if
they be really human after all.'
' About that, Mr. H y, there can be no rational
doubt,' replied the preacher gravely. ' Christian
Aborigines exist, some of whom have shown marked
capacity for acquiring and utilizing knowledge; and
from what I have seen, the types prevailing on this
coast are equally intelligent.'
' Anyway nothing can be done without locating
them.'
' That may be,' admitted the preacher. ' What
troubles me is the fashion in which a Christian nation
ignores its responsibility to the native race. A duty
of infinitely greater moment than raising cattle or
growing bananas and sugar-cane is utterly neglected.


We owe it to the original inhabitants of this country
that adequate provision be made for their physical
and moral well-being. And that duty becomes more
imperative as our civilization monopolizes the black
man's territory.'
' They tell me you have a magic lantern equipment
in your saddle-bags,' remarked the grazier with
apparent irrelevance.
' That is so. I brought it along for use chiefly among
the Kanakas. Thinking it might be of interest to
the young people here I packed it with other things.'
' What about giving the niggers a show ? '
' Could that be done ? '
' Quite simply. Paddy is in touch with the scrub
people. He bought a wife from one of the camps,
and through her connexion maintains intercourse
with them. They would not hesitate to creep out
after dusk under his protection.'
' I should be delighted just for the fun of the thing.
It could not be expected that any good can be done
in that way.'
' I don't know. Paddy's influence has saved our
cattle from raids when our neighbours have suffered
badly. Weird ideas of your show are sure to circulate
among the niggers afterwards. To have our place
associated with the strange magic you make, may
easily serve us much better than you think.'
On the following afternoon, a sheet was spread
on the slab wall of the smithy, facing the scrub, and
the lantern placed in position. As night drew down


members of the two families gathered within the open
space back of the smithy.
' Plenty fella nigger come longa dark see white
fella debbil debbil,' was the message delivered by
Paddy about the same time, as he emerged from the
scrub. Yet the preacher listened vainly for any
indication of their coming, as final darkness settled
upon them. But his sight could not penetrate deep
shadows cast by the fringing forest, nor even the
lighter patches between. Nor were his ears keen enough
to detect footfalls soft as the tread of a wild-cat
stalking its prey.
He had thrown words of a familiar hymn on the
sheet, which they sang. A succession of Bible themes
followed, after which he prepared to amuse his audience
with a varied assortment of mechanical and comic
slides.
' When will your niggers be here ? ' he inquired of
his host.
' Why, man alive ! They're all around you ; dozens
of them I '
The preacher opened the rear shutter of his lamp,
and the gleam mirrored itself in shining eyes starting
suddenly out of the blackness, whilst an uneasy
sibilant murmur disturbed the silence. Satisfied, he
shut off the light.
The final slide presented a man asleep on a bed,
mouth wide open, senses locked in oblivion. Excited
murmurs rose from the darkness behind. Cries of
' Coot! Coot!' mingled with unintelligible gutturals,


as a rat, cautiously curious, approached the open-
mouthed sleeper, finally leaping into the cavity and
disappearing between masticating jaws. Then babel
broke loose, and a troop of dusky forms rose melting
hastily away into friendly darkness, though a few of the
bolder spirits accompanied Paddy in an effort to dis-
cover the source of magic, by examining the walls
of the smithy outside and in.
' The story of your " debbil debbil" show will be
halfway to Cape York by this time to-morrow, Mr.
P ,' said the settler, as he helped in re-stowing the
outfit.
' I wish it could have been a Gospel message in-
telligible to them instead of a mysterious appeal to
their superstition and ignorance.' sighed the preacher.


CHAPTER XIII
Providence and a Dog
' WHY do you keep those savage brutes, Mr.
Hy ? '
The preacher stood on a ramp leading from the back
verandah. The hounds, red-eyed, fierce-fanged, snarled
and leaped the length of their chains, frothing in
baffled rage at the stranger.
' They are savage,' agreed the settler, quietly
surveying the trio. 'No one save myself dare go
within reach of their chains. When I let them loose
for a run, even I have my work cut out to get them
safely on the chain again.'
' They must be a danger to any neighbour visiting
you.'
' Everybody comes in vehicle or on horseback,
and no one dismounts till they know if the dogs are
loose. We keep them as a protection against the
niggers.'
The ' nigger ' of the settler was an untamed savage
of the inner scrub, a creature as wild as the animals
which share his jungle habitat, and very much more


dangerous to the isolated homestead. Lurking in the
inner recesses of the scrub, his camp approached by
long tunnel-like tracks, to be negotiated only on all
fours, he watched every movement about the lonely
homestead, creeping out during a temporary absence
of its inmates to loot and burn, and sometimes to
perpetrate tragic deeds upon helpless women and
children discovered there ; or, on rainy days, when
the stockmen remained in the comfort of the home,
breaking forth in a wild freak of destructive frenzy
upon unwatched herds. In the stampede which in-
variably accompanied such a raid, valuable beasts
were crippled or killed, and many carried spear-wounds
and broken shafts of spears for days, being yarded and
relieved.
' No nigger dares come within range of these dogs,'
continued the settler. The preacher, scenting one
of the pioneer's interesting stories, remained silent.
' I always turn them loose when the men leave
the homestead now. The niggers seem always to
know when the men are away.'
The speaker paused in a way peculiar to himself
when growing reminiscent, gazing meditatively at
the hounds, somewhat subdued by a peremptory
order jerked at them by their master.
' See that chap with the brown streak down his
face ? I would not let that chap go for his weight in
gold, after what he did for us last summer. Mother
and I had gone early to Cardwell with the wagonette
and pair, to bring supplies left by the steamer the day


before. Two of the boys were about the place, so
the dogs were left on the chain. About ten o'clock
my brother's daughter Millie came with a message
that niggers had been among the cattle on a grazing
patch five miles away. The boys saddled at once
and rode out to investigate leaving our two girls and
their cousin here.
'The morning was hot. Just within the slip-rails
by which you entered our home paddock, there is a
lagoon about neck deep in the middle, and shallowing
to the edge. It is so far from the river that alligators
never have visited it, and so has become a favourite
bathing resort for both families. Absence of men-folk
and the hot morning suggested the idea of half an
hour in the lagoon to the girls. They were enjoying
themselves immensely when a band of niggers crept
out of the tussocks, silently surrounding the pool.
One of my girls who can whistle through her fingers
like a boy, whistled loudly for the dogs. The baying
of the hounds could be heard. They always go mad
if they wind a nigger. For a moment or two it seemed
as if the ruse would succeed. The beasts sprang up
and began to run ; but their leader called out something
and they turned back with grins of derision. The
girls had huddled together in the deepest part of the
lagoon. At a command from the leader several niggers
began to wade towards them. Just as the girls had
lost all hope, that dog with the brown streak down his
face sprang through the long grass into the open.
He had drawn the staple of his chain in frenzied


plunging as the wind drove the scent of the niggers
down to him. Those on the edge of the lagoon saw
him coming and made a break for the scrub. The
brute in the water on that side was too late. The
dog got him as he reached dry ground. The girls
seized their clothes and raced for home. It was
after dark when the dog limped back, still dragging
his chain. His feet were thick with scrub thorns.
His body was spattered with gore ; but I just picked
him up in my arms and cuddled him. After extracting
all the thorns I could find, and bathing him with warm
water, I put him in his kennel. You will not wonder
that we prize our dogs, savage as they undoubtedly are.'


CHAPTER XIV
The Alligator
HE is the crocodile of Australia, found only in the
tropical zone, stealthy, cowardly, a deadly peril to
any living creature overtaken in deep water. On land
ungainly, sluggish, easily evaded. In the water agile,
cunning, and almost inescapable by his victims. A
fisherman preparing a fine perch for the frying-pan,
standing knee-deep in water, finds the fish suddenly
snatched from his hands, with scarce a ripple to show
where the depredator has vanished. An ox or a horse
stooping to slake its thirst at some quiet pool is con-
fronted suddenly by huge gaping jaws and scaly
head, and clutching fore-paws, the claws of which
sink inches deep through hide and flesh. A human
being in similar circumstances may fare as ill, with
equal suddenness and inability to escape.
' Come for a ride to the river ? '
The cheery voice of his host broke pleasantly in
upon the preacher's reverie, as he swung in his favourite
verandah hammock, trailing a foot on the boards.
' Don't mind if I do,' he replied, springing eagerly
to the floor. ' What is it ? Fishing or shooting ? '


' Neither! We go stalking alligators. I have an
idea that a couple of yearlings missing from the herd
over the river have been taken by an alligator. The
cattle come down to drink about noon. I have
watched two days without result, but if alligators
are about, they are bound to appear soon.'
' The river' was a stream known locally as the
Murray. For twelve miles of its course tidal waters
prevailed, rendering it navigable for small vessels.
Its upper reaches drained the grazing lands frequented
by cattle belonging to the brothers H y. Twenty
minutes smart riding brought the preacher and his
friend to a point at which the tidal waters were barred by
a rocky ledge, over which the fresh-water stream dropped
several feet to the deep channel below. Dismounting
the grazier secured the horses, and then led the way
up stream.
' Make no sound from now on,' he whispered. ' This
pool deepens for the first hundred yards or so, and then
shallows to the ford. If an alligator is on the job he
will be located in this pool. If he discovers our
presence he will not show.'
Cautiously and silently the preacher followed the
grazier, creeping from one shelter to another, ever
intently scanning the pool for indications of movement
ere each advance was made. In this stealthy silent
fashion they arrived at a recess between two boulders,
commanding a clear view of the ford. Half an hour
passed in silent vigil, broken only by fragmentary
conversation in whispers. Several groups of cattle


waded into the stream, slaking their thirst in undis-
turbed security. A cow from one of these groups
having reached the centre of the stream, halted in
apparent indecision whether to turn or continue
to the pasture on the home side of the river. There
came a sudden splash, a bellow of fear and pain from
the unfortunate beast. Both men sprang to their
feet, gazing at the frantic struggle for life, as the cow
sought to tear herself free from the claws and teeth
of a huge alligator, slowly dragging her towards the
deep part of the pool.
' So, that is the secret,' said the grazier, drawing a
deep breath as he hastily sighted his rifle.
' Got him ! ' shouted the preacher excitedly, as
the alligator, releasing his hold at the crack of the
rifle, sank silently beneath the water.
The grazier shook his head, intently watching the
spot in which the reptile had disappeared.
' Things are too quiet out there for that,' he answered.
' If he were really hurt he would make more fuss.
I suspect the bullet has scared him badly, without
hurting him much.'
This proved to be the case. Later the bullet was
discovered imbeded under a scaly projection back of
the eye-socket. The marksman had tried to put his
bullet through the eye into the creature's brain.
' We must get the brute,' the grazier continued,
as he led the way back to the horses. 'He will stick
to the deep water for the next day or two. But we
can get him now we know he is there.'


. »
?'■£ ■ * ; '
# ■ ' %■
T3
u
/>. 49)-
al waters.
*o
J. ' s
01 4->
2 f
£
5 fJi
P.* 'AEMI' ..: —™ '
X
a
QJ
+■»
•*
C I)
, rt *
o
2 1
<u a,
tJ £>
bo -
C
E39l9NfRft|Q MP^I
<L>
*2 OJ
-■■ . M : jm¥~
/"* V"
> ••. •.. aR# iSfS&S. . tt jlflp
'■ . ; f JP^
l-t
(N fC
■ Jm> #
! i-.JPf :
, gjr
' s v •


They rode hastily back to the homestead. Whilst
the grazier busied himself at the forge fashioning a
strong hook, one of the sons caught and killed a young
pig. Attaching the hook to a chain and the chain
to a stout rope, the grazier affixed a portion of the
pig as a bait. Once again they repaired to the river.
A heavy post was sunk in the ground, the rope securely
attached, and the bait tossed into the water.
' The splash will bring his nebs up on a visit of inquiry.
Let us get out of sight.' And the grazier dived into
a clump of bush on the bank above them. They had
lain but a few minutes in hiding, when the preacher
pointed silently to an unusual swirl in the water
opposite the post.
'I see ! ' whispered the grazier. ' The brute took
fright at something just as he was nosing the bait.
They never disturb the surface water except when
seizing their prey or when taking fright. But he
will come again. No alligator can resist fresh pork.'
They had not long to wait. The rope suddenly
tightened. Simultaneously came a terrific threshing
of the water. The post, sunk deep and rammed hard,
gave to the strain till it was almost horizontal, then
slipped with a sudden rush from its socket. Post,
rope, chain, bait, and alligator, disappeared in a
moment.
' The fishing game is played out,' remarked the
grazier, grimly surveying the rent made in the bank
as the post left its bed. ' Some alligator that chap,'
he added. ' But I'll fix him yet.'


Returning again to the homestead the grazier took
the remainder of the pig, and inserting a heavy dose
of strychnine carefully stitched the cavity over.
' It seems a shame to waste good pork,' he remarked,
' but one steer is worth several porkers these times,
and nothing will tempt an alligator like fresh pork.'
The poisoned bait, slightly weighted to make it float
just under the surface, was placed in the stream.
Twenty-four hours later the body of a huge alligator
drifted on to the ledge of rock at the lower end of the
pool. With the aid of a horse and trace-chains it was
brought to land. Measurements made showed that
the creature was bigger in girth than the preacher's
horse, and jaws and teeth were in proportion. But
there! The alligator yarn of North Queensland is
akin to the fish yarn of other latitudes ; and, lest the
preacher's reputation for veracity should permanently
suffer we refrain from quoting him further.


CHAPTER XV
' He Heareth Us •
You had better come at once; boy given up.
The preacher sat with the telegram in his hand,
sorely stricken. A brother minister had sent it from
Brisbane. He realized the dreadful significance of
it. Months before he had sent wife and children
(a girl and a boy) away south. The wife, a victim to
malaria, had vainly striven to remain at his side
until this final year of their term should have ended.
But a cruelly humid summer and repeated attacks
of malaria compelled her to leave, and they had
borne her, half fainting with weakness, aboard the
steamship. Kindly souls cared for her and her little
ones en route. Telegrams reassured him from each
port of call. An unmarried sister met and took
charge of them on arrival in Brisbane, and a comfortable
little furnished cottage at Sandgate became a temporary
refuge and home. The invalid had quickly rallied,
and he and they were looking eagerly and hopefully
for speedy reunion. The end of his term was less
than two months distant, and a Brisbane suburban
appointment awaited him.


Then had come disquieting news of the serious illness
of their boy of two. Bulletins followed quickly of a
still more disquieting nature. Letters explained how
serious was the child's condition. He could only pray
for blessing on medical skill, for comfort and strength
to be given the mother, herself in precarious health
at best, and for himself to strive to trust utterly the
' Love that faileth never.'
That night among the latest deliveries came the
fateful telegram. It left no alternative. Yet to
comply was exceedingly difficult. He had no colleague
to take charge during his absence. The return trip
would occupy at least a fortnight, the greater part of a
week being spent in the forward journey, and the
expense, added to that already incurred, was a de-
pressing item, in view of their straitened resources.
A boat was due out at day-break. He must catch
that boat. It was midnight ere his hasty preparations
were completed. All through the rush and turmoil
of the hours his thoughts had been with the watching
mother and her suffering babe, so far away. At
midnight he had time to kneel in prayer, and in that
solemn quiet obtained unmistakable communion with
his God. Relief beyond expression stole in upon
his own troubled spirit. He prayed that like blessed
peace might enter and fill the soul of the woman he
loved, despite her physical weakness and the sorrow
which threatened. He prayed too for their child,
that he might be spared until he himself could stand
beside the mother, if bereavement must smite her


heart. As he prayed he found himself thanking
God for having granted that which he had asked,
so deep and unfaltering was the assurance borne in
upon his soul of the fact. A further gladdening
conviction that the child would recover crowned the
experiences of that wonderful midnight vigil. A
telegram was passed in to the night operator ; ' leaving
to-day wire Bowen Mackay, Keppel Bay, Psalm
fifty-six and third.' Then the preacher lay down and
slept, happy in the trust he reposed in God.
That night his wife sat writing a letter addressed
to the S.S. Leura, Keppel Bay, as she watched by her
babe, between the hours of midnight and morning.
The preacher received and treasured that letter ever
afterwards. And these are some of the sentences
penned by the woman as she sat by her apparently
dying babe: ' I have just been praying for our dear
one, and I cannot express the deep peace which has
come into my soul. Text after text poured into my
mind. It seemed as if someone were just speaking
them, texts full of comfort. One specially kept
coming over and over; 'He shall deliver thee in
six troubles, yea, in seven there shall no evil touch
thee." I feel it is all right with our darling whatever
comes. It was just as if my Saviour came into the
room beside me, and is with me still; and now all
trouble is gone. It is all peace, and rest, and comfort
in Him.'
Picture that scene : the midnight hour, the invalid
mother, the sick babe, the ' UNSEEN CHRIST.' It was


no marvel that the preacher's eyes blurred as he read
those lines, recalling his own rare experience on that
same midnight hour. Nor was it surprising that his
tremulous lips were saying, ' Thank GOD ! Thank
GOD !' as he paced the steamer's deck.
Such experiences are real. They touch the deep
things of God and the Unseen Holy. They are facts
as much to be respected by scientific thought as the
law of gravitation or the attraction and repulsion
of matter. No conception of the universe is logical
which omits them from its reasoning.
This letter was the final touch which filled the
preacher's soul to overflowing. The first telegram
to reach him on board the Leura spoke of ' slight
improvement'; the second ' decidedly better '; and
a third received with the letter ' every hope now of a
good recovery.' When he arrived at the cottage on
the hill-side at Sandgate, it was to unite in rejoicing
over the babe-life spared. And the babe grew to
manhood, scholarly and good, an athlete in sport, a
devout consistent Christian, loved and respected by
all who knew him. And now a little cross over a
simple grave bears silent witness that he too is num-
bered among that throng who made the great sacrifice,
that the home he loved, and the dear ones cherished
there, might continue to dwell in peace and safety.
What he was to that home, and the grief-stricken
hearts within it, they and God alone know.


CHAPTER XVI
Nundah
THAT was the preacher's new station. During the
brief preliminary interval at Sandgate, a fifth member
joined their little home circle in the guise of a wee baby
boy. His still sickly brother and his motherly little sister
rejoiced greatly in his advent. For many years the
trio were the light and joy of the preacher's household.
The family circle never grew larger.
Nundah is a favoured suburb of the great Queensland
metropolis. Prosperous business men from the city
made their homes there. Pineapple growers, most
of them also prosperous, dotted the country round
it with plantations. Church and parsonage occupied
part of the site of the old Moravian Mission station,
whereon more than a generation ago a busy mission
to the aborigines had been established. Kedron
brook, named by them, still flowed in the shallow valley
southwards. Descendants of the old missionaries
were officials and members in the church to which
the preacher ministered. One aged missionary still
lived on the hillside opposite. A second came regularly
to minister to the congregation at the Lutheran church,
on the main road to Sandgate, limping yet from the


effect of a spear-wound in the leg, received forty
years before. He was last of the heroic band, who
finding it impossible to keep the natives round them
on the mission station, had gone with them into the
wilds, living as they lived, hoping thus to exert a
permanent influence upon the children, though the
adults proved intractable. We have referred to the
climax in an earlier chapter. This came when a
band of warriors from a distance decreed death to the
only missionary left. A friendly native warned
him of his peril just as the attack was being launched.
He crept from his gunyah into the darkness, as a
shower of spears pierced it. One of them struck
him in the thigh. He could not extract the jagged
point, so, snapping the haft off close to the limb,
he stole into the thick brush on the edge of a tidal
creek. Dropping noiselessly into the water, he swam
to the other side, tramping thirty miles to the mission
station, during the night. He entered safety just as
dawn broke, the pursuing natives emerging from cover
a few hundred yards in his rear, so closely had death
followed on his trail. The spear-head was extracted,
and he lived to minister to his people for several
decades afterwards; but the mission itself became
an acknowledged failure. Descendants of these Mora-
vian families constituted an invaluable element in the
preacher's new congregations.
In this circuit the preacher first discovered in himself
the possession of a literary strain, hitherto unsuspected.
Dr. and Mrs. Howard Taylor, of C.I.M. fame, were


directly responsible for the discovery. The preacher
had met them at dinner in the home of a mutual
friend. He was led into retailing some experiences
connected with his ministry in the far interior. Mrs.
Taylor urged him to write for publication that which
he had just been telling them. Later he reduced
the incident to manuscript, posting her a copy. A
year or two after, Morgan and Scott, of London,
published it in pamphlet form, under the caption,
On the Diamantina. Once being started the preacher
found the lure of the pen irresistible, and for a number
of years past, the long-suffering public served by
Methodist periodicals in Australia has ' endured many
things at his hands.' During the stay in this circuit,
too, he met with the Rev. Thomas Cook. The great
mission conducted in Brisbane by the British Evange-
list sent a wave of revival influence through the
Nundah circuit. Gracious seasons were experienced
by all, and in particular a wonderful blessing came
to the young people of the Nundah congregation.
The preacher was fortunate enough to get a kick from
a horse, which crippled him for weeks, and caused
the good-natured host and hostess of Rev. Thomas
Cook to take him to their home between meetings.
The opportunity for familiar social fellowship with
the evangelist and his wife was much prized at the
time, and left impressions affecting all the preacher's
later ministry.


CHAPTER XVII
Over the Downs
THE call of the spacious interior came again to the
preacher. In many respects, during his early manhood,
he was specially fitted for such service as that to which
Conference now designated him. Also the upland
interior of Queensland was free of malaria, and the
preacher hoped that incessantly recurring ague and
fever, from which his wife suffered, might be reduced
to a negligible quantity in the wonderful atmosphere
of the Downs. Roma was his circuit centre, sixteen
hundred feet above sea-level, over three hundred
miles inland, just at the point where the undulating
downs merge into the dead levels of the West. Drought
had afflicted this region for eighteen months. The
preacher remained three years, and no break in the
drought occurred during all that time. The Conference
granted him an annual ticket over four hundred and
thirteen miles of railway, from Chinchilla eastwards
to Cunnamulla in the south-west. It was the best
it could do for a vast territory under the conditions
which prevailed. Part of the time two Home Mission
agents were given, to be used in the spheres the preacher


judged best. In addition to the stretch of railway,
with its eighteen townships of varying size strung
like gigantic beads on a string, he visited large stations
and occasional hamlets on either side of the line.
The only method of locomotion practicable, owing
to the drought and consequent absence of feed, was
a push-bike, the familiar distance-devouring motor
of a later day being unknown. The cyclometer on
his front wheel registered three thousand six hundred
miles, so travelled, during his first year. In his
second year the mechanism went wrong at the ninth
month, the record standing at two thousand nine
hundred miles, when it ceased registering. The
preacher did not replace it, having grown so familiar
with the pace made, and most of the tracks traversed,
as to need no monitor en route. But it is safe to
reckon that he covered no less than ten thousand
miles on a push-bike during the three years of his
ministry in that wide district, in addition to some
fifteen thousand in the train. He managed to visit
each extremity of his wide-spread circuit once in
the month, pausing for a service at each railway town
and settlement on the up or down journey, and steal-
ing days for a speedy dash out to right and left, as
opportunity served. In all that wide district he was,
at most places, the only regular representative of
Christian teaching visiting the locality.
The incidence of drought conditions in the western
areas of Queensland and New South Wales, when
severe, cannot be conceived by those who have never


experienced them. Rivers become a serpentine of
sun-baked mud, varied by odd pools of turgid slimy
water. Dust, fine, impalpable, impregnates the atmos-
phere, shortening the treeless horizon, filling the
heavens with a dull lurid glow, through which a blood-
red solar disc glares pitilessly upon the arid desolation
beneath. Carrion birds flap heavily through the
dust-laden air, or settle in flights over some hollow,
in which the sickening sediment of a vanished pool
festers in hot sunshine, round which are littered
moaning forms of creatures perishing of starvation
and thirst. Under such conditions populous flocks
and herds vanish into skeletons, strewn over the
parched landscape.
The immediate neighbourhood of Roma escaped
the worst rigors of drought in the years of the preacher's
sojourn there. Grape-growing had become a primary
industry, and, save that the berries were smaller and
less juicy, the vineyards bore their wonted crops.
Wheat practically failed for the whole period, and
sheep almost vanished. Roma lies on the western
edge of the downs country, and carried much edible
scrub in its outlying districts. Cattle and some
sheep were preserved on these where artesian or well
water could be obtained. In fact brigalow, sandal
wood, box, and myrtle, provided a touch of spring
in the driest of seasons by their perfumed and prolific
blossoming. Farther west, along the Maranoa and
Warrego, the prolonged drought smote with dreadful
severity.


Through all the depressing mental and physical
conditions the preacher hurried to and fro, bearing
the solace and radiance of vital religion, where it was
so urgently needed. He visited his own home every
fortnight, always at the week end, tarrying twenty-
four to thirty-six hours according to the railway time-
table. Glimpses of his experiences appear in chapters
which follow.


CHAPTER XVIII
4 The Former Rain '
DROUGHT ! Parching, pitiless, persistent, paralysing
drought! For three years it had rested upon thousands
of square miles of the west and middle-west. Starva-
tion, suffering, death, swept those wide pastures,
inflicting utter ruin upon small selector and many-
acred grazier alike. Fortunes had been spent in feeding
stock with fodder railed from the more fortunate
coast districts, only to find funds failing at last, and
thousands of sheep fed to a cost of two pounds per head,
perishing in the end. They fared better who kept
their money and allowed the stock to perish at the
outset.
The Maranoa, at Mitchell Downs, was a dry, sandy,
gravelly river bed. At sparse intervals a water-hole
lifted its slimy surface to the sun, while in its turbid
depths the few surviving fish moved sluggishly to and
fro. The downs, wide, brown, bare, radiated from
grassless levels the fierce heat of the sun. Scraps of
salt-bush, patches of desert pea, clumps of box, or
sooty mulga brush, alone broke the monotony of bare
brown earth and quivering heat haze. Whirlwinds
whisked and circled across the open without ceasing,
lifting the red dust and dry leaves in broad-based


circular columns, that wandered aimlessly to and
fro, or, caught in some fantastic swirl, suddenly left
the earth to float away in detached spirals skywards.
Then far overhead, in obedience to some whim of the
heated atmosphere, dust and leaves would scatter in a
descending shower, filtering earthwards again. Gaunt
sheep strayed here and there, scraping with their
feet to find in the parched earth traces of trefoil or
clover seed, or shivelled root of grass and herbage ;
patient dumb creatures, doomed thus to wander,
till the weakened frame sinks into a heap of fluttering
wool and bleaching bones, gradually disappearing
beneath drifted dust.
' No sign of rain yet ? '
The preacher was speaking with a settler upon the
resumed leasehold of the big station.
' Looks as if it never had rained and never could
rain on this country,' was the dejected answer.
' And yet a stockman from Mitchell Downs pitched
a story of flogging fish with his stockwhip through
flood waters on this very plain four years ago,' replied
the preacher with a smile.
' Four years is a long time. I suppose it must
rain sometime. Going to our place ? '
' Yes ! Are your wife and family there still ? '
' Yes I Tom left a few months back. He surren-
dered his share in the place, because I had a wife and
kiddies to care for, and he has none. He picked up a
good billet in Brisbane, and has been sending up
supplies to help us hang it out a bit longer.'


The settler was a wheat grower from South Australia.
He had moved with teams and equipment on to a
four-thousand-acre block of the Mitchell Downs re-
sumption adjoining the railway.
' You have sunk a good deal in this place between
you,' responded the preacher sympathetically.
' Every penny we possessed is in it. That six
hundred and forty yonder has been ploughed and sown
twice over. Not a blade has shot. This year we had
no seed, and in any case our horses were too poor
to work. We can only give them half a feed daily.
It's a toss up if they see the season through.'
' You are up against it all right.'
' We are facing ruin utter and complete.'
' Have you seriously asked God to deliver you from
it? '
' What's the use ? Nothing can save us but rain;
and where is the sense in praying for rain with a sky
like this ? '
' That is to say prayer for rain is of use only when
conditions favour a down-pour,'
' Well, I wouldn't put it like that, you know.'
' What you said means that, or it means nothing,'
argued the preacher. ' Will you come up to the house
and spend an hour talking and praying over your
trouble ? God is certainly able to send rain right
now, if that really be your only way out. Asking
opens the way for Him to act in a special way on your
behalf.'
' I will come cheerfully enough. I was coming in


any case. We all enjoy the family service when you
call. But it is useless shutting your eyes to the fact
that this strip of country suffers from periodic drought.
We happened to strike it just as such a period began.
We have just got to see it through if we can.'
' Yet,' said the preacher gravely,' lam old-fashioned
enough to believe that God controls rain-making
factors. He may not be able, consistently, to intervene
by preventing a drought cycle when it is due. But
I am convinced He is able and willing to help one who
trusts in Him out of any crisis drought may have
brought. "He giveth you the former rain in just
measure. He causeth to come down for you the
rain," is what the Old Book declares; and lam
prepared to accept that assurance. I believe if you
are right with God it is reasonable to expect rain,
if that be the only deliverance possible; but you must
ask for it.'
' Well, come up to the house. It is time for morning
tea. The wife will be glad to see you, and so too,
will the kiddies. They have all their memory texts
ready from your last visit.'
The preacher spent the remainder of the morning
with the farmer's family. Conversation bore upon
the ever-present need for rain. Passages from Holy
Writ pertinent to the topic were quoted and read.
Ere leaving he led in a prayer for deliverance from the
ruin which threatened, definitely asking that rain
might be sent, if that could be done consistently with
the will of God.


' Trust utterly in God,' he said, at parting. ' Don't
worry over how it shall be possible for God to answer.
That is His business. He can find a way of deliverance.
Your privilege is just to trust and wait the revelation
of His will and power.'
That night as the farmer took a last look round
before retiring, he noticed a dark cloud just above
the western tree-tops. A bright moon threw it into
strong relief. A flicker of lightning played across
it as he gazed.
' I wonder! ' he said, turning thoughtfully indoors.
For nigh on three years no such bulging cloud had hung
across the western sky.
At midnight a peal of thunder rattled the windows
and roused the farmer and his wife from sleep. The
moon was effaced. Thick gloom shrouded the outlook.
A blue glare scattered the blackness, bringing out
every feature of the landscape with startling vividness
for the fraction of a second. A crash of thunder
shook the house to its foundations. Heavy drops
of rain sounded upon the roof, quickly increasing to
a swift windless downpour. The absence of wind was
a peculiar characteristic of that midnight storm.
Usually a thunder-storm is heralded and accompanied
by a scurry of wind-gusts. The farmer and his wife
could not sleep again for joy at the sound of falling
rain. All through the night and into daylight the
drenching rain continued, till the storm slowly exhausted
itself. Not ten miles away red dust lay thick over the
landscape. This singular storm, concentrating in


wooded hills about the upper Maranoa, had crept
out over the farmer's location, shedding its grateful
drops on his parched acres and half-filling his biggest
dam. It meant water for a twelve-month, and herbage
presently to carry starving horses and cattle on. In a
few days a sort of miracle happened. The wheat-field,
sodden with rain, heated with months of unbroken
sunshine, generated like a hot-house. Wheat grains
buried in soil previously so dry that they had not
germinated, now quickened into life. A sheen of
sprouting green covered the whole area.
It was spindling and running to head when a second
storm broke over it, soaking the whole crop just in
time to save it from dying off. Standing in the
sunshine of the next morning, surveying acres of wheat,
glistening still with beaded rain-drops, and realizing
that now a great harvest was assured, the farmer
quoted softly to himself the passage often conned
since the preacher's visit: 'He giveth you the former
rain in just measure. He causeth for you to come
down the rain.'
There was nothing really supernatural in the re-
currence of such storms. Australian droughts often
break up in that fashion. Preliminary thunder-
showers occur as a prelude to a general rain. In fact
it was so in the case described. General rain followed
in the autumn. It is also a common occurrence for
succeeding storms, in the same locality, to follow the
course of their predecessors. The notable thing about
the storms described above is the fact that each took


the route which ensured deliverance to those who
needed and prayed for it.
' Tom ' came back as the wheat ripened. They
harvested more than two thousand bags of prime
wheat. The mill at Roma, idle through lack of
grist, gladly took the whole at two pounds per bag
on the trucks.


CHAPTER XIX
Death Brew
THE knot of men gathered about the house-front
scattered as the preacher dropped from his bicycle
at the verandah. He noted an unusual silence, and
the scant response to his greeting. Furtive looks and
troubled faces met his inquiring glance.
' What is wrong ? ' he asked anxiously.
' is dead,' was the terse reply.
' Dead ! Had he been sick long ? '
'No ! In fact, he wasn't sick at all. But you had
better see his missus. She's inside.'
was husband to the woman whose house had
been given for the week-night service at A y
siding. The preacher had never met him. Like
most of the men employed on the big stations, he was
absent on week-days, returning to his home at the
week end, or if shearing often away many weeks at a
stretch. The tragic news startled the preacher,
whilst the reluctance of the men to speak concerning
the matter filled him with foreboding. The door
stood open. He passed quietly within. A rigid
form lay on a stretcher in the centre of the chamber,


covered with a sheet. A second door, leading, as he
knew, to the kitchen, was closed. He tapped gently,
and a woman opened it, silently making way as she
recognized him. The wife of the dead man sat in a
corner of the room weeping.
' What is it, Mrs. ? ' he asked taking her hand.
' Jim's been poisoned, Mr. P ; poisoned at
's shanty,' she sobbed. ' They brought him home
unconscious last night. He died before morning.'
A paroxysm of weeping shook the bowed figure.
The preacher found himself at a loss for any word of
comfort. The calamity was so grim, and sordid,
and hopeless, that the solemn words of triumphant
Christian faith could not apply.
' I am more sorry than I can say,' he said gently.
' Jim was a straight goer. He will be badly missed.'
'Oh ! Jim ! My poor husband ! If you had only
died in a man's way. God help us ! God help us!'
And the bereaved woman buried her face, rocking to
and fro in uncontrollable grief.
'So runs a sly groggeiy ?' questioned the
preacher, turning to the woman who admitted him.
' He has been running the place for years, d
him,' replied the woman bitterly. ' His shanty is
the curse of every home in the district.'
' Why do you women not inform the police, even
if the men will not ? '
' The police ! They're as bad as the rest of the men,
so far as the grog is concerned. I reckon makes
it worth their while too.'


' So!' said the preacher grimly, and the mono-
syllable was full of menace for the shanty keeper,
and the officials who pandered to him.
Seating himself beside the bereaved woman, he
quietly led her to tell her story, rightly concluding
that the mere telling would relieve the tension of her
grief. Her husband had just returned from a successful
shearing tour, with a cheque for forty-three pounds in
his pocket. Against her urgent counsel and entreaty
he had gone round to the shanty keeper to cash the
cheque. On the evening of the second day he was
brought home in a drunken stupor, and minus the whole
of his money. At midnight he had died without re-
gaining consciousness.
The little hamlet clustered round a railway siding,
providing access to a great homestead, a mile or two
across the plain. A medical officer, alighting from a
passing train, made hasty inspection of the deceased,
asked a few curt questions, regaining the train as the
engine finished taking in water. Death was reported
as due to ' natural causes accelerated by strong drink.'
Yet the man had died from alcoholic poisoning.
Whilst the body of the dead man lay awaiting burial,
his son, a lad of nineteen, was brought into the next
chamber helplessly drunk. The blackness and misery
of it all lay heavily upon the life of that little bush
home.
Instead of his usual week-night service the preacher
conducted a burial service at sun-down. Committing
the dead to the care of One in whom justice is ever


tempered by mercy, the preacher made an indignant
arraignment of traffic in the hell-brew which had
destroyed this man and desolatad the heart of a wife
and mother. That night, by favour of the operator
at the railway, the preacher telegraphed messages
cancelling all his engagements for the remainder of
the week. An hour before midnight he caught the
mail train for Brisbane, four hundred miles away.
The following evening he dined with the Attorney
General. On the train by which he returned two
detectives journeyed west. By the mail carried on
the same train the mounted trooper stationed at
received an official communication directing him to
proceed immediately to , and intimating that his
successor would have arrived at , and be prepared
to take over the district. The latter was a total
abstainer and keen on his work. Two days later a
couple of swagmen camped at the government dam.
About dusk they sauntered up to the shanty. Two
hours after, the shanty keeper was taken, handcuffed,
to the station, and a miscellaneous collection of kegs
and bottles, carted from his residence, was freighted
to the excise authorities. They contained a weird
assortment of alcoholic and other mixtures, highly
inimical to the well-being of those who imbibed them.
The purveyor of these choice potions received a sentence
of four years' imprisonment, a sentence by no means
commensurate with his offence, yet sufficing to purge
the locality of a plague spot which had blasted many
lives. The preacher had the satisfaction of having


borne effective testimony against a traffic which,
even in its legalized form, is the most prolific source
of evil and misery the civilized world knows. Often
such as he are the only persons willing to challenge
vested iniquities in these way-back townships.


CHAPTER XX
The Stockman
' THEY have arranged a social instead of the usual
preaching-service to-night, dear. I hope you won't
mind it much. They insisted on it as a welcome to
me.'
The preacher's wife was speaking, as he made a
hasty toilet in the prophet's chamber of the little
cottage, in which he was ever a welcome guest on his
regular visits to Mitchell. The train from Cunnamulla
had been late, and only his wife remained awaiting
his arrival, the others having gone to the church.
She had come from eastwards by mail-train sixty
miles, that she might take advantage of his monthly
week-night visit to make acquaintance with the
Methodists of Mitchell Downs and neighbourhood,
and incidentally enjoy a day or two of his company,
midway of the preacher's fortnightly visit to his
own home.
' I rather grudge the evening to a social, sweetheart;
opportunities for preaching are so few. Still, it is
kindly meant, and honours you ; so we must make the
best of it.'
' Mr. Chisholm insists upon our singing a duet.
He heard us sing at the Quarterly Meeting social.'


Couldn't you sing them a solo ? '
' I am afraid they would be disappointed, dear.
Chisholm has made out the programme, and has put
us down to sing " What are the wild waves saying ? "
of all pieces to think of. It seems they have a copy
of the song in the house.'
' If we sing anything, sweetheart, it must be a bit
of Gospel. We can sing a message if we are not
able to speak one.'
' Very well, dear. What shall it be ?
' Oh! something out of Sankey's. What about
532 ? You could take soprano and I could run a
tenor, making a duet of it throughout.'
The suggestion was agreed upon, and before leaving
for the meeting they both knelt in prayer, seeking
a blessing upon the contemplated song. Midway of
the programme they were called upon. The preacher
explained his desire to sing a gospel message instead
of the song requested, and announced the piece selected.
As he finished speaking a man stepped into the porch
leaning back among the shadows to escape observation.
' Though your sins be as scarlet': the strain stole
appealingly over the audience. The man in the
shadow started suddenly, leaning forward eagerly
listening, quite oblivious to the light into which his
face had been thrust. The preacher noted the move-
ment, and also the coiled stockwhip hanging loosely
on the man's arm. The gleam of spurred heels and
buckled leggings, together with his garb, proclaimed
him a stockman or drover on duty; and the preacher


remembered the large mob of bullocks camped in the
dry river-bed, passed on his way to the church. The
stranger had evidently been drawn thence by the
music and lights. The face gleamed dead white in
the lamp-light, the dark eyes glowing with a sombre
fire, a young, strong, handsome face, upon which
careless, if not vicious, habits had graven lines which
destroyed its youthful frankness. The tense features,
the absorbed interest with which the stranger hung
upon the song, moved the preacher to a silent prayer
for the soul which looked so hungrily through the dark
glistening eyes.
As the song drew to an end the man became conscious
of the light into which he had thrust himself, and drew
swiftly back into the shadow again. He remained there,
silent, immovable, leaning against the wall, observing
all, himself unobserved, until the programme concluded.
Then the preacher made his way quickly to the spot.
' Won't you come inside ? This is just a free and
easy meeting. Everybody is welcome,' said the
preacher addressing the stranger. ' There is nothing
to pay, not even a collection,' he added smiling.
' Thank you, I am not dressed for such company
as you have here,' was the reply. ' Could you spare
a moment or two for a quiet word outside ? I should
esteem it a great favour.'
The man's speech and manner betrayed unmistakable
evidence of education and good breeding, and without
answering the preacher passed out into the starlight,
away from the busy chattering throng.


' Do you believe that hymn you and the lady sang ?'
queried the stranger abruptly.
' That hymn expresses gospel truth. Why do you
ask ? '
' Because if that is truth, it means to me more than
I can tell you, at this juncture in my life.'
The speaker hesitated, glancing keenly at the
preacher ere he continued. The grave, quiet eyes
steadily meeting his removed any hesitancy respecting
the confidence he was moved to give.
' It means there may be hope for my future just
when I had concluded there could be none. Do you
know I had settled to go on to South Africa, after
delivering these bullocks at Crow's Nest; because
I could go to the devil over there without disgracing
my people as I should do here ? '
' There is no necessity for you to go to the devil
in South Africa or anywhere else, my friend,' replied
the preacher earnestly. ' Give your manhood to God
through Jesus Christ. He can and will make something
worth while of it.'
' You parsons don't know what a fellow is up against
out here. Once he has gone down there is no let up.'
' Yes there is. The man who has fallen into the mud
is not compelled to wallow in it. " Though your sins
be as scarlet: " have you forgotten that already ?
Whatever the nature of a man's sin, God through
Christ can forgive, and so forgive as to take the stain
of it out of his soul; and put into the man a Power
that enables him to live a clean, straight life ever


afterwards. If a man will only sincerely resolve,
God helping him, to quit the bad and live the good,
trusting in God through Jesus Christ for the power
to do so, he can make good.'
' I waited to speak with you,' replied the stranger
thoughtfully, ' on the off-chance that you might have
been singing something which you knew to be true.
In fact it struck me that both you and the lady seemed
to believe what you sang; but I know nothing about
that sort of thing myself. Honestly, I should like
to be a good man, and I have really tried, though eyery
time I have come a cropper. I'm if I'll put on
a veneer of respectability and be rotten inside. If
I can't be good I'll be openly and honestly bad.'
' Man ! ' urged the preacher, gripping the stranger's
arm almost fiercely, ' you can become a good man.
Jesus Christ died to make the forgiveness of any
and all sin possible. He has given the Holy Spirit
that the weakest and wickedest may receive power
to be strong andjgood. What you failed to do in
your own strength you can do easily and happily
in the power of the Holy Spirit. Give yourself right
now to God through Jesus Christ. Let Him do what
He wants to do with and in you.'
' Thank you! I scarcely understand all that you
mean. I am willing for my part to do my best;
but I shall have to go at once. I can hear the cattle
moving and my mates need me.'
The sound of many rushing hoofs, the crack of whips
and yelp of dogs, and hoarse shouts of men, coming


from the river bed, lent urgent emphasis to the stock-
man's words.
' Just a moment! ' pleaded the preacher as the
stranger leaped into his saddle. ' Where do you
camp to-morrow night ? '
'ln the home paddock at Taurida. We have
permission to water at their dam.'
' Well, look! Taurida people are here to-night.
lam not due there till the night after. But my wife
can go home with the H 's. She will be able to
help you. I will get her to meet you at the dam.
Good night! God bless and save you ! '
At sundown next day the preacher's wife sat on the
bank of the great dam, talking with and finally praying
with the drover, whilst the thirsty cattle drank greedily
at the muddy pool. The drover himself drank of
the wellsprings of everlasting life, and peace which
passeth all understanding entered his passionate,
troubled soul. The work of grace was permanent
its results genuine, as after tests proved.
A letter, forwarded from a cattle camp on the
range near Toowoomba, still retained by the preacher's
wife, reveals something of this. The drover was but
a stripling barely out of his teens. The man in charge
of the outfit was a capable overseer, but given to
drinking bouts when opportunity served. He had
also obtained some fame as a pugilist among his
cronies. He had halted the cattle on a stock route,
not a score of miles from the mountain-perched town-
ship named, chiefly because of proximity to a lonely


wayside groggery. With the three other men of the
outfit he had entered upon a carouse that had lasted
several days, leaving to the youthful stockman sole
responsibility for the safety of the herd. Fortunately
for the latter the cattle were leg-weary and disposed
to browse and drowse the time away. Nevertheless
it had been a big strain on the lad, watching day and
night, waiting for the sobering up of the men.
Early in the afternoon of what proved to be their
last day in that camp, the four men returned in a state
of semi-intoxication, hilarious, irresponsible, bent
on compelling their youthful comrade to join them in
a final drinking bout. He was given the option to
' drink beer and smoke and swear like the rest,' or
'to put the boss down in a stand-up fight with bare
fists.' He chose the latter. Let his own words tell
the issue.
'We fought fifteen rounds,' he wrote. ' And I
was just feeling I could not stand another. The boss
had sobered up as the mill went on. I knew a bit
about the game myself, but he had too much weight
for me. However, just as I felt I could stand up to
him no longer, I managed to get a good one home
and he went down. When he got up he had had
enough.
' Keep your religion, and be to you,'
he said.
' I am keeping my religion, and by God's grace I
won't be damned. It was a great victory. lam sure
God helped me, for the boss has never been knocked


out before. But pray for me, Mrs. P . It is
tough going among our crowd.'
' Good boy Emil,' said the preacher, as his wife
read the foregoing to him, and the shining eyes of his
wife showed she was sport enough to endorse the
sentiment.
The preacher's wife corresponded with the young
stockman for years. Up to the last he was still' keep-
ing his religion,' or, as the good lady was wont to
put it, his religion was keeping him.


CHAPTER XXI
Pioneer Cycling
ANY chance of a dinner ? '
The preacher stood in the doorway of a boundary
rider's home on Amby Downs. The doorway com-
manded a view through the open door of the kitchen
in the rear, in which the family sat at their midday
meal. His push-bike, resplendent in burnished nickel-
plate and new enamel, as yet untarnished by use,
leaned against the outer fence in the shade of a box-
tree. Noon had just passed. He had crossed a home
paddock of the big station, from the main south-
western road.
' Come right through !' called a man, hastily rising
from the table to welcome his visitor cordially.
' Where's your horse ? I'll turn him loose for an hour.
There's nothing much to pick at, but the run will
do him good.'
' He is outside the fence ; but he is all right, thank
you. He has had all the food he will need for the next
few hours. I have only time to snatch a cup of tea.
I am due at Martin's for service and christenings
to-night.'


' You won't make it. Why, it's twelve or fourteen
miles the other side of Wahonga !'
' How far do you reckon it to Wahonga ? ' inquired
the preacher, seating himself at the table after greeting
the family.
' You won't do it under thirty-five miles from here.
You will have to go back to the main road, six miles,
then three miles towards Mitchell along that. The
gate in Wahonga boundary is on the right as you go,
and it is twenty-six miles from the gate to the home-
stead. You will scarcely make there before dark
on these short days.'
' Leave it till I have had a snack,' and the preacher
applied himself to the homely fare. A few verses
of Scripture were read and prayer offered before they
left the table. Then the preacher prepared to resume
his journey.
' I don't see your horse,' remarked the host, anxiously
as they stepped from the verandah.
' He is there all right,' answered the preacher, pointing
to the machine partly hidden by the intervening
fence.
' You'll never do it on that thing,' said the man,
quizzically surveying the bicycle.
The machine was a novelty to South-west Queens-
land in those days. The preacher's bicycle was the
second imported into the district. Its importation
was due to dire necessity. The drought held all the
vast region he was expected to traverse in its deadly
grip. Horse-back travelling became an impossibility


in the absence of water and grass. The preacher
himself looked dubiously at the ' thing ' and wondered.
It was still new to him, and he questioned whether his
brief experience had made him familiar with all its
capacities for mischief.
' I can at least try,' he said thoughtfully.
' In any case you cannot get to Martin's tonight.'
' Where does Wahonga lie from here ? The home-
stead, I mean.'
' Out there!' And the man waved his hand towards
the west.
' Why can I not go out there ? ' asked the preacher.
' For one thing there is no track, and for another,
there are fences.'
' Fences are no obstacle to my horse. He can get
through or over any of them. And a sheep-pad is
as good as a metalled road, so long as it runs straight.'
' You'll get bushed, sure as a gun.'
' All guns are not sure,' smiled the preacher. ' I
ought to be able to travel west, with an afternoon
sun to guide me. What is about the distance from here
to the homestead direct as one could go ?'
' About twenty miles. Martin's is a good twelve
beyond that.'
' Thirty-two miles ! With a passable track, I ought
to be able to do that, easily, before dark, even on a
June day.'
After further argument the preacher prevailed
upon his friend to give directions concerning the route
he had chosen.


* You cross this box flat,' he said. 'Go through the
fence on the other side of it. Make up the ridge
ahead of you; and go along that until you sight a
big dry lagoon, on the right. Bear a little to the
left, and you will come to a fence at the foot of the
ridge. That is the Wahonga boundary. Due west
you will see a clump of pines on a sandridge. Go
through the centre of them. About a mile from there
you should strike a dry water-course. Don't cross it.
Keep the bank till the creek bends away north;
then strike due west. Ten miles from there you will
find the homestead if you have travelled straight.
You'll never do it; but don't cross the creek. Then
we'll know where to look for you before your water-
bag gives out.'
' You are sure I shall get bushed ?' smiled the
preacher.
' Nothing surer. If you were anybody else, I'd
call you a fool for trying.'
' Well, I won't cross the creek. Now what about
Martin's ? Can you give me any points about finding
them ?
' Very few. All I know is that he has settled on a
twelve-thousand-acre block beyond the old cattle
paddock, on Wahonga. I tried to place him a week
or two back, but failed. I was glad to make my way
back to Wahonga after dark. But you won't need
points for anything beyond Wahonga for the next
day or two.'
Yet at four o'clock that afternoon the preacher was


sipping tea with the ladies in Wahonga homestead,
and even so, was keenly disappointed. The men
were all absent on distant parts of the run, felling
scrub for starving stock, or inspecting rapidly vanishing
water supplies. He had counted upon finding men
about the place, from whom he could have obtained
explicit directions for the remainder of his journey.
The only information he had obtained so far was the
statement of his friend the boundary rider on Amby
Downs.
The ladies knew nothing of his proposed route,
save that he must cross the horse paddock and pass
' out through the big white gate.' When the preacher
reached the outer fence of this paddock no less than
five white gates broke the line, and all of the same
size. Judging that his way would lead west from the
homestead, he selected the gate nearest to that direc-
tion, and one, which as he put it later ' felt like it.'
Not a hundred yards from the gate he encountered
gray sand. There was nothing for it but to push the
bicycle, ahd at times carry it. Progress became
slow and toilsome. Despite a frosty nip in the air,
perspiration trickled from every pore. Just as the
sun dropped below the nearing ranges that fringe
the upper Maranoa, the track ran out on to firm
soil. Mounting the machine, the preacher cycled des-
perately during remaining vestiges of daylight, escaping
catastrophe by narrow margins, until it grew too dark
for further riding on a roadless surface. But he had
reached a peculiar wash-out in a dry torrent bed,


accurately described by his boundary-rider friend.
Deviating into the bush at right angles to the wash-out,
he stumbled through a broken dogleg fence ; and knew
that he had entered the twelve-thousand-acre block
of the settler whose dwelling he sought.
Night had settled down. Stars blazed in the deep
azure overhead with the rare brilliance peculiar to
that dry western atmosphere. Troops of marsupial
night-prowlers stole silently past, or paused to furtively
scrutinize the intruder, ere they continued on their
way to a soak in the bed of the water-course. Their
tameness boded ill for his quest. No human habita-
tion could be near their haunts, or they had shown
more fear of man. Trusting to a queer instinct,
which, in similar conditions, hitherto had never failed
him, the preacher ascended a low range. On its
summit he paused awhile, that the air, drifting lazily
upwards from the wide shallow valley before him,
might cool his heated body. He sniffed the refreshing
breeze, vainly seeking the pungent odour of wood
smoke; and scanned the sombre bush for gleam of
fire without result. He was impelled by that strangely
inscrutable impulse to plunge downwards, stumbling
over stones and fallen timber in the darkness. An
hour later the bicycle, which he was wheeling, bumped
at right angles across a wheel-rut. The preacher
turned the lamp on to the wheel-marks and the hoof-
prints between. All were fresh. The vehicle had
been heavily laden, for the wheels had sunken deeply
into the soil. It was drawn by horses whose hoofs


had torn the soft surface as they tugged at their load.
To follow such a lead was an easy task. A loaded dray
could have but one destination in that locality, whatever
it carried. Yet another hour passed ere the welcome
gleam of fires in a clearing greeted the tired traveller.
A dray loaded with freshly split fencing material
stood at the verge of the clearing. On the farther side,
buried in shadow, was a primitive bush home, and a
welcome sound of yelping dogs advertised the fact of
his arrival.


CHAPTER XXII
The Midnight Service
IT was nearing ten o'clock on that June night.
White frost glistened in the starlight upon log and
tussock as the preacher, accompanied by a crowd
of yelping dogs, wheeled his bicycle to the back veran-
dah step. He had been given up by his congregation.
All had travelled, most of them for long distances,
to attend the service. The exigencies of pastoral
life compelled return on the morrow, and in view of
this, all had retired early. Truth to say also, the
severely limited accommodation, added to the frosty
nip in the air, hastened the general retreat to warmer
quarters. The settler's home was a hastily built
two-roomed dwelling, destined later to become a
kitchen annexe to the real homestead. A lean-to
verandah behind this, partially roofed and enclosed,
provided space for a makeshift fireplace and stove
at one end, and a camp stretcher made ready for the
preacher, at the other, A hay shed filled with straw,
recently from the thresher, was the only other building
worthy of note. The settler himself, bootless and
hatless, rose from the camp stretcher as the preacher
reached the verandah.


' Is that you, Mr. P ? ' he inquired, peering into
the darkness.
' All that's left. The greater part of me has evapor-
rated in sweat. Sorry to be late. I have been going
my hardest since leaving Wahonga, at four this after-
noon.'
' You will be ready for something to eat ? '
' Very much so ! '
' Well! That is your snuggery for the night, at the
end of the verandah. Make yourself as comfortable
as you can. My wife will be out in a minute. She
put the joint in the oven again, in case you turned up
late. Your congregation has retired. The women
and children have our two rooms, and the men and
boys are in the straw-stack. I'll make up the fire
inside and the women will fix themselves and the
kiddies, so that you can come in to supper.'
The hostess quickly appeared, and a merry blaze
soon twinkled and crackled in the stove, whilst a
larger fire blazed up in the wide chimney indoors.
His hostess had been organist of the little church at
Mitchell until a year or so before. The settler was
an adventurous spirit from South Australia, who had
come to Queensland and gone west seeking land
suitable for grazing and wheat-growing. He had
fallen in love with the land at the head of the Maranoa,
and with the organist at Mitchell: in both matters
displaying sound judgement. A very juvenile selector
having also elected to take up his abode in their home,
the good lady of the house had written to the preacher


begging for a visit, chiefly on the new-comer's account,
but promising also that people from many miles round
should be gathered to meet the preacher. Soon the
latter was seated at the table indoors, spending an
enjoyable twenty minutes in company with a hot
savoury roast.
' What about the service ? ' inquired the host,
as the preacher leaned back contentedly, sipping a
final cup of coffee.
' What about the congregation ? ' he queried in
reply.
' The congregation is right on the spot. They
tumbled out when the dogs gave tongue.' And he
threw back the door revealing a group of men and
boys congregated round a big fire in the open.
' Very good ! What about the baptisms ? I under-
stand there are to be a number of them.'
' They've got a pen full waiting, mostly one and two
year olds, though a few run beyond that.'
' Suppose we take the christenings first. The
babies can be brought here; the older ones can be
left sleeping, and I will baptize them as they he.'
In such a fashion the preliminary baptismal service
was held, the preacher visiting groups of brown-
faced cherubs, so fast locked in slumber that his
ministrations scarcely ruffled its hush. Then followed
a preaching-service. The hostess led the singing
with her own fine voice and the assistance of a small
cabinet organ. They sang familiar hymns—' Abide
with Me,'' Rock of Ages,'' Jesu, Lover of My Soul'—


and the congregation, packed into the dimly-lit room
and about the verandah and doorway sang without
hymn-books, as though glad of a chance once more to
join in social worship.
The preacher talked of Love that was infinite,
welling up from the Father-Heart of God, Love that
sacrificed Itself in Christ of the Calvary hill to expiate
sin, and pours Itself in tides of redeeming grace into
every willing soul of man. A Power that hushed,
and held, and stilled, pervaded that service,, until
that little bush hut became as the gate of heaven
to the awed throng. Just on midnight the congrega-
tion dispersed again to the primitive provision for
their rest. Frost glistened like snow in the starlight
as the preacher passed, wearied yet happy and thankful,
to the rest his aching body and brain so sorely needed.
The keen air struck chill through his damp clothing,
damp with undried perspiration, due to arduous
exertions of the afternoon and evening. His share
of the very limited supply of rugs, generous as it was,
yet proved inadequate to his need; so he decided to
lie down in his clothes, merely slipping off his boots
as a preliminary. A brief good-night to the angels
was scarcely uttered ere he fell asleep. A couple
of hours later he wakened. The frosty air had found a
way in. Drowsily he recalled the red glow in the stove
as he had passed to his crib. The hearth beside the
warm stove would be preferable to his bunk. Gather-
ing up the rugs, the preacher moved noiselessly, in
stockinged feet, along the verandah. A comfortable


warmth rose from the black shadow which enveloped
hearth and stove. As he prepared to spread his
rugs, his foot pressed upon something soft and warm.
He stooped, gently groping in the shadow. His
fingers rested lightly on the soft coils of a woman's
hair. Someone had crept from the crowded inner
room to the hearth whilst he slept. Swiftly drawing
back he retreated silently, congratulating himself
that the sleeper remained undisturbed. His valise
lay beside the stretcher, flung there on his advent
earlier that night. Unstrapping it he drew a macintosh
coat from within, and, wrapping this over his rugs,
grew cosily warm and drowsy.
Bright sunshine flooded everywhere when the
preacher wakened again, and the activities of a busy
household, subdued on his account, progressed round
him. A hasty toilet and he was out, greeting members
of his midnight congregation, groups of whom were
having picnic breakfasts in sunny sheltered nooks,
preparatory to an early start for home. Several,
under the influence of the service, seized the opportunity
for further instruction and counsel. They knew the
preacher must leave immediately to keep appointments
elsewhere, and could not say when he might again
visit the place.


CHAPTER XXIII
The ' Cain ' Stain
THE preacher was breaking new ground on the lower
Condamine. As he cycled across the home paddock
the setting sun was reflected in red fire from glazed
windows in a low-built, many-roomed house on the
edge of a billabong. Clouds of obscuring dust hung
over stockyards away to the left. A big-horned
bullock galloped madly out of the dust into the open,
trained cattle dogs yelping about him in a vain effort
to turn his wild rush for liberty. In his rear, crouching
low in the saddle, rode a youthful stockman, the
nimble-footed horse rapidly gaining on the frantic
bullock. For a few hundred yards the wild race
continued. Then the horseman was riding at the
flanks of his quarry. He bent in the saddle, caught
the flying tail, gave a quick heave and jerk, and the
bullock fell heavily, thrown forward, almost somer-
saulting, as he rolled on his back. Meanwhile the
horse stopped suddenly, the man slid to the ground,
gripped a foreleg of the dazed beast, a sheath knife
flashed, then as the bullock struggled to -his feet,


the man sprang to the horse trained to wait for his
rider. The maddened bullock attempted to charge
the horseman, stumbling and falling to his knees.
Gathering himself clumsily the beast tried again,
only to fall once more ; for the stockman had severed
a sinew above the knee, effectively crippling him.
In a fortnight the wound would heal. But never again
would that bullock leap a fence or gallop from custody.
Dusk was falling as the preacher drew near to the
house. Signs of age, decay, and neglect were apparent
in every aspect of it. He was approaching it from
the rear, for the building faced east, fronting the
coolibah-lined water-course. A general gloom per-
vaded the place, due partly to the absence of light,
for only a tallow candle, flickering in the interior
of a kitchen, made a meagre gleam swallowed up by
the all-embracing gloom. But an indefinable sense
of something sinister —almost menacing—oppressed
the preacher as he wheeled his machine into its shadow.
A grey-haired giant, clad in the usual shirt and pants
of work-day station garb, met him at a broken wicket-
gate.
' I heard you were coming,' remarked the giant as
the preacher introduced himself. ' Muggins told
us you'd be out, only he said it would be to-morrow.'
' I sent word for to-day,' replied the preacher,
inwardly relieved at the friendly tone of the rather
grim individual who had addressed him. ' Muggins
will be postmaster at the township ? '
' Township !' laughed the man. ' Condamine used


to be a township in the days before the railway.
Timothy Muggins is about the only permanent resident
now-a-days. But you won't go any further to-night.'
' Not much use if the service has been arranged for
to-morrow night. Will it be any use waiting for that ? '
'Oh ! I think so. There are a good few families
scattered up and down the river. Preaching will be
to them as attractive as a theatre night is to city
folks, and they will have good moonlight to travel
home by.'
The speaker led the way into the house, introducing
himself meanwhile. He was a grazier, whose home
was in the New England tablelands. He and his sons
had leased and were working this station as a cattle
run. A man cook in the kitchen constituted the
household staff, save when at intervals his wife and
daughters visited them.
Depositing his valise on the verandah, the preacher
laved face and hands in the tin dish filled with water
provided for the purpose. ' A bunk ' would be ' got
ready ' for him later. Soon a hot joint of beef steamed
on the table, and the grazier and his two long-limbed
sons sat down with the preacher. Appetites were too
keen to be fastidious respecting refinements. Even
the preacher, after a day's cycling, munching wheat-
meal biscuits and dry raisins, was hungry enough to
ignore the absence of a table-cloth, and the soiled
disfigured table itself, and also the deprivation of
many of the common conveniences of ordinary home
life. He had been agreeably surprised by the discovery


that his host was an educated man. Conversation
lapsed whilst they sat at the table, each being so ab-
sorbed in meeting clamant needs of the inner man
as to lose interest in conversation.
' Smoke ? ' The laconic query was flung at the
preacher as his host rose from the table, leading the
way to the front verandah.
'No! ' he answered. 'My education was neglected
in that direction.'
The smokers disposed themselves in various attitudes
of ease about the verandah, and were soon lost in the
complacence of the after-dinner pipe. By this time
the moon had risen, flooding the fringing coolibah
with broken lanes of soft radiance, and spreading a
silvery sheen over the weatherbeaten house-front
where they lounged. A mopoke hooted in the tree-
tops, and a crane croaked harshly from a near-by
pool.
' This used to be a fine property,' remarked the
grazier. ' The last owners made a sad mess of it.
Prickly pear has over-run the best paddocks and
the house and yards are weathered and rotten.'
' It looks like a place with a history,' replied the
preacher. ' I had a strange feeling of something
depressing or bad about it, as I approached it to-night.'
'Queer!' ejaculated the grazier. ' Ever hear any-
thing about the place ? '
' I never knew it existed till I made it at sundown
to-day.'
' Well, it has a history, and not a pleasant one either.


It was owned and worked by the . Some relatives
of the family have an interest in it still. The last
to live here were three brothers. Two of them were
found dead one day, and the other all shot to pieces.
Both the dead men had been shot.'
' Shot by one another ? '
' No doubt of that, though the one found alive
never dropped a word of what had transpired. He
died before the year was out from the effect of his
wounds. But the house is full of bullets. In the
wall above where you are sitting there are several.
The room at the end of this verandah where the bodies
were found is pasted with holes. There must have
been a power of shooting whilst it lasted.'
' What was the quarrel about ? '
'Oh ! all three were full of whisky. They had been
drinking for days, and were probably mad. There
was a woman here, almost white, though with dark
blood in her veins. She had grown from childhood
on the place, and had been trained and educated by
the old people. When they died, she kept house for
the brothers. She ran away to Condamine when the
shooting began. It was said at the time that the young
men quarrelled about her, in the course of a drunken
spree.'
' So that is the story ? ' the preacher said thought-
fully. 'lt is more sordid and tragic than anything
I imagined. What a comment the incident is upon
the foolishness which persists in regarding alcohol as
an article of diet and trade !'


' Are you afraid of ghosts ? We are said to keep a
very healthy one here.'
' Never happened on one yet,' smiled the preacher.
' When I do I shall know.'
' Some people get frightened before they meet one,'
remarked the grazier, smiling grimly.
'Time enough to get frightened when the ghost
appears. Why did you ask ?'
' The only room we have for a chance visitor is the
one in which the dead men were found. Some people
object to occupy it. The last visitor we had was
an Anglican clergyman from Dalby. He sat on a
chair on the verandah rather than sleep in that room,
or any other, in a house with such a history.'
That night the preacher slept soundly, although
his first sleep was broken by a grim nightmare vision.
A grisly corpse planked itself suddenly on his chest,
crushing the breath out of his body with its weight.
An indignant and violent effort to dislodge the incubus
landed him headlong upon the floor.
' Confound that damper and beef,' he muttered,
ruefully rubbing the back of his head, ere he scrambled
hastily into bed again, carefully going to sleep upon
his right side this time.
A carolling magpie in a branch over his window
wakened him at sunrise. A spatter of bullet holes
disfigured the walls of the chamber, brought into
relief by the bright daylight, recalling to mind the
gruesome tragedy enacted there a generation before.
Thrusting the memory from him, the preacher sprang


out of bed. Already his host and the lads were
breakfasting, preparatory to another day's mustering.
He speedily joined them, and, as they rode out to the
open run, he cycled down a wheel-track to the Govern-
ment road, skirting a bend of the Condamine river.
It was an ancient coach road of the days before the
railway, though now deserted by general traffic.
It had been formed, ballasted, and blue-metalled,
with the meticulous care of times when paternal
Governments undertook the construction of roads
and bridges, and employed an army of maintenance
men strewn along the mileages. Despite years of
neglect, and erosion of many storms, the road was very
serviceable still,
Exposed cobble surfaces caused his machine to
bump considerably, otherwise running was easy.
As he wheeled on to the splintered planking of a
bridge spanning the river, green pools flashed up to
left of him, rippling shallows gurgled brightly to his
right, and the weathered woodwork swayed and
creaked to the impact of the bicycle.
Ascending the sloping bridge-head he found himself
in the township. Deserted dwellings, mostly fallen
to decay, lined either side of the roadway. Muggins'
proved to be not only post office, but a store and wine-
shop as well. It was a low-built rambling, roomy
building, a wayside hostelry of the old coaching
days. Great stables, stalled for many horses, and an
ample fodder room for supplies, still stood in the wide
yard, though the exterior of shed and house alike
gave evidence of neglect and decay.


■ ■ '- " " % .Nil


Unused apartments in the house itself were in a
similar state of neglect and disrepair; but those in
regular use by the household, and those kept for the
use of such stray travellers as happened along, were
well-kept and comfortable. A large commercial room
was still furnished, and utilized as a hall for local
social functions. On this occasion it took the place
of a church. It easily accommodated sixty people,
and the piano was a decided advantage for either a
religious service or a convivial gathering.
As the late afternoon drew to an end this room
began to fill with company drawn from long distances,
both up and down the river, and from homes strewn
along the main road. They were interesting too.
One, for instance, who drove his family in a well-
equipped drag drawn by four beautiful bays, was
referred to as ' of , just back from doing
four years for sheep stealing.' He had been found
shearing several hundred sheep bearing the ear-mark
and tar brand of a neighbouring run. He had failed
to satisfy judge and jury that it was ' really a very
careless mistake.' He was well-to-do ; his own flocks
running into thousands. He had been ' unfortunate,'
according to his neighbours and intimates. ' Mistakes '
were always occurring in their primitive surroundings.
It was inconvenient when such ' mistakes' happened
in the vicinity of an inquisitive inspector of police,
or when the. person who suffered by it chanced round
whilst it was in process. Still neighbours make
' mistake£-and ' Well! Let bygones be bygones.'


Half an hour before time for the service the wine-
bar closed, its proprietor and his family decorously
finding a place among the gathering congregation.
The preacher's valise supplied Sankey hymn-books,
Miss Muggins sat at the piano, and soon a hearty
burst of song marked the opening of the service.
The preacher had stationed himself next to the door.
He was midway of the opening prayer when an
interruption occurred.
' 'Scuse me, Mister! ' said a thick voice in his ear,
whilst a heavy hand, with the weight of a reeling
body behind it, fell upon his shoulder. ' You forgot
your prayer-book.'
Simultaneously Muggins senior sprang from an
attitude of devotion to the preacher's side, uttering
a smothered exclamation, by no means appropriate
as a response to the prayer. He gripped the intruder
fiercely by an arm, whirling him with a swift movement
back through the doorway. A scuffling struggle
on the verandah followed, punctuated by sundry
sulphurous exclamations choked in the utterance;
then came silence, during which prayer was resumed
and completed.
' Hope you won't mind him, sir,' whispered the host
hoarsely, returning very red in the face. ' I thought
he was safe. Got a bit wined, but he's all right at
heart.'
A great round moon crept over the tree-tops as the
congregation filed out of the room. They had grown
strangely subdued and intent, as the preacher reasoned


of sin, of righteousness, and of a judgement to come.
Not a few, with earnestness born of that hour, thanked
him for his visit, and begged him for the sake of the
young people in their homes to repeat the visit at an
early date. Declining a pressing invitation to remain
a guest at the wine-shop, the preacher cycled the six
miles back to the homestead at which he had stayed
the previous night. That would still leave twenty-
two miles of bush track between the late daylight
of a winter morning, and half-past eight, when the train
would pass the platform. To keep appointments
for the next and succeeding days, he must catch that
train. With more than a mile of sandridge to negotiate
en route, and nothing but a dray-track for roadway
the task would tax his skill and power as a cyclist
to the utmost.


CHAPTER XXIV
When Providence Slept
' You leave early, then ? '
' As soon as it is light enough to see.'
The preacher was bidding goodnight to the grazier,
after coffee and ' Black Jack ' on his return from the
Condamine service.
' The cook will have toast and coffee ready half
an hour before daylight.'
' Thank you ! I shall need the refresher before I
am through, if cook does not mind.'
' That's all right. Give him credit in Kingdom
Come. He'll need all of it when the balance is
struck.'
A big moon slipped down among the western tree-
tops, and gray dawn crept up the east, as the preacher
cycled carefully across the horse paddock next morning.
The crisp, frosty air invited swift movement, but that
was impracticable. Treacherous roots and stumps,
caked with dust, till they were the colour of the road-
way, littered the track. Clear light was needed ere
these could be recognized and avoided by a swiftly
moving cyclist. Later the coming sunshine enabled


him to increase speed, and finally to run the four-inch
wide track of a wagon-wheel for smooth going. But
there were storm-washed ruts and the mile and half
of sandridge, which greatly reduced his average
pace. With thirty-five minutes to go, he was still
seven and a half miles from the railway. If the train
ran to time, which, being the tri-weekly mail, it was
likely to do, he had a task sufficient to tax his powers
as a cyclist to the utmost. To miss the train meant
cutting out his monthly visit to more than one place.
For a few miles once before, on a pinch, he had touched
a speed of seventeen miles an hour. The track from
where he stood to the station was a dead level over a
clayey surface worn smooth by traffic. He felt no
misgiving as to the outcome, if only Providence did
His part whilst the cyclist attended to his own par-
ticular responsibility. With this latter obligation
upon him, the preacher tightened the straps of his
valise, dropped a little oil into the bearings, doffed
coat and vest, strapping these to the handle bars,
and mounting determined to do his best. On the
driving side of the wagon rut was a well-trodden path
about fifteen inches wide. The preacher selected
this for a running track. Within fifteen minutes
half the distance had been covered. Despite the wintry
air, beads of perspiration gathered under his hat-brim
and trickled down his neck, yet he was happy. He was
riding well within his powers, and thoroughly enjoying
his race against time.
But suddenly his world turned upside down. He


was conscious of violent concussion, followed by a
brief space of converging shadow, that almost became
total blackness. Recovering somewhat, he found him-
self sitting plump in the dust of the roadway. A few
yards away lay his machine, three spokes of the front
wheel cut clean through, a fourth bent behind a short
thick stick jammed against the fork. On the other
side lay his valise burst from the straps. Worst of
all, as he gathered his wits sufficiently to observe
the fact, both wheels were deflated. Relieved to
find himself with nothing worse than a throbbing
head-ache, the preacher rose to his feet. He knew
at a glance what had happened. The front wheel
had touched the end of the stick in passing, flinging
it like a sprag between the spokes. The machine had
promptly somersaulted.
' It might have been worse,' he muttered to himself.
' Providence was caught napping that time, anyway.'
Then he proceeded philosophically to rectify the
damage. Of course all chance of catching the train
had vanished. Spokes were removed and re-spaced,
making the wheel safe, punctures discovered and
patched, and an hour after the mail had passed, he
crossed the line at the gate-house, on the way to his
welcome at the lengthsman's home at which he domi-
ciled when in Miles.
' Here is a note brought after you had gone the other
day,' said the lengthsman's wife, handing the preacher a
bit of torn note-paper bearing a pencilled message, as he
laved hands and face in a tin dish on the back door step.


'Please call round and see my husband before you
go away. Mrs. can point out our house from her
front door.' So ran the hasty scrawl.
' That is the place,' the woman answered to his
query, at the same time pointing to the gatehouse
which the preacher had just passed. ' is an
infidel, and rather a rough sort of chap. Says he has
no time for priests and parsons. He calls them
" non-producers, social parasites," and worse. He
will most likely insult you if you go near.'
After refreshment and a brief rest the preacher
strolled across. As he approached the cottage, a
woman came round the end of the building from the
rear, beckoning him silently, and he turned to meet her.
' I am awfully glad you came, ' she said in low
tones. 'My husband is very sick —not laid up,
you know. But ' and here her voice broke
in a dry sob ' the Dalby doctor says he is dying of
cancer, and cannot live more than two or three months
at most. He doesn't know I have sent for you.
Don't let him know, please. He has been a good
husband, but he is an atheist in religion. He went
to your service in the courthouse, and when he came
home he asked for my Bible. He has been reading it
a lot since. And oh! sir,' she sobbed overwhelmed
by her emotions, ' I don't want him to die an atheist.'
' You are praying for him ? ' queried the preacher.
'Yes. I have prayed for him all my life.'
' Keep on praying; I will do my best.' And the
preacher turned to the open door. A man sat in a


canvas deck chair with his back to the opening, smoking,
and so occupied with his thoughts as to be unaware of
the preacher's presence.
' Good afternoon, Mr. ,' said the preacher. ' I
heard you were not well, and thought I'd call before
I pulled out again.'
The man turned at his voice, and a swift challenge
of suspicion, almost of hostility, leaped into his eyes,
giving place to a friendlier gleam as he met the smiling
unconcern of his visitor.
' I haven't been too good for months past,' the man
answered slowly ; 'in fact,' he added grimly, ' I've
had notice to quit.'
' So bad as that ?
' A dead cert, Mister. But, I say, I'd like to hear a
bit more from you about what you were saying the
other night—that about God Almighty being a
Father to the lot of us —I mean.'
The preacher's mind went back to that service in
the court-house, and the furtive hearer who had
crept into a shadowed corner, vanishing into the night
ere his congregation dismissed, yet whose wistful
eyes had haunted his thoughts ever since. The same
eyes looked eagerly into his now. He had talked
that night on the theme of the Psalmist, ' Like as a
father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them
that fear Him.'
' What I tried to explain is true of God as He has
revealed Himself, in the written Word and in the Lord
Jesus Christ,' he said.


' I wish we could be sure of that/ sighed the man
wistfully. ' I've put up for a rationalist and some
bad man for years, but it was mostly devilment. I
never did rid myself of a feeling that God was real.'
' Have you tried praying to Him ? '
' Not till the last day or two. I may as well own
up having tried to pray since I listened to your talk,
and started reading the Bible for myself.'
' Would you join in a prayer with me now ? '
' Yes ! if you think it would be of any use.'
' God answers prayer when we mean our praying,'
replied the preacher. ' Let me lead you. Just
repeat what I say.'
There was a momentary hesitation, then the man
knelt beside the preacher.
' God be merciful to me a sinner ! '
The man's voice faltered, yet he repeated the prayer.
' Once more,' urged the preacher. ' Let us repeat
it together. I too am a sinner and need mercy. Jesus
Christ said that the man who first prayed that
prayer was justified—made right with God.'
Together and several times in succession they
repeated the prayer, the preacher, meanwhile, silently
lifting up his soul to God for that touch of the Holy
Spirit, by which the inward mind and self become
illuminated and comforted. He felt the bowed
form at his side quiver with a rush of unwonted emotion.
' 0 sir, it seems as if God Almighty is close about us,'
he whispered brokenly, ' and a great weight has been
taken off my mind.'


' Thank God !' ejaculated the preacher. 'lt is
the mercy we are praying for, touching you. Thank
Him now for that mercy.'
' 0 God !' faltered the kneeling man, after hesitating
for a moment or two, ' I thank You for the mercy.'
Then utterance choked, and the preacher continued
the thanksgiving for him ; and later marked passages
in his Bible that were calculated to help and instruct
this beginner in the Christian life.
' Pray for the gift of the Holy Spirit,' said the
preacher at parting. ' I myself will pray, every time
I think of you, that God may send His Spirit into your
soul, giving assurance of your acceptance with Him.'
That night, as the preacher lay full length upon the
seat in a compartment of which he was the only
occupant, as the ' mixed train' trundled and jerked
slowly westwards through the night, his thoughts
wandered back over the events of the day.
' Providence was wide awake after all,' he mused
with a smile. ' The delay meant help to a needy soul.'
A month passed, and the preacher found himself
once more at the gate-house. The wife of the man
leaned over the fence as before, waiting his approach.
His quick glance took in the mourning garb, and the
woman's eyes filled and her voice choked as she tried
to respond to his greeting.
' So he has gone home ? '
' Yes ! ' she said. ' Much sooner than we had
expected. But his going was glorious. Come in,
and I will tell you about it.'


The story was delightful enough despite its pathos.
The ' Peace of God' had flooded the man's soul in
those last weeks. His rough mates, called into the
room at his request for a final handshake, had been
awed and filled with amazement at the transformation
of the erstwhile atheist. His dying hour had thrilled
with a prayer, which to the family had seemed inspired.
The end was triumphant; and the preacher left the
widow's cottage, humbled and grateful that God still
used faltering human agents in a work so blessed.


CHAPTER XXV
The Teamster's Baby
THE preacher sat on the verandah of his home,
enjoying the rare luxury of a week-end rest. He had
reached there at midnight of Thursday, from his
fortnightly run to Cunnamulla and intervening places.
This was Friday morning. He looked up from a
newspaper at the sound of wheels pausing at his
front gate. A spring cart, in which a man and woman
were seated, the latter with a tiny babe in her arms,
had drawn up at the footpath. The man climbed
down, and the preacher rose to greet him.
' Is the minister at home ? '
' Yes ! I plead guilty.'
The preacher never had been enamoured of sacer-
dotalism in garb or otherwise, usually being taken for
anything other than a clergyman, by strangers.
Probably this fact carried disadvantages; but to the
preacher's idea there were advantages more than
compensating for such happenings.
' My missus would like you to christen our baby,
sir,' said the visitor. ' It's very sick. Fact is,' he


added lowering his voice that the woman should not
hear, ' Doc' told me just now that it would not live
more than a day or two. The missus doesn't know,
but she's mighty worried because it has never been
right.'
' How old is baby ?'
' Not four weeks yet.'
' Very well! Bring your wife into the house. By
the way, what is your name ? I don't remember
having met'you before.'
'No we've been out back. I've got a ' six-forty '
block fourteen miles west of here. I took it up a
couple of years ago, and ran a ring fence round it,
thinking it would be a bit of a stand-by in time of
drought. The swamp is dry now, but is covered with a
growth of herbage. I reckon it may keep my team
alive till a break comes. Our name's Weakes. I'm
BUI Weakes.'
' You can't have been back long, for I was along the
western road less than four months ago.'
' We're not on the main road. I brought the
missus and kids in on the wagon over three months back.'
' Well never mind that, Bill. Put your horse and
cart into our yard whilst I help your wife in this way.'
' Hold hard a minute, mister. I —er —that is—er—
the baby's coming has cleaned me right out. I—'
' Look, Bill ! ' interrupted the preacher, 'if your
pockets were stuffed full, I wouldn't take any of it
for doing a simple little thing like this.'
' WeU, thank you, Mister. Sometime I may be


able to do you a good turn ; and if so you'll find I'm
not one to forget.'
So the babe was brought into the best room of the
parsonage, being duly baptised. As the ceremony
ended, the preacher's wife entered with a tray, and both
husband and wife were treated to tea and scones,
ere they left for home.
Midway of the following Monday the man appeared
again at the gate. The preacher was just finishing
a thorough overhaul and oiling of his trusty ' bike,'
preparatory to joining a ' mixed train' due out at
11 p.m. for the Chinchilla end of his circuit. The
teamster limped badly as he made for the entrance.
He had been thrown from a horse that morning,
rather seriously injuring his hip. The preacher
hastened to greet and help him up the steps ; but the
teamster declined to come further than the gateway.
' I just called,' he explained. ' The baby's dead.
I thought you'd like to know.'
' Where is it ? '
' Out at our place. I came in to get a coffin. We'll
bury it when I get back.'
The preacher knew well the hearts and ways of these
slow-speaking, shy men of the bush.
' You would like me to come out and bury it ? '
he asked.
' I'd be main glad if you would,' ejaculated the man,
at the same time choking back with difficulty a sudden
rush of emotion. ' You see, it'd mean so much to
the missus, and she's terrible broken up.'


' I'll come. Fourteen miles I think you said ?
What sort of a road ?
' It's the back track, not the main road. But it's
good going now it is dry.'
' When do you start for home ? '
' Soon as I leave here. The carpenter said he had
only to tack a bit of covering on. He had a baby's
coffin in stock.'
Obtaining a few additional particulars of the route,
the preacher turned again to his preparations for the
fortnight's absence from his circuit centre. With
good luck he could traverse the twenty-eight miles
involved, conduct the funeral, and be back in time
for an hour in his home before joining the train.
It happened also to be the night of the full moon.
Half an hour before sundown he was at the slip-rails
of the teamster's paddock. He noted a tiny group
of people digging under a clump of brigalow, away
to his left, quite half a mile from the bush-hut standing
at the end of the track he was following. Everything
about the little home was quiet. The dogs were away
with the little group under the brigalow. A couple of
wondering half-scared child-faces peered at him from
behind a corner of the hut and then disappeared
as his machine ran noiselessly to the doorway.
A woman sat at a rough table made of boards,
laid upon stakes driven into the earthen floor, her head
bowed upon her folded arms. A tiny blue casket,
enclosing a little waxen image, so pitifully white
and rigid, lay almost smothered in the loose folds


of the woman's hair. She was unconscious of his
presence until he spoke, Then she lifted a face,
dull with the agony of eyes that had forgotten how to
weep, and that showed the havoc of recent sickness
and lack of proper nourishment. The heart of the
preacher was deeply stirred.
' So the Everlasting Love stooped to gather your
little blossom to Its Bosom,' he said gently.
The pained, uncomprehending look in the woman's
eyes troubled him.
' I suppose you are talking religion,' she answered,
breaking the puzzled silence. ' I don't know anything
about religion,' she continued apathetically. ' I got
a set against religion when I was a girl in my teens.
I've never got over it.'
'.Tell me about it,' the preacher replied, glad to
seize upon any way of distracting the woman's thoughts
from her brooding grief.
' There's not much to tell. It was away out back.
When I was about thirteen, the wife of a man on a
grazing area, near our home, offered to teach me to
read and write, and a few other things, in return for
what work I could do in the house. They were
religious people. When the clergyman came from
Thargomindah, they always drove to the big station
for the service. Once they took me along. Just
after we entered the station boundary, we passed
some cattle in the bed of a creek. A young bullock
in good condition was lying under some trees chewing
the cud. Mr. drew out a rifle he always carried


in the wagonette, and shot the bullock, leaving him
head downwards on the bank to bleed, whilst he went
on to Holy Communion. On the way home he skinned
and cut the bullock up, taking it with us in the cart.
I was turned sixteen then, and there were other things,
I was fed up with religion and religious people, and Bill
is like me. He believes in straight going. It's a
lot better than religion.'
' That was not religion,' said the preacher quietly.
' Have you got a Bible ? '
' There's one that was mother's, in a trunk under
the bed.'
' Would you mind bringing it out ? '
The preacher carried his own pocket Bible, but he
wanted to bring the family Bible into use. He opened
it at the Sermon on the Mount, reading to her the
beatitudes, explaining that this was true religion.
The parables of the Good Samaritan and of the Prodigal
Son followed.
Then he selected texts and passages, suited to her
need of the moment, full of the Christian's hope and
triumph in the face of death, and with wise and gentle
words applied them to her sorrow and loss; until
suddenly the woman dropped her face into her hands
and sobbed. Kneeling beside the weeping mother,
the preacher prayed a simple, tender petition on her
behalf, and for the little ones left to her love and care.
As he rose from his knees, the woman turned a tear-
stained chastened countenance towards him.
' Thank you ! oh thank you ! It has done me good,'
she exclaimed.


The little ones had crept in, wondering, silent,
wistful. And the preacher turned to them, telling
them the story of the baby Christ and the singing
angels, and of the beautiful home where the angels
live, to which all who love the Lord Jesus, and every
tiny baby, go when they die. At his suggestion the
woman told them she would read and explain to
them all the beautiful stories in the Bible, in future
days. Once more he prayed, first explaining to the
children that he was going to talk to the Great Kind
God for them, and getting them to kneel with him.
Afterwards he taught them a short child's prayer,
for night and morning, with which they would be able
to talk to God themselves, assuring them that though
they could not see God, He could see and hear them.
He got the mother to promise to hear them say the
prayer.
The teamster came in from the grave-digging,
to say that all was at last ready. He leaned upon
a rude crutch, limping badly, for the exertions of the
day had aggravated the injury to his hip. Lifting
the lid of the coffin he attempted to fasten it in its
place; but his fingers trembled so that the screws
fell from them, and his eyes blurred so that he could
not use the screw-driver. Gently the preacher pressed
him aside, and, taking the tools, secured the lid of
the coffin in its place. Then the teamster raised the
coffin and, tucking it under his arm, began limping
painfully towards the grave in the distance. Once
more the preacher intervened. Heading the little


procession, he placed the tiny casket on the handlebars
of his machine. They skirted the dry swamp. Dusk
was beginning to deepen into darkness. A flock
of cranes rose with hoarse croaks from a soak in the
centre of the swamp. Rock plover shrilled from the
damp margin round it. Bony horses, patiently
starving on the last remnants of herbage they could
find, gaunt, grisly, loomed huge-framed through the
darkness. A flicker of lightning, playing over the
fringing Coolibah and Box of the western skyline,
presaged a storm which later in the night deluged the
swamp, and brought deliverance to the hardly beset
teamster and his family.
At the grave-side the preacher talked of the glory
and mystery of the unseen holy, striving to couch his
thoughts in language simple enough for the children to
understand. He talked of the immortality revealed
to the world through Jesus Christ, and the assurance
that the sweet babe life, flickering for so brief a space
in their midst, had not been extinguished in nothing-
ness ; but had passed on into an existence radiant
with the Love and Life of God. There was a moment
of heart-breaking pathos as the preacher committed
the little body to its lonely resting-place. A tiny
mite, herself little more than a babe, begged with a
passion of tears, for the ' baby' to be rescued from
' the black hole,' whilst the parents sobbed explanations
which only intensified their mutual anguish.
But the preacher must hasten. Already muttering
thunders rumbled in the west. Fortunately a great


round moon flooded the homeward-track with light.
' I'll never forget it! never !' the teamster almost
sobbed, as he wrung the preacher's hand at parting.
And perhaps that was why this little life flickered
for a brief space in the bushman's home, ere passing
into the great mystery of that which is to be. One®
only did the preacher again see the teamster. It was
in the midst of farewells as they were leaving the
district. A hand gripped his and held for a moment,
leaving behind a roll of crisp notes.
' We've had a streak of luck,' he said in answer to
the preacher's surprise, ' and the Missus wants you
to buy a present for your wife for the baby's sake.'


CHAPTER XXVI
' Through the Valley '
DURING the years of the preacher's sojourn there,
Roma became a consumptive sanatorium. The
Queensland Government made a series of experiments
with convalescent homes established in the immediate
vicinity. A limited number of patients were accom-
modated, in settlers' homes selected for the purpose,
and placed under oversight of a resident government
medical officer. It fell to the preacher's lot to visit
patients in most of these homes during his term in
that circuit, in some cases to rejoice with them in
renewed vigour and apparent restoration to sound
health; but in many cases to counsel and comfort
them as they succumbed to disease, bravely endured,
yet beyond human skill or power to heal.
What a pathetic procession memory revives!
Lustrous bright-eyed maidens, flushed with unearthly
beauty, that did but emphasize the consuming fire
destroying vitality within. Men, youthful to middle-


aged, ever growing more haggard and bent, yet ever
sanguine of recovery, until in some sudden spasm
life cords would snap, and the pathetic struggle end-
Experiences in that circuit would be incomplete without
a sketch from such associations.
' Charlie B is very weak; in fact, I think he
is sinking fast.'
The preacher had reached home for the week end,
a brief but precious interlude in continuous journeyings.
There had been the usual riot of welcome from the
small fry in that home, and he had escaped to his
room for a wash and change, and the customary quiet
talk with the comrade of his life-work.
' Poor Charlie ! ' mused the preacher. 'lt has been
a strange experience to meet him here, and to see
him find his way to God after all.'
Charlie B was one of a family from a Brisbane
suburb, in which the preacher and his wife had served
a fruitful term. All his mates, including a brother,
yielded themselves to God during a gracious season
of spiritual awakening. Charlie alone had resisted
all invitations and overtures, growing almost cynical
in his repudiation of religion and the church-going
habits of his home. Now, three years later, broken
in health, advanced in tuberculosis, he had come to
the dry atmosphere of the western downs, in a vain
effort to recuperate wasted vitality. The preacher's
wife, during his absence, had welcomed the forlorn
lad. She had ever held a high place in his esteem
for all his waywardness, and during a conversation


early in their renewed acquaintance, she broached
again the matter of personal religion.
' Have you found peace with God yet, Charlie ?'
she asked.
'No ! But I want to, Mrs. P . I came here when
the doctor insisted on my going west, because I hoped
you would forgive past rudeness and help me. It is
pretty mean when a fellow is finishing up. All the same
I'd like to get right with God, if He will let me.'
' Do you imagine God is unwilling to bless you,
Charlie lad ? '
' Well I don't deserve that He should. When I
was strong and prospering I turned Him down. It
would only be just if He turned me down now.'
' You had no fear that I would turn you down,
Charlie ? '
' I knew you too well for that.'
' Do you think I am better or kinder than God ? '
' If God will be as kind and patient with me as you
have always been, Mrs. P , it will be all right.'
' Charlie boy,' and the woman's voice grew tremulous
with a deep and tender impressiveness, ' whatever
pity and love I feel for you in your weakness and need,
is only a tiny reflection of the Great Pitiful Heart of
God shining in and through mine. Trust Him utterly,
and all will be well.'
Then she had taken from his table a Bible that his
mother had given him, and by the help of its inspired
teaching, led him step by step into the experience
his soul hungered for. That was months before this


night on which she talked with her husband of the
lad whose steps were even then passing into ' the
valley of the shadow.'
' After tea and a half-hour with you and the kiddies,
I will run over and have a look at Charlie,' said the
preacher.
The clock struck ten as the preacher left for his
visit. It was July, and the night was swept by a
biting westerly. Brilliant stars shone frostily in the
deep azure overhead. Buttoning his greatcoat closer
round him, he walked rapidly through the deserted
streets. A few minutes later he had entered a small,
partially furnished cottage, temporary home of the
dying lad and his mother. The father had joined
them that day. They were grouped over the fire.
For several days and nights the lad had been unable
to lie on' couch or bed. He sat now propped by
cushions in the glow of the fire. As the preacher
entered a spasm of coughing shook the frail body,
leaving the sufferer panting and exhausted. With
silent grip of the hand the father made way for the
preacher, and he sat down beside the lad.
' Not so good to-night, Charlie ? '
' No, Mr. P ,' gasped the sick lad. ' The best
turn you can do me is to pray for a quick finish.
Queer, isn't it,' he continued between rapid gaspings
for breath, a whimsical smile twisting the haggard
lips the while, ' a fellow begging another to pray for
his death ? '
' God will touch you, and bid you come, just at the


night on which she talked with her husband of the
lad whose steps were even then passing into ' the
valley of the shadow.'
' After tea and a half-hour with you and the kiddies,
I will run over and have a look at Charlie,' said the
preacher.
The clock struck ten as the preacher left for his
visit. It was July, and the night was swept by a
biting westerly. Brilliant stars shone frostily in the
deep azure overhead. Buttoning his greatcoat closer
round him, he walked rapidly through the deserted
streets. A few minutes later he had entered a small,
partially furnished cottage, temporary home of the
dying lad and his mother. The father had joined
them that day. They were grouped over the fire.
For several days and nights the lad had been unable
to lie on' couch or bed. He sat now propped by
cushions in the glow of the fire. As the preacher
entered a spasm of coughing shook the frail body,
leaving the sufferer panting and exhausted. With
silent grip of the hand the father made way for the
preacher, and he sat down beside the lad.
' Not so good to-night, Charlie ? '
' No, Mr. P ,' gasped the sick lad. ' The best
turn you can do me is to pray for a quick finish.
Queer, isn't it,' he continued between rapid gaspings
for breath, a whimsical smile twisting the haggard
lips the while, ' a fellow begging another to pray for
his death ? '
' God will touch you, and bid you come, just at the


right moment, Charlie lad,' answered the preacher.
' Trust Him and leave it to Him. His strength will
be in you to the end and beyond it.'
' Yes ! That's so.'
' You remember, Charlie, one of old thinking of
what has come to you and saying, ' Yea though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death I
will fear no evil ? '
' You didn't finish it,' gasped the sufferer. ' Thou
art with me. Thy rod and Thy staff, they comfort
me.'
Exhausted by the effort of speaking, the lad sank
back with closed eyes, and the preacher, dropping
an arm over the drooping shoulders, waited in silence
until he looked up again.
' You mean, Charlie, that He is now with you and
comforts you.'
' Yes, Mr. P . That's it.'
' Well, don't try to talk any more, Charlie. lam
just going to offer a prayer as I sit beside you. You
mu«t just let yourself rest back in " the Everlasting
Arms." '
A merciful unconsciousness came soon after, and at
midnight the redeemed spirit left its stricken tenement,
passing into light and joy ineffable. The last of the
way had been rough going, yet it led to peace and light.


CHAPTER XXVII
Again the Sea
THE preacher had applied for transfer back to New
South Wales. Recurring malaria threatened per-
manently to impair his wife's health. It was thought
that climatic conditions obtaining in the mother state
would materially assist recovery. Under regulations
governing his original transfer from New South Wales,
he was entitled to return. In his case definite pledge
had been given from the chair by the President,
at the Conference designating him to the Queensland
work, that, should he apply for transfer back again,
after nine years of service, his application would be
granted. It was disconcerting, to say the least,
when he received intimation that the New South
Wales Conference could not honour the undertaking.
He appealed to the supreme court of his Church,
meeting triennially, and, fortunately for him, due in
the following May. That court directed the New
South Wales Conference to make the transfer. But
this could not be effected till the next meeting of the


Conference. Meanwhile the preacher must receive
appointment for one year.
At his own request he was given nominal permission
to rest for the year, whilst actually working a Home
Mission station on the shores of Moreton Bay, a special
grant being made to assist the finances. That year
of rest proved to be one of the busiest and most success-
ful of his ministry. The little old church at Wynnum
was sold, a new site purchased, a convenient and well-
appointed building erected, the congregation of thirty
increased to two hundred, and a prosperous sea-side
suburban circuit established.
It was a great transition from the drought-stricken
south-west. Those alone who have spent years in
the wide treeless expanses of interior Australia, with
their vast stretches of plain, destitute of water, save
for the occasional dam or rain-filled hollow, can
appreciate the delight with which the eye roves over
a glimpse of the wide heaving ocean. When such have
come from arid sun-scorched regions, desolated by
prolonged drought, the transition to copious, cool,
moist sea-winds and the restless wash of measureless
tides, for the moment becomes overwhelming. Such
sensations swept over the preacher and wife, with
their three bright bairns, as they alighted, dusty
and travel-worn, on Wynnum railway platform.
For thirty miles the great roadstead of Moreton Bay
stretched almost from their feet to the haze-covered
east, in which Moreton and Stradbroke islands broke
the line of great ocean waters. Northward in measure-


less reaches, the waters faded into a sky-line, beyond
which the Great Barrier Reef threw back the ocean
swell in ceaseless foam and surf. A few miles from
shore floated the island prison of St. Helena and the
luxuriant jungle and coral beaches of Green Islands,
across a tempting stretch of lapping water, whipped
into wavelets by a fresh north-easter.
Somewhere back among ancestors who invaded the
fen-lands of Ely, whence his immediate progenitors
emerged, the preacher must have had a Viking strain,
for the brine of the ocean ever stirred in him a wander-
lust of the wave, which nothing could quench. It had
found some satisfaction in exploring coastal estuaries,
membership in rowing clubs, and in manipulating
sailing boats, heretofore. It leaped into life again
as his glance wandered over that expanse of sea,
flung out to the far horizon. A friend, among the
many genial acquaintances found in this seaside
suburb, himself an accomplished yachtsman, dis-
covering the preacher's penchant for aquatics, placed
in his care a fourteen-foot racing machine, saucer-like
in shape, built to carry a huge spread of sail, yet
wonderfully safe and handy with a moderate weight
of canvas. Memory revels still in the whip of wind-
swept spray, and the lurch and heave of tumbling
waters, as the Ada literally jumped into a head sea,
or careened under a leading wind on the long home
stretch from some day of sailing. The preacher
evolved an instinct for riding the white horses of the
roadstead, equal to that which guided hand and eye


in controlling the live leaping steeds of his previous
career.
There were days when the quintet from the little
' furnished cottage ' on the hill drifted lazily over
scarcely ruffled surfaces. There were other days when
they were drenched with ceaseless showers of spray,
as the Ada leaped and slid over and through seas
chivvied by a strong north-easter —days when the
kindly devout bed-ridden elderly friend, from her
balconied room, would watch the familiar sail, as the
little boat breasted a tide-rip in the channel between
Green Island and the landing-stage, assuring the—
to her—rash crew of her continuous prayer for their
safe delivery from perils so recklessly invoked. And
there were nights, just here and there one or two,
when the hardy voyagers ventured more than a day's
sail down the southern channel, and lay snugly packed
together on the wide floor of the boat, a sail drawn
over them, watching the blue heavens above agleam
with scintillating points of light, listening to the
lapping murmur of the waters, the snap of opening
and closing shells, the drone of surf a score of miles
away, beyond island masses eastward, and the mani-
fold sighings and splashings of nocturnal life among
the inshore shallows, while broken snatches of sleep
and dreams came between.
And at times a touch of tragedy darkened the days.
Such a day for instance, as that memorable 26th of
December, when the preacher and his yachtsman
friend, with a twelve-year-old brother of the latter,


sailed across the six miles to Green Island in a vicious
southerly gale, out of sheer enjoyment in fighting,
at odds, the wind and sea. When, after the billy
had been boiled in a sheltered cove on the island,
they beat down the channel to run back in smoother
water along the windward shore; the preacher,
holding the sheet and balancing out to steady against
the gusts, descried two human heads bobbing up
and down in the vortex of waves to windward. The
yachtsman steering drove the Ada hard into the gusts,
intending that her lee rail should pass within hand-
grasp of the drowning men, enabling an easy rescue.
But the strain proved too severe, and the jib blew
out, so that despite smart handling the little vessel
fell to leeward, and was thirty or forty yards off the
course planned as she passed the swimmers. Light
lines thrown were grasped by one, as the boat swung
up in the wind and her anchor dropped. Oars were
of no avail in such a wind and sea. The remaining
swimmer battled feebly to keep afloat, so exhausted
that each wave buried him. The yachtsman lost
no time. He was a strong swimmer, yet the channel
was infested by sharks. There had been a third
man. He had been taken a few minutes previously.
Tossing aside most of his clothing, whilst the preacher
snapped a bowline round his waist, the yachtsman
leaped over, reaching the drowning man just as his
feeble strokes failed altogether. For a few tense
moments they were being drawn inboard, the feverish
hands hauling and lifting quickened by thoughts


of the grisly horror which at any moment might over-
whelm both rescuer and rescued.
A boat containing fourteen pleasure-seekers had
overturned through inexpert handling. The Ada
could not beat up against the wind without her jib,
A yacht was shaking out her sails for the run up the
river from Wynnum jetty. Racing down the wind
the Ada crossed her bows. The yachtsman poised
ready, plunged from the rail, swimming to meet the
oncoming boat. Under his guidance the yacht
turned and traversed the wind-swept waters until
the swamped boat was located. Three more shivering
half-drowned survivors were discovered, clinging to
it. All others had disappeared. No vestige of the
nine hapless victims of this holiday tragedy was
ever found. But through the tragedy and sorrow
of it all shines the heroism of a man whom the preacher
delighted to hold as a friend, one of a type far more
numerous than we are apt to realize, except as some
tragic need calls out the latent heroism in them all.


CHAPTER XXVIII
' Just Trust'
THE busy year at Wynnum, shot through with its
unique seaside incidents and pleasures, passed quickly
away. On the last Sabbath the preacher addressed
fine congregations, gathered to celebrate the opening
of the new church. The Monday night public meeting
blended with its felicitations on the success of the new
enterprise, a note of regret and farewell. The Chairman
of Committees in the Brisbane House of Parliament
presided and said many kind things of the preacher's
work during the year. Other tokens of affection
and esteem were unmistakable, and float like sweet
incense from out the past.
Notwithstanding the direction given by the supreme
court of the church, the Mother Conference very tardily,
and with little credit to herself, finally honoured her
own definite undertakings. A telegram came con-
taining among other things, the message ' stationed
Moree.' Fortunately the then President of New
South Wales Conference by next mail sent an explana-
tory and apologetic letter, promising readjustments


at the end of the connexional year. The first message
reached the preacher late at night, away from home,
anniversary preaching in a suburban circuit. Moree
lay in the still drought-stricken area of the north-west.
Climatically it was utterly unsuited to the urgent need
which drove him from Queensland. It was like a
deliberate mockery of that need. During his sojourn
in Queensland the preacher had won a good degree
among his brethren. Officials of the Albert Street
circuit had approached him, with a view to inducing
him to withdraw his application for transfer, as a
step towards securing his appointment to that station,
which at the time was the blue ribbon circuit of Queens-
land.
The preacher was very human. The scant respect
paid by the New South Wales Conference to his
request for return had hurt deeply, and the appoint-
ment finally made was disappointing and keenly
humiliating. Perhaps he required the discipline.
That Saturday night he did not sleep. He felt strongly
disposed to retire from the ministry. Lucrative
openings on the city press beckoned him. The services
on the Sunday were conducted somehow. Memory
recalls only that fact. Declining a pressing invitation
to remain for the night, the preacher journeyed home.
He wanted to talk over things with the one unfailing
human friend. The burden of her counsel is the title
to this chapter, and in the end he came to see and
feel as she did about it. He just trusted, and went
on with the duty immediately to hand, waiting for


the future to explain all. And the outcome proved
the deep wisdom of the counsel given, and the folly
of forgetting the Invisible Control, which registers
Itself through all Conference blunderings and apparent
heartlessness, as through all else in a God-governed
universe.
The last of that three years of drought he spent
traversing scenes familiar to his ministry of more than
twenty years before. During that year a brother
appointed to Inverellhad a severe health-break, involving
retirement for a time. At the first reading of stations
ensuing, the preacher was appointed to Inverell. That
thriving town is hung on the western edge of the New
England table-land, some two thousand feet above sea
level. A leading medical authority assured the preacher
that no place in Australia better suited to his wife's nec-
essity could have been found. But for the preacher and
his wife the way to Inverell lay through Moree. It would
have opened to them in no other way. The experience
was another encouragement to say, with one of ancient
days, ' I will trust and not be afraid '; or to verify
the truth of Cowper's insight when he wrote :
Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take.
The clouds ye so much dread
Are big with mercy, and will break
In blessings on your head.


CHAPTER XXIX
In 4 Parlous Ways '
JUST one sketch may be permitted of the preacher's
experiences in the last year of ' the big drought,'
among the parched levels surrounding Moree.
'We can find a meal for yourself and a bed; but
there is no feed for your horse and very little water.'
The preacher was dismounting in the yard at H 's
homestead on Moomin Plains.
' Our water failed,' continued the speaker. 'We
drew a couple of tanks from the Millie bore, before
sending the last of our teams down to the coast. If
rain does not come we shall have to quit when the
tanks are empty.'
' The Moomin has dried up ? '
' Been dry as Sahara for months.
' Well! Abdallah has put forty odd miles behind
him to-day, and will be glad of the rest even if feed
be absent. How is it going with the S s? '
The preacher had named a grazier between thirty
and forty miles further west.
' I don't know. Bad, I reckon, though we have


seen and heard nothing of them for months. They
were skinning thirty thousand sheep then. Had
them all in the home paddock dying faster than the
men could get their pelts off.'
' I thought of making there for to-morrow night.'
'lt would be wiser to go back. If your horse
knocked up you would come to grief.'
' I think Abdallah will see me through/ replied the
preacher.
' He looks a bit tucked up now/ was the dubious
answer.
' Yes! But the day has been very hot, and he has
had neither food nor drink since early morning.'
' Bring him round to the tank and we will give him
a bucket of water.'
The Arab drank greedily, asking for more. A second
bucketful was drawn and given him, then he was turned
loose in a grassless paddock. Dinner and evening
prayer followed.
The preacher rose early next day, and after a hasty
meal, resumed his journey. He recognized the risk.
If the S s had abandoned their homestead, the
prospect of finding water for himself and his horse
would be meagre. Feed for the latter could scarcely
be expected, in any case. But he reckoned on reaching
the great Goonal station for the following night,
where in the worst of droughts, food for man and
beast was always available. The S s depended
for water upon wells which hitherto had never failed.
Whether the prolonged drought through which they


were passing had varied that experience remained to
be seen.
At midday he stopped in a patch of myall to boil
his quart pot, filling it with water from the bag slung
at his saddle. Removing saddle and bridle from the
Arab, he climbed the myall, breaking and feeding to
the horse the fine twigs and leaves at the extremity
of the branches. For an hour or two he loitered,
waiting for the worst heat of the day to pass, ere he
resumed his steady progress westwards. Just as the
crimson disc of the sun sank below the western edge
of the level opens he reached the homestead. The
place was deserted. Recent wheel-tracks showed
where vehicles had gone towards the Narrabri road.
He hastened to the great well in the back yard. A
windlass with rope and iron bucket attached, stood
over the opening. Dropping a pebble he listened
vainly for an answering splash from below. To make
certain he released the clutch and sent the bucket
down the well. It came up minus any trace of water.
The gravity of the situation was evident to the
preacher. His horse had travelled nigh to forty
miles since his last drink. A similar distance lay
between his present position and Goonal. He thought
wistfully of the perennial supply at that homestead,
of its irrigated fields, orchard, and gardens. Four
miles further west lay number two homestead of the
S s property. Should he go on there and again
find the place deserted, it would add eight miles to
the long night journey which must be undertaken


forthwith. And yet S senior, with his motherless
girls, might be there and eagerly anticipating his
coming.
He looked his horse over keenly. The splendid beast
was visibly fagged. His body was gaunt with that
emptiness the bushman invariably terms ' tucked up.'
Yet the fire in his eye was unquenched and his nervous
ears twitched and wavered expectantly. The preacher
was satisfied that if required to do so, the noble animal
would carry him another fifty miles, without food or
water. So he turned still westward. Smoke blurred
the deep blue of the skyline as the homestead stood
out against the evening after-glow. A few minutes
later the grazier and his two daughters were welcoming
the preacher. An artesian bore sunk on the run
adjoining their boundary supplied them with water
and they elected to see the drought through. A few
bags of chaff remained from the last wagonload brought
from the distant rail-head months before. That
meant unexpected feed for the horse, though he refused
to look at it until he had consumed five buckets of
water, administered with necessary intervals between.
The preacher rested two days, holding a family service
night and morning of each day.
On the morning of the third day he left for Goonal.
Eighteen miles out he was passing the only dwelling
on the route. Months before, the proprietor, a young
married man, originally from New England, had
left with the remnant of his sheep,' travelling for grass.'
The wife was said to have rejoined her relatives in the


table-land, and the preacher was riding wide of the
house to avoid the smaller paddocks immediately
surrounding it. Happening to glance in that direction
he noted a wisp of smoke above the chimney. Look-
ing more carefully he saw a little child on the door-step.
Instantly he turned and rode to the house. It was
fortunate he had noticed the presence of human
beings. The wife of the young grazier was still there,
with her child of two. Her nearest neighbour was
eighteen miles away. She had elected to remain in
her home for two months after her husband had gone,
supplies for that period being provided, and she hoped
it might rain, in that space, when her husband and his
brother would return. At the end of two months,
should the drought continue, the latter was to come
for her and the child. That was four months previously.
No word or token had reached her. She dared not
risk attempting to find her way across the trackless
area on either side. She could only wait, hoping
every day for deliverance. Meanwhile the food
supply had been reduced to flour and water. Happily
the last had not dried away. It was discovered later
that a series of misadventures had hindered the brother-
in-law from keeping his appointment; meanwhile
her husband was congratulating himself that she and
the babe were safe with her friends. On the arrival
of the preacher at Goonal, a buggy and pair was
despatched for the mother and child and their distress
and anxiety ended.
About this date a Presbyterian student, city bred,


arrived in Moree as a supply for the local church.
He was a plucky fellow, yet quite inexperienced in
bush-craft. Goonal, though wide in its hospitalities
to all Protestant denominations, was really a strong-
hold of Presbyterianism. He resolved to visit that
station at least, scoffing at the idea that a vigorous
young fellow should find it difficult to do once what the
elderly Methodist man was doing the year round.
And really the simple journey planned should not have
been a serious undertaking. His ingenuousness led
the young man to confide to a local pressman the
experiences which followed.
Wandering from the direct route, he lunched at
Combadillo station, eighteen miles out from Moree.
He was directed by the nearest road to Goonal from
thence. Sixteen miles on he passed through a small
gate out of Combadillo on to a travelling stock
reserve. Eight miles west lay Goonal homestead,
with nothing in the shape of track or road to guide
him. A man used to crossing country would have
made it easily. But this young man from the city
had never crossed country in his life. The sun was
just dropping below a brigalow scrub in front of him.
He entered it along an ordinary stock track made by
wandering cattle, thinking he was following a path
leading to Goonal. The track led into the midst
of a belah swamp,recently flooded by a passing thunder-
storm. Girth deep in this the horse stopped, refusing
to go further. Its instinct rebelled against going away
from sound, dry footing. Had the rider but thrown


the reins on its neck the animal would probably have
taken him straight to his destination. In his ignorance
of horses and their ways, the young man thought his
steed hopelessly bogged. Removing boots and stock-
ings he dismounted, took saddle and bridle from the
horse, and floundered on through the slush until
darkness and fatigue compelled him to get rid of both,
preparatory to a final effort to extricate himself.
His boots had been lost, and his feet suffered cruelly
on hidden sticks and broken roots, as he waded through
the apparently interminable swamp. He stumbled
on to dry ground at last, and lay down utterly ex-
hausted. Concluding that death was near, he wrote
one or two farewell messages on the fly-leaf of a pocket
Testament, and lay down to die.
Long afterwards he woke, with a hot sun scorching
his face and neck. Not being dead, and feeling
considerably refreshed by his long sleep, he resolved on
another effort to find a way out. But his swollen
lacerated feet must be protected in some fashion
before they would bear his weight. The felt hat lay
near. With his pen-knife he halved it. Tearing strips
from his shirt, he bound each half round a foot. A
handkerchief served as head-gear. Slowly and very
painfully he made his way, until emerging from the
scrub he beheld Goonal homestead, three miles distant
across the plain. As luck happened, the master of
Goonal was just searching that fringe of scrub with
field glasses seeking trace of a stray horse. The
shambling figure arrested attention. A rider was


hastily despatched to investigate. When the unhappy
theologue reached the homestead, a warm bath, a hot
meal, and a long rest restored his wonted vigour. He
came back to town in the station buggy, and left for
his city home by next train, vowing that nothing
should ever induce him to tempt fate again in such
outlandish and forsaken regions.


-ia' iBBl
iJBF Jr - mm
if«HL 3*:" <8B||;'
' /
The Preacher now.


CHAPTER XXX
Inverell
ON leaving Moree, the preacher was appointed to the
Inverell circuit, a small but prosperous centre for a
pastoral, agricultural, and mining district, scattered
along the western edge of the northern table-land,
and extending westwards in the valley of the Gwydir
and Mclntyre rivers. During his term in the district,
tin was the principal interest in mining, and Tingha,
sixteen miles to the south-west, was the chief centre
of that industry. Gold, silver, and other less precious
metals were obtained in many directions through the
rough mountain region impinging on the valley of the
Mclntyre. The attempt to minister to the numerous
hamlets and scattered homes of such a district in-
volved incessant travelling. For ten nights of the
moonlight, the preacher held week-night services
monthly, from Tingha and Borah creek, twenty miles
east, to Ashford, forty-two miles west. He kept two
pairs of ponies, Billy and Jacky, bays of twelve hands
high, and Kitty and Silver, taffy fillies of an inch higher.
With these he would scamper twenty miles, hold
177 12


service, and return by midnight or one o'clock in the
morning, to leave after a hasty breakfast for a similar
excursion in some other direction. Only thus could
his ministry serve the scattered hamlets committed
to his care.
At Inverell itself a new and commodious church
must be built and furnished; not a difficult task,
for a generous legacy provided funds. It was much
more difficult to fill a church with a capacity for five
hundred people, which replaced one having seating
accommodation for less than a hundred, and rarely
filled at that. A fine Evangelistic Mission, scheduled
as part of the opening functions, helped in solving
the problem. The Rev. W. G. Taylor, of the Sydney
C.M.M., prince among evangelists, came for the first
four days. The preacher and his helpers carried it
on for the next week. It was ' a season of refreshing
from the presence of the Lord.' It left, among other
notable results, a vigorous Sunday night open-air
meeting, preliminary to the service. A regular
congregation of one hundred and fifty to two hundred
people was brought together ; and on special occasions
the church was filled. Such an occasion was the three
nights on which Egerton Young, famous Canadian
missionary and lecturer, told his story of work among
the Indians.
Typical of experiences met with was an incident
at the close of a regular Sunday night service. The
preacher had driven forty-two miles that day, preach-
ing before starting and once half way in. He had


no time for refreshment before the evening service.
He decided to dispense with an after-meeting, and at
the close of the service left the rostrum, intent upon
accosting a stranger in one of the front seats. The
latter had risen excitedly on the preacher's approach.
' Isn't there a prayer-meeting ? ' he exclaimed.
' Not to-night, friend,' replied the preacher, smilingly
extending a hand in greeting.
' But I want to get saved ! '
'Oh ! That alters it. Here, you good people!
Don't all leave,' called the preacher. ' This brother
wants to get saved. Follow us into the vestry.'
It was not long ere the stranger became gloriously
saved and happy; and the preacher left that im-
promptu after-meeting feeling rested and refreshed,
so strangely does compensating spiritual power renew
jaded mind and body. The stranger was a fossicker
from far out among the ranges. He had arrived late
the day before, too late to dispose of his little store
of gold, and secure stores for the year, as a preliminary
to his annual drinking bout. The open-air service
attracted him. The music drew him to the church.
The Spirit of God laid hold upon him during the
service. On the morrow, to the no small chagrin
of a certain publican, he loaded up with supplies
for the year, banked the remainder of the price of his
gold, and left sane and sober for his lonely camp.
Once in penetrating an unfrequented fold of the
mountains the preacher discovered his camp, and
found him still rejoicing in God's saving grace.


CHAPTER XXXI
Gravitating City-wards
THE preacher's wandering days—the days of wide
distances and lonely journeyings—were drawing to an
end. Important charges in the thickly populated
cities of the coast opened to him. Thus his next
term was spent in a densely populated suburb of
Newcastle. Though changed in many ways, the
work was exacting and the responsibilities no lighter.
' You will find, brother,' remarked the preacher who
was vacating the circuit, ' a warm-hearted people.
But they are peculiar. They're always ready for a
big revival or a big row. If they don't get the one
they're sure to have the other.'
The preacher experienced a modified exhibition
of both idiosyncracies during his term. They had
' a revival,' and they had ' a row.' The revival
was probably of too moderate a type to exclude the
row. The combination created perplexities and some
worries for the preacher; yet the church prospered,
and there were compensations. Some of these were
found in the simple joys of parsonage life in that
sea-blown suburb. A sketch of the usual week-end
happenings will best illustrate their nature.


/r
j|
■ a vS
r= , ; f -.7rfe- iSa^«»gg|yr
IJHKHi' fR*» ipPUM IB8BE1
W MBBEsmsMH ■■■■■i
1. A city home of the Preacher.
2. The Preacher's Moruya home.
■{tee f>. 43.)
/. p. 180


' What about a day on the beach to-morrow, sweet-
heart ? '
' Oh yes, Mum !'
' Be good now ! "
' Do, there's a dear ! '
The query was addressed by the preacher to his
wife, busy pouring tea at the opposite end of the table,
at which the family had gathered for their Friday
evening meal. The exclamations came from the
young people—a girl of eighteen and two boys of
fourteen and sixteen respectively. Each had risen,
excitedly clustering round the matron with a coaxing,
caressing imperativeness. Their home was in the
midst of a coal-mining community. Gaunt chimney
stacks and pit-head works stood out stark and bare
against the sky in every direction, and streets and
roofs were grubby with coal dust. But away to the
east and south stretched wide ocean expanses fringed
with sand-dunes, and miles of grey beach, broken at
intervals by cliff-faced bluffs. The preacher and his
family found in these respite and relief, often sorely
needed, from the drudgery and grind of every-day
duties. A few hours on the wind-swept beach,
draughts of spray and sunshine, inhaled as they lay
at ease on the warm dry sandhills, or as they splashed
in the surf, revived jaded powers of mind and body.
' We have only half finished the week-end cleaning,'
replied the matron, ' and there is Sunday's dinner to
prepare. You go, dear, and take the children.'
' No good, Mum !'


' Make her come, Dad ! '
' What sort of a day should we have without you,
Mum? '
The youthful chorus appealed confidently to the
preacher, who sipped at his tea, smilingly enjoying
the boisterously affectionate siege of the matron's
chair.
' There will be house-cleaning to do when you have
gone to heaven, sweetheart,' he said. ' A little bit
extra left for then will not matter. You need a day
off more than any of us.'
' And Dad won't go without you, Mum. You'll
keep him from a day off, if you don't come.'
' I suppose you must have it your way,' sighed the
matron. ' But I don't know what we shall do for
dinner on Sunday.'
' Sufficient unto the day is the dinner thereof,'
answered the youngest lad, stooping to roguishly
kiss the matron's cheek ere he resumed his seat.
' What if there be no dinner at all ? '
' Oh, we'll have hard-boiled eggs and curried rice,
and other mix-ups. Don't you worry about the
butcher and all that, Mum.'
So it came to pass that a curiously laden party
moved from the parsonage gate in the dusk of early
morning. One lad carried a tent fly and a rug or
two, thrown across his shoulders in true swag fashion ;
the other carried a well-packed hamper, with rashers
for frying, a baking-dish for a pan, and eggs from the
previous day's laying, packed among a plentiful


supply of other eatables, including a few potatoes
to be roasted in their jackets, on the embers of their
camp fire. The preacher carried two billy-cans, the
larger one filled with water, the smaller with milk-
The mother and daughter carried light packages,
bathing costumes, books and magazines, for they
were out for the livelong day.
' Hooray ! Hurry, Mum ! There's Ford's trolley ! '
The speaker dived headlong into a cutting, where a
coal-line pierced the sandhill to reach the beach
front, signalling to a group of men just in the act
of driving off on a low flat trolley.
They were miners, working an outcrop tapped by
the railway, some three miles along the beach. Rough
of garb, given to rugged speech, yet possessing hearts
brimful of human kindness, a familiar type, known
and loved by the parsonage folk. Cheerfully they
responded to the lad's signal, crowding uncomfortably
together to make room for the new-comers, welcoming
their advent with unfeigned cordiality and some
amusement. So, with legs dangling a few inches
above the levelled surface, the merry party trundled
and rumbled along, until they reached a stretch of
beach beyond the range of habitual surfers and picnic
parties.
Selecting a spot where storm water from the hills
had torn a shallow valley through the sand-dunes,
the fly was pitched in form of a tent, providing a
dressing-room for the ladies. The tent blocked the
view from the beach and formed a convenient dressing-


room for the males in the open behind it. Soon
the party were tumbling and romping in the surf ;
' Dad,' who roamed in boyhood along these self-same
sands, having selected a spot for their purpose, free
of treacherous undertow. Sunbaths in the dry hot
sand varied the romping and splashing in the surf,
until the clamour of healthy appetites could be withstood
no longer. Then followed camp-fire cookery, and the
pleasing odours of frying bacon and simmering coffee
mingled with the ozone-laden breath of the ocean. A
dilatory delightful meal followed, and after that they
drowsed in shade or sunshine, as the temperature
suggested, or lost themselves in the beautiful glades
of bookland, or, rested and refreshed, wandered among
the real glades of sea-coast scrub land, or at low tide
among the thousand-fold interests of tidal pools and
rocky foreshores. The slanting afternoon sun recalled
the stragglers. An evening meal closed the late
afternoon, and ere the little tent was folded away,
the sound of a familiar hymn broke through the wash
and ripple of ocean waters, and the voice of thanks-
giving and prayer ascending from the kneeling group
brought in response a sense of Divine companionship
and blessing, resting and reviving the soul even more
than the day had renewed and refreshed jaded brains
and bodies.
How enchantingly beautiful it all is in retrospect
even though the backward glance grows dim with
tears. For pathetic and tragic years intervene,
casting heavy shadows over that delightful past, and


darkening all succeeding days. That little wooden
cross on a grave far across the world flings a shadow
on life's pathway, deepened by the shadow of its
fellow, silently testifying how another soldier lad
brought a war-worn body back, only to have it laid
to rest in his homeland. And yet did they not write
of the lad whose splendid manhood flung itself into
the bloody maw of battle for liberties and loves more
precious to him than life itself :
God gave him to us;
God has taken him again;
God is Love to him and to us,
And does not that word flame with radiant eternal
truth, breathing its strange, deep spell of comfort
into hearts that long for sight or sound of the splendid
boys that come not again ?


CHAPTER XXXII
The Parsonage Trio
WHAT laughing rollicking babies they were, to begin
with! What eager, impetuous, impatient kiddies
they became ! each in his or her own way oddly
independent and self-reliant from infancy upwards.
A wee baby girl first crept into the love and life of
the parsonage home. A merry wee sprite, born with
a daring that never left her and sometimes threatened
recklessness. We can see her now, lifting herself
from the knee of a lady friend, as she caught a glimpse
of her mother, stealing unobtrusively from the rear
to her place in the choir, calling in clear penetrating
baby treble, that sent a ripple of amusement over the
sedate assemblage,—' Muffer, take your feet lamb.'
Or when, as a babe of a year and half, she became the
constant companion of the preacher in his drives to
afternoon appointments. Motherly old ladies and
equally motherly young ladies would seek to lift and
cuddle her on their soft warm knees, only to find
their overtures indignantly repulsed, or, if made swiftly
enough to momentarily capture the babe, to find the


indignant wee mite thrusting off enfolding arms,
and hurriedly scrambling back to her seat. Had not
' Dad ' told her that every young lady sat straight up
during preaching, and was she not a young lady ?
And how gleefully she would cling to ' Dad's' left leg,
enfolding her on the floor of the buggy, as, with his
right foot on the brake, and both hands gripping the
reins, he sought to convince the Creamies that a bolt
down Turlinjah hill was no proper way to begin the
journey home! How she would laugh and chatter of
Timor and Croydon, as they plunged down the incline,
tossing manes flying in the wind, and iron-shod hoofs
pattering on the metal!
Then came the boys, and the trio was complete,
and Dad and the boys between them, despite maternal
forebodings, made a tomboy of the demure little maid.
What a squabbling brood they were too, each with
driving force enough for a dozen, each with a person-
ality bent on dominating at all costs, and each in
desperate need of acquiring the philosophy of ' give
and take ! ' How the dear mother despaired of them
at times ! Especially of the boys, when they came
to an age in which decisions not reached by moral
suasion were usually attained through force majeure.
' I never saw such human tigers of children ! Never !
the shocked and startled mother would say through
her tears. 'My brothers were never like that. Satan
himself must possess them.'
And the preacher would say,' Don't worry your soul-
case through, sweetheart. Pump religion and sound


morals into them. They will come out right in the
end.'
The preacher knew the breed. He had been one
of them. Happily maternal fears were not realized,
and still more happily, the highest anticipations
' Dad' had cherished were more than realized. The
greater part of the credit for this happy issue was due
to the wise, sorely tried, prayerful, persistent mother,
though the preacher did his best loyally to second her
efforts.
Difficult as were the finances of the household, they
determined to secure the best education possible for
them. The lassie went to Hawthorne M.L.C.; and
Dr. Fitchett, that master mind in reaching the sym-
pathies and calling out the best in the girls committed
to his care, left his imprint for good upon her character.
She returned an accomplished and in some directions,
brilliant young lady, of whom her sturdy manly
brothers were as fond and proud as she was of them.
How she revelled in their football and sprinting
contests, glorying in the trophies they brought home;
and how they gloried in her sweet cultured power
of song, and brilliant playing, and bonnie looks!
A musical strain ran through the family. Father,
mother, girl and boys all sang. The girl developed
more than ordinary skill on the piano. The younger
lad was a born violinist, and high-class tuition gave
him fine control of his instrument. Departure from
the city severed him from the finishing tuition he
longed for, but the natural gift caused him to evolve


I \£3k
; #.?■
M**
|
e 26, 1917.
■
C
P
>—>
cfl
T3
2
I
}
0
J?
#14^
\
U-.
O
<
i
:.v
*C5
<y
*C
fa
<
Payne,
<y
e
fa
cc
<D
fa
#,
p<
-S-,
c
.2
A
5
c
0
H
-*-»
p
.Si
: 926^
i P 1
W
H
M
fO
1


a style of playing full of an individuality of its own.
How they used to fill the parsonage with rich and
glorious music between them ! And how, too, when a
prankish mood Supervened, those sedate precincts
would echo to brilliant rag-time choruses, coon songs,
and the like, frequently bringing a wondering, delighted
throng to the pavement outside the open windows!
When they went, the maiden to brighten a good
man's home, and the boys into the world, the music
vanished, and the parsonage life never lost the gray-
ness their going left upon its outlook. Bursts of
melody returned when they foregathered. But that
too has vanished. The violin went to camp, went to
the other side, helped men through many a sombre
day, and cheered them in many a gloomy night. Then
the day came when the fingers that made it sob,
and sigh, and thrill, and dance, and sing, would never
caress it more. Loving hands packed it carefully for
transit back, only to have it torpedoed and left at the
bottom of the Atlantic. Perchance it was better so.
It would have been hard to see it in other hands.
The preacher heard it played for the last time ere it
went across the sea. He can never forget it. The
lad was home on ' final leave 'to say good-bye. For
a space he thought the house empty of all but himself.
The preacher happened to be in his study, when the
instrument began to speak. It played no air or strain
of regular music. It wailed, and sobbed, and sang.
Instinctively the preacher caught the meaning. The
lad was relieving the tension of his soul through the


violin. The preacher was not easily overcome;
but as that thrilling, wailing, yearning strain of mingled
love and sorrow and hope poured itself passionately
through the strings, he could only drop his head
upon his hands and weep. Later, having recovered
self-control, he sauntered carelessly out. The lad
had ceased playing, the violin lay across his knees
as he leaned back among the shadows, silently brooding.
He rose with the usual happy smile.
' What were you playing, old chap ? I never heard
that before.'
' No more did I, Dad,' he replied, with a half-
embarrassed grin. ' I sometimes worked off home-
sickness in that way, and was just giving vent to a
fit of the blues. I wouldn't have done it if I had
known you were in.'
' I'm glad you didn't know, chummie. I would
not have missed it for a great deal.'
And then followed one of those choice half hours
that the preacher and his boys occasionally enjoyed
with each other, the memory of which grew very
precious in the sorrowful days that supervened.
The trio meets no more in that parsonage home,
yet he and the partner of his sorrows and joys are ever
conscious of it, as a living reality still. ' Spirit with
spirit' still meets in a mystic fellowship shared by all
who 'abide under the Shadow of the Almighty,'
whether they be ' Here ' or ' There.'


Printed by Clements Bros., Meeting House Lane. Chatham
