

FROM SILVER
TO STEEL
THE ROMANCE OF
THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY.
BY ROY BRIDGES.


4^ > i


The Process “Blocks for this Book
were made by PREBBLE & JAMES
193 Little Collins Street, Melbourne


FROM SILVER TO STEEL


COPYRIGHT BY
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO. PTY. LTD.
107-111 Elizabeth Street, (^Melbourne


VIEW OF OUTCROP LOOKING NORTH FROM JAMIESON'S SHAFT, 1886.


FROM
SILVER TO STEEL
The Romance of
THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY
BY
ROY BRIDGES
George Robertson & Co. Pty. Ltd.
107-111 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE
1920




CONTENTS
Chapter Page.
I.—The Visionary Sea (1842-1845) 16
II. —The White Quartz (1867) 24
111. —The Mount Gipps Run (1866-1875) 29
IV, The Thackaringa Lodes (1876-1880) .. .. 34
V. —The Silver Barrier (1880-1883) 37
VI. —The Rise of Silverton (1880-1884) 41
VII. —The Silver Mines (1882-1885) 46
VIII. —The Boundary Rider (1883) 50
IX. —The Syndicate of Seven (1883) 55
X. —The Hill of Mullock (1883-1885) 59
Xl.—The Men of Silverton (1884-1886) 62
Xll.—The Game of Euchre (1884) 70
XIII. —The Broken Hill Company (1884) 74
XIV. —The First Survey (1884) 78
XV.—The Silver Chlorides (1885) 83
XVl.—The Surface Show (1885) 87
XVII.—The Camp on Broken Hill (1885) 93
XVIII. —The First Prospectus (1885) 104
XlX.—The Broken Hill Proprietary (1885) ... 108
XX.—The Rise of Broken Hill (1885-1887) .... 112
XXl.—The Fall of Silverton (1885-1890) 127
XXII.—The Battle of the Barrier (1887) 130
XXIII—The Burning of Francis Abigail (1888) .. 134
XXIV.—The Mine and the Ores (1886) 139


Chapter. Page.
XXV. —The Flotations (1887-1888) 145
XXVI. —The Conquest of the Drought (1892) .... 153
XXVII. —The Great Strike (1892) 158
XXVIII. —The Report of J, B. Jaquet (1893) 169
XXIX. —The Open Cut (1891) 174
XXX. —The Fires Underground (1895-1906) .. .. 179
XXXI. —The Report of Schnabel (1892) 184
XXXII.—The Sulphides (1891) 188
XXXIII. The Gas Bubbles (1902) 200
XXXIV. —The Production of Spelter (1908) 210
XXXV.—The Explosives Association (1908) 218
XXXVI. —The Oversea Markets (1885-1914) 225
XXXVII. —The Associated Smelters (1915) 233
XXXVIII. —The Proprietary Mine (1919) 239
XXXIX. —The Port Pirie Shelters (1919) 245
XL, —The Steel Enterprise (1911) 251
XLI. —The Construction of the Steel Works
(1913-1915) 261
XLII. —The Loan of £1,000,000 (1914) 267
XLIII. —The Opening of the Steel Works (1915) . 271
XLIV. —The Ship-Building Scheme (1917-1918) .. 275
XLV. —The Iron Ore (1919) 281
XLVI. —The Shipment of the Ore (1919) 290
XLVII.—The Newcastle Steel Works (1919) .. .. 295
XLVIII.—The Mount Gipps Homestead (1919) .. .. 306
CONTENTS


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
View of Outcrop Looking North from Jamieson’s Shaft,
1886 Frontispiece
Facing page
Captain Chas. Sturt 12
Outlook from the Barrier Ranges, from Sturt’s Narrative .. 16
Piesses’ Knob, 1844 18
Depot Glen, 1845 20
Depot Glen To-Day 28
Thackaringa, 1883 32
Thackaringa—Gipsy Girl Mine 36
Pioneer Mine in the Early ’Eighties 40
Old Day Dream Smelters 44
The Pinnacles 48
Residence of Mr. C. Rasp 54
George McCulloch and Charles Rasp 56
O’Connell’s Cottage To-Day 58
Barrier Ranges—The Hill of Mullock 60
Wm. Jamieson and G. D. Delprat 64
Round Hill, with Imperial Dam in Foreground 80
Philip Charley 84
The Old Chimney Stack 92
Fred. Dutton, Chairman London Board 96


Facing page
Bowes Kelly, Present Chairman of Directors 114
Jamieson Shaft, Looking North-East 116
Poole’s Grave 118
Township of Broken Hill, 1889 122
Transporting Ore from Broken Hill, 1885-1886 126
Silverton Tramway, Opened 10th September, 1887 128
Silverton To-Day 130
Silverton, Looking North 132
Late A. R. Blackwood, First Chairman of Directors .. .. 140
Proprietary Mine in Late ’Eighties, Showing Smelters .. 146
Late William Knox, First Secretary 148
Stephen’s Creek Reservoir, December, 1911 156
Late W. R. Wilson 174
Patterson’s Open Cut, 1901 176
Proprietary North Smelters, 1887-1888 184
Proprietary South Smelters, 1887-1888 192
F. M. Dickenson, Present Secretary , 196
Coke Works, Bellambi, New South Wales 198
Proprietary Mine and Offices 204
First Fifty Tons Zinc Concentrates Produced at Broken Hill 212
First Spelter Furnaces in Australasia, 1908 216
First Refined Zinc (Spelter) Produced in Australasia .... 220
Lead Stacked at Port Pirie 224
Broken Hill, Showing Mines 238
Main Shafts, Concentration Mill 240
Zinc Concentration Plant 242
Port Pirie Smelting Works, 1911 246
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


Facing page
Refinery, Port Pirie, 1911 250
Iron Monarch and Iron Knob 252
Late John Darling 254
Ironstone Quarry, Iron Knob 260
Site for Steel Works, 1912, Port Waratah 262
Blast Furnace, 1914 266
First Shipment of Ironstone from Hummock Hill to New-
castle, 1915 272
Opening of Steel Works, Newcastle, 2nd June, 1915—The
Official Luncheon .. .. 274
Stock of Munition Steel, 1916 276
Bloom Mill 278
Outcrop, Northern Portion of Iron Monarch 282
Site of Steel Works, March, 1914 286
Hummock Hill Jetty 288
Ore Bridges at Newcastle for Discharging Ironstone .. .. 290
Open Hearth Steel Furnaces, Newcastle 294
Rolling Mill 298
Rails and Joists for Australian and Other Markets .. .. 302
The Rod Mill, Newcastle 304
Steel Works, Newcastle, from Water Front 306
The “Haunted” House, Manager’s Residence, Old Mount
Oipps Station 308
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


CAPTAIN CHAS. STURT.


INTRODUCTION
THE romance of the Broken Hill on the Barrier silver field
of New South Wales is interwoven with the history of
Australia for three-fourths of a century. Discovered in
1844 by Captain Charles Sturt on his expedition into Central
Australia, the Hill, till nearly forty years thence, stood for no
more in the minds of the men of outback New South Wales than a
curious landmark on Mount Gipps sheep-station, and its wealth
of silver and lead was not suspected through those years by shep-
herd, drover or prospector. Only when the wild excitement of
the gold rushes of the fifties had died down, and the miner was
digging deeply and more deeply into the earth for the yellow
ore, did the prospector set himself to solve the secret of the
Barrier. About the Broken Hill in the late seventies and early
eighties a rich silver field was laid bare; but the riches of the
Silverton mines were no more than the spillings from the
great treasure locked in the iron-cased hill. One September
morning, young Charles Rasp, boundary rider on Mount Gipps
Station, climbed through the scrub about the ridge going up from
the rolling red plain, and, thinking the bluff a big outcrop of
tin, led his boss and his mates on Mount Gipps to peg out the
first blocks. The sinking of a little shaft and discovery of
a silver slug revealed the first show of precious chlorides. The
locks were off; the enchanted chest lay open—out of the mines
upon the Broken Hill poured a stream of treasure.
About the Hill was played through the first years of dis-
covery a drama in which a few men—station manager, station
hands, and mining surveyor—were the chief figures. Their
venture, at first derided by the men of Silverton field—then at
the zenith of its prosperity—brought fortune to five of them.


The Broken Hill silver-lead mines, sunk on the block pegged out
by the men of Mount Gipps, became as famous through the
Australian States in the succeeding years as the mines of Bendigo
and Ballarat in the gold rushes of the fifties. Their fame went
over the world. At the base of the Broken Hill grew a great
city. About the Hill burned fierce activities and bitter industrial
strife. The Silver Hill sucked to itself the life of the Barrier.
The City of Broken Hill drained into its streets the blood of the
mining town of Silverton and the little townships which had
arisen for a few years about the rich mines of the early eighties.
The magical Broken Hill played a high part in the destinies of
the Australian people through the last years of the nineteenth
century, the first years of the new century, and the years of the
Great War. The Hill of Mullock —so the Silverton men named
it contemptuously in the early days of the Barrier—rose to an
international importance. For this broken-backed, iron-cased
hill, projecting from the red sun-burnt sands and mulga scrub,
proved to hold the richest silver mines of the world.
The romance of the Broken Hill from 1885 till to-day is the
romance of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited. The
Proprietary sprang from the first syndicate of seven on Mount
Gipps Station, and the succeeding Broken Hill Company of
fourteen. Within thirty-four years the Proprietary Mine on
Broken Hill yielded 173,451,037 ounces of silver, 1,279,334 tons
of lead, and 102,857 ounces of gold. It paid to its shareholders
£10,564,388 in cash dividends, £568,000 in cash bonuses, £576,000
in cash from flotation of the British Broken Hill Proprietary
Co. Ltd. and £1,744,000 in shares in the companies floated from
the parent company —a total of £13,452,388. It distributed
£13,348,560 in wages. And this treasure —still seeming inexhaus-
tible —has come out of the once despised Broken Hill, the
Razorback, the Hill of Mullock.
The Broken Hill Proprietary’s destiny has been crowned
with fortune since the formation of the company in 1885. Its
fortune forms the most romantic page of the Broken Hill romance.


It developed wide markets in Europe and the East for its silver
and lead. It established its famous refinery in South Australia
the Port Pirie smelters. It acquired, through its need of iron-
stone fluxing for smelting, the Iron Monarch and the Iron Knob
on the western shore of Spencer’s Oulf; and its possession gave
to it an infinite store of ironstone higher in metallic content than
any known deposit in the world. It determined in the years before
the Great War on the foundation of its steel works at Newcastle.
It obtained its plant from America and Europe before the sub-
marine campaign dislocated the shipping services. The output
of rails and structural steel from the Newcastle works was avail-
able for Commonwealth and State Governments and Australian
firms when the scarcity of freight checked importations from
overseas. The Broken Hill Proprietary then had borne a notable
share in the fortunes of the Commonwealth through the years
before the war. It was to bear as great a share through the war
years. It aided to link the Continent by rail from east to west.
It rolled the steel plates for Australian ships. Its Newcastle
steel works grew into a flourishing industry,—as its mine on
Broken Hill had grown mighty. The romance of the Broken
Hill is the romance of a little group of men on an outback station,
of a rich mine that bore them to fortune, and of a city that sprang
out of a sheep paddock into vigorous life. The romance of the
Broken Hill Proprietary is its progress through years of unbroken
fortune—from silver to steel.


CHAPTER I.
THE VISIONARY SEA (1842-1845).
A BLACK, broken-backed ridge, bunched above the mulga
scrub. The bluffs and the saddle of this ridge in Stan-
ley’s Barrier Ranges are barren, corrugated, and bur-
nished in the sunlight. Above the plain the broken ridge goes to
a height of one hundred and fifty feet; it stands above sea-level
eighteen hundred feet. The Barrier Ranges ride inland north-
north-east for one hundred and fifty miles and more. Between
range and range sweeps the desert —red sands, grey wastes, metal-
lic, arid and grassless through the burning drought.
But for the gum trees by the watercourses, the mulga under
the ranges, monotonous miles of salt bush and blue bush, the
desert is dead through the hot months of the year. With native
well and soakage dry, the blacks avoid the Barrier, though in the
caverns riddling the base of the broken, burnished ridge rock
wallabies abound. Only at times the kites fly eastward in a
whirling cloud. The vegetation blackens and dries. The brick-
red sand swirls through the broken Barrier, as the surf through
reefs. North-west the stony desert burns like a lime-kiln.
So through the long summer the plains are scorched, glitter-
ing with schist and lime, waterless, yet haunted in the heat with
the mirages of silver waters like blue sunlit seas. Through the
drought these plains are the playground of the desert winds.
Before the blast coming white-hot from the furnace of the Central
Desert the sand is blown up in monstrous pillars. Pillars of
flame-red shape between plain and dazzling sky, the colour ever
deepening; the columns whirling higher, to merge at length in


OUTLOOK FROM THE BARRIER RANGES FROM STURT’S NARRATIVE.


one stained canopy—indigo, blood-purple streaked with fire. Day
—but the cloud blackens over the shining heaven. Day—but the
darkness of the night drops as a pall. The sun is dead; the
canopy dull from the purple to a smoky blackness. A vast smoke
cloud obscures all light and form—wind-tortured scrub, the
burnished broken ridge. Moan of the storm; intensity of sul-
phurous heat; the lightning quivering along the Barrier.
The rain bursts from the clouds. The lightning writhes in
silver fire from peak to peak. The thunder breaks with the
shock of earthquake. Muddy torrents surge down dead water-
courses. The scrub is lashed with flying sand and rain. The
parched plains suck the waters, yet are left thirsting when the
clouds sweep onwards; and the sky clears to blue, and the sun
burns again.
After the storm the desert is transformed into a green
garden. The plains of fine loam and powdered lime are converted
into vast forcing beds. Through all the months of drought the
grass seeds and the flower seeds, brown with the dust, have pre-
served the germ of life. Magically the plains grow green with
grass and blossom with flowers of many colours, from the splen-
dours of purple and scarlet of the desert pea to the pale tints of
the iris. But, the sun burning on through the months, the grass
withers away, and the colours of the flowers are merged in the
monotony of sand and salt bush.
On an October morning in the year 1844, two men leaving
the exploration camp, under the shade of the gum trees by
Stephen’s Creek, rode over the plain to the Broken Hill. The
elder — a lean and sunburnt man of about fifty years of age, sitting
stiffly in the saddle, his eyes shaded by a wide cabbage-tree hat
—was Captain Charles Sturt, formerly of the 39th Regiment of
the Line, and head of an expedition purposed to probe the mystery
of the heart of the Continent. The younger—a short, stoutly-
built figure, clad, like his leader, in sweat-stained shirt, riding
breeches and high boots, but with a dark blue forage cap perched
on his head—was James Poole, Sturt’s second in command.
B


About the base of the ridge tbe mulga scrub grew so thickly that
the two, having dismounted, were compelled to hew their way
up through the scrub. Painfully they forced a passage, and,
having climbed at last to the highest point upon the hill, scanned
the countryside with their glasses.* It was the hope of Captain
Sturt that from such an eminence it might be possible to make
out the blue inland sea on which Poole, riding up into the Barrier
ahead of the exploration party some days before, believed that
he had looked; but the two peered out now over red sands, miles
of salt bush, and, south-east, blue ranges cut like Pyramids.
They caught no glimpse of the shimmering waters of a sea with
many islands —such as Poole declared that he had seen far off.
Only the mirage flickered —like silver waters.
Before Sturt and Poole no white man had set foot upon the
Barrier. As yet there was no lure of gold or silver to lead men
to the ranges. No stockman seeking pastures rode into the country
of the drought. The Garden of Australia Felix, discovered by
Sir Thomas Mitchell, lay open to the squatter. The existence of
the Barrier was known, indeed, before Sturt’s expedition. In
the year 1843 Captain Frome, Surveyor-General of South Aus-
tralia, had marked on his fine map,f showing the progress of
exploration in the colony “a succession of apparently barren
ranges running nearly north and south.” Frome himself had
recently undertaken an expedition to determine the dimensions of
the mysterious Lake Torrens, and had journeyed as far north as
*Sturt’s visit to the Broken Hill is confirmed, apart from the reference in
his narrative of an expedition into Central Australia, by a statement of Dr.
John Harris Browne, surgeon to the expedition. In 1889 Dr. Browne was a
fellow-passenger with Mr. William Jamieson (of the Broken Hill Proprietary
Co. Ltd.) on a steamer bound for India. Learning that Mr. Jamieson had come
from Broken Hill, and observing that he understood that “silver had been found
there,” Dr. Browne informed Mr. Jamieson that Sturt’s party had camped on
Stephen’s Creek, and that Sturt had ridden over to the Hill. The drawing of
the outlook from the Barrier Ranges, published in Sturt’s Narrative, was taken
from the top of Broken Hill. On his return Mr. Jamieson tested from the
summit of the Hill the accuracy of the drawing, and was impressed with its
fidelity.
tßritish Parliamentary Sessional Papers, 1843.


PIESSES’ KNOB, 1844.


Mt. Serle. In the course of his explorations he had caught a
glimpse of dim ranges afar. And the blacks about the Moorundi
Station of young Edward John Eyre told of a river flowing from
a distant range into the River Darling. Beyond it was a dreary
waste of hills and sand, with little game for the hunter, and water
only in scattered native wells. Yet it was rumoured among the
colonists —on some tradition of the blacks, or story of a great
lake —that inland there lay a vast sea beyond the desolation
of plains and arid ridges. What actually lay hid in the very
heart of the Continent —mountain, or plain, or rolling bush, or
inland sea —no man might say with certain knowledge. Only the
hot wind blowing eastward to Moorundi suggested burning
desert.
Young Eyre himself had suffered cruelly on his journey from
the north-west in the year 1840—before he was driven back from
Mt. Hopeless. From the peak on 2nd September, 1840, he had
looked out upon Lake Torrens—like an impassable sea. Just such
a visionary sea as in October heat of 1844 James Poole—ill-fated
assistant of Sturt on this journey to the Stony Desert—peered
out on from the Barrier. And Frome, too, had been beaten back,
although he had at least been within reach of the Barrier from
the west. Ho explorer had solved the riddle of the heart of the
Continent. No white man had come nigh the iron-capped Broken
Hill.
Shattered in health from the vicissitudes of exploration on
the Darling, the Murray and the Murrumbidgee, and from the
revolting charge of the penal settlement at Norfolk Island,
Captain Charles Sturt was living in 1844 on his estate near
Adelaide. He was then in his forty-ninth year. His restless
spirit was not yet content with high achievement. The mystery
of the heart of the Continent lured him constantly, as the riddle
of the rivers had lured him in his early days in New South Wales.
Accounts of hardship in the drought-stricken area to the north
and perilous adventures with savage blacks, borne back to him
by Eyre and Frome, in no way restrained him. In 1839 he had


become Surveyor-General of South Australia; but in October of
the same year he had exchanged his post for the Office of Com-
missioner of Lands for the Colony. He had long been in com-
munication with the Home Office regarding the continuance of
exploration towards the interior, offering himself to lead an
expedition. Early in 1844 a despatch from Lord Stanley, Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies, reached Sir George Grey, Governor
of South Australia. The terms of the despatch were explicit.
The expedition to be organised under the leadership of Captain
Sturt was to endeavour to reach the centre of the Continent, in
order to discover whether mountains or sea existed there, and if
the former to determine the direction in which the rivers flowed.
On no account was Captain Sturt to attempt to follow the rivers
down to the north-west. The expedition was to proceed by way
of Mt. Arden; but, as this route was already discredited by the
experience of Eyre, Sturt decided to proceed up the Darling to
the Williora, a small tributary of the river. It was his plan then
to strike north-west from the Williora or Laidley’s Ponds, thus
avoiding Lake Torrens. The expedition was mustered at Eyre’s
station at Moorundi. James Poole was second in command and
with Sturt, too, were the surgeon, John Harris Browne, his per-
sonal friend and an experienced bushman, and John McDouall
Stuart, on whom the mantle of Sturt was yet to fall. In addition
there were twelve other white men and a couple of blacks, and
the party had charge of eleven horses, a spring cart, a horse dray,
three bullock drays, a boat, thirty bullocks, two hundred sheep,
four kangaroo dogs and two sheep dogs. Prom Moorundi Eyre
accompanied the expedition to Lake Victoria which was reached
on 10th September, 1844. By 11th October Sturt and his expedi-
tion arrived at Laidley’s Ponds; hut, instead of finding a large
creek running towards the Darling from the north-western ranges,
Sturt realised with bitter chagrin that the watercourse was merely
a surface channel distributing the flood waters of the river into
a chain of shallow lakes eight miles distant. With the immediate
dread of thirst, if the expedition should proceed, Sturt sent Poole
and Stuart ahead towards the range, from which the natives had


DEPOT GLEN, 1845.
From Drawing in Sturt’s Narrative.


declared the water flowed. They returned with a wonderful story
confirming Sturt’s dream of the inland sea. Poole had looked
out from the Barrier Ranges on a great blue sea—stretching
along the horizon from S.W. by S. and then E. of N. In this
sea were many islands and shoals of rock —as far as the eye could
reach. And Sturt’s mind was fired by the vision of looking at
last on his great inland sea; and enthusiastically he wrote off a
letter to Adelaide —
“To-morrow we shall start for the ranges—and then for the
waters, the strange waters, on which boat never swam, and over
which flag never floated. But both shall ere long. We have the
heart of the interior laid open to us, and shall be off with a flow-
ing sheet in a few days. Poole says that the sea was a deep blue,
and that in the midst of it was a conical island of great height.”
Mirage! A search that was to lead Poole to his death, and
Sturt to misery, disease, blindness. And yet a search that led
the explorers’ footsteps first over the waste to where metalli-
ferous, burnished, the hog’s hack hunched above the mulga scrub,
and the iron bluffs stood black against the sky.
While the party camped on Stephen’s Creek, which flows
S.E. from the Barrier Ranges, Sturt, with his mind still inflamed
by the hope that Poole’s vision of the blue sea and its islands
might yet appear before him, rode on with his assistant on that
October morning, until he reached the high black peak itself, and,
having climbed up to the very scarp of the rock, he stood there
staring with dim eyes out over the plains afar, noting the mirage
form mystical blue lakes, and realising bitterly that Poole had
looked only upon mirage. And from the very crown of the
Broken Hill he sketched the outlook of the surrounding country
—the scrub, the plains, the Pinnacles. Soon the party, having
climbed to the square-cut Piesse’s Knob, to find their horses feed-
ing by the creek, went on their way.
“At about three miles,” Sturt wrote in his narrative, “we
passed a very remarkable and perfectly isolated hill, of about
150 feet in height. It ran longitudinally from south to north


for about 350 yards, and was bare of trees and shrubs, with the
exception of one or two casuarinas. The basis of this hill was
a slaty ferruginous rock, and protruding above the ground along
the spine of the hill was a line of the finest hepatic iron ore I
ever saw. It lay in blocks of various sizes, and of many tons
weight, piled one upon the other, without a particle of earth
either on their faces or between them. Nothing, indeed, could
exceed the clean appearance of these huge masses. On ascending
this hill and seating myself on one of them to take bearings, I
found that the compass deviated 37 degrees from the north point,
nor could I place any dependence on the angles I here took.”
From his visits to the Broken Hill Sturt took back with him
several pieces of metalliferous rock. And throughout the direful
months of drought ensuing—the journey from the Barrier to
Grey Range, the thirst-haunted months of the depot of the Rocky
Glen, the cruel disappointment of the Stony Desert, the struggle
of the scurvy-stricken explorers back to the river at the close of
1845—Sturt carried with him the specimens of ore from the
Broken Hill. He returned broken utterly with disease and almost
blind. He handed over the specimens of ore to the Governor of
South Australia. Nothing resulted. The metalliferous fragments
were lost. No man concerned himself with the possible wealth of
the Barrier Ranges. The Age of Gold and the Age of Silver
were not yet. The story of the sandy wastes and arid ranges, the
merciless drought-stricken months at Rocky Glen, the Stony
Desert repelled the explorer and the squatter. Only the tradition
of the white glittering quartz strewn on the ranges, as Captain
Sturt had seen it, and as in the narrative of his expedition he
recorded its discovery, remained in the memory of the colonists,
to be recalled in the gold rushes of the fifties and the sixties, and
to send prospectors—their minds all fevered with the thought of
gold—seeking the white quartz of the Barrier; for, said the dig-
gers, with the white quartz must be the gold.
But all the years from Sturt’s ill-fated expedition to the
hapless rush of the gold-seekers the secret of the Broken Hill—
the incomparable treasure of silver that the black ridge guarded


—remained unsolved and unsuspected. Drought—and the Bar-
rier whitened with the heat; the red sand-storms whirled up, and
were swept onwards. Rain —and the plains grew green with
herbage, and blossomed with flowers of many colours. And
nearer, nearer still, came the squatters, and nearer yet the shep-
herds, to the Barrier, finding pasturage for their flocks in the
fair months after the rain. Afar they saw the Broken Hill,
ribbed black, metallic, burnished, against the sky-line.


C HAPTER II.
THE WHITE QUARTZ (1867).
BUT while the plains about the Barrier Ranges lay yet
unpeopled, the factors for the ultimate discovery of the
silver treasure of the Broken Hill developed speedily.
The first factor was the discovery of gold.
As far back as 1788—the year of the arrival of Captain
Phillip and the first fleet in Botany Bay—had occurred the
earliest rumour of the occurrence of gold in the Colony of New
South Wales, A convict showed to an officer fragments of yellow
metal, which he declared that he had discovered. Ultimately he
confessed that he had filed down a brass buckle, and had mixed
the filings with the gold pared from a guinea “to give it a natural
appearance.” This, at least, was the official version; but from
the outset of the discoveries of gold the Governors of New South
Wales sternly censored all such reports, dreading the effect upon
the discipline of the convict section of the young community.
In 1814 a party of convicts cutting the road to Bathurst
found gold “in considerable quantities,” but were compelled by
threats of floggings to keep silence. In 1825 a convict, flogged
for having stolen gold in his possession, put up a defence that
he had “found it in the bush,” On 15th February, 1823, Assis-
tant Surveyor James Mcßrian discovered “numerous particles
of gold” in the sands of the Fish River about midway between
O’Connell Plains and Diamond Swamp, a little to the north of
the old Bathurst road, and about fifteen miles east of Bathurst.
The Polish Count Paul E. von. Strzelecki had declared in 1831
that he believed the Australian Andes to be auriferous. In a


letter to Captain King, dated 26th October, 1839, he mentioned
the discovery of silver. Native silver, he said, occurred at Honey-
suckle Range—in very minute and rare spangles disseminated in
primitive greenstone. In 1839 the Count reported to Sir George
Gipps that he had found in the Yale of Clwydd an auriferous
sulphuret of iron yielding a very small quantity of gold, although
not enough to repay extraction. But the Governor, shaking his
head, directed Strzelecki to keep secret even this discovery,
dreading lest if such gold should be found, it would he impos-
sible for him and the military establishment to hold in check the
45,000 convicts of the colony. Two years later the geologist, Rev.
W. B. Clarke, of Sydney, declared that gold was to be found in
the Australian rocks, and three years later he exhibited a few
small specimens to legislators in Sydney. In his hook on “The
Southern Goldfields” Clarke mentioned that silver had been met
with at two or three places in the southern districts. The silver
was in the form of small fragments of arborescent crystals. But
Clarke, too, feared the danger anticipated by the Governor, that
the announcement of a discovery of gold might cause rebellion
among the convicts. The secret must be hid.
The secret was not to be hid. The lonely shepherd found
the precious metal glittering in white quartz. By the Mitchell
Creek, north of Wellington Valley, the old shepherd McGregor
sought gold in secret. Drover and traveller making into the
towns displayed shining flakes and fragments—mica for the most
—yet all inflaming the minds of the colonists with the belief that
the land was rich in gold. No less an authority than Sir Roderick
Murchison, president of the Royal Geographical Society of Lon-
don, impressed by the specimens shown to him by the returned
Strzelecki, asserted as his belief that the Australian rocks would
prove auriferous. Gold lumps were exhibited in Sydney and
Melbourne.
Within four years of Sturt’s last expedition gold was dis-
covered in California. The prospect of treasure lured to America
adventurers from over the world —among them Edward Ham


mond Hargraves, a colonist of western New South Wales.
Hargraves was to be on his return from California the actual
discoverer of the splendid wealth of gold in Australia.
In 1850 the adventurer returned from America, realising
the resemblance of the gold-bearing rocks of California to the
rocks of his own district in New South Wales, and bent on
proving with pick and cradle whether the country was rich in
metal as the auriferous area of California. And in March of
the same year William Campbell, at Clunes, his mind fired by the
precious exhibit of gold in quartz shown at Brentani’s jeweller’s
shop in Melbourne, started the prospecting that was to be crowned
by rich discovery.
Gold! By 12th February, 1851, Hargraves had found gold.
In the Lewis Ponds and Summerhill Creek, on the Macquarie
and the Turon Rivers, in the districts of Bathurst and Welling-
ton. On the 4th May, 1851, the discovery was announced in
Sydney. By August, 1851, the Ballarat goldfield was revealed.
The secret was out; and the Australian colonies became Tom
Tiddler’s ground. Over the world came the adventurers to pick
up gold and silver.
For the gold rush of the fifties followed. Overseas came the
gold-seekers—overseas by hundreds, in one week as many as five
thousand new arrivals —flocking into the young country. The
gold fever burnt in them one and all. It infected the crews of
the very ships that brought the treasure seekers; and lucky was
the skipper, landing his passengers and cargo in Port Jackson
or Port Phillip, if his ship’s company, unable to resist the stories
of discovery, did not desert him to a man, and make off helter-
skelter to the diggings. Squatter, drover and shepherd, old hand,
city clerk, Government official, seaman and immigrant—adven-
turers all —joined in the rush. The thought of gold—the vision
of discovery and fortune —lured them onward as a mythical
Eldorado had led the Spaniards over the Main to Mexico and to
Peru three centuries before. Further and further afield the
search for gold impelled them —nearer and ever nearer to the


Barrier. The story of the white quartz on the Barrier, as Sturt
had seen it, as his own narrative and the narratives of his com-
panions had recorded the discovery, drew the prospectors onward.
It was more potent in its influence upon them than Sturt’s history
of the drought, disaster and privation. The teamsters bringing
down wool from the inland stations for Port Adelaide were ques-
tioned eagerly. White quartz—yes, they had seen white quartz,
they answered readily; or they had heard the shepherds moving
their flocks near to the Barrier after the rains tell of the white
quartz glistening along the ranges. A teamster exhibited, too,
a piece of white quartz showing gold freely. He had found it,
he declared, away in the Barrier Ranges. The truth of it was
that he had obtained it surreptitiously from a station overseer,
and that its actual owner had brought it back with him from a
visit to the gold diggings at Ballarat.
White quartz, gold specked, from the Barrier! The story
went abroad. It was borne overland to Burra Burra —one hun-
dred miles north-east of Adelaide. At Burra Burra the shepherd
Pickett had discovered copper in 1845; and the mine had yielded
a treasure of rich ores—red oxides, blue and green carbonates,
malachite —and had attracted thither a considerable population.
At one time—lßs9—the mine employed 1170 men. The story of
the white gold-bearing quartz of the Barrier, brought thither by
the teamsters, resulted instantly in a rush across the desert for
the ranges. The falsehood was criminal in its results. The
drought was on the land; and, tramping, tramping, mile beyond
mile, across arid desert, fainting from the heat of the waste, burnt
up with thirst in the waterless country, the gold-seekers moved
on the way of death toward the Barrier. Many turned back;
many died of thirst; a few struggled on across the desert. A few
climbed up into the Barrier. A few reached the very hog’s back
itself —Wilyu-Wilyu-Yong —the Broken Hill. It held its secret
grimly. Five men from Bendigo struggled through to the Bar-
rier. Two of them returned. White quartz, but no gold. And
the treasure-seekers sought only gold, and had no thought of


baser metals. It may be that they bandied carelessly some of
the slugs of silver that ten years thence were to lead to the revela-
tion of the silver fields. The drought deterred them from pros-
pecting. There was no water, and they could not stay. At least
one party may have sunk a shaft hoping to find gold by the grim
inhospitable ranges, for over twenty years thence J. B. Jaquet,
geologist to the Government of New South Wales, was shown an
old abandoned shaft from which a small quantity of copper had
been raised.*
Picture the gold-seekers then, struggling over the desert to
the Barrier in the sixties —burnt men, bearded, red-shirted, brown-
breeched, with cabbage-tree or slouch hats, California fashion,
burdened with pick and shovel and load of tucker, tramping on.
All to fail —many to perish in the burning summer months;
dying, it may be, in sight of the black ridge high against the
sky-line. Toward night the gold sun burning at its back —like
the glare of the smelters of the Broken Hill to be; and with the
night a cloudy blackness over the range, as the smoke of the city
of the future; or with the night all things silver-white under the
moon.
And yet no gold. No understanding still of the treasure of
the Broken Hill. The remnant of the prospectors, fleeing back
before the drought, told of the sterile place—no water, and no
gold. And for a decade from this time —1867 —the Barrier
retained the secret of its treasure.
*Mr. Jaquet’s opinion is challenged by Mr. E. H. Dawson, who conducted
for the New South Wales Mines Department the first survey of the Broken
Hill. Mr. Dawson states that the shaft referred to was sunk by Paddy Green’s
party, the first prospectors of the seventies.


DEPOT GLEN TO-DAY.


CHAPTER III.
THE MOUNT GIPPS RUN (1866-1875).
THE cruel privations of tire prospectors who had sought the
Barrier in the white quartz rush of 1867 repelled a fresh
attempt for the next five years to learn the mineral
resources of the ranges. At Bendigo and Burra Burra the sur-
vivors cursed the very name of the Barrier. Only the squatters
were moving further afield. In the lean years the salt-bush
would carry their sheep and cattle, and after the drought had
broken and the rain fallen the stock fattened on the rich pastures
under the Barrier.
By 1866 —the year before the white quartz rush—the Mount
Gipps run, in the Albert district of New South Wales, was held
by Messrs. Cunningham and MacCredie. On 18th February of
this year it was transferred to the firm of McCulloch, Sellars and
Company, of whom Sir James McCulloch, Premier of the State
of Victoria, was the principal. The vast run of 1400 square miles
encased the Broken Hill. Five years later James McCulloch
placed his nephew, George McCulloch, in charge of Mount Gipps
station as manager, allotting to him an eighth share in any profits
which the drought-stricken area might allow. Before the appoint-
ment of George McCulloch as manager the lessees had put up a
small homestead on the righ bank of Stephen’s Creek, at about
nine miles distance from the Broken Hill. The homestead was
now transferred to the banks of the Mount Gipps Creek, a tribu-
tary of Stephen’s Creek —three miles away from the original
homestead. The new station buildings were constructed from
hard brown stone and roofed with iron. On the high bank nearest


to the Broken Hill were built huge woolsheds, storeroom, and
quarters for the station hands; across the creek —ordinarily a dry,
sandy bed with a soakage of water deep down —were put up the
overseer’s cottage and the stockyards; higher still up the rise a
substantial stone dwelling for the manager, and a cottage for a
married couple, who ordinarily kept house for him. About
McCulloch’s house extended a wide verandah, the flooring laid
with glittering micaceous blocks; near the entrance a deep tank
was cut down into the rock. The outlook was on dreary mulga-
clad ridges rising gradually from stony lower ground overgrown
with salt bush and blue bush. Taking up his residence in the
manager’s house, George McCulloch, who was to play a promi-
nent part in the principal discovery of silver on the Barrier,
settled down to the grim encounter with the droughts which
withheld prosperity from Mount Gipps station. The man was
well fitted for the struggle. A strong, stoutly-built Scotsman
with an iron will. Given to the mastery of men, his very strength
finding expression in a force of language unequalled on the
stations about the Barrier; grim and tenacious, cursing bitterly
the droughts which struck his venture down repeatedly, yet
struggling on from year to year; a hard exterior did not conceal
the worth of the man. In the later years of settlement his hospi-
tality became famous through the district. Much given to prac-
tical joking, and laughing largely at his victims; rejoicing in
feats of strength; wrestling with his visitors, if any had the
courage to face him; dancing the sword dance for their enter-
tainment. But in those first years upon the Barrier McCulloch
had few visitors at Mount Gipps station. The loneliness of the
place emphasised such eccentricities as were his, and the arduous
years hardened his character.
By now the Broken Hill—so called from its iron-clad broken
back—had given its name to a 50,000-acre paddock. Dams were
being sunk over the country to fill with the rains and provide
supplies of water through the inevitable dry months. The lonely
shepherds wandering through the salt-bush country handled care


lessly the slugs of silver washed down from the ranges and, not
guessing their value, tossed them away. The settlement consisted
of the scattered stations and the sly-grog shanties by the drovers’
route from the north down to Terowie, in South Australia. The
people of the Barrier consisted of the station hands, the shep-
herds, the blacks —descendants of the tribes who in the past had
piled the cairns of stone on Mundi Mundi station. As yet the
prospector did not make this way, though his hour was at hand.
Down from Queensland and northern New South Wales then
passed the drovers. Overland the cattle-duffers drove the cattle
stolen from distant stations. On Stephen’s Creek German
Charley—notorious in the first years of the Barrier silver rush
—set up his grog shanty. At Lake’s Camp, nine miles from the
Umberumberka Creek, old Lake conducted a shanty almost as
notorious. The grog-sellers along the route, reputed in league
with the cattle duffers, figured in many a grim and evil story
of the district. Near one sly-grog shanty a graveyard was laid
out neatly. It was not that the landlord finished off his guests;
it was the quality of his rum, doped heavily with tobacco.
A thirsty drover arriving at the shanty called for drinks, sick-
ened accordingly, and nearly died. But his constitution standing
the shock of the rum, he recovered, and, when well enough to take
the track again, called for his bill. One pound was charged for
digging his grave.
“Here, what the hell do you mean by this?” demanded the
drover of the shanty keeper. “A quid for grave digging! Whose
grave?”
“It oughter bin yours,” the German told him stolidly. “You
vos sick. The sun vos ’ot. If you’ ad died, you vould not ’ave
kept. I ’ad to be prepared.”
At one such wayside inn a drover, coming in sick, with his
pockets full of money, died on the premises. The corpse was set
up in the bar; the company drank its health till the money was
spent.
At Lake’s camp the walls of the shanty were studded with


the bottles of past carouses. On Stephen’s Creek German
Charley retailed his famous fighting rum. Asked later for the
prescription of the deadly stuff old German Charley, stout,
thickly-set, phlegmatic, blandly declared, “Oh, you gets all the
old clay pipes you can an’ next you takes your tobacco, so much
rum, an’ so much sugar. You boils the whole lot down; you
knocks the top ’oop off the barrel, rams sticks of tobacco inside,
and replaces the top. The sticks of tobacco give it a flavour!”
Another yarn of the man, dating from these early days of
the Barrier, relates to the inexplicable appearance of a bullock,
bearing the Mount Gipps brand, in Charley’s stockyard. A
mounted trooper riding up found Charley armed with a rifle.
“I’m a bit shaky to-day,” he told the trooper. “I vos up
late last night. Yill you shoot a bullock for me?”
“Which one do you want shot?” asked the trooper, taking
his rifle.
“ ’lm,” Charley told him laconically, indicating the bullock
from Mount Gipps.
And so the trooper fired and brought down the beast.
Charley’s lamentation was excruciating. “Oh, do you vant
to ruin me?” he asked. “You ’ave ruined me. Bat vos a Mount
Gipps bullock.”
The trooper left.
On another occasion the police and the black trackers were
looking for Charley. Something wanted explanation. But the
trackers were at fault, and it was long before they tracked their
mark down to a sandy watercourse. Out of this shot a figure on
a high pair of stilts shaped from saplings, and disappeared into
the scrub. The trackers could not be induced to follow.
“No fear,” they chattered. “No plurry fear. Debil!
Debil!”
A wild, rough country, the Barrier of the late sixties and
early seventies. Unsuspecting drovers and station hands stood
nigh to fortune. For this mulga scrub, this salt-bush country,
these ranges ribbed hard against the burning heaven contained


THACKARINGA, 1883.


an infinite treasure of silver. In this drear place of lost endea-
vour the silver broke through the earth ready to the hands of
men, hut that the drought stood guardian. An arid, sunburnt
place, swept by the summer winds and the whirling dusts of the
desert, and yet, like far Nevada, Utah, New Mexico, or the
Chilian tablelands a natural storehouse of silver.
c


CHAPTER IV.
THE THACKARINGA LODES (1876-1880).
LATER, after the rain had fallen on the Barrier, and the
water lay in the hollows of the creek beds, odd parties
of prospectors chanced to potter about the ranges in the
hope of finding gold. Some found a little copper and silver —
before the drought repelled them, parched and beaten, —but no
gold. No man suspected yet the infinite treasure of silver await-
ing revelation. But in 1875 silver was discovered at Sunny
Corner —worked originally for gold. The thoughts of the pros-
pectors were diverted from gold to silver. From the Barrier now
small slugs of silver and fragments of galena and white quartz,
green specked with copper, were carried in by drovers and shep-
herds to the stations, the mining camps and the townships on the
fringes of the salt-bush plains. And at Menindie, on the River
Darling, whence on 19th October, 1860, Burke and Wills had gone
out to their death in the desert; at Burra Burra, among the copper
mines; at Terowie, in South Australia, whither the teamsters went
to load stores from Adelaide for the inland stations, the rumour
grew gradually that the Barrier, if, for all its white quartz it
had no gold, was rich in silver. Men who recollected the white
quartz rush were not allured as yet by this new rumour. The
prospect of a great discovery of silver was not supported as yet
by any rich display of slugs and glittering ores. The rigours of
the journey on the route followed by stockmen and teamsters
across the salt-bush plains, the supreme difficulties of transport
in the event of a discovery as yet improbable, most the sun which
burnt over the ranges and the plains, licking up the water from
the creeks, withheld the miners for the time from the Barrier.


Still the time was ripe for discovery. By the seventies the
wild gold rushes of the fifties had died down. The miner, no
longer finding the treasure ready to his hand, searched for the gold
more painfully, and now sought for copper and silver as well
as gold. Since 1845 copper had been mined in New South Wales
on the Copper Hill, near Molong, and in the neighbourhood of
Canowindra. Across the border in South Australia the great
Kapunda mine had been discovered by Francis Dutton and
Samuel Bagot as far back as 1842. And gradually among the
copper miners at Burra Burra the survivors of the white quartz
rush of 1867 recalled, too, the metal outcrops and the promise
of the ranges, alluring, but for the drought. Through the decade,
indeed, the drought stood as a fiery guardian of the silver Bar-
rier, until the destined time of its discovery. The time was at
hand. A shepherd bringing down to Burra Burra a slug contain-
ing rich chloride of silver declared, indefinitely, that he had found
it away on the ranges. The discovery—though the value of the
silver chlorides was not yet familiar to the prospectors—prepared
the way at least for the development of the Barrier silver field
which was speedily to follow.
At Menindie an Irishman named Patrick Green ran a store.
His supplies from Adelaide were brought up to Terowie and
carted overland —a journey occupying a month or more. The
track between Menindie and Terowie passed at a halting-place
known as Thackaringa, on which a shanty stood, the out-cropping
of a lode of silver-lead ore. Overland in these days passed a
curious company —the drovers with their stock from the stations
growing along the Barrier; the drivers of the camel-trains carry-
ing supplies for inland; the teamsters going down with wool for
Adelaide, or with waggons for stores.
The outcrop of ore showed plainly in a bank to the right of
the track; but no one heeded it till Paddy Green, driving his
waggon to Terowie, noticed the glittering galena, and decided
that it might be worth his while to have the stuff tested. Accord-
ingly he raised thirty-six tons of ore and carted it to Terowie,
to be sent down thence to Adelaide for shipment to London, where


it could be assayed. The packages of ore, which might have
revealed the riches of the Barrier as early as 1876, never reached
England. They were shipped, indeed, at Adelaide; but, by a
curious fatality which marked all the first efforts to determine
the mineral wealth of the Barrier, the voyage of the ship home
was tempestuous, and it became necessary to lighten the cargo.
The Menindie storekeeper’s packages of ore from Thackaringa
were jettisoned.
Meanwhile Patrick Green divided his time between store-
keeping and prospecting. The store, indeed, brought him an
assured income, but prospecting for copper might lead to for-
tune, For he thought in copper, as the prospectors of the sixties
had thought in gold. His knowledge of Burra Burra induced
him to believe that copper was to be found about the Barrier.
Coming over from Menindie with a little party of prospectors,
he drove several shallow shafts on a spot on which a few years
later the Alpha mine was to be established. But no copper was
found, and the prospectors, striking camp, moved over to the
Yellowstone, which, in the dry climate, had the advantage of
being only three miles to the north of the Mount Gipps Hotel,
into which German Charley’s shanty had developed. There they
put down a shaft of fifty feet, and still found no copper.
And, as no word came from England of the results of the
assays of the Thackaringa ore, Green decided on a fresh attempt.
In 1878 he raised one hundred tons of the stuff from the outcrop,
and had it carried down to Adelaide for shipment to England.
This time he had better luck. The parcel of ore reached London.
Still, two years elapsed before the result of the assays came back
to the Barrier. Although Green had selected only low grade stuff
the assays had showed that the ore was of high value, containing
about thirty-five ounces of silver and sixty per cent, of lead to
the ton. It was judged by the mining community as at least
worth putting money into. With wisdom Green had secured
miners’ conditional purchase leases over the area about the lode.
And with his brother, Richard Green, he embarked on the venture
which was to mean the development of the Pioneer mine, famous;
in those first years of the silver Barrier.


THACKARINGA —GIPSY GRIL MINE.


C HAPTER V.
THE SILVER BARRIER (1880-1883).
THE English assays of the Thackaringa ores lent an incentive
to prospecting about the Barrier. No man, indeed, dreamt
yet of the splendour of the Broken Hill. But many dis-
coveries throughout the district at the dawn of the eighties demon-
strated soon that, though the white quartz did not indicate the
presence of gold, the area was a silver field of rich promise. The
hope of gold had led the prospectors over the plains to the Barrier
in the sixties, and a gold rush brought the prospectors now to the
district. Gold was discovered in 1880 at Mount Brown, 150 miles
to the north, and in the years 1881. and 1882 a rush thither
resulted. During 1882 a man named Schmidt, from Jamestown,
in South Australia, was making up for Mount Brown gold-
field, and, passing through Thackaringa, noticed that no work
was being done on the mine newly opened by Paddy Green. The
Barrier Ranges field was included in the Albert Goldfield Reserve
—proclaimed in 1881; and Schmidt, attracted by the apparent
richness of the ore, applied for mineral leases. The area to be
covered by the leases was already covered in part by the mineral
conditional purchases already applied for by Green and his mate
Garot. Green and Garot, on learning of Schmidt’s deal, promptly
obtained from the Supreme Court of New South Wales an injunc-
tion ordering the man to abstain from working the Thackaringa
leases. The publicity of the dispute assisted to bring the Thar-
karinga lodes into prominence.
The same year saw the start of the Umberumberka mine, at


about two miles from the Umberumberka Creek, in which the
soakage of water through the dry months was ordinarily steady
and considerable. John Stokie, a resident of the district, dis-
covered at this point an outcrop of galena, and his negotiations
with speculators in Adelaide resulted in a limited liability com-
pany with a nominal capital of £20,000. Stokie’s discovery and
the opening of the mine resulted speedily in the formation of a
mining camp within reach of the soakages.
By now many miners were finding their way back from Mt.
Brown. Their attention was speedily caught by the reported
discoveries of silver at Thackaringa and Umberumberka, and
many paused to do a little prospecting on the Barrier. Tenta-
tively, carelessly at first, the prospectors made their way about
the ranges and the salt-bush plains. Their discoveries were
immediate. There, ready to their hands, lay unquestionable
wealth of silver, in outcrops of rich ore, in slugs of silver. At
first they paid small heed to specimens of green tinted, soapy
stone, until, the happy idea occurring to a miner to send down
a specimen to Adelaide for assay, it was pronounced to be
chloride of silver of singular richness. And now excitement
commenced to burn along the Barrier. Rich discovery on rich
discovery roused the excitement speedily to a very fever, recall-
ing the fever of the gold rushes. Headed hy Charles Nickel, the
miners moved out from the camp about the Thackaringa lodes
and the camp by the Umberumberka, already growing into a
township; found their way into the Apollyon Valley; prospected
over the rich area, soon to be famous for its Day Dream mine;
as far as the Soakage; along Stephen’s Creek; on the Mount
Gipps station, and doubled back to the Round Hill —three miles
from the Broken Hill —out to the Pinnacles. And day by day
came stories of discovery—slugs of horn silver, rich lodes, dis-
plays of precious chlorides.
Only they passed by the Broken Hill. The chance pros-
pectors over the Hill found nothing. If they sank a shaft —as
a later tradition had it—they found nothing. They left it scath-
less yet—an iron-bound mount of treasure.


Charles Nickel was among the lucky prospectors of those
first days of the silver field —for it was opening now into a field
of incalculable richness. He failed at first to realise his fortune.
In fact he cursed it roundly. While he was out prospecting he
lost his way one evening, and could not make back to camp before
the night overtook him. Black darkness fell —no moon, a rocky,
scrubby place, and no camp within coo-ee. So, having shouted
himself hoarse, he gave up hope at last, and determined to make
the best of it. In the circumstances he could not do otherwise.
Supperless, he went to bed —stretching himself out on a rock to
sleep, with a rock, like Jacob’s, for a pillow. He passed the
worst of bad nights. The rock was hard. He was used to rough-
ing it; but he had never, he believed, struck anything so solid as
that rock. And he cursed the rock at intervals, when his discom-
fort woke him. He was cursing when he stood up stiffly at sun-
rise.
“Blast the rock!” he swore, swinging up his pick vengefully
and bringing it down upon his bed. “Blast!” But he stopped
dead and stared. The splintered rock revealed a rich show of
chlorides. He had been lying on a bed of silver.
This was his story of the discovery of the famed Maybell
mine. Nor, after all, need he have stayed bushed for the night.
Getting his bearings with the daylight, he found that he was only
a few miles off the Mount Gipps homestead. On turning up at
the station, he was roundly chaffed by McCulloch for having
been bushed. But the laugh was his, for the block of chlorides,
when lifted from his bed and sent down to Adelaide for assay,
proved of a surpassing value. With this discovery commenced
the close search for the rich ores.
' Rich ores were found. The shafts sunk by the prospectors
revealed chlorides of silver. Some proved little pockets of ore;
some were the start of mines to become famous in the early days
of the Barrier silver field. Prospectors, pushing further and
further from Thackaringa, discovered big slugs of horn silver,
going on assay some 10,000 to 18,000 ounces of silver to the ton.
The slugs were not discovered, indeed, near any lode, but they


stirred the prospectors to the searches which disclosed the metal-
bearing veins. Galena in large nodules found its way through
Menindie into the hands of the New South Wales Government
geologists; but the earliest departmental assays showed only 21
ounces of silver to the ton, and 67,07 per cent, of lead, with
minutely crystalline galena going 31 ounces of silver and 83.07
of lead.
The news of the discovery of rich silver went abroad. The
richness may have lacked nothing in the telling. At least the
discovery started a rush to the Barrier. And soon over the
plains came the miners by tens, by hundreds, pouring in soon
through Menindie, and by the direful way through Terowie.
And still the drought burnt over the Barrier, and only after rain
dared the prospectors move far afield. Discovery followed dis-
covery—from the Umberumberka to the Day Dream —a score of
others. By the Umberumberka Creek the camp of canvas grew
as by magic into a town. Only in 1875 had Paddy Green raised
ore from Thackaringa. Till that time that country had been a
sheep run. But as early as September, 1880, the field had received
its official recognition from the New South Wales Government.
At that date Richard O’Connell was appointed in charge of the
police—and the wild Barrier needed such recognition from the
Government —as Acting Clerk of Petty Sessions, Mining Regis-
trar and Warden’s Clerk.
Umberumberka Camp—it was a hard name for a thirsty
climate. The New South Wales Chief Inspector of Mines got
it wrong when he first reported on it. Umbermerka, it was
printed in the Mines Department’s report for 1882. Silvertown
was easier—so the name of Umberumberka township, two miles
from the great mine, became naturally enough Silverton, the
heart of the silver Barrier.


PIONEER MINE IN THE EARLY EIGHTIES.


CHAPTER VI.
THE RISE OF SILYERTON (1880-1884).
FOR eight-and-thirty years since first Captain Frome, Sur-
veyor-General of South Australia, had looked from Black
Rock Hill toward the barren ranges, for six-and-thirty
years since Captain Sturt had struck from Laidley’s Ponds across
the salt-bush plains and climbed the Broken Hill, the silver secret
of the Barrier had lain hid. The secret was out. Not the drought,
though it burned over the Barrier in the early eighties, not the
ever-present dread of thirst, not all the rigours and privations of
sunburnt plains and ranges might now repel the rush of miners
to the field. As if by magic the treasure was revealed. Ranges
and plains swarmed with the silver-seekers; ranges and plains
re-echoed with clang and clatter of pick and shovel, and clamour
of many voices. A silver-field of thirty six miles’ extent lay open
to the fortune-hunters. Men thought in silver, as in the fifties
and the sixties they had thought in gold.
Now by the dead watercourses, now under the stunted gums
and in the mulga scrub —wherever shade was to be found against
the fiery day, or mineral-tainted water soaked through the ground
—the miners’ tents were pitched. Through the night the camp-
fires burned red, as many lamps. Shafts riddled the scorched
earth; some laying bare pockets of silver-lead; a few giving up
their masses of ore; a few revealing the precious lodes.
The sun blazed down through the summer days. The black
flies swarmed about the toiling, sweating figures. The salt-bush
plains and ridges quivered in the heat. Before the desert winds
the red sand and the thin red dust whirled over the silver fields
and merged in ochre-coloured, blackening canopies; but the clouds
bore no rain. The soakages were dwindling, as the drought


burned on. Men slaked their thirst with green-scummed, sul-
phurous water from evaporating pool and drying dam. Men
sickened with fever —died. In this last great contest of the
Barrier drought with men it seemed that the drought must be
the victor, and the prospectors for the silver treasure be driven
once again back from the ranges.
But, with the continued revelations of new treasures, as the
prospectors pushed their way out into the ranges, the excitement
grew to fever heat. The story of the wealth of the Silverton
field in the Albert gold district of New South Wales went down
to the great cities, and was confirmed by the results of the assays
and the prices realised in England for the crude ores. The
mirage, shimmering silver-blue across the salt-bush plains, sym-
bolised the silver mirage along the Barrier. The Barrier Ranges
Silver Mining Company set itself to the development of the
field.
Further afield! From Thackaringa and from the ever-
growing town of Silverton, the prospectors made their way in
the very face of the sun. Silverton rose to prosperity as any
mushroom mining town of the gold rushes. It stood in the line
of traffic from Menindie to Adelaide, and the road striking north
to Milparinka. Within five years it rose to the zenith of its
prosperity; within five years it was to fall to premature decay.
But in those first years it stood for the hub of the Barrier silver-
field. Into it flocked the new arrivals; into it came the lucky
prospectors, to spend with all the old extravagance of the gold
diggers.
Into the very face of the sun! Joe Meech and Allan Sinclair,
pioneers of the Thackaringa field, went pushing north from
Silverton—hoping to find a new Bonanza, a Pioneer, an Umbe-
rumberka. They carried with them only scanty rations, and for
drink relied upon soakages not yet sucked up utterly by the
drought. But the native wells, where Sturt had found water,
were dry; the soakages disappearing into the sand; so that the
prospectors must dig deep down for a trickle of muddy water.
And yet,- despite the heat, blinding white upon the range, lean


rations, and at most a pint of tainted water to the day, the part-
ners held to their quest for silver. They were not beaten back —
buoyed up by the hope of silver as Sturt had been buoyed up to
endure the sun, the famine and the thirst in his brave hope of
looking ultimately upon his visionary inland sea. In the Apol-
lyon Valley the prospectors pitched their camp. They parted
company each day at dawn, prospected separately throughout
the day, and with the fall of night returned to the camp to report
results. At last Sinclair hit upon the Apollyon lode, and two
days later Meech struck the Day Dream —Meech’s Blow.
This was the story of the Day Dream —most famed of Bar-
rier mines before the Broken Hill. Searching along the rough
and lonely range at the hack of the Seven Mile, Meech grew tired,
and made his way down through a gap towards a low ridge.
Under the shade of a tree he lay down on the rock and slept.
Waking, he saw before him on the ridge a metalliferous outcrop,
and, stumbling wearily towards it, found it to be a “blow” of
mineral, charged with bright blue, green and yellow carbonates.
Along the base of the blow some mysterious hand, presumably
a black’s, for no white man would have passed by such a dis-
covery, had raised little piles of beautifully-coloured fragments
of the stone. Appropriately Meech named the blow the Day
Dream.
A week thence Thomas Crisp, who had arrived in the neigh-
bourhood a day or two later than the first prospectors —partners
yet, but speedily to be involved in litigation—found the Hen
and Chickens lode.
The Day Dream was the source of bitter trouble between
Meech and Sinclair. Sinclair maintained that Meech and he
were actual partners, and that they should have shared equally
in the profit of discovery. Meech, he asserted, had pegged out
the Day Dream, had registered it in another name, and finally
had claimed the whole. The dispute—it typified the continuous
strife and the wranglings of the prospectors over claims —resulted
in a law suit in Sydney, before the Barrier Ranges Silver Mining
Company, stepping in, acquired its control over the property,


which it developed speedly into the most famous mine on the
fields.
Chance led to the discovery of the Treasure—Morris’s Blow.
A prospector’s tent was pitched for days before the find upon
a very precious block of ore—black ironstone, it appeared—four
feet six inches in size, but proving to contain veins and patches
of chloride of silver thickening from a quarter to one and a
quarter inches. The claim on which the block rested was worked
by Morris and his partner, Nolan. W. R. Wilson, manager of
the Day Dream for the Barrier Ranges, offered the partners
£12,000 for their mine. Another man offered £9OOO. The pair
cleared £BOOO from their property.
Slugs of silver brought into Silverton in these first years,
and tested by an assayer, gave startling results, going 10,890,
15,859 and 18,148 ounces of silver to the ton. The slugs of silver
were often found far from any lode and in form resembled the
nuggets which in the gold rushes the Cornish miners had known
as lode stones. The finding of them led the prospectors to search
closely for lodes, and in some instances resulted in rich discovery.
Thus the excitement of Silverton was stimulated constantly; thus
the rush of silver-seekers was increased. Within three years’
time from the first English assays of the Thackaringa ore, the
Silverton field carried a population of 5000 persons.
By September, 1883, the town of Silverton possessed a popu-
lation of 250 persons, and the following year the number was
increased to 1745, according to the figures of the police-census
directed by Wyman Brown, newly-appointed Warden of the
district. With the rush of miners the number rose speedily to
3000—the highest figure in the town’s brief, glittering prosperity.
Hotels, banks, dwellings, stores sprang up as in a day. All the
hotel accommodation so provided was inadequate for the num-
bers of the new arrivals lured to the Barrier by the stories of
its richness.
In Silverton itself excitement over the continuance of the
discoveries rode high. Credulity of the newcomers was the
string on which the speculator played. His objective was


OLD DAY DREAM SMELTERS.


gold, not silver. An abandoned shaft would be repegged, to
become a speculative Bonanza. The assays of silver slugs never
yielded such results as the spurious assays of silver that was
never found. And in the wild and whirling excitement of the
first years on the Barrier the speculator picked his mark readily
among the new arrivals —and picked him clean; for, when the
deal was clinched, the silver treasure of the prospectors would
prove as visionary as the silver blue mirage across the plain.
Silverton was all too small for the newcomers. The new chum
dossed where he could. At times a bed on a billiard table was
a luxury, and was charged for at a corresponding figure. The
men who had brought their tents with them overland were envied
among the new arrivals. Many a man who was to strike a for-
tune on the silver-field was glad in those days to dump with a
bluey on the floor of a miner’s shanty, or to lie in the open with
the unknown on the banks of the TJmberumberka Creek. The
sands of the dead watercourse —till the flood came down a banker
at the end of the summer, 1884—formed a soft bed for many
of the silver-seekers on the Barrier fields.
Supplies of food were as inadequate as the original loaves
and fishes for the feeding of the multitude. Bread cost 2/- per
41b, loaf. Meat was considered dear at the price of 7d. per lb.
Vegetables were not to be bought for money. Stores had to be
carted overland from Terowie, and the freight charge was £7
per ton. But in the rainless years of the first rush to the Bar-
rier, the scarcity of water meant the most severe privation to the
miners and their folk. Washing was an unwarrantable luxury.
Yellow, brackish and sulphurous water, as the soakages gradu-
ally decreased, was retailed at 6d. per bucket. Purer water, said
to be carried overland in barrels from the Government tank at
Mingary, in South Australia, cost 1/- a bucket. The drought
of the first years, indeed, retarded the development of the field,
speedy as it was. Warden Gower, of the Albert gold district,
reporting on the field in 1883, emphasised the peril to the very
existence of the community along the Barrier, unless a water
supply could be assured.


CHAPTER VII.
THE SILVER MINES (1882-1885).
THE difficulties of transport of the crude ores from the field
were acute in those early days. Teams hauling the ores
left the Day Dream mine regularly for Terowie. The cost
of the carriage overland and the shipment of the ores to England
worked out at £8 per ton, but the prices realised from £l6 to £25
per ton.
Conspicuous among the countless shafts that riddled the
field stood out the famous mines of the Barrier in the early
eighties. Two miles to the west of Silverton the Umberumberka
mine was worked by the Umberumberka Silver Mining Com-
pany, of Adelaide. Operations were started by the company in
November, 1882, and in the first few years the ore yielded from
70 to 120 ounces of silver to the ton. The ore was found chiefly
as crystallised galena distributed in irregular patches through
the lode. Five hundred tons of the ore realised £7OOO in England.
On Lake’s Camp, nine miles from Silverton, several shafts
had been sunk. The most successful at first were the Apollyon
and the Bobby Burns, both with silver ore distributed regularly
through the lode. At one and a half miles distance from Lake’s
Camp were the Hen and Chicken and Meech’s Blow. The Hen
and Chickens lode yielded quartz, stained with green and blue
carbonate of copper, and containing chloride of silver, patches
of grey carbonate of lead, galena and specular iron. At Meech’s
Blow the ore was found on the summit of a small hill of mica
schist and altered sandstone. Resulting from Meech’s discovery
the Day Dream mine became the centre of a mining field with


500 men upon it. The lode ran from two to four feet thick and
was very rich in quality.
A township was surveyed at Lake’s Camp to form the centre
of this section of the Barrier silver field. It was to be named
Wilson, after W. R. Wilson, manager for the Barrier Ranges
Silver Mining Company, a famous company in the Barrier fields’
first years (the directors being Messrs. Thos. H. Gumming, B.
Jackson, W. A. Horne, W. P. MacGregor) owning the Day Dream,
the Hen and Chickens, and the Gipsy Girl.
Eight miles to the north-east lay Purnamoota, reached
through the desolation of sand, scrubbed with salt-bush and blue-
bush. Known by the first arrivals in the fields as Namoota, or
the Soakages, the area won fame in those days for the discovery
of many slugs of almost pure silver found on the surface. The
discovery led to many claims being taken up and many shafts
put down. The shafts proved soon the burial place of an infinity
of dead hopes. Within a radius of ten miles were situated soon:
The Lubra, War Dance, Terrible Dick, Treasure, Hidden Secrets,
Model Republic, Black Prince, Silver King, Great Northern,
Mount Robe —an endless list.
In the eighties Purnamoota could boast of two hotels, stores,
a school, an institute, and many dwellings. The Lubra was
regarded as one of the most promising mines on the silver- fields,
its veins consisting of ironstone containing patches of silver and
grey stone or carbonate of lead. From it a parcel of half a ton
of ore produced 6000 ounces of silver; another of one ton between
300 and 400 ounces. The claim exploited by Crisp Brothers,
twenty chains north-east from the Lubra, revealed a ferruginous
galena vein. Three hundred-weight of slugs from it went on
assay 4800 ounces of silver to the ton.
In December, 1884, a branch of the Commercial Bank was
opened at Purnamoota, and a post office established. Such seemed
the richness of the place that in those early days the authorities
discussed plans for the establishment of tram services and elec-
tric lighting. A gazette was issued, at the instance of Sir
Joseph Abbott, New South Wales Minister of Mines, to change


the name from Purnamoota to Namoota. The mines were soon
to he closed down; the shafts to he abandoned; the houses to fall
to ruins, or to be dragged away on rollers. All this within a
decade, for by 1890 Purnamoota stood a dead desolation.
Fifteen miles to the south-east of Silverton stood the Pin-
nacles, named from the three cones that topped the hills. In the
mine the two lodes —the Minnie Moira and the Charlotte Green-
ways—yielded ore going 300 to 500 ounces of silver to the ton.
The area won prominence early in 1884, when Messrs. Maiden
and Pretty discovered the property which was to contain this
Pinnacle group of silver mines—in those early days among the
principal mines of the district. Famed, too, on the Barrier were
the Pilgrim mine, from which a parcel of ore weighing 70 lbs.
yielded, when treated at Melbourne Mint, a return equal to 8000
ounces per ton; the Goat Hill, from which three shares changed
hands at £IOOO each; the Manola, with its lode ten inches thick
and yielding lumps of pure chloride weighing several ounces; the
Orion, that gave up a slug of 285 lbs. of silver; the One Tree Hill
mine, a mile south-west from the Lubra, yielding, too, its chloride
of silver.
Still the Silver City was not to be founded here. Each gave
hopes, only to bring early disappointment.
The IJmberumberka mine—the first company formed and
the first to pay dividends —had by 1891 ceased distributions and
reached the stage of reconstruction. The Pinnacles had reduced
operations to the selection of high-grade ore, subsequently to be
worked intermittently, but, with the turn of the century, bringing
enhanced value for metals and improvements in methods of treat-
ment, renewed interest was directed to many of these early hopes.
The Pinnacles still survives.


THE PINNACLES.


CLAIM.
OWNERS.
TONS.
GROSS
VALUE.
Umberumberka -
Company ....
560
£
9,500
Eleven over Six
-
W. Sully - - -
-
15
225
Nil Desperandum
-
H. F. Hanson
-
10
150
Magrath’s Claims
-
Magrath and Co. -
-
150
1,250
Kingston’s Claims
-
C. C. Kingston
-
200
3,000
Pinnacles
-
Company -
-
6
90
Round Hill
-
White and Foley -
-
6
90
Black Prince -
-
Company -
-
4
80
Hen and Chickens
-
Barrier Ranges Silver Mining Co.
60
6,000
Day Dream
-
Barrier Ranges Silver Mining Co.
300
9,000
Gipsy Girl
-
Barrier Ranges Silver Mining
Co.
900
13,500
Ap oily on -
-
Apollyon Silver Mining Co. -
-
800
10,000
Lubra
-
Crisp Bros. -
-
12
8,000
Maybell -
-
Nickel and Wilson
-
7
3,500
Clifton
_
Nickel, Brade and Wilson
-
16
4,500
M’anola
_
Home, Hale and Dawson
-
2
1,500
Caledonian
Melsaae ....
-
6
1,500
One Tree Hill -
_
Nickel, Anderson and Fischer
-
6
300
Christmas
-
Hanson and Collins
-
6
5,000
Pluck Up -
-
Company - - -
-
8
600
Uno
-
Glass and Mann -
-
4
1,200
Silver Peak
-
Garot and Stokie -
-
15
375
Hercules -
-
Company ....
-
200
2.400
Pioneer
-
R. Green ....
-
2,000
30,000
Five over Six -
-
R. Green -
-
30
450
Goat Hill -
_
Ellis and Lloyd -
-
250
3,750
Maggie’s Secret
-
Edgar and Davidson -
-
30
450
Outward Bound
-
Osborne and Co. -
"
12
180
The greatest mines, the owners, the yields up to September,
1884, were: —
But while Silver ton resounded with the life of the Barrier,
while the prospectors unfolded month by month the treasure of
silver, the Broken Hill, looking out over the salt-bush plains,
stood unscathed, iron-bound, black —a menace to the teeming life,
the gay prosperity of Silverton; the ultimate source of its
destruction. And itself a magical store of treasure, measured
by which the wealth of Silverton, of the Day Dream, of all the
prosperous mines upon the Barrier was to be discounted —for-
gotten.
D


CHAPTER VIII.
THE BOUNDARY RIDER (1883).
THE morning of sth September, 1883. The sun not yet high,
but dazzling yellow in a sky like pale blue glass. The heat
of the spring day foretold the coming of the burning
summer. The salt-bush plains rolling afar shimmered and flick-
ered in the heat. A thin brick-dust whirled up in spirals from
bare patches of red earth, breaking the salt-bush like scabs upon
a sheepskin. And high and black the peak and corrugated ridge
of the Broken Hill stood up against the clear sun and the blue
sky—rising from dull green scrub, and going bare, burnished and
black, as oxide of tin.
So the Broken Hill showed up to the eyes of young Charles
Rasp, boundary rider of the Mount Gipps station, coming canter-
ing over the salt-bush paddocks through the hot morning. Lean
and sunburnt, yellow bearded, hair worn thin on his brows from
sweating under his slouch hat. Blue shirt open at the neck;
sleeves rolled up on his brown arms; moleskins stuck in riding
boots and belted about his middle—a stooping figure, yet sitting
firmly in the saddle; and riding swiftly over the salt-bush pad-
dock toward the Broken Hill, as if upon a quest.
Black burnished ridge; black as oxide of tin. And of a
night in his dugout, nigh Acacia Siding, Rasp had read every
word —read and re-read of the account of black oxide of tin, as
set out in his “Prospector’s Guide.” He had bought the book
on his last trip down to Adelaide. For young Charles Rasp,
brought out by his parents to Hew South Wales in his thirteenth
year, was more than a rough boundary rider on an inland sheep


station. Knew his job, indeed, having picked up a hard experi-
ence on the stations of New South Wales in the years before he
had drifted down to Mount Gipps station. The quiet boundary
rider possessed a natural shrewdness in driving a bargain, was
perfectly reliable, and could be trusted on a journey overland
with a flock of sheep, not to follow the order of his calling, and
paint the roadside pub. or the city hotel blood-red. George
McCulloch had a keen estimate of a man. And Rasp had been
entrusted by him several times with the sheep to be driven down
from the station to Adelaide.
Black oxide of tin —and the ridge stood like a mass of black
oxide of tin out of the salt-bush plain. Many a time, mustering
sheep in the Broken Hill paddock, Rasp had ridden under the
shadow of the black scarp, and passed it without interest.
“A hill of mullock,” a prospector pulling up at the Mount
Gipps homestead one day called it in his hearing. “There’s
nothing in the Broken Hill. It’s only a blanky hill of mullock.”
And a hill of mullock it had stood unsought and unpro-
spected. Though a few lumps of curious stuff had been lifted
off it; though its black iron capping seemed like a mass of metal
that had bubbled molten through a huge fissure of the earth long
ages since.
A storekeeper of Thackaringa, Mr. P. Hawson, had been
attracted by the outcrop on the Hill, and had obtained a report
from an “expert” up from Melbourne. The expert condemned
the show on the samples of stone submitted him. Still among
the hands at Mount Gipps station there had been much talk of
late about the Broken Hill, and the chance that if prospected it
might show some such silver ore as now was raised at Thacka-
ringa and Umberumberka. And the discussion had become end-
less, now that the canvas camp at Umberumberka Creek was
growing up into a township; and the discoveries of chloride of
silver and the silver slugs were common talk in Silverton, The
station hands making over to Silverton, and understanding the
feverish excitement now burning among the miners come in for
the week end, brought back the yarns that they had heard —the


luck of the prospectors working into the ranges; the ore that
was being lifted from the Umhermnberka and the Pioneer mines;
and speculated the more on the prospect of like discoveries on
the hill. Receiving scant encouragement from dark and grim
McCulloch, who, growling at the notion of silver on Broken Hill,
muttered blackly of the fate of any prospector who should come
poking about to peg out the Hill itself; listening all the while
with a keen interest and speculating to himself the chance of
silver in the mis-shapen, metalliferous ridge hunched like a hog’s
back from the plain.
Many a time had Rasp ridden under the Broken Hill. Passed
it by carelessly at first; then, as by the infection from fevered Sil-
verton, staring up at it, wondering at the black iron-capped mass.
Conjecturing that, if a few miles off men were finding precious
treasure, a like treasure might be found upon the Hill itself —
silver, lead, copper, or only ironstone? The thought was in his
brain when he bought his little “Prospector’s Guide” in Adelaide.
It should give him some idea of what the Hill contained —whether
it was a hill of mullock or whether it might be mineral-bearing.
And his attention had focussed soon in the account of black
oxide of tin. Black as the metalliferous rocks on Broken Hill,
The account seemed to tally with the black capping of the Hill.
And so at dawn he had ridden out from his hut, his mind
filled with the idea —to climb the Hill; to see for himself and,
perhaps, if the black rock seemed to contain mineral, to peg out
a block on the Hill itself.
He had not reasoned out yet what he should do after. Secure
his lease through the Warden’s office at Silverton; and perhaps
induce a group of the speculators in the town to put in money to
sink a shaft. Or yet McCulloch himself —estimating the boss’s
furtive interest in all the talk about the ironstone on the Hill,
and the chance that, if prospected, it might prove rich in metal.
And Rasp himself had saved from his pay, and, if the hill should
promise a sporting chance, could spare the money for a venture.
So many men had struck it lucky; so well assured now were the
riches of the Barrier.


Cantering over the salt-hush plain and reaching the scrub
at the base of the hill, slipping out of the saddle, he forced his
way through the thick mulga, and up over the ringing metal-
liferous blocks piled loosely at the base. Lonely, the hog’s back
hunched —unscathed, save that a chipping from a rock told of the
visit of a chance prospector, who had failed to find traces of
silver, and had made his way down from the scarp and oft to
Silverton. How McCulloch would have cursed had he chanced
to find the prospector there! How he would be cursing now if
he should have chanced to ride over from the station, twelve miles
oft, and have found the boundary rider there —climbing the hill,
little hammer in hand, chipping the ironstone! But no one came.
Only a rock wallaby started up and leaped away. Ho sound
through the air but the cry of a young lamb afar, and the
ringing ironstone under the boundary rider’s heavy boots —the
clang of his hammer on a block of stone.
He climbed to the summit. The sun struck down burning
upon the Broken Hill. The salt-bush paddock rolled out mile on
mile. A mirage shimmered afar, as silver water flowing out over
the sands. Range and pinnacles flickered mist blue in the heat
—all silver blue.
And on the Hill Charles Rasp pulled out of his hip pocket
the little book —his “Prospector’s Guide” —and read once more
the account of the black oxide of tin; and was assured that he
stood on a great mass of tin —a mountain of tin; another Bischoff,
such as twelve years earlier James Smith had hit upon down in
Tasmania. And, to make sure of the richest claim, he singled
out the blackest pitch upon the Broken Hill.
So, climbing down the Hill, he caught his horse and rode
away—making for the Mne Mile, where a curl of smoke showed
the camp of David James and James Poole. The two young
contractors were engaged at this time in sinking dams upon the
Mount Gipps station—for the drought had meant the loss of
stock, and additional dams must be in readiness for the long-
expected rain. Young Rasp made thither, his mind filled with
the thought of the wealth of tin upon the Broken Hill, and pur


posing to induce the two dam-sinkers to join him in the venture
of opening up the Hill. James, he knew, had had experience of
tin mining in Cornwall before he came out to the colonies.
Finding the pair at the camp, he drew them aside, and told
them that he had been upon the hill that morning; and spoke of
the metal blocks, and the black capping of the hill —solid tin,
black oxide of tin. “I want you both,” he wound up, “to come
in with me.”
If the contractors laughed at the first thought of mineral
upon the hill of mullock, they listened with increasing interest.
There might be minerals on the hill. It had never been properly
prospected. No one knew —though the prospector called it the
hill of mullock. Three years before —and who among them would
have thought of the Pioneer, or the Gipsy Girl, or the IJmberum-
berka mine, nigh Silverton? With their own eyes they had seen
the slugs of silver from the soakages, and the chlorides! And
business men thought it worth while putting money into the Sil-
verton mines! Burnished, metallic, unknown—the black Hill
loomed against the sky.
Black oxide of tin! Rasp, diving into his pocket, pulled
out the “Prospector’s Guide”—his last trump card. The pair,
smoking quietly, listened to him while he read the description
of black oxide. And, convinced that Rasp was right and that
the Hill promised to be rich, they agreed to ride over with him,
and peg out finally the blackest spot upon the hill. So the three,
cutting their way through the mulga, pegged out a stretch of
forty acres that same day on Broken Hill. David James drove
the first peg.
Before the new syndicate left the hill, it was resolved that
Rasp should ride at once to the stone cottage on the hillside half
a mile from Mount Gipps station, where Constable Richard
O’Connell, Deputy Mining Registrar and Warden’s Clerk, was
quartered, and should lodge with him his application for the
first mineral lease (Block 12) on Broken Hill.


RESIDENCE OF MR. C. RESP.


CHAPTER IX.
THE SYNDICATE OF SEVEN (1883).
BUT the trouble which now confronted Rasp—he had con-
fessed to his partners on the Hill —was how to face the
boss. McCulloch had threatened to break any prospector’s
neck if he heard of him pegging out the Broken Hill. And
McCulloch was a big enough man to do it very effectively, if he
should carry out his threat. Still the boss had to be faced, so
Rasp resolved to throw up his job, draw his back pay, and say
nothing of his tin mine till he was safely away. Rasp did not
lack moral courage, but he knew McCulloch, Riding slowly back
from O’Connell’s in the evening, Rasp crossed the creek, and
made his way up to the manager’s dwelling—Government House.
McCulloch was enjoying his evening smoke upon the veran-
dah of his house, and received his erring boundary rider good
humouredly.
“Well, Rasp,” he demanded, “what’s your trouble?”
But he eyed him blackly and suspiciously as Rasp told him,
faltering, that he wanted to throw up his job and draw his pay.
“Don’t want to lose you, Rasp,” McCulloch said. “You
suit us all right. You know your job. Have you got a better
one?”
No; he’d done very well on Mount Gipps. It wasn’t that.
Silver? No; it wasn’t silver!
“Look here, Rasp,” the manager growled, lurching to his
feet; “I know what you’ve been up to. You’ve been pegging
out the Broken Hill,” glaring at Rasp—black-browed, angry,
speculative. Knowing the man for no fool, and estimating


shrewdly to himself that Rasp might have found something on
the Hill; and cursing inwardly that he himself had let the chance
slip, and that the boundary rider had got in ahead of him.
Slowly Rasp admitted that he had pegged out a forty-acre
block upon the Hill. No, he had not found silver. He’d been
reading about tin, black oxide of tin, and the Hill was some black
metal very like it. He and James and Poole had pegged out their
claim that day and registered it with Dick O’Connell,
Restraining himself by an effort of will, though nigh to an
explosion that would have shattered Rasp, McCulloch estimated
swiftly, “Well, we don’t want to lose you, Rasp,” he said again.
“You’ll only be throwing your money away; and your job’s a
good one. There’s nothing on the Hill.”
Rasp fumbled in his pocket for the “Prospector’s Guide,”
“Or, if there is,” the manager said slowly, “you and James
and Poole haven’t got the money to get the stuff out. You’ll have
the place rushed, even if you strike anything. What did you
say you’d pegged out? About forty acres. Man, we’ll all of us
go into it, and peg out the whole Hill.”
And shrewdly the manager sketched out a new plan. He’d
go into the business; put up money! Some of the station hands
would go in with them —form a syndicate, and bag all the blocks
on the Hill. What did Rasp think of it? If there was nothing
in it, he needn’t lose his job. Jobs like his on Mount Gipps station
were not going begging every day of the week. Not showing too
keen an interest in the move, but an indifferent good humour.
And Rasp, keen as he and understanding the manager, and esti-
mating as shrewdly, pronounced the idea a good one.
That night a meeting of the station hands and the contractors
was held at Mount Gipps station. While the group sat smoking
about him, Rasp told of his discovery and his application for the
lease—capped his argument with the inevitable quotation from
the “Prospector’s Guide.” McCulloch admitted heavily that
there might be something in it. At any rate, a man oughtn’t to
let the chance slip. You never knew.


GEORGE MCCULLOCH AND CHARLES RASP.


And before the meeting broke up the first syndicate of the
Broken Hill was formed. It was a syndicate of seven:—
Chaeles Rasp, boundary rider.
Geoege McCulloch, manager of Mt. Gipps station.
Geoege Uequhaet, sheep overseer.
Geoege A. M. Lind, storekeeper and bookkeeper.
Philip Chaeley, station hand.
David James, contractor, owner of bullock teams.
James Poole, his mate.
The station buzzed with the new excitement. The syndicate
agreed that the next morning McCulloch himself should ride
over to the Broken Hill with Rasp and peg out the remainder
of the Hill; and thence over to Silverton to register the applica-
tions for the leases on behalf of the syndicate. Young Philip
Charley, a city lad, whom Sir James McCulloch had sent up to
his nephew’s station to learn sheep farming and to recover his
strength, was the most excited member of the syndicate. As a
boy in Melbourne Charley had fallen into ill-health. Office-
work, the doctor declared, was not for him; he must get away
into the country. The interest of Sir James McCulloch having
been engaged on his behalf, he received a letter one day instruct-
ing him to call at the office of McCulloch, Sellars and Co., to
meet Mr. George McCulloch, He was ushered into the presence
of the dark and dour Scotsman, who, with his most forbidding
frown, demanded his business. The boy told him. He wanted to
get away from the city into the country. McCulloch grunted.
“Laddie,” he demanded, “d’ye think ye’d care for living
on a sheep station?” The boy replied that it was the very thing
he wanted. McCulloch agreed then to take him up from Mel-
bourne to Mount Gipps to try how he liked the life. Young
Philip Charley took to the station as a duck to water. The hard
and active life built up his strength. The open spaces and the
freedom after the narrow confines of an office compensated for


all the heat and dust and flies, —the monotony of mutton and
damper. McCulloch, taking to the lad, treated him with the
utmost kindness.
McCulloch now assumed indifference to Rasp’s venture.
Urquhart, the overseer, asserted that tin-making was waste of
a man’s time and money. None the less, the horses were saddled
at dawn, and McCulloch and Rasp were off on their twelve-mile
ride through the warm air to Broken Hill. And on the Hill that
day they pegged out the remaining blocks, —making an error only
through the mulga scrub, —a mistake that was to have an impor-
tant bearing on the destinies of the Broken Hill. And on the
following day McCulloch and Rasp appeared before the acting
Warden in Silverton to register applications for Blocks 11, 13,
14 and 15. By 21st September the syndicate had lodged applica-
tions for Blocks 10 and 16.
So the syndicate of Mount Gripps station was formed. So
in September, 1883, the first Broken Hill Company,—the syndi-
cate of seven, —never registered, came into being. So the pos-
sible treasure of the Hill of Mullock was safeguarded against
chance discovery by any of the prospectors now swarming about
the silver Barrier.


O’CONNELL'S COTTAGE TO-DAY,
Where the application for the first mineral lease on Broken Hill was lodged.


CHAPTER X.
THE HILL OF MULLOCK (1883-1885).
“ A HILL of mullock,” the prospector had called the Broken
/-\ Hill. The name caught on in Silverton. The syndi-
cate’s property was known contemptuously as the
“Hill of Mullock,” and the gibe was soon to seem confirmed by
the little syndicate’s first experience of operations on Broken
Hill.
The excitement at Mount Gipps station died down. Fortune
did not follow immediately on the formation of the syndicate.
No work of much account was carried out on the Hill through
the summer months, while the paddocks of Mount Gipps station
were burnt up by the drought. Rasp obtained a few samples
of stone from the outcrop; but these, when sent down to Adelaide
for assay, revealed no tin, and the merest traces of silver. Accord-
ingly the syndicate arranged that Rasp should ride out to the
Hill once more, and prospect the leases further for silver and
lead. Ascending the saddle on Block 13, close to Block 14, and
noticing a rusty, decomposed mass of stone, Rasp drove in his
pick. To his surprise the pick sank in to the handle, and, prising
up the loosened mass, he dislodged a strange, glassy, honey-
combed material, the nature of which puzzled him considerably.
He had seen nothing like it on the field. The lead found there
till then was usually in sulphide or grey oxide form. The loosened
mass was of great weight, as if heavily charged with mineral.
Finding no explanation in his “Prospector’s Guide,” he decided
to try if it would melt in the fire. Returning to his camp with
a lump, he put this on the fire, where, with a few splutters, it
disappeared. Soon from under the coals started a gleaming,


silvery stream of liquid metal; and Rasp, with is limited know-
ledge of minerals, promptly considered that it was pure silver. But
when it cooled into white metal, and he tested it with his knife,
he found it too soft for silver, and he decided that it must be
lead. It was lead of a high percentage. In those first years of
the Barrier, when claim on claim yielded the precious chlorides
of silver, the discovery of lead accounted little in importance.
And the means of the syndicate were decidedly limited. None
the less, it was decided then to put down a shaft on the spot of
Rasp’s discovery. The shaft was only a post hole. A miner named
Rosewarne undertook the contract, and sunk the post hole for
a depth of about 65 feet. The results did not justify its con-
tinuance. The assays showed only a few ounces of silver to the
ton, while the silver slugs of the soakages went 1000 ounces and
more. For the while no further work was undertaken on the
Hill —nothing that fulfilled the letter of the mining regulations,
which compelled at least a measure of development. For the
time the syndicate held the protection of the leases against a
prospector’s chance discovery of treasure on the Hill; but the
day drew on when the members must enter seriously upon the
work of development or forfeit tenure of the leases.
McCulloch had, indeed, good cause through the months of
drought for abstraction from the possibilities of Broken Hill.
The drought was devastating New South Wales. The pastures
on Mount Gipps were long since withered; the paddocks had
become an utter desolation of sand and salt-bush. The dead
sheep rotted on the plains. The very prospectors were repelled
from pushing further their search for silver. Black and morose,
McCulloch cursed the drought and the loss of stock. And the
syndicate’s application for the leases of the Hill formed a stock
joke in Silverton.
By May, 1884, the drought threatened the very existence of
Silverton. The township was dependent on the soakage of the
Umberumberka Creek. At this point the water during the rainy
season ran into a cup, and the sand which filled the cup retained


BARRIER RANGES, “THE HILL OF MULLOCK.”


the moisture ordinarily through the dry months. By sinking
wells into the sand fresh water was to be found; but now, under
the sun, the supply fell lower and lower. Bores put down in
the neighbourhood yielded water, but it was salt; and only if it
were left undisturbed overnight, did the salt sink and the water
sweeten.


CHAPTER XI.
THE MEN OF SILVERTON (1884-1886).
IN May of the year 1884 there arrived on the Silverton field Mr.
William Jamieson, mining surveyor of the New South Wales
Government. Many of the mineral leases of the field had
never been surveyed, and the neglect of the Department of Mines
had occasioned considerable complaint. At the start of the drought
Jamieson was in charge of a district at Bourke. But the drought,
the burning up of pasture and water, the impossibility of finding
feed for horses necessitated the abandonment of the work for
the time. Having visited New Zealand on this enforced leave,
Jamieson was asked by the New South Wales Government on
his return whether he could find a surveyor to undertake the
work on the Barrier. He offered himself to visit the field, and
this offer being approved by the Government, he started off on
such a journey through the drought-stricken country to Silverton
as recalled the expeditions of the first explorers.
From Sydney he travelled by rail to the terminus at Nyngan,
drove through to Bourke, and on down the Darling to Menindie.
In the drought the Darling had sunken from a river to a mere
creek; in places it was possible to walk across it. In the days
of journey from the river it was necessary to carry barrels of
water for men and horses. Prom Menindie the party struck
south for 250 miles, before they left the river to make the ninety
miles journey overland to the Barrier.
The countryside had been laid bare by the drought. The
trees stood dry and black-leafed from the heat; as, in the Mallee
country, the sand was drifting, forming great banks where the


trees checked its progress. At times the waggons stuck in the
sand, and the horses could not shift them, and every man must
put his shoulder to the wheel. The party had carried water with
them; it was fortunate, for the evaporation had left the water
in the station wells salt as brine.
It was a scorched and thirsting party that Mr. Jamieson
brought at last into Silverton, emerging then from mining camp
to township. It was a wild, feverish place, threatened by the
continuance of drought, and yet borne up by the excitement of
the discoveries of silver. De Baun’s was the principal hotel in
the township,—palatial by comparison with the old Mount Gipps
Hotel, —the bush pub. on Stephen’s Creek notorious long before,
and run by German Charley. A yarn was current at the time
that a man had once engaged in an argument with a Silverton
pub-keeper on the comparative strength of the brands of rum
sold at their houses. “Mine,” claimed the Silverton man, “will
kill a man stone dead at a thousand yards.”
“If two blokes,” Charley retorted, “comes to my pub. at
the same time, an’ one ses ‘ Ave a drink, mate,’ an’ if they ’as
two drinks an’ don’t start fightin’, well —they’s b cowards.”
But Silverton was emerging from the tanglefoot days. De
Baun’s fine hotel and Sully’s well-known store were conspicuous
among the new buildings emerging from the disorder of miners’
shacks and tents. A wild place, though, and, for all the check
of the drought on prospecting, stirred constantly by the new
stories of discovery. A thirsty miner with empty pockets need
only adopt a little strategy to slake his thirst. If he could rake
up a silver slug,—borrow it, steal it, —he had only to show it in
the next hotel. He need not plunk it down on the bar. He could
travel on the slug,—as the Barrier miners learnt to put it. Where
had he got the slug from % was the instant question. Drinks were
called for to refresh his memory. And of the making of wild
rushes for the scene of the discovery of the slugs there was no
end.
Prominent among the men of Silverton in those first years
was W. R. Wilson, big and bluff manager of the Day Dream.


Built in such a mould as Jamieson or McCulloch—dominant in
will, achieving popularity hy his good humour and generosity.
Prominent, too, was the great Fitzgerald Moore, —Irish-American
from the Pacific slope, his head shaded hy a vast sombrero. Popu-
larly he was reputed to be the representative of the Rothschilds;
he himself spoke modestly of huge interests in rich Peruvian
silver mines—“so rich,” he would wind up, “that when the mules
have been working in the mines for a while we have to smelt ’em
down, sir! Smelt ’em down! They get simply saturated with
silver. Believe me!”
Over the principal hotel in Silverton presided John de
Baun —a huge man six-foot-three in height, and broad in propor-
tion. In only one respect had nature failed to fashion him on
generous lines, —his voice. It was small and squeaky. New
arrivals were prone to believe that it was De Baun’s little joke.
It was no joke—it was the big man’s tragedy.
Into Silverton would come driving at times stout George
McCulloch, of Mount Gipps. His force of expression had become
a gift envied throughout the Barrier. A churchman visiting
the silver-field put up at Mount Gipps station, and borrowed a
horse while he rested his own. The manager was away at the
time. Not being equal to the rough roads of the district, the
churchman soon let the horse down, badly breaking its knees.
And while he yet contemplated the disaster, a big man came
driving along in his buggy, pulled up, and saw his horse. He
expressed all that he felt.
“You must he Mr. George McCulloch,” said the churchman
politely. “How do you do, sir?”
McCulloch’s hospitality, none the less, made Mount Gipps
the favourite headquarters of visiting parsons—as of any visitors
to the district. McCulloch’s welcome was genuine. If next
morning the parson found his horse turned loose, and himself
expected to catch it, it was only the manager’s little joke. If the
horse were not to he caught, it was a test of whether the parson
would swear. One victim the manager genially drove round the
district in his own buggy. Somehow the horses became unman-


G. D. DELPRAT,
Present General
WM. JAMIESON,
First General Manager, 1885


ageable; somehow the wheel caught a big stone; and out pitched
the guest into a ditch. “I thought, mon,” growled the manager,
“you said you could ride? Why, you canna ride even in a
buggy.”
Into Silverton came the adventurers. Among them Robert
Gordon Grahame —Packsaddle Grahame —who a year or so later
was to make a sensational flight before the Queensland police. A
tall, brilliantly plausible figure, he made his friends in Silver-
ton, and found his marks. Three-penny bits enriched the assays
from his bonanzas. Clearing out at last from Silverton—engag-
ing in a series of swindles —he made his way to Morden station,
in New South Wales. A piece of trickery resulted in a charge
of obtaining money by false pretences—sworn against him by
Edward Yentry Gayer, grazier, of Morden station. The Police
Magistrate, King, issued a warrant for the man’s arrest, and,
armed with this, Constable Bolster and Gayer started off on the
same day for Tibooburra, where the magistrate had learnt a man
resembling Grahame had been passing himself off by the name
of Rutherford. Arriving, the pursuers found that Rutherford
alias Grahame had left the place. He had stated that he was a
member of the firm of Power, Rutherford and Co., and was going
to Queensland to buy cattle. He had spent his money freely in
champagne, and in Silverton, and through all the centres where
he had blazed his trail, Grahame had been noted for his love of
champagne. Following the trail to Caldwell station, and on to
Bulloo Downs and Thargomindah, the pursuers learnt that at
Thargomindah a constable had endeavoured to capture the man,
a telegram having come through ordering his arrest. Grahame
had threatened the constable with his revolver, and escaped up
the Bulloo, leaving his swag at the hotel. Having outlined fresh
horses at Thargomindah, and engaged a black tracker named
Tiger, Gayer and Bolster started off on the same day, and followed
the tracks of the fugitive in an easterly direction.
The fugitive summoned up all his cunning to avoid capture.
Striking a wire fence, he climbed along it for yards, stepping
down again and marched along it for a distance till, rested, he
E


climbed to the wires once more. None the less the tracker led
the pursuers hotly upon his trail. Once only was he thrown
temporarily off the track. Grahame had changed his boots for
a contractor’s bluchers, and the track led into the contractor’s
camp. But, making round the camp, the black found the prints
of the bluchers, and led Bolster and Gayer on the trail once
more. Four days after leaving Thargomindah they came up
with their quarry. Grahame, darting from the shelter of a tree
where he had been resting, sought the scrub, Bolster roaring
after him, “Stand, or I fire!” Grahame’s only answer was to snap
his revolver twice at the constable; but it missed fire. Bolster
fired then, and shot Grahame through the head.
But the coming tragedy cast in the Silverton days no shadow
of foreboding in the young adventurer, —an adventurer among the
adventurers who came flocking into Silverton in those first years
of the Barrier field. Silverton was to boast, too, before the year
was out, its newspaper, “The Silver Age”—run by J. S. Reid,
who, with his brother, had previously conducted a paper at Wil-
cannia. The first issue of “The Silver Age” appeared on Satur-
day, 30th August, 1884. Silverton, with its hotels, its stores, its
offices and dwellings, lacked only in the month of May, 1884, a
water supply.
It was provided. The drought broke a few days after Jamie-
son’s arrival at the field. The survey party had moved out of
Silverton and camped in the bed of the Umberumberka Creek.
The dry sands formed a soft place to bunk of a night. For those
first days the drought held the party, as it held the miners, close
to Silverton. But the worst heat of the summer was over; the
desert winds brought up the dust storm; the black clouds formed,
as they had formed many a time through the drought, to pass
without rain. Now along the Barrier the lightning burned
white, and the thunder rolled from peak to peak. By night the
rain had not yet fallen over Silverton; the sands of the creek
bed were yet dry when the surveyor and his men turned in.
Some years before Jamieson had experienced a narrow


escape from a sudden flooding of a Queensland watercourse. The
storm afar left him uneasy. Now, when the thunder ceased, the
sound came through the night as of surging water. He was on
his feet instantly, and shouting to rouse his men to tumble up
and get out. “The creek’s coming down a hanker!” he roared.
“If it gets us here it’ll wipe us out!”
Struggling up in the darkness, tugging at tent pegs, clear-
ing canvas and bedding and clothing, the men stumbled through
the darkness and up the bank. The surge of waters had grown
loud —was nigh; the flood was on the camp as they got clear.
Standing on the bank as the creek went by—a banker, —the
party realised that only merest chance had saved them from
being drowned.
But the drought was over. The Silverton field was saved
from ruin. Now the prospectors, with the assurance of a supply
of fresh water, might move freely along the Barrier. Now the
work of survey might be taken up. Now, with the prospect of
new pastures for the sheep, McCulloch, manager of Mount
Gipps station, though bitter at the loss of sheep through the long
drought, might turn his mind back to the unexploited property
of the syndicate of seven. Some work must be done, if the leases
were to be retained. And money must be found, if the work
were to be undertaken. An end was put to inaction by the
breaking of the drought, and in the ensuing months, at least, a
start was made. The syndicate of seven had undertaken each to
put £7O into the venture, but the money was never available.
Each member of the syndicate was now to hold two shares, and
to be allowed, if he wished, and —it was far more important—
if a buyer were offering, to sell one of his shares, provided only
that he gave the first offer to the syndicate. It was agreed, too,
that the first call should be made to provide the funds for carry-
ing out at least the regular minimum work on the Hill.
And soon the first real shaft —Easp’s shaft—was to be sunk
upon the Broken Hill. The job was let after the drought to
the brothers Donald and John McKay and their mate, Donalch


son —miners come down from Cobar. The site selected for the
sinking of the shaft was on Rosewarne’s post-hole. The amateur
surface-prospecting done in the intervening months revealed only
the bodies of lower grade carbonate of lead ore. And, by a queer
piece of irony—as if the Hill concealed its secret to the last, —
Rasp’s shaft was to be sunk on the poorest part of the lode. The
stuff raised was practically unpayable. On assay it was only
10 to 12 ounces to the ton; and in those first years of the Barrier
ore going less than 80 ounces to the ton was not worth con-
sideration. ‘ * The Hill of Mullock ’ ’ —the prospector had declared;
and a hill of mullock members of the syndicate came soon to
regard their venture.
Ten ounces to the ton! Calls at the rate of ten shillings a
week. It was well for the fortune of the first Broken Hill Com-
pany, unregistered, that in the meantime agreement for the sale
of a share by any member had meant the admission of new blood,
new energy, new intelligence—and more money.
The syndicate was in process of reformation; and original
members were not merely offering their one share, but dropping
out of the concern altogether. Shrewd Rasp and dour McCul-
loch and young Philip Charley, the boy of the syndicate, retained
a half-hearted belief in the property.
Lind was the first member to drop out of the syndicate. He
had become interested in a show of his own, and desired to break
away from a condition of the syndicate that all should share in
any discoveries. Promptly Rasp and McCulloch bought up his
interest between them. IJrquhart followed. “This silver mining
business,” he would declare, “is the very devil. It’d ruin a
man!” pointing for corroboration to boundary fences broken by
prospectors and straying sheep; and, disgusted with the failure
of the Hill after eight months’ of tenure of the leases to reveal
payable stone, he parted with his shares for a song to Sam
Hawkins, the station carpenter. But the sales of shares —the
division of the original seven into fourteen —brought into the
syndicate a new figure—William Jamieson.


Jamieson had become acquainted with McCulloch and the
station group. The shares held by the dwindling syndicate were
practically going begging; and the Hill remained unexploited
and unknown. It might yet, for all the poorness of the stuff
raised from Rasp’s shaft, prove to contain silver ore as rich as
any of the mines now seeming to flourish on the field. Jamieson
secured three shares of one-fourteenth each. One he bought
from Charles Rasp for £llO, another from David James for a
similar sum, and one from Philip Charley, through McCulloch,
paying into the latter’s hands the sum of £lOO.


CHAPTER XII.
THE GAME OF EUCHRE (1884).
CALLING over at Mount Gipps station in the evening to
complete the purchase of the £lOO share, Jamieson found
McCulloch —though keen enough on the particular trans-
action and prepared finally to part with the share for £lOO, on
the clear understanding that he could not get a penny more,
while demurring grumpily at the cheque in payment —intent on
the disposal of another share to a new chum by the name of Cox,
who had called in on the way down from Momha station, in which
he had an interest. Cox was a new chum well endowed with means
and out for colonial experience, but he had already been in Silver-
ton. And not all the eloquence that the manager at Mount Gipps
could conjure up was sufficient to convince Cox that a fourteenth
share was worth £2OO. McCulloch declared it dirt cheap. Cox,
emphasising the “dirt,” pronounced it “dirt” probably, but
certainly not “cheap.”
“Two hundred’s my price for the share,” growled the
manager, eyeing the new chum facing him. “If you want the
share you can have it for two hundred.”
“If you’re so keen on selling, Mr. McCulloch,” the English-
man drawled, “I’ll give you a hundred for it.”
“Who’s saying I’m wanting to sell?” demanded the mana-
ger.
“My dear sir,” Cox answered easily, with a lift of his brows,
“aren’t you?”
“No,” declared McCulloch; “I’m not.”


“Struck anything yet on the Hill?” answered the newcomer,
smiling.
“I’m not saying I haven’t —it’s good property. You’re
lucky to have the chance of a fourteenth share for two hundred.”
“I’m not trying to buy the Hill.”
“It wouldn’t be any use if you were.”
“Really! I understood you’d be glad to get the whole Hill
off your hands; but I’m not out after it, and I’m offering £IOO
for a fourteenth share.”
“Two hundred,” roared McCulloch, bringing his hand down
with a smash on the table.
“I’m not buying,” the new chum answered, rising from his
chair. He had reached the door before the manager called him
back. Two hundred he insisted was a low price for a share if
the Hill were opened up. The Englishman reminded him
instantly that it was not; and that to open it up would take
money.
“I might split the difference,” offered the manager, with
an air of sacrifice, “if you haven’t the £200.”
“I’ll give you £llO for a fourteenth share,” Cox answered;
“or £l2o—l’U say £120.”
The manager vowed that he would see him further. Reverted
to £200; brought his figure down; pulled it up. And Cox adher-
ing to £l2O, the manager adhered finally with a like tenacity to
£2OO. Each estimating the other —McCulloch realising that the
new chum wanted to buy; Cox that the manager wanted to sell.
It was a deadlock.
“Tell you what,” said the new chum, grinning, “I’ll play
you for it.”
“Play me what?”
“Cards! Any game you like; the winner to get the share
or his price!”
The manager paused. He played a good game of euchre
with decent cards. But if Cox held the cards? McCulloch
weighed it—hesitated—balancing the chances. If he won he got


his £2OO. If he lost Cox got his share for nothing. And he lost
even the £l2O. McCulloch made his offer.
“I’ll play you,” he said, “euchre! If I win you’ll pay me
two hundred. If I don’t you’ll be getting a fourteenth share
for one hundred and twenty.”
“Done!” said the new chum, laughing.
The game was historic. It caused a mild excitement among
the station hands. It was fixed for the following evening at
McCulloch’s house —two games out of three. So up to the mana-
ger’s house came that evening the members of the syndicate to
watch the game. Cox took it coolly. McCulloch, dispensing
whisky to his guests, watched his man out of the corner of his
eye. A new chum —and knowing as much as a Silverton man!
“It’s a risk I’m taking,” McCulloch growled, as they sat
down to play. The surviving members of the syndicate, group-
ing themselves round to watch the play, grinned furtively.
McCulloch won the deal. The cards were going to McCul-
loch. His face was beaming, as he hospitably offered his guest
another drop.
“You’ll spoil the game,” the Englishman told him, laughing,
as he dealt the cards.
The cards still went to McCulloch. The first game fell to
him easily. He was grinning as he and his opponent settled
down to the second game of the rubber. McCulloch was winning
still —for the first few deals —winning still and cheerful through
the cloud of tobacco smoke from the pipes of the watching
syndicate.
“I’ll have to play up,” said the new chum easily, as the
manager announced “All but!” and effaced the cards.
Cox won a march in the next hand, and the watchers pulled
their chairs forward. “It makes me nine,” Cox said, and
McCulloch, glaring at the syndicate, declared that a man couldn’t
play with all that row going on, —but lifted the trump card from
the pack with the air of a man who has good cards. The euchre
gave the new chum the game.


“Game for game,” Cox chronicled cheerfully, but the mana-
ger said no word. The syndicate drew in their chairs. The
tobacco smoke thickened. The manager forgot to proffer the
whisky.
The final of the rubber was not exciting. From the first deal
it was a walk-away. Cox held the cards. McCulloch’s silence
was as oppressive as the cloud of tobacco smoke. The members
of the syndicate, if appreciative, did not offer comment. And
Cox’s score leaped to nine before the manager started. He made
it spades. His one weak card Cox took finally and spoilt his
march. The manager wore an air of injustice as he took one for
his hand. Cox’s deal, —the cards flew from his fingers. And
when the right bower turned up the manager groaned in spirit.
It was soon over.
The syndicate wisely forbore to comment. McCulloch, rising
heavily from his chair, growled that the smoke was enough to
choke a man.
“A good game,” pronounced the new chum; “the hundred
and twenty’s yours, Mr. McCulloch.” And the manager solemnly
assented, “It was a good game, but it might have been a dam’
sight better.”
It was the game of cards for the record stake in history. On
those few hands of euchre, out of McCulloch’s possession passed
—for the price of £l2o—a share in Broken Hill, which, held in
its entirety, would have represented in six years’ time —if its
market value was taken into account and dividends and bonuses
added—£l,2so,ooo.
Still, for his peace of mind, the manager was no prophet,
and none foresaw that from the shaky venture on the Hill of
Mullock were soon to come riches beyond dreams of avarice.
Drawing one of the station hands aside before he left the house,
McCulloch bought a share from him for £9O, retaining his own
shares and clearing £3O for his loss at euchre.


CHAPTER XIII.
THE BROKEN HILL COMPANY (1884).
THE Syndicate of Seven resolved itself ultimately into the
Broken Hill Mining Company, with a membership of
fourteen. Jamieson did not retain two of his shares. He
sold to H. P. C. Keats the share which he had bought from Rasp,
and Keats in turn sold at a much later stage to W. R. Wilson,
manager for the Barrier Ranges Silver Mining Company. The
share obtained from James went to J. G. Dalglish, district sur-
veyor of Dubbo. In the months which elapsed between the
decision to split up the shares and the discovery of rich prospects
on the Broken Hill several changes of shareholders occurred.
But at the time when finally the fortunes of the group were soar-
ing, the fourteen shareholders in the Broken Hill Company—
which held the leases of the Hill and had taken over responsibility
for calls at the rate of 10/- per week—were as follow: —
1. Charles Rasp, Boundary Rider, Mount Gipps Station.
2. George McCulloch, Manager, Mount Gipps Station.
3. David James, Contractor.
4. James Poole, Contractor, his mate.
5. Philip Charley, on Mount Gipps Station.
6. Solomon Wiseman, Rabbit Inspector.
7. Kenneth Brodribb, Station Owner, Poolamacca.
8. Bowes Kelly, late Station Manager, Billilla.
9. Samuel Hawkins, Carpenter.
10. W. R. Wilson, Manager, Barrier Ranges Association.
11. James G. Dalglish, District Surveyor, Dubbo.
12. A. Cox, Station Hand.
13. William Jamieson, Surveyor.
14. J. C. Palmer,


The interest of members centred now on the sinking of Rasp
shaft. The contract for the job, secured by the McKay Brothers
and Donaldson, was to cost at the rate of £2/5/- per foot. It
passed through carbonate of lead; it revealed a little silver; —other
little postholes revealed nothing. The manager of Mount Gipps
station was able to exhibit to visitors to the station samples of
ore in evidence of the outlook. Expert opinion had it that the
mine might possibly prove a valuable argentiferous lead lode.
But as yet the ore raised from the shaft was only of sufficient
richness to make the company wish for more. Expert opinion
was not shared in Silverton. The property of the company was
a poor one, and the company was sinking more money in Rasp
shaft than seemed ever likely to he raised out of it.
The application for leases which Rasp and McCulloch had
put it on behalf of the original syndicate were followed by fresh
applications. Block 17 was pegged out by Otto Fischer, who
named it the Cosmopolitan. William Maiden, of Menindie, leased
Blocks 5, 6 and 7; Block 8 was taken up by George White, and
Block 9 by Thomas Nutt, who named it romantically the Eliza-
beth. But the movement about the Broken Hill merely reflected
the excitement of the Silverton field, and was not aroused by
any assay of ore from the company’s property. The calls were
heavy, and no returns were paid. McCulloch was wearying of
the adventure. Some of his fellow-members would have been
glad to have sold their fourteenth share for £SO. No buyers were
offering—under Providence. For years after the men who
declared that they had turned down an offer of a share in Broken
Hill made up a big percentage of the Australian mining com-
munity. McCulloch, already gravely concerned by the blow which
the drought had dealt to the fortunes of Mount Gipps station,
talked of getting out of the business. Jamieson counselled him
to hang on. The manager hung on.
And now the leases on the Broken Hill were to engage official
attention. Continuing the work of the geological survey of New
South Wales, C. S. Wilkinson, Government Geological Surveyor,
left Sydney on 23rd June, 1884, and proceeded by way of Wil


cannia to the Silverton field. A purpose of his visit was to
guide the New South Wales Government in expenditure on the
provision of tanks, and in carrying the telegraph line through
to Silverton. He found Jamieson at the Round Hill, and on this
hill the geological surveyor put in a great deal of his time, satis-
fying himself with a brief examination of the Broken Hill itself.
His visit might have had a most important bearing on the desti-
nies of Broken Hill, but he chanced to call at Jamieson’s camp
too late in the evening to undertake the examination of Broken
Hill that night. Jamieson would have put him up for the night,
and had him driven over to the Broken Hill on the following
day; but Wilkinson, declining his hospitality, left the camp, and
did not return—going on to Mount Gipps station, whence he was
conducted out to Broken Hill, but spent onlv half an hour on the
Hill itself.
On his return to Sydney he reported on the Silverton field
as richly metalliferous, observing of the Broken Hill that it
appears to be a very large lead lode, —big enough to supply Aus-
tralia with lead, when the railway was carried through. The
Australian supply at the time worked out at about 4000 tons of
lead in a year.
Formally Wilkinson reported:—
“About three miles to the S.W. is the Broken Hill, so called
from the rugged outline of its rocky summit. This Hill is the
highest point on a narrow ridge which runs N.E. and S.W. for
several miles, and forms a conspicuous feature in the district
rising for about 150 feet above the general level of the undulat-
ing plain country on each side. The crest of the ridge is formed
by the outcropping of a huge lode. The lode varies in width
from 10 to 120 feet, and in places rises above the surface in large
craggy, black masses. It changes in character every few feet,
and consists of a ferruginous quartzite, gneisen, felspar, porous
brown iron ore, or gossan, and oxide of manganese (Pyrolusite),
with patches and veins of crystallised carbonate lead (cerusite) ;
the occasional black colour of the mass is due to the manganese
oxide. Two shafts, one 52 feet deep and the other 50 feet, and


about 30 chains apart, have been sunk into the lode, as well as
two smaller shafts. Between these I did not see any galena in
the stuff raised, but I was informed that a little had been obtained;
and, as the cerusite had evidently crystallised from a solution
of lead derived from the decomposition of galena, I believe that
masses and veins of galena will be found disseminated through
the lode, as in the case of the smaller lodes near the Round Hill
on the N.E. and the Pinnacles on the S.W., which are probably
the continuation of this one. A sample of porous gossan from
near the surface gave an assay at the rate of 3 ozs. 5 dwts. of
silver per ton, with a trace of lead; and two samples—one taken
from a vein 18 inches thick of large crystals of cerusite, and
another of a finely crystalline mass of cerusite from the north
shaft on a different part of the lode—gave an assay respectively
1 oz. 12 dwts. of silver and 73.23 per cent, of lead, and 1 oz. 12J
dwts. of silver and 74.87 per cent, of lead. These results cannot
be taken as indicative of the argentiferous nature of the lode,
for the galena from which the cerusite has been derived may
have been rich in silver, and yet the silver may not have entered
into the solution from which the crystals of cerusite were formed.
Therefore the richer silver ore will probably be found in associa-
tion with the undecomposed sulphide of lead, silver, etc,, and in
the oxidised portions of the lode which originally contained the
sulphides, Mr. George McCulloch, of Mount Gipps, showed me
the results of assays of 26 samples of the ore taken from dif-
ferent parts of the lode which gave at the rate of from 4 to 45 ozs.
of silver to the ton and 46 per cent, of lead. Further prospect-
ing will, I am of opinion, prove this to be a valuable argentiferous
lead lode. It appears to dip with the strata about N, 40 degrees
W. at 50 degrees and on the N.W. side sends off several
branches; about ten chains from it there is a large dyke of dio-
rite. It is remarkable that no gold has yet been found in the
vicinity of these intrusions of diorite.”


CHAPTER XIV.
THE FIRST SURVEY (1884).
WHILE McCulloch grumbled,—though still retaining a
half-hearted belief that the luck of the mine would
yet turn; —while the station hands found the calls a
heavy drain on their finances, William Jamieson was proceeding
with the survey of the Silver ton field. The Broken Hill leases
had not yet been surveyed. Having now an interest in the Hill,
he would not undertake the survey himself. Indeed, the survey of
the Barrier field was the work of more than one man, and Jamie-
son, communicating with the blew South Wales Government, asked
that assistance should be sent. On his representations five sur-
veyors were allotted to the field. Foremost among them came
E. H. Dawson, surveyor under the Department of Mines, and to
him fell the task of the first survey of the Broken Hill.
Making up from Wentworth to Silverton, Dawson found
Jamieson’s survey party camped near the Maybell mine—which
had sprung from Charles Nickel’s bed of silver. The two
surveyors agreed to divide the work between them —Jamieson
surveying the Purnamoota and Silverton side of the field, while
Dawson worked the Thackaringa, Pinnacles and Broken Hill
division.
The latter started the survey of the Hill on the 27th August
1884. His party, taking with them 100 gallons of water in barrels
from the creek of the Pinnacles, drove over to the Hill, The
supply was obtained for the party by William Maiden. The
mulga scrub was still so thick about the base of the Hill that, to
get the track through, they were compelled at times to clear the


track with axes. The riddled base of the Hill swarmed with
rock wallaby. The divisional fence between the Mount Gipps
and the Kinchega runs crossed the very line of lode. They found
only two men on the Hill—camped in a tent nigh Rasp shaft,
which they were sinking leisurely. The survey occupied till sth
September, and the work had to be carried out under exception-
ally hot weather for the spring of the year. Once it was inter-
rupted by the gathering of clouds, —so thick that they blotted out
the day. The darkness of night came over the Hill and plains;—
it seemed that a terrific storm was to burst over the Barrier. But
the clouds swept east; the sun burnt again in the clear sky;
and not a drop of rain had fallen. Before the survey was com-
pleted the party ran short of water. The contents of the bucket
in which the party washed was not poured out. It was used
from day to day.
The first block that Dawson surveyed on the Hill was Block
15. The company’s property had been taken up as follows: —
Block 10.—George McCulloch and George Urquhart.
Block 11.—Philip Charley.
Block 12. —Charles Rasp, David James and James Poole.
Block 13. —George McCulloch.
Block 14.—George Urquhart.
Block 15.—G. A. M. Lind.
Block 16.—G. A. M. Lind, J. Poole and P. Charley.
The blocks had been accurately pegged, the survey party
found; but in the case of Block 16, while 80 acres had been applied
for, only 61 acres had been pegged out. In the pegging out of
Block 10 one of the longitudinal lines was not run straight, thus
narrowing the lease at one end. White, in pegging out Block
8, which adjoined Block 10 at the south corner, had run his too
much to the south, and Nutt, perceiving the irregularities in
pegging, had stepped in and secured the Elizabeth (Central)
Block.


Over at Round Hill a group of mining shacks had clustered.
The nearest habitation worthy of the name was the Mount Gipps
Hotel, across Stephen’s Creek. The hotel had passed from Ger-
man Charley’s possession into the hands of Frank Jones, of
Wilcannia, and was run by him and his clerk, Mickey O’Farrell.
Over the Round Hill to Jamieson’s camp drove Dawson, to
report to him the result of the survey of the Broken Hill and
to show him the traces of the leases. Making first to Mount
Gipps station to inquire for Jamieson, he found McCulloch weigh-
ing out stores. Dawson telling him then that he had just com-
pleted his survey of the Hill, and had seen the McKay brothers’
men at work on Rasp shaft, the manager asked, “Well, what’s
your opinion of the show?”
“An enormous blow of some sort,” the survevor answered.
“Any good, d’ye think?”
“I couldn’t say. It strikes me as poor—so far! The shaft
may strike something deeper down. It may turn out rich.”
“I’m getting tired of it,” McCulloch admitted. “I’m losing
faith in it. Calls —it’s nothing but a succession of calls. I’ve
more than half a mind to throw up my shares. Jamieson says
to hang on! I’ve hung on so far. But for my part I’m tired
of paying the calls.”
“It may be a big thing,” Dawson observed. “It’s worth
hanging on to —perhaps.”
Going on then to Jamieson’s camp, Dawson told him of his
meeting with McCulloch. And McCulloch at the station spoke,
too, of his meeting with Dawson. And Poole—with the prospect
of a possible deal with the surveyor—came riding over to Jamie-
son’s camp that same evening to offer his fourteenth share in
the Hill at the price of £BO. Telling Jamieson of the interview,
Dawson said he was inclined to buy the share; but Jamieson
replied, “I wouldn’t advise you to do so. The calls are heavy,
and there’s no saying yet how the mine will turn out,”
Dawson did not buy.
The members of the company paid their calls, and received
no return. The Hill was still the Hill of Mullock in Silverton.


ROUND HILL, WITH IMPERIAL DAM IN FOREGROUND.


By the end of August nothing had been found. The shareholders
arranged then for Norman Taylor, formerly field-geologist
engaged in geological survey in Victoria, to report on the pros-
pects, and to determine whether there was a chance yet that the
Broken Hill would prove worth the expenditure that was taxing
all their resources. He reported so hopefully that he lent a new
incentive to the company. On 13th September, 1884, he wrote as
follows: —
“The ridge contains the most extraordinary and largest lode
I have ever seen on the Barrier Eanges silver field, or, in fact
anywhere. The outcrop on the broken crest of the Hill is a huge
wall of manganiferous ironstone striking from N. 35 degrees E.
to E. 35 degrees N., or generally, as it is much contorted, about
N.E. A shaft has been sunk on the north end of the ridge 60 feet
deep, passing through a solid mass of friable black and brown
ferruginous carbonates of lead, enclosing blocks of quartz con-
taining copper carbonates. Near this shaft the strike of either
the western limb of the main lode, or of a branch one, suddenly
turns round with a sharp curve to the north, and afterwards
appears to take its proper coures again. Further south-west the
manganese lode on its eastern escarpment assumes a tabular or
horizontally-bedded appearance, with the carbonate of lead out-
cropping under it. An opening has been made, exposing a vein
two feet thick of nothing but a mass of beautifully crystallised
cerusite (carbonate of lead). On a bearing of about S. 25 degrees
E. from the western angles of leases 14 and 15 a vertical shaft
is being sunk in a saddle on the summit of the ridge. It has
passed through 40 feet of a mixed mass of lode matter contain-
ing carbonate of lead in various forms, and at the above depth
struck an ill-defined though more settled lode, crossing the shaft
and dipping to the N.W. at an angle of 45 degrees. Ten feet of
this was passed through and followed down on the underlie for
25 feet more. At the bottom the ‘country’ (a decomposed schist)
was struck, and the lode suddenly turned over to the opposite
course, nearly at right angles. It will be useless to continue this
underlie shaft, and the only way will be to go on sinking the ver-
r


tical shaft till the lode is struck again. It is more than probable,
however, that the lode will go back to its old course again, as the
general underlie or dip of the main mass seems to he the north-
west, and nearly vertical. This shaft is 108 feet above the camp
on the flat below on the west side of the ridge, hut the plain on
the east side is at a much lower level. There is no doubt that an
enormous body of mineral—how highly argentiferous or other-
wise can only be proved by assay,—exists in this extraordinary
range; and, in order to properly develop it, a drive or adit should
be put in on the south-east side of the ridge from the flat. This
drive should have a north-west direction, and would thus inter-
sect all the lodes and leaders in the range. The ore could then
be stoped upwards, and he cheaply and easily trucked out of the
main drive and cross cuts. The ore in depth will almost cer-
tainly consist of mixed sulphides of zinc, copper, iron, lead, etc.,
rich in silver; and I have no hesitation in saying that in my
opinion you have one of the most important properties on the
field.”
On 4th October, 1884, the Broken Hill Company published
its first advertisement in “The Silver Age.” It ran:—
“Miners wanted to contract for sinking 100 feet from the
bottom of the shaft at Broken Hill. Apply Poole and James’s,
camp, Nine Mile Tanks. Mount Gipps run.”
On 18th October the company was inviting tenders for driv-
ing a tunnel 900 feet into the Hill.
Silverton smiled. The company possessed unwarrantable faith
in its Hill of Mullock. And miners to work on wage—when any
miner might strike his own Bonanza —were few. But in the next
months the laughter died down. A rumour grew that the com-
pany was finding chloride of silver in the shaft. And in these
months Silverton was to be dazzled with the understanding of
splendid discovery.


CHAPTER XV.
THE SILVER CHLORIDES (1885).
NOVEMBER, 1884, found the McKay Brothers, Donaldson,
Wills and Kemp still engaged in sinking Rasp shaft to
the one hundred feet level. Rosewame had sunk to sixty-
five feet in carbonate of lead, and the contractors and their men
reached close on one hundred feet; hut by that depth the lode had
passed out of the shaft. The proposal to drive a tunnel into the
Hill was abandoned. Meanwhile the members of the Broken Hill
Company, meeting at intervals at Mount Gipps station, discussed
the outlook gloomily. William Jamieson and his party proceeded
steadily with the survey of the Silverton field.
Gloom at the persistence of failure and the continuance of
calls oppressed the shareholders. The record of success and
discoveries on the field proceeded, while the shaft on the Broken
Hill gave yet no promise that the property contained more than
bodies of low-grade ore. But, while the shareholders grumbled
and repined, traces of chloride of silver were commencing to
appear in the stuff raised from Rasp shaft. The miners did
not suspect its occurrence. It was for Philip Charley, station
hand on Mount Gipps, to make the discovery.
The rigour of station life wore down the average man after
a time, and at intervals the hands were allowed to go down to
the cities to pick up their strength. In January, 1885, Charley
returned to Mount Gipps from a holiday in Melbourne, and one
morning, shortly after his arrival, rode over to the Broken Hill
to see for himself the progress of the shaft, and to learn whether


the contractors had yet struck ore likely to prove more valuable
than carbonate of lead.
His question to McKay and to his men on his arrival at
Rasp shaft seemed unnecessary. No, they had struck nothing.
The shaft at this stage was in slate, the lode having passed out
on the underlay. The dump was covered up with mullock and
no ore was in view. The miners—copper miners, —asserted that
the stuff when it passed out was the same, —low-grade lead ore.
The lad was not to be put off so easily, and decided to take a look at
some of the last ore before he returned to Mount Gipps.
Searching, he found presently a few large boulders of car-
bonate of lead ore, and, breaking one of these up, he examined it
closely. Suddenly his eyes were caught by the appearance of
specks of grey chloride of silver, and, picking these out with the
point of his knife, he returned excitedly to the contractor.
“Chloride of silver!” he gasped.
The miner, examining it, laughed at the idea. Carbonate of
copper, he declared, and persisted in his opinion. But the lad
had become acquainted with the appearance of chloride from the
ore shown in Silverton, and was not to be convinced.
“Chloride!” he declared it again. “Chloride!”
And, leaping on his horse, went galloping back to Mount
Gipps to spring the news of his discovery and to exhibit his speci-
mens. He was wild with excitement. Chlorides of silver on the
Broken Hill! He had put up with a great deal of chaffing in
Silverton over his share in the Hill of Mullock. Chlorides! The
laugh was with him and his partners now.
His fellow-members of the syndicate were ready to be con-
vinced, and to share in his excitement. Some of the stuff was
sent over with haste to Silverton for assay. The assay gave
between 700 and 800 ounces of silver to the ton. The last assay
before Philip Charley’s discovery went only 25 ounces. The
courage of the shareholders soared proportionately, and the
rumour growing in Silverton occasioned the experts to speak less
cynically of the Hill of Mullock. On 31st January, 1885, “The
Silver Age” admitted: “Broken Hill claims are looking well,


PHILIP CHARLEY.


and it is said that ores equal to 700 ounces have been obtained
during the week.”
A week later “The Silver Age” announced: “It is said that
quite recently pieces of ore taken from the mullock heap have
shown chlorides and given comparatively high assays. . . . Since
it became known there have been numerous inquiries for Broken
Hill shares.”
Mr. William Jamieson and his survey party were camped
at the time on Stephen’s Creek. Appreciating the full value of
the discovery, Jamieson determined at once to endeavour to find
the point from which the chlorides had been lifted in the shaft.
Accordingly he arranged with Keats, now a shareholder, to go
over to the mine, with instructions to Donaldson to rig up a boat-
swain’s chair, and to pull him up and down the shaft by the wind-
lass, until he struck the point at which the chlorides showed.
Keats took the risk. Up and down the shaft, swinging dizzily and
bumping against the wall, he was hauled, searching with his lamp
foot by foot, until he hit upon the show of chloride.
Up to the camp on Stephen’s Creek that night Jamieson
came galloping through the hot dusk, and, leaping from the
saddle, hurried into the tent and flung down a piece of stone
before the men.
The men examined the specimen curiously. The verdict was,
“We can’t see anything out of the way about it. It’s only a bit
of carbonate of lead!”
“Carbonate of lead be hanged! Don’t you see that?”—
pointing to the specks of chloride in the lump.
“Chlorides!” the party gasped at him. “Where’s it from?”
‘ ‘ Off the Hill! Rasp shaft! ’ ’
“No! You don’t say!” And presently—“l guess you ought
to be worth a thousand soon,” one of them muttered enviously.
“A thousand! Why, I wouldn’t sell out for twice as much.
Who knows but I might get £SOOO for a share in a year or two.”
The men of the survey party laughed uproariously at the
notion of a share in the Broken Hill soaring to such a figure.
It was an excellent joke. But the samples obtained by Keats


were forwarded by Jamieson to J. H. Fawcett, an asayer, who
had set up his office in a small stone building by the Mount Gipps
Hotel. The stuff went 600 ounces to the ton. The hopes of the
Broken Hill Company were stimulated further by this discovery.
None the less, —although the far-seeing sought for shares, —there
was no marked stir at Silverton, for the report of the discovery
was not sufficiently exaggerated to cause more than casual interest
among the miners. The continued revelation of the glittering
ores from the pockets and the lodes of the field engrossed their
minds, and 600 to 700 ounces of silver to the ton from a few speci-
mens compared as yet poorly with the regular output of rich
stuff raised from the Day Dream, the Treasure or the Lubra.
Only the far-sighted turned their attention quietly to the improv-
ing prospects of the Broken Hill.
Micky O ’Farrell, quietly prospecting for chlorides near Rasp
shaft, found traces of the ore, as Charley and Keats had found
it, and handed the specimens to W. R. Wilson, who had the stuff
assayed. The results of the assay prompted a move to acquire
a half share in the Hill at a price which would have filled the
empty pockets of the shareholders on Mount Gipps.
A few days before Charley’s visit to the mine a Silverton
man named Logan had examined some of the stuff from Rasp
shaft, and, finding traces of the chloride, was preparing to raise
the money in order to buy into the company. On the Victoria
Cross claim, adjoining the Cosmopolitan (Block 17) to the north,
Morgan D’Arcy, too, discovered a surface show of chlorides —
the first about the Broken Hill. Decidedly the shareholders’
prospects were looking up. Offers now to be made to them
seemed to offer a profitable escape from a burdensome under-
taking. But fate intervened.


CHAPTER XVI.
THE SURFACE SHOW (1885).
ON the night of 7th April, 1885, a heavy storm broke over
the Barrier. On the following morning William Jamie-
son, having knocked oft out-door work in order to finish
a set of plans, decided to ride over to inspect a newly-completed
storage tank at about three miles distance from the Broken Hill.
At lunch time he crossed over to the Elizabeth, which Nutt and
O’Earrell had pegged out on the boundaries of Blocks 8 and 10.
As he was about to ride away, a man named Thomas Low
approached him, and, telling him that he had something to show
him, took out of his pocket a round and weatherworn lump of
stone, revealing rich chloride.
“I found it near your mine,” he announced.
Examining the stone with excitement, Jamieson realised
immediately from the appearance of the stone that it must have
been washed down from higher on the Hill.
“Where did you get this, man?” he asked. “By Jove, you
must show me the place.”
But Low realised the value of the find as well as Jamieson,
and was out for a bargain. “I’ll show you,” he replied, “on one
condition —that you let me have a share in the Hill.”
Necessarily Jamieson was not prepared to part with the
share which he had retained in the property. But Rasp, he
knew, held an additional twenty-eighth, which he had bought
during the frequent transfers resulting from the shaky fortunes
of the Broken Hill Company. Rasp was ready to sell this share
at a reasonable price, and, even though chlorides had been found,


would part with it now, —more particularly if the sale should
mean a revelation of silver chlorides, which might raise the whole
company to fortune. Jamieson told Low, accordingly, that he
could get him a share. So, before he left the Elizabeth, he had
arranged that Low should come over to his camp—now by the
Wilyu-Wilyu-yong Creek, by the Round Hill—and, with the
definite prospect of a purchase of the twenty-eighth from Rasp,
should undertake to lead Jamieson on the following morning to
the spot at which he had picked up the lump.
In the evening Low duly turned up at the camp. Rasp, hastily
summoned by Jamieson, rode over early on the following morn-
ing, and, the position being put to him, undertook to sell the
twenty-eighth to Low. On this promise Low accompanied Jamie-
son and Rasp in a buggy out to the Broken Hill. With them
went Jamieson’s black boy, Harry Campbell, who was employed
to look after the horses at the survey camp. Making up by the
track which the McKay party had worn through the mulga scrub
on to the Hill, they were conducted by Low to the spot where he
had found the weather-worn stone, and thence they climbed up
to the point from which Jamieson estimated the lump must have
been washed down.
At Jamieson’s heels followed the black boy, Harry, carrying
on his shoulder al6 lb. sledge hammer for breaking stone. J amie-
son had injured his thumb, and whenever he came across a likely-
looking piece of stone, the boy broke it with the hammer. And
soon the hammer, descending on a great block and cracking it
asunder, revealed the treasure, —chlorides of silver, —rich chlo-
rides. The stone which Low had found was, indeed, a fragment
from the outcrop, and had been washed down, as Jamieson had
conjectured. The excitement on the Broken Hill that morning
was electric.
The discovery was followed by a succession of rich finds.
There all these months, while syndicate and company had lost
time and money in the sinking of Rasp shaft, the stuff had lain
ready to their hands, —revealed now in a splendid profusion by
a few blows of a sledge hammer. The secret of the Broken Hill


was out at last. Not the Day Dream had offered so rich a pro-
mise. Down to the buggy in the late afternoon the discoverers
staggered with lumps of the broken stone. Jamieson, in the heat
of excitement, roared to Rasp:—
“You take it down to Fawcett right away! And don’t you
come back till you get the assay!”
Over to Fawcett’s office at the Mount Gipps Hotel sped Rasp
that night, roused the assayer, and got him to work at once. The
first assays went 796, 949 and 1066 ounces of silver to the ton.
A new sensation was to he sprung on the Silverton field. But
for the time Rasp said to Fawcett, “You won’t say anything
about this, of course?” and “Of course not,” Fawcett replied.
Jamieson, hurrying over to Mount Gipps station, found
McCulloch, and told him to summon a meeting of shareholders
for the Saturday night—llth April. He would have information
of a most important nature to communicate. McCulloch, too,
had important news. W. R. Wilson, on behalf of Wilson and
Co., was offering to buy half the Hill from the company. And,
said McCulloch, obviously favouring the sale, with the money that
Wilson and his partners in the venture would pay for half the
Hill, the shareholders could get back every penny into their
pockets—which had been emptied for the sinking of the shaft,
—and more than a hit to spare. If the shareholders approved
of the sale! Jamieson, with his knowledge of the sensational
development of the Hill, prepared to spring a surprise on his
friend McCulloch and his fellow-shareholders.
On the Saturday evening the shareholders met in the mana-
ger’s house at Mount Gipps station. Wilson had come over to
bargain for the purchase of half the Hill. Jamieson had come
in the full excitement of discovery, realising its import to the
fortunes of the company. Rasp was there with his knowledge of
the assays, and the satisfaction of knowing that his venture in
pegging out the Hill was likely to be crowned by fortune. McCul-
loch, hit hard by the drought, and seeing before him the prospect
of making good a fair share of his loss, and realising nothing of
the discovery on the Hill, was prepared to sway the meeting to


accept Wilson’s offer. And, entering the meeting with this domi-
nant idea, McCulloch took the chair, and proposed that Wilson
should at once he called in to state his terms for the purchase of
half the Hill.
McCulloch was met with the immediate opposition of Jamie-
son. Wilson must not he called in yet. He must wait outside
until the shareholders had heard Jamieson’s information, and
were in a better position to consider Wilson’s offer. McCulloch
demurred; but, curiosity getting the better of him, and the tone
of the meeting being decidedly in Jamieson’s favour, consented.
Wilson was accordingly told to wait in the drawing-room till the
meeting was ready for him. For once McCulloch forgot to put
out the whisky. McCulloch and Jamieson prepared for battle.
Rapidly now and with excitement Jamieson told the share-
holders that Low had found a lump of chlorides on the Hill. It
would be madness now —after this and Philip Charley’s find —to
think of parting with half the property. And Wilson was offer-
ing to buy. Why? The lump found by Low had been washed
down from the Hill!
“Where?” McCulloch was on his feet and demanding—
“ Where? Tell us whereabouts!”
“No!” Jamieson was emphatic. “Not yet! Low found the
stuff. Low’s got to get something out of it first.” And, in the
face of McCulloch’s repeated request for information, Jamieson
recounted swiftly Low’s condition, —that he must have an interest
in the show before he would reveal the place,—withholding for
the time the facts of his own and Rasp’s visit to the Hill, the
discovery of the chlorides, the sensational assays. McCulloch
took strong exception to any such terms. It was their property,
not Low’s. The thing might turn out to be nothing. And the
shareholders might lose the chance of Wilson’s offer.
Jamieson retorted that he would not part with a block upon
the Hill. The meeting must decide on Low’s condition. McCul-
loch angrily asserted that it must decide on Wilson’s offer. The
meeting split into two factions, —McCulloch and his followers
clamorous for Wilson, or alternatively the disclosure of the spot


at which Low had found chlorides; Jamieson enjoying the joke
hugely, and his supporters standing out for a fair deal to Low
and the rejection of any offer from Wilson. The leaders engaged
soon in single combat —verbal combat. McCulloch excelled him-
self. Jamieson stood the assault creditably. The room resounded
to the shock of battle. And all the while Wilson waited in the
drawing-room and wondered at the row and the language.
Out of the battle came at last an armistice. A compromise
was reached. Jamieson was to leave the meeting and bring Low
over at once to the station. But where was Low? Over at the
survey camp—miles away! When the meeting had heard Low
and himself the shareholders might—if they wished, —consider
Wilson’s offer. And presently, while Wilson still waited and
while the excited meeting rowed still, Jamieson was driving
through the night to bring back Low. Finding him in camp, he
hurried him off to Mount Gripps, and brought him into the room
with him before the shareholders.
“Here’s the man who found the chloride,” Jamieson an-
nounced. “Now, what I want to put before the meeting is this,
—if you’ll issue another share, I’ll guarantee to turn out from
the Hill five or six tons this coming week!”
And Low, when he could get a word in edgewise, asserted
that he was prepared to guarantee that, with the assistance of
one man, he would knock out £4OOO worth of ore in a fortnight.
But the meeting had fastened on to Jamieson. Wilson’s offer
was forgotten now. Issue a new share! Not they! McCulloch
headed the onslaught. Low having been invited more or less
politely to withdraw and wait with Wilson, the noise of battle
sounded on into the night. Again a compromise was reached.
Jamieson effected at last that every man should put down
secretly on a slip of paper the sum that he considered that Low
should receive for his discovery. Jamieson wrote down £IOO.
Some of the shareholders must have put down nothing. For the
sum worked out ultimately at £BO on the average struck from
the collected strips of paper. Jamieson played his trump cards
—the surface show and the assays.


But now, roused by Jamieson’s excitement over the dis-
covery, the shareholders were one and all against the sale of half
the Hill. McCulloch was loudest in the declarations against sale.
Wilson could buy a share if he liked. Ultimately he did buy a
share from Keats for £2OOO, And, as he had been kept waiting
all these hours, while the company fought out its destiny, he must
be put up comfortably for the night. On the Sunday morning
the whole body of shareholders should sally forth in cavalcade
to the Broken Hill. And Rasp kept his word to Low —that he
would sell him a twenty-eighth share. Low bought for £lOOO.
Early on the Sunday morning every vehicle and every horse
about the station was harnessed up. Out to the Broken Hill the
party drove, McCulloch threatening savagely, “If you don’t find
the place, Jamieson, we’ll put you down the damned shaft!”
But on the Hill —about the place from which the specimens
had been lifted for assay in Silverton —even the manager’s last
doubts were dissipated. He had carried a pick with him in his
buggy, and presently he unearthed a big lump of stone bearing
rich chlorides. It meant an end to all the waste of money and
the loss since first Charles Rasp had pegged the block out on the
Broken Hill. McCulloch seized the lump for his own, and, stag-
gering down to the buggy with it, heaved it in and drove off for
Mount Gipps station. The lump bore chlorides so rich that the
stuff could be cut with a knife. The party, returning with the
full assurance that Low’s discovery had indeed revealed a most
valuable property in the Broken Hill, found the manager of
Mount Gipps station regarding triumphantly the big block of
precious ore, dumped down upon the verandah of his house.


THE OLD CHIMNEY STACK.
Beside this stack in a large tent there lived in the early days Win. Jamieson and his
assistants.


CHAPTER XVII.
THE CAMP ON BROKEN HILL (1885).
THE shareholders in the Broken Hill Company were on
the way to fortune. The discoveries of chlorides of silver
had changed the whole outlook of the property. But for-
tune had come too late for several members of the original Syndi-
cate of Seven. By the middle of 1885 only four of these members
—McCulloch, Charley, James and Rasp—retained their interests
in the mine. Urquhart and Lind had grown discouraged at an
early stage of the adventure. Poole seized the opportunity
afforded by the finds of chlorides to sell his fourteenth share to
S. Davis for a sum of £4500 —a magnificent price it might well
have seemed to him at that time. He left Silverton then for the
Burra. At the same time David James disposed of a twenty-
eighth share to Mr. Harvey Patterson, owner of Corona station,
for a sum of £IBOO.
Corona station at this time was one of the biggest pastoral
properties in Hew South Wales, covering an area of 3,200,000
acres and carrying 80,000 sheep. Patterson’s first interest in the
syndicate’s property on the Broken Hill resulted from a conver-
sation with Wiseman, who asserted that he had “got into some-
thing pretty good.” Although the big discoveries of chlorides
had not yet occurred to justify Wiseman in giving any guarantee
of the richness of the mine, Patterson decided to have a look at
the Hill for himself, and the opportunity was presently afforded
by the visit of Hon. J. P. Abbott, Minister of Mines for New
South Wales, to the district. The squatters about Silverton were
asked to show the Minister all possible attention, and to “horse”


him and his party through from station to station as far as
Bourke. Going over to Mount Gipps to confer with McCulloch
on the arrangements for the Ministerial visit, Patterson chanced
to arrive on the very evening when a big silver slug had been
carried in from the Hill. The station buzzed with excitement.
The silver slug was of far more concern even to hospitable
McCulloch than the arrival of a visitor. The syndicate was hold-
ing a meeting, and for the time Patterson was left to look after
himself and his horse, receiving general instructions to “hobble
it somewhere.” By the time he had looked after his horse and
returned to Mount Gipps station the meeting of the shareholders
was practically over, and McCulloch was presently available to
entertain his guest. In the manager’s buggy the two drove up
from the creek to “Government House” —fenced about at this
time like a prisoner’s camp, so that no one might go in or come
out, except with McCulloch’s special sanction. The clear evi-
dence of the silver slug—in support of Wiseman’s enthusiasm,
the excitement of Jamieson, McCulloch and the other share-
holders—had resolved Patterson to secure an interest in the
property. Chatting in the smoke-room with McCulloch after
dinner, Patterson asked whether it was possible to buy a share
in the Hill, and, if so, what would McCulloch take for one ?
“Mon,” said McCulloch impressively “I wouldn’t take twenty
thoosan’ poond!”
Laughing, Patterson answered, “Well, that’s too much for
me.”
“Look,” said the manager, “I’ll tell you what you can do.
You can go out and see the mine with Jamieson in the morning.
He’s going out there. If you like a half-share in it I can prob-
ably induce Philip Charley to let me have one of his.”
“But what would be about the price?” asked Patterson.
“Well, if you offer him aboot twa thoosand poond, I’d advise
him to take it.”
Next morning, in company with Jamieson, Patterson was
watering his horse, when he saw a young man standing on the
other side of the creek, and, asking who he was, was told by


Jamieson that he was David James, a member of the syndicate.
“Do you think,” Patterson asked, “he would part with a
share or a half-share?”
“Well, you stay here,” said Jamieson, “and I’ll go over and
talk to him.”
Returning, Jamieson told Patterson that it was all right—
he could have a half-share, hut he would have to decide by the
following evening. The two drove off then in the buggy towards
the Broken Hill. Soon, when a mile or so off, the black Hill
appeared above the plain, and Jamieson, pulling up, called out,
‘ ‘ There you are, my boy! There’s the Broken Hill! ’ ’
“What!” cried Patterson, “that range?”
“Yes!”
“But what’s that black stuff sticking up?”
“That’s the lode!”
“Well,” said Patterson, “I don’t want to see any more of
it; if that’s so, I’ll take the share.”
Jamieson urging him to have a look at the mine itself, the
two made their way up through the mulga scrub to Rasp shaft,
and descended to the lower level. At this 150 feet level the lode
showed twenty-five feet wide, and from across it Patterson
secured several pieces for assay in Silverton, Ascending then,
the two visited the spot where the silver slug had been lifted on
the previous day, and Patterson secured from it a fragment for
assay, with other specimens. As yet the Hill was hedged about
with mulga scrub, and as the two climbed it rock wallaby started
up in scores, and, halting a little distance off, peered at the
strangers, as if wondering what on earth was doing on their Hill.
The two drove from the Hill to Silverton that afternoon.
In the town Patterson made his way with the specimens to the
office of Plude, an assayer, who had come up from Ballarat to
Silverton, and with whom he had become acquainted in the big
“silver lead” show on Corona, which had resulted in a wild rush
from Silverton. Impressing on Plude the need of immediate
assays, as James was to have his answer the next evening, Pat-
terson received the assayer’s promise that the results would be


available next day. The assays removed all doubt from his mind.
The fragment from the silver slug went 518 ounces of silver to
the ton. The samples from the twenty-five feet lode reached the
fine percentage of 50 to 56 per cent, lead and 40 to 50 ounces
silver. Jamieson had made an appointment with James to be at
Mount Gipps in the evening, and thither Patterson and he
drove. Jamieson himself undertook the negotiations with James.
He came back triumphant. He had got James to take £IBOO
for his share. Patterson, clinching the deal, entered then into
the fortunes of the Silver Hill.
The Ministerial party duly found its way to Mount Gipps
station, and was “horsed” through by McCulloch to Corona, and
by Patterson from Corona to Sturt’s Meadows station, 30 or 40
miles off. The party was carried by the station owners through
to Bourke, on the River Darling.
The rush from Silverton to Corona on the reported discovery
of silver lead had occurred a little earlier. Patterson had been
prospecting with a party on Corona station, believing that, as
the outcrops resembled the outcrops on the Silverton field and
the Broken Hill itself, he might strike a new Bonanza. On the
eve of his leaving on a visit to Melbourne, one of the station
hands came in from the back run and told the manager that he
had found silver lead in the Eight-Mile paddock. Before set-
ting out for Melbourne Patterson, much excited at the news,
determined on a thorough investigation, and instructed the mana-
ger to keep in touch with the man till his return. When he
returned, however, his manager informed him that the man had
left the station, but before going away he had shown him a very
fine specimen of silver lead. Promptly Patterson conferred with
his business agents, Dalgety and Co., and Mr. Arthur R. Black-
wood, with whom he was associated from time to time in Mel-
bourne, and was advised to send up a competent man to Corona
station to investigate the find and conduct further prospecting.
Elude agreed to undertake this task, and when Patterson again
reached Corona a few months later he found that great excite-
ment had been caused by several specimens of “silver” which


FRED. DUTTON, CHAIRMAN LONDON BOARD.


had been brought in by Flude’s prospecting party. On looking
at the specimens Patterson told Flude that be knew where there
was a whole range of that stuff —out on the Sixteen-Mile. Ex-
citedly Flude declared his intention of making out right away
with the prospectors to camp on this area, and, Patterson agree-
ing, the party started off. The owner, in the meantime, was
arranging for an assaying plant to be brought up from Adelaide.
The prospecting party, on reaching the Sixteen-Mile, started to
measure out blocks. Flude begged Patterson to take him into
the venture, and the station owner assured him that he would
do so, for Broken Hill itself was not in it with this find, and that,
if the stuff were all that Flude said it was, there was enough
and to spare for everybody on the station. As a next step Pat-
terson sent his manager into Silverton to take up the claims.
The method of taking up mineral leases at this time was for the
applicant to fill in special forms for each block, and, if these
were approved by the Warden, the applicant had to exhibit them
on the walls of the Warden’s Court. So voluminous were the
applications for the Sixteen-Mile that when the manager, Donald
Woodfield, had pinned them all up they covered the walls of the
court. The exhibits caused an immediate sensation in Silverton.
What sort of a find could have been made, was the question,
when the applications for blocks occupied such an area of the
court? Silverton was severe in its comments. Gross selfishness
had been displayed by the owner of Corona station. Why, he
couldn’t have left an inch of ground for anyone else to occupy!
It was a sheer monopoly. Still, within the next twenty-four
hours after the exhibiton, Silverton had started on a new rush.
Everybody who owned, or could steal, beg or borrow horse and
trap or bicycle was speeding out in search of the new field.
In the meantime the assay plant had been delivered at Corona
station. It was the practice of the owner from time to time to
take a trip round the station, which occupied a week. Leaving
Flude to carry out the assays on the stuff lifted from the Sixteen-
Mile, Patterson reluctantly started off on an inspection. Return-
ing he hurried straight for the assay office in search of Flude.
G


Flude did not seem to want to face him. His whole aspect was
crest-fallen, penitent, apprehensive.
“What have the assays gone?” asked Patterson breathlessly.
“I’m very sorry,” stammered Elude, “I made a mistake.”
“Why—what’s gone wrong?”
“Well, it isn’t silver lead at all. It’s only chromic iron.”
The new sensation was blown out. Disgustedly Silverton
men made their weary way back to town, Down came the applica-
tions from the walls of the Warden’s Court. Silverton was
inclined to think that Corona station had been playing a joke on
the community. Patterson asserted that Flude ought to have
known better.
With the displays of chlorides from the Broken Hill now
made in Silverton the shares in the concern no longer went beg-
ging. Logan had lost his chance of fortune. His own find of
chlorides in the stuff from Rasp shaft had induced him to
approach members of the company and offer to buy in. His
difficulty was that he had no money with him at Silverton to pay
cash down, and although Downie, his partner, had £9OO in the
bank, he would not believe that Logan had found chlorides, and
declined to lend him money to buy a share. Logan accordingly
wrote off to Brisbane for the cash, but as there was no railway
communication with Silverton the arrival of the money was too
late. After the finds of chlorides on the Hill the shareholders
were not prepared to sell for a few hundred pounds, and the deal
was off.
Money was still wanted for the proper development of the
Hill. McCulloch, indeed, talked darkly of an offer of £20,000
for his interests; and the sum, he said to Jamieson, would enable
him to clear off the burden of loss incurred through the last
drought, Jamieson counselled him to hang on at all costs. McCul-
loch, of course, hung on. It was questionable whether he had
ever seriously considered parting with his interests. Apart from
his advocacy of the proposal to sell half the property to Wilson,
McCulloch had been a source of strength to the company from
the time of the formation of the first syndicate. He had shown


isdom and foresight in insisting that every formality required
y the mining regulations should be fulfilled to the letter. The
hareholders had cause for gratitude to him for their indisput-
ihle possession of a property soon to be valued in millions. Sil-
/erton adventurers, stirred to excitement by the show of chlorides
from the Hill, had no chance now of jumping any of the claims.
The eyes of all Silverton were now upon the possibilities of the
Broken Hill, while hitherto the Day Dream had held pride of
place as the richest mine on the Barrier.
Thomas P. Gumming and Bell Jackson, directors of the
Barrier Ranges Silver Mining Company, were eager to buy into
the Broken Hill Company. Poole at the time had not disposed
of his share to Davis; but so high had the stock soared after the
finds on the Hill that he was asking from £SOOO to £6OOO for his
fourteenth. Cumming and Jackson, approaching Jamieson, were
told that the lowest price at which they could hope to buy was
£SOOO. They regarded this as excessive, and did not buy.
After the memorable Sunday excursion to the Hill, the one
thought of the shareholders was the development of the mine, now
offering splendid prospects. It was agreed that the shareholders
should contribute on a basis of £IOO for every fourteenth share
—£l4oo for the work of development—paying down £2O for a
start. At a meeting of the company on 25th April, Mr. William
Jamieson was appointed manager of the mine at a salary of £SOO
a year. For this position he relinquished his office as mining
surveyor to the New South Wales Government, being convinced
of the rich prospects offered by Broken Hill. Sam Sleep, a
Cornishman—efficient as a miner, —was appointed underground
manager.
A month earlier —at a meeting of shareholders at Mount
Gipps station on Wednesday, 18th March—it had been decided
that, in view of the improved prospects indicated by Philip
Charley’s discovery, a drive west from the bottom of the straight
shaft to cut the lode at 147 feet should at once be commenced.
By April the lode was touched in the cross cut at 150 feet, and
in the first shot chlorides were exposed.


Jamieson, now undertaking the management, arranged with
Fawcett to remove with him over to the mine, and to act as
assayer for the company. The manager pitched his camp on
Block 14, below the Hill itself, building a great stone chimney
near his tent for the convenience of the camp cook. In camp
with him were Fawcett, W. R. Thomas (his assistant), A. Reid,
Alf. Orman, Thomas World (the camp cook), and the black boy,
Harry. Dan McKay’s camp was situated a few hundred yards
away—towards the forty-acre block leased by Penglase and Car-
son, afterwards the Junction. As yet the camp at Broken Hill
was hedged about with mulga scrub, through which a track led
up to the shaft (Rasp) on Block 13, and a shallow shaft on Block
15, sunk to about fifty feet. Down Rasp shaft ran a rough timber
ladder, set askew, so that, descending, a man clinging to the rungs
could look dizzily—if he wished —into the depth below. It was
a primitive method for going down the shaft, but primitive were
all the methods for the first development of Broken Hill. The
expenses bit deeply into the small capital of the shareholders,
pointing inevitably to the need of new investment. Down the
flat before the camp the scrub was yet dense. On the Junction
block stood a thick patch of bull-oak.
Logan and Downie held a forty-acre block adjoining Block
13 of the Broken Hill Company’s property. Between this and
the track to Silverton a block of twenty acres had been pegged
out by a young fellow named Hugh Mullins, who had come over
to Silverton on the news of the discovery on the Broken Hill.
Thomas, yarning with him under the shade of a gum
nigh to the Silverton track, chanced to remark that the place
would never catch up to Silverton, and, looking out on the dreary,
sun-baked sand and mulga scrub, doubting Thomas affirmed,
“There won’t ever be a town here!”
“There won’t be!” Hugh Mullins took him up. “Why, of
course there will be! You must be a gawk to think that! I’ll
bet you a crown that in less than three years there will be two or
three pubs here. ...”


And Thomas grinning, Mullins grew hot on it. “I’ve a good
mind to start a town of my own here,” he asserted. “And, by
Jove, I will, too! ’ ’
He started it. He sketched out a town in the sand. Starting
with the hotels in the centre, and filling in with stores and resi-
dences. Thomas, taking up the joke, volunteered to draw the
plans. He’d some spare time on hand that evening.
“Only what are we going to call it, old chap 1 ?” —looking out
on the waste and the sand and the scrub, and laughing—“Mulga
Town? Silver City? That’s up against Silverton. It’s your
town! You’re the founder. Mullinsville! That’s got it! Mul-
linsville!”
That night Thomas fixed up the plans. He even named the
streets. He left the reserves for gardens. Growing visionary,
he allotted sites for the churches and the university buildings.
Mullinsville should be a centre of learning.
Amid a roar of laughter Mullins announced, “I’m off to put
up the blocks for sale in Silverton!”
Mullins was in earnest. He went to Silverton, travelling by
the road through the Nine Mile, where the coach ran at a fare of
£1 each way per passenger. He offered acre blocks from the
twenty acres which he had pegged out. To the amazement of
the group on Broken Hill business men bought the blocks —pay-
ing as high as £25 an acre. Sully and Strahan were among them,
and Sully and Strahan retained their blocks. And Mullins’s
deal was to add to the confusion of the title question, which was
to culminate in the Battle of the Barrier a year or two later.
McCulloch came driving over in his buggy to the Hill one
day to learn how the work was progressing, and fell into conver-
sation with Fawcett.
“Where are the assays most constant?” McCulloch enquired.
“In the north shaft,” Fawcett told him.
“And what does it go to mostly?” asked McCulloch.
“Dross!” was the laconic reply.
McCulloch dropped out of the conversation.
Actually the work on the mine proceeded slowly. Eighteen


men were now employed. Seven of them earned 8/4 a day, and
eleven of them 10/-. Alf Orman rode over regularly to draw the
money from the bank at Silverton. Rich chlorides were met
with in the drive, and at the 150 feet level chlorides were visible
for fifteen feet across the lode. And in Silverton J. S, Reid esti-
mated the value of the property, and the rush that must now
come, and affirmed that within twenty years there would be 10,000
men on the Hill. The prospects offering, and the shortage of
cash for development, debated by the shareholders’ meeting at
the Mount Gipps station, resulted in the decision to float a new
company, Messrs. William Jamieson, George McCulloch, Bowes
Kelly and W, R. Wilson were appointed a committee to draw
up the prospectus.
Wilson was the only member who had ever floated a com-
pany. None of the others of the committee knew anything about
it. So the committee, with the exception of McCulloch, met in
Wilson’s office at Silverton, and Wilson advised the offer of 2000
shares to the public of Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide and Silver-
ton in equal proportions and at £9 each, on the terms of £2/10/-
on application, £2/10/- on allotment, and the balance by four
equal monthly payments of £1 each. When the payments were
completed the shares were to be issued as paid up to £l9, “for,”
said Wilson, “if you give them a share worth £l9 for £9 it’s
dirt cheap.”
And the committee formulated accordingly that night the
first prospectus of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company
Limited.
Off from Wilson’s office to J. S. Reid’s office of “The Silver
Age” the members of the committee hurried with the prospectus,
and demanded of Reid that his press should get to work right
away, and turn out as many thousands of copies as the night
would admit, Jamieson was deputed to catch the coach next
morning and to speed off to Adelaide, and the copies of the pros-
pectus must be ready for him. Jamieson objected that he had
made no arrangements for the trip. The committee declared
against him—he was to be off next morning. He protested that


he was not going down as he stood —all covered with mud and
dust from the mine. Wilson cut the ground away from under
his feet. He had invested in a new suit —never worn it. It would
fit Jamieson well enough. At any rate, he’d got to go to Adelaide.
Jamieson yielded so far as to try on the suit. It fitted. The
members of the committee were not given to compliments, but
now declared him the devil of a swell. The manager promptly
agreed to go to Adelaide.
So the office of “The Silver Age” hummed all night. So
Jamieson mounted the coach next morning. And after him were
handed up huge packages of the prospectus, which was to turn
the eyes of the speculative world on Broken Hill.


CHAPTER XYIII.
THE FIRST PROSPECTUS (1885).
Ay it issued from the printing press of “The Silver Age”
on 20th June, 1885, the first prospectus of The Broken
Hill Proprietary ran as follows: —
(REPRINT.)
PROSPECTUS
OF THE
Broken Hill Proprietary Co.
LIMITED
TO BE REGISTERED UNDER THE COMPANIES ACT.
CAPITAL, <£320,000
In 16,000 Shares of £2O each, to be issued as paid up to s£l9
2,000 Shares are offered to the Public of Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Silverton,
in equal proportions, at £9 each, on the following terms, viz.;—
On application £2 10 0
On allotment 2 10 0
Balance by Four equal Monthly Payments of £1 each .... 400


When the payments as set forth are made and completed, the Shares to be issued as
paid up to £l9, to rank in all respects with the remaining 14,000 Shares held by the
present Owners; and the calling powers of the Company thereafter to be limited to £1
per Share, for which the whole 16,000 Shares are equally liable: Calls not to exceed
1/- per Share per month.
PROVISIONAL DIRECTORS.
GEOEGE McCULLOCH, Mount Gipps Station.
BOWES KELLY, Silverton.
HAEYEY PATTERSON, Melbourne.
KENNETH E. BRODEIBB, Poolamacca Station.
WILLIAM JAMIESON, Silverton.
WM. AUSTIN HORN, Adelaide.
J. W. BAKBWELL, Adelaide.
WM. E. WILSON, Silverton.
S. P. HAWKINS, Mount Gipps Station.
BANKERS.
COMMERCIAL BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
SOLICITORS.
MOULE & BEDDON, Melbourne.
BROKERS.
T. S. HORN, Beaconsfield Buildings, Adelaide.
CHAPPLE & ALLEN, Silverton.
SECRETARY PRO TEM.
CHARLES CHAPPLE, Silverton.
THE object for which it is proposed to form this Company is to take over and
work for silver, lead, and other minerals, or otherwise dispose of Mineral Leases
Nos. 46, 49, 50, 51, 52, 58, 59, 60, 865, 866, and 867, County of Yancowinnia,
Barrier Silver-Field, New South Wales, now held by the Broken Hiix Mining Company,
and containing a total area of 457 acres 1 rood.
Leases 46, 49, 50, 51, 52, 58, and 59, having an area of 297 acres 1 rood, comprise
the celebrated Broken Hill. It will be seen by the sketch plan attached that the seven


blocks named extend in a north-east and south-west direction for 150 chains 93 links, the
lode showing distinctly for almost the entire length, and being of a thickness varying
from seven to thirty feet.
Two shafts have been sunk on the line, in which it is apparent the lode is going
down almost vertical. In the deeper of these —on measured block 13 (M.L. No. 49)
near the centre of the property —crosscuts have been driven through the lode at 100 feet,
where it is 14 feet thick, and at 150 feet, where it is 21 feet 10 inches from wall to wall.
At both levels rich ore, showing chlorides freely, has been cut. A bulk sample of five
bags, taken from right across the lode at 100 feet, gave an average assay result equal
to 118 oz. of silver to the ton of ore. In the lower crosscut for over seven feet the ore
shows chlorides freely, and the "whole "width is believed to be highly payable.
At various places along the outcrop for a distance of 800 yards south from this
shaft chlorides have also been found in the immense masses of surface ore of which it
is composed, and the average results by assay from this surface ore are highly
satisfactory.
About 500 yards north of the main shaft No. 2 shaft is down 50 feet, and here the
ore again shows chlorides.
Mineral Leases 865, 866, and 867 run at right angles to the above-mentioned
Leases, and embrace the best timber there is in the locality, as well as a suitable tank
site, on which there is already excavated a supply tank.
Mineral Lease No. 60 has an area of 40 acres, and is situated at a place called the
Nine-mile, five miles in a north-west direction from the Broken Hill. It is traversed
by a strong galena lode, giving fair assay results, and which may prove in itself a
valuable property.
Of the various Leases specified, Nos. 46, 49, 50, 51, 52, 58, and 59 are gazetted as
approved, and the Minister’s sanction to the remaining four is expected in due course.
The proceeds of the sale of the 2,000 shares now offered to the public (viz., £18,000)
will be apportioned in the following manner: £3,000 will be paid to the original
proprietors (as registered on the 20th June inst.), as payment for their outlay to date,
and the balance of £15,000, less expenses connected with the forming of this Company,
will be placed to the credit of the Company for the purpose of working the mines and
purchasing necessary smelters, etc.
Taking into consideration the vastness of the lode both in size and extent, together
with its proved richness, the Provisional Directors believe that in placing these shares
before the public they are inviting them to become partners in what appears to be one
of the most valuable mining properties in Australia.
When the Company has been formed the Head Office will be in Melbourne. A
Board of three Directors will be appointed there, and at Silverton a Local Board of
four Directors.
The share list will be open simultaneously in Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and
Silverton, on the 29th June, and will close on the 6th July, 1885; and as soon thereafter


as may be deemed advisable a meeting of shareholders will be called, to adopt Articles
of Association, appoint Directors, and transact other necessary business for completing
the incorporation of the Company.
Should any shares remain unapplied for when the lists close, they will revert to the
Broken Hill Proprietary Company, to be disposed of in such manner as may be decided
upon.
Should the applications exceed the number of shares offered (2,000) they will be
allotted pro rata. When the lists have closed the applications will be dealt with in
Silverton, where the allotment will be made and the result notified to applicants through
their local Brokers with all possible despatch.


CHAPTER XIX.
THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY (1885).
SO down to Terowie and through to Adelaide went Jamieson
with his load of copies of the first prospectus of The Broken
Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd. In Adelaide the committee had
decided that he was to wait on J, W. Bakewell, of Bakewell and
Symon, the leading firm of solicitors in the city. The committee
had elected to consult Bakewell on the question whether the pros-
pectus complied with all legal requirements, as Bakewell was a
friend of theirs, and his advice might be gratuitous.
Arriving at the solicitor’s office with the copies, Jamieson
was accorded an interview with Bakewell, explained his business,
and submitted the prospectus with an air of profound satisfac-
tion, The committee’s enthusiasm for the chlorides of Broken
Hill pervaded the entire prospectus. This enthusiasm was not
communicated to Bakewell’s legal mind. Bakewell scanned it,
and his comment was “H’m!”
“What do you think of it?” asked Jamieson.
“Well, it won’t do at all,” pronounced Bakewell, with an
air of finality.
“Why, what’s wrong with it?”
“It’s too definite altogether. It doesn’t provide for the
future. Why, you actually say definitely, ‘lt’s so and so!’ You
should never have said anything of the kind. You’ll have to put
it this way—‘lt’s about so and so.’ I mean, qualify it!”
Jamieson was learning something about the drafting of a
prospectus. But Bakewell, having enjoyed his little joke, settled
down in the capacity of adviser to the company to assist the


manager in a revision of the prospectus. The revision was so
thorough that the reprinting of the whole issue of the prospectus
had to be undertaken.
In the terms of the prospectus 500 shares were allotted to
Silverton, 500 to Adelaide, 500 to Melbourne and 500 to Sydney.
Charles Chappie, temporary secretary for the company, speedily
disposed of all the shares allotted to Silverton, where the rich
prospects of the mine were now thoroughly realised. From
Sydney C. J. Buckland forwarded by 6th July applications for
the full 500, and T, S. Horn soon sold the number allotted to
Adelaide. Only in Melbourne did the stock hang fire. Prospec-
tive buyers declared the payments too stiff for an unknown mine,
and demanded to know what the company would do with all the
money. Still, even the Melbourne stock was to be taken up. In
accordance with the terms of the prospectus, £3OOO from the
£IB,OOO raised by the sales of the 2000 shares was to be paid over
to the shareholders in the company of fourteen, and £15,000, less
the expense connected with the formation of the company, was
to be devoted to the purpose of working the mine and purchasing
smelters. The Proprietary placed the £15,000 with Dalgety and
Co. on call, but the money was never used. William Knox, of
Collins-street, Melbourne, was now appointed Secretary to the
new silver mining company.
But during the absence of the manager in Adelaide a start-
ling development had taken place upon the Broken Hill. The
black boy, Harry Campbell, might have well been the Broken
Hill Proprietary’s mascot. The boy had become the keenest of
prospectors. On the morning before the manager left the Broken
Hill for Silverton to assist in drafting the prospectus of the new
company he sent the boy on to the Hill, showing him a lump con-
taining chloride, and telling him “Plenty that fellow longa there.”
His directions were that he should search at the end of the big
bluff. The boy came back to Sleep, the underground manager,
with a load of lumps of the richest ore yet found upon the Hill.
He had struck the chlorides in the kaolin at a point on Block
12 near the north boundary of Block 11. Sleep at once put on


a couple of men to open up the ground, and a profusion of rich
ore was speedily laid bare. The ironstone disappeared at the
surface, and the silver was found in a matrix of kaolin and
quartz. Specimens assaying as high as 18,000 ounces to the ton
were raised, and several tons bagged from the surface cutting
were found by fair bulk assays to contain from 2000 to 3000
ounces of silver to the ton.
This shaft—Knox shaft—started the very life of the splen-
did Big Mine of the Broken Hill. It was unlucky for the share-
holders of the company of fourteen that a find of this surprising
richness should not have been made before Jamieson left Silver-
ton for Adelaide to float the new company. It was a lucky stroke
of destiny for the holders of the 2000 shares placed on the mar-
ket. Wild excitement followed upon the Barrier. Prom all the
mining field commenced a rush towards the Broken Hill. Silver-
ton, the town of a decade —between its birth and its decay,—had
received its very death blow. But as yet none in Silverton
realised that the town had passed the zenith of its fortune, and
that the silver star of Willyama—Broken Hill —rose dazzling
above the Barrier.
So, on 10th August, 1885, the Broken Hill Proprietary Com-
pany Limited was floated. The date was memorable. It marked
the true start in the development of a mine, which, as in the
passing of a day, was to prove the most splendid in the history
of silver mining. Out of the Hill of Mullock were to flow now,
as an endless river, many fortunes. By its magic treasure were
to be influenced the destinies of men, of States, of the Australian
Commonwealth. Out of the black and burnished Hill, which
Captain Sturt, broken and worn visionary and explorer, had
climbed, hoping to look upon his inland sea —the sea of silver
mirage—out of the ironbound Hill, which, towering, treeless,
shadeless, had repelled throughout the years the gold seekers and
the silver seekers; out of the bluff which young Chas. Rasp, the
boundary rider had marked out as a mass of oxide of tin;
for a share in which George McCulloch, manager of a drought-
stricken station, had played a game of cards —out of this Hill


of silver was now to flow wealth beyond dreams of avarice. The
Broken Hill brought splendid fortune to station manager, mining
surveyor, station hand. Its magic exchanged the boundary
rider’s hut for a great house in Adelaide. It transferred the
manager of Mount Gipps station from the stone cottage to a
mansion in England. For the salt-bush plains it gave him old
world gardens; for the prints upon his walls, treasures of art.
It opened to the men of Mount Gipps the wondrous ways of the
world —to all who had trusted in the Hill of Mullock till its reve-
lation as the Hill of Silver. And on the very flat where young
Hugh Mullins had sketched his Mullinsville with a stick on the
hot sand was now to spring up a great city, pulsating, burning
with life —Willyama, the Youth —Broken Hill—the City of
Silver.
The sudden change in the fortunes of the Mount Gipps group
drew them all away from Broken Hill—Charles Easp to Ade-
laide; George McCulloch at first to Melbourne and then to
England; Philip Charley to Sydney and his own station in Hew
South Wales; David James to Kapunda and Adelaide. At first
the members of the group would leave Broken Hill for a visit
to the cities, and then return to the home of their fortunes.
Philip Charley, having made a tour of the principal cities and
mining centres of Australia, came back with the assertion that
there was no place equal to Broken Hill. Externally Easp’s
development from boundary rider to man of wealth manifested
itself gradually. At first the transformation was suggested by
a paper collar and a suit of reach-me-downs. The next trip to
the city resulted in the smartest of smart tailoring and superla-
tive linen. After this Easp did not very long remain on the
Barrier, but bought a big house in Adelaide.
So the men who had figured vividly about the Broken Hill
in the early eighties passed out from its story. For the time the
interests of George McCulloch were linked with the development
of the Big Mine. For a lifetime the story of Mr. William Jamie-
son has been bound up with the story of the Hill. But the Great
Silver Mine itself now dominated the drama of the Broken Hill.


CHAPTER XX.
THE RISE OF BROKEN HILL (1885-1887).
THE first meeting of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company’s
Board of Advice (referred to in the prospectus) was held
at the mine on 25th July, 1885. McCulloch presided, and
Wilson, Jamieson and Bowes Kelly attended. The principal
decisions reached were that Jamieson, as general manager, should
proceed at once to Melbourne to confer with the directors on the
financing and development of the mine, and the purchase of two
25-ton smelters; and that fifty tons of picked ore, to be sent to
Melbourne for smelting, should be treated as promptly as pos-
sible under the supervision of one of the directors.
Jamieson accordingly went down to Melbourne. Forty-eight
tons of ore were sent after him down to Adelaide, and shipped
thence round to Melbourne. But the selection of the ore under
Fawcett’s supervision was all too slow for the general manager,
and a lively interchange of letters and telegrams took place
between him and his fellow-directors at Broken Hill. Writing
on 17th August, McCulloch stated that Sleep, the underground
manager, had come in that day to show him Jamieson’s telegram
directing him to send away at once thirty-two tons of the best
ore to be had at grass, and to ask him to act. On the previous
day Sleep had sent away eleven tons of ore approximating 500
ounces to the ton. He had got all the ore picked that was at
grass, and, at the same rate, it would take him six weeks to get
the balance. At any time he could send away stuff averaging
fifty to sixty ounces. “I think myself,” McCulloch added, “it
would be a great mistake to send away this low-class ore after


the good stuff has gone. The man cannot do impossibilities with
the workings and appliances he now has for getting the ore out.”
But at last the selected ore, weighing 48 tons 5 cwt. 3 grs.,
was sent off to Melbourne, and was forwarded by Jamieson to
the Intercolonial Smelting and Refining Company’s works at
Spottiswoode, Going out to the works to learn the results, the
general manager found that the smelting was over, and that the
ores had given a splendid yield. The lot had produced 35,605
ozs. 10 dwts. 19 grs. of silver. For a time this silver was placed
on exhibition at the City of Melbourne Bank in Collins Street.
The exhibit naturally excited considerable public interest; but
the sceptics declared that it was only a dodge on the part of the
company promoters. The silver was not from the Broken Hill
mine at all, they asserted. The company promoters had simply
got the silver from somewhere else, and had put it into the ore.
“I don’t know where we could have got it from,” declared
the general manager, thinking ruefully of the state of the com-
pany’s finances.
The silver was sold for cash, and netted £7442/12/11. The
Broken Hill Proprietary had received from its forty-eight tons
of ore the means for starting seriously the development of the
mine.
In the coming months the development of the mine proceeded
apace. The consent of the Minister of Mines in Sydney was
obtained to the amalgamation of all the mineral leases pegged
out two years before on behalf of the Syndicate of Seven. Two
30-ton Nevada smelting furnaces and plant capable of putting
through 100 tons of ore a day were ordered, and the plant was
speedily being hauled from Adelaide to the Broken Hill. In the
meantime a blast furnace had been erected and blown in at the
Pinnacles mine, and furnaces had been put down at the Day
Dream, and were kept continuously in blast. Earlier still water-
jacket smelters had been erected at Sunny Corner silver field,
which had been opened up in 1875, and had, indeed, prepared
the mining community for the development of the silver Barrier.
This work at Sunny Corner was carried out under the personal
H


direction of John de La Monte, holder of the patent rights for
the water-jacket smelter, who subsequently came on to the Sil-
verton field to superintend the erection of the Day Dream
smelters. Pending the completion of the Broken Hill Proprie-
tary’s own smelters a contract was made with the Barrier Ranges
Silver Mining Company for the treatment of a quantity of ore
from the Hill at the Day Dream smelters. The Barrier Ranges
Company put through its smelters 1053 tons of the Broken Hill
ore, and the yield was 132,140 ounces of silver, or an average of
125 ounces to the ton. Fawcett, assayer to the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary, was sent over from the Hill to the Day Dream to
represent the Proprietary, and remained for three months in the
lively mining camp which had grown up about the mine. La
Monte had brought over from the Pacific Slope a number of
Americans to run the smelters, and among them Pat Conway,
who was in charge of the work at the Day Dream, and who might
be described as speaking with a pronounced American brogue.
A refinery had been established at the mine, and silver bullion
was produced to be hauled away through Terowie to Adelaide.
The nature of the ore from Broken Hill was new to the men
at the Day Dream, and on the reception of a load the surface-
foreman, Giles, who was taking delivery, came hurrying to Faw-
cett to announce, “They’ve made some blunder over at the Hill.
There’s some waggons just arrived with a whole lot of mullock. ’ ’
Fawcett, on inspecting the consignment, found that the mul-
lock was rich chloride in white kaolin from Knox shaft.
At the Hill the silver treasure was now being opened up
systematically and with speed. On Block 15 the southern shaft
was sunk perpendicularly to a depth of 102 feet, showing from
65 feet down a mixture of “country” and ore, and proving that
the lode was nearly perpendicular. The ore consisted of car-
bonate of lead in small veins of oxide of iron, with here and there
spots of chloride of silver. The general manager expressed the
opinion that when the crosscut was made at a depth of 120 feet
the part of the lode would turn out to be rich in carbonate of lead
and to contain rich shoots of silver ore. On Block 14 outcrops


BOWES HELLY,
Present Chairman of Directors.


of lead showed on the surface of the lode, but none had yet been
opened out to any extent. On Block 13 three shafts —the main
shaft, the air shaft and the permanent engine and working shaft
—had been sunk. The main shaft had reached a depth of 200
feet, and two crosscuts at the 106 feet level and a drive 146 feet
long had been made. At this level the perpendicular shaft left
the lode, which apparently dipped slightly to the north-west. At
146 feet another crosscut was put in, showing the lode to be
29 feet wide and nine feet from the perpendicular. A drive of
170 feet was made along the hanging wall, but then it was found
impossible to proceed with the work on account of the insufficient
draught of air to blow the fine particles of lead away from the
men at work, who were becoming seriously affected with its poison-
ing. Crosscuts and drives exposed an immense body of highly
payable ore. On Block 12 three shafts (2, 4 and 5) were being
sunk. Shaft No. 3 was down 132 feet, and revealed chlorides;
from shoft No. 5 some good ore was lifted; but in shaft No. 4
was struck the richest part of the lode, assaying as high as
17,800 ounces to the ton. At 145 feet the lode appeared to be
about 180 feet wide. A large tank to hold 1,680,000 gallons of
water had been constructed near the mine.
At the first general meeting of the Proprietary, held at the
company’s office, 121 Collins Street West, Melbourne, Arthur R.
Blackwood, Chairman of Directors, congratulated the share-
holders on their possession of a silver mine of remarkable rich-
ness and extent. The present development, he said, already
revealed large bodies of valuable ore, which it would take years
to treat and reduce. The syndicate’s property had risen to the
dignity of a great mine.
Mr, Bowes Kelly, who was announced in the first prospectus
as a provisional director of the Broken Hill Proprietary, and
who was elected a director at the first ordinary general meeting
of shareholders on 15th December, 1885, had acquired a fourteenth
share in the Broken Hill, before the first discovery of chlorides
from Rasp shaft had sent the shares soaring. In 1880-1 Mr.
Kelly was manager of Billilla station, near Wilcannia. He wit


nessed the first rush of gold seekers making up to Mount Brown.
Leaving the management of Billilla then, he found his way ulti-
mately up to the Paroo River, north of Wilcamfia, and, having
held land there for a brief period, he sold out advantageously on
the boom of a rich year, and left the district for Melbourne. The
discovery of the Silverton field following the Mount Brown rush,
and the fame of the Barrier becoming noised abroad, he travelled
next up to Silverton, to find town and mining field in the full
fever of excitement over the discoveries. His hope was to secure
an interest in a promising property, but shares in the famous
mines of the first days were offering only at fabulous prices.
Travelling round the field, now being opened up by the prospec-
tors, and inspecting claim after claim —thin veins, shallow
pockets, glittering surface shows accepted then as the promises
of new Day Dreams —Mr. Kelly heard first of the venture on
the Broken Hill undertaken by the Mount Gipps syndicate of
seven. Mr. Jamieson was perhaps the most strenuous advocate
at the time of the prospective richness of the Hill. Silverton did
not yet take it seriously—a Hill of Mullock; an immense mass
of low-grade ore, may be; nothing as yet to reveal or even to
suggest its treasure. But Mr. Kelly formed the idea that this
Broken Hill might be indeed the very centre of the silver fields
—the main body of the ore scattered richly in pocket and vein
through the Silverton field. The chance of securing an interest
in the Hill offering in 1884, he bought a fourteenth share.
The share had originally belonged to Poole, James’s part-
ner, but it had passed under the control of Mr. Sidney Kidman.
From the stock driven down past the contractor’s camp Poole
and James had bought four steers—not for cash, for the mem-
bers of the original syndicate had little ready cash—but for a
share, as a set off, in the Broken Hill. And with the shares in
the Hill going begging, it might well have seemed to the partners
that they had the better bargain. Kidman had placed the share
in the hands of Silverton agents to be disposed of, and this share
Mr. Kelly bought on behalf of himself, his brother, Mr. George
C. Kelly, and Mr. William Weatherly, his successor at Billilla, for


JAMIESON SHAFT, LOOKING NORTH-EAST.


a sum of £l5O. One factor which guided him in his speculation
was the consideration that, if anything resulted from the opera-
tions on the Broken Hill, he was assured of a return for his money.
For this was by no means the case in buying an interest in the
Bonanza of an average prospector. The chances were that the
buyer might never again see his money—even if the property
proved on development to be rich in silver. The prospector might
never have secured a right over the property on which he had
found, or had not found, silver. His application for a lease
might have gone through to Sydney, and not have been granted
by the Mines Department. And in the early muddle over the
Barrier leases the odds were that the development of a claim
and the proof of its silver contents would mean a host of claim-
ants, who had bought, or believed that they had bought, interests
from the original prospectors. By this time, in the wild rushes
from one quarter of the Barrier field to another, the original
prospectors might have disappeared. But the members of the
Broken Hill syndicate were settled definitely at Mount Gipps.
During this visit to the Silverton field Mr. Kelly did not
travel out to the Hill itself. The journey to Silverton over
waterless plains and ridges was no mean undertaking. He had
his knowledge of the Hill itself second-hand from Jamieson and
McCulloch and others of the men of Silverton. Before the
summer he returned to Melbourne.
During the summer McCulloch himself came down to town,
and on Mr, Kelly’s calling upon him to learn the progress of the
venture on the Broken Hill, the manager of Mount Gipps was
able to tell him that the stuff lifted from Rasp shaft was show-
ing chlorides —rich chlorides. Specimens on assay in Adelaide
had gone as high as 300 to 400 ounces, and the shares had risen
in value as high as £6OO. Mr. Kelly’s belief that the Hill should
prove a rich property was immediately to be justified. The Hill,
as he had conjectured, was the very heart of the Barrier, like a
great treasure-chest from which the silver had been spilt ages
before over the sands.
Returning to Silverton after the worst heat of the summer


with this new interest in his share in the property, Mr. Kelly saw
the sudden rise of the Broken Hill syndicate to fortune. His
name thus appeared among the fourteen original shareholders
in the second syndicate. He was among the shareholders who
attended the historic meeting at Mount Gipps station on the
Saturday night when Low’s discovery of chlorides was announced
by Jamieson, and W. R. Wilson’s effort to secure a powerful
interest over the property was frustrated. And, subsequently
driving out from Mount Gipps to the Broken Hill itself for the
first time, he found it, he says, apart from the shaft on which
the McKay Brothers were engaged, “just as the blacks had left
it.” Later, when it became clear that for the proper develop-
ment of the mine more capital must be secured, and when the
flotation of the Broken Hill Proprietary was planned, he was a
member of the committee appointed for the drafting of the
prospectus. The discovery of the chlorides —the surface shows
which were to transform the little venture on the Broken Hill
to the greatest silver mine in the world —bore him to fortune.
He had bought a fourteenth share for £l5O. He was looking,
he says, for something at a reasonable price and with a reason-
able prospect of turning out a good thing. And he had “hit it.”
His purchase was to identify his life’s interest and activities till
to-day with the direction of the mighty organisation springing
out of the first little shaft upon the Broken Hill.
Mr. Duncan E. Mcßryde, also at this first meeting, was
elected a director of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company
pany —an office which he, too, has held to the present day. At
the time of the discovery of gold at Mount Brown in 1880 he
was living on his station, Mount Poole, formerly known as Depot
Glen. The Depot Glen had been the prison house of Captain
Sturt and his party of explorers through the fatal months of
drought—from 27th January to 17th July, 1845.
“It was not,” wrote Sturt, “until after we had run down
every creek in the neighbourhood and had traversed the country
in every direction that the truth flashed across my mind, and it
became evident to me that we were locked up in the desolate and


POOLE'S GRAVE.
Ne ar Depot Glan.


heated region, into which we had penetrated, as effectually as
if we had wintered at the Pole. It was long, indeed, before I
could bring myself to believe that so great a misfortune had
overtaken us; but so it was. Providence had, in its all-wise pur-
pose, guided us to the only spot in that widespread desert where
our wants could have been permanently supplied, but had there
stayed our former progress into a region that almost appears
to be forbidden ground.”
The Glen had been cut by a little creek running down from
a low harsh range, a fringe of gum trees marking its course.
Through the long months of drought Sturt and his followers
were compelled to camp by the water in the Glen. Attempts to
escape in any direction were frustrated by heat and thirst. Poole
was wasting with scurvy. The water in the Glen was drying up,
before the drought broke, and on 12th June the first rain fell.
While Sturt himself proposed to journey north and west,
Poole was now to be carried back to the River Darling, in the
hope of saving his life. He died on the first day out from Depot
Glen. His body was brought back to camp and buried under
the Red Hill, as Sturt called it—the Mount Poole of the eighties
—at about three and a half miles distant from Depot Glen. On
Mount Poole station in 1880 a tree carved with the letters “ J.P.,
1845” still marked the grave.
The discovery of gold at Mount Brown, near the boundaries
of Mount Poole station, was made by a contractor named Neale
while fencing. Neale picked up small nuggets of gold lying on
the surface of the ground after a fall of rain. He collected a
considerable number of these nuggets, and the news of the dis-
covery brought a rush of gold seekers to the district —the rush
which meant the revelation of the Silverton field. To the owner
of Mount Poole station and his men the rush meant broken fences,
torn down by the miners making helter skelter for the new gold-
field. Over the district, where Sturt’s ambition had been shat-
tered and Poole’s life burnt out, came these, thirty-five years
later —the miners in their scores —to form at one time in the brief
life of the field a community of five thousand persons.


Mr. Mcßryde had long been anxious that a more fitting
memorial should be erected to the intrepid explorer whose bones
lay buried beneath the tree on Mount Poole. Several years
earlier he had obtained the stone for a monument —it had been
carted for a distance of twenty-five miles —but he had been unable
to engage the services of a stone mason. When the rush took
place he found a mason among them, but this man, unfortu-
nately, had his own ideas of spelling. The stone was to have
been inscribed “To the memory of James Poole, Second in Com-
mand of Sturt’s Exploring Party. Died here on the 16th of July,
1845;” but the mason threw an additional “c” into “Seccond.”
This was the correct spelling, he insisted, when Mr. Mcßryde
objected that one “c” would have been sufficient. In fact, so
convinced was the man that he was right that he staked his pro-
fessional reputation and his job on it. He lost his job. The
stone with its curious epitaph was set up under the tree, and a
railing placed about it to mark the grave. Years afterwards,
when travelling to London as a director of the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary, Mr. Mcßryde met the mason as a fellow-passenger.
But he was a mason no longer. He had made his way from New
South Wales to Western Australia, and had struck it rich there
in the gold days. The Mount Brown field was short lived. The
Silverton field blazed into fame. The star of Broken Hill shone
over the Barrier. By the time of the flotation of the Proprietary
Mr. Mcßryde had sold Mount Poole station. He was well
acquainted with the rich promise of the Broken Hill, and, though
he was not a member of the original company of fourteen, he was
among the first buyers when the Proprietary’s shares were
offered to the public. From his first election as director his for-
tunes have been identified with the Broken Hill.
Much of the preliminary work in Melbourne was carried
out by Mr. Harvey Patterson, who had been in the habit of divid-
ing his time between the city and Corona station —which he dis-
posed of to a syndicate in 1889 with 150,000 sheep. At the request
of the local committee, Patterson proceeded to appoint brokers,
selecting the firm of Byron Moore and McLeod. He himself


made every endeavour to lend impetus to the disposal of the Mel-
bourne shares, persuading Mr. Arthur Blackwood (afterwards
first chairman of the company) to take fifty shares, while Mr.
Edward Miller (afterwards Sir Edward Miller) and Mr. John
Peterson took shares to the value of £IOO each, and one or two
more of Patterson’s friends and relatives also bought into the com-
pany. The amount of £9 asked for the shares was declared to be
excessive, and Patterson was told repeatedly that instead of asking
pounds the company should he selling its shares for “9/-” if
it really wanted to get rid of them. He, however, expressed him-
self as fully confident of the future of the mine. In all only two
or three hundred shares were got rid of in Melbourne itself,
Messrs. Byron Moore and McLeod taking shares to the value of
their commission. Still this mattered little, as the demand in
Silverton and Adelaide, where the Broken Hill was known, was
such that the balance of the shares left from Melbourne sales
were speedily snapped up. The next task for Patterson was to
find bankers for the company, and to establish the office of secre-
tary in Melbourne, as the company was to be registered there.
The Bank of Australasia had for some time past conducted Pat-
terson’s business, and accordingly he went to it to secure its
interest. He interviewed its superintendent, the late Mr. E. S.
Parkes, on the subject, told him of the history of the Hill, and
assured him that he was confident that this was to be one of the
biggest things that had even been floated. At which the superin-
tendent smiled a supercilious smile, and, though he refrained
from harsh comment, his clear opinion was, “Another mining
maniac! There’s no end to them.” Courteously and diplomatic-
ally, however, he replied, “Mr. Patterson, you can depend that
we shall be glad to get the account, and we know that what you
have said you have every confidence in.”
“I don’t think your bank will ever regret taking this
account,” said Patterson.
And this account was to prove the best of accounts handled
by the bank, for as the company grew with the development of
the mine very many of the shareholders also placed their business


with the bank, and in addition it reaped the benefit of the com-
pany’s Eastern trade.
Patterson now proceeded to appoint a secretary. He selected
William Knox, who had been associated with the Bank of Vic-
toria, but severing his connection with it, had established his
office near the Rialto, in Collins Street, Melbourne. Patterson
was well acquainted with him, for he had already transacted busi-
ness with him, owing to Knox’s holding the secretaryship of the
Pioneer Tin Mining Company of Tasmania, and in his capacity
as accountant. Having sounded several firms on the question of
taking the secretaryship, Patterson waited finally on Knox.
“William,” said he, “you’ll have to do this job for us at one
pound per week. I’ve other offers from thirty to thirty-five shil-
lings a week.” Knox consented. He said he would take on the
work, although it was a very small remuneration. Still he hoped
in the future to get a little more. And he got it.
Not long after the secretary moved his office to the opposite
side of Collins Street, next to the office of James Service and Go.
It was here that the first meeting of the company took place. In
the light of future developments, humour is attached to an inci-
dent which occurred at a meeting at which Mr. Mcßryde was
elected first to the board. Meeting Mr. Patterson in the office,
Mr. Mcßryde questioned him on the prospects of the Hill. Pat-
terson assuring him that it would be one of the biggest things on
earth, the director retorted, “It’s all bunkum; don’t talk non-
sense!” Prom Collins Street the office was moved to Queen
Street, to the north of Gordon and Gotch’s Building. Thence
it was removed to 39 Queen Street, afterwards to 31 Queen Street,
and finally, in 1896, to the suite in the Equitable Buildings on
the corner of Collins and Eliazbeth Streets, which the company
still retains.
And all this while about the Hill was springing up a town-
ship, as Silverton had sprung up by the TJmberumberka soakages.
Mullins had been a prophet. And Mullins had stepped in early,
and had disposed of business sites on the block which he had


TOWNSHIP OF BROKEN HIKE, 1889.


pegged out. Touching Logan and Downie’s block, and in a line
with the Broken Hill Co.’s Block 14, a track wound from the
Broken Hill to Silverton. The first house on Broken Hill was
built for William Jamieson—on Block 14. And, with T. H. N.
Goodwin, Government surveyor for the Silverton district, Jamie-
son selected the site for the township of Broken Hill. It was
named Willyama —aboriginal for “youth.” The original survey
was carefully made by Mr. Goodwin. But the wild excitement
over the chlorides brought the miners from the Silverton field
crowding about the Hill; and the town grew up as the miners
listed. Delamore’s Hotel, by the Silverton track, followed the
general manager’s house. One evening Thomas and his mates
found the contractor’s men engaged in clearing off the mulga
scrub and digging for the foundations of the first hotel at Broken
Hill. The Broken Hill group would not believe it. “A pub. on
Broken Hill!” The drought was broken indeed —and the hotel
came. It was pulled down out Lake’s camp way and re-erected
by A. P. Pincombe. And the night of its opening to the public
meant a wild wet night for the Barrier. The thing was done in
style. The dinner given by the proprietor assembled a gathering
representative of the district. Up to the hotel rode the miner
from Purnamoota, and the men from out-back; drove the man
from Silverton; walked the group from Broken Hill. Not a man
who ate that dinner, and drank those wines, and roared with
laughter at the bewhiskered settler who, using a serviette for a
handkerchief, declared, “My blanky oath, they’re doing the
blanky thing blanky well,” but felt that night that the Hill of
Silver would bring them all fortune. Never was the outlook
for Broken Hill and the Proprietary’s great mine more glorious.
It was a wild wet night upon the Barrier!
Over to the Broken Hill ere this had come John Johns,
boarding-house keeper, of Silverton, and, making his way into
the camp, offered a dozen eggs for the right to run a boarding-
house for the miners. Eggs were as precious as chlorides on the
Broken Hill at this time. He secured his right. He handed


over the eggs. He could not have had a worse advertisement for
his boarding-house. Nine of the eggs were bad; there was not
a doubt about them. There was some doubt about the other three.
They revealed, none the less, a leaning towards their contem-
poraries from that nest.
After Delamore’s Hotel rose in quick succession Sully’s old
store, the Silver King Hotel, Brazill and Jones’s store, the shops
of J. R. Stewart the baker, Neilson and Co. the butchers, Langa-
mier’s billiard saloon, Vaughan’s Hotel, Ledgard’s, Lee’s, Finn’s,
until out along the sandy track shaped the first buildings of
Argent Street. About the main street rose a medley of shacks
and shanties and more substantial dwellings—a confusion yet, for
no man had a clear title. The Lands Department of New South
Wales paltered with the question for months. The holders of
the miners’ rights about the Hill pegged out at will the blocks
for business sites and residential purposes. On 3rd October,
1885, the New South Wales Government issued a proclamation
under section 26 of the Mining Act, 1884, reserving the greater
portion of the land on which the town was growing up from occu-
pation under the miners’ rights or business licences. The depart-
mental surveyor started to set out the principal streets for the
town. Within a few months from the revelation of the chlorides
on the Broken Hill thousands of miners settled about the Hill;
and the Government doing nothing further to provide them with
a town, they, in defiance of the proclamation, continued to occupy
the reserved land, and put up buildings on it—some of consider-
able value.
In the Barrier town, as in any of the mining towns of the
gold and silver rushes, a house-owner could never be certain of
the permanence of his property. A building that could be
removed —as Delamore’s Hotel from Lake’s Camp—was the
soundest investment. In one case an owner put up a light
weatherboard cottage and let it to a miner. The rent fell into
arrears. The owner threatened ejectment. And coming along
one morning to secure the rent or eject the tenant, the owner


rubbed bis eyes—for the block was vacant! Tenant and house
had disappeared! Something volcanic seemed to have happened
on that particular spot for the Barrier. The tenant had become
a property owner on the outskirts of the Hill.
But while the new settlement grew up in disorder, instead
of following out the careful plans which Jamieson and Goodwin
had prepared for the outlay of the town from the present site of
the railway station, the conditions resulting tended to produce a
pestilence in the community. From the earliest days on the Bar-
rier typhoid fever had claimed many victims. It levied now a
heavy toll of victims from the community at Broken Hill. The
wild life of the Barrier furthered its ravages. A miner “batch-
ing,” as the majority did, and coming home dog-tired, would not
trouble to prepare himself a proper meal, or take the precaution
of boiling the water for drinking. As a result, weakened by
want of proper food, and by the deep drinking to which the
feverish life of the big mining camp conduced, he fell an easy
victim to disease. A party of fifty miners from New Zealand
lost half their number through typhoid. Funerals passed daily
through the streets. A mine official going to visit a friend
passed a funeral on the way. On arrival at the house he learnt
that the funeral was his friend’s. The grave-digger was the
hardest worked man in Broken Hill. He had his lapses. Once
he was called upon to prepare for the interment of a Chinaman.
The Chinese community gave the deceased a send-off in style.
The grave was piled with bottles, in case the soul of the deceased
might find the way to Paradise, or elsewhere, as thirsty as the
Hill. The grave digger was missing immediately after. As his
services were in constant requisition, a search party went out to
look for him. He was found reposing peacefully on the China-
man’s grave —and there was circumstantial evidence that the soul
had made his way to Paradise by a way as drought-stricken as
the Barrier.
The mining town burned in these first years with a very fever.
Hither flocked the adventurers; hither came the miners now in


hundreds; hither was transferred the life of Silyerton. The
streets were riotous the night through; the hotels drove a roar-
ing trade; champagne was more plentiful than water. Rot yet
was the Silyerton field exhausted; not yet the discoveries at an
end; not yet had the black Broken Hill standing above the mining
town absorbed to itself the hopes, the activities of the life of the
Barrier. But from the shafts upon the Hill still poured the flood
of splendid treasure.


TRANSPORTING ORE FROM BROKEN HILL, 1885-1886.


CHAPTER XXI.
THE FALL OF SILVERTON (1885-1890).
BROKEN HILL was emerging from the wild confusion of
a mining camp to the dignity of a town, which speedily
outrivalled Silverton, Silverton had confidence in itself
as yet, though the life of its streets was passing steadily into the
streets of Broken Hill. Silverton, convinced of its stability, had
moved for the construction of a railway, which would link up
the Barrier mines with the seaboard and lead new life and pros-
perity to the town.
The agitation for railway communication resulted in the
passing of the Railway Bill in the South Australian Parliament
on 11th November, 1884. By December the permanent survey
of the line from Petersburg, in S.A., towards Cockburn, on
the New South Wales boundary, was completed. The line was
to be constructed on the 3ft. Gin. gauge, and a tender for the con-
struction at a cost of £153,569 was accepted on 11th May, 1885.
The termination of the line at Cockburn did not meet the require-
ments of the Barrier. But the South Australian Government
refused to carry the line through into New South Wales; and
the New South Wales Government, ever neglectful of the Bar-
rier, would not accede to the request of Silverton to construct a
railway from the silver field to Cockburn. The interests of the
Barrier were such that the prominent men of Silverton stepped
into the breach, and, on 30th May, 1885, issued the prospectus
of the Silverton Tramway Company, with a capital of £50,000
in 50,000 shares of £1 each. The provisional directors were


Messrs. W. P. MacGregor, K. E. Brodribb, W. R. Wilson, John
Penrose and J. S. Reid. The primary object of the company
was to connect Silverton by rail with the South Australian bor-
der terminus at Cockburn. The Silverton Tramway Act, autho-
rising the company’s undertaking, was assented to on 14th
October, 1886. Actually the “tramway” was a railway con-
structed on the 3ft. 6in. gauge, run under steam, and covering
the thirty-five miles between Cockburn and Broken Hill; for, by
bitter irony, not Silverton but its dominant rival, Broken Hill,
secured the benefit of the line. It was carried through the decay-
ing Silverton and on to Broken Hill. On 10th September, 1887,
the special train which brought the Duke of Manchester and a
parliamentary party for the official opening reached the terminus
at Broken Hill,
The Silverton tramway gave to Broken Hill all the advan-
tages which Silverton had hoped to reach. It was linked up
speedily with the mines upon Broken Hill. It afforded the outlet
for its wealth of silver and lead, through Cockburn and Peters-
burg to Port Pirie. It reduced immeasurably the cost of the
despatch of ores and the receipt of plant, timber and supplies.
But the line arrested in no way the decay of Silverton. In May,
1891, the Tarrawinge tramway was opened. This “tramway”
was a railway on the 3ft. Gin. gauge, which was laid from Broken
Hill, forty miles north to Tarrawinge. At the terminus beds of
crystalline limestone occurred, and the line was constructed for
the purpose of conveying this material to the smelters at Broken
Hill. The opening was marked by a celebration which surpassed
the wildest jollifications on the Barrier. A special train packed
with guests was run up to the Hill and out to Tarrawinge. Never
was such a banquet served in the extravagant history of the
Broken Hill; never was so much champagne swallowed on the
Barrier in so brief a time.
Silverton men had laughed at the Hill of Mullock. The jeer
was bitterly avenged. The Hill of Mullock had dealt Silverton
its death blow. About the Broken Hill, which had looked for
centuries over the mulga scrub and the sand, the mining camp


SILVERTON TRAMWAY, OPENED SEPTEMBER 10TH, 1887.


grew magically into a town, and the town into a great city. And
while the Big Mine ate into the heart of the Broken Hill, and
Willyama grew about its base, Silverton was dying fast. Early
in 1886 the population was counted at two thousand persons. In
the month of April the Day Dream smelters closed down, and
as employment slackened the fortunes of the town grew darker.
The population of Broken Hill soon numbered five thousand
persons —Silverton men many of them. In the life, the clam-
orous excitement of its streets, the wild carousals of its hotels,
the gaieties of Silverton in its roaring days were re-enacted. And
greater grew the town, and greater grew the flow of treasure
from the silver Hill; for here was no rich, shallow lode, but a
great Hill of silver and lead, proving in the years without stay
or stint inexhaustible.
The ways of Silverton became deserted. The removal of
its buildings over to the Hill left hideous gaps in its streets.
Only a few Silverton men retained hope for the dying town, and
yet planned the erection of new and costly buildings for its
dwindling population. In February, 1889, the foundations of
Silverton’s town hall and public library were laid —with the
solemn pomp of a funeral. A decade had seen the rise of Silver-
ton—its burning life, its spendour, its death blow, its decay.
Within another decade Silverton was dead. It had been aban-
doned by its people; its houses had been jinkered over to Broken
Hill. The sale by auction of the furniture and fittings of the
municipal council chamber marked the last beat of the “Heart
of the Barrier.”
Silverton —the wayside station on the railway up to Broken
Hill—is the very skeleton of a town famous in the early days
of the Barrier.
I


CHAPTER XXII.
THE BATTLE OF THE BARRIER (1887).
WHILE Broken Hill grew into a great mining town, the
New South Wales Government had failed to adjust the
question of titles. Every man who had settled about the
Hill, and, taking up a block, had erected shop or dwelling thereon,
was, in the strict sense of the law, no more than a trespasser. The
whole of this mineral-hearing area was reserved by regulation
from occupancy. The New South Wales Government might easily
have launched prosecutions on a large scale, and have piled up
revenue from the fines. The Government adopted the admirable
expedient of allowing the occupants of the blocks about the
Broken Hill to fight it out among themselves. The occupants
did. Petitions for the settlement of the question poured into
the Lands Department. Deputation after deputation from
Broken Hill waited on Ministers. The New South Wales Govern-
ment decided at last to sell the town lands, and in February, 1887,
a gazette notice was issued stating that in the month of April
they would be put up to auction, and giving the upset price for
each lot, together with the value at which improvements on it
had been effected. But the auction sale never took place, and
finally the Government decided to throw open the land to occupa-
tion at 12.30 p.m. on 20th September. And at the tail end of that
proclamation the Governor-in-Council might well have substi-
tuted for the loyal “God Save the Queen” the sporting “May
the best man win.”
The Battle of the Barrier was fought on the issue of that


SILVERTON TO-DAY.


proclamation. It resembled a struggle for a dry spot on the
occurrence of the Deluge. Only about twelve occupants who had
entered on their land before the issue of the proclamation under
Section 26 of the Mining Act had any title to their property.
As 20th September approached it was apparent to Warden and
police that such a dust storm was rising over the Barrier as had
never occurred in the memory of the oldest inhabitant on the
Silverton field. Warden Wyman Brown did his best to avert it.
His public notice, written and issued in anticipation, was a fine
piece of diplomacy, and his diplomacy—according to the best dip-
lomatic precedents—added zest to the trouble. His notice issued
on 15th September ran:—
“In view of the town lands at Broken Hill being thrown
open for lawful occupation under miners’ rights or business
licences, I desire to point out for general information the
provisions and bearings of Mining Board regulation 104, which
is as follows:—‘No person shall take forcible possession of any
land occupied by any other person. Any person who may desire
to take possession of any land unlawfully occupied shall, if his
right to take possession is disputed, apply to the Warden to
inquire into such dispute.’
“Now I have been advised by the Mines Department that
the proclamation throwing open this land is dated from 12.30
p.m., or half an hour after mid-day (Sydney time), on the 20th
inst. Such being the case, I would advise every occupant of
improved land to mark out in accordance with Mining Board
regulation 102 as soon as possible after the hour named, and obtain
conditional registration within three days from such marking,
and, further, to watch their land, and allow no outsider to enter
or mark it without disputing his right to do so. This can be done
by simply watching the land for two or three hours before and
after noon. If any person should insist on marking off any land
after his right to do so is disputed by the occupant, I should then
advise the person in occupation to gently remove the other. If
after that any attempt to enter or mark out the land is made,
then simply take proceedings against the jumper under the 116th


Section of the Mining Act for a breach of the 104 Regulation,
which, if the case be proved, renders the defendant liable for a
fine of £lO and costs, or, as an alternative, three months ’ imprison-
ment with hard labour in Wilcannia gaol.”
The day came. Every block had its claimants, and the num-
ber of contestants suggested a basis of valuation. And many a
block became a battle ground, and gory victors pegged and regis-
tered the claims. It was spoil to the victors.
So all day long the noise of battle rolled! And when the
remnants had sorted themselves for the night, in security of pos-
session, a telegram came through from Sydney stating that the
blocks had been pegged out too soon, and that the reservation
was not to be thrown open till midnight.
The turmoil of the day had produced a glorious thirst. And
beer revivified alike the victors and the vanquished. And the
night was rent with the new battle of the Barrier. And the site
of Broken Hill that night received the baptism of blood. The
police did not interfere. It was safer not to. So the contestants
fought, as they fondly thought, to a finish. The day dawned,
and the strongest blood-stained claimant was left in possession
of his block of land.
The Lands Department could not have done the thing more
thoroughly if it had tried. For its next step was to announce
that the land could not after all be available until 23rd Septem-
ber. And then the whole issue had to be fought out again, and
never did such a storm rage about the Silver Hill in all its
history.
But now men were mad with the magic of the Barrier. A
new boom had set in. The pioneers who had forced the secret
from the earth —after long agony of travel over the deserts,
through the scrub, after heart-breaking toil, were succeeded by
the speculators. The Barrier burnt at fever heat. For miles
about the Hill the deserts and arid mounds had been pegged out.
New Bonanzas had been discovered —in the air; new companies
floated in one hour —and burst in the next. Promoters would
pay £IOOO down for half the shares, and for the work on the lease,


SILVERTON, LOOKING NORTH.


which might or might not justify the flotation of the company
already floated. After the Hill and the chlorides, men were pre-
pared to believe any story of the wealth of the Barrier. The
credulity of the newcomers was as precious a vein of metal as
a company promoter could hope to strike. A syndicate would
be formed, and while the promoters were away pegging out the
ground, the secretary in town was preparing the scrip and pros-
pectus. By the time the promoters returned they would find the
prospectus before the public, the shares over applied for, and
selling in the streets at a premium. On some of the claims scarcely
any work was ever done. And yet the fever worked; and yet bank
clerks, store assistants in Silverton flung up their jobs to become
shareholders. Money flowed into empty pockets, and flowed out
again. And, while the fever burnt about the Broken Hill, the
property of the great Broken Hill Proprietary developed like
the fruition of a splendid dream.


CHAPTER XXIII.
THE BURNING OF FRANCIS ABIGAIL (1888).
THROUGH the year 1888 the drought burned over the Bar-
rier—such a drought as in the early eighties must have
spelt destruction to the camps on the Silverton field. The
rainfall for the whole year amounted to only three and a half
inches, and two inches of this fell in February. The drought,
indeed, extended over the whole State of New South Wales, affect-
ing most cruelly the western district. It decimated the flocks and
herds of the Barrier stations, and it restricted considerably the
operations of the silver mines. One by one the smaller mines
about the Broken Hill were compelled to reduce the number of
hands employed. One by one, as the water dried from the tanks,
were these mines compelled to close down. The fevered excite-
ment of the gamble in Barrier shares spelt loss to many, aggra-
vated the disaster of the drought, and accentuated the distress
from unemployment. The poisoned water from the tanks pro-
duced an actual pestilence. Typhoid fever, as if it had been a
plague, ravaged the community.
And the drought burned on. And the tanks emptied; the
soakages were dry. Nigh Silverton was dug a deep tank known
as the Rathole, and controlled by the New South Wales Depart-
ment of Mines. In their distress the residents of the Barrier
made application to the Department for permission to use the
water for drinking purposes. The application was blankly
refused. The indignation of the Barrier was white hot. In the


columns of the “Silver Age” of 22nd September, 1888, appeared
an advertisement that marked the indignation of the people. It
ran: —
WATER FAMINE.
FRANCIS ABIGAIL, M.L.A.
(Minister of Mines),
WILL BE BURNT IN EFFIGY
THIS EVENING,
On the Government Reserve,
at 8 o’clock.
FOR CRIMINAL AND CRUEL NEGLECT
OF THE INHABITANTS OP THIS TOWN.
All are invited to attend
the “Auto Da Pe.”
PARKES WE DECLINE TO NOTICE.
A huge crowd assembled for the celebration, and burnt that
night in effigy was Francis Abigail, Minister of Mines of New
South Wales. A dummy figure was made to represent the Minis-
ter. A coffin and a hearse were borrowed to contain his ashes.
Enormous crowds collected on the vacant space occupied to-day
by the Post Office, on which the gallows had been raised. In
solemn funeral march a procession made its way thither. And
hanged from the gallows was the figure of Francis Abigail, and,
taken down, was consumed to ashes amid the wildest cheering.
The Rathole was thrown open by the Government proclama-
tion for the use of the Barrier.
On the sth November occurred a new disaster —an outbreak
of fire in Argent Street, The street included in its rows of busi-
ness premises many of the old wooden buildings which had been
hauled to Broken Hill in the first years of the boom. The tim-
bers were now dried with the heat of the drought and the long


waterless months to tinder. The fire apparently started in a
shop occupied by a hairdresser and tobacconist, and smoke was
first seen issuing from the Exchange Buildings—shortly before
six o’clock in the evening. For three hours the fire raged, swept
Argent Street from Oxide to Chloride Street, brought many a
shack of iron and matchwood crashing down, and laid the whole
side of the street in ruins. The fire brigade, with the shortage
of water, could do nothing. Vast crowds collected. A few of the
clear-headed endeavoured to cut away some of the buildings to
form a break. Several men seemed to go mad. One was seen
deliberately smashing windows; another clinging to a swinging
sign in the full track of the flames. When some of the crowd
tried to drag him down he cursed and kicked at them savagely,
and, climbing on to the roof of a burning building, disappeared
A mine official rushing at the head of a party to cut away a build-
ing in the hope of saving the remainder of the block was faced
by a wildly excited proprietor, who raved at him, “If you touch
this place I ’ll brain you! ’ ’
“You damned old fool,” the officer shouted back; “if the fire
comes along you won’t have a house left.”
The flames swept over the building speedily. A crowd of
speculators gatherer on the balcony of a hotel; the rotten struc-
ture crashed to the ground. In the bar of the Denver City Hotel
drinks were being served out to a rush of customers while the
roof was burning overhead. At one store the mob started to
“salvage” the stock —carried it out into a lane and dumped it
down. Instantly a crowd of women gathered, helped themselves
to hats and gloves, and enjoyed all the excitement of a bargain
sale without having to pay a penny. One mother with half a
dozen youngsters was observed to fit out the family. Mean-
while, from burning buildings men were throwing glass and
crockery on the pavements. One man staggered out carrying a
huge glass mirror and dropped it deliberately on the road. The
fire and the rescuers that night represented the loss of £70,000
worth of property. Out of the ashes of the Argent Street fire


rose soon a line of fine buildings, but for the time the loss added
to the gloom and depression of a disastrous year.
But the great mine upon the Broken Hill throbbed with
dynamic energy. But the story of its wealth was borne about
the world. Overseas was shipped its bullion; its silver, minted,
passed from hand to hand in every city; its silver was wrought
into massive plate and glittering treasures of art. And while
the Barrier burnt, thirsted, sickened under the drought, came the
great year of feverish boom that meant to the many ruin and
fortune to the few.
For the half-year (1885) 35,605 ounces of silver were pro-
duced from the Proprietary’s mine, yielding a net return (in
London) of £7442, During the corresponding half-year in 1886
the yield of silver had risen to 871,665 ounces, and the output
of lead amounted to 1990 tons, representing £157,215, and allow-
ing the payment of £48,000 in dividends. For the half-year ended
30th November, 1887, the mine produced 1,267,699 ounces silver
and 6511 tons of lead, representing £287,704 in net returns in
London, while dividends increased to £96,000. And still the out-
put from the mine increased for the six months ending 31st May,
1888 —the yield of silver reached 1,633,737 ounces, the lead 6773
tons, the net returns in London £371,727, the dividends £152,000;
and for the following six months the yield of silver 2,290,455
ounces and of lead 9885 tons, the value £509,579, the dividends
£192,000. For the three years since the discovery of the chlorides
and the flotation of the Proprietary the mine had produced
7,079,291 ounces of silver, 27,998 tons of lead, and given net
returns of £1,579,377 and dividends of £568,000. By comparison
with such figures the wealth of the Day Dream, the May Bell,
the Lubra —and of any mine within the recollection of the Bar-
rier—seemed paltry and mean. Upon the Barrier there was one
Broken Hill, and one only; but the hope of achieving similar
discovery lured thither the uninitiated, and the record of its
treasure enabled the speculator and the company promoter to
turn the credulity of the fortune hunters to rich account. Silver
—an infinite stream of silver—from the Broken Hill—a few vears


earlier unknown, despised. Not the wildest tale of the company
promoter had fashioned such a visionary Bonanza. And about this
Hill —these arid ranges, these dry plains—should not a new
Broken Hill be undiscovered, unexploited—wanting only a little
capital for development to bear its shareholders to fortune ? The
output from the Big Mine, the report of the new flotations and the
huge dividends aroused about the Barrier such a boom as by its
fever fitted well the heat and fever of the year of drought (1888).
Barrier stocks went booming. Men went mad!
Shares! No one had any other thought than to buy and sell
shares—shares in any shape, shares in anything—so long as they
were shares. Booms there had been upon the Barrier since the
first years of discovery—none such as in this year. Broken Hill
was the centre of a very brain storm. Broken Hill—prosperous
ever—stood soon within a graveyard of lost hopes.


CHAPTER XXIV.
THE MINE AND THE ORES (1886).
IN the first years from the formation of the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Company the great mine upon the Broken Hill was
to become the centre of a group of great mines, by which the
wealth of the Hill was bared —the Central, the Cosmopolitan, the
North, the South —the mines which were floated from the property
of the parent company. Soon, on the very crest of the Broken
Hill, rose a stack of masonry sixty feet in height to carry off the
fumes and gases evolved in smelting. The Proprietary’s first
two smelters were blown in on 6th May, 1886, but such was the
output of ore that the directors determined at once to extend
the plant by the addition of three thirty-ton furnaces. The
power required to drive the five furnaces was provided in a 30
h.p, compound engine with a 40 h.p. surface condenser. Addi-
tions speedily brought the Proprietary’s plant up to a capacity
of treating five hundred tons of ore in a week.
Now through the day the Hill —which three years earlier had
risen black and silent from the salt-bush plain—resounded with
the roar of energy; now all night the furnaces upon the western
slope flared though the darkness. Against the glare of the flame
men flitted to and fro with heated slag pots—men seeming the
very figures of an inferno. The endless sound and the undying
fires destroyed the silence of the night, its cool, its darkness. And
from the Hill poured day and night the stream of treasure.
Black and burnished to the day, black against the night—
the Broken Hill had risen lonely from the salt-bush plain through


centuries. So had Sturt looked upon it. So had the shepherds
of the outback stations. So had the prospectors who had come
by the desert ways on the quest of the white quartz. So the lonely
stockmen; so the drovers; the drivers of bullock teams and camel
trains going overland. So the motley figures of the first silver-
seekers on the Barrier. Now pierced by shafts, now topped by
smoking stacks; now burning, whirring with a new dynamic
energy; now growing famed throughout the world —the Broken
Hill beat as the very heart of the silver Barrier, infusing new
life into a mining field already threatened with decay, absorbing
to its strength the forces, energies, high hopes that had burnt up
from salt-bush plains and arid mulga-studded ranges.
The manganiferous capping of the Broken Hill was nddled
soon with shafts and crosscuts. Out of the vein came oxides of
manganese and iron, carbonate of lead and kaolin. The silver
occurred almost entirely as chloride and chlorobromide. Native
silver was found in connection with cuprite in the stopes in Rasp
shaft, and partially decomposed sulphides of silver at the water
level in McCulloch shaft. Red oxide and green carbonate of
copper appeared, too, in the stopes of Rasp shaft. Lead was one
of the most abundant constituents of the vein, in the form of
cerusite or carbonates. It was particularly plentiful in the north-
eastern workings, from McCulloch shaft to the north shaft in No.
15 block. At the main shaft the ore in both levels carried a high
average of silver. Borne of the carbonates of lead were pure and
handsome; at times they were snowy white, and at others of a
light cream colour. In addition to the chloride of silver, infini-
tesimally disseminated through the lode, there occurred all
through it hard lumps of ironstone, which appeared to form con-
centration points for the chlorides. These were always rich, and
assayed 1200 to 2000 ounces to the ton. Just above the main
shaft, on the very crown of the ridge, the outcrop showed chloro-
bromide of silver for a distance of fully fifty yards. At the spot
where the aboriginal Harry found the chlorides the ironstone
disappeared at the surface, and the silver was laid bare in a
matrix of kaolin and quartz.


LATER A. R. BLACKWOOD,
First Chairman of Directors.


Mr. William Jamieson did not elect long to remain as general
manager after tlie flotation of the company. His wish to resign
was announced at the first half-yearly meeting of shareholders
on 15th December, 1885. He was succeeded by Mr. S. R. Wilson,
brother of W. R. Wilson, and formerly mining-manager of the
Day Dream.
And the Big Mine of Broken Hill stood dominant through
these years, though for a time two rushes affected the minds of
the miners upon the Barrier silver field. As early as 1885 tin
in the form of cassiterite had been discovered in a granitic dyke
on Poolamacca Run, to the north of Broken Hill. The dryness
of the season for the time withheld prospecting for the mineral
on a grand scale, and not until 1887 did the rushes to Waukeroo
and Euriowie, to the north, take place. Then occurred the tin
boom, when the miners made from the Silverton field in hundreds
to Waukeroo and Euriowie. Soon Euriowie was proclaimed a
township and before the end of 1887 it had a population of five
hundred persons, and among the buildings were the inevitable
police station, two banks and several stores. The rush did not
result in the development of a prosperous field. Within a year
or two Waukeroo was deserted, while Euriowie struggled on.
Altogether a hundred tons of partly dressed ore were despatched
from Euriowie in the first few years. The Mount Euriowie mine
was exploited by five shafts and several levels; but the mass of
available ore was speedily exhausted, and the costly concentrat-
ing plant, having treated only small quantities of ore, soon stood
dismantled.
A little gold, too, was discovered on Mount Gipps run in 1888
in a small quartz vein, which had a width of three inches and
traversed micaceous slates. The vein was proved to a depth of
fifty feet by the Yancowinna Gold Mining Company, which, after
an expenditure of £BOO, ceased operations. Nigh Purnamoota
and on Mundi Mundi station gold was discovered in small quan-
tities, and the former discovery led to the formation of the splen-
did sounding “ White Princess Gold and Silver Mining Com-
pany” and the “Golden Crest Gold and Silver Mining Company,”


but they proved little more than names. In October, 1886, a
discovery of alluvial gold was reported on Wininni station, across
the border in South Australia. A rush of miners from the Bar-
rier to Teetulpa ensued, and a shortage of hands necessitated
temporary suspension of work; for, though the wealth of Broken
Hill was understood, the lure of gold was ever far more potent
than the lure of silver.
To the meeting of shareholders held in Melbourne on 30th
June, 1886, S. R. Wilson, general manager of the mine, reported
that water of first-class quality was showing at the bottom of
three of the shafts. A seam of ore in the lode (south drive) in
Jamieson shaft eclipsed any ore raised till then from the mine.
It was, said Wilson, more like chlorides and kaolin than kaolin
and chlorides. But while the output of rich ore continued, the
problem with which the directors set themselves to deal was the
provision of an assured supply of water. The supply from the
shafts was proving adequate as yet; on the flat a well had been
sunk, and in addition two large tanks had been completed. Mr.
William P. MacGregor, who had succeeded Mr. A. R. Blackwood
as chairman of directors, declared that the question need not
cause any apprehension even in the driest season.
Prom the Broken Hill —from the Barrier mines—were col-
lected in these first years ores of a rare beauty—red silver ores,
embolite (like delicate sea corals), cerusite, carbonate of lead
(cloudy grey, rich yellow, green to black), crystals of topaz (as
drops of water), azurite, the blue carbonate of copper, malachite,
the green carbonate, and aurichalcite (in crystals of a bluish
green, garnets and native copper, marked as with green fronds
of ferns). A collection of these rich gemmy ores made by
Mr. E. W. Aldridge at Broken Hill represented in value £IO,OOO.
Out of the Big Mine was raised ore of a wondrous richness. In
the lode in No. 4 shaft was struck at 140 feet ore of three colours
—red, white and blue. The blue ore resembled brittle silver,
which was so impregnated as to suggest that the chlorides had
been squeezed into the kaolin. The red ore carried the chlorides


in streaks, and in the white ore the chlorides occurred in small
lumps.
Considering it expedient to obtain from outside a report on
this property, the directors, in 1886, engaged the services of John
Provis, a mining engineer, with experience of the American silver
mines. Reporting on 6th December, Provis declared that the
Broken Hill vein was a very large fissure vein, extending, with
interruptions, from the Broken Hill South Company’s claim to
Piesse’s Knob—a distance of nine miles. It was most prominent
in the Broken Hill Proprietary’s claim, where it stood out con-
spicuously on the crest of the Hill, extending from Block 10 on
the south-west to the middle of Block 15 on the north-east. Beyond
this point it became broken up in smaller branches and took a
different course. Apparently the iron ore was the primary con-
stituent of the vein, and boulders of the country rock had also
fallen into the fissure. At a subsequent period the carbonate of
lead was deposited, and also the kaolin, and more recently the
chloride of silver. These carbonates and chlorides were probably
the result of decomposition of other lead and silver ores, and a
change in the nature of the ores might be expected at a lower
depth.
Mining had been confined almost exclusively to Blocks 11,
12 and 13. The vein through these blocks ranged from 30 to 150
feet in width. The deepest workings were at McCulloch shaft,
going down 316 feet from the surface. There were four distinct
classes of ore in the vein, and these were: —
Lead ore, consisting chiefly of carbonate of lead, which pre-
dominated in the workings at Rasp shaft and McCulloch
shaft.
Iron ore, chiefly oxides of iron and manganese, occurring
mostly south of McCulloch shaft, between Brodribb and
Knox shafts.
Kaolin ore, in the vicinity of Knox shaft and No. 5 shaft.
Copper ore, occurring in small quantities at Rasp shaft as
cuprite, malachite and azurite.


Provis added that he had made experiments on the suit-
ability of this kaolin for amalgamation, and the results had been
highly satisfactory. W. R. Wilson had since then conducted
experiments on a larger scale with still more satisfactory results.
These results demonstrated conclusively the desirability of treat-
ing the kaolin ore separately, and he considered the body of
kaolin in the south-western workings sufficiently developed to
warrant the serious consideration of the erection of an amalga-
mation plant.
“The general results from several hundred samples taken
from all parts of the mine,” said Provis, “showed that many
years of prosperity may he expected, and that the mine is
destined to rank among the foremost of the leading silver mines
of the world.”


CHAPTER XXV.
THE FLOTATIONS (1887-1888).
AT the request of the Board of Directors, Mr. W. R. Wilson,
director of the Proprietary, visited America during 1886,
and inspected the workings of many of the silver mines.
He inquired there into the question of the purchase of an amal-
gamating plant, but, finding that the cost would be considerable, he
decided not to enter into the purchase without consultation of his
fellow-directors on the board. The board’s consideration of the
metallurgical question resulted in the engagement of H. H.
Schlapp, formerly superintendent of the Pueblo Smelting and
Refining Works, of Colorado, U.S.A., to take the position of metal-
lurgist in charge of the smelting reduction. W. R. Wilson, while
in America, entered into negotiations with Schlapp, and satisfied
himself by exhaustive enquiries that his qualifications as metal-
lurgist were of the highest order. The board resolved that no
extensive machinery, either for amalgamating or leaching, should
be ordered before Schlapp’s arrival, when the directors might
have the benefit of his advice. Arriving at Broken Hill from
America on 17th April, 1887, the new metallurgist occupied him-
self at first in perfecting his analytical knowledge of the ores
and effecting changes in the smelting house. The development
of the Big Mine, despite the difficulties of water supply and of
communication with the railways of New South Wales and South
Australia —a difficulty then being overcome by the completion of
the South Australian Government’s line from Terowie to Cock-
burn, on the border, and the Silverton Tramway Co.’s line—


resolved the directors on a new venture. The leases of the
Broken Hill Proprietary Co.—as originally taken over from the
old company of fourteen —numbered seven—Blocks 10 to 16 inclu-
sive. The directors, in consideration of the enormous body of
ore, now decided on the partition of the property into blocks and
their formation into new companies, thus raising capital to
ensure their development. The directors’ scheme for the flota-
tion of Block 14 was laid before shareholders at an extraordinary
general meeting held at Scott’s Hotel, Collins Street, Melbourne,
on 16th February, 1887. Mr. William P. MacGregor, chairman
of directors, presided. The directors submitted, and the meeting
approved of, resolutions in favour of segregating the block and
founding an independent company. Acting under the powers
thus conferred by the shareholders and by the advice of the Pro-
prietary’s solicitors (Messrs, Moule and Seddon), the directors
proceeded to form and register a company. This comprised
100,000 shares of £5 each, which were issued as paid up to
£4/10/-, funds for management and development to be provided
by calls, as required. Of this number 96,000 shares were dis-
tributed pro rata among the members of the Proprietary, who
appeared on the share register on the night of 13th April, 1887.
This was equivalent to giving six £5 shares in the new company
for each single share held by members of the present company.
The 4000 unallotted shares became the property of the new com-
pany.
The property (Block 14) adjoined the ground of the Pro-
prietary on the north-east, and consisted of one forty-acre block
on the main line of lode, with a water right to another forty
acres on the flat ground to the eastward. The alienation of
Block 14 necessitated a reconsolidation of the remaining blocks,
which was effected with the Hew South Wales Department of
Mines.
On 2nd May, 1887, the resignation of Mr. S. R. Wilson as
general manager of the mine was accepted by the board. This
resulted in the engagement of a general manager whose experi-
ence in the silver mining methods of the United States of America


PROPRIETARY MINE IN LATE 'EIGHTIES, SHOWING SMELTERS.


was to exercise a powerful influence on the destinies of the mine.
The board offered the position to Mr. W. H. Patton, superinten-
dent of the Consolidated Virginia Silver Mining Co. and other
celebrated silver mining companies on the famous Comstock
lodes. Patton had had long experience in the mining of large
silver lodes, and the importance of this experience for the deve-
lopment of Broken Hill determined his selection by the Proprie-
tary’s directors. An additional consideration was that he had
controlled extensive milling and amalgamating plants, and, in
reporting to the shareholders, the directors observed that they
regarded the possession of his experience and advice concerning
these processes of ore reduction as of the highest importance,
and in itself alone as justifying the appointment. Schlapp was
realising the expectations of the board. He had assumed charge
of the smelting furnaces on 18th April, and, while finding that
Tittle alteration was needed in S. R. Wilson’s arrangements, had
effected improvements chiefly in the metallurgical combinations.
The furnaces were running smoothly; the cost in the reduction
of the ore was diminishing. The plant of five furnaces had a
capacity for dealing with 5000 tons of ore a month. The losses
in silver were very light. All the ores so far received from the
mine, Schlapp reported on 7th June, could he treated in blast
furnaces without difficulty. Some of them, such as the kaolin
ore, required a great deal of fluxing, and were therefore more
expensive to treat. With the addition of three new furnaces
the capacity of the works would he over 10,000 tons of ore per
month.
The directors decided to order three new furnaces, but of
a capacity of eighty tons each, as compared with the thirty-ton
capacity of the five existing smelters. A large quantity of ore
throughout the property, it was found, would not pay to put
through the smelters, and the directors accordingly considered
the necessity for erecting an ore concentrating plant. Patton
was requested to bring with him from America full plans and
particulars of a “well approved plant and appliance,” and replied
by cablegram that he “understood requirements.” Pumping


plant, too, had been ordered from America, and, pending its
delivery at the mine, sinking and work in the lowest levels of
McCulloch and Rasp shafts were suspended, as it was found
impracticable to keep down the water and continue sinking. But
in the work of the mine the main feature of the early half of
the year was the sinking of the Patterson shaft. This was a
new shaft sunk in the footwall country —260 feet north-east of
Brodribb shaft. It was to command the whole of the working
on Blocks 12 and 13, and on it the main machinery was to be
erected. The intention was to maintain this shaft always as the
deepest shaft, when carried down. Examination of the plant
now working on the mine was made in March by Rees Davies,
consulting engineer, and, with the extensive additions made and
contemplated, the board observed that the mine should be fully
equipped with pumping, winding and blowing machinery for
some time to come.
And now, following on the successful flotation of Block 14,
a new partition of the syndicate’s original property was con-
templated by the board of the Proprietary. Block 14 had been
registered originally in the name of George Urquhart, Block 15
in the name of Lind, and Block 16 in the names of Lind, Poole
and Charley. Blocks 15 and 16 lay immediately to the north-
east of Block 14, and comprised 102 acres. The directors’ sug-
gestions for floating Blocks 15 and 16 were submitted to an
extraordinary general meeting of shareholders held on 28th July,
1887. The Directors observed that the suggestions did not bind
them in any way to adopt the scheme, for they would have full
liberty to cancel or modify it, as they might see fit in the interests
of the shareholders. It was suggested that both blocks be united
and embraced by one company, to be formed, and to be called
“The Broken Hill Proprietary Northern Blocks Company
Limited.”
The meeting was largely attended, the scheme fully dis-
cussed, and a resolution empowering the directors so to dispose
of Blocks 15 and 16 was carried unanimously. On Bth August
the board decided that Mr. George McCulloch, who had remained


LATE WILLIAM KNOX, FIRST SECRETARY.


a director, should visit England with Mr. William Knox for the
purpose of offering the blocks on the London markets. Arriving
in England on 4th October, and successfully overcoming initial
difficulties, including not a little suspicion that Broken Hill did
not exist, was not a great mine, and that the whole flotation was
a company promoter’s scheme, McCulloch and Knox conducted
the business successfully, and by 19th November the directors
of the Proprietary were enabled to announce that a sufficient
number of shares had been applied for to justify them in floating
the British Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited.
The company was floated in England in 240,000 shares of £5
each. Of these 80,000 were distributed among the parent com-
pany’s shareholders in part payment of the purchase money.
The balance of 160,000 shares was fully subscribed for, and
realised £BOO,OOO. Of this amount £576,000 in cash was distri-
buted to the Proprietary’s shareholders in three bonuses—
amounting to £36 per share —and £125,000 was placed to the credit
of the new company. The net result to every Proprietary share-
holder was thus £36 in cash and £25 in shares, or £6l per share.
This second successful flotation was followed speedily by a
third—Block 10 —which was held originally in the names of
McCulloch, Rasp and James, and comprised 36 acres. At a
general meeting of shareholders, held at Scott’s Hotel, Mel-
bourne, on 21st February, 1888, approval was given to segregate
Block 10 and to form a new company. The company, comprising
100,000 shares of £lO each paid up to £9/10/-, was formed in
March; shares were distributed among the Proprietary’s share-
holders on the basis of six shares for every parent company
share, and 4000 shares were retained by the Block 10 Company
for sale to provide funds, if needed. The nominal value of the
shares received by shareholders as the result of the flotation of
the three ventures was £1,744,000, and, with the £576,000 from
the British flotation and profit derived from the mine products,
the directors were enabled to hand over to the shareholders of
the 16,000 Proprietary Company shares a value of £2,696,000,


All this within five years of the time when the Broken Hill syndi-
cate’s shares were going begging for £IOO odd!
The Broken Hill Proprietary in holding the three blocks
retained for itself the very pick of the Hill. The magnitude of
the ore body in its blocks and the splendid grade and variety of
ores available elevated the property —of which the Mount Gipps
syndicate had so recently stood in undisputed possession—into
the greatest silver mine in the world. The great market value
attaching to the original shares necessitated now the re-organisa-
tion of the company. At an extraordinary general meeting of
shareholders held on 31st January, 1889, it was decided to increase
the number of shares in the company from 16,000 to 160,000, by
reducing each share from £2O to £2. These resolutions were sub-
sequently confirmed at a general meeting on 21st February. The
old scrip was withdrawn and the new scrip issued to shareholders.
On this issue the company made its first and only call. The shares
were issued as paid up to £l/18/-, and in order to make them
fully paid up to £2 a call of 2/- per share was made. The amount
was paid by the simultaneous declaration of a dividend.
Prom the surface to the 2200 feet level Block 14 proved rich
in carbonates. Smelters were erected, and the mine took on a
vigorous life. Within two years £230,000 was distributed in
dividends. The earliest results of the Block 10 mine were dis-
appointing, and not till December, 1889, was the body of kaolin
struck at a depth of 400 feet —going on assay 200 to 2000 ounces
of silver to the ton. Blocks 15 and 16—the British —were
despoiled of their carbonates before operations concentrated on
Block 15 for the time.
Arriving in Melbourne from America on 24th September,
1887, W. H. Patton, the new general manager of the Proprie-
tary, proceeded immediately to Broken Hill to view the workings
and to determine the development which he should recommend.
On 17th October he submitted to the board his report of his
examination of Blocks 12 and 13 in particular. He found, he
said, the silver in the ore above water level to be in the form of
kerargerite, or silver chloride, occurring, as a rule, in the form


of horn silver, crystalline or massive, but sometimes in the kaolin
ores in a laminated, flaky condition. Below water level the char-
acter of the ore would change into a sulphide of silver, more or
less mixed with sulphides of base metals. The capping of the
vein was silicious manganic iron ore, some of which was free
enough from silica to serve as a valuable flux in smelting. Below
this, in the portion of the vein lying to the north of Jamieson’s
shaft, the ore was a silicious carbonate of lead and manganese.
A careful estimate of the quantity and quality of the ore in sight
to a depth of about 246 feet at McCulloch shaft and 238 feet at
Jamieson shaft gave the following results:—
Manganic iron ore, containing a little silica, which could be
used as flux, 117,100 tons, value 8 ounces per ton.
Silicious iron ore, containing too much silica to be used as
flux, 315,900 tons, giving a value of 35 ounces per ton.
Silicious carbonate of lead ore, requiring the free use of lime
as a flux, 621,475 tons, giving a value of 31 ounces per ton.
Kaolin ore, containing carbonate of lead and manganese in
silicate of alumina, 60,500 tons, giving a value of 47 ounces per
ton.
Leaving out the iron flux, the aggregate of ore in Blocks 12
and 13 was 997,875 tons, which would average 32 ounces of silver
to the ton. To provide for the possible recurrence of horses or
intrusions of the country rock into the ore bodies, Patton stated
he would deduct 30 per cent, of this estimate of quantity, calling
the amount of ore in sight above water level 700,000 tons. All
these ores could be smelted successfully, but the presence of a
large percentage of silica made it necessary to use carbonate of
lime as a flux, and this material seemed scarce, for the supply
cost 25/- per ton for an inferior article. A proper system of
concentration would remove the silica from the ore, reducing the
amount to be smelted at least one-half in bulk, and would save
the heavy expense of a flux. He recommended the immediate
erection of a 300-ton concentrating plant, which could be increased
in capacity, as the company became satisfied of the presence of
the necessary amount of water with which to operate. The ore


exposed on the, 316 feet level of McCulloch shaft showed zinc and
lead sulphides (zinc blende and galena), which would probably
continue in depth. The zinc blende seemed to carry no value, and
could by concentration be separated from the argentiferous galena,
when, after desulphurisation in a proper furnace, the lead could
be reduced in the smelters.
The report was suggestive of important developments shortly
to occur in the methods of mining the ore of Broken Hill.


CHAPTER XXVI.
THE CONQUEST OF THE DROUGHT (1892).
THE drought of 1888 was followed by the drought of 1891-2.
Except for a slight shower during a thunderstorm, no rain
fell from July till the end of 1891, The summer was excep-
tionally hot —even for the Barrier—and the population of the
town, now totalling 22,500, was subjected to severe hardship.
Tanks and dams were almost dry. The temperature reached 100
degrees in the shade day after day, and on several days soared as
high as 115 degrees. This intense heat was accompanied by dust
storms. Stifling nights succeeded blazing days. The conditions
on the Hill were almost unbearable. The Municipality of Broken
Hill (incorporated on 22nd September, 1888) was compelled to
buy water from the South Australian Government, In the early
days of Silverton water had been brought from Mingary—thirty
miles across the border in South Australia; and water was
brought now from the South Australian Government’s tank at
Mingary—a distance of seventy miles. This supply, while
enabling the community to struggle through the summer, pro-
vided very little for domestic purposes.
The mines necessarily were affected considerably by the want
of water for reduction works. Before the summer drew to a
close the shortage of water was so acute that it seemed that, with
the impracticability of obtaining a supply for the blast furnaces,
operations must be suspended. Water had previously been
obtained from Acacia, eight miles off. The deposits of lime-
stone at Acacia were soaked with water, and examination proved


that this could still be obtained by sinking wells. Accordingly
the Broken Hill Proprietary, the Block 10, Block 14 and the
British companies formed themselves into a trust, and purchased
the leases at Acacia. Wells were sunk, pumps put in, and a pipe
line laid to Broken Hill. A limited supply was thus conveyed
to the mines, and it assisted them in continuing operations till
the break of the drought. At the same time the Proprietary put
down pipes in both directions along the line of lode to any of the
mines containing water in the shafts. The pipe lines extended
from the White Lead mine, on the south-west, to the Potosi and
New Cosgrove’s mine, on the north-west. During the drought
the company expended £25,000 in its endeavour to ensure a supply
of water for the mines.
The Proprietary was prepared itself to undertake the work
of establishing on Stephen’s Creek such a storage as would at
last render the community reasonably secure against the drought.
But this undertaking fell to the Broken Hill Water Supply Com-
pany, which was registered in Melbourne on 12th February, 1890.
This company was formed to take over the interests of the earlier
Nolan’s Stephen’s Creek, Broken Hill Water Supply Company
Ltd., and the Barrier Ranges and Broken Hill Water Supply
Company Ltd. The authorising Bill passed through the New
South Wales Parliament, and the first sod on the work of the
embankment was turned by Sir Henry Parkes on 16th April,
1890.
The watershed of Stephen’s Creek embraces 170 square miles
of country. Near Piesse’s Knob its course passes between two
low hills, standing at a distance of 900 feet apart. At this spot
the embankment was constructed. A serious start on the work
was not made till January, 1891, but the scheme was practically
completed by May, 1892. The scheme allowed for a storage of
3,940,919,900 gallons.
Scarcely was the work completed than the drought broke.
On 29th May more than an inch of rain fell over the watershed
of Stephen’s Creek. Soon 500,000,000 gallons of water were held
within the reservoir.


The success of the Stephen’s Creek reservoir terminated
agitation for a scheme to pump water into Broken Hill from the
River Darling, or from one of the large lakes filled from time
to time by flood waters of the river. In 1889 the promoters of
the Stockdale scheme secured the passing of an Act through the
New South Wales Parliament, which offered to them a monopoly
over the water supply for Broken Hill. No attempt was made
to carry out the scheme, and the Act lapsed in October, 1891—
allowing the Broken Hill Water Supply Co. to proceed with its
work on Stephen’s Creek.
The worst menace of the Barrier, which had vanquished the
prospectors of the sixties and had threatened these years after
to destroy the great community about the Broken Hill, was thus
at last overcome, only after years of shortage. The connection
of Mr. Harvey Patterson with the Broken Hill Proprietary from
the flotation of the company lends singular interest to the circum-
stances in which, with facility, he solved the problem of supply
for the Ivanhoe mine, W.A., of which he was one of the original
directors. The company had been formed in Melbourne, but the
fortunes of the mine had been prejudiced by the difficulty of
obtaining sufficient water for the operation of the plant. Mr.
Patterson had evolved by long study and observation a secret
method for the discovery of water, and this he now was called
upon to put to the test. To obtain water at all, miles of pipes
had been laid down to the mines on the field, and such water as
was then available had to be pumped down to the mine. At the
request of the Board of Directors Mr. Patterson agreed to visit
the company’s property, and, proceeding thither (in 1896), he
arranged with Hewitson, the manager, for a party of men to be
placed at his disposal, while he explored the locality in search
of a reliable supply. At first he endeavoured to find water to
the east side of the mine, but could discover no indication of
underground storage as sufficient for the mine requirements; and
accordingly he surveyed the western side, with the result that
at about a mile from the mine he found a watercourse, 200 to 300
feet across, down which his method finally pointed to the under


ground supply. Over this area he surveyed and pegged out
about a mile and a quarter of ground down to the point at which
it functioned with the township reserve. When he returned to
the mine and informed Hewitson of his plan, the manager, some-
what sceptical, inquired: “Why can’t you get water nearer the
mine?” Mr. Patterson replied that from the place which he
had selected all the water that the mine required and more would
be available. Rights over the area having been secured and the
ground being properly surveyed, a shaft was started at the spot
which Mr. Patterson had pegged out. On his taking the manager
over to see the locality Hewitson observed casually, “I suppose
anywhere about here will do?”
“Anywhere about here won’t do!” retorted Mr. Patterson.
“The shaft is to go down right here where these pegs are!”
So the shaft was started at this very spot. The shaft was a
large one, so that if the supply anticipated proved adequate
pumping plant might the more easily be installed. Mr. Patter-
son, having seen the start of the work, returned to Melbourne.
When the shaft had been sunk to a depth of 130 feet the
manager sent off to the Melbourne office a most despondent letter.
The company, he said, was throwing money away to no purpose.
He was convinced that the work would be barren of results. No
water had been struck, and none was likely to be. The Board
of Directors consulting Mr. Patterson, he expressed his confidence
of the accuracy of his method and the certainty of success.
“Look here,” he said, “you send me up to find water, and
because the manager does not get the water where he thinks it
should be you are inclined to condemn me. This shaft is to go
down and get the water!”
The directors’ prompt reply was that whatever Mr. Patter-
son said was to be done would be done. Had Mr. Patterson
chosen at this stage, it would have been possible for him to have
contracted with the company to charge his account with the
failure of the scheme —if failure it should prove—and thus have
acquired for himself an undertaking which was speedily to prove
of inestimable value to the mines; for about a fortnight later a


STEPHEN’S CREEK RESERVOIR, DECEMBER, 1911.


telegram from the manager reached the Melbourne office of the
company to the effect that water had been struck at a depth of
147 feet, and, so far as the indications went, there was a supply
available of 97,000 to 100,000 gallons a day.
Had Mr. Patterson taken over the whole responsibilty for
the undertaking, and thus obtained control of the supply, his
profit for the sales of water to the mines would have worked out
at about £BOOO to £IO,OOO a year up to the present time; but this
was out of the question, inasmuch as he was a director of the
company.


CHAPTER XXVII.
THE GREAT STRIKE (1892).
THE discovery of silver and the rush of miners to the Barrier
synchronised with a movement of profound import to the
political destinies of Australia. In the year 1884 a union
was formed among the miners on the Silverton field. As the field
developed the strength of this union increased. It was not yet
sufficiently powerful to enforce upon the field its principle of
preference to unionists in the employments offered by the mines.
The mine managers engaged the labour they required without
concern for the question whether the men were unionists or non-
unionists. But, gaining in force and affected by the spirit of
dissatisfaction with industrial conditions now abroad among Aus-
tralian workers—an unrest finding expression in bitter struggles
with employers and tending ever to the ultimate rise of the Aus-
tralian Labour Party to political triumph—the Miners’ Asso-
ciation entered on active hostilities against the non-unionists
employed at the mines. In the early days, indeed, employment
was offering for any working miner. The problem of the mine
manager was to find a. sufficiency and a continuance of labour.
The Silverton field resounded with the life of the miners’ camps.
But with the stories of Charles Nickel, Joe Meech, Allan Sinclair
and a score of other lucky prospectors to disturb their minds, a big
proportion of the miners elected to turn prospectors after rain
had insured a supply of water on the Barrier, and, with the chance
of sudden rise to fortune, scorned to work for ordinary wages.
The concentration of the main activities on the Barrier into the


Big Mine and the group of mines upon the Broken Hill, the dis-
appearance of the prospects of new Bonanzas, when every claim
for miles around had been prospected, transformed the working
conditions of the field. The Proprietary alone employed in 1888
as many as 1700 men. The collection at the one centre of the miners
who previously had been scattered over the field, the community
of interest, the realisation that the prospect of winning more than
a miner’s wage from the Barrier was remote, tended in every
sense to strengthen the unionists. The linking up of the Miners’
Societies in the Barrier branch of the Amalgamated Miners’
Association ensuing, the unionists now set their strength to secur-
ing from the mining companies recognition and acknowledgment
of their claim to be employed on the mines to the exclusion of
non-union labour. For the union—as every union—found itself
up against many men who, if they wished for the material benefits
for themselves, insisted on preserving their own individuality,
and refused to be drawn into the ranks of the union and under
its domination. Non-unionists appeared to the unionists as a
source of weakness if not an actual menace. The Miners’ Asso-
ciation, in its sturdy strength, was aggressive. It pressed for
the Proprietary’s recognition of its principle of preference to
unionists. In a letter to the Proprietary on 2nd November, 1889,
signed by Richard Sleath, the association demanded that all non-
unionists should be compelled to join the association. The union
rules, the letter pointed out, provided that members should not
work with non-unionists. Failing compliance with the associa-
tion’s claims, the men decided that after Wednesday, 6th Novem-
ber, the members of the Barrier branch of the Australian Miners ’
Association should refuse to work with non-members.
The Board on 6th November declared its decision. It resolved
—“That the positions of men who are willing to continue in the
company’s service, whether members of the Australian Miners’
Association or not, are to be maintained, and every protection
and encouragement be afforded to them.”
The men struck work. The Barrier was stirred with a new
sensation. If the feeling of unionist to non-unionist had not


developed into the very gospel of hate of the turbulent years
of the new century, at least the strife between the two classes
was acute. The Barrier had won its name for the lawlessness
in the first whirling days. The threats against the non-unionists
—the clash between the factions —the danger of serious disorders
were realised. Police were despatched from Adelaide and Sydney
to Broken Hill. But the Directors and the Secretary (Mr. Wil-
liam Knox) of the Proprietary proceeding thither, and conferring
with the representatives of the other companies affected, speedily
met the men. The first strike was over in ten days. An agree-
ment was drafted and ratified between representatives of the
companies and the miners. The essence of this agreement was
the recognition of the Amalgamated Miners’ Association by the
mine owners.
The following year was memorable for the great maritime
strike. The unionists at Broken Hill became involved in this
supreme test of the strength of Australian unionists against em-
ployers, which was to paralyse for a time the activities of the
ports of Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide, and to cause infinite
depression and loss to employers and employes. Broadly the
two classes united, the one against the other. Naturally the mine
owners were in sympathy with the employers, and the miners
with the unionists engaged in the struggle. The fever infected
the Barrier. The rupture came.
In the agreement resulting from the first strike the mine
owners had consented to recognise the unions formed by their
own operatives. They declined in any way to acknowledge or
be influenced by outside unions. They refused to entertain the
demand made by the A.M.A. that they should employ only the
ships manned by union crews to carry their lead and silver from
South Australia to Sydney, where it was transferred to the over-
seas steamers. The stocks of bullion began to accumulate upon
the mines. Difficulty was experienced in obtaining supplies of
timber for use underground and of coke for the blast furnaces.
On Friday, sth September, representatives of the Proprietary
British, Block 10, Junction, Victoria Cross, Round Hill, South


and Central Mines, meeting in Melbourne, decided to close down
all the mines at once, except the Proprietary, which was to dis-
charge its hands on the following Wednesday. The miners,
learning this decision, at once formed a strike committee, and
ceased work. The dispute extended over four weeks. The excite-
ment among the miners rose to fever heat. The inevitable nego-
tiations, interchanges, conferences ended in the inevitable com-
promise, and the representatives of both parties attached their
signatures to an agreement which included the following impor-
tant principles:—
“That in the event of any further trouble existing, the point
or points at issue shall be referred to a Board of Arbitration of
equal numbers of either side, say three; and, failing their being
able to agree, that an umpire be appointed, who shall either be
a Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court of any of the
Australian colonies; and, in the event of the Board not being
able to agree, the judge to be chosen as umpire, or, upon his
declining to act, the selection to be made by lot out of the list
of Judges of the various colonies. The decision when given to
be final and binding on both sides. The award to take effect from
date of notice of arbitration on either side.”
“That the Amalgamated Miners’ Association, Barrier Colonial
District No. 3, agree that no question of any kind in connection
with any other labour organisation shall form the basis of a dis-
pute, and only a question affecting the mines and the employees
is to be considered a matter on which arbitration shall be
resorted to when trouble takes place—the meaning of this being
that in the event of a Trades Council or any labour body outside
the A.M.A. of Barrier Colonial District No. 3 calling the latter
out for a dispute foreign to the mine or men, they will refuse
to come out, and will not raise such questions as between the
mines and themselves. ’ ’
“That contracts other than stoping of ore shall be allowed
as heretofore.”
In this agreement the principal points were the isolation
of the Barrier Ranges Miners’ Union from labour associations
K


existing elsewhere, and the reference of subsequent disputes to
arbitration.
But with the break of the Great Drought of 1892 came a fresh
trial of strength between the mine owners and the men—the Big
Strike, which broke the power of the branch of the association
for years to come. The first signs of trouble were revealed on
the spread of a rumour that in consequence of the continued fall
in prices of silver and lead, the mine owners were considering
the question of more economical working of the mines. In 1885,
when the Broken Hill Proprietary was formed, the highest price
for silver was 4/2 per ounce and the lowest 3/11J, and for lead
the highest price per ton was £l2/5/- and the lowest £lO/10/-.
In 1890 the price of silver rose as high as 4/6J per ounce and
of lead £l4/5/- per ton. But in 1892, the drought year, the
highest price reached only 3/7 J per ounce of silver and £ll/5/-
per ton of lead. Among the alterations likely to he made under
more economical working, it was rumoured, was the introduction
of a system of calls for public tenders and letting contracts for
the stoping of ore. The directorate of the Broken Hill Proprie-
tary had, indeed, reached this decision, and had communicated
its views to the directorates of other mining companies operating
at Broken Hill. On 10th June Mr. Knox, Secretary of the Pro-
prietary, wrote, on behalf of the directors of the principal mines,
to the secretary of the Barrier Ranges Miners’ Association
(Richard Sleath) stating that the companies which, acting in
conjunction had formed one party to the 1890 agreement, had
determined no longer to be hound by Clause 4, which imposed
the restriction on the stoping of ore by contract. The companies
had been impelled to this decision by the following considera-
tions:—(a) The disproportionate amount of ore raised per man
having regard to the cost per ton; (b) the large decrease in the
price of silver and lead; (c) the general reduction in the value
of ore raised consequently upon the largely increased output of
the various mines; and (d) the heavy increase in the import
duties of all mining requisites. The directors, Mr, Knox added,


had no intention of interfering with the Miners’ Union or of
reducing the rate of wages. The opposition of the miners to
this proposal was communicated to the Secretary of the Broken
Hill Proprietary by Sleath, acting for the Miners’ Association.
No agreement appearing in sight, Mr. Knox wrote on 27th June,
giving notice to the miners of the directors’ intention to with-
draw from the two agreements between them and the employees
at Broken Hill —the withdrawals to take effect from 30th July.
The miners were prompt to regard this decision as a chal-
lenge to the strength of the unions. On 3rd July a mass meeting
of 6000 unionists was held at Broken Hill to consider the ultima-
tum from the mine owners. It was decided that, instead of
waiting for the mine owners’ action on 30th July, all operatives
on the Hill should be called out immediately. The idea was in
the minds of some of the men that the immediate strike would
mean loss to the companies from the subsidences which would
occur in imperfectly secured sections of the mines, unless fresh
supports could be put in immediately. Companies and miners
settled down that day to a bitter trial of strength.
A move by the strikers led to a stormy scene at the fourteenth
half-yearly meeting of shareholders, held in the hall of the Older-
fleet, Collins Street, Melbourne, on 27th July. Sleath himself
attended the meeting as a shareholder. The miners had bought
a share, and this had been registered in Sleath’s name two days
earlier, in order that he might attend the meeting. Mr. Bowes
Kelly, Chairman of Directors, presided at the meeting, and the
attendance of shareholders was very large.
A report from Mr. John Howell, General Manager of the
mine, presented at the meeting, stated that, since the commence-
ment of the strike, reports had been industriously circulated to
the effect that the Proprietary mine was in an extremely bad
and shaky condition, and that the underground workings were
in danger of collapse. To these reports the General Manager
gave emphatic denial. When the Chairman had moved the adop-
tion of the reports and balance-sheet, Sleath started to his feet
and asked leave to move an amendment.


“Certainly,” said the Chairman. “Mr, Sleath is addressing
you, gentlemen, I ask you to give him a fair hearing.”
Sleath, making his way to the platform, moved that the
reports and balance-sheet he referred back to the Directors and
Manager for explanation and correction. He commenced then
a fiery defence of the men, and declared that the General Mana-
ger’s statement —that MacGregor shaft was in good working
condition —was inaccurate. Heard patiently at first, he pro-
ceeded, as he warmed up to his work, amid a storm of inter-
jections.
“You’re not addressing a Broken Hill audience now,” cried
a shareholder, “Do you do any work?” demanded another.
But the Chairman calling for order, Sleath was allowed to
finish his speech and move his amendment. Then he met more
than his match. Among the shareholders was the late J. L.
Purves, K.C., a well-known barrister —the most redoubtable of
opponents Sleath could have encountered. “Let Mr. Sleath take
this message back to Broken Hill,” cried Purves indignantly,
“that, when he seeks to induce the Government of Hew South
Wales to inforce labour covenants to assist these men on strike, he
is asking the Government to institute a new order of things, by
which each individual Parliament of each individual State would
be enabled to paralyse mining enterprise. Our friend here is
a very different man from what he is on the waggon under the
burning effigy of some decent man, discoursing to these mis-
guided men at Broken Hill. Let him go back again to Broken
Hill and tell these people who are working with him, and who
are telling the men from the platform that the shareholders will
be fearful of the mine falling in and the loss to their pockets—
let him go back and tell them that we don’t care if it falls in
to-morrow.”
Purves, proceeding amid loud applause, declared at last:
“Sleath says force is to be the thing. Hot merely will we not
work ourselves, but we will prevent anyone who wants a day’s
wages from going up the mine to work.”


Sleath rose to a point of order. “This loquacious friend/’
he declared, to loud laughter, “has made a lot of untrue state-
ments. I would ask if I made that statement. ’ ’
“Not here, but you did at the mine,” the Chairman reminded
him.
“I say that any man that makes such statements tells an
absolute falsehood,” Sleath asserted angrily.
Then Puryes finished him. “This gentleman comes here
laughing in his sleeve,” roared he. “He thinks it is a very fine
thing to say I am loquacious, because I earn my living with my
tongue. He is welcome to do so, and when Igo to Broken Hill
I shall have something to say about a loquacious friend there.
He tells you that £3 per week kills miners, because they suffer
from lead-poisoning. Well, gentleman, he is a miner. Ido not
see any signs about him of lead-poisoning. He is a working man.
Why, gentlemen, his hands are whiter than mine! He comes here
with the money of poor starving women and helpless children.
He is one of the Chevaliers d’lndustrie —one of the knights of
indolence, who live and prey upon the real working man and pre-
vent him doing his day’s work!”
Amid cheers Purves sat down. Sleath said no more. His
amendment was lost, and the Directors’ attitude on the strike
was approved.
On the occurrence of the strike the officers of the Broken
Hill Proprietary’s staff offered at once to remain on the mine
to protect the property, if need be, from damage at the hands
of the strikers. The offer was not accepted by John Howell.
The staff was accordingly compelled to leave the mine—to return
weeks later in the very face of a howling, threatening mob.
A dangerous spirit was abroad among the miners. Indivi-
dual officers and other loyal employees of the mining companies
were subjected to insult, pelted with stones, roughly handled.
Daily a muttering, menacing crowd assembled down on the flat
at the edge of the Broken Hill leases. Wild speeches were
delivered by the leaders. A cordon of pickets was set by the
strikers on the boundaries-of the mine to bar any men who had


the hardihood to proceed to work from entering the mines.
Meantime the Directors were meeting from day to day in Mel-
bourne. Telegrams were arriving constantly telling of develop-
ments at Broken Hill, the dangerous spirit abroad, and the like-
lihood of open outbreak. Such was the menace that strong bodies
of police were entrained to Broken Hill, and firearms and muni-
tions sent up from Adelaide. For several weeks the mining
companies made no other move than for the protection of their
properties against the strikers, and did not attempt to put in
non-union labour to get out the ore. The struggle was watched
from all parts of Australia. Labour organisations and indivi-
dual sympathisers with the men contributed money to assist the
strikers over a time which was commencing to tell heavily upon
them and their families. The money contributed was spent in
the establishment of a co-operative store, from which provisions
were distributed.
Through July and into August the strike proceeded, and the
mines lay idle. On 17th August the mine owners issued a mani-
festo in which they stated that the mines would be re-opened on
25th August. They would then he prepared to engage any
efficient workmen, without regard to their being members of a
union or not. The management of the mines, they added, refused
to he controlled by union rules. While reserving to themselves
the power to let contracts for the stoping of ore, they did not
propose to make any alteration in the rate of wages which had
ruled before the strike.
At early morning on 25th August a great crowd of miners
and their wives gathered on the edge of the leases. The day had
been awaited by other residents of Broken Hill with apprehen-
sion, lest the attempt of any workman to go on to the mines should
result in violence and rioting. The mine officers were the first
to make the attempt. A few passed up through the black and
muttering crowd to the Hill. But on the appearance of one
officer, against whom the miners had a grudge, a yell went up,
and, amid a wildly surging crowd, he was turned back, stoned,


struck and kicked. It was high time for the police, under Super-
intendent Grainger and Sub-Inspector Saunders, to intervene.
Out of the police barracks and through the surging crowds twelve
mounted police and fifty constables on foot forced their way.
The officer was rescued from his assailants; the road to the mine
cleared. Up to the Hill went the officers and the workmen who
had the courage to face the wrath of the strikers. By night the
Broken Hill Proprietary had engaged one hundred men, and as
many were distributed over the mines worked by other com-
panies. Actually the mine owners’ move was a death blow to
the strike. Prom this time on miners continued to return to work
in increasing numbers; but the main body of unionists remained
steadfast. Accordingly, to enable operations to be undertaken
on a proper scale, the mine owners decided to bring up to Broken
Hill “free” labourers, engaged in Melbourne and elsewhere. The
news of this proposal reached the strikers at the Hill. The first
train load of non-unionists arrived at Broken Hill on 10th Sep-
tember, under police escort. A strong body of police received
the men on their arrival. In the centre of an armed guard the
non-unionists were marched down the crowded streets and up to
the mine. Yells of “Scabs!” “Blacklegs!” marked their pro-
gress; stones were thrown; threats of tarring and feathering
were hurled after them. Surging forward, the mob sought to
break the ranks of the constables. One of the constables was
struck down, and the police fired on the crowd. The mob broke
away and the march proceeded. The police force was too strong', ’
The arrangements made under the direction of the police
magistrate, Whittingdale Johnson, held the rioters in check, and
the party reached the mine in safety. But the black and threat-
ening crowd gathered still on the edge of the leases, and no man
among the non-unionists dared to leave the Hill under peril of
his life.
Meantime the New South Wales Government had determined
on a blow at the very heart of the strike. Orders were issued
from Sydney for the arrest of the strike leaders —seven in all—■


Sleath among them. Six were arrested at the office of the Labour
Defence Committee. Sleath was arrested by Sub-Inspector
Saunders in the street a little later. Committed for trial on
charges of having conspired to prevent subjects of the Queen
from following their lawful occupations, and with having, by
reason of these conspiracies, caused men to commit breach of
the peace and acts of rioting, the men were brought to trial
before Acting Judge Backhouse at the Deniliquin Circuit Court
on 29th October. After a trial of three days the jury brought
in a verdict of guilty against six of the men, and these the judge
sentenced to terms of imprisonment with hard labour ranging
from two months up to two years.
The strike had broken down. Man after man now dared to
seek employment on the Hill. Operations were approaching their
former magnitude. Officially the Labour Defence Committee
held out till Bth November, and then, in despair, declared the
strike oft and asked for a conference. This attempt and other
attempts proving ineffectual, the unionists submitted themselves
for re-employment. And in the meantime the places of many
had been filled, and work could be found only for a number of
them. As a result of the want of employment, aggravated by
the financial depression of the following year, great distress pre-
vailed at Broken Hill. The mine owners’ victory resulted in
several years of industrial peace upon the Barrier.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
THE REPORT OF J. B. JAQUET (1893).
THE origin of the Broken Hill lode, now famous throughout
the world, had been the subject of much theorising. Geo-
logists and mining experts differed in opinion. Up till
1892 the general view was that the lode represented an immense
fissure vein. Reporting on the lode on 12th April of that year.
Mr. E. P. Piman, Government Geologist of New South Wales,
declared that, after his visit to the Hill and his inspection of
several of the underground workings, the principal impression
conveyed to his mind was that the Broken Hill ore deposits did
not occur in the ordinary true fissure lode, but should be referred
to what were called “segregated lodes” of the type known in Ben-
digo district (Victoria) as “saddles.” The Broken Hill lode
appeared to him to be a huge saddle lode, formed in a fissure which
owed its shape to the contortions undergone by the gneissic rocks.
If this were correct, the probability was that the eastern and
western legs would be found to thin out gradually as they descen-
ded, and in that case the depth at which they would disappear
would depend to a great extent upon the width of the synclinal
basis on either side of the Hill. There was a possibility of other
similarly-shaped lodes being found more or less vertically under-
neath the Broken Hill lode.
Mr. J. B. Jaquet, geological surveyor, issued in Sydney on
2nd October, 1893, his elaborate memoir on “The Geology of the
Broken Hill Lode and Barrier Ranges Mineral Field of New
South Wales.” In this report, the result of long and scrupulous


survey, Mr. Jaquet declared that the Broken Hill lode was a
saddle lode. Examination of the three lodes —the Broken Hill,
Eastern and North-Eastern —would show that they followed the
strike of the country in a very persistent manner. The presence
of an anticline forming the core of the Broken Hill ridge was
evidence of the great lateral pressure to which the rocks at this
locality had been subjected, while the undulating character of
this anticline and the fact that the direction in which it tended
varied within certain limits suggested that the present conforma-
tion of the rocks enclosing the saddle lode was also in part due
to pressure falling upon them in directions other than lateral.
The outcrop of the Broken Hill lode varied in width from
20 feet to 100 feet, and could he traced for a distance of about
a mile and a half from opposite Kelly shaft in Block 10 to No. 2
shaft in Block 15. The sulphide ores contained only small quan-
tities of iron and copper pyrites, while the amount of this metal
in the larger portion of the oxidised ore was not very great, and
increased in quantity as the surface was approached. These
circumstances would seem to indicate that the ironstone forming
the outcrop did not represent a gossan formed on the oxidation
of pyritous ore. The gneisses and other rocks contained small
crystals of iron pyrites, which in the weathered specimens were
partly or wholly converted into oxides. These oxides would also
be set free during decomposition of primary minerals, particu-
larly dark mica. Again, the presence of dendrites on the cleav-
age planes was evidence that manganese ore was liberated during
the breaking down of the country rock. Oxidation would com-
mence in the upper portions of the lode, and gradually creep
downwards. The percolating waters would from time to time
carry away certain of the new-born minerals brought into exis-
tence on the decomposition of the sulphides—notably the zinc
compounds; hence a decrease in bulk, and consequently a settling
of the oxidised ores, accompanied by the production of cavities,
would take place. Prior to entering the lode these waters, pass-
ing through the decomposing remnant of superincumbent rock,


would receive a small quantity of iron and manganese salts, which
salts they afterwards deposited in the cavities in the upper por-
tions of the lode. In this manner a compact outcrop of mangani-
ferous ironstone would be produced, and, just as oxidised ores
were slowly taking the place of sulphides, the ironstone was
insidiously creeping downwards and taking the place of the
oxidised ores.
“The importance of the part which the cap of the lode has
played in protecting the loose masses of ore below it from direct
contact with the atmosphere,” Mr. Jaquet proceeded, “cannot be
over-estimated. Had it not existed decomposition of the sul-
phides would have proceeded more quickly, but, at the same time,
the ore produced would have been rapidly denuded away. Inde-
pendent of other conditions, the width of the outcrop would seem
to depend on the amount of denudation that had taken place and
the depth of the cap of the saddle from the surface.”
The cap of the saddle, Jaquet observed, entered the Proprie-
tary mine from Block 10—at McGregor shaft it occurred above
the 230 feet level, at Mcßryde shaft a little above the No. 3 level,
at McCulloch shaft immediately above the 216 feet level, while
between McCulloch shaft and Rasp shaft it cropped out at the
surface.
The lode in the neighbourhood of Jamieson shaft had been
thoroughly exploited to a depth of nearly 300 feet, and shown
to vary in width from 40 to 60 feet. At a depth of 400 feet the
shaft passed through a lode of sulphide ore 20 feet thick, and
this lode was again met with in the western crosscut at 485 feet
and 515 feet levels respectively, and found to be of the same thick-
ness and to underlay north-west. Jaquet was of opinion that the
cap of the saddle would be found somewhere between the 285
feet level and the point at which the shaft passed through the
lode; that the comparatively speaking narrow lode met with in
the lower levels of the mine represented the western leg of the
saddle lode, and that the eastern leg should be met with at a con


siderable distance eastward of the end of the 485 feet eastern
crosscut.
Patterson’s shaft differed from Jamieson’s shaft in being
situated at the eastern side of the lode. The upper portions of
the lode above the 238 feet level had not been thoroughly explored,
but between the 238 and 338 feet levels it was about 100 feet wide.
At a depth of 538 feet a crosscut had been driven westward for
a distance of 90 feet without meeting any defined body of ore.
As to the depth at which the cap of the saddle occurred below
the 338 feet level no evidence was available. It was, however,
noteworthy—having regard to the fact that in all other portions
of the lode, when the eastern leg had been proved some distance
below the cap of the saddle, its western leg underlay was very
slight—that the 538 feet western crosscuts should have reached
such a length without meeting any ore, and it suggested the pos-
sibility that the eastern leg might have pinched out before reach-
ing this depth. The portion of the mine from McCulloch shaft
to Wilson shaft formerly contained rich carbonate of lead ore,
and after all this ore had been won the workings were filled up
with “mullock.” Rasp shaft had been completely destroyed by
movements which had occurred in the hanging wall. It would
seem as if the cap of the saddle, a short distance south of McCul-
loch shaft, made an abrupt turn upwards, and at the same time
the western leg “pinched out.” In some places the eastern leg
appeared to have been suppressed also, and there was thus a
complete bar of country rock across the lode. The saddle emerged
at the surface a short distance south-west of Rasp shaft. Its
upper portion, together with the lode which was above it, had
been removed by denudation; it was owing to this fact that the
lode in the neighbourhood of Rasp shaft was comparatively nar-
row. The saddle appeared to enter the Hill again between Rasp
and Wilson shafts, and then dipped southwards for some dis-
tance. Enormous amounts of manganiferous iron ore occurred
on the Proprietary mine. This ore, containing a considerable
quantity of lead carbonate, and an amount of iron oxide largely


in excess of that required to satisfy the silica which it contained,
was particularly well suited for mixing with the rich dry silicious
ores in the blast furnace —hence it formed a valuable asset.
The largest carbonate of lead-ore body entered the northern
portion of the mine from Block 14. It rose to the surface of the
saddle, and a portion had been destroyed by denudation. Prom
McCulloch shaft it pursued a southerly course underneath the
masses of low grade ores, until it finally disappeared a short
distance south of Brodribb shaft. Nearly the whole of the ore
which it formerly contained had been removed. Another car-
bonate of lead ore body was situated between Drew shaft and
the boundary of Block 10, It was a continuation of the body
which had yielded ore containing phenomenal amounts of silver
in Block 10. Two large Bonanzas, composed of dry high-grade
ore, existed in the Proprietary mine. One occupied nearly the
whole of the portion of the lode situated between Jamieson and
Wigg shafts.
The portion of the lode which intervened between the sul-
phides and the ironstone cap and was not occupied by ore bodies
previously described was filled with dry low-grade ore. The
quantity of this ore present in the mine was enormous, and
should it be possible to treat it economically the mine would be
enabled to keep up a good output of silver from this source alone
for several years to come.


CHAPTER XXIX.
THE OPEN CUT (1891).
THE entrance of W. R. Wilson, as an outstanding figure in
Barrier silver mining in the eighties, into the fortunes of
the Broken Hill Company of fourteen in 1885 had marked
in itself an admission of the increasing value of the long-despised
property. His ability and influence had proved important factors
in the development of the Proprietary’s mine. A man of wide
interests—“ St. Albans” Wilson, owner of one of the finest studs
in Australia —none the less he had devoted himself in the first
years of his directorate to pressing forward the development of the
Big Mine on a scale proportionate to its richness. In July, 1886,
Wilson had left Melbourne on a visit to America and Europe—
mainly to make investigations for the guidance of the Proprie-
tary in opening up its property. It was due to Wilson’s influ-
ence that Patton was appointed General Manager in 1887, and
H. H. Schlapp in 1886 as metallurgist. Schlapp, in turn,
secured the appointment in 1887 of W. J. Koehler as his
assistant. In the following year Mr. E. J. Horwood, present
Manager of the Proprietary’s works at Broken Hill, a young
mining engineer who Lad studied at Melbourne University and
had spent a few years in the South Australian public service,
came to Broken Hill, and was engaged by the Proprietary to
carry out its underground survey work. He was employed, too,
on similar work for other companies, making the underground
survey of nearly every mine on the Hill. Giving up private
practice in 1892, he joined the staff of the Proprietary, and was


LATE AV. R. WILSON.


appointed Mining Manager in April, 1895, and four years later
Manager of the company’s Broken Hill works.
In a comparatively brief tenure of office as General Manager
Patton justified Wilson’s estimate of his ability. Through his
agency the square set system of timbering was adopted at Broken
Hill shortly after he took over the management of the Proprie-
tary’s mine. Even after the discovery of the surface shows of
chlorides and recognition of the importance of the prize, the
management was compelled by the scarcity of all classes of
material, the absence of railway communication and the high
price of timber on the Barrier, to work on primitive lines, and
to pass from one section of the property to another, wherever
the ore most suitable for smelting purposes was available, with-
out regard for the serious consequences on later workings. In
the early days, following the sinking of Rasp shaft, most of the
mining was carried out upon the lead carbonates —rich in silver
and lead —occurring in isolated lodes between McCulloch and
Patterson shafts. The ground was held in position by round
posts and caps of native gum, and at a later stage with New
Zealand pine. The gum gave way and the pine decayed, with the
result that the old slopes fell in, thus rendering the section more
difficult to work than if it had never been opened at all.
By the time of Patton’s arrival the size of the lode necessi-
tated a departure from the older methods of mine timbering.
The mine, indeed, was timbered throughout, hut, owing to the
great width and friable character of the lode, the management was
obliged to keep the filling well forward, 800 feet in one part. This
was effected by gravitating broken rock and earth from the sur-
face to the depths below —a method entailing heavy expense.
The width of the lode was such that no timber of sufficient length
could be obtained. Patton decided on the introduction of the
square set system of timbering, which he had employed during
his thirteen years of experience in American silver fields. The
system consisted of filling in the spaces left vacant on the removal
of the ore from the lodes with a series of timber sets or frames.
The timber employed was Oregon pine, imported in logs, sawn


down to a section ten inches square. The long timbers sent up
to the mine were cut and notched into the sizes needed, and were
built up from wall to wall, allowing passes, chutes and gangways
to be constructed easily. At the outset the square set system was
found to operate without accident during the displacement of
vast bodies of ore. Jaquet on his visit in 1892 observed that no
method of timbering previously invented was so well adapted
to the condition obtaining at Broken Hill. But its use in the
workings of the lode did not prevent the occurrence of several
disastrous creeps. In the Proprietary’s mine an extensive
crushing of the stopes and levels took place near the northern
boundary, and between McGregor shaft and the boundary of
Block 10 the surface settled and became fissured owing to a sub-
sidence in the excavations below. The partial failure of the
square set method at Broken Hill Jaquet attributed rather to
the wrong arrangement of the sets in some part of the lode than
any inherent defect of the system.
By 1891, indeed, the sides of the immense cutting created
by the removal of a mass of ore nearly 300 feet wide were com-
mencing to move. The big creep which ensued crushed the square
set timber as if it had been matchwood. In the meantime W.
H. Patton resigned his position as General Manager on 30th
July, 1890, and John Howell was appointed in his place. Like Pat-
ton, Howell had had a wide American experience—in mining, con-
centrating and smelting ores. It fell to him to press forward
the great scheme for the working of the mine—originally recom-
mended by W. R. Wilson —the open cut. The cut was planned
originally to relieve the strain by removing a portion of the out-
crop. It was found, however, that the outcrop itself contained
valuable proportions of lead and silver, and the Proprietary
determined ultimately to carry the open cut through the entire
length of the property. The material furnished besides silver
and lead a fine flux for the smelters. Within fifteen years the
cut was nearly 300 feet deep by 4000 feet in length, and from it
had been lifted 4,145,756 cubic yards of material, which had
yielded 1,409,833 tons of ore. With the completion of the open


PATTERSON’S OPEN CUT, 1901.
(Looking South.)


cut the Proprietary came practically to the end of its supply of
oxidised ores.
Howell’s elaborate report on the mine and its workings was
presented to the Board on 29th October, 1891. He considered
that the irregular occurrence of the grades of ore would have
rendered extraction impossible except by the square set system,
and that in working the greater depths the same system must be
continued. The proposed method of working off the top of the
Hill was not intended to replace the square set system. Little
was then known about the mine below the 300 feet level, but large
bodies of kaolin and rich silicious silver would without doubt be
met. There was nothing new in the proposal to cut down the
cropping of the lode and quarry out the ore by a system of open
cuts, for the system had been carried out for eight months past
between Rasp and McCulloch shafts.
There was a feeling abroad, he added, that the dividend-
paying life of the Broken Hill Proprietary would end, when
the ores of the grade and character then being worked were
exhausted, notwithstanding the fact that there might remain in
the mine, in addition to the enormous bodies of sulphide ores
already exposed, vast quantities of dry silicious oxidised ores,
containing some lead but not fit for smelting. This was entirely
erroneous, and it was not so much the grade of these ores as their
character that excluded them from the existing methods of reduc-
tion. The greater quantities of these dry silicious ores remaining
in the mine had double the silver value that the great bulk of the
lead carbonate ores had contained, which till then had gone into
the furnaces.
Howell recommended that the open cut scheme should ex-
tend :
(a) From Block 14 to Wilson shaft at the northern end of
the property to about 60 feet.
(b) From Wilson shaft to the 100 feet level, thus giving 160
feet from the top of the outcrop.
L


(c) From Jamieson shaft to Mcßryde shaft, from 80 to 100
feet.
(d) From Mcßryde shaft to Block 10, from 100 feet to 200
feet.
Simultaneously with the starting of a comprehensive scheme
for increased water supply, Howell recommended that the com-
pany should commence operations on some suitable site for the
erection of extensive reduction works to treat their milling, con-
centrating and sulphide ores on a scale commensurate with the
capabilities of the mine.


CHAPTER XXX.
THE FIRES UNDERGROUND (1895-1906).
FORESTS of Oregon pine were sunk in the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary’s mine under the square set system of timbering.
The dryness of the ground increased the ordinary inflam-
mability of the timber, and a fire broke out on Block 11 in 1895
which burned underground for years. All the energy and skill of
the staff at Broken Hill were brought to bear on the problem of
extinguishing the fire, which was eating its way Through the tim-
bers of the old workings; but the fire was not to be quenched.
The block of timbering so affected was accordingly walled off from
the remainder of the mines. For years after the heat of the work-
ings about this section and an occasional outburst of fumes —in
one instance a serious outbreak of flame —showed that the fire still
smouldered.
The fire first broke out —from an unexplained cause —on
21st July, 1895, It occurred in an old timbering at the bottom
of the open cut. This timber formed the uppermost portion of
earlier workings, which had suffered more from the “creep” of
ground than any other portion of the mine. For years these old
workings had been rendered inaccessible by the shifting of the
ground. The timbering had been crushed and the square set
system had collapsed. The crushed timbering continued verti-
cally to a depth of about 200 feet, and was connected by a narrow
neck with another timbered area, which went down to a further
depth of 100 feet. When the fire started it was found impos-
sible to reach it underground, and the mine officials centred their


efforts on closing all the outlets from the crushed area —with the
object of restricting the spread of the fire as far as possible till
more water could be brought to play upon it —and on drenching
all timberings leading northwards. All available steam was
forced down on the burning working, and finally carbonic acid
gas, generated in the south smelters, was pumped through
McGregor shaft. The officials dreaded lest the fire should
become so intense within the inaccessible area as to force its way
northwards through the narrow vein extending as far as Wigg
shaft. The extension, however, was prevented, hut the gas and
water still forced down continually failed to extinguish the fire.
The broken state of the ground rendered it impossible to seal
the area up so effectively as to allow the gas to have proper effect
on the upper levels of timbering. Accordingly, after several
attempts to reach the narrow neck, in order to set a block across
the whole width of the underground workings, the gas was turned
off, and a dam of tailings formed at 20 feet south of the line
between Drew and MacGregor shafts. Though the fire continued
to smoulder, it was confined by the dam to an area in which the
oxidised ores were practically exhausted.
The next serious outbreak occurred on 12th September, 1897,
on Block 12. It was confined to an area between Jamieson and
Brodribb shafts, in the sets between the Nos. 2 and 3 levels. This
fire was brought under control with far less difficulty; but it was
attended by the death of three men who, while endeavouring to
reach the seat of the fire, were overcome by the poisonous gases
generated from the fire. It was believed that the fire had been
started maliciously, and a reward of £SOO was offered for infor-
mation leading to the conviction of the guilty parties, the New
South Wales Government contributing £IOO and the Broken Hill
Proprietary £4OO. The section of the old square set system
affected was cut out and the place enclosed in walls of waste
material, thus isolating it from the other workings.
But on 27th September, 1902, this underground fire was
responsible for a fresh outbreak. In June a pit had been sunk


from the bottom of the open cut, in order to facilitate the pass-
ing of mullock underground for refilling purposes. The pit
passed right through the portion of the mine affected by the
fire, and for the time, with the exception of a little heat, no incon-
venience was experienced by the miners. Work was being car-
ried on in the sulphide ore, which was below the fire region. But
the appearance of safety in the fire area was not borne out. Old
timbers in the vicinity of Brodribh shaft commenced to smoulder
heavily, and the fumes forced their way into the shaft at the
No. 3 level. The men were promptly called out of the dangerous
region. The workings had again to be blocked off from the rest
of the mine. On this a movement occurred in the burning stopes
above Brodribh shaft, and charcoal falling on the floors below
the third level fired the timbers at that point. The task of cutting
off the burning area had to be undertaken under peril from the
noxious fumes of gas, and such was the difficulty of safeguarding
them against the danger that thirty-seven men were overpowered,
although they were got out of the gas-impregnated area without
loss of life. Brick walls were finally built up between the 300
feet and 400 feet levels, restricting the fire to a comparatively
narrow area. The outbreak was attributable to the re-ignition
of the fire of September 1897, caused by the movement of the
ground and the draughts of air which reached the old smoulder-
ing timbers. In the reeking poisoned atmosphere the men of the
Big Mine were compelled to fight a grim battle before —by 6th
October —the fire was finally cut off from the other workings
of the mine.
A grimmer battle was fought by the Proprietary’s men in
the course of the outbreak on Block 11 in 1906. On the evening
of 17th February a fire started in the 400 feet level —from a gal-
lery about 150 feet north of Mcßryde shaft. The fire originated
from a blast, and the men, instead of returning to ensure that
all was in safety, settled down to their crib. Before they had
finished, the gallery was choked with smoke, and when the out-
break was noticed the smoke was too thick for them to approach


near enough to reach the fire with water. The fire spread rapidly.
All that could be done was to block the gallery with sandbags
and turn water from the 300 feet level into a winze which was
close to the seat of the fire. Smoke poured up thickly through
a stope, which, being only partially filled up, acted as a chim-
ney. The district was heavily timbered, but at the outset it was
believed that the precautions taken would prevent the fire from
extending considerably. The men were now engaged in filling
the stope above the fire with tailings and slush, and the indica-
tions were that the fire was subsiding, as less smoke was being
driven off, although an occasional puff came from the crevices
in the ground.
Early on the morning of 12th March the fire revealed itself
at Mcßryde shaft, although a stream of water had been played
down in the meantime from the 300 feet level. At the 1000 feet
level fragments of burning wood and stone were found to be
tumbling down the shaft, which was ablaze above. The staff
endeavoured to meet this by putting a water curtain 300 feet south
of Mcßryde shaft, hoping to prevent the fire from travelling
further south. At the north end three shafts were sunk, and
water poured down continuously. Before the month was out the
fire seemed under control. On 9th April occurred disaster.
On the Saturday night a slight outbreak of gas took place
on the 400 feet level, between Drew and Weatherly shafts. The
men were brought out at once, and the precaution taken of not
allowing them to descend again till Monday morning, after the
gallery had been examined. That morning an assistant to the
underground manager reported that the gallery at which the
ventilation was good was safe for working. The men were
allowed then to go down, and commenced work. At ten o’clock
a mine official walked through from Weatherly to Drew shaft,
inspected the gallery, and found all clear. On his way back,
however, his lamp commenced suddenly to burn low, the fumes
of gas reached him, and he stumbled over the body of a miner
lying unconscious on the ground. A sudden rush of gas had again


poisoned the air of the gallery. Sick with the fumes himself,
the official tried to drag the man out of the gallery to Weatherly
shaft; but the weight was too much for him, and he himself on
the point of being overcome by the gas. Dropping the man, he
made his way into the 300 feet level, which was clear, and sum-
moned the miners working there to go down with him and effect
a rescue. The miners accompanied him, hut on reaching the dan-
gerous place several of them were immediately overcome by the
fumes, and had to he dragged out by their comrades.
The news of the peril in which the man lay was carried to
the surface. Two mine officials now made desperate efforts to
save him, going down into the poisoned gallery three times, and
each time beaten hack. At last they reached the man, but had
got to him too late, for he was dead.
Among the miners who had attempted to rescue their un-
happy comrade a fresh fatality occurred. When the gas was
overcoming them they had staggered to the stage, but one, stupi-
fied by the fumes, had fallen from it unnoticed, and was found
lying at the bottom of the shaft with his skull fractured.


CHAPTER XXXI
THE REPORT OF SCHNABEL (1892)
ON the resignation of Schlapp in 1893 the appointment of an
Assistant General Manager became necessary. On the
recommendation of Mr. William Knox, the Board selected
for the appointment Mr. Alexander Stewart, of the Tharsis Com-
pany’s mine, in Spain, observing that his experience in the man-
agement of open cut work would be of great advantage to the
company. In January, 1895, Howell, while on leave of absence,
resigned, and Stewart was appointed General Manager for the
Proprietary.
Howell and Schlapp had both devoted considerable atten-
tion to the experimental treatment of sulphide ores, emphasising
that on the efficiency of this treatment must depend the future
of the mines. In 1891 the Proprietary took the lead among the
Barrier mining companies in approaching on the problem Dr. C.
Schnabel, Royal Counsellor of the Prussian Mining Department
and Professor of Metallurgy at the Clausthal Mining Academy
—the greatest authority of the day on the treatment of zinci-
ferous ores. The scientist coming out to Australia—by arrange-
ment with the Proprietary and other principal companies con-
cerned—in the following year, spent several months in experi-
menting at Broken Hill. His deductions were set out in his
elaborate report to the associated companies on “The Metallur-
gical Treatment of the Sulphides of the Barrier Ranges.”
Dr. Schnabel observed that in the lower level of the mines
working on the Broken Hill line of ore deposits were found


PROPRIETARY NORTH SMELTERS, 1887-1888.


of minerals carrying lead, silver, zinc and sulphur—generally
known as sulphides. These minerals occurred in such quantities
that their metallurgical treatment had become a vital question
for several of the mines of the Barrier Range. As it was most
probable that below a certain depth the whole mineral bearing
contents of the Broken Hill deposits would consist of sulphides,
the future existence of the Broken Hill mining industry depended
upon the metallurgical treatment of the ores.
As far as these sulphides had been developed, they were shown
to consist mainly of a silver-bearing mixture of galena and zinc
blende. The mixture of galena and zinc blende in the majority
of the ores was so intimate that the naked eye could not distin-
guish the individual minerals, and the whole made the impres-
sion of a single mineral. Only in exceptional cases were the
minerals present in coarser particles. In part the mixture con-
sisted of dense masses of granular structure, and again, on
account of partial solution of the component parts, as porous
masses.
The existing intimate mixture of sulphides of lead and zinc
made the ores unsuitable for treatment by the ordinary metal-
lurgical processes, the separation of lead and zinc being impos-
sible without material losses of these metals. As the treatment
of these ores in Europe with cheap labour, power and fuel was
expensive and difficult, the difficulties of the economical manipu-
lation reached their maximum in Australia in existing circum-
stances. While the treatment of the oxidised ores of the Barrier
was simple and combined with large profits, the treatment of the
complex sulphides involved more difficult operations, and could
never be expected to throw off as large profits as had been accom-
plished in the treatment of the oxidised ores. Sulphides, the
silver contents of which dropped below a certain amount, could
never be expected to be treated profitably, unless very high in
lead.
After giving full consideration to all the known methods for
the treatment of sulphide ores, and having in view the results


of the numerous experiments conducted at Broken Hill, Schnabel
recommended the methods which had the object in view of extract-
ing the zinc from the ores previous to the smelting process, as
being the most profitable as well as the most expeditious opera-
tion. The process consisted primarily in roasting the ores and
subsequently freeing the roasted ore from its zinc contents by
leaching with sulphurous or sulphuric acid, and then smelting
the ores thus freed from zinc in a blast furnace, the product of
which was bullion. The zinc was obtained in the shape of sul-
phate of zinc, from which oxide of zinc was produced:—
The process involved, he said, the following methods:—
(1) “The zinc is extracted before smelting the ore.”
(2) “The ore is reduced 25 per cent, to 40 per cent, in weight
by the removal of the zinc.”
(3) “The whole of the silver and lead contained in the ore
is recovered without material loss. ’ ’
(4) “The zinc can be retained in the form of oxide of zinc.”
The plant which Schnabel suggested should be erected to
consist of: —Two reverberatory roasting furnaces, two Hasen-
clever furnaces, one sulphuric acid factory, one combined rever-
beratory muffle furnace for the decomposition of zinc sulphate,
with the leaching plant and the main flue and chimney stack.
The process, he said, would be improved by the removal of the
quartz, a part of the gangue and a small part of the zinc blende
made by dressing the ores previous to roasting. This was an
important point, as the quantity of quartz increased proportion-
ately to the removal of the zinc blende, but the cost and degree
to which the ore could be improved by this preliminary dressing
could only be determined after trials with an ore dressing plant
of the newest and most improved design. It would therefore
be advisable to erect a plant of from thirty to fifty tons daily
capacity. Summarised, Schnabel’s recommendations were that
the sulphides should first be dealt with at the seaboard, on the
score of economy; that the scheme of treatment should be roast-
ing and leaching out of the zinc of sulphuric acid solution, the


smelting of the residue containing the lead and silver, and the
treatment of the zinc sulphates. Schnabel purposed to treat the
zinc sulphides, Jaquet observed, in a manner analagous to that
in which they had been operated on by nature in the upper part
of the lode. The oxidised ores had been desulphurised by being
brought into contact with them, and the operation had been fol-
lowed by the leaching out of the zinc compounds formed. By the
application of a greater temperature and by the use of a stronger
solution Schnabel proposed to effect in a few days what nature
had required thousands of years to perform. The most vital
question hearing on the future of the silver mining at Broken
Hill, Jaquet asserted, was the success which would attend the
attempts to treat profitably the sulphide ores.
The Broken Hill Proprietary, having weighed Schnabel’s
recommendations, decided not to accept them, in view of the
expense involved and the uncertainty of their proving successful.
Its confidence in the experiments of its own staff was justified.


CHAPTER XXXII.
THE SULPHIDES (1891).
THE treasure which flowed from the Big Mine on Broken Hill
in the early days of the Proprietary gave to the company
the revenue of a principality. Money was spent lavishly
for the development of the property. Fifteen shafts were sunk
on the Proprietary’s mine along the line of lode, and of these
eight were equipped at an early stage of operations with powerful
plant. Later, under Stewart’s management, the work was con-
centrated at a central shaft—Stewart shaft. Later still, when
Mr. G. D. Delprat had succeeded Mr. Stewart as General Manager
(1889), Delprat shaft was sunk to the west of Stewart shaft. This
shaft was so equipped as to he capable of feeding concentrating
plant treating 12,000 tons of ore a week. The shafts sunk on the
Big Mine since 1883 are: —Rasp, McCulloch, Patterson, Brodribb,
Jamieson, Wigg, Knox, Mcßryde, MacGregor, Dickenson, Wea-
therly, Drew, Muecke, Stewart and Delprat.
But in June 1886, the entire reduction plant employed by
the Proprietary consisted of the two thirty-ton Nevada water-
jacket furnaces. The first sod in the excavations for the smelters
on Broken Hill was cut on 29th October, 1885, and the first of
the furnaces was blown in on 6th May, 1886. Two additional
furnaces of similar capacity were then planned, and by 3rd
October, 1888, eight furnaces were in full blast on the mine. This
plant was increased in succeeding years to fifteen furnaces of
eighty-ton capacity each, which were equal to reducing about
4500 tons of crude ore a week.


While this development proceeded at the Big Mine the Pro-
prietary decided to establish its own refinery. For the first four
years of the company’s operations the products of the mine were
shipped to Europe as silver-lead bullion. Choosing Port Pirie,
in South Australia —282 miles from Broken Hill—as a site for
its refinery, the company obtained from the South Australian
Government a lease for wharf accommodation and, for a sum of
£IOO, the land on which to construct the works. Over the man-
grove swamps about the little wheat port rose a vigorous seaport
town; out of the Proprietary’s refinery developed the Port Pirie
smelters. Into this port were brought the huge stock of Oregon
for timbering at the mine, and supplies for the Broken Hill
mines. To it were railed, over the Silverton Tramway Companv
and the South Australian Government’s lines, the bullion, portion
of which was shipped to England and the remainder run into the
Proprietary’s refinery close to the wharves. The first plant for
the refinery was designed by H. H. Schlapp, Chief Metallurgist
to the Proprietary, and was erected in December, 1889, at a cost
of £22,489. This plant consisted of two twenty-ton softening
furnaces, four twenty-ton desilverising kettles, four twenty-ton
lead refining kettles, two liquation furnaces, sixteen retort fur-
naces and a blast furnace. It was capable of treating between
400 tons and 500 tons of silver lead bullion per week—the quan-
tity depending on the purity of the material, as if antimony and
arsenic were present in large quantities, the operation of refining
was delayed.
The process employed from the start was the “zinc” process
invented in 1850 by Alexander Parkes, of Birmingham. The
method employed was based on the fact that molten zinc has a
strong affinity for gold and silver, and will, under favourable
conditions, unite with them and form an alloy. The zinc is then
readily separated from the gold and silver by distillation. The
process, as developed from Parkes’s system, afforded a ready
method of separating these metals from the lead. The silver
lead bullion from the Broken Hill smelters was delivered at the


refinery as rich in silver as possible, and the marketable products
from the refinery were soft lead of excellent commercial quality,
silver from 996/1000 to 999/1000 fine, and dore bullion, or gold
land silver bullion. In the first years of the operations at Port
Pirie the pure silver was sold in the Australian States by tender
—in parcels of 10,000 to 150,000 ounces—and was purchased by
the banks ordinarily at a price somewhat above the price current
in London. The soft lead was shipped to England or to China,
which became a large buyer of the Broken Hill lead. In 1893
the Proprietary completed negotiations for the purchase of the
British company’s smelting plant, consisting of four eighty-ton
furnaces, thus enabling it to control plant at the Hill and the
Port of twenty eighty-ton smelters. In 1898 it was decided to
close down the smelters at the Hill and to concentrate smelting
operations at Port Pirie.
The company realised speedily that smelting could be only
one step in the treatment of the various classes of ore mined from
the Hill. Provis, in the report of sth December, 1886, had
referred to four classes of ore—lead, iron, kaolin and copper.
Nine years later Stewart, in his first report after his appointment
as Acting General Manager, stated that the extraordinary varie-
ties of the ores from the mine made it unique in this respect
among the known mines of the world. The high percentage of
sulphur and alumina carried in the kaolin rendered this ore
unsuitable for direct furnace work, and, having this fact in view,
the Directors, on 30th May, 1887, announced in their report that
they were considering the erection of an ore concentration plant.
Patton was about to leave the United States of America at the
time for Broken Hill, and he was instructed to bring with him
plans and specifications for plant capable of treating up to 300
tons of ore a day.
In July, 1889, the ore dressing mill was completed. The
total cost of the mill —which was capable of. treating between
150 tons and 200 tons, and was planned to treat the lower
grade lead ores, including engine power, machinery and build


ings, amounted to £39,648. It was not entirely successful in
operations. The ore was crushed under powerful steam stamps,
but, as the action of these stamps was simply an indiscriminate
pounding, the separation of the metallic particles from the gangue
particles was largely a matter of chance. An objection, too, was
the excessive quantity of slimes or minute particles thus pro-
duced.
The crude ore was tipped first on grizzlies —stationary screens
of wire. Some of the ore passed through the screens to revolv-
ing screens, and the remainder directly to the steam stamp. This,
making seventeen revolutions a minute, separated the more finely
divided particles from the material, the ore which could not pass
through the meshes of the screens going on to the steam stamp.
The stamp was capable of reducing 120 tons in twenty-four hours.
The finely screened and crushed ore was then carried by water
along the hydraulic classifier—a long inclined iron trough with
outlets regulated on the sixteen double jigs. The slimes were
conveyed to the five revolving tables, fed continuously at the
centre, and flowed over the surface of the tables towards peri-
phery in one direction. Five jets of water carried oft the lighter
and less valuable portion, leaving the heavier portion in concen-
tric rings on the surface of the table, whence a single stream
carried them into a trough. As the silver was frequently pre-
sent in the oxidised ore, dissociated from the lead and associated
as chloride of silver with minute particles of silver, the success-
ful concentration of a great quantity of the ores at Broken Hill
was impossible. Hence, although the concentrating mill might
recover a fair percentage of the lead, a large quantity of the
silver content of the ore remained in the tailings. The tailings,
when sufficiently rich in silver, were sent to the leaching plant.
The subsidence of the ground in 1894 necessitated the removal
of the mill and the construction of new plant to the west side of
the railway embankment.
From the time of the erection of the ore dressing mill the
losses of metals contained in the tailings from the plant became


an important consideration. Patton, in his report of 15th July,
1889, observed that the dressings of the ore showed that the quartz
tailings contained from 12 to 14 ounces of silver, but he was satis-
fied that this loss could be reduced to about four ounces a ton
by the erection of machinery adapted to the purpose. This
resulted in the establishment of the leaching plant in June, 1890,
at a cost of £15,000. It was designed to treat the tailings of the
mill and some kaolin and silicious iron ore unsuitable for smelt-
ing. The plant was purposed to treat 2800 tons of material a
week, and it comprised twelve lixiviation vats, twelve precipita-
tion vats, and four storage vats, with a special laboratory and all
the appliances of a first-class lixiviation plant. Hypo-sulphite
of sodium solution, with or without the addition of bluestone, was
tried experimentally in this plant, but the results at the outset
did not prove successful on a large scale. Schlapp, in 1890,
recommended the installation of the lixiviation plant in con-
junction with the leaching works, stating that the result of experi-
ments with a view to treating low-grade ores as well as tailings
by leaching with hypo-sulphite of sodium had given favourable
results.
At this stage the Directors were closely concerned with the
treatment of the sulphide ore. Mr. W. P. MacGregor, at the
shareholders’ meeting on 24th July, 1890, remarked that there
appeared to be a section of the community who were afraid that
a mine was practically done for whenever sulphide ores had to be
treated. He would like to disabuse them of that idea. He
explained that the sulphide ore merely meant that the kaolin or
sulphide of lead was intimately associated with “Black Jack,”
as the miners called it, or, in its technical term, Zn.S. (sulphide
of zinc). The matter was wholly a question of ore dressing.
The unsatisfactory result of the leaching operations was
announced to the shareholders at their meeting on 29th January,
1891, the Chairman of Directors observing that leaching was
always a metallurgical worry, for if one thing was not the matter
something else was. It was found that considerable silver value


PROPRIETARY SOU TH SMELTERS, 1887-1888


was inclosed in the small particle of quartz and ironstone, and
it was impossible for the solution, as it was called, to reach the
silver, which consequently passed through and was lost. This,
the Chairman said, related to the tailings and the crude ore. At
the time the Luhrig dressing process was engaging attention in
Europe, and, in view of the losses in tailings, the company sent
home representative samples of ore for treatment by this method,
arranging with Schnabel, who had been engaged to visit Aus-
tralia to report on sulphide ore treatment, to watch the opera-
tions of the Luhrig plant. The whole problem of ore treatment,
future processes and furnace accommodation had been receiving
from the Directors consideration so serious that, following on
their visit to the works in 1891, they issued a circular to share-
holders, on 7th April, explaining to them the state of affairs
under the existing methods of ore treatment at the mine. By the
middle of 1892 the leaching plant had treated 13,662 tons of
concentrated tailings, with an extraction of 62 per cent, to 87
per cent.
Howell, in his report to the Board on 31st May, 1893, stated
that the ores were complex in character, and the lead, zinc, iron,
copper, sulphur and silver were so intimately associated that they
might be considered to a great extent chemically combined. No one
direct treatment like smelting could break up the combination
and liberate the metals. Experiments were being conducted to
ascertain to what extent concentration could be applied to the
separation of the metals, in order to make one product high in
lead and sufficiently low in zinc to be a good smelting material,
leaving the other principal products high in zinc and silica to
be treated by some less expensive process for the recovery of
the silver. The experiments had proved satisfactory. From 24
per cent, to 31 per cent, of a concentrated material had been
obtained, carrying over 60 per cent, of lead, from 20 to 34 ounces
of silver, and seven per cent, to nine per cent, of zinc per ton;
but the great bulk of the remainder was a product high in zinc,
silica and garnet, and containing from seven to twelve ounces of
M


silver per ton. In order to deal with this bulk of the ore, it was
proposed that a chlorodising plant, comprising ten furnaces,
should be added to the leaching works for roasting the ore before
its subjection to leaching,.
In 1894 the plant was remodelled and moved to the site near
Dickenson shaft, and it was arranged with the British company
to purchase its concentrating plant and building, which were set
up on the new site. On 19th September it was announced that
experiments with the smelting of crude sulphide ore averaging
21 per cent, lead, 15 to 16 per cent, zinc and 16 ounces of silver
per ton had been made in the British furnaces with satisfactory
results. The results were attributed to the oxidising action of
the binoxide of manganese and ferric oxide contained in the
silicious ores of the mine and in the manganic iron flux, which,
when smelted, was decomposed to a certain extent and gave oft
large volumes of free oxygen. This, it was thought, oxidised
the sulphide ore and allowed easy reduction.
Mr. Bowes Kelly, Chairman of Directors, stated at the meet-
ing on 31st January, 1895, that the combined concentration plant
(British and Proprietary) would treat the carbonate ores as well
as the sulphide ores. The first ore was low in silver and lead,
but the lead was of great advantage in fluxing. A portion of
the plant had been engaged in treating a silicious sulphide high
in silver. A little over three tons of crude ore gave one ton of
concentrate, assaying 20 to 28 ounces of silver, 50 to 65 per cent,
of lead, and six per cent, to eight per cent, of zinc per ton. The
concentration plant was now capable of treating about 1500 tons
a week, and the management anticipated that it would be able
to recover about two-thirds of the silver and 50 per cent, of the
lead. The announcement marked the first practical step by the
Proprietary for the treatment of the sulphide ores, and in the
next half-yearly report the Directors stated that they had decided
to open up the sulphide ore zone at the mine, in anticipation of
the completion of the concentrating plant.
Stewart, Acting General Manager, in his report of 31st May,


-1895, referred to the starting of the oxidised section in the ore
concentration mill, but stated that the results had not been
encouraging, as the ore available was not well suited for dress-
ing. A fair percentage of the lead had been recovered in the
concentrates, but a large proportion of the silver had passed with
the tailings. Still experiments at the leaching plant pointed to
the probability of recovering a large part of the silver from
the tailings. Stewart added that, as a first step toward treating
sulphide ore on a larger scale, a concentration plant was being
erected to deal with 200 tons a day. The difficulties in the treat-
ment of sulphides were being overcome. Mr. D. E. Mcßrydc,
the Chairman, informed the shareholders on Bth August, 1895,
that the time was rapidly approaching when the future prosperity
of the company would virtually depend on the sulphide ore pro-
duct. Other companies had already reached that stage, and
numerous proposals for the purchase of the ore had been received
and many suggestions for methods of treatment. The Directors
had decided that it was undesirable to take any definite step till
they knew more nearly the quantity and quality of the avail-
able ore.
On 28th January, 1897, the Board announced its plan of
operations for the treatment of the sulphides. The existing con-
centration plant comprised the ore dressing mill, with a capacity
of 5000 tons per week, so planned as to allow an increase up to
10,000 tons, nine roasting furnaces 150 feet long by 40 feet wide,
and nine 120-ton smelters. This concentration plant was designed
to produce (1) a high-grade lead product, (2) a high-grade zinc
product, (3) tailings of little or no value. The first product was
to be smelted at Port Pirie, and the second either to be sold to
European buyers or to be treated by the company, as might be
found most advantageous. Thus was developed the production
of zinc concentrates. The third product was dumped at the mine,
and by the time of the development of the flotation process had
accumulated to the extent of millions of tons. The process thus
adopted was not a new one, or as complete as it should have been


from the metallurigcal standpoint, but it yielded a profit. Briefly
it was mechanical separation or concentration, and reduction by
smelting of the more valuable constituents. The ore was first
crushed, then jigged in water, by which means the sulphide of
zinc was separated from the sulphide of lead and the silicious
material passed away as tailings. The concentration plant, put
into commission in October, 1897, was extended shortly to the
10,000 ton capacity. Distinct advances, Stewart observed, were
being made towards the production of a zinc product which would
realise a fair proportion of the value contained. By the middle
of 1898 the treatment of sulphides had become a most important
feature of the company’s operations. Ore won for the half-year
amounted to 71,547 tons of oxidised ores from the open cut, 60,499
tons of oxidised ores from the stopes, and 72,685 of sulphide ore.
By the end of 1899 the tonnage of sulphide ore treated by the
concentration plant had increased to 107,797 tons for the half-
year. Special plant had been added for the treatment of slimes,
with improved results in the recovery of lead, and additions were
in hand which it was hoped would increase the percentage of
recovery. Attempts to make a marketable zinc concentrate had
been partly successful, but improvements were yet necessary.
In the meantime changes were taking place in the personnel
of the Proprietary’s staff. In April, 1892, Mr. William Knox
resigned the position of Secretary to the Proprietary, which he
had held since 1885, and Mr. F. M. Dickenson, Assistant Secre-
tary, who since 1888 had acted from time to time as Secretary
while Knox was abroad, was appointed Secretary, the Board
observing that from his former association with the company the
directors believed that he had full and intimate knowledge of
the requirements of the position. He holds to-day the office of
Secretary to the Broken Hill Proprietary.
Mr. Stewart resigned his position as General Manager in
April, 1899. The Board of Directors promptly appointed to the
position Mr. G. D. Delprat, who had joined the company in Sep-
tember, 1898, as Assistant General Manager. A native of Hoi-


P. M. DICKENSON.
Present Secretary.


land, Delprat, having completed his university course in Amster-
dam, at once took up mining and metallurgy as his profession,
going first to Spain, There he acted from 1879 as metallurgist
to the Tharsis Copper Mining Company, and in 1882 he became
engineer-in-chief of the mines and works. With the Tharsis Com-
pany —a pyritic proposition—he controlled the work of extrac-
tion of copper from the pyrites. In 1882 he resigned to join the
Bede Metal and Chemical Company, of Newcastle on Tyne. This
company controlled many leases of copper mines in Spain, and
of these Delprat was placed in charge. In 1891 he left Spain for
London, and was appointed consulting engineer to his company.
A roving commission then took him to other parts of the world,
and he visited all the important mining centres except the Aus-
tralian and the South African. It was to fall to Delprat to add
a new page to the romance of Broken Hill, and, by the applica-
tion of the flotation process to the peculiar problem of the ores,
to change the whole outlook for the Barrier field.
The General Manager, in his first official report, remarked
that on the completion of the smelters at Port Pirie and the exten-
sion of the concentration plant it would be possible to devote more
attention to making zinc product. Having regard to the enor-
mous quantities of zinc now contained in the tailings of the
sulphide concentrate, there could be no doubt as to the great
importance of efforts in this direction. On 28th July, 1898, the
Chairman had drawn attention to the fact that by the mechanical
means employed in the ore concentration mill nearly all the lead
and the major part of the silver were recovered in a form that
could be smelted. Scientists all over the world were endeavour-
ing to perfect a system for the recovery of the remaining zinc
and silver. The heaps of zinc concentrate were becoming assets
of value. At the time magnetic separation of zinc was in view,
and experiments attended with a certain success were being con-
ducted for the recovery of the zinc contents and a portion of the
lead and the silver. It was not considered, however, by 1900 that
any of the schemes for magnetic separation were perfect enough


to warrant adoption by the Proprietary. By the middle of 1900
the ore concentration plant was dealing with 265,000 tons of sul-
phide ores a year. In 1901 the experiments with magnetic
separation indicated that it was reasonable to assume that the
operations would he successful, but the General Manager still did
not feel justified in recommending the adoption of a particular
plant. The company was soon to realise the wisdom of caution.
It was at this stage that the sintering of slimes was inaugurated.
Enormous heaps of slime tailings existed at the mine, and the
heaps were being steadily increased. These dumps had not been
taken into account in the company’s assets, though it was antici-
pated that sooner or later some economical method of treating
them would be discovered. There were by January, 1902, 35,000
tons of slimes at the mine, resulting from the concentration pro-
cess, and assaying approximately 22 per cent, lead, 20 ozs. silver
and 15 per cent, zinc. The General Manager decided to sinter
this material, and it was estimated that even with the low prices
of metals then ruling the treatment of these slimes would show
a profit of at least £30,000. The treatment of the slimes con-
sisted of cutting with shovels the half-dried slimes into rough
bricks, building them up into the form of kilns and roasting them.
Little fuel was needed to cause the sulphur in the ore to ignite.
The sulphur content, originally 14 per cent., was reduced in the
process to 6.5 per cent, or 8.5 per cent., and the materials, becom-
ing matted together, could be used in the smelters without trouble.
The process was not regarded as a perfect one, and it was realised
that later operations must be modified or disappear. By 30th
November, 1903, 27,000 tons of slimes had been sintered, and
nearly 2000 tons a week were being sintered and sent to the Port
Pirie smelters.
But now came an announcement regarding a new process for
the recovery of zinc. The directors were cautious in their com-
ments. They could make no statement, they said, as to whether
the process would prove itself effectual on a large and commer-
cial scale. On 30th January, 1903, the Chairman announced that


COKE WORKS, BELLAMI, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Erected 1902 to supply Coke to Port Pirie Works.


experiments conducted by the General Manager led the Board
to hope that he might eventually be successful. Collectively there
must be a million tons of tailings at the mine which could be
utilised, while the concentration plant was still producing large
quantities.


CHAPTER XXXIII.
THE GAS BUBBLES (1902).
FOR a considerable time the General Manager had devoted
himself to the problem of extracting zinc tailings in solu-
tion. His expert in metallurgy at the mine was Mr. A. D.
Carmichael, with whom he had frequently discussed the possibili-
ties of solving this problem. Going over one of the heaps of tail-
ings piled about the mine, Mr. Delprat chanced to notice that a
dump had become heated, and that combustion was taking place,
as if in a haystack. In Spain, where he had been so long engaged,
the practice was to apply this combustion as a process for the
treatment of pyrites containing copper—dissolving the copper by
piling the metal up in heaps and keeping it wet, with the result
that the mass would become heated up. On observing combustion
in these tailings at Broken Hill, Delprat remarked to Carmichael,
“If we get this heated up we shall obtain sulphate of zinc, and
shall be able to wash it out. ’ ’ The difficulty presenting itself, how-
ever, was to keep the tailings wet, owing to the fact that water was
expensive on the Hill. Accordingly Delprat instructed Carmichael
to mix salt with the tailings, as the salt would draw the damp
out of the air. But the application of salt proved a failure, and
similarly nitrate of soda was of no use for the purpose.
“Well,” said the General Manager to Carmichael, “we have
several hundreds of tons of salt-cake lying there from another
process. Try that.”
“That’s no good,” Carmichael objected; but Delprat per-
sisted, “Never mind; try it.” “What shall we do with it I” Car-
michael asked. “Boil the stuff and see if it will go into solution.”


Returning in half an hour’s time Carmichael reported, “It’s
no good. I told you so. It won’t go into solution, and I can’t
keep it down.” Proceeding to examine the beaker, Delprat him-
self was unable to devise the means of forcing the bubbling scum
on the liquid to sink down. Neither to General Manager or
Metallurgist did the significance of this difficulty occur as yet.
For the time being both tried in vain to dissolve the scum. On
pouring it off into another vessel they found it impossible to sink
it. Standing looking at the scum and endeavouring to reason
out the solution, Delprat was struck suddenly with the signifi-
cance of the difficulty. “Why, we’ve got the two separated,” he
said, “and that will do just as well as getting it into solution.”
On the following day the two engaged at the assay office in a
series of experiments with varying quantities, but always with
the same result. “What we had been trying to do,” Mr. Delprat
observes to-day, “was to obtain a cheap material to mix with the
tailings, in order to keep them wet and to let them gradually heat
themselves up, for in that condition the sulphide of zinc would
be changed into soluble sulphate of zinc. ’ ’
Writing confidentially to Mr. Dickenson on 17th November,
1902, Mr. Delprat reported his discovery of the flotation process.
He stated that for some time he had been giving attention to the
extraction of zinc from waste products. Magnetic separation
had not satisfied him, as it required a large capital for a small
turnover, and several means had been tried without success; but
he had dropped, he thought, on a novel process, which, for sim-
plicity, cheapness and effectiveness, far out-distanced any process
yet employed by the company. In a further letter of the same
date the General Manager reported the recoveries of metals in
the original middlings as 94.6 per cent, of the zinc contents, 83.9
per cent, of the silver, and 77.7 per cent, of the lead, while the
best result with the magnetic separation had been only 75 per
cent, of the zinc. On the following day Mr. Delprat wrote stat-
ing that as a result of three further tests to ascertain the strength
of solution most beneficial, he obtained a recovery of 96.2 per


cent., 94.2 per cent, and 95.18 per cent, of the zinc, 74 per cent.,
65.8 per cent, and 71.88 per cent, of lead, while the tailings only
contained 1.7 per cent, of zinc and 3.5 per cent, of lead. In a
private note to Mr. Dickenson on that day Mr. Delprat said: —“I
hope that you will lose no time in securing protection, and after-
wards patent rights, as I feel convinced that this process is of
immensely wide application, and its simplicity and cheapness are
bound to cause it to replace magnetic separation. The plant to
work it is of the cheapest description—one ton of middlings gives
half a ton of product. We produce 3000 tons of middlings per
week, 20 per cent, zinc, which should give us 1500 tons of zinc
of 40 per cent, per week—rich in silver.
“I think that the process is applicable to other sulphides
than blende —for instance, copper pyrites, in which case our field
for operation would be enormous —and the value of the discovery
would justify the remarks you made in your Japanese paper
regarding the money there is in an invention to separate cheaply
the zinc from our dumps. Don’t you think that the German
patent rights had better he secured by cable? Our German
friends are rather fond of stealing a march on anyone, and there
is always a number of people trying to find out what we are doing,
especially since the sintering has been such a success. ’ ’
In evidence samples were forwarded of middlings before
treatment, zinc products and waste, and the General Manager
pointed out that in the test a recovery of 94 per cent, had been
secured, the zinc product assaying 39.4 per cent, of zinc. Mr.
Delprat expressed astonishment that no one had discovered before
the process, which was simplicity itself. In this, however, he was
under a misapprehension, for it was soon to be discovered by the
company that in 1901 a patent had been taken out in Australia
by Mr. C. V. Potter for the recovery of sulphides from their ores
by a separation effected with dilute acids.
The Proprietary’s Board of Directors took immediate steps
to protect the invention, not only in Australia, but also in the
United States and in Germany. The process was applicable to


middlings, tailings and slimes, and the plant being of a simple
character, the production of zinc concentrate on a fairly large
scale could be commenced without loss of time. The middlings
were the richest zinc products on the mine, and it was proposed
that for the time being the work should be limited to this
material.
The Proprietary’s claim for preliminary protection of the
invention was made in the following words:—
“A process for separating zinc blende or other sulphides
from complex ores, or mill products of tailings.
“The ore is pulverised and put into a bath containing
a solution of salts, in order to increase its density, and a free
acid. Preferably I use a solution of salt-cake, or a solution
of sodium sulphate and sulphuric acid, but any other salt or
acid answers the purpose.
‘ ‘ The essential part of the process is that the zinc blende
or other sulphide is acted upon ever so little by the acid, by
which gas is evolved, which bubbles of gas attach themselves
to the particles of zinc blende or other sulphides and cause
these to rise to the top, where they can be skimmed off.
“What is claimed as a novelty is that the zinc blende or
other sulphide is caused to come to the top through the
medium of gas evolved in or introduced into the solution.”
On the invention becoming known, Mr. Potter’s patent agent
raised the question of the infringement of rights, and notified
the Proprietary on 17th December, 1902, that he had been
instructed by his principal to take steps for the protection of
Potter’s interests. The Registrar of Patents held up the com-
pany’s application; but, after hearing arguments, he gave as his
decision that Potter’s was not a master patent, and he accepted
the Proprietary’s application. In 1903 Potter brought an action
against the Proprietary to restrain what he declared the threat-
ened infringement of his patent, and protracted litigation ensued.
This opposition delayed the establishment of the company’s
works, and it was not till the beginning of 1904 that the flotation


plant was installed and commenced to produce zinc concentrates.
The output for the half-year ended May, 1904, amounted to 287
tons of zinc concentrates from 868 tons of tailings; for the follow-
ing six months the production was 8105 tons; and the quantity
increased each year till, in 1911, it amounted to 92,302 tons, by
which date 1,750,000 tons of tailings had been treated for a return
of close on 500,000 tons of zinc concentrates.
In the course of the litigation between C. Y. Potter and the
Broken Hill Proprietary it was ascertained that the earliest
knowledge of the effect of acids on ore dated back 130 years. R.
Watson, D.D.F.R.S., in his “Chemical Essays,” published in
1789, observed: —
“Let some lead ore be reduced into a fine powder, put into
a narrow-bottomed ale glass, fill the glass three parts with water,
drop into the water a portion of the strong acid of nitre, etc., and
you will observe the ore universally covered with bubbles of air.
These will buoy the ore up in large tufts to the surface, and the
air will continue to be separated from the ore till the acid becomes
saturated with the lead.”
Apparently the first attempt to put this principle to prac-
tical use was made by William Haynes in 1860. Haynes invented
a process for separating mineral sulphides from the gangue or
rocky constituents by the use of “oily, gummy or bituminous
matter.” This was followed in 1886 by the process of Hezekiah
Bradford for concentration by “surface tension,” and subse-
quently by the inventions of Carrie J. Everson (1885), Robson
and Crowder (1894), P. E. Elmore (1898), and A. S. Elmore
(1901). With the exception of the Elmore oil and acid process
none of these inventions was put to practical use, and Potter’s
process having proved almost unworkable, it remained for the
salt-cake process to inaugurate the successful application of acid
flotation for the recovery of zinc.
The value of the discovery to the Barrier mines was incalcul-
able. In this regard it may be noted that the report of the Hew
South Wales Mines Department for 1903 gave the total ore raised


PROPRIETARY MINE AND OFFICES.


for the year as 1,100,514 tons, and classified the product as fol-
lows ;
Profitable,
Sulphide lead concentrates 203,416 tons
Oxidised ore 22,072 „
Slimes 61,498 „
Zinc concentrates 21,634 „
Tailings 61 „
308,681 tons
(These zinc concentrates only contained an average of 39
per cent, of zinc.)
Unprofitable.
(Dumped for treatment at some future date.)
Containing—
Tons. Silver. Lead. Zinc.
Slimes 47,607 590,828 7,131 9,746
Middlings .. .. 229,635 1,787,537 16,582 43,159
Tailings 514,338 2,291,641 25,853 87,896
Zinc Middlings . 29,092 322,630 2,303 6,779
Rhodonite .. .. 5,825 36,830 206 936
826,497 5,029,466 52,075 148,516
Thus practically 75 per cent, of the tonnage of ore raised
was being dumped on the surface with a view to possible future
treatment.
In the following year (1904), on the practical demonstra-
tion of the flotation process, the Mines Department again referred
to the by-products awaiting retreatment, and describes the dumps
as follows: —
The residual ore dumps along the line of lode continue to
grow, and have reached such large dimensions that they now form


a bulwark 40 feet high facing the town, extending north and
south half a mile or so along the western boundary of the Pro-
prietary company’s leases and elsewhere, and they must continue
to increase week by week until some of the processes now being
brought into practical use can deal with this excess of by-products.
The Proprietary mine’s dumps of tailings and slimes all lie on
the west side of the outcrop, and for some time the question of
their accommodation has become a serious consideration.
The following statement of approximate tonnages and
values of by-products then lying on the surface was given to
convey some impression of the wealth heaped up and awaiting
extraction, and it was remarked the figures were not over-
estimated: —
Mine and Description. Tonnage.
Proprietary—Tailings 2,500,000
Block 10—Jig Tailings 366,000
„ Middlings 136,400
„ Other Products 165,000
Central —Tailings, etc 1,000,000
South —Tailings 600,000
„ Slimes 100,000
Block 14—Tailings, etc 250,000
British —Tailings, etc 175,000
„ Slimes 80,000
Junction —Tailings (old) 10,000
„ Tailings (new) 60,000
„ Slimes 25,000
Junction North —Tailings 95,000
„ „ Slimes 5,000
North—Old Mill Tailings 100,000
„ Slimes 20,000
Total 5,687,000


To this total of over five and a half million tons the Barrier
companies were adding at the rate of 18,000 to 20,000 tons per
week.
The metal contents ranged from five to twelve ounces silver,
4 per cent, to 17 per cent, of lead, and 12 per cent, to 22 per cent,
of zinc per ton, and if taken at an assay of eight ounces silver,
12 per cent, lead and 18 per cent, of zinc, these stocks represented
the enormous contents in metals of—
Silver 45,496,000 ounces
Lead 682,440 tons
Zinc 1,023,660 tons
or on a calculation of about 85 per cent, recovery of metals, with
silver at 2/3, lead £l2 per ton and spelter at £22, the value locked
up in these stocks of so-called “unprofitable” products amounted
to the sum of £30,453,885, viz,:—
Silver £4,350,555
Lead 6,960,888
Zinc 19,142,442
£30,453,885
The release of this great wealth was to he effected by the
flotation process or gas bubble, the phenomenon of which appears
still to be unsolved. Many theories have been ventured as to the
cause for the energy or force bringing about the flotation and its
selective action, or affinity, for certain classes of substances and
not others. The problem has engaged considerable attention
from leading chemists in England and Australia, who have
apparently failed as yet to arrive at any definite solution. It
seems admitted that the selective flotation of sulphide particles
by an acidulated solution is a chemico-physical process—chemical
only in the liberation of the gas essential for the work of flota-
tion, and entirely physical in the actual flotation of the metallic
particles. In actual practice the gas performing the work of


flotation has been determined to be carbon dioxide, which can only
be produced by an ore containing the necessary adventitious sub-
stances. These may be the carbonates of calcium, magnesium, zinc,
manganese and iron contained in the ores as calcite, mangesite,
calamine, rhodo, creosite and siderite. Ores containing none of
the adventitious substances cannot be treated by the process
unless limestone is mixed with them, while it has been demon-
strated that there are many ores which, though containing one
or more of these substances, yield no result. No fixed reason has
been assigned why the gas so generated should selectively adhere
to the sulphide particles in preference to other materials con-
tained in the ore, and even to this date the cause of this selective
adhesion is not fully understood.
London experts considered the flotation as principally due to
the action of the acid on carbonate of maganese and carbonate of
iron. While allowing that the former plays an important part,
the Broken Hill Proprietary’s officers still held the view that the
flotation is produced by carbon dioxide gas generated from the
calcite contained in the gangue of the ore, and a successful float
depends on the amount of calcite in a sulphide ore. The old
theory that flotation is due to the aversion of the sulphide par-
ticles from becoming wetted, and they are always surrounded
under normal conditions with a film of air, is the theory generally
accepted. Whether this aversion on the part of the sulphides is
caused by electric charges—an opinion first advanced by
Professor Huntington in evidence before the Commission in
London on the Potter-Delprat process in 1904, has never
been tested, as in fact this has always been regarded as
a natural property of sulphides. On 21st January, 1904, Mr.
Donald Clark, of Melbourne, stated that the flotation was due to
the superficial attack by the acid developing sulphuretted hydrogen
bubbles, which clung to the sulphur particles and, when sufficient
in volume, floated to the surface. Pure sphalerite, he said, was
not attacked by dilute sulphuric acid, but blende that was at all
ferruginous was attacked. The specific gravity of blende was


about four. Four grams would displace one c.c. of water, and
therefore a bubble of 3 c.c. of sulphuretted hydrogen would float
four grams of blende. Since 98 grams of sulphuric acid would
produce 22.3 litres of sulphuretted hydrogen at o°c. and 760 m.m.,
that quantity of gas should float 29,760 grams of blende, or,
roughly, 300 times the weight of the acid. By heating the solution
to near its boiling point a less quantity of acid was required on
account of the expansion of the bubbles. In practice it was found
that only the finest particles, such as slimes produced, could be
lifted by the tiny bubbles which attached to them. When two or
more minerals were present, Mr. Clark added, they appeared to
form a couple, and the bubbles transferred to the electro nega-
tive; but, whatever the true explanation was, the action was
almost instantaneous in separating zinc sulphide from the Broken
Hill ore.
N


CHAPTER XXXIV.
THE PRODUCTION OF SPELTER (1908).
HAVING established the production of zinc concentrates, the
Broken Hill Proprietary had now to consider the mar-
ket in which to dispose of its product. It was obvious
that the release of enormous quantities of zinc from the stocks
held by the mines at Broken Hill must have a serious effect on
the spelter market. The fact engaged attention abroad as early
as 1903, for the American journal “The Mineral Industry” noted
the export by Australia of 20,754 tons for the year, as against 1260
tons for 1902, while the increase also formed the subject of com-
ment in the report of the “Metallgesellsehaft” for 1903. Dealing
with the question, Mr. Harvey Patterson, Chairman of Directors,
remarked at the meeting of the Broken Hill Proprietary share-
holders in August, 1904, that the world’s output of spelter was
500,000 to 600,000 tons a year, and if excessive quantities were
produced it might mean a reduction in value. Having regard to
this contingency, Mr. Patterson added that the board had been
considering the limitation of output. Other companies on the Bar-
rier would also be consulted with a view to limiting production in
some way. Personally he was not pessimistic as to reducing the
selling price of the metal, for an increased supply would mean
that it would be put to new uses, and would probably supplant
copper to a certain extent in hardware and other manufactures.
As early as May, 1902, the Broken Hill Proprietary received
offers from European smelters for the purchase of zinc concen-
trates, but, in consideration of the Potter injunction, the board


decided that nothing should be done for the time, and it was not
till June, 1904, that the first sale of zinc concentrates was made.
The purchasers were Beer Sondheimer and Company, of Frank-
furt on Maine, Germany, and the 502 tons sold returned £2/12/6
per ton net. This was followed by a sale of 400 tons in Septem-
ber to F. H. Snow, as representing Aaron Hirsch and Sohn, of
Halberstadt, this realising £3/6/6 per ton at Broken Hill. In
October 2000 tons were sold to the same firm at £3/7/6 per ton.
In evidence of the simplicity and cheapness of the flotation plant,
the outlay on the works up to May, 1904, amounted only to £ISOO,
so that the return from the first 500 tons covered practically the
whole of this expenditure.
With the development of the process of flotation and its
adoption by the other Barrier companies difficulties in disposal
of the product increased, for, before the end of 1904, when tenders
were called for the purchase of 50,000 to 60,000 tons of zinc con-
centrates for delivery in the following year, only one offer was
received. This offer was for no more than 16,000 tons, for delivery
in the second half of 1905, on the basis of “ prices six months
hence,” and at a returning charge of £5/18/- per ton. An alter-
native proposal was made for the same quantity for the latter
half of 1905, and for 10,000 tons a year in 1906 and 1907. Sub-
sequently an offer for 5000 tons was received from another firm,
but only at a returning charge of £6/2/6 per ton. Other firms
asserted their inability to offer, as their requirements were
already filled. Dealing with the position, Rudolf Wolff and
Kreuger and Co., in their annual review for 1905, stated that
zinc ore was offered throughout the year in tremendous quanti-
ties, and from all quarters. Interest was chiefly directed to the
high accumulation of tailings on the Barrier Ranges of Australia,
and contracts had been formed for bringing part of these vast
supplies to the market. Considering the copiousness of the ore
supplies during the year, it would be a matter of surprise if pro-
duction of spelter did not increase on a greater scale. The review
added that the reason was that most works found during the year


that they were smelting to their fullest capacity, and unless they
enlarged their plants they could not treat larger quantities of
ore. The building of new furnaces meant capital outlay, which
had to be seriously considered, in view of the possible break in
high prices and of subsequent unremunerative over-production.
Moreover, additional furnaces meant more workmen, and “zinc
distilling workmen” could be made but not found. All this took
time, and, with the fear that arrangements would be completed
too late, it was scarcely surprising that many hesitated over an
increase in their capacity. There was, however, some construc-
tion in Silesia during 1905, and a new plant of larger capacity
was to be erected by the International Metal Co. at Hamburg,
while new plants were to be constructed at Honfleur, near Havre,
and at Yielle Montagne, Liege.
The position was dealt with by Mr, Harvey Patterson at
the meeting of the Proprietary’s shareholders on 24th February,
1905. One of the most interesting features of the last half-year’s
operations, he said, had been the success attained in the produc-
tion of zinc concentrates. It was now within measurable distance
that the company would be able to produce zinc in such quantities
as would represent a very considerable proportion of the world’s
output. In view of this fact the board contemplated the erection
of reduction works for the manufacture of spelter, so that the
company might feel some independence regarding the disposal
of its product. At the time the sale of zinc concentrates was to
some extent restricted, and, as the company was not then produc-
ing spelter, its operations in dealing with this by-product were
necessarily hampered by these limitations. The company should
be in a position to supply both the finished product—spelter—
and zinc concentrates as well. In a metallic state zinc could be
disposed of in the open markets of the world with much greater
facilities—practically as lead or copper could be —but as a concen-
trate it was limited in sale to the firms and companies manufac-
turing spelter, as the Broken Hill Proprietary proposed to do.
The production by the company had been only 8104 tons for the


FIRST 50 TONS ZINC CONCENTRATES PRODUCED AT BROKEN HILL.


half-year, which was an infinitesimal part of its possible product.
On the aspect thus stated by the Chairman “The Mineral Indus-
try,” commenting on the position which Great Britain was likely
to acquire in regard to Australian productions, referred to
the extensive utilisation of the vast zinc resources of Broken Hill,
where, it said, there was literally “in sight” and development a
greater tonnage of zinc ore than few, if any, other districts could
show. Australia appeared to be destined to take an important
position in the zinc industry of the world. In the following year
the journal remarked that there was no question whatever that
a great increase of zinc ore from Broken Hill was to be expected
in the near future. The magnitude to which this had already
advanced had had a highly important effect on the zinc smelting
industry in Europe and on the market price for spelter. This
anticipation was borne out by the production of zinc concentrates
from Broken Hill in the succeeding years. The production was
as follows:
Year. Tons.
1906 103,665
1907 237,218
1908 276,720
1909 373,906
1910 468,627
1911 516,378
1912 520,578
1913 506,680
Mr. Patterson, at the half-yearly meeting in 1905, had
pointed out that the Proprietary was then producing eight per
cent, of the world’s supply of lead, three per cent, of its silver,
while with its existing scheme of plant it could produce between
5 per cent, and 6 per cent of the world’s output of spelter. It was
noted that the demand for spelter had advanced, and in view
of the large reserves of tailings, then being increased at the rate
of 7000 to 8000 tons a week, the Chairman declared that the time


had arrived when the treatment of these tailings must be pushed
on with vigour.
In February, 1905, the Proprietary was asked by the other
Barrier companies to share in concerted action for regulating the
output in such a manner that every company would receive its
fair proportion of the general profits. It was realised that only
a limited number of spelter works existed, and if more concen-
trates were offered than could be dealt with the returning charge
would be increased through competition, and the smelters would
only buy their necessary tonnage till they could arrange a con-
tract for a number of years, at a returning charge suitable to
themselves which would enable them to extend their work.
Practically the Australian production was a surplus quan-
tity in the world’s market. It was felt, however, that any arrange-
ment with the Broken Hill companies could only be on the lines
of a general reduction in output, to which the companies would
probably not agree. Accordingly, in August, 1905, the decision
was definitely announced to erect a plant for the production of
spelter at Port Pirie. This announcement caused uneasiness to
certain of the European smelters. One of the leading buyers
immediately cabled and wrote to the Proprietary impressing on
it the difficulties to be faced in the manufacture of spelter, especi-
ally from mixed ores, and suggesting the erection of the com-
pany’s works in Europe, adjoining other works, or that the com-
pany should act in conjunction with a group of smelters with
technical experience at their disposal. Considerable difficulties,
indeed, had to be faced by the Proprietary in establishing its new
industry. The Chairman, at the February meeting in 1907,
pointed out that the distillation of zinc was an intricate problem.
The “Mineral Industry” in 1904 dealt with this very question.
The metallurgy of zinc, it stated, was frequently spoken of as a
backward art. The smelting process was expensive as compared
with that of lead and copper ores, while the proportionate extrac-
tion of metals was greatly inferior. This idea, however, rested
on false standards of comparison. The zinc smelter, as a rule,


dealt with ore already concentrated to a high degree, so that his
practice was comparable to that of the smelter of galena concen-
trate, or black tin ore, rather than to that of the silver, lead or
copper smelter, who had to treat a large quantity of ore for a
comparatively small quantity of metal. The smelting of zinc
ore was attended by severe limitations, arising from the volatility
of the metal by a temperature below the reduction point of the
oxide, the strongly endothermic character of the reaction, and
the necessity of effecting it in small retorts, inevitably fragile,
which must be arranged in the furnace, entailing great loss of
heat by radiation, the intermittent nature of the process and its
multiplicity of details. No other metallurgical process, perhaps,
was quite so much dependent on the human factor.
None the less the Proprietary proceeded with its scheme.
Before the end of 1906 an experimental spelter plant had been
erected at Port Pirie. This, however, did not prove a success.
The principal difficulty was to get the parts of the furnace to
stand the very high heat test required, and also to obtain suitable
clays for the retorts. These retorts require a high refractoriness
so as to withstand a temperature reaching at times to 1500 deg.
Centrigade. Their chemical composition must resist corrosion,
and they must have good heat conductivity, high tensile and com-
pressive strength, and ability to resist the abrasive and impact
blows of the charging and cleaning tools. Their walls must be
so dense as to be little penetrative by metallic vapours, so that
the zinc vapours may be prevented from filtering through the
retort and thus being lost. They must also have a high elasticity
to endure repeated contraction and expansion through varying
temperatures, and, above all, their cost must be small.
On 13th July, 1906, the board granted six months’ leave of
absence to the General Manager for the purpose of visiting
Europe and America. During this tour he made full enquiry
regarding methods of zinc treatment, visiting the leading zinc
works in the United States, Belgium and Germany. Although
he was met with considerable reticence on the part of the smelters.


who were adverse to furnishing details or allowing him to make
more than a superficial inspection of their furnaces, he succeeded
in acquiring sufficient information to realise that the furnaces
designed by Paul Schmidt and Desgraz, of Hanover, were most
favoured. Such furnaces were then being installed at the Berze-
lius works, near Cologne. At one of the principal of the German
works details of the process were refused, hut an offer was made
to give an officer of the Proprietary six months’ training, on the
condition that the company should give them a long contract for
zinc concentrates. Prom the information thus collected it was
clear that the principal difficulties in making spelter were to
obtain proper clay for retorts, and to secure a furnace which
would work smoothly. In the General Manager’s opinion the
difficulty of obtaining suitable clay commanded the situation.
As Mr. Delprat put it, “If you get your retorts to stand, and they
are not too porous, it seems to me that you are in very close touch
with success.” Mr. Delprat advised the company that from his
observations at the various works he considered that it should
be able to manufacture as well as any of the companies abroad
—if it found suitable clays. He was satisfied that the European
buyers were charging at least £1 a ton too much for returning
charge. He recommended the erection of furnaces of the Paul
Schmidt and Desgraz or Ehenish type. Arrangements ensued
for that firm to send an expert to Australia to superintend the
building of the furnaces.
The General Manager during his investigations had ascer-
tained that the purchase of the zinc concentrates was practically
in the hands of a combine. This fact supported the view that
unless the company took independent action to establish spelter
works it must remain entirely in the hands of the combination.
By Bth May, 1908, the first unit of the spelter works was com-
plete. Having regard to this position, as ascertained by Mr.
Delprat, the company decided to add nine furnaces of the same
type at an estimated cost for the ten of £IOO,OOO. The production
of the ten furnaces was calculated at about 8000 tons of spelter


FIRST SPELTER FURNACES IN AUSTRALASIA, 1908.


a year, for which there was a ready market available in Australia
and the East. Early in 1911 the spelter plant approached com-
pletion. By February, 1911, it had produced 448 J tons, and from
the experience gained it was expected to give results equal to
expectation. Difficulties regarding efficient labour had been over-
come, and an ample supply of suitable clays was assured. By
August, 1912, the plant was in full working order, and sales were
being made regularly for shipment to Japan, while the require-
ments for the silver-lead refinery at Port Pirie and the whole
of the Australian market for spelter were fully met.


CHAPTER XXXV.
THE EXPLOSIVES ASSOCIATION (1908).
THE Broken Hill Proprietary was now called upon to face
a development which, if unchecked, must have meant an
unwarrantable impost upon the finances of Australian
mines. The advent of the sulphides and the hardness of the ores
mined from the Broken Hill involved increased consumption of
explosives.
For several years before 1904 Nobel’s Explosives Company
held a monopoly of the Australian market. In 1905, however,
the introduction of the National and Nahnsen’s explosives into
the Commonwealth brought about a competition, which had the
effect of maintaining the charges at satisfactory rates. Through
1906-7 this competition continued; hut a move was gradually
being engineered to bring about a combination of interests among
the principal companies engaged in the manufacture of explo-
sives. By the end of August, 1908, the success of the move made
itself felt. An organisation had been formed, consisting of:—
Nobel’s Explosives Company Ltd., Glasgow;
Dynamite Aktiengesellschaft, Hamburg;
The British Explosives Syndicate, Glasgow;
The New Explosives Co., England;
Kynoch Ltd., Birmingham and South Africa;
Curtis and Harvey, England.
The result of the formation of this High Explosives Trade
Association was shown when an increase of 45 per cent, in the
rates charged for explosives was announced. The Australian


representatives of the several firms quoted the same rates. It was
rumoured that unless contracts were formed for the ensuing year
the prices would be further advanced. This increase in the charge
for explosives applied throughout Australia—though the rates
were adapted to a certain extent to the varying rates previously
charged in the different mining districts. The Broken Hill Pro-
prietary found that the increased charge on its estimated require-
ments of explosives for the coming year would mean an advance
of at least £4500. It was further computed that the advance on
which the Association was insisting would represent a total addi-
tional impost of £125,000 a year on Australian mining companies.
The Board of Directors of the Broken Hill Proprietary were
alive to the import to Australian mining of the move towards an
amalgamation of interests in explosives. It had planned a course
of action which was to have the effect of countering the move and
of relieving Australian mining from an unjustifiable impost.
Before the South African war Cecil Rhodes, then Chairman of
De Beers Consolidated Companies, had encountered and defeated
the operations of an Association in explosives. Faced with in-
creased charges, he had taken, on behalf of his company, a course
worthy of the bigness of the man. He had determined on the con-
struction of a dynamite factory near Cape Town, and this work,
although held up by the Boer war, had recently been completed.
The Broken Hill Proprietary’s first move against the Association
operating in Australia was to inquire by cablegram whether the
De Beers Company would be prepared to supply it with explo-
sives for its mine. Acting under instructions from Melbourne,
the London board of the Proprietary ascertained through expert
advice that the explosives manufactured by the De Beers Com-
pany were of high quality, and that the company’s specifications
for its raw materials were rigid. The Proprietary then moved
to engage the interests of the De Beers Company in Australian
mining, and, as a result of cable exchanges, Mr, R. Quinlan,
General Manager of the explosives factory near Cape Town, and
Mr, I. R. Grimmer, Assistant General Manager of the De Beers


Company, visited Australia at the end of September, 1908. Earlier
action had been taken to ensure concerted interests of Australian
mining companies, and on 14th April, 1908, at the instance of
Mr. W. H. Corbould, of the Lloyd Copper Co., a meeting of mine
owners took place at the office of the Chamber of Mines, in Mel-
bourne. The following mining interests were represented by:—
Western Australian Chamber of Mines: V. F. Shallcross.
Victorian Chamber of Mines: F. G. T. Nicholas, H. E. Rowe,
C. B. Longbottom.
Mount Morgan Gold Mining Co.: R. G, Casey.
Mount Lyell Mining and Railway Co.: Alfred Mellor.
Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd,: F. M. Dickenson.
British Broken Hill Proprietary Co, Ltd.: W. H, Woodhead,
Broken Hill South Co.: F. C. Howard.
Lloyd’s Copper Co.: W. H. Corbould.
Great Cobar Co.: G. H. Blakemore.
And Nymagee Copper Co.
The Chillagoe Railway and Mining Co. Ltd., the Waihi Gold
Mine, New Zealand, and the Wallaroo and Moonta Co. also
expressed sympathy with the movement. The meeting decided
that steps should be taken to protect the Australian industry from
additional charges. A committee was formed to investigate the
matter at once, and Mr. F. M. Dickenson was appointed its Chair-
man. The mining districts were circularised, and by the arrival
of the representatives of the De Beers Company much informa-
tion on the position was available.
The Proprietary had moved secretly. The nature of its nego-
tiations with the De Beers Company had been closely guarded, lest
the Explosives Association should defeat its plan of action by a
counter-move. On the arrival of Messrs. Quinlan and Grimmer,
Dickenson, who, as Secretary of the Proprietary and Chairman
of the Committee, was fully conversant with the position, in-
formed the principal Australian mining companies of the nego-
tiations.


FRIST REFINED ZINC (SPELTER) PRODUCED IN AUSTRALIA.


Heavy capital expenditure on the extension of works, engage-
ment of distributing agents, and the establishment of magazines
faced the He Beers Company in taking the step engineered by
the Broken Hill Proprietary and in entering the Australian
trade. The company in the ensuing negotiations laid it down as
a condition that it must be assured of contracts for the supply
of at least one-half of the Australian consumption of explosives,
and the contracting mining companies should enter into contracts
extending over five years. Finally it was agreed that the basis
of requirements should be fixed at 24,000 cases, equalling 1,200,000
pounds of explosives a year, and this demand from promises
given at the preliminary conferences seemed fully assured.
But the Explosives Association was now aware of the Broken
Hill Proprietary’s counter move, and the support acccorded by
other mining companies. Before the end of the year its concern
was shown by the activities of local agents, who were energeti-
cally circularising the mining districts. The agents stated that
on cable advices they were prepared to offer explosives “at a
special reduction in price,” and they offered to negotiate for con-
tracts extending over five years. The offer was at direct variance
with their earlier instructions not to enter into contracts for a
period beyond 31st December, 1908. The intervention of the
De Beers Company had countered the move for inflated charges.
Actually the energy of agents met with a certain success, and,
indeed, almost defeated the Proprietary’s efforts to induce the
Cape Explosives Company to enter the Australian market. The
establishment of an Australian trade, the De Beers Company
realised, must he costly and difficult. Many incidental expenses,
not attaching to the South African enterprise, must accrue. The
trade must be on a large scale to show a profit. The whole prin-
ciple of the De Beers Company was to supply explosives for the
work in South Africa at actual costs, without profit other than
the overhead charges to meet interest and redemption on capital.
For the protection of the company’s partners in South Africa
it was essential to ensure that no loss should be sustained on the


Australian undertaking. Negotiations resulted in a five years’
agreement from 31st December, 1908, on the basis of 12,000 cases
a year. The signatories were:—
The Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited.
The Broken Hill South Silver Mining Company.
The Broken Hill Proprietary Block 10 Co. Ltd.
The Broken Hill Proprietary Block 14 Co. Ltd.
North Broken Hill Mining Company Limited.
British Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited.
Chillagoe Company Limited.
Targinnie Syndicate Limited.
Conrad Stanite Mines Limited.
Mount Lyell Mining and Railway Company Ltd.
Hampden-Cloncurry Copper Mines Limited, and
New Einasleight Copper Mines Limited.
The action taken by the Broken Hill Proprietary at the head
of the Australian companies, and the concern for mining interests
shown by the Cape Explosives management, had defeated the
movement for the exactions of heavier rates for explosives. The
success attending the counter move meant the saving of immense
sums, which must otherwise have been diverted from Australian
mining development.
The Australian representatives of Nobel’s, in a spirit of
complaint, declared that it was only fair to the company that
it should be known that it had no opportunity of competing with
the Cape Company for the contracts. Had this opportunity been
given, he did not think it would have lost the business of the
Proprietary and other companies. Yet when tenders were called
for supplies of explosives from Ist August, 1908, to 31st July,
1909, an offer was put in by Nobel’s agents for supply for five
months only, and it contained the following restrictions:—“Acting
under instructions from our principals, we are precluded from
contracting beyond the end of the year.”
Speaking at the annual meeting of shareholders in the De


Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., held at Kimberley, South Africa,
in November, 1917, Sir David Harris traced the benefits to South
African and Australian mines from the entrance of the Cape
Explosives Co. into the market. At Broken Hill in 1905 he
observed the price was 51/6 per case of explosives, rising in 1908
to 67/6; but on the entry of the De Beers Company in 1909 the
price dropped to 59/- a case, while at 30th June, 1916, the price,
in spite of war conditions, was 56/9 per case delivered. And the
speaker recalled, to the applause of shareholders, the statement
of the late Mr. John Darling, the Chairman of the Broken Hill
Proprietary, to shareholders on 27th February, 1910: “It is com-
puted that the saving to mining companies in Australia from this
competition amounts to no less than £125,000 per annum.”
The effect of the entry of the Cape Explosives Co. into the
Australian trade was observed by the Interstate Commission,
reporting in May, 1916. The Commission had before it an appli-
cation from the Melbourne agent of the company that the five
per cent, duty on mining explosives should be removed. The
application was opposed by the Manager of the Australian
Explosives and Chemical Company Ltd., Melbourne. In evidence
on behalf of the Cape Explosives Company it was stated that, to
meet the excessive rates charged by the shipping companies for
the carriage of explosives from Cape Town to Australia, the com-
pany had bought its own steamer, which made regular quarterly
sailings. The Australian Explosives Company admitted that,
while it was “purely Australian,” it was “financed by the Nobel’s
Explosives Company,” and that it “evidently paid Nobel’s Com-
pany to keep the ‘Australian’ company going.” In the opinion
of the Commission, as stated in the report presented to the Federal
Parliament, the Australian Company was “kept in existence” by
the Nobel Dynamite Trust Company “for the sole purpose of
giving colour to the idea that there was an independent Aus-
tralian industry.” While it was contended that “its products
entered into competition with the products of the great explosives
manufacturing firms who constitute the High Explosives Trades


Association, its prices are regulated by that association,” The
Commission also stated: —
“In the cost of mining, particularly in respect of miners
who have hut little capital, the question of the price of explo-
sives is a most serious consideration. Whilst the explosives
combine, known as the High Explosives Trade Association,
controlled the Australian market the prices, compared with
those since the inception of the competition by the Cape
Explosives Works Limited, were excessive, and there can be
no doubt of the truth of the statement that the local ‘mining
industry is under a great debt to the Cape Explosives Works
Company,’ and that it would be a calamity to us from a
mining point of view 7 if South African explosives were kept
out. ’ ’
The discriminating rates of duties, declared the Commission,
“were to the advantage of the European combine and to the dis-
advantage of the miners.”


LEAD STA CKED AT PORT PIRAE.


CHAPTER XXXVL
THE OVERSEA MARKETS (1885-1914).
THE first loads of ore to be smelted at Spottiswoode under the
supervision of William Jamieson were carted down from
Broken Hill to Adelaide. The sale of this silver for
£7442/12/11 marked the start of a trade which was to rise to
international importance. The problems before the develop-
ment of the Broken Hill Proprietary’s market were met, problem
by problem, through twenty-nine years between the foundation
of the company’s fortunes and the international chaos occurring
on the outbreak of the war.
At the outset —from the start of smelting operations at
Broken Hill on Bth May, 1886, to the establishment of the
refinery at Port Pirie in December, 1889 —the entire output of
silver lead bullion was shipped to London. In London the bullion
was distributed among desilverisers through the firm of Vivian
Younger and Bond, who acted as the agents of the Broken Hill
Proprietary up to the foundation of the company’s London ofiice
in 1890. This silver lead bullion was purchased ordinarily for
the leading lead works, operated by the firms of Cookson and Son,
Enthoven and Son, Locke, Blackett and Co., and Locke, Lan-
caster and Co. But, faced with increases in freight and realisa-
tion charges, the Board of Directors determined that the Pro-
prietary should undertake the refining of its own bullion and
place its own finished products on the market. This decision
resulted in the foundation of the Port Pirie refinery. In view
of the prominence of place on the world’s metal market speedily


to be assumed by the Broken Hill Proprietary, curious interest
attaches to the fact that, when the first tenders were invited by
the company for the sale of silver lead bullion in 1888, the result-
ing offers had to be declined.
In order to facilitate shipments on the Proprietary’s behalf
it was decided at first to establish an agency at Port Adelaide.
But in weighing the advantages of Port Adelaide as against Port
Pirie, the board found that the latter port was better suited to
its purposes —for the importation of mine timber and coal, and
the export of the products of the mine. The freight charges
through Port Pirie were lower, and no break of gauge increased
the cost of hauling ores and supplies. The board accordingly
secured wharf accommodation at Port Pirie.
On the decision to erect the refinery the board did not imme-
diately select Port Pirie as the site for its works. But the break
of gauge at Terowie and the initial cost of filling in any site
offering at Port Adelaide induced the board to choose Port Pirie.
The refinery, designed by H. H. Schlapp, commenced operations
in December, 1889, with Gregory Board as Superintendent. A
ready market offered for refined silver, but the Proprietary
found no such demand for lead. On 30th November the directors
informed the shareholders that they had decided to “go slowly,”
until experience had been gained in the disposition of both silver
and lead on the best markets and in the most profitable mode of
sale. Actually the board was observing the prospects of the
Eastern market. Inquiries had been instituted on the possibility
of developing trade with India, China and Japan, and W. R.
Wilson had visited the East with this purpose in 1888. In the
meantime the board —in accordance with the announcement of
W. P. McGregor, Chairman of Directors, at the meeting on 22nd
January, 1890—directed the reduction of one-quarter of the out-
put from the Broken Hill smelters into soft lead and refined
silver, and one-quarter to bullion bearing 15 to 30 ounces of silver
to the ton, while the remaining half was to be shipped to London
without passing through the refinery at Port Pirie.


The first sale of refined silver from the Proprietary’s own
works at Port Pirie was made to Gibbs, Bright and Co. on Bth
May, 1890. It consisted of 183,343 ounces, and realised 3/9J per
ounce standard. The first shipment of B.H.P. lead to London was
forwarded by the steamer “Shannon” on 24th March, 1890, but
transhipped to the steamer “Oceana.” It consisted of 164 tons,
and realised a price of £lO/9/10 per ton. On 27th May a second
shipment, consisting of 507 tons, was made by the steamer “Bal-
larat,” the return being £lO/7/3 per ton. During the year the
export of lead to London totalled 2111 tons. No shipment had
then been made to the East, and the Australian market had
absorbed only 176 tons. In the following year the quantity sold
locally increased to 813 tons. In October, 1890, Alexander
Eraser was appointed local agent for the sale in Australia of
the company’s lead.
But the efforts made by the Broken Hill Proprietary to open
up a trade with the East were speedily successful, and by May,
1891, the company was finding a ready sale for silver and lead
at highly satisfactory prices, a steady market opening up in China.
The first shipment of lead from the Broken Hill Proprietary
Company for the East —300 tons —was made by the steamer
‘ ‘ Changsha ’’ to Hong Kong on 14th February, 1891. It was con-
signed to the firm of Butterfield and Swire, and realised a net
price of £l3/6/8 per ton. In spite of the conservative tendency
of the Chinese merchants, who had been accustomed to the L.B.
brand and were prejudiced at first against any other, the Broken
Hill Proprietary increased its shipments, which, by May, 1892,
had totalled 8000 tons. For this period the shipments to Lon-
don represented only 2800 tons. The B.H.P. brand of lead had
now become so favourably known that a higher price was offer-
ing for it than for other makes.
The development impelled the board to review the question
of continuing shipments of bullion to London. As a result of
correspondence with Vivian Younger and Bond, F. Walter Bond
and N. C. Cookson, of Cookson and Son, visited Australia at the
end of 1892 to confer with the directors of the Broken Hill Pro


prietary. An agreement resulted between the Proprietary and
the firms of desilverisers —Cookson and Son, H. J. Enthoven and
Sons, Locke, Lancaster and Co. and H. R. Merton and Co.—on
behalf of the Usine de Desargentation Societe Anonyme, of Hobo-
ken. This agreement provided that the desilverisers should accept
all bullion shipped by the Proprietary on the basis of the average
price of silver and lead. The Proprietary undertook not to sell
except through Vivian Younger and Bond, and not to increase
the output during the currency of the contract. The agreement,
which was terminable on three months’ notice, took effect from
Ist July, 1893. No payment was made by the desilverisers for
the gold content of the bullion. This gold content, however, was
found so important that at the end of 1893 the Proprietary deter-
mined to extend the refinery at Port Pirie in order to deal with
the whole of its bullion. Actually the desilverisers had been
deriving large profits from the gold content. By August, 1895,
the Proprietary, by treating its own bullion, had saved 13,300
ounces of gold, representing £55,000 in value. For the first half
of the year the saving covered 75 per cent, of the cost of refining.
By this time reports from many authorities showed that the
quality of the B.H.P. lead was equal to the quality of the lead
produced from any works in the world. This quality so far stimu-
lated the Proprietary’s Eastern trade that by the end of 1899
the shipments of B.H.P. lead had increased to an annual quantity
of approximately 9500 tons. At this time the interest of Butter-
field and Sons in the trade was transferred to Jardine, Mathieson
and Co., at Hong Kong. The firm of Mitsui, Bussan Kaisha took
up the business for Japan, as a result of a visit by K. Fukui, its
director, at the beginning of 1897. Within a few years the
B.H.P. brand had captured practically the whole Eastern market.
A factor of importance in the development of this trade was
the care exercised by the board to have the Proprietary informed
intimately and at first hand of the tendencies of the market. In
1907 the board decided that Mr. F. M. Dickenson, Secretary to
the Proprietary, should visit China and Japan, with the purposes
of bringing the company more closely into touch with its cus


tomers by informing it more intimately of their requirements,
and of scrutinising the nature and extent of competition.
The Secretary visited the East at the end of 1907, and the results
were reflected speedily in an increase of trade. Up to this time
the trade had represented from 9000 to 12,000 tons a year. By
the end of 1910 the quantities had risen to over 20,000 tons. At
this time the Secretary paid a second visit to the East. Stating
the development occurring in the Eastern trade, Mr. John Dar-
ling, Chairman of Directors, announced to shareholders at the
August meeting in 1911 that the Eastern sales for the half-year
constituted a record, representing 15,282 tons, as against 11,796
tons for the preceding half-year. By the end of 1911 the com-
pany’s shipments to the East had risen to 30,000 tons a year.
While the trade with China and Japan was thus develop-
ing through these pre-war years, trade with England and the
Continent proceeded on the lines of direct sales to the leading
metal firms, either under contracts for shipment from Australia
or sales made through the London office of quantities on consign-
ment. As early as 1896 Mr. P. M. Dickenson visited England
and the Continent, and investigated—among a number of impor-
tant questions of policy—the sales of lead and other products
from the mine. At the time the disposal of copper matte, for
example, was a matter of some difficulty. No material change
was effected in the method of selling lead to the European mar-
ket till 1908. The Broken Hill Proprietary then became con-
cerned in an international move to devise a more direct control
over the lead market. In 1894 prices had fallen to a year’s
average of £9/11/6 per ton, but a gradual increase in the suc-
ceeding years raised the price in 1900 to £l7/3/7. In the follow-
ing year a drop of no less than £4/19/6 was recorded in the
average price. By 1902 the price had descended to £ll/5/3; in
1907 it advanced to £l9/12/5; but in 1908 a further drop of
£5/17/8 occurred. The directors of the Broken Hill Proprietary
had already considered proposals for some organisation to con-
trol the market. As early as 1892 Figueroa, in Spain, had sug-
gested that the companies should combine to support prices for


silver and lead, and ten years later the outline of a scheme for
organisation had come before the board. No definite move
resulted. In 1908 a complete collapse in the market was averted
only by the Proprietary and other companies storing lead in
London and supporting the market by themselves purchasing lots
as occasion demanded. The gravity of the position resulted in
the Lead Conference, which met in Paris in February, 1909. The
companies represented controlled mines with an output of 400,000
tons, or more than one-half of the world’s annual production of
lead. The conference resulted in the formation of the Lead Con-
vention. The signatures to the first agreement were:—
G. and A. Figueroa, Madrid.
Societe Des Anciens Etablissments, Sopwith, Ste. Ame, Paris.
Ste. Miniere et Metallurgique de Penarroya, Paris.
American Smelting and Refining Co., New York.
American Metal Co. Ltd., New York,
Usine de Desargentation, Ste. Ame, Hoboken-les-Anvers
Societe Anonyme G. Dumont and Freres, Liege, Bleihutte
Call G.M.8.H., Call I.D Eifel. —(Represented by Metall-
gesellschaft, Frankfurt o/M.)
The Broken Hill Proprietary became a party to this agree-
ment on the termination of certain existing contracts, but only
in respect of its English and Continental shipments. Its Eastern
and Australian trade was excluded.
The primary object of the association was to introduce a
steadying influence into the market. The market had hitherto
suffered through the chief producers conducting their business
on divergent lines. To achieve a common policy members of the
Convention agreed to place their lead shipments in the hands of
one firm of metal brokers in London —H. R. Merton and Co. —
and the Metallgesellschaft on the Continent. These agents for
the Convention were to arrange sales subject to direction by a
committee representative of the producers. The constitution
of the first committee for the producers was:—


Company. Representative,
1. The Broken Hill Proprietary Mr. Fred Dutton (as
Co. Ltd. President).
2. Penarroya Mons. Ch, Ledoux
(Vice-President.)
3. G. and A. Figueroa Comte de Romanones.
4. Sopwith Mons. Wilnaotte.
5. American Smelting Co Mr. E. Brush,
One of the principles laid down was that the selling brokers
should, as far as practicable, make sales direct to the consumer
in order to minimise speculative transactions on the market. Up
to the outbreak of the war on 1914 the Lead Convention continued
to deal with the shipments of practically the whole of the original
interests that were parties to the first agreement; hence it was in
operation for a period of five years.
That the Convention had the effect of steadying the market
is evidenced by the average net prices realised over correspond-
ing priods before and after its formation: —
Before Convention.
Half-year ending:—
1903 May £lO 11 2
November 9 19 10
1904 May 10 6 1
November 10 14 0
1905 May 11 6 4
November 12 10 6
1906 May 14 18 0
November 16 5 5
1907 May 18 6 5
November 16 4 9
1908— May 12 10 11
November 11 19 10
As Against after Convention.


Half-year ending:—
1909 May £l2 7 6
November 11 19 9
1910— May 11 17 7
November 11 15 2
1911— May 12 5 2
November 13 9 6
1912 May 15 7 0
November 17 10 11
1918—May 16 2 3
November 18 2 7
1914—May 17 7 0
November 18 0 2
The war breaking out on 4th August, 1914, closed immedi-
ately several of the channels for the disposal of the products from
the Proprietary’s mine on Broken Hill.


ADMINISTRATIVE, 1920
F. M. Mitchell
(Steel Works
Secretary)
David Baker
(Manager of
Steel Works)
H, G. Darling
(Director)
R. O. Blackwood E. Lewis
(Director) ( Asst. General Manager)
Wm. Jamieson
(Director)
H. V. McKay
(Director)
Bowes Kelly
(Chairman)
D. W. Harvey Patterson
(Director)
G. D. Delprat
(General Manager)
Hon. D. E. McBryde
(Vice Chairman)
F. M. Dickenson
(Secretary)


CHAPTER XXXVII.
THE ASSOCIATED SMELTERS (1915).
DISTURBANCE of the metal market preceded for weeks
the outbreak of the Great War. The vast organisation
was sensitive to the first signs of gathering storm. Ner-
vousness increasing day by day; actual consternation reigning
by 25th July—panic.
In the words of the London “Mining Journal” of Ist
August, 1914: —“The nervousness on the score of politics which
commanded attention last week had since developed into such a
scare as has not occurred within the memory of a living man.”
On the Continent the disorganisation became acute. The Ex-
changes of Vienna, St. Petersburg, Amsterdam, Brussels and
Barcelona closed. The Exchange in Paris closed on Monday,
3rd August—with the declaration that settlements would be post-
poned from the end of July till the end of August.
In London the situation on the Continent was reflected by
an immediate deluge of stocks from abroad. The failure of a
number of English firms followed —in consequence of realisations.
By the morning of Friday, 31st July, word had come through of
the postponement of the Paris settlements. In the evening the
Committee of the London Stock Exchange issued notices extend-
ing settlements for a month. And the London Exchange itself
was closed until further notice —a step without precedent, as the
extent of the disorder was without precedent. The closing of
the Exchange was commended —in view of the extent to which
advances against securities have developed in modem times. The


closing of the leading provincial exchanges followed immediately,
and the New York Exchange took similar action.
Stocks were thus rendered unsaleable; the banks, for their
own protection, called in loans, and on 30th July increased their
rates to four per cent. The panic grew. Within a few days the
whole machinery of international credit was dislocated. Regular
exchange operations were at an end. The discount market was
thrown into utter dismay. And the Bank of England raised the
rate to eight per cent., and was reported to be working on 10 to
10J per cent. Only the definite declaration of war lent the
imperative steadying effect. On 7th August the banks re-opened,
the rate was reduced at once to six per cent., and in the evening
the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced that a further reduc-
tion to five per cent, would be made on the following day. The
Moratorium Act was at once proclaimed.
The vast oversea market which the Broken Hill Proprietary
had built up in the pre-war years was thrown into disorder on
the bursting of the storm. Practical stagnation of industries
resulted from the world-wide financial crisis. On 30th July
the metal market closed its doors. From then till 16th November
no official quotations for lead were announced. The Proprie-
tary’s Board of Directors were faced with a problem of unpar-
alleled difficulty. The Continental contractors for zinc concentrates
had given notice of the suspension of their contracts. All mar-
kets for finished products were closed, with the exception of the
Australian, the Japanese and the Chinese markets, which absorbed
in all only a quarter of the Proprietary’s output. It was prac-
ticable to restrict operations for the time, and thus at least avoid
new loss. But out of Rasp shaft upon the Broken Hill had grown
in thirty years an organisation so great that to close down the
works in part would mean distress to thousands of workers. And
the note struck by Australian enterprise was the note of British
enterprise—to carry on. On the other hand, to continue produc-
tion without a sufficient outlet for the products of the mine and
the smelters must entail locking up an immense sum for an indefi


nite period. To determine on a course of action in this world-
wide confusion of the first weeks of war presented to the directors
the most difficult problem in the history of the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary.
Immediately before the outbreak a dividend had been
declared payable within a few days. It was now a question of
whether shareholders or employes should receive first considera-
tion. The board decided that the Proprietary had its obligations
to its employes, and that the wholesale curtailment of opera-
tions, which must cause widespread suffering, must not take place.
It postponed the payment of the dividend —for the first time in
the history of the company. Thus, prudently conserving the
company’s resources, the board curtailed operations only by the
discontinuance of the night shifts, reducing, too, all expenditure
where possible.
The Federal Government was alive to the industrial depres-
sion which must result from the shutting down of the Proprie-
tary’s mine or smelters. On 7th August Sir William Irvine, the
Attorney-General, conferred with Mr. F, M. Dickenson, Secre-
tary to the Proprietary, and the company, in order to allow the
continuance of work at the mines grouped about the Hill, issued
instructions that the Port Pirie smelters should be run at full
time. Work at the Big Mine was reduced to half-time. This
continuance was in face of the fact that the Proprietary’s Lon-
don office had advised as early as 31st July that the markets
generally were so disorganised that it was impossible “to say any-
thing. ’ ’ The lead price for forward delivery had fallen as much
as £1 a ton. Silver, following upon China realisations, was down
to 23|d. —a fall of Id. per ounce within three days. On 6th August
the London office stated that it would probably be necessary to
suspend the Lead Convention, and that stocks were held at the
disposal of the British Government, as no other business was
possible.
It was not then suggested that lead shipments should be dis-
continued. But this soon became imperative through the panic


in the insurance rates resulting from the sinking of the shipping
by German raiders—in particular the “Emden,” before it met
its end from the cruiser “Sydney” off Cocos Island. The Broken
Hill Proprietary had at this time over 8000 tons of lead on the
water, which, fortunately, had been covered at current rates.
When £lO/10/- per cent, was demanded the rate became prohibi-
tive. And the price of lead was falling still—on 2nd October the
unofficial quotation was as low as £l6/10/-. For a while ship-
ments to England were entirely suspended, and not until the
clearing of the seas at the end of October was the position suffi-
ciently reassuring to justify the resumption of shipments.
Local demand and Chinese and Japanese orders were main-
tained ; but these, as stated, absorbed only a fourth of production.
Before the middle of September inquiries were received from
the Russian Imperial Government for shipments to Vladivostock.
The problem of disposal of products was necessarily common
to all the Broken Hill mining companies. Negotiations were
proceeding on their behalf with the Broken Hill Proprietary
with a view to the treatment of ores on a joint smelting account.
Ultimately an agreement was entered into with Mr. W. L. Bail-
lieu, M.L.C. (Victoria), acting on behalf of the North Broken
Hill Company, the Broken Hill South Company and the Zinc
Corporation. These companies accepted at their own risks the
realisation of their products. The prospects of realisation were
then discouraging. Advices from the Proprietary’s London office
were to the effect that, as the chief producing countries —Spain,
America and Australia —were outside the war zone, unless there
was a considerable curtailment in production, the London mar-
ket, which must be the chief relieving centre, would be glutted.
Silver had accumulated to the extent of 500,000 ounces. No
market had yet been found for the production, but the companies
decided to hold the product at Port Pirie. This entailed a very
heavy financial strain on the companies, for, while the shipments
were resinned in October, 1914, the first proceeds were not avail-
able for distribution till the end of December. But a recovery


in the silver market had set in, and before the end of the year
shipments equalled the output at the Port Pirie refinery.
The agreement for joint smelting operations was followed by
negotiations for amalgamation of interests in the Port Pirie
smelters. The Board of Directors was approached by Mr. Bail-
lieu, on behalf of the other companies, with a proposal to purchase
an interest in the smelters. From these negotiations resulted the
formation of the Broken Hill Associated Smelters Proprietary
Limited, with the Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited,
the Broken Hill South Silver Mining Company N.L., and North
Broken Hill Limited as the original shareholders, each with an
interest of £200,000 in a capital of £750,000. The Zinc Corpora-
tion subsequently joined to the extent of £IOO,OOO. In the terms
of this agreement the Proprietary was to receive £300,000 in
cash and £150,000 in fully paid up shares in payment of plant,
good will, etc., and £50,000 in fully paid up shares in part pay-
ment of stocks taken over from it by the new company. The
smelting works were transferred to the Associated Smelters on
2nd June, 1915, and from that date the products passed automati-
cally under control of the new company.
Zinc concentrates representing over 80,000 tons a year had
been absorbed before the war by the continental smelters. The
disposal of this product after the outbreak became one of the
chief problems facing the Proprietary’s Board of Directors. In
the search for a market the board directed inquiries in the East
and the United States of America, and in March, 1915, a trial
shipment was consigned to the New Jersey Zinc Company, Mobile,
which resulted in a contract with that company for supply of
54,000 tons on satisfactory terms, for delivery during the years
1915-16-17-18.
Freight engagements for the war period demanded most
cautious handling; but the Proprietary secured charters through
the freight contractors, Messrs. Scott, Fell and Company, for the
greater part of the required shipping space at the low rate of
42/- a ton from Port Pirie. During a visit to Japan and China,


undertaken at the end of 1915 on behalf of the Broken Hill Asso-
ciated Smelters, Mr. Dickenson investigated the possibilities of
outlets for zinc concentrates, and brought back with him several
proposals for contracts. In the meantime the Federal Govern-
ment assumed control of zinc production. The ultimate result
was the formation of the Zinc Producers’ Association, which con-
trolled the sales for spelter and zinc concentrates during the
succeeding years of the war.


BROKEN HILL, SHOWING MINES.


Chapter XXXVIII.
THE PROPRIETARY MINE (1919).
WITH the solution of the sulphide problem the Broken
Hill Proprietary Mine pursued a steady course of
fortune through the years before the outbreak of the
Great War. The mine still dominated the group of mines sunk
on the Broken Hill, as the iron-capped Hill had dominated the
ridge and plain when first Sturt and his party approached it
over the sun-scorched wastes. At the dawn of the new century
the company acquired the leases at the Iron Knob, inland from
Spencer’s Gulf, in South Australia, with the purpose of provid-
ing ironstone fluxing for the Port Pirie smelters. Prom the
acquisition of these immense deposits of iron ore was to spring
an enterprise outrivalling the Big Mine in its supreme activities
—the Newcastle Steel Works. At the time when flotation was
changing the whole outlook of operations on the Barrier the
advent of the steel enterprise was nigh at hand.
Now with the open cut the ridge was ripped from the Broken
Hill. The open cut was carried down 300 feet and for a length
of 4000 feet, and the stuff raised by the flying foxes yielded
1,500,000 tons of ore. To-day the open cut remains an immense
chasm —the bottom deep in sandy tailings from the plant. The
ridge is but a memory. With the completion of the open cut
the Broken Hill Proprietary came practically to the end of its
stocks of oxidised ores. The oxidised ores gave place to sulphides
at an average depth of 250 feet, although at one point in Block
11 they dipped below the 500 feet level.


The first years of the century had been marked by a pro-
found depression on the Barrier, and the possible exhaustion of
the famous mine itself had been conjectured. But, by the experi-
ments of Delprat and their ultimate success, the company was
enabled to send to the mill sulphides which previously could not
have been handled at a reasonable return, and to take full advan-
tage of the high prices ruling for zinc. In the dumps piled up
from the tailings left by the old processes, and still high in metal-
lic content, the company owned a rich asset to supplement the
output of sulphides from the mine. Flotation re-established the
fortunes of the Barrier when at least it seemed that the treasure
of the Broken Hill was nearing exhaustion, and, with the declin-
ing fortunes of the mine, the city, which had sprung up as if by
magic, must decay, as the mining towns of the gold days had
decayed.
To-day, if the fever of the first years of the Silver City of
Broken Hill has burnt out, the city stands firmly established at
the base of the Broken Hill. The Hill shapes hard, slate-grey,
rust-brown, capped with high stacks —a mass of building mount-
ing tier by tier from its base. From the city streets a dusty road
passes up over the flat—a road trodden in the past by all the
figures in the drama of Broken Hill—the men of Mount Gripps,
McKay’s party of contractors, Jamieson and his staff, the miners
of the past thirty and odd years, scientist, artisan, mechanic —
the leaders of the roaring crowds in the industrial storms which
whirl up over the Barrier as the sand storm swirls from the
Central Desert. Hard, rust-brown, slate-grey, rent and riven
Hill, and vast structures of iron and stone stand cut clear to
the day. In the night a line of yellow globes like moons surmounts
the mine. The line of yellow globes against the silver-blue of
the night passes from mine to mine upon the Hill.
The offices are of brown stone; iron buildings case the plant
evolved in the progress from the primitive windlass to the vastest
mechanism assembled about any Australian mine. Down in the
flat lie the skeletons of the dismantled plant which sought the


MAIN SHAFTS. CONCENTRATION NILL.


problem of the Broken Hill, served a brief purpose, failed, and
were scrapped. The little assay office, in which Fawcett laboured
in the first days of the mine, stands yet; but the work of assay
now engages a considerable staff, quartered in extensive offices
on the terrace above the office of the management and its staff.
From the brown dumps of tailings, at the bases of which the big
steam shovels work, conveyor belts of rubber crawl up like snakes
to the mills. The mine is linked by a network of lines with
the “tramway” which goes down to Cockburn, on the border,
whence the South Australian lines carry on the loaded trucks to
Port Pirie.
Delprat and Stewart shafts descend into a maze of under-
ground workings. Long miles of echoing galleries, square set
with forests of Oregon pine, and lighting at the miners’ lamps
with the gleam of ores, and resounding with the clang of pick—
the dull roar as a charge is fired—the crash of falling stone torn
down —the roll of laden trucks, horse-drawn or electrically-driven
—the clank and rattle of the cages going up and down. The out-
put of the ore from the Big Mine, when the Day Dream and all
the mines of Silverton remain no more than memories from the
old Barrier days, has proceeded through these years, broken only
when the fires have burnt underground or the industrial battles
of the Barrier have raged about the Hill. Through the galleries
sweeps the cool air provided by the elaborate system of ventila-
tion, The sulphide ore consists of a fine-grained argentiferous
galena and zinc blende, with a proportion of quartz, garnet, rhodo-
nite and felspar. As a rule it has a compact, granular structure,
and once the friable zone immediately below the oxidised ore is
passed through it exists in a compact form. Thus rock drills
must be employed to drive through it. The face, when drilled, is
blasted down. Where the men work the drills in the face is lit
with electric light, and as the point of the drill meets the ore the
sparks fly out in showers. The stopes rise one above the other,
and as the ore is broken, it is tumbled into passes or chutes,
whence it is delivered into the trucks to be conveyed to the shaft.
The ore is landed from the doubled truck cages of the main shaft.
P


The vast system of rubber belt convejmrs was established to
handle the material from the dumps with the utmost economy of
labour. The belts bear up the material for regrinding, in order
to prepare the tailings for treatment in the acid plant, enabling
the company to recover a large percentage of concentrates. The
fine yellow sandy residue is borne away by an aerial tramway 1600
feet in length, which enables the tailings from the zinc plant to
be delivered more economically to the mullock chutes. The tram-
way starts from the foot of the dump and passes over the chutes
along the gaping chasm of the open cut; the chutes are connected
with the underground workings. A yellow hill of sand stands
below the terminus of the tramway. The ore is mined by con-
tract. In the majority of the stopes the ore is mixed with gangue
in varying proportions. The trucks, filled underground to a load
of 25 cwt., are passed from the top of the shaft on to the weigh-
bridge, hitched then to an endless travelling steel rope, and hauled
to the tipping cradles above the bins. The ore falls over the
grizzles of tapered manganese steel. The bins hold 800 tons, and
command five Gates crushers, which break the ore to two-inch
pieces. Crushed ore and smalls pass together into bins discharg-
ing into one-ton trucks, which are lifted two at a time by the
hydraulic lift to the original level on the top bins. The hydraulic
elevator has two crushers on one side and three on the other, and
the whole of the crushing plant stands between the two concen-
trating mills. The trucks of crushed ore and smalls are passed
at the top level from right to left to the mills, each of which has
a capacity of about 6000 tons of ore per six working days. From
the trucks the ore is tipped into bins commanding a set of fast-
running rollers with steel shells of toughened steel. The ore is
passed to the rolls by a roll feeder, assisted by a jet of water, and
from the rolls it goes over a rocking screen with three-inch holes.
The “through” ore proceeds to the concentrating plant and the
“oversize” falls on a travelling Balata belt, discharging into the
boot of an elevator, which returns it to the original top level and
discharges into a second set of bins. These bins command a


ZINC CONCENTRATION PLANT,
Showing Couveyor Belt conveying Tailings, after treatment in the Lead Concentration
Plant, to Zinc Concentration Plant.


second set of three rolls, grinding more finely than the first set and
revolving at a greater speed. Again the through ore goes to the
concentrating department, and the oversize falls on to a second
travelling belt, is lifted once more to the original level and dis-
charged into a third bin. From the third bin the process is
repeated; the oversize is raised to a bin from which it goes to
the last crusher, a ball mill, constructed for wet grinding. Prom
it no ore can escape till it is crushed sufficiently fine to pass the
screens. In the newer mill the oversize is thus never returned
to the same set of rolls, and this has the advantage over the older
method that a much smaller proportion of slimes results, while
gradual reduction effects at the same time a gradual concentra-
tion.
The crushed ore is now fine enough for the coarse jigs. On
its way it passes through a slime separator—an inverted cone
with an inflow of water at the bottom and an overflow carrying
the water charged with all the slimes, which are sent on to the slime
department. The coarser material goes to the jigs, in the first
two compartments of which concentrates of about 60 per cent,
lead are obtained; in the third and fourth a product assaying
about 10 per cent, lead, 19 per cent, zinc and 10 ounces silver; and
in the last tailings assaying from three to four per cent. lead. The
discharge from the jigs through a spigot is continuous. The con-
centrates pass through the launders into bins above the railway
where they are drained of water and, when dry enough, are run
into the trucks. The tailings are run into bins, to be trucked
ihence to the tailings heap. The middle product is discharged
into a ball mill with slotted screens, and the pulp resulting is
carried by a bucket elevator into the fine jigs of four compart-
ments, passing on the way through a slime separator. The fine
jigs form concentrates assaying 40 per cent, lead, 13 per cent,
zinc and 22 ounces silver; a middle product assaying 9 per cent,
lead, 18 per cent, silver and 10 ounces silver; and the tailings
assaying 5.5 per cent, lead, 18 per cent, zinc and 8 ounces silver.
Concentrates and tailings are disposed of in the same way as the


coarse jigs. The middle product goes through another ball mill
with slotted screens, and the resulting pulp is raised to the slime
separator belonging to the fine jigs. Every product finds its way
automatically through the process to its destination.
The slimes from the separators pass into Y boxes, in which
they are classified into coarser and finer slimes. The coarser
proceed to the Wilfley tables, and the middlings from these over
a second set of Wilfley tables at a lower level. The concentrates
find their way to the concentrates bins, and the tailings to other
bins for removal to the zinc treatment plant. The fine tailings
go to the Luhrig vanners, and concentrates and tailings are dis-
posed of in the same way as the products from the Wilfley tables.
During the crushing and grinding a fine slime is formed, which
settles with great difficulty in the circulating water. At first
these slimes were allowed to run away mixed with the tailings
as untreatable. Subsequently the slimes, containing about 17 per
cent, lead and 18 ounces silver, were settled in tanks, and the
resulting slimes, about 1300 tons weekly, were collected and
treated by the sintering process. This process was discontinued
in 1912, as it was found possible to treat the slimes more advan-
tageously by flotation, eliminating the loss of zinc.
The jig tailings, before being trucked to the dumps, are
passed over shaking screens, for the separation of all mate-
rials fine enough for the zinc plant. The fine tailings are loaded
into eight-ton hopper trucks, and are passed over an elevated
railway into the bins.


CHAPTER XXXIX.
THE PORT PIRIE SMELTERS (1919).
ABOVE tlie swamps acquired by the Broken Hill Proprie-
tary on an inlet from Spencer’s Gulf rise the Port Pirie
smelters —one of the largest establishments of the kind
in the world. The little wheat port of the past has become famous
with the smelters. A town has grown up under the shadow of
their smoke. To Port Pirie through the years have been borne
from overseas plant and supplies for the mine far off in
N.S.W. From Port Pirie have been distributed over the world
the riches of the Silver Hill. The life at the Port, which might
be leaden through the humid heat of the long summer, is fevered,
restless, ever-changing. Through the streets, under the shadows
of the high buildings, pass the army of operatives from the works
—the seamen from the great ships bringing Oregon from America,
sulphur from Japan, explosives from the Cape, and loading silver,
lead and zinc for the Eastern or Western world. The railroad
from the border sweeps into the very street; rail trucks run thence
to the smelters; by the smelters long wharves extend to the fringe
of mangrove swamps. Street resounding the clash and rattle of
trucks, the shriek of shunting locomotives; wharves echoing with
sounds of loading and discharge and the roar of big coal loading
plant. The green swamps encircle smelters and town but for the
deep inlet from the blue gulf by which the steamers come and go—
great cargo boats and tramps, interstate colliers with coal from
Newcastle, tug boats hauling clumsy barges laden with red iron-
stone fluxing from the port of Hummocky, upon the western


shore. Across swamp and plain, above dull foothills, the Flinders
Range masses steel-grey against the sky. Above the smelters
the smoke belched from stacks going 250 feet in air commingles
and spreads out like a black swaying fan over Port Pirie. Reek-
ing with heat through the summer—ever restless, ever-changing,
fevered.
The works comprise a nest of thirteen smelters; but by the
adoption of the high blast and improving smelting practice it was
found possible a number of years since to throw ten out of regular
use, while maintaining an output higher than when the whole
plant was in work. In the early years of the smelters a low per-
centage of lead was recovered by comparison with the 95 per cent,
won by methods improving in line with the development of metal-
lurgical science. While achieving richer results, the Broken Hill
Proprietary attained new economies by the adoption of labour-
saving devices—such as the mechanical feeder for the smelters.
This feeder consists of pairs of trucks passing under the ore, fuel
and flux bins to receive the furnace charges and hitched on to a
travelling rope circling round to discharge their load into the
smelters automatically, and returning to receive new feed. At
the outset large Ropp furnaces were installed to desulphurise the
lead concentrates. The concentrates on reaching the smelters
are discharged from the railway trucks into bins and passed
thence into the Ropp roasters, together with lime, fine iron and
silicious ore. Prom the Ropp roasters, each of which has a capa-
city for treating 100 tons a day, the mixture is passed by mecha-
nical rakes into bins, and thence lowered into one-ton trucks,
which are raised by a hydraulic lift to the higher level command-
ing the Huntington-Herbelein converters. Into the converter
pots, each holding about eighteen tons, the hot powdery ore is
dumped; a blast is turned on at the bottom and an iron hood
lowered on to the pot to direct the escaping gas into a large flue.
The air blown in oxidises the remaining sulphur, and through
this the contents of the pot are raised to a red heat till the mass
fuses together. After four hours the pot is tipped, and the mass,


PORT PIRIE SMELTING WORKS, 1911.


falling to the floor, breaks into large sections, which are reduced
by hand spalling to small pieces. These are loaded into skips,
which are raised to the feed-floor of the smelters. Concentrates,
raw and converted, are fed with ironstone, limestone and coke
into the smelter. The smelting furnaces, rectangular in form,
measure 212 inches by 62 inches at the tuyeres. The blast is sup-
plied by blowers discharging into a 60-inch main pipe, from which
branches pass to each furnace. Motive power is supplied by
compound surface condensing engines. From the furnaces the
molten ore is run off into moulds, and the resulting bullion is
transported thence to the refinery. The recovery is about 95 per
cent, of the lead, 98 per cent, of the silver and practically all the
gold.
In the refinery the bullion is melted down at a comparatively
low temperature in a copper softening furnace, holding about 36
tons. After a process of about eight hours the dross containing
most of the copper floats in a many-coloured scum on the sur-
face of the molten metal. This scum or copper dross —about 3000
pounds of dross forming on 36 tons of bullion —is skimmed off.
It assays 77.5 per cent, lead, 8 per cent, copper, 1.0 per cent, iron,
1.0 per cent, zinc, 4.3 per cent, sulphur, .7 per cent, arsenic, .7 per
cent, antimony, and 2.1 per cent, insoluble. The copper dross is
returned to the smelters, and the molten lead remaining is tapped
and carried through an iron launder into a second furnace similar
to the first. The temperature is raised and lowered twice, and
the process occupies sixteen hours. The dross is again skimmed
off, and assays 74.0 per cent, lead, 10.7 per cent, antimony and
1.0 per cent, arsenic. This skimming is transferred into the
antimony dross furnace, similar in construction to the other two
furnaces, and mixed with fine coke and fine coal in the proportion
of 120 pounds each to 2800 pounds of dross. The oxide of lead is
reduced to metallic lead, which is tapped off every shift and re-
turned to the second softening furnace. The slag, tapped over four
hours, assays 55.6 per cent, lead, 18.65 per cent, antimony and 3.7
per cent, arsenic. The slag is sent to a cupel furnace, where 450


pounds of antimonial slag is mixed with 250 pounds of blast fur-
nace slag and 150 pounds of coke. This produces an antimonial
metal containing 78.0 per cent, lead, 20.0 per cent, antimony and
1.5 per cent, arsenic. This metal is fit to put on the market.
The remaining bullion, freed of copper and antimony, con-
tains all the silver and the gold which are separated from the lead
by means of metallic zinc. The metal is run into kettles holding
40 tons, and 200 pounds of zinc are added in order to combine
with the gold. A mechanical stirrer is lowered into the molten
mass, which, when thoroughly mixed, is allowed to cool slowly.
On the surface forms a gold-zinc crust, which is skimmed off,
and, being ordinarily too poor for treatment by itself, is used on
second or third kettles, as if it were zinc for extracting the gold
from fresh bullion. The alloy or gold skimmings after the third
time contains about 200 ounces per ton of silver, six ounces per
ton gold, 10 per cent, zinc and 89 per cent. lead.
When the first dross is removed about 750 pounds more zinc
are added to the metal and the stirrer again applied. As the
mixture cools a new scum forms, containing the zinc and prac-
tically all the silver. This scum is raked into the basket of a
Howard press operated by compressed air. The molten lead
mechanically mixed with the alloy is squeezed out of the zinc-
silver alloy through perforations in the basket. The resulting
alloy weighs about one ton, and assays approximately 3000 ounces
per ton silver, 20 per cent, zinc and 70 per cent. lead. It goes on
to the silver department. The small percentage of silver remain-
ing with the lead in the kettle is removed by a further admixture
of 700 pounds of zinc. The third scum is too poor for the silver
department, and is used for desilverising the next kettle of
bullion.
The lead freed from its silver and gold is drawn off into a
refining furnace. The last traces of zinc are removed from it by
heating and skimming the dross twice. The pure lead is then
run into the market kettle and drawn off into the moulds. The
assay shows this lead to be about 99.995 per cent, of metallic lead.


The last note of economy is struck on the whole process—the dross
resulting from these final operations goes hack to the smelters.
Every 36 tons of bullion going from smelters to refinery yields
30 tons of market lead.
The gold skimmings from the first zincing are sent to the
retort furnace. The retorts (nine), made of plumbago and
heated by means of gas, hold each about 12 cwts. of skimmings.
Through a heating of four hours the skimmings are melted; some
of the zinc is distilled off, and gold bullion and gold dross remain
in the retort. The bullion contains about 225 ounces of silver and
seven ounces of gold. The gold bullion, stacked till 35 tons have
accumulated, is put in a kettle, melted down, and yields from
15,000 to 20,000 pounds of dross containing lead and some copper.
This dross is squeezed in a filter press, like ordinary zinc dross,
in order to remove the lead, and then smelted on a cupel. The
cupels are formed of four parts cement and one sand, and take a
charge of about half a ton. From the cupel results a gold con-
centrate carrying 17,000 ounces of silver and 550 ounces of gold,
and a slag containing 0.1 ounce of gold and 40 to 50 ounces of
silver per ton. The concentrates are passed into another cupel
and are run up to Dore bullion, carrying 30 to 35 ounces of gold
per 1000 ounces of silver. This Core bullion goes to the parting
plant.
After the dross has been removed from the kettle 700 pounds
of zinc are added to complete the gold extraction, and, this com-
pleted, desOverisation is accomplished by a further addition of
zinc. The second gold skimming is pressed, retorted, cupelled
and run up to Dor6 bullion. The silver skimmings are heated in
plumbago pots in a gas-fired furnace, and the product from this
operation is retort bullion, about 82 per cent, of the skimmings
and dross about three per cent., while the balance, consisting of
zinc, is distilled and caught in the form of metallic zinc. The
value of the bullion is approximately 3500 ounces per ton, and
this is concentrated on cupels till it contains about 50 per cent,
silver. The rich bullion is then conveyed into the silver yard,


which is so enclosed that only those employed on the final process
may enter. Here the bullion is further concentrated on cupels
into crude silver, which is re-melted, with the addition of a little
lime, in a perfectly new cupel. The fineness of the silver result-
ing is 998.5. This silver is re-melted in plumbago pots, and a
little copper added to reduce the fineness to 996 —the fineness of
export bars. The molten contents of the plumbago pots are
poured into moulds, and the resulting bars are trimmed, weighed
find marked. The silver is ready with the lead for export.
In the parting plant the gold is separated from the silver.
The Dore bullion is dissolved in sulphuric acid in cast-iron kettles
over a coal fire. When the silver has been dissolved the solution
of silver sulphate in strong acid is siphoned from the dissolving
kettles into cast-iron settling vats, and, remaining there for a short
while to allow any particles of gold to settle, is carried into crys-
tallising tanks, set within larger tanks to allow cold water to be
circulated about them. The strong liquor is diluted, the sulphate
of silver crystallises out, and the crystals, collected on a filter,
washed with water and dried, are reduced to metallic silver with
coke dust.
The residue in the dissolving kettles, consisting of metallic
gold with salts of iron and lead, is put into another kettle and
boiled again with fresh sulphuric acid to remove the last trace
of silver. The residue, washed to remove the silver salt, is boiled
with hydrochloric acid to take out the iron and lead salts. Finally
it is thoroughly washed, dried, melted and cast into ingots run-
ning to about 992 fine.
The refinery looks down upon the wharves where the great
cargo boats tie up to load the treasures of the Broken Hill and,
making out over the blue gulf to sea, scatter them over the world.


REFINERY, PORT PIRIE, 1911.


CHAPTER XL.
THE STEEL ENTERPRISE (1911).
IN 1911 the Broken Hill Proprietary engaged in a new adven-
ture. The results were of high import to the fortunes of
the company and to the destinies of Australia. The Pro-
prietary had grown up with the Age of Silver. It was to herald
in Australia the dawn of the Age of Steel.
In the immense deposits of red and black manganiferous ore
at Iron Knob, from which for the past decade had been derived
the ironstone flux for the smelters at Port Pirie, the Proprietary
owned the sources of new fortunes. The ironstone was excep-
tionally high in metallic content—as rich as 68 to 69 per cent.—
by comparison with the 30 per cent, metallic content of ore from
the Lower Cleveland deposit, near Middleshorough, in Yorkshire,
the 50 to 55 per cent, of the red hematite deposits near Lake
Superior, and the 36 per cent, of the Minette deposits of Luxem-
bourg and Lorraine. In taking up the leases of the Iron Knob
and Iron Monarch the Proprietary had acquired possession of
as rich a deposit of iron as any in the world.
The acquisition of Iron Knob and Iron Monarch was linked
with the romance of the Broken Hill. Monarch and Knob are
situated 34 miles inland from the port of Hummock Hill, on the
western shore of Spencer’s Gulf. Monarch and Knob, capped
with black manganiferous ore, look out over the red soil plains
of Coruma and Middleback stations —the plains rolling up into
hills that, wave on green wave, surge to the bases of the broken
Gawler Ranges. The scene from the Monarch’s crown is oddly


suggestive of the Broken Hill and the red plains about it —but
a Broken Hill on a magnificent scale. The story of the Broken
Hill, the richness of it, the dazzling rise of station hands to for-
tune, induced in the minds of settlers about the Iron Monarch
and the Iron Knob the hope that in the black-capped mountain
and in this black crag might be hid a treasure to surpass the
wealth of Broken Hill. About the bases of Monarch and Knob
lay tumbled black and burnished ore and glittering schist. The
first prospectors searched for silver, just as the first prospectors
on the Barrier had sought for gold. A syndicate was formed;
leases were taken up; shafts were sunk about the Monarch and
the Knob. Parcels of ore were shipped away through Port Pirie
for England; but, though the assays showed a high metallic con-
tent, the ore was iron, not silver. The visions of a new Broken
Hill faded; the syndicate was discouraged, and the payments on
the leases fell into arrears. And, seeking ironstone flux for the
Port Pirie smelters, the Broken Hill Proprietary acquired the
leases from the South Australian Government.
The acquisition of the leases was announced by Mr. Harvey
Patterson, and his colleagues on the Board of Directors, in their
report for the half-year ended 31st May, 1900. For some con-
siderable time past, the report stated, the directors had been
concerned as to the supplies of ironstone flux for smelting pur-
poses at Port Pirie. The supplies had been irregular in quantity
and quality. It was of the utmost importance to the company
that regular and assured supplies should be available, and that
the stone obtained should be of good grade ore. Having to face
these difficulties, and being unable to arrange on favourable terms
for the requirements of the Port Pirie smelters, the directors
had secured leases in South Australia known as the Iron Monarch,
and situated about 40 miles inland from Port Lowly, on Spen-
cer’s Gulf. In order to work the leases, which carried an immense
body of iron of excellent quality—in every way suitable to the
requirements of the smelters —it would be necessary for the com-
pany to construct a tramway from the coast to the property. To


IRON MONARCH AND IRON KNOB
IRON MONARCH—HIGHEST POINT 600 FEET ABOVE THE PLAIN.
TOTAL LENGTH OF OUTCROP, 6300 FEET.
IRON KNOB.


merits had entered on bold developmental policies. In the supply
of rails for the transcontinental line controlled by the Common-
wealth, and for the lines to be constructed or relaid by the States,
an Australian company, if it could procure reliable steel, was
assured of preference. The high quality of the iron at Iron Knob
had long since been demonstrated, and that the entire deposits
were likely to produce ore of an equal richness had been tested
by exploratory borings over various parts of the leases and by
careful assay. In undertaking, at the wish of the Board of
Directors, a visit to Europe and America, Mr. G. D. Delprat,
General Manager for the company, had before him the definite
purpose of conferring with highest experts on the practicability of
the Broken Hill Proprietary’s establishing in Australia the steel
works which should exploit the wealth of the Iron Monarch and
Iron Knob.
Addressing the 52nd half-yearly meeting of shareholders on
sth August, 1911, Mr. John Darling, Chairman of Directors,
observed that with so large a concern as the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Company the management was always fully taxed to
keep ahead of the time, and, having in view the necessary exten-
sion of the company’s industrial operations, the directors had
decided that Mr. Delprat should visit England and America in
the interests of the company, so as to acquire the latest informa-
tion and, if necessary, secure the services of experts for the
development of industries kindred to its resources, and till then
barely touched upon. In more definite terms the Chairman of
Directors, addressing the succeeding meeting held on 23rd Feb-
ruary, 1912, announced that Mr, Delprat had visited the United
States of America, and was then in Europe collecting all the
information possible regarding the manufacture of iron and steel
and kindred industries. Probably on his return, which was
looked for shortly, he would bring with him an expert on such
matters, and the whole subject could then be carefully weighed.
Owning the deposits of ironstone at Iron Knob, and having in
view the fact that the requirements of the Commonwealth for iron


LATE JOHN DARLING.


and steel rails would be very large during the next few years, the
Board of Directors had thought it prudent to make all possible
investigations with a view to the extension of the company’s
enterprise.
The General Manager, on his return to Melbourne, submitted
a report on the result of his investigations in Europe and the
United States of America. The fact of the company’s holding
the immense ore deposit in South Australia, which contained
millions of tons of pure ore, he said, made it incumbent to
ascertain whether this ore could be turned to more profitable
use than merely as a flux in the smelters at Port Pirie. The
deposit was already connected with the coast in Spencer’s Gulf
by the tramway, and a very long wharf facilitated the loading
of the ore. At the time when the company built this line and jetty
the market for steel in Australia was limited, and it would have
been unwise to erect steel works. The demand for steel, how-
ever, had since grown steadily, and requirements were now such
that the urgent necessity for having steel works in Australia was
a well-recognised fact. In 1910 the following quantities of iron
and manufactured steel were imported into Australia: —
Tons.
Pig iron 38,000
Plate and sheet, corrugated, galvanised .. 58,000
Sheet, galvanised, not corrugated 48,000
Plain sheets, ship and boiler plates .. .. 43,000
Iron and steel scrap 15,000
Steel rails and fishplates 148,000
Iron and steel wire 73,000
423,000
While the market was assured, the management had been
convinced, by careful examination of the resources of the Iron
Knob, that the Proprietary held on its leases a solid basis for
the establishment of an iron and steel industry, and that these


resources of iron of the finest quality for making steel would be
sufficient for the requirements of more than a generation. With
the supply of ore assured, the next point of importance on which
Mr. Delprat had to advise the Broken Hill Proprietary was the
source of the supply of coal of suitable coking quality. From
the Proprietary’s own experience at its coking works there was
excellent coking coal near Newcastle, to the north of Sydney, and
on the south coast of New South Wales to the south of Sydney.
While in the United States of America the General Manager
had looked for a Manager of the future works, and had secured
the option of the services of Mr. David Baker, from Philadelphia,
a man of great experience and high qualifications, who had been
recommended to him by one of the leading men in the American
steel industry. It was to fall to Mr. Baker to recommend to the
Proprietary the site most suitable for the erection of the steel
works. The General Manager in his report remarked that there
would be no difficulty in securing one of the excellent sites avail-
able, with railway connection and harbour frontage, so that the
coal could arrive in railway trucks at the lowest freight, and the
ore be delivered from steamers and landed directly in front of
the blast furnaces. The raw material from Iron Knob, delivered
at the foot of the furnaces, would be as cheap as, if not cheaper
than, at any of the works which he had seen in the course of his
European and American tours. This, combined with the excep-
tionally good quality of the ore, should enable the Proprietary,
he considered, to produce steel as cheaply as any country in the
world. It was not difficult to make a good product from good
material, and the quality of this steel should be all that could be
desired, provided that skill and experience were available for the
construction of the works and the conduct of operations. For-
tunately there was no lack of highly qualified men for this pur-
pose, so that the Proprietary need not go through an experimen-
tal stage at its steel works.
The General Manager urged that the company, if it should
determine to establish the steel works, should, without loss of


time, erect a blast furnace of 350 tons capacity, with the corre-
sponding number of open hearth steel furnaces and the rolling
mills to deal with the steel produced. The lay-out of the plant
should be such as to allow for extension, and, by meeting Federal
and State requirements, the works should be enabled to occupy
in Australia the same position as steel works occupied in Europe
and America. The management had ascertained from Federal
and State Ministries that they were prepared to lend all possible
assistance to such an enterprise.
The Broken Hill Proprietary’s immediate activity in estab-
lishing its steel works was most fortunate. By the outbreak of
the war in August, 1914, the construction of the works was already
far advanced, and when the submarine campaign at last restricted
freight and importations the works were producing steel rails,
steel and iron products which could not have been secured from
overseas, and the want of which must have put an end to impor-
tant enterprises of Commonwealth and States and private firms.
The establishment of the steel works at this stage bore directly
on the destinies of the Commonwealth.
Simultaneously with the General Manager’s recommenda-
tions for the establishment of the steel works at Newcastle Mr.
Baker presented his report on the project to the Board of Direc-
tors. He stated that he found at Iron Knob a deposit of high-
grade ore admirably suited for steel making by the basic open
hearth process. The quantity was such that the Proprietary
need not consider the acquisition of any other supply for at least
a generation to come. The limestone quarry at War dang Island,
controlled by the company, offered an abundance of flux of the
highest quality, and for fuel large deposits of low sulphur coal
of good coking quality were offering in the neighbourhood of
Newcastle and Port Kembla, in New South Wales. Prom the
data obtained by tests he believed that the best coke for an iron
blast furnace could be made in modern by-product ovens from
some of the coal in the neighbourhood of Newcastle. In the manu-
facture of steel, he proceeded, the cost of assembling raw mate-
Q


rials necessary to provide a ton of pig iron determined whether
a steel proposition was to be profitable or not, for the production
of pig iron was the first stage in the steel process. In the case
of the Broken Hill Proprietary, he found that it was possible
to assemble either at Port Kembla or at Newcastle the ironstone,
coke and limestone for pig iron production at a lower cost per
unit than was possible for the Steel Corporation—the largest and
cheapest producer in the United States of America. As it took
more tons of coal than tons of ore to make a ton of finished steel,
it followed that the works should be nearer to the coal than to
the iron ore—allowing that such other considerations, as water
supply, harbour facilities and nearness to market were equal.
He had decided in favour of Newcastle over Port Kembla as the
site for the works. Newcastle had the largest supply of good
coking coal suitable for iron blast furnaces, and the coal was the
best adapted to the Proprietary’s purposes. The company’s land
at Port Waratah, across the harbour from Newcastle —which had
been acquired as far back as 1896 for the purpose of erecting
smelters —had a good water frontal, and, augmented by purchases
and assistance from the New South Wales Government, would
provide ample space to meet the growth of the works for many
years. The one steel product of which the greatest tonnage was
required in Australia was steel rails. It was therefore of the
greatest importance that the company should undertake to make
rails first in laying out its works. In 1910 nearly 150,000 tons
of rails were imported into the Commonwealth of Australia.
The Proprietary should at least undertake to make nearly that
tonnage with its initial installation. To do this would require
the following plant:—
One 350-ton modern blast furnace,
Three 65-ton open hearth steel furnaces,
One blooming mill, and
One heavy rail mill.
To supply coke for the 350-ton furnace the company should
add to this plant sufficient by-product coke ovens of the best type


to supply enough ooke for the blast funaces. The surplus could
be sold to Newcastle and the surrounding municipalities or be
utilised in the steel works. This plant should be equipped with
the latest and best labour-saving appliances for handling all
materials, and the company should provide means at Hummock
Hill and Wardang Island for the rapid loading of steamers with
ore and limestone. The steel furnaces should use the liquid pig
iron taken hot from the blast furnace, and should also use a large
percentage of steel scrap. With the aid of scrap the steel fur-
nace recommended should produce enough ingots to make 400
tons of finished rails each working day, or 120,000 tons each year.
After the rail mill was in operation the company would, doubt-
less, decide to build a sheet and wire rod mill and wire plant, and
thus be able to supply the market with plain and galvanised
sheet iron and the heavier size of plain and galvanised steel wire.
At no stage of the preliminary steps to the establishment
of the steel works at Newcastle was the decision of the share-
holders on the Broken Hill Proprietary’s new venture in any
doubt. A circular letter, dated 17th July, issued with notices of
extraordinary general meetings to be held on 27th September
and 14th October informed shareholders that, with their sanction,
it was the intention of the directors to enter on the manufacture 1
of iron and steel. At the 54th half-yearly general meeting on
30th August, 1912, Mr. Harvey Patterson, Acting Chairman of
Directors, announced that Mr, John Darling, the Chairman,
while on a visit to England, would consult the London board,
and this would be of considerable benefit to the operations of the
company in view of the proposed establishment of the iron and
steel industry. The lode at the Iron Monarch and the Iron Knob
was over a mile in length, and he (the Acting Chairman) had
inspected it from one end to the other. At the farthest point
south a prospecting shaft was put down 150 feet below the
outcrop, and ore of splendid quality was exposed. It was in this
neighbourhood that operations would he started to produce ore
for manufacturing purposes. At the time ore for flux in the


smelters was being quarried at the northern quarry, and to date
680,709 tons had been taken out, averaging over 68 per cent, of
metallic iron. To estimate the total quantity of ore at sight the
figures would run into many millions of tons, even to 100 feet of
depth, and it would take many generations to work it out. When
shareholders calmly and deliberately considered the fact that this
industry meant the prolongation of life of their company for an
almost interminable length of time, it would be surprising if every
shareholder did not heartily assist in raising the necessary
capital.
The decision of the extraordinary general meeting of share-
holders held in the Equitable Building on Friday, 27th Septem-
ber, 1912, was as memorable in the history of the Broken Hill
Proprietary Company as the meeting at the manager’s house on
Mount Gipps station, when Jamieson announced Low’s discovery
of chlorides and checked the move of Wilson and his backing to
secure possession of half Broken Hill. Mr. Harvey Patterson,
as Acting Chairman, assured the shareholders that the directors
had gone most exhaustively into the whole question of embarking
on the steel industry. Ho definite scheme had then been decided
upon.
On the motion of the Acting Chairman, seconded without
question by the shareholders, resolutions were carried approving
of the extension of the Broken Hill Proprietary’s operations to
the manufacture of iron and steel, authorising the increase in the
capital of the company by the creation of 540,000 new shares of
8/- each, fully paid up, and leaving the issue to the discretion
of the directors. The motions carried at the September meeting
were confirmed at a meeting of shareholders on 14th October.
Armed now with full authority to proceed to the manufacture
of iron and steel, directorate and management entered with energy
on the establishment of the steel works at Port Waratah.


IRONSTONE QUARRY, IRON KNOB.


CHAPTER XLI.
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE STEEL WORKS
(1913-1915).
THE site at Port Waratah on which the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary decided to erect its steel works seemed singularly
unpromising. On a strip of higher ground, indeed, stood
the old and disused smelters of the Wallaroo and Moonta Com-
pany, and a low wharf ran out thence to the sea. But about this
higher space stretched a green swamp, covered with scrub and
reeds and mangroves, going down to the very water’s edge. Along
the little bay extended at low tide grey mud flats, which when
the tide rose were well under water. Yet on this scene Mr. Del-
prat and his staffs —experienced officers drawn from Broken
Hill—entered with energy upon the task of draining, reclaiming
and pile driving to prepare the site for the reception of the
plant. The first start on the works was made on 3rd January,
1913—by stripping off the iron from and pulling down the old
buildings and smelters.
Addressing the shareholders at the 55th half-yearly meet-
ing, held in Melbourne 28th February, 1913, Mr. John Darling
announced that Newcastle had been chosen as the site for the
steel works. Already the New South Wales authorities had
shown their desire to assist the project, for dredging was being
undertaken in a business-like manner. When the works were
about ready for operation it was proposed that at least two
specially adapted steamers for carrying iron ore should be avail


able, and fitted with automatic loading and discharging appli-
ances, so as to reduce transit charges to the very lowest cost.
Dealing with the financial aspect of the scheme, Mr. Darling
stated that after some delay, as a result of the disturbed con-
ditions in Europe owing to the Balkan war, and after careful
consideration, the directors had decided to issue 240,000 of the
new shares to the shareholders and the public at 40/- per share.
As a prudent course it was deemed advisable to underwrite
100,000 of these shares, paying a commission of five per cent, on
the 100,000 shares only. The result of the issue was that in all
—including the 100,000 shares underwritten —applications were
received and allotment made of 221,056 shares, leaving 18,944
shares unallotted, which it was not the intention of the directors
to issue for a time.
An important reference to the future development of the
steel industry was uttered by Mr. Darling in this speech—the
first reference to the possibilties of ship-building, which was to
figure prominently in Australian political issues during the later
years of the European war. The possibilities of iron products,
the Chairman said, seemed immense, as the Argentine, Canada
and Australia were pushing on with the construction of new rail-
ways, and, in addition, there was the continuous demand for the
renewals of railway lines in all parts of the world. The large
demand for ship-building also continued, and all industrial
requirements were growing to a considerable extent. When the
plant in Newcastle was in readiness the Broken Hill Proprietary
could look to its being fully employed. The world’s production
of iron and steel in 1900 was 21,000,000 tons, but in 1911 it had
increased to 32,000,000 tons, and in 1912 to 34,000,000 tons. Yet,
with this vast production, stocks were very light, and all avail-
able furnaces were being brought into requisition in order to
meet the urgent demand.
The prospectus of issue of 240,000 shares had been published
on 25th January, 1913, The company, it stated, held Crown
leases under the Mining Act of 1893, in South Australia, over


SITE FOR STEEL WORKS, 1912, PORT WARATAH.


the large and rich deposit of ore at the Iron Knob. These leases
comprised about 340 acres. The total area acquired at New-
castle comprised 24 acres freehold, purchased by the company
in 1896, 110 acres freehold acquired by the company by purchase
in 1912, and 96 acres acquired from the New South Wales Govern-
ment under the Newcastle Iron and Steel Works Act of 1912,
17 acres reclaimed on fifty years’ leasehold, and 17 acres still to
he reclaimed. The New South Wales Government had under-
taken to dredge and maintain a channel from the works to the
Pacific Ocean 500 feet wide and 25 feet deep at low water. The
money to erect buildings and provide equipment and plant was
to he raised by the shares offered for subscription.
The construction of the steel works at Port Waratah pro-
ceeded with remarkable speed. On the swamps an army of workers
was now engaged. A steam pile-driver and two hand drivers
were employed continuously to ensure solid foundations for the
erection of the plant. Three steam-driven concrete-mixing plants
supplied the concrete for the beds. The site selected for the
erection of the blast furnace was a stretch of mud flat, covered
at high tide to a depth of three feet of water. To reach it a punt
had to be floated out with the pile driver and engine, and to form
the foundations the piles had to be driven to a depth of over
thirty feet. Ultimately 225 big piles in fifteen rows of fifteen
each were driven, and a bed of concrete 44 feet square and 17 feet
thick formed above them. For the foundations of the heating
stoves nine rows of 38 piles were driven. And while the work
proceeded inshore dredging operations went on along the wharf
frontage, and the sand was pumped ashore to reclaim the swampy
land. Two dredges were at work day and night, until along the
frontage the depth was increased from ten to twenty-five feet.
On this frontage the Proprietary’s staff built a jetty for the
reception of the heavy plant, and on this was set up a travelling
steam crane capable of lifting a 60-ton load. The jetty was con-
nected with a railway, over which all the plant was carried to
the foundations prepared for its reception. The difficulties pre


sented by the nature of the shore selected for the site were over-
come steadily by the technical skill of the staff and by the power
of the plant employed, after the first problem had been met of
securing a sufficient space of solid ground for the centre of opera-
tions for the lay-out of the works. Overseas to Newcastle was
brought the great plant in fulfilment of the European and
American orders. And swiftly, efficiently through the months
of 1913 and 1914 the work at Port Waratah went on. By June,
1914, the great blast furnace was nearing completion and ready
for lining. The four hot blast stoves were set up, and the pipe
connections with the furnace were being made. The three blow-
ing-engines and the dust-gatherers were being installed. The foun-
dations of the open hearth plant had been laid; the foundations
of the rolling mill sufficiently advanced to allow of the erection
of the vast machines. The permanent electric power plant was
already supplying all the power needed during construction.
Three of the fifteen boilers were in place; the coke ovens were
being built under direction of an engineer from the Semet-Solway
Company, and a coal bin constructed having a capacity of 5500
tons, and fitted with belts for receiving the coal and for loading
the steamers, so that the ore steamers might be supplied with a
return cargo from Port Pirie at a rate of 600 tons an hour.
Along the foreshore was extending a great wharf.
While the construction of the steel works thus sped on at
Newcastle, at Hummock Hill was being collected and installed
the plant for the despatch of ore. A new quarry was opened up
at the Iron Monarch, and storage bins connected with the main
line of tramway were being constructed. By the end of June,
1914, the ore-crushers at the seaboard were in place; the steam
portion of the power plant was being set upon its foundations.
The jetty was being extended —to an ultimate length of 2400 feet
—and the conveyor belt installation, by which the crushed ore
was to be carried from the bins for the full length of the jetty
and loaded directly into the ships’ holds for Newcastle, was pro-
gressing steadily. Thus at Hummock Hill, as at Newcastle,


work on the great undertaking was being pushed forward with
feverish energy. During the half-year the sum of £486,470 was
spent on the iron and steel plant for Newcastle, and £17,729 on
the Iron Knob tramway and jetty. In May the directors had
entered into negotiations for the provision of the additional
capital necessary for the completion of the iron and steel works.
By the middle of June negotiations were completed, and the whole
of the £600,000 six per cent, debentures, part of an intended
issue of £1,000,000 underwritten at two per cent. The issue was
offered to the public on 11th July, the list closed on the 13th July,
and the total amount subscribed in the two days was £744,400.
At Newcastle large shipments of plant were arriving from
Europe and America. The heaviest lifts were handled without
difficulty over the new wharf by the big cranes. By June prac-
tically all the plant was on the ground, and had either been
erected or was being erected. It had been decided that at the
outset every department should be placed under charge of an
expert from abroad. These managers had arrived to supervise
the completion of the plants. Under the instruction of these
managers were to be placed staffs of Australians who were to
show a characteristic aptitude in acquiring knowledge of the
process and of the operations of the plant.
It was well for the success of the new undertaking, on which
the Broken Hill Proprietary had expended a total of £770,000,
that the decision to establish the steel works had been immediately
carried into effect. On 4th August, 1914, came the declaration
by Great Britain of war against Germany. “The devil of war
seems to have come into the world, ’ ’ said the Chairman of Direc-
tors, addressing the shareholders on 28th August, “and to have
put the whole of the Christian communities at the throats of one
another, while all the pagan communities appear to be at peace.
Little wonder that the company should suffer by it!”
But with the works at Newcastle and Hummock Hill near-
ing completion, the Proprietary could at least face the prospects
for its undertaking with confidence. The first confusion follow


ing on the declaration of war was allayed in a degree by the lead
taken by Federal and State Governments—wise for the time, and
calculated to inspire public confidence—“ Business as usual.”
For the first two years of the war the constructional programmes
of Commonwealth and State were to proceed practically without
check. And though the demand for steel rails was to slacken in
1916 with the curtailment of the State programme, and later with
the completion of the transcontinental line in 1917, the continu-
ance of the works and the fact that supplies were available from
the Australian Steel Works, while supplies from overseas were
inevitably reduced through the shortage of freight, stimulated
during these war years the success of the Proprietary’s new
venture. It was well, indeed, for Commonwealth and States that
the enterprise of the Proprietary was launched in the first year
of the war. Hon. D. E. Mcßryde, Chairman of Directors, was
able to announce to the shareholders at the February meeting
(1915) that contracts had already been entered into with the New
South Wales and South Australian Governments for the supply
of 4500 tons of steel rails, and that negotiations were proceeding
with the Federal Government for the Proprietary to supply its
requirements over an extended period.
The Newcastle steel works in the first months of the war
were pushed to their completion. Only a slight set-hack occurred
—shipments of material from Belgium failing to arrive; but it
was found possible to manufacture these materials in Australia.
The delay affected principally the construction of the coke works,
through the non-arrival of special Belgium bricks and part of
the machinery for the by-product plant. But the General Mana-
ger was able to report for the February meeting that the blast
furnace would be blown in on 31st March, that the open hearth
furnaces should then be ready, and that blooming mill and rail
mill were practically completed.
The official opening of the Newcastle Steel Works was fixed
for 2nd June, 1915.


BLAST FURNACE, 1914.


CHAPTER XLII.
THE LOAN OF £1,000,000 (1914).
BY 6th July, 1914, the Broken Hill Proprietary issued a
prospectus giving the details of its proposal to offer
£600,000 of six per cent, twenty years’ debentures for
public subscription. The issue, which was made to raise capital
for the completion of the Newcastle Steel Works, was part of an
intended issue of £1,000,000.
This announcement was of special interest, because of the
prominent part taken by the Commonwealth Bank in the arrange-
ment. By arranging for the underwriting of the amount offered
and receiving applications from the public, it was observed, the
hank had entered on a new phase of business. Such association
with an industrial venture, the Governor was afterwards solemnly
advised, was not usual among Australian hanks, nor was it “in
accordance with the traditions of strict banking practice.”
The Pisher Government had set up the Commonwealth Bank.
The Fisher Government was a Labour Government. Already
members had been asking questions of the Pisher Government’s
successor —the Cook Government. Senators demanded to he
informed whether it was a fact that the Commonwealth Bank
had advanced money to the Broken Hill Proprietary by way of
loan. Members of the House of Representatives wanted to know
was this true, and Sir John Forrest, Federal Treasurer, admitted
that he didn’t know. In the Senate the Ministry confessed that
the Governor would not tell it for the information of the House,
taking up the attitude that he was not obliged to answer any


question that the House —or any other House —might put to him.
Mr. Cook declared that Mr. Denison Miller, Governor of the Com-
monwealth Bank, was a “financial Czar!”
But while the Federal Parliament failed to obtain details,
the transaction had been carried out with a celerity decidedly
“not in accordance with the traditions of strict banking prac-
tice” —from the Conservative standpoint. The Broken Hill
Proprietary Company had succeeded in arranging with the Com-
monwealth Bank to raise the sum of £1,000,000, and the whole
transaction had occupied the space of two hours.
During April Mr. F. M. Dickenson, Secretary to the Broken
Hill Proprietary, received from Mr. G. D. Delprat, General
Manager, a private note from Newcastle. Mr. Delprat stated
that he had been in the Newcastle Club an evening or two before,
and had been chatting with several members, including some of
the Newcastle bank managers. The conversation was not in
serious vein, and in the course of it one of the bank managers
had remarked, “If you want money for finishing your steel works
why don’t you get in touch with the Commonwealth Bank? They
have got plenty of money to invest.”
Mr. Delprat wound up his note to Mr. Dickenson with the
remark that he only sent this on to him for what it was worth.
The Secretary of the Proprietary, however, considered that it
was worth looking into. The Commonwealth Bank was reported
to have plenty of money. So he turned up the Act under which
the bank had been formed, and he found from it that the Gover-
nor’s powers were practically unlimited, or at least wide enough
to cover such a transaction. Still Mr. Dickenson was not pre-
pared to suggest that a direct representative of the Proprietary
should approach the Commonwealth Bank. It would never do
at that stage of the Proprietary’s undertaking at Newcastle for
it to become known that the company had applied for a loan from
the Commonwealth Bank and had been turned down—allowing
that the Governor of the Commonwealth Bank refused the appli-
cation.


Dropping into the Athenaeum Club one evening, having the
Act in his pocket, Mr. Dickenson fell into conversation with Mr.
E. J. B. Nunn, of the firm of Nunn, Smith and Jefferson. Mr.
Nunn chancing to remark on the amount that was being spent by
the Proprietary on the Newcastle Steel Works, Mr. Dickenson
indicated to him that the company wanted more money for the
purpose—another £1,000,000 —but had not yet settled how it was
to be obtained. Mr. Delprat had told him that he had heard that
the Commonwealth Bank had plenty of money. What did Mr.
Nunn think of the Proprietary’s going to the Commonwealth
Bank for its £1,000,000? “Well at least there is no harm in
trying,” Mr. Nunn observed. “But the trouble is that we would
not like to apply personally,” was the reply; “it would never do
to have a refusal.” “I know the Melbourne Manager, Mr. M.
B. Young,” said Mr. Nunn. “I have no objection to interview-
ing him if you wish.” The suggestion was assented to, but it was
impressed upon Mr. Nunn that he must not mention the appli-
cant or security during his conversation with Mr. Young. So on
the following morning (Ist May) Mr. Nunn waited on Mr. Young,
and, holding in view Mr. Dickenson’s wish, chatted a little on
general matters, adding at last, “But I have come to see you on
business.” “What do you want?” asked Mr. Young. Mr. Nunn
told him, “I want a million.” Taking this as a joke, Mr. Young
enquired, “Oh, is that all?” Mr. Nunn assured him that he was
perfectly serious, “and,” he said, “have you got the money? I
can offer you double the security.” The Melbourne Manager
asking for the name, Mr. Nunn replied that he was not yet at
liberty to disclose it. “But it is a splendid security,” he empha-
sised: “double the money.” Mr. Nunn pressing for an answer,
Mr. Young said he “thought the money might be got.” It was
arranged finally that Mr. Nunn should obtain permission to dis-
close the name of the security. The interview had resolved itself
into a keen battle of wits —Mr. Nunn endeavouring to determine
whether the Commonwealth Bank was likely to entertain the pro-
posal; Mr. Young to ascertain the weight and nature of the
security.


From the Commonwealth Bank Mr. Nunn hurried off in
search of Mr. Dickenson at the Proprietary’s office; had him sum-
moned from a board meeting, and, putting the position to him,
asked permission to disclose the security, which was given. Back
went Mr. Nunn to Mr. Young and announced the name. Mr.
Young admitted that he thought the proposal “might be enter-
tained.” As Mr. Denison Miller, the Governor, was himself in
Melbourne, he would confer with him. Mr. Nunn left for lunch, and
while he was there a message came to him from the Commonwealth
Bank asking him to meet Mr. Denison Miller —with one of the
Directors and the Secretary of the Broken Hill Proprietary at
2.30—n0t later, as the Governor was compelled to leave that after-
noon for Sydney. Mr. Nunn left his lunch and hurried off in
search of Mr. Dickenson—who was not to be found. At the last
moment Mr. Dickenson appeared in his office, where Mr. Nunn
was waiting impatiently, and the two hurried off to the Common-
wealth Bank. It was too late then to find one of the directors.
The matter was fully discussed in their interview with Mr. Deni-
son Miller and Mr. Young, and the Governor finally announced
that he would entertain the application.
The Broken Hill Proprietary had provided for its £1,000,000
within two hours.


CHAPTER XLIII.
THE OPENING OF THE STEEL WORKS (1915).
THE first shipment of ore from Hummock Hill for Newcastle
was landed on Bth January, 1915. The vessel which car-
ried this first load to be passed over the system of conveyor
belts down the long wharf at the Port was the “Emerald Wings,”
tramp steamer (which has since been purchased by the company
and re-named “Iron Baron”), with a carrying capacity of 5500
tons. The shipment consisted of 2800 tons of ore from Iron
Knob. Loading commenced at six o’clock in the morning. The
plant was set in motion, and worked without stay or fault. The
©re swept on in a stream from section to section of the belt till,
arriving at the end of the jetty, it poured in a roaring cataract
down the chute into the ship’s hold. The red dust blew up in
clouds, staining the waters of the gulf as with blood —symbolic,
for from the Iron Port, week by week since the January morning
of the first shipment, has poured in a ceaseless stream the ore
which is the very red life-blood of the steel works at Newcastle
—for the works which through the months of war rolled out rails
for the line to link the continent from end to end.
The opening of the steel works at Newcastle was memorable
in the history of the Broken Hill Proprietary—memorable, too,
in the story of the Commonwealth. The works were opened
officially on Wednesday, 2nd June, 1915, by Sir Ronald Munro
Ferguson, the Governor-General. The assemblage on this occa-
sion included many prominent figures in the public life of the
Commonwealth, The Governor-General was accompanied by Sir


Gerald Strickland, Governor of New South Wales, and Sir Wil-
liam Ellison Macartney, Governor of Tasmania. Federal Minis-
ters, Ministers from the several States, representatives of the
Broken Hill mining companies, of the public services, of the com-
mercial, financial and political life of Australia figured in a
notable company of guests. Arriving at Newcastle by a special
train from Sydney, the party were welcomed by Mr. W. C.
Graham, New South Wales Minister of Agriculture, Alderman
R. G. Kilgour, Mayor of Newcastle, and Mr. F. M. Dickenson,
Secretary of the Proprietary. Four steamers conveyed the mem-
bers of the party from the wharf at Newcastle to the new wharf
at Port Waratah. On arrival the guests were welcomed by the
Hon. D. E. Mcßryde, M.L.C. (Victoria), as Chairman of Direc-
tors of the Proprietary, and his colleagues on the hoard, Mr.
Delprat, General Manager, and Mr. Baker, Manager of the Steel
Works. Streamers of bunting flew from high points about the
works; the whirr of machinery told that the great enterprise
which had grown up out of the mangrove swamps in those two
years had sprung into a strident, vigorous life.
The guests assembled finally in the mills for the official decla-
ration of the opening of the steel works. To the Governor-
General and his party and the directors was assigned the plat-
form overlooking the works.
“The plant you have seen to-day,” said the Chairman of
Directors, “is only the first section of what we hope will be one
of the largest undertakings in the Commonwealth. We hope that
these works will he the means of giving a large amount of employ-
ment, and at the some time assist in making the Commonwealth
independent of other countries for its supplies of iron and steel
requirements.”
“These works,” said the Governor-General, declaring the
works open, “are the crowning achievement of a great under-
taking with ramifications in many States of the Commonwealth.
It is an enterprise in which all Australia is interested. Its raw
material is drawn from mines in many parts of the country, and


FIRST SHIPMEN T OF IRONSTONE FRO M HUM MOCK HILL TO NEWCASTLE 1915.


its product will make the railways of the continent independent
of extraneous foreign supplies. The vastness of the installation
we have visited testifies to the mineral resources of Australia, and
to the confidence felt by men of business and capital in the stabi-
lity of the country and in its prospects of development. The
works contain the most up-to-date machinery and the latest
improvements in the process of manufacture, all of which is so
essential to success in production and to good conditions of
employment. We may rest satisfied that all developments and
extensions considered necessary by the staff of the great concern
will be carried out, and that the steel products of the Newcastle
works will achieve a world-wide reputation. We desire to see all
our industries —agricultural, mining and manufacturing—pro-
gressing in equal measure, so that this widespread and aspiring
community may speedily become the most secure and powerful
nation in the southern seas.”
The Governor-General declared the works open. Amid the
cheering the mills awoke to life. From the soaking pits the great
pincers, propelled forward by the overhead crane, plucked up an
ingot of glowing metal and laid it on the platform. The glowing
mass was shot forward to pass through the mills until, as a slim
steel rail, it formed the “official first-born” of the Newcastle
Steel Works.
The construction of the steel works and the development of
the iron and limestone supplies, Mr. Mcßryde announced at the
official luncheon, had cost the Broken Hill Proprietary close on
£1,500,000. “It is now some years,” he said, “since the erection
of these works was first contemplated. To-day we see them in
operation. No one is better pleased than the directors, knowing
that they have done something that will be of lasting benefit to
what will ultimately be one of the great nations of the world.”
“Our hosts of to-day,” said the Governor-General, “are
doing national service. Germany, the most strongly organised
nation for war or for industry, seems to consider herself to have
a monopoly in blood and iron. The lads of the Southern Cross,
whether at Newcastle or at Gallipoli, are dissipating that fiction.”
R


Before each of the guests at the official luncheon had been
placed as a souvenir a section of the first steel rail turned out
from the Newcastle works. The first rail was manufactured on
Saturday, 24th April, 1915. The blast furnace was put into com-
mission by Bth March, and so soon as a stock of pig iron was
established two of the open hearth steel furnaces commenced work.
The blooming mills came into operation on 9th April, and the
rolling of billets and blooms in execution of the first orders was
at once proceeded with. By 27th August the Newcastle works
produced 36,214 tons of pig iron, from which were made 17,134
tons of billets and blooms and 11,574 tons of steel rails.
The steel works had entered on activities, accelerated and
enhanced in value by the war, which, but for the energy displayed
in the construction of the great plant, must have imperilled the
success of the Broken Hill Proprietary’s new adventure.


OPENING OF STEEL WORKS, NEWCASTLE, 2ND JUNE, 1915. —THE OFFICIAL LUNCHEON.


CHAPTER XLIV.
THE SHIP-BUILDING SCHEME (1917-18).
THE activities of the Newcastle steel works during the war
years were devoted largely to the production of steel rails
for the Federal and the State Governments. At the start
of 1918 the Broken Hill Proprietary was producing plates for
the ships to be constructed under the Federal Government’s ship-
building scheme.
By the time when Mr. W. M. Hughes, Prime Minister of
the Commonwealth, was first emphasising the significance to Aus-
tralia of the shortage of shipping, the Board of Directors of the
Proprietary was contemplating the engagement of the company
in ship-building. The board had in view not only the opportunity
offered to the company, but the national service resulting from
the consummation of such a scheme. All the steel material
required for the purpose could be provided by the Newcastle
works. The New South Wales Government owned engineering
and ship-building yards near at hand —on Walsh Island. Early
in May, 1917, the board entered into negotiations with the Hob
man Ministry for the acquisition of the yards. The Holman
Ministry was prepared to entertain the proposals, and the terms
of an arrangement for the Proprietary to take over the ship-
yards was agreed on by the parties. The board had gone so far
as to engage an expert to assume charge of its new enterprise.
Everything had been put into train, when Mr. Hughes objected.
By the Prime Minister’s urgent request the General Manager
of the Proprietary conferred with him. The result was that the


Proprietary’s project had to be abandoned. Not the Proprie-
tary, though fully equipped for building the ships so sorely
needed by the Empire, hut the Federal Government was to build
ships. So the General Manager wrote the following letter on
behalf of the Proprietary to the Premier of New South Wales: —
“12th February, 1918.
“Dear Sir, —I had an interview to-day with the Prime
Minister, Mr. Hughes, who explained to me that if our com-
pany started building ships simultaneously with the Federal
Government our doing so would greatly embarrass the
Federal Government and interfere with the success of their
ship-building programme.
“Nothing is further from the wish of my board than
that they should interfere in any way with the Federal
Government’s programme, and under the circumstances the
Board consider it wise and patriotic to withdraw from the
negotiations which have been going on between us in con-
nection with Walsh Island.
“The board do this with regret, but are urged to take
this step by a desire to do everything possible to assist the
Prime Minister on the lines which he has laid down.”
The Proprietary, however, engaged readily in the rolling of
the ship plates required by the Federal Government. By January,
1918, the equipment for producing plates was completed, and
plates had been rolled with good results. But in the meantime
the Proprietary had entered into contracts with the Federal and
the State Governments and private firms for the supply of rails
and other steel products. Between February and August, 1915,
the contracts represented over 106,000 tons, and to the end of
October contracts for close on another 50,000 tons were made. The
quality of the steel produced fulfilled the anticipations formed on
the first consideration of the Newcastle project. On the formation
of the Federal Munitions Committee early in August, 1915, the
Broken Hill Proprietary entered into negotiations with the Com-


STOCK OF MUNITION STEEL, 1916.


mittee regarding the manufacture of munitions on the specifica-
tions of the Imperial Government. As a result the Proprietary
was encouraged to engage in the preparation of steel for supply-
ing the Australian firms which had entered into contracts to make
shell bodies. Sample bars were shipped by the Proprietary to
London for testing, and the high opinion expressed by Australian
contractors of the quality of the shell steel produced was indorsed
by the Imperial authorities. The Proprietary was asked accord-
ingly to forward to England 500 tons of 3|-inch shell steel. The
Imperial Government purchased 1500 tons, and subsequently
ordered 30,000 tons of shell steel, steel rails and fishplates.
To meet the contracts the Proprietary found it necessary to
increase considerably the original plant. At the outset the pro-
duction of pig iron by the blast furnace was too extensive for
the three open hearth steel furnaces, and four additional furnaces
were accordingly installed. An 18-inch mill for rolling structural
steel and light rails, and 12-inch and 8-inch mills for small size
bars, and a steel foundry to produce the heavy castings for new
plant at the works were added to the works. The demand for
the output of steel increased as the possibilities of oversea ship-
ments diminished with the reduction of tonnage during the sub-
marine campaign. The Board of Directors approved accordingly
bf the erection of a second blast furnace with its set of heating
stoves. None the less—although at first the demand exceeded the
output from the steel works —the supplies enabled the Federal
Government to complete its transcontinental line and the State
Governments to proceed with their programmes of construction
and repair. With the financial stringency the State programmes
were gradually slackened off; but the fact that steel rails were
available from Newcastle at rates far cheaper than must have
ruled for imported rails assisted the States in carrying the con-
struction of important developmental lines to completion. The
Newcastle steel works became accordingly an all-important indus-
trial factor. Not only did they provide within themselves for
the employment of over 3000 men, but their production of steel


rails and structural steel prevented the discontinuance of public
and private undertakings, and a corresponding continuance of
employment for workers in all of the States. Yet the recurrence
of industrial troubles throughout the years of war had the effect
at intervals of throwing the vast costly plant out of gear, and
reducing accordingly the yearly output of steel products.
To Newcastle itself the steel works were all-important. New-
castle had suffered heavily from the war, through the withdrawal
of oversea freight and the cessation of coal loading during the
disastrous strikes in 1916 and 1917. But while the port became
practically emptied of shipping, and the blight of war and indus-
trial trouble fell upon it, across the water at Waratah was grow-
ing up a vast industrial undertaking guaranteeing employment
to hundreds of men, and, through its attraction of shipping and
its weekly distribution of wages, tiding the commercial interests
of Newcastle over the worst depression.
The continuous development of the Newcastle steel works
was rendered necessary to keep pace with the ever-increasing
demand for supplies for Australian public works, rails for the
lines and steel plates for the ship-building programme, as impor-
tations diminished with the diminishing supply of oversea ship-
ping. During 1917-18 the Board of Directors undertook the
reconstruction of the company, with the purpose of providing
fresh capital for development. In the war years the enterprise
had become of such national importance that the British Treasury
officials and the Federal Treasurer readily sanctioned a new issue
of shares on lines involving reconstruction, and aimed at raising
£637,000, to be employed in extension of the steel works. Up to
May, 1919, £2,845,400 had been spent on the Newcastle scheme,
and of this amount there was outstanding £901,700, obtained on
the company’s six per cent, debentures. The balance, £1,943,700,
minus £480,000 raised on the share issue of 1913, had been pro-
vided by the Broken Hill Proprietary, out of its financial
resources. The reconstruction scheme provided for raising the
£637,988 by issuing the 318,994 unissued shares (of the authorised


BLOOM NILL.


capital of £600,000 in 1,500,000 shares of 8/- each) at 40/- per
share.
At a meeting of shareholders held in Melbourne on 10th June,
1918, it was resolved that the 318,994 shares should be offered at
40/- per share to members of the company in proportion to the
numbers of shares held by them, and that any shares not so allotted
should be disposed of by the directors on such terms and to such
persons as they considered expedient in the interests of the com-
pany. Further, it was resolved that the original authorised capi-
tal of the company should be increased from £600,000 in 1,500,000
original shares of 8/- each to £3,000,000, by the creation of
1.500.000 additional shares of 12/- each and 1,500,000 additional
shares of £1 each. In addition it was resolved that after the
issue of the 318,994 shares, and with the purpose of capitalising
the sum of £900,000, part of the amount standing to the credit
of the company’s reserve fund —consisting of undistributed
income accumulated before Ist July, 1914 —the directors should
be authorised to distribute this sum by declaring a bonus of 12/-
per share on the original 1,500,000 shares of 8/- each. These
original 1,500,000 shares of 8/- and the additional 1,500,000 12/-
shares were to be so consolidated as to form 1,500,000 £1 shares.
On the consolidation being effected the capital of the company
consisted of 1,500,000 issued fully paid up shares of £1 and
1.500.000 unissued shares of £1 each. Following this consolida-
tion, and with the purpose of capitalising a further sum of
£600,000 to the credit of the company’s reserve fund, the direc-
tors were authorised to distribute the sum by declaring a bonus
of 20/- for every 2J shares of 1,500,000 issued and fully paid up
shares of £1 each, distributing among members in payment of
the bonus 600,000 of the unissued £1 shares in the company as
fully paid up to £l.
The issue and the recapitalisation scheme met with the full
approval of shareholders, and Mr. Bowes Kelly, Chairman of
Directors, in presiding at the meeting, observed that, according
to cable advice from the Proprietary’s London office, the scheme


had been favourably received by English shareholders. And, he
added, as an Australian he was proud that it had fallen to the
lot of the Broken Hill Proprietary to establish the Newcastle
steel works. Although the mine on Broken Hill was a huge
silver lead mine, it was a mole hill compared with the Iron Knob.


CHAPTER XLV.
THE IRON ORE (1919).
THE Iron Knob is situated at a distance of 41 miles west-
south-west of Port Augusta. “The outcrop of ore,” Mr.
H. Y. L. Brown, Government Geologist of South Australia,
reported in 1910, “extends for a distance of 20 chains. A quarry
has been opened at each end; from the north quarry 10,000 tons of
ore have been raised and shipped, and from the south quarry 80,000
tons. At the south quarry the workings are about 100 feet high
at the face and a width of 150 feet at the bottom. The ore is
chiefly hematite. I estimate the quantity in sight above the
level of the south quarry at 1,000,000 tons. Average analyses of
the ore shows that it contains 68.5 per cent, iron, 2.3 per cent, silica
and no phosphorous or sulphur. The Iron Monarch deposit forms
a capping on a hill, which rises to a height of 600 to 700 feet above
the surrounding plain country. It covers an area approximately
of fifty acres, and has an estimated thickness of from 100 to 150
feet; this thickness is probably exceeded in places. On the sur-
face the ore contains manganese, which, however, may be con-
tinuous in depth. Taking the bed to average 100 feet in thick-
ness, I estimate that it contains 20,000,000 tons of ore. In addi-
tion large quantities of iron ore denuded from the bed are scat-
tered over the adjacent country. Analyses of the ore showed —
(1) Iron, 54.57 per cent.; manganese, 12.47 per cent.; and silica,
1.2 per cent.; (2) iron, 52 per cent.; manganese, 15 per cent.;
silica, etc., 2.3 per cent. At the Iron Knob and the Iron Monarch,
which may be considered as one deposit, there is exposed a vast


quantity of high-grade iron ore and manganic iron in sight, which
I estimate at 21,000,000 tons, and its magnitude and importance
are so far unequalled in Australasia.”
The Iron Monarch and the Iron Knob to-day form the very
heart of the Broken Hill Proprietary’s iron and steel industry.
On the flat below the Monarch a new settlement has grown up;
on a slope about the base of the Iron Knob stands the older settle-
ment, dating from the days when the supply of ironstone flux
for the Port Pirie smelters was obtained from their outcrop. At
Hummock Hill, as the port of shipment of ore for Newcastle, the
settlement consists chiefly of the white houses built by the Broken
Hill Proprietary for the staff of officers and the married men
among the operatives, and the canvas camp in which the single
men are quartered; but it comprises, too, its stores, its hotel and
its post office. The Hummock rises immediately above the plant
and the long red wharf for the despatch of ore—a dull, iron-
coloured hill lightly scrubbed with green brush. The iron town
overlooks the expanse of Spencer’s Gulf. The scene has a rich
beauty on a clear summer’s day. Green mangroves belt the
sands; the beach descends so gradually into the sea that the shal-
lows are painted with regular lines of colour, tone by tone, from
gold to deep green. On a still summer’s day the gulf is a vast
sheet of blue metal, studded with gems of white sunlight. The
currents seem to play across it as the blue from burnished bronze.
The blaze of the summer gives to blue gulf and ochre-red and
green shore an almost tropical beauty. Through the fierce heat
of summer and the chill and storm of winter the activities on iron
outcrop and at iron port are unceasing.
Between Port Pirie and the port of Hummock Hill ply
through the week the Adelaide Steamship Company’s small,
powerful tug-boats. The tug-boats, leaving the wharf at Port
Pirie about every second day, convey passengers, mails and stores
for the Iron Port, haul over barges with new plant for the ever-
developing works, and return with the barges loaded with iron-
stone for the smelters. The visitor to the Iron Port by a tug


OUTCROP, NORTHERN PORTION OF IRON MONARCH.


leaving early on a clear summer’s morning receives the most vivid
impression of the heat, the colour, the burning activities of Hum-
mock Hill and Iron Knob.
Port Pirie is reeking with heat. The air is burdened with
the moisture sucked up from the mangrove swamps on which the
port, with its long wharves, its smelters, its coal-handling plant,
its great buildings, has grown up. The tug-boat lies under the
wharf, yet in the full glare of the sun. The inlet from the gulf is
blue and dazzling with light; the mangroves from the stained
mud flats and sands are a low wall of green; in the distance, over
swamp, over burnt paddocks and blackened bush and low arid
hills, the Flinders Range goes inland, mile on mile. The range
resembles a mass of blue-grey steel —mountain stacked against
mountain with monotonous regularity. Casting off from the
wharf, the tug-boat slips down the channel by which the great
ships make to and from the famous port out on to the gulf—cobalt
gulf and cobalt sky.
Mount Laura, far off in blue mist, marks the shore for which
the tug-boat is making. Port Pirie and the smoke of its smelters
fade out astern and are lost in the haze of heat. To the right
appear dimly Port Germain, its houses and its long pier. The
port of Hummock Hill is 28 miles from Port Pirie, and the tug-
boat should be tied up alongside the red wharf by noon; but it
makes first for Backy Bay, where a jetty has been constructed
so that firewood may be loaded for Port Pirie. The shores about
Backy Bay are arid, waterless and covered only with light brush
and blue bush; but three miles inland stretches the mallee scrub
from which the firewood is cut, to be hauled down by bullock
teams to the jetty. The water supply is pumped from the tank
on the tug-boat into the tanks on the jetty.
Prom Backy Bay the tug-boat makes abowt Point Lowly
light and beacon for Hummock Hill, on the western shore of the
gulf. It passes by iron-coloured shores and by yellow beaches
fringed with mangroves. Over the gulf play dark blue copperous
currents. Porpoises leap from the waters. White clouds of
gulls follow the tug-boat.


The first sight of Hummock Hill is caught under a cloud
of grey smoke from a high black stack. The brown hill shapes
beyond the stack. Under the smoke, as the tug-boat draws in, the
iron red wharf is seen projecting into the sea. Iron dust is blown
out above the crushers in a red cloud. The port is clear soon,
with its long wharf, its smoking stack, and the red dust above
its plant, and its white dwellings gleaming in the sunlight. Far
up the coast Mount Laura breaks from the dull scrub. Sands
and shallows are like a stained glass. Wharf and the nearest
buildings are painted rust red with iron dust. The tug ties up
at the foot of a high flight of red steps, and the red steps lead up
to a long red platform. A big crane awaits the unloading of
stores and machinery from the barges, and for the full length of
this highest platform of the wharf —above the conveyor belts —
rails are laid, so that supplies may be drawn on trucks hauled
by horses into the works or the town. For the full 2400 feet of
this wharf the crushed ore is swept on the conveyor belts through
the chute at the end directly into the ship’s hold to be taken to
Newcastle. Everything is painted with red dust; red dust is
underfoot —and red sand from the works into the outskirts of the
white town. The offices of the Broken Hill Proprietary lie
between the railroad, laid out on high earthworks, and the beach.
Seaward all is yellow, green and blue; shorewards all but the
white painted iron dwellings, iron red and copper green. The
humidity of Port Pirie is in the air, and the metallic clangour
of the crushers, the dull mutter of plant, the crash of a train of
trucks shunted over the bins recall its activities.
In the establishment of the settlements at Hummock Hill
and the Iron Knob the Broken Hill Proprietary has endeavoured,
by the construction of offices, dwellings and mess rooms, to ensure
the comfort of its staffs. The houses are soundly built of iron and
shaded by wide verandahs. Each has its own allotment of ground,
but the comparative shortage of water and visitations of the
rabbit plague prevent the successful cultivation of gardens.
Hummock Hill has its institute and recreation hall —a fine build


ing with library and concert room and screen for the display of
bioscope films, which are shown every Saturday night. The
meals are served in a big mess room, with kitchen range and cool
storage, provided through the medium of thatched, wire double
buildings, attached. Over Hummock Hill the sand dunes descend
to a long stretch of beach shelving gradually into deep water,
which forms the bathing place of the community. On the beach
turns out on a summer evening all Hummock Hill for surf
bathing.
At early morning the trains of trucks to be loaded with iron-
stone from the bins below the quarries on the Iron Monarch and
the Iron Knob pass out from Hummock Hill. The railroad moves
in a practically straight line over 34 miles of red burnt country,
going up by easy grade to a height of 550 feet below the Iron
Monarch and the Iron Knob. The track passes in full view to
the passenger of Mount Laura, Mount Young and the Middle-
back Range, one of the sections of the broken Gawler Ranges.
Sand and ironstone, mulga and scrub and stunted oak, myall,
acres of salt-bush lend to the country a marked resemblance to
the district about the Broken Hill. After a journey occupying
over two hours the train reaches the new settlement of white
houses on the flat under the Iron Knob—a shattered scarp of
iron, black-capped, and red with ironstone. The massive, shape-
less Iron Monarch—dull green, red, black —rises high above
the Iron Knob. From the quarry face far up the side of the
mountain men come scurrying and vanish from sight down the
track. Soon up the quarry face starts a cloud of red dust, and
the boom of the explosion and the roar of ironstone tom by the
blast from the cliff thunder down. Red pillars of iron dust shut
out now the quarry face; the roar of blasting is like a cannonade.
The pillars of iron dust —from the first quarry and from a quarry
about the Iron Monarch’s base —might be pillars of fire. For
safety the work of blasting is carried out daily during the lunch
and the dinner hours.
The settlement about the rail-head at Iron Knob has been


laid out on a similar plan to that adopted at Hummock Hill.
The dry heat of the summer is less burdensome to the residents
than the humidity of Hummock Hill, but, thus far from the sea,
the Iron Knob settlement lacks the advantage of the bathing
place. It has not even a creek within easy reach, and, as yet, the
whole question of the water supply forms its main problem. The
supply is largely dependent on surface flow into storage dams
down on the flat. Water from the condensers at Hummock Hill
is brought up in railway tanks to supplement the supply for
drinking, and water for the horses and for concrete mixing is led
in by gravitation from Tassie Creek, nine miles off. After the
rains the water flows down this creek through a deep ravine, and
at this point wells have been sunk and two windmills erected to
pump the water into a concrete tank, from which it is sent on
to Iron Knob. The rains seem to pass by Iron Knob and to break
far away on Middlehack or on Coruma Hills. In the hope of
striking water bores are being sunk in the flat, hut at the depth
of 350 feet at the first reached only saline water. Round the
flank of the Iron Knob the older settlement perches on a low
hill and slope, and thence the salt-hush plains extend to the hills
above Coruma station, A red track marks the way to Port
Augusta.
Passing through the white settlement the railroad curves out
under the ore bin below the base of “C” quarry on the Iron
Knob. This bin has a capacity of 400 tons and is fitted with nine
chutes, through which the ore is run down into the trucks. Over
the heavy platform of timber above the bin a double railroad is laid
with forty-pound rails and leads up to the quarry. Down the
“full” track thunder the loaded trucks at the end of a 800 feet
cable, hauling up by their weight the empty trucks from bin to
quarry. Prom this main working line fifteen rail tracks lead
in across the rocky platform to the quarry face. The ore is loaded
by hand labour into the trucks—steel hopper trucks with bottom
discharge doors, capable each of carrying six tons of ironstone.
Horses are employed to shunt the loaded trucks from the face


SITE OF STEEL WORKS, MARCH, 1914.


out to the main incline plat, from which the load is run down
to the bin. A set of powerful winding (double) drums is keyed
to the winding shaft; post brakes are fitted to both drums, and
foot brake levers, with emergency screw brakes strong enough to
stop the full load at any point down the incline. The ropes for
the drums are woven of plough steel with six strands of seven
wires—to one and a half-inch diameter. A truck, when loaded
with ore, is hauled out from the face of the quarry to the brow
of the incline, where it is held by safety blocks set under the
wheels, until the hook on the end of the steel rope is attached.
The brake on the drum is applied when the truck reaches the
brow of the incline, and when the man in charge of the bin gives
the signal that the full track is clear the truck is allowed to shoot
down to the bins.
The face of quarry “C,” which is capable of an output of
800 tons of ore a day, goes up to a height of 100 feet. To get out
the ore from the quarries blasting holes are first bored with ham-
mer and hand drill, the holes then charged with powder and gelig-
nite, and the blast brings down as much as 1000 tons of heavy
rock and fines. The large rocks are reduced to convenient sizes
by blistering with gelignite, and the broken stone is loaded with
shovels into trucks.
Against the burning face of ore on this summer afternoon
men are labouring with pick and shovel and hand drill. The
sweating skin and the clothes of every man are stained red with
iron. The quarry face is red and black and grey, like burnt ashes,
to the black outcrop, to which a rough track leads through
tumbled burnished blocks of ironstone. From the height are
revealed plains of red sand, salt bush, blue bush, scrub, low hills
and distant ranges. To the slope below clings the older settle-
ment. The hills, to which the plains roll slowly up, are painted a
curious vivid green, as if rain falling on a rich soil had produced
luxurious verdure. The track leads down into the hollow, where,
sweating at the forge, the blacksmiths point the drills for the
quarries. Thence the track climbs the rocky hill and descends


into a rocky gully. Mulga and oak grow stunted; the summer
sun burns down; the broken, burnished ironstone and the schist
are glistening. All is dazzling, shadeless, aflame with a red heat;
no breath of wind brings coolness.
The track goes up by the empty “D” quarry, worked once
for fluxing for the Port Pirie smelters. The “Chinamen” of the
old days—platforms of rock and timber, from which the ore was
tipped into drays to be hauled down to the Port—yet remain.
Thence the burning track goes down abruptly to the platform
before quarry “B” on the Iron Monarch, from which the blast-
ing at noon has tom down hundreds of tons of ore. Black man-
ganiferous ore is won from the south end of the quarry and red
ironstone from the north, so that the workers at the face are
stained, some black as coal lumpers, and others as red as the
labourers at the face of quarry “C,” back on the Iron Knob.
Nineteen rail trucks run into quarry “B,” and as many into
quarry “A” —a half-mile further round the flanks of the Mon-
arch. Prom quarry “B” the output of ore is 800 tons a day, and
from quarry “A” 1000 tons. Prom the platforms before the
quarries trucks of ore, worked on the principles of the system
at quarry “C,” are shot down the inclines, converging at the
plat of the main incline. Thence the trucks are lowered in sets
of four to the storage bins, which at present have a capacity of
5000 tons.
Quarry “A” is the face most favoured through the summer
by the labourers in the employment of the Broken Hill Proprie-
tary Co., for the cool breezes blow regularly on the height. Out
of this fine open face are cut patches of china-white kaolin, veined
with iron in colours from gold to purple. This soft kaolin is
shaped by the workers into pipe bowls, paper weights and seals.
Below the platform before the quarry green hills go up from
the gully, and the distant mountains are blue through haze. Prom
the flat the railroad strikes in a straight red line through the thin
scrub towards Hummock Hill.
In order to increase the output from the quarries, in proper-


HUMMOCK HIL L JETTY.


tion to the demands of the Newcastle steel works, new plant has
been installed to work the quarries on the Iron Monarch. Below
the quarries a concrete building has been erected as the power
house for the new air compressor plant, which has a capacity
of 2000 cubic feet per hour. This plant delivers into a receiver
at the power house, and a 5-inch main connects with a second
receiver at the plat, on which the tracks down the inclines from
“A” and “B” quarries converge. From the second receiver the
air is carried through 4-inch mains to the crown of the Monarch
at a distance of about 300 feet behind the faces, and thence l|-inch
distributing pipes lead to the compressed air drills, which have
replaced the hand drills.
A 3-inch water main has been carried from power house to
plat, and the water is pumped by a duplex air pump into a rein-
forced concrete tank of 4000 gallons capacity, pumped thence to
another 4000 gallon concrete tank on the height of the Iron Mon-
arch, and led down by 2-inch mains to the top of the quarries.
This water is distributed to the drills by J-inch pipes.
Through the summer conditions at the Iron Knob settlements
are arduous; but the fine dry air, and the the principles on which
the Broken Hill Proprietary has laid out the buildings, ensure
the health of the community. The work of getting out the iron
ore proceeds with the same tireless energy and precision as mark
the entire manufacture of iron and steel at the Proprietary’s
works.
&


CHAPTER XLVI.
THE SHIPMENT OF THE ORE (1919).
THE railhead at the Iron Knob touches the verge of Outback.
To it come the camel trains with the wool packs; to it
wool is hauled in by donkeys and bullock teams —from
stations as far as 200 miles beyond Iron Knob. The wool is
shipped from Hummock Hill to Port Pirie.
The train which has come up from Hummock Hill in the
summer morning is ready loaded by evening for return to the
Iron Port. Into its trucks have been loaded from the bins 350
tons of ore; a few trucks are loaded with wool and sheepskins.
The train starts off with a crash along the red track —making back
for Hummock Hill. The sun is dipping an iron red beyond the far
ranges. The Middleback is dyed purple, and a haze of violet hue
fallen over scrub and blue bush. Through the burning day and
through the hot evening the country about the Iron Monarch and
the Iron Knob is painted in rich and vivid colours.
The 3ft. Gin. railway at the Iron Knob was laid originally with
40-lb. rails, but, with the increased tractive power rendered neces-
sary to cope with the demand for iron ore for Newcastle, it was
found advisable to relay the track with 80-lb. rails from the steel
works. Powerful Baldwin locomotives haul the train of trucks
between the Iron Knob and Hummock Hill, and lighter English
locomotives are employed for shunting and yard work. The capa-
city of the trucks, which are fitted with bottom discharge doors,
ranges from 10 to 15 tons. At a distance of one mile from Hum-
mock Hill the loaded train is passed over the weighbridge and


ORE BRIDGES AT NEWCASTLE FO R DISCHARGING IRONSTONE.


weighed in. Finally the engine is shunted to the rear end of the
train and the trucks are moved over the crusher bins. The red
ore and the black ore torn from the Monarch and the Knob are to
go through the final process, which will reduce them to the sizes
convenient for passing over the long system of conveyor belts and
into the ship’s hold for Newcastle. The train comes out of the
darkness into the blaze of lights at Hummock Hill. Seawards
the only lights are the white flashes from Point Lowly and the
Blinker. But between the crimson lanterns on the six dolphins
beyond the end of the wharf, to catch the swing of a steamer, and
the long chain of electric lamps marking the wharf from end to
end burn the lights of a steamer come into the Iron Port at even-
ing to load ore for Newcastle. High lamps burn over the works;
the crushers are working with clashing jaws; the sweep and rattle
of the conveyor belts go on continuously. The whole process of
crushing and loading is in working. Over the end of the wharf
floats a red cloud of iron dust; above the crusher blows the red
dust, obscuring the glow of electric lamps to a dull burning red.
On this hot summer’s night the full spectacle of the operations
at Hummock Hill is revealed by the electric glow, and the full
realisation of the activities of the Iron Port conveyed.
On reaching the bins at Hummock Hill the train of trucks
is moved over the crusher bin and the ore discharged from the
trucks. Swinging chutes are operated from the bin to feed the
crushers, and the ore passing down passes first over a 7ft. by 3ft.
grizzly with 3|in. openings, which allow the fines to pass first
directly into the receiving bins before each crusher. The crush-
ing plant comprises five Hadfield heavy pattern steel frame jaw
crushers, and each crusher is driven by a 75 h.p. induction motor.
The jaw openings of the crushers are set to 3i inches, and the ore
broken by the clashing jaws sweeps out into the receiving bins,
which have already taken the fines. Under the bins passes a
rubber conveyor belt 26 inches wide and 220 feet between centres,
on to which the crushed ore is discharged from the bins. Passed
on by the belt to the discharging end up to a vertical height of


twelve feet, the ore is poured on to a cross belt of equal dimen-
sions, but running at right angles; and this second belt carries
it on to the conveyor belt to the big storage bin, which is capable
of holding 30,000 tons of ore. Controlled by the automatic trip-
per, the stone is discharged from the belt into the section of the
bin allotted to its particular class of ore. The bin is divided into
three sections—one, at the south end, for the reception of the
rough manganiferous ore; the second for the fine manganiferous;
and the third, and by far the largest section, for crushed red iron-
stone. Under this storage—the vertical sides of which are rein-
forced with concrete walls and the flooring with thick Dorman
Long steel troughing—is a gallery, into which discharge chutes
—each capable of discharging 1400 tons of ore per hour —descend
at intervals of 10 feet over the 36-inch conveyor belt, which has
a length of 540 feet between centres, and which rises on a series
of light trestles to a height of 35 feet.
Prom the storage bin the ore is passed over a series of seven
36-inch conveyor belts, each discharging from one to the other,
to the end of the long wharf. Each of six sections of the belt is
driven by a 75 h.p, induction motor running at 485 revolutions
a minute, and each is elevated at the discharge end to an angle
of 15 degrees. The ore flows down through steel chutes from
one section of the belt to the next, until it reaches the last section
of the belt, from which it is shot down on to a short 36-inch belt,
fitted to a steel beam, to which a 25 h.p. driving motor is attached.
The beam is moved forward to reach the centre of the ship’s hold,
and a swinging chute 10 feet in length is attached to the end to
be lowered into the hold. And along this system of conveyor belts
the ore is borne and loaded into the steamer at the rate of 900
to 1000 tons an hour. It is automatically weighed as it passes. If
a mishap should occur all this sweep of plant can on an instant
be rendered lifeless. The system of emergency control is fitted
the full length of the wharf and under the storage bins. It com-
prises a pair of separate electric cables starting from the end of
the wharf and terminating on the feeder panel of the main switch


board in the power house, where a magnet is fixed directly under
the tripper of the main switch. Every 200 feet along the jetty
tumbler switches are installed, and in the event of emergency
during loading the tripping of any one of the switches releases
the magnet, which trips the main switch on the feeder panel, thus
cutting oft the electric current and bringing to a standstill the
motors down the wharf.
Originally the power plant providing electric current con-
sisted of a 600 b.h.p. patent locomobile, coupled direct to a 420
k.w.a.c. generator, 525 volts, 50 periods, running at 167 revolu-
tions per minute. This engine is of the cross compound type,
working at 180 lbs. boiler pressure, and a superheat of 300 degrees
to 700 degrees Fahr., or a total heat of 680 degrees to 700 degrees
Fahr. A surface condenser and air pump are attached, and an
induced draft fan assists the boiler output. To the plant has
been added a turbine-driven set (300 k.w.), and the works and
township are lit with electricity from a 25 k.w.d.c. generator, driven
by a 35 h.p. three-cylinder kerosene engine. Large evaporating
plant provides water for the locomotive and power plant boilers.
The plant consists of four steel vessels fitted with copper steam
coils. The steam enters the first vessel at 125 lbs. pressure, and
the sea water is evaporated under a pressure varying from 50 lbs.
to 60 lbs. per square inch. The vapour from the first steel vessel
is used in the next vessel for evaporating more sea water, until
from the fourth vessel the vapour is drawn into a surface con-
denser, condensed and pumped into the storage tank. The plant
produces 12,000 gallons per 24 hours. Live steam is provided
from four Babcock and Wilcox boilers.
The workshops at Hummock Hill are fitted with labour-
saving machines, driven by 25 h.p. electric motors. To overcome
congestion at the yards a new lay-out for workshops and traffic
sidings has been planned. New machine shops, engine sheds, saw
mills and foundry are to be constructed; new sidings to be put
down; a new type of coaling plant installed, into which the coal
from Newcastle will be carried by conveyors, and from which it


will be fed through chutes down to the locomotives as required.
The new lay-out will extend along the line toward Iron Knob, and
will be so planned as to leave ample space for development.
Under the cloud of red dust, under the glow of electric lamps
the task of loading the ore into the steamer for Newcastle pro-
ceeds without check. The ore flows in a stream from section to
section of belt till it falls in a cataract into the ship’s hold. Above
the vessel the red dust is blown like spray. This summer night
the fierce heat is broken. A southerly wind blows up. The
waters surge about the piles, and their blue-black wash is stained
with the crimson light from the dolphin lanterns, and lit with
the white and gold fire of electric lamps along the wharf.


OPEN HEART H STE EL FURNACES, NEWCASTLE.


CHAPTER XLVIL.
THE NEWCASTLE STEEL WORKS (1919).
NONE other among Australian industries has sprung to life
with the magical speed of the Newcastle Steel Works.
None other owns this white-hot energy, this riot of col-
ours, or carries the same sense of power. Yet in stature, in force,
as in years, the steel works are an infant, measured by the scale
of the works planned for the future. Over the space, washed six
years since by the sea and grown with mangroves and weeds,
straddles the giant. Along the foreshore stretch the 1300 feet of
wharf for the accommodation of the steamers which bring the
ore from the Iron Port and load coal for Pirie and steel and iron
for Australian and oversea ports. Over the reclaimed area spread
the steel works—the blast furnaces, the hot air stoves, the iron
and concrete structures which encase the blowing machines, the
open hearth furnaces and the rolling mill, the black coke ovens,
the power plant, the railway yards from which the lines link up
the works. The steel works are supplied with the labour-saving
plant of the great European or American steel works. The opera-
tion of the Newcastle plant gives the impression of titanic forces.
To tend this plant the skilled American steel-workers, engaged
at the start of the enterprise, have drilled an army of Australian
operatives.
Laden with ore from the Iron Port, the steamer ties up at
the red wharf at Port Waratah. The cargo is discharged with
the same precison and economy of time as marked the loading
at Hummock Hill. Down the length of wharf travels an


overhead bridge, and from it electrically-worked grabs descend
into the hold. The open jaws of the grab bite deep into the ore,
and fastens each on a mouthful of six tons. The ascending grab
swings in over the masses of broken ironstone in the ore yard and
disgorges the mouthful on the red pile. The process strikes the
first note of the economy of labour and the precision which
emphasise the modernity of the steel works. The grab is operated
by one man, and the ore in the hold is trimmed with shovels by
a few men to ensure that the jaws fasten on a full six-ton load.
Otherwise the swift discharge of ore from the steamers needs no
hand labour. Stacked by the ore from the Iron Knob is the lime-
stone brought from the Proprietary’s quarries at Devonport, in
Tasmania.
Practically at right angles with the wharf is constructed on
a high steel platform the range of 195 coke ovens, capable of
producing from Newcastle coal over 300,000 tons of coke a year.
Of this number 129 ovens are in operation, 29 nearing comple-
tion, and 37 to be built. The stack for the ovens is of steel, and
goes without stay 160 feet in air. The coke is propelled mechani-
cally from the ovens, which are of the Semet Solway recuperative
type. From one ton of coal are recovered 22 lbs. of sulphate of
ammonia, 7| gallons of tar and 12,800 cubic feet of gas, of which
about 5000 cubic feet are available for power purposes after fur-
nace requirements are met. The gas is passed through con-
densers and taken on to the by-product house, at which ammonia
and tar are extracted. The two saturators, at present installed
where the ammonia content is separated, have a capacity of about
8,000,000 cubic feet of gas per day. The ammonia is used subse-
quently for the manufacture of sulphate of ammonia for agri-
cultural purposes. Part of the gas is employed in heating the
coke ovens and the remainder is distributed through the works.
The tar is used as a fuel for some of the furnaces. The coke,
discharged from the ovens as the doors draw up, moves out in
great squares of glowing coals, and falls crumbling on the plat-
form. Jets of water are played upon it, and the steam goes up


in clouds. Thence it is passed down the inclined bench directly
into the trucks, to be hauled round to the blast furnace.
The diet of the two monster blast furnaces is restricted to
ore, limestone and coke, but the feed for a day totals 1000 tons
each. The feed is conveyed in electrically-run trolleys to the base
of the furnace, drawn up mechanically to the top—a height of
98 feet —and fed in automatically. The Baker Newman rotary
distributor spreads the lumps and fines forming the charge auto-
matically and equally about the receiving bell of the furnace.
The bell is fitted to close tightly the mouth of the furnace, and
when it is lowered the charge slides off into the furnaces. The
furnaces are of the quick-running Pittsburg type, and a stream
of water falls constantly down the exterior to keep the lower
part near the tuyeres at a moderate temperature externally, pre-
serving the inner wall from erosion as the great mass of material
presses down within, and preventing the radiation of heat. The
blast furnaces consist of cylindrical stacks lined with refractory
brick and girt about with a huge belt, from which the tuyeres are
connected with the hot air stoves. In a depth of eight feet at the
base rests the hearth or crucible, which contains the molten metal
and slag. Above this is the melting zone, which has an out-
side diameter of twenty-six feet six inches. The slightly
tapering stack holds the feed, which the intense heat blown
from the stoves resolves gradually into molten iron and slag.
The waste gas from the top of each furnace is taken through
a dry dust catcher, and thence through a Steece and Ford
washer, which removes 95 per cent, of the suspended mat-
ter from the gas. The washed gas is then distributed through
mains to four hot blast stoves of the improved Oowper type. The
stoves are each 21 feet in diameter and rise 90 feet from their
concrete beds. Each is a cylindrical tank of steel containing
pigeon-hole structure of fire brick. The cleansed gas is passed
first into two of the four stoves, heating the bricks within half
an hour to a bright red heat. It is then cut off from these two
stoves and swept into the other pair to repeat the process. Part


of the gas is conducted through an underground flue to the Bab-
cock and Wilcox boilers, which furnish the power for operating
the blast furnace blowing engines. To keep the furnaces run-
ning 35,000 cubic feet of air per minute each is required, and this
is forced by the blowing engines through one of the stoves into
the blast furnaces.
At intervals of four hours through day and night the blast
furnaces are tapped at the base, and each tapping allows 60 to
80 tons of molten metal to run off. The clay hole at the base is
broken in with pointed steel rods. As the rods probe their way
in the gas escapes suddenly with a roar, the molten ore spurts
out in flame, and clouds of gas-weighted smoke rise about the iron
workers. To receive the flow of ore a channel has been cut
through clay on the platform, and a second channel drains off
the molten slag in the opposite direction. Each channel ends in
a steel chute—the one leading into the 45-ton steel ladle lined
with firebrick, which has been rolled up on its truck to receive
the molten iron; the other on the opposite side of the platform
conducting into a slag pot. The slag floating on the top of the
heavy iron is directed down its channel to the slag pot, and the
iron glides in a fiery stream towards the ladle. As the ore pours
down rumblings sound from the ladle; flame and smoke ascend;
sparks shoot out. The slag pot is emptied into some hollow of
the ground while the slag is yet molten and burning with spurt-
ing gases of crimson, blue and gold. The granulated slag forms
a cheap material for filling in low-lying portions of the area on
which the works are built, and portion is supplied to a cement
company.
The brimming ladle of metal is hauled round by rail to the
open hearth furnaces. The metal is either lifted in the ladle by
an immense crane and fed down through a funnel into the fur-
nace or conveyed to the Heyl and Patterson two-strand pig cast-
ing machine. This machine marks an advance on the old iron-
work system of forming a series of pig moulds in sand and run-
ning in the molten iron. The structure resembles a switchback —


ROLLING MILL.


a connected chain of moulds working up hill on a steel grade
somewhat after the manner of the conveyor belts at Hummock
Hill. The rate at which the chain travels is calculated to allow
each mould to receive its filling of molten metal. The moulds of
gradually cooling metal make a ribbon of varied colour as the
chain passes up the track carrying the metal under sprays of
water. It sweeps past two men working in a cloud of steam, and
armed with sharp pointed steel rods to loosen the cooling pigs
from the moulds. Reaching the end of the switchback, the solid
pigs are dropped from the moulds to the ground below, and the
empty moulds return for a fresh filling of metal from the ladle.
The pigs are delivered by the magnets of a ten-ton gantry crane
into the charge boxes, to be conveyed to the steel furnaces. In
conjunction with the open hearth furnaces a cylindrical mixer
capable of receiving 1000 tons of metal for conversion in the fur-
nace to steel was installed during 1917. A flight of iron steps leads
up into the structure which encases the seven furnaces. The fur-
naces are built lengthwise down the middle of the iron shed, and
are supplied with gas forced up through the pigeon-holed brick-
work below. Each furnace is fitted with a steel door, worked by
a lever and pierced by a wide circular opening, lighting with the
glow of the inferno within like a huge fiery yellow eye. Through
these openings a flaming, heaving mass of molten metal with fierce
gases swirling over it is revealed, but the glare is such that the
interior must be viewed only through blue glasses. Sets of rails
run parallel to the furnace for the full length of the platform
and pass out on a viaduct in the open. Over these rails move
up and down the electrically-driven 100-ton cranes, marshalling
under the charge of one man the trains of trucks, which have
been passed out over the viaduct, with their loads of pig and
scrap iron to feed the furnaces. As the cranes thunder up and
down the track electric blue sparks splutter from the wires over-
head. Deliberately a crane ranges the row of trucks into line
with the furnaces, and, as the door draws up and a fierce white
flame breaks forth, it fits a thick rod on to a charge box, propels


it forward into the furnace and, gripping it as if with a flexible
steel hand, swirls it over with a single sweep, tipping the load of
pig and scrap into the fiery brew. Withdrawing the empty charge
box then, it replaces it on its carriage, seizes another load, and
repeats the process until all the feed is delivered into furnaces.
From time to time ferro silicon and ferro manganese are fed in
by hand labour. In due course the heat of the furnace rises to
3000 degrees Fahr.
On the opposite side of the furnaces the platform stands
high above a floor built level with the yards. Rails run along
the ground floor immediately under a lower platform on the oppo-
site side, and along these double rails are hauled the ladles and
the great ingot moulds for receiving the molten steel from the
ladles when the furnaces are tapped. The tapping of a steel
furnace is a spectacle more wonderful than the tapping of the
blast furnace. One of the steel ladles, capable of holding 50 tons,
is hauled immediately below the swinging chute, down which the
molten steel is to pour. To cleanse the interior of the ladle and
remove possible dampness or the generation of gases which might
cause explosion when the steel pours in, jets of gas burning at
intervals along the edge of the higher platform play into the cup.
When the ladle is set in readiness the sweating, blackened men
on the projection of the platform immediately before the brick-
work and the clay of the furnace pierce the barrier with rods,
and from the breach pour instantly roaring gases and a silver
white torrent of molten steel. Down the channel fashioned for
it and through the chute the white stream passes in a flash into
the cup. Instantly a bellow reverberates from the steel cup;
instantly a pillar of fire goes up; a cloud of smoke rises. The
pillar glows with gold and silver lights, and as it mounts higher,
illumining the great gallery from end to end, the smoke assumes
hues from ruby to amethyst. The white fall of steel alone is
unchanging. The pillar of fire goes higher. The spray of molten
steel blown from the chute and cup descends in a myriad of
golden sparks. White clusters of metal hang like stalactites from


chute and ladle brim. Intensity of heat is given oft. The sweat
streams from the steel-workers tending the clear flow of the
metal. The cup is filled to the brim. The steel within is heav-
ing like the lava of a volcano on the verge of eruption. Splashes
of metal are flung out on to the loose sand on the ground floor,
to burn in gold and crimson and blue pools. The foam of steel
makes a dazzling display of shooting golden stars. The roar of
sound is mightier than falling waters.
As the cup brims over, the watcher in the 100-ton travelling
crane overhead noting, the crane moves up above the ladle. Huge
grips descend on to the brim of the cup. Swaying, flaming, rumb-
ling, spilling molten metal in streams to eat into the sand like
lava and shooting forth showers of yellow stars, the brimming
ladle is drawn across the gallery and over the waiting lines of
ingot moulds ranged along the lower platform. By the valve in
the bottom of the cup each mould receives its draught of white
metal till it is filled to the weight of three tons. The train of
filled moulds is then drawn off by rail to the soaking pits. A
casing of steel has formed on the cooling surface of the ingots,
while within each as yet is molten metal. An electrically-driven
stripping machine of 150 tons capacity removes the moulds from
the ingots, and a stiff-leg charging crane lifts the red hot ingots
up into the soaking pits, which form a fresh bath of fire to ensure
solidarity at an even temperature.
In no department of the Newcastle steel works is realisation
of the titanic energy and the flawless operation of the vast plant
more acute than in the long sheds which house the blooming and
rolling mills. With the plant in operation the sheds rever-
berate with terrific sound. From a staging, on which a foreman
and four assistants control with levers the working of the mills,
the whole progress of the ingot from soaking pit to mills may be
observed. Day or night the process is charged with fierce colours
and strident sounds; but the night—when the works are lit
throughout with electric lamps—reveals to the visitor the full
wonder of plant and process. An overhead crane moves along


the soaking pits. Into the open pit dips an immense pair of
pincers. The pincers draw out from the flame a glowing red
and white ingot—much as a dentist’s forceps draw a tooth. Mov-
ing deliberately and precisely, as if the crane itself chose the
spot, the pincers drop their victim on to a track of revolving
rollers resembling a long flat treadmill. Instantly the rollers
propel up the approach table to the cylinders of the blooming mill,
the ingot glowing with angry heat and shrieking as if in acute
agony. Reaching the mill, the ingot is gripped as in an infernal
trap and, under varying pressure, scraped and beaten down amid
a shower of sparks and flying scraps of white metal with a very
chaos of sound. The blooming mill and the engine for driving
it were built by Macintosh, Hemphill and Co., Pittsburg, IJ.S.A.
It is a 35-inch geared mill of massive construction, and is driven
by a twin reversing engine of high power with cylinders 42 inches
by 60 inches. It contains seven pieces of metal in its structure
each weighing 42 tons, in addition to many smaller parts. When
the ingot goes on to the approach table it is 20 inches square and
about five feet long. In fifteen passes the ingot is reduced to a
bloom four or six inches square. Reduced by the mill to requisite
girth, the bloom is cropped at the rough ends and cut into billets
of requisite length by the shears, and is in readiness for the roll-
ing mill. The first billet is run into the 28-ineh rail mill on elec-
trically-driven travelling tables. The other billets are carried
mechanically to a re-heating furnace, close to the shearing
machine, where they are kept at proper temperature for
the rail mill. The mill, which converts the billet into the
completed rail in nine passes, takes ninety seconds for the
entire operation. The mill was supplied by the United Engi-
neering and Foundry Company, of Pittsburg, U.S.A. It is
fed by two travelling tables, and is driven by a twin horizontal
engine with cylinders 42 inches by 60 inches. The engine is of
the reversible type and has no flywheel. Fashioned by the mill’s
powerful wheel to standard form, the rail is swept on to the hot
saw, by which, amid strident, shrieking and crackling discharge


RAILS AND JOISTS FOR AUSTRALIAN AND OTHER, MARKETS.


of dazzling white sparks, it is cut into the required length.
Finally it slides out on to a flat platform alongside its predeces-
sors, which seem politely to move up in order to make room for
it, is straightened, finished off at the ends, and drilled with fishplate
holes. Lifted then by the magnets of the electric hoist, it is borne
off to its place in the stack in readiness for supply to contract.
The two mills are of a capacity to produce 1000 tons of finished
rails a day. The plant in the finishing mill department can
handle the entire output of the open hearth and make of it com-
pleted rails.
Steel for the 18-inch mill is rolled in the blooming mill to
billets of the required size. The billets are then re-heated in a
gas-fired furnace, pushed through to the conveying rolls and fed
into the mill. The mill is of the three-high type, continuous run-
ning, and is served by four tilting tables, which allow the rolling
of two bars at the same time. The finished product consists of
light rails, fishplate bars, light structural steel and billets for the
smaller merchant mills. In the fishplate finishing plant adjoin-
ing this mill bars 30 feet in length are sheared to plate length,
pushed through a horizontal heating furnace, and then fed to a
punching machine. In another machine holes are notched to take
dog spikes; the finished plates pass through an oiling machine
and are tied into bundles for supply to contract. In an adjoining
building the 12-inch and 8-inch mills are installed, and the pro-
cess resembles that of the 18-inch mill. Bars and flats are rolled
—down to f-inch round bars. Power is supplies by two Beiliss
and Morcom high-speed engines. Adjoining the 12-inch and the
8-inch merchant mills is a continuous rod mill, consisting of 16
pairs of rolls. The billets of If inches are passed from the fur-
naces through the rolls till the material is reduced to .220 of one
inch. Two automatic reels coil up this rod, and the coil is dis-
charged into a conveyor, and from the conveyor goes into the
trucks. The mill, supplied by C. S. Cooper, of U.S.A., is driven
by a high-pressure engine. All heavy castings for the new plant


are produced in the steel foundry, and the iron castings in the
direct metal iron foundry.
Cooling water for the works is obtained by centrifugal pumps
supplying two tanks 60 feet high with a capacity of over 100,000
gallons each. The power house for the plant is equipped with a
1000 k.w. steam turbine set and three 500 k.w. generators, the
latter driven by a combined vertical high-speed engine of Belliss-
Morcom construction. Lighting is provided for by a 250 k.w.
direct current generator, and energy for the power house and
the rail mills is furnished by five batteries of Babcock and Wilcox
water-tube boilers of 5155 square feet heating surface.
The intensity of heat about the furnaces through the whole
process of tapping and filling of ingots and moulds—the spectacle
of the sweat-drenched workers at furnaces and at mills—the
straining figures that ply the rods at furnace base, or direct the
long fiery snakes of steel that glide through the merchant mills,
would suggest that the strain of the place must mean for the
operative speedy physical and nervous breakdown. The army
of stalwart workers assembled about the central offices at the pay
hour on a Friday affords the answer. These men are vigorous
and fit and fine as if from systematic training. And, the official
tells, once a steel worker always a steel worker. The 3000 Aus-
tralian workers, whom the few American experts engaged at the
start of operations have trained, form the skilled force which
the developing activities of the enterprise demand. The system
of distributing the week’s pay is an interesting feature of the
steel works. To every man is allotted his number, and as one
clerk calls the number a second shoots the pay envelopes across
the counter. Hundreds of men are paid off within a compara-
tively few minutes.
Closing this record with the year 1919, the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary in the first thirty-four years of its existence established
the base metal industries within the Commonwealth. In the first
decade the company inaugurated the lead and spelter industry,
and opened a trade invaluable to Australia, not only with the


THE ROD MIL L NEWCASTLE.


East but throughout the world’s markets, until to-day the brand
“8.H.P.” is symbolical.
The second decade was marked by the solution of the all-
important sulphide problem. The solution gave new life to the
mining industry of the Barrier, and produced incalculable revenue
for circulation in the Commonwealth. The third decade saw the
foundation of the company’s steel works, which opened new and
ever-widening avenues of employment for thousands of Austra-
lian workers.
This key industry—the Newcastle undertaking—has already
paid £2,500,000 in wages, or, in other words, the company through
the establishment of its iron and steel enterprise itself has circu-
lated this sum, apart from over £13,348,000 distributed to the
employes at the Proprietary’s mine at Broken Hill and Port
Pirie works. Thus just on £16,000,000 has been paid by the Pro-
prietary in wages to its direct employes, whilst Australian
subsidiary industries, rendered possible by the Newcastle works,
are also paying out in wages many thousands of pounds each year.


CHAPTER XLvIII.
THE MOUNT GIPPS HOMESTEAD (1919).
THE buildings on Mount Gipps station — the home of George
McCulloch and members of the first Broken Hill syndicate
—to-day are crumbling into ruins. The iron has been
stripped from the roofs of the woolshed, the men’s quarters and
the manager’s house. Only the brown stone cottage in which lived
George Urquhart, overseer in the days of Rasp’s discovery, is yet
preserved and in occupancy. The air of melancholy which hangs
over all deserted dwellings broods heavily about this place—with
all the memories of the past —which saw the Hog’s Back revealed
as the Hill of Silver and the great city grow up about its base.
On the white plaster cracking from the wall of McCulloch’s room
someone has scrawled in charcoal, “This House is Hournted.”
Haunted by the memories of the dead years and of the men who
are gone by—old George McCulloch, stout-hearted manager of
Mount Gipps; Charles Rasp, who, on the morning of the sth
September, 1883, with the contractors David James and James
Poole, rode from the dam sinkers’ camp on the Nine Mile to peg
out the first block on the Broken Hill —these two, and many a
figure of the Silver Barrier.
On this big stage—the twelve miles of hill and plain between
the city and the deserted station —has been played out the whole
drama of the Barrier —from 1844, and by the sea afar the New-
castle works mark the progress of the Broken Hill Proprietary’s
activities from silver to steel.


STEEL WORKS, NEWCASTLE, PROM WATER FRONT.


Sunday is the week’s holiday of the community at Broken
Hill. Over the red sandy track from the city to the green line
of Stephen’s Creek pass from the early morning motor car and
trap with their parties of holiday makers. The fine gum trees
along the creek bed have been carefully preserved from the
destruction which stripped in the first years of settlement at
Broken Hill these red plains and brown ridges of their scrub of
belar, sandalwood and mulga, and left them hare but for the
stunted blue bush, salt bush and skeleton grass; spindly tobacco
plant, with pale grey leaves and sick yellow blossoms; the patches
of paddy melon and larger gourd, hard green against the red sand,
or shrivelling in the heat with their dead fruit scattered like so
many skulls.
Imagine, then, the visitor speeding out of Broken Hill by
motor car on this burning summer morning—making for Mount
Gipps station. He has left the smoking stacks of the Hill and
the great buildings of the city’s heart far behind. The car is
striking out about north-east for the crossing of Stephen’s Creek
to Mount Gipps. Passing the camel camp, whence the Afghans—
lean brown men, black-bearded, white-turbaned, and clad in flow-
ing white garments—go with their loaded camel-trains carrying
stores for the out-back stations far to the north. A camel-train
is making out over the red plain. Afar the mirage is flickering
silver-blue —such a mirage as Sturt’s assistant, Poole, saw from
the Barrier and thought to be an inland sea —a blue sea with
many islands. It may be that Poole looked out over the plains
about the Broken Hill and that his islands were the Pinnacles —
indigo blue pyramids afar—the Round Hill and Willyama, the
Hog’s Back. A silver sea—symbolic of the silver Barrier which
was revealed forty years after.
The camel-train goes on over the red plains. Camels, with
white-turbaned, white-clad drivers; red sands —it needs but the
Pinnacles, lost to sight afar beyond the Broken Hill, to lend the
final suggestion of Egypt and the desert to the scene.
Three miles from Broken Hill the Round Hill swells up from


the plain—brown with the summer—once with a settlement thriv-
ing about its base, and to-day, though fallen from its early pro-
mise, preserving still its hope of new activity. Soon to the right
of the track the black stack smokes above the pumping plant of
the reservoir in Stephen’s Creek —a dazzling sheet of water over-
looked by Piesse’s Knob, cut squarely, whither, in the disastrous
expedition of 1844, the men of Sturt’s party climbed to look out
over the plains for straying horses.
Down the smooth track by the railroad going out to Tarra-
wingee speeds the car—into the shade of the gum trees by
Stephen’s Creek. These gum trees were saved years since by
Warden Wyman Brown, at the instance of the surveyors Dawson
and Goodwin, who had recommended the reservation of two
chains of timber along the creek bed. To-day the place forms
Broken Hill’s one pleasure resort. In the shade which the gum
trees cast on the dry sand of the creek are many picnic parties,
though the morning is yet young. The track leads across the
creek and makes up into the higher, rougher country—and
through the gate in the wire fence about the Mount Gipps station.
The dismantled buildings are twelve miles out from Broken
Hill, standing by a dead watercourse leading down into Stephen’s
Creek. The old original station buildings before McCulloch’s
day were situated three miles off on the right bank of Stephen’s
Creek. A mile below the weir stood German Charley’s shanty—
German Charley, distiller of the ‘‘Fighting Rum,” and central
figure of many a legend of the first wild days of the Barrier. The
track to Mount Gipps station goes by the railway that marks the
grave of Robertson, drowned years since with his son in Ken-
nedy’s tank, whither he had come for a barrel of water. And
by this track—burning this morning in the summer heat —drove
many a time old George McCulloch in his buggy, cursing the
drought and the venture on Broken Hill; rode Rasp, the station
hand, tall, stooping and yellow-bearded; came on his way up from
Melbourne for his first experience of station life young Philip
Charley, the boy of the Syndicate of Seven. All is red-brown


The ‘'Haunted’' House, Manager's Residence, Oud Mt. Gieps Station.


and grey—stone and sand, mulga and salt-bush. Ahead the
Moorkaie Range masses dark blue. The sun strikes down; the
air is very clear and dry. Making down, the car passes in sight
of the big dismantled woolsheds, the stores, the men’s quarters—
the brown stone walls yet standing firm—over the sands of the
Mount Gipps Creek, and up the rise past the overseer’s old cot-
tage to McCulloch’s house —“Government House.” The house
is roofless; the windows sashless; the doors removed; the plaster
tumbling from the strong brown walls. The verandah space is
yet laid with the glittering micaceous flags, on which McCulloch,
returning from the Broken Hill on the memorable Sunday morn-
ing after William Jamieson’s black boy, Harry, had found the
rich chlorides, dumped down triumphantly the block which he
had borne off in his buggy from the Hill. The deep stone tank
near the entrance is yet filled with water. The broken hearths
are black still with dead fires. In this room from which the
plaster is falling in slabs McCulloch played the historic game of
euchre for a fourteenth share that, within a few years, was to be
worth £1,250,000. Up to this door Charles Rasp came nervously
on the September evening to give McCulloch notice that he was
leaving the employment of McCulloch, Sellars and Co., and, stand-
ing here, the keen-witted manager estimated that the station
hands had pegged out Broken Hill. Here the syndicate fought
the battle of the Saturday night, when William Jamieson checked
the sale of half the Broken Hill to W. R. Wilson, while Wilson
waited in the drawing-room. By the Manager’s historic dwell-
ing are the old quarters of the married couple who kept house for
McCulloch. About half a mile off stands the cottage of Richard
O’ Connell, police officer, mining registrar, and warden’s clerk,
with whom Rasp, on 6th September, 1883, placed his application
for Block 12, pegged out by Rasp and James and Poole, on
Broken Hill.
Up the rise from the manager’s house, where mulga, salt-
bush and blue-bush cover raggedly the nakedness of the land,
may be marked yet the dump about the shafts put down by


McCulloch and his men, in the days when the names of the Day
Dream, the Lubra and the Treasure were in all men’s mouths,
and when the black-capped, burnished Broken Hill was yet the
Hill of Mullock. Gone is the Day Dream—gone the great mines of
the Barrier before the Broken Hill —the desert has Lake’s Camp
and Purnamoota —Silverton is no more than a decaying cluster
of houses about a wayside station on the railroad to the city of
Broken Hill. But the mines yet give out their silver and lead;
but the city yet is great; only the dwellings by the creek on Mount
Gipps station, from which sprang the Broken Hill Proprietary,
tumble in ruins.
“This House is Hournted” scrawled the hand on the plas-
tered wall —haunted by the memories of the men on whose high
hopes and courage in the face of failure were based the destinies
of the Broken Hill Proprietary.


THE SPECIALTY PRESS PTY. LTD.
Art 'Printers
174 UTTLE COLLINS STREET
MELBOURNE
