

FROM MINER’S TENT
TO MISSION PULPIT.
CDartin leaking,
BALLARAT’S TOWN MISSIONARY.
AN IN MEMORIAM SKETCH
By The Australian Silverpen.
WITH PHOTO AND ILLUSTRATIONS
PRICE THREEPENCE.
Ballarat:
E. E. Campbell, Printer and Publisher, 14 Sturt street.
1898.




■
...
- •
'
.




FROM MINER’S TENT TO MISSION
PULPIT.
MARTIN HOSKING,
The Much-Beloved Ballarat Town Missionary
(By Ihc “ Australian Silverpen.")
From time immemorial the names and characters of the
great and good of past ages have been rescued from oblivion,
and to some extent immortalised, either by valiant deeds or
in song or story, so that we can to-day ponder over the
sayings and doings of holy men, who lived on the earth long
anterior to the birth of Christ, and they seem in reality to
live over again as the ages come and go.
The nineteenth century is prolific in its records of the
past. Its tributes to the memory of those who have battled
for the right in all ages are among the brightest pages of
contemporary history.
The names of such illustrious Christian Noblemen as
the Wesleys, George Whitfield, the Sainted Fletcher, John
Angel James, Charles lA. Spurgeon, Colonel Gardner, Sir
Henry Havelock, and a host of others, will never die. Our
children’s children will read the story of their godly lives, as
avc have done, and, no doubt, pass them along as examples
of good living, to children yet unborn.
The Australian continent is not wanting in its memories
of good men. The Rev. Daniel J. Draper, who with his
good Avife Avent down Avith the s.s. “ London ” in the Bay of
Biscay, is still kindly remembered. His last appeal to the
ill-fated passengers has become like househo’d Avords in
Christian families. All over the Avorld his heroism in the
hour of death, and his fortitude up to the last moment of his
existence, is, and will be, an object lesson in all time to come.
In our now famous Golden Ballarat avc have not been
Avanting in good men. The Revs. Theophilus Taylor, Dr.
Joseph Dare, J. W. Inglis, John Mewton, Archdeacon Potter,
James Bickford, Thomas Williams, William Henderson, R.


M. Hunter, Spencer Williams, R. C. Flockart, J. G. Milliard,
W. L. Bmks, Thomas Raston, R. T. Cummins, William
Thomas, California Taylor, and Matthew Burnett.
As for laymen, who, by their lives and Godly bearing,
lived out the religion they professed, we have them by scores.
Among the many I have known, I might name Jemmy Jeffry,
the Cornish miner preacher, Father Boots, Father Hodges,
James Kernick, Richard Tregaskis, Jonas Summerscales,
Geddie Pearce, Father Johns, James Russell, W. H. Hotchin,
William Martin, J. Woodland, Father Sanderson, John
Polkinghorn, Alexander Hunter, and many others.
All these good men lived consistent holy lives and died
triumphant deaths, leaving behind them memories—sweet
memories—never to be forgotten.
But none of those I have named, either clerical or lay,
shone out in such radiancy after death as the friend of the
poor, destitute, and afflicted, as did the subject of this paper.
Martin Hosking, Town Missionary, was a God-sent man;
his work was that of a Christian Philanthropist among the
needy, destitute, and sorrowing; his name was a benediction.
The great sympathy of his heart was noticeable in every
feature of his thoughtful face. No wonder he was called
“ Martin Hosking, the Good."
A few days ago I was travelling down country, A lady
was in the same carriage, accompanied by two fine children,
a boy and a girl. The name of Martin Hosking incidentally
cropped up. In a moment the lady's face brightened, and
she said, “ Sir ! if there ever was a good rrian on this earth,
it was Martin Hosking. The two children you see with me
were brought down from the back blocks of Victoria to
Ballarat, when infants, to be baptized by Mr Hosking. The
occasion was one never to be forgotten. It seemed as if the
almost then (seemingly) dying man had a mysterious power
given him of God when baptizing the dear children. I tell
you, sir, he seemed to literally breathe on them the ‘ Holy
Ghost,’ when he took them in his arms and prayed that they
might grow up to love and serve God.
“ I do not,” said she, “ belong to the Methodist Church.
I am a Presbyterian, but I would ten thousand times rather
have had the blessing on my dear babes of dear Mr. Hosking,
than that of the greatest saint in my own or any other
church,”
During his comparatively short life, Martin Hosking
carried about with him, wherever he went, a peculiarly
divine influence, and this wonderful God-like invisible power
was remarked upon by strangers, before being long in his
company, and was acknowledged by everyone.


Strange to say, every low character in Ballarat East and
West had a good word to say of the kind Town Missionary,
and very seldom indeed were angry words used to him.
Of Martin Hosking, as of his Master, it might well be
said, “ When reviled, he reviled not again."
Chalk it up on your “bar” slates, ye grog sellers of
Ballarat East. The dead Town Missionary, Martin Hosking,
although against your trade and occupation, was the loving
friend of every one of you.
It might well be asked, “ Is it possible in such a place
as the lowest parts (socially) of a city or town, for any man
to get the favour of every one —rich and poor, good and bad ?”
Is it according to the general order of things to find
fallen women, drunken reprobates, thieves, rogues, vaga-
bonds, and even murderers, saying as they pass a Missionary
in the street, “ God bless you, sir ?” I judge not ! but it was
so with Martin Hosking. I knew of one of the worst char-
acters, a once resident on the Ballarat gold fields—now
doing a long sentence in “ Pentridge ” —who said to a visitor,
“If I had but taken Mr Hosking’s advice, I would not be
here,” and as the tears ran down his face, he said, “ Aye, sir,
but the Town Missionary was a good man; ‘ Our Push ’
would have half murdered any fellow who would have dared
to molest our dear friend, Mr Martin Hosking, the Missionary.
He has, sir, pleaded with me, prayed with and for me, given
me money when I was almost starving, brought the blankets
off his own bed to my place to cover my sick wife in the cold
weather, watched over me and mine, as if we were his own
brothers and sisters. When he died I gave up all hope, my
only friend being no more. I seemed to be forsaken both by
God and man, and here I am, a convict prisoner, penitent
enough God knows, now, when it is too late. I lie in my
prison cell at night, and frequently dream of the kind good
missionary, his pleading face flits before me, and I almost
think I can hear him begging me to reform and be a better
man.”
This is but one of the many instances I have gleaned re
the life work of Martin Hosking, the Town Missionary, who,
up to the last moment of his life, thought not of himself, but
of the poor, the depraved, the sinful, and destitute around
him.
Surely the Heavenly reward of such a man must be
great!
I call to mind a touching incident of how he was loved
by the Ministers of Ballarat. A short time before he died,
one of the Wesleyan Ministers was by his side. Kneeling by


the bed, he said, “ Place your hands upon my head, Brother
Tlosking, and give me your blessing,”—when the dying Mis-
s onary said, '■'■ The Lord bless you and keep you. The Lord cause
tie light of His Countenance to shine upon you, and give you peace."
It seemed, said a listener, as if an angel from the Heavenly
wot Id was uttering the solemn words, and that there was, in
the room, a sacred presence, felt, although unseen.
I have frequently, since then, pictured to myself the
scene in that sick room —the dying Missionary with pale sad
face, propped up in the bed, his hands outspread on the head
of the ordained Clergyman, giving him his blessing, amid the
suppressed tears and sobs of those in the next room, who
could hear the faint utterances of the dying Saint.
If men like good Martin Hosking live and die amongst
us, surely the sweet influence of their Holy lives must remain.
The writer had the honor of suggesting and inaugurat-
ing “ The Martin Hosking Rest Fund," whereby the worn out
Missionary was enabled to visit England, the Continent, and
the Holy Land.
The following appeared in The Courier at the time of Mr.
Hosking’s leaving for London :
Mr. MARTIN HOSKING.
THE BALLARAT TOWN MISSIONARY.
(By “ Silver pen C)
“ It must be gratifying to everyone who has taken an
interest in the Hosking Rest Fund to see the very great success
of the movement, and the universal sympathy shown by all
classes and all denominations, for a good man, who, over-
worked, seeks a resting time to recuperate and restore the
vital energies of a too active and always willing to work
physical frame.
“ Martin Hosking is a God-sent man. Never was a better
choice made by a committee than the selection from a number
of others many years ago of Martin Hosking as the Ballarat
Town Missionary. How he has laboured, how he has soothed
the bereaved, comforted the sorrowing, visited the dying,
cared for the widows and orphans—let the thousand-and-one
who are to-day witnesses of his labours most abundant
amongst us, testify. A man with all friends, and no enemies,
is a rarity nowadays, but in the Town Missionary we have
such a one. The friend of all and the enemy of none, might
well be said of him of whom I write. The ‘ Rest Fund ’ has
had subscriptions and donations from poor and rich—from a
Shilling to have they ranged—and no pushing necessary


y alleway \j onument,
Sturt 23 a^ara^
The Scene of the late MARTIN HOSKING'S Saturday
Night Services.


\ '•••■ . \ _ V
'., j
I
* , V ’ i


to make the folk respond. It was enough to say, ‘ Collecting
for the Hosking Rest Fund,’ and down went the subscription
or donation heartily, freely, with a will. Dr. Whitcombe,
J.P., the chairman, at the first meeting called by the writer,
put the sum to be collected at and this could easily
have been the amount. Only fancy, ye stingy-souled
growlers, who fear to venture on an undertaking of this kind
—the magnificent sum of close on freely given, within
a month from the first announcement. It does make one feel
that for a good man some would even dare to die.
“ Mr, Hosking, as he says himself, is not a college
educated man, but he has an educated heart—a heart
beating in unison with the great heart of Him who always
went about doing good. The poor had always a friend in
Martin Hosking; the sick, an attentive listener to their
sorrows and troubles, and if he possibly could, a soother of
their pains. If in the great hereafter we will be recompensed
tenfold for all the kindly acts of charity we have done on
earth, what a storehouse of blessings is laid up in heaven for
Martin Hosking. Whoever asked his aid and was refused ?
Whoever received an unkind word or a bitter taunt from the
Missionary ? His life has been one big gala day of ‘ good ’to
everyone, and his nights as well, for he was always at it. No
one ever knocked at his door and had to go away unbefriended.
What a pity that a large-hearted, Christian man like Martin
Hosking was not endowed with riches, for nothing would
please him better than making sad hearts rejoice, drying the
tears of the sorrowing, and comforting the dying.
“ The scene at the Eastern Railway Station yesterday
forenoon was one of the most wonderful I have ever seen in
this colony. Old and young were there saying a ‘good-bye’
to their much-loved friend ; tears were freely shed—why, it
would seem that all were weeping ; and when the choir stood
by the edge of the platform, and sweetly sang their farewells,
it was, indeed, touching in the extreme. The great difficulty
was to get near the departing friend. Hand-shaking, even
the little ones with tearful eyes indulged in, for all must say
‘good-bye’ in their own fashion to the good Missionary.
Well, no man has ever left Ballarat with so many good
wishes for his safety in travelling and speedy return ; and as
one who was present very appropriately said, ‘ If we never
meet the good Martin Hosking again in this world, may
we meet him in the upper circle of the skies, where is
unknown the word ‘ farewell.’ As the train started, three
hearty cheers were given by the assembled crowd, who, one
and all,* felt, that in losing for a time Martin Hosking, the
Town Missionary, Ballarat has lost a good citizen, an able
prea.cher of the Gospel, and an honoured servant cf God.


“Mr. Hosking sails by the R.M.S. Britannia for London,
on Friday, at noon.
“The absence of the clerical element at the demonstration,
with one exception, was noticed by many. Not a minister
of the town or city was there to say good-bye to the ‘people’s
friend.’
“ I am pleased to record that Mrs. Thomas, one of the
lady collectors, unaided, collected, in shillings and half-
crowns, nearly
“ Silverpen ”in the “ Wesleyan Spectator ,’’ Melbourne.
“ I am sure that no name among the local preachers of
the Wesleyan Church in Victoria is more familiar to the
readers of the Spectator than that of Martin Hosking, the
good Town Missionary of Ballarat. His praises have been
sounded, not only in Victoria, but in all the other colonies
of Australasia, and his converts are to be met with in every
city and town.
“ It was a happy thought of ‘ Silverpen ’ to organise a
4 Martin Hosking Rest Fund,’ in order that the good friend
of all might have a trip to the Old Country for the benefit
of his health.
“ It did not require a stethoscopical examination to see,
by the careworn look of the Missionary, that hard work,
ni a ht and day wearinesss, was affecting the health of the
always active friend of the poor, the distressed, and the
dying ; and that absolute rest was necessary in order that
the vital energies might regain their former vigour and
effectiveness, and Martin Hosking be once more, as of old,
himself again.
“ The movement was started about a month ago, and up
till Monday last nearly £4OO has been received in hard cash.
This gratifying result is entirely due to the high appreciation
all classes of the community have of the grand work done by
the Missionary, and the great love and respect entertained
for him by every resident in Ballarat, both city and town.
“ Mr. Hosking has for years been the means of bringing
comfort to many a distressed family, joy to many a sorrowful
heart, and peace to many a dying soul.
“ His name among the poor and destitute is a familiar
household word. When sickness, and troubles, and dark
clouds overhang the home circle, then Martin Hosking
appears as an angel of light to soothe, to comfort, and to
cheer, and no one ever felt more keenly for human suffering,
or showed greater sympathy for the distressed,


“ The last penny in his pocket has been often taken out
to procure some little dainty for the sick and dying. No
wonder that the tears rolled down the cheeks of the Town
Mission choir on Sunday evening last as they sang—
" God be with you till we meet again.
“ The scene at the Ballarat Eastern Railway Station, on
Wednesday forenoon, was one never to be erased from the
mind. There, surrounded by the people, stood ‘ their friend,’
each one vieing with the other as to who should say the last
word and wish the last adieu. They were losing for a time
their dear Pastor , and almost father—he, who, in the wintry
months suffered none with whom he had aught to do, to
want; he, who visited them in sickness and distress, in fair
weather and in foul; and when many of their dear ones were
approaching the confines of the eternal world he was there to
help the dying, and urge them to trust their all to Jesus, the
sinner’s friend. How Martin Hosking has laboured as a
Missionary, cared for and soothed the bereaved, comforted
the dying, and assisted the destitute —ls it not all written in
God's remembrancer on high ?
“The little children were brought by mothers to the
station to get Martin Hosking’s blessing before he left them.
A man with all friends and no enemies is a rarity now-a-days,
but this was exemplified in the case of the missionary, for, I
believe, I am correct in saying Martin Hosking never made an
enemy.
“ He leaves Ballarat, taking with him the respect and
love of everybody, with prayers innumerable that the voyage
may completely restore him to health, and that he may
return strengthened and invigorated afresh for the great ‘ life-
work ’ in which he has been so long, a good and trusty
champion.
“ Mr. Hosking sailed in the Britannia , R.M.S., on Friday
last, for London, a large number of friends seeing him off from
the Williamstown Pier.”
P.S.—When I bid my friend, the good Missionary, fare-
well on board the “ Britannia,” I had no idea I would meet
him in a few months time in the city of London. But so it
has turned out. I was delighted to see Mr. Hosking one day
in the month of October at Mr. Sale’s, Oxford Street, City.
There can be little doubt the voyage has done him great good
—he looked quite a different man. We visited many of the
principal sights and churches of London, and heard many of
the great preachers. Mr. Hosking has just left for Paris and
Rome on his return journey, through the Holy Land, via Port


Said, and will no doubt be able to tell his people on his
return much interesting news of what he saw in the regions
of Egypt and Palestine.
London, Nov. Ist, 1889.
I met Mr. Hosking during his travels in the great
Babylon of the world, and with him visited most of the sights
of London. He seemed never weary of sight seeing. He
was delighted with St. Paul’s, Westminster Abbey, the
Tower, National Gallery, Windsor Castle, and most of the
principal Churches.
At the Clapton Hall, the great meeting place of the
Salvation Army, we were introduced to all the members of
the “ Booth ” family, the late Mrs. Catherine Booth with the
rest. Mr. Hosking was delighted ; we had a long chat with
Commissioner Booth- .Tucker, who travelled with me from
Colombo. At St. James’ Hall we were introduced to Rev.
Hugh Price Hughes, the Rev. Dr. Newton Hall, M.A., and
others. Mr. Hosking was like a “ busy bee,” gathering
honey (information) everywhere he went for “ redistribution,”
as he said, when he returned to Australia. His great
rejoicing was the anticipation of visiting the Holy Land,
going over the Christ trodden streets of Jerusalem, and
seeing for himself the spot—pointed out to travellers -where
the Crucifixion took place. Those who have listened to his
lectures in the churches and schoolrooms of Ballarat on his
journeyings, will recall to mind the wonderful “art” he had
of picturing in words, before his audiences, the interesting
scenes he had visited.
But it would be as well here to say, if only in a few
words, anent his early life. Martin Hosking was born at
Lelant, West Cornwall, in the year 1841, and followed the
occupation of a miner both there and in these colonies till
he was appointed Missionary.
When a boy, he made himself a general favourite—
willing to do anything for anyone. His kindly disposition
was acknowledged even then. He told me when he visited
his native place, one old woman said: “You are not the
‘ boy Martin’ are you ? Bless me, is it raly so ? ”
He also told me of the visit he paid to the little church
where he was converted, and his kneeling on the very
“ spot ” where he claimed Christ as his own so many years
before. It was a touching recital, and one, I have little
doubt, many who will read this little booklet, have heard
from his own lips.
There was not a particle of selfishness in Martin






Hosking’s composition. Money to him seemed to be bn*-
the channel of doing good. Daring his life as Missionary, he
received thousands of pounds sterling for the Town Mission,
scores of pounds were thrust into his hands without any
conditions whatever as to how they were to be expended, and
yet he was no beggar.
If Mr. Hosking had not been a “ true man,” he might
have died a very wealthy one. But with him it was : “ Are
you in want ? Thank God, I can help you /” and this he did
irrespective of church, creed, or nationality, and that with
no unsparing hand. His doctrine was, “Freely I have
received, freely I give,” and it is now no secret among his
private friends, that he often denied himself and his family,
in order that somepoor suffering soul might have little
luxuries, suitable and necessary for the sick room and the
dying hour.
Mr. Hosking first inaugurated the Saturday night
gatherings by the Galloway Monument, Sturt Street. The
crowds who gathered there weekly were always delighted to
hear his earnest and fervent appeals.
Many a wandering boy and fallen girl have been
attracted by the Town Missionary’s addresses, and the hearty
singing of the Mission Choir ; and afterwards these lost sheep
were helped and counselled by him as to their future.
Wherever you go in these Colonies, you are sure to meet
some one who knew the Ballarat Town Missionary. Martin
Hosking was for many years on the Methodist Local
Preachers’ Plan, and few of the titled Reverends gave more
satisfaction in the pulpit or platform at anniversaries. The
man seemed to be always ready to take part in religious
services. He was witty and logical, wonderfully fluent, had
a splendid memory, and always exceedingly apt in his
remarks and illustrations, and certainly a most popular
platform speaker.
He could tell a story, sing a hymn, preach a sermon, or
make a speech with the best of them ; but his main forte and
purpose in life seemed to be comforting the sorrowful, help-
ing the needy and afflicted, and soothing the dying. In the
lowliest tent, as in the rich man’s home, the Missionary was
an angel of light and a welcome visitor. Many a poor dark
benighted soul has been pointed to the cross, and looked,
while they trusted, to the saving of their souls. Many have
accepted Christ as the sinner’s friend while the good Martin
Hosking has been pleading with God at their bedside.
“ Why ! ” I asked a poor fellow, who had reformed and
become one of Mr. Hosking’s best workers, “Why is it you
all love the Town Missionary so much ?


“ Oh, Sir,” said he, “ we know right well he loves every
one of us, and the strangest thing to us is, the deeper a man
or woman was sunk in sin, the more Mr. Hosking kept at him
or her, till they gave in, and got saved.
“ It would,” said he, “just have done you good to have
heard the Town Missionary pray in the sick room. It was
hearing him thus praying first brought me to give up sin.
His prayers were as if he were talking to God as a kind,
indulgent, heavenly parent, and we all knew Mr. Hosking
was sincere and good, and meant in his heart every word he
.said. “ There were no vain repetitions in his requests, no
sham praying, or making long prayers for show, with Martin
Hosking. ‘ I believe ’ Said this reformed man, ‘ God does
hear and answer the prayers of his believing children, and
if ever there was a child of God on earth Martin Hosking
was one.”
This I take as good evidence of the Missionary’s
character.
For 2i long years did the Town Missionary labour in
Ballarat, both East and West. Night and day he was
always at call. In sickness or in trouble, the poor afflicted
ones would say, “ Send for Martin Hosking. He is sure to
come, whether the Doctor does or no. Mr. Hosking’s widow
tells me that many a night he has come home weary,
downcast, and foot-sore, and had hardly swallowed his
evening repast, before there has been a call at the door: “Is
Mr. Hosking in ?” and rising from the table without demur,
the poor weary suffering Missionary has trudged out, often
in the rain, into the dark night, and followed the messenger
to the house of suffering and sickness, or mourning.
For years before his death, his friends could see that the
dread disease, “ Miner’s Consumption,” was gradually bring-
ing him nearer the end. Nothing would persuade him to
give up his much loved work. “To die in harness,” seemed
to be his great desire.
The few months he spent in England, the Continent)
and the Holy Land, seemed to give him new life for the
time, but nothing would stay the serious lung trouble. He
knew what was killing him, and often told the writer it was
only a matter of weeks or months before he would die. But
death had no terrors for Martin Hosking. Almost his last
words to me were : “ I shall soon see Jesus,”
I doubt much if a nobler, purer, more godly life than
that of the Town Missionary, ever ended in the Australias
under the Southern Cross.
It is but right to say that Martin Hosking had a good


friend in Mr. John King, of Bridge street, the well-known
chemist. Many a score of pounds sterling worth of medicine
and medical requisites Mr. King kindly gave to the Missionary
for his patients free of charge.
Mr. King has given me a number of incidents of the good
Missionaty’s dealings with the Ballarat poor and afflicted.
He says—“ One day Mr. Hosking asked me to accompany
him to see a poor woman who suffered from a bad leg, the
doctors advising ‘her to go to the hospital, and have it
amputated. The interview I shall never forget. When we
entered the dirty hovel, the old woman was too weak to rise
from her miserable stretcher. We examined the leg, and
certainly the sight was not a pleasant one ; ulcers and sores
were visible from knee down. I suggested all the salves and
ointment should be washed off, and then the kind heart of Mr.
Hosking shone out to perfection. He went outside, gathered
a few chips, lit the fire, put an old saucepan on, boiled the
water, and on his knees on the bare floor set to and bathed
and washed the sores. I then suggested what to do, and
gave him the necessary ointment ; and for several weeks this
good man regularly visited the old lady, and himself attended
to her necessities. It was gratifying to me to know from Mr.
Hosking that my remedies resulted in a cute, and that the old
lady is alive to-day, and still praises the dear man and his
friend who saved her leg from being amputated.”
A few weeks before his lamented death I found him one
morning sitting under his verandah writing out a few jottings
from his journal, but he had to give up, too weak to even hold
the pen ; the dear good Missionary could not finish his
writing. He left his praises to be sung by others. All he
then said was, “ I have done my best; no man could do more.
If I had my life to live over again, I would try and do
better.”
Mr. Hosking’s love for wife and children was of the most
beautiful kind. His son, S r, seemed to be as dear to
him as the apple of his eye ; but as he told me in London,
“All my dear children I love with a great love.” His journal
abounds with little jottings here and there of his wonderful
fatherly heart-love, and concern for their future. But he
would, when talking of them, say, “ God will not forsake my
dearest wife and children when He takes me. I can trust , and am not
afraid .”
Martin Hosking’s place will never be filled in the hearts
of the people of Ballarat. Roman Catholics and Protestants
alike mourned when he died. The immense crowds of
mourning sympathisers of all classes of the community
at his funeral —fully a mile long—testified to the great


love and respect in which the dead Missionary was held
by Australians generally. Hundreds from ail parts of
the Colonies journeyed to Ballarat to be present at the
funeral obsequies, and thus show their love for the once
humble Cornish gold miner, who so well and faithfully for so
long was Ballarat’s loved Town Missionary.
For days one of the Town Mission converts sat by his
bedside, and kept her fan going constantly, thus cooling the
no doubt aching head and throbbing temples, and driving
away the flies, just then very troublesome. This little act of
kindness and sympathy told its own story to visitors, and
said, if not in words, “Behold how they loved him.”
I shall never forget, nor will many others, the day of Mr.
Hosking’s funeral. From early morning till the afternoon,
when his body was carried to the hearse, a constant stream
of people, old and young, passed round his coffin in single file,
all anxious to look for the last time upon the face of the good
man, who had done so much for the poor, sick, and sorrowing
of Ballarat. I venture to assert that more genuine tears were
shed on the day of the Missionary’s funeral, over his
remains, and at the grave, than over any other departed
c itizen of Ballarat.
Is it to be wondered at ? I think not. Here was a man
living amongst us for over 20 years, always going about
doing good, utterly regardless of the risk to his own life,
seemingly invulnerable to infection; although suffering himself,
caring not for personal inconvenience, his greatest joy to
relieve distress and point suffering sinners to the Lamb of
God ; and this with the other Christian characteristics of
his inner self was his delight through the years of his earthly
pilgrimage.
It is no wonder a Christian Minister in another Colony,
writing of the death of dear Martin Hosking, wound up an in
memoriam tribute to his memory with the verse;
Oh may I triumph so.
When all my warfare’s past,
And dying find my latest foe,
Beneath my feet at last.
The scene at the grave was a remarkable one. Thousands
had gathered in the cemetery before the funeral arrived. It
was the most tearful and sorrowful assemblage I ever
witnessefl.






MOURNING IN THE CHURCHES.
References were made to Mr. Hosking’s death on Sunday
in most of the churches throughout Ballarat, and the “ Dead
March ” was played at the close of the services.
At the Town MissionTTall on the Sunday the pulpit was
draped in black. The preacher for the day made a most
feeling and touching reference to the great loss sustained by
all through the dearth of the Missionary.
At the Lydiard street Wesleyan Church the Rev. E. T.
Cox officiated in the morning, and at the conclusion of the
service the Dead March was played on the organ by Miss
Eyres. The pulpit cushion and communion table were
covered with black cloth. In the afternoon a short service
was held in the senior Sunday school, when reference was
made by Mr. A. A. Buley, M.A., superintendent, to the
death of ‘ Martin Hosking.’ In the evening the Rev. J.
Cowperthwaite, 8.A., made special reference to the death of
Mr. Hosking. The text was taken from 2nd Timothy iv., 6
“ For I am now ready to be offered and the time of my
departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight; I have
finished my course ; I have kept the faith. Henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only,
but unto all them also that love His appearing.” The rev.
gentleman during the sermon spoke of the nobility of good-
ness exemplified by the life of Martin Hosking. He was an
earnest man. How earnest for the welfare of others was well
known to them all. His was, like the great apostle Paul’s,
an arduous life; but was it not a happy one? He (the
preacher) did not know of a more consistent life than that of
their departed brother. His was an apostolical life. The
great funeral of that day was not respect shown to a man who
lived for himself, but for a man who had gone into the service
of Christ with whole-hearted devotion. Martin Hosking put
his soul into his religion. Oh that men and women of
Ballarat would consecrate their intellects, their money, their
social position to the cause of Christ, what a blessing would
follow to the community. May God help them all to emulate
the nobleness and goodness of Martin Hosking. The choir,
accompanied on the organ by Miss Eyres, sang “Vital
Spark,” and the “Dead March” was again played on the
organ.
At the conclusion of the service at the Synagogue,
Barkly Street, on Saturday, feeling reference was made by
the Rev. I. M. Goldreich to the lamented death of Mr,
Martin Hosking.


Dawson Street Congregational Church.
After the morning service, on Sunday, an eloquent and
affectionate reference was made to the Christian character of
the late Mr. Martin Hosking, and just prior to the benediction
being pronounced, the congregation all rose and remained
standing whilst the “ Dead March in Saul ” was being
played. The preacher for the day was the Rev. W. H.
Westmoreland, of Stawell, formerly of Ballarat.
The beautiful monument erected to Mr. Hosking’s
memory in the new cemetery, Ballarat, is but a poor
expression of the heart-felt sorrow of all those who knew and
loved the departed Christian warrior. He was truly the
friend of all and enemy of none. He fell asleep at Ballarat,
February 17th, 1893, mourned by young and old of both city
and town.
On the day of his death, I visited him, and on ray return
home, I wrote for publication the following. It appeared
next day in one of the Ballarat papers :
“ There are men whom it is impossible to praise, and
there are others, thank God, in this wicked world of ours
whom you cannot refrain from praising. Their every-day
life is a big doxology of thanksgiving, both to God and their
fellow-creatures.
“On the 6th November, 1841, at Lelant, Cornwall,
there was born a man who has made his mark as a noble
Christian worker in our Golden City—the friend of the
friendless, the comforter of the widow and orphan, , the
trusted and tried sympathiser of every distressed man, woman,
and child, in our city and town, and the humble follower of
Him who, when on this earth 1800 years ago, went about
doing good. In Ballarat there is only one man I know of
can come up to the high standard of excellence I have here
portrayed, and that is Martin Hosking, Town Missionary.
It may be while I write he has exchanged time for eternity,
for when I looked upon the kindly face of my friend but an
hour or two ago Death had set his mark there, and no one
could mistake the sign—that Ballarat's model philanthropist
was nearing his end.
“He said to me— ‘ lam longing for the end, for then I
shall see Him whom my soul loveth. My pain is excruciating;
oh, that I could die. The change to me is from darkness
into sunshine; mine eyes shall soon behold the King in His
beauty.
“When in England a year or two ago we visited together


many of the old land marks, St. Paul’s Cathedral, West-
minster Abbey, The Tower, and other places, but everywhere
we went it was the thoughtful student learning, from the
relics of the past, lessons, so as to tell the dear ones in
Australia (as he has so well done in his lectures), particulars
of the sights and scenes of travel he took such interest in
when journeying in quest of health.
“ Some of the incidents of our padding through the streets
of the modern Babylon were to him astounding, and many of
them amusing. Our visit to the great Clapton Hall, now the
property of the Salvation Army, I shall never forget; the
whole business of the evening just suited our friend. He was
once more listening to experiences of those who, like himself,
kept at it, early and late, in order to do all the good they
could to raise the sunken and depraved. Many a Thank
God ! Mr. Hosking uttered that night as he heard stories of
rescue from sin and utter misery from the lips of (at one time)
some of the worst characters in London. Mr. Hosking was
introduced to the Booth family, and told Mrs. Booth-Tucker
that, when a lad, he had heard the General preach in the open
air, and the good effect it had on his after life,
“As simple and humble as a child, Martin Hosking took
with everybody; there was something in the man’s face that
told the big love of his heart for the sinful and the fallen, and
his hand was always ready to help their distress.
“ The most unlikely persons sent him money to distribute,
feeling sure that every penny would be well and faithfully
applied in healing the wounds of some poor afflicted—it may
be—(as it often was)—outcast erring son or daughter of
humanity. I should like before we part with our friend, to
‘ wreathe a garland of immortelles around his head ’ and let
him know before he leaves us for ever how much we loved
him for his work’s sake. .
“ A ‘ Memorial’ is sure to be erected to the memory of
the God-sent servant of the most High by the inhabitants
generally of the Qity and Town he loved so well—for no one
could be more highly respected than Martin Hosking, the
Town Missionary.
“ Downshire Villa, Ballarat East, 17th February, 1893.
“ [P.S. —11 o’clock p.m.—Just as I had finished writing a
knock came to my door, and two sons of my friend came to
say, ‘ Father is dead ! ’ Martin Plosking will never die while
Ballarat exists.] ”
And now I close my simple story of the good Martin
Hosking, and notwithstanding the fact that 5 years have


HEAVEN APPROVED MEN.
Like faithful lights, which on the coast appear
To warn the mariner of danger near;
Their steady faith, and holy works abound,
Refulgent lights, which shine to all around,
By bright example pointing out the way
That leads from darkness to eternal day.
& (6 k (Q
/O tr~G
/ / ■_
/ \.t A-j
/
I | '
rolled away since his body was consigned to the grave, his
memory is as green as ever in the hearts of all those who
loved and respected him, and for many years to come, the
name of Martin Hosking will be associated with that of the
long list of dead Christ-like martyrs to the Mission cause.
The Rev. Robert Masroon, D.D., wrote as follows, and
it seems an appropriate finish to this sketchy and hastily
written tribute to the memory of Martin Hosking:
B. E. Campbell, Printer and Bookbinder, 14 Sturt Street, Ballarat.




