

GUIDES TO GROWERS.
(Issued by the Department of Agriculture , Victoria.)
No. 40.
FRUIT FLIES.
MAY, 1898.
461.


WEST AUSTRALIAN FRUIT FLY.
(Halterophora capitata.)
Fig. 1. Fly. Natural size. (From nature.)
~ 2. ~ Magnified. ~
~ 3. Larva. Natural size. ~
~ 4. „ Magnified. ~
~ 5. Pupa. Natural size. ~
„ 6. ~ Magnified. ~
QUEENSLAND FRUIT FLY.
{Tephritis Try mi.)
Fig. 7. Fly. Natural size. (From nature.)
~ 8. ~ Magnified. „
„ 9. Larva. Natural size. ~
~ 10. ~ Magnified, „
~ 11. Pupa. Natural size. ~
~ 12. „ Magnified. ~
~ 13. Ptach infested with larvae. „
Fig. 14. Fruit fly from New Hebrides. Natural size. (From nature.)
„ 15. Magnified. (From nature.)




FRUIT FLIES.
(By C. French, Government Entomologist .)
I. THE WEST AUSTRALIAN FRUIT FLY.
In the early part of the present year my attention was directed
to some maggots in a consignment of peaches which had been
sent from Sydney for sale in Victoria, and having placed the
diseased fruit in an anatomical jar, our worst fears were soon
realized, and in a few days two specimens of the so-called West
Australian fruit fly ( Halterophora capitata ) made their appearance.
It is most unfortunate for growers here that this much-dreaded
pest should have been added to the numerous troublesome insects
with which the fruit-grower has to contend.
In this pamphlet it is not intended to give a full account of
these destructive little insects, as this will be done in Part 111. of
the “ Destructive Insects of Victoria.” shortly to be issued, still
it was thought necessary to bring some facts and short descrip-
tions before the public, so that these pests might be recognised
when seen. Fortunately for us, the so-called Sydney and Queens-
land fruit fly has not, as far as we are aware, yet made its
appearance in our colony, but as it is almost certain to come we
had better be prepared for it.
In New South Wales and Queensland both of these pests are
present, and do immense damage to fruit of many kinds, so that
the title of peach fly is hardly applicable for an insect which will
tackle, as the fruit fly is said by Mr. Tryon and others to do, not
only peaches but apples, pears, quinces, nectarines, plums, oranges,
shaddocks, and even figs, thereby rendering these fruits as near
as possible unfit for human consumption.
In describing these flies, we cannot do better than give roughly
the descriptions as mentioned by Messrs. Tryon, Fuller, and
Froggatt, and these, with the assistance of the plate which ac-
companies this pamphlet, will, we trust, be sufficient for the
present purpose, or at least until such time as Part 111. appears,
and in which a coloured plate containing both insects will be
given.
Life Histoky op H. capitata.
The eggs, as described by Mr. Fuller, are laid in the fruit byAhe
female fly, and the larrae soon hatch from them and commence
feeding. When they are full grown the'maggots leave the fruit
and enter the soil to pupate, that is to change into the last Stage


prior to their emergency as perfect insects, and great numbers are
carried to the ground in the falling fruit. After having rested in
the soil as pupre for about twelve days, the flies hatch and make
their way to the surface and continue their destructive work.
In Western Australia, Mr. Fuller remarks that the fruit is
attacked just as it begins to sweeten, and before it ripens. Green
fruit being seldom if ever attacked. The eggs are laid in the
fruit by means of a very sharp needle-like organ (see figures on
plate), called the ovipositor, borne on the extremity of the
abdomen of the female. The maggots are soft, yellowish-white
in colour, somewhat shining and limbless worms, and somewhat
resemble those of the meat fly. The pupae or chrysalids are oval
and stout, at first a golden yellow colour, but subsequently chang-
ing to a reddish-brown. The flies are pretty little insects, with
two wings only, about half the size of the common house fly.
They have very large and lustrous eyes, the thorax is mottled
with grey and black, and the abdomen is of a brownish-yellow and
crossed by two stripes of a silver grey colour. The wings are
large and ample ; they are transparent, strongly veined, and
marked by several clouded bands of grey and yellow colour.
The legs are long and slender and of a yellow colour. In walk-
ing, the fly always carries its wings in a drooping attitude. It is
a very difficult thing to find the flies in an infested orchard,
although they must be present in large numbers. If, however, a
maggoty peach is put aside in a box for a few weeks, the flies
can be reared and easily observed.
Remedies;
It has been remarked by those who have had most to do with
this pest, that the measures adopted must be more of a preventa-
tive than a curative kind. More insidious than the codlin moth,
the trouble is at all times internal. Two of the most efficacious
means of checking the codlin moth, viz., poisoning by means of
paris green, and trapping the chrysalids, are of no avail when
dealing with the fruit fly. The means recommended by those
who bave had much experience with both these insects, are—
(l) Pick and destroy affected fruit and remember that the full-
grown maggots are in the ripe fruit, and although many of them
fall to the ground of their own account, most of them leave the
fallen fruit sometimes after it has been lying on the ground.
The crop on the first trees affected should be sacrificed in order
to save the bulk of the fruit that ripens later in the season.
The period of incubation of the egg is very short, and the fly
only, punctures the fruit a fortnight or so before it ripens, so
that if the trees are carefully examined at the time the fruit
is fit to pick, it will be seen w'hether the grubs are present or
not.


(2) All fruit showing evidences of the presence of maggots,
and also all fallen fruit should be gathered daily and destroyed.
Boiling is the best process, although feeding to pigs is the one
generally adopted. The latter plan has, however, many dis-
advantages, because often the pigs cannot eat all the fruit, and,
moreover, it is not impossible for the maggots to pupate in the
stye.
(3) Poultry —as fowls, ducks, and turkeys —should be allowed
to feed under the infested trees.
(4) A layer of gas lime, one inch thick, should be spread under
greatly infested fruit-trees, and when the fruit is all off gas lime
might be dug in, and so utilized as a manure. The lime acts
in a caustic manner and destroys the maggot by contact. As to
how this pest has been introduced into Western Australia is a
mystery.
II.—THE FRUIT FLY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
AND QUEENSLAND.
This formidable enemy of the fruit-grower has been named by
Mr. Froggatt after Mr. II. Tryon, Government Entomologist of
Queensland, who has unfortunately had but too many opportu-
nities of dealing with and observing this pest.
Life History.
The eggs of this species, as Mr. Tryon remarks, are just large
enough to be seen upon a dark background by the naked eye.
The full-grown maggot is about four-tenths of an inch in length.
A feature of the maggot not generally known is that it is an
air breather, and that if air be excluded from the fruit its in-
habitants must die. The chrysalis is one-fifth of an inch in,
length, and exists in a partly comatose condition till it develops
into the fly. -
The fly is brown in colour, with two clear opal-tinted wings,
conspicuously bright, light yellow spots on the body, and bright
blue eyes. The male is easily distinguished from the female, as
the posterior portion of its body is rounded, while that of the
female carries the ovipositor and pointed projection used to pierce
the skin of the fruit and deposit the egg in the tissue. The
ovipositor can place an egg one-twentieth of an inch below the
surface. The fly’s length is three-tenths of an inch, and its wing
expansion four-tenths of an inch. When disturbed it does not
fly far, but tries to hide beneath the leaves, and for this reason
often goes unobserved.
Mr- Tryon concludes that the average life of the insect is
about five weeks, and that each female lays about a dozen
eggs.


The fly is fond of syrups, but will not touch, any that are at all
fermented, and it has a convenient habit of vomiting any food it
finds distasteful or disagreeable.
When fruit is easily punctured the fly distributes through
many, but occasionally eight, and even the whole batch of eggs
are placed in one fruit. It is not usual to find eggs laid in fruit
before it is two-thirds grown, and seems to defer operating till a
pleasant odour from the fruit is perceptible.
Regarding the periods of development at which the fruit is
attacked, Mr, Tryon, together with Mr. Sei ' some
valuable information. The eggs take three d
under observation, but in the open they will L
tarded by climatic conditions. Occasionally the young
killed because the growing fruit presses upon them, and in other
cases the young are unable to break down the tough woody tissue
of immature fruit. Mellow saccharine fruits hatch out all the
eggs, and the grubs mature unless the tunnel becomes close and
excludes the air. In pip fruit and slipstone peaches the grubs
can live near the centre, but in close-stoned fruit they must work
near the surface. The life of the grub in the fruit is from two to
five weeks, occasionally less than two weeks. It invariably
happens that when the grub has done feeding it leaves the fruit,
which has then usually fallen to the ground. After leaving the
fruit the grub usually tries to hide beneath the soil, sometimes
going as deep as 4 inches, and then within 24 hours changes into
a chrysalis. In summer a period of from seven to fourteen days
elapses before the fly emerges out of the chrysalis, but in winter
the lethargic condition continues much longer. There are several
broods during the year, and from August to April (in Queensland
and New South Wales) reproduction is virtually continuous, as
females preponderate, and as each lays twelve eggs prodigious
multiplication is the result.
Occasionally the fly passes the winter as a perfect insect; the
ability to breed throughout the year is due to the succession of
fruits, from loquats to oranges in winter.
Remedies.
The remedies as mentioned by Mr, Tryon I am inclined mostly
to agree with, and amongst other materials mentioned is the pre-
ventive stage, that is to protect uninjured fruit from attack. At
present millions of flies are being bred in the infected fruit that is
allowed to rot beneath the trees. There is also the advantages
of fine; netting with which to cover the trees, but this in large
orchards would of course be too expensive to most people. The
flies can no doubt be kept away also by offensive odours of different
kinds, as kerosene, preparations of tar, &c., but this latter could
only be done some weeks before the fruit ripened. Mr. Tryon


also recommends that wood tar, if smeared on pieces of rag or
tow and hung suspended in the trees, be adopted, and I have no
doubt whatever as to the value of this recommendation. The
Italians have mixed wood tar with soda crystals, making a perfect
solution for spraying, a system which Mr, Tryon informs us has
but lately been published. The shelly covering of the chrysalis
renders it practically impervious to any liquid applications, but
if the ground is dug up or raked, so that the chrysalis is exposed,
it dries up and dies. When the fruit drops to the ground the
pest is virtually caught in its own trap. Then is the orchardist’s
opportunity. If the infested fruit is gathered at least daily and
destroyed, the development of another batch of flies is prevented.
Burning or scalding would be most effective, but as this is not
always a convenient method it would be found well to keep an
open trench about 2 feet deep in which the fruit should be buried,
and the covering of the earth rammed down. Another effective
way would be, as Mr. Tryon thinks, to place beneath the trees
some caustic substance which will destroy the tender maggot, and
he had found ordinary gas lime most efficacious. Several persons
having tried this and found it both inexpensive and effective as
its deterrent odours drive the flies away. Dr, Cobb, who has had
many opportunities of dealing with the pest in New South Wales,
is not enamoured of the system as above recommended, and
counsels constant cultivation, this to destroy the grubs and pupae
below ground. In Malta we are informed that this West
Australian fly does great damage to the orange crops, and accord-
ing to the Rev. Mr. Henslow, its attacks appear to be confined to
oranges only. Finally then, the only effectual plan is to carefully
examine the growing fruit, also any which may be sent from the
other colonies to Melbourne markets, and in the case of growing
fruit, the trees should be examined as often as possible especially
near the time of the fruit changing colour for ripening. Upon
examining ripe fruit, peaches especially, very close observance
will be necessary, as the indications to an untrained eye are
difficult of detection. Should any outward sign present them-
selves, either as punctures or premature decay, cut some of the
fruit in halves, and if the maggots be present the damage will
soon be disclosed.
A valuable addition to the economic literature on these two
flies has been written by Mr. Froggatt, whose excellent plate will
greatly assist growers who have never previously seen these
insects in their various changes. Before closing it may be of
interest to note that specimens of a fruit fly, closely allied to the
two species with which we have been dealing, but nearly three
times as large, have been sent to me from the New Hebrides
where, owing to the attacks of this fly, the orange crop has
suffered badly, and this, in case of its possible introduction into


Victoria, we have also figured, only the perfect insects being
available at present. We trust this'pest may not come this way,
although it being a larger insect, the indications of its presence
will likely be more pronounced. If the presence of any of these
flies are suspected it should be reported at once, and all growers
and dealers, no matter how small, would do well to act in concert,
as when these pests make their appearance there is no saying
how far they will spread, or how extensive the damage they may
cause to the fruit industry of our colony.
It may be mentioned that the Queensland and West Aus-
tralian fruit flies have been proclaimed as noxious insects under
the Victorian Vegetation Diseases Act.
By Authority: Eobt. S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne.
