

AUSTRALASIAN EDITION.
Fruits of Philosophy
OR THE
PRIVATE COMPANION
OF
YOUNG MARRIED PEOPLE.
*7-
CHARLES KNOWLTON, M.D.,
Author of “ Modenh Materialism.”
MELBOURNE :
PRINTED FOB THE PUBLISHER BY A.. ASHER, SWAN STREET, RICHMOND.




PREFACE.
Tins edition of a prosecuted book is published in Melbourne in response to
numerous requests, the London edition of 1877 not being procurable, and the
Editor hereof! being one of the very few possessors in Melbourne of a previous
edition. The Editor publishes it for the following reasons. First, he, like
Mr. Bradlaugh, feels aggrieved at any attempt to restrict the free expression
of opinion. Secondly, the importance of the subject is, he thinks, supreme and
urgent, though altogether unrecognised by nearly all. And thirdly, he is of
opinion that the book should not be issued without notes, which he has done
his best to furnish. He does not concur in many of the statements of Dr.
Knowlton, who wrote more than forty years ago, but has objections to inter-
fering with his text otherwise than by comment. He wishes the public to have
as exactly as possible the book which was prosecuted in England, and this
method will amply answer his further purpose. He much regrets his inability
to give the notes (some signed “ G.R.”) which Mr. Bradlaugh inserted in his
edition.
A few words of further introduction may be necessary, in addition to Mr.
Bradlaugh’s preface.
Some person at Bristol appears to have first put forward the work in such a
manner as to provoke proceedings against him. When this was known in
London, it was agreed between Mr. Bradlaugh and Mr. Watts, who was the
publisher of the book and sub-Editor of Mr. Bradlaugh’s paper, “ The National
Reformer,” that the latter should, as publisher of the work, proceed to Bristol
aud take the responsibility of and defend the publication, as involving the
right of free printing. Mr. Watts, however, seems to have become frightened,
and when prosecuted in February he pleaded guilty to publishing an obscene
hook, and got clear at a cost of £2OO.
Mr. Bradlaugh was highly indignant at this cowardly surrender of the right
to print freely on the population question for the relief of the poor, and the
Benefit of the world. He said he would not have published the book, as he did
not like it, but that it was dishonorable and injurious to the cause of freethought
to admit the right of rnyone to dictate as to what is or is not to be printed.
In March last, therefore, he and Mrs. Besant agreed, in spite of the great dis-
advantage of the recent condemnation of the book as immoral by its former
publisher; they agreed magnanimously to republish the book at once
and encounter the results —see their preface following.
On the 23rd March they published the book, personally delivering the first
copies to the Chief Clerk to the Magistrates at Guildhall, to the Head Officer
of the City Police, and to the Solicitor for the City of London, giving notice
that on the 24th they would sell it at a certain place and hour. On that day,
at four p.m., they began to sell, sold 500 in the first twenty minutes, and
have since sold, it has been said, 135,000 copies. On the 12th April they
were arrested, and bailed by sureties in £lOO each, and themselves in £2OO
each, to appear on the 17th. The case occupied some days, but on the 19th
both were committed for trial, and released upon their own recognisances,


the magistrate remarking that the proceedings should have been, not by
arrest, but by summons. On the 4th May Mr. Bradlaugh applied for and
obtained a writ of certiorari to take the case before the higher court of
Queen’s Bench, his personal security for the costs being accepted. Hie case
was tried on the 18th June, and lasted several days. The Lord Chief Justice,
in summing up, said that the prosecution was most ill-advised, and that there
was not a word in the pamphlet calculated to excite the passions, tic
verdict ot the jury was, nevertheless, to the effect that the book was calcu-
lated to debase public morals, but they entirely exonerated the defendants
from bad motives in publishing it. The Chief Justice declined to receive the
verdict, having laid down that if they thought the book immoral, their verdict
must be “ guilty,” whatever they might think of the motives of the pub-
lishers. The verdict of guilty was then recorded, though it afterwards trans-
pired that some of the jury dissented, and paid their fees to the defence fund.
On the 28th of June the Chief Justice, after saying that the defendants might
have been released on their own recognisances, had they not persisted m
pushing the sale of the book after the verdict, sentenced each defendant to
six months’ imprisonment, a fine of £2OO, and to find £5OO securities for good
behaviour for two years. The execution of the sentence was postponed pend-
ing decision upon a writ of error, after which the sentence was ultimately
confirmed, though it does not seem to have been carried into effect. _ ihe de-
fendants promised to stop the sale of the book pending the final decision, and
it is not known if it has since been resumed. It is not of much consequence to
the public if it has or has not, as there are many other books which give the
same information, and in a note some particulars respecting a few of them
are given. Melbourne Editor.
THE BRADLAUGH AND BESANT PREFACE TO THE
LONDON EDITION OF 1877.
The pamphlet which we now present to the public is one which has been
lately prosecuted under Lord Campbell’s Act, and which we publish in order
to tcst P the right of publication. It was originally written by Charles Knowl-
ton M.D., an American physician, whose degree entitles him to be heard with
respect on a medical question. It is openly sold and widely circulated m
America at the present time. It was first published in England, about forty
years ago, by James Watson, the gallant radical, who came to London and
took uif Richard Carlile’s work when Garble was in ]ail. He sold it unchal-
lenged for many years, approved it, and recommended it. It was printed and
published by Messrs. Holyoake and Co., and found its place, vMh other
works of a similar character, in their “ Freethought Directory of 1853, and
was thus identified with Freethought literature at the then leading 1 ree-
thought depot. Mr Austin Holyoake, working in connection with Mr Brad-
Wh at the “ National Reformer” office, Johnson’s Court, printed and pub-
iSfed “in his tun. ; and this well-kkown Freethought advocate, m lua
“ Large or Small Families,” selected this pamplet, together with R. D.
LWtPs “Moral Physiology,” and the “Elements of Social Science, for
special recommendation. °Mr Charles Watts, succeeding to Mr Austin Holy-
oake’s business, continued the sale, and when Mr Watson died in 1875, he
bought the plates of the work (with others) from Mrsi Watson a »d eontimied
to advertise and to sell it until December 23, 1876. For the last forty jears
the book has thus been identified with Freethought, advertised by iead g
Freethinkers, published under the sanction of their names, and sold in the


head-quarters of Freethonght literature. If during this long period the party
has thus, without one word of protest, circulated an indecent work, the less
we talk about freethought morality tho better. The work has been largely
sold, and if leading freethinkers have sold it—profiting by the sale—in mere
carelessness, few words could be strong enough to brand the indifference
■which thus scattered obscenity broadcast over the land. The pamphlet has
been withdrawn from circulation in consequence of the prosecution instituted
against Mr Charles Watts ; but the question of its legality or illegality has
not been tried. A plea of “ guilty” was put in by the publisher, and the
book therefore was not examined, nor was any judgment passed upon it ; no
jury registered a verdict, and the judge stated that he had not read the
work.
We republish this pamphlet, honestly believing that on all questions
affecting the happiness of the people, whether they be theological, political,
or social, the fullest right of free discussion ought to be maintained at all
hazards. We do not personally endorse all that Dr. Knowlton says : his
u Philosophical Proem” seems to us full of philosophical mistakes, and, as
neither of us are doctors, we are not prepared to endorse his medical views,
but since progress can only he made through discussion, and no discussion is
possible wnere differing opinions are suppressed, we claim the right to publish
all opinions, so that the public, enabled to see all sides of the question, may
have the materials for forming a sound judgment.
The alterations made are very slight. The book was badly printed, and
errors of spelling, and a few clumsy grammatical expressions have been cor-
rected ; the sub-title has been changed, and in one case four lines have been
omitted, because they are repeated word for word further on. We have,
however, made some additions to the pamphlet, which are in all cases kept
distinct from the original text. Physiology has made great strides during
the past forty years, and not considering it right to circulate erroneous
physiology, we submitted tho pamphlet to a doctor in whose accurate know-
ledge we have the fullest confidence, and who is widely known in all parts of
the world as the author of the “ Elements of Social Science the notes
signed “ Gr.R.” are written by this gentleman. References to other works
are given in foot-notes for the assistance of the reader if he desires to study
the subject further.
Old Radicals will remember that Richard Garble published a work entitled
“Every Woman’s Book,” which deals with the same subject, and advocates
the same object, as Dr. Knowlton’s pamphlet. R. D. Owen objected to the
u style and tone” of Carlile’s “ Every Woman’s Book” as not being “in good
taste,” and he wrote his “ Moral Physiology” to do in America what Carlile’s
-work was intended to do in England. This work of Carlile’s was stigmatised
as “indecent” and “ immoral,” because it advocated, as does Dr. Knowlton’s,
the use of preventive checks to population. In striving to carry on Carlile’s
work we cannot expect to escape Carlile’s reproach ; but whether applauded
or condemned we mean to carry it on, socially as well as politically and
theologically.
Wo believe, with the Rev. Dr. Malthus, that population has a tendency to
increase faster than the means of existence, and that some checks must there-
fore exercise control over population. The checks now exercised are semi-
starvation and preventible disease ; the enormous mortality of the infants of
the poor is one of the checks which now keeps down the population. The
checks that ought to control population are scientific, and it is these which
we advocate. We think it more moral to prevent the conception of children
than after they are born to murder them by want of food, air, and clothing.
We advocate scientific checks to population, because so long as poor men


have large families pauperism is a necessity, and from pauperism grow crime
and disease. Ths wage which would support the parents and two or three
children in comfort and decency is utterly insufficient to maintain a family of
twelve or fourteen, and we consider it a crime to bring into the world human
beings doomed to misery, or to premature death. It is not only the hard-
working classes which are concerned in this question. The poor curate, the
struggling man of business, the young professional man, are often made
wretched for life by their inordinately large families, and their years are
passed in one long battle to live ; meanwhile the woman’s health is sacrificed,
and her life embittered from the same cause. To all of these we point the
way of relief and happiness ; for the sake of these we publish what others
fear to issue, and we do it confident that if we fail the first time we shall
succeed at last ; and that the English public will not permit the authorities
to stifle a discussion of the most important social question which can influence
_ a nation’s welfare.
(Signed) CHARLES BRADLAUGH.
ANNIE BESANT.


PHILOSOPHICAL PROEM.
Consciousness is not a “ principle” or substance of any kind ; nor is It, strictly
speaking, a property of any substance or being. It is a peculiar action of the
nervous system; and the nervous system is said to be sensible, or to possess the
property of sensibility, because those sentient actions which constitute our different
consciousness, may be excited in it. The nervous system includes not only the
brain and spinal marrow, but numerous soft white cords, called nerves, which
extend from the brain and spinal marrow to every part of the body in which a
sensation can be excited.
A sensation is a sentient action of a nerve and the brain ; a thought or idea,
{both the same thing), is a sentient action of that brain alone. A sensation, or a
thought, is consciousness, and there is no consciousness but what consists either m
a sensation or a thought. .
Agreeable consciousness constitutes what we call happiness, and disagreeable
consciousnes constitutes misery. As sensations are a higher degree of conscious-
ness than mere thoughts, it follows that agreeable sensations constitute a more
exquisite happiness than agreeable thoughts. This portion of happiness which con-
sists in agreeable sensations is commonly called pleasure. No thoughts are agree-
able except those which were originally excited by, or have been associated with,
agreeable sensations. Hence if a person never had experienced any agreeable sen-
sations, he could have no agreeable thoughts; and would of course be an entire
stranger to happiness. . . , ~
There ore five species of sensation —seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling.
There are many varieties of feeling—as the leeling of hunger, thirst, cold, haidness,
-&c. Many of those feelings are excited by agents that act upon the exteiior ot the
body, such as solid substances of every kind, heat, and various chemical initants.
Other feelings owe their existence to states or conditions of internal organs. These
latter feelings are called passions. .
Those passions which owe their existence chiefly to the state of the brain, or to
causes acting directly upon the brain, are called the moral passions, i ney are g. ief,
ano-er, love, &c. They consist of sentient actions which commence in the brain and
extend to the nerves in the region of the stomach, heart, &c. But when the cause
of the internal feeling or passions is seated in some organ remote fiom the brain,
as in the stomach, the genital organs, &c., the sentient action which constitutes the
passion, commences in the nerves of such organ, and extends to the brain ; and the
passion is called an appetite, instinct, or desire. Some of these passions are natural,
as hunger, thirst, the reproductive instinct, the desire to urinate, &c. Others are
gradually acquired by habit. A hankering for stimulants, as spirits, opium, and
tobacco, is one of these. . ~
Such is the nature of things that our most vivid and agreeable sensations cannot
be excited under all circumstances, nor beyond a certain extent under any circum-
stances, without giving rise, in one way or another, to an amount of d'sagreeap e
consciousness, or misery, exceeding the amount of agreeable consciousness which.
attends such ill-timed or excessive gratification. To excite agreeable sensations to
a decree not exceeding this certain extent, is temperance; to excite them beyond
this extent, is intemperance; not to excite them at all, is mortification or abstinence.
This certain extent varies with different individuals, according to their several
circumstances, so that what would be temperance in one person may be intern-
from'disagreeable consciousness, is to be in a state which, compared
with a state of misery, is a happy state ; yet absolute happiness does not consist in
the absence of misery—if it does, rocks aro happy. It consists, as aforesaid in
.agreeable consciousness. That which enables a person to excite or maintain
-agreeable consciousness, is not happiness; but the idea of having such in o


possession is agreeable, and of course is a portion of happiness. Health and?
wealth go far in enabling a person to excite and maintiin agreeable consciousness.
That which gives rise to agreeable consciousness is good, and we desire it. If we-
use it intemperately, such use is bad, but the thing itself is still good. Those acts
(and intentions are acts of that part of man which intends) of human beings which
tend to the promotion of happiness are good ; but they are also called virtuous, to-
distinguish them from other things of the same tendency. There is nothing for the-
xvord virtue to signify but virtuous actions. Sin signifies nothing but sinful actions
and sinful, wicked, vicious, or bad actions, are those which are productive of more-
misery than happiness.
When an individual gratifies any of his instincts in a temperate degree, he adds-
an item to the sum total of human happiness, and causes the amount of human
happiness to exceed the amount of misery, farther than if he had not enjoyed
himself; therefore it is virtuous, or, to say the least, it is not vicious or sinful for
him so to do. But it must ever be remembered, that this temperate degree depends
cn circumstances—that one person’s health, pecuniary circumstances, or social
relations may be such that it would cause more misery than happiness for him to do-
an act which, being done by a person under different circumstances, would cause
more happiness than misery. Therefore it would be right for the latter to perform
such act, but not for the former.
Again. Owing to one’s ignorance, he may not be able to gratify a desire without
causing misery (wherefore it would be wrong for him to do it), but which, with
knowledge of means to prevent this misery, he may so gratify it that more pleasure-
than pain will be the result of the act, in which case the act to say the least is-
justifiable. Now, therefore, it is virtuous, nay, it is a duty for him who has a.
knowledge of such means, to convey it to those who have it not; for, by so
he furthers the cause of human happiness.
Man by nature is endowed with the talent of devising means to remedy or pre-
vent the evils that are liable to arise from gratifying our appetites; and it is as
much the duty of the physician to inform mankind of the means of preventing the-
evils that are liable to arise from gratifying the reproductive instinct, as it is to-
inform them how to keep clear of the gout or the dyspepsia. Let not the cold
ascetic say we ought not to gratify our appetites any further than is necessary to
maintain health, and to perpetuate the species. Mankind will not so abstain, and
if means to prevent the evils that may arise from a farther gratification can be
devised, they need not. Heaven has not only given us the capacity of greater en-
joyment, but the talent of devising means to prevent the evils that are liable to
arise therefrtm ; and it becomes us, “ with thanksgiving,” to make the most of
them.


Knowlton’s
FRUITS OF PHILOSOPHY.
CHAPTER I.
Showing how desirable it is, both in a political and a social point of
view, for mankind to be able to limit, at will, the number of their
offspring, without sacrificing the pleasure that attends the gratifica ion,
of the reproductive instinct.
First.— ln a political point of view.— lf population be not restrained
some great physical calamity, such as we have reason to hope will not here
Sr £ visited upon the children of men, or by some moral restraint tho
time will come when the earth cannot support its inhabitants. Population,
unrestrained, will double three times in a century. Hence, computing the
present population of the earth at 1000 millions, there would be at the end of
one hundred years from the present time, 8000 millions.
At the end of 200 years, 64,000 millions.
300 „ 612,000 „
And so on multiplying by eight for every additional hundred years, bo that
in 600 years from the present time, there would be thnty-two thousand seven
hundred and sixty-eight times as many inhabitants as at present. It lie
natural increase should go on without check for 1000 years,, one sing e pan
would increase to more than thirty five thousand one hundred and etghty-fo
times as many as the present population of the whole earth . ...
Some check, then, there must be, or the time will come when imlhonai will
be born but to suffer and to perish for the necessaries of life To what aft
inconceivable amount of human misery would suJi a state of tlnngs gi o
rise » And must we say that vice, war, pestilence, and famine, are _ desirable
to prevent it ? Must the friends of temperance and domestic ha P pl ” e '" 3 St
their efforts ? Must peace societies excite to war and bloodshed i Mast to
physician cease to investigate the nature of contagion, and to search for t
ineans of destroying its bineful influence ? Must he that becomes d.seased
marked as a victim to die for the public good, without the P™
making an effort to restore him to health ? And in case ot a failure ot crops
in one part of the world, must the other parts withhold the means of
supporting life, that the far greater evil of excessives population throughout
the P globe g may be prevented ? Can there be no effectual moral restraint,
attended with far less human misery than such physical ca amflies as these .
Most surely there can. But what is it. Malthus, an ng: is i
subiect of population, gives us none but celibacy to a late age. Uat now
itis to Suppose* that men and women will become as monks, and nun.
during the very holiday of their existence, and abjure during the fairest- years
of their lives the nearest and dearest ot social relations, to avert acatastropho
which they, and perhaps their children, will not live to witness- But besides,
ineffectual or if effectual, requiring a great sacrifice of enjoyment,,
this restraint is highly objectionable on the score of its de
It would give rise to a frightful increase of prostitution, of intemperance ami


•onanism, and prove destructive to health and moral feelings. In spite of
preacmng, human nature will ever remain the same ; and that restraint which
forbids the gratification of the reproductive interest, will avail but little with
the mass of mankind. The checks to be hererfter mentioned are the only
moral restraints to population known to the writer, that are unattended with
serious objections. . ...
Besides starvation with all its accompanying evils, over-population is
attended with other public evils, of which may be mentioned ignorance and
slavery. Where the mass of the people must toil incessantly to obtain
support, they must remain ignorant, and where ignorance prevails, tyranny
reigns.
Second. —In a social -point of view.— 11 Is it not notorious that the families
of the married often increase beyond what a regard for the young beings
coming into the world, or the happiness o£ those who give them birth, would
dictate ? In how many instances does the hard-working father and more
especially the mother, of a poor family, remain slaves throughout their lives
tugging at the oar of incessant labour, toiling to live, and living but to toil ;
when if their offspring had been limited to two or three only, they might
have enjoyed comfort and comparative affluence ? How often is the health
of the mother, giving birth every year to an infant—happy if it be not twins
and compelled to toil on, even at those times when nature imperiously cabs
for some relief from daily drudgery. Ho \v often is the mother s cmiitoi t
health nav even her life, thus sacrificed ! Or if care and toil ha\e weigned
down the spirit, and at last broken the health of the father, how often is the
widow left unable, with the most virtuous intentions, to save her iatheilcss
offspring from becoming degraded objects of charity, or profligate votaucs o
>1( “Nor is this all. Many women are so constituted that they cannot give
birth to healthy—sometimes not to living children. Is it desirable m it
moral that such women should become pregnant ? Yet this is continually
the case Others there are, who ought never to become parents , because if
J ev do it is only to transmit to their offspring grievous hereditary diseases,
ami render such mere subjects of misery throughout their sickly existence.
Yet Si women will not lead a life of celibacy. They marry . They become
narents and the sum of human misery is increased by their doing so. But it
fs follv’to expect we can induce such persons to live the lives ot Shakers. Nor
is it necessary all that duty requires of them is to refrain from becoming
na ents Who can estimate the beneficial effect which a rational moral
restraint may thus have on the health, and beauty, and physical improvement
of our race throughout future generations.
Let us now turn our attention to the case of unmarried jouth.
“Almost all young persons, on reaching the age of maturity, desue to
marrv That heart must be very cold, or very isolated, that does not find
soliuf object on which to bestow its affections. Thus, early marriages would
be almost universal, did not prudential considerations £
man thinks,‘l cannot marry yet: I SUl !S^VfterwTrd^
money first, and think of a matrimonial settlement afterwards.
« \n d so he goes to making money, fully and sincerely resolved m a few
. •*. *i.i t nr* itriiATTi lip now lovgs. 13ut passions fire strong «in<l
years, to .tax ,Jt W.U.i he now o£
iniscraoie o , f, j mora i feelings alike make shipwreck, ilie
affections he" had thought ‘to treasure up for their first object are chilled by
SSJJSL Ld blunted by excess. He scarcely retains a passion but avarice.


Years pass on —years of profligacy and speculation—and his first wish is
accomplished ; liis fortune is made. Where now are the feelings and resolves
of his youth ?
—“ Like the dew of- the mountain,
Like the foam on the river,
Like the bubble on the fountain,
They are gone—and for ever 1”
«Heis a man of pleasure—a man of the world. He laughs at the romance
of his youth, and marries a fortune. If gaudy equipage and gay parties
confer happiness, he is happy. But if they be only the sunshine on the
stormy sea below, he is a victim until the period when provision has been
made for a large expected family. Had he married the first object of his
choice, and simply delayed becoming a father until his prospects seemed to
warrant it, how different might have been his lot! Until men and women
are absolved from the fear of becoming parents, except when they themselves
wish it, they ever will form mercenary and demoralizing connexions, and seek
in dissipation the happiness they might have found in domestic life.
“ I know that this, however common, is not a universal case. Sometimes
the heavy responsibilities of a family are incurred at all risks ; and who
shall say‘how often a life of unremitting toil and poverty is the consequence ?
Sometimes if even rarely the young mind does hold to its first resolves. The
youth plods through years of cold celibacy and solitary anxiety ; happy, if
before the best hours of his life are gone, and its warmest feelings withered,
he may return to claim the reward of his forbearance and his industry. But
even in this comparatively happy case, shall we count for nothing the 3*cars
of ascetic sacrifice at which after happiness is purchased? The days of
youth are not too many, nor its affections too lasting. We may, indeed, if a
.great object require it, sacrifice the one and mortify the other. But is this,
in itself, desirable ? Docs not wisdom tell us that such a sacrifice is a dead
Jogs—to the warm-hearted, often a grievous one ? Does not wisdom bid us
temperately enjoy the spring-time of life, ‘ while the evil days come not, nor
the years draw nigh, when we shall say, we have no pleasure in them i
“ Let us say, then, if we will, that the youth who thus sacrifices the present
for the future, chooses wisely between the two evils, profligacy and asceticism.
This is true. But let us not imagine the lesser evil to be a good. It is not
good for man to be alone. It is for no man sor woman s hajjpincss or benefit
that they should be condemned to Shakerism. It is a violence done to the
feelings, and an injurv done to the character. A life of rigid celibacy,
though infinitely preferable to a life of dissipation, is yet fraught with many
evils. Peevishness, restlessness, vague longings, and instability of character
are among the least of these. The mind is unsettled, and the judgment
warped. .Even the very instinct which is thus mortified, assumes an undue
importance, and occupies a portion of the thoughts which does not of light
or nature belong to it ; and which, during a life of satisfied affection, it
would not obtain.”
In many instances the genital organs are rendered so irritable by the reple-
tion to which unnatural continency gives rise, and by the much thinking. ,
caused by such repletion, as to induce a disease known to medical men by the
■name of Gonorrhoea Dormientium. It consists in an emission or discharge of
rthe semen during sleep. This discharge is immediately excited in most
instances by a lascivious dream ; but such dream is caused by the repletion
and instability of the genital orgrns. It is truly astonishing to what a degree
of mental anguish this disease gives rise in young men. They do not under-
stand the nature, or rather, the cause of it. They think it depends on a
weakness—indeed, the disease is often called a 11 seminal weakness —and.


that the least gratification in a natural way would but servo to increase it-
■ Their anxiety about it weakens the whole system. This weakness they
erroneously attribute to the discharges ; they think themselves totally dis-
qualified for entering into or enjoying the married state. Finally, the genital
and mental organs act and re-act upon each other so perniciously, as to cause-
a degree of nervousness, debility, emaciation, and melancholy—in a word, a
wretched ness that sets description at defiance. Nothing is so effectual in
curing this diseased state of body and mind, in young man, as marriage. All
restraint, fear, and solicitude should be removed.
“ Inasmuch, then, as the scruples of incurring heavy responsibilities deter
from forming moral connections, and encourage intemperance and prostitu-
tion, the knowledge which enables man to limit the number of his offspring
would in the present state of things save much unhappiness, and prevent
many crimes. Young persons sincerely attached to each other, and who-
might wish to marry, would marry early—merely resolving not to become
parents until prudence permitted it. The young man, instead of solitary
toil and vulgar dissipation, would enjoy the society and the assistance of her
he had chosen as his companion, and the best years of life, whose pleasures;
never return, would not be squandered in riot, nor lost through mortification.” -
CHAPTER II.
On Generation.
I hold the following to be important and undeniable truths :—That every
man has a natural right both to receive and to convey a knowledge of all tho
facts and discoveries of every art and science, excepting such only as may be
secured to some particular person or persons by copyright or patent. That a
■physical truth in its general effect cannot be a moral evil. “ That no fact
in physics or in morals ought to be concealed from the inquiring mind.”
Some may make a misuse of knowledge, but that is their fault; and it is
not right that one person should be deprived of knowledge, of spirits, of
razors, or of anything else which is harmless in itself and may be useful to-
him, because another may misuse it.
The subject of generation is not only interesting as a branch of science, but
it is so connected with the happiness of mankind that it is highly important
in a practical point of view. Such, to be sure, is the custom of the age that
it is not considered a proper subject to investigate before a popular assembly,
nor is it proper to attend the calls of nature in a like place ; yet they must and
ought to be attended to, for the good—the happiness of mankind requires it ;
so, too, for like reason, the subject of generation cught to be investigated until
it be rightly understood by all people, but at such opportunities as the good
sense of every individual will easily decide to be proper. This I presume to-
say, not simply upon the abstract principle that all knowledge of nature’s
workings is useful, and the want of it disadvantageous ; but from the known
moral fact, that ignorance of this process has in many instances proved the
cause of a lamentable “ mishapand more especially as it is essential
to the attainment of the great advantages which it is the object of this work
to bestow upon mankind.
People generally, as was the case with physicians until of late years, enter-
tain a very erroneous idea of what takes place in the process of conception.
Agreeable to this idea, the “ check ” which I consider far preferable to any
other, would not be effectual, as would be obvious to all. Consequently,
entertaining this idea, people would not have due confidence in it. Hence-


it is necessary to correct u long held and widely extended error. But this I
-cannot expect to do by simply saying it is an error. Deep rooted and hereto-
fore undisputed opinions are not so easily eradicated. If 1 would convince any
one that the steps in one of the most recondite processes of nature are not
such as he has always believed, it will greatly serve my purpose to show
what these steps are. I must first prepare him to be reasoned with, and then
reason the matter all over with him—l must point out the facts which
disprove his opinion, and show that my own is unattended with diili-
-culties. , ...
But what can be more obvious than that it is absolutely impossible to
explain any process or function of the animal economy so as to be understood,
before the names of the organs which perform this function have been defined,
that is, before the organs themselves have been described ? Now it is well
known to every anatomist, and indeed it must be obvious to all, that in
■describing any organ or system of organs we must always begin with some
external and known part, and proceed regularly, step by step, to the internal
and unknown. As in arithmetic, “ everything must be understood as you go
along.”
Fully to effect the objects of this work, it is, therefore, a matter of necessity
that I give an anatomical description of certain parts—even external parts —
which some, but for what I have just said, might think it useless to mention.
It is not to gratify the idle curiosity of the light-minded that this book is
written : it is for utility in the broad and truly philosophical sense of the
term ; nay. farther, it shall, with the exception of here and there a little
spicing, be'confined to practical utility. I shall therefore endeavour to treat
of the subject in this chapter so as to be understood, without giving any
description of the male organs of generation ; though I hold it an accomplish-
ment for one to be able to speak of those organs, as diseases often put them
under the necessity of doing, without being compelled to use low and vulgar
language. But I must briefly describe the female organs ; in doing which, I
must, of course, speak as do other anatomists and physiologists; and who-
ever to this objects, will discover more affectation and prudery than good sense
, and good-will to mankind.
The adipose or fatty matter immediately over the share bone, forms a
considerable prominence in females, which, at the age of puberty, is covered
with hair, as in males. The prominence is called Mans Veneris.
The exterior orifice commences immediately below this. On each side of
this orifice is a prominence continued from the Mans Veneris, which is largest
above and gradually diminishes as it descends. These two prominences are
• called the Labia Externa, or external lips. Near the latter end of pregnancy
they become somewhat enlarged and relaxed, so that they sustain little or no
injury during parturition. Just within the upper or anterior commissure
formed by the junction of these lips, a little round oblong body is situated.
This body is called the Clitoris. Most df its length is bound down, as it were,
closely to the bone ; and it is of very variable size in different females. In-
stances have occurred where it was so enlarged as to enable the female to haA e
venereal commerce with others ; and in Paris this fact was once made a
public exhibition of to the medical faculty. Women thus formed appear to
partake in their general form of the male character, and are termed herma-
phrodites. The idea of human beings, called hermaphrodites, which could be
either father or mother, is, doubtless, erroneous. The clitoris is analogous
in its structure to the penis, and like it, is exquisitely sensible, being, as it is
supposed, the principal seat of pleasure. It is subject to erection or distension,
like the penis, and from like causes. # ,
The skin which lines the internal surface of the external lips is folded in


such a manner as to form two flat bodies, the exterior edges of which are-
convex. They are called the Nymphai. They extend downward, one on
each side, from the clitoris to near the middle of the external orifice, some-
what diverging from each other. Their use is not very evident. Ihe orifice
of the urethra (the canal, short in females, which leads to the bladder} is
situated an inch or more farther inward than the clitoris, and is a little pro-
tuberant. .
Passing by the external lips, the clitoris, the nymphae, and the orifice or the
urethra, we come to the membrane called the Hymen. It is situated just at
or a trifle behind the orifice of the urethra. It is stretched across the passage,,
and were it a complete septum, it would close up the anterior extremity of
that portion of the passage which is called the Vagina. But the instances in
which this septum or partition is complete, are very rare ; there being, in
almost all cases, an aperture either in its centre, or, more frequently in its
anterior edge, giving the membrane the form of a crescent. Through this-
aperture passes the menstrual fluid. Sometimes, however, this septum is
complete, and the menstrual fluid is retained month after month, until appear-
ances and symptoms much like those of pregnancy are produced, giving rise
perhaps to unjust suspicions. Such cases require the simple operation of
dividing the hymen. In many instances the hymen is very imperfect, inso-
much that some have doubted whether it is to be found in the generality of
virgins. Where it exists, it is generally ruptured in the first intercourse of
the sexes and the female is said to lose her virginity. In some rare instances
it is so very strong as not lb be ruptured by such intercourse : and the nature
of the difficulty not being understood, the husband has sued for a divorce.
But everything may be put to rights by a slight surgical operation. 'lhe
parts here described are among those called the external parts of generation.
The Internal organs of generation consist, in the female, of the Vagina,,
the Uterus, the Ovaries and their appendages.
The Va s ina is a membranous canal commencing at the hymen, and extend-
ing to the uterus. It is a little curved, and extends backwards and upwards
between the bladder, which lies before and above it, and that extreme portion
of the bowels, called the rectum , which lies behind it. The coat or membrane
which lines the internal surface of the vagina, forms a number of transverse
ridges. These ridges are to be found only in the lower or anterior half of the
vagina, and they do not extend all round the vagina, but are situated on its
anterior and posterior sides, while their lateral sides are smooth. I mention
these ridges, because a knowledge of them may lead to a more effectual use
of one of the checks to be made known hereafter.
The Uterus , or womb, is also situated between the bladder and the rectum,
but above the vagina. Such is its shape that it has been compared to a pear
with a long neck. There is, of course, considerable difference between the
body and the neck, the first being twice as broad as the last. Bach of these
parts is somewhat flattened. In subjects of mature age, who have never been
pregnant, the whole of the uterus is about two inches and a half in length, and
more than an inch and a half in breadth at the broadest part of the body. It
is near an inch in thickness. The neck of the uterus is situated downwards,
and may be said to be inserted into the upper extremity of the vagina. It
extends down into the vagina the better part of an inch. In the uterus is a
cavity, which approaches the triangular form, and from which a canal passes
down through the neck of the uterus into the vagina. 'lbis cavity is so
small that its sides are almost in contact. So that the uterus is a thick firm
organ for so small a one. Comparing the cavity of the uterus to a triangle,
we say the upper side or line of this triangle is transverse, with respect to the
body, and the other two lines pass downwards and inwards, so that they


would form an angle below, did they, before they meet, take a turn more-
directly downwards to form the canal just mentioned. In each of! the upper
angles there is an orifice of such size as to admit of a hogs bristle, l.'.ese
little orifices are the mouths of two tubes, called the Fallopian tubes, of which
more will be said presently. The canal which passes through the neck of the-
uterus, connecting the cavity of this organ with that of the vagina, is about a
quarter of an inch in diameter. It is different from other ducts, for it seems
to be a part of the cavity from which it extends, inasmuch as when the cavity
of the uterus is enlarged in the progress of pregnancy, this canal is gradually
converted into a part of that cavity.
The lower extremity of the neck of the uterus is irregularly convex and
tumid. The orifice of the canal in it, is oval, and so situated that it divides-
the convex surfaces of the lower extremity of the neck in two portions, which
are called the lips of the uterus. The anterior is thicker than the posterior.
The orifice itself is called os tinea:, or os uteri, or, in English, the month of tha
womb. When the parts are in a weak relaxed state, the mouth or neck of
the uterus is quite low, and in almost all cases it may be reached by a linger
introduced into the vagina, especially by a second person who carries his hand
behind. .
The Ovaries are twe bodies of a flattened or oval form, one of which is
situated on each side of the uterus, at a little distance from it, and about as
high up as where the uterus becomes narrow to form its neck. The longest
diameter of the ovarium is about an inch. Each ovarium has a firm coat of
membrane. In those who have not been pregnant, it contains from ten to
twenty vesicles , which are little round bodies, formed of a delicate membrane,
and filled with a transparent fluid. Some of these vesicles arc situated so-
near the surface of the ovarium as to be prominent on its surface. I hey are
of different sizes, the largest nearly a quarter of an inch in diameter.
In those in whom conception has ever taken place, some of these vesicles
are removed, and in their place a cicatrix or scar is formed which continues
through life. However, the number of cicatrices does not always correspond
with the number of conceptions. They often exceed it, and are sometimes
found where conception has not been known to have taken place.
The Fallopian Tubes are two canals four or five inches in length, proceeding
from the upper angles of the cavity of the uterus, in a transverse direction, in
respect of the body. Having so proceeded for some distance, they turn
downwards towards the ovaries. At their commencement in the uterus they
are very small'; but they enlarge as much as they progress. The large ends
which hang loose, terminate in open mouths, the margins of which consist of
fimbriated processes, and nearly touch the ovaria.
We are now prepared to treat of conception. Yet as is
closely connected with it, and as a knowledge of many things concerning
menstruation may contribute much to the well-being of females, for whom .
this world is at least as much designed as for males, I shall first briefly treat
of this subject.
Menstruation. When females arrive at the age of puberty, they begin to
have a discharge once every month, by way of the vagina, the colour of blood.
This discharge is termed the menses. To have it, is to menstruate. The age
at which menstruation commences varies with different individuals, and also
in different climates. The warmer the climate, the earlier it commences and
ceases. In temperate climates it generally commences at the age of fourteen
or fifteen, and ceases at forty-four, or a little later. Whenever it commences,,
the girl acquires a more womanly appearance. It is a secretion of the uterus,
or in other the minute vessels distributed to the inner coat of the
uterus, select, as it were, from the blood, and pour out in a gradual


manner, the materials of this fluid. It has one of the properties, colour, of
blood, but it does not coagulate, nor separate into different parts like blood,
and cannot properly be called blood. When this discharge is in all respects
regular, it amounts in most females to six or eight ounces, and is of from two
to four days continuance. During its continuance the woman is said to bo
unwell, or out of order. Various unpleasant feelings are liable to attend it ;
but when it is attended with severe pain, as it not unfrequently is, it becomes
a disease, and the woman is not likely to conceive until it be cured. During
the existence of the “ turns,” or the “ monthlies,” as they are often called,
indigestible food, dancing in warm rooms, sudden exposure to cold or wet, and
mental agitations should be avoided as much as possible. The “ turns ” do
not continue during pregnancy, nor nursing, unless nursing be continued too
long. The milk becomes bad if nursing be continued after the turns re-
commence. Some women, it is true, are subject to a slight hermorrhage,
that sometimes occurs with considerable regularity during pregnancy, and has
led them to suppose they have their turns at such times ; but it is not so ; the
discharge at such times is real blood.
The use of the menstrual discharge seems to be to prepare the uterine
system for conception. For females do not become pregnant before they
■commence, nor after they cease having their turns ; nor while they arp sup-
pressed by some disease, by cold, or by nursing, Some credible women have,
however, said that they become pregnant while nursing, without having had
any turn since their last lying-in. It is believed that, in these cases, they had
some discharge, colourless perhaps, which they did not notice, but which
answered the purposes of the common one. Women are not near so likely to
conceive during the week before a monthly, as during the week immediately
after. But although the use of this secretion seems to be to prepare for con-
ception, it is not to be inferred that the reproductive instinct ceases at the
Xl turn of life,” or when the woman ceases to menstruate. On the contrary, it
is said that this passion often increases at this period, and continues in a
greater or less degree to an extreme age.
Conception. The part performed by the male in the reproduction of the
species consists in exciting the orgasm of the female, and depositing the
semen in the vagina. Before I inquire what takes place in the females, I
propose to speak of the semen.
This fluid, which is secreted by the testicles, may be said to possess three
kinds of properties—physical, chemical, physiological. Its physical properties
are known to every one —it is a thickish, nearly opaque fluid, of a peculiar
odor, saltish taste, &c. As to its chemical properties, it is found by analysis
to consist of 900 parts of water, GO of animal mucilage, 10 of soda, 30 of
phosphate of lime. Its physiological property is that of exciting the female
genital organs in a peculiar manner.
When the semen is examined by a microscope, there can be distinguished
a multitude of small animalculoe, which appear to have a rounded head and
a long tail. These animalculae move with a certain degree of rapidity. They
appear to avoid the light and to delight in the shade. Leeuwenhoek, if not
the discoverer of the seminal animalculas, was the first who brought the fact
of their existence fully before the public. With respect to their size, he
remarked that ten thousand of them might exist in a space not larger than a
grain of sand/ They have a definite figure, and are obviously different from
the animalcules found in any other fluid. Leeuwenhoek believed them to be
the beginnings of future animals—that they are of different sexes, and even
thought he could discover a difference of sex, upon which depends the future
sex of the foetus. Be this as it may, it appears to be admitted on all hands,
that the animalcules are present in the semen of the various species of male


animals, and that they cannot be detected when either from age or disease the
animals are rendered sterile. “ Hence,” says Bostock, “we can scarcely refuse
our assent to the position, that these animalcules are in some way or other
instrumental to the fuetus.” The secretion of the semen commences at
the age of puberty. Before this period the testicles secrete a viscid, transpa-
rent fluid, which has never been analysed, but which is doubtless essentially
different from semen. The revolution which the whole economy undergoes
at this period, such as the tone of the voice, the development of hairs, the
beard, and increase of the muscles and bones, &c., is intimately connected with
the existence of the testicles and the secretion of this fluid. “ Eunuchs pre-
serve the same form as in childhood ; their voice is effeminate, they have no
beard, their disposition is generally timid ; and finally their physical and moral
character very nearly resembles that of females. Nevertheless, many of them
take delight in venereal intercourse, and give themselves up with ardour to a
connexion which must always be unfruitful.”
The part performed by the female in the reproduction of the species is far
more complicated than that performed by the male. It consists, in the first
instance in providing a substance, which in connexion with the male secretion,
is to constitute the fuetus ; in furnishing a suitable situation in which the
foetus may be developed ; in affording due nourishment for its growth ; in
bringing it forth ; and afterwards furnishing it with food especially adapted
to the digestive organs of the young animal. Some parts of this process are
not well understood, and such a variety of hypothesis have been proposed to
explain them that Drelincourt, who lived in the latter part of the 17th century,
is said to have collected 2GO hypothesis of generation.
It ought to be known that women have conceived when the semen was
merely applied to the parts anterior to the hymen, as the internal surface of
the external lips, the nyrnplue, &c. This is proved by the fact that several
cases of pregnancy have occurred when the hymen was entire. This fact need
not surprise us ; for, agreeable to the theory of absorption, we have te account
for it, only to suppose that some of the absorbent vessels are situated anterior
to the hymen—a supposition by no means unreasonable.
There are two peculiarities of the human species respecting conception,
which I will notice. First, unlike other animals, they are liable—and for what
has yet been proved to the contrary, equally liable to conceive at all seasons
of the .year. Second, a woman rarely, if ever, conceives until after having
had several sexual connexions : nor does one connexion in fifty cause con-
‘ception in the matrimonial state, where the husbandaud wife live together
Uninterruptedly.Public women rarely conceive, owing probably to a
-Weakened state of the genital system, induced by too frequent and pro-
miscuous intercourse.
A woman is most likely to conceive, first when she is in health ; second,
between the ages of twenty-six and thirty ; third, after she has for a season
been deprived of those intercourses she had previously enjoyed ; and fourth,
soon after a monthly turn.
It is universally agreed, that sometime after a fruitful connexion, a vesicle
(two in case of twins) of one oi the other ovary becomes so enlarged, that it
bursts forth from the ovary, and takes the name of ovum ; which is taken up,
or rather received as it bursts forth, by the fimbriated extremity of the fallo-
pian tube, and is then slowly conducted along the tube into the uterus, to the
inner surface of which it attaches itself. Here it becomes developed into a
full-grown fuetus, and is brought forth about forty-two weeks from the time
of conception, by a process termed parturition. But ono grand question is how
the semen operates in causing the vesicle to enlarge, &c.; whether the semen
itself or any part thereof reaches the ovary, and if so, in what way it is con-


veved to them. It was long the opinion, that the semen was ejected into the
uterus in the act of coition ; and that it afterwards by some unknown means
finds its way into and along the fallopian tubes to the ovary. But there are
several facts which weigh heavily against this opinion, and some that entirely
forbid it. In the first place, there are several well attested instances m which
impregnation took place while the hymen remained entire ; where the vagina
terminated in the rectum ; and where it was so contracted by a cicatrix as not
to admit the penis. In all these cases the semen could not have been lodged
anywhere near the mouth of the uterus, much less ejected into it. Secondly,
it has followed a connexion where, from some defect in the male organs, as
the urethra terminating seme inches behind the end of the penis, it is clear
that the semen could not have been injected into the uterus, nor even near its
mouth Third, the neck of the unimpregnated uterus is so narrow as merely
to admit a probe, and is filled with a thick tenacious fluid, which seemingly
could not bo forced away bv anv force which the male organ possesses ot
ejecthm the semen, even if the mouth of the male urethra were m apposition
with that of the uterus. But, fourth, the mouth of the uterus is by no means
fixed. By various causes it is made to assume situations, and pro-
bably the mouth of the urethra rarely comes in contact with it.
Fifth. “ The tenacity of the male semen is such as renders its passage
through the small aperture in the neck of the uterus impossible, even by a
power or force much superior to that which we may rationally suppose to
reside in the male organs of generation.’
Sixth. “Harvey and De G-raaf dissected rnimals at almost every period
after coition, for the express purpose of discovering the semen, but av ere nev ci
able to detect the smallest vestige of it in the uterus in any one instance.
Aware of the insurmountable objections to this view of the manner in which
the semen reaches the ovary, it has been supposed by some physiologists that
the semen is absorbed from the vagina into the great circulating system, wheie
it is mixed, of course, with the blood, and goes the whole round ot the circu-
lation, subject to the influence of those causes which produce great changes m
the latter fluid. .... . ... , ~
To this hypothesis it may be objected, that while there is no direct evidence
in support of it, it is exceedingly unreasonable, inasmuch as we can scarcely
believe that the semen can go the whole round of the circulation, and then
find its way to the ovary in such a pure unaltered state as the experiments ot
Spallanzani prove it must be in, that it may impregnate.
A third set of theorists have maintained that an imperceptible somet.iing,
which they called aura seminalis , passes from the semen lodged in the vagina
to the ovary, and excites those actions which are essential to the development
of an ovum. Others, again, have told us, that it is all done by sympathy.
That neither the semen nor any volatile .part of it finds its way to the ov ar> ,
"but that the semen excites the parts with which it is in contact in a peculiai
manner, and by a law of the animal economy, termed sympathy or consent ot
parts, a peculiar action commences in the ovary, by which an ovum is
To both these conjectures, it may be objected that they have ne> other
foundation but the supposed necessity of adopting them, to account lx»r ic
effect of impregnation ; and further, they “make no provision for the forma-
tion of mules ; for the peculiarities of, and likeness to parents, and tor t.ie
propagation of predisposition to disease, from parent to child ; tor tie
production of mulattoes, &c.” . „ , , . .
A fifth, and to me far more satisfactory view of the subject than any
other, is that advanced by our distinguished countryman, Ur. Dewees, ot
.Philadelphia. It appears to harmonise with all known facts relating to tlif


subject of conception ; and something from analogy may also bo drawn in
its favour. It is this : that there is a set of absorbent vessels loading
directly from the inner surface of the labia externa and tiie vagina to
the ovaries, the whole office of which vessels is to absorb the semen and
convey it to the ovaries. Ido not know that these vessels have yet been
fully discovered ; but in a note of the sixteenth page of his “ Essays on
Various Subjects,” the doctor says ;—The existence of these vessels is now
rendered almost certain, as Dr. Gartner, of Copenhagen, has discovered a duct
leading from the ovary to the vagina.”
Another question of considerable moment relating to generation is, from
which parent are the first rudiments of the foetus derived ?
The earliest hypothesis with which we are acquainted, and which has
received the support of some of the most eminent of the moderns, ascribes the
original formation of the foetus to the combination of particles of matter
derived from each of the parents. This hypothesis naturally presents itself
to the mind as the obvious method of explaining the necessity for the co-
operation of the two sexes, and the resemblance in external form, and even in
mind and character, which the offspring frequently bears to the male parent.
*• The principal objections,” says Bostock, “ to this hypothesis, independent of
the want of any direct proof of a female seminal fluid, are of two descriptions,
those which depend upon the supposed impossibility of unorganised matter
forming an organised being ; and those which are derived from observations
and experiments of Haller and Spallanzani, which they brought forward in
support of their theory of pre-existent germs.
In relation to these objections I remark, first, that those whose experience
has been with hale females, I suspect can have no doubt but tliat the female
orgasm increases like that of the male, until an emission of fluid of some kind
or other takes place. But whether this secretion may properly bo called
semen, whether any part of it unites with the male semen in forming the
rudiments of the foetus, is another question. For my own part lam inclined
to the opinion that it does not. I rather regard it as the result of exalted
excitation, analogous to the increased secretion of other organs from increased'
stimulation ; and if it be for any object or use, as it probably is, it is that of
affording nature a means of relieving herself ; or in other words, of quieting
the venereal passion. If this passion, being once roused, could not by some
means or other be calmed, it would command by far too great a proportion of
our thoughts, and with many constitutions, the individuals, whether male or
females could not conduct themselves with due decorum. One fact which
leads me to think that the female secretion in the act of coiton is not essential
to impregnation, is, that many females have conceived, if their unbiassed tes-
timony may be relied on, when they experienced no pleasure. In these cases
it is more than probable that there was no orgasm, nor any secretion or
emission of fluid on the part of the female.
As to the objection of “ the supposed impossibility of unorganized matter
forming an organized being.” Ido not conceive that it weighs at all against
the hypothesis before ns ; for I do not believe such a thing takes place, even
if we admit that “ the original formation of the foetus is a combination of
particles of matter derived from* each of the parents.” What .do, or rather,
what ought we to mean by organized matter ? Not, surely, that it exhibits
some obvious physical structure, unlike what is to he found in inorganic
matter, hut that it exhibits phenomena, and of course may be said to possess
properties unlike any kind of inorganic matter. Matter unites with matter
in three ways, mechanically, chemically, and organically ; and each mode of
union gives rise to properties peculiar to itself. When matter unites organic-
ally, the substance or being so formed exhibits some phenomena essentially


different from what inorganic bodies exhibit. It is on tins account that wo
ascribe to organic bodies certain properties, which we call physiological pro-
perties such as contractility, sensibility, life, &c. When from any cause these
bodies’have undergone such a change that they no longer exhibit the Pheno-
mena peculiar to them, they are said to have lost these properties, and to be
dead A substance need not possess all the physiological properties of. an
animal of the higher orders, to entitle it to the name of an organized or living
substance nor need it possess the physical property of solidity, ihe blood,
us well as’many of the secretions, does several things, exhibits several pheno-
mena which no mechanical or mere chemical combinations of matter da
exhibit. We must therefore ascribe to it certain physiological properties, and
regard it as an organised, a living fluid, as was contended by the celebrated
John Hunter. So with respect to the semen, it certainly possesses physiolo-
gical properties, one in particular, peculiar to itself, namely, the propel y
of impenetrating the female ; and upon no sound prmcip e can it be regarded
in auy P other light than as an organized, and of course a hvmg fluid. And if
the female secretion or any part of it unite with the male secretion m the for-
mation of the rudiments of the foetus in a different manner than any other
substance would, then it certainly has the property of doiQg
give tins property a name or not; and a regard to the soundest principles of
physiology compels us to class this property with the physiological 01 vital,
and of course to regard this secretion as an organized and living fluid, bo,
then, unorganized matter does not form an organized being, admitting the
hypothesis before us as correct.
That organized beings should give rise to other organized beings under
favorable circumstances as to nourishment, warmth, &c, is no more wonderful
than that fire should give rise to fire when air and fuel are present. To be
sure, there are some minute steps in the process which are not fully known to
us • still if they ever should be known, we should unquestionably sec that
there is a natural cause for every one of them ; and that they are all consonan
with certain laws of the animal economy. We should see no necessity of
attempting to explain the process of generation by bringing to our aid, or
rather to the darkening of the subject, any imaginary principle, as the msus
formativus of Blumcnbach. . ? .
As to the “ observations and experiments of Haller and Spallanzani, I think
with Dr. Bostock that they weigh but little, if any, against the theory before
us I shall not be to the labor of bringing them forward, and showing their
futility as objections to this theory, for I am far from insisting on the correct-
ness of it ; that is, I do not insist that any part of the female secretion, during
coition, unites with the male semen in the formation of the rudiments of the
second hypothesis or theory I shall notice, as to the rudiments of the
foetus, is that of Leeuwenhoek, who regarded the seminal animalcules of t ie
male semen as the proper rudiments of the foetus ; and that the othce of t ie
female is to afford them a suitable receptacle, where they may be suppoited
and nourished until they are able to exist by the exercise of their own func-
tions This is essentially the view of the subject which 1 adopt, and which I
nothing but the ‘‘extreme
improbability,” as its opponents say, “ that these anmialcules should be the
rudiments of beings so totally dissimilar to them. But I wish to know if
there is more difference between a foetus and a seminal animalcule, than there
Is between a fodus and a few material particles in some other form than that
° f The h thiTd 'hypothesis, or that of pre-existing germs, proceeds upon a pt»-


cisely opposite view of the subject to that of Leeuwenhoek, namely, that the
foetus is properly the production of the female ; that it exists previous to
sexual congress, with all its organs, in some part of the uterine system ; and
that it receives no proper addition from the male, but that the seminal fluid
acts merely by exciting the powers of the foetus, or endowing it with vitality.
It is not known who lirst proposed this hypothesis ; but, strange as it may
appear, it has had the support, of such names as Bonnet, Haller, and Spallan-
zani, and met with a favorable reception in the middle of the last century.
Agreeable to this hypothesis, our common mother, Eve, contained a number
of homuncules (little men) one within another, like a nest of boxes, and all
within her ovaries, equal to the number of all the births that ever have been,
or over will bo, not to reckon abortions!. Were Ito bring.forward all the facts
and arguments that have been advanced in support of this idea, it seems to me
I should fail to convince sound minds of its correctness, and as to arguments
against it, they surely seem uncalled for.
Having now presented several hypothesis of generation, some as to the
manner in which the semen readies or influences the ovary, and others as to
the rudiments of the foetus, I shall now bring together those views which upon
the whole appear to me the most satisfactory.
I believe with Dr. Dewees that a set of absorbent vessels extend from the
innermost surface of the labia externa, and from the vagina to the ovary, the
whole office of which is to take up the semen or some part thereof, and convey
it to the ovary. I believe with Leeuwenhoek, that the seminal animalcules are
the proper rudiments of the foetus, and are perhaps of different sexes, that in
case of impregnation one of them is carried not only to, but into a vesicle of
an ovary, which is in a condition to receive, and be duly affected by it. it is
here surrounded by the albuminous fluid which the vesicle contains. This fluid
being somewhat changed in its qualities by its new comer, stimulates the
minute vessels of the parts which surround it, and thus causes more of this
fluid to be formed, and while it affords the animalcule materials for its deve-
lopment, it puts the delicate membrane of the ovary which retains it in its
place, upon the stretch, and Anally bursts forth surrounded, probably by an
exceedingly delicate membrane of its own. This membrane with the albu-
minous fluid it contains, and the animalcule in the centre of it, constitutes the
ovum or egg. It is received by the fimbriated extremity of the fallopian tube,
which by this time has grasped the ovary, and is by this tube, slowly conveyed
Into the uterus, to the inner surface of which it attaches itself, through the
medium of a membrane, which is formed by the uterus itself in the interim,
between impregnation and the arriving of the ovum in the way I have just
mentioned.
The idea that a seminal animalcule enters an ovum while it remains in the
©vary, was never before advanced to my knowledge ; hence I consider it
incumbent upon me to advance some reasons for this opinion. First, it is
admitted on all hands, that the seminal animalcule are essential to impregna-
tion, since “ they cannot be detected when either from age or disease the
animal is rendered sterile.” Second, the ovum is impregnated while it remains
in the ovary. True, those who have never met with Dr. Dewees’ theory, and
who, consequently, have adopted the idea that the semen is ejected int# the
uterus, as the least improbable of any with which they were acquainted, have
found it very difficult to dispose of the fact that the ovum is impregnated in
the ovary ; and have consequently presumed this is not generally the case.
They admit it is certainly so sometimes, and that it is difficult to reject the
conclusion that it is always so. Dr. Bostock, who doubtless had not met with
Dewees’ theory at the time he wrote, and who admits it impossible to conceive
jbow the semen can find its way along the fallopian tubes—how it can find its


way towards the ovary farther, at most, than into the uterus, and consequently
cannot see how the ovum can be impregnated m the ovary, says, 1 e' ! ‘.q>s the
most rational supposition may he, that the ovum is transmitted to tiie u ems
in the uniinpregiiatod state; hut there are certain facts which seem aliaort
incompatible with this idea, especially the cases which not ,infrequently occur
of perfect feel uses having been found in the tubes, or where they escaped them
into the cavity of the abdomen. Hence it is demonstrated hint the o» nm is-
occasionally imp, eg., aid in .1,0 Mes [wl,y .lid l.e not say ovana .and we
can scarcely resist the conclusion that it must always he the case,
« Haller dismisses this hypothesis, [Bostock’s “ most natural supposi >«».
haps,”l and decides against it.” °*» * ‘‘The experiments ot Uu.ksl. mk
which were very numerous, and appear to have b.en made with the requisite
degree of skill and correctness, lead to the conchision
the voting animal is perfected m the ovarium. 6 - A c ase ir
by Dr. Granville of a foetus, which appears to have been lodged m the uodf
of the ovarium itself ; and it is considered by its author as a proof that eom
ception always takes place in this organ.” The above quotations are from die
third volume of Uostocks 1 hjsiologj. , . • i -i
Now as the seminal animalcules are essential to impregnation and as the
ovum is impregnated in the ovarium, what more probable connect are cjn «
form than that an animalcule, as the real proper rudiment of the tectus, enters
the ovum where, being surrounded with albuminous fluid, with which it is
nourished, it gradually becomes developed ? It may he noticed that Leeu-
wenhoek estimates that ten thousand ammalcu es of the human semen may
exist in a space not larger than a gram of sand. I here can, therefore, be no
difficulty in admitting that they may find their way along S2
vessels from the vagina, not only to, but into the ovum, while situated m the
° V llhlnk no one can be disposed to maintain that the animahulp merely
reaches the surface of the ovum/ 1 and thus impregnates it. But possibly
some may contend that its sole office is to stimulate the ovum, and in this way
set a-going that train of actions which are essential to impregnation. But
there is no evidence in favor of this last idea, and certainly it does not so well
harmonise with the fact that the offspring generally partakes more or less of
the character of its male parent. As Dr. Devvecs sayfcol the doctrine of .31
pathy, “It makes no provision for the formation of mules; for the pecu-
liarities of, and likeness to, parents ; and for the propagation of predispo-
sition to disease from parent to child : for the production of mu attocs, &c.
Considering it important to put away the popular and mwchievousicnw,
that the semen must enter the uterus to effect impregnation, I shall, in
tion to what has been already advanced, here notice the expemnente of Dr.
Brighton. He divided the fallopian tubes in numerous instances, and toumt
that after this operation a foetus is never produced, but that corpora lute*
were formed. The obvious conclusions from these facts are, that the semen
does not traverse the fallopian tubes to reach the ovana ? if,.w t he° B emea
becomes impregnated while in the ovarium, and consequently that the semen:
reache/tlie ovaritni, in aorae way, except by the uterus
I may remark, however, that a corpus luteum is not positn e proof t.iat im-
pregnation, at some time or other, has taken place; yet they are so rarely
found in virgins that they were regarded as such proof until the time of
B1 Harvey'’ and *d^Oraa? dissected animals at almost every period after
coition, for the express purpose of discovering the semen, but were never able
• I say surface of the ovum, for it, is probably not a mere drop of fluid, but fluid sur-
rounded with au exceedingly delicate membrane.


-to detect the smallest vestige of it in the uterus in any one instance.”—
Dewees' Essay on Superfcetation.
The fact of superfcetation furnishes a very strong argument against the
idea that the semen enters the uterus in impregnation.
A woman being impregnated while she is already impregnated, constitutes
superfoetatiou. It is established beyond a doubt that such instances have
occurred, yet those who have supposed that it is necessary for the semen to
pass through the mouth of the uterus to produce conception, have urged that
superfcetation could not take place, because, say they, and they say correctly,
“so soon as impregnation shall have taken place, the os uteri closes, and
becomes impervious to the semen, ejected in subsequent acts of coition.”
Dr. Dewees relates two cases, evidently cases of superfoctation, that oc-
curred to his own personal knowledge. The first shows that, agreeable to the
old theory, the semen must have met with other difficulties than a closed
mouth of the uterus—it must have passed through several membranes, as well
as the waters surrounding the foetus, to have reached even the uterine ex-
tremity of a fallopian tube. The second case I will give in his own words.
“ A white woman, servant to Mr H., of Abington township, Montgomery
county, was delivered about five-and-twenty years since of twins ; one of
which was perfectly white, the other perfectly black. When I resided in.
that neighbourhood I was in the habit of seeing them almost daily, and also
had frequent conversations with Mrs, H. respecting them. She was present
at their birth, so that no possible deception could have been practised respect-
ing them. The white girl is delicate, fair skinned, light hair, and blue eyed,
and it is said very much to resemble the mother. The other has all the
characteristic marks of the African ; short of stature, flat, broad-nosed, thick
lipped, woolly headed, fiat footed, and projecting heels ; she is said to re-
semble a negro they had on the farm, but with whom the woman never would
acknowledge an intimacy ; but of this there was no doubt, as both he and the
white man with whom her connexion was detected, ran from the neighborhood
so soon as it was known the girl was with child.”
I am aware that some have thought they had actually discovered semen in
the uterus, wlile Ruysch, an anatomist of considerable eminence, who
flourished at the close of the 17th century, asserted in • the most unequivocal
manner, that he found the semen in its gross white state in one of the fallo-
pian tubes of a woman, who died very soon after, or during the act of coition;
but, says Dewees, “the semen, after it has escaped from the penis, very
quickly loses its albuminous appearance, and becomes as thin and transparent
as water. And we are certain that Ruysch was mistaken. Some alteration in.
the natural secretion of the parts was mistaken for semen ; this was nowise
difficult for him to do, as he had a particular theory to support—and more
especially as this supposed discovery made so much for it. It is not merely
speculative, when we say that some change in the natural secretion of the
parts may be mistaken for semen ; for we have the testimony of Morgagni on
our side. He tells us he has seen similar appearances in several instances in
virgins and others, who had been subject during their lives to leucorrhoea, and
that it has been mistaken by some for male semen.”
On the whole I would say, that in some instances, where the mouth of the
uterus is uncommonly relaxed, the semen may, as it were, accidentally have
found its way into it; but that is not generally fhe case, nor is it essential te
impregnation; and further that, whatever of semen may at any time bo
lodged in the uterus, has nothing to do with conception. It is not consistent
with analogy to suppose that the uterus has vessels for absorbing the semen
and conveying it to the ovaria, considering the other important functions
which we know it performs.


The circumstances under which a female is most likely to conceive, are
first, when site is in health ; second, between the ages twenty-six and thirty ,
third, after she has for a season been deprived of those intercourses she had
previously enjoyed ; fourth, soon after menstruating. Respecting this latter
circumstance, Dr, Dewees re narks : “ Perhaps it is not erring greatly to say
that the woman is liable to conceive at any part of the menstrual interval. It
is generally supposed, however, that the most favorable instant is imme-
diately after the catamenia have ceased ; perhaps this is so as a general rule,
but it is certainly liable to exceptions and he relates the following case
which occurred to his notice“ The husband of a lady who was obliged to
absent himself many months, in consequence of the embarrassment of his
affairs, returned one night clandestinely ; his visit being only known to his
wife, his mother, and myself. The consequence of this visit was the impreg-
i -if ion of his wife. The lady was at this time within a week of her menstrual
period ; and as this did not‘fail to take place, she was led to hope she had not
iuffered by the visit of her husband. P>ut her catemenia not appearing at the
next period, gave rise to a fear she had not escaped ; and the birth of a child
nine months and thirteen days from the night of this clandestine visit, proved
her apprehensions too well grounded.”
I think this case is an exception to a general rule ; and, furthermore, favors
an idea which reason and a limited observation, rather than positive know-
ledge, has led mo to advance above, namely, that a woman is more likely to
conceive, other things being the same, after being deprived for a season of
those intercourses she had previously enjoyed. Had this lady s husband re-
mained constantly at home, she would probably eithei not have conceived at
all, or have done so a fortnight sooner than she did.
This case is also romaakable for two other facts ; one, “that a woman in
perfect health, and pregnant with a healthy child, may exceed the period of
nine months ; the other, that a check is not always immediately given to the
catamenial flow, by an ovum being impregnated.” Probably it is not so
generally so as many suppose.
The term of ntero-gestation , or the length of timi from conception to the
commencement of labour, is not precisely determined by physiologists. “It
seems however,” says Dr. Dcwees, “ from the best calculations that can be
made,'that nine calendar months, or forty weeks, approaches the truth so
nearly, that we can scarcely need desire more accuracy, could it be obtained.”
Unquestionably, however, some cases exceed this period by many days or
even weeks, and it has been a question much agitated, how far this period is
ever succeeded. It is a question of some moment in a legal point of view.
Cases are reported where the usual period was exceeded by live or six months ;
cases, too, where the circumstances attending them, and the respectability of
their reporters are such as to command our belief. Dr. Dewces has paid much
attention to this subject, and ho declares himself entirely convinced, “ that
the commonly fixed period may be extended from thirteen days to six weeks,
under the influence of certain causes or peculiarities of constitution.
These occasional departures from the general rule will, perhaps, be the
more readily admitted when we consider than they are not confined to the
human species. From the experiment of Tessier, it appears that the term of
utero-gestation varies greatly with the cow, sheep, horse, swine, and other
animals to which his attention was directed.
Properly connected with the subject of generation, are the signs of preg-
nancy. Dr. Dewees remarks, that “ our experience furnishes no certain mark
by which the moment conception takes place is to be distinguished. All ap-
peals by the women to particular sensations experienced at the instant, should
be very guardedly received, for we are certain they cannot be relied upon ;


for enjoyment ami indifference are alike fallacious. Nor are certain nervous
tremblings, nausea, palpitation of the heart, the sensation of something flow-
ing from them during coition, &c., more to be relied upon.” Burns, however,
says, “ Some women feel, immediately after conception, a peculiar sensation,
which apprises them of their situation ; but such instances are not frequent,
and generally the first circumstances which lead a woman to suppose herself
pregnant, are the suppression of the menses a fickle appetite, some sick-
ness, perhaps vomiting, especially in the morning ; returning qualms, or of
languor in the afternoon ; she is liable to heartburn, and to disturbed sleep..
The mind becomes sometimes irritable, sometimes melancholy. The breasts
at first often become smaller, sometimes tender ; but about the third month
they enlarge, and occasionally become painful. The nipple is surrounded
with an areola or circle of a brown colour, or at least of a colour sensibly
deeper or darker than before. She loses her looks, becomes paler, and the-
under part of the lower eyelid is often somewhat of a leaden hue. The
features become sharper, and sometimes the whole body begins to emaciate,
while the pulse quickens. In many instances particular sympathies take
place, causing salivation, toothache, jaundice, &c. In other cases very little
disturbance is produced, and the woman is not certain of her condition until
the time of quickening, which is generally about four months from concep-
tion. It is possible for women to mistake the effects of wind for the motion
of a child, especially if they have never borne children, and be anxious for a
family ; but the sensation produced by wind in the bowels is not confined to-
one spot, but is often felt at a part of the abdomen where the motion of a
child could not possibly be felt. Quite as frequently, perhaps, do fleshy
women think themselves dropsical, and mistake motions of the child for
movements of water within the abdominal cavity. The motion of the child
is not to he confounded with the sensation sometimes produced by the uterus
rising out of the pelvis, which precedes the feeling of fluttering. At the end
of the fourth month the uterus becomes so large that it is obliged to rise out
of tlie pelvis, and if this elevation take place suddenly, the sensation accom-
panying it is pretty strong, and the woman at the time often feels sick or
faint, and in irritable habits, even an hysterical fit may accompany it. After
this, the morning sickness and other sympathetic effects of pregnancy gene-
rally abate, and the health improves.
Very soon after impregnation, if blood be drawn, and suffered to stand a
short time undisturbed, it will become si/y, of a yellowish or blueish colour,,
and somewhat of an oily appearance. But we cannot from such appearances
of the blood alone pronounce a woman pregnant ; for a suppression of the
menses, accompanied by a febrile state, may give the blood a like appearance
as pregnancy, so also may some local disease. Of the above mentioned
symptoms, perhaps there is no oiic on which we can place more reliance than the
increased colour of the circle around the nipple.
Six or eight weeks after conception, the most sure way of ascertaining
pregnancy is, to examine the mouth and nock of the uterus, by way of the-
vagina. The uterus will be found lower down than formerly ; and its mouth
is not directed so much forward as before impregnation-; it is more completely
closed, and the neck is felt to be thicker, or increased in circumference. When
raised on the finger, it is found to be heavier, or more resisting. Whoever
makes this examination must have examined the same uterus in an unimpreg-
nated' state, and retained a tolerably correct idea of its feeling at that time, or
lie will he liable to uncertainty ; because the uterus of one woman is naturally
different in magnitude from that of another ; and the uterus is frequently
lower down than natural, from other cause than pregnancy.
It has not been fully ascertained how long it is after a fruitful connexion’


before any effect is produced upon the ovaria, that is, before any
alteration could be discovered, were the female to be dissected.
But Haighton’s experiments have established the fact, that wita
rabbits, whose term of utero-gestation is but thirty days, no effect is propa-
gated to the ovaria until nearly fifty hours after coition ; we should judge,
therefore that with the human species it must be several days, and it is
"cnerally estimated by physiologists that the ovum does not reach the uterus
until the expiration of twenty days from the time of connexion.
It is probable that in all cases in which any matter is absorbed from any
part of the animal system, some little time is required for such matter, after
its application, to stimulate and arouse the absorbent vessels to action ; hence
it is probable, that after the semen is lodged in the vagina, it is many
minutes, possibly some hours, before any part of it is absorbed.
CHAPTER III.
Of Promoting and Checking Conception.
Sterility depends either on imperfect organization, or imperfect action of
the organs of generation. In the former case*, which are rare, the menses do
not generally appear ; the breasts are not developed, and the sexual desire is
inconsiderable. There is no remedy in these cases.
The action may be imperfect in several respects. The menses may be ob-
structed or sparing, or they may be too profuse or frequent. It is extremely
rare for a woman to conceive who does not menstruate regularly. Hence,
where this is the case, the first step is to regulate this periodical discharge.
For this purpose the advice of a physician will generally be required, for these
irregularities depend upon such various causes, and require such variety ot
treatment, it would be inconsistent with the plan of this work to attempt
to give instructions for remedying them. A state of exhaustion or weakness
of the uterine system, occasioned by too frequent intercourse, is a frequent
cause of sterility. The sterility cf prostitutes is attributed to this cause, but
1 doubt it being the only one. With females who are apparently healthy,
the most frequent cause is a torpor , rather than weakness of the genital
organs For the removal of sterility from this cause, I shall give some in-
structions, and this I do the more readily because the requisite means are
such as will also regulate the menses, in many cases, where they do not
appear so early in life, so freely, or so frequently, as they ought.
1 In the first place it will generally be necessary to do something towauls in-
vigorating the system by exercise in the open air ; by nourishing food of
■easy digestion ; by sufficient dress, especially flannel ; and especially by strict
temperance in all things. With this view, also, some scales which fall from
the blacksmith’s anvil, or some steel filings, may be put into old cider or wine
/cider the best), and after standing a week or so, as much may be taken two
or three times a day as can be borne without disturbing the stomach. All the
while the bowels are to be kept rather open, by taking from one to three of
Pill rufi every night on going to bed. These pills consist of tour parts of
ffioes two paris of myrrh, and one of saffron-by weight These measures
having been regularly pursued until the system be brought into a vigorous
state, medicines which are more particularly calculated to aiouse the gemtil
organs from a state of torpor may be commenced, and continued for months
if Necessary. The cheapest, most simple, and lam not prepared to say it is
not the most effectual in many cases, is cayenne. All the virtues of this
article arc not generally known, even to physicians I know it does not havc
the effect upon the coats of the stomach that many have lt may
be taken in the quantity of from one to two rising tea-spoonsful, or even
more, every day, upon food, or in any liquid vehicle. Another medicine of


much efficacy, as I have reason to believe, is Dewees’ Volatile Tincture of
Guac. It is generally kept by apothecaries, and is prepared as follows :
Take of Gum Guaicum, in powder, eight ounces ; carbonate of Potash, or
of Soda, or (what will answer) Salaeratus, three drachms ; Allspice, in powder,
two ounces; any common spirits of good strength, two pounds, or what is
about the same, two pints and a gill. Put all into a bottle, which may be
shaken now and then, and the use of it maybe commenced in a few days. To
every gill of this, at least a large tea-spoonful of Spirits of Ammonia is to
bo added. A tea-spoonful is to be taken for a dose, three times a day, in a
glass of milk, cider, or wine. It is usually given before eating ; but if it
should chance to offend the stomach when taken before breakfast, it may in
this case be taken an hour after.
Dr. Dewees found this tincture, taken perhaps for months, the most effec-
tual remedy for painful menstruation, which is an obstinate complaint. If
there be frequent strong pulse, heat, thirst, florid countenance, &c., it is not
to be taken until these symptoms be removed by low diet, a few doses of
salts, and bleeding, if required.
A third medicine for arousing the genital organs, is tincture of Spanish
Flies. But I doubt its being equal, in sterility, to the above-mentioned
medicines (though it may exceed them in some cases, and may be tried if
these fail) ; a drachm of them hiay be put to two gills of spirits. Dose, 25
drops, in water, three times a day, increasing each one by two or three drops,
until some degree of stranguary occurs ; then omit until this pass off, as it will
in a day or two. Should the stranguary be severe, drink freely of milk and
water, slippery elm, or flax-seed tea.
In many cases of sterility, where the general health is considerably in fault,
and especially where the digestive organs are torpid, I should have much con-
fidence in a Thomsonian Course. It is calculated to arouse the capillary
vessels throughout the whole system, and thus to open the secretions, to
remove obstructions, and free the blood of those effete and phlegmy materials
which nature requires to be thrown off. The A’iews of the Thomsonians as to
heat and cold, appear to me unphilosophical. But this has nothing to do with
the efficiency of their measures.
In relation to sterility, I would here bring to mind, what has been before
stated, that a woman is most likely to conceive immediately after a menstrual
turn. And now, also, let me suggest the idea that nature’s delicate begin-
nings may be frustrated by the same means that put her a-going. _ This idea
is certainly important when the woman is known to have miscarried a
number of times. Sterility is sometimes to be attributed to the male, though
he apparently be in perfect health. It would be an interesting fact to ascer-
tain if there be no seminal animalcules in these cases; and whether medicines
of any kind are available.
It has been ascertained that a male and female may be sterile in relation to
each other, though neither of them be so with others.
The foregoing measures for sterility are also suitable in cases of impotency .
This term, I believe, is generally confined to, and defined a want of desire or
ability, or both, on the part of the malej but I see no good reason why it
should not comprehend the cases in widen there is neither desire nor pleasure
with the female. Such females, it is true, may be fruitful; but so, on the
other hand, the semen may not have lost its fecundating property. _ Impo-
tenßy, at a young or middle age, and in some situations in life especially, is
certainly a serious misfortune, to say the least of it. The whole evil by no
means consists, in every case, in the loss of a source of pleasure. All young
.people ought to be apprised of the bauses of it—causes which in many in-
stances greatly lessen one’s ability of giving and receiving that pleasure


which is the root of domestic happiness. I shall allude to one cause, that of
premature, and especially solitary gratification, in another place. Intemper-
ance in the use of spirits is another powerful cause. Even a moderate use of
spirits, and also of tobacco , in any form, have some effect. It is a law of the
animal economy that no one part of the system can be stimulated or excitea
without an expense of vitality , as it is teimed. That part which is stimulated
draws the energy from other parts. And hence it is that close and deep study,
as well as all the mental passions when excessive, impair the venereal appe-
tite. All excesses, all diseases and modes of life which impair the general
health, impair this appetite, but some things toore directly and powerfully
than others.
As to the remedies for impotency, they are much the same as for sterility.
It is of the first importance that the mind be relieved from all care and
anxiety. The general health is to be improved by temperance, proper exercise
in the open air, cheerful company, change of scenery, or some occupation to
divert the mind without requiring much exercise of it ; nourishing food, of
easy digestion ; flannel worn next to the skin. The cold bath may be tried,
and if it bo followed by agreeable feelings, it will do good. The bowels may
be gently stimulated .by the pills before mentioned ; and the preparation of
iron also, already mentioned, should be taken.
To stimulate the genital organs more directly, cayenne, Dewees’ tincture of
guac, or tincture of flics may be taken, 1 have given directions for making
and taking the tinctures of flies, chiefly because it is esteemed one of the best
remedies for impotency caused by or connected with nocturnal emissions, to
which I have before alluded. . . .
It is in rases where little or no pleasure nor erection attend these emissions
Cfvses brought on by debauchery, or in elderly persens, that I would recom-
mend tincture of fhes, and the other measures above mentioned. In some
bad cases, enormous doses of this tincture are required, say two or three hun-
dred drops. Yet the best rule for taking it is that already given, namely,
begin with small doses, and gradually increase until some stmnguary be felt,,
or some benefit be received. In this affection, as well as in all cases of im-
paired virility,the means 1 have mentioned are to be pursued fora long time,,
unless relief be obtained. These have cured after having been taken for a
year or more without this result. In all cases of impotency, not evidently
depending upon disease of some part besides the genital organs. I should’
have much confidence in blisters applied to the lower part of the spine.
Occasional nocturnal emissions, accompanied with erection and pleasure, are
by no means to be considered a disease ; though they have given many a one
much uneasiness. Even if they be frequent, and the system considerably de-
bilitated, if not caused by debauch, and the person be young, marriage is the
proper measure.
There have been several means proposed and practised for checking concep-
tion. I shall briefly notice them, though a knowledge of the best is what
most concerns us. That of withdrawal immediately before emission is cei-
tainly effectual, if practised with suflicient care. But if (as I believe) Dr.
Dewees’ theory of conception be correct ; and as Spallanzani’s experiments
show that only a trifle of semen even largely diluted with water, may impreg-
nate by being injected into the vagina, it is clear that nothing short of entire
withdrawal is to be depended on. But the old notion that the semen must
enter the uterus to cause conception, has led many to believe that a partial
withdrawal is sufficient, and it is on this account that this error has proved
mischievous, as all important errors generally do. It is said by those who
speak from experience, that the practice of withdrawal has an effect upon the
health similar to temperance in eating. As the subsequent exhaustion


•probably mainly owing to the shock the nervous system sustains in the act of
coition, this opinion may be correct. It i« further said this practice serves to
.keep alive those fine feelings with which married people first come together.
Still I leave it for every one to decide for himself whether this check be so far
. satisfactory as not to render some other very desirable.
As to the haudruche, which consists in a covering used by the male, made
of very delicate skin, it is by no means calculated to come into general use.
It has been used to secure from syphilitic affections.
Another check which the old idea of conception has led gome to recommend
with considerable confidence, consists in introducing into the vagina, previous
to connexion, a very delicate piece of sponge, moistened with water, to be im-
mediately afterwards withdrawn by means of a very narrow ribbon attached
to it. But as our views would lead us to expect, this check has not proved a
sure preventive. As there are many little ridges or folds in the vagina, we
cannot suppose the withdrawal of the sponge would dislodge all the semen in
every instance. If, however, it were well moistened with some liquor which
acts chemically upon the semen, it would be pretty likely to destroy the
fecundating property of what might remain. But if this check were ever so
sure, it would, in my opinion, fall short of being equal, all things considered,
to the one I am about to mention—one which not only dislodges the semen
pretty effectually, hut at the same time destroys the fecundating property of
the whole of it.
In consists in syringing the vagina immediately after connection with a
solution of sulphate of zinc, of alum, pearlash, or any salt that acts chemically
on the semen, and at the same time produces no unfavorable effect on the
female. In all probability, a vegetable astringent would answer—as an infu-
sion of white oak hark, of red rose leaves, of nutgalls, and the like. A lump
■of either of the above-mentioned salts, of the size of a chestnut, may he dis-
solved in a pint of water, making the solution weaker or stronger, as it may
be borne without producing any irritation cf the parts to which it is applied.
These solutions will not lose their virtues by age. A female syringe , which
will he required in the use of this check, may he had at the shop of an apothe-
cary, for a shilling or less. If preferred, the semen may he dislodged, as far
* The principal book on this subject is the “ Elements of Social Science,” by a doctor of
medicine, published in 1854 by Truelove, 256 High Holborn. In that book five methods of
preventive intercourse are described at pages 319 and 513. First, Withdrawal, which
is recommended by It. D. Owen in his “ Moral Physiology ” and the author of “ Notes on
the Population Question.” Of the last the present writer knows nothing. The former is
one of the best books on the subject. Second, the French Letter, which is procurable
from nearly every chemist. Third, the sponoe, recommended by R. Garble in his “Every
Woman’s Book,” and by M. G. 11. in “ Poverty, its cause, and cure.” The former is, it is
believed, out of print. The latter is a good pamphlet, of which a few copies are left of some
thousands which the present writer has distributed. Fourth, Injections—chemical or
simple—recommended by Dr. Knowlton in the lately prosecuted book, and by many other
American authors. And fifth, Attention to the Monthly Periods, recommended by Dr.
Raciborski, and explained by the author of the “Elements of Social Science,” by Dr.
Ruddock in his “ Ladies’ Manual of Homoeopathic Treatment ” (p. 100), and by Dr. Beaney
in his “ Generative System ” (pp. 68 and 148). All these books arc sold in Melbourne. The
present writer would here like to direct attention to the particularly wise and important
advice given at pages 45-7, of Dr. Beauey’s book, as well as in R. D. Owen’s “ Moral
Physiology.” Of these methods, the First is successful with some persons, but is scarcely
practicable or therefore certain with others, besides being considered hurtful to some. The
•Second is the most certain, but intensely disagreeable to some persons. The Third is not
generally considered certain without the Fourth,[which is troublesome, though tolerably
certain. The Fifth is perfectly unobjectionable, and it is believed successful when the periods
are regular and healthy; but is not always to bo depended upon otherwise. All these
methods are so far objectionable, or uncertain, that the present writer has, at different
.times, urged the importance of skilled experiments being made, if necessary, by the State,
at any amount of expense and trouble, to discover a better expedient.


as it can be, by syringing with simple water, after winch some of the solution
f 8 to be injected, to destroy the fecundating property of what may remain
lodged between the ridges of the vagina, &c.‘
f know the use of this check requires the woman to leave her bed for a few
moments, but this is its only objection ; and it would be unreasonable to sup-
pose that any check can ever be devised entirely free of objections. In its
favor it may be said it costs nearly nothing ; it is sure ; it requires no sacri-
fice of pleasure ; it is in the hands of the female ; it is to be used after, in-
stead of before connexion, a weighty consideration in its favor, as a moments
reflection will convince anyone ; and last, but not least it is ucivo to
rlcanliness and preserves the parts from relaxation and disease, iho vagina
ve^jTmuch s contracted ly a persevering use of astringent injections
and they are frequently used for this purpose in oi procidentia utcn o i
a sinking down of the womb. Subject as women are to fluor albus and other
diseases of the genital organs, it is rather a matter of wonder they are not
more so considering the prevailing practices, those who have used this
check (and«ome have used it to my certain knowledge, with entire success,
for nine or ten years, and under such circumstances as leave no _ room to
doubt its efficacy), affirm they would be at the trouble of using injections
merely for the purposes of health and cleanliness.
By actual experiment it has been rendered highly probable that pregnancy
may, in some instances, be prevented by injections of wimple water, apphet
with a tolerable degree of care. But simple water has failed, aud its occa-
sional failure is what we should expect, considering the anatomy of the paits,
and the results of Spallanzani’s experiments, heretofore alluded to.
Thus much did I say respecting this check in the first edition of this work.
That is what I call the chemical check. The idea of destroying the fecun-
dating property of the semen was original if it did not . originate with me.
My attention was drawn to the subject by tiie perusal of ' Moral x hy siologj.
Such was my confidence in the chemical idea that I sat down and wrote tins
work in July 1831. But the reflection that I did not know that this cneclc
would never fail, and that, if it should, I might do someone an injury in re-
commending it, caused the manuscript to lie on hand until the follow in
December. Sometime in November I fell m with an old acquaintance, 'v ho
agreeably surprised me by stating that, to his own personal knowledge, this-
last check had been used as above stated. I have since conversed with a
gentleman with whom I was acquainted, who stated that, being m Baltimore
some few years ago, he was there informed of this check by those who have
no doubt of its efficacy. From what has as yet fell under my own observe
tion, fam not warranted in drawing any conclusions. I can only say 1 nave
not known it to fail. Such arc my views on the whole subject, thin, it would taxe
many instances of its reputed failure to satisfy me that such failures were not
owing to an insufficient use of it. I even believe that quite cold water alone,
if thoroughly used, would be sufficient. In Spallanzani s experiments, wann
water was unquestionably used. As the seminal animalcules areesseiitndto
impregnation, all we have to do is change the condition of, or (if youm ill>
to kill them ; and as they are so exceedingly small and delicate, this is doubt-
less easily done, and hence cold water may be sufficient.
What has now been advanced in this work will enable reader to judge
for himself (or herself) of the efficacy of the chemical or syringe check ; and
time will probably determine whether I am correct m this matter ; lor do
know that those married females who have much desire to escape, will not
stand for the little trouble of using this check, especially when they consider
that on the score of cleanliness and health alone, it is worth all this trouble.
A great part of the time no check is necessary, and women of experience and-


observation, with the information conveyed by this work, will be able to judge
pretty correctly when it is and when it is not. They may rest assured that
none of the salts mentioned will have any deleterious effect. The sulphate
of zinc is commonly known by the name of white vitriol. This, as well as
alum, have been much used for leucorrhteea. Acetate of lead, would doubt-
less be effectual—indeed, it has proved to be so; but Ido not recommend it,
because I conceive it possible that a long continued use of it might impair the
instinct.
I hope that no failures will be charged to inefficacy of this check which
ought to be attributed to negligence, or insufficient use of it. I will therefore
recommend at least two applications of the syringe, the sooner the surer ; yet
it is my opinion that five minutes delay would not prove mischievous, perhaps
not ten.
CHAPTER IV.
Remarks on the Reproductive Instinct.
I scarcely need observe that by this instinct is meant the desire for sexual
intercourse. Blumeubach speaks of this instinct as “ superior to all others in
universality and violence.” Perhaps hunger is an exception. But, surely, no
instinct commands a greater proportion of our thoughts, or has a greater in-
fluence upon our happiness for better or for worse. “ Controlled by reason
and chastened by good feeling, it gives to social intercourse much of its
charm and zest; but directed by selfishness or governed by force, it is prolific
of misery and degradation. In itself, it appears to be the most social and
least selfish of all our instincts. It fits us to give, even while receiving
pleasure ; and among cultivated beings the former power is even more highly
rained than the latter. Not one of our instincts, perhaps, affords larger
scope for the exercise of disinterestedness, or fitter play for the best moral
feelings of our race. Not one gives birth to relations more gentle, more
humanising and endearing: not one lies more immediately at the root of the
kindliest charities and most generous impulses that honor and bless human
nature. It is a much more noble, because less purely selfish, instinct, than
hunger or thirst. It is an instinct that entwines itself around the warmest
feelings and best affections of the heart.” —Moral Physiology,
But too frequently its strength, together with a want of moral culture, is
such that it is not “ controlled by reason and consequently, from time im-
memorial, it has been gratified, either in such a mischievous manner, or to
such an intemperate degree, or under such improper circumstances, as to give
rise to an incalculable amount of human misery. For this reason it has, by
some, been regarded as a low, degrading, and lt carnal” passion, with which a
holy life must be ever at war. But, in the instinct itself, the philosopher sees
nothing deserving of degrading epithets. Ho sees not that nature should war
against herself. "lie believes that in savage life it is, and in wisely organised
societies of duly enlightened and civilised beings it would be, a source of ten-
fold more happiness than misery.
. A part of the evil consequences to which this instinct is daily giving rise
tinder the present state of things, it belongs more particularly to the moralist
to point out ; whilst of others, it falls within the province of the physician to
treat. But let me first remark that physicians have heretofore fell far short
of giving those instructions concerning this instinct which its importance de-
mands. In books, pamphlets, journals, &c., they have laid much before the
public respecting eating, drinking, bathing, lacing, air, exercise, &c, ; but
have passed by the still more important subject now before us, giving only
here and there some faint allusion to it. This, it is true, the customs, not to


v nrU( ieries of the age, have compelled them to do, in publications designed
for eye in so me small work, indicated by its title to be tor private
perutal, tty mst, with the utmost propriety, t.ve embodied much h.gl.ly
time, to an intemperate
de frae’ SirSSSt. all other appetites be so gratified as
;Sbi»arssa
happiness, but intellectual-not merely the happiness of the individual, but
the iw !!()f Uptimes at which this instinct ought not to be gratified. With
- Ft Z; iTmndit not to be gratified until they are seventeen or eighteen years
ri.hjppj.
SSmk j^^gsgas
mmsmmmi
aaBBSBSp^MSIES
decided by numbers, but that it depends upon cueumstances, ™ , 0
an wffl atoutt’rf
sss I" °t spirit
some instances, faintness and want of pp , ~ . s| ,j r j ts Thus the
fication, call loudly for some stimu us, t j ie passions, and leads to
individual is led to drink. This ad thus two vicious
further indulgence. This again, callie to '“''2’ Xr Strange as it
with the
tempera, indulgence, viz., non-
turnal emissions*,


Every young married woman ought to know that the male system is ex-
hausted in a far greater degree than the female, by gratification. It seems,
indeed, to have but little effect, comparatively, upon some females. But
with respect to the male, it lias been estimated by Fissot, that the loss of one
ounce of semen is equal in its effects upon the system to the loss of 40 ounces
of blood. As it respects the immediate effects, this estimation, generally
speaking, may not he too great. But a man living on a full meat diet, might,
doubtless, part with 50 ounces of semen in the course of a year, .with far less
detriment to the system, than with 2000 ounces of blood. It is a fact, that
mode of living, independent of occupation, makes a great difference with re-
spect to what the system will bear. A full meat diet, turtles, oysters, eggs,
spirits, wine, &c., certainly promote flio secretion of semen, and enable the
system to bear its emission. But a cool vegetable and milk diet-calms all
tiie fiercer passions, the venereal especially. Most men adopting such a diet
as this, will suffer no inconvenience in extending the intervals'of then-gratifi-
cation to three or four weeks ; on the contrary, they will enjoy clear intellect,
and a fine flow of spirits. This is the diet for men of literary pursuits, espe-
cially the unmarried. _
As to the mischievous manner, it consists in the unnatural habit or onan-
ism, or solitary gratification. It is an anti-social and demoralising habit,
Which, while it proves no quietus to the mind, impairs the bodily povfOrs, as
well as mental, and not unfrequently leads to insanity.
While the gratification of the reproductive instinct, until such circum-
stances, and in such manner as I have mentioned, leads to bad consequences,
a temperate and natural gratification, under proper circumstances, is attended
with good—besides the mere attendant pleasure, which alone is enough to
recommend such gratification. I admit that human beings might be so con-
stituted that if they had no reproductive instinct to gratify, they might enjoy
good health ; but being constituted as they are, this instinct cannot bo
mortified with impunity. It is a fact universally admitted, that unmarried
females do not enjoy so much good health, and attain to so great an age as
the married ; notwithstanding the latter are subject to the diseases and pains
incident to child-bearing. A temperate gratification promotes the secretions,
and the appetite for food ; calms the restless passions ; induces pleasant
sleep ; awakens social feelings, and adds a zest to life which makes one con-
scious that life is worth preserving.
APPENDIX.
Cl here connect with this note, hy way of Appendix, the following extracts from an
article which appeared in the Boston Investigator, a paper which, mivahiU
dictn, is so “ crazy” as to be open to the investigation of all subjects which
mightily concern mankind ]
TliK only seeming objection of much weight that can he brought against
diffusing a knowledge of checks, is that it will serve to increase illegal con-
nexions. Now this is exactly the contrary effect of that which those who
have diffused such knowledge most confidently believe will arise from it. io
diminish such connexions, is indeed one of the grand objects of these publi-
cations—an ob ject which laws and prisons cannot,. or at least do not, accom-
plish Why is there so much prostitution in the land ? The true answer to
the question is not, and.never, will be—Because the people have become ac-
quainted with certain faefs in physiology. It is because there are so many
unmarried men and women—men of dissipation and .profligacy, owing to
their not having married in their younger days and settled down in life. But
are there so many unmarried people in the country i Not because


young hearts, when they arrive at the age of maturity, do not desire to
marry, but because prudential considerations interfere. The young man
thinks, I cannot marry yet, I cannot support a family, I must make money
first, and think of a matrimonial settlement afterwards. And so it is, that
through fear of having a family before they have made a little head-way in
the world, and of being thereby compelled to “ tug at the oar of incessant
labour throughout their lives,” thousands of young men do not marry, but go
abroad into the world, and form vicious acquaintances and practices. The
truth, then, is this : there is so much of illegal connexion in the land, because
the people had not, twenty years ago, that very information which, it would
seem, some, doubtless through want of due reflection, are apprehensive will
increase the evil. I might quote pages to the point from “ Every Woman’s
Book hut I fear my communication would be too lengthy. I content my-
self with a few lines. “ But when it has become the custom here as else-
where to limit the number of children, so that none need have more than
they wish, no man will fear to take a wife ; all will marry while young ;
debauchery will diminish; while good morals, and religious duties will be
promoted.”
It has been asked, if a general knowledge of checks would not dimmish
the general increase of popuhition ? I think that such would not be the re-
sult in^this country until such result would be desirable ; in my opinion, the
effect would be a good many more families (and on the whole as many
births), but not so many overgrown and poverty-stricken Ones.
It has been said, it is best to let nature take her course. Now in the
broadest sense of the word nature, I say so too. In this sense, there is
nothing unnatural in the universe. But if we limit the sense _of the word
nature so as not to include what we mean by art, then is civilised life one
continued warfare against nature. It is by art that we subdue the forest j
by art we contend against the clement j by art we combat the natural ten-
dency of disease, &c.
As to the outrageous slander which here and there one has been heard to
utter against the fair sex, in saying that fear of conception is the foundation
of their chastity, it must be the sentiment of a “ carnal heart,” which has
been peculiarly unfortunate in its acquaintances. “To the pure all things are
pure.” -Chastity, as well as its opposite, is in a great degree constitutional ;
and ought in a like degree to be regarded as a physical property, if I may so
say, rather than a moral quality. Where the constitution is favorable, a very
indifferent degree of moral training is sufficient to secure the virgin without
the influence of the above-mentioned fear ; but where it is the reverse, you
may coop up the individual in the narrow dark cage of and fear,
as you will, but still you must watch. An eminent moralist has said, “ That
chastity which will not bear the light (of Physiology) is scarcely worth pre-
serving.” But, verily, I believe there is very little such in the market. What
there be is naturally short-lived, and, after its demise, the unhappily consti-
tuted individual stands in great need of this light to save her from ignominy.
What might it not have prevented . . . Fall River affair ? And if one of
two things must happen, either the destruction of fecundity or the destruc-
tion of life, which of the two is the greater evil ? In these cases, alone, this
lio-ht is calculated to do sufficient good to counterbalance all the evil that
would arise from it ; so that we should have its important advantages to the
married, in a political, a domestic, and a medical point of view, as so much
clear o- a in. This of course is my opinion ; but since I have probably reflected
more upon the subject than all the persons concerned in my imprisonment
put together, until it can be shown that I have not as clear a head and il!>
jau r e a heart as any of them, I think it entitled to some weight.


Extraordinary Case of Infanticide
At the Water Police Court on Monday afternoon;
before Messrs. Marsh, W.P.M., and Smithers, a
caste Fijian woman, called Ellen (widow of a Fijian
magistrate) was committed for trial at the next Central j
Criminal Court, on a charge of infanticide. During
the hearing the Kev. Francis Tait, Wesleyan minister,
officiated as interpreter. The prosecution was con-
ducted by Mr. C. B. Stephen, instructed by the
Crown Solicitor. Prisoner was defended by Mr. K.
Driver. The evidence showed that prisoner's husband
(who was also a half-caste) died four years ago in
Fiji. About four months ago prisoner came from
Fiji with Mr. Abraham Levy, of Darlinghurst-
road, and entered hia service. She is a woman
of prepossessing appearance, about 40 years of
age,fand one who has borne a very high character in;
Fiji. About 12 o’clock on Thursday night, the 13th
of last month, Sophia Gray, nurse and housemaid at
Mr. Levy’s called to prisoner, who was in the yard, to
come to bed. Prisoner said she would come directly.
Subsequently prisoner became very ill, and remained
in the kitchen all that night. Mrs. Cichinnick, who
was engaged nursing Mrs. Levy, who was also very
ill, told Mr. Levy of prisoner’s sickness, and he sent
for Dr. Wright. Early on Friday, December 14, Dr.
Wright saw prisoner, and stated that she had had a
premature birth, ~ ’ '— -
.. The strange part of the case has now to
be told. Drs. Wright and Dansey were agregd-i
that the child was born alive and fully developecCouT ~
Dr. Wright was clearly of opinion that the child was
not prisoner’s, as prisoner had either a miscarriage or
premature birth, and there could, not have been a ,*
delivery at a full period. He was also of opinion
that prisoner’s children would have a slightly j
dark coloured skin, whereas the deceased was ■
pure white. Drs. Wright and Dansey con-
curred in the opinion that, taking all the
circumstances into consideration, it was just
possible that the child was prisoner’s, although they
were doubtful, and scarcely thought it possible. There
was no evidence given for the defence, and the Bench J
stated that a prima facie case had been made out.
After the usual caution was administered to prisoner,
Mr. Driver characterised the reading of the caution as
“unmeaning mockery,” and not warranted by the
evidence. He urged that there was not one word
from first to last to warrant anyone calling upon pri-
soner to defend herself from the horrible charge. It
was required in superior courts, presided over by
gentlemen understanding their duties, that the evi-
dence should be clear and overwhelming ; but he
could not (nor any body of learned gentlemen) see one
single passage in the evidence to send the prisoner to
take her trial. He knew well it would end in the •
Attorney-General, in sheer disgust, writing on tlje ■/
papers, “no prosecution. ” Prisoner was committed
for trial. An application for bail was refused.


