

FULL AND TRUE PARTICULARS
OF THE
PROSECUTION AND IMPRISONMENT
FOR SEVEN DAYS
OF PASTOR
WHITE, OF LAUNCESTON
FEBRUARY, 1890.
"The Shame lies not in the Prison, but in the
Crime.”
“Let him that is without sin among you cast the first
stone.”
Jesus Christ.
The chief difference between me and some of those
who have cast me out is not that they have always kept
to the strict letter of the Law, but that I have been found
out.
STEPHENSON AND SON, PRINTERS, LAUNCESTON.




The charge laid against me by the Crown was“ That
you did knowingly and willfully give a false Certifi-
cate of Marriage.”
THE FULL PARTICULARS.
#N the fourteenth day of October 1889,in the afternoon, an elderly
lady called on me, leading me to believe that she was a wife
and mother, in deep distress of mind, and desirous that I
should marry a young couple in the morning ; and to induce
me to do so, repeatedly offered to take all responsibility on herself—
she said that the father of the girl could not give his consent, as ho
was in such a sad state of health from a recently performed internal
operation, that the seeret must at present he kept from him, or the
shook might prove fatal—she then told me that the young man was
twenty years of age, the girl under 17 years of age ; that the young
man had been keeping company with an elder sister, and had been
loved and trusted in the family as a son, and had made use cf the
facilities afforded him to seduce the younger girl—who was now
pronounced by a medical man to be far gone in pregnancy ; that he
had owned he was guilty, and under persuasion and threats, had
promised to marry the younger girl and give up the elder. I told
her she could not take the responsibility from my shoulders, and I
refused to have any thing to do with the marriage without the con-
sent of the young man’s father. She left no address, but went
away in great disappointment.
In the evening of the same day, a young couple, evidently of
full age, came to me wishing to be married at once, I told them the
Law required marriages to be performed between the hours of eight
a.m., and four p.m., when they both became very excited, and beg-
ged me to perform the ceremony before they' left my house, declaring
that more than one life depended on my refusal. I told them of the
visit of the lady in the afternoon, and that their names led me to
suspect that they were the parties referred to, save the discrepancy
as to the lady being the mother of this elder girl, as I well km-w that
her mother was dead, and the age of the young man given by her as
twenty, while by appearance I would believe that the young man
before me spoke the truth when he said his ago was twenty four.
They then admitted the whole truth, the young woman saying that
the lady who had called on me was her aunt ; the young man still
declaring himself to be of the age of twenty-four years. I then said
to the young woman, if you believe this vile story concerning your
young man and your younger sister, I must say I am astonished at
your conduct in coming out alone with him. and with the determina-
tion to bo married to him. I should have thought your love would
have turned to the bitterest hate : she then said I do believe it all,
and it might have been as you say, Pastor White, but what if I am
in the same condition as my sister? I know my sister, and am sure
it is not all my young man’s fault that she is as she is, and you hear
him declare that he hates her, and will never see her face again after
the ceremony, if he is married to her—while I love him and we might
get over it and be happy—she then nearly fainted, but on recovery,


said she would certainly go and drown herself unless she could be
married. I really believe she would commit suicide if something
was not done to pacify her, and I then promised to marry them at
eight o’clock the next morning, if she did not alter her mind—the
young man then offered mo £ls to marry him, or to give him a
Brumigham Certificate that he could show that night, which I
indignantly refused to do.
On the morning of the 15th, they came and were married by me
begging very hard to have the marriage dated back in my books,
which I refused to do on any condition whatever-—my determination
being not to break the laws of my adopted country. After the
ceremony was performed, the young woman could scarcely stand, she
appeared to be so weak and ill, and I got her a cup of tea, she then
said that she dare not go home and show the certificate which I had
given to her husband, because her father was dangerously ill, and
ho had been told of her sister’s condition, and now if he found that
notwithstanding her knowledge of that fact she had come only this
morning and got married to the young man, he would go into a
terrible passion, and she was afraid the shock might kill him before
her face : both of them then begged for a certificate dated two months
back in order to save her fathers life, and after a great deal of re-
luctance I yeildcd to this, on their solemn promise that it should only
be used in the absolute necessity to save the sudden shock, and so
soon after as possible, the true certificate should be placed in his
hands, moreover, I told them that I should not keep the secret from
her father when he was well enough to come round to me, but I
should show him my books.
I was the more ready to believe that the father was in the
dangerous slate of health which they represented him to be, on
account of the same statement having been made by his sister the
day before but have since found out that he was about in his business
the whole time ; but for this lying all round, I should have gone to
see him before I performed the marriage ceremony, but knowing him
to be a Catholic, I was aware that I should not be allowed to enter
his sick room, and whatever my folly might be, I did not know that
I was breaking the Law, nor did I have any intention, other than that
of preventing further crime on the part of the young people, and
shielding from harm the father represented to be almost at the point
of death.
These particulars will be found to differ from the report in the
papers ;my council somehow got the facts mixed a good deal. The
young woman for instance never threatend to drown herself on the
morning of the marriage, nor did the aunt wish the elder girl to be
married, but just the contrary. I was led to believe that the young
man had shewn the true certificate, both were in his possession when
he left my house, but about a fortnight after the marriage, a clerk
from the office of Mr. Byron Miller, called to see ray books, on the
ground that it a young woman had been married on the 15th day of
August, she was not at that time 21 years of age. I then wrote out
a voluntary statement, and gave it in strict confidence to the clerk
for Byron Miller’s private information, concerning the way in which
the certificate in the hands of the girl’s father had been obtained,and
immediately wrote the fullest, particulars to the father. And here I
wish to correct a wrong impression that has gained credence with
Protestants, namely—that the whole business was a Papist plot, laid
for my downfall. lam fully persuaded up to this point there was
nothing of the kind, and the father of the bride would have been
glad to withdraw from any further action, but it was Mr, Miller,
whose sensitive morallity was so horrified at the enormity of my
crime, that ho placed my confidential information in the hands of
the Attorney General, whether he first took counsel with any other


persons whose holy indignation might be aroused, and who followed
the old plan i.e. handed me over to the civil or secular arm, or no,
I cannot tell, anyhow the information went from Mr. Miller’s office,
to the Crown and at the hearing I was taken by suprise to see Mr.
Miller’s clerk in the witness box, and my confidential private note
handed in as evidence against me, had I known the Law, is it
likely I would have placed myself in peril, but Ignorantia non-excusat
legam. Yet that I was ignorant of the Law was not my fault but my
misfortune; I bought the Marriage Act of Tasmania, was well ac-
quainted with its provisions, and I did not break the law contained
in the Acts, and I think I had a right to believe that I was in pos-
session of all and every particle of the Law, relative to marriage ;
though His Honor, Judge Adams ridiculed the idea of my being
ignorant of the Law, and remarked that such a statement was almost
incredable. I know that the first lawyers in the city did not
know of any Law outside the Marriage Acts on that subject, and I
was told that the Attorney General himself did not at first see where
I was amenable to Law until the paragraph in the Criminal Proce-
dure Act was hunted up, and this was the hidden trap that was
sprung upon me.
IN THE PRISON.
I had not been within the walla of the gaol more than an hour
before the thought came to me with wonderful comforting force and
power, viz.—God never permits men or devils to place a light of
His into a corner where it is not wanted. This led me to earnest
prayer, followed by a sweet confidence that some poor soul would be
the better for my coming into gaol. There were two young men who
waited on me, and they treated me with as much respect as if I had been
a gentleman at home, and they my hired and loving servants. After
a day or two, we had a bible reading and prayer every day, and a
third young man wished to join us. One was a backslider who had
been united in fellowship witli the Plymouth Brethren—the result
so far as I can possibly judge is that they will all be honest men, one
is gone home to his widowed mother in Victoria, he staid at my
house when he came out of gaol, and I aided him in getting home.
I had a letter the other day from the two who are still in gaol, in-
forming me of their sorrow at being in future deprived of the benefit
of my monthly visits by their removal to Hobart; one of these is
the backslider restored, the other, a young man the son of a Clergy-
man in England, who professes to have found life in Christ, and he
and I may have cause to praise God to all eternity that we so
mysteriously met in a gaol. Oh the wondrous depth and height of
the love and wisdom of our wonderful God, overruling even the
mistakes of His servants for His own glory and their lasting joy.—
My God knew that I did not run into sin, or swerve from the right
wilfully, to gratify any base or sorded passion of fallen nature, I was
overtaken in a fault, and He at once sent His pardoning mercy and
love to comfort, sustain, and bless me ; glory be to His holy name
for ever !


The following lines written to cheer my children, are inserted to
snow that I was very kindly treated by the officers in the prison
house, and not very unhappy while there :
ROYAL HOTEL
PATTERSON STREET
Answer to Questions and fears , in a letter received
from my Son.
“ The Hotel”
* The Dormetary*
“Long Nights’ 1 '
“ Food"
Fusty old clothes
“No doubt Goa
is with you.”
The hotel and its grounds, are spacious and clean,
And the host, is more genial than any I’ve seen,
The attendants obliging, and civil of lip ;
And strangest of all never look for a “ tip.”
jjy bedroom is lofty, its walls are pure white,
My bedstead substantial, no creaking all night,
My bed is of straw, with clean blankets and rug,
And so for my sleeping, lam pretty snug.
“ Early closing hotels,” why, as I’m alive !
They lock us all in at half-past five :
After thirteen long hours, doors open again,
I can’t say i like it, but will not complain ;
It guards well our morals, is meant for our good,
No doubt—but some good things are misunderstood
My first meal, three courses, bread, skilly, and salt,
The skilly in bucket and ladle was brought,
All wholesome and clean, but in saying my grace,
My thanks were less hearty than in my own place.
Of food, I have plenty, enough and to spare,
And I eat very well, so banish that fear.
Anent, “fusty clothing” don’t get in a stew,
Mine were all made for me perfectly new.
You are right, “ God is with me” even in here,
The voice of my Saviour, says “be of good cheer,”
There are three who now kneel with thy father in
prayer!
God is saving their souls 1 “it is good to be here, ’
Birds sing more, and louder, when caged they be,
Than when they are skimming the liquid air free,
And so it may be with an innocent soul,
If like Paul and Silas, he gets in a hole.
It was not all “ Old Adam” that clapt me in here,
Whatever folks think, for ray conscience is clear,
Which would not be the case had I done any wrong,
So cheer up dear J. B. here endeth my song.
PHILOSOPHER WHITE.
Feb. 21st, 1890.


A SOLILOQUY IN A
ROYAL CLOISTER,
BY PASTOR WHITE.
Mid all my changes in this mundane scene,
Have I a Monk become, or do 1 dream;
My dress of grey, a cell eight feet by four ;
Coarse bed, coarse food, all rule, no liberty,
A seven days retreat for fasts and prayers,
Have I allegiance sworn to Pope of Rome,
And thus disgraced a noble line of ancestry,
Who in old times resisted unto blood
The fiendish cruelty of papist ire,
I stand bewildered, would my brain were clear,
That I might understand, why am I here!
I see no altar, skull, or cross bones, none,
I have no sandels, shaven crown, .or rosary,
No “ breviary,” "Paternoster,” or “ Hail Mary.”
No “ Lives of Saints,” no “ Garden of the Soul"
No secret cupboard with roast, fowl and sherry,
No pretty Nun with holy smiles to wait
On me—instead two fellows marked with
H. M. Q., then I'm in Gaol, thanks to God !
I still am protestant and no R. C.
For what are bolts, and bars, and lock and key,
All nothing ! nothing, while my soul is free.
Feb 21st, 1890.
My greatest puhishment and deepest sorrow has been inflicted
since my release, by the Members of the Ministers’ Association.
The Eevds. William Law, and D. 8. Brunton were not present at the
meeting on the 10th of Marcl


LAUNCESTON MINISTERS’ ASSOCIATION.
Newnham,
March 3rd, 1890.
Pastor White,
At our monthly meeting this day, it was resolved,—That a
Special Meeting of the Association be convened for next Monday,
10th March, at 11 a-m.
BUSINESS :
To decide upon the action of the Association in relation to Pastor
White’s case.
Yours sincerely,
G. T. HEYWARD,
Hon. Sec. L.M.A,
N. 8.—1 omitted to copy my reply to this letter, but remembered
it was in substance an approval of the course pursued ; telling them
that I was going on a visit to my children who reside at Latrobe, the
cheap fares offering a special inducement, and saying at the same
time, if I did not go, I thought I should come to the meeting after
they had been in conference a half-an-hour.
I fully expected that the outcome would be an expression of
sorrow, that I had been led to sign the papers, and hand it to the
parties in question through my too sympathetic disposition, and
after that, an expression of kindly sympathy—here I greatly erred
in judgment as the sequel will disclose.
LAUNCESTON MINISTERS’ ASSOCIATION.
Monday, March 10th, 1890.
Pastor White,
Dear Brother,
I regret to have to convey to you the following resolution which
was unanimously passed at the Special Meeting called to consider
your case this day.—“ That this meeting having carefully considered
Pastor White’s case in all its bearings, feels itself reluctantly com-
pelled in the interests of truth and righteousness, to suspend him
from the membership of this Association for the period of one year
from this date,”
Fraternally yours,
G. T. HEYWARD,
Hon, Se% L.M.A


YORK STREET,
March 14th, 1890.
Rev. G. T. Heyward,
Dear Sir,
I am in receipt of the resolution passed unanimously at the
meeting of the Launceston Ministers’ Association, on the lOth'inst.
To say that I was surprised and deeply grieved thereby is only a
very faint expression of what I felt on receiving it. Let me ask the
brethren if there could not have been found a more excellent way.”
Had I committed a most abominable crime, would not Jesus
Christ have had some of you visit the fallen brother, and seek to win
him to repentance ?
Had I been a member of a church, would not the rule be to cite
me before the church.
Whatever your views of the case may be have you not acted
contrary to the teaching of scripture, in casting a man out unheard,
and with no word of pity, tenderness, or prayer. My dear brethren,
is it right thus to grieve the least of the brethren ? I pray you again
to consider the matter, and seek the Lord’s guidance. “ Truth and
righteousness ” are not incomparable with “ love and mercy,”
I am, sincerely yours,
WILLIAM WHITE.
To the Members of the Ministers’ Association,
Launceston.
LAUNCESTON MINISTERS’ ASSOCIATION.
April 14 th, 1890.
Pastor Whit*,
Dear Brother,
At the Monthly Meeting of this Association held this day, your
letter of March 14th, was laid before the Association.
I am instructed to reply to your complaint—that “ no member of
the Association had visited you,” etc. ; and that you had been “ cast
out unheard,” etc. You have surely overlooked the fact that you
were apprised of the Special Meeting called to consider your case,
and invited to attend it. The brethren were fully prepared to hear
all you wished to say, and more than ready to “ speak the words of
pity, tenderness, and prayer,” which you complain of being denied.
By your voluntary absence you deprived them of the opportunity.
Further, I can assure you that it was with extremes! reluctance
this resolution you have received was carried ; and had you atten-
ded the meeting, and expressed, any regret and sorrow for your
action , it is more than likely the course taken would have been far
less severe.
Trusting you will be led to see the action of the Association in
its true light, and give them credit for acting from Christian principle.
Believe me, sincerely yours,
G. T. HEYWARD,
Hon. Sec. L.M.A.


YORK STREET.
Launceston, 16th April, 1890,
My Dear Mr. Heyward,
I enclose copy of your letter of 3rd March. I know what a
loving sensitive heart you have, and if you find that you have mis-
led the ministers, and them heaped blame on my devoted head hy a
firm belief that you had invited me to attend the Special Meeting
held on March 10th, you will feel as much as I felt of shame and
sorrow at my momentary forgetfulness that brought so much trouble
more on others than on myself. I can say positively, that I should
have postponed my visit to Latrobe, had I been invited to the meeting,
indeed, I was much inclined to do so as it was, but thought I might
be misunderstood if I intruded myself. In fact I was pained to find
I was not invited. Better had it been for us all had the ministers
visited me, and acted on Gal. vi, 1, and Matt, xviii, 21. There is no
“ suspension ’’ taught here, and to my mind the practical issue of the
suspension must be that you must pray—“ Lord if we grieve Thee
at any moment, suspend us from communion and fellowship with
Thee for twelve months, as we have suspended our brother.”
If I am right, the case is more serious for the ministers than for
me, and in, my heart I really feel it to be so.
I am, dear sir,
Yours affectionately,
WILLIAM WHITE.
LAUNCESTON MINISTERS’ ASSOCIATION.
April 2lst, 1890.
Pastor White,
Dear Brother,
Yours of the 15th inst. duly received. It shall be laid before
Association at next meeting.
Sincerely yours,
G. T. HEYWARD.
LAUNCESTON,
June 23rd, 1890.
My Dear Mb. White,
I am instructed as chairman of the meeting of the Ministers’
Association, held yesterday, to convey to you the resolution passed
at the meeting.
I may first of all stale that the May meeting lapsed, owing to
the illness of the Secretary.
The following was moved by the Rev. William Law, and unan-
imously agreed to, —“That Pastor White’s letter be received and ac-
knowledged, and that he be respectfully informed that as shewn by his
own true copy of notice as enclosed in his letter, he did receive an
invitation (the same as that sent to all other members of the Associa-
tion) to the meeting where his action was discussed, and that here
the matter must end as far as the Association is concerned,”
I am,
Yours faithfully,
DONALD S. BRUNTON.
Cii :i inn an.


YORK STREET
June 10th, 1890.
My Dear Me. Brunton,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, written hy you
as Chairman of the Ministers’ Meeting, held 2nd June.
I suppose this ends the matter “so far as the Association is con-
cerned,” but there will remain after all in my estimation, a good
deal behind that never can be satisfactory to the conscience of any
man in the Association, or to myself.
That I was wrong—though not criminally so—l have owned
from the time the charge was laid against me. In my first note to
the Association, I said “ I fear I have grieved you all by one moment
of folly,” and I have said more than this to individual members of
the Association ever since, and besides this there is my public state-
ment in the newspapers, admitting the wrong and confessing that I
was ashamed of it.
My mind is very chameleonlike in character, taking colour for
the time from that over which it broods.
God knew well that I had not run after sin, seeking to gratify
any base passion of human nature, but that I had “ been overtaken
in a folly that leaned to virtue’s side,” pind I had peace with God
long before the charge was laid against me : and the first hour I was
in the gaol, this thought was laid very comfortably on my mind,
viz.—“ God never allows men or devils to place a light of His in any
corner where it is not wanted,” and this led me to prayer, quiet, trust,
and perfect assurance that God would bless mo to some soul while in
that place, and I left full of a joyful assurance that 1 had been the
means of restoring one backslider, and awakening to a concern for
salvation two young men among my fellow prisoners.
I wrote my letter to the Association with my heart full of praise
to God who had so sustained and comforted me, and so evidently
overuled my sad mistake for His own glory, and the salvation of
souls. This spirit gave to my letter a jubilant tinge which has been
misunderstood.
However, as I was not present at the meeting held 10th Maroh,
and the letter before the meeting was considered to evince a spirit
of levity incompatible with the gravity of its subject. Then if I was
wrong, why do all the ministers show their folly by doing wrong
also, i.e. by settling the offender at once by a drastic, cold, and un-
feeling resolution. Had there been a wise man among them, such
hot haste would have been prevented, and it would have been deci-
ded that a deputation wait on Pastor White, more especially as his
letter was considered somewhat unsatisfactory. I must also say
that the last resolution forwarded in your letter looks like an attempt
to shirk the truth.
Would any reasonable man feel sure that a mere notice of a
meeting “called to consider Pastor White’s case,” would be an invi-
tation to the man whose case was to be tried to attend such meeting 1 ?
Moreover, that Mr. Heyward considered such notice to be all sufficient
is plainly contradicted by himself. In his letter to me dated April
14th, he says—“ You surely overlooked the fact that you was ap-
prized of the meeting called to consider your case on the 10th of
March, and invited to attend it.” If such notice as all the rest re-
ceived is alone referred to here—then what meaneth the conjunction
and the words following ?
1 am, dear Sir,
Yours as ever,
In the love of Christ.
WILLIAM WHITE.


MISSION TO CHINESE,
1 have taken a deep interest in the above Society, and have been
on the Committee from its formation ; latterly, have been Assistant
Secretary--and between the meeting of the Committee just after my
hearing in the Police Court, and the meeting of the Committee some
time after my incarceration, had collected back subscriptions and ob-
tained four now annual subscribers, two of which Mr. F, Hart, and
Mr. A. Clerke was obtained after my imprisonment.
The day before the Committee met again, Mr. F. L. Fysh (trea-
surer) called on me to know if I had any money in hand, saying the
Committee would meet on the morrow, I told him what money I had,
and said I will come to the meeting and bring my book and the
money. He then asked if I could give him the money at once—l
gave it up to him—he then said, so you will attend the Committee
Meeting to morrow, to which I answered yes, 1 saw nothing to
hinder me, he then said, “but have you a notice of the meeting ?”
this was said as he was leaving my house ; the thought then occured
to me—this means mischief, I am not wanted at the meeting, and
I did not go. The next day Mr. Fysh, and Mr. J. E. Clark called
on me. Mr. Fysh, said “you were not at the meeting Mr. White,” I re-
plied no, “I took your question as you left my house to mean that
the usual notice had not been sent, with the intention that I was not
wanted there,” Mr. Clark then said such was the fact, and they had
been sent to tell mo that the Committee, under all circumstances, had
resolved that it would be better that I ceased working in connection
with the Society for six months.
I gave up my book and told them they would see me no more ;
from all this I cannot think otherwise than that all parties had come
to a conclusion to treat me as a Pariah, cast mo out unheard, and
stamp me as a felon. I felt very ill after they had left, but thank
God I can get to heaven without any of them, and there if I meet
them I suppose we shall all sing one song, and be peacefully united,
and happy together. As it is now, these particulars were necessary
to be given to ray friends to explain why I am absent from all work
done by the Ministers’ Association, etc.
From the general public I have received nothing but kindness
and sympathy in my trial, for which I am their debtor.
WILLIAM WHITE.
Extract from the Daily Telegraph, February 21st, 1890.
Very general surprise was expressed yesterday throughout the
city when it was made known that Pastor White had been sentenced
to a week’s imprisonment for having given a false Marriage Certificate
The public are already acquainted with the full particulars of this
sad case, and wo think it will be almost unanimously conceded that
any violation of the law committed by Pastor White was due to kind-
ness of heart, and caused by a humane Christian feeling to save a
girl from public disgrace, and soften a blow to a man lying stricken
almost to death. Pastor White certainly committed an error of judg-
ment in yielding to the entreaties of tho supplicants, but it was one
of such a nature that the recording angel would assuredly blot out


with a keener perception of justice in its merciful purity than did the
Bench, before whom Pastor White was yesterday tried. Taking the
whole surroundings of the case, we think the majesty of the law
would have been amply vindicated by a formal verdict of guilty being
recorded, and the Pastor released on his own recognisance to appear
before the Court when called upon. It is always an unpleasant duty
to have to criticise the judgment of the Bench, but in this instance
we feel compelled to say that His Honor has failed to grasp the pecu-
liarly extenuating circumstances »f the case, and has recorded a
sentence which certainly lacks the imprint of that mercy which
Pastor White exercised to his own detrernent.
Reply to Daily Telegraph of February 21st, 1890.
Sir, —1 thank you for the very kind remarks in your paper in
reference to the sentence passed upon me in the Supreme court, at
Launceston, on the 20th ult., for issuing a false certificate of marriage.
I wish to say to your readers that I feel sorry and very much ashamed
of the fact that 1 did sign my name to that which was untrue ; and
the only palliation or excuse is that 1 was so absorbed in the sad facts
of the case upon which I was engaged that I did not notice that
which most affected my own character, and thoughtlessly wrote out
the paper. And not 'till about five minutes after the parties had left
my house did the fact dawn upon me that what I had put my name
to was a lie. Then it was past recall, and this is the only bitter regret
I have in the whole business I find there are some persons who think
the remarks of the judge on this head were too severe. But it should
be borne in mind that he only knew me by this sad mistake. He
could not know that whatever other feelings I have, this was not one
to be found in my character through 60 years, and that it was a case
allied to that of the anger of the meek man Moses, God has given
me perfect peace now respecting this fault. But it teaches this lesson
Do not entirely rely upon habit for safety, do not think when you
say “ I forgot,” that forgetfulness is no fault. See what results may
follow. But as to the very serious consequences that might follow
the giving of one of these certificates, His Honor, Judge Adams must
have known that no very serious consequences could follow’. At the
bottom of the certificate there is printed the following notice :
N.B. —“ If it be requisite to prove this marriage in a Court of Law,
the registrar of births, deaths, and marriages will furnish a document
for that purpose.” Does not this imply that the certificate in question
would not be accepted and acted upon in a Court of Law 1 On the
other hand, if such serious consequences do attach to such certificates
then it is a crying shame to the Government that there is no restric-
tion laid upon the local printers to sell these certificates to
none but ministers of the churches in Tasmania in person. I was in
one printer’s office when a young man was served with one of these
certificates, and I know 1 of another instance where two young men
were in the printer’s office, and one of them among other papers pur-
chased two of these certificates. Anybody can fill them in by for-
ging the name of a well-known minister, or by simply using a fictitious
name ; thus parents may be deceived into the belief that a marriage
has been celebrated, and all the while no such marriage has taken place.
Benefit Societies may pay monies to parties on the death of a reputed
husband or wife on the production of one of these papers, and the
party receiving the money may have no legal title to the money what-
ever. In fact the only real solid good of these certificates is that they
afford an opportunity for all interested persons to W’rite to the minister


of the church named therein to enquire if such marriage is registered in
the books of the said church. This is laxity on the part of the Govern-
ment, very favorable to immortality, and some remidy will, I trust, be
at once applied. I also do contend, as you say in your paragraph in
to-day’s issue, that when I bought the “ Marriage Act oi Tasmania”
I had a right to be’ieve that as that document was prepared and sold
under the sanction of the Government, that I was in possession of all
and every particle of the laws relative to marriage, and I have no
hesitation in saying that had the act contained the clause which has
been hunted up and found in the Criminal Procedure Act, the prose-
cution of Pastor White by the Crown would never have been heard
of. Thanking you for all your courtesy and kindness.
Yours, etc.
WILLIAM WHITE.
February 28.
