





1945.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
FULL EMPLOYMENT IN
AUSTRALIA.
Presented by Command, 30 th May, 1945.
[Cost of Paper. —Preparation, not given: 980 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing, £23.]
Printed and Published for the GOVERNMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of AUSTRALIA by
L. F. JOHNSTON, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.
(Printed in Australia,)
No. 11. [GROUP H.] — F.2834 1s.


FULL EMPLOYMENT IN AUSTRALIA.
CONTENTS.
Page.
Part I.—lntroduction.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3-4
Part 11.— Employment and Expenditure .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 4-6
Components of Expenditure .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 4
Variability of Expenditure .. .. .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 4
Scope for Stabilization of Expenditure .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
Part lll.—Maintenance oe Full Employment .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6-9
Private Consumption Expenditure . . . . .. .. . . .. .. .. 6
Public Expenditure on Current Services .. .. .. . . .. .. .. 7
Private Capital Expenditure .. .. .. . . . . . . . . . . 7
Public Capital Expenditure . . .. . . . . . . . . 8
Net Expenditure from Overseas .. .. .. .. , , .. .. .. 8
Part IV.—Special Problems of a Full Employment Economy .. .. .. .. .. 9-14
Excess Spending . . . . .. . . . . .. . . .. .. .. 9
Mobility of Resources .. . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . 9
Efficiency . . .. .. . . . . .. . . .. .. .. 10
Wages .. .. . . .. . . .. . . . . . . .. .. 12
Public Finance .. .. .. . . .. . . . . .. .. .. 12
Balance of Oversea Payments .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
Part V.—Change-over prom War to Peace .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14-18
Special Features of the Transition .. .. .. . . .. . . . . . . 14
Machinery for the Change-over . . .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 14
Controls in the Transition . . . . .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 15
Re-organization of Production .. .. . . .. .. . . .. .. 16
Conclusion .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
Part VI. —Machinery of Government .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18-19
Essential Information .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. .. 18
Formulation of Economic Policy . . .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 18
Commonwealth-State Collaboration . . .. .. .. .. . . .. .. 19


FULL EMPLOYMENT IN AUSTRALIA.
PART I.—INTRODUCTION.
Pull employment is a fundamental aim of the Commonwealth Government. The
Government believes that the people of Australia will demand and are entitled to expect full
employment, and that for this purpose it will be able to count on the co-operation of servicemen’s
associations, trade unions, employers’ associations and other groups. Because the Referendum
was not carried, the co-operation of State Governments and local authorities will be particularly
necessary.
2. Despite the need for more houses, food, equipment and every other type of product,
before the war not all those available for work were able to find employment or to feel a sense
of security in their future. On the average during the twenty years between 1919 and 1939
more than one-tenth of the men and women desiring work were unemployed. In the worst
period of the depression well over 25 per cent, were left in unproductive idleness. By
contrast, during the war no financial or other obstacles have been allowed to prevent the
need for extra production being satisfied to the limit of our resources. It is true that war-time
full employment has been accompanied by efforts and sacrifices and a curtailment of individual
liberties which only the supreme emergency of war could justify; but it has shown up the
wastes of unemployment in pre-war years, and it has taught us valuable lessons which we can
apply to the problems of peace-time, when full employment must be achieved in ways consistent
with a free society.
3. In peace-time the responsibility of Commonwealth and State Governments is to provide
the general framework of a full employment economy, within which the operations of individuals
and businesses can be carried on.
4. Improved nutrition, rural amenities and social services, more houses, factories and
other capital equipment and higher standards of living generally are objectives on which we can
all agree. Governments can promote the achievement of these objectives to the limit set by
available resources.
5. The policy outlined in this paper is that governments should accept the responsibility
for stimulating spending on goods and services to the extent necessary to sustain full employment.
To prevent the waste of resources which results from unemployment is the first and greatest
step to higher living standards. But if our living standards are to increase to the greatest extent
possible, we must produce as efficiently as possible goods that are wanted.
6. There will be no place in this full employment policy for schemes designed to make
work for work’s sake. Moreover, full advantage must be taken of modern methods of production
and training in all branches of industry, and the economic system must be flexible enough to meet
changing needs. In these conditions, full employment has advantages to offer to every section
of the community. To the worker, it means steady employment, the opportunity to change
his employment if he wishes, and a secure prospect unmarred by the fear of idleness and the
dole. To the business or profession.' ! man, the manufacturer, the shopkeeper, it means an
expanding scope for his enterprise, free from the fear of periodic slumps in spending. To the
primary producer, it means an expanding home market and —taking a world-wide view—better
and more stable export markets. To the people as a whole, it means a better opportunity to
obtain all the goods and services which their Inborn 1 , working with necessary knowledge and
equipment, is capable of producing.
7. The rural industries present a series of problems which the Rural Reconstruction
Commission is at present examining. When the Commission’s work is complete, the Government
will publish a detailed statement of its policy in relation to primary producers in a full employment
economy, and set out the measures by which it is proposed to improve and stabilize their standards
of living.
8. The Government has proposed in current international discussions that an employment
agreement should be concluded whereby each country would undertake to do all in its power to
maintain employment within its own territories. The Government is also taking part in discussions
relating to other forms of international collaboration designed to expand world trade and to
mitigate fluctuations in prices of raw materials and foodstuffs. A domestic policy of full
employment in Australia will prove of benefit to other countries.
9. The maintenance of conditions which will make full employment possible is an obligation
owed to the people of Australia by Commonwealth and State Governments. Australian
governments will have to accept now responsibilities and to exercise new functions, and there will
need to be the closest collaboration between them. Unemployment is an evil from the effects
F. 2831.—2


of which no class in the community and no State in the Commonwealth can hope to escape, unless
concerted action is taken. Special problems inevitably arise from the federal nature of the
Australian governmental structure, and the Commonwealth Government will approach the State
Governments in an effort to devise in consultation with them the instruments for meeting these
special problems.
10. The object of this paper is to make clear the problems w T hich lie ahead in making
full employment possible, and to indicate the. lines along which their solution can be found. The
paper is also concerned with the more immediate task of bringing about a smooth transition from
war to peace. The transition must be effected in such a way as to provide a lasting foundation
for the progress and welfare of Australians, as individuals and as a people, in the years of peace.
PART II.—EMPLOYMENT AND EXPENDITURE.
11. This Part of the paper describes the main factors determining the level of employment,
and indicates the kind of measures that will be necessary to avoid unemployment.
12. The amount of employment available at any time depends on the volume of production
being undertaken. This in turn depends on the demand for goods and services—that is, on
expenditure by individuals, firms, public authorities and oversea buyers. Full employment can
be maintained only as long as total expenditure provides a market for all the goods and services
turned out by Australian men and women, working with available equipment and materials, and
fully employed after allowing for the need for leisure.
13. To understand why total expenditure fluctuates, and how the fluctuations can be offset,
we need to analyse the components of total expenditure and then to examine the extent to which
each part is likely to fluctuate, and the extent to which each part is capable of being stabilized.
COMPONENTS OF EXPENDITURE
14. The broad divisions of total expenditure are—
(а) Private Consumption Expenditure —expenditure by private individuals on food,
clothing, rent, amusements, &c.
(б) Public Expenditure on Current Services —expenditure by governments and local
authorities on regularly recurring items such as defence, transport, education,
police, health and medical services, maintenance of public capital equipment.
(c) Private Cajntal Expenditure —expenditure by individuals and Arms on machinery
and plant, factories, houses, stocks of goods.
(d) Public Capital Expenditure —expenditure by governments and local authorities
on such items as now railways, roads, bridges, buildings, land development,
power and light, water conservation and irrigation, &c.
(e) Expenditure from Overseas —expenditure on Australian goods by oversea
consumers and businessmen which gives rise to employment in Australia.
Some of the expenditure in. the first four categories is on imported goods,
and therefore gives rise to employment abroad, not in Australia. It is usual
to allow for this by making expenditure from overseas a net item—that is, the
difference between exports and imports.
VARIABILITY OF EXPENDITURE.
16. Some parts of total expenditure are more likely than others to start fluctuations in
employment. Private consumption spending is closely related to total incomes and changes
substantially only if employment and incomes themselves fluctuate. Public expenditure on
current services arises from the established policy of Australian governments and, apart from
long-term changes, does not fluctuate substantially.
16. On the other hand, a great deal of private capital expenditure is unstable because it
depends on personal judgments of business prospects, which are constantly subject to revision
in the light of changing circumstances. These fluctuations in private capital expenditure are an
important cause of fluctuations in production and employment,
17. In the past, public capital expenditure has fluctuated considerably. Because
governments believed that it was necessary to economize in bad times, they tended to reduce
their capital expenditure when private spending fell off. Governments need not have varied their
capital expenditure in sympathy with private spending—indeed, it will be argued in this paper
that the reverse policy should be pursued.
18. Spending from overseas on Australian goods and services has in the past been extremely
variable. All other countries have suffered substantial fluctuations in their levels of employment
and total income and their spending on our exports has varied accordingly.


SCOPE FOR STABILIZATION OF EXPENDITURE.
19. One of the chief threats to full employment is, therefore, the instability of private
capital expenditure and of expenditure from overseas. Unfortunately, neither type of expenditure
is capable of being completely stabilized. The prospect of a high and stable level of demand will
encourage businessmen to maintain a steady flow of capital expenditure, but many other factors
on which their judgments depend are necessarily variable. We must also be prepared for continued
fluctuations in spending from overseas. This will be less serious to the extent that oversea
governments succeed in raising and stabilizing their people’s employment and incomes. Domestic
measures to promote stability of primary producers’ incomes will also tend to stabilize spending
and employment in Australia.
20. Public capital expenditure is the principal type of expenditure that can be readily
varied to offset variation in the unstable parts of expenditure.
21. Public capital expenditure has always been important in the Australian economy
and can be controlled by Commonwealth and State Governments. When employment tends to
decline, resources can be usefully employed by the decision to embark upon developmental work
and to improve the collective capital equipment of the community. It is economical to use
resources that would otherwise be idle in these forms of capital construction, and thus to maintain
the economy in full employment. This differs from the policy that has frequently been adopted
in the past, especially during the depression of the ’thirties, when public works were reduced at a
time when all other expenditure was falling. These reductions were the result of a belief that
reduced spending was the appropriate policy when revenues were falling as a result of a decline
in income. If total expenditure is to be maintained, and the resources of the community fully
employed, this policy should be reversed. Government policy will then be directed to building
up the nation’s capital equipment, and stimulating the general level of consumption. At the
same time private spending will be stimulated by a higher level of economic activity, a sustained
demand for goods and services and stable conditions for the maintenance of private capital
expenditure.
22. A tendency of spending to decline, thus causing unemployment, can be offset by a
relatively small increase in public expenditure and by banking policy and other measures to
encourage private spending. Just as unemployment breeds more unemployment because
unemployed 'workers and depressed businesses are bad customers for other industries, so
employment breeds more employment because extra demand for some goods enables the producers
of those goods to increase their purchases and so on. If governments maintain a continual close
review of current and prospective trends in spending and the level of activity in the economy,
they will be ready to act as soon as a decline threatens. The earlier they do so, the smaller will
be the increase of public and private expenditure required. When expenditure is increased it will
give additional employment and incomes to some producers ; their extra spending will still further
increase employment and incomes, and this process will go on for some time multiplying on itself.
23. The essential condition of full employment is that public expenditure should be high
enough to stimulate private spending to the point where the two together will provide a demand
for the total production of which the economy is capable when it is fully employed. The
effectiveness of public expenditure in stimulating employment generally is vividly brought home
by our experience at the beginning of this war. There were then more than a quarter of a million
unemployed. The Commonwealth Government directly absorbed some of these people into
the armed forces, into clothing and munition factories, and into building new factories, aerodromes,
and similar establishments for war purposes. The balance of the unemployed was quickly
absorbed by private enterprise to produce goods and sendees to meet the demands of these newly-
employed workers, and to meet the demands of the government for war goods. During the war,
the high level of government expenditure required to achieve our war effort has not only resulted
in full employment, but has caused a continual strain on available resources, and has involved
a contraction and diversion of private enterprise because of the scarcity of resources.
24. To carry out a full employment policy will require the closest collaboration between the
State and Commonwealth Governments, and between governments, employers and trade unions,
along lines some of which have already been worked out. It will also means that so far as possible
expenditure should take place in areas and in industries where labour and equipment are organized
for production. Particularly in view of the need for decentralization, transfer of resources into
new areas and new industries will of course sometimes be essential.
25. It must be recognized that, once full employment has been achieved, a decision to
devote additional resources to one objective of policy can be carried out only by diverting resources
from other objectives. This need to choose between objectives cannot be averted by monetary


or financial measures for it arises simply from the fact that the amount of resources of labour, land
and materials available at any time sets a definite upper limit to the volume of goods and services
which can be produced.
26. This policy for full employment will maintain such a pressure of demand on resources
that for the economy as a whole there will be a tendency towards a shortage of men instead of
a shortage of jobs. This does not, of course, mean that at any particular time everybody will
be at work: some people will be away from work because of sickness, some will be taking a
spell between seasonal or periodical employment, some will be in the process of changing from
one employment to another offering better prospects, some will take time to acquire new training
to equip them for other employment. These reasons for unavoidable absences from work can
gradually be made less important, but in any case there is no need for them to entail poverty,
insecurity and the feeling of being unwanted for the individuals concerned. The Government
has already provided in Social Security legislation for the maintenance of those people who are
absent from work from unavoidable causes.
27. Progressively the policy will enable the community to build up its equipment and
so improve its efficiency and its production. This increasing wealth will enable us still further
to improve our public and private equipment and will provide a basis for gradual expansion
of consumption. It will be the Government’s policy to ensure that this increased consumption,
while raising living standards generally, will benefit most those whose need is greatest. To the
extent that the community feels that greater provision for leisure is more important than a
greater increase in the flow of goods and services, it will be possible to bring about a reduction
in working hours. The extent and speed of these developments depend of course on the rate
at which productivity increases, but full employment can do much to make actual the potential
increase arising from growing knowledge and improving equipment.
PART III.—MAINTENANCE OF FULL EMPLOYMENT.
28. The policy here outlined is briefly that, if spending and employment tend to decline,
governments should stimulate spending, both by their own expenditure and through, their
monetary and commercial policies, to the extent necessary to avoid unemployment and the
consequent waste of resources.
29. This policy will need careful administration. Not only will it be necessary to offset
a tendency for spending to decline, but governments must also ensure that total expenditure
is not too high. As long as there are unemployed resources to be drawn into production,
increased expenditure will produce a higher level of employment, but once full employment
has been reached, production is at its maximum. A higher level of expenditure would then
cause prices to rise, with adverse effects on the stability of the economy and on the welfare of
large sections of the community.
30. This Part examines in some detail the possible movements of the various components
of total expenditure set out in paragraph 14, and the extent to which these components can
be influenced by government policy in such a way as to maintain full employment whilst avoiding
a disruptive inflation of prices. Except in abnormal circumstances, it will be possible to achieve
these aims without governments having to control private transactions. At certain times,
however, when a specially critical situation has to be met, it may be necessary for governments
to exercise some degree of direct control in order to avoid inflation. A clear example of such
a critical situation is the period of transition from war to peace, which is dealt with in Part V.
of this paper, when for a time it will be imperative to maintain control of prices, capital issues,
and materials in short supply.
PRIVATE CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURE.
31. Private consumption expenditure cannot easily be varied to offset temporary
fluctuations in other types of spending. It normally bears a fairly constant relationship to
incomes and employment. With stable incomes, only a change in people’s spending habits
would change consumption expenditure. Those habits change only over a long period. They
are affected to some extent by government policy. For instance, provision by governments
of benefits in social legislation permits a higher proportion of private income to be spent on
consumption goods and services. Moreover, the increase that will accrue to lower income groups
as productivity rises will largely be spent on increased consumption.
32. These developments depend on the one hand on the community’s standards of social
justice, and on the other hand on the rate of technical progress. They are also limited by the
need to provide for the development of private and public capital projects. This need
is particularly important in Australia, which is inadequately supplied with the capital equipment
without which farmers, workers and businessmen cannot achieve their maximum efficiency.


PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON CURRENT SERVICES.
33. This type of expenditure too is fairly constant at levels determined by government
policy, and is not well adapted to meeting temporary fluctuations in private expenditure. The
people require and demand certain standards of public services and administration. The size
of the police and defence forces, departmental administration, the provision of health and medical
services and so on, cannot be quickly varied to meet changing circumstances. On the other
hand, over a long period at least some of these services will lave to be gradually expanded.
This will be particularly true of health and medical services, education, and employment services.
The stability of a gradually growing section of public expenditure will contribute to the stability
of total expenditure and hence of employment.
PRIVATE CAPITAL EXPENDITURE.
34. This is by far the most critical section of total expenditure. In the first place, it is
itself large—in the best pre-war year it was more than £100,000,000. Secondly, it is inherently
liable to fluctuations, depending as it does on the judgments of businessmen whose spending on
capital goods is influenced by many variable factors. Thus between 1928-29 and 1931-32, private
investment dropped from £115,000,000 to £29,000,000. Finally, it is important also because
these large fluctuations in private capital expenditure have a direct effect on the level of private
consumption spending of those employed in the capital goods industries ; and a further indirect
effect because the reduction of this consumption spending reduces the employment, incomes and
spending of those normally employed in consumption goods industries.
36. Private capital expenditure will continue to be one of the most significant parts of
total expenditure. Its extreme variability, and the impossibility of completely stabilizing the
factors which bring about that variability, present a most important and difficult problem.
36. The Commonwealth Government believes that the greatest single contribution to the
stability of private capital expenditure will be the assurance that total spending will be maintained
at high and stable levels. Furthermore, special plans will create new opportunities for private
capital expenditure. For example, the Commonwealth and State Governments are agreed on
plans for a substantial expansion of house building activity as soon as the war permits. Building
is an important element of private capital expenditure, and industries associated with it should
be on a firm basis for expansion for many years to come.
37. A major cause of decreases of private capital expenditure in the past has been the
tendency of many businessmen, farmers and other investors simultaneously to contract their
capital expenditure because of the fear of a reduction in spending. This was inevitable in an
economy in which total expenditure was expected to fluctuate, and in which businessmen were
extremely sensitive to their rivals’ and associates’ estimates cf movements in spending in the
near future. Simply because businessmen tended simultaneously to contract their capital
expenditure, they contributed significantly by their very actions to the fall in total spending which
they feared.
38. Although fluctuations in private capital expenditure will not disappear under conditions
of continuous full employment, it may be expected that the demand for private capital equipment
will be less uneven if governments act to maintain total expenditure at a reasonably constant
level.
39. Governments can themselves also contribute to the stability of expenditure on capital
goods. During the war, the Commonwealth Government has reduced interest rates to record
low levels. This policy of low interest rates will be continued. As controller of the banking
system and with the added powers it will acquire under the Government’s banking legislation,
the Commonwealth Bank will be in a position to ensure that the flow of credit from the banking
system is regulated to promote stability in capital spending. In particular it will be the
responsibility of the Commonwealth Bank to ensure that the banking system does not initiate a
general contraction of credit or contribute in any way to the growth of unemployment through a
decline of expenditure. The Commonwealth Bank will be in a position to adopt a policy of
maintaining and expanding direct advances as may be required by the level of total spending
in the community. It is intended that the Industrial Finance Department, which the Government
is now setting up within the Commonwealth Bank, will also provide capital finance for small
and growing businesses, many of which although credit-worthy cannot provide the required
securities for bank advances. This will make a significant contribution to our industrial
development.
40. As a contribution to the expansion of opportunities for capital expenditure, the
Government will promote industrial and agricultural research. Some firms are able to maintain
their own research and investigation sections. Many others cannot afford it. Both classes of
firms may be able to derive advantage from the development of research facilities by the
Government in collaboration with industry.


41. The Commonwealth Government considers that the proposals outlined in this section
provide a firm basis for the steady expansion of capital expenditure, and offer a real promise of
confining within a small and manageable range the fluctuations in capital expenditure which, in
the past, have been such a potent threat to the level of employment and to the stability of the
economy.
PUBLIC CAPITAL EXPENDITURE.
42. Provision for the maintenance and development of public capital assets by
Commonwealth and State Governments and by local and semi-govcrnmental authorities will
require a level of public capital expenditure substantially higher than before the war. Merely
to list some of the possible objects of public capital expenditure in Australia is to emphasize the
importance of this expenditure ; housing and slum clearance, community centres, hospitals and
libraries, roads, railways, bridges, harbours, aerodromes, electrical and other power-undertakings,
administrative buildings, land development through irrigation, afforestation, water conservation,
prevention of soil erosion, flood control, reclamation. In each of these fields there is an urgent
need for improving public capital assets, which must be met if public agencies are to provide the
services it is their function to provide for the Australian people.
43. In determining the level of public capital expenditure, account must be taken both
of the intrinsic importance of public capital projects for Australia’s welfare and development,
and of the part which public capital expenditure must play in maintaining full employment.
Should a decline in spending threaten to leave resources idle, governments must be prepared to
take advantage of the opportunity to employ those resources in accelerating and expanding
their own programmes for national works, housing, improvement of capital equipment and
provision of facilities for social and cultural activities. Similarly, when private spending is
tending to expand, some reduction may be made in public capital spending. If private spending
seems likely at any time to expand to a level where it may prevent the completion of urgently
needed public capital projects, the Commonwealth and State Governments should seek means
by which they can determine which capital projects, public or private, are the more important
to the community, and accord priority to those projects.
44. Australia is fortunate in that there is a great range and diversity of fields in which
public expenditure on capital equipment and development is required, covering many sections
of industry and types of labour, and extending all over Australia. This means that there is
ample scope for public capital expenditure to be maintained at levels adequate to promote full
employment, and that this expenditure will provide employment in many industries and
in many parts of the country.
46. Careful and detailed advance preparation will be required if public capital expenditure
is to play a significant part in our development, and particularly if it is to play a main part in
stabilizing the level of total expenditure, so as to maintain employment and avoid inflation.
Plans, equipment and materials must be kept at an advanced stage of preparedness if men and
women threatened with unemployment are to continue in employment. Commonwealth and
State Governments, through the National Works Council, have already made considerable
progress in the preparation of these plans.
NET EXPENDITURE FROM OVERSEAS.
46. In the past, the chief fluctuations in total spending and employment in Australia
have arisen from changes in the value of Australian exports, in response to the varying prosperity
of world markets. In order to meet this threat to the maintenance of full employment in
Australia, the Government’s policy will be based upon the following principles :
(а) to seek agreement now with other nations—particularly the major industrial
countries of the world —by which countries undertake to do all in their power
to maintain employment within their own territories, and thereby expand
demand for internationally-traded goods ;
(б) to participate in developing other forms of international collaboration designed
to expand world trade and to mitigate fluctuations in prices of raw materials
and foodstuffs;
(c) to prepare now for the post-war development and diversification of Australian
export markets for both primary and secondary products;
(d) to develop measures to stabilize the incomes, and hence the expenditure, of
Australian export producers, so as to offset the effect of short-term fluctuations
in the demand for Australian exports;
(e) to stabilize total expenditure and employment in Australia in the face of any
expected reduction in spending from overseas on Australian goods and services,
by bringing about a compensating expansion in public capital expenditure
and by other appropriate means ; this will require a continual review of export
prospects, in order that these measures may be taken in good time.


47. In seeking to offset fluctuations in receipts from overseas, it will obviously be desirable
to stabilize farm incomes as far as possible, in order to give primary producers the same sense
of security as we are seeking for the rest of the community. In the past, measures have been
adopted to maintain essential activity by rural producers, even though at times their financial
position has been jeopardized by a serious slump in prices, or by an adverse season. These
measures, however, did not eliminate the serious fluctuations in the expenditure of export
producers which have been the cause of wide variations in total expenditure in Australia. To
meet this problem and to eliminate this element of instability, the Government proposes to
seek the co-operation of the States through the Australian Agricultural Council in maintaining
greater stability of income to rural producers.
48. Australian spending on imports is not a significant factor in maintaining full
employment in Australia since it affects employment in other countries. The chief problem
here from the Australian point of view is whether our receipts from abroad will provide sufficient
oversea funds to pay for all the imports which, in conditions of full employment, Australians
will wish to buy.
49. This problem of the balance of payments is dealt with in Parts IV. and V. of this
paper. It is important, however, to point out here that if, at any time, we are obliged, because
our export income is insufficient, to impose quantitative import restrictions in order to keep
our spending on imports within the limit of our available oversea funds, there will be a tendency
for local resources to find employment in industries which can attract spending previously devoted
to imports. To the extent that this happens, employment will be maintained with a smaller
expansion of public and private capital expenditure. However, Australia 'will have urgent need
of certain imported materials and will impose quantitative import restrictions only if they become
necessary to keep our oversea purchases within the limits of our oversea income.
PART IV. —SPECIAL PROBLEMS OF A FULL EMPLOYMENT ECONOMY.
60. Parts 11. and 111. of this paper have outlined a policy by which total expenditure may
be kept stable at the level which will employ all a vailable resources and at the same time avoid
inflationary pressure on prices. However, full employment will itself give rise to problems which
are not important in an economy in which there is considerable unemployment. The Government
recognizes that these problems exist, and that their solution will tax our ingenuity and goodwill.
The Government believes, however, that the people prefer to face these problems, rather than
revert to the waste and bitterness of unemployment.
61. The dangers of excess spending, of immobility of resources, of inefficiency, of instability
of wages, of unstable public finances and of inadequate oversea funds are all problems which have
to be solved if our living standards are to derive the greatest benefit from full employment, and
if prices are to be kept sufficiently stable to avoid an inflation which would seriously threaten
the welfare of large sections of the community. If we value full employment and high living
standards sufficiently,we need not fear that solutions will be impossible to find.
EXCESS SPENDING.
52. We have already said, in Part 111. that there will be a danger that, in pushing total
expenditure to the level necessary to maintain full employment, we may from time to time go
too far. People would then be trying to buy more goods and services than available resources
are capable of producing when fully employed., so that the economy would be threatened with
the danger of inflation.
63. Avoidance of this threat depends on the skill with which governments can control
their expenditure policies. Experience will progressively improve the technique of this planning.
54. Australian governments will need to study closely economic and financial trends in
Australia and overseas and the extent to which the available measures of government policy are
adequate to deal with this problem. There must bo great emphasis on collaboration between
Australian governments and between governments and private business, if we are to ensure not
only that full employment will be maintained but that it will be maintained without running into
the dangers of inflation.
MOBILITY OF RESOURCES.
65. It is essential that a full employment economy should not run along in a groove,
unresponsive to the changing wants of the people and to technical progress. Unless the economic
system is flexible, and responds effectively to changing circumstances, full employment can be
achieved only at the cost of using resources in relatively unproductive and wasteful employment.
To an important extent, this problem can be solved if a spirit of enterprise is alive amongst all


concerned with productive effort, whether businessmen, primary producers or workers. But
in order that such a spirit may have full scope, workers wishing to changes their employment must
have a ready means of discovering favorable opportunities; equally, employers need a ready
means of getting in touch with additional workers with suitable abilities when they wish to expand
their activities.
56. Bor these, reasons, an efficient Australia-wide employment service is an. essential
instrument of a full employment policy. In May, 1944, the International Labour Conference at
Philadelphia accepted the principle that full employment required the existence and development
of an effective employment service and recommended that c: the essential duty of the employment
service should be to ensure, in co-operation with other public and private bodies concerned, the
best possible organization of industrial, agricultural and other employment as. an integral part of
the national programme for the full use of productive resources ”. The Government is proceeding
to establish a Commonwealth Employment Service in the Department of Labour and National
Service on the general lines of this recommendation.
57. To these ends, the Employment Service will be designed—
(a) to bring to the notice, of men and women seeking employment the full range of
opportunities offering, and in particular to find employment offering scope for
their abilities;
(b) to enable employers to draw upon suitable labour throughout the Commonwealth ;
(c) to provide assistance where necessary to enable employees to move to where
employment is available.
58. The Employment Service will also work with the relevant State Government
Departments and other governmental agencies whose activities affect the employment situation —
(a) in developing and determining the content of training and retraining courses ;
(b) in co-operation with public or private bodies concerned with location, of industry,
public works, housing, social amenities and similar measures :
(c) in disseminating information concerning labour supply, employment opportunities,
the skills required to do particular kinds of work, changes in the skill
requirements of particular industries, employment trends, special problems
of seasonal and casual employment and other information of value in promoting
full employment.
59. The Government aims to build a thoroughly efficient service capable of contributing
to the smooth and effective working of the full employment economy. Special attention will be
paid to the need to obtain suitably qualified and experienced personnel for all grades of the service,
so that full advantage can be taken of the best modem practice in placement, training and
vocational guidance. The Government desires to make it clear that no effort will be spared
in building a service of the highest quality in both its personnel and procedures, and accordingly
invites both employers and employees to collaborate in ensuring its success.
60. Further assistance to men seeking employment can be provided through government
measures for vocational training. The Reconstruction Training Scheme is already established.
It is primarily designed to assist Service men and women to re-establish themselves in appropriate
civilian occupations after their discharge. It provides for living allowances and other benefits
for Service personnel who cannot return to their pre-war occupations. In the selection of post-
discharge courses of training, Service personnel make their own choice of their future employment,
provided labour for such employment is not in excess.
61. It may prove desirable to extend this scheme and to place it on a permanent basis.
The Government would then continually review industrial developments, and when the need
for trained workers of particular types appeared, would introduce special training plans to meet
the need. Similarly, if labour for a particular type of occupation became in excess supply,
the Government would introduce special re-training plans for those who were obliged to seek
alternative occupations. In these plans reliance would continue to be placed on State Technical
Colleges, Universities and other existing educational facilities.
62. A further contribution will be made to mobility by financial provision for those moving
to new employment.
EFFICIENCY.
63. One of the most frequent criticisms of a policy for full employment is that it will
fail to provide the necessary incentive to enterprise and efficiency. The Government considers
this criticism is incorrect but recognizes that the question is too important to be ignored.
64. Resources should be distributed between industries in such a way that the goods
and services most wanted by consumers and businessmen will be produced. The danger feared
in a full employment economy is, in the first place, that businessmen will prefer to continue


existing types and methods of production, rather than seek out new products which might be
wanted by consumers-, and that governments in their anxiety to prevent unemployment might
be tempted to support them.
66. The solution of this problem of distribution of resources rests mainly with businessmen.
During the years between the wars, however, some businessmen showed a strong tendency to
reduce the extent of competition, and make agreements among themselves to share existing
markets and raise or keep up prices. These arrangements mean that businessmen can
maintain profits without undertaking the risks of new developments, and without scrapping
obsolete plant and methods of production. Such arrangements are destructive of enterprise
and contrary to the interests of the community.
60. The Government can do something to assist in the revival of enterprise. Its greatest
contribution will be to keep total expenditure at a level sufficient to employ all available resources.
This will assure businessmen that consumers will be able to buy the goods and services which
industry produces, and will leave to businessmen only their familiar task of finding out what
goods and services consumers wall want. Paragraphs 36 to 40 in Part 111. emphasize the
importance of this contribution, and also the contribution that can be made through government
encouragement of research facilities, and through provision of financial facilities for small and
growing industries.
67. Secondly, it is feared that workers will not wish to leave their accustomed occupations
oven if the demand for the goods they have been producing has declined. The danger is one
that can be met only by a revival of a spirit of enterprise amongst workers.
68. The maintenance of adequate levels of total expenditure will assure workers that
the community has need of their services somewhere, and will restore the basic sense of security
without which new risks will not readily be undertaken. The proposals for an employment
service, training schemes and financial assistance to workers changing jobs will reduce the risks,
costs and delays of making changes. Trade muons can help substantially by co-operating with
governments in finding out and removing the impediments to mobility. If the Government
maintains an adequate level of total spending, and if businessmen and governments open up
new avenues of production as new goods and services are demanded, these proposals should
ensure that workers will be willing to change their employment when necessary.
69. The claim that occasional depressions arc necessary to remove inefficient firms and
to speed up the transfer of resources from declining to expanding industries cannot any longer
be supported in view of the miseries imposed, on large sections of the community by those
depressions. Full employment will restore a sense of security to workers and businessmen,
and will ensure a revival of enterprise that will in turn ensure production of the goods and
services wanted by the community.
70. War-timo experience has shown many Australian industries to be highly efficient
even in difficult circumstances. But it has also shown examples of high costs of production
which can reasonably be attributed to inefficient organization and management. It is not
surprising that in some cases Australian standards of industrial organization and management
should fall short of levels reached overseas, since our industrial history is relatively brief and
we have had limited opportunities for acquiring knowledge, skill and experience in the difficult
tasks of management. The responsibility of management for taking the lead in improving
employer-employee relations is particularly important. It is a pre-requisite to improvement
in general efficiency of production, and can be achieved only by a steady improvement in the art
of management in Australia. The Government proposes to discuss with representatives of
employers and employees ways in which special facilities can be provided to enable Australian
business executives to be trained and given the necessary experience.
71. Dining the war, the Department of Munitions has assisted many manufacturers by
advising them on the technical and organizational problems of production. For smaller
enterprises, this form of service can be of very great help in developing technical and managerial
efficiency. The Government is prepared to develop this type of service if adequate use is
made of it by industry and it is hoped to link it closely with the proposed development of research
into the problems of particular industries.
72. While the tariff and other methods of protection are legitimate devices for building
up industries appropriate to our economy, the grant of protection by the Government to producers
is a privilege which carries with it the responsibility for maintaining the highest possible level
of efficiency. Protection must not be protection of excessive costs, inefficient methods and
obsolete equipment, nor should it encourage the practice of relying on rings, cartels, tariffs and
a guaranteed home market, rather than on efficient production. Protection in the past has
been granted upon the advice of the Tariff Board, and the Government proposes to continue


to rely upon this body. The Tariff Board has ample powers to investigate and report upon
the efficiency of protected industries. It is the Government’s intention that the Board shall
carry out these investigations and make regular reports.
73. The Government attaches great importance to the improvements in efficiency which
follow from the application of modern knowledge to the improvement of working conditions.
Experience during the war, especially in the United Kingdom, has shown how excessively long
hours of work can reduce individuals’ efficiency and how the effect of shorter hours on production
can be offset by consequent improvements in this efficiency. War-time experience has also shown
how fatigue can be reduced, and general health and efficiency improved, by intelligent factory
welfare policies. The Government looks to employers to continue and extend these, war-time
developments. It will itself review closely developments in this and other countries, in order
that employers may have available the most up-to-date information on which to base their
own welfare policies.
74. The Government believes the whole field of labour relations and working conditions
is of profound importance to both the future efficiency of labour and the welfare of workers.
It intends, therefore, to continue and develop the work of the Department of Labour and National
Service, particularly in the fields of industrial relations and. industrial welfare.
WAGES.
75. The problem of wages in a full employment economy is to ensure on the one hand
that workers receive in the form of higher real wages a fair share of increases in productivity
resulting from technical progress, and on the other hand that undue sectional pressure for wage
increases does not lead merely to a rising spiral of wages and prices without any real benefit—
and perhaps with disadvantage—to the workers themselves.
76. The trade union movement includes the great majority of consumers, and should
protect their interest by ensuring that a minority does not obtain temporary benefits which
will involve higher prices for consumers in general. Claims for necessary sectional wage increases
may be suitably dealt with under the existing conciliation and arbitration machinery, although
this machinery should be overhauled to ensure more rapid and effective working.
77. A sense of the responsibility of the trade union movement to the community is
more likely to be fully developed if unions generally are satisfied that the system of wage fixation
is such _as to pass on to workers a fair share of increased output flowing from the growing
productivity of labour as technical processes improve, and our resources are further developed.
It should be possible to have a periodical review' of the standard of consumption which the basic
wage is to represent —a review designed expressly to ensure that the normal upward trend of
real output available per head is duly reflected in the level of real wages. The main factor
affecting this trend will be progressive technical improvements increasing the productivity of
labour.
78. The Government is considering the setting up of a special committee on which
and employees will be represented to report on possible changes in the principles
and machinery for making general adjustments in wages and industrial conditions.
79. Increased wages are not the only means by which workers receive a larger share of
the national output. In Australia, a significant contribution to living standards has been made
in the past, and will continue to be made, by a high level of social services. Some of these are
in the form of direct money payments, such as invalid and old-age pensions, child endowment
and widows’ pensions. Others are services provided directly by governments and public
authorities, including education, health and medical services, kindergartens and libraries.
PUBLIC FINANCE.
80. It has been established that, since public expenditure on current services is relatively
stable except forlong-term changes, it is public capital expenditure which must be varied where
necessary to maintain full employment.
81. In order to maintain the appropriate level of expenditure, governments must obtain
the necessary finance. The chief possible sources are taxation, and borrowing either from the
public or the central bank.
82. Taxation should be the main source of revenue. It can be levied so as to secure a
more equitable distribution of incomes, and does not create a problem of interest-bearing debt.
The objections to it are not serious provided that the rates are not too high. It is also important
that the public should understand the purposes for which taxation is imposed, that it should
not be irritated by more frequent changes in taxation policy than are inevitable, and that it
should be satisfied that taxation affects individuals with reasonable equity.


83. However, there are limitations on the extent to which taxation can be used; but these
will still permit it to be at such a level that the yield from incomes when the economy
is fully employed covers at least all public expenditure on current items, including the maintenance
of existing assets. It should also make some contribution towards public capital expenditure.
Taxes will be designed to have the least possible restrictive effect, both on the readiness to
undertake private capital expenditure, and on the efficiency with which production is undertaken.
Levels of taxation and existing methods of levying direct taxation are being closely examined,
and consideration will be given to such changes as may seem necessary.
84. Borrowing from the public is on a voluntary basis and avoids some of the disadvantages
of taxation, but leaves a debt on which interest has to be paid. Financing by the Commonwealth
Bank can be used to advantage up to the limit of available men and resources, but if carried
beyond this point it would gravely threaten the real incomes of workers and low income groups,
and would result in conditions so unstable that full employment could not be maintained.
BALANCE OF OVERSEA PAYMENTS.
85. A policy of full employment, brought about through the maintenance of high levels
of expenditure, will necessarily involve an increased demand for imports. Australia has always
been a heavy importer of materials and, with an expanding national income, will continue to
be so in the future. But the amount we can spend on imports is limited by the amount of export
proceeds, together with reserves of oversea funds, which are available for this purpose.
86. The Government is taking measures designed to expand and stabilize post-war markets
for Australia’s exportable products, which will help to achieve greater stability in our export
incomes. An Export Advisory Committee, consisting of representatives of the Government
and of those interested in exports, has already been established to provide a means of contact
and collaboration. The Government has under consideration the establishment through the
Commonwealth Bank of export credit guarantee facilities which would reduce the financial
risks of the export trade, and also the establishment of a joint Government and Commercial
Export Trading Corporation which would actively promote Australia’s export trade in primary
and manufactured goods. The scope and quality of our trade representation overseas is being
examined to bring it up to the standards required. The Government is also seeking opportunities
to negotiate trade treaties with countries where there are possibilities of expanded commercial
relations after the war.
87. The full success of these measures, however, depends upon the general state of
employment and economic activity throughout the world, which largely determines the demand
for internationally traded goods. The Government is therefore seeking an international
agreement among important trading countries to maintain high levels of employment within
their own territories.
88. Australia must be prepared for some fluctuations in the balance of payments-
Difficulties may arise from a decline in the world demand for Australian exports, either because
of a failure on the part of important trading countries to maintain employment and spending,
or because of a shift in world demand to products different from the ones we have been exporting.
There are also climatic and other temporary factors which will continue to have an important
effect on exports.
89. Minor fluctuations in export income will, as in the past, be met by running down
oversea reserves in poor export years, and building them up in good years. The Government’s
banking legislation provides the Commonwealth Bank with adequate powers to mobilize our
foreign exchange reserves and will ensure that the best use is made of them.
90. If there is a prolonged and severe fall in export incomes, it will not be possible to
meet the deficit in the balance of payments merely by drawing from oversea reserves, and we
shall then have to reduce expenditure on imports. In the past, necessary reductions in imports
have usually been allowed to come about by permitting a fall in export incomes to result in
reduced spending by export producers, thus bringing about unemployment and a general fall
in incomes to the extent necessary to reduce imports to the level at which they could be paid
for from export income. This deflationary method is inconsistent with a full employment policy,
and serves the interests neither of the people of Australia nor of the people of the countries with
which Australia trades. The Government will not countenance this method in future.
91. Other means of reducing imports will thus be required. If the deficit in the balance
of payments is primarily due to a permanent decline in oversea demand for Australian products,
and if it is not possible to restore export income by shifts of productive resources to meet changes
in world demands, an alteration in the exchange rate may be the appropriate method of correction.
If, however, the fall in export income is one which, although prolonged and severe, is not
permanent, the more appropriate method may be quantitative restriction of imports.


92. The kind of action taken to control imports would depend on the Government’s
assessment at the time of the causes and probable duration of the deficit in the balance of
payments. The Government considers there are good grounds for expecting a reasonably steady
expansion of export income in the future. If, however, there should be a serious deficit in the
balance of payments, import spending will inevitably have to be reduced. It would be in the
interests neither of the world nor of ourselves to make the reduction by means of
unemployment in Australia. Australia will make its maximum contribution to the flow of world
trade by maintaining full employment at home, and by allowing the consequent high level of
expenditure to become effective in demand for imports up to the limit of our available oversea
funds.
PART V.—CHANGE-OVER FROM WAR TO PEACE.
SPECIAL FEATURES OF THE TRANSITION.
93. The previous parts of this paper have dealt with the maintenance of full employment
under normal peace-time conditions. In the change-over period immediately following the
end of the war, however, we shall be faced with problems of a special kind.
94. In the first place, about 1,000,000 men and women now in the Armed Forces and war
industries will be seeking peace-time occupations. Secondly, the war-time excess of spending
power will persist at least until more adequate supplies of peace-time goods and services again
become available.
95. The economic problems arising from these two dominant features of the transition
are in many respects similar to the problems which we have experienced during the past six
years. In the earlier stages of the war, it was urgently necessary to expand production of war
supplies and to build up the strength of the Armed Forces. To meet this need, we had first
to employ fully all our resources and then to bring about transfers of resources from the less
essential to the more essential kinds of production.
96. In the transition it will be necessary to expand production of peace-time goods and
services and to transfer to productive employment the men and women now in the Armed
Forces and in war industries. Furthermore, with so much to be done in building houses,
catching up arrears of maintenance on farms and in essential public utilities, re-equipping and
expanding industries for peace-time production and increasing the output of consumers’ goods,
expenditure in the transition is unlikely to fall short of that required for maximum production,
particularly since these demands are in many oases backed by accumulated purchasing power
with which to make them effective. On the contrary, the volume of spending will tend to exceed
the value of goods and services currently available, so that the crisis in the war-time fight against
inflation is likely to come in the immediate post-war period after victory in the field is complete.
97. The main threat to employment in the transition, will come from the physical and
organizational difficulties in the way of restoring civilian production of all kinds in time to
employ the people who will then be seeking work. - Much peace-time employment will not exist
until production plans have been prepared, machinery adapted and tooled up and skilled workers
located or retrained. These difficulties can be overcome only if a great deal of preparatory
work has been carried out before the major part of the change-over has to take place. The
degree of success that can actually be achieved must largely depend on how far it is found
practicable gradually to transfer from the immediate war effort the key man-power and other
resources required for this essential preparatory work.
98. The Government can promise no more rapid progress in these transfers than is
consistent with honouring our commitments to our Allies and with pressing the war against
Japan to the speediest possible conclusion. Subject to these strategic commitments, however,
the Government will do everything possible to make man-power available for the preparatory
work on which the success of other transitional measures will so largely depend.
MACHINERY FOR THE CHANGE-OVER.
99. Special measures will be necessary in the transition to make good war-time arrears
and deficiencies in production, to help people to find peace-time employment, and to prevent
inflationary price rises. Amongst the most important of these measures will be the
following:—
(a) A national housing programme to be developed and cam - ' 1 out jointly by the
Commonwealth and the States.
( b ) A plan for land settlement under which ex-service personnel will be able to take
up land under satisfat fcory conditions.


(c) Advance planning through the National Works Council of public works designed
to catch up the arrears of public capital expenditure accumulated during the
war and to promote development of national resources according to a long-term
programme.
(d) A teaming scheme for ox-service personnel, involving a wide range of educational
facilities.
(e) The establishment of a nation-wide Employment Service to help people who have
been engaged in war-time activities to find peace-time occupations.
(/) Action for the restoration or expansion of key .industries which have been
particularly affected by war-time shifts in production.
(g) Measures to ensure that .-source resources are used for the most urgent purposes,
and to hold in check the tendency to inflationary price rises.
100. The co-operation of the States has already been sought in planning these important
national measures. The change-over from war to peace can only be carried out successfully
by a full use of all the resources of public administration. Ultimate responsibility necessarily
rests with the Commonwealth Government. The State Governments, however, possess a wide
range of facilities for administering public works projects, land settlement and housing
programmes, and for improving both the welfare and the efficiency of people engaged in rural
industries. Full use must be made of these special facilities. Moreover, under the Constitution,
the power to carry out certain of the measures which will be essential to ensure that most urgent
needs are met first, and that excess spending power does not lead to inflationary prices increase,
rests in peace-time solely with the States, although the nation as a whole is vitally concerned
that these measures should be made effective. Accordingly, the Commonwealth Government
will continue its discussions with the State Governments with a view to arranging joint action
to ensure an orderly transition from war to peace.
CONTROLS IN THE TRANSITION.
101. As a result of war-time rationing and restriction of production, the demand for many
classes of goods will bo much higher than normal in the early stages of the transition period.
At the same time, available supplies will remain less than normal until the transfer of resources
and re-organization of production have been completed. Thus, the war-time excess of demand
over available supplies will continue for some time in the transition period. In the absence of
price control, prices would be certain to rise substantially and so render useless the work which has
been done during the war in preventing inflated prices. It is clear therefore that price control
will be essential m the transition period.
102. Secondly, it will be necessary to ensure that urgent production is not unnecessarily
held up by difficulties in obtaining materials. Especially in the case of key materials required
for the building and construction industries, supplies are unlikely to be sufficient to meet all
demands for some time after the close of the war. As long as those materials remain in short
supply, construction of homes, hospitals, schools and factories must receive priority as compared
with less urgent though desirable projects. Moreover, if these priorities are continued in the
early stages of the transition period, the excess demand for scarce materials can be prevented from
causing an inflationary rise in their prices. It will therefore be necessary for the Commonwealth
Government, in agreement with the States, to continue the policy established during the war
of allotting materials in short supply to the best advantage.
103. Associated with the problem of materials is the supply of capital for both public and
private investment. During the war the Capital Issues Control has limited private investment
to projects required for war purposes. The States, in agreement with the Commonwealth, have
accepted a similar control over borrowing for public works, and the office of the Co-ordinator-
General of Works has been established to keep the works programme within war-time needs. To
ensure that capital expenditure, both public and private, is not so great in the transition period
as to place undue strain on the machinery for preventing inflationary price rises, it will be desirable
to continue measures designed to keep this expenditure within practicable limits.
104. Although it is at present impossible to foresee in detail how difficult will be the problem
of the balance of payments in the transition period, there is good reason to take precautions in
advance against possible difficulties in finding the means of payment for the imports we shall
require. Not only will it be necessary to meet urgent needs for some imported materials and
equipment for our industries, together with the accumulated arrears of consumption goods,
but it is also possible that the prices of the goods we import will have risen to a greater extent
than the prices of the goods on the export of which we rely for obtaining oversea exchange. Time
may be needed, moreover, before our export industries get back into full production. For all
these reasons, therefore, it will be necessary to retain the machinery for controlling imports, in


order to keep our international accounts in balance and to make the best use of our available
foreign exchange. In particular, it may be necessary to give priority to imports of essential
materials and equipment needed for industry, building and construction.
105. Direction of labour will not be continued after the war. The Government will ensure,
however, that the Employment Service is functioning effectively by the time hostilities cease.
The service will bo responsible for helping people discharged from the Armed Forces, workers in
war industries and others who need new jobs to find appropriate employment as quickly as possible.
It will also assist in finding suitable positions for the people who will be trained under the
Commonwealth Reconstruction Training Scheme. This scheme has been designed primarily
to help ex-service men and women to re-establish themselves in civilian life ; however, where a
particular need exists for certain types of trained personnel, the Government will introduce special
training plans in which opportunities will be available for civilians as well as for ex-service
personnel.
106. To meet the problem of the occupational adjustments which will follow the end of the
war, the Commonwealth Government has already introduced a scheme of re-employment
allowances for ex-service personnel and a scheme of unemployment benefits for civilian workers.
These measures will make reasonable financial provision for people moving to new employment
and will protect individuals during the waiting period and contribute to the stability of total
expenditure. The administration of both schemes will be greatly facilitated by the establishment
of the Employment Service.
RE-ORGANIZATION OF PRODUCTION .
(a) The Building Industry.
107. The Government desires to achieve as soon as possible after hostilities cease the
highest rate of new dwelling construction and other building activity that available resources
will permit. In particular, the output of new dwellings must be increased to remedy the
accumulated shortage, and the highest priority will therefore bo given to the housing programme.
108. The Commonwealth authorities concerned have set up machinery for close
collaboration with the State construction bodies who will be mainly responsible for carrying
out the public sector of the building programme. Machinery has also been established for
consultation with the building industry, including representatives of trade unions, professional
organizations and employers. The proposed post-war housing programme will be possible
only if action is taken—
(a) to increase the effective labour supply by increasing mobility;
(b) to decrease the labour required per unit of construction by improved building
methods; and
(c) to increase the numbers in the industry by providing facilities for training of more
building workers.
109. Already some demobilized servicemen have begun training in building trades,
and their number will be rapidly expanded as further men are released from the services and
essential civilian production. The Controllers of Materials are also being requested to expand
the production of building materials and fittings as soon as possible. The Secondary Industries
Commission is paying particular attention to the capacity needed in the transition period for
the production of building materials and fittings. Action is also being taken to place advance
orders overseas for building materials that have to be imported, and which are or may be in
short supply. The Government has also established an Experimental Building Station, which
is investigating improved and more economical methods of dwelling construction.
110. The Government recognizes the far-reaching implications of the programme set
the building industry. Big technical and organizational changes will be necessary if the industry
is to reach the target rapidly, efficiently and economically. The industry must quickly produce
an unprecedented quantity of buildings at reasonable cost. Neither governments nor the
industry can alone achieve this result. The Government accordingly invites the industry’s
active collaboration in solving a construction problem of a size not hitherto faced in this country
under peace-time conditions.
(6) Manufacturing Industries.
111. In many factories, the transfer from war to peace production cannot be accomplished
overnight. Machinery used for war-time production will need to be altered, added to or replaced,
and time will be required for other industrial re-adjustments. The Government has surveyed
the needs of industry for preparatory planning and also for re-organization and reconditioning
of plant and machinery, installation or new equipment and tooling-up for civilian production.
This survey has indicated that about 9,000 men are needed for preparatory planning and about


18,000 men for the actual conversion of plant. These estimates cover the requirements of all
manufacturing industry, including small enterprises to whose needs the Government will give
sympathetic consideration.
112. An instalment of men is being made available during the first six months of 1945
for the preparation and execution of plans by private manufacturers for post-war civilian
production. The position will bo kept under review to see that, as far as is consistent with the
effective prosecution of the war, key manpower is made available to manufacturers to enable
them to prepare for post-war production and employment. The unavoidable demands of the
Pacific War may mean, however, that our manufacturing industries may not be as well placed
at the end of the war as those in countries where considerable re-allocations of manpower will
be possible now that Germany is defeated. This is the inevitable result of Australia’s special
geographical position.
113. Advance preparations for transfer and conversion are particularly important for
the heavy and engineering industries. The detailed problems involved are at present being
closely examined by the Secondary Industries Commission. Opportunities will continue for
the effective employment in these industries of considerable numbers of skilled workers. Many
process workers, however, will have to seek alternative employment, which they will find in
other industries provided production gets under way quickly enough. Special re-training and
transfer measures may be necessary, and this problem is being examined in conjunction with the
unions concerned. Employment in the heavy and engineering industries has been greatly
expanded during wartime, and it will be necessary to expedite the process of conversion, so
that employment can be provided on the necessary scale. Export markets and new types of
production should help to maintain employment in these industries.
(c) Public Developmental and Capital Projects.
114. The advance planning of public developmental and capital projects is particularly
important to ensure that public capital expenditure can play its allotted part. The programme
of urgent and important works, which is being prepared by the Commonwealth and State
Governments and other public authorities collaborating through the National Works Council,
contains both long-term and short-term works widely distributed throughout the Commonwealth.
A second programme of less urgent works, which can be started without delay should any
unexpected deficiency occur in private or oversea expenditures, will also be prepared.
115. The Commonwealth has so far been able to release only limited numbers of specialist
personnel from the Services and defence work to assist advance planning of works, but as
opportunity offers, these releases will be increased. The various constructing authorities are
being asked to ensure that all legal, administrative and financial formalities in connexion with
the urgent programme arc completed before the end of hostilities. Placing of orders for
materials and equipment has already begun.
(d) Rural Industries.
116. It will be necessary to arrange for the orderly transfer of some resources engaged
in the rural industries, where production has rapidly expanded in response to war-time needs, to
lines of production which are in greater demand under peace-time conditions. The Australian
Agricultural Council, consisting as it does of representatives of the State and Commonwealth
Governments, is the appropriate body to deal with this problem. The Commonwealth
Government recognizes its continuing responsibility for assisting producers during the process
of transition.
117. Many servicemen have indicated their desire to go on the land after the war.
Accordingly, the Commonwealth Government has reached agreement with the States for
collaboration in settling servicemen on. the land. These agreements are based on the principles
that settlement should be undertaken only to the extent that economic prospects for the
production concerned are reasonably sound, and that ex-servicemen should not be assisted to
become settlers unless a competent authority is satisfied of their suitability, qualifications and
experience. If the tragic errors of the land settlement schemes after the last war are to be
avoided, settlement must be soundly based on proper investigation and development. The
Government considers it better to ensure success for the great majority of those settled than to
encourage many with false hopes.
CONCLUSION.
118. The special problems of the transition period are different from those arising in
the administration of a full employment policy under normal conditions. Immediately after
the war, the outstanding problem will be to assist ex-members of the armed forces and workers
who have been engaged in war industries in finding as quickly as possible new employment in


normal peace-time occupations. Whilst all these people are finding new employment, and
probably for some time afterwards, total expenditure will tend to exceed the value of goods
and services available. The task in the transition, therefore, will be to promote the rapid
transfer of labour under satisfactory conditions, and at the same time to prevent the excess
demand from causing a damaging inflation.
119. Three things are necessary to solve this problem. First, resources must be made
available for the preparatory work without which many kinds of production cannot be quickly
stopped up as hostilities cease. Secondly, certain minimum controls must be retained in order
to avert inflationary price increases, and to ensure that resources other than labour will be
available where they are most needed. Finally, in order to re-organize production and help
people find peace-time employment, special measures will be needed, amongst which the
progressive expansion of the building industry and the efficient functioning of the Employment
Service are the most important.
120. The Commonwealth Government believes that the measures which it proposes to
take in collaboration with the States are essential to prevent inflation and to accomplish the
change-over with the least possible friction. It believes, too, that in the process of solving the
problems of the transition period, as in the administration of the war effort, important
developments will take place in the relations between the Commonwealth and State Governments,
wliich will materially assist this country in achieving its objective of securing full employment
and rising standards of living.
PART VI.—MACHINERY OF GOVERNMENT.
ESSENTIAL INFORMATION.
121. The earlier parts of this paper have outlined the nature and. content of an economic
policy aimed at the maintenance of full employment. In carrying out this policy, account must
be taken of the activities, not only of the Commonwealth Government and its instrumentalities,
but also of State and Local Governments and semi-governmental authorities, private businesses
and individuals. It will be necessary to review continuously the implications of policy over a
wide field of economic activity.
122. The responsibilities of the Commonwealth Government necessarily require that it
should have all information essential for carrying out this task. It must know how resources are
distributed between different areas, the degree of efficiency with which they are being used, and
any large prospective changes in the volume of employment. The maintenance of employment
depends upon a swift and accurate appreciation and analysis of approaching dislocations and the
speedy application of effective counter-measures.
123. Examples of the type of information which should be obtained at frequent and regular
intervals are comprehensive statements of both present and prospective employment, statistics
of variations in both public and private capital expenditure and a knowledge of changes in stocks
of important commodities. Publication of accurate and up-to-date statistics on these lines will
be an invaluable guide to private industry in planning production and capital expenditure for the
markets of the full employment economy.
124. Whether an expenditure programme is practicable and whether it is adequate to
ensure full employment can only be decided if reasonably accurate estimates arc available of the
total number of men and women seeking work and their distribution between different industries
and occupations. At a time when there is considerable movement of labour it may not be
practicable to obtain this information from returns by employers. The probability of serious
error in employment estimates becomes the more likely the longer is the period since the last
industrial and occupational census. The Government is therefore considering the advisability
of taking a personal census at more frequent intervals than once every ten years.
FORMULATION OF ECONOMIC POLICY.
125. As a result of its experience with war-time administration, and in view of its continuing
post-war responsibilities for full employment policy, the Commonwealth Government is finding
it necessary to evolve appropriate machinery corresponding to its enlarged functions.
126. Before central governments recognized their responsibilities to sustain general economic
activity, the activities of Ministers and their Departments were reasonably self-contained and, as
a consequence, the system of administration exclusively by separate Departments was well
adapted to the work that governments had to carry out. Since the depression of the early ’thirties,
however, and increasingly since the war, it has become the rule rather than the exception for major


questions of policy so to cut across departmental boundaries that no single Department is
exclusively concerned, while some matters —for example, the framing of employment policy —
have become the collective responsibility of Cabinet. Consequently, it has become an urgent
matter of government organization to make better provision, both for general inter-departmental
collaboration in the development of policy affecting more than one Department, and for the
examination of major questions of policy from the standpoint of Cabinet as a whole.
127. The essence of the employment policy outlined in this paper is the willingness and
ability of governments and governmental authorities to undertake sufficient capital expenditure
of the right kind at the right time and in the right places. Accordingly, it will be necessary
at regular and frequent intervals to consider the amount and composition of public capital
expenditure in relation to the total programme necessary to maintain full employment. Under
peace-time conditions, by far the larger proportion of public capital expenditure will be the
immediate responsibility of governmental and semi-governmental agencies other than the
Commonwealth. For this reason, the existing machinery for consultation between the
Commonwealth and State Governments must be used and developed for reviewing and
co-ordinating public capital expenditure as a major instrument of full employment policy.
128. The Government has been impressed by the value of the work performed during the
war by the War Commitments Committee. This Committee has examined the labour requirements
of commitments undertaken in connexion with the war effort and for essential civilian supplies,
and has advised the Government whether these commitments can be met. The Government
intends to ensure that these reviews will be continued.
COMMONWEALTH-STATE COLLABORATION.
129. Emphasis has been placed throughout this paper upon the need for agreed action by
the Commonwealth and States if the objectives of the full employment policy are to be achieved.
In the National Works Council a useful instrument of joint planning of both immediate and
long-term public works programmes has been established and is operating satisfactorily. The
Government is anxious to build up the machinery for frequent and regular consultation between
the Commonwealth and State Governments, and there are in the Premiers’ Conferences and in
Conferences of Commonwealth and State Ministers appropriate instruments for such consultation.
The Commonwealth Government therefore proposes to invite the State Governments to participate
in more frequent Conferences of Premiers and of Commonwealth and State Ministers.
130. These Conferences can, of course, deal only with major matters of principle. The
Commonwealth Government accordingly suggests that they should be supplemented by meetings
of Commonwealth and State officials called by agreement between the Governments—
(a) to clarify proposals which may subsequently need to be considered by Premiers
in order that the fullest information will be available to both Commonwealth
and State Ministers ;
(b) to work out detailed proposals agreed upon in principle at Premiers’ Conferences
for subsequent confirmation by those Conferences ; and
(c) to co-ordinate the administrative arrangements of Commonwealth and State
agencies for carrying out proposals which have been agreed upon.
This method of consultation has already been successfully applied in working out plans for post-
war housing and soldier settlement.
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia by
L. K. Johnston, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra.


