

Full Verbatim Report
THE GREATEST ACTION IN HISTORY.
In the Commonhealth Court of Nineteen hundred and
seventeen.
Before His Honor, Mr. Justice Equity.
A novel Dramatization
Conscription versus Voluntaryism
THE INTRODUCTION;
THE OPENING OF THE CASE;
THE ARGUMENTS AND ADDRESSES OF COUNSEL;
THE FAMOUS JUDGMENT;
with
REFLECTIONS AND A CONCLUSION,
which announces
THE LAMENTABLE DEATH OF MR. JUSTICE EQUITY.
Price
.. 6d.
First Edition.
(Copyright.)
[All Rights Reserved.]


COURT SCENE


INTRODUCTION.
The fact that very few, if any, readers peruse an intro-
ductory notice will fully justify the brevity of this.
The Case herein set forth deals with the momentous ques-
tion of Conscription, and it may reasonably be said, that such
a Case might well have been
Endless conflicting arguments have been heard here, there,
and everywhere on this one great national question.
I have therefore endeavored to place this vital matter on a
higher plane; the scene is laid before a well-known and eminent
Judge, and it is handled by learned Counsel.
It should be understood that strict legal! procedure has not
received exact consideration, but I feel confident that to the
lay-mind, the position, as presented, will be quite sufficiently
entangled.
My object is to throw some light on this vexed question;
If this has been achieved, I shall be well compensated; if not,
the disappointment will then be that of
Yours faithfully,
Sydney, N.S.W. CHRISTIAN ALPHOMEGA.
1917.


Full Verbatim Report
THE GREATEST ACTION IN HISTORY.
In the Commonhealth Court of Nineteen hundred and
seventeen.
Before His Honor, Mr. Justice Equity.
The Grab-all-Give-nothing-but-Hot-air Corporation,
versus
The Preponderating Labourers’ League.
Mr. Selfish, K.C., with Mr. Capitalist, instructed by Messrs.
Coercion Conscription & Co., appeared for the Plaintiff' Cor-
poration, The Grab-all-Give-nothing-but-Hot-air Corporation;
and Mr. Democrat, K.C., with Mr. Socialist, instructed by
Messrs. Hard-work, Bread-winner, and Poverty, appeared for
the Defendants, The Preponderating Labourers’ League.
In opening the ease for the Plaintiff Corporation, Mr. Sel-
fish stated, that at the commencement, or very soon after the
outbreak of thd great world-war, his clients advertised for men
at a wage of about 8/- or 10/- per day. The response to his
clients’ advertisement was great; so great, in fact, that it
exceeded all expectations, and his clients were daily obliged
to refuse large numbers of men, who had come from all parts
of the Commonhealth to seek employment.
Continuing his opening address, Mr. Selfish drew His
Honor’s attention to the fact that his clients had been obliged
to refuse many of the applicants, on account of their not being
up to certain Military standards.
Mr. Selfish further stated that his clients, at a later date,
found, that they would require the services of more men in their
employ, and their former advertisements were from time to
timje re-published with fairly satisfactory results; but they now
found that very few were responding to his clients’ advertise-
ments ; their immensely important interests were being seriously
embarrassed, and their prospects of achieving a pronounced
success were very remote unless this Honorable Court would
grant the relief sought by his patriotic clients.
Mr. Democrat, K.C. : Your Honor will doubtless have noted
that there are very few, if any, witnesses on either side, and
I would like to point out that ray honorable friend, Mr. Selfish,
together with the clients he represents, have most inequitably
smothered, or intentionally concealed, from your Honor the
fact that the result of this extraordinarily unique action could
be very speedily settled, as its determination was wholly de-
pendent or contingent upon the Plaintiff’s recognition or non-


recognition of that one great fundamental principle, which,
for lack of a better name, I will call the unwritten law of “De-
mand and Supply.”
His Honor: You must well know, Mr. Democrat, that it
is useless for you to take up the time of this Honorable Court
by references to what you call an unwritten law, and to avoid
a confusion of the important issues before us, you might with
greater propriety refer to it as either a custom or practice.
Mr. Democrat : I thank your Honor for so timely! a cor-
rection, and I sincerely trust that your Honor will indulge me
to the extent of believing that it was far from my intention
to trespass upon the valuable time of this Honorable Court.
His Honor: Pray, proceed with your address, Mr.
Democrat.
Mr. Democrat: Well, your Honor, I may state that from
time immemorial it has always been the custom to recognise
that every purchasable commodity is unalterably governed and
controlled by those two common factors which we know as
Demand and Supply. These two factors, your Honor, have
ever regulated the operations of the world, and they are as
ceaseless in their operations and ramifications as are the waves
of the oceans or seas. After hearing your Honor’s remarks as
to wasting the time of this Honorable Court, it surprises me
beyond measure to find my learned friend, Mr. Selfish, and
his clients, attempting to take up the Court’s time by denying
existence to the two potential factors I have referred to; recog-
nition of sarnie would have obviated any necessity for the hear-
ing of this action, as the matters in dispute could quite as easily
have been adjusted out of Court to the entire satisfaction of all
concerned.
Mr. Selfish: I take exception to the remarks of Mr. Democrat
youfi Honor; his remarks are grossly insulting, in that they
impugn the intelligence of this Honorable Court and my clients,
and I ask your Honor to believe that my motives are inspired
by patriotism. The whole of our Empire is at stake; the war
is raging, and the fortunes of battle are swaying to and fro,
and it is imperative that my clients should have more, and more
men to reinforce and relieve the men it already has, other-
wise the Commonhealth may be lost if the enemy should win
this war, and such a catastrophe must be averted at all costs.
His Honor: Do not become so incoherently excited, Mr.
Selfish; I see nothing grossly insulting in Mr. Democrat’s re-
marks, unless it be your wish to deny him the right of speech.
When you state, Mr. Selfish, that the Commonhealth may
be lost, will you please tell me to whom the Commonhealth be-
longs? You will, lam sure realise, that it is desirable for this
Honorable Court to become cognizant of such ownership, if
any, in order to enable it to deal with such an important
matter, if the question should hereafter arise.


Mr. Selfish: I beg leave to bow to your Honor’s better
judgment, as I may perhaps have appeared hyper-sensitive.
Your Honor’s question as to ownership of the Common-
health is extraordinary, in that it in no-wise concerns this
action, and I could only answer it by stating that it presumably
belongs to the British Empire.
His Honor: Will you then tell me, Mr. Selfish, to whom be-
longs the fee simple of the Territory we know as the Common-
health.
Mr. Selfish: The fee simple, your Honor, belongs to those
people who have become registered as its owners in fee, and
that portion which has not yet been alienated presumably be-
longs to the respective State Governments of the Common-
health ?
Mr. Democrat : I have xo thank your Honor for asking
these questions, as they have a most important bearing upon
the matter now before this Honorable Court, and I am in-
structed by my clients to state that although Mr. Selfish and
his clients have acknowledged the regulating influence of De-
mand and Supply in relation to every commodity from which
they enhance their incomes and earnings, they persistently re-
fuse to acknowledge its application with regard to human
life when every other nation is extolling its inestimable
value during this war, and is doing its utmost to secure un-
limited supplies of men. My learned friend, Mr. Selfish,
stated that his clients at about the commencement of the war
advertised for men at a wage of about 8/- or 10/- per day,
and that they were then actually obtaining more men than
they required. They continued that policy, your Honor, until,
in process of time, they exhausted the supply of the great
majority of men who were willing to sell their services at the
wage they were then offering. My learned friend, however,
has not told your Honor that sheep, cattle, horses, butter, and
almost every other commodity has, in the interests of Mr. Sel-
fish’s clients, increased in value and price, and neither has he
told your Honor that his clients are cheerfully paying all such
increased prices without demur. I may also tell your Honor
that I have done my utmost to cause ray learned friend, Mr.
Selfish, to equitably and generously recognise that this same
condition must logically also apply to the far more important
commodity of human life, which has correspondingly increased
in value, in that the demand in this case also exceeds the supply
I have, therefore, been definitely instructed by my clients
to state, that if Mr. Selfish and his clients are prepared to now
advertise for men at, say, 20/- per day, they will be able to
obtain more men than they could find clothes, equipment, or
transport for; this they stubbornly and persistently refrain
from doing, because they illogically refuse to recognise that


these two potent factors, Demand and Supply, must also obtain
in relation to the human life which is to be sacrificed for the
conservation of their wealth and vested interests.
His Honor: Do you admit, Mr. Selfish, that Mr. Democrat
has approached you with a view to a settlement of these dif-
ferences, and that you absolutely refuse to recognise human
life as of any greater value to-day than it was at the commence-
ment of the war, or, alternatively, do you insist upon recognis-
ing it as of lesser value than butter, eggs, or any such other
commodity ?•
Mr. Selfish: I do admit the correctness of Mr. Democrat’s
statement, your Honor; but I contend that this Honorable
Court should not allow such an unpatriotic and unworthy argu-
ment to be given expression to, much less availed of.
His Honor: You, Mr. Selfish, must not suggest that any-
thing other than unadulterated justice should prevail in this
Honorable Court if I am to remain on this judicial bench;
while I thus remain, I shall not allow you or anyone else by
covert implication to suggest that the judgment of this Honor-
able Court can be influenced or conditioned by the sentiments
you refer to. I shall therefore thank you to refrain from
imposing upon me the painful necessity of again reprimanding
you.
Mr. Selfish; I humbly apologise, your Honor, and I would
have your Honor believe that I am but strenuously appeal-
ing for the maintenance of those patriotic ideals which have
actuated my clients in instituting these proceedings, and I am
sure that your Honor will realise the vital importance of my
clients being placed in a position to obtain the men it requires.
TTis Honor: Let me ask you a question, Mr. Selfish: Have
your clients, or any of them, advertised for men at 20/- per day,
as suggested by Mr. Democrat?
Mr. Selfish: No, your Honor; my clients have not adver-
tised for men at 20/- per day, and I am instructed to state
that they have no intention of so doing, because they could not
afford to pay such an amount.
His Honor; My experience has been that when a person
cannot afford to for an article they invariably have to
go without it, unless they steal it. Is it true, Mr. Selfish, that
without any demur, as stated by Mr. Democrat, your clients
are actually paying much higher prices than formerly for
every commodity other than human life ?
Mr. Selfish: It is true, your Honor, because there is abso-
lutely no analogy; and I am instructed to state that if we do
not promptly get the men required by my clients, they will
speedily resort to other measures.


His Honor; Am I to regard that as in the nature of a
threat ? Be good enough, Mr. Selfish, to justify your attitude
by indicating the Act, if any, which will satisfactorily explain
the meaning of your expression.
Mr. Selfish: Your Honor must know that the Federal Con-
stitution provides for the Conscription of the services of every
man for Home Defence; the weakness of the constitution is
that it does not allow my clients, by application of such Con-
scription, to send men out of the Commonhealth to fight; the
constitution, as framed, cannot be altered or amended without
a Referendum to the people of the Commonhealth, and my
clients therefore desire that your Honor, from patriotic mot-
ives, should give to the words “Home Defence” the broadest
possible meaning, by declaring that the word “Home,” where
so used, shall apply to, mean, and include each and every part
of the British Empire, and that it shall not be interpreted in its
narrower sense of meaning only the Commonhealth. I may
also state, your Honor, that my clients desired to pass or secure
an amendment of the Commonhealth constitution in the direc-
tion indicated, but there was a fly in the ointment, because
the Opposition majority would not allow such a measure to
be passed in the Commonhealth Parliament, and, if so passed,
they declared that it would be of no effect, in that it did not
conform with the requirements of the constitution with regard
to an amendment of such constitution. This, your Honor, re-
sulted in my clients being compelled to submit the proposed
amendment of the constitution to the people by Referendum.
The submission of this Referendum has cost thousands of
pounds, your Honor, and, in direct opposition to the wish of
my clients, the people had the presumptuous audacity to de-
feat my clients’ intentions by rejecting the proposals em-
bodied in such Referendum. The result is that my clients are
unable to secure, by Conscription, the services of the men they
require, land it is believed that if your Honor will but give
to the word “Home” the desired broader meaning, my clients
might then be able to secure all the men they require.
His Honor; The whole of your remarks, Mr. Selfish, most
pronouncedly evidence the fact, that your clients are ap-
parently endeavoring to do something which is in direct con-
flict with the will or wish of a majority of the people.
Mr. Democrat: Your Honor has stated the case exactly
as it is, and my learned friend, Mr. Selfish, is simply wasting
the time of this Honorable Court by asking your Honor to
support his clients in the doing of something which a majority
of the people have, by Referendum, definitely determined
should not be done, and it goes without saying that Parlia-
ment has no alternative but to abide by the will of the majority.
Mr. Socialist : May it please your Honor for me to state
that my eminent leader has evidently forgotten to acquaint


your Honor with the fact, that since the said Referendum was
taken, a Parliamentary election has been held. Prior to the
holding of such election, the clients of our learned friend, Mr.
Selfish, resorted to every subterfuge to avoid an election, and
they actually went so far as to seek a prolongation of the life
of the then Parliament, in order to avoid having to submit
themselves to the people for re-election, because the result of
the Referendum had clearly indicated that if an election were
to take place, it would probably mean that every Parliamentary
candidate who had advocated the supporting of the Refer-
endum proposals, would most likely be ignominiously defeated
at the polls. I may also state, your Honor, that the general
discontent caused by the clients of our learned friend, Mr.
Selfish, was such, that there was every indication of serious
trouble arising, unless the said election was held in conformity
with the terms of the constitution. This, your Honor, pro-
duced one of the greatest political somersaults in history, and
I may state that with one or two exceptions, the whole of
these Parliamentary candidates verbally pledged themselves
to ever afterwards respect the result of the said Referendum,
and to resist (if re-elected to Parliament) any attempt to intro-
duce Conscription or Compulsion of any kind. The electors,
however, doubted the verbal statements of these parliamentary
candidates, and the latter, in order to further strengthen their
verbal pledge, actually published a manifesto signed by nearly
every such parliamentary candidate, binding themselves (if re-
elected) to ever afterwards oppose any suggestion to introduce
Conscription. As Exhibits in the ease, I now place before your
Honor, this enormous bundle of newspapers. These contain
the public announcements I have referred to, and also reports
of the verbal pledges given by Members of Parliament in
their respective speeches when addressing the electors. It will
be observed that none of the clients of our learned friend, Mr.
Selfish, have denied the correctness of such newspaper reports
of their said speeches.
His Honor: Mr. Democrat, your junior (Mr. Socialist) has
been good enough to furnish this Honorable Court with a dis-
sertation which deals primarily with what he has metaphori-
cally described as one of the greatest political somersaults in
history. lam not accustomed to listening to such elastic
rhetoric, and would, therefore, ask you to more lucidly convey
his meaning, couched in language more suited to the dignity
of this Honorable Court, and at the same time communicate
the results accruing from that to which he refers.
Mr. Democrat : What you say is true, your Honor, and I
have no doubt but that my junior (Mr. Socialist) has offended
you by his choice of rather immoderate language; and while
tendering a most abject apology for his impropriety of speech,
I will respectfully crave your Honor’s permission to be al-


lowed to withdraw the expression, “the greatest political
somersault in history,” and as in substitution therefor, I would
describe the action of Mr. Selfish’s clients as the most un-
scrupulous manifestation of political chicanery,, or, if your
Honor should so prefer, you might permit of their action being
described as one of the most skilfully strategic or diplomatic
moves ever made by that sophisticated gang to whom
my learned friend, Mr. Selfish, so proudly refers as his
patriotic clients. In making these amends for the shortcom-
ings of my junior, your Honor, I must candidly admit that I
am inclined to regard the historic Judas Iscariot as the essence
of a gentleman when compared to the clients of my learned
friend, Mr. Selfish, and my deductions have always led me to
regard as the most truthful of men, the man who acknowledges
himself a liar; so also, your Honor, do I regard as a brave man
the man who openly admits that he is a coward.
Mr. Selfish ; I appeal to your Honor, it isj intolerable that
my learned friend should be allowed to prostitute the tradi
tions of this Honorable Court by using his privileges as a
shield behind which to make a cowardly attack, and at the
same time heap obloquy upon my clients, who, as your Honor
well knows, represent the better members of the whole com-
munity, and I am sure that your Honor will have realised
ere this, that my learned friend Mr. Democrat, is only adopt-
ing this attitude of unworthy innuendo in order to conceal
his pro-German sympathies, and also his personal identification,
as one of the pillars of that anarchical association, which can
be concentrated into the three letters I. W.W.
His Honor: I shall not allow the time of this Honorable
Court to be wasted in this scandalous manner, and unless the
argument and addresses of Counsel be confined to the matters
before me, I shall peremptorily adjourn the hearing with a
view to affording you gentlemen an opportunity of settling
any personal differences which might subsist between you.
Mr. Democrat : I apologise, your Honor, for any possible
misconstruction which you might attribute to our respective
addresses; neither I, nor my learned friend, have the smallest
inclination to emulate the puglistic example of Mr. Purves,
a well-known member of our learned profession, who practised
at the Victorious Bar. You may rest assured, your Honor,
that both I and my learned friend Mr. Selfish are as platonic
of disposition as we are generously endowed with philosophic
temperaments, and we have already forgotten anything and
everything beyond the case which is so earnestly engaging
your Honor’s attention, but I would like to respectfully sug-
gest to your Honor, that my learned friend, Mr. Selfish, should
be compelled to restrict his allegations to statements of fact,
categorical, not allegorical.
11


Mr. Selfish: I object, your Honor, to my learned friend’s
hyperbolical criticisms, when his verbosity is nothing less than
a volume of terminological inexactitudes, which must inevit-
ably confuse the issues before this Honorable Court.
His Honor: Be seated, Mr. Selfish. I desire that Mr.
Democrat should proceed with his address, and must ask you
to desist from the raising of frivolous objections, which might
be calculated to prejudice the best interests of your patriotic
clients.
Mr, Democrat : My learned friend Mr. Selfish and his
clients, your Honor, are appealing to you to absolve them
from any further adherence to the pledges which they re-
spectively gave to the people during the recent elections. In
making these pledges, your Honor, they resorted to the re-
pugnant methods which have been disclosed, for the one
purpose of saving their Parliamentary seats, and I might
say, that individually, many of these Parliamentary candidates
would stand by and calmly see the War lost, if by so doing,
it would secure their re-election to Parliament, as their elec-
tion was then very much in doubt, on account of their having
been in direct conflict with the will and wish of the electors
upon the great question involved in the Referendum 1 . I may
also state, your Honor, that neither Mr. Selfish nor his clients
have made this Honorable Court aware of the fact, that my
clients represent the working classes, or to be more correct,
I should say that my clients represent that preponderating
majority of the people, who, not from choice, are absolutely
obliged to work for their living or alternatively starve, and
I may further state beyond fear of contradiction, that my
clients as a rule, represent a gigantic majority over all other
classes of population in this great Commonhealth.
His Honor: Do you then, Mr. Democrat, include me as
one of your clients? I also have to earn my living by ad-
ministering unadulterated justice in this Honorable Court.
Mr. Democrat: I qualified my statement, your Honor,
by stating that, as a rule, a certain majority obtains, and it
is quite possible that your Honor might have the distinction
of being one of those isolated exceptions, which go to prove
the rule I have referred to.
His Honor: Your explanation is perfectly lucid, Mr
Democrat; pray, proceed with your address.
Mr. Democrat: Well, your Honor, I am also instructed to
acquaint you with the fact that incalculable numbers of my
clients are earning wages or salaries of from 16/- to upwards
of 20/- per day, and because the clients of Mr. Selfish continue
to advertise for men at 8/- or 10/- per day, they illogically
suiggest that ray clients should be so crassly insane, (or as
they would describe it, so rabidly patriotic) as to throw aside


the 16/- to 20/- per day which they are now earning, and rush
in to accept in substitution the ridiculously low wage which
is being offered by the clients of Mr. Selfish.
His Honor: Excuse me Mr. Democrat for interrupting you,
but I desire to ask whether, if so required, you are in a position
to produce witnesses and evidence to support the statement
which you are now importing into your address?
Mr. Democrat: Yes, Your Honor, I can produce more
evidence than you could possibly wish to hear, and I might
say that this is the particular evidence which my learned
friend Mr. Selfish and his clients have done their best to con-
ceal. Your Honor will at once realise, that to compel a man
to work for 8/- or 10/- per day when he is now earning double
these amounts, or a great deal more, is tantamount to asking
your Honor to legitimise the wholesale exploitation and sys-
tematic robbing of my clients (who represent a preponderating
working majority), by that more fortunate wealthy minority,
who constitute the clients of my learned friend Mr. Selfish.
I am also instructed to state, your Honor, that the result of
an exhaustive investigation conclusively shows that the fee
simple of all alienated [lands in the Commonhealth is owned
and controlled by less than 600,000 wealthy people out of a
total population of over five millions. These 600,000 people in
conjunction with the huge financial institutions have immense
wealth and vested interests to safe-guard, and I admit, that
if Germany is not defeated in this great world-war, and she
were then able to confiscate the Commonhealth, it would be
a very bad day for the 600,000 people whom Mr. Selfish re-
presents, but logically, I can see no equitable reason why the
great majority should be asked to sacrifice themselves to pre-
serve the assets and wealth of this financial minority, unless
that wealthy minority provides a sufficiently attractive finan-
cial reward, to cause the huge majority to seek that poorly
paid employment, which has for its object, the preservation of
the assets of the said minority, in which the great majority
have absolutely no interest.
Mr. Selfish: May it please your Honor, that I should in-
terrupt my learned friend’s address. He is labouring certain
points to the detriment of far greater potential factors. He
does not tell you, your Honor, that if the Germans controlled
the Commonhealth, every man would have to be a conscript
soldier. Neither does he tell you that the high wages he so
boastfully refers to, would cease to obtain under German
rule, and that the clients he represents, would all be Serfs un-
der the iron-heel of Germany. My statements, your Honor,
are not theories ; they are facts enunciated by that unimpeach-
able authority, the Right Honorable Silly Views, Prime Minis-
ter of the Commonhealth, and his statements on all such mat-
ters, as your Honor is aware, are universally acknowledged
as absolutely infallible.


His Honor: Do you mean to suggest Mr. Selfish, that if
Germany were to obtain control of the Commonhealth as a
result of this war, that I would be a Serf ? Did you ever hear
of that historic event known as the Norman Conquest? Do
you suggest as a result of that event, that I and you and the
rest of us who are present in this Court to-day, are all Serfs?
Do you suggest as a result of the Boer War, that the Boers
are all Serfs? And do you also suggest that if Conscription is
applied by the Commonhealth it makes us patriots, but, if it
is applied by Germany it makes Serfs? When addressing this
Honorable Court, Mr. Selfish, I would like you to avoid ro-
mancing as much as possible, or expressing sentiments, which,
in certain irresponsible persons, might be classified as wild
imaginings, or the idle vapourings of a diseased mind; I
sincerely trust that you will not promulgate any further ques-
tions of the character I have just been asking, by making any
more of such wild assertions in this Honorable Court; would
it not be better to reserve such statements for certain parts
of the Domain, which have apparently been set apart for that
express purpose.
Mr. Democrat: I believe, your Honor, that the Domain
has been abandoned in favor of Larking Place, where they
also utilise women. I think the utilisation of women is hav-
ing a most baneful effect; to have women publicly advocating
oh the Recruiting question from'' a public platform, is as bad
in theory and in practice, as it would be illogical to suggest,
that they should be recruited for service in the trenches; a
woman’s influence on this great question, if exercised among
her own personal relatives, might produce some gratifying re-
sults, but its promiscuous application to the husbands of other
women, and to strange men generally is highly improper, as
it is only calculated to excite their derision, alienate their
minds, and do an inestimable volume of harm; if, however,
women choose to hold a meeting among themselves, presided
over by women, and addressed by women on the recruiting
question, there can be no doubt, but that great good might
come from it, in that each woman can apply the deductions so
arrived at, with regard to her own male relatives, and in no
other manner should a woman’s activities be tolerated in re-
lation to such matters.
His Honor: Be seated Mr. Democrat! I fail to under-
stand why learned Counsel cannot confine themselves to the
important issues before this Honorable Court; it must be ap-
parent to all, that these diversions or references to extraneous
matters can serve no useful object, in that the case as stated
for hearing by this Honorable Court narrows the whole issue
down to a question of evolving the most equitable means for
obtaining a sufficiency of recruits to work for the specific pur-
pose of trying to win the War. ;


To talk about Serfdom and other impossible suggestions,
is only wasting the time of this Honorable Court, and I am
positively certain, that not only 1, but every member of the
community, desires to see Great Britain achieve a gigantic
victory over her enemies; this statement, however, cannot
carry any greater conviction or weight, by constant repetition
to those already cognizant of the fact, that Great Britain must
win the War, and shall win the War; of course, there.can be
no question about it ; Great Britain and her Allies will win
the War and I have no time to listen to consequences accruing
in respect of anything to the contrary, which I, as a judge of
this Honorable Court, positively decline to recognise, as hav-
ing the remotest possibility of ever happening.
This statement by His Honor was immediately followed by
deafening cheers, clapping, and hear hears, while many in the
Court actually commenced to sing the first bars of: “God Save
the King. ’ ’
Court Crier : SILENCE in the COURT! SILENCE in the
COURT!! SILENCE in the COURT!!!
His Honor rose from his seat; indignation was stamped
upon every feature of his venerable old face; immediately
thereafter, a pin would have been heard to strike the floor
had it been dropped, and the contrasted silence was almost
thick with intensity.
His Honor: I am astounded and surprised at such un-
seemly behaviour, and unless silence and order are maintained,
I shall be reluctantly compelled to either have the Court
cleared or adjourn the hearing.
Mr. Capitalist: May it please your Honor, that I as the
junior of my esteemed and learned leader, Mr. Selfish, should
be permitted to state that your noble pronouncement has
metaphorically acted as a spark to the tinder: it has spon-
taneously inflamed the concentrated but suppressed en-
thusiasm, which, while rather indecorously manifesting itself,
might readily be forgiven, on account of it evidencing the
absolute unanimity of all parties, towards the speedy consum-
mation of those glorious ideals, to which your Honor has given
such succinct expression.
Mr. Democrat: I also, your Honor, would take the liberty
of stating, that not only I, my junior, my learned friend Mr.
Selfish, together with his clients, as well as all that great ma-
jority of clients whom I have the honor to represent, are all in
absolute accord and endorse every sentiment which your
Honor has so ably expressed, and on behalf of the members
of the Bar, I may state, that we unanimously concur and sup-
port Mr. Capitalist in his plea for your indulgence to any one
present in this Honorable Court, who, in a moment of uneon-


trollable enthusiasm, generated by your Honor’s own worthy
remarks, should so far have forgotten his surroundings, as to
be guilty of anything in the nature of contempt of Court, by
clapping, cheering, or otherwise evidencing his or their patrio-
tic approbation by such an indecent display of enthusiastic
acclamation.
His Honor: Gentlemen of the Bar, the episode, while con-
flicting with the traditions and etiquette of this Honorable
Court, shall, in accordance with your wishes, be allowed to
pass without further reference being made to it.
Mr. Selfish: I shall adopt your Honor’s suggestion by as-
sisting in everything capable of effecting a satisfactory solu-
tion of the difficulties referred to by your Honor.
Mr. Democrat: My learned friend Mr. Selfish is so ultra-
conservative, that although I accept his proffered assistance,
I can see that the task of effecting a solution will be hopeless
unless we throw our cards on the table face upwards; I take
it that he is acting in accordance with his instructions, which,
from the attitude he has hitherto adopted can only be conjec-
tured to mean that the interests of the wealthy clients whom
he represents must in no-wise be trespassed upon. He has not
actually said so in words, but as I can place no other construc-
tion upon the attitude he has hitherto assumed, I shall therefore
presume to dictate the only reconcilable suggestions which I
could honestly regard as acceptable to the gigantic majority
of clients whom I have the honor to represent. To do this
effectually, I must speak generally, and by so doing, I must
for the saving of argument ignore the exceptions to any rule,
which such generalities must necessarily import.
Firstly : —My clients represent the hard-working masses
of the people; that is the brawn, the muscle, the sinew, and the
finest essentials for creating a magnificent fighting army.
Secondly : —My clients do not possess estates or relative
wealth of any kind comparable to that of the clients of Mr.
Selfish; my clients are bread-winners, toiling for the necessary
sustenance to keep body and soul together.
Thirdly: —My clients are patriots to the back-bone, but
one most important factor has been overlooked by my learned
friend Mr. Selfish and his clients; my clients possess an extra-
ordinary measure of intelligence; it is far in excess of that ob-
taining as a general rule among the populations of other coun-
tries. My clients are enlightened to a surprising degree as
the result of compulsory education, and they now read, think
and reason for themselves; the inevitable result of this is, that
the finest oratory will fall upon deaf ears, and cannot alter
the deep-seated convictions and conceptions generated by so
generous an education; in this respect, there is really no ana-
logy between them and the working classes which existed,
during or anterior, to the days of the great Napoleonic wars.


Fourthly My clients are very socialistic in their ideas r
with the resist that they ask why they should be called upon
to fight over-seas for conservation of the vested rights or in-
terests of the relative few, and instead of receiving a reward
for so doing they are actually penalised by being compelled to
forego part of the wages, salaries or earnings which they are
now receiving.
Fifthly:— My clients contend that the wealthy classes of
the community are, most unpatriotic : surely half a loaf of bread
is better than nolle ? The clients of Mr. Selfish have practi-
cally the whole loaf, and they virtually say that they want to
keep the whole loaf by utilising the services of the great
majority to prevent its being stolen from them.
Sixthly ; —My clients resent this attitude; it becomes
wholly irreconcilable to them when the clients of Mr. Selfish
ask my clients to assume an attitude which is the direct anti-
thisis of that which Mr. Selfish’s own clients have adopted;
it can therefore be seen that when the clients of Mr. Selfish
suggest the conscripting of the great majority at a relatively
nominal wage, it imposes an appalling sacrifice upon my
clients, their wives, children or other dependents by compelling
them to forego the relatively handsome wages which they are
now receiving, and for what? why, for the purpose of conserv-
ing the huge vested interests of the wealthy minority without
my great majority having any participation in the wealth so-
protected and defended; in this respect, your Honor, they do-
not even receive the crumbs from the loaf which they actually
prevent the enemy stealing.
Seventhly: —My clients assert it is useless to contend that
conscription affects everyone equally; this is not so, and by
way of example, they cite the following actual case
Mr. Moneybags, a wealthy young married squatter, volun-
teered and went to the Front; he laughed when they told him
the amount of wages he was to receive, and replied that it
made no difference to him if they did not pay him anything at
all. This mans’ wealth and estates yield a steady increasing in-
come; if he chose he need never do a days work as long as he
lived, and if he were killed or died, the income from his es-
tates is assured to his wife and children, and whether he be
dead or alive does not concern them in this respect. Mr. Poor-
fellow also volunteered; the latter was a hard-working young
fellow with a wife and family of young children, but he had
no wealth or estates; he was working for a wage of £8 per
week. The latter allowed his patriotism to so influence him
that he resigned from. Ms then billet, and by so doing he vic-
timised his wife and his children by compelling them to live
in relative poverty on a weekly allowance of about half the
amount he had previously been earning. Both the men I have
referred to were killed, and the consequential results were.


that the wife and children of Mr. Moneybags are how better
oft than ever, as there was no financial loss to them through
Mr. Moneybags having been killed, and to-day you can see .his
wife and children still living in luxury and driving about in
the most fashionable up-to-date motor cars. The wife and
children of Mr, Poorfellow, however, have been obliged to
part with the comfortable little home they had, and his wife
and children are now living in relative destitution and beg-
gary on account of their bread-winner having been killed.
My clients are seriously questioning themselves as to
whether Mr. Poorfellow was not an arrant fool, a madman, or a
man who had failed to realise that the truest form of loyalty
and love is that which*is reared in the cradle, and it cannot be
wondered at that my clients should designate Mr. Poorfellow
as disloyal to both his wife and his children whom they
unanimously declare him to have treacherously victimised.
Eightly: —My clients assert, that had Mr. Moneybags said
to Mr. Poorfellow; “Look here Mr. Poorfellow, my estates
and wealth are in danger, and I want you to risk your life
by helping me to fight the men who would rob me of it; if
you are prepared to do so, I will cheerfully give you the same
wages as you now are earning, and if yon are killed, I will
see that an insurance policy is taken out to secure to your
wife during her life, an annuity equal to the wages you are
now receiving, and if she should die, then a division of the
same amount will be divided among your children, until the
youngest shall have attained the age of sixteen years.” In
such a case as that, your Honor, my clients would unanimous-
ly support any proposals for obtaining men on such 'terms, if
based on the principles I have enunciated, but they insist that
the wealthy clients of Mr. Selfish should give away half the
loaf for division among those whom they now desire should go
forth and fight against those who are trying to steal the whole
loaf.
Ninthly; —My clients further state that they will never
surrender their majority rights to governance by the minority ;
neither will they tolerate conscription or coercion of any kind,
and they assert that if the wealthy clients of Mr. Selfish have
one spark of self-sacrificing patriotism in their whole com-
position, let them demonstrate it by forthwith surrendering
sufficient of their accumulated wealth and assets to enable
them to collectively advertise for men at 20/- per day, and
they will then have more men than they can provide for; if
on the contrary, the clients of Mr. Selfish are so craven,
cowardly and unpatriotic, that they won’t pay the price, then
my clients will also follow their dastardly example of selfish-
ness, by declining to accept a lesser price for their valuable
services.


Tenthly: —My clients also contend that the clients of Mr.
Selfish are uselessly wasting thousands of pounds sterling up-
on futile recruiting efforts through the non-recognition of my
client's claims; they further contend that the immense sums
of money so being wasted, if expended far division among the
men whose services they are seeking, would have secured far
greater results. They also state that the inculcation of pa-
triotic ideals should be conducted by women at the cradle-
side and not in Larking Place, and that addresses by women
at the latter place are ruining all prospects of satisfactory re-
cruiting by their un-womanly attitude, in that it offends the
keenest susceptibilities of self-respecting men who would
readily respond in a manly manner if women were not ef-
feminating and weakening the whole of these recruiting-
efforts.
Last hut not least: —My clients assert in no uncertain
voice that any attempt by Mr. Selfish or his clients to secure
a license to exploit and rob them' of their earning power by
conscripting them for service outside the Commonhealth, will
be resisted in such a manner as shall culminate in civil war,
general disorganisation, the cutting of all voluntary help to
Britain and her Allies, and this latter will be speedily followed
by the declaration of a Commonhealth Republic founded upon
an equitable constitution] this Commonhealth Republic by
Socialistic confiscation of all real property and wealth through-
out its Republic will then voluntarily provide such a maximum
of practical assistance to Great Britain and her Allies as
could never be equalled by the coersive licensed exploitation
of the huge hard-working majority which I have the honor to
represent at the hearing of this action.
I shall now ask your Honor to in no-wise regard any
statement I have made on behalf of my clients as in the na-
ture of a threat; they simply represent the crude, cold hard
logic of a not too highly cultured multitude which I greatly
respect; they conceal nothing, and they are all ready and
willing to fight to the death for the winning of the great
war, but they insist upon being rewarded instead of being
victimised for so doing.
Mr. Socialist : My learned leader Mr. Democrat has left
but little for me to say, your Honor, except that, when looked
at from the broadest standpoint his argument simply sets aside
all considerations other than the settlement of the differences
in relation to the respective personal interests of both the par-
ties to this great action ; it appears, your Honor, that a speedy
and satisfactory settlement of the points which my learned
leader has placed before this Honorable Court will immediately
generate sitch an unanimity of interests that all parties will
the better understand each other as the result of this hearing;


it will have ventilated, and I hope, adjusted their respective
grievances, and they will thence go forward in unity to assist
in securing that glorious and inevitable victory, to which Your
Honor has so proudly referred.
Mr. Selfish: May it please your Honor, that I should be
permitted to exercise my privilege of final address to this
Honorable Court, for which I have so long and patiently
waited.
I have listened both interestedly and attentively to the
■claims and arguments enunciated by my learned friend Mr.
Democrat and his able junior Mr. Socialist, on behalf of their
clients, whom they have been generous enough to admit are not
as cultured or enlightened as those whom I have the honor and
distinction to represent upon the hearing of this unheard of
action. I would not be so foolhardy as to deny the logic or
reason which might be presumed to support many of my
learned friend’s arguments, but by way of rejoinder, I would
ask: Who can deny that the foundations upon which such ar-
guments are based, are as the sands which are ever shifting
and which have no stability, in that they are but Socialistic
visions ?
Who will deny that savages in the lowest scale of civilisa-
tion will not fight for the preservation of their Territory when
it is attacked? I know full well that every creature worthy
of the name of man would jump at the chance of being able
to seize a rifle and fight to the death if an enemy were actually
invading the Commonhealth.
Who, again I ask, would have the audacity to classify our
people as having no greater or better intelligence than the
untutored, uneducated, illiterate, uncouth, uncultured and un-
enlightened savages? I venture to say that the most humble
of my learned friends clients would resent such an imputation,
yet I have no hesitancy in declaring that if the very savages
were placed in the advantageous position in which we stand
they would see to it that their enemy would never have a
chance of invading their Territory, why? because they would
rush off to meet him, and they would try to exterminate him
before he should ever have a chance to do. so. We actually
know as intelligent men ( not as savages) that the enemy is
■straining and striving to strike at the Commonhealth and
every other British possession, and again, I ask:—Who would
suggest that we should not seize our rifles as readily, and im-
mediately go forth; meet our enemy on the way, and effectual-
ly prevent him front ever having the chance of reaching,
directly attacking, or invading the Commonhealth ?; we all
know full well, that if he could once get here, he would pol-
lute the very atmosphere we breathe; he would exercise the
functions of a poisonous filthy ulcer of the worst kind, and
to the utmost he would enforce not only conscription and


coercion, but the actual enslavement of those whom he de-
feats; this dastardly enemy would also reduce the earning
capacity of nearly all my learned friend’s clients to probably
less than half the amount which my clients have been so
generously offering to pay, in order to avert the possibility of
such a catastrophe ever happening.
Who, I ask, can honestly deny that the Commonhealth
soldier is not the best paid soldier in the world ?
Has he, as a Commonhealth citizen, not got his man-hood,
his very self-respect, his mother, his wife, his children, and his
country to tight for, quite as much as the poor illiterate savages
to which I have referred?
As a citizen of the Commonhealth, is he not a part-owner
or share-holder in all our great public works, railways, tram-
ways, and all our great public buildings and other public as-
sets, which represent millions upon millions of pounds sterl-
ing ?
Apart from all these, is he not also a part-owner or
share-holder in all the unalienated land in the Commonhealth
to which my learned friend Mr. Democrat has referred? and
last, but not least, is he not a share-holder in all the taxes,
rents, rates, etc., which are collected by the Government, in
respect of that portion which is alienated?
After all I have said and asked by way of rejoinder, your
Honor, I fail to see how any man can say that a citizen of the
Commonhealth, collectively speaking, is not wealthy, or that
he has nought to fight for, because although individually or
personally he may not be wealthy, yet at the same time he is
actually a share-holder or part-owner of all the gigantic assets
I have enumerated.
I shall not trespass any further upon the valuable time
of this Honorable Court, your Honor, and neither shall I
waste time by responding or attempting to respond to the wild
visions or republican dreams to which my learned friend Mr.
Democrat has referred, because his disclaimer to the contrary in
no-wise conceals the implied disloyal hidden threat, which I
am sure, your Honor, and my clients will treat with the silent
contempt, scorn, and utter disregard which it so richly de-
serves ; as I have nothing further to say, your Honor, I shall
gracefully leave the interests of my clients to the tender
mercies of this Honorable Court.
Mr. Capitalist: I have but little to add to the address of
my learned leader, Mr. Selfish, your Honor. The strength
of his cogent rejoinders must necessarily dispose of the verbose,
Socialistic platitudes enunciated by our learned friend, Mr.
Democrat, and I have the temerity to suggest that he is now
congratulating himself upon his not being obliged to respond
to the unanswerable logic embodied in the closing interroga-


tories which my learned leader so dexterously imported into
his final address. It is with a sense of unparalleled confidence,
that I now concur, and unequivocally endorse, all that he has
said; and without the smallest apprehension I shall now com-
placently await your Honor’s delivery of the Judgment of
this Honorable Court, well knowing, that quite regardless of
its purport, it will for ever hereafter exercise a potent world-
wide influence on the minds of all broad-minded men, whenever
the subject matter of this great action shall present itself for
determination in those other countries of the world which may
not be as well endowed with those dispassionate, enlightened
methods of procedure which are now accomplishing the solution
of this world-wide problem, without the blood-shedding accom-
paniments so invariably associated elsewhere with the effective
settlement of National matters of infinitely less importance.
Knowing that your Honor ’s impartiality will, as always, evi-
dence itself in this Honorable Court’s judgment, I shall with
confidence and conviction forthwith mark my brief with at
least twice the fee which, under other circumstances, I should
never have had the presumption so to do.
With a gracious bow, Mr. Capitalist resumed his seat to
await that most interesting feature of the action —the judg
ment.
His Honor: Gentleman of the Bar. I appreciate the grave
and sincere propriety with which you have addressed your-
selves to this lengthy and important action. The Case, as
stated for the determination of this Honorable Court, will nec-
essarily entail a rather voluminous judgment. At the outset
it presented nothing more than a hazy nebulous mass of con-
flicting thought and interests, so inextricably interwoven and
hopelessly entangled as would have justified myself, or any
other man, for hesitating at the egoism of any human mind
attempting to unravel such an awe-inspiring complexity of
clouded issues, which, in themselves, were quite sufficient to
suggest to the superficial mind its impossibility of solution.
In view of what I have said, I must generously acknow-
ledge that the gorgeous and transcendental display of brilliant,
instructive, learned, analytical, and illuminting rhetoric of
Counsel, has materially lightened the onerous responsibilities
imposed upon me in relation to my handling and expert mani-
pulation of that very delicate and highly sensitive balancing
instrument —the Scales of Justice.
The significance of my remarks might be more readily
appreciated and understood when it is realised that an average
ordinary legal trial is relatively weakened or strengthened,
as the case may be, by old-established precedents, supported by
Statutes and Acts, of Parliament, which, like beacons, guide
us along the beaten paths of usage and custom, where Appeal
Courts also exist for rectification of errors or faulty judgments.


In dealing with this case, however, we metaphorically cast
them, all overboard; we recede to those antiquated, pre-historic
ages which were devoid of these cast-iron precedents ; ages long
anterior to any of those time-honored precedents upon which
our most eminent Counsel have so largely depended for, sup-
port. In contradistinction to all such recognised practice, I have
been commissioned to deliver a judgment where no Court of
Appeal exists, other than that distastefully repugnant ele-
ment, “Force,” which, as you are all aware, is now devas-
tating the civilisation of Europe.
It must he palpably obvious to all that an appeal to
“Force” does not produce “Right,” in that its only progeny
is “Might”; this latter, as you all know, is invariably the an-
tithesis of “Right,” and for a practical illustration of its ap-
plication, you have only to allow your minds to dwell upon the
acts of Germany towards Belgium, France, and other nations,
perhaps, much weaker than herself.
As a patriotic Judge of this Great Commonhealth Court of
Rational-reasoning and Common-sense, it has been my most
earnest wish and prayer, that the Almighty King of Kings
should inspire me with the necessary intelligence and strength
of character to enable me to effectually resist all those ex-
traneous influences, temptations, or class-prejudices which
might in any way militate against my arriving at a judgment
so generally acceptable to all parties, as will remove beyond
the remotest bounds of possibility, any thought of either party
appealing to that horrifying Court of Might or Force, to which
I have so reluctantly referred. It is, therefore, with a resig-
nation borne of righteous effort that I shall now deliver the
judgment of this Honorable Court.
THE JUDGMENT.
This Honorable Court affirms and declares its findings as
follows:-—
(1) That any Member of Parliament breaking or attempt-
ing to break so sacred a pledge as that upon which
he or they induced the electors to elect or re-elect
them to Parliament, shall, upon evidencing his or
their inclination so to do, be forthwith ignominiously
expelled from such Parliament.
(2) That any Member of Parliament who has hot so
pledged himself shall be free to exercise his judgment
in accordance with the dictates of his own conscience,
in that he has not SOLD to his electors his right to
exercise such judgment.


That the Relerendum has irrevocably determined for
the time being that the constitution of the Common-
wealth shall not be amended to provide for Com-
pulsory Service outside the said Commonwealth. The
result of this Referendum must be respected and
strictly observed, otherwise what possible excuse could
justify the enormous expenditure of time and money
in the taking of such a Referendum, which, if not ob-
served, might be calculated to establish the most legi-
timate grounds for creating revolutionary chaos of the
worst kind, through attempting to wilfully ignore
the will of a majority of the people, as evidenced by
such Referendum.
That it cannot give a broader meaning to the words
‘‘Home Defence” unless and until, by an universal as-
sent to creation of an Empire Parliament, vested under
its constitution with power to call up each and every
male subject of such Empire for service in defence of
each and every part or parts of such Empire, as shall
or may from time to time require to be so defended
against the enemy aggressor.
That the war must be won, that it can be won, and
that it will be won, must be accepted by all. The war,
however, will be won by one great agency, and that
agency will be ‘‘WEIGHT OF MONEY.” A suffi-
ciency of money will buy human life, services, and
anything and everything required to WIN THE
WAR. This Honorable Court therefore calls upon
Parliament to help to win the war in manner follow-
ing : —Dispense with any further hum-bugging of the
people by immediately recognising and acknowledg-
ing, that the financial position of the Commonhealth
can be made one of the strongest, by promptly ex-
tinguishing the disastrous Banking competition at
present obtaining throughout the said Commonhealth;
this result can be speedily achieved by passing an Act
of Parliament to provide, that no person, Company,
nor Institution, other than The Commonhealth Bank,
shall at any time hereafter, be allowed to carry on or
conduct any Banking business within the Territory of
the Commonhealth: the effect of so doing will be
the means of creating one of the greatest financial
assets in the whole world, and some of the paramount
benefits accruing therefrom will (inter alia) be as fol-
lows ;
(a) That the Commonhealth Bank by reason of being
the only institution allowed to do Banking busi-
ness, will necessarily compel every citizen of the


Commonhealth to deal with the said Bank; this
will enable the Commonhealth Bank to provide
more than sufficient for all normal requirements,
in that the money drawn from the said Bank
by one customer, must invariably find its way
back into the same Bank for credit of another
customer, subject to no other Bank being allowed
to provide the disastrous competitive facilities
referred to: one moment’s serious thought will
thus convince the most sceptical when it is rea-
lised, that if there is only The Commonhealth
Bank, and the Government or any private em-
ployer draws money with which to pay wages
or other outgoings, nearly the whole of this
same money, whether subsequently distributed in
payment for rents, groceries, drapery, furniture,
rates, taxes, custom’s duties or in almost any
other manner, must invariably find its way back
to The Commonhealth Bank as the fountain
source from which it was drawn. It must, there-
fore be seen, that uniformity of financial resource
is thus maintained for this one exclusive Bank,
which, under any other conditions must be pre-
judicially unbalanced, if the money so drawn is 1
lowed to find its way into any one of the many
other competitive Banks to which this Judgment
refers.
(b) From a patriotic or national point of view, the
carrying into effect of this Judgment will mean,
that the whole Banking business will not only
become nationalised, but also economised and sim-
plified, in that the Commonhealth Banking busi-
ness will virtually resolve itself into a series of
debit and credit entries, and the Note Issue of
the said Bank can then be more perfectly regu-
lated, instead of perpetuating the present game
of financial battle-dore and shuttle-cock in connec-
tion therewith.
(e) A continuity of the expensive and destructively
competitive banking system at present obtaining
is PREJUDICING THE SUCCESSFUL FINANC-
ING OF THE WAR, and it is also inflicting upon
the people of the Commonhealth a wholly un-
necessary and monstrous imposition, in that enor-
mous sums of money are being annually wasted
in expenditure for the upkeep and maintenance
of all the costly competitive Banks referred to
in this Judgment. The greater proportion of
all the managerial and other expenses of these


wholly superfluous institutions could be extin-
guished by all such business being under the
supreme control and management of The Common-
health Bank, and the money now being so waste-
fully expended* could then be devoted towards
helping to WIN THE WAR, The magnitude
of the saving capable of being effected through-
out the Gommonhealth in this direction, might
be better appreciated by regarding the head office
of the Gommonhealth Bank as the centre of a
one thousand yards radius, within which will
be found, a dozen or more lavish buildings rep-
resenting the costly establishments of a dozen
or more of the different competitive Banks, each
of which is prejudicing a materialisation of those
national economic ideals which this Judgment un-
reservedly calls upon Parliament to adopt for the
purpose of helping to WIN THE WAR.
(d) The prompt adoption of these recommendations,
will immediately thereupon release for service at
the Front, A SMALL ARMY of innumerable Bank
Managers, Bank Accountants, Ledger-keepers,
Bank Clerks, Exchange Clerks, and others, who
will, no doubt, be only too eager to then devote
their best services towards the WINNING OF
THE WAR.
Having recognised WEIGHT OF MONEY as the
agency which will WIN THE WAR, this Honorable
Court also calls upon Parliament to pass another Act
of Parliament for the immediate creation of a Com-
monhealth Insurance Department, and to simultan-
eously legislate to prevent any person or Company
being allowed to carry on any further Insurance busi-
ness within the territory of the Commonhealth. Some
of the paramount benefits accruing from so doing
will (inter alia) be as follows-
(a) The management and officers for the staffing of
this huge Commonhealth Insurance Department
can be drawn from the leading Insurance of-
fices at present existing, and upon this Govern-
ment Department having been adequately staffed
and properly organised, the financial economy
effected throughout the Commonhealth will be
absolutely startling by reason of the almost un-
believable proportions of the enormous annual sum
of money, which will also, then be made im-
mediately available towards assisting to WIN
THE WAR.


(b) That the Government, by Legislative enactment,
shall make it compulsory for every person to be
insured for a minimum sum as against the com-
bination of accident and death; failure to pay
the minimum premium to be punishable in such
manner as Parliament shall consider most ex-
pedient. The revenue from this will also help
to WIN THE WAR, and also provide for de-
pendants of those who are killed and wounded.
(c) Immediate Parliamentary adoption of the fore-
going will also release for Service at the Front
ANOTHER SUBSTANTIAL ARMY of wholly un-
necessary Insurance Managers, Sub-Managers,
Accountants, Book-keepers, Secretaries, Ledger-
keepers, Clerks, and others together with a
FURTHER SMALL ARMY of Insurance Can-
vassers, whose services would never again be
required, because Legislation would make it
criminal for any person to remain uninsured
against accident, death, or anything else that the
Government might determine upon; the enormous
revenue so derivable will dispense with War
Loans, when taken in conjunction with the ex-
clusive Banking operations referred to in this
Judgment.
That this Honorable Court refuses to believe that
voluntaryism can ever fail to be successful if the re-
ward offered to such volunteers be equal to or in
excess of the wage, which such prospective volunteers
shall or may be earning at the time when they are in-
vited to offer their services.
That this Honorable Court also refuses to give its as-
sent or ratification to any proposal for creating by
Conscription or Compulsion, a license to compel a man
to accept for his services abroad, a lesser wage than
he might then be actually earning; such a proposal
must necessarily be repugnant to the traditions of
both Justice and Equity, in that it could never logi-
cally be regarded as other than licensed robbery, un-
less the whole of the freehold lands and wealth of
each and every citizen or company were also con-
scripted or confiscated to the Government for and on
behalf of the whole of its people, as a condition pre-
cedent to creation of a license to rob the poorer, and
greater majority of the people.
That this Honorable Court also refuses to recognise
that Conscription can ever be honorably upheld, in
that a volunteer for service is deserving of both honor


and respect for being the hero that he is, whereas
Conscription robs him of all or any such honor or
respect, in that he immediately becomes a Serf worthy
of less respect than the dumb cattle, which have no
intelligence to assist or guide them in relation to
such matters; this Honorable Court, therefore, re-
fuses to recognise that the end justifies the means, or
alternatively, that two wrongs can ever make into
right that which is wrong.
That this Honorable Court deprecates the present
method of War Loans; the said method can only pro-
duce the one disastrous result of making the rich
far richer, and the poor much poorer, and it there-
fore declares, that having once entered upon the war,
there must be cessation of the fighting, and there
must be NO PEACE without securing to the people
of the Commonhealth, the payment of an indemnity
sufficient to extinguish the whole of the said War
Loans and all interest thereon, together with a sum
sufficient to provide a reward for those, and the de-
pendents of those, who fought and assisted to con-
quer our enemies. It might be said, that had there
not been such a Curse as Conscription, Germany could
never have effectually attempted the devastation and
enthralment of other Nations; therefor, let the military
power of our Enemies be irretrievably smashed and
destroyed by making it a condition of ANY PEACE,
that the Governments of Enemy Countries must for-
ever hereafter absolutely abandon Conscription, there-
by making free men of all those enemy peoples, who
to-day, are but the Slaves, Serfs, and Instruments of
an accursed system, which, in the past, they have been
powerless to resist or to free themselves from.
That any peace without indemnities will impose a
crushing burden upon the people of the Common-
health, who, after having sacrificed to help to WIN
THE WAR, would otherwise be victimised and penal-
ised for having done so, in that the men who
actually fought, or their dependents, would thereafter
be taxed to repay the said War Loans unless such in-
demnities be insisted upon.
That after victory shall have been achieved, Great
Britain and the Commonhealth, and all other Allies
shall remain in military possession of Germany,
Austria, and Turkey, until such time as all the said
indemnities shall have been duly paid and satisfied
together' with interest thereon, plus the amount
necessary to pay for the upkeep and the maintenance


of the Allied armies so in possession of all enemy ter-
ritories; while such Allied armies shall remain in
possession of all such German, Austrian and Turkish
territory, every individual enemy subject shall be dis-
armed, and they shall remain disarmed until all such
indemnities shall have been duly paid and discharged,
and even though it should take ONE THOUSAND
YEARS TO CONSUMMATE, it must still be enforced
in order that our people shall not be victimised by
being taxed or called upon to repay any such War
Doans or interest, and also for the purpose of ef-
fectually demonstrating to our enemies, that a repeti-
tion of §ueh whf 66flditi011§ eah only further burden
and crush the people of any and every nation, which
shall hereafter engage in unjustifiable aggressive war-
fare upon the people of any other nation.
(13) Recognising WEIGHT OF MONEY as the potential
agency to WIN THE WAR, this Honorable Court also
calls upon Parliament to insure against the possibility
of making peace without the necessary indemnities
by forthwith enacting, that all the net earnings, in-
come, salaries, or other emoluments of each and every
man and woman in excess of a maximum of Ten
pounds per week, shall forthwith be paid into the
Commonhealth Treasury during the whole period of
the war, and for such a period of time thereafter
as shall complete the extinguishment of all National
liabilities incurred by the Commonhealth in connec-
tion with the assistance it is furnishing to Great
Britaip and her Allies. The revenue derivable from
the application of the said enactment should forth-
with provide a greater reward for those who HAVE
NOT, who by going forth to fight, do thus preserve
the assets and wealth of those WHO HAVE.
(14) That the incidence of this Judgment must be gen-
eral, thereby victimising myself and many others in
the sacrifice so to made by its enforcement in con-
formity with the terms hereof, and it evidences the
fact, that this Judgment is devoid of all unworthy
elements of selfishness in that it absolutely compels
THOSE WHO HAVE, to provide the maximum attrac-
tion and rewards for THOSE WHO HAVE NOT.
For and on behalf of ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN I
do hereby declare the foregoing to be the Judgment of this
Honorable Court.
“GOD SAVE THE COMMONHEALTH. ’ ’
(Signed) EQUITY,
Judge.
29


Mr. Capitalist: With all due respect to your Honor, I
must be so candid as to declare your Judgment to be nothing
less than a transmogrification of Legal Procedure.
His Honor: Gentlemen of the Bar; This has been the
greatest trial of my life; I feel relieved by the knowledge that
I have tried to do my duty by delivering the Judgment of
this Honorable Court; I fully realize that some may be pleased,
and some may be displeased, but as no Judgment can please
everybody alike, I who declare it to be good shall now
emulate the supreme example of that great historic personage,
“Pontius Pilate,” who on a fateful occasion declared, that he
conld find no fault in that one Good Man of all Men, and he
yet thereupon delivered “Our Saviour” to the multitude to do
with HIM as they might think fit, so therefor do I also from
this Judgment Seat, now deliver unto the people of this great
Commonhealth the Judgment of this Honorable Court, to
enable them to use it as they may see fit; and I hereby warn
you, Mr. Capitalist, that as and from the day that you! shall
crucify the said Judgment, it shall ever thereafter blossom
forth as the gradually adopted policy of all the more enlightened
nations of the world.
Gentlemen of the Bar, I am grieved that the sarcasm of Mr.
Selfish should have caused mje to say all I have said, as I
am conscious that this portentous Judgment, might not be all
that it should be, but it is the best that I have to give during
such troublous times; I am so aged and feeble, that I would
gladly have been relieved of such a grave responsibility, as
I feel that I shall soon pass away; upon such an event happen-
ing, I do not desire that you should perpetuate my memory
with some costly Marble Tombstone; far rather would I seek
a Cremation, capable of incinerating me to ashes, and if you
should desire to preserve them, let me suggest that you should
bottle and then label them with this! simple but patriotic
Epitaph:
‘ ‘ These are the Ashes of a Man who Tried to do his Duty. ’ ’
REFLECTIONS.
That His Honor had been wholly unnerved, was manifest
to everyone; the tears had streamed down his aged, venerable
old face; intense silence had reigned throughout the delivery
of his famous Judgment; his subsequent remarks had held his
listeners spellbound; and, as he rose from his seat on the
Bench, cheer upon cheer unrestrainedly broke from the
frenzied and overjoyed, multitude: the Court Crier vainly


his voice was lost amidst the deafening and tumultuous ap-
plause which echoed and re-echoed, through those historic old
buildings from which the people were now making their exit.
In small groups they were to be seen slowly wending
their way homewards, whilst discussing that "which they des-
cribed, as a divine lesson, or a page from “THE GREAT
UNWRITTEN BOOK OF WISDOM.”
CONCLUSION.
On the day following that upon which the famous Judg-
ment had been delivered, the community was shocked to learn
that His Honor, Mr. Justice Equity, had died, thus leaving
enemies and friends alike to mourn for their loss of one,
shrieked his peremptory mandate, £ ‘ Silence in the Court! ’ ’ but
who had ever tried to be the friend of all.
The least valued becomes most valued when lost.
A good seed evidences its greatest value after burial.
THE HALF-MASTED FLAGS CAUSED LITTLE SURPRISE.
, _ , . . '3
- ■ '


Printed and Published
The Argent Manufacturing Company
19 Hunter Street,
Sydney.
