

FUNDAMENTALS
OF
JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE
BRUNO TAUT
KOKUSAI BUNKA SHINKOKAI


FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE
ARCHITECTURE
BY
BRUNO TAUT
KOKUSAI BUNKA SHINKOKAI
IThe Society for International Cultural Relations]
Tokyo, Japan




Foreword
In this age of round the world trips and international air ser-
vices much is being done to dispel the mistaken ideas upon which many
of the world’s misadventures in the past have been based. But valua-
ble as such intercommunication undoubtedly is, and in spite of the
hospitality which nations now extend to foreigners, there is still a
need for organizations which will foster a mutual respect among
nations grounded on a thorough and scholarly understanding of the
past as well as the present.
The Japanese people haye been so engrossed in studying, apprais-
ing and adopting aspects of Western civilization that they have given
very little thought to making their own civilization and culture
known abroad. But with the growing interest in the Orient, Western
scholars are coming to Japan in increasing numbers to leam some-
thing about the arts, the history and the culture of her people.
Language and other difficulties have heretofore made it difficult
for foreign students to have access to the necessary materials. The
Kokusai Bunka Shinkokai has therefore been established with the
purpose of assisting in every possible way the studies of those who
wish to leam something about Japan, and of encouraging a true ex-
change of ideas' among the nations.
As one means of attaining this object, the Society conducted a


“Lecture Series on Japanese Culture” with the aid of leading Japanese
scholars. The series began on October 15,1935, and came to a success-
ful close on December 6.
This pamphlet is the record of a lecture delivered by Dr. Bruno
Taut on October 30 at the Peers* Club. The English translation is by
Mr. Glenn F. Baker and Mr. H. E. Pringsheim.
March 1936
KOKUSAI BUNKA SHINKOKAI
Dr. Bruno Taut was born in Konigsberg, Prussia. For some
time after the Wat he was editor of the Fruhlicht, and won for
himself a recognized leadership of the expressionist movement in
architecture. From 1921 to 1924 he was an active city engineer of
Magdeburg. In ,1925 he moved to-Berlin, where he designed several
large-scale “ Siedlung ” buildings until he became an authority in
that field. Since 1933 he has been in Japan, where his contributions
in architecture. and industrial arts have furnished a new light for
the Japanese. He is the aothor of several excellent books on
architecture and town-planning.


Fundamentals of Japanese Architecture
The subject with which I have been honoured is broad, and the
Society’s confidence obliges me to consider it most carefully. The field
is all too comprehensive. For when one considers the diversity of the
phenomena, the manifold forms within different historic periods—on
the one hand, simplicity, clarity and delicacy, and on the other, a
strange decorative play and the mixture of the two —he might almost
abandon the attempt to discuss the matter in one short evening.
One possible method remains, however. In the first place, a du-
alism and a contradiction between antagonistic elements are, it seems
to me, predominant—also the listener may wish to know how I feel
justified in raising a criticism, together with an antithesis, in this brief
review of the whole of Japanese architecture. In the second, as we
who are in the Japanese scene are acquainted with the different kinds
of architecture, the thousand-fold variations may be omitted. It ought
to be possible to indicate fundamentals, to provide a compass as a
guide among the many buildings.
■But here a new danger emerges. As an architect, my attitude to-
ward the historic is necessarily conditioned by the artistic conception
which I myself endeavour to realize. From this it follows that artists
must speak and write subjectively about art. But is there any science
of art which would be objective in the sense that it would present


authentically not only historical data, but also stylistic questions and
qualities of old works —thus giving a truly just criticism, independent
of time and space 1 One of the most famous Japanese authorities on
Oriental architecture, Professor Ito, recently wrote in a Japanese tech-
nical magazine somewhat as follows: “Fifty years ago Europeans came
and told us, ‘Nikko is the most valuable,’ and we thought so too;
now Bruno Taut has come and told us, ‘lt is Ise and Katsura which
are the most valuable,’ and again we believe.” —Fine Oriental irony,
and superior to our systematization.
We can do little else than voice our opinions, or at best bring to
light forgotten things. Reading some old works on Japan dating back
about half a century, Justus Brinkmann seemed to me one of the best
authorities on Oriental art. His book Kunst und Handu/erk in Japan
(Arts and Crafts in Japan) published in 1889, confirms Ito’s words in
that the shrines of Qegu and Naigu were exotic curiosities for him.
He describes their details as ethnographical peculiarities of Japan, say-
ing nothing about their architectural value or their beauty, and the
torii he calls “gatelike gallows.” It is only when he comes to Nikko
that he feels beauty and praises it on many pages. Similarly in his en-
thusiastic book Japanese Homes and Their Surroundings, published
in 1886, the American, Morse, remarks especially the interesting dec-
orative side; but for the simple reserved aspects he has only senti-
mental statements on the Japanese feeling for nature.
These books are scientifically more honest than most nowadays,
and are quite far from opinions such as those of a well-known Ger-
man novelist who compared certain buildings— at present considered
best because of their classic simplicity—to bams.
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


But what else of the art of Japan was noted in that time? In
painting, interest was directed almost exclusively to the art of Uldyoye,
to woodcuts, and so forth.
Although Brinkmann speaks of Hokusai on many pages with the
highest admiration, he mentions only briefly those artists who are
greater according to contemporary opinion—such as Utamaro, but
especially Kiyonaga and Harunobu; while Sharaku, who was “discover-
ed” later, was not known to him. But the really great arts of brush
painting and the kakemono of the Zen atmosphere are included, like
the Ise shrine, only for the sake of completeness. How little about
Sesshu, Japan’s great master, or about Motonobu, Tanyu, Eitoku,
Sanraku or even Korin; only two pages about Ike Taiga, absolutely
nothing on Gyokudo Urakami —perhaps the greatest genius of painting
in Japan—and not a word about Chikuden. Therefore it is not
surprising that the work of Kobori Enshu and of the Katsura Palace
neither existed for these writers nor was mentioned by them. And
from their silence one may take the courage to record one’s own
perceptions, which, though subjective, are not more so than those of
earlier times, and at least All in evident gaps.
Art, though not definable in itself, is something which evades all
calculations and rational formulation, but which nevertheless influ-
ences the intellect —indeed, without it the intellect would be sterile—
and is by no means a thing of mysticism and vagueness. The art form
is a product of the emotions which under favourable conditions select
very decisively from experience and then give the art form, however
hidden its sources, objective existence. Writers on art have often come
to the conclusion that the only science of art consists in registering
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


and cataloguing, and that no science could exist concerning the quali-
ties of art and their evaluation. In their opinion it would also be com-
pletely impossible to regard distant or past cultures in approximately
the same way as their creators. Certainly, criticism of ancient art dif-
fers little from that of new art, and depends on the points of view and
beliefs of the present. Indeed, it is always ourselves to whom a work
of art speaks, and if it speaks significantly, we are grateful to it and
commend its quality. Thus criticism of ancient art differs little from
that of new art, and becomes a battlefield of the inclinations and
tendencies of the present time.
Beauty may be called “eternal” only when the form —whether
in the Gothic Cathedral, the Doric Temple, or in the Ise Shrine and
the Palace of Katsura —has fulfilled to its utmost the demands made
upon it by the environment and culture of the country; in short,
when it is a successful realization of the entirety of things. Eternal
beauty no longer means to-day what it did only a short time ago. It
does not mean an admonition to imitate outer appearance, or to copy
with more or less virtuosity, but to take the spirit of beautiful works
as a model, and to bring present conditions to the clearest and most
perfect form, as was done in them.
It seems therefore that the exotic no longer exists in Europe for
Japan, or in Japan for Europe. International cultural relations, which
are promoted by the Kokusai Bunka Shinkokai, may now be effec-
tively cultivated, because logic, both rational and aesthetic, is alike —
though countries and their peoples may be different. Progress and the
correction of errors follow upon the recognition of this.
At the conclusion of the great carnival of imitating old styles we
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


have been struggling, for several decades in Europe and from more
recent times in America and elsewhere in the West, to create that
form which will clearly and precisely correspond to contemporary use,
material and technique. But our sensitive faculty has been deranged,
the chain of tradition, which alone gives security to it, has been bro-
ken, and organic development has been replaced in the past as well
as in the present by fashion, whether in a romantic and sentimental
or in a super-modem costume. Like waves of fashion, like the length
of skirts, the courses change and will replace one another until funda-
mentals have been agreed upon, and continuous work begun.
Though one may observe the same shifting in all contemporary
countries, including Japan, it was Japan which contributed most, by
its tradition of simplicity, to the vigorous attempts in Europe since
1900 to get rid of the mummery of ancient costumes. Modern artists,
at first in England but later in Germany and Austria, were in partic-
ular strongly influenced by the manner in which Japanese painting
and ornament were immediately connected with nature. But what at-
tracted the architects was not the strangeness of tree trunks used in
tea-houses in their natural condition, not the love of the atmosphere
of age uiabi, not the violent asymmetry, not the minute dwarfishness,
and certainly not the overloaded bizarrerie of Nikko. Of Japan they
had an idealized conception of cleanliness, clarity, simplicity, cheerful-
ness and faithfulness to the materials of nature, and for the greater
part they still retain that conception. This gave them a liking for
things in Japan quite at variance with the preferences of the general
public in the West and this divergence has continued to the present
time. The general public thinks Japan interesting because she is decid-
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


edly different, and it seeks and finds the very things which are least
interesting to the architect because of their local significance. The
public also retains scientific terms of fifty years ago according to which
the world, with its art treasures, is a museum; and it loves to make a
museum of its apartments with curios—not yet being able to regard
art as a creation which leads from yesterday through to-day into to-
morrow, and which will continue as long as there are human beings.
Dr. Ito was right: all the Japanese opinions about their own arts
orientated themselves too much according to Western ideas; and so
Japan eventually was still more violently affected by the carnival of
styles than the West. When tradition broke down, standards of qual-
ity disappeared and one copied the foreign even though one’s tradi-
tional good taste rejected it —it was exotic and therefore interesting.
It was thought that what most Europeans and Americans liked in
Japan ought to be best, and so one followed their interests and judg-
ment. And from then to the present, Nikko has remained the great
attraction of Japan, to which most tourist parties are brought.
Naturally I do not wish to contest that locally-conditioned pecu-
liarities do not have a great influence on architecture, but these are
things which can never be understood by a non-Japanese, and which
therefore remain sterile for the permanent recreation of the world’s
art. But I believe that they remain sterile even for the further develop-
ment of Japanese architecture. For what are they essentially? They are
—this may be sacrilege to many Japanese —the tea-houses with their
rooms for the tea ceremony. Their beauty—often great —is beyond
question, and yet in spite of all jts fineness it is in itself sterile for
modem Japan. This is not architecture, but improvised lyricism, so to
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


speak. But lyricism does not, as in poetry, readily convey itself in
wood, bamboo, shoji , mats, stucco and so forth. The old masters of
the tea ceremony stressed the unique subjectivity of the pure beauty of
this atmosphere. They declared that it would be lost by repetition and
they would certainly pronounce all the elements of the tea-house to
be “cheap”; entrances made of trees left in their natural states, stuc-
co applied on round bamboo, and even the rustic fence, the irregular
stones in the garden, and the garden itself with its thousands of imi-
tations in hotels, restaurants and private homes. The meditative uni-
versal mood underlying Zen was too elevated not to degenerate easily.
What was meant to be a unique expression of spiritual personality of
a restful character turned to be petrified rules and dry academicism- —
not only in the architectural details but in the tea ceremony itself.
Many of the details of construction of the tea-house were taken
over into private homes, partly to their advantage, as may be seen in
their quiet atmosphere as a whole, but especially when they exhibit
genuine “Tea-taste”—which is usually the case in Kyoto. This taste
strictly excludes carved or filigreed decorations in the woods of the
ramma (a kind of transom), all abnormalities of proportion, and all
dwarfish things; for according to its origin in Zen it asks for the at-
mosphere of shibui (silent and quietly contemplative harmony).
I need not here depict the advantages of the Japanese house or
its unique appropriateness to the climate and the customs, as far as
these keep strictly to tradition. The takonoma, as a place fixed for
things of culture, art and the spirit, represents a unique creation of
Japan and a 1 solution of absolute validity which deserves to be imi-
tated in changed form in each time and in each country. To speak only
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


of painting, millions of pictures are being painted, but the artists do
not know what the people who buy them will do with them, or where
they will put them; while in the Japanese house their use and place
are quite clear. For the rest, however, the Japanese room remains neu-
tral. No reminiscences attach to dark comers, and Western “cozi-
ness” is lacking as well as much furniture, carpets, curtains, table-
cloths, cushions, pictures, wall-papers and so forth. Just as the air in the
room is completely changed by being open to the outside, so the rem-
iniscences attached to the walls and comers —reminiscences which
all too easily oppress the inhabitants—are erased as though impressed
in dough. This was what exerted the principal effect on the artists of
the West. Modem room furnishing in Europe and in America may
well have seen the origin of its contemporary method in Japan.
But Japan, which is a country of frequent and heavy natural
catastrophies, had to pay very dearly for this cultivated taste. The
architect who comes here searches in vain for structural and technical
devices against storms, earthquakes and fires. He finds, according to
the structural terms of the West, traditional as well as modem, literal-
ly nothing. Japanese buildings are like houses of cards and shake
elastically in earthquakes or storms. This of course should be the case
with the vertical supports which are thin and of a standardized strength
dictated by taste, in order that they may not break at the first shock.
But if stresses increase the roof falls in on the verticals, either break-
ing them or pushing them aside.
And in this connexion Japan exhibits one particularly dangerous
caprice which is repeated even to-day in every average new structure:
the placing of heavy planks in the roof. This is really frightening in
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


farm houses and in older structures. I have carefully studied house-
construction and I admire the way in which carpenters do their work
—successfully balancing the heaviest things in the air, contrary to all
logic. But I do not admire what they do there. Though the Japanese
may call wabi or sabi (antique) those rough planks half a metre in
thickness which are placed on top cannot contest the total nonsense
of the thing. They may retreat behind national peculiarities, behind
the marked irrationality of the Japanese character, and perhaps also
behind the closeness to nature of the Japanese —which one likes to
emphasize so much, and which is not doubted by anyone. Their
friendship with nature has certainly produced quite singular cultural
achievements; but in this case it seems that they know their friend,
nature, very badly, and her frequent caprices expressed in earthquakes,
typhoons, fires and tidal waves, even less.
I doubt very much whether one can see a particular trait of Japa-
nese character in this lack of elementary conceptions of construction.
Rather, I am inclined to declare this, as well as the bizarrerie and ab-
struseness —in short, all that attracts most visitors to Japan as exotic
—to be a phenomenon of degeneration, and in fact non-Japanese. All
Japanese who wish to make their country a new organism with regard
to technique, construction and town-planning ought to be gratified if
such a presumption were correct, for it implies that the Japanese spirit
may work rationally as well as aesthetically and be justified in hoping
to solve the difficult contemporary task of finding a synthesis of Japan
and the West.
Seen in general outline the history of Japanese architecture ap-
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


pears to be something like this: The Nara period, in which Buddhism
and simultaneous influences from Korea and especially from China
came in, is the turning point, from which time the critical question
has been raised as to which elements of Japan’s culture are essentially
Japanese in character and which are not. The vestiges of a prehistoric
time quite surprisingly contain nothing of the elements which are be-
lieved nowadays to be distincdy Japanese. There have been finds of
arms, personal ornaments and things of the kind, but they are inter-
national rather than local in style. Strangely enough they are reminis-
cent of Asia Minor and Mycene, and seem Japanese perhaps only in
the surprising fineness of craftsmanship in metal and flint. The pic-
tures of houses on some of the objects show a kind of inartistic lake-
dwelling, such as were usual all over the world and such as have been
partially preserved to the present, in Scandinavia for instance, as a
protection against snow and water, and in Switzerland against rats.
Notwithstanding local peculiarities dictated by the climate, the Japa-
nese farm house has kept this international trait to the present, in so
far as its contour shows the most surprising similarity to, and often
complete identity with, different regions of Europe. Similarities exist
with the high straw roof of the German Black Forest and North Ger-
man lowland districts; with the Alpine shingle-roofed house and its
open galleries and stones on the roof; and with the farm houses of
Serbia and of the Balkans in general—even soil and plants may be
found on the roofs, as in Northern Europe.
This aboriginal Japanese culture found its peak in the Ise Shrines
which are rebuilt every twenty-one years in the same form, altogether
about sixty times, so that their contemporary form goes back to the
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


Nara period. Although this form was probably created in an effort of
Shintoism to resist Buddhism, Shintoism at the same time received
from Buddhism an impetus to the highest artistic refinement. How-
ever, in contrast to other shrines, as for instance those in Izumo, the
Ise Shrines have not taken over any elements of Buddhist architecture
—disregarding the very unimportant balustrade motif on the staircase.
They are therefore absolutely Japanese, more so than any other thing
in Japan. And what are their most important characteristics?
For one, they have absolutely nothing which could be called a
caprice or in contradiction to common sense. Their construction is
simple and yet logical in itself, for it is not, as was the case later, con-
cealed from view by suspended ceilings, but is made an aesthetic ele-
ment. The posts and other structural members did not need to follow
any static calculation. Here one is dealing not with engineering but
with architecture, such as is the case with the Parthenon where the
last definite form has also been created —there in marble and here in
wood and straw. Just as the Parthenon receives its form, as to pro-
portions and profiles, from the clear and transparent air of Greece, so
the Ise Shrine receives its form from the thickly humid and rainy air
of Japan.
Under these very divergent fundamental conditions, in both
cases, the human spirit has created the purest architectonic form. Every-
thing in Ise is artistic, nothing is artificial. There are no peculiarities:
the natural wood is fauldess and marvellously polished, and the straw
roof is equally perfect in its gorgeous curve, without upcurve of the
ridge or of the eaves. Equally flawless is the joining of the wood with
the stone of the foundations, and there is no ornament which is not
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


integral to the architectonic character. The golden globules on the
cross-beams under the ridge join the harmony of straw and hinoki
wood, and the white papers and green branches of the Shinto sect are
unsurpassably in accord with the whole.
Japanese often pretend that the atmosphere of age exerts a partic-
ular fascination on them, and they include a whole artistic concep-
tion under the term wabi (to become, or appear, antique); but at the
Ise Shrine, nothing is wabi . It is always new, and it is precisely this
which seems to me to be a specifically Japanese thing. The oppressive
musty smell of age is banished, and with it, all non-architectural acces-
sories, all ornaments contradicting pure architecture. They are only
ballast anyway, and were omitted because their perpetual repetition
every twenty-one years was seen to be nonsensical.
The contemporary form of the Ise Shrine originated simultane-
ously with the Buddhist architecture of Nara, where the Japanese spir-
it of clear, simple conceptions asserted itself successfully in the first
temples, as for instance at Jurin-in and Shin-yakushiji. One need not
waste words on the many fine works of Horyu-ji and Nara; nor on
the way in which—in Horyu-ji for example—the Chinese conformity
has been relaxed into asymmetry by counterbalance. Shotokutaishi
raised carpentry to the level of a respectable profession, of which he
remains the patron saint even to-day. And although the Japanese car-
penter proved himself a master, even in the complicated Buddhist
temples, the new structures that he now had to create broke his con-
ceptions of construction. The Buddhist temple roof is not construc-
tion, but decoration—and is there not architecture either. The carpen-
ter had to subdue his natural, logical feelings under the sectarian
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


prescriptions of a foreign doctrine which at first was enforced, but
later was revered for its deep wisdom. The probable reason for the
abandonment of the constructive rationale—a quality which also orig-
inally existed in Japan— must be sought for in this.
Also many Japanese say that it is against the Japanese spirit to
build for any long duration of time, and seek thereby to justify the
easy destructibility of the Japanese house. In spite of this, however,
some Buddhist temples are of an exceedingly great age—H6ryu-ji,
Byodo-in at Uji, and others have endured for a millennium. And as
for secular structures, there is at least one very striking piece of con-
tradictory evidence. In the thirteenth century the survivors of the
Heike, who had been rooted out by the Genji, fled to the lonely
mountains of Shirakawa in Gifu Prefecture, The frames of several old
farm houses built by them have been preserved, and others have been
built in the meantime. These buildings present something unique in
Japan in so far as their construction is rational and logical throughout.
I inspected the largest house up to the topmost point of its roof and
found that everything shows the same logic of carpentry as the Euro-
pean. One could just as well call this construction Gothic. The roof
is made with clear triangular joints like the roofs of the Middle Ages
in the West, and is also reinforced lengthwise by means of great diag-
onals against wind pressure or earthquakes, and on the ground floor
the thrust of the roof is quite logically directed to the outer posts.
Here the carpenter did not need to apply the temporary diagonal sup-
ports which are always necessary to-day in the average Japanese house
in order that it may not collapse or be disarranged before the walls
and doors are put in place.
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


I have found no explanation of the riddle of Shirafcawa, which
indeed is explicable only in that the Heike were the last beaters of a
highly developed Japanese culture—a culture both rational and aesthet-
ic, of which the Konjikido in Hiraizumi is the only jewel still pre-
served. This building, with its precious incrustations related to the By-
zantine, also exemplifies the trait which may be called international
because of its artistic freedom and greatness. But such is the course
of the world; culture succumbs to barbaric violence; and so with the
Heike Japan lost the sound and reasonable basis for its aesthetics.
Allow me in this lecture to pass over the many variations and
fine differences produced within the architecture influenced by China
and Buddhism during the Ashikaga, Kamakura, and other periods
through the seventeenth century and down even to the early Toku-
gawa period. The influences of Zen became an important regulator
with which to subdue the ostentatious architectural conceptions of
the war-lords. This was because the temple precinct of Zen was above
all social classes, receiving all those who retired from secular life;
simple samurai as well as daimyo, shogun and even Emperors, There-
fore the most brutal dictatorship could not entirely discard the cos-
tume of a culture which was philosophic and artistic to a certain de-
gree. But the fact that it was only a costume was already revealed by
the Momoyama Palace of Hideyoshi whose architecture, ordered by
the dictator, is very weak.
The excesses of such bad art, executed at the order of the dicta-
tor, are shown in the Nikko structures. They have nothing of that
which at Ise is purely architectonic; of that which has clarity of line,
faithfulness to the material and beauty of proportion, and which al-
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


together mean architecture; on the contrary there is an overabun-
dance of ornamentation and ostentation which replace the missing
architecture.
Japanese genius expressed itself in another great accomplishment
between 1589 and 1643 —at the same time that the Nikko structures
originated—in the erection of the Katsura Palace near Kyoto. Its par-
ticular accomplishment is reflected in some other similar edifices, but
one is nevertheless justified in seeing in it, as well as in the Ise Shrine
Gegu, the standard Japanese architecture for the world. In the Katsura
Palace once again, a thousand years after Nara, all the simplicity and
delicacy of Japan, together with the differentiation of crafts and the
philosophic refinement of thought which had occurred in the mean-
time, is epitomized.
This palace, with an infinite number of interrelations among its
component parts, would —like any other great work of art —require
several lectures for adequate treatment. Its creation is attributed to
Kobori Masakazu, the daimyo of Enshu, about whom very little real
data is obtainable. Last year on the fifth of May, the anniversary of
his death, I took flowers to his grave. His descendant, Kobori, who is
the priest of Koho-an, served us powdered tea in Enshu’s living room
and told us that Enshu died in 1645 at the age of sixty-nine.
Whatever the facts may be, the Katsura Palace is conceivable in
Japanese history only as the superior creation of an ingenious artist.
However great the number of superb things one may find in Shugaku-
in and in others, only at Katsura does there exist that overwhelming
freedom of intellect which does not subordinate any element of the
structure or the garden to some rigid system. At Nikko, as in many
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


architectural attractions of the world, the effect is gained by quantity
—about in the same way that an army of two hundred thousand is
larger than one of twenty thousand. At Katsura on the contrary, each
element remains a free individual, much like a member of a good
society in which harmony arises from absence of coercion so that ev-
eryone may express himself according to his individual nature. Thus
the Katsura Palace is a completely isolated miracle in the civilized
world. One must speak of its “eternal beauty,” which admonishes us
to create in the same spirit much more than is the case with the Par-
thenon, with the Gothic Cathedral or with the Ise Shrine. That which
is peculiar to Japan, the local, is insignificant; but the principle is
absolutely modem and of complete validity for any contemporary
architecture.
Kobori Enshu was director of police under the Shogun in the
district of Fushimi, and was said to have given aid to political refugees
from the Tokugawas. It is particularly easy nowadays to understand
why his portrait shows traits of great bitterness. Although Katsura
was constructed for the Imperial family it must have been built by
order of the Shogun, because of the then existing distribution of
power. At the same time the Shogun had commanded countless ar-
tists to Nikko for the work of ornamentation —but Enshu did not
make use of any such embellishment.
In these two contrasting forms Japan holds a unique mirror to
the world: here, the free art of free geniuses; there, a dictated accumu-
lation which can never become architecture. Japan’s architectural arts
could not rise higher than Katsura, nor sink lower than Nikko; for
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


Nikko was undigested importation, but Katsura was an intellectual as-
similation of existing influences. Contemporary Japan therefore has a
clear choice between these two poles which have been created in its
own history. And it is not difficult to recognize in present-day struc-
tures where the trends follow Katsura, or where they follow Nikko.
Where architecture is replaced by decoration, mainly Buddhist in
character, and where the architect has to design a dictated style like a
servant —there is Nikko. But where the materials remain architectur-
al; where the architect has freedom to grapple with new problems
and is allowed to develop and to gain recognition; and where the
prospect still exists of becoming a modem daimyo in intellectual pur-
suits and in decisive influence on the problems facing the country,
especially on town-planning quite inadequate in Japan—there Katsura
is a remote goal toward which the direction has nevertheless been
found.
None among you will doubt which I prefer, and which I hope
for Japan; and none can ask which will enable a modem Japanese
culture to be bom.
FUNDAMENTALS OF JAPANESE ARCHITECTURE


The paper used for the cover of this book is commonly
called Fusuma-gami or Fusuma-paper which is chiefly meant for
covering Fusuma and walls. The particular paper used of this
cover is Torino!® With a painted pettern by Urushi or Japanese
lacquer. The Torino!® paper is a peculiar product of Echizen (Fukui
Prefecture) in Northern Japan.
The paper of the text is Shigarami-gami , so named after the
place of its production, Shigarami-mura in Shinshu (Nagano Prefec-
ture) in Central Japan. It is made exclusively of K 620 or paper
mulberry which is bleached on the snow in winter and manufactured
solely by the hand of man. The Shigarami-gami is famous for having
been in exclusive use by the Sanadas, the successive feudal lords of
the district during the Tokugawa period, whose family documents
were all of this paper. It is being manufactured to-day in the same
way as in olden days, but its output is very limited since it is a
winter by-product of the farmers when there is no field-work. The
paper is noted for toughness and great durability.


ILLUSTRATIONS




1. The positive line, which begins in the Isé Shrines, was not diverted in consequence of Bud-
dhist influences; but the principle of rational construction as represented in Shirakawa was later
destroyed. Buddhism particularly Zen —contributed in the Tea Ceremony a spiritual aesthetics
which for the second time (that is, after Isé) brought Japanese architecture to a zenith in the Palace
and garden of Katsura.
The negative line, in which the degeneration of construction into decoration was intensified
by the rulers’ orders for ornamentation, comes from the Buddhist temple.


2 and 3. The Isé Shrines, with the unimportant exception of the balustrade and staircase
posts, are the most original creations of Japanese architecture. There is perfect clarity in
proportion and in treatment of material. (How impossible it is to reproduce the beauty of
any truly great work of architecture in an illustration!) These structures have their origin
in the Japanese climate, which has much of both sunshine and dampness so that while the
air is not transparent, the sky is brilliant. From this come not only the deep green of the
surroundings, but also the particular feeling of the Japanese for nature.


4. The small Momoyama Palace, Hiunkaku, built for Hideyoshi in the sixteenth century,
which exhibits an unassimilated mixture of Japanese and Chinese elements and the loss
of the feeling for proportion.
5 and 6. The “famous” gate to the grounds of the Temple of the Dead at Nikko, built
in the seventeenth century at the beginning of the Tokugawa Shogunate. Superficial
ornamentation has here completely replaced architecture. (According to G.B.Sansom,
the dictator appropriated nearly three-tenths of the proceeds of the rice crop of the entire
country: that is, eight million out of twenty-eight million koku.)


7 and 8. The few farm-houses preserved at Shirakawa in Gifu Prefecture, which
may be as much as twelve hundred years old, embody a sense of rational construc-
tion which accords completely with that of the European Gothic.


9 and 10. Town plan of Kyoto
and Nara, perhaps from the sev-
enth to ninth centuries A. D.
This is the only instance in
which Japan directly adopted
the Chinese system of plann-
ing towns in exactly rectangular
streets and quadrangular blocks;
but as the placing of the houses
in the blocks shows, only the out-
ward form, and not the method,
was taken. As a consequence
of building houses around the
blocks in these two cities, orien-
tation toward the sun—and
with it the intrinsic character
of the Japanese house —was
lost. Lack of sun in living quar-
ters was later palliated by refe-
rence to the romantic darkness
of rooms for Tea Ceremony.


11. Temple grounds of Hôryuji, constructed in the seventh century. They exhibit a beautiful
assimilation of Chinese influences on Japan as well as a transcendence of absolute
symmetry. However, the carpenter’s sense of functional construction was disorganized by
the decorative elements.
12. In the Izumo Shrine, Shinto also lost its architectural harmony. That which was clear
and convincing in Ise became decorative play only, in this instance.


13 and 14. Decorative tendencies such as these
have died out in modern times, when feeling of
material has been lost even to the extent of imita-
tion of the grain of wood in concrete.
15. Entrance gate to the park of Shugakuin in Kyoto,
built in the seventeenth century. The second classic
period of Japanese architecture produced forms
which are in direct accord with contemporary life.
The automobile in this picture is not at all incon-
gruous in the setting.


16. A country house near Kyoto in which
an attempt has been made to arrive at some-
thing suitable to the climate and environ-
ment in modern forms and materials.
17. A small, modern, one-room house in
“Trockenbau". This is an example of a
Japanese conception according to modern
principles, without degeneration into fash-
ion or decoration.




19. Entrance to Katsura Palace, near Kyoto, built in the seventeenth century.
20. Approach to Katsura Palace. In world architecture this Palace is one of the soundest exam-
ples of complete and perfect realization of function; indeed, in the functions of beauty and
spirituality as well as in that of utility. The extent to which every detail has been brought into
perfect proportion with every other is worthy of great admiration. This has been so well done
that although even the smallest details have their own individuality, no one of them predom-
inates to the detriment of their unity as a whole.


21. Wing of the Katsura Palace. Of the greatest simplicity in architectural line, the building
connects with a garden, which though only partly covered with lawn and moss, is so charm-
ing an enclosure that it could not be closely imitated. It is simpler, however, than that of any
private Japanese citizen; and although it has no aspects of the garden used as an adjunct to
every-day living, it is otherwise typical of the art of the Japanese garden.
22 and 23. Sketch of the wing of Katsura Palace. Please compare the structure and proportions
with those of Hiunkaku. (Illustration No. 4)


24. From the reception rooms of Ka-
tsura Palace, where, in contrast to all
else, the most complete order prevails
in consistently typical Japanese decora-
tion, contour, and so forth. The pattern
in the paper on the walls and doors
does not reproduce properly in this
illustration, for it is actually quite re-
strained only a soft, dull gold in a
white ground.
25. Niche in a tea-room, showing a
hanging kettle over a sunken fireplace.
Notice that the art of treating the post,
according to the strict classical style, lay
in removing the branches in such a way
that it did not appear to have been done
artificially. The plaster reveals a thatch-
ed sub-surface, which was the usual Jap-
anese method of rein for cement. As
the tea ceremony rooms are pure lyri-
cism, they are not, therefore, truly archi-
tecture. With their creation came their
original downfall the imitation of
which was not at all desirable. It was
said by an old master of the tea cere-
mony: “Through imitation was beauty
lost.”


K. B. S. Publications
Series-B. No. 23
KOKUSAI BUNKA SHINKOKAI
(The Society for International Cultural Relations)
Headquarters
Meiji-Scimei-kan, Marunouchi
TOKYO, JAPAN
Telephones Cable Address
Marunouchi (23; 2038, 0957 INTCULTRE-TOKYO
