

FUNERAL ODE
IN MEMORY OF THE DECEASED EXPLORERS OF AUSTRALIA,
BURKE AND WILLS.
THEATRE
ROYAL.
Words by ------- J. SMITH, Esq.
Music composed by - - - - - - -A. REIFF, Jun.
WILL BE SUNG ON WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 21, 1863.
Chorale.
Back from its lonely grave we bring the sacred dust,
A nation’s sorrow and a nation’s trust;
With kindred dead in consecrated earth to rest,
Where no irreverent hand its slumber shall molest.
Denied in life the glory of the civic crown,
Upon the heroes’ tomb we lay it sadly down;
O’er the poor relics bending a dejected head,
And honouring, too late, the mute, unconscious dead.
Solo, Soprano.
Aglow with youth and hope they went
Where all before was dark and drear ;
While o’er the unknown waste there lay
The shadow of an awful fear.
Dim perils wore gigantic forms,
And solitude seemed more profound,
Where living creature’s foot had left
No trace upon the burning ground.
But, unappalled, the heroes held
New course across each trackless plain,
And round them glared the blinding sun,
And o’er them beat the tropic rain.
Solo, Tenor.
Morn after morn three fleecy clouds,
Mute messengers, would beckon forth
And marshal the four travellers
Their way towards the glowing north.
And ever, as the day advanced,
Would melt into the stainless blue ;
And ever, as the morning dawned,
Their pallid beacons would renew,
Till on the Great Dividing Range
In breathless joy th’ explorers stood,
And saw the trickling source of rills
That flowed into northern flood.
Solo, Contralto.
Then through the grassy plains they swept,
That spread from mountain unto sea,
Knee deep in flowers, where 44 Woodnotes wild ”
Blend with the murmur of the bee.
There came a day desired by all,
Life’s brightest hour, perchance, for each,
When Burke and Wills—their goal achieved,
The Flinders tidal waters reach ;
Oh! noble exploit, well fulfilled !
Oh ! splendid honour, bravely won !
Turn, southward turn your wayworn feet,
Heroes, your glorious work is done.
Solo, Bass.
Not so ! the " greatest is behind,”
An act of fortitude sublime,
Whose memory each tender heart
Will cherish to the end of time ;
For manly eyes will brim with tears,
And woman’s voice shall falter, when
The story in its pathos tells
How fell these lion-hearted men—
Calm, cheerful, steadfast, kindly, true.
Surrendering their latest breath
With gentle words upon their lips,
And smiling in the face of death.
Quartette (Unaccompanied).
Oh, never shall the good old land
That breeds a race of sons like these
Want men to plant her spotless flag
On unknown coasts of unknown seas.
Oh, never dies the spirit staunch,
The intrepidity that fills
The gallant hearts of heroes like
Imperishable Burke and Wills.
