

FUNERAL OF THE LATE MR. MICHAEL FITZPATRICK,
Ml. A.
From “ Sydney Morning Herald ” of Tuesday, Dec. 13tlx, 1881.
The mortal remains of the late Mr. Michael Fitzpatrick, M.L.A., were
consigned to their last resting-place, in the Roman Catholic Cemetery,
Petersham, yesterday afternoon. The funeral procession left the late
residence of the deceased at Croydon, at 3 o’clock, and reached the cemetery
at Petersham by 4, and at the cemetery the mourners were increased by a
number of members of Parliament and other friends or acquaintances of
the deceased, who left Sydney by the 3-30 p.m. train in order to be present
at the grave. Several of the deceased’s old colleagues were there, and
many others who, though not fellow-workers in the sphere in which Mr.
Fitzpatrick moved when in life, nevertheless mourned over his death as for
the loss of a good friend. Mr. Farnell. M.L.A., and the Hon. John Marks,
M.L.C., were among the mourners—colleagues of the deceased in the
Government of which he was one of the chief members; and there were
the Hon. Sir John Hay, who a quarter of a century ago conferred upon the
deceased the important appointment in the Department of Lands and
Works, which he held until he finally retired from the Civil Service; Mr.
William Forster, M.L.A., his brother-chief of the Opposition Benches in
the Assembly; Sir Patrick Jennings, M.L.A., a fellow-worker in matters
relating to the communion to which they both belonged; Messrs. R. P.
Abbott, Fremlin, Martin, Beyers, Kidd, Dillon, Lynch, and Lloyd, associates
in Parliament; and Messrs. E. Du Faur, W. Forde, H. Halloran, F. S.
McDermott, E. O. Moriarty, J. G. O’Connor, T. Butler, A. Bennett, W. C.
Browne, Captain Charles, and others who had enjoyed the pleasure of
deceased’s friendship or his acquaintance. Many other members of Parlia-
ment would have been there if the hour appointed for the interment had
been more convenient, and one which would have made it possible for them
to be present at the meeting of the Legislative Assembly before proceeding
to the funeral. It was almost as necessary for members who had been
closely associated with the deceased to attend in their places in Parliament,
and to testify by their voice or vote, their sense of the loss which the House
and the country had sustained, as to be present at the mournful ceremony
at the grave; and therefore, through a want of proper arrangement as to
the hour when the funeral should take place, many of the deceased’s politi-
cal friends were absent from the cemetery. To all of these this circumstance
was a matter of great regret, and doubtless this feeling will be intensified
when they know that their presence at the funeral would have caused
the gathering round the grave to be a stronger protest than it was
against a course of conduct which made the funeral one of the saddest
description, and aroused feelings of sorrow and indignation in the breasts
■of every one present—-Roman Catholics as well as Protestants. In life,
Mr. Fitzpatrick was well known to be a firm supporter of the Public
School system, and more than once he publicly stated that he followed the
dictates of his conscience in this matter to the injury of his position in this
world, and, he had been told, at his peril in the next. That his bold and
unflinching advocacy of what was distasteful to the authorities of the Roman
Catholic Church did affect his position here was certain ; but he placed no


faith in what he had heard of the injury that might accrue to him after his
death, and he continued in the course he had always followed —remaining a
member of the Roman Catholic Church, and assisting it by his voice and
his purse, but, in dealing with questions affecting the public, adopting a
liberal policy which had for its object the public good. For many years he
was a member of the choir in St. Patrick’s Church, attending Sunday after
Sunday, and so zealous was he in this self-appointed labour in the interests
of the church, that his attendance was as regular as ever before, even when
he was occupying the high office of Colonial Secretary. For his reward his
remains were yesterday denied the rites of Christian burial. No priest was
present to read the burial service at the grave, nor at the funeral ; and with
only a short prayer from some of those who, in the lifetime of the deceased,,
were nearest and dearest to him, and who knelt at the head of his grave
with streaming eyes, and the sign of the cross and the benediction from a
clerical friend—who attended in his everyday dress, and -acted on his own
authority, —the body was lowered into the earth, and covered out of sight.
The coffin, which in appearance was severely plain, bore upon the lid many
floral emblems of affection, and as it was carried to the grave, Mr. Farnell,
Mr. W. Forster, Sir Patrick Jennings, and Mr. F. S. M’Dermott acted as
pall-bearers, the mourners generally following behind. Up to the time
when the coffin was placed over the grave, the absence of a priest was not
apparent ; but then there was a pause as if those conducting the arrange-
ments were waiting for the priest to put in an appearance. The delay was
of no avail ; and, in a manner which showed that all hope of anyone coming
to read prayers for the dead was abandoned, Sir Patrick Jennings directed
that the coffin should be lowered into the grave. The deceased’s sons and
some other relatives knelt at the head of the grave overwhelmed with grief ;
one of them in broken accents commenced the Lord’s Prayer, which was
joined in by the others ; and, while the mourners around stood wondering,
and all of them keenly sensible of the sadness of such a burial, the Rev. Dr.
Forrest stepped forward and performed the little ceremony mentioned above
—a sign and a few words —which occupied no longer than a few seconds,
and then the sexton shovelled in the earth. It is needless to say that when
the funeral was over everybody was talking of what they had witnessed, and
indignantly protesting against it. There was an attempt on the part of one
or two persons to conceal the real circumstances of the case ; but on inquiry
we were informed that Dr. Colletti had promised to attend the funeral, and
was willing to do so, but that he was prevented from attending by the
authorities of the Roman Catholic Church in Sydney, and that neither he
nor any other priest was permitted to read prayers at the grave or anywhere
else over the body, because, according to the law of the church, this cere-
mony is denied to all who have not complied strictly with those laws, and
in that category Mr. Fitzpatrick was considered to be. When one of the
relatives of the deceased visited St. Mary’s to request that a priest might be
permitted to attend and read prayers at the grave, one of the priests whom
he saw, and to whom he preferred his request, is said to have remarked, in
allusion to the deceased, “ I’m afraid the unfortunate man has lost his
soul.”
From the Parliamentary “ Hansard ” of Tuesday, December
13th, 1881.
Mr. Buchanan : I wish to take the earliest opportunity to bring under the
notice of the House the scandalous treatment by the Romish Church of
the remains of the late Mr. Fitzpatrick. The whole community has been
shocked at the contemplation of the disgraceful outrage perpetrated on so


solemn an occasion. Both Roman Catholics and Protestants feel that a
most unseemly proceeding was enacted —one which tends to outrage every
Christian feeling, and to bring down on the heads of those who were the
authors of it the strongest condemnation. Every one knows the circum-
stances of the case. The late Mr. Fitzpatrick was a member of the Roman
Catholic Church, yet, contrary to the expectations of his friends, no priest
appeared at the grave to perform the ceremonies of the church. Every sort
of studied contumely was thrown on the remains of our late friend.
Sir Patrick Jennings; Certainly not.
Mr. Buchanan : The honorable member may say “ Certainly not,’'
but those who devised the business meant studied contumely by their absence;
degradation and insult were intended for the heart-broken relatives and the
deceased, whose remains were hurried into the grave without ceremony of
any kind being performed. This seems most extraordinary, because the
late Mr. Fitzpatrick was a member of the church, he constantly attended
the service of the church, and even assisted in its worship by taking part in
the choir, he was a subscriber to the church, and in every way identified
himself with it; furthermore, while he held the office of Colonial Secretary,
the Archbishop of the church sent him a letter asking him to attend a
meeting inaugurated for the purpose of raising subscriptions for the building
of the Cathedral, and to move a resolution —which meant a subscription.
Not only did Mr. Fitzpatrick attend the meeting and move a resolution, but
he also subscribed If there was anything faulty or wrong with his
conduct as a Roman Catholic, why did they take his money P Why did they
take his money, and then, when he was lying a lifeless corpse before them,
desert him in that cowardly and despicable manner, outraging every Chris-
tian feeling and principle, and eliciting an outburst of indignation, scorn,
and contempt from the whole community —from all sects combined. My
justification for bringing the matter before the House is that many of the
priests are public officers, inasmuch as they draw money from the public
Treasury. I will ask the Government to make an investigation into the
matter, to see if those who were guilty of such a gross, outrageous dereliction
of duty can be any longer tolerated as public servants. This will be a
justification for the House to consider the matter, and may also be a ground
for the House and the Government to reflect on the propriety of once and
for ever abolishing the system of State aid to religion, and so put an end to
that which at best is a very scandalous state of things. I ask upon what
principle of Christianity or feeling of religion was it that the remains of an
honorable and upright man were deprived of the ordinary burial ceremony
—whatever vitality, comfort, or solace there may be in it —and a studied
insult and degradation inflicted on the name of Michael Fitzpatrick and his
family. This is not the first time that the same thing has happened here.
There was the case of a very honorable and a very able man, the late
Daniel Egan, who was most grossly and scandalously treated by this church ;
his remains were disinterred in the dead of night, and to this hour we do
not know where they lie. Another instance of the same outrageous intoler-
ance, gross bigotry, and fanaticism happened at Bathurst, in the case of the
late Mr. Kenna, but we have the consolation of knowing that this gentle-
man resisted this priestly tyranny with his last gasp. During his whole life
he would not succumb to it; he would not, at the dictation of bishop or
priest, remove his children from the Sydney Grammar School, where they
were getting a most adequate education. He told both bishop and priest
that he would not do it, and he died in that virtuous resolution, and left the
priests and bishops to go which way they pleased—he went his. Now we
have the case of the late Mr. Fitzpatrick, a prominent gentleman, a good
father, a good husband, and stern and devoted friend, a man of high honor,
in every way worthy of the name of a man. He belonged to the church,
was in communion with it, and for some cause or other, which we cannot


possibly get at —because, although he made an able speech in favor of the
Public Instruction Act, he voted against it,—this outrage has been perpe»
trated on his remains. His temporising did not avail him; priestly tyranny
pursued him not only through life, but after death —or rather the hour of
burial was selected for the infliction of a cruel degradation and insult on his
remains and on his fatnily. Ido not think that any language can properly
describe our feelings in reference to the matter. The same spirit which
attempted to inflict this degradation on the dead body of Michael Fitzpatrick
would have burned the living body of Michael Fitzpatrick at the stake ; it
is the same spirit of intolerance and brutal tyranny which has characterised
the proceedings of these priests in all ages. But a significant change has
come over the spirit of the times. Let the Pope, any of his cardinals, or
any of his priests, take the most obscure and humble being who crawls on
the face of the earth, and attempt to burn him at the stake for any opinion
which he may hold, and I venture to affirm that the indignation of the whole
world will wither them to ashes. The days of these abominations have gone
by for ever, however much the priests would like to reproduce them in our
time, and we have a faint attempt at this in the insult offered to the remains
of Mr. Fitzpatrick. Turning from this gross and scandalous outrage —from
the degrading tyranny and oppression which characterises this creed of
dogma and devilry—to the pure and simple majesty of Christ’s religion,
what a different spirit we find ! Do we find the great founder of Christianity
refusing to pour forth a prayer on behalf of the greatest sinner who ever
lived ? Do we not rather find him ready to pour out, and actually pouring
out, his life’s blood for the salvation of the greatest of sinners ? Do we not
find this exemplified in every page of his history ? Do we not find a mar-
vellous contrast when we compare his large-hearted generosity and liberalism
with the cramped, narrow, and obnoxious tyranny of the Roman Catholic
Church ? How little in common is there between the creed of that church
and the sacred charities of Christ’s religion ; how little likeness to these is
there in the oppression, the arrogance, and the insolent tyranny of the
authorities of a church who will, in the sight of weeping, broken-hearted
relatives, appear at the grave of one of their adherents, and there, with
studied insult and degradation, outrage every human feeling. What is there
in this to compare with the pure and beautiful charity of the religion of
Christ ? Jesus Christ said to the priests of his day “ I will have mercy and
not sacrifice. Go ye and learn what that meaneth.” What is the creed of
this church which has insulted, annoyed, and attempted to degrade a respect-
able family in this city ? Is it not disclosed in every page of history, and
is it not the reverse of that of Christ ? The creed of this church is “ I
will sacrifice and have no mercyand God knows that every page of history
tells us how cruel and how bloody have been these sacrifices. The infamy
of the act to which I have been referring is unspeakable and unparalleled
when we come to reflect upon it. Will any one tell me that if Michael
Fitzpatrick had left the church he would not have had half-a-dozen
priests, and buckets of holy water at his grave, if he wanted it; and would
not all sorts of mummery and necromancy have been performed on the
occasion ? He might have kept a seraglio; he might have lived in every
immorality ; he might have indulged in every grossness and abomination ;
and if he had left the church they would have been silent, and he
would have had all the honors and all the respect which priests could give
him on such a solemn occasion. But, unfortunately, he happened to be
poor; the church, however, were willing to even strip him in his poverty —
to take all he had, or all that he could give. Yet while they took his £3O
they, with their characteristic cruel intolerance, benighted bigotry and
oppression, cast aside all sympathy and all human feelings for the bereaved
friends, and inflicted a cruel and abominable insult on him and them. It
becomes every man to express his strong feelings on the subject, because


the community is excited to indignation which almost borders upon violence ;
it is felt that an insult has been offered to this enlightened community which
believes in the exercise of free and independent judgment, and that there is
growing up in our midst that which calls to our mind the dark ages when
all manner of superstitions were nurtured, and when, under the guise of
these, all sorts of crimes were perpetrated. When we find a system not
akin to, but the same as, that of those dark ages, growing up in our midst,
it becomes every freeman to denounce it in every conceivable manner, and
to lose no opportunity to tell these archbishops and bishops that they dare
not, and shall not, revive the tortures and execrable misconduct of old ; that
such things will not be tolerated in this free country, and that this attempt
to work on the fears of the living by the infliction of studied and dastardly
insult upon the dead —a cowardly, mean device which is constituted by the
chicanery of priestcraft in its darkest and worst aspects—will not pass
unnoticed here; and that every man who has a mind to think, and a heart
to feel, revolts at the abominations of yesterday, and feels that if there is
any degradation in them it will be rolled back on those priests and on that
church which trades upon the fears and the ignorance and the fanaticism of
the people for their own aggrandisement and their own infamous prosperity.
Sir Patrick Jennings ; It is extremely painful and unpleasant to
me to address the House on this occasion, because I feel, perhaps as much
as any one, the loss of Mr. Fitzpatrick, who was a dear friend of mine. I
regret very much that any person should have taken the course which the
honorable and learned member for Mudgee has taken to-night in thrusting
forward any differences which might have existed between the late Mr.
Fitzpatrick and the authorities of the church to which he was said to belong,
because I contend that the relations between individuals and the church to
which they belong are private, and form no subject for public discussion.
I enter my protest against what I conceive to be the indiscretion which
would introduce into this arena any subject of that sort. I respected the
late Mr. Fitzpatrick as much as any person, and I appreciated his good quali-
ties. I did not know him in his earlier days; but I entered the House with
him at the same election, and I sat by his side supporting the Government
of the day. I, therefore, knew what were his abilities, and what large capa-
bilities he had for legislative work. I would have gladly refrained from saying
one word on this question, because I feel rather oppressed with regard to
the circumstances of Mr. Fitzpatrick’s death. But I will not refrain from
expressing a strong protest against the action of the honorable member for
Mudgee. That gentleman has taken advantage of this occasion to make
one of his famous “no popery ” speeches. I am not here to defend the
Catholic Church against one who has systematically reviled its faith, and
those who belong to it, ever since he has been in this House. I have heard
him stigmatise, unchecked, the head of the Catholic Church as a miserable
plasphemer. The honorable member being seized with that idea, I contend
that no impartial man will consider his judgment or verdict with regard to
the practices or tenets of the Catholic Church as coming from a person who
is entitled to any credence whatever. As to the church which the honorable
member abuses, it includes within its fold the great majority of Christians ;
it has, from the time of its foundation, been the solace, the refuge, and the
support of millions of Christian souls ; it has done more good to the world
and humanity than any other institution.
Honorable Members: No.
Sir Patrick Jennings : I have a right to express my opinion. I
admit that this is no place for religious controversy, and I should not have
said a word about religion ; but since the honorable member has dragged it
before the House, and has made a most deliberate attack upon the Catholic
Church, I will not refrain from announcing the fact that I have a firm, sin-
cere, and thorough belief in the religion in which I live and which I profess;


and I would not be ashamed anywhere to give my opinions which would up-
hold and justify my action as a believer in the faith. The honorable member
did wrong to drag this controversial subject before the House. What has
this House to do with the action of the authorities of the Catholic Church ?
They may be right or they may be wrong; but they are not under the con-
trol of anyone here so long as they conform to the law. The church has a
religious belief, and if you would belong to the church you must observe the
rules which are laid down for the guidance of its members. No man can
say “lam a Catholic ” unless he conform to those rules. He must do cer-
tain things. It is not a mere fantastical or fanciful faith. Be he the
meanest or the greatest—a king or an emperor—the greatest man will re-
ceive no more favor at the hands of the church than the meanest peasant.
I regretted very much what took place at yesterday’s funeral. I regretted
it exceedingly, because I have done my best to have it ordered otherwise. I
say I regret that it was not ordered otherwise. But lam here not knowing the
circumstances —and no man here knows those circumstances —under which
the funeral service was refused. That being so, it would be improper to
listen to an ex parte statement coming from an avowed opponent of the
Catholic Church. Whatever the circumstances may be, we have no right
to pronounce an opinion on a subject of which we know nothing. I believe
the performance of a certain ceremony would have been grateful to the
hearts of many Roman Catholics. If that had been so, certain false state-
ments would propably not have been made. I distinctly rupudiate the
allegation that the service was not allowed for political reasons. Those
reasons are questions of conscience, and conscience is the supreme arbiter
in all human lives. If a man’s conscience will not allow him to go with the
church, his clear duty is to leave it, and he ought not to continue in com-
munion with it. He cannot say “My conscience is against the church, but
I will not leave it!” Conscience being, as I have said, the supreme arbiter,
if a man finds that he cannot conscientiously belong to any Christian deno-
mination, he has a clear duty before him, and he ought not to shrink from
it. What my friend’s views were I know not. He was a man at any rate
who possessed all the Christian virtues. His generosity was unbounded;
his charitable construction of the views of others was a model of admiration;
he was outspoken and fearless in all his acts ; and I do not know of any
person for whom I had a stronger feeling of friendship. I regret exceed-
ingly that over the grave of this deceased gentleman, whom we all knew so
well, whom we all loved so much, and whom this House has done so much
honor, this unseemly debate should have been introduced by one who is an
avowed and systematic reviler of the Catholic faith.
Sir Henry Parkes : I should not have risen to take part in this
debate had it not been for the speech we have just heard. I do not now
rise as a member of the Government, but in a wider capacity —as a repre-
sentative of the people. I regret with the honorable member for The
Bogan that this question has been introduced. I regret still more that it
has been introduced in the manner in which it has ; and I go fully with the
honorable member in his view as to his right to profess his opinions in any
place and under any circumstances. But he has done a little more than
that. He has held out before us, and before this country, the Roman
Catholic Church as a body for our admiration. I think this is not a place
in which we should be invited to admire the proceedings of the Roman
Catholic Church, and it ill-becomes the honorable member, after the con-
tradictory opinions which he has expressed—-and to which I shall in a
moment advert, —to invite our admiration of any such questionable subject.
Sir Patrick Jennings : I merely stated my views.
Sir Henry Parkes : The honorable member paraded in a manner
which I have never heard before in this free Legislature, the excellencies of
the Roman Catholic Church. He talked of the victories which she had


won, of the souls innumerable which she had converted, and the blessing
which she had been to the world. The honorable member has a perfect
right to that opinion, but it ill-becomes him to parade that opinion before
us for our admiration ; and I decline to listen to it without expressing my
■dissent. The honorable member has placed himself, as a distinguished
member of the Roman Catholic Church, in a very strange position, and he
has placed his church in a very strange position. In dealing—and lam
sorry that we have any occasion so to deal —with the memory of one of its
most distinguished members, he tells us that that member possessed emi-
nently all the Christian virtues. If so, then this immaculate church must
judge very differently from the way in which the honorable member judges.
It judged of the deceased gentleman very differently from the judgment of
the honorable member. But my chief reason for rising was on account of
the startling doctrine propounded by the honorable member, and concurred
In to some extent by the honorable member for Gundagai, that we have
nothing to do with the manner in which the church treats its members. I
say that as a British community we have everthing to do with it, and if the
Roman Catholic Church in this community dares to follow one of its ablest
and most distinguished adherents to the grave, to stamp degradation upon
his lifeless body, we can easily conjecture what tactics she employs to enslave
and coerce and crush to the dust her obscure and feeble members. Have we,
as a community, having in charge the holy trust of our national freedom, no
need to be alarmed when there is a body which in carrying out its own views—
and we know that this church interferes in every political election, and in every
political movement —holds over its people this crushing power of denunciation
which does not stop on this side of the grave ? I deny altogether the doctrine
that the treatment of a Roman Catholic or a Protestant by his church is a
matter with which the community has nothing to do. The church —take the
Roman Catholic Church or the Church of England—is in all its essential parts
a public body. Its very worship is called public worship ;it lives by obtain-
ing money publicly, and to no inconsiderable extent, it still draws the
money of the State. We have everything to do with it, and I say that,
when we see this church following one after another of its prominent mem-
bers with this attempt to persecute them in the grave, it ought to awaken
in every breast alive to the maintenance of our own freedom, a strict and
constant caution as to the movements of this church. Ido not hesitate to
state my belief as to this church in its non-religious character. I believe its
ecclesiastical government is an organisation for crushing the human soul in
this world under the pretence of saving it in the next, and that, trading upon
the lowest passions and the weakest feelings, it seeks to perpetuate its own
dominancy, not for any religious end, but for the ends of a dark ambition
confined to ecclesiastics alone. And when we see this church in its gigantic
•strides in this colony, and see it time after time as we have, endeavouring
thus to terrify the living by its conduct to the dead, I say it is time for us
to awake and realise that in this dark ecclesiastical body there is a com-
bined attempt to invade, and, if possible, annihilate our own freedom.
Mr. Dillon : I thoroughly appreciate the delicacy of the subject now
before the House; but I think that in my position—and some honorable
members will understand what I mean by that —it would be cowardly on my
part if I were to refrain on an occasion like the present from expressing my
candid opinions on what I saw yesterday. I have never yet been afraid to
say what I thought on any public matter, and what has occurred if it were
intended to have any effect on me as one of the public, will utterly and
entirely fail of its object. In fact, if I had any misgivings as to what my
public conduct should be, the occurrence at the Petersham graveyard yes-
terday would only have the effect of confirming my determination. Excep-
tion has been taken to the tone given to the debate, but it was occasioned
by an honorable member who sits on the Opposition benches—l allude to


the honorable member for The Bogan (Sir Patrick Jennings). His speech
was the first to introduce anything in the shape of polemics.
Sir Patrick Jennings: Certainly not.
Mr. Dillon ; His speech was a very incautious one. I thought the
honorable gentleman was one of the last members of the House capable of
making such an incautious speech, and I feel sure that the principal cause
of it was that he was so overcome with shame at what has transpired that
his balance was utterly upset, and that he really did not know what else to-
say. Exception has also been taken to a matter of this kind being brought
before the House. I certainly think it is a subject in which the people of
the country have an interest and which we are perfectly justified in bringing
under public notice, and I do hope, so far as I am personally concerned,
that the very widest publication will be given to everything that is said and
done to-night, that people may know in what position we stand in New
South Wales. lam very sorry to have to deal with a subject of this kind
because, if there is one thing I regret more than another, it is ecclesiastical
controversy, or any discussion which touches polemics. I think it does not
matter what a man believes in ; so long as his opinions are conscientiously
held, the subject matter of his belief is of little importance. It is the con-
scientiousness of his opinions, and the manner in which he regulates his life
which are the great things upon which his destiny depends. It is not a
pleasant matter, therefore, to go into details as to whether prayers should
have been said at the grave, or whether a person ought to have gone there
with a stole around his neck. It is possible that the same fate may be re-
served for me if an opportunity should occur, but I shall be extremely careful
not to leave a chance of anything of the sort. I dare say I shall be able to
find some corner in this large country where I may repose after death with-
out having to beg a grave from the people who own the Petersham Ceme-
tery. I say it is a matter which does concern the public, for here was a
public man carried to his grave yesterday to whom the last respects usually
paid to the dead were tendered principally by members of the House. It
is this House only which has performed his obsequies ; and being, as he
was, a member of the House, I think that when an insult was publicly and
studiously offered to his remains in the presence of a large number of
honorable members we should not be doing our duty to the country if we
did not call attention to the matter. It is all nonsense for one or two
honorable members to tell us that no insult was offered ; the insult was
studiously offered. I do not suppose that the authorities of the church
think any more of a few prayers offered over the dead than I do, but they
know that the easiest way of hurting the feelings of the family of the
deceased is by refusing these public ceremonials at the grave, and they
adopt this means of striking terror into the hearts of those who are weak-
minded, as a large number of people are. lam quite sure that there are
hundreds and thousands of Roman Catholics in the country who re-echo-
every sentiment I am uttering here to-day.
Mr. Slattery : There is not one.
Mr. Dillon ; There are hundreds and thousands throughout the
country who feel in their hearts a deep sense of shame and humiliation at
what has taken place, and who would re-echo these sentiments if they only
dared to give expression to them. I know that very few dare.
Mr. Slattery : Why, you dare, and you are a fellow of St. John’s
College.
Mr. Dillon : It does not make the slightest difference whether lam
or am not a member of St. John’s College. Am I then to refrain from ex-
pressing my opinion of so dastardly an insult as that which has been offered
to a better man than myself--the late Michael Fitzpatrick? A high tribute
has been paid to his virtues, and it has been truly said that the church had
no objection to his personal character ; because he was more honest, more


true, and more straightforward than the great majority of ecclesiastics. He-
was as honest a man as ever lived ; he was almost too honest. Honorable
members will understand what I mean by the expression ; he was too out-
spoken to be a successful party leader. He was a man who lived a moral
life, but that availed him nothing at the hour of his death ; it did not pre-
vent insult and ignominy from being heaped upon his remains ; but he had
no fault, I was going to say, whatever. He had, however, the misfortune
to be poor, and I believe, notwithstanding what the honorable member for
The Bogan has said, that if the late Mr. Fitzpatrick had been a rich man,
he would have been treated in a very different manner.
Sir Patrick Jennings : You ought to be ashamed to say that.
Mr. Slattery : You know it is false.
Mr. Dillon : The honorable member’s statements have not the
slightest effect upon my mind, and he knows that what I say is true. The
honorable member for The Bogan knows in his own person that riches have
a very strong influence with ecclesiastical authorities. At any rate if
you cannot buy rites for the dead you can buy honors for the living from
ecclesiastical authorities. No one can deny that. We have a perfect
right to bring a matter of this kind before the House, and the public are
entitled to hear what has taken place. It has been said that no insult was
studiously offered; but it cannot be denied that up to Sunday it was
intended by a certain clergyman to perform the burial service. Instructions
came, however, from head-quarters, I presume, on the following day, to the
effect that the rites were not to be performed. I presume that they came
from the Archbishop ; and if they did, he only acted in accordance with the
course of conduct which he has pursued ever since he came to the colony.
We have had nothing but bigotry and intolerance ever since Archbishop
Vaughan landed in the colony. He has used his position for the purpose
of promoting dissension among the people, and everybody will confess,
except those interested in concealing the fact, that the religious animosities
existing throughout the country now are mainly due to the action of Arch-
bishop Vaughan. He is ruling his clergy with an iron hand ; and when you
find a man whose mind has been nourished on mediaeval learning it is not
astonishing that his ideas of the duties of life should be those of the middle
ages. When we find him ruling his clergy—a great number of whom are
half-educated boors —with the utmost severity, what else can you expect but
attempts like this to insult people, and to insult their remains after death P
It is not a pleasant subject ro deal with ; but when an insult has been offered
to a man like the late Mr. Fitzpatrick, one can hardly refrain from feeling
very strongly upon it. It is not as if the late honorable gentleman had
been cut off from the church, or had left it. He was a continual attendant;
he was a man who had sung in the choir for fifteen or twenty years. Not
more than three years ago he attended a meeting at St. Mary’s Cathedral,
at the invitation of the ecclesiastical authorities, to propose a resolution, and
he gave a subscription of £ 3O. That, no doubt, was the object for which
he was invited there. Circulars were sent round asking gentlemen to attend,
and Mr. Fitzpatrick went and proposed a resolution, was praised by the
Archbishop, and complimented on the receipt of his money. I suppose that
he led the same life then that he has done during the last three years, and
I presume that his life was as well known to the Archbishop. Mr. Fitz-
patrick happened then to be in a high position, so that his countenance to
the church might be valuable. He was in a position to give money at the
time, being in the receipt of a considerable salary from the State. Since
then, however, he went out of office, became poor, and, I believe, has died
poor. His remains were treated, as far as the authorities of the church
were concerned, with the utmost contumely they could inflict upon them.
I consider that conduct of this kind deserves the severest reprobation, and,
I believe we should be greatly wanting in our sense of propriety if we


allowed the occasion to pass by in silence —if we allowed it to pass without
recording our indignant protest against the unmerited obloquy which has
been heaped upon an honest citizen —an attempt being made in his person
to intimidate others who may be weak-minded enough to submit to the
dictates of these people.
Mr. Buchanan, in reply: I must congratulate the Colonial Secre-
tary upon having made one of the most felicitous, powerful, and eloquent
speeches ever delivered in the Assembly. The principal characteristic of
the speech was its truthfulness ; it was undeniable; it could not be disputed;
every line of it was true.
Mr. Slattery : That is a very high compliment.
Mr. Buchanan : The honorable member may say what he pleases, but
I will give him a century to reply to the speech, and I guarantee that he will
not be able to do so. If it be any comfort to the Colonial Secretary I will
tell him that I shall now think twice before I give a vote which will remove
him from his present position. The honorable member for Gundagai seems
to have misunderstood the nature of my remarks. No one says that all
honor, respect, and reverence were not shown by those who were present at
the burial, but this does not do away with my statement that a studied insult
and outrage was intended by the authorities of the Roman Catholic Church.
We have evidence that arrangements were made for a priest to officiate at
the grave —I, speaking for myself personally, should wish him a hundred
miles away, for all the good which he could do. Of course my belief is not
that which is entertained by Roman Catholics, and I say that in the counter-
manding of the order for the attendance of a priest, a studied insult was
offered to Mr. Fitzpatrick’s family and to his remains, and it was intended
to act upon the fears of the living. This was the theme of the Colonial
Secretary’s eloquent discourse, every line of which meant annihilation to the
whole procedure and policy of the Church of Rome. The honorable mem-
ber for The Bogan (Sir Patrick Jennings) has told us that this church has
done all manner of good, and has conferred great benefits on humanity.
Does the honorable member understand the history of the church ? Does
he know anything about the Spanish Inquisition ? Let him open the dun-
geons of the Inquisition at any period of its history, and let the groaning,
mangled victims writhing under the tortures of the thumbscrew and the rack
answer him. Does the honorable member see nothing but virtue and good-
ness in the horrors of St. Bartholomew’s night —a popish plot which had
been concocted for years, and which was carried out by a body of ruffians
who assaulted men, women, and children in their beds, and mangled them
beyond recognition ? Was this a display of the goodness of the Roman
Catholic Church ? Is not the whole history of that church one dark, long
night of mutilation, cruelty, bloodshed, and blasphemy ? Have we not read
of occasions when men of learning and enlightenment who threatened the
foundations of this hotbed of superstition and wretchedness were seized and
flayed alive, or placed under excruciating tortures until death relieved them?
Is not that everywhere recorded? Looking down, age after age, of the
whole world’s history, do we not find that this church has been steeped to
its very throat in blood? The church has never done anything but to burk
attempts to enlighten humanity; it has ground down the people under
violence and superstition ; it has always been a barrier in the way of human
advancement. Has it ever hesitated to imbrue its arms up to the elbows in
innocent blood ? This is the church which the honorable knight attempts
to eulogise in a manner which would lead one to imagine that some lunatic
who had escaped from Tarban Creek was addressing us, or that it was
thought that we were bereft of our senses.
Mr. Speaker; The honorable member is out of order in comparing
any honorable member with an escaped lunatic.


Mr, Buchanan : I was only speaking by way of illustration, but I
withdraw the remark. This chureh—l beg the pardon of the House for
calling i; a church —has been an engine in the hands of kings to enslave
humanity; in every age of the world’s history its career has beet) such as
to shock and to make all good men shudder, and at this moment where do
we find more deadly enemies of it than there are in Rome—the very hotbed
of it ? Where will you find more deadly enemies of it than there are in the
heart of France? Go to the Vatican, and I believe that in its dungeons you
will now find some poor miserable trembling victims of priestly tyranny.
Every child knows all about the history of this church, and to tell us that it
has been the guide and the elevator of humanity is the most monstrous talk
ever heard of. This church is a tyrannical, an oppressive, a cruel, and a
persecuting organisation which resorts to poison, to every crime—it will
even perpetrate murder—to teach its adherents to obey it. It does all this
for the purpose of subduing, corrupting, and degrading humanity. History
tells you this and proves it beyond doubt. I will put it to the honorable
member for The Bogan (Sir Patrick Jennings) in this way: suppose this
were a colony under a Catholic power; that we had a Catholic Government,
and that out of 108 members forming the Legislative Assembly only eight
of them were Protestants. What sort of toleration should we then have ?
Protestants now give Catholics the right of free speech, the right to do as
they like, and to worship God as they like. Would Catholics give Protes-
tants those rights if they were in power, as I have supposed? Would our
streets not be crowded with dark superstitious processions, and would not
emblems of fanaticism be flashed in the face of the sun, and would we not
be forced to go down on our knees before these abominations, and, if we
refused, be dragged away and plunged into dungeons and tortured? Would
they not coerce us and force their worship on us? Would they not close
every Protestant place of worship with violence? Would they not maltreat
us, shut our mouths, and grind us down in the dust as they have done in
other times whenever they have been in a majority? They would show
themselves in their true light if they had the power. But when they are in
the minority they put on the disguise of humility and pretend to be tolerant,
while in their hearts there is nothing but intolerance and gloomy fanaticism ?
This church is the most intolerant organisation in existence. It tolerates
nothing but its own dark superstition, which it spreads by blood and violence
wherever it obtains a footing. I say that the Colonial Secretary’s speech
was an honorable one ; it was one which was creditable to the House, it
was true in every particular, and it will be received with shouts of applause
all over the country if it be reported correctly, as I trust it will be. The
speech will gain the Colonial Secretary troops of friends all over the country,
I, perhaps, being the least of them. It is high time for us to buckle on our
armour when we see such atrocities as these perpetrated—when we see that
a distinguished, a high, and an honorable man is insulted and his family
■outraged, and every sort of degradation offered to them in the hour of their
deepest distress. It is a scandalous and a monstrous thing. I think the
House may also be congratulated on the speech which was made by the
honorable and learned member for Tenterfield, who has had the courage to
speak out while other honorable members remained silent.
Mr. Slattery : I had the courage to speak.
Mr. Buchanan : But the honorable and learned member for Tenter-
field had the courage to tell the ecclesiastics that they are a parcel of ruffians
in disguise. It requires very little trouble to find that out. But the honor-
able and learned member stood up here as a Catholic and plucked out the
heart of the church’s mystery. He has let the country understand that he
for one has the courage to say to these priests—to their faces —“ Thou
best; I will not be intimidated by you; you may go to the weak, the
wretched, the degraded, and the ignorant to exercise your baneful influence,


but do not come to me. I tell you that I despise you, I detest your dark
superstition, I despise your chicanery and designs, but, thank God, I can
live and die without you.’’ This is what the honorable and learned member
has said —all honor and credit to him. May every honest upright Catholic-
follow his example, and then this colossal engine of blood, of detestable
superstition and i ifamous tyranny may, by one supreme effort, be rolled in
the dust and every priest after it.
From “ The Echo ” of Tuesday, December 13th, 1881,
The treatment prescribed by the authorities of the Roman Catholic Church
for the poor remains of one of its most distinguished members in the
colony will excite more sympathy than surprise. Some have been grieved
by it; others have been shocked by it; in others, again, it has aroused hot
indignation. But there is little cause for astonishment. The case of Mr.
Kenna at Bathurst, has not yet been forgotten. The teaching of which such
action is the natural result, is familiar to us all. Only a few months have
passed since its principles were laid down in no uncertain terms by the
journal which is understood to be the organ of the church in Sydney; and
if , the official denial of ecclesiastical responsibility for these words, which
was elicited by contemporary comment, be still accepted, it will be interpre-
ted thus—“ for ‘ responsibility ’ read ‘ concurrence.’ ”
But if there be little ground for surprise, how far is indignation to be
justified ? There is room for it when the case is regarded as one of general
interest. Everybody has a certain cause for anger at the existence of a state
of things which subjects men who have served their country and their age
to indignity after their death, because they have dared to do what they
thought to be right. But have those who are thus liable, and are content to
remain during life under conditions which render them liable, a right to
bo angry when that in which they practically acquiesce beforehand comes to
pass ? Mr. Fitzpatrick’s liability to this indignity cast upon his remains
arose out of his connection with the Roman Catholic Church. He could
have removed that liability at any time by dissolving the connection. So
can others. He knew what had been done to others. Others now living,,
know what has been done to him. It is probable that in life he looked
forward to such treatment with comparative indifference. Others who cannot
do that know what, if they they act like him, they have reason to expect.
Instead of being angry, they should consider within themselves whether it
is well to remain under the conditions. There are three courses before
them ; To do what they believe to be right, and face the consequences ;to
shrink from what they believe to be right, so as to escape the consequences
and to enter upon new conditions under which they will be free to do what
they believe to be right without running the risk of any such consequences
as those incurred by Mr. Fitzpatrick.
But what are such consequences, after all ? Who that reflects will
admit that they ought to frighten or affect the conduct of any man ? Cer-
tain prayers and ceremonies have been omitted on the deposition of a coffin
within a grave. Who imagines that the man whose lifeless body fills that
coffin is the worse for the loss ? Does any one who is not an ecclesiastic
think the worse of him for it ? Public and private feeling are flowing in
strong currents the other way. It is not Mr. P itzpatrick, it is the authorities-
of his church, or the rules that bind them, that are thought the worse of.
The loss is theirs, not his. There have been times when the church was-
able to trade upon the fears of those who believed it had a power over them
even in the grave. Those whose fears were used as engines of coercion.
But when people have learned to see that a lighted candle in a hollow turnip
is a lighted candle in a hollow turnip, and nothing more, the exhibition of


such contrivances is more likely to involve risk to the exhibitor than to dis-
turb the minds of spectators. The authorities of the church prohibited the
reading of prayers at this grave ; but, whether consciously or unconsciously,
they preached a silent sermon ; and the tendency of that sermon will be to
stimulate inquiry and promote the exercise of private judgment rather than
to establish an unquestioning and unhesitating obedience. Mr. Fitzpatrick,
by his life, entered a firm protest against the dominance of ecclesiastical
rule over the conduct of public affairs. The circumstances attending his
death have given that protest new emphasis. The cause to which he was
bold enoflgh to commit himself in life has received fresh support at his
grave, for it has been proved to be the cause of liberty and conscience.
Much has been said during the education controversy about alleged
encroachments upon the rights of conscience. We are now shown in what
sense that term is used by the authorities of the Roman Catholic Church.
Mr. Fitzpatrick has been punished for doing what he believed to be right.
If he had not done what he believed to be light, he would have escaped.
Had he opposed State education, and thereby done what he thought wrong
and violated his conscience, no such penalty would have fallen upon his re-
mains. He has suffered—so far as there has been any suffering—for con-
science sake. But the church cannot at one and the same time be the pro-
tector of its members’ consciences and crush them to the ground. Clearly
in the light of these transactions, “ the Catholic conscience ” is only a term
that signifies the will of the church ; and the State, in maintaining the
Public School system, is not oppressing the consciences of one-third of the
people (according to the representations that are sometimes made), but
crossing the policy of a group of ecclesiastical authorities in the colony who
are ruled from Rome, and the secret of whose power lies in the suppression
of individual conscience amongst the one-third of the people aforesaid.
From “ Sydney Morning Herald ” of Wednesday, 14th December
1881.
The general feeling on reading the account of the lack of religious
ceremony at Mr. Fitzpatrick’s funeral will, outside the Catholic Church, no
doubt be one of indignation. But we must remember that the action of the
Church authorities was perfectly consistent with their professions, and with
their expositions of their system. It was not an act of spite or personal
hostility towards the deceased gentleman—it was not a want of charity, or
an indifference to the feelings of the surviving members of the family. It
was a rigorous and unflinching carrying out of the doctrine that within the
Catholic Church there is no individual liberty in spiritual matters —that
every one who enters there must renounce all hope of ever being allowed to
exercise his own judgment on matters as to which the Church through its
authorities may think proper to pronounce a definite opinion. It matters
not that these questions may be social or political—that they come across
the personal life, or the family life, or the social or political career of the
person affected. Everything in their life has to bow to the all-pervading
supremacy of the spiritual authority as expressed by authorised ecclesiastics,
and no member of the Catholic Church is to know anything of personal
liberty, or the right of private judgment, or the claims of conscience if
the church thinks proper to take them from him. The cold way in which
Mr. Fitzpatrick’s remains were denied the courtesies of Christian obsequies
was, if in violation of every human sentiment, in perfect consistency with
the discipline of the Roman Catholic Church.
What it was inconsistent with —and this is the great lesson which the
transaction ought to burn into the hearts of the people of this colony—is
the assertion that the Public School system violates the consciences of


Roman Catholics. Mr. Fitzpatrick’s funeral ought to dissipate that argument
for ever ; and, if it does so, he will have done more by his death than by
his life. He was through life a consistent supporter of a National system
of education —he was so because he conscientiously believed in it; he re-
tained his convictions to the last, and because he was faithful to his conscience
he practically received the anathema of his church. He was refused the
the regular rites of sepulture because he would not surrender his con-
science, because he kept it as his own personal possession, because he
would not unman himself, because he showed the qualities which befit
a free man and a citizen of a free State. A good Catholic cannot do this
when he is ordered by the church not to do it; he cannot keep his con-
science when he is ordered to give it up ; he cannot cherish his honest con-
victions when he is ordered to hold the opposite. The Catholic system,
therefore, when pushed to its consequences, involves the denial of the in-
dividual conscience. It does not deny that man is born with a conscience,
but it refuses to a member of the Catholic Church, the permission to
keep what God has endowed him with. The church takes it from him, on
the ground that he is incompetent to manage it himself, and that it is safer
in holy keeping. In virtue of his being a member of the church he parts
with his right to his own conscience, whenever it is claimed from him, and
if he demurs to the surrender he exposes himself to the ultimate spiritual
penalties.
We will not discuss at present whether this system is a good or a
bad one—whether it is good for the individual development or good for
human society. All we are intent upon now is to impress upon the minds
of our readers that a church which is prepared to deny the right of con-
science to its members cannot without inconsistency pretend that it is
entitled to oppose any law of the country on the ground that it violates the
consciences of the members of its church. People who are not allowed to
own a conscience cannot have their consciences wounded. The Public
Schools Act of this colony has been publicly condemned by the Archbishop
of Sydney on the ground that it violates the consciences of the Catholic
laity. We have the most direct and positive proof that this is not the case.
When the people were left to their judgment and their conscience in the
matter, Catholic parents sent their children to the schools freely and con-
tentedly ; and we have never yet heard of a single authentic case of a
Catholic parent who complained of the irreligious tendency of the schools.
If, even after all the pastorals and exhortations of the last few years, the
Archbishop were still to leave his people free, they would find of themselves
no objection whatever to the Public Schools. If their consciences are to be
so respected in this matter, why does not he respect them P Why does not
he say to them, “ Do whatever your conscience tells you to do, and abstain
wherever your conscience tells you to abstain.” The fact is, he dare not do
this ; he knows very well that personally and individually the great mass of
the Catholics have no objection whatever to the Public Schools, and are
very much distressed that he has. What he has been trying to do is to over-
lay their conscience with his own, just as his ©wn is subject to the
ecclesiastical authority above him. When he says that their consciences are
wounded, it is not they who speak through him, it is he who speaks for them.
He undertakes to say what their consciences feel, but he can only say it by
first getting possession of their consciences. And how does he get possession
of these consciences ? Only by a process which really destroys the essence
of conscience, namely by creating an abject spiritual terror. He frightens
them with his anathemas, and by threatening them with the deprivation of
those religious ceremonies, in the potency of which Catholics are trained to
believe. If a man really believes that his salvation does not rest between
himself and his Maker, but is practically delegated to a brother man, who
has authority to act, and if that trustee insists on spiritual obedience, and


offers damnation as the alternative, then the victim is not a free man. He
has neither will, nor judgment, nor conscience that he can call his own.
In actual practice, Catholics vary very much in the degree of surrender they
make. It is much against the grain of a liberty-loving man to make it at
all, especially when he sees around him his fellow citizens belonging to other
churches who are called upon to make no such sacrifice. But according to
the strength or weakness of their character, the efficacy of their training,
and the degree to which they are sensitive to spiritual terrors, they do yield.
When the Archbishop has cracked his spiritual stockwhip over the heads of
his flock, and rounded them up out of the Public Schools, he says, “ See
now how the consciences of these parents were violated by having to send
their children to the Public Schools.” We protest that we do not see it at
all. We see that their consciences have been injured, but it is their church
and not their Civil Government which has done them the injury. They
have been forced into an unnatural position, and compelled to deny their
inward convictions. Their will has been strained, their conscience coerced,
and though the strain may have given much pain to the spiritual sinews,
the authority that ordered the torture was not the State, but the Church.
THE CRUSHING OF CONSCIENCE.
(From the Melbourne Daily Telegraph).
The sensation created by the Roman Catholic hierachy of Sydney in seek-
ing to insult the mortal remains of Mr. Michael Fitzpatrick, late M.L.A. for
Yass Plains, will not be confined to New South Wales. Similar persecution
and degradation may be the lot of any member of the same communion, in
any of the colonies, who, in matters political, follows the dictates of his
conscience rather than the behests of his clerical advisers. This assertion
of personal and political independence is all that the deceased gentleman
had been guilty of, and it is for this that his memory and his family have
been subjected to the bitterest defamation the Catholic Church can inflict.
Mr. Fitzpatrick was a good citizen, faithful and beloved in all his domestic
relations, active in forwarding all movements of a beneficent and elevating
character, particularly when associated with his own denomination ; while
his rectitude, courage, and capacity gave him commensurate influence in
public affairs, so that he commanded the respect of both opponents and
friends in politics. His church, however, was less tolerant. By her his
independence was treated as apostasy, and obedience to his conscience as
rebellion against his faith. He was not a profligate, nor a pervert, nor a
secularist; he died by the act of God, amid the loving lamentations of his
aflicted family; but his church left him to be buried like a dog because he
differed from her priests on a question of public policy, affecting not his
co-religionists alone, but the whole community. Archbishop Vaughan, as
a Catholic prelate, denounced the Public School system of New South
Wales ; Mr. Fitzpatrick, as a Catholic politician, upheld it; each, no doubt,
being actuated by equally conscientious convictions. But the respect which
Archbishop Vaughan is ever demanding from Protestants for his own con-
scientious convictions, he refuses to one of the most reputable and cultured
of his own people. Ecclesiastics who remorselessly crush all conscience in
their adherents cannot expect “ hesetics ” to pay much attention to them
when they cry out for consideration to the demands of the clerical conscience.
Mr. Fitzpatrick’s consistent faithfulness to his own convictions led to his
persecution in life and to indignity in death. Time and again during his
career, he publicly protested against the malice with which he was being
pursued because of his opinions on educational matters, stating that he was


■being injured in this life, and threatened with peril to his soul in the next.
He, however, refused to recant, persevering to the death in loyalty to his
•convictions.
It might have been supposed that, towards so faithful and honorable
an adherent, death would have assuaged the vengeance of the church. But
no. His body was refused the rites of Christian burial, and his soul was
consigned to eternal perdition. When a son of the deceased applied at St.
Mary’s Church for the performance of the usual funeral service, he was told
by a priest that the “ unfortunate man ” had “ lost his soul,” and when the
body arrived at the cemetery no ecclesiastic was present, so that it had to
be consigned to the grave with an informal prayer, sanctified by the wailings
of outraged relatives and the sympathy of indignant mourners. That this
exhibition of malignant bigotry should provoke general and stern reproba-
tion throughout New South Wales is not surprising. Nothing less could
have been expected from any community of free men, and the incident will
do more to establish the Public School system of that colony in the affection
of the people and to wean Catholics from the tyranny of ambitious priests
than all other efforts combined.
S. E. LEES, PRINTER & RUBBER STAMP MAKER, 134 PITT ST., SYDNEY.
