

Net


The accompanying photograph is of J. Furphy
& Sons’ new factory, erected recently and adjoining
the Shepparton Railway Station. The premises are
commodious and-up-to-date, and laid out with a
view of manufacturing economically and expedi-
tiously the special lines herein illustrated. The
motive power consists of one Suction Gas Engine
of 2.0' horse power, driving an Electric Generator,
and electric motors are distributed throughout the
factory. The business was founded in 1873 by
John Furphy, the ,senior partner (who started as
the first village blacksmith in Shepparton), and it
gradually grew and developed into a manufacturing
concern, and by specialising on a few lines, which
wo tpru out in large quantities, we are able to sell
them at a remarkably low price, with satisfaction
to our customers and a reasonable profit for our-
selves. It may interest you and be to your advantage
to look through the following pages, and see you
don't miss the yarn, Lost In a Furphy, by “Chicob,”
the mysterious author, who is quite unknown to us,
but who has been at some pains to give us a cheap
and original advertisement
J. FURPHY & SONS
i \
I m


FFUPIIY’S
* FOUNDRY,
VICTORIA
S11EPPARTON
m
Up
\
’ **■-
* 1 V, . .
THIS IS WHERE THE FUKPI1Y FARM WATER CARTS ARE MADI


LOST IN A FUR PHY
By “ CHICOB ”
Reprinted from “Sydney Mail,” 29th September,, 1909.
Good, better, best,
Never let it rest,
Till your good is better,
And your better—best.
This is not a conundrum. II is an inscription, in the
fashion of our elder forefathers, who wrote distichs and
laconic apothegms on their fountains and sundials and
guide-posts, and upon the semi-sacred places and things
that they loved and honored. It is the inscription on
“ Furphy’s Farm water cart.”
To the dweller in cities a “ Furphy,” as it is fa-
miliarly called, is probably as lacking in definite sug-
gesliveness as “a chickabiddy." I don't myself know
what “a chickabiddy” means, hut to the lonely
inhabitants of the waste and waterless west country “a
Furphy” is a household word, a boon and benediction to
men. It is simply a sort of iron-clad water barrel, con-
structed of strong sheet-iron, resembling boiler-plates,
it is about 4 feet long and .3 feet in diameter, and is
mounted on low iron wheels, standing some 16 inches or
18 inches from the ground to the axle.
(Continued on page 4)


THIS IS— NO- 2 Furphy Farm Water Cart
They’re all over the place! Wherever you go in
Victoria nr Rivcrina you'll come across a “Furphy.” Not
by talk, purely on merit we have sold some thousands
of these carts, and intend to sell hundreds more. They
are just about as good as we know how to make them,
and we've been on the job about 2!) years—fact is, there's
nothing wrong about them tint the price, which is a hit
too low for us to make our fortune. We don't, propose
to pester you to death, or spend 20 per cent, of our profits
trying to sell you one. We're not. built that way. If
you're not. ready (to buy, don’t buyl hut if you want to
"run your ranch with a minimum of labor, money, pers-
piration, and profanity, buy a "Furphy,” and you’ll get
there. Description of Fart:—A strong barrel ift. long
by Oft. diameter, made of 18 gauge galvanised iron, with
rounded cast iron ends, holds 180 gallons, mounted on
two strong cast iron wheels 30in. diameter, tin. tread,
axle lit in., large lap with brass plug i 3-Bin outlet, con-
venient to till, and quick to empty, strong and very dur-
able, weight OJcwt, For price see separate list.


A wooden barrel mounted on a pair of low wheels
is really a pi*imiliv«* typo of Kurphy; and, wliilo it is
sound, is almost just as good; but during' half Iho yoar
it is unused, and in a dry and torrid atmosphere the
slaves warp and crack, the hoops conic off, and when
you want it in a hurry you spend half your lime caulk-
ing it with lags and putty.
A Kurphy is useless, except as a water-carrier; hut.
as such, it is also perhaps the most ellicienl fire-lighter
yet devised, and has a'special detachable pumping ar-
rangement for- spraying hush-tires—a hush lire in the
lliverinn is really only a sort of a prairie-lire, a great
grass blaze; hut 100 deplorably often terribly destructive.
Among my multifarious jobs I was engaged last
summer as cook and slushy to a gang of fencers, in a
remote angle of a lug li,ooo acre sheep station. We
were nine miles from the homestead, and I:> or Id from
anywhere else. Our nearest water supply was a lank,
filled generally a couple of times a year from a 150 feet
well, of absoulely horrible water. It was saline and
smell unspeakably, and was wholly until for human
drinking purposes. There were, of course, numerous
surface tanks about the run, but our line of fencing was
remote from any of them—its purpose, indeed, was to
divide a Id,ooo-acre paddock, and the existing tanks,
as is customary, were all on the boundary fence, so as to
water the stock in two paddocks simultaneously.
One of my many duties was to till the Kurphy at the
least distant drinkable tank —drinkable from a hack-
block’s point of taste, for the water all looked very like
(Continued on page 6)


THIS IS— No. 4 Furphy Farm Water Cart
No. 6 Cart i. much the same, but longer
.josh Hillings said: —“ L’lioro is one thing about a
hen that looks liko Wisdom—she don't cackle till after
she has laid hoc egg. Wc don’t claim (o have laid any
“Kurphys," hul we've sold so many that we can’t help
cackling -about it. so we wish you to study the details
of the water carl shown above. Notice the good sub-
stantial wrought iron wheels 3ft. 3in. dia. with 34in.
lyre, axle 2in. diameter, capacity 180 gallons, weight 7
cwl., construction otherwise the same as Xo. 2 Carl.
Xow then! You have to cart water! How do you do it?
With a leaky old barrel stuck on a forked sapling sledge,
or a malt tank mounted on your farm dray—a turnout
(hat cost you about £2O? Look here! Your dray is begging
for better work; and if the tank is not already cooked, it
soon will he; and all the while we have the water cart
above—made expressly for you. Should you want a cart
of greater capacity, how about our No. 57 It holds 220
gallons, and the barrel is Ift. longer, hut it is mounted
on same wheels and axle as the Xo. 1. Weight of No. 5,
7i cwt. For prices of Xo. i and Xo. 5 see separate sheet.


dirty milk, and had to bo troatod with Epsom salts to
precipitate the suspended matter. A few ounces of salts
will clear a 400-gallon lank, and. a feaspnonful placed
in a bucket overnight will give you about three-quarters
of a bucket of tolerably clear wat.er, which can be poured
off into another vessel.
Now, t always carry a three-penny note-book or two
in my hip pocket, to record the experiences of which 1
am so anxious a searcher, and which from time to time
find publicity in these columns. And these, with the
motiveless malignity of inanimate things, are perpetually
sneaking out of my poke and getting lost for a day or
two; while I go about bleating for my strayed property.
As fate would have it, just when we were nearing
the completion of our Job, 1 lost the run of one of my
most precious manuscripts, “Reminiscences of a Sheep’s
Head.” Its preciousness will be more readily appreciated
when I say that I have since been unable to get any
Australian editor to look at it. “ Too horrible,” they
tell me. Inevitably, I was confident it was the best thing
I had ever done. I liad been to a lank some three-
quarters of a mile away to fill the Furphy, and felt sure
that I had the note-book when I started, I did’nt have
it when I came back.
When a Furphy is filled you should put on the lid of
the man-hole and give it a screw down, hut, with my not
unusual absent-mindedness, Iliad forgotten the lid.
Also, it is the correct thing to sit astride on the front
and yell insults at your horse. No one but an idiot—and
I have even doubts about him—ever walks in the bush,
so far as my observation goes. Even with a load of
wood, the old hand leaves himself a nook on the shaft
between the sticks.
(Continued on page 8)


This is the
No. 7 “ Furphy ” Farm Water Cart
Here we present you with a view of 3 of our No. 7
water carls, (he photo of which was«taken en route be-
tween Toeumwal ami Finley. N.S.W. These carts formed
one consignment of a total of 33 carts supplied to the
N.S.W. (iovermnenl, for Vanko Irrigation Settlement.
The No. 7 water cart holds 350 gallons, the barrel is
about 9 ft. lung, and the transport has two wrought iron
back wheels 3 ft. 3 in. high, and two cast iron front
wheels 30 in. high, weight 13 cwt. We usually provide
a pole arrangement for two horses, or, if desired, a
draw bar for traction engine purposes can be arranged
for. This large cart is of advantage where water has
to he carted a long distance. Come on now! (let out of
that rut! I.el us add your name to our list of contented
users. When you buy a “Furphy"’ you buy Satisfaction
every lime, and get it cheap—the result of many years’
elfort to “Build the Best.” If you are trying to do
without a “Furphy,” you are paying for one without
getting it. For price see No. 7 on separate list.


LOST IN A FURPHY
In jolting' back with the water, I took my seat as
usual, and yelled, “ (lee! Vi'lel. Woa back—(ice, ye cow!
You,” in the approved style; but in the absence of the
lid the water splashed up every now and I lien and
douched my hack, running down and running round the
guttering, as it were, of rny waistband. I had only a
working shirt mi, of course, and a pair of dungarees.
I wriggled a good deal. I remembered subsequently, and
concluded I must have wriggled out the precious note-
book.
Three limes, to the explosive indignation of
the boss, Big "Sam Hooke, I travelled backwards
and forwards to the lank, and scrutinised every
foot of the way. Xo notebook ! I was
so irritable over my loss that I quite forgo! my policy
of giving no back-talk, and treated Sammy to a piece -of
my occasionally vigorous vocabulary, that fairly look his
breath away, and reduced him to solto voce growls. He
would no doubt have chucked me there and then, hut he
knew that he couldn't get another man at that time of
year, and within a few days pf completing bis contract.
A Kurphy lasted us about four days, for very often
I watered the horses from it with a bucket; and it was
on, a Sunday afternoon that it ran out. I intended to
yoke up and (ill it towards evening, in the comparative
cool.
Ihe boss usually went home on Saturday evenings
to his selection, seven or eight miles away: and it chanced
that two young fellows who were travelling through the
run for some purpose, paid us a visit in the afternoon.
I made tea, of course, and they started to “pilch" with
Tommy Spruill, Sam’s man for the time being. To
pilch” is to engage in interminable talk and argument
about nothing in particular, and is a pastime that seems
never to grow Hat, stale, and unprofitable to the hush
folk.


Furphy’s Farm Water Cart
WITHOUT TRANSPORT.
NO. B—lBo GALLONS
NO. 9—220 GALLONS.
This illustration represents our 180 gallon tank
without transport, hul tilled with two wood hearers, so
that, it can he plaeed llnnly on the bottom of a dray or
other carriage. We have found that many farmers are,
desirous of using their present means of transport, but
are “full up" of I lie trouble they have with mall tanks,
or barrels always going “bung," and they sensibly wish
to invest in a “Furphy” Barrel. Here we meet their
requirements. The barrel is constructed in the same
durable manner as our complete water carts, but the
east iron ends are of a slightly different pattern and not
suitable for mounting on our ordinary transport. Weight
of No. 8 Tank as above, 2* cwt.
Our No. 9 Tank (without transport) holds 220 gal-
lons, and is (I ft. long, being I ft. longer Hum Np. 8, and
weighs about. 35 lbs. more. Moth these barrels are titled
with a east iron manhole and close-fitting iron lid, and
also with our large tap of t 3-8 in. outlet. For prices
see separate list.


I took no particular notice of them till I heard
Tommy exclaim, excitedly, “I'll het you what you like
1 can.”
Tummy had the reputation of being “a hit of an
innocent.” tfe said he was 2S, and may have been, hut
he was very small, and looked about 18. His efforts at
growing a “mo” resembled a kitten’s. Strange to say. he
had a profound respect for my general knowledge of
things he didn't know. We were great pals.
“.lack,” he called to, me, “can’t a cove get through
any hole that he can get his head through?”
“I don’t know, Tommy,” I said. “We used certainly
to helive so at school, hut I’m inclined to dovdd it now.
I'm sure I couldn’t, at any rate.”
“ Course you could," said Tommy, “if you tried.”
“.Well, thanks, I'm not going to try.”
“ Wot I says,” chipped in his antagonist, “ Wot I
says is, a cove could get his head into the hole in the
Furphy. I seen a horse do that, but he couldn't get his
body in. Are you game to try?” he questioned Tommy.
“ I am that,” says Tommy, violently taking off his
hat.
“Take care, Tommy, you mightn’t be able to get
out again so easily,” I cautioned.
“ If I get in, 1 can get out agen, can’t I?” said
Tommy, aggressively.
“Have your own way, old chap. It’s not my funeral.”
As I had finished washing up, and wasn’t greatly
interested in the wager, I went into the tent to have a
lie down. The last thing I heard was a triumphant,
“Well, wot did I tell you.”
Evidently Tommy had won. Then I dozed off.
(Continued on page 12)


this is— No. 10 Purphy’s Bush Fire Gaft
\\> unco know a “squatter” who maintained, “He was
as free of money as a frog of feathers.” We believed him,
but we know Hie comparison does not fit in most cases,
otherwise we would not have used our endeavours to in-
troduce the “Furphy” No- 10 Bush Fire Cart, which is
designed to he of great service in case of Bush Fires. The
turnout consists of a No. i Water Cart equipped with a
low down force pump, of great capacity; 15ft. of large
bore suction hose and strainer; about sft. canvas hose
from lop of pump to manhole of tank; 10ft. of tin. de-
livery hose, with brass jet and spray muzzle; a sprinkler
pipe about 5 ft. long of galvanised iron is made to attach
to tap; and a comfortable driver's seat and tool box pro-
vided. My simply turning on the tap a track through the.
grass about Oft. wide may he sprinkled for burning fire-
breaks; or. by working the ipump a powerful jet may be
obtained for putting out burning trees or stumps, and
the supply of water in barrel may be replenished from
other water carts by means of the same pump. Unlike
Mush Fire Carts of other makes, our No. 10 is very con-
venient and useful for general purposes.*


LOST IN A FURPHY
I wns awakened by a voice at Ilia tan I opening.
“Hi! .lack, Jack
“What 11 1 a (liakans is it ?”
“Tommy wants you.”
“Wall, don't 1 1 a know wliara to linil me
“'K can't coma," said Ilia ambassador, hesitatingly.
Hut I burst out laughing, and interrupted him.
Of aoiirsa, I knaw what had lia|i|ianad. Tommy bad
got into Ilia Kurpliy, and couldn't gat out again.
I want mil of tba lanl lo Hud Tommy's bead looking
sheepishly out of Ilia inanliola. Tba fast of him was
knaaling down, safidy imprisonad in tba iron shall. lit;
graatarj ma dapraaalingly.
“t knows fin a fool. Jack; but wul's lo be dona?"
I baliava Tommy was tba only one of my associates
who aver suspected llial I was or ever had beau or ever
would be anything hut a hlanky bad cook. So I was
naturally Haltered, and considered Ilia situation with due
solemnity.
The result was that I look out (ha plug, and drained
Ilia Kurpliy dry; there were only a few pints in it. 1
made Tommy as comfortable as I could with soma jacks
and half a hag of chalf, and told him to lie low. Also
I gave him a sixpenny Nat (iouhl to keep him from
thinking. I always carry a few copies of that brand of
literature in my swag. Omar is not dearer lo the semi-
educated, nor Corelli to the dami-sami educated, than
Mat's horse-tripe is to the nol-eduaatad-al-all; and paper
is always at a premium in the busti.
I don’t think I actually encouraged Tommy lo stay
where ha was, hut I confess 1 had a mild curiosity to
sea what Sammy Hooka would do about it.
(Continued on page 14).


this is- Furphy’s Spike Roller, No. 1
Here we are again! Another specially—our Clod-
erusher or Spike-roller. And please note this: If you
see anything else like it in Australia you ran declare.
“They’ve copied from Furphy!” II is far easier to copy
Ilian to originate you know. Let us tell you something
about our Spike Roller. It is composed usually of live
cylindrical castings, studded with triangular spikes. Pul
together they make a roller that will break clods harder
than the ploughman's head even if he is a Scotchman).
We have sidd hundreds of these implements, and are
assured by users that it is not only (be best possible
fool to use before the seed drill, hut also to roll the crop
after it has sprouted. Description:—Fach casting is
204 inches long, measures 22 inches diameter over tops
of spikes. 21 inch axie right through, which revolves in
large bearings. Rollers can be made from 5 to 12 feel
long; the. standard size crushes 10 ft. i in., and
measures overall It ft. 7 in., and weighs about
4 cwt. Four horses can work it easily. Don’t fool
away your time and money on a wood roller with spikes
driven in when one is obtainable at such a low price per
cwt. If you are an easy-going customer, and get one,
you will need two —one for yourself and one for your
neighbors. But don’t lend it. Refer them to Furphy.


LOST IN A FURPHY
Then I \v(‘iit peacefully on with my avocations tili
Inwards tea-time.
On these treeless plains you can see for miles, ami
shortly before sundown I announced to rummy: “He's
coming.'’
A somewhat anxious voice besought me from the
dept hs: —
‘‘You'll slick up for me. .lack?'’
“That's all right, Tommy. Leave it to me.'’ I put
lbi‘ chops in I lie frying-van, am! presently Sammy rode
up. He didn't seem in a very'amiahle humor.
“Ain't the tea ready yet?" he asked, crossly.
“It's just ready. I put the chops on when I saw
yon coming."
“Were's lhal Tommy? K's always n;j to some
funny business the mini! me hack's turned.''
Coolness in emergency is one of my must con-
spicuous characteristics, also an infallible diplomatic
instinct of when to lake the hull by the horns.
“He's in the Furphy,” I answered calmly, giving the
frying pan a shake and sprinkling some salt on the chops.
“In the what?" gasped Sam, staring at me as if I had
eoi'ks in my hat. (This is supposed to he an infallible
indication of incipient lunacy, going “balmy” in the
hush.)
“In Ihe Furphy," I yelled. “Hash your eyes and
carcase, can't you hear me? An' he can't get oul."
"It's all right, Sam." came a faint sepulchral voice,
“ Fm "ere."
Sam was human. He sal down on the tucker-box
and laughed till I thought he'd have a til, peal on peal.
The embarrassing situation had developed 100 slowly
lor me to see the comic side of it. tint I daresay it was
I here.
\\ hen he recovered he was in an irritable good-
enough humor, and had a vigorous hut not unamiahle
(Continued on page 18)


Furphy’s Spike Roller, No. 3
“ Flexible Pattern ”
“Flexible Pattern’’
Our No. 3 Spike Roller is intended In supersede No.
2 pattern, Hie manufacture of the latter we have aban-
doned;—This No. 3 roller is built with a (lexible steel
frame which adapts it for use on uneven ground as well
as for level paddocks; the standard size of this pattern
crushes 10 ft. i in., and measures overall II
ft. 2 in., and four horses can work it com-
fortably. The roller weighs about 16 cwt. and consists
of six spiked castings, one pair in the front, and two
pairs in the rear, with a separate axle and two bearings
for each set of castings; with this method of construc-
tion no pole or wheel is required, and the draft being
well forward the rollers steer readily. For price see list.


conversation with Tommy through (ho hole. At his
earnest solicitation Tommy again tried to got out, and
Sam stood on top of the Kurphy, and tried to pull him
out hy the head, hut soon convinced himself—though not
nearly so soon as he convinced Tommy—that he would
have to drag his head off and get the rest of him out in
sections.
“Well, I'm jiggered if 1 ever see the like.” he said
at last. “What the blazes will we do?”
I saw an opening for some more diplomacy. “Tommy
thinks he can thin in (wo or three days to
si|iiee/e out, and I’ll see to the ..thinning, Sam; I give you
my word for that. A pint and a half of soup a day is all
I'll give him till he's line enough. You'd have to cut him
out wi’h a cold chisel, and you know his “(tills" (the
figure head who was supposed to be general manager of
the station, which was in the hands of the executors.)
“You’d have to pay for the Kurphy?"
“Me pay for the Kurphy,” roared Sam. “Me pay!”
Sammy had the reputation of being the meanest man in
I lie Riverina.
“Well, it’s the station's, and you got the loan of it.
1 suppose you're responsible for it.”
Sammy caved in.
“Look 'ere, you Tommy, w’en you gets out if I don't
give ye the father and mother of a strappin’ my name's
not Sam ’Ooke.”
“Now, Sam, you shut up! That's enough. It’s an
accident; and if it wasn’t that I know Tommy’d lose his
billet (he was paid by the station, though he was always
lent to Sam, when lie was engaged in contract work),
I'd walk over to the homestead and get the blacksmith
to come and cut him out, if you had to nay for three
Furphies.”
(Continued on page 18)


Set No. 1
Furphy’s Swingletrees
For (i horses abreast. Weight, 14 rwi. Composed
ol' 2 sels Xo. (), ami main bar AF. Main liar is also of
nse as a main r> horse har, by shifting the draft shackle.
You’ve tried the rest. Now buy the Best.
Furpby’s Famous Swingletrees; invented and pa-
tented over a iinarler of a century ago, by our senior
partner, at a time when the best available swingletree
used by the (ionlburn Valley pioneers was a wooden bar
with troublesome clips at the ends and centre. The de-
mand for our Hollow Steel Swingletrees was immediate
and permanent, and we are selling .more now than ever
we did. This in face of the fact that our success induced
<liiile a mushroom crop of other makes, which—“up like
a nickel and down like the stick"—only serve to illumi-
nate tlie good and lasting qualities of our make. Any-
how, farmers, disgusted to find that when the wooden
liars were urgently wanted, repairs were nearly always
necessary, were prompt to appreciate such a decided im-
provement, and welcomed a swingletree with riveted re-
movable ends and centre, as solid as a rock and as strong
as (iibrallar; a swingletree foolproof and unbreakable:
a swingletree “all” there when wanted, ami never found
wanting when there. Our swingletrees have stood the
test of 25 years’ hard service, endured the greatest
abuse, and they “toe the mark,” smiling every time.


“All right. .lack, ’ave il your own way: lull of all
the but I'll say no morn. And what am ye lo do
for water?”
“I'll feleb il morning and evening, in the buckets,
though I’ve a notion il won’t he long before there’s rain."
I made Tommy as snug as I could with hags and his
nap” (blankets), and gave him some soup. He really
didn’t seem to mind much.
If rained heavily that night, and the next day. so
Sam went home, as we couldn’t get on with the fencing.
The second night I heard’Tommy make two nr three
attempts lo wriggle through, bul ineffectually; and we
discussed the untoward si'ualion in the morning.
I had given a good ileal of thought to the matter,
and had come lo the conclusion that the difiiculty in his
egress lay in the fact (hat the opening was slightly
funnel shaped, bevelled, lo allow the cover to fit tightly.
You can conceive a person being able to squeeze through
the narrow end of a funnel, working himself along from
•he broad opening, when he could not possibly gel hack
through an orilice presenting a square, sharp edge.
Also, the Kurpliy was so low thal he couldn’t gel a
straight shove at the opening. When he knelt down and
got his head through he was compelled to hunch his
hack a bit in trying to rise, and he could get little pur-
chase for a shove. If we could have turned the Furphy
upside down, I think we might have shaken him out.
• Tommy agreed with my arguments, but “didn’t see
no way out of it.” He showed me his hands, and we both
agreed he was getting thinner.
The rain cleared off in the forenoon, and about
dinner-time 1 saw Sam coming along with another horse-
man. It was his (tills.
(Continued on page 20)


Set No. 2
Furphy’s Swingßetrees
Our eomplele sot fur 5 horses abreasl. for plough-
ing. Weight, l-'i lbs. Main bar fl can be used also as
main bar in wide '-horse set .see Set ,N<>. 3.) Cars D
are also available for use in ordinary 3 anil i abreasl
els. See Sels No. i and No. (i.
When you buy our swingletrees you get
all useful bars, and are not burdened with
some, in the 5 and (i Horse Sets, that cannot
he used in oilier sels. Kven our equalising liars in Set
No. 6 (3 horsei are used as short 3 horse liars, ]), in Set
No. i. The ends and centres are now made duplicating,
and easily replaced when worn out by any blacksmith or
bandy man, and they never come lose. “Kurphy" wouldn't
sell so many of his swinglelrees if they weren't good ones*
.We sold over 30 lons in 101 I.) They're "talking'’ all the
way from .lunee lo .Jeparil. Inleresled? Write Kurphy
al once. Mill you say, "Kurphy Swings cost too much.
All right ! Hecklin' if up now ! What do you pay for a
decent one-horse bar of oilier make ? If you make it
yourself, how long does i( last? How many hours do
you lose patching up your wooden ones? What does a
breakdown i' of a mile from home cost you. Perhaps
our swings are handicapped in Hrsl eosl at the start, bill
I hey soon earn (he difference, and afterwards they keep
on earning. Again we say, "You've tried the Rest; now
buy the Best.


LOST IN A FURPHY
I thought ll)i’ fat was in Iho I'm 1 , and warm'd Tommy
mil lo budge. “Mot a move, mind!"
Tlmy rodn up. and I hoard Sam explaining, “II would
lake a man ’alf a day to plug a post-hole after this rain."
“Well, well," said his dills peevishly, “you’ll have to
break up camp and finish after the harvesting; there can’t
he more than 20 or 25 chains to do. Send the Furphy hack
to the station this afternoon; I In* harvesters will probably
be wauling it al White’s hul. Tommy can lake it; where
is Tommy 2"
I (houghl Sam would pass the (piestion on lo me, hul
he preferred to do his own lying, and I thought the belter
of him for it.
duricTTis y enough, he hit on precisely Ihe same lietion
that I would have ladled out.
“ I sent ’im ’ome to tlx the harness for Ihe waggon
teams,’’ he answered, glibly. “We’ll be wantin’ ’em foi-
lin' wheat-cartin' soon. Hut .lark then 1 can take i( over.”
“Very weT. I see you have Ihe plug out," he con-
Jinued. moving bis horse a few steps forward towards
Ihe casket of our guilty secret, and my heart jumped; but
it. was only lo turn him round. “Mind you don't forget to
pul if hack," he added, as he moved away.
1 hardly had a full view of his back before Sam
began. “’hire’s a how-d'-ye-do!" And Tommy’s head
bobbed up through Ihe hole.
For heaven’s sake. Tommy, lie down till he’s out of
sight.”
You could see a rabbit half a mile oil' on that billiard-
table plain if he stood on his hind legs.
Sam went into the lent growling, and I had a light-
ning think.
(Continued on Page 22)


Set No. 3
Furphy’s Swingletrees
Our wide i horse sel for scoop work. Arranged as
shown. Die liars give i horses Ihe “elbowroom" lhal is so
necessary in tank sinking or channel work. Main bar A
is (he same bar as shown in Set No. 2, Iml wilh draft
shackle shifted to centre of bar. Weight, 100 lbs. For
price see list.
“If a man can write a better book, preach a belter
sermon, or make a better mouse I rap, than his neighbour;
though he build his house in the Woods the World will
make a beaten path to his door.’’—F.iuerson.
There is a beaten path to the door of our Factory; and
there is a reason:—
In the year 1918 we admit some grass grew at our
front door, and our annual output of swingletrees dropped
from 25 tons to less than I lon, owing to the “Prolileers”
putting up the price of Ihe raw material from 11 5 per ton
to €75-per lon, consequently we had to ask a prohibitive
price for our product.


LOST IN A FURPHY
As soon as the coast was clear, I called to Tommy.
“You’ll have to get out, Tommy, somehow.’’
“Hlowed if I can, Jack!” Tommy half whim-
pered. “I tried last night, and I ’dare to goodness I
couldn’t get the right wriggle on nohow. 1 might ’a done
it the first night, I ’ad three goes, an’ —”
“I heard you squirming,” 1 put in hurriedly, catching
a look nn Sam’s face that hoded no good to poor Tommy.
He had come out of the tent and stood listening.
“If 1 thought,” he began solemn y to Tommy, “if I
thought you'd been pullin’ my leg all this time I’d—”
“Dry up, Sam. The thing is to get him out now.
E’d better do it pretty slick,” said Sam, ominously.
Suddenly he brightened. He had an idea.
“ ’Ow would it be," he suggested, eagerly, “to turn
the Fnrphy on its side. ‘K could put ’is legs out, and I
could "itch the mare on to them, and get a pull on. Some-
think would ’ave to give.”
“.No you don’t, Sammy ’(Joke! Not me,” Tommy
fairly snarled at don’t ’itch no mare to my
legs. Don’t you let him, Jack.”
“Shut up, Tommy, don’t lit 1 a goal. And you, Sam,
have some common.” Dut Tommy was in a snarling lit.
The things he’d like to do and would do to the big man
and his <tills if he could get out are unprintable.
Starvation must he an irritating process.
1 soothed him, and gave him a pint of hot soup and
an extra large slice of toast, which he retired into his
cramped shell to consume, while I expounded my idea
to Sammy.
(Concluded on page 24)


Set No. 4 and No. 5
Furphy’s Swingletrees
Tlio upper illustration is Set No. 4, our ordinary 4
abreast set for ploughing and harvesting. Main bar M
ran be used also as main bar in wide 3 horse set. (See Set
Xo. 5). Weight. 98 lbs. For priee see list.
The lower illustration is Set No. 5, our wide 3 horse
set. Mar B is the same as in Set Xo. 1. hut with draft
shaekle shifted.
This set we find is strong enough to he used as a 6
horse tandem set. using pulleys and chains for the 3
leading horses. Weight, 76 lbs. For price see list.
Please note: We supply sets of trees up to 7 horses
abreast and tandem yokes for 4, 6. or 8 horses. When
ordering swingletrees, order the sets by number and the
individual bars by the letters marked on illustrations of
them.


I wasn’l too confident of my solution, tuft Sam was
enlhusiasth. Ho could hardly et Tommy tinikh his soup.
“Here you. Tommy, listen. I'll gel up and stand over
Hip hole, and you pul your hands through, tike's if you
was froinfr to lake* a dive, and I'll catch 'o'd of 'em and pull
you Ihroufrh. - ’
“ '()«• Hie mischief can a cove dive up 'ill," said
Tommy, ipierously, tint beginning to adjust himself.
“You shut up. and do as Jack tells you. An' w'en t
pels you mi! "
No. you don't. Wit; 'e. Jack? I'll slay w'ere lam
“Thai's all rifrlil. Tommy. If lie lays a llnfrer on
you I'll poison him."
“There, there, ionimy. I was on'y jokin'." said Sam
“Put up your ’ands.”
“Don't you pull ton 'ard if I yells," said Tommy, and
pul his hands throufrh.
Sam seized them, ami with frenfle vifrour, hut really
astonishing ease 1 , pulled the prisoner out like a periwinkle
from his shell.
“\V'y,” said Tommy, feeling- his shoulders and anato-
my generally. “I h'lieve you could 'ave done that all along.
Hive us a hit of dinner. Jack. Me waistcoat's slickin’ to
me backbone.”
And I had my reward. In cleaning out the Furphy f
found the lost note hook. Tommy would probably have
hesitated to assent to Hu* suggestion that tie was the
instrument employed by special providence to restore to
lh(> continent my.lost contribution to its literature. But
I'm pretty sure it was something more than fool’s luck.


Sets No. 6 and No. 7
Furphy’s Swingletrees
The upper illustration is Set Xo. (j, ami shows our
ordinary 3 horse set. Main liar C is the same as used
in 3 horse set. Set Xo. 7). Bars i> are also used in
Set Xo i hy shifting the hooks. Weight of Set Xo. 0 is
(>8 Ihs.
Tin 1 lower e.ut illustrates out Set Xo. 7 for 2 horses.
Weight. ;i:i Ihs.
Below we give the weight and length of Individual bars:—
Bar marked AK, main har for
length, 03 in.
Har marked A. main bar for
85 Ihs.; length, 73 in.
Har marked H, main har for
38 Ihs.; length. til in.
Har marked C. main har for
13 Ihs.; length. 11 in.
Set Xo. I. Weight, lbs.:
Sets Xo. 2 and 3. Weight.
Sets Xo. i and 5. Weight.
Sets Xo. t) ami 7. Weight,
Har marked I), short 2 horse har or Kitualiser. Weight.
I I Ills.; length. 3 I in.
Har marked K. one horse har. Weight. It Ihs.; length.
37 in.


Furphy’s Plough Wheels
and Circular Coulter
For more than 20 years we have been making plough
wheels of the above pattern, which lias now been generally
copied by Melbourne plough makers, hut our special ap-
pliances and large output enable us to “beat them badly - ’
both in quality and price. We can supply either broad
or ordinary rime, and with them boxes, washers and bolts.
The wheels are strong and substantial, and as nearly oil-
light and duslproof as it is possih'e to make (hem, and
will lit almost any colonial make of 2,3, or 4 furrow
plough. We supply these wheels without axles largely
to the trade at a specially low price for cash with order
or for prompt payment. We also supply (he complete
wheels lilted with axles to fanners and agents at much
below Melbourne prices. Some farmers expect to get
ten dollars’ worth for every five dollars they spend. These
are the fellows we’re after, and ours are Ihe [dough
wheels they’re looking for. Ask us the price!
Our Circular Coulter is designed on same lines as
our plough wheel, and usually titled with a I 4 in. blade:—


This Page is for
Blacksmiths & Implement Makers
Wo mako a larpe variety of transport ami iniplomont
wheels ami illustrate lien* some of the patterns we have
and whieh we are able to supply to I lie trade. In order-
ing if will he snllieient to mention tin* number of wheel
as illustrated. If you have a wheel which you use in
larffe quantifies, send us a sample and estimate of your
requirements, and p:et our quotation. For particulars?
scv next pafrc.


PARTICULARS OF
TRANSPORT WHEELS
ILLUSTRATED ON PREVIOUS PAGE
Diameter Tread Bore
in in in
Inches inches Inches
Description of Wheel
39 34 2 Wrought iron wheel of water cart .. .. 132
30 4 1? I Cast iron wheel of waier cart .. 108
27J 2? l} | Light transport wheel 42
25 4 2 lor wood trolley .. .. .. 100
24 j 3J U laper Scarifier wheel, with loose box .. 58
18 4 If Scarifier wheel taper hole if required .. 52
IS 3 1J Scarifier wheel .. .. .. .. 44
16 4 14 taper ■ Scantier wheel, loose box. large oil ca.) .. 50
14 3 1J taper | Scarifier wheel, loose box, large oil cap .. 36
l*t w lu|all | OCCII 111 Cl VV 11CCI g I UvvC UUa\f UJI Lu|J a* Oal
16 3 I 1 i Scarifier front wheel 26
14 4 |l4 taper Grader or scarifier wheel .. 38
14 2f 14 layer Scarifier wheel 24
12 3 If taper Scarifier wheel ... ._ .. 20
11 24 If taper Scarifier wheel .. .. . .. ... 17
10 2 1 taper ' Single furrow plow wheel 9
10 j 2 Jparall’l I Hag truck wheel 9
17 2 1 For wheelbarrow 16
174 i 3 1 taper Light wheel bag jumper 20
254 4} Front plow wheel, with loose box .. .. 79
254 | 3J ~i Front plow wheel, with loose box .. .. 69
254 | 2s Front plow wheel, with loose box .. 59
194 I 4J Land plow wheel, with loose box .. .. 51
20 3f Land plow wheel, with loose box ... .. | 47
19? 4 Back plow wheel, with loose box .. j 56
19? 3f Back plow wheel, with loose box .. ■ 49
19? 24 I Back plow wheel, with loose box .. I 44
18? 2 ! Back plow wheel, with loose box .. i 42
19 3? | If j Swivel land wheel, with bush and washers
18 90 teeth j Intermediate cog wheel for stripper 1
15? 78teeth! Intermediate cog wheel for harvester ..1 24
244 123teethi Large spur wheel for harvester .. .. 38
44 14 4 Grooved pulleys for tandem yokes .. .. 24
In addition to the above wheels we have a large stock of patterns to
make duplicate cogwheels, pinions and bearings for strippers
and harvesters


View of Moulding Floor
This cut is. from, a plndofrraph of one corner of mu
factory, where Ilia moulding is done. The moulds are
Ii 11 is 1 11 ■l l and all ready In he Tilled with the molten'iron,
which may he seen issuing from the furnace at the far
side of the picture.


Things Worth Knowing
Our aelilress is—Knrnhy's l*'i)umli*y. Slmpparlon, Vic
Our ledepheine number is 3V Shepparlon Mxchange
Wo hank at Uio “Australasia," Slmpparton, and rofor
yoir jlioro..
Our prices arc for Delivery at Rails, Sliopparlun
Wo deliver {;oods in perfect order lo Railways, and
cannot bo bold responsible for loss or damage in transit,
but will give our best assistance to recover damages from
Ibe responsible parties nr to locate missing goods.
we forward goods by rail we post you a Railway
receipt, which is proof that the goods have been delivered
to Railways, and if you show this receipt at your station
the Railway Officials must produce the goods, nr find nut
what has become of them.
Freight. —The Rr.i'ways are liable 1 to make mistakes
in freight, and generally to your disadvantage l , l ed us
know their charge, and we shall gladly check it feir yem.
Freight. — Freight of No. 2 Wal<‘r Cart costs about
I 1/■per 100 mileos in Victeiria anel X.S.W., anel No. 4 Carl
ceisls about lu’/C feir the same distance. If our water
exacts are semi to Melbourne 1 anel thence 1 lo any station 50
miles eir more l from Midhourne. they are at one
half eireliifary rales, provided that the charge is not less
than the freight would be l if semi from Melbourne only-
If you buy a cet of No. 4 swing'.edre'es anel one C Bar
you can make any sed from i abreast elown lo Set Xei. T.
When ordering eireier sets by number and
Individual bars hy the letters em illustrations,


View of Moulding Floor
After Casting
This picture shows (In? moulding' door again, with
(lie castings taken from moulds, and ready for removal
to cleaning bench. The large circular castings in the
foreground are the cast iron ends of water carls.


Things Worth Knowing
Agents can save money in freight by making llieii'
orders up to about 3A ewt.
If yon have no account vvitli us, or are unknown to
ns, inconvenience and delay will be avoided by sending
Cash with order, or by referring us to your Hank, or to
seme Business Firm.
Please be careful lo give your Postal Address as well
as mention (lie Bail Station to which goods arc to be sent.
I se the telephone for inquiring, but not for ordering un-
less very urgent. If you do telephone au order please to
eonlirm it with letter or postcard by first post.
Sprinklers We can attach a Sprinkler for burning
firebreaks lo either our No. 2, No. i, or No. 5 Water Hart
at a small extra cost.
Taps. —lt does not pay us lo try and repair our lank
laps when worn, but- we simply duplicate laps at a low
price.
Repairs —When our old Waler (tarts with black iron
sheets are rusted out we can make them as good as new.
Send us the old east iron cuds, the manhole easting, and
the iron hands, and we can pul on a new galvanised
sheet. Say if yon require a new lap.
Three Wheel Carts.— We' can supply No. 2, No. i,
and No. 5 (tarts with front wheel instead of shafts, for
traction engine purposes at list prices and at short nolice.
CM.—Don't forget to grease the lap and oil the
wheels of water carls occasionally.
Kemember our address Furphy's Foundry, Shep-
parlon, Vic.


| ESPERANTO—AN INTERNATIONAL LANGUAGE
La akvo estas donaco de Dio,
sed la biero estas miksajo de
la diablo. Xe trinkn la bieron !
i
i
i
*
♦
*
i- <*
v i
t ♦
NEWTON RAPID SHORTHAND.
9\\ > X o
'(. «. L \ x
I f
♦ I
V I
♦ ■
♦ ♦' ♦-•♦ *♦ • ♦ f ♦
■-V <!>
t PITMAN’S SHORTHAND. ♦
i t .. .. - - •s. • <t t
i » “ “U V, I
'? <♦’
♦ t
V' ♦ V •■'■♦- ♦/■ ♦*'♦ ♦ ♦■ •♦♦ •♦-♦-♦■ *<r *,■ ♦ J ♦' ♦ $ ♦“•» ♦ » ♦}.♦•'♦ ♦


