

Further
Memories
of a
. . Long Life .
By T. S. REED.
Price One Shilling.
42740. Hussey & Gillingham, Printers, Adelaide.


c
iAj


Further JVlcrrjories
of a
♦ ♦ L»oj?g L>ifc+ ♦ .
X *
By T. S. REED


When the shadow cometh to each and
all may the sunlight pierce the valley.


INTRODUCTORY.
In these new reminiscences my desire is
not to furnish an Autobiography, hut rather
to treat of surroundings or of circumstances
or persons of which I have had some per-
sonal knowledge, and which, I venture to
hope, may prove of general interest to the
reader.
It will be seen that these records embrace
two differing stages in experience, the one
secular, the other its distinct antithesis.
Bad the latter experience dominated the life
throughout, much of the former could never
have been written.
The ground now occupied will not invade
that traversed sOme four years ago ; my one
regret is that those first “ Memories ” were
not inclusive of these, and that the edition
then issued, which was absorbed in a few
months, was not much larger.
1156/f Uflte *r.( Al




FURTHER MEMORIES
OF A LONG LIFE.
—Entomology.—
One of my earliest recollections dates on
or about the year 1822, when toddling into
the house from the garden to my mother, I
held out my hand, and said, “Booful;” a
large bee had settled upon it, but the
sting was withheld, as it tacitly declared
that it wouldn’t harm a young child.
This was my first study in entomology,
a study which was began early, and was re-
sumed after the lapse of some years, when
at Dr. Day’s College at Bristol, I sat next
to a boy whom we called “Butterfly
Thwaites,” from his constant discourses on
his brother’s collection. This brother was
the late Dr. Thwaites, of Colombo, then in
his father’s drapery business at Bristol.
Alter leaving school I was introduced to the
learned doctor in embryo, and was so
charmed with the extent and beauty of his
specimens, and especially with the exquisite
mounting, that I determined at once to
enter the field. My father had business
relations with West Indian and African
captains, who were promptly enlisted, and
who from Demerara, Tobago, Barbadoes,
and Sierra Leone, on the gold coast, soon
brought me large supplies of coleoptera,
snakes, and lizards, with centipedes thrown
in; and many a helpful suggestion I after-
wards received from the then Mr. Thwaites
and from our mutual friend Samuel Stuch-
bury, curator of the Bristol Museum.


—The Pulex.—
Returning to entomology and its multi-
form attractions, are there not other and
less voluntary branches that are indeed
forced upon one’s studious attention? I al-
lude to the pulex irritans, the adjective evi-
dently referring to both the specimen and
the student. The very derivation of this
scientific cognomen will help us to the solu-
tion of the problem: “Entoma” insects, “lo-
gos” discourse —a discourse carried on by
one side only, sometimes by one, at others
by multitudes; and it must have been to an
impatient listener in Gladstone’s case, when
in a Sicilian cottage he says he was literally
besieged with assailants, beginning first at
the ankles, and then travelling cheerfully
in their sanguinary progress upwards.
Even nearer home and in rural districts
tills study is at times pursued mutually in
attack and defence, irrespective altogether
of rank, age, or acquirements, wihen in the
dead of night slumbers are disturbed result-
ing in “the right of search,” when it be-
comes war to the knife or nail.
—The British Association. —
My relations with the entomologist were
renewed indirectly not long after this as
fellow-members of the British Association,
which held its meetings at Bristol in 1837.
We there met an assemblage of the most
notable men of science of the century.
There were, notably, Whewell and Brew-
ster, Murchison and Goneybeare, Prestwich
and Carpenter, Professors Owen, Dawbeny.
Babbage, and Lubbock, Sir William Hamil-
ton, Dr. Bright, Lord Lansdowne, and the
Marquis of Northampton; and at the clos-
ing conversazione (where I was privileged
to sit next to the lovely Miss Franklin) I
could see at a glance the whole galaxy of
talent under every department of science


grouped together on one common platform.
One member of the association. Professor
Prestwich, I knew well. He was then a
London wine merchant, and frequently
called upon us and on other merchants to
offer special parcels of wines; and I well
remember a quiet talk we had on matters
of science, on geology in particular, which
he told me was then his favourite study.
One of the most attractive papers read at
that association was by Professor Dawbeny
—a sort of chemical analysis on the charac-
teristics of mineral waters, a subject full of
interest to Bristolians, in view of our well-
known spas at Clifton, and those of our
neighbours at Bath and Cheltenham. In
this paper he stated that at the first Lisbop
earthquake the hot springs at different
places and far away became very turbid,
and then rose up so copiously os to overflow
the wells. The important inference drawn
by the Professor was that these thermal
springs are evidently safety valves, and this
was confirmed at the Naples eruption, when
there were violent tremors outside and all
round Carlsbad, and also to Weisbaden.
The towns themselves were perfectly tran-
quil, while these tremors, some of great vio-
lence, were felt as far off as Scandinavia and
the eastern part of North America. Coupl-
ing this with the fact that in other and
more frequent disturbances, such as at Ve-
suvius, any great eruption in which was
marked by slight tremors even in Scotland,
it seems to point clearly to the existence of
connected lines of volcanic bands through-
out the earth’s strata, telling us that when
the full time is come these fires, now dor-
mant, will then be lit up; and, through the
simultaneous action of lava in the vast
eruption, will accomplish the fulfilment of
the prophecy, “The earth shall be burned
up and the elements shall melt with fervent
heat.”


—Grim Rural Surgery.—
I pass to another branch of science—sur-
gery. An incident in my early youth, which
our friends across the water might probably
define as rather “a tall story;” nevertheless
I can personally vouch for its accuracy.
About four miles from Portshead (where my
father had a country house) dn a village named
Portbury, there lived an old couple. The
husband was attended by a surgeon named
Allen for a bad leg, which the. doctor said
must come off—an extreme measure, which
was strenuously resisted on the ground of
expense. The couple had means, but miser-
ly habits, and they grumbled at the cost of
the operation. So they drew the doctor
out, visit after visit, eliciting in apparent
rural curiosity all the main details of leg
amputation—how it was done, the leg tied
hard above the bad place with a strong ban-
dage to keep back the blood, how it was
cut off and the bane sawn through, the
blood vessels tied, &c. Then the doctor
told the old couple that long years back a
leg or an arm, after being tightly bound,
had been sawn, cut right through, and a
heated iron passed over the surface, bone,
flesh, and all, which burnt and closed up
the blood vessels, and comparatively stop-
ped the bleeding. Of course, this primitive
and rough mode of cauterization as prac-
tised three centuries back, has been fre-
quently alluded to by lecturers on surgery,
who mention cases even in which the stump
was dipped in boiling patch or turpentine,
padded buttons soaked in oil of vitriol being
applied and fastened to the arteries. But,
to return. The old couple seemed much
interested in all these varied recitals, and
acted on Capt. Cuttle’s wise proverb—
“ When found, make a note of.” One day
the doctor, with the intention of pressing
for an immediate decision or throwing off
all responsibility, called, saw the old woman


in the outer room, and said, “Well, and
how is John?” With a knowing look, she
replied, “Oh! John’s all right; leg’s off; go
in and see him.” They had with knife,
saw, and a redhot flatiron or fire shovel (I
forget which), done the whole thing them-
selves. The man got over it.
—A Dying Effort. —
I am reminded of a very sad case that oc-
curred to an old friend of our family in
Oxford —Dr. Kidd, a physician in large
practice. He had just sat down to dinner
with carving knife and fork in his hands
when, suddenly seized with apoplexy,
he tried at once to drive the fork into bis
temple and open a blood vessel, but just
failed to reach it, and fell back dead in his
chair.
—A Lunatic Patient. —
T once visited an old friend, Nat Orisp,
in medical practice near Reading, who had
taken charge of a lady patient, a daughter
of a rich London brewer. Her brain had
become weakened, and mentally she was
quite off the balance, although she con-
versed more, intelligently than one would
expect. Her one desire, as Mrs. Crisp told
me on arrival, was to write letters to peo-
ple outside, containing projects for her re-
lease. I was therefore duly instructed, in
the event of her selecting me as a medium,
to hand over any such letters to my hostess,
in harmony with intimations from her fam-
ily. One day I met Miss on the stairs;
and beckoning to me mysteriously, she put
a letter into my hand, and asked me to
post it I took it, and, with sad hypocrisy
bowing assent, posted with it straight to
Mrs. Crisp. Two or three days after we
happened to be talking about this incident,
when silently stole into the room the lady
herself, who had evidently heard all. Can
I describe her expression? Just a momen-


tary glance at the traitor, then a medita-
tive far-into-space look so easily translated
—“Oh that I had him with me for only one
five minutes for a claw, a strangle, or a
stab.” Of course one’s duty in the matter
was clear; but I had just the feeling as if
it had been a real act of treachery; and
never after did I go up to my room unless
satisfied that she was safely ensconced
either below or with the female attendant.
There is no question about the insane being
“affected by the lunar beam,” for as soon
as the moon approached the full, a decided
change came with it, symptoms —face of a
livid leaden hue with a darkened expres-
sion: constant restlessness, with compara-
tively sleepless nights.
—'Monomania.—
Some years after, I again visited my
friend, who had then removed to Brisling-
ton, near Bristol, and had another lady
patient under his control. The diagnosis
in this ease differed totally from the other,
and I was expecting with some curiosity
the introduction, as her mania consisted in
saying rude things to visitors, and one sen-
tence in particular. On sitting down to
dinner the symptoms came out. Her ruling
passion was to say, “He’s no gentleman;
he’s no gentleman.” I was thus one more
among a long list of those who in her esti-
mation had forfeited all claim to the ever
coveted distinction. But I did not like it
for all that; although we were on good
terms before I left.
—'A High Leap.—
Going back to more early'’ experiences,
and in one or two branches of physical
science, from a boy I loved to be in the
saddle. The earliest training was with a
cloth and surcingle on my father’s carriage
horse in a four mile run before breakfast to


Durdham Down and back. That down with
its low bushes and its many cavities, fur-
nished a good school for low leaps, and
formed an initiatory training for an unwit-
ting imitation of Dick Turpin, some few
years after, as follows; —I started one
morning for Colef'ord and Nuneham on
business on a fine upstanding saddle horse,
of great strength, and as easy as an arm-
chair, but, as I noticed, with one strong
aversion—a heap of broken stones in the
road. I had been a day or two at Oole-
ford, when one morning the nag took
fright at several stone heaps, and bolting,
ran furiously through the town and up the
hill at its outskirts, the two Ooleford doc-
tors following, evidently expecting a case,
as there was a turnpike gate at the top
and closed. The horse took the gate, and
but for my foolishly checking him, would
have cleared it beautifully. As it was, he
struck and broke the top bar with his chest,
but yet alighted safely on the other side
with me still on bis back, although in the
concussion I described a short trajectory
over his head. It was, indeed, a providen-
tial interposition, and brought with it the
hearty congratulations of both surgeons.
The horse was but slightly injured, a little
strained, and a few scratches; but after
riding him out gently in the afternoon, fol-
lowed by fomentations, the stiffness went
off altogether. The five-barred gate itself
thus injured, was a new structure, and the
paint hardly dry, its ancestor having also
come to a violent end —torn asunder by
horses. A carter had passed through with
his load in the morning, bad taken his tic-
ket, and returning in the evening failed
to produce it, having, as he said, dropped
it on the road; the keeper then refused
the transit. The man went back, found
the ticket, returned, and produced it,
though very dirty and much disfigured, to


the gatekeeper, who still refused to let him
through. He then first threatened, then
carrying out the threat, unharnessed his
horses, and dragged the gate down. Sum-
moned accordingly, he produced his ticket
in court, a silent but eloquent defendant,
and was discharged; the magistrate being
powerless to convict, but giving him a
strong caution never in future to take the
law into his own hands.
—A Curious Competition. —
On leaving Coleford for Xunchain I met
two friends (Forest of Dean men), John
Trotter, a coal proprietor, and James
Teague, a. medical student, who were
musical devotees to the very core, and one
night we agreed to sing in turn one song
after another with a minute’s interval be-
tween until either we, or our repertoire was
exhausted. That evening closed up with about
42 or 43 songs. My own list was 14, among
which were. “All is lost,” from “Somnambu-
la,” “In native worth,” “Awake, thou gol-
den blush of morn,” “Yarieo to her lover,”
“I love her, how I love her,” “Bay of Bis-
cay,” “The last man,” “Death of Nelson,”
and “The old bachelor.” Most of these
songs are no/w forgotten, and have given
place to a more refined style of composition.
—The Rebecca Riots.—
I well remember the Rebecca rioters in
Wales, and if ever riots were justifiable
those were. The number of turnpikes and
the consequent heavy tolls had multiplied
beyond all endurance, and in many districts
had so destroyed the traffic that it did not
even pay the gatekeeper’s wages. The far-
mers got no redress where alone they could
look for it —from the magistrates; for the
trusts were held by themselves. Their only
apparent remedy, therefore, was to take the
law into their own hands, which chey did


with such skill and perfect organization,
disguised in women’s clothes, that none
could ever be detected. In the enquiry
which ensued the Government at once dis-
solved the Turnpike Association, and practi-
cally justified the rioters.
—More Musical Memories. —
My first musical efforts were very primi-
tive. The fairer sex on harpsichord or
piano were daily enjoying sweet scales, sup-
plemented by the everlasting “Battle of
Prague,” but we boys were gently breathing
through the small teeth of a comb covered
with thin tissue paper, a prelude to the
more refined and perfect rendering of the
Jewsharp. My earliest recollections are of
the great Norwegian violinist, Ole Bull. He
was a successor and imitator of Paganini,
whom he heard as a boy, and was then so
impressed with his wonderful talent that he
devoted himself to hard study with the one
purpose to emulate him. Thus he became
accomplished in all Paganini’s tricks, and
his four-part chords were simply marvel-
lous. I can never forget his wonderful play-
ing on the fourth string in exquisite melo-
dies, some of his own composing, and others
in weird spasmodic Swedish and Norwegian
airs, similar to those I heard subsequently
sung by Jenny Lind. These two great
celebrities, Ole Bull and Jenny Lind,
seem to stand alone as high-class represen-
tatives of music in a northern clime. With
the exception of the guitar as an accom-
paniment, I never took to instrumental ac-
quirements, but threw myself ardently into
song. The earliest efforts were on “Com-
fort ye” and “In native worth.” I sang
the first of these in public -when about 17.
Whenever I could hear either of these songs
rendered at any concert, whether in early
or later years, in Bristol, Bath, London,
Birmingham, or elsewhere, the opportunity


was eagerly seized; and, looking at the ad-
vantages one thus got in noting the special
peculiarities of each ginger, no better train-
ing, in the absence of a good master, can
possibly be had. At about 18 I joined a
small glee society. The members were John
Daniel, composer of so many hymn tunes
in the “Bristol Tune Book;" Tom
Eankin, and C. B. Fripp, architect (both
great friends of W. B. Carpenter); W.
Pratten, at that time a famed pianist; and
myself. The glees we sung principally
were by Calico,tt, Spofforth, and Webbe, such
as “When winds breathe soft," “Queen of
the valley" “When the moon’s a,dun shield,”
“By Celia’s Arbor,’’ and “Mynheer van
Dunck.’’ We met at each other’s houses*
and, in view of so many societies having
come to an untimely end by supper feast-
ings, we limited our menu to bread and
cheese and ale, with salad or celery as ac-
companiments. I well knew one young
lawyer, Louis Livett, who had a sweet rich
tenor, and who once concocted an innocent
musical frolic. He and three others went
up to Clifton muffled in overcoats, and sang
a number of choice glees beneath the win-
dows of one house after another, where as
a rule they were well known. Windows
were thrown up by eager listeners and
money was flung to them; and in one case
they were invited in, but this invitation
they declined, as the fun would have been
spoilt. I was an alto in the British Madri-
gal Society for seven years. It was com-
posed of thirty members —leading merchants
and professional men, led by Mr. Corfe, the
cathedral organist—to wlrom were added
the twelve choristers and several minor
canons. We met once a fortnight at the
Montague Hotel for practice, and there the
society still assembles, 64 years from
its inception. We sang all the
well known madrigals, by Orlando Gibbons,


Benet, Wilbye, Morley, Marenzio, &c., and
also more modern part songs by Pearsall
and others. A large number of these madri-
gals were composed in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, and in her honour as “The fair
Oriana.” It was said in her time of any one
who could not join in a madrigal, that his
education had been sadly neglected. I was
glad to see on the oicicasion of the Ducal
University commemoration in Adelaide an
adaptation by Mr. Bevam of a well known
old madrigal, in a final line of each verse—
“ And I will love thee till I die.” It is
much to be lamented that the formation of
an Adelaide society is apparently imprac-
ticable. The chorister element and the
basses we have in abundance, but male
altos and tenors are sadly deficient. Touch-
ing part singing generally, in days gone by
at all public dinners, an occasional glee
was indispensable, professionals being en-
gaged therefor; especially also at the com-
mencement of any such festivity was sung
as grace that beautiful fugue “Non nobis
domine.” Why cannot this be sung now?
Our musical status must be at a low ebb
if at such engagements three amateurs
could not be found for its production.
—Whistling.—
I once heard at a small musical party ex-
quisite whistling by a young lady to her
own accompaniment on the piano. It was
like the distant warbling of a bird, and so
subdued in tone that we had to cluster
round the piano to hear her. The effect
was lovely, and in sound it bore just the
same relation to an ordinary whistle as the
harmonic to its natural tone.
—Physical Feats.—
I was a gymnastic pupil under a clever
but venturous master, Doctor Hartley, in
a large room in Park Row, where we assem-


bled at from 7 to 8 a.m. One morning an
army sergeant came in with a new feat;
this was swinging from the trapeze to the
horizontal bar at about a five or six feet
swing, and the sergeant asked if any of the
pupils would try it. I was told off and
found it a novel sensation, far easier than
it looked. This exercise was brought to
mind distinctly in after years when Leo-
tard, a young man of splendid physique and
with the eye of an eagle, went through
his wonderful flights. As be stood on a
little platform, the first trapeze was swung
by his attendant to within about four feet.
He sprang to that and the impetus carried
him to the next trapeze; from this to a
pair of stirrup irons; then to a third tra-
peze; and on to a similar platform at the
other end. But the crowning sensa-
tion was the finishing act, in which
he swung to the centre trapeze,
turned a somersault, descending to the
ground on flat feet—no spring or rebound—
and with an awful thud that made every
spectator shudder at the tremendous risks
he was running. No nerves could stand it.
and his death shortly after was ascribed en-
tirely to these repeated shocxs to the sys-
tem. This brings to mind a feat almost as
dangerous that Hr. Hartley showed me and
got me to do—once only. Fixing the hori-
zontal bar at about 7 ft., and standing with
toes just on the edge, he made a clean drop,
grasping the bar with his hands when at
chest height. 1 followed, and felt as if
every muscle in my body had been strained
to breaking point. I saw about this time a
sensational occurrence at St. Vincent’s
Rocks, Clifton. The announcement was
"The Flying Man.” The highest point of
St. Vincent’s rocks was 250 ft., and the
distance across (at the same level) to the
opposite point about 700 ft. One end of a
thick manila rope was fixed to the timber


work on the topmost rock on the Clifton
side, and the other end to a tree in the
Leigh Wood Valley side. Then, suspended
from the rope by some method at feet and
armpits under two running grooved wheels,
and with rope and pulley arrangement to
control his descent, he took his downward
flight, and without accident. The distance
thus traversed must have "been nearly 1,200
ft., and he waved a flag as he went.
—A Close Shave. —
I had about this period a narrow escape
from assault and robbery rvhen driving on a
dark night from an adjacent village to the
Portshead Hotel. There was about two
miles of lonely road through a thick wood,
and by the lamp’s flicker I saw a
man start out from among the
trees. Whipping the horse into a
gallop, I gathered reins and whip in
left hand, and took up prominently a pis-
tol in the other; but, after slowing down a
little, I found the man running close be-
hind. I then cocked the pistol, emphasizing
the click with my tongue, started again into
a gallop, and happily saw his face no more.
I had more than £7O in my portmanteau,
and thankfully did I rejoice in my escape.
—Hunting.—
I once had an amateur run with the Chel-
tenham staghounds. The stag, which not
long before had given them a 30-mile run,
was uncarted. Leaping out, he took a
short stand, first glancing at the assembled
field, and then, deliberating for a moment
or two upon the course, off he went. The
usuail 15 minutes’ grace having expired the
hounds were laid on; amd, spreading over
the ground for a minute or two, soon
picked up the scent, and away. I had a
mount from Laveriek, of Portshead, which
I think, from his jumping, had never seen


hounds before. As a rule, however, it was
a comparatively easy country, mostly four-
feet loose stone walls, and these reduced
materially by the first three or four riders,
so that the leaping to a beginner was at-
tractive. Just after this I charged at a gate
with set teeth, the nag tipping the top bar,
likewise tipping me into a good six inches
of wet clayish mud on the other side.
After this I drew near to a rasper hedge,
which can only be rushed, but my effort
was altogether too mild, needing some co-
quetting to get myself free, which I had
hardly done when I saw a farmer and his
son rushing across the field, with strong
and -sarcastic language to boot. Happily
I got away, taking an angular direction, so
that the interview was deferred “sine die.”
But for one or two doubles these mishaps
would have put me out of it altogether.
As it was I got here and there a good sight
of the field, and saw some fine leaping, es-
pecially by Miss Agg. Gardner, who, on a
splendid grey, cleared a five barred grandly,
when at the same time some red coats un-
hooked it and saved the jump. It ha,s al-
ways been a marvel to me how a woman
can keep her seat, especially in a jump dr
swerve. The secret lies of course in the
grip; it did not lie with me when once
riding with sidesaddle Mr. C. B. Young’s
.mare Jessie, from Battunga to Woodhouse.
The quiet amble was gratifying, the change
to a trot was not, which on every occa-
sion led to an inspection of roads over
her head.
—The Berkley Hounds. —
In passing through Berkley one day,
as the hounds bad just arrived at the
meeting-place, I saw the Earl (Fitzhar-
dingej nde up, then upwards of 70. It was
a sight to be remembered to observe him
alighting from his hunter and, booted and


spurred, walk all through and among the
pack, speaking to each hound by name as
though he loved them; feeling his way
gently and carefully as not to tread on their
feet; and every dog looking up and giving
him a responsive note. The finest riding 1
ever saw was during a visit to Oxford at a
great steeplechase, in which Mr. Mason rode
Elmore’s celebrated horse Lottery, of whom
it was said that, while other horses had to
rise to their fences, he jumped as from
a springboard; and of Mason, that he had
the most perfect seat in the saddle. I had
the opportunity of seeing this after the
steeplechase was over, when Mason, being
close to me, turned round and took the
hedge into the next paddock. Both with
man and horse it was the most graceful act
you could imagine. I have often thought of
the to-and-fro sway of a pair of half-opened
round compasses astride of a pencil or a
ruler as the only fit illustration you could
give of Mason’s graceful natural rise and fall
in the leap, adjusting a perfect balance as
if by instinct.
—Diving.—
A sensational and frequent occurrence in
those times was the diving from some great
height, either from a bridge or the yard of
a vessel, which I have repeatedly seen both
at Bristol and on the Thames. I think,
however, that this deep diving was after-
wards forbidden by the Lord Chamberlain
through a bad accident or death by contact
with a submerged pile or something of the
kind. I remember once at Oxford doing a
dive myself on a reduced scale —the experi-
ment was never repeated. A number of us
were bathing in the early morning, when
Beckwith, the champion swimmer, with one
og two others, dived from the top of a low
pollarded willoAV 10 or 12 ft. from the water.
I also went up and came down, but at an


angle that drew comment and enquiries
from the onlookers as to how it felt. But
this was nothing to a performance I once
saw at Glenelg by a Baptist minister. Seve-
ral of us were bathing together from the
platform at the jetty end, where the depth
was 12 or 14 ft. The rev. gentleman was
standjing on the edge, stripped and ready,
when to our astonishment he said —“Well, I
can’t swim; but I daresay it will be all
right.” Then, over he went, and down he
went. The further history resolves into a
blind faith, a few untimely splutters, and a
fluttering of hands, followed by sinking ten-
dencies, when he was rushed by Frank
H and others and ignominiously lugged
to the platform steps.
—Mob Fairs. —
In one of my Cheltenham visits I witness-
ed a mob fair, where the girls used to come
in from far and near to be hired as servants.
It was a singular sight, the fresh, rosy-looking
country girls standing about in groups and
rows, waiting for a possible master or mis-
tress —a sort of living auction mart; and, 1
should think, a source of much evil. At the
close of the day the tables were spread at
the nearest hotels for a rough-and-ready
feast, the cost of which was defrayed by the
young men, and after this came the dance.
This hiring fair was said to have sprung
from am old custom in Russia, only that
there the state hiring was for life. Unmar-
ried men and maidens assembled in the
public gardens on Easter Sunday and
throughout that week. If a man was taken
by a pretty face, the fair one was at onoe
accosted and asked for her parents’ name
and address. If she gave it, the suit was
favoured; if she withheld it, it was a non-
suit.


—Servants and Mistresses.—
The modern system of hiring is accom-
plished at registry offices —offices happily
not quite as numerous as the flittings of
some unfortunate hirelings from the mis-
tresses’ homes. It is well, both for servant
and mistress, that these extremely tempo-
rary residences are exceptional. While,
however, there are always two sides to
every question, it is worthy of note that,
whatever the existing causes of these rapid
dismissals, the overexaeting atmosphere of
the home or the shortcomings of the domes-
tic, the servants have yet a true registra-
tion of their own—an unerring record in
full operation among the whole body of do-
mestics, silent in its working, and without
direct or apparent combination, but never-
tneless a faithful register of the character of
every mistress at its head. I have often
heard this, and once saw it verified in the
case of a mistress who within 12 years could
count either class of servant, cook or house-
maid, on the fingers of one hand; two of
them being worthless and registry mistakes.
Of these two exceptions, one, who proved
utterly unsuitable in her habits and in the
character of her work, was dismissed within
six weeks. Her successor, who was unex-
ceptionable in either respects, and who
came to sta.y, told her mistress that this
woman had found her out, and
said “You can go to her; she’s
all right, though I didn’t suit her.”
In many cases, while everything is expect-
ed, seldom is a kind word given. The
mistress is not unkind it may be, by inten-
tion; but too often regarding the servant as
a piece of machinery, paid to carry out the
operations, unhelped by sympathy and the
sense of co-operation. Servants and mis-
tresses are members of ■ one family even
now —I speak only of these exceptional
cases; and if the domestics are kindly


treated —the work laid down will be cheer-
fully done, creating a spirit of co-operation
and a bond of sympathy that will make
them no less faithful than respectful ad-
herents.
—Old Customs.—
Nearly all those old customs that were
kept up in my early days as regularly as
the year came round have now died out—
the Maypole, dressed with garlands of
flowers; and the happy children, young
men, and maidens dancing around it; the
oak-apple day, 28 days later, in remem-
brance of the second Charles’s tree-hiding;
and, above all, that beautiful custom, im-
practicable in South Australia, of carol
singing, and of the waits, sung on every
Christmas Eve. Many of the carols were
quaint and grotesque.
The Lord at first did Adam make,
Out of the dust and clay.
In Bethlehem, in Jewry,
The blessed babe was born,
And laid within a manger,
Upon this blessed morn—
The which his mother Mary
Nothing did take in scorn.
But they were yet all beautiful an their
reference to the one birth of births; and
the whole ceremony of carol singing ended
with hearty wishes for a happy Christmae
season, and the supplement of a willing
money tribute to the poor singers.
—“Mothering Sunday.”—
Another annual festival was regularly
kept up in all homes —“Mothering Sunday”
—on which a large tureen of so-called fur-
menty (really frumenty) was brought in
filled with wheat grains, boiled in sweeten-
ed milkj and plentifully strewed with rai-
sins, to commemorate “Mid-Lent Sunday,”
when the young men and maidens, either
in service or unmarried life, took or ob-


fcained leave to go and see their parents—
the mother especially, in order to renew
and strengthen the ties of filial love. To
us children, being at our home, it was only
the welcome dish without the necessity of
a journey to obtain it. Likewise, and again
on Shrove Tuesday, did we and those in
every family get the accustomed dish of
pancakes without being previously shriven
as of yore. Died out also has that old-
time custom, decorative and magnetic, of
the pendent mistletoe branch, which oft-
times hung from ceiling or chandelier, a
tacit invitation if any fair one should with
apparent unconsciousness pass beneath the
branch, perhaps not thinking any one could
be near! But he was —and came nearer!
—Music Again.—Jullien and Hullah. —
Reverting again to music, I well remem-
ber hearing that brilliant pianist, Thalberg.
in several Bristol concerts, I can recall the
deep impression he made upon me by his
wonderful chords, which it was said seem-
ed like four hands on the keys at once. His
great delight also was in playing lovely
solos of his own composing—songs without
words, played with one hand and accompa-
nied with the other. The great sensational
musicals at this period were the London
shilling promenade concerts under the con-
ductorship of the mighty Jullien, who first
made them a financial success. He had a
splendid band, and introduced the best
movements from Haydn, Mozart, Beetho-
ven, and other great masters, with a series
of marches, gallops, and polkas, many of
his own composing, that attracted immense
crowds. Added to this was his own won-
derful personality. Dressed and bejewelled
to the utmost, with an enormous white
waistcoat, a huge head of curly black hair,
and wielding a baton inlaid with diamonds
and rubies in fantastic aerial curves—such


was the inimitable Jullien. At this same
time a great movement was introduced by
Hullah, who established large classes for
instruction in vocal and choral music, and
with such success that a large hall was built
purposely for him in St. Martin’s lane, Long
Acre. One of these class concerts I attend-
ed, and it was said that between 1840 and
1860 twenty-five thousand passed through
his hands.
—Violinists and Singers.—
Three great violinists, who succeeded each
other at this period were Wienawski, Vieux-
temps, and Sivori, each having marvellous
execution and a refinement essentially his
own. Sivori was a pupil of Paganini, and
inherited much of his power. Once when in-
vited to dinner and to bring his violin with
him, he said “Merci mon violon ne dine
pas.” Subsequently to this I heard at va-
rious concerts the incomparable bassi Lab-
lache and Tamburini, Herr Staudighl, and
Herr Formes, and also a rich tenor, Signor
Borrani, son of Dr. Boisragon, of Chelten-
ham. Then followed in concert and in opera
Mesdames Pasta and Titiens, Christine Niel-
sen and Patti, and that rich deep contral-
to, Madame Albani. Some of these used to
receive £2OO a night at each concert.
Charles Halle I have also listened to in bis
exquisite rendering of the “Moonlight
sonata,” and once I heard Weiss sing his
own composition, but to my taste he simply
ruined it by singing too fast. To close this
long musical procession, after these fol-
lowed as conductors Alfred Mann at the
Crystal Palace, and Michael Costa in his
“Eli,” with the grand and almost national
march which with Mendlessohn’s “Wed-
ding march,” can never be excelled.
—George Robins. —
I have already alluded to some sensational
incidents of a physical character; but


others in those early days engrossed the
mind. One in particular that for some
years supplied amusement and interest to
the commercial circles throughout the
whole kingdom was seen in the grandilo-
quent and bombastic advertisements of
sales by auction by the renowned George
Robins. In this puffing age, although he
dates far back into the last century, he yet
stands on the highest pedestal as the prince
of puffers- His glowing descriptions, ready
wit, and persuasive manner frequently led
the biddings to far above the true value;
and I remember well the high-flown pla-
cards -announcing various auction sales.
One property in particular he represented
as being near a “hanging wood.” This was
a gallows, still undisturbed in the neigh-
bourhood! Another sale was of the great
collection of Horace Walpole’s curios at
Strawberry Hill, a sale which lasted nearly
a month. I have referred to an account
of this sale in an old “Illustrated News”
of 1842, in which Robins thus describes his
instructions: —“Whom the Earl of Walde-
grave has 'condescendingly honoured in
being selected to sell by public auction the
classic contents,” &c. This paper says,
moreover, that “George Robins was splen-
didly caricatured in a work entitled ‘Count
D’Horsay,’ or ‘Follies of the day,’ in which
he is introduced as ‘George Bobbins.’ ”
—-Famous Jurists. —
My great delight has ever been —in Eng-
land —to wander into the law courts, hear
counsel, and watch the ruling judge. A
very early but distinct remembrance was
of Sir Charles Wetherell, Recorder of Bris-
tol in 1830 and 1831; and after that of his
successor, Justice Crowder, with his pale
classic face in full contrast to his leading
counsel, Sergeant Bonn pas, with red hair,
equally florid complexion, and distinctly


combative manner—hence Dickens’s “Buz-
fuz.” In equal remembrance as leaders of
the Oxford Circuit were the solid gravity
and deliberateness of Erie, in contrast to
Gockburn, who always seemed brimming
over with dry humour, even as Lord Chief
Justice. I saw him in his earliest history
as counsel, and in his last judicial days at
Exeter in 1877, when 1 sat only four re-
moves from his legal highness on the bench
and —survived! At Westminister I recollect
admiring the two judges, Lords Denman
and Campbell, each tall and stately, and
with a grave dignity all his own; and often
with curious interest have watched old.
Baron Pollock, with deep wrinkles that you
could trace even at that distance, and al-
ways apparently fast asleep; but the mo-
ment anything arose in tho case the eyes
instantly but quietly opened and a question
or comment followed, showing that he was
legally as wide awake as the counsel. After
this came Baron Martin, with his dry Irish
humour. Justice Keats, and Bramwell
Platts; and then Blackburn, with his prac-
tical commonsense view of everything, as
if equity v. legality; and last followed Jus-
tice Creswell and Sir Fitzroy Kelly, whom
I often heard in their court. This reminds
me of a capital story Sir E. Bussell, in his
work, just published, tells of Creswell in
the Admiralty Court. The two counsels
were Sir Fred. Thesinger and Sergeant
Channel!. The latter all through the case
called the vessel the Ellen, while Sir Fred-
erick styled her the Helen. At last the
judge, with quaint gravity, said “Stop, I
have this vessel in my notes as Ellen and
Helen —which is it?” “Oh, my Lud,” said
Thesinger, “the ship was christened the
Helen, hut she lost her H in the chops of
the channel!” Poor letter H! Which is
the worst —to drop it, or to take it up?
You can now determine by a case in the


opposite direction, related by Dean Pigou,
of whom a man asked which was the next
station to Itchin (meaning Hitchin). The
immediate answer was “Scratching."
—The History of a Table.—
I was once visiting Mr. Goodridge, of
Bath, who then took me over the mansion
of the late Thomas Beckford (whose archi-
tect he was). There I saw lovely articles
of vertu; one in particular was a small
boudoir table, beautifully inlaid with mar-
bles of various colours, obtained from the
well known Babbicombe quarries near Tor-
quay. As I was then on the eve of being
furnished, a resolution was passed and
warmly seconded by Mr. Goodridge, for a
large ootagonal marble table from these
same quarries. Accordingly we designed a
plan of a single section of about 24 pieces,
which I sent down to Woodly at Babbi-
combe for an estimate of cost; and this
being Is. 6d. per piece of about three six-
teenth inch thickness, the order was sent;
and the whole set of pieces, nearly 200 in
number, arrived in due course, cut exactly
to shape, and ready for fitting. These being
carefully unpacked, I ordered a |-incb slab
of slate, set the pieces in order
thereon, and with best newly baked
blaster of Paris audaciously
believed I could do the whole thing myself!
In one short hour the enlightenment came.
Then the whole set minus the slab was sent
back to Babbicombe with a full confession
and with instructions to properly fix and
cement them. The result was a slab of the
most exquisite inlaying I have ever seen, the
lines of junction being perceptible only by
the differing shapes and colours of the
pieces; and as these were of varied forms
and different sizes, the minute accuracy was
the more marvellous, as every piece had to


be finely ground into its place. The whole
was a selection of the loveliest colours. The
weight of the slab was 1| cwt. Three legs
were therefore needed. These I got cast in
iron (afterwards bronzed), from a plaster
of paris lion’s head and foot I had seen as
one of the supports of a hall table. I
then connected these legs towards the feet
with a light iron scroll work, and at the
top with a flat iron IJ-inch rim, on which
the slab was subsequently bolted, so that
dt could be taken bo pieces when required.
This with strong wide castors and a rose-
wood bevelled edge to the slab completed
the table, now r nearly 2 cwt., which suggest-
ed a change of position every now and then
by an inch or two, as the drawing room
floor declared it was too heavy, and threat-
ened otherwise to dent, Mr. Goodridge
valued the table at £45; the real cost was
about £22. The perfect workmanship was
evidenced by its subsequent removals —from
Bristol to Derby, and afterwards to Lon-
don, which removals, covering 23 years,
were effected without the smallest damage.
On leaving London for Adelaide I sent it
to the well-known auctioneers, Messrs. Fair-
brother, Clark, & Lye, when a lady bought
it; but on its arrival at the new home, (die
husband regarding it as too heavy an in-
vestment, returned it to the auctioneers
tor resale. Mr. Lye, whom I knew well,
told me of this, and that with pleasure he
had effected the transfer to his own draw-
ing room. Sic transit tabula 1
—Sister Anne. —
Rather a funny episode occurred on the
day of my marriage. Mr. Binney was to
officiate, and the carriage was ordered to
call for him at his house in Trinity square,
to join us at a certain hour at the Four
Swans, Bishoplsgate, and then go on to
Plaistow. The hour arrived, but no chap-


lain, and we waited and waited, until at
last, in dread of a first arrival of the bri-
dal party at the Plaistow Church, we
started, and all the way for about five miles
in search of the minister, William Stanton
and I enacted the tragedy of Blue Beard,
alternately bobbing our heads out of the
window, the “inside” anxiously saying,
“Sister Anne, Sister Anne, what do you
see?” and the only reply of the watcher,
“Nothing but a cloud of dust and a flock
of sheep.” The last act was the arrival aft
the church door, fortunately just in time,
followed immediately after by the reverend
gentleman. There were two Trinity
squares, and the driver selected the wrong
one, ominous indeed, but at the outset only,
for with the bride, five beautiful brides-
maids, the ceremlony, the breakfast, the de
parture, vigorous assaults made from the
nice plantation and the shoe cupboards,
everything went off without a flaw, the on>
ly questionable item, that on that day both
bride and bridegroom were “sent to Coven-
try,” that town being the first halting place
in the honeymoon trip.
—Engineers.—
It was a great festival time for engineers
in the forties. New lines were projected
and laid down throughout the United King-
dom and in foreign countries also. My
brother-in-law, William Hanson, who was
then traffic superintendent of the eastern
counties line, brought me incidentally into
association with many members of the pro-
fession. One morning we spent an hour
with Mr. Peto in his office—he was then
partner with Grissell. On another occasion
we had an interview with George Bidder,
in years back “the calculating boy,” able
at a glance to master any combination of
figures—more so indeed than to master the
contents of a long closely written letter


which the postman brought while we were
there. Holding it up to us, he said —“How
can he expect a man to get through all
this?” Ringing a bell, he remarked to his
private secretary —“Please look at it and
tell me what it is all about.” The renown-
ed Isambard Brunei I have seen repeatedly,
and on one occasion travelled with him in
the same carriage. His engineering prin-
ciples stood him in good stead —in fact, sav-
ing his life, when in conjuring tricks with
his children he unintentionally swallowed
the half-sovereagn. After two unsuccessful
operations by Sir Benjamin Brodie, Brunei
suddenly said—“l will stand on my head
and try to jerk it out.” A small stage was
devised, to which he was strapped and in-
verted, and after one failure the coin was
dislodged and fell into his mouth. He said
that was the happiest moment of his life.
—Scotch Pluck. —
One autumn we were invited to spend
some time in Scotland with Mr. Oolvin and
his sister who had taken a cottage at
S'trone, at the foot of Loch Long, where lay
at anchor a few yards from the garden gate
his little yacht, in which we had pleasant
spins. An incident had just previously oc-
curred in the experience of my sister-in-law.
Miss Oolvin, that elicited one’s admiration
of her determination and pluck. Passing
the dining room door late one evening she
heard a slight noise, as if some one were
trying to open the wdndow. Quickly and
silently approaching it she drew aside the
curtains, and peered out through the dark-
ness with her face against the window —
her nose was then close to a man’s nose out-
side! Rushing out, she opened the front
door and saw the man running down the
pathway. She chased him to the gate,
which he cleared, and escaped. She was a
lady gentle in blood and to the manner


bom; but she was tall and strong, and if
she had caught that man she would have
held on until help came.
—Sabbatarianism and Muscle.—
We had in the course of this visit two il-
lustrations of northern Sabbatarianism.
The kirk was a mile from our cottage home;
and, my near relative being unable, to walk,
I applied on the Sunday morning to the old
boatwoman to row us up. Shaking her
head, she said —“Na, it’s na lawfu’ day.”
However, after some reasoning, she was led
to regard it as an act of necessity, and a
return passage was secured. On another oc-
casion, when staying at Arroehar, at the
head of the loch, very much the abode of
fishermen, I heard that they never went
on the lake to fish on either the Saturday or
Sunday night, regarding each night as part
of the Sabbath, and thus exercising their
lawful calling in only five nights out of the
seven. In going back to Strone we had a
splendid instance of Scotch muscle. We
wished in particular to get back that
evening, and two young men, brothers,
fine stalwart fellows of about 6 ft. 2 in.,
offered to row us down, each taking one
heavy oar. To our wonder and admiration,
with just one rest of a minute or two, they
steadily pulled the whole 16 miles.
—lnstinct or Heason? —
Many a happy day have I spent on Lochs
Lomond, Katrine, and Long, and especially
on the moors attached to the Craigielands,
William Colvin’s property, which joined
that of Miss Lucy Hope Johnstone. Near-
ly every year, on about the 10th of August,
we with many others were his guests at
the ushering-in of the grouse season. One
afternoon, on the 11th, Mr. Colvin, Mr.
Samuel Stitt (of Liverpool), and I went
up to his nearest moor —of course, without


guns, but taking with us his favourite dog,
Sweep. Coming to one point, he sent him
round the moor for a sort of preliminary
scour, to see if many birds were about. As
we stood there, Colvin suddenly said —“'1
will go and hide behind that wall (about
100 yards away) and see whether Sweep
will find me." The dog returned, missed
his master, looked Mr. Stitt and myself
hard in the face —with a startling gaze ot
enquiry that gave us a sense of awe —and
then, instantly looking round, tore along
straight to a small elevated mound, where
he stood for a moment or two peering
about. Failing in this effort, he returned
to us, scouring round about, evidently tak-
ing up the scent and gradually nearing the
wall, which he jumped, and master and
dog met. We then felt with that look on
the one hand and his regard to the high-
est point of ground he could reach, how
little we knew of the nature or boundaries
of what we call instinct, for this was mani-
festly either reason or inference.
—lntoning the Service. —
But it was not always at the Craigielands
a houseful of guests. It afforded to me at
other occasional seasons a quiet resting-
place and a welcome reception by the lord
of the manor when alone in his glory. And
touching a small musical episode, we were
once quietly dining alone together when a
sudden thought struck me. “Colvin, let us
intone our wants?” (Of course, I cannot
gave the literal rendering, only the purport)
and I broke out in recitative —“I do now
glance at that asparagus.” The answer
then came vocally—“ Brother, 'tis thine”
(and the domestic brought it). And
again 1 sang —“Those strawberries com-
mend themselves to me.” The reply also
chanted—“ That fruit is on the way to
thee” (servant brings it). And so on amid


quiet merriment to the end. Some desires
were expressed in recitative and others
were chanted, but none but those present
can imagine the half-suppressed smile and
astonishment of the domestic who admi-
nistered on the occasion.
—Loch Skene.—
I shall never forget an autumn morning
I spent on one of the Scotch lochs in Dum-
friesshire. You come first to the Gray
Mare’s Tail, a beautiful cascade with a pre-
cipitous fall of 400 ft., but broken up into
spray in the descent by numerous small
projecting rocks; hence its title. Ascend-
ing by its side for about 1,000 ft., you sud-
denly see the beautiful Loch Skene, situate
in a large hollow at the mountain top,
clothed with rich grassy banks and mossy
ground, and in all the hush and stillness
of nature as if one long remove from the
world below. There was not a living
being visible beyond a small flock of
sheep quietly grazing far off as i
stood there for some time gazing,
wondering, awed by the silence. After this
1 gradually let myself down to the purpose
of the visit. The Loch Skene trout are
said to be the finest in the world, and cer-
tainly the shyest; but with a beautiful, still
morning, clear water, and very few bushes,
tbe prospects piscatorially were not promis-
ing. So I stole along like a burglar at
nightfall to the nearest bush, cast a deadly
‘■'speeder” fly just round the edge, and
brought out a lovely brown trout forthwith
• —my first and last. And then in all the
quiet of this beautiful little lake there sud-
denly appeared upon the scene a party of
noisy, laughing tourists —“gents”—will not
say “gentlemen”—and fair ones, who
spread their luncheon, followed by
cork explosions from ale and porter bot-


ties, with a supplement of rods; and, al-
though on the opposite side of the loch, I
could both see and hear them absolutely
thrashing the water; ergo, the trout were
“non est,” for not a rise did they get, or
would have done, if they had remained un-
til this day. In returning to the valley be-
neath, and taking another path on soft,
grassy ground in the descent, I was horror-
stricken by suddenly coming without warn-
ing or any apparent break in the ground,
to an unlooked-for precipice of quite 100 ft.,
and was just able to arrest progress by dig-
ging my heels and rod into the soil and thus
preventing my going clean over a precipi-
tous cliff. Laus Deo! Ah.', how often each
and all of us could, if we would, use that
phrase of thanksgiving in many an incident
of daily life.
Joachim and Others. —
1 once went with a friend to a Monday
popular concert, when we sat next to Davi-
son, who wrote the musical critiques for
the “Times.” On that evening the quartet
were Joachim, Norman Neruda, Hies, and
Piatti. Arabella Goddard played in one of
the intervals, when Joachim came in and sat
with us for a few minutes. I was introduc-
ed to him, of whom it was said by his mas-
ter —that at 13 years of age he was all but
perfect. He was at this time about 25, and
with a fine massive forehead. His wonder-
ful conception and the depth of expression
in everything he played were subjects of
universal comment. I often heard Grisi,
whose singing, teven after her “threescore
and ten,” always charmed her listeners.
Hex “last farewells” were “legion,” and
were a household word. Her concerts lat-
terly were in combination with Parry and
her husband, that loveliest of tenors, Mario.


—Jenny Lind. —
Who can ever forget the rich, clear,
birdlike notes, the pure enunciation, the
wondrous charm, that ever surrounded the
Swedish Nightingale, Jenny Lind? Irregu-
lar features, yet a beautiful face —beautiful
in its peaceful, radiant expression; and her
singing, perfect naturalness. I shall ever
remember, when present at one of her con-
certs, the hush of mingled respect and lov-
ing admiration that pervaded the whole as-
semblage when she came on to the plat-
form, her inner life thus reflecting itself
first in her face, and then on her audience.
Another sweet singer was Madame Sher-
rington, who appeared much in oratorios,
and, in association with the silver-toned
tenor, Sims Reeves, who, whether in opera
or concert, gave such unmixed delight to all
his listeners.
—Church Choirs,
While at Derby I was instrumental in
forming an amateur musical society, includ-
ing lady voices—Mrs. Charles Allison, Mrs.
Gisborne, the Heygates—Mr. Smith, the
banker, Mr. Josiah Lewis, and myself. We
met at each other’s houses to sing glees,
Mendelssohn’s and other part songs, with
an occasional madrigal. They were very
enjoyaible meetings, and the harmonies
went well, although the perfect blending
was sometimes minimized by the undue
prominence of certain voices through their
constant practice and repute as solo sin-
gers, for there were some lovely trebles.
And tins is the great evil in some church
choirs, where here and there one voice is
heard in prominence above all the rest. The
result is that, while the parts are duly
sung, the perfect harmony is wanting. The
self-evident structure of an effective choir
is a sufficient number to each part and,


when collected together, retained; of lovers
of music, lovers of worship with rich voices
and pure intonation; in harmony among
themselves, organist included, and then giv-
ing out vocal harmony to the congregation.
Constant changes, irregular attendants, anci
an insufficient number is with any choir
a manifest anomaly. But with all defects
inseparable from such circumstances what
a contrast is the present to the old-fashion-
ed “country choir” that stands out in keen
remembrance, with its accompaniments of
squeaking fiddle, drowning bassoon, and at
times very cracky clarionet. In other chur-
ches, also, ours for instance at Portshead,
a small barrel organ, grinding out turn by
turn about a dozen tunes.
—A Calais Adventure. —
When once visiting a cousin, a naval pay-
master at Dover, 1 became acquainted with
Captain (afterwards Sir Luke) Smithett,
and one night took a trip with him in the
ivid to Calais. Strolling along the prin-
cipal street the next day, a “lovely bonnet”
caught my eye, and 1 thought of a near re-
lative by whom I thought it would be ap-
preciated. On my entering the shop of Ma-
dame Tetau, a young lady at the counter
heard this request—“Je desire cette cha-
peau pour une jeune demoiselle Anglais;”
and she replied—“ For a young English
lady,” for she happened to be an English
girl. The bonnet secured, she was instruct-
ed to send it to the mail steamer, the
Vivid, that afternoon, as it was to sail at
midnight. On boarding the vessel about
10 p.m. no parcel had arrived. Returning
to Madame Tetau’s I found they had all
gone to bed; her “concierge,” or porter,
however, woke her up, eliciting the infor-
mation that the bonnet had been actually
sent, giving him the name and address of


her young lady who had dispatched it.
Thither and at some distance the concierge
and I repaired, waking up the domestic,
"when after an explanation of the circum-
stances we were ushered up into a large
room with four 'or five beds all tenanted
by “les demoiselles Francais.” My fair
one in question was then accosted by the
concierge, and sitting up in the bed dis-
coursed to both of us to the effect that it
had actually been sent with my address
and delivered on the mail steamer to the
steward. With profound bowings and apo-
logies I therefore left the “pension” en
route to the steamer; and as we passed
the house of Madame Tetau (pronounced
as most of you know “tatoe”) my compa-
nion, her “concierge,” as some little diver-
sion in this anxious time, looked up and
said —“Tetau, Tetau. pomme de terre, mon-
sieur.’’ It was all very well, but w T hat I
Avanted A\ T as not Tetau, but chapeau.
Boarding the Vivid, Captain Smithett sug-
gested the French mail steamer, Avhich had
just sailed, as the probable resting-place
of the lost property, which, on our arrival
at Dover, 1 found on enquiry Avas the case,
and that it was then in the captain’s cabin.
He, however, had evidently regarded it as
a “treasure trove,” for it was only after
a minute description of the bonnet that he
reluctantly handed it over to me. The
entire approval of “a love of a bonnet”
Avas at last the one reward.
—An Indian Governor. —
In 1876 I was privileged with a long in-
terview with the late Sir Charles Trevel-
yan, formerly Governor of Madras, at his
residence in Eaton square, at the instance
of our close friend, the late Samuel Mor-
ley, and to Avhom he gave me a letter of
introduction. Ushered into his library by


a grand livery servant, I there saw him
apparently immersed in books and docu-
ments and thought it fortunate if I ob-
tained a very momentary' interview. It
was therefore a pleasant surprise in the
opposite direction to find that he mani-
fested so much interest in the subject of
our boarding out system, that we were in
close conversation for more than half an
hour, and then walking with me himself
to the ftont door, which he opened, and
with a hearty grip of the hand to boot.
Just after this I had a very pleasant in-
terview with the Misses Rosamond and Flo-
rence Hill, when we had a long, long talk on
the subject very dear to both of us —the
boarding Put of children —into which they
so carefuly enquired in the course of their
Australian visit.
—Doctors. —
I have either known, consulted, or heard
as lecturers, nearly all the great doctors
of the last century. First and foremost
among these was our family physician Dr.
Prichard, author of “The Physical History
of Man,” of whose work Max Muller says
in his autobiography—“lt still remains un-
paralleled in ethnology.” Our next phy-
sician was Dr. Addington Symonds, equal
in repute in his own profession as was his
son, John Addington Symonds, as a lite-
rateur. In harmony with my first desire
(afterwards overruled) to enter the medi-
cal prcfeiaicn, 1 often vi.-ibd the Bristol dis-
secting rooms with a young student friend,
and also witnessed important operations at
the infirmary. One in particular was the
removal of a very large tumour just over
a man’s left hip by Nat Smith, said then
to be one of the neatest operators in Eng-
land, his amputation of a man’s leg above
the knee in a few minutes being regarded
as almost unparalleled. Then followed Dr.


Bompas, of the Fishpond Lunatic Asylum,
brother of Dickens’s Buzfuz, whom I often
saw in court, and whose son, George Bom-
pas, the well-known author, was our friend
and constant visitor for years. In IM7 I
consulted Dr. Prout, in high repute as phy-
sician and author —truly one of the old
school, clad in knee breeches, silk stock-
ings, and gold buckled shoes. After this
during my Derby residence I was under the
famed Dr. Jephson, of Leamington. His
last visit to me was his last day in prac-
tice. He was at times compared with Aber-
nethy from a certain roughness and abrupt-
ness of manner; but this really was towards
either hypping patients or to those who dis-
regarded his instructions. To me he was
always kind and gentle. Next in the pro-
cession was our friend and physician, Dr.
Heygate, of Derby, also of the old school,
tall and burly, and every inch a gentleman.
After the usual salutation—“ Well, how are
we?” taking his Avatch, he whispered out
the pulsations—“ One, two, three, four,
five,” and so on, finishing up always with
seventy-two, seventy-tAVo. This settled
number was evidently a consoling fixture
as a relief to the mind of his patient. In
the course of the succeeding small talk, if
any death had occurred, he Avould say with
uplifted hand—“ But the fiat had gone forth
—the fiat had gone forth!” Many a plea-
sant and musical evening we spent at his
house, Avhere Ave always met Cardinal Ncav-
man’s sister, Mrs. John Mozley, and her
husband the publisher, and once his bro-
ther, Thomas Mozley, who Avrote “Re-
miniscences of the Tractarian movement.”
—An Epileptic.—
One Derby incident is stamped upon my
memory. Our next-door nighbour and
friend, a young widoAv, had a servant Avho
was an epileptic. The attacks were not


frequent, but she always knew when they
were coming, and warned her mistress ac-
cordingly. One evening we were startled
by a loud tapping at the drawing-room win-
dow, and then saw her rushing back to the
house. This was her warning to
us in the temporary absence of her
mistress, and my wife went in at
once to see her safely through the
convulsion, being joined just after by our
friend. But very soon was I also sent for,
as she was reported to be walking about
talking wildly in her delirium; and, more-
over, that she. had said, “Send for the mus-
ter!” (sic in Derbyshire). So in I went
(and but for the ladies, most reluctantly),
and could only keep her right by racing her
up and down the room in a perfect walking
maiui, and talking on various subjects all
the time, until Dr. Graves arrived, when I
was much interested to see his mode of
treatment. While with me, she was look-
ing far away into space (and I didn’t want
her to look at me), the doctor at once quiet-
ly but firmly put her at arm’s length, hands
on her shoulder, and said, “Now, Jane, Icok
at me!” Well, she didn’t; but, on the con-
trary looked all around him; and, from what
ever cause, this direct challenge or other-
wise, she soon got quieter and came round,
and I retired from the scene with the fer-
vent hope that this would be my last epi-
leptic.
—’Change of Air Ordered. —
In London 1 contracted a severe cough.
Three separate physicians were interviewed
—Drs. Kidd, Gibbons, and Bollock —who
separately testified as with one voice to a
serious affection of my left lung and to
the necessity of leaving England permanent-
ly for a warmer clime. The advice was
adopted, and the voyage taken on board a


leading vessel. There were seven passen-
gers in all, inchiding an inebriated and half-
aberrated doctor, whose neglect was so
marked and his habits so eccentric that
many of the officers and crew came to me
for advice and medicine, as I had had some
experience in this way. My treatment was
homoeopathic, and no deaths resulted from
it. This accounted, no doubt, for the
thanks which were proffered by the pa-
tients generally. Soon after our arrival in
Adelaide we heard that the doctor was an
inmate of the Melbourne Lunatic Asylum.
—The Eucalyptus Cure. —
In the meantime ray own symptoms con-
tinued, and were ever present throughout
the voyage—constant coughing, occasional
spitting of blood, and an almost settled pain
in one spot of the left lung—l think they
called if in England “malasimilation.”
Arriving at Adelaide in the end of Novem-
ber, 1866, I left town a few days afterwards
for the bush in the neighbourhood of Port
Wakefield iu a roaring hot north wind,
which lasted the whole week. The resinous
fumes springing out of the young eucalyp-
tus shotots and from the many pines all
through the week seemed to be pumped
into the whole system, giving me the im-
pression (as I remarked to my companions,
Mr. C. B. Young and William Hanson) of
recovery, and this was fully confirmed at
the end of the trip by the disappearance
of the symptoms altogether. The record of
this case subsequently found its way to the
old country, and was carefully noted by
the London doctors before alluded to.
—The Reids. —
My first official introduction, after one to
the Chief Secretary, was to a doctor, the
colonial surgeon, who shortly after, on the


Glenelg Jetty, in return introduced me to
one of a variety of the same botanical
order. The mutual introduction was as
follows: —‘Mr.Mitcham Reid, Mr. Destitute
Reed.’’ Dr. Moore then kindly enlightened
me by compiling the whole history; Mr.
Trinity Reid, Mr. Mitcham Reid, Mr.
Squatter Reid, Mr. Ross Reid, and Mr.
Destitute Reed—a surname found in after
years to be still susceptible of expansion,
seeing that when we lived in Hill street
there were six other Reeds within two
stones’ throw.
—John Bond Phipson.—
The hospital visits that occurred in other
and previous places were resumed in Ade-
laide, operations included, and they conti-
nuing until after Dr. Poulton had left,
when I recorded the French inscription,
“Ce complet,” excepting occasional inter-
views with secretary or doctors on various
business; this was apart altogether from
incidental visits to hospital patients. One
in particular, soon after my arrival, was
made to the late John Bond Phipson, who
was a ward occupant on more than one occa-
sion. Poor fellow! but for a fatal chronic
thirst, he could either with tongue or pen
have accomplished anything. He wrote me
such a striking and characteristic letter in
one of these intervals that I cannot for-
bear its insertion:—
‘‘Adelaide Hospital, August 3, 1867. T.
S. Reed, Esq. Dear Sir —I am obliged
again to return to the hospital, and am
now confined to my bed. The hospital is
not a very cheerful place to end one’s days
in. I should not like to be left alone to
die when all that is wretched paves the
way to death —one poor fellow cough,
cough, coughing, all night long; a second
moaning and groaning; a third crying; a
fourth praying—‘o Lord! 0 God! Oh,


dear me!’ Another in delirium from fever,
tossing himself out of bed and tumbling
about on the floor; another in his imagina-
tion driving bullocks all day and night long;
and one poor fellow got up in the middle of
the night, and staggered towards my bed
saying 'My name is Biggs/ All this makes
one feel very nervous.
Our wasting lives grow shorter still
As days and months increase,
And every beating pulse we tell
Makes but the number less.
To my observation five out of six seem to
leave the world as unconscious as they
came into it. I believe, as a rule, mental
and bodily suffering terminate long before
the scene is finally closed. The mere act of
dying seems seldom in any sense of the
word a painful process; and, as to the ac-
tual fear of death, it seems that kind hea-
ven has for the most part given it to us when
it was intended that we should live, and
taken it away from us when it is intended
that we should die. My kind friend, Mr.
James Smith, was down to see me yester-
day; the patience of that good man is inex-
haustible. Thanking you also for your
kindness to me and mine.—Believe me,
yours, Jn. Bond Phipson.”
Referring for a moment to the failing of
this talented man, while I am not going
to discuss this great problem the drink
question, in which practically I am thank-
ful not to be interested, I cannot yet for-
bear a word on the absurd system of
“shouting,” and on the excessive consump-
tion beyond a man’s needs or desires that
it entails. If on a hot day a man is in-
duced to take a glass of ale, whether hop or
ginger - , and gives another to a friend, why
should it be regarded as a point of honour
on the other side to make a similar chal-
lenge, thus doubling the consumption when


the desires have been already met; nay,
far more sometimes, when the potations are
increased in proportion to the numbers,
transforming the man into a barrel, when
the ruling question becomes simply one of
capacity.
—A Private Hospital.—
Reverting to the hospital matters, I was
pnce a patient myself, but with an experi-
ence diametrically opposed to that of poor
Phipson, being one of four patients that
were very sorry when the time came to
leave the institution. I had undergone at
the Private Hospital, North Adelaide, a
serious operation, which was happily suc-
cessful, and then had nothing to do but to
lie still and get well. One morning when
approaching convalescence I was lying tran-
quilly in bed, two of the nurses being occu-
pied in discussing the sheets, &c., at the
bed’s foot when I cried out, “Oh, do take
care; don’t touch my feet. I am so* dread-
fully ticklish,” which was indeed too l true'
from a child. At this very time Nurse
Maude, the same who afterwards nursed
Sir William Jervois after his accident, and
of whom he wrote in glowing terms to the
press, this Nurse Maude was passing by,
heard my exclamation, and evidently trea-
sured it up for future use, as either on that
day or the next when passing the bed, she
deliberately grabbed first one foot and then
the other, followed by roars from the pa-
tient that could generally be heard. I men-
tion this to show what nurses’ capabilities
are. In the midst, however, of all these
persecutions that was a happy time, for
nothing could exceed the kindness both of
the nurses, and especially of the lady super-
intendent, Sister O'Brien. I used to tell her
in her visits night and morning that all the
patients must, as with Florence Nightingale,
rejoice in seeing her shadow cross the room.


—The Cascades. —
And it was this atmosphere of kindliness
and cheeriness throughout that made me in
sense sorry to* leave the building; not
so in the case of three others, one of
mm, indeed, remaining there six weeks af-
■r his apparent recovery, nominally as a
mvalescent.
±tie
While at Tasmania on one occasion I visi-
ted the Cascades Asylum on Mount Wel-
lington, an asylum containing nearly 70 in-
sane criminals, chiefly prisoners from
Port Arthur, under the charge of Dr. Cover-
dale and a staff of attendants. I entered
the principal ward with the headkeeper.
The room was large, and its tenants weie
about 50 in number. A sad and terrible
sight! Men who had committed every pos-
sible crime, and of the worst kind; the most
prominent—murder, or attempt to murder;
then in some cases an escape and fresh mur-
ders, until the criminal was tracked and
dodged and taken, at times in a half-starved
condition. One saw there every variety of
sullen, lowering faces; the mind at work
amid half-suppressed threatenings and mur-
murs, ready at any moment to break out
into action, and every eye was fixed upon
us. I have seen epileptic cases of temporary
aberration in England, when the eye
shrinks from the straight firm look of the
doctor; but here a glance from either of
us met its instant response in the glaring
gaze of defiance and enquiry. Were these
poor fellows entirely to blame? Whatever
their criminal antecedents, their natural
lawlessness, were not these tendencies in-
tensified by the undoubtedly manifold in-
stances of extreme cruelty and harshness
perpetrated by the Port Arthur gaolers?
In this same ward I was shown one man
who at times had fits of raging madness
that compelled them to lock him up in a


cell faced with iron bars, like a caged wild
beast. He was just recovering from one of
these paroxysms when I saw him, although
still in the cell. Passing on the
keeper said “That man standing
there committed seven murders.” I
just glanced at him, but he saw
it in a moment, and glared at me, mutter-
ing with his lips. The keeper at once
warned me —“Don’t look at him; he would
make a dash for us in a moment.” I took
the hint. There were only two of us in a
room with 50 of the worst examples of cri-
minal lawlessness. Very wonderful is the
existence of that restraining force and its
protective power, even humanly speaking.
You see the same principle at work in a
riotous mob, where one man has ridden
alone into their midst, and with calm deter-
mination and reasoning has effectually dis-
persed them. The rationale would, I sup-
pose, be that, just as in the highest sense
it is truth that makes inspiration, so is it
the sense of what is right that gives inspi-
ration to the unit in the midst of wrong-
doers, and on their part creates a certain
respect for the right and for the courage
displayed by him in upholding it.
—A Musical History.—
It could not be said of us five-and-twenty
years ago that we were a very musical co-
lony. Many circumstances, however, have
tended since that period to foster and sti-
mulate the tastes in this direction, and we
may now fairly claim to be one of the most
musical people in the Commonwealth. The
causes are many, but a prominent factor
was apparently the establishment of the
String Quartet Society, formed by private
subscriptions in 1880 for the purpose of edu-
cating the popular taste through the pro-
duction by high-class performers of the
choicest chamber music. A series of con-


certs was initiated, extending over a period
of six years, succeeded by a further series
in combination with the College of Music.
Closely following the formation of this so-
oty was the establishment of a chair of
msic in the University, occupied so effec-
by Professor Ives, with the enthu-
tic support of the late Sir William Ro-
!on, with whom music was a passion,
Who warmly supported the foundation
of the Philharmonic Society, whose effec-
tive renderings of various oratorios also
contributed greatly towards the general
musical enlightenment. At the close of
the String Quartet concerts the prevailing
testimony was to the effect that no other
institution had done so much to educate
and refine the popular taste in this direc-
tion, but the attendance of the public was
not encouraging; and, apart from the sub-
scriptions, the movement would have been
a failure. Even some who subscribed were
attracted to it more as a social than a musi-
cal function. I was requested at one con-
cert, in the absence of the honorary secre-
tary to collect the subscribers’ cards.
A fashionably dressed your'* lady approach-
ed the door, and when I asked for her card
said —“Oh, thank, you; I wish first to see
who is here.” She then peered into the
room, and, being satisfied with her glance,
handed me the card and went in—society
environments first; musical last! The
main elements of success in this movement
were in the able, unremitting efforts of the
committee in collecting together performers
such a.s White, Hall, and Meilhan; Rei-
mers, Sharp, and Squarise; Barton, Winter-
botham, and Schrader; Bernstein, Gutt-
ling, and Mrs. Alderman, and also Miss
van Senden and Madame Kate Thayer.
Apart from these movements, our musi-
cal education has received a strong impetus


by the advent from time to time at onr
concerts of high-class singers and per-
formers, violinists such as Wilhelmj,
second to none in purity of tone
and brilliant execution; Remenyi, the
Hungarian, who played those lovely
nocturnes of Chopin; and, last and
best, Lady Halle, “the Neruda,” for all her
family were violinists of high repute. She,
however, surpassed them all by her brilliant
execution as soon as she could walk; and
we in South Australia all remember the ex-
quisite refinement, purity of tone, and bril-
liancy with which she charmed her lis-
teners. The crowning capital to the edu-
cational structure is supplied in the Elder
Conservatorium, which has so evidently ful-
filled the intentions of its late lamented
founder in giving the highest possible train-
ing in every branch of vocal - and instru-
mental music, and in bringing to light many
a gem that would otherwise have lain dor-
mant and unknown. Let us hope that the
attractive features of gratuitous admission
to concerts at the Conservatorium under
a university prestige may so strengthen the
musical tastes generally that in future full
audiences may support paid talent!
—Gipsies and Music. —
In a conversation in the year 1854 with
my friend, William Henley, a Russian mer-
chant of high standing and a great lover of
music, he spoke in eulogistic terms of the
Hungarian gipsies, who as instrumentalists
produced the most wonderful and strange
music he had ever heard, and his opportu-
nities for hearing good music were not few.
He told me that these gipsies were mar-
vellous in their improvising, depicting
every possible emotion in their weird pas-
sionate melody, and he expressed a strong
opinion that if such a band could be got
over to England, kept in order, and so con-


trolled that their engagements would be ful-
'flled, it would be a splendid speculation.
have had these gipsies constantly in re-
membrance ever since, wondering if any
other eountry than Russia or their own had
ever been visited. It was therefore with
deep interest that in a recent number of
the “Century Magazine” I noted for the
first time since 1854 reference to a band of
these Hungarian gipsies who played first in
Philadelphia and subsequently at the Paris
Exhibition of 1889, and in London, to crow-
ded and astonished audiences. I quote one
or two sentences in which these perform-
ances were described: —“They put all the
strange beauty and poetry of their lives into
all the music they played—-fierce passion,
unutterable sadness, love, and rage in alter-
nation. The longer they played, the more
intense their feeling—glowing black eyes,
eheeks aflame when they seemed as if seized
with frenzy; then in a moment their voices
were hushed in a sudden wild wail, and at
last stilled in the glad ecstasy, for the?
sang as well as they played.” Their instru-
ments were six violins, a ’cello, double bass,
flageolet, and a pair of cymbals. Their
music was Hungarian, besides much that
was improvised, and their engagement,
which was for a month, was faithfully kept.
Would such a speculation be successful for
the Commonwealth? It should, however,
be said that the Magyar music is not con-
fined to gipsies. For at least seven years
past the beauty and weird effect of the
Hungarian dance has been recognised and
adopted by many of the great masters and
writers, as witness Lizt’s wonderful “Rhap-
sodies Hongroise,” and arrangements of the
“Ungarische” by Brahms and Behr. In
these dances there is always a slow move-
ment first, the idea being that the player
sits down upon the grass and commences to
play slowly as an invitation to the dance.


When it is answered by a sufficient number
of dancers, he dashes into quick time, and
then the dancers, who until now have been
quietly promenading, suddenly respond,
throwing increased life and action into the
measure of the dance.
—Advertisements.—
Few things interest and amuse one more
than the extent and character of advertise-
ments, and I suppose no other single
item in the whole world of com-
roerce can record such wonderful
growth and expansion as advertise-
ments, seen in every tram and carriage,
at every railway station, and even on the
rail fencing; apart altogether from their
universality in almost everv shop window.
Perhaps the most attractive and most re-
cent of these were shown in the Rundle
street fire salvage sale —those artistic paint-
ings, rough as they were, yet dashed off
with such taste and rapidity. It seems now
as if it were impossible to carry on business
without striking advertisements and a se-
ries of sensational items —“Clearing,” or
“Stocktaking,” or “Bankrupt Stock Sales,”
“Going at a Frightful Sacrifice,” “50 per
cent. Under Cost,” and sometimes “Why go
Further?” And the people don’t! for these
want-creating announcements appear to fill
the marts “right down the street,” as the
Americans would say.
—Painless Dentistry.—
I had once some illustrations of another
favourite Adelaide advertisement, “Painless
Extractions,” when in my office in King
William street my meditations were often
disturbed by the yells that so frequently
accompanied the operation of tooth-draw-
ing, always eliciting the thought “Another
painless extraction!” The painlessness
seemed to come after the performance was


over, and this should have been stated in
the advertisement. The Americans are
more ingenuous, as they advertise “Teeth
extracted without pain, $2; with pain, sl.”
The proper course would be for the dentist
to say in every such case “Let us spray!”
1 have lately come across some lines written
many years since by a near relative on an
undoubtedly painless extraction of a back
molar by a well-known Adelaide dentist:—
Hooray! Hooraw!
My poor old jaw
Shall ache no maw.
Hooray! Hooraw!
For Doctor Nor-
Man, he soon saw
What the matter waw.
He gave me laugh-
ing gas to quaff,
And while I lay
Like senseless clay—
Hooraw! Hooray!—
He pulled the tooth
(Strong-wristed youth),
That out it kum;
Then I went hum
And sang galore—
Hooray! Hoorore!
My poor old jore
Shall ache no more —
Hooray! Hoorore!
—Railway Bookstalls. —
Returning, again, to the general principle
of advertising and its success, 1 am remind-
ed of a very remarkable movement by a
young man of singular enterprise on a some
what similar direction which 1 watched
from its inception with deep interest, ihia
was the establishment of bookstalls at rail-
way stations in England by Mr. W. H.
Smith. Educated at Tavistock, but mainly
at home, and an earnest Wesleyan, he en-
tered his father’s business at 16, and only
five years after initiated the movement in-
dicated, securing the right of selling news-


papers at all the English railways, and
after this the lease of the blank walls of
every staHon, finally establishing a circu-
lating library throughout the whole rail-
way system. The profits realized in all
these enterprises, were enormous. His own
personal history was still more remarkable.
Returned in 1874 an M.P. for Westminster,
he was appointed only three years after as
First Lord of the Admiralty and First Ca-
binet Minister; and in 1886 was, under
Lord Salisbury, First Lord of the Treasury,
and Leader of the House of Commons! Im-
mediately after his death a peerage was
conferred upon Mrs. Smith as Lady Ham-
bleden in an autograph letter from Queen
Victoria, and his eldest son about a year
ago married into the nobility, with royal
dukes and duchesses at the wedding.
—Clever Australian Horses.—
During the seventies, when horses were
very cheap, I bought a charming grey nam-
ed Forester from a Clarendon farmer for
£9, and in after years sold it to the late*
Mr. Ford, of the York Hotel, who always
spoke of him Avhen he saw me. As the
young farmer told me, “Forester could
learn to do anything.” Among other
things I taught it was to take my pocket-
handkerchief in his mouth, and shake it
whenever I said, “Blow your nose. Fores-
ter!” Riding home from Medindie one
day, I met Sir James Fergusson and his
private secretary, Mr. Moubray Morris.
His Excellency stopped me, made a good
all-round inspection of the grey, and finish-
ed up by an unqualified approval. The
other horses that officially I subsequently
rode or drove were of good family, as fre-
quently testified by one of our best judges,
the hon. the Speaker, and with one excep-
tion, were all in the army, “Colonel,”
“Captain,” “Major,” and “Sergeant,” the


exception being “Sul tan,” the most thorough-
bred of them all, which on one occasion he
unequivocally declared. His constitution
had been seriously injured in a journey to
the south, when he got bogged in the mud-
dy clay of the Finniss Swamp; I therefore
placed him as a convalescent at Govern-
ment Farm, under charge of Mr. Jarvis,
who put him in the paddock with other
horses. His Excellency the Governor had
at this time several well-bred animals in a
separate enclosure; and soon after his arri-
val, Sultan, turning up his nose at his asso-
ciates, jumped the fence and joined his
compeers. Jarvis then took him back, but
he again leaped into the enclosure. Once
more was he removed to the ordinary pad-
dock, but made a third return! Then, as
Jarvis afterwards told me, “Of course, i let
him remain,” declaring, as he did, that he
would associate only with those of his own
rank! The finest horse of the lot was
Major, who was equally good in harness or
saddle, and although white through age he
had the spirit and paces of an entire, as
with arched neck and uplifted feet he al-
most scorned to touch the ground. Be.ng
no longer needed, I passed him over to
tire police, which transfer admitted of an
occasional visit. On one such occasion,
when the whole batch of horses were
standing together at the foot of the yard,
he answered to his name and turned round
in a moment. It was a case of mutual
affection throughout; he even licked my
cheek, and would always lick my hand like
a dog—a straight flat hand, of course, to
guard against the usual affectionate token
of a bite. I once heard of a man who
thrust his hand into a horse’s mouth; 1
never did that. In his case it was to
see how many teeth the horse had, and he
closed his mouth to see how many fingers


the man had —the curiosity of each was
satisfied.
—Cats and Dogs.—
I have always had a liking for animals —
not only horses, but cats, dogs, and birds.
We had at this time a fine collie pup from
Sir James Fergusson’s kennel, faithful, but
fierce, even to me, if corrected. We had
also as a present from Lady Edith a Persian
cat, with such a forest of fur that a lady
vis ; fcor once asked me what animal it was?
Birds have been in remembrance all
through my life, although I once had a sad
case of misplaced affection in this direction.
At our friend’s house at Glenelg I had care-
fully noted a sweet little parrot, and how
that bird in response to an invitation from
the lady of the house gently and lovingly
kissed her with his little beak. The fre-
quent repetition of this love scene induced
me one day to follow suit; and, gently ap-
proaching him with implicit confidence, 1
uttered the same words—“ Kiss, kiss!” He
did without a moment’s hesitation, and
took a clean equilateral triangle from my
under-lip, smacking his own, as wdth evi-
dent relish he swallowed and digested it in
my presence! I stole silently away, and
thought over it.
—Fly Fishing.—
The most expert fly fishing I ever saw
was once when at the Bala Lake, in North
Wales. We had been catching fish on Lake
Ogwen—fair sized and a number. When
tired of casting, we went right away to the
Bala Lake to troll for pike; and, as our
trout were too large, a man we saw fishing
a stream close by the lake offered to get us
some small ones in a few minutes. The
stream was about 12 or 15 ft. wide, with
thick bushes at least 6 ft. high on each
side, and this man oast over those bushes


into the stream without a single tangle,
whisking back a Little trout at nearly every
throw. Furnished with these, I went to
the edge of the lake and caught a nice little
pike of about 5 lb. in a few mi-
nutes, but no more. For pike fish-
ing I much prefer a dace hooked on
under the fin as a live bait. Then you have
a measure of expectation mingled with the
suspense as the float rushes about here and
there, until comes the wh/iz-z-z, the strike,
and the pike—a fish which has oftentimes
been played into my landing net in the Der-
byshire rivers, the late Mr. Michael
Bass’s water especially. But the most
sensational catch in this direc-
tion was one at the Lock of the
Lowes in Dumfriesshire. It was raining
fast, and with Scotch plaid, cloak fashion,
I stood on a small bank, slanting down
about 4 ft. to the loch; and, seeing a reedy
rushy spot, with a free winch I sent an art -
ficial dace spinning out to the place, lodg-
ing where wanted just outside the rushes,
when the float darted out of sight in a mo-
ment. After playing the pike a little I
brought him up tOi the edge in shallow wa-
ter; and, the bank being too steep to lug
him up, I scrambled down, dug the rod
spear in the bank, and took the line in my
hand —always a bad thing to do if you can
possibly help it, as it gives the fish every
chance in a flounder to get off the hook
This he did; but as, half stupefied, he gave
a slow flounder, I jumped over him into the
water, and in a moment with both hands
under, tossed him up on the bank. This
was followed by a second throw, and ano-
ther catch of about 3 lb. A gentleman and his
son, who were fishing a little distance away,
saw this, and came running along to look
at the two fish, when the first of the pike,
which I was taking up by the gills to show


them, paid me out by a snapping bite at
my left thumb, which bore the mark for
years. In this State, unhappily, we have no
rivers, no lakes, practically no nothing in
the fishing line. The Murray is muddy
and uncertain, witih a strong current, al-
though I have caught many a codling,
bream, and catfish in that river.
—Sea Fishing.—
At Victor Harbour the principal sport is
with sweep at Seal Rock, Encounter Bay,
and King’s Point neighbourhood; but the
fishing there, although at times very good,
is often disturbed by other and involuntary
offerings in the unwelcome “leather jac-
ket.” “There's nothing like leather” in
manufactures; but in fishing it is too often
“Nothing but leather, jacket included.”
A sad accident occurred at that popular
resort two years since. An elderly gentle-
man was sitting on the jetty edge, and
with rod in hand was eagerly watching
through spectacles for the first arrival. As
none came, a spectator, the Honourable
the Speaker, with a courteous sympathy,
remarked, “You do not appear to be very
successful, sir.” There was no reply, and
the question was again put, when the gen-
tleman turned slowly round, looked the
Speaker hard in the face, and deliberately
said, “That, sir, is—-a—question—which—
concerns —myself—alone.” The Honour-
able the Speaker spoke no more, but wait-
ed patiently—it may be for a minute or
two —when a, fish was hooked. It was
drawn halfway up, but incontinently drop-
ped into its native element. The elderly
gentleman was stooping over to watch the
descent when his soft felt hat fell over,
also followed by his spectacles. Then,
with a rage that could no longer be sup
pressed, he exclaimed, “There, take the
lot,” throwing rod, line, and tackle


into the water, and with hurried steps he
left for the harbour. The hat was borrow-
ed. The biggest tish I ever caught was at
the Edithburg jetty. I had thrown out a
strong schnapper line for a possible small
shark, when I suddenly felt a heavy dead-
weight kind of tug, and was dragging slowly
towards the jetty end with no resistance
save a 10 or 12 ft. rush; when I called out
to Mr. Andrews, late Registrar-General,
who was fishing some way off—'“Oome here!
I have got a floating island.’' It was a huge
stinging-ray, and he suffered us to lug him
up to the jetty steps. By this time the
township was well represented by a perfect
crowd, when a sailor brought a grappling-
iron, and with others slid him up the steps
on to the jetty. From his size and from
two unsuccessful attempts to turn him over,
the people estimated him as weighing 24
cwt. He was 9 ft. 6 in. long and 4 ft. 8 in.
or 8 in. wide. Residents petitioned for the
liver for the oil. All I cared for were the
stings, and the upper pendent one measured
14 in.
■—Eels. —
I cannot understand why, instead of hav-
ing to import the eel from Melbourne, we
do not rear this fish in the Murray, where
from the abundance of rich lobworm feed
in the mud of the lagoons especially, it
would multiply rapidly, and furnish a cheap
and plentiful item in our daily menu. I
remember once going from the Nalpa run to
Wellington, when, in digging into the mud
at one of the lagoons, the spade cut through
large lobworms innumerable, and if there,
I suppose they are elsewhere.
—Rat v. Snake. —
One day when I was fishing on the Mur-
ray with Elliott Randell, we witnessed a
singular anomaly in natural history on


board one of the river steamers, where the
captain showed us a large ten-foot snake in
a glazed box, which he had recently caught.
They had let a rat into the cage as food,
when both snake and rat at once flew at
cadi other. The rat got the first grip, after
which the creeping thing declined any fur-
ther interference, and so we saw the rat
running about over the folds of the snake,
who took mo notice. The plucky rat deserv-
ed his freedom.
—Tasmanian Fishing.—
I once had some good sport in Tasmania—
at Hobart in the bay for flathead, at the
Brown River for bream, and at Ross with
b»e fly always tipped with a grasshopper,
the favourite food with trout, dropping or
leaping into the river as they do fra in the
teatree in crowds. A young squatter one
afternoon mentioned the trout in that
neighbourhood as sometimes reaching 20 lb.
and upwards—when, however, they would
never take the fly. 1 regarded this as ra-
ther a yarn, but a day or two after I saw it
verified when fishing near the Ross Bridge.
There appeared close to the opposite
bush what seemed to be a small
floating log, but just after it gave
a quiet flounder and went down.
Then I distinctly saw the whole fish,
red spots and all; it must have been
15 or 16 lb. at least. At Perth I oaugbt
a number of black fish, but these never
bite till the moment of sunset, when the
sport begins, and lasts for about an hour.
—Gippsland.—
A most exciting trip pisea tonally was in
the Gippsland lakes. Beginning at Bale
Bridge in pursuit of large eels, I fished from
a small boat moored to the bank, with beef
as a bait, and soon lugged up a large one of
3 or 4 lb. into the boat, when he crested


up towards me like a snake. This gave
me a lesson. Afterwards I pulled them up
with the head against the gunwale, and
gave them a smart blow at the back of the
neck, which kills at once. The next day
I left for the lakes entrance, stopping for
the afternoon at Rosherville, where the
landlord told me that the bream were of-
ten to be found about half a mile away;
but (with a sarcastic smile) ‘you have to
catch them.” I determined to try, and
did. A long throw-out it was, over a
weedy shallow, before reaching the deeper
water; but the fish were there, and five or
six good ones were taken back in the
creel, and met with approving cheers
from the landlord on my return. The
next day I took the steamer to Lakes
Entrance, three miles beyond Ginningham,
where, in special association with the Aus-
tins, of Melbourne, I had a week of splen-
did bream-fishing, moored in a boat to the
stump of a particular old tree. Day af-
ter day, with shrimps as bait, we had
never-failing sport, with a strong current,
a heavy lead, and many a fish lost; never-
theless, with other hotel visitors, we
caught so many that on one particular day
they buried some in the garden, although
there were 70 visitors.
—Boomerangs.—
While at the hotel I saw excellent flights
of the boomerang, when a native in throw-
ing did in nearly every instance what he
had promised. A more recent exhibition at
Port Victor was not so successful; but the
native who probably stands at the head of
the list, and who was at the Boorura Sta-
tion, in Queensland, in 1895, repeatedly
threw the boomerang to a considerable dis-
tance, and on its return caught the wea-
pon in his left hand. A gentleman
when in London in 1898 went to


the Alhambra or this Palace The-
atre (I forget which) and saw some
boomerang throwing. The weapon was
evidently much smaller than the usual size,
and probably made of papiermache, from its
apparent lightness and the little force em-
ployed in throwing it; but the returns were
as good as he had ever seen in the bush.
—The Census and Women’s Age.—
The recent census reminds me of similar
periodical returns in Bristol about 65 years
ago, which were then put into the hands
of merchants in each parish for collection.
My father had one section of our parish (St.
Nicholas) allotted to him, and I was the
collector, and with boyish curiosity I look-
ed at some of the stated ages. In one in-
stance two maiden ladies (twins), and at
least 50 years of age, recorded only 29; and in
similar returns, which also passed through
my hands ten years after> the two ladies
(Hepzibah and Keziah by name) still re-
mained at 29!
—Two French Trips.—
One of these in early days, from Folke-
stone to Boulogne, by mail steamer —a
perfect example of the oscillating theory and
suggestive of those internal symptoms one
often feels in a swing when everything seems
to recede from you ; in the steamer every-
thing does, and no one likes to own it. Not
many minutes had elapsed before I saw at a
glance that “symptom previous” in the
face of my friend, that peculiar leaden
greenish tint, followed by the varied ex-
pressions resistant, resigned, feignedly
cheerful —that only mal dt mer can produce,
and all pointing to the problem that every-
one will work out for himself; for, in
reference to my condolings, he replied with
decision, “ Oh, Pm alright, thank you.”
Soon after this I missed him, and, as I heard


the lecturer, Max O’Rell, once say, “I didn’t
feel very well myself.”
I have noticed in these occasional studies
of constitutional history, that while on long
voyages you are calm and comparatively
unaffected, it is the shorter trips that are so
subtractive, probably due to the oil or
certainly to the working machinery of either
ship or passenger.
Boulogne was reached at bed time, and I
arose next morning with “great expecta-
tions ” (for it was a fete day) and with the
perky confidence of youth in my “ French”
to be bowled over by the “ garcon ” at the
breakfast table in the very first and simplest
sentence, but so rattled out as if in a single
word, “ Des oeufs, Monsieur.” I looked at
him, and then said, “ trop vite, trop vite,”
when he considerably lessened speed and the
“ Des-ceufs,-Monsieur ” was understood, and
my first practical lesson learnt, for of a truth
more can be gleaned in a week’s intercourse
than in a year’s dialogue book.
Boulogne has its upper and lower town,
and the former on this festival day was by
far the most attractive, the summit of the
steep hill being covered with booths, well
furnished with every tempting thing. It
was about mid-day that, in passing one of
these booths, the eye was caught by a short
length of beautifully worked narrow and
“real Brussels lace”; but the Gallic pro-
prietrix, a latitudinal body of nearly equal
dimensions, was fast asleep inside, and woke
up to my tappings with an impatient,
“ Qu’il bete, qu’il bete. ” But she amply
repaid herself for the annoyance when I
bought and she sold the aforesaid lace and
also myself ; as the young lady in England
subsequently told me it was “only insertion”
and worth about a fifth of my investment.


Nothing is more humbling than misplaced
confidence, but not always so ; for I well
remember a case of sweet unconsciousness
in London, when an old lady came up to a
poor mendicant sitting on the pavement edge,
decorated with a pendent card, “ Deaf and
dumb.” “ How sad,” she said ; “how long
have you been so?” “Just five years,
ma’am,” was his reply. “ Poor man, here’s
half-a-crown for you,” and she went her way
and never saw it.
In 1855 I crossed at midnight from Dover
to Calais with Captain (afterwards Sir Luke)
Smithett in the “ Vivid,” at fifteen knots the
fastest steamer then afloat, and an exciting
time it was for the first twenty minutes.
The near harbor waters were crowded with
small craft ; four men were at the bows,
looking out with all their eyes, followed by
the constant cry of “ Port,” “ Larboard,”
“ Starboard,” as they sung out, “ Sail
ahead ! ”
On the way to Paris I stayed for a few
hours at Lille to see its Picture Gallery, in
which one painting alone repaid the visit,
and the authorities say that its value cannot
be assessed—a small painting, about 14 x 10,
of an old man seated at a table, reading the
Bible to his wife by the light of a single
candle. In the reflection of light and in its
absolute naturalness, it cannot be surpassed.
On arriving next day I found the great
city crowded with visitors from all parts of
Europe, to the Great International Exhibi-
tion (of 1855), in a large building erected in
imitation and friendly rivalry of our own in
1851 ; only that while ours was of glass, this
was of white stone. But the four years’
interval was one of great and acknowledged
advance in every class of exhibits, for every
exhibitor in our inaugural gathering of 1851,


had, in the interval, learned valuable lessons
for future guidance. Personally I was most
interested in the “ Fine Arts ” Annexe,
comprising paintings and sculpture, a fine
exhibit in itself, although on the whole I
preferred our own in which there were some
grand and noted chefs d’auvres which were
not re-exhibited at Paris.
On the next afternoon I had a near view
of the Empress Eugenie, then in the zenith
of her beauty. Being in delicate health at
the time she was being drawn through the
building in a wheel chair by a footman, the
silent Emperor following behind, and stopped
for some minutes just facing me and at the
same glass case of curios.
Among the many churches and buildings
of this great city which have been visited
and described by thousands, I will here allude
to only one, viz., the tomb of Napoleon 1.,
under the magnificent dome of the Hotel des
Invalides, where one was impressed less by
its grand surroundings than by the cocked
hat and sword that he had wmrn and wfielded,
and that lay upon the sarcophagus, a silent
but eloquent testimony to the marvellous
history of the great ravager of nations.
On a subsequent occasion I again visited
Paris with a near relative on December 30,
1856, in time for the chief festival of the
year, “ Le Jour de PAns”-—New Year’s Day.
There at the gate of the Tuileries Palace
Court we saw and heard all the regimental
drummers of Paris banded together in the
large enclosure to drum in the new year to
the Emperor and Empress who appeared on
the balcony, the Emperor himself bearing in
his arms the infant Prince Imperial whom he
held up high in the air amid the acclama-
tions of the assembled populace. On that


day and during the week the boulevards are
lined with booths crowded with bonbons and
confitieres of every kind, carvings, dolls,
etc., and every tempting thing, and all Paris
and its children are there to buy them.
The day closed with the Grand Carnival
or Masqued Ball held at the Opera House,
when our friend the late Dr. Brewer (the
well-known author and then writing for
French magazines), took us to a side box
where we had an excellent view of that
wondrous though saddening spectacle. The
Palais Royal is distinguished alike by its
cheap jewellery shops and its restaurants.
One evening Dr. Brewer took me to the
cheapest of these, as an illustration of what
Paris can do in dinners. We sat down to an
exellent dinner—linen and everything beau-
tifully clean—four courses, including a half
bottle of vin ordinaire for 75 centimes = 7d.
One matter has just occurred to me in
connection with the French omnibusses and
tram carriages, and ours in Adelaide. When
their complement of passengers is reached a
placard appears outside, “ Ce complet,” it is
complete or it is full—our carriages are
never full, and then at the last, the first
intimation is given by the carriage springs.
This reminds me of a circumstance that
happened to a near relative in a London
omnibus. Among the passengers inside was
a stoutish woman who was noticed as
repeatedly scratching hard in the neighbor-
hood of the ankles. This at length became
so marked that the man opposite looked hard
at her, meditated for a moment, and then
drew out from beneath a glass jar and
said, “ Dear me, I had here twelve leeches
and now there are only seven,” followed
instantly by shrieks and an instant clearance
of every occupant.


PART 11.
Recollections of Pastors and
Evangelists.


*— ■[<#£■ —'
'■* /)l\
Recollections of Pastors and
Evangelists.
One of the holiest men I ever knew
was a former pastor of Brougham-
place, whose cognomen was the saintly
Hebditch, and this was as truly his re-
putation with man as his character
with God. His favorite text was “Abide
in Me, and I in you.” He lived the one
and fully realised the other. Two ser-
mons of his I shall always remember—
the one on Communion, “When I awake
lam still with Thee. My last thoughts
at night, my first thoughts on -waking,
of Thee.” And very beautifully he 'com-
mended a continued unbroken commu-
nion, an under-current of holy influence
at work, even in the midst of business
occupation. The other sermon, equally
beautiful, “Until I went into the 'sanc-
tuary then understood I.” 'ln all the
devotional exercises his was emphati-
cally a prayer prayed, not a pre-arrang-
ed composition, however reverently ut-
tered, hut in itself a communion em-
bodying a prevailing and intense desire
to bring others into the same inner
circle with himself.
His last illness, an affection of the
throat, was a very short one, and in
reply, I suppose to his own question,
the medical attendant mentioned some


two or three weekg as the probable ter-
mination of has sufferings. To a brother
minister who called soon after, he said,
“Wlhat do you think? I have just been
placed under sentence of death in a
fortnight,” and this utterance with a
smiling countenance.
Only a few days previously to this I
was present in his study when he spoke
solemn words of warning to a profess-
ing Christian, who was then living in
the vain effort to keep one foot in the
Churdh and the other in the world;
words that bore fruit, and were ever
remembered with loving gratitude.
The year 1894 was one of great spiri-
tual blessing. The Spirit of God was
•especially present in the person and
ministrations of Gipsy Smith, abun-
dantly owning his labor in a large num-
ber of converts, who remain until this
day. I was then living with a family,
to whose dwelling some people affixed
the cognomen of “Jesus Hall.” A
clerical gentleman to whom I mention-
ed this seemed rather shocked—why, I
know not, as we have in Oxford Jesus
and Christchurch” colleges; and it was.
without doubt, a beautiful testimony to
the reputed character of its head—one
of them of holy and imperturbable life,
since gone up higher.
—Living Epistles
This testimony suggests one of a simi-
lar chai'acter, only in this case borne
by the world outside.
A well-known firm had removed to
other offices in Pirie-street, when some-
one chalked up on their former office


door, “Gone to Heaven.” That is now
true of both partners, who all through
their lives were “known and read of all
men,” as evidenced by this testimony
borne at the grave of the last surviving
partner by one outside of their denomi-
nation, “If the whole professing Church
were like that man what a Church it
would be.”
Gipsy Smith.—
To return to Gipsy Smith, whom I
was privileged to know, and to be a lis-
tener at nearly all his services. In view
of all the preachers one has heard, from
John Foster and Robert Hall up till
now, I have never once heard the Scrip-
tures read with such deep pathos as by
Gipsy Smith. There was an entire
absence of special emphasising or ac-
centuation (when so often manner do-
minates matter), it was simply read,
and with deep feeling throughout, as if
realising that the Lord Himself in per-
son was at his side. The effect was
such a power and freshness as if you
were reading it almost for the first
time.
The same touching pathos pervaded
all his prayers, and nothing can exceed
the searching earnestness of his ad-
dresses. The Way College boys know
something about this. One of his most
earnest utterances was, “The woman
touching the hem of His garment.”
When speaking of the multitudes
thronging Jesus he said —Multitudes
throng, but do not come into contact.
Multitudes of professing Christians
throng the Churches, and even the com-


munion table, but do not touch Jesus,
and, as a consequence, they have no
joy, no peace.
If this poor woman had met with
Christ twelve years before wihat a lot
of trouble and suffering she might have
saved herself; instead of getting better
she got worse, and the same with you.
You might have met with Christ years
ago, but instead, you have taken the
medicines of your own choosing from
any quack that has come along. It is
Christ alone who saves; you must come
into touch with Christ.
The people who touch Jesus know it.
The moment she touched Him she felt
in her body that she was cured, and the
moment I touch Jesus the Spirit tells
me that lam bom again. She believed
in the cure before the touch, and you
must believe before getting; but you
will know when you have got it. Lastly,
you must confess Christ openly. She
began behind; then came before Him
right out before the crowd, and finished
on her knees. She wasn’t afraid. Will
you be afraid to come out to-night?
Oh, come straight out from the crowd,
for you need Jesus, and say, “My Lord
and my God.”
I was deeply impressed with
three characteristics at all these
meetings a definite, direct Gos-
pel message, a deep-seated love
for souls, and a God-sent wisdom
in dealing with them. At the close of
each address it was, “Now', bow r your
heads in prayer,” after which a solemn,
earnest, loving invitation was given to


any who were prepared to confess
Christ, and then one after another
would hold up the hand for a moment
or two, followed by a quiet, but fervent,
response, “Thank you; God bless yon,”
to each, and then, in twos and
threes, they came down to the
vestry after each meeting to be
helped on their “way to the
Wicket Gate” by the many workers
present. I mention these details, not
tor a moment to hold up as a spectacle
this solemn stage of a soul’s crisis, but
l>ecause this method was so unformal,
though natural, so Godlike, so blessed.
When Gipsy Smith came to Adelaide
he sought admission in vain to some
churches, who said, “They were not
ready, not ripe for him,” and so he
passed by. He had heard of this, and,
in conversation, said in his earnest
manner, “'They would have been ripen-
ed.” Other churches received him
gladly, and were abundantly blessed. I
remember that in one of his addresses
he said that the origin of the gypsies
had always been a subject of enquiry
or speculation, and that it was still an
unsolved problem. But, according to
Grellman, there seems little doubt of
the Hindoo origin of these tribes, and
that the Himalayan slopes were the
original home of all the gypsies prior to
the year 1417, when they first made
their appearance in Europe. The two
languages are also very similar. In
Hindostani the word “snow” is “hima,”
in Romany “him,” the word “bearer”
in Hindostani is “laya,” in Romany


“loya,” and in both languages Hima-
laya” means bearer of snow.
There is another singular fact also re-
corded in the life of the late Empress
of Austria, who in one of her castles
lived in the midst of the oldest tribes,
viz.;—That the true Tzigans never
claim possession of the power of divina-
tion and witchery, with which they are
so popularly credited. On the contrary,
they ridicule the belief, and say that
true Romanies do not believe in for-
tune-telling. It is good enough for
other inferior tribes to do so. This
was the testimony of the daughter of
one of the oldest tribes “Ferenzi
Janos.”*
—Thomas Cook.—
I heard the evangelist, Thomas Cook,
one evening at Kent Town church, and
was much impressed with his calm
business-like face, as if he had but one
aim, to preach the clear truths of the
Gospel, and to save souls. He read
Exodus xx., and from the first to the
tenth Commandment showed pretty
clearly that each one in the church had
either in act, intention, or thought
broken every commandment in the de-
calogue. One thinks here of a little
girl I once heard of wlio, when punish-
ed for doing wrong, said, “Oh, those
commandments do break awfully easy.”
In his sermon he gave a simple defini-
tion of faith, so little understood practi-
cally. “Faith is not simply believing in
facts. People sometimes say of salva-
tion ‘only believe and you have got it,
♦“Martyrdom of an Empress.’’ p. 145.


when there is an entire unfitness in the
person addressed for its reception.’ No,
faith means accepting the claims of
Jesus in a practical way, from a sense
of our sins, of our 'danger, and of our
need; and then coming to Christ in a
simple trust, accepting Him as your
Saviour.” Following this with an ear-
nest invitation, he said, and so said as
to shut out all offence-taking, “Oh,
What fools you are not to come.” Then
concluded by pointing out the blessings
consequent on the coming.
—John McNeill. —
A deep and abiding impression w T as
undoubtedly made upon all classes of
the community by the mission of John
McNeill. His mid-day meetings at Pirie-
street were crowded by business men.
many of whom 'had not entered a
church for years. Attractive in person,
of fine commanding build, and with a
bright cheery smile, his earnest pointed
addresses and clear Scotch enunciation
fixed the attention of every hearer in
an unbroken silence, save in the occa-
sional touches of keen Scotch humor
that pervaded the Whole mission.
In one address that I heard, he took
the story of Daniel as a thorough busi-
ness young man, faithful to God, and,
therefore, to King Darius, his master,
and who, in the face of the royal de-
cree, kneeled down and prayed, and
gave thanks to his God as usual. His
enemies, who in all his business rela-
tions could find no occasion against
him, laid a trap, and came and sniffed
at the door and listened. The ti'ap sue-


ceeded to a turn, for there was Daniel
praying and giving thanks as usual, and
they saw and heard him. Well, you
know the story of his faithfulness, how
the trap failed, and the result, for his
enemies themselves had a turn with
the lions, and have never been heard
of since. Oh, you business men, think
of Daniel; he was a splendid business
man, and his religion did it. Kneel on
your knees and pray; you have appeal-
ed to the highest court then, and you
will be better masters, better mis-
tresses, better clerks, better servants.
Your godliness may lead you into
trouble, but it will lead you out of it,
that is the thing.
—Messrs. McNeill and Burke
Once again 1 heard him address a
crowded audience one Sunday afternoon
at the Exhibition Building, when he
was accompanied by Mr. Burke, who,
with a clear tenor voice and perfect
enunciation, sang some Gospel songs
that riveted the attention of all pre-
sent.
The subject taken was blind Barti-
mseus, and he cried, saying, “Thou son
of David have mercy upon me.” And
they rebuked him, but the more they
rebuked the more he cried. The devil
was pulling the back string, but Jesus
conquered, for the man howled down
the crowd instead of the crowd the
man. And he so cried on that Jesus
stood still; He couldn’t go on; so tender
and loving, and gentle; that cry stopped
Him at once, and He said, “What wilt
thou?” “Lord, that I may receive my


sight.” He knew what he wanted,
and went straight at it. How many of
you want to have your eyes opened, for
you are stone blind, stone deaf, stone
hardened. One word more, “Barti-
ni sens followed Jesus in the way,” and
where Jesus is now Bartimseus is still
following Him in the way. That is
what you can’t do if you are without
Jesus.”
Just before the service commenced a
fashionably-dressed lady and her hus-
band came in, and were ushered on to
the platform close to the preacher, to
whom they were introduced, and who
(without uncharitableness) were cer-
tainly not usually seen at any meetings
of this class. In the course of the ad-
dress Mr. McNeill said to this purport,,
and with a slight touch of humor, “Oh,
some of you well-to-do men and women
what do you do with your Sundays?
Are they very dull, and don’t you often
wish the day over?”
—Results.—
Very possibly the number of perma-
nent conversions, springing out of the-
visits of these Evangelists, may be ma-
terially lessened through instances of
mere emotional impulse, the question
yet naturally arises, Why there arc so
few conversions under the ordinary
ministrations thi'oughout the Churches.
This question was, an fact, asked of Mr.
Yatman at the Ministers’ meeting
which preceded his Adelaide mission.
His reply was, “The great prevalence of
subjective, rather than objective,
preaching.” He was right, and John


McNeill, at one of his meetings, struck
the same chord, “Oh, ye ministers!
preach the Cross! preach the crucified
Jesus! ‘I determined to know nothing
among you but Jesus Christ, and Him
crucified.’ ”
—Preaching.—
And while, thank God, such faithful
utterances are manifold, yet how often
one hears what are called “beautiful
sermons,” eloquent, flowery, faultless
passages, every sentence and word care-
fully thought out and emphasised
whether in prayer or sermon—sermons
sometimes deeply spiritual in the an-
nounced title, yet entirely subjective,
teeming with illustrations drawn from
the natural and material w T orld; but in
which the name of Christ is scarcely
mentioned, and as if not a single sin-
ner were in the assembly.
Men are not saved by beautiful
thoughts or by evangelical doctrines,
but by Christ Himself; and if Christ is
not preached in His relations to the
unsaved—who are always present—the
conscience is untouched; such preach-
ing appealing only to the imagination,
therefore of no account with man, for
it does not reach them; of no account
with God, because it does not reach
Him. for it is the world’s gospel preach-
ed by an ambassador in bonds. And
if ever there was a time when an
earnest preaching was needed it is now.
That the attracting power of the minis-
try is lost is self-evident from the re-
ports we hear on every hand. If, as
is sometimes said, the world is getting


better, there would be a considerable
and net increase in the annual addi-
tions to the churches; nay more, the
existing church accommodation would
be inadequate to the increase of popu-
lation On the contrary, in some in-
stances the churches at the year end
do not hold their own. In London Mr,
Reader Harris, Q.C., tells us that one
only in every eight attends a place of
worship on Sunday. In Scotland, as
recorded three months since, the num-
ber attending public worship, and of
children at Sunday-schools, has decreas-
ed considerably. This is very sad in
itself, still more so that the conscious-
ness of this falling away has, in some
instances, evidently incited not to a
more devoted ministry, but to an intro-
duction of the worldly element; a pro-
minent instance evidenced by the re-
cent engagement in a London Church
of the actress, Mrs. Brown-Potter, for
Sunday evening recitals.
—Hearing.—
But any minister would say, and
should say, “I am one. What of
you (professedly Christian hearers)
who are many?” Are we by
our lives and examples helping the min-
ister, helping on the work of the
Church universal, or are we dead
weights, for surely the word comes
home, “What manner of persons ought
ye to be in all holy conversation and
Godliness?” Are we living up to the
one pure standard of Christian recti-
tude, for the great hindrance to the
spread of Christianity is the inconsis-


tent professor. Over and over again has
he been quoted to me (in any commen-
dation of the true faith) by non-profes-
sors, while asserting their own straight-
ness, as being able to carry out as
smart a transaction as anyone. Such
crooked dealings imply a weak or bar-
ren Christianity, but, furthermore, to
a non-professor such failures are a di-
rect attack on the integrity of the Gos-
pel standard. Let us, therefore, each
and all take it to heart and apply it,
"These things ought not so to be.”
—The Advanced Teaching.—
And this newer criticism or advanced
teaching, has it done anything for us
in real advancement in spiritual pro-
gress? Has it constructed any better
system or aspects of faith? Years ago
I knew of three instances in which it
tended altogether, and successfully, to
sap its very foundations in the confes-
sion and unbelief it fostered. Two sis-
ters, earnest Christians and devoted
Sunday-school teachers, who gave it
all up and said, “We believe in nothing
now.” Another, a young man. also an
earnest Church member, and in the
same town, who died an infidel, ascrib-
ing his fall to the same teaching.
—Present Needs. —
Our great need seems to be twofold,
to regain the interest and presence of
those who have gone back and have
left; and to get hold of the outsiders
wlho will not enter what they term a
“swell church ” —that is, to enter any
pew of well-dressed people. I believe
that in most cases they would be wel-


corned if they did. They ought to 'be.
for in this day we have open pews, and
with them it is hoped open hearts.
lan Maclaren, in his “Church Folks,”
just published, speaking especially of
Scotland, says, “Some exclusives
would not only close, but lock their
pews against the stranger. In a Lan-
cashire country churCh they did, and
only a few years ago, when, as Sir
Edward Russell tells us, Archbishop
Sumner, on a crowded confirmation
day, seeing that numbers were stand-
ing, and with many empty pews, stop-
ped the service, and bade the people
come forward and enter. But a voice
cried, ‘They are private property and
locked.’ Then, saith the Bishop, ‘ls
there a blacksmith present?’ ‘Yes,
my lord.’ ‘Then let him remove the
locks at once, there Should be no pri-
vate property in the house of God.’ ”
Reverting once more to “the subjec-
tive,” it must, of course, have and hold
its place. Subjects, doctrines, the re-
lations of man to God, must be treated,
but if a 'message is borne and delivered
in the full consciousness of an infinite
responsibility as God’s messenger, if
by one who is full of the Spirit of God
thoughts are thrown out, thoughts that
hit the mark, making the hearer think
and bring his thinking into action, then,
there never would be a sermon with-
out real manifest blessing; evidenced in
a material and constant increase in
numbers throughout the church, and a
deeper spirituality among its mem-
bers; and the minister, himself, would
in full proportion be quickened too.


—Objective Preaching.—
I cannot withhold at this point a line
or two from a Sunday morning’s ser-
mon at the Stow Church, from the lips
of a living minister, and preached with
all the holy energy and devotedness so
peculiarly his own, from “The Son of
Man, came not to be ministered unto,
but to minister.” The Son of Man!
What a spotless, holy character. What
testimony it elicited. Heaven said:—
“This is my beloved Son. in whom I
am well-pleased.” Hell said, “This is
the Holy One of God.” The betrayer
said, “I have sinned in that I have be-
trayed innocent blood.” His judge
said, “1 find no fault in this Man.” The
dying thief said, “This man hath done
nothing amiss.” And Jesus Himself
could challenge the whole of His ene-
mies, and say, “which of you con-
vineeth me of sin?” How was this
wonderful life sustained? By prayer.
He was constantly apart with God
alone in prayer; Jesus fed upon prayer,
that He might feed the world on the
bread of life.
This 'is just one clause, as it were,
of the sermon, but it is certainty an
illustration of objective preaching, re-
minding me of another sermon in the
same direction I once heard from the
Rector of our parish at Derby, the Rev.
W. B. Wilkinson, whom I was privileg-
ed to know intimately, and who said,
“I would rather give up all the doc-
trines and rites and ceremonies of the
Church, than give up one single iota
of my faith in Christ”—a remarkable
utterance, especially as a number of his


hearers were of the extreme high
Church party; the Mozleys In particu-
lar, one of them a sister of Cardinal
Newman.
—Rev. H. R. Haweis.—
We were privileged in Adelaide a
few years since, with a visit, all too
short, from one who had made his
mark as a clergyman, a musician, a
traveller, and an author —the Rev. H.
R. Haweis —and in his lecture on
the Catacombs, he showed some lime-
light views of what were said to be
some original portrait sketches of the
Saviour. One of these, in particular,
had very much of that expres-
sion. the mingling of divinity, and
gentleness, and purity, that at once ap-
peals to our spiritual instincts—
although so infinitely short of what He
Himself must be, “the Chiefest among
ten thousand, and the altogether lovely”
—lnstincts that must, in themselves, be
an inspiration, for we can detect in
a moment in any such portrait the “ap-
parently human.” To me an “Ecce
Homo” of Guido, although so overborne
by suffering, appears as most appxmxi-
mate to one’s ideal. Ah, what will
it be to see Him and know Him for
ourselves. And this was indeed the
strain the reverend lecturer—he knows
it himself now—took up, when, with the
portrait on the canvas before us, he
said, “Wouldn’t you like to know what
He looked like? Oh, what a number of
times in the New Testament, in which
the look ids brought forward, ‘He lift-
ed up His eyes.’' It must have


been something very beautiful to have
seen His look of love, as when He said,
‘I have compassion on the multitudes.’
And then think of His look upon Peter.
Ah! Peter saw it though so far off, for
‘he went away and wept bitterly.’
What power then in that look. And
again, to the disciples came the words,
‘Follow Me.’ Why did they follow
Him? It was in the look.”
To my taste Mr. Haweis was a beau-
tiful lecturer on whatever subject.
With no attempt at studied effect or
accentuation in every word or sentence
his quiet earnest forcible delivery
came home and found a lodgment in
every hearer. And his subjects were
worked out to the end; unlike another
clergyman I heard of who left off in
the middle, and in a curious one too.
It was Dean Burgon, who, in all inno-
cent gravity, said at the end of one lec-
ture —it was on Jonah —“We- have now,
my friends, reached that portion of
Jonah’s history when he was swallow-
ed by the whale, where, if you please,
we will leave him till Tuesday next.”
And now, before leaving the Episco-
pal pale, a serious question arose in my
mind, a short time since, as to whether
the present University curriculum,
which is mainly subjective, whether as
regards theology or logic, or metaphy-
sics, »fec., is sufficiently comprehensive.
And in view of a sermon recently
preached by a clergyman to laborers
and farmers, I would humbly suggest
the addition of another subject to the
usual course of study; namely, that
branch of practical farming as it re-


lates to live stock. It was in a sermon
on the Prodigal Son, in which occurred
the following pathetic sentence, “Think,
my dear friends, how the father yearn-
ed over that erring child, when he kept
that calf waiting for him three whole
years, for three whole years.”
—The Salvation Army.—
When staying at Port Victor some
five or six years ago, I watched, with
much interest, the work of the Salva-
tion Army, then under the command of
Captain Maude Judd and her lieu-
tenant, joined afterwards by Captain
Ebbage, on furlough; and many a ser-
vice I then attended. Apart from the
occasional noise and mirthfulness the
spirituality of the worship was un-
doubted, as seen in every part of the
service in the prayers, earnest, short,
and definite; in the addresses, and in
the hymns and refrains, varied by oc-
casional solos, these sometimes con-
taining touching appeals to the unsav-
ed, I ihave beard in that Barracks a
simple story, drawn from personal ex-
perience, told with such pathos and
earnestness, as to profoundly impress
strong men who were listeners. The
prominent feature at all their services
was in personal testimony, given with
no uncertain sound clear sailing and
full assurance, an assurance which,
just at this time, was brought to the
test in the sudden and unparalleled ap-
pearance of that beautiful Aurora,
lightening up the whole of the evening
sky with the wondrous vividness and
brilliancy of its light. While numbers


through the colony were struck with
terror at the sight, thinking the end
had come, these three young women
evidently thought so too, for, looking
up, one of them said, “Perhaps the
Lord ds coming; well, if He is, I am
ready.” “And so am I,” said each of
the others. The keynote of all three —
“Blessed assurance, Jesus is mine.”
But with all this assurance so mani-
fest in those Salvationists there was no
assumption or self-confidence.
—The Black Converts.—
I was especially struck with this
spirit of humility among the Jdack con-
verts a kind of self-shrinking and re-
verence after either prayer or testi-
mony. One of those, Mrs. Hamilton,
who had just been deserted by her hus-
band, rose up, and with much feeling,
said, “My husband is gone away, and I
can only follow him with my prayers,
that God will bring him back again.”
Another black, dear old Crumme,
whose English was very limited, could
in testimony only give a word here and
there. Pointing to his heart, he would
say, “Bad—sin—down there.” Then,
looking upwards, he would say, “Eli,
Eli” (my God, my Father). Again
pointing to his heart, “Blood good; bet-
ter country up there,” pointing to the
skies. Thither he went only a few
weeks ago, and is now rejoicing in the
glory. But the greatest trial of their
faith appeared to me to be found in
their open-air meetings testimonies
given time after time by one
after another, sometimes by once


notorious drunkards and swearers,
confessing former sins, before
their old companions; and all
this, week by week, wet or fine, by
officers and soldiers, given with all the
freshness as if told for the first time.
It was a happy thought of the Gene-
ral, the employment in this work of
a large proportion of women, whose
gentle, softening influence must, as a
rule, prove subduing and beneficial;
yet exposed at times, as I have heard,
to sneers, and ridicule, and interjections
met with searching, earnest rebukes,
but always ending with a touching
“God bless you.”
—Dean Hook.—
The word interjections reminds me of
a story told of the late Dean Hook,
who, as well known, was very abstract-
ed and absent-minded. Sitting in his
pew one day, a brother-clergyman, as
an offertory sentence, was reading of
Zaccheus, “Behold, Lord, the half of my
goods I give to the poor”—the Dean
was heard to say, “Much too much;
most unnecessary on the part of Zac-
cheus; I shall not give more than
usual.”
—Mr. Charles Reeve.—
Those were happy days when we met
Mr. Reeve at bis Bible readings and
Mission meetings. They were distinct-
ly unsectarian. If you had asked his
denomination of any regular frequenter
I think he would have discarded the
term, and said, in effect, “I am from
Antioch.”


At one of these afternoon meetings
a good deal was said about believing
prayer, and the certainty of its being
heard and answered. One of those
present asked Mr. Reeve if he could
give any instances of answered prayer
from his own personal experience. “Oh,
yes.” he replied, “many, very many.
I will gladly give one or two of
them. I ’had, one day, an intimation,
as from the Lord, that I should go to a
certain town, some 150 miles north of
Sydney, by steamer and rail. The re-
turn fares were 10/ and 25/ respective-
ly, besides living expenses. I had
scarcely anything in my pocket, and
the steamboat was to sail in about an
hour. I went down to the steamer,
put my portmanteau on board, and then
walked up and down the wharf, com-
mitting myself and the circumstances
to the Lord, in trust, that as He was
sending me He would provide the
means, when a lad came running up to
me with a letter. This was from a
lady, who wrote that she had just
gone to bed when she heard, as it were,
a voice saying, ‘Get up at once, and
send Mr. Reeve all the money you
have.’ This was about £3, which she
at once dispatched by the lad to Mr.
Reeve’s rooms, and thence to the stea-
mer.” “At another time,” Mr. Reeve
said. “I was in London, and wanted
£O5 for mission expenses, which I must
have in three days. No one knew that 1
wanted it blit God Himself, to ivhom 1
-prayed, and in whom I trusted.
• The next day I received a present
from a friend for the mission of ±SO.


and three others cheques of £5, £6, and
£4 respectively.”
At a subsequent meeting, when Mr.
Reeve was accompanied by two lady
missionaries, an interesting testimony
was given by Miss Parsons in a simi-
lar direction. She was on her voyage
with another mission sister, who was
in extremely delicate health. The
monsoon, at a certain latitude in those
China seas, and at that season, was
an invariable occurrence, and it was
said that if it did, humanly speaking,
Miss Tuck would never have survived
it. they therefore both prayed that
there might be no monsoon; and God
answered the prayer. The captain,
officers, and many others in the stea-
mer were all saying, “No monsoon;
July, and no monsoon;” and wonder-
ing, couldn’t understand the reason:
but we did.”
Another instance occurred one day in
India, when Mr. Reeve had no
money his native boy had laid
the table, but there was nothing
whatever upon it for dinner. He
then sat down, praised the Lord
for all His past goodness, and
that if it was to be His will now, he
would gladly be hungry. A knock
then came at the door, and a native
boy, with dishes containing two cooked
pigeons and a kind message from some
colonel. w*ho, with Ms friends, had been
out shooting, and as they had got much
more than they -wanted, thought he
would like some. They knew nothing of
his needs.


Yet, one more and very marked in-
stance, in the testimony of a well-
known and devoted young missionary
lady. She was on one occasion placed
in charge of a large Sunday-school in
a northern district of New South
Wales, where she found the hearts of
the children so hard and impenetrable
that nothing seemed to touch them.
Soon after this she was laid aside for
some weeks with influenza, which,
in her solitude, became a season of
much thought and prayer for these
children.
One day a suggestion came home to
her, “Pray for four children.” No
names were given, simply “Pray for
four children.” Soon afterwards four
names did come home to her, as a dis-
tinct revelation, and for these she pray-
ed, and prayed on. After a short time
these identical four children came to
see her, and told her, in their simple
language, that they “must accept the
Lord Jesus Christ.” On her recovery
she went to Sydney, and there she
prayed, “Lord, there are still many left
unsaved in that school, and they must
come too.” The answer came, “They
shall come.” When able, she at length
returned to her work, when one of the
children came to her and said simply,
“Jesus is mine,” and this was followed
by one after another, until, eventually,
they were all saved without a single ex-
ception. Laus Deo.
—Revs. John McNeil and Allan
Webb.—
A series of meetings were held in


Plrle-street Church by the late Rev.
John McNeil and Rev. Allan Webb,
which were characterised by marked
blessing, as seen not only in
those who conducted the ser-
vices, but in the hearts of those
present, when one after another
rose up in testimony from their places,
and one lady especially, who came out
of her pew to the front, constrained to
offer her joyful testimony to God’s
glory.
The same Presence was felt at their
early morning meetings for prayer—
one especially in which they were so
full of the Spirit—such joy and rejoic-
ing, in praise and in the prayers, as to
be almost uncontrollable. It began
with a simple, earnest prayer from a
young lady, telling the Lord that she
came out that morning because she
must; because she couldn’t stay away.
The simplicity and the earnest way in
which she said it filled the whole room,
and it was crowded with praises and
hallelujahs.
With respect to devotional meetings
in general I have often noticed, m re-
membrance of many a service one has
attended in Catholic cathedrals and
churches abroad, the apparent deep re-
verence, the rapt devotional expres-
sion of the worshippers; whether emo-
tional or temporary is not for us to
judge; but there it is, an earnest de-
vout expression visible to all, and with
a fearless unconsciousness of any as-
cription of cant, or insincerity from out-
siders, while with us, if at any service
the heart is stirred up to an unusual


exercise of devotional feeling, its mani-
festation is at once suppressed through
the shrinking fear of showing it to
others. Exceptions there are, but this
is the rule. Sir Edward Russell, in his
last work, tells us what the colored
race thinks about it, and says that he
once heard a negro preaching on the
Crucifixion of Christ with a tearful
touching interest and pathos that was
evidently heartfelt, and at times almost
tragical. After the service he asked the
preacher if he liked to worship in the
same church with white people. He re-
plied, with a deep earnestness that left
no doubt of his sincerity, “Oh. no. I like
my own color. If the Spirit of God
comes to us, de tears stream from our
eyes; taint so with the white folk.
Dey haven’t the Spirit of God as we
have.”
—Definition of Prayer.—
1 once read a beautiful definition of
prayer in about a dozen words, “Prayer
Is not only asking God to do
things. It is looking at God,
and listening to Him; a con-
sciousness of Him, and a realisation
of eternal things that makes us see
and feel them every moment; and we
only get that alone with God.”
Blessed, indeed, if we always realised
this in our grasp of the true object of
prayer; so beautifully defined by Dr.
Dale—“ln prayer our great design is
not to move men. but to move God.”
If we fail to do that we fail altogether.
I remember years ago reading some-
where of a beautiful rendering of the


forgiveness clause in the Lord’s
Prayer under the two dispensations. As
spoken to those under the law it is
“Forgive us our trespasses as we for-
give them that trespass against us,”
but under grace, in Ephesians iv., 32,
it is “Forgive one another, even as God
for Onriist’s sake has forgiven you,” so
that the order is exactly inverted. Un-
der the law, God’s forgiveness is condi-
tional upon ours; under grace our for-
giveness is conditional upon God’s—
that is, I ask forgiveness, not because
I forgive, but because I am forgiven.
And in a more general sense that verse
“in everything by prayer and supplica-
tion make known your requests unto
God” tells us that in all the little inci-
dents of life we can and should, in full
dependence upon God, bring Him into
our confidence. I remember hearing
much bearing upon this subject from
the revered Anna Shipton, whom I was
privileged to know when in England,
and who once said, “Even if I dropped
a pin, and wanted particularly to find
it I would pray about it,” and in reply
to some expression of surprise or re-
monstrance at this too minute applica-
tion, she at once gave a case in point,
and said, “Supposing, under ordinary
circumstances, a man had dropped a
scarf-pin, and unable for the moment
to find it, the result in all probability
would be irritation or strong language,
it may be even an oath,” an illustration
that was at once unanswerable, and
brought us all into full agreement. And
it is in full accordance with reason. “If
it is in everything;” if it is “Casting


all your care upon Him,” then, no mat-
ter how trivial the burden, these enjoin-
are distinctly inclusive, releasing
us altogether from any decision of the
natural intellect as to whether this or
that is a fit occasion for prayer. By
way of illustration—A gentleman 1 met
one morning on a Kensington omnibus
told me he had forgotten his keys and
had to return, and was then unable to
find them. And he said. “I then prayed
about it, and the thought came, ‘in a
certain coat pocket’—as I thought a most
unlikely place, the coat having been
long laid aside, but 1 remembered to
have worn it incidentally for a few mi-
nutes the night before, and there were
the keys.”
One thing suggests another, remind-
ing me of rather a droll question put
not long since to an evangelist in Lon-
don (Which gives us the idea that
prayer in little things may be misap-
plied). The gentleman asked if nis
friend thought it right to pray about
corns? The evangelist at once replied,
“Yes, when you take your tight boots
off.” Ah, what a personal and prac-
tical reminder to myself in early days,
when I walked in them, and when my
minister (Rev. S. Summers), walking
by my side at the time, said, “You 11
pay for this, my young friend, some
day.” A true prophecy. I think it was
Mrs. Gamp who said, “Not as my
foot’s large, but the boots is small.”
I have often thought that among
numberless others, a very strong proof
of the power and outpouring of the


Holy Spirit is furnished in the prayers
of the illiterate. One instance is in
special remembrance. We had, in con-
nection with Broadmead Baptist
Church, Bristol, a city missionary,
named “Blind Jones,” who, "with won-
drous certainty (as do some of our well-
known Adelaide friends), quietly made
his daily way about among the Bristol
slums. A true Salvationist, he was
made a great blessing to numbers, and
among these, a well - known drunken
swearing fishwoman, named Mary
Player, If ever a contrast existed in
this world, it did in that woman, who
often came to my mother’s house after-
wards, quiet, gentle, and courteous.
Soon after her conversion, I went one
evening to a prayer-meeting in Brick-
street, held by Mr. Jones for his con-
verts, and among these Mary Player,
who, at his request, offered up a prayer,
couched, of course, in plain language,
but simple, earnest, connected, and to
the purpose. I have quoted this in-
stance to more than one young man
under that sad, sad cloud so prevalent
In this our day, asking if they could ac-
count for it. A simple negative in
every case was the reply, and I ask
now, as I have ofttimes asked my-
self, “Supposing this poor woman, ut-
terly illiterate, and unable to read or
write, had been asked then, after her
con version, to stand up at a moment’s
notice, and say a few words on
some subject familiar to her; say
her own occupation, the fish
trade, could she have done it?”
She could not have put a dozen


consecutive sensible words together.
But when she emerged from those
scenes of diabolism, and came into rest,
“clothed and in her right mind,” in
prayer she “took no thought how or
what she should, speak”—“lt be
given you in that same hour what y»
shall speak, for it is not ye that speak,
but the Spirit of your Father which
speaketh in you.”
—Prayer Answered.—
And, in another form or channel, I
remember an instance which could not
be regarded as other than “the work-
ing of that one and the self-same
Spirit—‘the Holy Ghost, which is the
Comforter.’ ” Many years since an
Intimate friend in Kensington had been
paying occasional visits to a Christian
lady, confined to her bed with a seri-
ous malady that apparently defied
medical efforts for its removal. Being
laid up himself temporarily with a
severe cold, he sent her a short note,
saying, “I cannot come to see you to-
day, but I send you a tonic.” And
these were “the seven Abies,” which,
since then, have been circulated in
many a small booklet.
Able to save to the uttermost. —Heb.
vii., 25.
Able to keep me from falling.—Jude
24.
Able to succour them that are tempt-
ed.—Heb. ii., 18.
Able to make all grace abound.—ll
Cor. ix., 8.
Able to keep that which I have com
milted unto Him.—ll. Tim. i., 12.


Able to subdue all things unto Him-
self.— Philippians ill., 21.
Able to do exceeding abundantly
above all that I ask or think. —Eph.
iii., 20.
When recovered, and on calling, as
soon as he entered the room, she said,
“You cannot tell what a comfort those
‘ables’ were to me. I laid in bed that
morning thinking my husband was un-
able, the doctor not able, no one seem-
ed able to do anything for me, when, at
that moment, the servant entered the
room with your note. I then knew
and so fully realised, who it was that
was able”—a blessed realisation, on her
part, of that beautiful word in John
xxi., ‘lt is the Lord.’ ‘My Lord and my
God,’ able and willing to supply all my
need through His riches.
—Bible Readings.—
I used to meet at Bible readings in
London two holy women, sisters, the
Misses Hull, whose one hymn suffices
for every believer to hold them in lov-
ing remembrance, “There is life for a
look at the Crucified One.” Whenever
either spoke at a reading it was just a
word or two, but an utterance that
came home with power to every one of
us.
At one of these readings one of the
sisters said just a woi'd that has clung
to me ever since. It was this—“ What
a depth of meaning there is in that
word ‘Such’ in Hebrews viii., L
‘Such an High Priest.’ In that beauti-
ful summing up of chapter vli., 26,
you have detailed attributes and cha-


racteristics of our great High Priest—
‘holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate
from sinners,’ and then follows that first
verse, ‘this is the sum: we have sueh
an High Priest’—now in the place of
pleading on the right hand of the
throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
our Advocate, our Redeemer, our Lord,
our resting-place here and hereafter.”
And then I have often coupled with
that other word in this epistle, “Con-
sider”—wherefore holy brethren “con-
sider the Apostle and High Priest of our
profession, Christ Jesus. Now, ‘con-
sider’ how great this man (Melchisedec)
was”—a type of the Great High Priest
and then bringing out the contrast, in
Leviticus xiii., in the ease of leprosy,
where the Priest shall “look” or “see”
or “consider,” is repeated five and
twenty times. Precious contrast indeed
in our Great High Priest in Hebrews,
Avhere in the more fatal disease, the le-
prosy of sin, one single look at the once
crucified and now risen High Priest
suffices for its eradication, once and for
aye.
Then look, sinner, look, unto Him and
be saved
Unto Him who was nailed to the tree.”
—Professor Drummond. —
I listened with deep interest to a
stirring and eloquent address from the
late Professor Drummond about ten
years ago to University students. All
classes were fully represented at that
gathering, ministers and clergy includ-
ed, some of whom sat just before me


listening with 'breathless attention and
approving, smiling countenances. But
there came a distinct elongation and
settled gravity on the countenance of
one minister at an alleged and far too
close association of man with the mon-
key tribe. The name has often been
given to us in early days, but anything
in the direction of present kinship I
didn’t like myself as implying a gene-
ral reflection upon one’s ancestors.
—Mr. Yatman.—
It was a stirring time among the
Churches during the mission of Mr.
Yatman, the American Evangelist.
The preliminary minister’s meeting
was fully attended, and such of the per-
suasion as were absent then, and at the
after meetings, were the losers.
The one Characteristic in this Mis-
sionary was deep earnestness. He was
a man of God, a man of prayer, and
with love, and joy, and peace beaming
in his face. He always came on to the
platform with a bright smile, and said
“Good afternoon,” or “Good evening,”
to the audience, which seemed to elicit
at once their regard and attention, and
which certainly never flagged for one
moment.
“At every meeting,” to use McLaren’s
word in his last book, you saw “an un-
broken expanse of earnest faces not
only listeners, but considered, startled
at times into a still deeper attention by
Ins sudden utterance of the word
‘Hearken!’ ”
The addresses were interspersed with
sacred part songs, or with solos by Mr.


Virgo, each of these a solemn and
earnest gospel invitation, and adding
greatly to the attractiveness, and to the
success of the mission, for the converts
were many.
I will only give a few of Mr. Yat-
man’s utterances, by way of illustra-
tion. “Let it he seen by those about
you that you are a Christian in the
absence of worry. It is wicked to
worry. I believe in the fulls Hope-
full, peace-fall, faith-full, cheer-full,
beauti-full, joy-full, trust-full, and then
Spirit filled. The safe path is the nar-
row path; keep in the middle of it.
We want our goodness to last; not good
on Sunday and spitfire on the Monday,
but goodness seven days in the week.
Washing white removes the dirt; white-
washing only covers it. Nearer nn r
God to Thee, means further from sin.”
There are too many people in the
position of the colored woman, who
said, “I wmnts to git religion, but I
dreads the process.” But believe this,
that What we have to give up, to for-
sake, is nothing to what we get; and it
is for ever.
What folly to close our eyes to the
eternal future in the face of all these
yearnings for something better, some-
thing different to the unsatisfying pre-
sent. Is it safe to continue in a vague
uncertainty when that “beyond” may
open out upon us at any moment? The
one central remedy for it all is in a
single verse, “All we like sheep have
gone astray, we have turned every one


to his own way, but the Lord has laid
upon Him the Iniquity of us all.”
Believing this from the heart, receiv-
ing Christ into the life, we are safe
for this life and for a glorious here-
after. Rejecting it we shall in that
“beyond” wake up to an intense reali-
sation of the infinite yearning love of
God in Christ and what it is to have
lost it.
In all the varied forms of unbelief
in this our day, Christ and the salva-
tion He offers is rejected not by intel-
lect, but through the pride of intellect
that will not stoop to the acceptance
in child-like faith of this God-like sim-
ple plan of salvation so suited to our
needs, and which has so met the needs
as seen in the lives and deaths of my-
riads of those who have professed and
accepted it.
I have known and watched the life
and the death of every type of the re-
jectors, in whose sad and latest experi-
ence—not in delirium or mental excite-
ment, but with clear, lucid faculties—
the veil of the future has been lifted
in bitter lament to realise the Saviour
they had rejected. Two of these among
numbers will suffice; with one profes-
sing infidelity through the Me, at the
last it was “Jesus, Jesus, save me.”
With the other, highly cultured and in-
tellectual, of unimpeachable integrity,
but an agnostic who used to talk to
my father of his abnormal views, at
the last, day after day came the pathe-
tic lament, “Oh, that I could read my
title clear.”


These are recorded not as sensa-
tionals, but as examples to point us
upwards and to testify that the great
change must come now, that if the
“New Name” be written in the fore-
head hereafter it must be written now.
The name is the character, not what
we seem, but what we are, and Christ
prints this likeness now, not only in the
life, but in the very face. I had a per-
fect illustration of this some years ago
when standing outside the Exhibition
Building amidst two or three hundred
Salvationists, awaiting the door open-
ing to a “General Booth” meeting; a
wondrous study of faces. There you
could recognise at a glance the once
coarse, case-hardened visage, tempera-
ments, reckless, careless, or irate, but
now all changed and replaced by a
subdued expression of calm and joyous-
ness, in some of rapt earnestness. In
ail of these the Christian impress; they
had beheld as in a mirror the glory of
the Ix>rd, and had been changed into
and reflected His image. The most
Christ-like face I ever saw was in a
Salvationist, and it was but the reflec-
tion of every act and wont in her life,
and this is what we all need, the daily
impress, the daily preparation for the
prepared place.
Dismiss that thought, which one
often hears, that Heaven must be
“unspeakably dull and monotonous,
and nothing but Psalm-singing.”
There will be no monotony there.
Heaven, always described as a
city, will have its glorious activities,


Its numberless missions, entrusted to
one another, according to capacities
and attainments, and faithfulness here
—matured and glorified there. “One
star differeth from another star in
glory,” some rulers “over few cities
and some over many;” but blessed for
us, even if a star of the lowest magni-
tude. Psalm singing there will be,
but who can tell what will be those
wondrous harmonies of Heaven? Who
shall tell what Heaven’s music will be
—music thrilling the great choir
through and through, and because it is
“the new song,” the song of Moses and
the Lamb. “Now unto Him who loved
us.” Can you sing it? for the song
must be learned here, and It
means, for you and for me if among the
ransomed ones a glorious inheritance
in life and joy eternal, and that inherit-
ance through and in Him, who re-
deemed you.
■Hussey & Gillingham, Printers, Adelaide.




