

k,. f -r->; * 's *.:■#**. ■ v -««v;; b ':-•*. •M- ' : fV'#-' >" '. * •;;*#&?*s • ■>;•■;•■; • '»• v -•/>.- j&Afe. .- * *<£•■•.* .* ’■'/.:& d '4s%r>\ •'••■• w -‘ *v' • r '-" •,..;
i; , i
■ MERZ AND McLELLAN,
' ,I*’ , J j ■ 28, Victoria Street,.
j ■ ’ ■ ■ y ‘ ' •’ •-• -Vn .. ■.. i.
i T < <n< /« » „ n ».r.
. ,';;v I
ri a Stre e t ~ , -■ ,
London, S.W.,
July. 1912.
it*;'' f' V ■'■ ir V ■ ' -f ■! '-'i ' :
-' V # A.
•' &&&&s*&■ i'V'^;’-^’,'
t.f.-M .***• V'W HLZ& »V '•• A ■ ■- . ■-.- .. *./\J, •; i ■r’i.i;, .;' ...•’•' ■
mmmSß
-■ > : .■■,•■•■■■• ■■
,i. i fArngj;W ■e.-j-CF. •'•(! i: -Jr. j •,
mi '# 4 1 , V . A ' ?
’ *> v v?. >,-r, ■* •■’ v;'.*. ■.«
,
t -. 1




FURTHER REPORT
UPON THE
APPLICATION OF ELECTRIC TRACTION
TO t h:e
MELBOURNE
SUBURBAN RAILWAY SYSTEM.
MERZ AND McLELLAN,
28, Victoria Street,
J u ly, 1912.
London, S.W.


The Hon. W. A. Watt,
Premier of the State of Yictoria,
Melbourne.
MELBOURNE SUBURBAN RAILWAYS.
In accordance with your instructions and the arrangement made between
my firm, the Government and the Railway Commissioners, I beg to present
herewith our further report upon the application of electric traction to the
Melbourne suburban railways.
My previous report, made in 1908, dealt fully with the general aspects
of electric traction on suburban railways throughout the world and the
conditions in Melbourne, and the arguments and conclusions therein reached
have been strengthened in the time that has elapsed. Since that date the
conversion of steam railways to electric working has been rapidly proceeding
in other great capitals, while the suburban passenger traffic in Melbourne itself
has also greatly increased.
The present report deals primarily with two things : the system of electric
traction most suitable for your railways, and the financial results of their
conversion to electric working.
The two principal systems of electric traction, the direct current system
and the single phase system, are both extensively used in different parts of the
world to-day. With a view to enabling you to decide finally which of these
systems is more suitable for your railways we have, in accordance with your
instructions, prepared complete alternative schemes, and the Agent General has
invited by public advertisement and received tenders upon our specifications
from the leading manufacturers of the world. The figures and conclusions in
the present report are based upon these tenders and the actual guarantees
accompanying them. Your decision to invite alternative proposals has proved
admirably calculated to enable you to choose the best system for Melbourne,
and the result as disclosed by those tenders can be taken to be conclusive as
regards your railways.
As regards the financial results to be expected from electrification, in my
previous Report I made certain estimates of the growth of your suburban
traffic; actual experience during the last four years has shown this estimate
to have been too conservative, the traffic increase having much exceeded that
assumed. The desirability from a financial point of view of converting
your lines to electric working is in consequence considerably stronger to-day
than in 1908, since which date large profits would have accrued to the suburban
railways had they then been electrified.
While the conversion of the railways will, by itself, show a handsome
profit on the money expended, the establishment of a general system of electric




power supply for other purposes should still further improve the result. In
accordance with your instructions, we have prepared a separate report upon
this important question.
The present Report is accompanied by copies of the specifications upon
which the tenders for converting your lines were invited and a list of the tenderers
themselves, together with a complete analysis of the same for your considera-
tion. We defer giving our recommendations as to the tenders you should
finally accept until after the writer’s arrival in Melbourne.
In conclusion, we wish to express our thanks to all concerned for the
assistance which we have received in the preparation of this Report, and
especially to the Commissioners and Mr. Stone, without whom it would have
been impossible to have completed the specifications and our analysis of the
tenders in the very short time available.
I have the honour to he,
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) CHARLES H. MERZ.
Westminster,
July, 1912.
For Summary oe Conclusions see page 21.


Victorian Railways.
THE APPLICATION OF ELECTRIC TRACTION
TO THE
MELBOURNE SUBURBAN RAILWAY SYSTEM.


•M3XSAS
ah i ox
UOIADVaX DI-aXD3I3 30 NOIXYDIIddY 3HI
•SAVAVIIVy N V X 3 O X 3 I


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE SUBURBAN LINES.
Systems Considered—Railway Lines Considered —Traffic and Train 1
Service—The Schemes Compared as to Technical Features—•
Initial Cost of the Two Schemes —Operating Cost—Energy Con-
sumption of the Two Schemes—Substation Operation—Mainten-
ance of Track Equipment —Maintenance of Rolling Stock —Total
Annual Cost of the Two Schemes —Conclusions with regard to
System. .
PART 11.
CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE COUNTRY LINES.
Conditions under which Electrification Pays—Traffic on Yarious 9
Country Lines—Melbourne-Woodend-Bendigo Line Traffic
Conditions—Technical Features of Systems Compared—Traffic
Conditions Assumed—Cost of Converting Melhourne-Woodend-
Bendigo Line—Cost of Electric Working on Melbourne-
Woodend-Bendigo Line—Conclusions as to System for Country
Lines.
PART 111.
COST OF CONVERTING SUBURBAN LINES—COMPARISON WITH
STEAM.
Basis of Comparison—Effect of Electrification on Revenue—Electrical 15
Energy—Capital Expenditure—Financial Results of Electrifi-
cation—Rate of Capital Expenditure.




Table.
TABLES.
(in the Report).
Page.
Part I.
i.
Mileage of suburban lines included in scheme.
2
(Suburban
lines.)
ii.
Traffic, transportation and number of coaches required.
3
m.
Leading particulars of the two schemes as applied to the
suburban lines.
4
IY.
Comparison of the initial cost of the two systems as applied to
the suburban lines.
5
V.
Quantity of electrical energy required for the suburban lines
under the two schemes.
6
VI.
Annual cost of the two systems as applied to the suburban
lines.
8
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Part 11. YII. Estimated traffics on Melbourne-Woodend-Bendigo line. 10
lines n ) try YIII. Leading features of direct current and single-phase schemes 11
for the Melbourne-Woodend-Bendigo line.
IX. Initial cost of converting the Melbourne-Woodend-Bendigo 12
line to electric working on the two systems.
X. Annual cost of electric working on the Melbourne-Woodend- 13
Bendigo line under the two systems.
Part 111. XI. Train service a«nd transportation estimated by Commissioners 15
(Suburban for steam and electrical conditions in 1915
lines.)
XII. Cost of operation of the Melbourne Suburban Passenger 1G
service in 1915—electric and steam compared.
XIII. Capital expenditure required to furnish an electric service 17
to deal with the traffic in 1915.
XIY. Summary of financial results due to electrification (1915).
XV. Summary of capital expenditure.
DIAGRAMS .
(in the Report).
Parti. Eig. 1. Shewing the actual and assumed growth of traffic on suburban
Part 11. Fig - - 2. Traffic on various country lines
Fig. 3. Growth of traffic on Melbourne-Woodend-Bendigo line.
Part 111. Fig. 4. Rate of capital expenditure.
PLATES.
(At the End of Report):
Map of suburban railway system.
Yarraville Power Station—Plan.
Yarraville Power Station —Elevation.
Yarraville Power Station —Pictorial elevation
Converter Substation with oil insulated transformer elevation
Converter Substation with air cooled transformers elevation.
Converter Substatipn—Pictorial elevation.
Overhead Track Equipment.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
SCHEDULES.
(At the End of Report).
A. Copy of Advertisement.
B. List of Tenderers.
DOCUMENTS ACCOMPANYING REPOET (BOUND SEPARATELY).
I.—COPIES OF SPECIFICATIONS.
1. Power Station Buildings, Complete Boiler House Equipment and other
Plant. No. N.21/20.
2. Condensing Plant and Pumps. No. N.2PG/113.
3. Turbo-Alternators and Transformers, Direct Current scheme. No.
N.2P42/80.
4. Turbo-Alternators and Transformers, Single-phase scheme. No.
N.21'42/82.
5. Equipment of substations, Direct Current scheme. No. N.33T/28.
6. Equipment of Switchhouses, Single-phase scheme. No. N.33T/30.
7. Train Equipments, Direct Current scheme. No. N.30'7/57.
8. Train Equipments, Single-phase scheme. No. N.3G'7/58.
lI.—ANALYSES OF TENDERS.
(A) Summary of analyses and itemization of Table IY., Page 5 of Report.
(B) Analyses of Tenders :
1. Power Station buildings, complete boiler house equipment and other
plant.
2. Condensing plant and Pumps (10,000 kilowatt sets).
3. Turbo-Alternators and Transformers, direct current scheme (10,000
kilowatt sets).
4. Turbo-Alternators and Transformers, single-phase scheme (10,000
kilowatt sets).
5. Equipment of Substations, direct current scheme.
6. Equipment of Switchhouses, single-phase scheme.
7. Train Equipments, direct current scheme.
8. Train Equipments, single-phase scheme.
(C) Analyses of alternative Tenders for 20,000 kilowatt sets:
2. Condensing Plant and Pumps.
3. Turbo-Alternators and Transformers, direct current scheme.
4. Turbo-Alternators and Transformers, single-phase scheme.


MELBOURNE SUBURBAN RAILWAYS ELECTRIFICATION.
PART I.
CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE SUBURBAN LINES.
This part of the Report deals with the application of electric traction
to the Melbourne Suburban railways, and with the question of which system
of electric traction is to be preferred for them.
The two systems of electric traction which, as arranged, are considered
in this Report are the direct current overhead wire system and the single
phase overhead wire system. In accordance with your instructions, tenders
were invited by public advertisement by the Agent General on specifications
prepared by ourselves for carrying out the work alternatively on one of these
two systems. The specifications were carefully drawn so as to make the prices
received directly comparable, not only as between different firms tendering but
also as between the two systems. Tenders were received from nearly all the
leading- makers* and the figures used in this Report are based on the most
favourable tenders received.
Systems
considered
The technical differences between the two systems, briefly are as follows :
(a) The Direct Current System. —Employing overhead conductors
conveying direct current to the trains at a pressure of 1,500 volts,
and supplied from 12 wayside substations containing converting
machinery delivering direct current and receiving high tension 3-phasc
alternating current at 25 cycles per second. The high tension trans-
mission is by underground cables from the power house to the import-
ant substations in the central area and by overhead wires erected on
the same structures which carry the railway track conductors, to the
outlying substations. (See also Table III.)
(6) The Single Phase System. —Also employing overhead con-
ductors conveying single phase alternating currents to the trains at a
pressure of 11,000 volts supplied at some six points on the railway
lines. The power is generated and transmitted to the feeding points
as 3-phase alternating current! at 25 cycles per second and subdivided
at each feeding point into three distinct single phase currents, the con-
ductors over the tracks being suitably subdivided and insulated from
one another. The high tension transmission is arranged as in the
direct current scheme, partly by underground cable, partly by over-
head wires. (See also Table III.)
The rail-way lines with which this part of our Report deals and which
form the basis of comparison between the two systems are shewn on the map
* See Schedule B.
jAn alternative method is to generate and transmit the power as single phase current. Our
calculations shew, however, that the method recommended is cheaper both in first cost and operation.
Yet another alternative would be the employment of current of a lower periodicity than 25
cycles. One tender for such a scheme was submitted but showed no financial advantage. Such a
current would, moreover, be unsuitable for general power supply. The provision of two types of
generating plant and two sets of distributing cables would destroy one of the chief advantages of a
common central system of power supply.
With this exception, no important technical departure from the specifications was suggested bv
any tenderer.


The railway Plate I. attached. The mileages are given in Table I.
lines con-
sidered.
TABLE I
MILEAGE OF SUBURBAN LINES INCLUDED IN SCHEME.
Miles. Chains.
Route miles ... ... ... ... ... ••• 150
Track miles of running roads ... ... ... 289
Sidings, etc ... 84
The above figures include some 26 miles of route, making 60 miles of
single track and some 8 miles of sidings, in addition to those covered by the
previous Report. The addition consists of extensions of the scheme taking
in Eltham, St. Albans and ITankston; also Williamstown Racecourse, Elem-
ington Racecourse, and Show grounds. Additional tracks have also been
added at certain places on routes which were included in the previous Report.
The conversion of the various suburban lines to electric working would
of course occupy some considerable time and would bo carried out progres-
sively. We think that it would be reasonable to assume that conversion
would be complete by 1917; we therefore have to consider for the purpose
of the comparison made in this Report the probable traffic which the lines
would have to carry at that date, since no comparison for anything less than
the whole of the suburban lines is of value.
Traffic and
train service.
98 99 1900 I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II 12 13 14 15
16 17 18 19 20
Fig. I.—Shewing Actual and Assumed Growth of Traffic on Suburban Lines.
Figure 1 illustrates tlie growth of traffic as , recorded up to 1911 and as
assumed for the purpose of this Report. It will be seen from this figure that
from 1914 to 1917—the period during which conversion is presumed to take
place—we assume an acceleration in the growth of traffic due to the large
YEARS


[BER OF COACHES REQUIRED.
Previous Report.
1917.
73,257,280
150,000,000
4,780,000
8,500,000
19,000,000
38,000,000
453
870
43
80
496
950
375
750
20 miles per hour.
21 miles per hour.
addition to the schedule of trains and the improvement of speed which would
become available as conversion proceeds.
Figure 1 shews 150,000,000 journeys in 1917 and indicates a considerable
growth thereafter. All the figures of initial and working costs included in
the comparison which follows, are based upon this traffic; but all the designs
of power generating and distributing plant are such as to admit of further
extension, as and when required.
II e consider it advisable to defer the preparation of the actual time table
of electric trains until shortly before the electric service on each branch is
opened. We have, however, carefully considered the total amount of trans-
portation which would be required to deal with the above traffic, and shew
in Table 11. the train miles, coach miles, and number of coaches in daily
service, and in reserve, which we consider to be required. The transportation
recommended in Table 11. is based upon the following general assumptions
which we would also recommend as the basis upon which time tables should
be drawn up when the service is put on r
1. That the trains on all lines, wherever possible, follow a regular
schedule throughout the day.
2. That rush traffic be provided for by increasing the length of
the trains.
3. That the frequency of the trains be so adjusted that the rush
traffic does not require trains of a greater length on any line than 6
coaches to commence with.
4. That the amount of accommodation provided should approxi-
mately bear the same relation to the number of passenger journeys as
in the case of the train service described in the previous report.*
TABLE 11.
Number of passenger journeys per annum
Train miles per annum including waste mileage
Coach miles per annum including waste mileage
Number of coaches required
Daily in use
In reserve
Total
Average number of coaches in motion between
5’30 and 6 - 30 p.m.
Schedule speed
Two complete alternative schemes of
Single Phase—have been worked out in
electrification-
detail, both t
Current and
upon the trans-
Direct
both based
TRAFFIC, TRANSPORTATION AND
NUMBER
portation defined in Table II. and upon the length of track given in Table I.
The technical features of each scheme have been carefully considered to
* The increased length of average journey is offset by the better loading factor. The accommo-
dation proposed exceeds that provided in the time tables prepared by the Commissioners.


Power Plant.—
Source of electric power
Power Station at
Yarraville.
Type of electric power
3-phase at 25 cycles
per second.
Number of boilers in-
24
stalled
Normal steaming capa-
30,000 lbs. per hour
city of each boiler ...
Number of generating
6
sets installed
Economical output of
10,000 kilowatts.
each set
Maximum continuous
12,500 kilowatts.
capacity of each set
Parts included in each
Turbine condensing
set ...
plant, alternator,
and s t e p-up
transformer.
Pressure at secondary
20,000 volts.
terminals of step-up
transformers
Power Transmission. —»
TABLE 111.
LEADING PARTICULARS OF THE TWO SCHEMES AS APPLIED
TO THE SUBURBAN LINES.
Number of
Specification.
Single Phase
Scheme.
Number of
Specification.
Direct Current
Scheme.
Power Station at
Yarraville.
3-phase at 25 cycles
per second.
30.000 lbs per hour.
X. 21-42
X. 21-42
(Turbo-Alter-
nators and
transform-
ers)
(Turbo-Alter-
nators and
10,000 kilowatts.
transform-
12,500 kilowatts.
T urbiue,condensing
plant, alternator,
and step-up
transformer.
N.21'6
~ 113
X. 21-6
113
20,000 volts.
(Condensers.)
(Condensers.)
Yarraville to 12
substations on
railway lines.
Yarraville to (!
points on the
railway lines.
Wayside distributing
plant
12 substations each
containing step-
down transform-
ers and converter
plant, with
switchgear.
G Switch houses
each containing
switchgear for
subdividing the
track circuits fed
at each point into
8 groups, one con-
nected to each
piliase of the
power supply.
X.B3T
X.33T
Type of current delivered
to line
Single phase cur-
rent at 11,000
volts.
Direct current at
1,500 volts.
Type of overhead con-
ductor
Copper wire.
Copper wire.
Cross section of copper
over each track :
(a) Running lines
k square inch,
g square inch.
Running rails
square inch,
g- square inch.
Running rails
bonded.
{/>) Sidings
Return circuit from
trains to feeding points
bonded.
Train Equipment—
Type of trains
Xumber of motor coaches
Type of train equipment
Number of motors on
Multiple unit.
500
Direct current.
Multiple unit. (
500 '
! X.3C-7
X. 30-7
Single phase. , ft
Do
4 '
I 57
each motor coach
* In each scheme the transmission lines supplying the most important substations and parallelling the central
railway lines would be underground cables ; the rest, forming the greater part of the transmission lines are assumed
to be overhead supported on the same structures whicli carry the track conductors supplying current to the
trains. With the system arranged in each case to use overhead track conductors, the structures have to be provided
in any case ; and they can be very easily adapted at minimum cost and without risk or complication to carry the
power transmission lines also.


Direct Current
Single Phase
Scheme.
Scheme.
£
£
, aux-
plant
222,1.51
241,877
u Luis,
46,956
46,667
100.868
110,015
...
61,495
21.868
378,605’"
41,905
142,165
47,806
4.264
4,264
and
con-
r and
415.851
359,846
4,850f
24,800$
ires...
20,000
181,632f
jaclies
947,282
1.977.344
2,349,437$
3,057,024+
we give a comparison
(Table YI., page
Operating
cost.
ensure that either is complete and practicable and that both represent the
same degree of reliability and facility in operation, so far as essential differ-
ences between the two systems admit. The leading particulars of the two
schemes are compared in Table 111.
Table 111. also gives in marginal columns the numbers of the specifications
prepared for the two systems and upon which tenders have been received.
Complete analyses of these tenders have been made and together with copies of
these specifications accompany the present Report. (Bound separately.)
In comparing the two schemes as regards initial cost, in Table IY. we
have for sake of simplicity omitted items which are entirely unaffected
by the choice of system, namely as regards power plant, the preparation of the
power station site, all brick and concrete work and structural steel for the
power station buildings ; and as regards rolling stock, the coach bodies and
bogies, inspection pits, repair shops, and repair shop equipment. Table IY.
compares the capital cost on the basis of the lowest tenders received for each
system, and the transportation given in Table 11. (p. 3).
TABLE IY
COMPARISON OF THE INITIAL COST
:OST OF THE TWO SYSTEMS AS
SUBURBAN LINES.
APPLIED TO THE
Power Plant; —
Turbo-alternators, step-up transformers, aux-
iliary transformers and condensing plant
Power station switchgear, auxiliary motors,
wiring and yard locomotives ...
High Tension Transmission :
20.000 volt underground cables
20.000 volt overhead lines ...
Substations
Electrical Equipment of Permanent
Way
{«) Trolley Wires (material only)—
For running roads
For sidings
(h) Erection of conductors, provision
erection of structures, insulators,
necting cables, section switchgear
track bonding ...
Alterations to Ways and Works :
(a) Increasing height under bridges
{V) Altering telegraph and telephone wires...
| Rolling Stock :
Electrical equipment of 500 motor coaches
and 450 trailer coaches... ... ' ...
Turning now to the operating costs, we
* In this case a tgure lias been allowed which will cover any of the three lowest tenders.
{■ Figures supplied l-y the Commissioners.
_ + Faeh item in the table includes an allowance over and above the tender price for contingencies,
■engineering, etc.; for details see summary accompanying “ Analyses of Tenders.'* 5 5


CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE SUBURBAN LINES.
8) shewing the annual cost of operating the suburban lines electrically under the
two schemes; and as in the case of the capital cost we omit from this comparison
items which are not relevant to it, such as the wages of train crews, provision
of station staff, and permanent way maintenance, including maintenance of
wayside structures required for the electrical equipment, all of which would
he the same for both schemes. The only items in fact, which enter into this
comparison are: —The provision of electrical energy; the operation and main-
tenance of the high tension transmission lines and substations; and the
maintenance of the electrical equipments on the coaches. It will assist con-
sideration of the comparison if we add a word of explanation as to the
treatment of each of these items.
The quantity of electrical energy required by the trains can be accurately
TABLE V.
QUANTITY OF ELECTRICAL ENERGY REQUIRED FOR THE SUBURBAN
LINES UNDER THE
Number of electrical units required by a
4-coach train making a round trip
between Sandringham and Broad- !
meadows according to guarantees in
lowest tender ...
Number of units annually required for
the whole system on the basis of the
transportation proposed, including
waste mileage.
(a) By the trains. (Calculated
taking into account gradients,
lighting, ventilation, etc.)*
( b ) As losses in the track con-
ductors
(c) As losses in transformation and
conversion in the substations.
(Calculated on basis of
guarantees in lowest tender.)
(d) As losses in high tension trans-
mission lines
Total units sent out from the Power
Station.
derived from the guarantees
closely considered and checked by us,
railways. To these quantities have he
involved in the transmission of the e
and in the case of the direct current scl
accompanying the tenders
is, in the light of our
been added in each c i
added in each case
electrical energy from
scheme in its conversion
~ which have been
experience on other
s the various losses
the power house,
at the substations.
* The basis figure assumed for the calculation is not actually the lowest consumption figures
guaranteed for Direct Current, but the tender containing the lowest guarantee is less favourable
on account of higher first cost.


CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE SUBURBAN LINES.
Energy
Consump-
tion of the
With the exception of the conversion loss, these quantities are small, nor
does their accurate determination present any difficulty. The loss in direct
current substations has been based directly upon guarantees of the efficiency
of the substation plant, accompanying the tenders, and care has been taken
in drawing the specifications to ensure that these also are reliable. Table V.
compares the amount of electrical energy required for each scheme, and
shews the various losses in detail. In calculating the cost of providing
this electrical energy it is for the present purpose only necessary to
consider the consumption of coal and water, since other power house
charges such as wages, repairs, etc., would be the same for the two
schemes.
two Schemes
(continued).
Substation
operation.
As regards operation of substation plants, each substation in the direct
current scheme contains running machinery and therefore requires an
attendant night and day (i.e., 3 men per substation); and in the case of the
large substation at Prince’s Bridge, we consider it advisable to include also
a second attendant in charge of the switchboard (i.e. 6 men). The cost of
the attendants shewn in Table VI. is based upon an eight hour working day
and the current rate of wages based upon the information supplied to
us. It also allows a margin of 10 per cent, to cover sick leave and
holidays. In the case of single phase switch-houses we have included one
man per switch-house and one relief man, seven men in all.
The maintenance of the electrical equipment of the permanent way
would cost the same for the two schemes. The trolley wire is heavier for
the direct current system and its actual renewal would cost more, therefore
the annual sum included to provide for this is greater ; on the other hand,
the fact that it is stouter and that the insulators for the direct current
scheme are subjected to a lower pressure and therefore require less
inspection than in the case of the single phase scheme, offsets the higher
cost of renewal.
Mainten-
ance of
equipment.
Mainten-
ance of
As regards maintenance of rolling stock equipment, the single phase
scheme is at a certain disadvantage. The greater number and complexity
of the electrical parts carried on the coaches, not only causes the single
phase equipments to be initially more expensive, as shewn in Table IV., but
also renders them more costly to maintain; and when routine inspection
is taken into account and also the fact that repairs are necessarily subject
to the exigencies of traffic requirements, the maintenance of the single phase
equipments exceeds that of direct current equipments in a slightly higher
proportion than that governing their respective first costs; for the purpose
of the estimate presented in 'fable VI., however, we have taken the costs
of repairs and renewals as directly proportional to the Capital Cost.
rolling stock.
Table VI. shews the annual cost of the two systems as applied to the
Suburban Lines. This Table takes no account of (1) the slightly reduced
seating capacity of the trains in the Single Phase Scheme on account of
the extra amount of room required by the Single Phase equipment, (2) the
extra wear of track rails due to the extra dead weight of the single phase
motors, (3) the extra amount of spare plant required in connection with the
single phase scheme on account of the greater complexity of the equip-
ments —although a certain financial allowance ought perhaps to be made
for these and other matters, we have not deemed it necessary to complicate
the Tables by including it as the relative financial result of the two systems
is sufficiently indicated without debiting either scheme with special items
Annual Cost
of the two
Schemes.


PART I
CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE SUBURBAN LINES.
the exact amount of which it is difficult to assess.
Annual Cost
of the two
Schemes
TABLE VI.
(continued).
ANNUAL COST OF THE TWO SYSTEMS AS APPLIED TO THE
SUBURBAN LINES.
Direct Current Single Phase
Scheme. Scheme.
Electrical energy
* Variable power house charges, in-
cluding coal, water, stores and
wages of coal and ash handling
staff 59,700 58,400
Inspection and maintenance of high
tension transmission lines ... 3,190 2,169
Operation and maintenance of sub-
stations ... ... ... ... 12,456 1,940
Maintenance and renewal of track
conductors ... ... ... ... 18,051 18,051
I V(Ji
Maintenance of coach equipments: - -
(a) Inspection, cleaning, stores
and small repairs... .. 22,900 30,800
( h) i Repairs and renewals ... 43,900 91,100
Interest charges on the capital ex-
penditure shewn in Table IV. ... 93,977 122,281
Total 254,174 324,741
SUMMARY OF PART I.
Conclusions We are now j n a position to summarize the results of the comparison
with regard
to System. - between the two systems, as shewn bv the tenders received.
As already stated the specifications were carefully drawn up so as to
enable an actual and fair comparison to be made between the suitability of
the two systems for your railways. The leading makers of each system
submitted proposals which had evidently been carefully prepared and the
figures upon which our comparison is made may therefore be taken to be,
and in fact are, the best and most recent for each system.
The conclusions to be derived from a detailed analysis of the tenders
are as follows :
1. The initial cost of the single phase system is £707,587 more than
that of the direct current system.
2. The annual operating cost of the single phase system is £70,567
more than the direct current system.
3. The direct current system will show an increasing advantage over
the single phase system as the traffic increases year by year.
4. We recommend the Direct Current System as that best suited to
the Melbourne suburban railways. In the next part of the
Report we shall consider the relative advantages of the two
systems for the rest of the railways.
* These figures are not quite proportional to the numbers of units given on page 6 since
the lower power factor of the single phase system slightly reduces the alternator efficiency.
X If instead of taking the cost of repairs and renewals as proportional to the capital
cost we were to calculate it on the basis of the relative cost of the repairs to individual
parts given according to the most favourable tender for single phase submitted by any firm,
the figures instead of being in the proportion of 2'l to i would be in the proportion of 3 to 1.


PART 11.
CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE COUNTRY LINES.
The questions with which this part of the Report deals are as follows: —
(1) Are there any of the Victorian country lines which it is desirable
to convert to electric working?
(2) If so, would the Direct Current system be less suitable for them
than the Single Phase system?
The two primary conditions, either with suburban or up-country lines
which electric working must satisfy, are firstly, that it should pay, and
secondly, that it should be of general benefit to the community by
improving means of communication. That electric working is peculiarly-
adapted to fulfil these two requirements on suburban lines has been proved
in many well known instances and it has now been decided to run
electrically the Melbourne suburban system. But assuming this to be
running the question arises as to how tar it will eventually be desirable
to extend the electrification zone. Electrification of the trunk lines from
Melbourne to Sydney or Adelaide is too remote to be a suitable subject
for detailed estimates. The question is, therefore, which of the sections of
moderate length are nearest coming within the scope of practical politics,
as regards conversion to electric working.
SEYMOUR 'fM
6IV« MILES TV
■/////.
WALLAN
29 Vi MILES Tv
aMIHfI RflllßNF
3,733.200 2,
ANNUAL GROSS TONNAGE (PAVING LOAD + TARE) IN BOTH
Fig. 2.-Traffic on Various .Country Lines
Figure 2* indicates the relative power of some of the country lines to
pay for electrification, which, as is well known, is a question of the traffic
upon them. The height of each column in the fi-rure represents the length
of the section and the breadth of it at any point roughly the amount of
traffic upon it. From this table it is evident that the lines out of
* In selecting the lines shewn in the diagram we have included intentionally only lines
of considerable length ; there are short sections such as, for example, the Mornington, Stony
Point, Healesville, Whittlesea, etc., which compare in density of traffic with the lines shewn
in the figure. We have, however, preferred to regard these rather as extensions to the
suburban system than as country lines proper. Their length is insufficient to have an
important bearing on the choice of system.


Melbourne which carry most traffic to-day are to Seymour (distance,
60 miles) and to Bendigo rid Woodend (distance, 100 miles).
Melbourne-
Woodend-
Bendigo
We have made detailed estimates for both of these sections. The former
carries the denser traffic and is therefore nearer to economical electrification.
We prefer, however, to present estimates for the longer line since one of our
u.
o
CO
Z
o
•J
-I
2
O
u,
u.
<
a
H
co
'5 o
O
O
C
Years.
Fig. 3 —Growth of Traffic on M elbourne-Woodend-Bendigo Line
main objects is to see whether by adopting the direct current system there is any
disadvantage compared with adopting the single phase system and we have
TAB L E VII.
Traffic
conditions.
ESTIMATED TRAFFICS ON MELBOU RNE-WOODEND-BENDIGO LINE.
Traffic estimated for
1920 under electric
working.
Passenger Traffic.
Passenger journeys per annum ... ... ... 1,800,000"
Number of trains per day in
both directions ... 24
Average weight of train
140 tons
Train miles per annum
780,000
Ton miles per annum
110,000,000
Ratio of speeds, proposed
existing ... ... I‘2
to existing ... *
Goods Traffic.
Tons carried per annum
1,710,000
Average number of trains
per day in both directions 25
A verage weight of train
300 tons
Train miles per annum
810,000
Ton miles per annum
240,000,000
Ratio of speeds, proposed to existing .. ... 1‘39
judged the Seymour line not long enough to prove this. The traffic between
Melbourne and Bendigo, both passenger and goods, is growing and the diagram
* Under steam conditions tine traffic would be l,(i'!0,000 journeys per annum ; the traffic given
in the table is the assumed result of electrical operation


CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE COUNTRY LINES.
Figure 3 indicates roughly the rate of growth. Future growth is, of course,
subject to fluctuations depending upon the prosperity of the country but for the
present purpose we assume that in 1920, which is the date we think it correct
to consider for the country lines, the passenger traffic will have grown 50 per
cent, and the goods traffic 30 per cent, in excess of the traffics of 1911.
T ABLE Till.
LEADING FEATURES OF DIRECT CURRENT AND SINGLE PHASE
SCHEMES FOR THE
MELBOURNE
-WOODEND-BENDIGO LINE.
Source of electric power
Type of electric power
Details of 3-phase overhead transmission
lines
Type of plant in each substation
Capacity of plant in each substation ;
Normally working
Standby
Length of route supplied by each sub-
station
Demand at each substation
Type of track equipment
Yoltage
Locomotives: —
Number required (including spares) .
Direct Current
Scheme.
Power Station at
Yarraville.
3-phase 25 cycle.
Yarraville to Albion
at 20.000 volts i.e.
duplicate to that
furnished for the
suburban service.
Albion to Kangaroo
(near Bendigo), at
100 000 volts in
duplicate.
Step - down static
transformers and
converters deliver-
ing direct current,
and switchgear —
and in substation
at Albion step-up
transformers.
1.500 K.W.
1.500 K.W.
141, miles.
1.500 K.W.
Overhead wire.
1,500 volts.
Single Phase
Scheme.
Power Station at
Yarraville.
8-phase 25 cycle.
Yarraville to Foots-
cray (already pro-
vided in duplicate
for suburban ser-
vice).
Footscray to Ravens-
wood (10 miles
short of Bendigo)
at 100,000 volts.
Stop - down static
transferm ers
delivering 2-phase
curr e n t, an d
switchgear and
in substation at
Footscray step-up
transformers.
4,000 K.Y.A.
4,000 K.Y.A.
34 miles.
4,000 K.Y.A.
Overhead wire.
11,000 volts.
The traffic figures taken as the basis for comparing the tw T o systems of
traction are given in Table YII. The changes we nropose and have assumed
as compared with steam operation are the following:
1. That the number of passenger trains run should he consider-
ably increased and to commence with at any rate the average weight
of passenger train should be reduced.
2. That the passenger service should be increased in speed by some
20 per cent.; both stopping and express trains being run as at present,


CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE COUNTRY LINES.
and the speed improvement applying to both.
3. That the number of goods trains should he reduced and weight
of each increased.
4. That the speed of th© goods trains should be considerably
increased. In the case of trains composed of wagons unprovided with
air brakes, this would not be possible but the improvement should
apply to all braked goods trains.
In proposing a greater increase of speed for the goods than for the
passenger trains, we have in view firstly, the desirability of relieving con-
gestion and avoiding delays due to goods trains being shunted on to a siding
for the passage of passenger trains, and secondly, that the greater speed of
goods trains together with an increase in their weight and a decrease in the
weight of the passenger trains, will have the effect of approximately equating
the power taken by a passenger and goods train respectively. This has the
advantage in electric working of enabling the maximum amount of traffic to
he dealt with for a given expenditure upon wayside equipment.
The leading technical features of the direct current and single phase
systems as applied to the Melbourne-Woodend-Bendigo line are given in Table
VIII. and Table IX. compares the initial capital expenditure of equipping this
TABLE IX.
INITIAL COST OF CONVERTING THE MELBOURNE-WOODEND
'-BENDIGO
LINE TO ELECTRIC WORKING ON THE TWO SYSTEMS,
Direct Current
I Scheme.
Transmission Lines ;
20,000 volt lines i 3,665
Step-up transformers and switchgear ... 18,089
100,000 volt lines , 128,412
Substations ... ... ... ... ... 156,909
Track Equipment :
Copper conductors (material only) :
Eunning roads ...
Sidings
44,226
Erection of conductors and provision
erection of structures, brackets,
sulators, signal cabin switchgear,
nections, track bonding, etc. ...
220,407
257,040
Locomotives
Alterations to ways and works
25,000
£858,121
line on the two systems. The whole of the outlay is included excepting that on
power plant.* This table shews that in capital outlay the difference between
* We are, of course, treating the conversion of this line as subsequent to and contingent on the
conversion of the suburban lines ; this is an inevitable condition, as the previous conversion of any
up-country line would be, economically speaking, impossible. It is, therefore, unnecessary to in-
clude the power plant in the Table of Capital Expenditure, since the item is practically the same for
the two systems ; the capacity of plant required is one or two per cent, greater in the case of the
direct current system, and one or two per cent, greater in first cost per kilowatt in the case of the
single phase system, and can therefore be omitted.


G ON THE MELBOURNE-WOODEND-
THE TWO SYSTEMS.
1 Direct Current
Single Phase
| Scheme.
Scheme.
16,350,000
17,880,000
21,645,000
19,858,200
£10,030
£9,350
8,302
3,010
4,319
781
£7,920
£9,720
£5,800
£9,600
£31.371
£82,461
£34,325
£34,842
£65,696
£67,303
CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE COUNTRY LINES.
the two systems is only a small percentage but that the direct current system,
i.e. that recommended for the suburban area, is the cheaper.
Table X. compares their operating cost. For the sake of simplicity
we have included in this Table only such items as are affected by the choice
of system. We have excluded all standing charges in the power station
such as wages, repairs and management, for the same reason that the capital
cost of the power station was omitted from the previous table, and we have
excluded such items as wages of train crews, station staff, maintenance of
permanent way, and provision and maintenance of carriages and waggons,
because none of these items have any bearing upon the choice of system.
When weighing, however, the difference between the two systems as shewn in
the table, it is necessary to bear in mind that the total cost of operation is
much greater than the totals in the table and therefore the difference shewn,
considered as a percentage on the total cost of operation, is insignificant.
T ABLE X.
ANNUAL COST OF ELECTRIC WORKING ON THE
BENDIGO LINE UNDER THE TWO
Electrical Energy :
Units per annum required by trains
(including shunting)
Units per annum delivered from power-
house
Variable charges in power station
Maintenance of transmission lines
Operation and maintenance of substations
Inspection and maintenance of track
equipment
Maintenance of locomotives
Add interest charges at 1% on the capital
outlay shown in Table IX.
Total Annual Cost
Several conclusions can be drawn from the figures given in the preceding
Tables. For the Melbourne-Woodend-Bendigo line—a distance of 100 miles—
and for the traffic assumed, the direct current system is less costly in initial
outlay than the single phase system. For any greater traffic, the margin by
which, the direct current system is cheaper is increased, due to the fact that the
number of locomotives required, which is the item in which the direct current
system is cheaper, increases with the traffic, and the track conductors and sub-
stations which are the items in which the single phase system is cheaper, increase
at a very much less rate than the traffic. In annual cost the two systems, for the
traffic assumed, may be considered to be equal within the errors of estimating.
This equality will only be very gradually disturbed by increased traffic, the


CHOICE OF SYSTEM FOR THE COUNTRY LINES.
tendency being every year to make the direct current system more favourable.
There is therefore nothing, so far as the comparison for this section is con-
cerned, to upset the recommendation for the suburban area.
Though the foregoing is true for the railways of Victoria it need not be
concluded that it is by any means universally true. A difference in one or
more of the local conditions might alter the case. In places, lor example,
where waiter power is available and where coal is more expensive, the con-
version of lines to electric working becomes economical at a much earlier
stage in the development of traffic than that considered above, and when this
is the case the single phase system sometimes proves to be the more economical
one to adopt. This is only one among many ways in which local conditions may
affect the question, but we are satisfied that no alteration in any such factors
need be anticipated in Victoria likely to upset the conclusion reached.
SUMMARY OF PART 11.
The conclusions come to in Part 11. are as follows:
1. The Melbourne AVoodend-Bendigo line (100 miles) is the line chosen
for making a comparison between the two systems.
2. The cost of equipping this line on the single-phase system is £12,932
more than on the direct current system.
3. The cost of operating this line on the single-phase system is £1,607
more than on the direct current system.
4. The Direct Current system is equally suited to the country lines.


MATED
PART 111.
COST OF CONVERTING SUBURBAN LINES AND COM'
PARISON WITH STEAM.
Part I. of this Report dealt with electric traction on the Melbourne
Suburban Lines and shewed the direct current system to he economically
preferable to the single phase system for them ; Part 11. dealt with the country
lines and shewed that when they are converted to electric working, tire direct
current system would be suitable for them also. This part of the Report
therefore deals with the conversion of the suburban lines on the direct current
system, and includes the following;
(1) A comparison between the steam and electrical operating costs and
financial results on the suburban lines
(2) The total capital expenditure required to convert the suburban
(•3) The approximate annual rate at which capital will be required.
As explained in Part 1., we consider 1917 to be a suitable date to take for
the purpose of estimates if the various branches shewn on tire map are
converted progressively : and we have given reasons for anticipating at that
date a traffic of 150,000,000 passenger journeys per annum, and a train service
amounting to 38,000,000 coach miles per annum. The estimates of steam costs
which have been placed at our disposal by the Commissioners, however, refer*
to the year 1915 and a smaller traffic and transportation. The comparison
between the cost of operation by steam and electricity given below therefore
adopts the 1915 hypothesis for both the steam and electric working; and the
estimates of capital expenditure are also given on the same basis.
Table XI. gives the basis of tb-e comparison with steam operation as
regards train service and traffic.
TABLE XI.
TRAIN SERVICE AND TRANSPORTATION E,
COMMISSIONERS FOR STEAM AND ELECTRICAL
CONDITIONS
IN 1915,
Steam Conditions.
Electrical Conditions.
Train miles per annum
4,230,000
5,442,600
1-29
Ratio of train mileage
Coach miles per annum (excluding waste
mileage)
25,400,000“
24,641,000
Number of cars in service, including
spares
Average speed including intermediate
stops...
16 m.p.h.
21 m.p.h.
Ratio of speeds
It will be seen that the electric
service proposed in Table XI. and
* This is on the basis of 6 coaches per train. The prevailing length of train to-day averages 74
■ coaches but it is anticipated that by the time the whole of the suburban stock has been brought up
■to a standard length the average train will consist of 6 coaches.


COMPARISON WITH STEAM OPERATION.
approved by the Commissioners exceeds the steam train service by 29 per cent,
in frequency of trains and by 31 per cent, in speed. It is clear that each of
these increases must tend to increase the traffic and therefore yield a larger
revenue under electrical conditions. We shall shew the financial results of
electrification with various increases of traffic.
In this connection it may be borne in mind that the effect of electrification
upon the revenue earned on the suburban lines is two-fold. The increased
number of trains and increased speed not only both tend to increase the number
of passengers travelling but the increase of speed tends also to gradually
increase the average length of journey; since it enables business men to live
further from the city. We estimate that the figure given in Table XI. for
electric coach mileage would accommodate not less than 25 per cent, greater
traffic than the coach mileage given for steam, the degree of crowding during
rush traffic being the same in both cases. The length of train can be more
readily varied to suit the conditions of traffic.
TABLE XII.
COST OF OPERATION OF THE MELBOURNE SUBURBAN PASSENGER
SERVICE IN 1915.—ELECTRIC AND STEAM COMPARED.
Electrical Operation.
Provision and distribution of electrical energy (excluding capital
charges, but including operating expenses on transmission
system, substations and electrical equipment of track)
06,27:1
Train crews
Motor men and stores ... ... ... ••• 34,800
Guards and stores ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ; 28,100
Maintenance of rolling stock
Equipments— Inspection, cleaning, stores, and small repairs j 15,500
Repairs and renewals ... ... ... ••• 1 29,600
Coach bodies and bogies, cleaning and repairs 49,981
Additional station and signalling staff beyond those required
for steam operation ... ... ... ... i 11,162
Total Electrical Operation
£235,416
Steam Operation.
Cost of train service, including train crews, cleaning staff, coal and
other stores and train lighting, at 14 - 25 d. per train mile ...
251,156
Cost of maintenance of rolling stock ;
Locomotives at 3‘4d. per train mile
59,925
Coaches at 2’Bd. per train mile
49,350
£360,481
Total Steam Operation
In a separate report entitled “ Production of Electric Power,” we have
shewn in detail the cost of generating electrical energy for the railway service
and for other purposes in connection with the railways, such as driving of
workshops, and the furnishing of a bulk supply to the Spencer Street Power
Station and the St. Hilda trams. Taking these figures as a basis and deducting
the cost of energy supplied to these departments as in our previous report, the


4,350
20,000
66,000
£297,966
£2,183,420
COMPARISON WITH STEAM OPERATION.
net annual cost for the railways themselves, excluding capital charges but
including operating expenses on transmission, maintenance of cable and distri-
bution system, works out at £66,273 for the traffic assumed by the Commis-
sioners for the year 1915. This figure in fact includes the total cost in 1915
of the supply of electrical energy to the trains, exclusive of capital charges.
Table XII. shews the total cost of electrical operation compared with
steam-operation for 1915. In calculating the cost of train crews due allowance
has been made for additional train mileage, and the item for extra station
and signalling staff is quoted directly from data compiled by the Commis-
sioners. The steam costs have been furnished by the Commissioners.
Table XII. shews that electrical operation, in spite of the increased train
service, increased speed, and increased carrying capacity at times of rush
traffic is cheaper than steam operation by £125,000 per annum.
The capital expenditure on the plant and apparatus required to furnish
the service discussed for 1915 is shewn in Table XIII.*
TABLE XIII
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE REQUIRED TO FURNISH AN
ELECTRIC
SERVICE TO DEAL WITH THE TRAFFIC IN 1915,
Power Station
Transmission System
Underground cables
Overhead transmission lines
Substations
Track equipment
Alterations to Ways and Works
Overline structures
Telegraph and telephone wires and other sundries
Equipment of car sheds, pits, etc,
Rolling Stock
Electrical equipment of coaches ... £634,354
Coach bodies and bogies... ... ... ... 485,050
£1,119,404
Less cost of providing additional steam stock-
credited to electrical scheme ... ... 821,488
Net cost of electrical rolling stock
761,063
83,188
59,875
328,708
562,280
Table XIV. shows the financial result of the electrification of the suburban
lines for 1915, after allowing interest on capital and the necessary sinking fund
on the cost of the Power Station as recommended in our previous Report and
as calculated by the Commissioners. Table XIY. shews that the reduction in
operating cost alone, assuming no additional revenue from electrification, but
* The figures given in this Table differ only from those given elsewhere in the report for
1917 in that the traffic here considered being smaller not quite the whole of the plant is required;
but we have included all buildings, cables, transmission lines and track equipment as for the com-
plete plant, and have only omitted one of the generating sets, a corresponding boiler capacity and a
proportion of the substation machinery and coaches, all of which would be added as the traffic grows.


COMPARISON WITH STEAM OPERATION.
including the cost of improved service and higher speed, is in fact more than
sufficient to pay interest on capital and provide the sinking fund.
TABLE XIY .
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL RESULTS DUE TO ELECTRIFICATION (1915).
Capital outlay :
Power Station
Remainder of scheme
Saving in operating cost after providing increase of speed
recommended
Profit, assuming increased speed and after paying 4% interest
on outlay, and providing the necessary sinking fund :
With no increase of traffic
With 10% increase of traffic
With 20% increase of traffic
With 25% increase of traffic
"With 30% increase of traffic
£761,053
1,422,367
125,015
20,174
127.174
234.174
287,674
330,554
The saving would, of course, be much larger if no improvement in the
service or speed were allowed for, as the reduction in operating cost as com-
pared with steam would be some £40,000 greater on a smaller capital expendi-
ture. The improvement in service and speed are in our view well worth having
and are amply justified by the resulting increase in traffic, which we estimate
at not less than 25 per cent.
If on the other hand comparison be made on the basis of the year 1917
and of the increased traffic discussed in the first part of this Report, the profit
as a result of electrification, again after paying all capital charges, will be
greater than anything shewn in the Table XIY.
Table XY. summarizes the total capital expenditure required to com-
plete the conversion of the lines, showing in parallel columns the figures for
1915 (the Commissioners’ date) and the figures for 1917.
TABLE XY.
SUMMARY OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURE.
1915. 1917.
Power Station | £761,058 £875,780
Transmission system ... ' 143,063 167,863
Substations ... 828,708 378,605
Track equipment 562,280 562,280
Alterations to ways and works ... ... 90,350 99,350
Rolling stock 1,119,404 1,907,482
8 004,858 3,991,360
Less expenditure required under steam traction | 821,438 1 815 000
i ’ ' !
Net Total j 2,183,420 2,676,360
L i
A strict determination of tire rate of expenditure is not possible since the
* This increase in traffic would require an increase of £lO,OOO per annum in the working
expenses and £15,500 in the capital expenditure. Both these have been allowed for.


COMPARISON WITH STEAM OPERATION.
rate of progress of the work is affected by so many causes; but assuming
the order of conversion of the various routes to be (1) All the lines using
the Flinders Street viaduct, (2) the Camberwell group, (-3) the Caulfield
group, (4) the Clifton group, (5) the St. Kilda and Port Melbourne lines,
Rate of
capital
expenditure
(continued.)
1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918
Fig. 4.—Rate of of Additional Capital Expenditure.
Note. —The dotted line indicates the total capital expenditure including that required in
any case for steam operation.
and allowing for the fact that the various contracts with manufacturers will
provide for the retention of a portion of the contract price over a period of
maintenance, the capital expenditure may be taken to fall due as shown in
Figure 4, which is correct whether it be used for calculating the money
required by 1915 or by 1917.
It must not be thought that the larger capital expenditure which we
estimate for 1917 is in any way due to the rate of conversion being slow—the
larger capital expenditure by 1917 is merely due to the fact that the increases
of traffic, augmented as they will be by the electric service, call for more
rolling stock by 1917, and it must be remembered that the expenditure by
1917 if steam working be retained would amount to not less than £l,-315,000
for a smaller revenue apart altogether from any cost of quadrupling, alterations
to ways and works, etc.
SUMMARY OF PART 111.
TTo are now in a position to summarize the results of electric compared
with steam working:
(1) In 1915 the Commissioners estimate the suburban traffic with
steam working at 4,230,000 train miles, the schedule speed being 16
miles per hour and they propose for electrification an increase of 29 per
cent, in the train mileage and of 31 per cent, in the speed.
(2) Assuming no increased revenue from this improvement in ser-
vice, electrification would be accompanied by a reduction of £125,000
per annum in working expenses, which is more than sufficient to pay
interest on the capital expenditure and provide a sinking fund.
(3) Assuming the increase of traffic which we now estimate, the
profit, as a result of electrification, after allowing for interest and sink-
ing fund, would exceed £350,000 per annum by the year 1917.
(4) The capital expenditure is estimated as follows :
1913 £500,000, 1914 £1,200,000, 1915 £1,700,000, 1910 £2,200,000,
1917 £2,450,000, 1918 £2,600,000, 1919 £2,676,360.




SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS.
The specifications upon which tenders were invited were carefully drawn up so as to enable
an actual and fair comparison to be made between the two systems of electric traction. The
leading manufacturers all submitted proposals and the figures are therefore the best and most
recent for each system.
THE SUBURBAN LINES (PART I.)
1. The initial cost of the single phase system is £707,587 more than
that of the direct current system.
2. The annual operating cost of the single phase system is £70,567
more than that of the direct current system.
3. The direct current system will show an increasing advantage over
the single phase system as the traffic increases year by year.
4. We recommend the Direct Current System as that best suited to
the Melbourne suburban railways.
THE COUNTRY LINES (PART II.)
1. The cost of equipping the Melbourne-Woodend-Bendigo (100 miles)
on the single phase system is £12,932 more than on the
direct current system.
2. The cost of operating this line on the single phase system is
£1,607 more than on the direct current system.
3. The Direct Current System is equally suited to the country lines.
ELECTRIC WORKING, COMPARED WITH STEAM (PART III.)
1. In 1915 the Commissioners estimate the suburban traffic with
steam working at 4,230,000 train miles, the schedule speed
being 16 miles per hour and they propose for electrification
an increase of 29 per cent, in the train mileage and of 31
per cent, in the speed.
2. Assuming no increased revenue from this improvement in service,
electrification would be accompanied by a reduction of
£125,000 per annum in working expenses, which is more
than sufficient to pay interest on the capital expenditure
and provide a sinking fund.
3. Assuming the increase of traffic which we now estimate, the
profit, as a result of electrification, after allowing for interest
and sinking fund, would exceed £350,000 per annum by the
year 1917.
4. 'fhe capita] expenditure is estimated as follows:-
1913 £500,000, 1914 £1,200,000, 1915 £1,700,000, 1916 £2,200,000,
1917 £2,450,000, 1918 £2,600,000, 1919 £2,676,360.


Schedule A.
ADVERTISEMENT FOR TENDERS.
The following advertisement appeared in the Journals named below :
ELECTRIFICATION OF MELBOURNE SUBURBAN
RAILWAYS.
The Agent-General for Victoria is prepared to receive tenders for certain plant in con-
nection with the electrification of the Melbourne Suburban Railways.
The work is divided into the following sections, namely
ALTERNATIVE (1). DIRECT CURRENT SYSTEM.
(a) Turbo-alternators and Transformers.
(b) Substation Equipment.
(c) Electrical Equipment of Coaches.
ALTERNATIVE (2). SINGLE-PHASE ALTERNATING CURRENT SYSTEM.
(а) Turbo-alternators and Transformers.
(б) Substation Equipment.
(c) Electrical Equipment of Coaches.
COMMON TO BOTH ALTERNATIVES.
(a) Boilers and Boiler House Equipment.
( b ) Condensing Plant.
Separate specifications and forms of tender for each of the above sections may be obtained
from the Agent-General. For any further information application should be made to the
Consulting Engineers, Messrs. Merz and McLellan, 28, Victoria Street, Westminister, S.W.
Contractors may tender for all or any of the above sections and for either or both
alternatives.
The charge for each specification is £5 ss. for the first copy and £2 2s. each for any
further copies. Sums paid for copies of specifications will be refunded on receipt of bona
fide tenders.
Sealed tenders marked “Tenders for Electrification of Melbourne Suburban Railways”
are to be addressed to the Agent-General and delivered at his office, Melbourne Place,
Strand, W.C., not later than Tuesday, 4th June, 1912.
The Government do not bind themselves to accept the lowest or any tender, and ample
security will be required from the Contractors whose tenders are accepted.
PAPERS IN WHICH ADVERTISEMENT APPEARED.
Date. Paper.
May 3rd, 1912 “ENGINEER.”
May 3rd, 1912 “Engineering.”
May 3rd, 1912 “ELECTRICIAN,”
May 3rd, 1912 “Electrical Review.
May 2nd, 1912 “ELECTRICAL TIMES.”
May 3rd, 1912 “Railway Gazette.”
May Bth, 1912 “‘Times' Engineering Supplement.”
May 2nd, 1912 “ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING.”
May 7th, 1912 “ ELECTRICAL INVESTMENTS.”
May 3rd, 1912 “Daily Telegraph.”
May 3rd, 1912 “Morning Post.”
May 3rd, 1912 “ Standard.”
May 3rd, 1912 “Financial Times.
May 3rd, 1912 “ Financial News.’
May 3rd, 1912 ... “Financier.”


Schedule B.
LIST OF TENDERERS.
A. E. G. Co., Berlin.
Allen, Son & Co., Ltd., Bedford.
Babcock & Wilcox, London.
Beilis & Morcom, Ltd., Birmingham.
British Thomson-Houstou Co.
British Westinghouse Co., Manchester.
Brown Boveri & Co., Ltd., London.
Banks & Co., Ltd., Birmingham.
Dick Kerr & Co., Ltd., London.
Escher, Wyss & Co., London.
Ferranti, Ltd., Hollinwood.
General Electric Co., Birmingham.
General Electric Co. of New York.
Mirrlees, Watson Co., Glasgow.
Parsons & Co., Ltd., Heaton.
Reyrolle & Co., Ltd., Hebburn.
Richardsons, Westgarth & Co., Hartlepool.
Siemens Bros., Dynamo Works, Ltd., London
Stirling Boiler Co., London.
Willans & Robinson, Ltd., Rugby.




PLATE I.
SYSTEM
/
£
SHEWN THUS „
ST. ALBANS


<
<
LU
Z
_1
z
o
Hi
CO
D
0
X
01
UJ
_J
o
m
ll
o
Z
g
I—
o
Ui
CO
CO
0
01
o
YARRAVILLE POWER STATION.


YARRAVI LLE POWER STATION.
- '■ - -- i
£° A _ L ___ c °NVEVq_R_ £_ P
lil [ I IHI I . I h I ? Ili r-r------------^zJ\
| I cpfftej, j -
| ua|f I *j | | ( 1 I J' ]&a™ospheric P (■
// W SOOT SHOOT d {" !■ -■ j,- -}- V- '/J*! I 1 [•■- I■.■" d. - , ,j ." m -'-^=^HRSb/ gUEP Ih Jrj wm \’‘~'^’' J r~ •’ J
/^\. : , □□ PvTKrTAT I/ SH li
t«. HCOAL STORE H , Tpiff [ ( , iliT JfliSJ i'J W Jj.. I ill I
' ' m'” ' ’ ■■ & \ boiler house I 1 , 'JS j '±r.~:zTr-+rrr:r*V 1 •£Wr*t~nsiaer
a*: -<5 ; ; i : I•$ ! g« iMiiawy?-'
kJ- <«i J+TTfliaaixo i-* jf'y'ji&g. rA TT'•-- ■ - »•■- ' •
2V.- -f+rIUsCBEEN H‘C'*><S SCREENING POND iSt K „„„.
_j _ ==^= J b K ,=| I ENGINE HOUSE
£ = SE I tN===3lßßy»
£*~- ** '• “j ‘ , J CIRCULATING
;»;• J I I , WATER PUMP
I X J
SCALE.
FEET 10 5 Q 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 2CO FEET
LONGITUDINAL SECTIONAL ELEVATION ON LINE BB OF PLATE V 1


ELEVATIONS FOR YARRAVILLE POWER STATION.
- H | H iii B 9
■■ ■■ || j Bi 111 lii
<
assess =t§iEliiai!
SWITCH HOUSE AND OFFICES ROADWAY TRANSFORMERS
FITTING SHOP
[BOILER HOUSE behind}
ENGINE HOUSE
Scale, V4*' to 1 Foot.
FEET 10 S 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 FEET
MAIN BUILDING-STEEL AND ARMOURED CEMENT PLASTER
SWITCH HOUSE AND OFFICES-BRICK AND REINFORCED CONCRETE,


CONVERTER SUBSTATIONS
(WITH OIL*INSULATED NATURALLY COOLED TRANSFORMERS;.
rrw^ri
S 1 j I
U. | 1 I | I
Wj J | ( , |
I 1 Q III
I I r—\ I I
ujL " |J I r \ 5 11
* O Jill! 6
a®lIU I I i I
£ si —i fl r 1 — 1 ° ii
I —H 111 L— l —l
I I ■ | I
I I "I
■ |UJ r~r Y_ ■n ■
bo --f-i-
I ... f RmHI
■ Kco<a: ■ K —* « ■
O < ui < 11 i —■ a
“■£?d i _i = to
ff
If - ' i = s sTti
i ”P | SPACE FOR I f= Sf ~
U- I ALUMINIUM ARRESTER 1 t- < ,-fIL- H
,1 (BELOW) I CD ■
Approximate Scale.
Feet 10 5 0 _____ IQ FeE£T
Note:—this scale is applicable only to substations
CONTAINING 1000 KW. CONVERTER SETS.


PLATE
Victorian Railways
CONVERTER SUBSTATIONS
(WITH AIR COOLED TRANSFORMERS).
~I~H
/ n H I—i 1 —i
I; H / ' — l II
S ® _J £ |
| -I ■ ■ i I
s t ii i !
K|| I 1 1
jl_ £ >— l | 1 1 g |(
I I rtr ■ i I
|| m -■ ’j"' I
s "-“I”-'
I _ j
■ CC w < os K ■
■ o<in < I p■> ■
IL I(5 _J 1,1 b O
ui °r ? c . « ih
OCOO 3
< .n < ■ '' ■ ill >.
cl H > -'■ 1 -■ 1 1 o K I
" j »o ■==—--"■=" fc == g t Ld
1“- SPACE FOR oOLII
ALUMINIUM ARRESTER S - ■
(BELOW) LJ H
Approximate Scale.
10 5 0
Note:—this scale is applicable only to substations
CONTAINING 1000 KW. CONVERTER SETS.


ELEVATIONS FOR CONVERTER SUBSTATION.
Scale. Vaa" to 1 Foot.
FEET 10 5 0 10 20 30 40 60 60 70 80 90 FEET


OVERHEAD TRACK EQUIPMENT.
CATENARY CONSTRUCTION
SCALE OF FEET.
FEET 012846 10 15 20 25 FEET
TRANSMISSION LINES ON
TRACK STRUCTURES
STANDARD SINGLE TRACK
STRUCTURE.
STANDARD TWO TRACK STRUCTURE.
SCALE OF FEET.
INCHES 12 0 1 2
6 7 8 9 10 FEET
