





— Var^0US P e0^'G * n "
IrllSs
THE FURTHER ADVENTURES OF
TUCKONIE AND PEGGY.
Nararka's Escapes.
IT was a bright,
Australian Sum-
mer noon, and a
young black boy of
about eleven years of
age, stood by a group
of white people, and
pointed excitedly up-
wards to where a
blue butterfly was
winging its way
through the sun-
light. "Look," said
Tuckonie, for that
was the lad's name,
"the blue butterfly
has cast its shadow
over our path.
Amongst my people that means good luck."
Peggy Harvey, a little white girl, and Tuck-
onie's best friend, followed his gaze with interest.
"I do hope it does bring us good luck, Tuckonie,"
she said.
"So do I, Peggy," said Mr. Harvey, "We can
do with some good luck."
"Yes," said his wife with a sigh, "things don't
seem to have gone so well for us lately, do they ?"
The little party were sitting on some grassy
land, half in the shade of their caravan, and,
while having their midday meal, they had been
discussing their plans for the future. It was quite
true that things hadn't gone so well for them.
The Harveys and Bob, with Tuckonie and Peggy,
had just lately come from the land of Ng'rui
Moch, where they had, with the help of the
authorities and some good friends, succeeded in
imprisoning a band of outlaw aborigines who had
been causing a lot of trouble to the other tribes
and to the white people as well. Tuckonie, to
his great delight, had found the Golden Boomer-
ang, and everyone believed that all their troubles
were over. However, they were doomed to dis-
appointment, for on the morning of the day they
were to leave the land of Ng'rui Moch, they went
to the hut where Nararka and his medicine men
had been imprisoned, and found that they had
escaped. The Golden Boomerang also was gone.
The Harveys had got up a search party
immediately, and Chief Narkunda, Tuckonie's
father, had sent some of his warriors out to look
for tracks. Sometime later, these men returned
and said that Nararka and his medicine men had
got well away, but that there were four different
sets of tracks leading from the land of Ng'rui
"Look," said Tuckonie, "the Butterfly has
cast its shadow."
way. Unfortunately
however, the rains
came and washed
them all away. Nat-
urally, after this, the Harveys were quite at a
loss to know which way to go, and so decided to
continue in a straight line towards the coast.
"It's going to be very hard to contact them
again," I'm afraid," said Mrs. Harvey.
"Yes." said Bob, "and even if we do, we don't
know that we'll be able to take them prisoner
again, for they may have joined up forces with
the Women Warriors since we saw them last, and
in that case, we would be no match for them."
Tuckonie turned swiftly. "White ones," he
said, "there is someone over there amongst the
bushes."
All eyes turned in the direction to which he
was pointing, and the next moment a handsome
young warrior came into view, followed by a
slender young black girl. "Why, it is Nulla."
said Peggy, "and Narrabeen is with him." The
two young people of the Kakadu Tribe advanced
to the little party resting by the caravan, smiling
and holding up their hands in welcome.
"Well," said Bob Hennessy, "Nulla and Narra-
been! We didn't expect to be seeing you again
so soon."
Mrs. Harvey looked at Nulla eagerly. "Tell
us, Nulla, have you had any in following the
tracks ?"
"White Woman," said Nulla, "we followed the
tracks of the Women Warriors a long way into
the bush, and at one time these tracks were so
fresh that we thought they could not be more
than half a mile away. But at this time the
sky was clouded, and before we had gone more
than a few yards, down came the rain, and the
tracks were washed away."
I.fany of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168


"Bad luck," said Bob, "just what happened to
"But we haven't told you all our news yet,"
said Narrabeen. "Nulla has something for you
which he thinks is a message."
The Harveys looked very interested. "What is
it, Nulla?" said John.
"Here it is, White One," said Nulla, and he
handed him a crumpled piece of paper. "I found
it fixed to a tree by a spear."
John Harvey opened the little piece of paper
excitedly. "Why," he said, frowning, "Nulla was
right, this is a message—a message promising
vengeance and it's from Nararka."
"Well, what does it say?" asked Bob eagerly.
"I'll read it to you," answered John. " 'White
Ones, you have caused me much trouble—through
you, all my plans have gone astray. I warn you
now that I will never give up my desire for ven-
geance. Some day you and your friends will pay
dearly for what you have done, and that day is
not far off. —Nararka.' "
"Well, White Ones," said Tuckonie, "it means
that Nararka and his medicine men must have
passed along the way which Nulla and Narra-
been were following. I think we should go a
little towards the North."
Oh Tuckonie, you're so clever," said Peggy.
"I never know whether it's North, South, East,
or West."
Tuckonie looked at her gravely. "My people
have to know these things, Peggy, for it is im-
portant to them."
John Harvey had been looking very thoughtful.
"I wonder if Professor Westbrook has had any
luck," he said. "He was following the tracks
too, under the direction of Wamba, the black
tracker."
"I do not know what has happened to Professor
Westbrook, White Man," said Nulla, "for we have
seen no sign of him since we left the land of
Ng'rui Moch."
Just then, Tuckcuie arose from the fallen log
on which he had been sitting, and started to walk
off by himself into the bush. "I won't be gone
long, \\ hite Ones," he said, as he went, "but
something seems to tell me to go."
"Can't I come with you, Tuckonie?" said
Peggy.
"If you like, Peggy," said the little black boy,
and hand in hand, they walked away until they
came to a secluded spot hemmed in by young ti-
trees.
"What do you mean by saying that something
told you to come here, Tuckonie?" said Peggy.
Tuckonie looked at her, his eyes wide and
serious. "Peggy," he said, "I think that my
mother's mother, old Nimity the witch woman,
is trying to send me a message by magic."
"Oo," said Peggy. I wonder if she is, Tuck-
onie." She wasn't surprised at hearing Tuckonie
say that he thought Nimity was trying to get in
touch with him, for she knew, by living so much
with the aboriginal people, that they had a
strange and wonderful power which white people
could not understand—the power of sending
thought messages to each other when miles of
bushland lay between them. So she did not
worry her little friend by more questions—she
simply sat by his side and waited, looking at him
• expectantly. For a space of two or three minutes,
Tuckonie sat as he was. Then he opened his eyes
and looked at Peggy.
"Was it Nimity?" she said inquiringly?
"Yes, Peggy," he answered, "and she warns me
of danger."
"Oh Tuckonie," said Peggy, "what's going to
happen to us?"
"The danger is not to us, Peggy, but to Pro-
fessor Westbrook and Eva, and the black tracker,
Wamba. As the message came through I saw the
picture quite plainly. Our three friends were in
Professor Westbrook's house, and Nararka and
Moodgee were tying them up with ropes."
"Oo Tuckonie," said Peggy, "isn't that awful."
"And then," continued Tuckonie, "the wicked
ones went into another room of the house and
gathered all Professor Westbrook's things to-
gether and placed them in a big box, which they
took out to the van that waited outside. Then,
once more they went into the house, and, scatter-
ing some brush and dead leaves around, they set
fire to it. As the message faded away, the flames
were leaping high in the air. And the voice of
Nimity was saying all the time, 'Tuckonie, you
and your friends must rescue them, for what I
have said will come to pass. Go quickly, or you
will be too late.'"
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


"Oh Tuckonie," said Peggy, "what a dreadful
thing to happen. Then we'll have to tell Daddy
and Mummy and Bob to start for Professor West-
brook's house at once."
"Yes," said Tuckonie. "But your people are so
strange, they may not believe that I have had a
message. They cannot understand how one
person may speak to another unless they are
close enough to hear each other's voice."
"Oh they'll believe us, Tuckonie," said Peggy,
"we'll have to make them. Come along quickly."
So the two children raced over to where the
Harveys were still talking to Nulla and Narra-
been. "Mummy," said Peggy excitedly, "Tuck-
onie has just had a thought message from Nimity,
the witch woman."
"Really Peggy," said Mrs. Harvey, smiling.
"Yes, yes, Mummy, it's quite true." And then
the two children told the Harveys all about the
message which Nimity had sent. Bob and John
were inclined to think it was just imagination on
Tuckonie's part, but Mrs. Harvey wasn't so sure.
"It's strange," she said, "but although I haven't
mentioned it, I've had an uneasy feeling about
Professor Westbrook and Eva. And don't forget,
Bob, that the aboriginal people know things we
don't. I sometimes think that these thought
messages can really be sent by those who have
the power."
"The white woman speaks truly," said Nulla.
"Yes," said Narrabeen. "If Nimity, the witch
woman has sent Tuckonie this message saying
that your friends are in danger, then you must
go to their rescue at once, for if anything happens
to them which you could have prevented, you
will never forgive yourselves."
Mrs. Harvey looked at the two white men im-
ploringly. "Narrabeen is quite right," she said.
"I think we should go."
"Well, all right," agreed John at last.
Bob looked at Narrabeen and Nulla. "What
about you," he said, "will you come with us?"
"If we may, white man," said the young black
warrior politely. Mrs. Harvey smiled. "There's
plenty of room in the caravan for everyone," she
said.
After travelling some time they saw the little
clearing in which stood Professor Westbrook's
house. As they looked, it was only too apparent
that Nimity's message was right. The dark sky
was lit by lurid flames leaping high in the air,
and great clouds of smoke blotted out the stars.
"Quickly," said Bob and John, jumping from
the caravan," we've got to get them out of there."
They hastened to the house, followed by Nulla
and, forcing their way into the blazing building,
found Professor Westbrook and Wamba uncon-
scious, while Eva was screaming with fright.
Throwing blankets around the victims of Nar-
arka's cruel plans, they managed to get them
from the house. And only just in time, for, as
they reached the open air again, there was a
terrific crash and the beams which had supported
the house, came toppling down.
"Oh John," said Mrs. Harvey, "for one horrible
moment I thought that you were going to be
trapped in there."
"It's all right," said John. "Here, quickly, help
me to attend to them —they've been overcome by
the smoke."
Then the little party got their three friends
safely into the caravan where they did all they
could to bring them round and make them com-
fortable.
The next morning, Professor Westbrook was
well enough to tell them what had happened.
The Harveys listened in amazement, as what he
told them was exactly the same as Tuckonie
had said when he described his thought message.
Bob and John were puzzled as to how such a
thing could happen, but Peggy was not worried —
she knew.
"The worst of it is," Professor Westbrook was
saying, "that Nararka h° - J all my scientific
apparatus. And aii tuose drugs which I have
been working on for years—drugs which could
be very dangerous in his possession."
"Yes," said Bob, "it's quite obvious what an
unscrupulous man could do with those drugs in
his possession. We'll have to be more careful
than ever."
At this moment, Nulla came to the door of the
caravan. "White Ones," he said, "I have good
news for you."
"What's that?" said John.
Nulla pointed to the ground some distance
away. "There are tracks there," he said, "and
they are the tracks of Nararka and his medicine
men. There is now nothing to stop us from
following them."
Many of the Incidents throughout this hook are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


Trapped by the Tide;
THREE weeks had passed since the
Harveys had rescued Professor West-
brook, Eva and Wamba, from the burning
house. Now they were once more nearing
the coast, but this time they were much further
north than they had been before. All along the
way, Wamba, Nulla and Tuckonie had been tak-
ing turn and turn about to walk in front of the
caravan following the tracks. On this day it
was Nulla's turn, and Tuckonie and Peggy were
sitting on a little ledge at the front of the
caravan. Suddenly they saw Nulla running back
towards them. "White Ones," he said, "I think
we are coming to the end of our quest."
The grown-ups in the back of the caravan asked
him what he meant.
"Well," said Nulla, "the tracks lead up over
the sand hills yonder, and down on to the beach."
Mrs. Harvey looked surprised. "Then the sea
is behind those sand hills, is it, Nulla? I didn't
think we were so close."
"I knew we were close," said Wamba, "because
1 could smell the sea in the air."
"Well," said Bob, "we'd better leave the cara-
van here and follow the tracks on foot, for the
time being, because we don't want to pitch our
camp to-night on the sand, in case there's a strong
wind."
Twenty minutes later they were all down on
the beach where a great surprise awaited them,
lor the tracks of Nararka and his warriors led
right into the water.
"Well," said John Harvey, scratching his head
in a puzzled way, "What are we going to do now ?"
Bob gave a rueful grin. "It looks as though
they have vanished into the water," he said.
Tuckonie smiled knowingly. "What they have
done is simple, White Woman. They have sus-
pected that someone might follow them and so
they have made for the sea. They have stepped
into the water up to their ankles, and have
walked along the beach in that way, so that the
little waves would wash out their tracks. Then,
do you see, no one would know whether they had
gone towards the north, or down towards the
south."
"That's very likely just what they have done,"
said Bob. "Well, the only thing for us to do, is
to break up into two separate parties and go
off in different ways, until we find some further
sign of them."
the little party broke up, John and Mary and
Narrabeen going one way, and Bob and Nulla,
with Wamba and the kiddies the other.
After the two parties had been separated for
about an hour, Peggy and Tuckonie, who were
dancing along in front of Bob and Nulla, saw the
maiks of some heavy object having been dragged
over the sandy beach, down to the water's edge.
Two sets of footprints accompanied it.
White Man," said Tuckonie, excitedly, "we
have solved the mystery. Nararka and his
Iriends walked along to here and then two people
who were waiting for them dragged a boat down
from its hiding place amongst the bushes. See,
we have found the marks of the boat."
Bob and Nulla, on ex-amining the marks found
that Tuckonie was right, and sent him running
post haste after the other party.
"We cannot follow them any further, White
Man, said Nulla. "Unless we are able to build
a boat, for they have gone across the sea. Most
likely they have made for the islands to the
north."
\Y ell, said Bob thoughtfully, "I don't suppose
there's anything to stop us building a boat. I'll
discuss the matter with John and Professor
W estbrook, and see what they have to say about
it."
The next few hours found the little camp as
busy as a bee-hive. Bob and Wamba and John
were ciioppmg trees, and splitting them into
tninner pieces which could be more easily handled
with a saw. Professor Westbrook and the three
kiddies carried the pieces to a little spring nearby,
where they left them to soak.
A few days later the boat was completed, and
everyone was very proud of her. Truth to tell,
it wasn t a bad little boat at all. It was quite
loomy, and part of it had been enclosed by some
of the striped awning from the caravan. The
three kiddies were very excited about it and felt
that they couldn't wait another moment before
putting out to sea.
P
"But Peggy," said Mrs. Harvey, smiling, "\ye
can't set off like this. First we have to pack
the boat with our goods and provisions."
Well, said John, "I don't see any harm in
having a trial run, Mary."
"No indeed," said Bob, "that's the wisest
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


thing to do under the circumstances. After all,
we don't know yet how the boat will sail. And
we can take some biscuits, tea, and a spirit stove
in case we get hungry."
"Oh," asked Tuckonie, gleefully, "can we go for
our trial trip now ?"
"Oh yes, please Daddy," said Peggy, and "Oh
yes, please," echoed Eva.
"We'd better go," said Mrs. Harvey with a
laugh, "I can see I'm not going to get any peace
from any of you until the boat is tried out."
So they all scrambled happily into the boat and
set off.
It was so pleasant with the sun sparkling and
dancing on the water, that no one wanted to go
back too soon. And they kept on, and on, until
they became so hungry that they knew it must be
time for a meal.
"Look," said Eva, pointing to a flat ledge of
rock which projected from the cliffs. "It would be
nice to go there and have our lunch."
"It would be too dangerous to try and anchor
there," said Mrs. Harvey.
"No, I don't think so, Mary," said John.
"There's a sort of little bay just there, and the
sea is very calm to-day. I think we could try it,
and it's all good experience, you know."
"Oh, very well then," said Mrs. Harvey with a
sigh of resignation. Then she laughed. "You're
just like a lot of school children with a new toy "
Soon the little boat was making for the tiny
inlet near the flat ledge of rock, and although all
the party got sprayed from the little wavelets
breaking against the side of the clifF, they manag-
ed to anchor quite well.
Away the kiddies went, while Mrs. Harvey
heated the water for the tea over the little spirit
stove which Bob had thoughtfully tucked away
in the boat. The children came back and had
their biscuits and tea and then told the grown-up
members of the party that a cave they had found
was much more exciting than they had expected,
as it led into another one.
"Oh, do come up and see it Daddy," said Eva.
"It's as good as the caves at the Land of Ng'rui
Moch."
To please the kiddies the grown-ups went with
them to the cave, and found that it was very fas-
cinating indeed. They passed through the first
cave, and then into the second which the children
had described, but at closer examination, Tuck-
onie found that this led to yet another, though
they would have to crawl on hands and knees in
order to pass through the small opening. They
became so interested in going from one cave to
another, and wondering if they would eventually
come out somewhere inland, that they quite lost
count of the time, and two hours had passed be-
fore John thought of looking at his watch. They
were all very surprised when he told them how
long they had been walking about in the caves,
and set out at once for the original one facing
out to sea. As they approached it, Bob became
rather disturbed, because he thought the sound
of the lapping water seemed closer than it
should. This meant that the tide had come up
while they were in the caves. However, he did
not mention the fact to the others until he was
quite sure, as he did not want to alarm them. But
it could not be kept away from them for long as
when they reached the outer cave, they found
that the floor of it was already under water. This
was rather a serious position, because the cave
was about three feet higher up than the ledge of
rock, and it meant that they would have to wade
through that depth of water in order to reach
the boat.
"The rest of you stay here for the time being."
said Bob, "and John and I will go to that part of
the ledge where we anchored the boat, and see if
we can bring her any nearer."
So saying, they set off, but to their horror when
they reached the anchoring place, they found
that their precious boat was gone. The incoming
tide had lifted it to a position where the tow rope
had rubbed on a sharp piece of rock- The rope
had worn through and the boat had been carried
away.
"Bob," said John, "the tide will probably come
up six or eight feet here."
"Yes," answered Bob, "and that means that the
ledge here will be that many feet under the water,
and even in the cave there'll be danger. At high
tide there'll probably be about four feet of water
in the cave and unfortunately the other caves lead
downward, not upward."
"There doesn't seem to be any way of getting
the boat back either," said his friend, "seeing it's
away over there."
They splashed their way back through the
water to where the others were waiting at the
mouth of the cave. Mrs. Harvey had already
Manv of the Incident-" »hrou(rhou« ♦hi? book are Illustrated on pasres 16A and lfiß


realised how dangerous their position was; but
if she had not, one look at the men's faces would
have told her.
"What are we going to do, John?" she said,
trying to keep her voice steady.
"Oh something will turn up dear," said John,
in a vain effort to be cheerful.
To make matters worse, the sky clouded over,
and soon a strong wind sprang up. The sea grew
wild, and the waves started to hurl themselves
angrily against the cliffs. As the time passed, the
water gradually mounted in the cave and all the
members of the party grew very silent. Eva and
Peggy, although they were trying to be very
brave about it, started to cry. This upset Mrs.
Harvey very much indeed, as she felt there was
no possible way of comforting them.
Tuckonie, however, with his little legs braced
firmly against the wash of the water, which was
now up to his waist, put an arm around each
little girl, and told them that help would come.
"Oh Tuckonie," said Eva, "I'd like to believe
you, but I can't because no one knows we're here."
"Perhaps they do," said Tuckonie.
Now Peggy, who knew Tuckonie's ways better
than Eva did, thought that he wouldn't say a
thing like that unless he had some reason, so she
asked him to tell her what he meant.
"Peggy." said Tuckonie very seriously, "I
do not know whether I have been successful in
what I have been trying to do, for I was reared as
a warrior, and not as a medicine man, so I know
very little magic. But do you remember that Old
Nimity, the Witch Woman, who is my grand-
mother, told me that there was a strong bond
between me and her."
"Yes," said Peggy, "I remember."
"And she told me," said Tuckonie, "that if I
tried very hard to get in touch with her, I might
be able to send her a thought message, just as
she is able to send them to me."
"Oh," said Peggy, "and you've been trying to
send her one, have you Tuckonie?"
"Yes," answered the boy, "I fixed my mind on
the camping grounds of my own people, and I
pictured my father and his warriors out hunting,
while the lubras dug for yams. I pictured our
medicine man Maroubra, counting the sacred
brnes of his ancestors, and I pictured Old Nimity
sitting, gazing into the fire which she makes when
she wants to work magic. Then in my heart I
said over and over again the words: 'Nimity,
Tuckonie is calling you, I am in danger, listen to
me Nimity.'"
"And what happened then Tuckonie?" said
Eva, her eyes round with wonder.
"Well then," said Tuckonie, "it seemed to me
that I heard Nimity's voice ever so softly in my
ears saying, 'Speak Tuckonie, for Nimity listens.'
And then I told her that we were caught by the
tide and might be drowned. I told her just where
we were and how she could get here. And when
I had finished my story, I heard her voice say,
'Have courage Tuckonie, and tell your friends to
have courage, for your tribe will never desert
you. I, Nimity, the Witch Woman, promise that
you will be rescued.'"
"Oh Tuckonie," said Peggy, "wouldn't it be
wonderful if it was all true."
Peggy then told the grown-ups of the party
what Tuckonie had done, and although they
weren't as cheerful about it as Peggy and Tuck-
onie were, they pretended to be, for they did
not want to worry the children more than they
could help. The water was now breast high on
the children, and the men of the party decided to
lift them on to their shoulders so that they would
have the best chance possible. Five minutes
passed .... ten .... fifteen .... and still
no sign of delivery. The wind had become very
cold and the water was colder still. They felt
frozen with fear and cold.
"It looks as though it's going to be the end of
everything," said John very softly to Bob.
"I'm afraid so, old chap," answered Bob in the
same tone of voice.
But Tuckonie's eager eyes had seen through
the gloom, a blurred object moving along towards
them. It was tossed this way and that by the
waves, but it still came on.
"Look 1 " he said, his voice grown strong with
hope, "we're saved!"
Every eye followed his outstretched arm, and
all their hearts leapt with joy as they made
out the shadowy shape of a large raft. Closer
and closer it came, one minute tossed high on
the crest of a wave, and the next minute out of
sight. Then up it would come again on the next
wave, each time a little closer than before. Soon,
the little party could make out the figures of
Many of the incidents throughout 'his book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


the warriors guiding it to them. There was Chief
Narkunda working hard at a rough home-made
paddle, and opposite him on the raft sat Mar-
oubra. Behind them they made out still other
warriors of the Arunta Tribe.
"You see, White Ones," said Tuckonie excited-
ly, "I did succeed in getting my message through
to old Nimity."
"It looks as if you did, youngster," said Bob,
"and although we can't make out how you did it,
we won't doubt you in future.
Skilfully, Narkunda and his warriors guided
the raft over the ledge of rock and up to the
mouth of the cave. It was hard work getting all
of the party on board the raft, for as it was rudely
built it was inclined to tip over towards one side,
and more than once someone slipped into the
water and had to be dragged back again. But at
length they were all aboard, and though they
were absolutely drenched and their teeth were
chattering with the cold, they were all too thank-
ful to complain.
"It's little enough to do for our friends. White
Ones," said Narkunda, the chief, in answer to
Bob's words of tharks. "You would have done
as much for us. No man who is worthy of the
name would do less."
Mary, once aboard the raft, felt very curious
about whether Tuckonie's thought message had
actually reached old Nimity, or whether the
warriors had just come that way by chance.
"Narkunda," she said, "your son Tuckonie told
us that he sent a thought message to old Nimity,
telling her that we were in danger. Was it
Nimity who told you that we were trapped by the
tide in the cave?"
"Yes, White Woman," said Narkunda, "Nimity
got the message from my son Tuckonie, and told
us that there was not a moment to lose, so we
set out immediately. It is fortunate that we
were camped not far away. We were very
anxious for we did not know if we would get to
you in time. But now, thanks to all the great
spirits, there is no longer any need for anxiety.
You are wet and cold, but when we get back to the
shore, you will find warm fires blazing, where
you can warm yourselves, and dry your clothes,
and the lubras of the tribe will have hot food
ready for you. Then you can rest, and by to-
morrow it will be as though this misadventure
had never happened."
Back at the camping grounds of the Arunta
Tribe, everything happened as Chief Narkunda
had told them, and the next day they were feeling
fit and well. One thing still troubled them how-
ever .... the loss of their beautiful boat.
"White man," said Narkunda, "if you wish,
my warriors will help you to find the boat, for we
still have a raft."
Accordingly, the two white men and some of
Narkunda's warriors set out on the raft, and after
a long and tiring trip, they eventually found the
little boat which had been washed in to shore
quite a long way up the coast. They changed
over from the raft to the boat and went back to
the camping grounds.
"The rest of you stay here for the time being," said Bob.
Many of the Incidents throughout this hook are Illustrated on pages 16A and ISB.


Headhunters from North
THE following day the warriors of the
Arunta Tribe said good-bye to the Har-
veys and went on their way. The Harveys
then set about transferring all their most
necessary belongings from the caravan to the
boat. As they were looking around the caravan
to see if anything had been overlooked, they
were suddenly startled by loud shouting in high
voices and looking from the window they dis-
covered that hosts of the women warriors were
almost upon them.
"John, what are we going to do," said Mrs.
Harvey, "the women warriors are here, and our
guns and ammunition are already in the boat."
"Well, there's one good thing," said Bob, "the
women warriors don't know that, so I don't think
they'll be anxious to come too near the caravan.
Our best chance is to stay here."
"But Mr. Hennessy," said the Professor, "these
women warriors wouldn't be here for nothing,
they must have some reason for coming."
The next minute the reason was only too plain,
for poor Narrabeen, who was down near the
boat was taken captive by the vicious, screaming
women. Nulla, who was standing a short distance
away saw them take her, and holding his spear
aloft, he advanced upon them, but they were
too many, and as he threw his spear at the
warrior who held Narrabeen a shower of spears
came back towards him, one of them striking
him in the side, and forcing him to fall to the
ground. Having got Narrabeen into their power
the women warriors, with defiant shouts, rushed
quickly off into the bush.
By the time the Harvey party had reached
the boat and got their guns and ammunition,
the women war-
riors were all out
of sight.
still wished to go with them or if he would prefer
to stay on the mainland and ask the aid of the
Arunta Tribe to help him get Narrabeen back.
Nulla said that that was what he would like to
do, and Wamba agreed with him; so after saying
good-bye to the two warriors the Harvey party
set out on their journey. After a few hours'
sailing, the little boat put in at a pretty little
island. Beautiful flowers grew in profusion
amidst a variety of semi-tropical trees. Tuck-
onie, Peggy and Eva, lost no time in explor-
ing it, but the grown-ups urged them to be
careful, as Nararka and his warriors might be
hiding somewhere on the island, although there
was no sign of them, and there were no tracks.
However, experience had taught them to take
no risks. On their way around the island Tuck-
onie found quite a number of sea-gulls' eggs
which he brought back to Mrs. Harvey, assuring
her that they were very good to eat and promising
that next day he would explore the island thor-
oughly to see what other food could be found.
The next day, true to his promise he set out on
another search, taking Peggy and Eva with him.
Suddenly, he stopped dead in his tracks. The
two little girls came running up to him wonder-
ing what it could be that he was staring at so
intently. They saw that it was a dead sea-gull,
stripped of all its feathers.
'This is a very bad sign," said Tuckonie, look-
ing at the bird.
"Why Tuckonie," said Peggy, "what does it
mean ?"
This bird has been killed bv the hand of man "
said Tuckonie, "and the feathers have been
plucked from its
body. It looks to
me as if it has
This is a very had sign," said Tuckonie.
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168


Nimity sends a thought message to Tuckonie.
[See page 2.]


' gK, yS **" *" Si
, B
r :: " iat^^fcfcrTi M "IT
JS w = ./ ®
' I f f&¥_? tfi ■' 'f/W r^^aMjtM
mL 'v I i ww/tt/
FnreneJlcd by the Aruntas.


and the person who wore these shoes could walk
anywhere without leaving tracks.
"Then we'd better go back at once and tell
Daddy and Mummy, and Bob and Professor West-
brook," she said. When the others heard this
they were rather mystified, as they knew that
what Tuckonie said was right. But at the same
time they had searched the island thoroughly and
couldn't make out where Nararka, Mallee and the
Medicine Men could possibly be hiding. However,
they decided that in future the children must
not go on any more exploration trips by them-
selves.
The following day, while roaming over the
island together, they discovered the trunk of an
old tree and growing out of it a young sapling,
which interested Professor Westbrook very much.
He said that as far as he could judge, the tree
itself must be hundreds of years old . . . perhaps
thousands, and that it was of a type of which he
had never heard.
"Very remarkable," the Professor said thought-
fully, but the Harveys could not see anything
very remarkable about it.
"Great spirits of our tribe," said Tuckonie.
At this unexpected exclamation, all the nartv
turned from the tree to stare at the little black
boy who in his turn, was staring at a strange pole
that stood some distance away, and was carved
and painted with different coloured clays.
"Great Scott," said Bob. "What is it "
"It is a totem pole," said Tuckonie.
"But to what tribe does it belong, Tuckonie?"
asked Professor Westbrook.
"None of the tribes on the mainland. White
Man," said Tuckonie. "It is a strange totem pole,
but I think it is like one which my father des-
cribed to me once, and told me that it belonged
to headhunters from the islands further away to
the north."
"Headhunters," said Peggy, her eyes as round
as saucers. "Oh my goodness."
"Well, if that's the case," said Bob, "I don't
think this island is a very healthy spot for us to
stay."
"Neither do I," said Mrs. Harvey. "I just
couldn't stand headhunters."
"I think we'll leave to-morrow," said John.
So, accordingly, at dusk they started packing
away their things again. However, just as they
were in the midst of this, Mallee, Bingi and
Moodgee, three of the wicked Nararka's warriors,
sprang out from a spot where they had been in
hiding for sometime. They had been living in
their boat which they had hidden in a cave, just
at water level and they had been waiting for a
suitable opportunity to attack the Harveys. When
they saw that they were preparing to leave the
island, they crept up into the bush and waited
until the Harveys had put down their guns. As
soon as the Harveys saw the warriors of Ng'rui
Moch, they ran for their guns. It was an exciting
skirmish and it would have been very hard to
know which way the fight would have gone, only
when it was at its height, loud voices were heard
shouting battle cries and looking down towards
the beach, both parties saw a host of strange
warriors clambering from their canoes up on to
the beach and rushing onward as fast as they
could.
"By Ng'rui Moch . . . headhunters," said Bingi
and without wasting any more thought on the
Harvey party, he took to his heels and ran into
the bush, Mallee and Moodgee following him.
The strange headhunter warriors formed a ring
around the island and gradually closed in, so the
Harveys knew they were bound to be caught
sooner or later.
"I think," said Bob," the only thing is to try
and make a dash for it."
"Do you think there's a chance," said the Pro-
fessor.
"If we all stick close together, yes," said Bob.
"After all, the warriors are thinned out round
the island, and if we can get past those who are
directly in our way, we may be able to reach our
boat and get away."
"Well," said John, "at all events, we'll try it."
And at a given signal the Harvey party rushed
for the beach. When Mallee and Bingi and
Moodgee saw what they were doing, they did the
same thing, but as their boat was further round
the other side of the island, they could not get
to it, but had to make for the Harvey's boat. All
this time the strange warriors were following
closely on their heels. The Harveys reached
their boat first, and were just putting off when
Mallee and Bingi and Moodgee came up.
"Take us aboard your boat," they said, "and
we will never give you any more trouble, we
swear it. You cannot leave us here to the mercy
of these headhunters."
"All right, get in," said John, "but if you try
any tricks in the boat we'll shoot you."
Nararka's medicine men did not need any fur-
ther invitation. They scrambled into the boat
and put off, just as the headhunters arrived on
the beach.
"Do you think you will get away," shouted
Takahama, the leader of the headhunting party.
Many of the Incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


"Our canoes are much quicker than your boat."
And, unfortunately this proved to be true, for
before the Harveys had gone any distance, the
canoes were all around them.
"Well," said the Professor, "I'm afraid there's
only one thing for it. We shall have to put up a
fight. Perhaps the noise of our fire-arms will
frighten them away."
Accordingly they opened fire and the shots did
frighten one or two of the warriors, particularly
as a couple of hits were scored. But Takahama
was not to be put off like this, for though he was
cruel he was also brave.
"Stop fighting with your strange fire sticks,
White Men," he said, "it is useless."
Bob Hennessy shouted back angrily, "If we
are going to die we are certainly going to kill a
few of you first."
Then Takahama stood up in the prow of his
canoe and shouted back. "White Ones," he said,
"if you will cease fighting, I will not promise to
spare your lives, but I will promise that you will
be given a chance. The warriors of Chief Wag-
gamoo, my father, never break a promise."
"What are we going to do, John," said Mrs.
Harvey anxiously to her husband.
John looked at Bob. "Bob," he said, " I think
we had better take them at their word. After
all, if we keep on fighting, we may kill a few of
them, but we can't possibly escape. If we go
with them they may be as good as their word and
give us a chance."
So Bob stood up in the boat and shouted to
Takahama, "Your bargain has been accepted,
Strange Chief; we agree."
On arrival at the island of the headhunters, the
captives were placed in a little group surrounded
by warriors, while the chief of the headhunters
was acquainted with what had happened, and a
meeting was held to decide what should be done
with them.
"You shall have your chance," said Takahama
to the captives, "we never break our promise."
"Then what is the chance?" Bob asked anxious-
ly.
Takahama laughed, "It is quite a good chance,"
he said. "We are awaiting for a flock of mutton
birds to arrive. Chief Waggamoo, my father,
has decided that if they arrive just as the shadow
of that tree reaches the foot of yonder rock, you
must die. But if they arrive before that time, or
after it, then you will be allowed to live."
Looking at Tuckonie they saw that the young
black-boy seemed very grave. "What do you
think about it, Tuckonie?" asked John.
Tuckonie answered very gloomily, "White
Man," he said, "I think they will kill us."
"But Tuckonie," said Eva, "the mutton birds
wouldn't arrive just the very minute that the
shadow of the tree reached the foot of the rock."
"Yes," said Tuckonie.
"W T hat's that, youngster," said Bob.
"They are only having a joke with us," said
little Tuckonie sadly. "It is a cruel trick, for the
mutton birds are never a minute late."
John Harvey opened his eyes wide in amaze-
ment. "Are you sure of this?"
"Quite sure, White Man," said Tuckonie, "the
mutton birds do the same thing every year. At
a time which is known to those who watch them,
the flock will leave a certain place and each year
they arrive back at that place in the same month,
on the same day, at the same moment. They
are never a minute early, or late."
Many of the Incidents throughout this book are Illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


The D
THE warriors of the headhunting tribe
advanced and decked their prisoners with
many flowers, hanging garlands around
their necks. Then one of them gathered
a number of short twigs, and holding them so that
one end was concealed he passed from member
to member of the party, making them draw
a stick. He told them that the person who
drew the shortest stick would be the first to die,
providing the mutton birds arrived on time. To
their horror it was little Peggy who drew the
shortest stick.
"Oh," said Mrs. Harvey, in terror, "they
couldn't possibly do such a monstrously savage
thing. Why, Peggy is little more than a baby."
At this moment
great shout of
excitement went
up from the Head-
hunters, for there
appeared far out '
to sea, what seem-
Ed to be a cloud
in the sky. Nearer
and nearer it came jflrwL™
and then the Har-
veys saw that it V '
was a flock of
birds.
"The mutton
birds . . . the mut-
ton birds," shout-
ed the Head-
hunters, and the
Harvevs looked at
the shadow of the 'ftixW Tj O*
tree. It was just
about to touch
the side of the
rock. Closer and
closer came the
mutton birds and
nearer and nearer
to the rock crept
the shadow of the tree.
Then an excited squealing as the birds landed
and the shadow touched the side of the rock.
"The Dance of Death! The Dance of Death!"
screamed the Headhunters and two stalwart war-
riors came and took Peggy roughly by the shoul-
ders.
John Harvey sprang at them, and with one
blow from his fist sent one of the warriors spraw-
ling on the ground, while Bob was locked in a
struggle with another. Tuckonie stood with his
boomerang in his hand, ready to let fly at one of
the warriors, for they had taken his spear.
Suddenly a hush fell on the warriors and a
of Death
whisper went round amongst them. "Okoo!
Here comes Okoo, the Dreaded One."
The warriors gave way and through the path
thus made, came a wizened old man. He was
hunched up and his fierce eyes blazed as he
looked to left and right about him. His hair was
white and long and matted and only a few teeth
were left in his gums.
"What is this?" he cried in a voice which sent
a shiver down everyone's spine.
Takahama stepped forward and although he
was Chief Waggamoo's son, he bowed low before
the terrible old man. "Great One," he said, very
humbly, "we are preparing for the Dance of
Death and the white child has been chosen as the
first victim."
"Fool," cried
Okoo, the Dreaded
One. "Do you not
know what you
were about to do?
Have you forgot-
ten the legend of
Queen Tiba? Does
not our tribe know
that the period of
its greatest glory
was during her
lifetime, and did
she not promise
that she would re-
turn to us again
at some future
date as a white
child with golden
hair, and lead us
back to our for-
■>' mer glory?"
The warriors
looked at one an-
other super-
stitiously. "Okoo
speaks the truth,"
they said.
"Do you not know," continued Okoo, "that our
laws command that if ever a white child with
golden hair and blue eyes should be brought to
this island, that she should be kept alive until
she has undergone the tests. If she fails in the
tests, then she is not Queen Tiba and she can be
killed, but if she is successful in the tests, then
she is our dead ruler returned to us, and we must
give thanks to the spirits and obey her in every-
thing she commands."
"What then shall we do," said Takahama.
"Take her, with her friends to the hut of
flowers," said Okoo, "and I will tell you what to
do." So the warriors took Peggy and the Harveys
The Dance of Death!
Many of tbe Incidents throughout this hook are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


to a hut which was decorated with flowers.
"What's going on, Bob?" said John.
"I'm hanged if I know," said Bob, "but at all
events he's saved our lives, that terrible old man."
Now the party noticed that there was much
murmuring going on amongst the warriors who
had withdrawn from the flower decked hut to a
little spot some distance away, leaving only a
few warriors to guard them. Mallee, Moodgee,
and Bingi had been tied to a tree at the spot
w T here the mutton birds landed, and were anxious-
ly glancing over towards the hut, trying to make
out what was taking place. But the warriors
were not interested in them —the white people
claimed all their attention. Tuckonie, they did
not seem to mind, now that the dance of death
was, for the moment, postponed, and he was
allowed to mingle freely with the warriors. He
went silently over to where a group of warriors
were speaking and sat down in the shadow of
some bushes, keeping very quiet the whole time.
The warriors apparently did not notice him, for
they continued with their discussion.
After a little time, he went back to the hut,
his eyes shining with excitement.
"You look as though you've found out some-
thing," said Bob, "have you?"
"Yes, White Man," said Tuckonie. "The war-
riors are all very excited about Peggy and they
really think she is Queen Tiba returned to them.
So I stood there silently to hear what they were
saying. They are going to ask her to repeat the
sacred sentence of the tribe, and that is to be one
of the tests."
"Don't tell me you had the good luck to over-
hear that, Tuckonie," said the Professor.
"Yes. White Man, I did," said Tuckonie. "The
sentence is this—'The fruit falls from the tree
and time turns it to dust. The dust in time pro-
duces life—the tree springs from the dust again
to bear more fruit.' "
"Do you think you can remember all that,
Peggy?" said Bob, "because apparently you're
going to be asked to repeat it."
"I'll try," said Peggy.
"What is it now, Tuckonie?" said Mrs. Harvey
as the lad was looking very mournful. "She is
also going to be asked to foretell the future,"
he replied.
"Oh dear," said Peggy, "I'll never be able to
do that, Tuckonie."
"Well," said Bob, "just say the things that
you think might happen to anyone. You might
tell them that great rains will fall in the Island,
and that after these the fruit will grow plenti-
fully. Tell them that the tribe will grow to great-
ness again and that they will have many vic-
Tories in battle. That should please them.
"Yes," said John, "and they're bound to have
rains sometime or other and they'll probably have
a few victories."
"All right," said Peggy, "I'll remember that."
Just then they saw the warriors, led by Okoo
the Dreaded One, coming back to the hut. "The
time for the test has come," said Okoo. "Let the
white child stand forth."
"Go, Peggy," said Mrs. Harvey.
Peggy walked out of the hut and stood in front
of Okoo. "White child," said Okoo, "if you are
indeed the spirit of Queen Tiba returned to us
from the land the other side of death, you must
pass two tests before you take over the command
of the tribe. When you died, you left to our fore-
fathers a sentence and told them that you would
use it when you came again. I ask you now in
the name of Queen Tiba to repeat that sentence."
Then Peggy looked up, and in a very solemn
voice, she repeated the sentence which Tuckonie
had told her. While she spoke there was a
solemn silence, and, as she finished, a great shout
went up from amongst the natives. "The secret
sentence," they said. "She has spoken it! It is
indeed Queen Tiba returned to us!"
"Do not be too sure," shouted Okoo, "for
there is yet another test to be passed."
"Yes," said Bob to himself, "and the hardest
one." And then, turning to Mary, he whispered.
"I do hope the poor little kiddie is able to carry
it through."
Then once more the voice of Okoo, the Dreaded
One, was heard. "White One, who comes to us
as Queen Tiba said she would appear, I ask you
now to foretell something that will happen in the
future, for this power is said to be in the posses-
sion of anyone who returns from the other side
of the grave." Therefore look into the future
and tell us what you see."
Peggy did not seem to be dismayed. The Har-
veys had expected that she might be nervous and
find nothing to say, but, to their astonishment,
she spoke out without hesitation. "I see a dark
and dismal cave hidden away amongst the trees,"
she said, "it is somewhere on this island. The
sun is sinking down behind the trees and the
shadows grow long. Then through the bushes I
see a warrior. He is wearing a red flower behind
his ear and he is creeping towards the cave. As
he comes to the entrance of the cave, he looks
behind him and to the left and right—then he
goes in. Inside the cave, he looks around, and,
from a little bag made of fur, he takes three
bones. Then he creeps away out of the cave
and back through the bushes."
Many of the Incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


When Peggy said this, the warriors looked at
each other and murmured. "Silence," said Okoo.
"Tell me, white child, what kind of trees grow on
either side of the cave?"
Peggy still had her eyes fixed on those of the
old man, and she answered as though she were in
a trance. "On one side of the cave is a tree which
has white blossoms growing all over it, and on
the other side is a taller tree with red flowers,
and standing near to that is a very tall palm
tree."
Then the warriors started whispering together.
"It is Okoo's cave," they said. "She has des-
cribed the trees which grow on either side of
it."
"It is true, warriors," said Okoo, "the child
has described my cave, and she has described
what will happen there."
"Tell us when it is to happen," cried the war-
riors eagerly. "Tell us when, Queen Tiba," for
by now they were quite convinced in their own
minds that Peggy really was Queen Tiba.
"John," Mrs. Harvey whispered to her husband,
"Peggy looks peculiar to me, as if she were talk-
ing in her sleep."
John frowned. "I was just thinking the same
thing myself," he replied. Then Peggy answered
Okoo in the same tone of voice. "The things
which I have spoken of are happening even now,"
she said.
The warriors raised a great shout. "Someone
is robbing the cave of Okoo 1 " they said. And,
leaving but a few of their number to guard the
prisoners, they made off for Okoo's cave. As
they approached it, they saw a warrior wearing
a red flower behind his ear making away through
the bushes. They lost no time in capturing the
man who was one of their own number, and they
found that he held in his hand the bones which
Peggy had described. They were magic bones
used by Okoo in making spells.
"You have stolen from Okoo, the Dreaded
One," said the warriors. "For this you might
have brought down a curse upon our whole
tribe."
"You shall die for this," said Okoo.
"No," said the warrior, "no. Mercy, I crave
mercy!"
But the warriors would not listen to him, and
Okoo, who was very angry at the attempted rob-
bery of his precious bones, told the warriors
that the thief would die by magic. He was quickly
brought back to the clearing near the patch where
the Harveys and Peggy still waited in the hut.
Takahama approached Peggy and bowed down
before her. "Queen Tiba," he said, "things have
happened as you told us they would. The thief
has been caught and he is about to die now by
the power of Okoo's magic."
"I wonder what they're going to do to the un-
fortunate man," said Mrs. Harvey. They were
not long kept in doubt.
"Let the warriors form the sacred circle,"
cried Okoo, "and I will go from here into the
woods and beat upon the death drum. On the
twelfth beat this thief shall fall to the ground,
dead."
The warriors now formed a circle, and the
unfortunate man who had stolen the bones, was
placed in the centre of it. He was trembling vio-
lently.
Far in the distance came the first beat of the
drum.
"Mercy!" screamed the warrior, and tried to
rush out of the ring, but he was quickly hurled
back again by those who guarded him.
On went the drum with measured beats, and at
each beat, the poor, frightened native in the ring
grew more frenzied. Time after time he tried to
break through, but each time he was thrown
back.
"Listen," said Eva, "that's the tenth beat."
Now the warrior in the ring seemed to lose all
hope. He stood there silently, his eyes fixed on
nothing. The eleventh drum beat fell upon the
air, and the Harveys saw a little shiver of sus-
pense run through his body
"Twelve," counted Peggy.
At this instant, the warrior gave one agonised
shriek and fell to the ground.
"It's over," said the Professor, "he's dead."
"Surely not," said Mrs. Harvey, aghast.
Put a few minutes proved that the Professor
was right. The warrior was indeed dead. Be-
lieving that Okoo's magic could cause him to
die on the twelfth beat of the drum, his heart
had failed him, and he had actually died. The
warriors lifted him and carried him from the
spot.
This depressed the Harveys very much, for
although they felt safe themselves since Peggy
had foretold the future so accurately, they were
horrified by the cruelty with which the Head-
hunters had treated one of their own warriors.
Meantime, Tuckonie was looking at Peggy
enquiringly. "Peggy," he said softly. "How did
you come to know what was taking place in the
cave ?"
"I don't know, Tuckonie," she answered. "It
seemed that I was asleep and that these things
were happening in a dream. I just told them
what I really saw."
Tuckonie looked thoughtful. "I believe it was
Nimity," he said. "She promised that if ever
she could help us by her magic, she would."
"Yes," said Peggy, "that is what I think, too."
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


The Tree j of Visions
SOMETIME after this, a messenger came come from the strange old tree which grew upon
up to the little hut where the Harveys th f isla^ d ; „
... , , ~ ~ + ,. nL .__ "That, my friends," said Okoo, was the Tree
were waiting, and told them that Okoo, Visions
the Dreaded One, desired to see them in "Whatever do you mean, Okoo?" asked John.
hls cave * „ , . "You will see for yourself in a few moments,"
As they came close to the cave, Okoo himself gaid Qkoo „ Look closely at the flames."
came out and bade them enter. The messenger .
was told to wait outside. Once in the cave, Okoo "The flame is blue," said the Professor. There
asked them to sit around in a circle. The Harveys must be some kind of chemical in those leaves,
sat down, very anxious to hear what he had to "Oh my goodness, Daddy, look!" said Eva.
say. He seated himself upon a rough, little "Pictures are beginning to form in the fire."
carved stool, and then addres- Tuckonie was tense with
sed them. "I am glad you have /Am VV/ v % excitement by this time,
come, white ones," he said, jr "Look, white ones," he said,
"for I wish to speak to you of SBTMff "I can see pictures of our-
many things. It is my belief selves in those flames. We
that the white child who f \ (f/ are walking through a
stands before me is, in reality, i Iff/ strange forest, and see, there
Queen Tiba, who died genera- if 'y grows a dreadful tree—
tions ago when our tribe was W&jjT liy sf / jjfy-'fSSE the trunk is thick and soft,
great- But, nevertheless, this /Jthe leaves are spongy. Now
child retains some of her own trjf ffl - —nr l° ok at it, the boughs bend
personality, and therefore, ' fi/M swa y an( t reach down as
the time will come when she tfsßßsM&ti / if they would grasp us."
will want to escape from this \ "Oh," said Peggy, "and
island. She will not be al- y fflPffflfo jUP/ ( nkJ there are great, big pods
lowed to go." IfmjfnW' ff / 0* hanging from the branches."
"But suppose," said John, fl/f' 1 Okoo looked at them all
"that Queen Tiba as their P very intently. "Those pods,"
ruler commands them to let k //A />'&* B7 he said, "are what I want for
her go—what would they do? ■ aw W -/ I w (jF the price of your escape. If
If she is their Queen they I I help you to leave this island,
must obey her commands. 3 I want you to promise me
Isn't that so?" J *al|£v that when you reach this
"In everything else but this strange land that you see in
one thing," replied Okoo. the fire, you will gather some
"Nevertheless, white ones, Sjragnel °t those pods for me and
you and I might be able to Bre&i? mHirEmbring them back to me."
come to some arrangement "And where is this land?"
whereby she would be allow- m said John.
Ed to depart." "It is below the earth," re-
John Harvey eyed the old plied Okoo.
man shrewdly. "I think, Okoo himself came out and bade them enter. "Well," said John, laugh-
Okoo," he said, "that you're trying to strike a ing, "I don't believe that we'll ever get there, but
bargain with us." if we did and got you the pods and brought them
"You are quite right, White Man," replied the back, we would be just as badly off, for we would
old wizard. "Before I explain, let me show you onl y be taken prisoner again."
something." "There may be something in that," replied
T l o +. i . . . . , „ , , Okoo. "Well, if you wish it, you can go by boat to
„ nt n-M WE 'nterestedly while he the o th er island and leave the pods there on
HP nIa PPH thp ea 7 es ron J a little leather bag. fh a f roc k near fh e totem pole. I will send some of
™ thl 5, f mi" SO r tV i' gS m a llttle heap my tribe to get them."
the ground. Then, rubbing two sticks together, "Well that seems fair enough " said Bob
he produced a spark and eventually set fire to the «H P well that seems fair enough, said Bob,
lpnvp« PVL An j vr ~ but why do you want these pods?
leaves, boon the cave was filled with a peculiar "WV,-P N „ -J RU << AT PI. P
perfume given off by the burning leaves. , Whlte one /f ld ° k . o0 ' you must know that
lam very powerful m this tribe. That is because
I know those leaves," said Tuckonie. "They lam a great master of magic—I can see into the
Many of the Incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages ISA and ISB.


future. A lot of my power comes from these
leaves which I have burned before you, leaves
which came from the strange tree on the other
island, but if you get me the other pods, I will be
still more powerful, for the magic in them is
greater than the magic in these."
"Well what do you think about it all, Bob?"
said John.
"It's worth a try," replied Bob. "All right,
Okoo, we'll agree to your bargain."
"I can rely on you?" said the old man.
"Yes," said Bob.
"Good," replied Okoo. "Then you will be en-
abled to escape." So saying, he rose from his
stool and went to the mouth of the cave, calling to
the messenger who awaited them. "Go to Chief
Waggamoo and to his son, Takahama," said the
old man, "and tell them that Queen Tiba is about
to make a great revelation whereby our tribe will
win much glory. You will bring every member of
your tribe into the thick woods surrounding my
cave, and there you will all lie face-downwards
upon the earth, with your eyes closed."
"That is a strange command," said the messen-
ger.
"It is not for you to question," replied Okoo.
"You will remain thus for one hour. During this
time I will take Queen Tiba back to the House of
Flowers, and these people who came with her will
form a circle round the house. I, Okoo, alone, will
be left with her, and it is then that she will make
the revelation which I, alone, am wise enough to
hear."
When this was said, the messenger went back
to the other members of his tribe to give them
Okoo's orders.
Then Okoo w r ent back into the cave. "You have
heard what I said, White Ones. Well listen
carefully. When the tribe is here in the woods
lying face-downward upon the earth, I will take
you and your friends back to the beach and let
you escape in your owm boat. You will have good
time to make this escape, as the warriors must
remain as I have told them for the hour. Come
now, all of you follow me." So saying, he got up
and led the way from the cave.
On their way, they met the people of the
tribe going into the woods to do as Okoo had com-
manded, and as they passed Peggy, whom they
believed to be Queen Tiba, they bowed low. When
all of them had disappeared into the woods, Okoo
led them down to where their boat was tied.
"John," said Mrs. Harvey, "although Mallee,
Bingi, and Moodgee are no friends of ours, we
can't leave them here at the mercy of the Head-
hunters. We must ask Okoo to allow them to
come with us."
"You can take them with you, white ones,"
said Okoo, "but do not forget your part of the
bargain."
"We will not forget, old man," said John. And
so saying he cut the ropes which bound Mallee,
Bingi, and Moodgee. "Get into the boat," he
said. "We're making our escape and we're taking
you with us, but I'm warning you that if there's
any trickery on the way, you'll pay for it."
Soon, the whole party were seated in the boat,
and as Okoo raised his hand in farewell, the little
party put out to sea.
Sometime later, they were passing the first
little island where they had discovered the
strange tree. "I think," said Bob, "that we ought
to go ashore here and pick up some of our gear
that was left."
"It would be a good idea," said John, "if we
have time for it."
"Oh I think we can spare the time," said the
Professor, "we've come over fairly quickly."
Now when they heard that the Harveys inten-
ded to land on the island for a little while, Mallee,
Bingi and Moodgee all looked at each other mean-
ingly, but the Harveys did not notice this. A
few minutes later they were on the island gather-
ing together what had been left there.
"White Man," said Tuckonie, "I think while
we are here, I will go to that strange tree and
gather some of the leaves, then we may be able
to make magic in the same way as Okoo made it."
"Very well, youngster," said Bob, "but I very
much doubt whether we'll be able to make the
magic."
"Anyway, Daddy," said Peggy, "it would be
very nice for Tuckonie to save some of those
magic leaves and give them to Nimity and Mar-
oubra because they'd know how to make magic
pictures from them."
So saying, the three kiddies ran off to that part
of the island where the strange tree grew.
"Well while we're shifting these things," said
Bob, "I think we'd better take precautions so
that Mallee, Bingi, and Moodgee do not escape.
We'll tie them up, John, and set the Professor
to keep watch over them with a revolver as well."
When the rest of the party had gone further
inland to get some more of their things, Bingi
spoke quietly to Mallee and Moodgee. "I have a
plan of escape," he announced."
"I see no way of escape," whispered Mallee.
"Why not?" said Bingi. You forget that the
motor boat in which we came to this island, is
hidden in a little inlet not far from here. If we
could succeed in overpowering this old man, we
can get away."
"But how," said Moodgee. "We're tied up."
"Yes," said Bingi," but I am standing near a
very sharp piece of rock, and ever since they tied
my bonds I have been rubbing the green twine
against it. It is half way through already, in
another minute I think it will give."
"Even so," said Moodgee, " if the old man sees
us attempting to escape, he will shoot."
"That is where I want Mallee's help," said
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


Bingi. "She must distract his attention for a
moment when I give her the signal, and then,
while he is off his guard, we will overpower him
and take him prisoner."
Just at this moment, little Eva came dancing
baGk to the Professor with some of the leaves
in her hand. This made it all the easier for
Bingi to continue rubbing his bonds against
the rock, for Eva claimed the old man's attention.
Then Mallee thought of a plan. "A snake!"
she cried, and gave a loud shriek.
The Professor darted up quickly, and following
the direction of Mallee's eyes, looked behind him.
At this minute, Bingi, free from his bonds, leaped
behind the old man and took him prisoner.
"Quickly," said Moodgee, "into the boat witfj.
him."
Mallee took hold of Eva, and they rushed for
the little inlet where their motor boat was moor-
ed. Eva's screams quickly brought the Harveys
to the scene, but by this time, the boat was way
out from the island and the Harveys knew they
would have no chance of overtaking them in their
own boat. They fired shots, but it was useless —
Nararka's friends continued on their way.
One hour later, the Harveys, a very depressed
little party by now, arrived at the shore where,
to their surprise, they saw the warriors of the
Arunta Tribe coming down the beach to meet
them.
"Greetings, my friends," said Narkunda.
"Tuckonie my son, you are safe. Thanks be to
the spirits of our tribe."
"We didn't know you were going to stay here,
Narkunda," said Bob.
"No, White Man," said the aboriginal chief,
"but you left your caravan here and I and my
warriors decided to guard it until your return."
"Well that was very decent of you, Narkunda,"
said John, "and we're very grateful to you for
doing this."
"But tell me," said Bob eagerly, "did you see a
motor boat pass this way V"
"Yes, white man," said the chief. "They
seemed as if they were going to pull in here, but
when they saw our camp fires, they made out to
sea again and went northwards. Were they
enemies?"
"They were indeed," said Bob. "They were
three people of Nararka's tribe—two medicine
men and a woman, and they have taken with them
as prisoners two of our party."
Now Chief Narkunda was very grieved when
he heard this, and he and his warriors promised
that if ever they should come across any of these
bad people, they would do their best to take them
prisoner.
Then Tuckonie gave the magic leaves from
the Tree of Visions to Nimity and Maroubra, who
were overjoyed to get them; and that night they
had one of the greatest feasts which could ever
be remembered in the history of the tribe.
The following morning, the Harvey party, in
their caravan, set out to the north once more in
pursuit of the wicked Nararka and his medicine
men.
CHAPTER SIX
The Vine Bridget.
NOW Mallee, Bingi and Moodgee, as soon
as they had seen the camp fires of the
Arunta Tribe burning on the shore,
decided that it would be unwise to land
on that part of the coast, so continued in a direct
line north until they thought they were far
enough away to baffle pursuit. Then they drew
in at a small cove, carefully hid the boat with
bracken and leaves and proceeded to a spot where
they had agreed to meet Nararka in case he did
not come to the island.
Two days later they arrived at the spot agreed
upon, but as Nararka was not there, they decided
to pitch camp for a week. Four days later their
master arrived and was delighted to find that they
had taken the Professor and Eva prisoner.
"Well, Great One," said Moodgee, "what are we
to do with this man and his child now that they
are in our power."
"We can make the most excellent use of them,"
said Nararka, "for the Professor's van, which
we stole from his house, is only a mile or two
away from here, hidden amongst the boughs of
overhanging trees. I thought we would use it
ourselves and make the Professor drive it back
towards the Land of Ng'rui Moch."
Mallee looked thoughtful, "That doesn't ap-
pear to me to be a good plan, for if he saw white
people on the road he could call out to them, and
tell them what was happening."
"Oh no, my dear Mallee," said Nararka, "for
if he attempts to do any such thing, he dies. I
hope you understand that, Professor Westbrook!"
Meantime the Harvey party were continuing
on their way northwards in the caravan. One day
during a resting period Tuckonie went off into
the bush to gather some kindling wood and re-
turned shortly afterwards, his face shining with
excitement.
"White Ones, White Ones," cried the boy.
"What ever is the matter with you Tuckonie,"
said Mrs. Harvey.
Bob laughed, "He's waving that stick around
as though it was a magic one. What have you
got there youngster?"
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


"It is a message stick from Narrabeen," cried
Tuckonie, "and it says that she is with the Women
Warriors and that they are on their way towards
the Land of Ng'rui Moch."
"Oh John," said Mrs. Harvey, "isn't that ex-
cellent. "Now we know where to look for Narra-
been at any rate."
"Yes, White Woman," said Tuckonie, "and the
message stick tells even more than that. It tells
that the Women Warriors have the Golden Boom-
erang with them."
"But then, of course," said Mrs. Harvey
thoughtfully. "If we turn and go in the direction
of the Land of Ng'rui Moch, we'll have to give
up our search for Nararka."
"Not necessarily dear," replied her husband.
"We know that he has gone northward, and the
Land of Ng'rui Moch, is north-west. Nararka's
party may go some distance north and then turn
due west towards the Land of Ng'rui Moch, be-
cause I have an idea that they will have some ar-
rangement to meet the Women Warriors on the
way."
"Yes John," said Bob, "that's very likely. I
definitely think we should turn our steps in the
direction of the Land of Ng'rui Moch."
"There's just one thing about it, Bob," said
John. "These Women Warriors are very numer-
ous, you know, and by now they know all our
means of attack. I doubt if we would be able
to put up much of a fight against them."
"I was thinking much the same thing myself,"
said Mrs. Harvey, "but on the other hand, we do
want to rescue the Professor and Eva and it's
very likely that they've been handed over into
the Women Warrior's care by now."
"If only we had a few more men with us," said
Bob.
"White Ones," said Tuckonie, "there is no
necessity for us to fight alone. I can send a mes-
sage to my tribe by means of smoke signals, tell-
ing them the direction we have taken, and asking
them to follow after us."
The next day, Tuckonie told the Harveys that
smoke signals had come back from the Arunta
Tribe in answer to his, saying that they would do
as he had asked them and follow on their tracks.
Now, the Harveys, in discussing the proba-
bility of Nararka's party meeting the Women
Warriors, did not know how right they were,
for that is exactly what happened. After going
on their way for about a week, Nararka and Mal-
lee and their medicine men, met the Women War-
riors at a place they had agreed upon. Whowie,
the chief, advanced to meet Nararka with her
hands stretched above her head in welcome.
"Has everything been done, Whowie?" de-
manded Nararka sternly.
"Yes, Master," said Whowie. "The strange
machines which you ordered have been brought
here to the secret place by two of your followers,
and are hidden amongst the bushes."
"That is good," said Nararka, "for we cannot
continue all the way in this heavy van, even
though the Professor has been driving it."
Some of the Women Warriors then came from
some thick bushes bringing with them two motor
bikes. Professor Westbrook was very surprised
when he saw these, but Nararka explained that
the way they intended to take was rough and that
the motor bikes would be much more suitable for
that kind of travelling.
"I ordered only two," he said, "because that is
all I thought I would need. But now we shall
have to take an extra person until we get far
enough inland to be able to leave the bikes and
go on on foot."
Then, to Professor Westbrook's horror, Nar-
arka handed Eva over to the keeping of the
Women Warriors.
"You cannot leave my little daughter in the
care of those dreadful women," cried Professor
Westbrook.
"I can, and I will," said Nararka. "What Ido
now is no business of yours." He then drew
Whowie aside and spoke to her of a plan he had
formed, which he thought would bring the Harvey
party to their downfall. "About two days' trav-
elling north-west from here," he said to Whowie,
"there is a deep ravine- I want you to make a
vine bridge such as we often make and stretch
it from one side of the ravine to the other."
"We should have to do this in any case," said
Whowie, "in order to be able to pass over the
ravine."
"Yes, yes, I know that, don't interrupt me, but
listen to what I have to say," said Nararka.
"When you have crossed over the twine bridge,
I want you to take the child's hair ribbon and
leave it there, looking as though it had dropped
and caught on a piece of twig. Then you will
cut through most of the twine bridge on your
side of the ravine, but still let it appear as though
the bridge was quite strong. When the Harveys
see the child's hair ribbon lying on the other side
of the ravine, they will know that she has gone
that way and they will attempt to cross over
the bridge. It will give way and they will all be
hurled to their destruction. And, in this way, we
shall be free of them and our vengeance will be
complete."
"Master," said Whowie, "it shall be as you say."
In due time, just as Nararka had thought they
would, the Harveys came to the ravine.
"Well," said Mrs. Harvey, "it looks as though
we can't go any further in this direction."
"No," said her husband, "I'm afraid we'll have
to go round it."
"Just a minute, White Ones," said Tuckonie, "I
see something blue there on the other side. It
looks like the ribbon which Eva wore in her hair."
Peggy strained her eyes eagerly in an attempt
to make it out. "Yes Mummy," she said, "Tuck-
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


onie is right, it is Eva' 3 hair ribbon and it's
caught on a little stick over there."
"Then Nararka's friends must have passed
over the ravine," said Bob.
"Yes," said Tuckonie, "they have, because,
look . . . here is a thick vine bridge stretched
over the ravine from one side to the other.'
"I think some of us ought to go over, because
once on the other side we can see which way the
tracks lead," said Bob.
"Then we could come back and bring the cara-
van around some other way and follow the
tracks," said John.
"Well," said Bob, "I rather fancy having a try
at crossing over by means of that rope. I'll go
first."
"Are you sure you can manage it, Bob," said
Mrs. Harvey, "the drop down into that ravine is
terrific. If you fell, you'd be killed."
"I won't fall," said Bob. And so saying he took
hold of the little green vine bridge and slid off
the side of the ravine. He had only pulled himself
about two feet along the bridge when it broke
near the other end. The sudden pull on the near
siue of the rope caused it to snap there also, and
Bob went hurtling down into the ravine.
"Oh, how dreadful," said Mrs. Harvey, hiding
her eyes, "He'll be dashed to pieces."
There was utter silence amongst the little
group for a moment, as each of them pictured
Bob lying dead at the bottom of the ravine.
At last Mrs. Harvey broke the silence. "I
don't suppose there'd be a least hope that he
would have been saved," she said.
Bob went hurtling down into the ravine.
"None at all I'm afraid," said John.
But Tuckonie, without saying a word to any-
one, had walked to the edge of the ravine, and
was now lying flat on the ground looking over.
Next minute he sprang wildly to his feet and the
Harveys knew from his expression that he had
good news for them. "White Ones," he said,
"there's a great deal of hope. His fall has been
broken. A little way down the ravine there is
a tree jutting out from the side, and your friend
has been caught in the branches."
"Oh," cried Mrs. Harvey, "then he should be
uninjured."
"He wasn't moving, was he Tuckonie,"
asked John.
"No White Man," said the boy, "I do not think
he is conscious, but there is a good chance that
he is still alive."
"How are we going to get him Daddy," said
Peggy.
"One of us will have to go down on a rope,
dear," replied her father.
"Let me go "White Man," said Tuckonie,
"lower me on one rope and give me another
to take down with me. When I reach your friend
1 will tie the rope around his waist and shoulders,
in such a way that it will not hurt him when you
pull him up. You can pull me up first and then
I can help you to drag his weight."
"A good idea, Tuckonie," said John, and im-
mediately they put the plan into action.
"Let us know as soon as you reach him, whether
he is alive or not," called Mr. Harvey to Tuck-
onie, as he lowered the boy down.
"Yes," Tuckonie called back, "I will, White
Man."
Soon, he was beside the sturdy little tree which
was growing out of the side of the ravine. Catch-
ing hold of one of the branches, he propelled him-
self along until he was close beside Bob Hennessy.
Gently, the little black boy stretched out his
hand and laid it over the heart of the white man
whom he had learned to regard as one of his
dearest friends. To the boy's joy, that heart
was still beating. With a shout of gladness he
called up to the anxious man above him, "He lives,
White Man," he cried, "he lives."
In another moment the boy called up and told
him that the task was completed. John then
pulled Tuckonie quickly up to the top of the
ravine, and then he and Tuckonie and Mrs. Har-
vey too, gently pulled on the rope which was sup-
porting Bob. When they got him over the top of
the ravine they found that he had been badly
bruised and cut about by the rocks, and there was
a very nasty cut in his head. But Mrs. Harvey
had soon attended to all his wounds and then
they put him on one of the bunks in the caravan.
"We won't move away from here to-day,"
said John, "Bob will need all the rest he can get."
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


Narrabeen's Risl^.
MEANTIME, a spy of the tribe of the
Women Warriors was hidden among
the bushes on the other side of the
ravine which the vine bridge had
spanned, watching all that happened, and a
couple of days afterwards she rejoined the Wo-
men Warriors and told them that their plans to
destroy the Harvey party had
failed. When the Women War-
riors caught up with Nararka and
his Medicine Men some days later,
and reported what had happened,
Nararka's anger was really ter-
rible. However, he contented him-
self with the fact that even if
the Harveys had escaped that
time, they would not escape death
when they approached the terrible
land below the earth.
"Where is this dreadful place
you speak of Nararka?" said
Mallee.
"It is a hiding place where none
will ever find us, my dear wife,"
replied Nararka, "the way is set
with grave dangers, but we who
know of them, can be prepared,
but anyone who enters that place
without warning will never escape I /
with his life. Of that I feel sure."
"And once there, master," said
Bingi, "you can continue with your
experiments on animals and in-
sects."
"Yes," said Nararka, "in the
days when Professor Westbrook
trusted me he taught me all he PKMSfIH
knew, and now that I have stolen
his scientific apparatus and his
drugs, I will be able to make
spiders and ants as big as human
beings, and when these are plen-
tiful in the land they will destroy
the white race and our vengeance
will be fulfilled."
Then, after a rest and a meal Ar . „ , ~ tl
Nararka and his little party went Narrabeen walked off m the
off on their motor bikes, leaving opposite direction.
Professor Westbrook with the
Women Warriors who then continued on their will be di
journey. They were bound for a spot near the gone, and
land of Ng'rui Moch, where Nararka and his "Yes,"
friends would meet once again. But Nararka had as long a:
thought that it was dangerous for so many of you have
them to travel together, and so they were going likely tha
by different ways. At night, when they paused dawn, an<
to strike camp, the Women Warriors just spread the track
themselves around a camp fire, and went to sleep
where they were, but a little mia-mia was built
for Eva and the Professor, and one of the warriors
was always placed on guard outside the door.
However, Narrabeen, who was their good friend,
thought the matter over in her mind, and at last
hit on a plan of helping them make their escape.
_-i i-L ■_n Creeping away from the women
sleeping around the camp fire one
night, she made towards the back
of the mia-mia occupied by the
Professor and Eva and whispered
through the boughs and twigs
which formed the back wall.
"Listen," said Eva to the Pro-
fessor, "someone is speaking to
us-"
"It is I, Narrabeen," said the
girl softly, "but do not raise your
voices or the woman on guard in
front of the mia-mia will hear us.
I think I have a plan for your
escape. Listen carefully to what
I have to say. I want both to take
off your shoes and push them un-
der the back wall of the mia-mia,
so that I can get them."
"What a funny thing to do,"
said Eva.
"Shh, Eva dear," said her fa-
ther, "listen to what Narrabeen is
telling us."
Then Narrabeen continued, "I
will find some means of drawing
the woman on guard away from
the opening of the mia-mia for a
moment. I want you to puff up
your possum skin rugs so that
they will look as though your bod-
ies are still underneath them.
Then, when I have called the wo-
man away from guard for a mom-
ent, you must slip quickly through
the opening and around to the back
of the hut, and then crawl quietly
away into the bush, and when you
have reached the cover of the
trees, run as fast as you can."
"But," said the Professor, "it
will be discovered sooner or later that we have
gone, and they will come after us."
"Yes," said Narrabeen, "but I will delay them
as long as I can. I will make it look as though
you have gone in another direction. It is not
likely that they will discover you are gone before
dawn, and then, by the time they have followed
the tracks I have made, you will have had a
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


good chance of getting too far away for them to
be able to follow you."
"So that's why you want my boots and Eva's
shoes," said the Professor, "you're going to make
tracks with them."
"Yes," whispered Narrabeen,"l'll wear your
boots and I'll take two sticks and tie one of
Eva's shoes to the end of each of them. Then
as I walk along, making the tracks of your boots,
I will put one stick after another on the ground,
making the tracks look as if the little child has
walked beside you. Now remember, go quickly
as soon as I have called the woman away."
So saying Narrabeen got up from behind the
hut, crept away through the scrub and then came
back looking as though she had come from a
different direction.
Eva and the Professor watched with great ex-
citement for what would take place, then from a
short distance away they heard Narrabeen give a
little startled cry.
"What's that," said the woman on guard.
"Quickly, come here," said Narrabeen, "I
thought I saw someone peering at me there
through the bushes."
The woman who had been on guard peered
around into the bushes when she joined Narra-
been, but saw nothing. "There is not a thing
moving," she said to Narrabeen.
"I was almost sure I saw someone," said Nar-
rabeen, "but perhaps I was mistaken."
"Why weren't you asleep around the camp
fire with the other women?" said the guard.
"I was," said Narrabeen, "but something
wakened me."
"You imagine too much," said the guard, and
returned to her post outside the mia-mia. Then
she thought she had better look inside, but when
she saw the humped up rugs in the half dark-
ness, she felt quite sure that the Professor and
Eva were still there.
Then Narrabeen did as she had promised and
walked off in the opposite direction, making the
tracks as she went. By dawn the Professor and
Eva were quite a long way away. Then it was
discovered by the guard that they had escaped,
and a hue and cry was raised. Whowie, the
Chief, instantly sent the warriors off to search
the bush, but soon one of them told her that the
tracks of the prisoners were plainly to be seen,
so the whole tribe set off to follow them. By
mid-day they came across Narrabeen, who had
thrown the boots and shoes away, and was now
trying to return to the camp unobserved. But
one of the warriors found the boots and shoes,
and then, when they realised that she had helped
their prisoners to escape by trickery, they were
so angry that they wanted her killed at once.
"No," said Whowie, "she shall not die quickly
by the spear, she shall die the death of a traitor.
We will take her into the desert country, and
there we will tie her to a stake in the ground
without food or water. So shall she perish from
hunger and thirst, and vultures pick her bones."
All through the night and during the time
that the Women Warriors were searching for
them, Professor Westbrook and Eva, now quite
hardened walkers, had been hurrying away
through the bush as fast as they could go, wear-
ing the vengeance shoes which Narrabeen had
made for them, and so leaving no tracks. When
they had gone about a mile they turned sharply
to the west. They kept on and on in this way
all that day, living on whatever berries and
edible roots they could find, and at the end of the
second day they were overjoyed to see amongst
the scrub, a white tent. They found that this
was occupied by a gold prospector and his wife,
who invited the old man and child inside and
soon put before them a hot meal. After this, the
Professor told his story, but although he did not
expect to be believed, for it was all so strange, he
was pleasantly surprised; the settler had heard
of the outcast tribe of Ng'rui Moch, and also of
the Women Warriors. The Professor wanted
to get Eva back to the city and send her to a
boarding school, where she would be out of all
danger, so as he felt that he was too frail to
undertake the journey himself, he promised the
prospector whose name was Mr. Barker that if
he would do this, he would tell him where he
could find a lot of gold. Mr. Barker willingly
agreed, and the next day he set out with Eva.
Now while all this had been taking place, Bob
Hennessy, well cared for by the Harveys had
made a recovery, and so the little party made off
again on its way. As the days passed they came
closer and closer to the desert country where
there were no trees at all.
Suddenly, Tuckonie noticed a flock of great
birds passing overhead.
"Look, White Ones," he said, "vultures. There
is something dead or dying near here."
Now this remark alarmed the Harveys, as
they thought that no animals would be likely to
live in such country, and therefore thought that
some traveller might be in difficulties. So accord-
ingly they put on speed, and soon they could make
out a dark patch some distance in front of them
and a little to the left. What was their horror
on reaching it, to find that it was the young
aboriginal girl, Narrabeen, tied to a stake. Her
eyes were closed and her head had fallen to
one side.
"Oh Bob," said Peggy, anxiously, "it's poor
Narrabeen. Is she dead?"
But to the relief of all, John Harvey was able
to tell them that she was still alive. "But, he
said, "if we had come an hour later, I think
it would have been all over with poor Narrabeen."
When she had recovered sufficiently, Narrabeen
told them that she had been able to arrange for
Many of the Incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


the Professor and Eva to make their escape, and
at this the whole party felt very relieved indeed.
"And it was all thanks to Narrabeen," said
Peggy. "Wasn't she brave to do it."
"Yes, she was indeed Peggy," said her father,
"she risked her life to save our friends, and we
must never forget that."
"We're never likely to," said Mrs. Harvey.
Then it was decided, as a matter of course,
that Narrabeen should travel with them.
A day or two later the Harveys, in their turn,
came across the tent of the settler. Naturally,
as they had not spoken to white people for such a
long time, they pulled up to have a chat with the
white woman who was sitting outside the tent.
She told them that she and her husband and
grown-up son were out that way prospecting for
gold, and then to their surprise she told them the
story of the Professor and Eva. Her husband,
she said, had taken Eva down to the city, but the
Professor was still there. Overjoyed, the Harveys
asked if they could see him at once, but the
woman was sorry to have to tell them that he was
ill. However, she led the way inside, where they
saw the Professor lying on a camp stretcher
looking very ill indeed.
"We're doing our best for him," said Mrs.
Barker, "but I think he has some kind of fever,
and as he was very weak when he arrived here,
he hasn't had the strength to fight it off. He is
delirious when he wakes, and I think it'll be quite
some time before he is well again."
"It's unfortunate that he's delirious in his
waking moments," said Bob, "because I would like
to have had a talk with him."
"Yes," said John, "but I'm afraid we can't wait
two weeks."
"He was one of our party, you know," ex-
plained Mrs. Harvey to the other woman.
"Well he will be quite safe here as long as he
likes to stay," said Mrs. Barker. "He's been very
good to us . . . he's told my husband and son
where they could find gold."
•Well," said Bob, "we can't afford the time to
delay here, but at the same time we would like
the Professor to join us when he is better. We
have a motor bike with us on the caravan, and
if we left it here he could follow on after us when
he felt well enough, if you wouldn't mind giving
him directions."
"Of course I wouldn't mind," said Mrs. Barker,
"I'll be only too pleased to help you in any way
I can."
However, the Harvey's troubles were not over
yet for after a three days' journey from the sett-
ler's tent, on crossing a plain which showed, by
the grass growing upon it, that they were enter-
ing into fertile country again, they experienced
one or two earth tremors. Although these were
slight they were quite enough to alarm the
Harveys.
"I think we must be coming into volcanic coun-
try," said Bob.
"I didn't think there was any volcanic area in
this country," said Mrs. Harvey.
"No, neither did I," said her husband, "but
there's no doubt that those were quakes, although
they weren't very bad ones. But there's this
to bear in mind—if a slight quake can take place
a bad one can follow."
"Oh dear," said Peggy, "I'd hate to be in an
earthquake."
As they proceeded, the grass along the way
became more green and luxuriant, and it was
soon evident that they were coming to a marsh.
They decided to go on, but in the middle of
the marsh, the back wheels of the waggon
started spinning around in the shallow water, and
the caravan stood stock still.
"Well that's bad luck," said Bob. "What are
we going to do now."
John looked thoughtful. "I don't think the
marsh is very deep," he said, "so perhaps one
of us could wade through to the other side with
a rope, and a slight pull might just be enough to
help the caravan go over."
"One man couldn't pull the caravan," said
Mary.
"No," said John, "but the engine will be going
as well, don't forget, and for that matter Bob
and I could both go over. Then when we get to
the other side we'll pull on the waggon and you
will have to start up the engine again and put
her into gear."
"All right then," said Mrs. Harvey.
So Bob and John set out and strode quickly
across the marsh. But when they were still some
distance from the other side, Mrs. Harvey noticed
that thev were sinking deeper and deeper into
the marsh.
"Don't go any further." she called out", "the
water is too deep. You'd better turn and come
back." But although she did not know it Bob and
John couldn't turn and come back, for they were
in quick-sand. They did not want to alarm Mrs.
Harvey by calling out and telling her this, so
they made every effort to get back, but in snite of
everything they could do the slimy quick-sand
kept on sucking them under.
At length Mrs. Harvey knew that something
was seriously wrong. They had left one end of
the rope tied around the caravan when they
set out so Mrs. Harvey pulled on this as hard
as she could but without any result.
"Oh Mummy," said Peggy, "what's the matter
with them."
Mrs. Harvey was frantic, as she couldn't think
of any way to rescue them, and the two men were
sinking deeper and deeper into the mire every
moment. But then to the surprise and joy of
all, the shouting of warriors was heard, and a
Many of the Incidents throughout this book are Illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


few minutes later the warriors of the Arunta
Tribe came running up to the edge of the swamp.
At once they saw that the two men were in
danger, and quickly making a human chain by
holding hands, they went out into the bog. On
they went, past the caravan and out to where the
two men were struggling in the quick sand, and
taking them firmly around the waist they started
back. They would not have been able to do this,
but for the fact that they were all holding hands,
and so each man pulled the man who was in
front of him, and in this way they got the two
men back to the caravan, where they left them.
Taking the rope from the caravan, the warriors
proceeded to the shore. Once there they all
pulled hard on the ropes and soon had the cara-
van back at the edge of the shore from which
they started. There was great rejoicing over the
fact that the Arunta Tribe had arrived in time.
"We have been following you ever since we
received Tuckonie's smoke messages," said Nar-
kunda the chief.
"Tuckonie's a very shrewd little fellow," said
Bob. "If he hadn't thought of sending you those
smoke signals that time, John and I might have
been underneath the quick-sand by now."
"Well, White Man," said Narkunda, "let us
not bother speaking about that now that the
danger is past."
"My word Bob," said John, "things sometimes
turn out for the best, don't they."
"What do you mean?" said Mrs. Harvey.
"Well," replied her husband, "we were very
impatient meeting with so many delays on our
way, but if we hadn't, Narkunda's tribe might
never have caught up with us, seeing that we
were travelling by motor caravan, and they were
on foot, and if they hadn't caught up, well you
know what would have happened."
Then Nulla, who had accompanied the Arunta
tribe, to his great surprise saw Narrabeen. With
cries of joy the two young aborigines embraced
each other, while the other members of the
tribe looked on smiling.
"It is indeed a very happy day for all of us,"
said Chief Narkunda.
All the warriors were glad that Nulla had found
his young wife again, for although he did not
belong to their tribe, they had learned to respect
him as a brave young warrior, and they all liked
him very much.
After they had eaten and talked, they started
discussing their plans for the future. It was no
use trying to cross the marsh again, so Bob and
John decided to go around it. The warriors of
the Arunta Tribe agreed to go with them, for in
spite of the fact that Narrabeen had been rescued,
they still felt that they had a score to settle with
the Women Warriors and they wanted to meet
them in battle.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Thcj Dead Forests.
-y yOW nice it is to have the warriors
L-J of the Arunta Tribe travelling with
us," said Mrs. Harvey one sunny
morning a few days later.
"Yes," said Bob, "it gives you a feeling of con-
fidence, doesn't it?"
"And isn't Tuckonie happy about it, Mummy?"
said Peggy, her eyes following the figure of the
little chap as he strode along by Chief Narkunda,
his father.
"They're wonderful people, those aborigines,"
said Bob. "When you get to know them you come
to apDreciate their friendship."
Just then Peggy noticed that Tuckonie had
held out his hand in front of his father as if he
wished to stop him and his eyes were fixed on the
dense green scrub ahead.
"Hello," said Bob, "it looks as if the kiddie has
seen something over there."
"I wonder if we're going to meet the Women
Warriors?" said Peggy. The next minute Tuck-
onie came running over to the caravan.
"White Ones," he said, "there is someone over
there in the bushes. I saw movement in amongst
the green.
"Well, Tuckonie," said Bob, "if it's the Women
Warriors I'll be very thankful for this time we'll
meet them in force."
So the members of the Harvey party got out
their guns and loaded them and all the Warriors
of the Arunta Tribe had their spears held aloft
ready for action as they approached the spot
where Tuckonie thought he had seen a strange
figure moving amongst the bushes.
"There doesn't appear to be anyone there now,
John," said Mrs. Harvey.
"You can never be too sure, dear," replied her
husband, "these Women Warriors are very fur-
tive."
"It did not look like a woman to me," said
Tuckonie. "it looked more like a man."
"Well," said Bob, "whoever it is, we're ready."
At this moment to the surprise of all concerned
the thick bushes in front of them parted and out
walked one of the strangest old men they had ever
seen.
"Great Scott," said Bob, "a white man!"
"He's most peculiar looking," said Mrs. Har-
vey softly.
Then the old man stopped in his tracks and
Many of the incidents throughout this hook are illust-ated on pages 16A and 168.


glowering angrily first at the Harveys and then
at the band of warriors called out, "Who are you ?
Why do you come here?"
Now everyone was just as surprised at his
words as they had been at his appearance and it
was some time before Bob recovered sufficiently
to be able to say "Well, if it's all the same to you,
old man, we have a very good reason for coming
here."
The old man looked at them sternly- "Is there
any reason for seeking death?" he answered.
At these strange words spoken in such a tone
every one looked at each other in amazement, but
John Harvey had the presence of mind to ask the
old fellow what he was talking about.
"I speak of that of which I know," said the
strange old man. "Peril lies ahead! If you wish
to remain in the Land of the Living go back and
never come this w r ay again."
"But why?" said Bob.
"I will tell you," said the old man. "Many
years ago when I was a strong young man like
you I was a member of an expedition which came
this way to investigate some strange stories which
we had heard. Also we wished to find diamonds
to make us rich."
"Why did you think there were diamonds out
here?" asked Bob, "and what were the strange
stories you had heard ?"
"Well," replied the old man, "a friend of mine
called on me at my house one night and told me
the story of a man who had one day staggered
to a little settlement in the interior, raving of
strange monsters and trees and diamonds. The
people of the town thought he was mad until he
showed them the diamonds which he had found.
The old man looked at them sternly.
Then they thought there might be some truth in
his story. My friend was one of those who thought
so."
"But what happened to the man who had the
diamonds?" said Bob.
The old man fixed his eyes upon Bob. "He
died some hours after reaching the settlement,"
he said. "He was in great pain and seemed to
be wandering in his mind. At all events the
result of it all was that we set out on this ex-
pedition and came this way and further."
"And did you see the strange things spoken of
by the man who died?" asked Mrs. Harvey.
"Yes, I did," replied the Hermit. "We went on
beyond here to a forest that is dead—it has
been dead for hundreds of years yet the trees still
stand. It is as silent as the grave in this forest
and there is no water, nothing. This does not
sound so very terrible but there is an evil atmos-
phere about the place. When you enter it the
flesh creeps upon your bones with horror."
"Well," said Bob, "a few dead trees and a
silence won't make the flesh creep on our bones."
"Perhaps not," said the Hermit, "but there are
strange creatures which fly in the forest. They
are like large bats but they are grey and if
they attack you, you will perish. And there
are even worse things than these for I saw plants
which seemed to move of their own accord.
Oh, don't go on, my friends, be warned in time
and turn back."
"We're not afraid," said Bob, "we're going on!"
"Very well then," said the old man starting to
walk away into the bushes once more, "but re-
member what I have said and take no chances."
And so saying the old man disappeared amongst
the scrub.
Now when he had gone Narkunda said that
his tribe would accompany the Harveys to the
edge of the Ghost Forest in case they should
strike danger, so the whole party continued on
together.
"Look John," said Mrs. Harvey, some days
later, "See how peculiar the trees look ahead
there."
<f Yes," said John Harvey. "I think we must be
coming to the edge of the ghost forest, of which
the old hermit spoke."
"I think so, too," said Bob. "Those trees do look
very old, and there's no foliage on them, as far
as I can make out from here."
"And how still the air is," said Mrs. Harvey,
"There's not a breath of wind."
Peggy, who was sitting in front of the cara-
van, looked at the strange forest that they were
approaching—felt rather creepy about it, al-
though she couldn't make out why. Apparently
the warriors of the Arunta Tribe were feeling
much the same, for they had dropped their voices,
and no longer spoke loudly, as was their custom,
but almost whispered to each other. Soon Nar-
kunda, the chief, came over to the caravan.
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


"White Ones," he said, "I think we are on the
outskirts of the ghost forest. This is as far as
we have promised to come."
"Well," said Bob, "I don't think we'll be going
on any further to-day, so we can all make camp
here for the night."
This was duly done, and soon the camp fires of
the Arunta Tribe were sending a bright orange
light up into the night. After they had all dined,
they settled down to sleep, for in the morning, the
Harveys wanted to make an early start. However,
that night, they were awakened by movements
amongst the warriors, and on asking the reason,
the white people were told that there had been
someone prowling about the canm Soon, all the
warriors were up and about, looking for tracks,
but this was very difficult, with onlv the light of
the moon to helm However, some of the warriors
had got up and gone off on the search, as soon
as the movement wa<? heard, and now those war-
riors came back to the camp . . . dragging wit
them an aboriginal woman. The Harvevs knew
at once, bv the rings and strange marks which
were nainted on her body, that she belonged to
the Women Warriors.
"She's a SPY," said the lad Tuckonie.
But now the young warrior, Nulla, spoke up.
"It is good that we have taken this woman cap-
tive." he said, "for now she can lead us to where
the Women Warriors are camped—l have a
quarrel to settle with them."
However, the woman refused to answer any
questions, and only shouted defiant remarks.
"Never mind." said John Harvey, "I will settle
this as soon as daylight comes."
And then thev all went hack to bed again for
the night, leaving the woman warrior in charge
of some guards, set bv Narkunda.
The following morning, John Harvey asked
that the woman should be brought before him.
This was done, and he then took up a camera,
and told her that it was a magic box. The woman
merely sneered, "I do not fear your magic,
White Man," she said.
"You will when you've seen it, wicked woman
warrior." said Tuckonie.
Mr. Harvev then made the warriors place the
woman in the sunlight, and he took a photo-
graph of her, which he afterwards develop-
ed. He then showed the woman the photograph
and although they could see that she was fright-
ened, by the way she trembled, she still refused to
give them the information they wanted.
"Very well," said John, "but I don't think you
will refuse after you have seen the rest of my
magic."
He then took a small bottle of chemicals from
a cupboard in the caravan, and pouring a little of
it on a tree which had come out in the photo-
graph, made the tree disappear, leaving a white,
blank space.
"Now," said John Harvey, "You have seen
what I can do. Unless you tell me where the
Women Warriors are hiding, I will pour this
magic fluid on your image here on this paper,
and the image will disappear, and as it disappears,
so will you become ill and gradually die."
On hearing these words, the woman warrior
could keep back her fear no longer.
"Mercy . . . great white Medicine Man," she
pleaded, "I will tell you where my tribe is
camped."
And so, without any more fuss, she told the
Harveys the secret.
"That is good," said Nulla, "at last we will be
able to do battle with the Women Warriors."
A few minutes later, they were all on their
way to the hiding place of their enemies.
In one hour's time, the Woman Warriors were
surprised and horrified to see dozens of brawny
warriors coming at them from behind every tree.
The white people, too, were with them. The Wo-
men Warriors sprang up, with their spears and
shields, but the warriors of the Arunta Tribe
were too many for them, and soon all the women
were overpowered.
"Now," said little Tuckonie to Whowie, the
Chief, "you will hand over the Golden Boomer-
ang which I have promised to my father."
"Imp of a boy," said Whowie, "you will never
find the Golden Boomerang." But then Narkunda
strode up to her and demanded it.
"I cannot give it to you, even if I wanted to,"
said the Chief, "for we no longer have it. The
Golden Boomerang is with Nararka."
Chief Narkunda did not know whether to
believe this or not, so he ordered his warriors
to make a thorough search of the camping
ground, but without result. The Golden Boom-
erang was nowhere to be found.
"Well, that's bad luck, Narkunda," said Bob
Hennessy, "but never mind, we'll find it some
day . . . for sooner or later we will come into
contact with Nararka and his Medicine Men,
and if they have it, and we can possibly get
it away from them, you can rest assured that it
will be yours."
"And now," said John, "the thing we have to
decide is what to do with those Women Warriors."
"We know what must be done with them,
White Man," said Narkunda, "most of these
Women Warriors were stolen away from their
tribes, when they were quite voung girls, and
taught to live the lives of warriors. They must
be returned to their tribes, and then the army of
the Women Warriors will be broken up."
"Well," said Bob, smiling, "I can't see them
settling down to housekeeping, after living as
warriors."
"That," said Narkunda, with a sly smile, "is
something for their own tribes to worry about,
not for us."
After this the good-byes were said, and the
Arunta Tribe proceeded back the way they
had come, and the Harveys went onwards into the
ghost forest, taking Nulla with them. Three days
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


.^Wf9 Mm { . &|1 S ■ jluf'lm M J J it • «C jt
jHt ' *yf jAL * M
Vi*> ' |kA ■■
jjHipp
■Mtf***' ' v "^^^H
KBPiS!' ■""
- ». > * I "
Peggy' l Initiation.
[See page 12.]


The Dead Forest.
[See page 22.1


hence found them well into the horrible forest.
It was just as old Matthew the Hermit had des-
cribed it to them. There was not a breath of
wind . . . not a sound to break the silence of the
atmosphere. Even the caravan made very little
noise as it rolled along its way, for the ground
was soft and fine as though the soil were com-
posed of ashes. The whole place looked grey,
and although days passed it didn't seem to grow
any better.
17 . ... ... - . //•,•
"I don't like this place at all," said Peggy, "it's
spooky."
"Yes," said Tuckonie, "it is in such a place
that evil spirits dwell."
Nulla, too, was very much affected by this
strange forest, as he sat sometimes for hours
on end, without speaking a word. At night time
it was even worse than in the day, for the trees
made horrible shadows on the ground, where
the dim light of the moon filtered through. Then
one day they saw green trees in the distance.
"Look," said Mrs. Harvey, "over there ... it
seems that at last we're coming to the end of
this horrible ghost forest."
"Oh, I'm so glad Mummy," said Peggy.
But Nulla was standing with his eyes fixed on
one of the dead trees quite close to them.
"What are you staring at, Nulla?" said Peggy.
"White Child," said Nulla, "I thought I saw
something move on the trunk of that tree."
"You couldn't have seen anything there
Nulla," Peggy said, "because there's nothing
there now."
"I am quite sure I saw something," said
Nulla. .. ~
"No Nulla, it must have been a shadow," said
Bob.
But at that moment they all saw something
move on the tree. Then on going over to examine
it more closely, they saw what appeared to be a
small grey mouse with wings on it. It was so
exactly the colour of the dead tree that it was
hard to see as it clung to the trunk.
"It's some kind of a bat," said Bob.
"It has a beak," said Tuckonie, "look."
"I don't like the look of it, whatever it is,"
said Mrs. Harvey, "it makes me shudder."
"It makes me creepy too," said Peggy.
"Look out, look out," cried Tuckonie, "it is
spreading its wings—it is going to fly."
The next moment there was a cry of pain from
Nulla, and he put his hands over his eyes saying,
"Oh! my eyes, my eyes. Oh! the pain, I'll go
mad, I will die."
"Quickly Nulla, quickly," said John, "let me
have a look at your eyes." And he pulled Nulla's
hands down from his face. "Great Scott," he
said, "look, the thing has bitten him just below
the eye, and it's all swollen up and going a nasty
colour. It must have injected some kind of
poison into his face."
As quickly as they could, they got the groan-
ing Nulla back into the caravan.
"Whatever are we going to do," said Mrs.
Harvey.
"There's only one thing to do in a case like
this," said her husband, "we'll have to lance the
flesh. We daren't run the risk of that poison
spreading through his system, for he must be in
agony even now."
The operation was carried out as quickly
and as gently as ever they could manage it, and
then an antiseptic was applied to the wound. It
did seem to ease the pain a little, though Nulla
was still groaning.
"We'll have to keep a sharp look out for those
things in the future," said Bob. "I think they
could prove fatal, we can't even be sure that
Nulla will recover."
However, by the time they had gone the rest
of the way through the ghost forest and were
on the edge of the green forest, Nulla's face
looked a lot better than it had done, although he
still felt weak and sick. That night they camped
just at the border line of the two forests . . .
the one dead ... the other very green, but for all
that they were still feeling very nervous.
"There's a dreadful atmosphere in this green
forest," said Mary, as she prepared the bunks for
the night.
"I noticed that myself dear," said her husband.
"It seems a poisonous kind of a place, but don't
let us speak of it any more, for we want to get a
good peaceful night's sleep if we can."
"Do you think Tuckonie and Nulla will be all
right sleeping out of doors," said Mrs. Harvey.
"I'm very nervous after that horrible experience
we had with the bat thing."
"They'll be all right," said Mr. Harvey, "Bob
and I have rigged up little canvas tents for them
just outside the caravan, so those flying creatures
will be unable to get in; our friends should have
a good night's rest."
So on hearing this, all the members of the white
party settled down for the night.
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


Underground River
NEXT morning they re- return to civilization, for I am
sumed their journey, dying now, but if you have the
and by mid-day they courage to continue on the way I
had reached a very W6nt ' yOU wiU become rich and
thick part of the forest. Thev glve great scientlfic discoveries to
J SB y F ski rTTKJrmA -f I-i /-v TTT/-W.l TXTHI, • _ i _ J J _ t
dying now, but if you have the
stopped here to have their lunch, t % 1 I 0 b l e tt er ] am
and while Mary set about pre- J mTdrl rdk Ing a ma P which will direct
paring it, Tuckonie and Peggy 1 \ '.Jjtm y< i U , an und^r ground river
went off to find what dry wood J w /STL, ./I V l/ivfcd, vhich you must follow m order
they could, for here the wood all rw§?7 v reac |] strange land where
seemed to be moist. After the Wi IsEjkh\W / ' ] araonds are to he found in
two kiddies had gone some dis- fj§\£ V 1111 l V P V , „ ~ „ ,
tance they came across one of \% \A «r° t° iF°?» ■fll t't
the largest trees thev had ever ffi \ JSM fcfc • 'VJr ' S /*-i.Sf r "
seenj Then, to their delieht ff villik^ l * L r „ € I a ? y more of lt ?
they found that the trunk of it // ~ e , s ' said John and he con-
J-VUIIVI tuuu tnc ux hiiiy UL it »- I/ J. J • j ~T
was hollow. So, of course, they §*' tmued. 1 whl not attempt to
felt that they must explore it. BlPfw ?i arr } you of all the dan g ers which
"We'll have to be careful »M di 6 ? yOUr path ' because the y
though," said Peggy, "because, (jpj/^jr§L \SkM are too numerous, but there is
you never know, those horrible great danger from poisonous
bat things might live in a hollow & * rom poisonous grey
"Yes." said Tuckonie, as he h "We've already had a sample
stepped into the tree, protecting ti/ j those, said Bob.
his eyes with his hands; but fjmjPi 'lty beware of the tree
nothing moved inside the hollow, wb * cb lives. I hope that the
so Tuckonie took his hands finder of this letter will have bet-
from his eyes and let them * *■*» ter luck than I had. Signed Adam
p-row accustomed to the darkness. Horrible bat thinrs might live in a rr ord.
Then, to his surorise he Jit t "Well, that's very interesting,"
saw something gleaming at his said Bob, "now let's have a look
feet. He bent and touched it and found that it at the map."
was an old brass bound box. He dragged it out The two men glanced over the old, indistinct
quickly and showed it to the astonished Peggy. ma P with experienced eyes. "Look,"' said Bob,
_ A box. ' said Peggy, "oh! my goodness Tuck- pointing to a spot on the map. "This is where
onie. I do believe we've found treasure." we're standing now."
The two children then nicked it up, for it was "Yes," said John, "and then the directions
nuite light, and went back to the caravan where Horn there lead over here to the north-west. See,
they showed it to the rest of the narty. Needless the follow who made the map has pointed little
to say, everyone there was amazed when they saw arrows all along the way. And there are things
it. ' written here."
_ v 15 !Uf> Very ? box by tbe look sai(l "Yes," said Bob, "see. here's the first land
-John. It s sometime since people manufactured mark by the look of it. Yes, he's written beside
boxes like this." it 'A steaming bog.' "
Five minutes later the two men were prying "And then the line leads up here," said John,
at the rusted lid of the box until, at length, with "That's due north from the bog, isn't it?"
a groan and a saueak it swung open. "Yes," replied Bob, "and the next land mark
Look, said John, "here's a map and a letter." is marked, 'Peculiar Rock Formation.' Wait a
By this time member of the party was minute, there's something else written here,
chattering with excitement. Even the sick Nulla 'Fairly large rock resting on the top of a rock
was sitting up listening eagerly to all that was shaped something like a pyramid!"
being said. "Oh well," said Mrs. Harvey, "that should be
Quickly John, said Mrs. Harvev. "read the easy enough to pick out."
letter I'm nearly dying of curiosity." "And the next one," said Bob, "is a well with
So John, screwing up his eyes read aloud. "I a cover shaped like an idol. Then by the look of
write this so that the treasures and wonders I things we go down this well until we come to a
have discovered will not be lost to the world. But ledge, and that, apparently, is where we strike
I must warn you, the reader, that the gravest the underground river "
dangers lie ahead of you. I know that I will never "It seems rather far fetched to me," said Mrs.
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


Harvey. "Do you think it would be a joke?"
"No dear, I don't," said her husband. "Who
would risk his life in a poisonous place like this,
just for the sake of having a joke."
"Yes, I suppose there's a lot in that."
One by one they followed the land marks
until eventually they came to the last of them
all . . . the idol over the well.
"Whatever is it supposed to be?" said Mrs.
Harvey.
"It's a strange monster," said Tuckonie, "I
do not remember any of our ancient gods looking
like this."
But Nulla was doubtful. "It appears to bear a
faint resemblance to Biggoon the Giant Water
Bat," he said.
"Anyway," said Bob, "never mind about the
idol for the time being, there should be an open-
ing in it somewhere, a shaft that leads down to
the underground river."
"Here it is, White Ones," said Nulla excitedly.
Quickly the little party gathered around the
opening that Nulla had found.
"Let's have a look," said Bob, "I can't see
any water at the bottom of it, it's so dark."
"Yes, White Ones," said Tuckonie, "there is
water there, I think I can just see the gleam."
"Well then we've got to find some way of
getting down," said Bob.
"That'll be easy enough," said Mr. Harvey,
"We'll have to lower ourselves down by ropes."
"There is one thing you have forgotten," said
Tuckonie. "If this shaft leads to an underground
river, don't you think we'd better make a boat."
"Yes, we must do that Tuckonie," said Bob, "I
hadn't forgotten about it, but I wanted to ex-
plore the place down there first."
"Well, we'll need a rope ladder," said Mrs.
Harvey.
"Yes," said John, "Nulla and Tuckonie can
make that for us."
An hour afterwards, Tuckonie and Nulla hav-
ing constructed the rope ladder, they all set off
down the shaft. It seemed to go ever so far down
into the earth, and it was so dark that they
couldn't see anything at all, but eventually they
reached the bottom and found they were stand-
ing on rock.
"This must be the ledge that Adam Morrisford
wrote about in his letter," said Bob.
"Yes," said John, flashing his torch, "but I
don't see any sign of an underground river.
Apart from this ledge we're standing on, it
seems to be all mud."
But Tuckonie was standing very still listening.
"White Man," he said, "I think I can hear the
murmuring of a river in the distance."
"Yes," said Nulla, "so can I. This way." And
so saying he went off along what appeared to be
a narrow passage.
The little party found that the two aborigines
were right, for after going some distance they
came to the banks of the underground river.
"How eerie it is," said Mrs. Harvey shudder-
ing, "I don't think I'm going to fancy travelling
on this river very much."
"Well, at all events," said her husband, "it'll
be a great adventure."
Having explored the place thoroughly the little
party once more made for the shaft, and quickly
climbed the ladder. Once above the ground again,
they set about building the boat. This boat was
not so easy to build as the last one had been, be-
cause the wood which grew in the forest wasn't
as suitable as the timber that they had used the
first time. However, at long last all their difficul-
ties were overcome, and they set about lowering
their long thin boat down the shaft. Next fol-
lowed most of their provisions, carefully wrapped
in bundles of canvas, and lastly the members of
the party themselves climbed down. They carried
their boat to the river, floated it and then packed
all their belongings on board. Then, filled with
excitement they set off. It was a very weird
sensation to find themselves paddling along an
underground river in pitch darkness and for a
time they all sat silent.
"White Ones," said Nulla suddenly, "I feel
there are strange living things in the water.
Sometimes I think I hear them, and then once
in the light I glimpsed something rising above
the surface."
"Well it's to be hoped they're not dangerous
Nulla," said Bob. "I'd hate to have to do any
fighting in this darkness."
"I think," said Mrs. Harvey, "that it's begin-
ning to grow a little lighter now, isn't it."
"Yes," said her husband, "there's a strange
reddish glow straight ahead of us."
"I wonder what sort of light it is," said Mrs.
Harvey, "there's no light from the stars or sun
down here."
"I can't think what it could be," said Bob, "but
I'm learning to take things quite calmly."
"Look," said Mrs. Harvey, "the river is begin-
ning to widen out now . . . you can see by the
strange light, and there's vegetation on the
shores; it's beginning to look something like a
landscape under the earth."
"Look out for those oars," Bob said, "I believe
we're coming on to a rock."
"Yes," said Peggy, "and, oh look, it's covered
with a sort of a slimy thing like a great big green
flower. It goes right over one side of the rock."
Mr. Harvey looked at it thoughtfully. "I think
it's some kind of strange vegetable growth."
"No, look," said Mrs. Harvey, "it's moving!"
"Great Scott!" said Bob, "the thing is alive!"
And so it was, for the next minute it slid
down into the water.
"Whatever could it have been," said Mrs. Har-
vey ; "was it a fish of some sort ?"
"I don't know what it was dear," said her
husband.
"It was neither fish nor beast nor plant," said
Tuckonie.
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


"Do you remember all those things which old
Matthew the Hermit told us," said Mr. Harvey
thoughtfully, "it looks as though he was speaking
the truth
"Yes that's right," said Bob, "he spoke of
plants which had life and power of movement."
"I think we should go ashore," said John, "and
do a little exploring."
The rest of the party were all in favour of
this although they were feeling a little nervous
not knowing what they might meet, but neverthe-
less they pulled into the shore and left the boat.
The ground near the river was soft and boggy,
so they struck off inland, each of them with a
canvas bundle containing their belongings over
their shoulders. On their way through the
strange vegetation which grew in this hot steamy
land under the earth they saw some very large
spiders, ants, and snakes, and this taught them
to be on their guard. After they had been walk-
ing for some time they all realised that they were
very tired and when Bob looked at his watch
they discovered that it was seven o'clock. Had
they been above the earth, the sun would have
down by this time, but here the strange
reddish glow^continued the whole time.
Well, said John Harvey, "it's really the end
"of another day, so we need not go any further."
So saying, they all set about rigging up their
tents for the night, and after making themselves
some rough sandwiches of bread and butter and
tinned meat, they prepared for bed. However,
just as they were about to go to sleep they heard
a strange hissing noise coming from the foliage
outside the tent. Tuckonie dashed out but was
only in time to see some huge object scuttling
awav through the bushes.
"What was it like," they asked him.
, ' <W . elI T 1 did see it plainly," said Tuckonie,
it might have been a large snake or lizard."
After this it was decided that one of them
should stay on guard while the others slept, so
Bob and John took turn and turn about, but for-
tunately nothing else happened to disturb their
rest, and in eight hours' time they set off again.
. As they penetrated further into this peculiar
jungle-like country, the red glow grew brighter.
Do you know," said Bob, "I think that glow is
coming from fires somewhere or other."
"Oh dear," said Mrs. Harvey, "I hope we're not
walking into a bush fire."
No, said Bob, "I don't think we would be
because this moist timber would not burn well."
Then how do you account for the fires . . .
if they are fires," said Mrs. Harvey.
"They might be volcanic," said Bob, "don't
forget that we experienced an earth tremor just
before we came to the ghost forest. I've got an
idea that all this is a thermal region."
<<Ye ®' you're probably right," said Mrs. Harvey,
because a boiling spring was one of the land
marks on the map wasn't it."
At this moment they were startled by a loud
cry of amazement from Tuckonie. "Look, White
Ones," he said, "look."
There before their eyes was the strangest tree
they had ever seen- Its trunk was soft and
spongy like all the trees growing in those parts
but it was curiously rounded and the boughs
too were rounded and appeared to be something
like the tentacles of a giant octopus. The leaves
were round, like long thick green fingers, and at
the centre of each bunch of leaves was a huge pod.
"Daddy," said Peggy suddenly, "I know that
tree. It's the same as the one we saw in the
magic fire pictures which Okoo the old wizard
showed us when we were on the Island of the
Headhunters." And looking at the tree they all
knew that Peggy was right.
"Well then," said Bob, "we've got to get some
pods from it, for we promised Okoo that we would
take them back to him, and we must keep our
promise, seeing that he was decent enough to
his. arid hplr) us escarp from the Tsland."
_ "Yes, White Man," said Tuckonie. "that's quite
right." And so saying the little fellow marched
over to the tree and lifted his arm to pull down
a branch and gather the pods, and then the most
amazing thing happened. The boughs of the tree
swept downwards and round to where Tuckonie
was standing, and the finger-like leaves gripped
his wrists and feet. Then the boughs started
to wind themselves around him and the next
instant the startled party saw the lad being lifted
from his feet and slowly carried towards a spot
in the tree where the trunk opened.
"Quickly," said Bob, "there's not an instant to
lose, Tuckonie is in danger." And tearing open
one of the bundles and taking from it an axe,
he dashed over to the tree.
John and Nulla were not slow in doing the
same thing, and a moment later they were all
hacking at the horrible soft boughs which were
doing their best to wind themselves about the
men. By this time poor Tuckonie was in great
difficulties and could not keep back a cry of pain.
"Oh White Ones," he said, "the bough has
wound itself so tightly around me that it is
crushing the breath out of my lungs."
Furiously the men chonped and fought while
Peggy and Mrs. Harvey looked on with horror.
But at last they saw the men were beginning to
get the best of the tree. They had managed to
cut through some of the boughs, which now lay
on the ground coiling themselves into all sorts of
hideous shapes, like so many snakes.
"Oh, how dreadful," said Mrs. Harvey.
At last the three men returned from the fight
bringing Tuckonie with them.
"Let's get away from here as fast as we can,"
said Mrs. Harvey.
"Just a minute dear," said her husband, "we
have to get those pods for Okoo."
"You're mad John," said Mrs. Harvey, "you
Many of the Incidents throughout this book are Illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


can't go back to that dreadful tree."
"It's all right dear," replied John, "most of the
boughs on this side are lopped off, and I'll only
pull the pods from those that are lying on the
ground." So saying, he went back to where the
fallen boughs stood and pulled off the pods.
Even then they squirmed and tried to twist
themselves around him, oozing a horrible brown
fluid as they did so- "Well, I'm glad that's over,"
he said as he returned to his friends.
"You're not any more glad than I am," said
Mrs. Harvey, "do let's get away from here as
quickly as we can."
So on they all went together.
CHAPTER TEN
Land Below the Earth
THAT night, when they camped, Peggy
suggested that they should burn some
of the pods they had got from the strange
tree ... to see what would happen.
Everyone agreed with this idea, and so, making a
little setting of twigs, they placed the pods on
and set fire to them. In a few minutes, a blue
flame shot up, and sure enough as they looked,
a picture began to form in the fire.
"I can't understand it at all," said Bob, "I
think there must be some peculiar sort of chemi-
cal in those pods which makes us see whatever it
is w r e have in our minds."
"Well then," said Mrs. Harvey, "Okoo must
have had this place in his mind when we looked
into that magic fire of his."
"But, he didn't have the leaves from this tree,
Mummy, he had them from the tree of visions
that grew on the other island," said Peggy.
"I dare say it's much the same sort of chemical
in both trees," said Bob.
Then Tuckonie gave a little cry of excitement.
"Look . . . White Ones, in the fire."
And there, in the midst of the picture was a
huge creature like a lizard. Then the scene
changed, and they saw themselves, sitting in a
little group, and then, to their horror, the creat-
ure entered this picture, and charged at them.
"Well, if that's a sample of what's going to
happen in the future," said John, "it's not going
to be very pleasant."
At this minute, they heard a smashing through
the undergrowth, and coming towards them, was
the same creature that they had seen in the fire.
Quickly, the two men picked up their guns and
discharged a volley of shots at the creature that
was approaching them, its eyes red with anger,
but although the shots entered the body, the
thing still came on.
"Run Mary," cried John, "and take the kiddies."
But then one of their shots entered the creat-
ure's head, between the eyes, and it fell with a
crash amongst the undergrowth.
"Well, thank goodness we got it," said Bob,
"apparently the only way to kill them is to hit
them right between the eyes; their nervous sys-
tems must be different from those of the animals
above the earth."
"It seems to me, we're going to be up against
a lot in this horrible place," said Mrs. Harvey.
"I think we'd do well to go back to the boat and
continue the rest of our journey on the river,"
Bob replied.
So they set off, back for the river, and after
boarding the boat, rowed onwards. As they went,
some of the party managed to get some rest, one
of the men always taking a turn at keeping
guard. After this, they all felt very much re-
freshed. Then they noticed that they were com-
ing to some kind of stoppage, and it was plain
that they could go no further.
"Do you know Bob," said John, "I think it is a
dam."
"A dam?" said Bob. "Why yes, I believe
you're right; it's not a natural formation, it's
made of square stones, piled one on top of the
other, and stuck together with some kind of
cement."
"Yes," said John, "you can make that much out
from looking at the bare spaces where that slimy
weed falls away from it."
They went right up to this crude looking dam
and examined it closely. When they parted the
weeds at the top, they discovered what appeared
to be a high-water mark.
_ .... • -V T-» 1 I t t 1
"If it wasn't so fantastic," said Bob, "you'd
think that at one time this place had been in-
habited and that the people built this dam to
stem the flow of the river, when it was in flood."
"That's probably just what happened, in some
ancient, by-gone age," said Bob.
"Then the river must sometimes flood," con-
cluded Mrs. Harvey.
By this time, Tuckonie, who had climbed to the
top of the dam, by means of the weeds, called
excitedly to his friends to follow.
"White Ones," he said, "there is some kind of
settlement beyond."
When they heard this, the members of the
party could hardly believe their ears, but Bob,
John and Nulla, followed his example and climbed
to the top. On the banks beyond the dam, a
strange sight met their eyes. There were
dozens and dozens of tall mounds, overgrown
with weed, but further on, the weed had been
pulled away from these mounds, apparently not
very long ago, and disclosed the fact that the
mounds w T ere peculiarly shaped huts, or houses,
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


built of white cement and having two window
holes in each, and a door. About two dozen of
these strange dwelling places had been cleared.
Just then, Tuckonie pointed to the area of
cleared ground. The door of one of the houses was
slowly opening, and the next moment, to their
amazement, out walked Professor Westbrook,
closely followed by Moodgee who was urging the
old man on at the point of a gun.
"Great Scott!" cried Bob, "Professor West-
brook. Nararka has captured him again."
"Yes," said John, "so this is where Nararka
and his Medicine Men have hidden themselves."
"We have found them at last," said Tuckonie,
"what a pity my tribe isn't here with us, White
Ones, for then we could have given them battle."
"Never mind," said Bob, "we'll have to content
ourselves this time with rescuing the Professor."
"But how the dickens are we going to do it,"
said John.
"Well," said Bob, "we can work our way fairly
close to that clearing by taking cover behind
these other mounds, which are still over-grown
with the weed. Then we'll just have to wait for
our opportunity."
"Yes," said John, "and I think our oppor-
tunity's come now . . . Look!"
Then they all saw Moodgee open the door of
another mound, thrust the Professor inside, shut
the door, and bolt it on the outside.
He then took his way back across the clearing
to the house he came from in the first place. He
went inside, and then all was silent.
"Yes," said Bob, "now's our chance, but we'll
have to go carefully."
"You and Peggy and Tuckonie had better wait
here, Mary" said John.
"White Man," said the little boy, "I would like
to come with you."
John Harvey smiled indulgently. "Not this
time, Tuckonie," he said, "someone must stay
behind to protect Mrs. Harvey and Peggy."
"In that case, I will stay," said the little boy.
So creeping from hut to hut, the two white
men and Nulla set off across the clearing, and
eventually reached the one occupied by the Pro-
fessor, without being seen. Cautiously they
drew the bolts and opened the door. Needless to
say, the Professor was astonished when he saw
them. Telling him to keep his voice down, they
related to him all that had happened, and they
asked him to follow them out of the hut.
"Not yet," said the Professor, "for they are
not settled down."
"What do you mean," said Bob.
"In this strange place," answered the Profes-
sor, "you will have noticed that there is no night
and day . . . therefore Nararka has a gun fired to
mark the difference between day and night. The
night-gun will be fired any minute, and then it
will be safe for us to go back, for they will all
be settled down for the night."
"But how did you get here," asked John-
"Well, said the Professor, "w T hen I had par-
tially recovered, I had intended following you.
One day I was sitting outside the tent belonging
to those settlers . . . they were away at the time
. . . when Nararka's party passed by and recog-
nising me, forced me to accompany them and
brought me on with them to this place."
"This is a strange place," said John Harvey.
"Yes," replied the Professor, "I think that at
one time this was very volcanic country, and dur-
ing an upheaval these vast caverns were blown
in the earth. The light you see is cast by volcanic
fires still burning in the depths of the jungle on
either side of the river."
"Then the volcano is still active ?" said Bob.
"Well," said the Professor, "I should say it was
sleeping. It is certainly not extinct."
Just then the firing of a gun was heard. "The
signal," said the Professor," "the coast is clear."
After a little while they all crept from the hut,
but as they were crossing a clearing, they were
horrified to see one of the giant lizard monsters
making towards them, its fangs bared.
"We'll have to shoot," said Bob, "those things
are dangerous."
"But we can't shoot," said John, "another shot
would alarm all Nararka's Medicine Men."
"There's nothing else for it," said the Pro-
fessor, "these things, once they have conquered
their first timidity are very vicious and enormous-
ly strong. You would never be able to kill them
with axes or knives . . . the only thing is a shot."
"Yes," said Bob, "w r e have had some experi-
ence of them. The shot has to be right between
the eyes."
They had to wait until the creature was
almost upon them before firing . . . Then, as the
report rang out, the gigantic monster crashed
to earth, dead. But the damage had been done.
From all the huts Nararka's Medicine Men came
pouring out and soon had surrounded the little
party (with the exception of Nulla who managed
to creep away unobserved), and compelled them to
surrender.
Nararka, of course, was very pleased that his
enemies had been taken captive so easily and he
told them they would be under his rulership and
they w r ould have to work clearing the vines
from the houses and then clearing the jungles
and whatever else he demanded of them. He
then asked them where Mrs. Harvey, Peggy and
Tuckonie were. But John knew that if he
said they were down there, the warriors would
search until they found them and they too would
be made captive, so he told Nararka that as the
journey was full of dangers they had left them
behind with the Arunta Tribe.
Nararka seemed to believe this, so he told
Moodgee to put them all in a hut and set guards
outside the door. When this was done and the
Medicine Men had once again retired for the
night, the friends discussed their situation to see
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


if they could think out any way of escape, but
everything seemed hopeless.
"Well," said Bob, "I suppose our only chance
now would be to wait until they put us on to clear-
ing the huts and then, perhaps, we might be able
to make a break for it."
And so, making the best of a bad job, they
decided to try and get a little rest while they
could. About an hour later they heard a voice
outside the door saying, "White Man, White Man."
It was Nulla with Tuckonie and the next minute
the door swung open. "Quickly White Ones,"
"follow us, the way is clear now."
"However did you manage it, Nulla," said Bob,
"there were two great hefty guards outside that
door."
"Yes," said Nulla, "but as we saw everything
that happened, we took great care to be prepared
for the guards. We crept up behind the house
first and then Tuckonie and I speared the two
guards before they knew what was happening.
Now, quickly, let us go back."
After this, they all crept back slowly across the
clearing, but once they came to the jungle land
they were able to hurry. It was not long before
they rejoined Mrs. Harvey and Peggy.
"Oh John," said Mrs. Harvey, "I was so dis-
tressed. I really thought the end had come."
"Well," said John, "all things considered I
think we should get out of here. I didn't expect
to find that Nararka had so many followers
with him. I thought at the most there would
only have been Bingi, Moodgee, Mallee and a few
others, but there seem to be dozens of them."
"It seems terrible," said Mrs. Harvey, "that
those wicked people will be allowed to go on living
and doing more damage."
"It does," said John, "but still, our main prob-
lem is how to escape."
"Yes," said the Professor, "and it will be a
problem too, for it will take us a long time to get
away up the river and they have two motor boats
here which are very fast."
"That's bad luck," said Bob. "We only have
a rough rowing boat that we made ourselves."
"Then," said the Professor, "they would be
able to overtake us, providing they knew that
we were gone," said Bob.
"They'll know," said the Professor, "they'll be
up and about again in another hour and one
hour's start in a rowing boat wouldn't give us
time to escape. There's only one thing to do, we
must destroy the whole underground settlement."
"But how can we do that?" said Bob.
"Look down there at the river. Have you
noticed that it is rising steadily."
"Why, yes," said Mrs. Harvey, "it's much
higher now than when we first came down here."
"Something, somewhere is causing a flood," said
the Professor. "The dam is the only thing that
would stop the city from being flooded out. If
that dam were blown up, the city would be
swamped, and these wicked people destroyed for-
ever. Also it would enable us to make our es-
cape without being pursued. Indeed, it is our
only hope."
"If we blew up the dam, said Mrs. Harvey,
"we would be caught in the flood tides, too!"
"Well," said the Professor, "we would have
to blow it up by means of a time fuse. I would
suggest that we take your boat about half a mile
up the river, then return to the dam and set a
time fuse. We would have to be very careful,
for when you were captured I heard Nararka tell
Moodgee that a guard of four men should watch
the dam, just to be on the safe side. Then, after
having set the time fuse to blow up in half an
hour, we could go post haste through the jungle
to the boat. That would mean that we would be
out of danger when the explosion took place and
it would also mean that by the time the flood
waters reached that part of the river where our
boat was, their fury would not be so great."
But then Tuckonie said that he could not leave
without taking with him the Golden Boomerang.
"You will have no chance of getting that, my
little fellow," said the Professor, "for the Golden
Boomerang is fixed up outside the hut of Nararka
so that all his wicked ideas might prosper. You
would have to go right to the door of the hut
and he would surely hear you."
"Nevertheless, White Man," said the little
aboriginal boy, "I must go, for my promise to my
father cannot be broken."
"Well Tuckonie," said Bob, "we feel it is only
fair to warn you that your life is at stake, for we
dare not wait more than an hour. You know
what it means if these people are permitted to
continue their plans . . . they will use Professor
Westbrook's experiments to make monsters that
will wipe humanity off the face of the earth."
Tuckonie looked grave.
"And if we wait more than an hour for you,"
said John, "our chances of victory would be
gone, so if you are not back within the hour,
Tuckonie, we must still set the fuse at the time,
and go."
"Yes," said Tuckonie, "I understand."
"Oh Tuckonie," said Peggy, "couldn't you
leave the Golden Boomerang?"
"No," said Tuckonie, "I must at least try to
get it." And so saying the little lad crept off
once more towards the clearing.
Ten minutes passed, twenty minutes, half an
hour and still no sign of the boy.
"Oh mummy," said Peggy tearfully, "they
must have caught him. Oh, what are we going
to do! Oh, Ido hope he will come back. Perhaps
he will, for the spirits of his tribe have promised
to look after him."
"Well, let us hope they do look after him," said
Bob Hennessy, "for we must put our plan into
operation in another ten minutes, for this is all
the time we have."
At this moment Nulla espied Tuckonie coming
towards them, holding the Golden Boomerang
Many of the incidents throughout this book are illustrated on pages 16A and 168.


aloft. "White Ones," he said with a very broad
smile, "I have got it. Now I will be able to bring
peace and prosperity to my tribe for all time."
Then the Professor and Nulla and Tuckonie and
Peggy made off along the banks of the river while
Bob and John crept cautiously to the dam, to set
the fuse. They could hear the wicked Nararka's
guards talking on the other side and once or
twice, when they stopped, Bob and John's hearts
leapt with fear, for they thought they had been
heard. But they managed to set the fuse and
creep back into the jungle again and then hurry
along down the bank of the river to where they
found the others waiting beside the boat.
"Quickly," said Bob, "let us get into the boat
and start off, we have not much time now."
Soon they were rowing up the dark river as
fast as ever they could go. Then a mighty ex-
plosion was heard and the waters of the river
rushed back towards the dam. For a few min-
utes the little party was taken back towards
the city in the great swirling rush of water, but
rowing frantically, the men managed to keep
her safe and afloat and eventually, when the
waters calmed a little, made some headway back
in the direction of the cavern. They heard shouts
and cries behind them and Bob thought he
heard Nararka's voice giving orders for the
motor boats to be got out.
"Hurry," said the Professor, "if they start
after us in the motor boats now, we'll have a
hard time getting away from them."
However, as the river course was much faster
than travel by land, eventually they reached
the ledge of rock which was at the bottom of
the shaft and abandoning the boat they went to
the bottom of the twine ladder, which they had
left there, when they first came. Quickly they
all scrambled up the ladder and at last merged
into broad daylight.
"How lovely it is," said Mary, "to be once
more on the face of the earth-"
They got into the caravan and drove away as
quickly as the density of the forest would allow
them. About half an hour afterwards to their
great sur-
prise, another
"Whatever could that have been?" said Bob.
"I suspected that something like that might
have happened," said the Professor, "and it has."
"But what was it," said Mrs. Harvey.
"A volcanic eruption," said the Professor,
"brought about by the flooding of the river over
the volcanic fires. The water and steam started
the combustion and then the long pent-up forces
of the volcano broke forth. There is quite a
possibility of all the waters of that river being
forced up to the earth."
"And the Land Below the Earth," said Bob.
"The Land Below the Earth had most certainly
been utterly destroyed," said the Professor.
Then they heard a roaring sound and
looking to their right they saw a great wall of
water hurling itself along what had once been
the bed of a mighty river.
"That valley," said the Professor, "has prob-
ably been dry for hundreds and hundreds of
years, but now it will once more be a great river."
They followed along the banks until they came
to the edge of the ghost forest. Here, to their
surprise the sound of chanting and shouting
reached them and a few minutes later, the war-
riors of the Arunta Tribe came running up."
"My father," said the lad Tuckonie, "I have
done that which I promised ... I have brought
you the Golden Boomerang."
And, so saying he presented the boomerang
to his father, who held it aloft so that all the
tribe might see it. When their eyes fell upon
it, they shouted and stamped with joy.
"And Narkunda," said Bob, "it looks as though
the prophecy of the Golden Boomerang is to be
fulfilled, for with the coming of this great river
through the dead forest, the trees will grow
again, and the earth will be covered with luscious
grass. No longer will it be a ghost forest, but
a new hunting ground for you and your people."
"But," asked Narkunda, "can we hunt in
safety, while the wicked Nararka and his Medi-
cine Men warriors still plot our downfall?"
"Nararka and his tribe have perished," said
Bob. "The evils which they did will no longer
trouble either
Tuckonie s father held the Boomerang aloft for all the tribe to see.
WHOLLY SET OP. PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY IVINN » CO.. PRINTERS. BALFOUR STREET. SYDNEY. 1942.




Particulars of Sketching Competition
■
: Can You Write SLOGANS?
HERE'S A CHANCE FOR EVERYONE!
TWO GRAND GOLDEN BOOMERANG COMPETITIONS
(!) Draw and colour the Illustration specified In your age group—your drawing can b* any sire and you can ; £6/6/0 oer month oiven awsv in
please yourself as to whether you use crayon, water colours or oils. J p . '
(2) Send your entries marked "Hoadleys" to Box 2728 NN, G.P.0., Sydney before 30th June, 1943 with the ■ frizes.
date and year of your birth, your full name and address, including State. I OPEN TO ALL AGES!
(3) Each entry must be the sole work of the competitor, and signed by parent or guardian accordingly. J (
(4) The fudges are the Managing Director of Hoadleys Chocolates, their advertising consultants and artist Lahm J The best slogan about Hoadley s
of "Sun" Newspaper. The judges' decision is final and binding on all entrants, and this is an express ■ Violet Crumble Bars received
condition of entry. No correspondence will be entered into with respect to any aspect of the competition, • f rom eac h State each month, will
and the prize-winning drawings become the property of Hoadley's Chocolates. ■ . . . . . 1 .
, .... i- i- i ' ...... . . li j. • ■ be awarded a cash prize of
In appreciation of the continued support Australian boys and girls are giving to their products, Hoadleys ■ fl/l/n
Chocolates Limilsd, of Melbourne, are once again offering prizes in a grand competition, particulars of which ! fcl/l/U.
are given below. . Competition commences Ist Jan-
In each of the Age Groups an attractive Golden Boomerang Breoch will be given to the girl and a handsome . ...... gruL i,,_. ioag
Golden Boomerang Tiepin wili be given to the boy who sends In the best entry. « c •
In addition to these prizes (12 in all) a Golden Boomerang Trophy valued at £3/3/0 will be given to the best J Entries must be in by the last
entry of all—the Grand Champion. Send in your entry as early as possible, and read the conditions carefully. ■ day of each month.
TROPHY VALUED AT £3'3'-
and 12 other prizes of Golden Boomerang Brooches and Tiepins.
Competition organised by
HOADLEYS CHOCOLATES LIMITED
Makers of delicious VIOLET CRUMBLE BARS.
AGE GROUPS
{ll V ' years—draw and colour Illustration on this page,
m o an ? tn years —and colour Illustration on front cover.
,' y ea "—draw and colour illustration facing page 25. The Dead Forest.
r 'i ji. years—d J raw and colour illustration facing pao« 8. Ntmlty's Thought Message.
1 1\ [c . a n "? ,1 vears—draw and colour Illustration facing paoe 9 Farewelled by the Aruntas.
(6) 15 and 16 years—draw and colour Illustration facing page 24. The Initiation.
NOTE '~wVbe 6 ,ubstituted! olden Boornerang Br o°e h «« and Tie Pins being unobtainable, Prizes of similar value
A GRAND CHAMPIONSHIP
PRIZE VALUED AT £25/0/0
will be awarded for the best
slogan sent in during the six
months, January to June, 1943.
This will be selected from the
monthly winners.
Judges of slogan competition will
be Managing Director of Hoad-
leys Chocolates and their adver-
tising consultant. Judges' decision
.will be final in all respects.
Send entries marked "SLOGANS"
to Box 2928 NN, G.P.0., Sydney,
N.S.W.
