

FURTHER NOTES ON THE AUSTRALIAN
CLASS SYSTEMS.
BY
A. W. HOWITT, F.G.S., F.L.S.,
Cor. Memb. Antbrop. Inst.
LONDON:
UAEEISON AND SONS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE,
Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty.
1888.




Further Notes on the Australian Class Systems.
By A. W. Howitt, i'.G.S., F.L.S., Cor. Memb. Anthrop. Inst.
[with plate V.]
Introduction.
In a former communication to the Anthropological Institute 1 I
reviewed the different class systems which up to that time had
come under my notice. I now propose to note some further
particulars which are important as showing that the various
class systems are regarded by the aborigines as being the
equivalents of each other, as explaining more clearly the
different types on which the various systems are constructed, 3
and finally as showing broadly the geographical range of the
types. Some little light is also afforded by these additional
particulars on the manner of growth and decay of the systems.
In order to make succeeding remarks as clear as possible to
the reader, I have added hereto a sketch map, showing approxi-
mately the boundaries of the several types of system 3 (PI. Y).
These boundaries are necessarily only approximate, and will be
liable to modification as further local details come in. But
making full allowance for this, I do not anticipate that these
alterations and additions will disturb the broad and important
features which an inspection of the sketch map shows.
Geographical Range of the Types of System.
The information at my command enables me to cover a great
part of the eastern half of the Continent, and there can be but
little doubt that the western half, were it possible now to mark
out the boundaries of the types of system obtaining over it,
would show analogous results. Unfortunately lam not able to
do this. Not because I have left the western half of the Con-
tinent outside my enquiries, but because those to whom I have
written in Western South Australia, Western Australia, and the
Northern Territory have remained deaf to my entreaties for
information.
In the sketch map (Pi. Y) I have marked out broadly the
1 “Notes on the Australian Class Systems.” “ Journal Anthrop. Inst.,” May,
1883.
2 See p. 41.
3 I hare at present no data to shew the extent of country covered by the
Waramunga type.
31
A. W. Howitt. —Notes on the Australian Class Systems.


boundaries of the various types of class system. It is not
probable, as I have already stated, that further enquiries will
make any material alteration in the broad features thus shown,
although they may do so in lesser details. Eor instance, it is
not yet quite certain whether all the aboriginal communities in
the “ Gulf Country ” of Carpentaria have agnatic descent. As
to this my enquiries are still continuing, as also for the purpose
of filling in the blanks which will be found in the Cape York
Peninsula and the coast of Eastern New South Wales.
Before mentioning the conclusions to which a study of the
range of types of system has led me, it is necessary to make a
few leiMlib fibout the country over which they are spread. In
descending from the Great Dividing Range and its downs and
plateaux in North-Eastern Queensland into the interior of
the Continent, the country becomes more arid and the streams
which flow inland combine to form the Diamantina and the
Barcoo Rivers, two great watercourses, which at uncertain times
pour deluges of water into the depressed interior. 1 These great
floods, after spreading over an immense extent of country, finally
remain and evaporate in a system of salt lakes, of which Bake
Eyre is the largest example. Into these great saline depressions
flows also the drainage from the north and from the west; and
the country surrounding them, except after saturation by the
floods, is more like a desert than anything I can liken it to. The
native communities which are spread over this tract of country
(or I should perhaps say were, for they are now practically
exterminated), have the Barkinji type of system. 2 This type
also extends southwards to the junction of the Darling and
Murray Rivers, and in all probability further to the west and
as far south as Port Lincoln, for I find that there also occur
the two primary class names Materi and Karuru which obtain
in the Lake Eyre country. Whether this type extends further
westward than is shown upon the sketch map is unknown to
me and must be left for future enquiries to decide. Since, how-
ever, the physical character of the country west of the boundary
which I have marked becomes more and more desert, I anticipate
that it will not be found that the tribes are on a higher social
level than those around Lake Eyre.
To the eastward of the boundary which I have marked for the
Barkinji type, the country is better watered and has far greater
food supply for an aboriginal population, until at the eastern
coast the food supply reaches its maximum. lam now speaking
1 While writing the above I observed the following in one of the local journals.
“ The country submerged is part of the delta of the Barcoo and Diamantina
Hi vers.”
2 See p. 41.


generally, and not with reference to isolated spots which might
he picked out where the coast is barren. Over this better
watered and provisioned country extends the Kamilaroi type of
system with a range also along the northern watershed to the
boundary of South Australia, and probably beyond it to the
westward. It appears to touch the eastern coast line, and to
follow it to about Rockhampton, where it leaves the coast and
striking southwards along the coast range follows its general
direction until at about the Hunter River, in Hew South Wales,
it reaches its most southerly limit. Thence the boundary of the
Kamilaroi type strikes westward to the junction of the Murrum-
bidgee and Murray Rivers, where it joins the south-eastern
boundary of the Barkinji type.
Thus the true Kamilaroi organisation with small variations,
mainly in dialectic forms of the class names, spreads over an
area in Eastern Australia at the very least 1,000 miles north and
south by 500 miles east and west. 1
This area comprises some of the best watered and most fertile
tracts, exclusive of the rich lands of the coast line.
The limits of the still more developed type which I have pro-
visionally called the Waramunga, I am at present unable to
define, as that tribe is so far the only instance which I have
recorded. 2
With the exception of that part of North-Eastern Queensland
where the Kamilaroi type touches the coast, the whole of the
coast tracts, speaking broadly, between the Great Dividing
Range and the sea, both in Queensland and New South Wales,
and between the Murray River and the sea in Victoria and South
Australia, were occupied by communities having abnormal types
of class system which in most eases count descent through the
male line. These coast tracts, taken as a whole, are the best
watered and the most fertile parts of Australia, and moreover,
the richest in animals and plant food for an aboriginal popu-
lation.
This coincidence of advanced social development with fer-
tility of country is not without some significance. The most
backward-standing types of social organisation, having descent
through the mother and an archaic communal marriage, exist in
the dry and desert country; the more developed Kamilaroi type,
having descent through the mother, but a general absence of the
Pirauru marriage practice 3 is found in the better watered tracts
1 The organisation is also found in Western Australia, see “ Kamilaroi and
Kurnai,” p. 36.
5 See p. 43.
3 X have discussed the Pirauru practice at some length in a memoir communi-
cated to the Anthropological Society of Washington, D.C., U.S.A. and em-
a 2


which are the sources of all the great rivers of East Australia;
while the most developed types having individual marriage and
in which, in almost all cases, descent is counted through the
father, are found along the coasts where there is the most
permanent supply of water and most food.
In fact it is thus suggested that the social advance of the
Australian aborigines has been connected with, if not mainly due
to, a more plentiful supply of food in better watered districts.
Still a difficulty suggests itself to this view, because, given the
existence of group marriage such as that of the Dieri tribe, one
micrfit reasonably expect that this practice of Pirauru would
have been rather perpetuated than abandoned under conditions
of environment which permitted the Pirauru group to remain
together on one spot instead of being compelled by the exigencies
of ° existence to separate into lesser groups having the Noa
marriage. This will certainly require careful consideration, but
also it must be borne in mind that the origin of individual mar-
riage, the change of the line of descent, and the final decay of
the old class organisation are all parts of the same process of
social development, and that not one cause only has been at
work but a number of causes which have worked together
towards that ultimate result which can be seen in the most
advanced communities.
I do not attempt to explain this course of development now,
but only desire to draw attention to the interesting conclusion
arising from an inspection of the geographical range of the
types, namely, that their development has apparently a con-
nection with improved physical surroundings. My argument
"bodied in the Smithsonian Report for 1883 to which I may refer, hut I think it
may assist the reader hereof if I extract the following particulars : “ The
various Piraurus are allotted to each other by the great council of the tribe
(Dieri), after which their names are formally announced to the assembled people
on the evening of the ceremony of circumcision, during which there is for a time
a General license permitted between all those who have been thus allotted to
each other. Bach Dieri man or woman is the Pirauru of some other Dieri
woman or man. The relation of Pirauru may exist between men and women
of different local groups or of different tribes. The relation of Pirauru may not
exist between a person and those who stand to him or her in one of the follow-
ing relations : father, father’s brother, father’s sister, mother, mother’s sister,
mother’s brother, brother’s child, sister’s child, brother, sister, or any of these
whom we call cousins, either on the father’s or on the mother’s side. Nor may it
exist between persons of the same totem. The Piraurus being allotted to each
other at each great council previous to the ceremony of circumcision, a man or a
woman being already Pirauru, may thus acquire a new Pirauru relation in
addition to these previously acquired. Hence in time a man may come to
have several Piraurus. As the Piraurus cannot be of the same class name, we
have here a number of men belonging to one class married collectively to a
number of women of the other class. This is, in fact, a form of group marriage,
and it accounts for the so-called polyandry of the Hairs.” See “ Studies in Ancient
History,” by J. P. McLennan, new edition, p. 100.


requires that the Barkinji type was once universal in Eastern
Australia, and that the other types have been gradually developed
from it.
The Classes are the Equivalents of each other.
In comparing the class divisions and totems of any great
group of allied tribes, such as that comprised in the term
“ Kamilaroi,” one finds that each component tribe has some more
or less marked difference or variation either in the names of the
sub-classes or in the character or number of totems. These
differences are often mere dialectic variations in names, but in
other cases they amount to actual differences in the structure
of the system or in the animals which constitute the totem
groups. When a still larger aggregate of tribes is examined
the variations become larger and the differences wider. Never-
theless the general identity of structure and of the fundamental
laws of the classes over wide areas, proves beyond doubt that
these varying forms are substantially equivalents. I have en-
deavoured to put this assertion to the proof, and the result has
been that the absolute identity and equivalence of the funda-
mental “ primary classes ” has been established beyond doubt in
tribes along a line extending from south to north across the
Australian Continent, from Mount Gambier on its southern
shores to the Gulf of Carpentaria, in Northern Queensland.
Similar identification embraces tribes westward from Brisbane
on the east coast far into the colony of South Australia. 1
This much having been done very little doubt can remain that
further enquiries will establish the same equivalence throughout
the whole of Australia.
In this connection I may note that the boundaries of any one
class system are usually wider than those of a single tribe, and
that the boundaries of a “ type ” of system have a still wider
extent, and include aggregates of tribes which may well be
termed nations, for they are bound together by a community of
classes which indicates a community of descent, and which is
usually accompanied by more or less frequent intermarriage.
In the following table I have shown some of the systems
which are each others’ equivalents. I have taken the primary
divisions for comparison and in some instances also the sub-
classes, while omitting for the present the totem groups, which
are not essential to my purpose, and which would be of use
1 I feel the strongest conviction that future investigations will shew that the
equivalence of the class systems extends to Western Australia, mother words, to
the whole of Australia. The four intermarrying classes have been recorded, for
instance, in Western Australia by Grey and other travellers, and also by corre-
spondents of Mr. Fison and myself.


mainly to determine some doubtful cases of equivalence. I
shall separately discuss them.
In order to bring the question of equivalence within the
shortest range of view, I have abbreviated the connected chain
by taking those which are most typical. It must not be sup-
posed that the tribes quoted touch each other, for some of them
are hundreds of miles apart. It is the class systems which
touch, and the tribes quoted are good examples of the particular
social organisation to which they respectively belong.
In the table the chain apparently ends at the Belyando Eive r
in Queensland. The fact really is that this class system is
found to extend to the headwaters of the Flinders Eiver in a
slightly varied form of names as given by Mr. Edward Palmer,
in his valuable paper on the Gulf Tribes. 1 The four-class
system, of which that at the Belyando Eiver is an example,
ceases at the Maikolon tribe, which is the first tribe on the
Cloncurry Eiver having a peculiar set of class divisions com-
posed of four male and four female names, which thence obtain
to the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria. When, however, one
considers that the only difference in the two systems is that the
female name with the Maikolon is distinct from the male name,
that is to say. that the brother and sister have different names,
while with the Belyando tribe the sister’s name is formed by
the addition of a feminine affix to the name of the brother, in
accordance with the common usage of the Kamilaroi type, one
might expect that, the laws of marriage and descent being the
same, the equivalence of the two systems would be recognized
where the two having the respective systems touch and inter-
marry. This equivalence has, however, not yet been worked
out, but when it is the one link will be supplied which is re-
quired to connect the chain of equivalent systems from Mount
Gambler to the Mitchell Eiver in the extreme of Northern
Queensland, a distance of over 1,600 miles in a straight line.
In some border tribes I find that the people claim the equiva-
lent classes of each tribe, that is to say, the classes peculiar to
the group to which their own tribe belongs, and also those which
are equivalent to them in the adjoining tribe. For instance in
the Wotjoballuk tribe of the Lower Wimmera Eiver in Victoria,
a man who is Krokitch-Wartwut in that tribe 2 told me that
when he went across to the Maraura tribe at the junction of the
Murray and Darling Eivers he was Kilpara, and that Gamiitch
is the same as Mokwara. In the tribe which inhabited the
country around Warrambool, in Victoria, the Kroki class is the
1 “ Notes on some Australian Tribes,” by E. Palmer. “ Journ. Anthrop.
Inst.,” February, 1884.
2 See p. 63.


equivalent of Bunjil and Kumit of Waa, these being the class
names of tribes which were spread over a wide extent of Eastern
Victoria, excepting Gippsland. 1
On the Maranoa Elver in Southern Queensland “a Hipaiinan
is also Urgila, and thus calls himself Hipai Urgila, and so on
with the other names.” 2 In Southern Queensland, but to the
north eastward of the Maranoa “the Uugori class names are on
the one side the equivalents of the class names Hipai, Kombo,
&c., and on the other side of those of the Emon tribe, namely,
Urgila, Anbeir, &c.” 3
Ho doubt whatever remains in my mind that the same
primary class divisions are not only identical over vast areas,
and include numerous tribes and diverse dialects, but that also
wherever two systems of classes touch each other the members
of the adjoining tribes invariably know which of the neighbour-
ing classes is the equivalent of their own, and therefore the in-
dividual well knows with which class his own has connubium,
and he knows also, though perhaps not quite so clearly, the
marriage relations of the other classes and their lesser divisions.
Two interesting questions arise from an inspection of the
annexed table. The first is how marriages are arranged between,
for instance, a totem of Kilpara (Example Ho. 3) and a totem
of Ipai or of Kumbo (Example Ho. 4) and how the question of
descent is settled in such a case. The second question is how
descent is settled in marriages between Hos. 4, 5, and 6, for Hos.
4 and 6 have descent through the mother, while in Ho. 5 it runs
through the male line. Probably in such cases the explanation
will be found to be that as the woman goes to her husband’s
tribe her children follow the line of descent it counts by in the
case of the totem or class which is equivalent to hers. 4
The Primary Class Divisions were once Totems.
I have elsewhere assumed that the class systems as we now
find them are the results of a process of development by which
the primary social divisions were sub-divided. 5 This does not
attempt to explain why it is that the primary class divisions
have names, which, in certain cases have no other meaning as
words, while in other cases they are clearly the analogues of
the totems or apparently their prototypes.
1 See p. 64. Information furnished by Mr. A. Tj. P. Cameron.
2 Information furnished by Mr. Lethbridge of Forest Yale.
3 Information furnished by Mr. James Lalor, M.A., of Roma.
4 The three class-systems here spoken of as equivalents are Nos. 4, 5, 6, in
Table A.
5 “Notes on the Australian Class Systems.” “Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,” May,
1883.


TABLE A.
Table Shoving the Equivalence oe the Peimaev Class Divisions. 1
No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
No. 4
No. 5
No. 6
w
Buandik ,, ,.
Wotjoballuk..
Barkinji ,.
Xamilaroi • • ..
Kaiabara
Wakelbura
o
g
H
Mount Gambler, S.A.
Wimmera Eiver, Y.
Darling Eiver, N.S.W.
Gwydir Eiver, N.S.W.
Bunya Mountains, Q.
Belyando Eiver, Q.
Kroki .. =
Krokitcb .. =
Kilpara .. =
Kupathin{g^ bo } =
Kupatine{^™ n } =
{fit 1 *
Cb
Kumit,. .. ==
Gamutch ,, —
Makwara ., =
{S}-
{Si}-
Wuthera {^," ng °
OK
Qb
Co
O
£
1 In this might be added Bunjil = Kroki, and Waa=Kumit, according to Mr. A. L. P. Cameron s Nos. 1,2, 3 identified by personal enquiries
£
C5.
by myself. No. 4 identified by Mr. Cyrus Doyle, late of Kunopia, N.S.W. No. 5 by Mr. Jocelyn Brooke, Sub-Inspector of Native Police,
Queensland. No. 6 by Mr. J. C. Muirhead, of Elgin Downs, Queensland. The equivalence of Nos. 4, 5, and 6 has also been determined by Mr.
James Lalor, M.L.A. of Kubberamunda, in Southern Queensland,


It might be reasonably expected that if the class systems
have been subject to a process of development extending
necessarily over great periods of time the changes which lan-
guage underwent should leave some traces in the names of the
classes, which would be likely to remain long after the language
had altered. They might be perpetuated as names not having
any meaning apart from the classes. This seems to me to be
indicated by the fact that over a large part of Eastern Australia
the names of the primary classes and sub-classes are the same
under slight variations, whereas the languages of the tribes
using them are more or less divergent, and often so much so as
to be unintelligible to any but the tribe to which the language
belongs, or to the few linguists who are found in each tribe.
In a large area of country wherein the four sub-classes are
not found, the primary classes have names which convey a
meaning as words independently of their signification as class
names. They are in fact in such cases totems which each
apply to one moiety of the tribe. Along the Darling Eiver, up
the Murray Eiver over a large part of Eastern Victoria, and
through Maneroo, in New South Wales, the meaning of the two
primary class names is almost everywhere Eaglehawk and Crow.
In some instances the names are the words for those birds,
whilst in others there are synonyms which are more frequently
used in speaking of these birds.
If the supposition is correct that in the primary divisions we
may recognize the oldest forms, and in the four subdivisions
somewhat newer forms of totems, it should be found that these
earlier divisions show signs of antiquity as compared with the
totems which are, according to this hypothesis, the nearest to the
present time. This, I think, is the ease. The totems are in all
cases words forming part of the living language of the tribe
divided by them. They are also invariably natural objects
found in the tribal country, and could not in some cases have
been brought as totems by the people when migrating in the
past from some distant part of the Australian Continent where
such animals do not occur. 1 In such migrations, Avhich must
have taken place since totems have been used, certain of them
must have suffered by disuse, or substitution by the absence in
the new country of objects to which the names belonged. The
totem name would be either lost altogether or some representa-
tive animal would be sitbstituted.
In the case of a primary or secondary division the totem
name might continue to exist as a name merely, as for instance,
1 Of course such totems as fire, water, rain, wind, the heavenly bodies, &c., are
not included in my remarks.


the names Dilbi and Kupathin, Krokitch and Gamutcb, Malera
and Wuthera.
The class name is general, the totem name is in one sense
individual, for it is certainly nearer to the individual than the
name of the moiety of the community to which he belongs.
The more proximate names would certainly be the most easily
modified, the more distant names would be those most easily
lost, or else would linger on unchanged. 1
In all these cases, however, it is necessary to bear in mind
that much would depend upon the line of descent when such
changes took place. I have observed that changes in the class
systems from the normal type are always far more apparent
where there is agnatic descent. Where this comes in the old
equilibrium seems to be profoundly disturbed. The primary
class divisions may be lost (Narrinyeri) or the totems may
have almost disappeared (Woiworung) or both may be wanting,
leaving only the abnormal totems the “ man’s brother ” and the
“ woman’s sister ” (Kurnai), 2 or finally the whole class system
may have disappeared (Coast Murring and Chepara).
Agnation is clearly connected with these later changes, but
some other cause must be sought for these earlier changes which
divided and again sub-divided the community under the law of
descent through the mother. At present I cannot see any
more reasonable cause than a profound feeling in the aborigines
against close intermarriage, or as they put it, against “ mixing
the same blood.”
This feeling is a very strong and living one in the Australian
savage. ItSTo one will be prepared to contend that it is an innate
one. It has been arrived at by their ancestors through a course
of reasoning which has satisfied them. Anthropologists will
have to modify their views as to the reasoning powers of
savages. They do reason, and granting their premises, their con-
clusions are strictly logical and correct. Those who have had
much to do with savages, and have got into their confidence
1 I have at present no evidence bearing directly on the change of totem name,
but I. am indebted to Mr. J. C. Muirhead for a case in which the tribal (local)
name has been changed. lie says in speaking of a tribe now called “ Mttnki-
bftra,” which was located at Natal* Downs and at the Cape Elver, “ I am not able
to state how this tribe came by its name or how the word Munki came to mean
sheep, but the following instance of an alteration in a tribal name may illustrate
the way in which such changes come about. There is at present a tribe living
about 60 miles south of Clermont having the name Wandali-bura. It was
formerly called During-bura when inhabiting Gregory Creek. For some reason
it discarded this place, probably because a Native Police barracks was formed
there, and is now called Wandali-bura from Wandali, = to loose, or to abandon
or throw away. At one time the Wakelbura (Wakel = eels) tribe was called
Orbul-bura, from orbul } a tuber found at the root of a small water lily.”
2 See page 50.


Primary Classes.
Totem.
Mtikwara
Bilyara—Eaglehawk.
Ttirlta —Kangaroo.
B urkunia—Bandicoot.
Kilpara
Ulebiiri —Duck..
Kami—Lizard.
KSlthi—Emu.
Turn —Carpet snake.
Namba —Bone fish.
Birnal —Iguana.
L
Bauanya—Paddy melon.
Yerilpari —Opossum.
find that they are perfectly capable of reasoning within the
limits of their experience.
I think, therefore, that there is reason for believing that
originally the primary class divisions were in fact totems, and
it might be well to abandon the terms “class divisions” and
“ sub-classes,” and, as suggested to me by Mr. Pison, to adopt
instead the terms “ major ” and “ minor totem.”
The Types under which the Class Systems may he arranged.
In a former communication I suggested certain formal delinea-
tions of the class systems. I have found these delineations so
very useful in working out the new details which have from
time to time come into my hands, that I propose to follow out
the same plan in this paper also. The formulas, if I may he
permitted to use that term, are very helpful in bringing into
view the similarities and the differences of the systems, and
thus also to enable one to mark what seems to have been the
process of development. Thus working, the arrangement of the
various class systems falls naturally under several “ types,” and
for simplicity I omit in them the totem groups in each. A
reference to the map (PI. V) will aid the reader in following
my statements in this section.
The Barkinji Type includes all those systems which have two
primary classes and a group of totems belonging to each, and
with descent counted in the female line. Abbreviating the
tabulated statement of the system 1 it will be graphically formu-
lated as having a community consisting of
A + B,
1 As a good example of this type of class system, I give the following which
extends over the Darling Elver from Menindie to Fort Bourke. I have given
the totems in their English as well as aboriginal forms :


1
[a
\ l
A 1
+ bJ
1
1
[y
Ipai
A Mur
B I
•
Kumb
) A a ' \^Kul
iB V
where A and B represent respectively the two exogamous in-
termarrying moieties of the tribe.
In the Barkinji tribe, and in others which extend over a vast
space of inland Australia, there is descent through the mother.
The Kamilaroi Type.—hi a former memoir I have given
reasons for believing the class systems of tribes which have the
“ Kamilaroi organisation ” to be a development of the simpler
forms of the Barkinji type. The Kamilaroi type of system may
be shortly described as one in which a community divides into
two primary classes, with four sub-classes, and with groups of
totems corresponding to them. Descent in this type is generally
in the female line. There are, however, exceptions which have
descent counted through the father, and which are of sufficient
range to form a separate type.
Bor an example of the Kamilaroi type of system I may refer
the reader to previous papers. 1 The Kamilaroi type can be
shown graphically by the subjoined formula.
While in the Barkinji type the descent runs direct in the
female line through the class names, it appears in the Kamilaroi
type, when one merely regards the names of the sub-classes, not
to run in the direct line. Yet when the two diagrams of the
descents are compared the principle underlying both is found to
be the same.
I have found the subjoined diagram very useful in bringing
before the mind’s eye in a concise form the rules of marriage
and descent in the Kamilaroi type of system. I give it in full
for the four classes with the letters attached corresponding to
the names as used in the condensed formula of this type. The
arrows point to the direction in which the marriages and
descents run in the one case used in the diagram, namely that
of the two intermarrying classes, Ipai and Kubi.
1 “Notes on the Australian Class Systems,” “Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,” May,
1883 ; “ Notes on some Australian Tribes,” Ji. Palmer, “ Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,”
February, 1884.


Barkinji.
Kamilaroi.
m A
m A a
/ «
/B b'
1
j
m and/-L B
1
m and / B h
&c.
&c.
Discarding the names and using the letters only, the sub-
joined diagram of the marriage of Ipai with Kubitha, and the
corresponding descent can be compared with the marriage and
descent in the Barkinji classes which are their equivalents.
The line of descent in both runs in the same manner through
the female line in the primary classes, hut where the suh-classes
are developed, it runs through that sub-class which with the
sub-class of the mother represents her primary class division.
The new arrangement is an ingenious restriction upon marriage,
thus forbidding one half of the intermarrying class in its female
members to any individual man, and moreover in thus removing
a moiety it removes at the same time the man’s daughter, who
otherwise would be of that class from which he could lawfully
take a wife. It removes from the possibility of marriage with
him ail those women who under the “ group relationship ”
system must be counted as his daughters.
The Waramunga Type}— Another most peculiar and interest-
ing class system has come under my notice. The community
is divided into eight intermarrying classes. That is to say, into
four times the number of those of the Barkinji, and twice those
of the Kamilaroi type. As this type of class system is a new
one to me, and as much interest attaches to it, I shall enter
upon some fuller details, showing how the eight class names
are related to each other. I have to thank Mr. Bison for most
valuable aid in working out this system from the data furnished
by Mr. Giles.
The information given by Mr. Giles does not disclose any-
thing showing that there are any other class divisions beyond
the eight to he mentioned, or that there are any totems attached
to them. This, however, does not in any degree prove them
absent, but only perhaps that they have been overlooked. The
fact th t the existence of the primary class names Dilbi and
Kupathin escaped the notice of many of our correspondents is
an instance enforcing extreme caution in drawing conclusions
from negative evidence.
1 Obligingly communicated by Mr. Allan M. Giles, of Tennant’s Creek, S.A.


Male.
Female.
Akamara.
Kakamara.
Ampajona.
Tampajona.
Unger ai.
Kamajili.
Apononga.
Napononga.
Opala.
Karila.
Tungeli.
Kungeli.
Kabaji.
Kabaji.
Apongardi.
Napongardi.
Female
Marries
Children are
Kakamara
Kabaji ..
TJngerai and Hamajili.
Tampa jona
Apongardi ..
Apononga and Napononga.
Kamajili ..
Opala
Ampajona and Tampajoua.
Kapononga • •
Tungeli
Akamara and Kakamara.
Narila
Ungerai
Apongardi and Napongardi.
Kungeli •• ..
Apononga ..
Kabaji and Kabaji.
Kabaji .. .. ..
Atamara .. ,,
Opala and Bfarila.
Kapongardi
Ampajona ..
Tungeli and Kungeli.
The Waramunga class names are as follows:
That is to say, the sister of Akamara is Nakamura, of Ampa-
jona is Tampajona, and so on with the other names, excepting
Unger ai.
The first matter to be disposed of is how the above eight
male and eight female classes are to be placed with each other
under the Waramunga laws of marriage and descent.
As to this, Mr. Giles gives full information which I have
tabulated as follows, assuming that descent is in the female
line, as is most frequently the case in Australian tribes.
The arrangement of the above in two groups, A and B, can
be now deduced from this table, on the assumption that they
are sub-divisions of two primary groups. I discard the male
names, and take the female names as representing the classes.
I commence with Nakamara A, who marries Kabaji; therefore
Kabaji is of the class B, and their child ISTarnajili is of the
class A. ISlamajili A marries Opala, who is therefore B, and
their child Tampajona is A also; Tampajona A marries Apon-


n
”1 ISTakamara.
'J
'3 Narila.
i
i Taanpaiona.
i
Nungeli.
A.
j
'2 ISTamajili
>
”4 Kabaji.
L1
_ii Napononga.
Napongardi.
Kupathin —>
3%S^
■" * Jir-\
Dilbi
gardi B, and their child Kapononga is A. Tinally Napononga
A marries Tungeli B, and their child is Kakamara A, being the
name from which we started. Here, therefore, we have the
following tabulated arrangement, which shows the eight inter-
marrying classes in two groups, and they also fall into couplets as
follows:
This arrangement is based upon the fact that, for instance,
Namajili is the child of ISTakamara, but ISTakamara is not the
child of ISTarnajili, as would be the case were we treating of
two sub-classes of the Kamilaroi type, but is the child of
Kapononga. The explanation is that ISTakamara + Tampajona
are equivalent to one of the four sub-classes of the Kamilaroi
type. Tor the sake of illustration this may be assumed to be
Ipai. Tor in a discussion of the principles underlying these
systems the equivalent names are of little moment so long as
the relative positions of the several names are preserved. It is
immaterial whether we assume Krokitch = Kilpara or Mok-
wara so long as we treat the names as merely expressing the
rule that the class A marries B and vice versd. On the above
assumption that Ipai may be taken as representing ISTakamara
-f Tampajona, the following diagram may be drawn out, which
at a glance discloses the relation of the Waramunga classes to
those of the Kamilaroi and Barkinji types. 1
1 I desire distinctly to say that at present I have no knowledge which of the
Waramunga couplets = Ipai. The future may bring information to connect
the Waramunga with some other system whose value is determined.


f A
1
m B
1
4
m
,. i
ana / A
2
m B
l
3
m
1
and/ A
i
m B
I
iv
rn
1
and / A
ii
m B
I
iii
m
1
and / A
i
&c.
Under female descent the individual reappears in the Barkinji
type of system in each generation, and in the Kamilaroi type
in the third generation.
The above tables make it now possible to ascertain what the
results would be in an inquiry to ascertain the reappearance of
the individual class name in the Waramunga type. It is imma-
terial which name is selected as all work alike. I take that
first to hand, namely, Nakamura, and I discard the names, and,
for the sake of simplicity use only the letters and numbers
attached to the formal table, premising that, as before, m=male
and / female.
The individual class name / A 1 (Nakamara) only returns
therefore in the fifth generation.
The Waramunga class system seems to me to add very great
weight to my former argument that the extension of the class
system into the Kamilaroi type was intentional, and not the
possible result of accident, but for the object of preventing those
intermarriages which the aborigines still regard as incestuous.
Abnormal Types with Descent through the Mother.
There were once tribes spread over the greater part of Western
Victoria; indeed probably also over the adjacent districts of
South Australia along the coast to the lliver Murray mouth,
which had a social organisation of a peculiar type. 1 So far as
I have been able to collect data, the various tribes referred to
were not all upon the same level as regards their class systems.
In some it seems to have been more complete than in others.
1 See p. GO.


A -I
fa [b
\a' + B-< V
L«" U"
The difficulty of the inquiry is increased by the decadence of
these tribes. Some of them have completely died out while
others are represented by miserable remnants.
I find the Wotjobaluk tribe of the Wimmera River to be the
best example of this peculiar type.
This tribe occupied a tract of country on the eastern side of
the Wimmera River, and extending northwards to the furthest
limit of the flood waters beyond Lake Albacutya. According to
my informants its class system was the same as that which
extended over other tribes located in the country from the
Avoca River, westward far into South Australia towards the
Lower Murray, and from the limits of the Wotjobaluk country
southwards to the sea-coast. It is certain that the northern
limits of this system of class names was about the Murray
River, where the names Kilpara and Mokwara obtained, and to
the east where the class names Bunjil and Waa were found.
I have given a detailed account of the class divisions and
totems, and therefore need only now refer the reader to it,
and to say further that they can be delineated by the sub-
joined formula, which shows the resemblance and the difference
to the normal types.
In this type, therefore, there have been developed six sub-
classes instead of the four of the Kamilaroi, or the eight of the
Waramunga, but there has not been attached to them the
peculiar alternating descents, which is their characteristic. It
seems open to conjecture that in this form we may see only
the Barkinji type with totems in a highly developed form.
I shall have occasion to refer to this in a subsequent section.
Systems counting Descent in the Male Line.
All the tribes of which I have so far spoken in this section
count descent in the female line. There yet remain, however,
other tribes which count it through the male line. As before, I
commence with that type which is the simplest.
A class system having two primary divisions only with totem
sub-divisions obtained over a large part of Eastern Victoria
(excluding Gippsland) and is best known to me in the form in
which it occurred in the country north and south of the Yarra
River, with the Woiworung tribe. The two primary inter-
marrying divisions were Eaglehawk (Bunjil) and Crow (Waa)
and there was one totem attached to the Crow division. Descent


was counted through the father, for the children of a Bunjil
man and of a Waa woman were Bunjil, and of a Waa man and
of a Bunjil woman were Waa. A marked distinction between
this and the Barkinji system, which it otherwise resembled,
excepting in the line of descent, was that the two major totems
were collected into certain localities, thus forming “ local totem
clans,” while with the Barkinji system the members of the two
class divisions w r ere scattered throughout the whole tribal
territory, members of each division, and of course also of the
rotems, being formed in the several local tribal groups. In the
Woiworung tribe, on the contrary, in certain localities all the
men and the children were Bunjil, the wives being Waa,
whilst in certain other localities the reverse was the case.
There is in this a remarkable instance of a profound alteration
in. the social arrangements connected with the change in the
line of descent, for it is evident that this class system is an
altered and partly decayed form of the Barkinji type. 1 The
class system of the Murring of the Maneroo tableland was of
this type but with less departure from the Barkinji form. It
had two primary class divisions, Eaglehawk (Merung) and
Crow (Yuckembruk), each with a numerous group of totems.
Descent was counted in the male line and the child took the
class and totem name of its father. 2 The members of the two
classes were not aggregated into local totem clans, as with the
Woiworung, but were as with the Barkinji distributed through-
out the tribal territory.
The Murring of the coast line had, however, with male descent
lost the class divisions, and the totems only survived as magical
names which were transmitted from father to son. 3
Examples of class systems framed after the Kamilaroi type,
but with male descent, are found in tribes over a considerable
range of country in South-Eastern Queensland. Of these the
Kaiabara tribe of the Bunya Bunya Mountains is a good
example. I subjoin the tabulated system so far as it has yet
been worked out. 4
1 “On the Migrations of the Kurnai Ancestors/’ “Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,”
May, 1886.
2 In “ Australian Ceremonies of Initiation,” p. 7, “ Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,”
May, 1884, I stated that the Ngar class divisions had uterine descent. This
was erroneous, as I afterwards observed.
3 Yet traces of the old law survive. No person may marry another of the
same name.
4 From data kindly furnished by Mr. Jocelyn Brooke, Sub-Inspector of
Native Mounted Police, Queensland.


Kaibaea Class System.
Primary Divisions.
Sub-classes.
Totems.
Kubatine ..
Bulkoin ..
Bunda ..
Carpet snake.
Native cat.
Flood water.
Dilebi
Baring
Turowain
Turtle.
Bat.
Lightning.
Male
Marries
Children are
Bulkoin ..
Turowain
Bunda.
Bunda
Baring .. •.
Bulkoin.
Baring
Bunda ..
Turowain.
Turowain
Bulkoin ..
Baring.
Kamilaroi.
Kaiabara,
to A a
m A a
7bT'
1
f B6'
1
m and / B h
to and /A «/
&c.,
&c.
& 2
An inspection of this table shows no difference from the
normal Kamilaroi type excepting in the names of the sub-classes
and of the totems.
It is only when one examines critically the rules which
govern marriages and descents that the distinctions come into
view. To show this I now give a tabular view of the marriages
and descents.
Using the same formula for this system as for that of the
Kamilaroi type, hut under the rules to be deduced from the
above table, the subjoined diagram of the marriages and descents
can he drawn out, and for comparison I have added that
illustrating the Kamilaroi system.


From these diagrams it is clear that with the Kaiahara
descent is in the male line, for the children are of the same
primary division as their father, and of that sub-division which,
with his own, is equal to the primary division. In the
Kamilaroi type the children belong to the primary division of
their mother and to the sister sub-class of that to which she
belongs. I think that we may safely assume that the Kaiahara
system is a development of that of the Kamilaroi type which
surrounds it on the north-west and south, and of which it is the
reeegnised equivalent.
Abnormal Tribes with Agnatic Descent.
Besides the tribes which I have now mentioned, and which
have complete class systems, or traces of class systems, there are
others which so far as can yet be made out have no class
systems or totems. An instance occurs on the southern coast of
Queensland in the Chipara tribe. Careful enquiries by a
competent correspondent in that district 1 seem to establish the
fact that this tribe had neither class names nor totems, for the
aboriginal informant upon whom my correspondent chiefly
relied was acquainted with the Kamilaroi class names, and
distinctly stated that in his own tribe there were none such.
This seems also to be further confirmed by the statements of
another correspondent 2 on the same coast line but somewhat
further to the northward, who informs me that he knew of no
such class names as those which obtain to the westward except-
ing in the case of a few individuals who bore them as personal
names. This suggests that in these two tribes (Chipara and
Turibul) the class systems had become extinct; just as the
class system of the Kurnai had become extinct, and as that of
the Coast Murring had also almost disappeared. It is remark-
able that all these are instances of coast tribes.
The occurrence of individuals bearing class names in a tribe
which did not have them as class names, is paralleled by the
occurrence of a family having the name of Bunjil on the eastern
side of the Bidweli country in Eastern Gippsland, where this
class name was otherwise unknown.
As a contribution to this part of the subject I have much
1 Mr. James Gibson, J.P., of Stanmore, to whom lam indebted for unwearied
assistance in a difficult enquiry.
2 Mr. James Petrie, of North Pine Hirer, who was intimately acquainted
with the Turibul tribe from boyhood, and who as being affiliated to it accom-
panied the Turibul to the great Bunya Bunya feasts, which were held inland at
certain times when the harvests of the fruit of the Bunya Bunya (Araucaria
iidwelli) occurred.


pleasure in being permitted to add as an appendix a valuable
critical analytical examination by Mr. ilson of the data
given by Bishop Salvado as to the “ names ” of the aborigines
near New Norcia in Western Australia. The original data will
be found in a paper presented to the Legislative Council of
Western Australia by the command of the Governor of that
Colony in 1871. I endeavoured to obtain further information
from Bishop Salvado, but I regret to say that my communica-
tion remained without reply.
The Totem Divisions.
The word “totem” which has been adopted from the well
known nomenclature of the North American Indians, refers in
this case to certain names which are borne by certain groups
or divisions of the social organisation of the aborigines of
Australia. This name which is borne by a whole group, the
members of which are considered as being of the same blood
and descent, is of course borne by the individual also. It is
inherited from the mother or from the father according as
descent is counted in the female line or in the male. Thus,
taking an instance from the Wakelbura tribe of the Belyando
River in Queensland, 1 where a man of the primary class Malera,
of the sub-class Kurgila, and totem Small Bee 2 married, he
would take to wife a woman who was of the primary class
Wuthera, of the sub-class Obu, and of the totem Carpet Snake.
The children would be of the totem Carpet Snake, but in
accordance with the rule of the sub-classes which I have
before referred to, would not be of the mother’s sub-class Obu.
but of the sister sub-class to it, namely, Wongo. The children,
therefore, inherit the primary class name and totem name from
their mother. When as in the Kaiabara tribe descent is in the
male line, the rule is exactly analogous, mutatis mutandis.
The individual bears the totem name as one of a group to
which the name is common, but besides this he has of course his
own proper individual name, which, however, is often in
abeyance because of the disinclination to use it, or even to
make it generally known lest it might come into the knowledge
and possession of some enemy, who thus having it might
thereby “ sing ” its owner—in other words, use it as an
“ incantation.”
Where there are two primary class divisions without four
1 Mr, J. C. Muirhead, of Elgin Downs, who has an extended and intimate
knowledge of the customs of these tribes.
2 I have throughout given the English equivalents for the totem names.


sub-classes, as in the Barkinji type, it becomes evident that the
totems are lesser divisions which form two groups, each of
which as a whole is equal to one primary division. I only
know of one case where the same totem occurs in both of the
primary divisions, and I am not certain whether or no in this
case it is an instance of two nearly allied birds, one of each
belonging to a class. Where the four sub-classes are found the
totem group which represents one primary class also represents
its sub-classes in common. Thus, again taking the Wakelbura
tribe as an example, the totem Carpet Snake belongs to both
Wongo and Obu, these being the sub-classes equivalent to
Wuthera, and so also with the other totems.
There is not any definite number of totems to each primary
class; on the contrary, it is often found on enquiry that one
class will have many more totems than the other, and that
moreover some one totem will be a very numerous one as to its
members — a very strong one ”as I have heard blackfellows
express it—while another totem will be borne but by few
people. This may arise out of several causes. There is the
possibility in all cases, where the investigator has to make his
enquiries from a few native informants that he may not have
had given to him all the totem names, for naturally the
informant will remember and give those totems with which he
has most connection. Thus he will name his own and those of
his father and mother, and of the group of women one or more
of whom he may lawfully marry, and of those people who form
the local group to which he himself belongs. The relative
number of the totems may become unequal, for it is quite clear
that a totem might be driven out of some district or even be
extinguished by a blood feud, for in such a case all the “ totems-
menwould have to assist each other and equally abide the
result.
The laws which govern the marriages of the two primary
classes, and the descents of the children in them, also find
expression in the laws governing the totems. But there are
variations in the application of the exogamous rule. In all
cases a person is prohibited from marrying another of the same
totem, or even of one of the totemic sub-divisions of the same
primary class. The fundamental law governs both cases. But
the general law which permitted him to marry a woman of the
other half of the community did not permit him in all cases to
take to wife any woman of the other moiety, but frequently he
was restricted in choice to a woman of some one totem. Thus,
still further restrictions upon marriage arise. Starting from the
1 “ Totemsmen ” may I trust be used in analogy with " clansmen.”


earliest restriction, namely, that of the Barkinji type of system,
where the choice of a wife is confined to one moiety of the
community, the successive sub-divisions into sub-classes and
totems produces a further series of restrictions, independently
of those which follow out of the action of the wide kinships
which arise from the system of group relationship of these
aborigines, based upon the original division of the community
into two intermarrying groups, each of which had a structure
which is now represented by the Pirauru groups of the Dieri
and other tribes near Lake Eyre.
It is interesting to note that the totems seem to be much
nearer to the aborigines, if I may use that expression, than the
primary classes. In many cases a man may not kill and eat his
totem, and it is a serious offence for him to kill that of another
person with intent to injure him. The totem is very generally
supposed to warn its human brother of impending danger. The
totems give occasion for certain magical dances at the initiation
ceremonies ; at the Jeraeil of the Kurnai the totem, “the man’s
brother,” is invoked over the novices.
The folk lore of the tribes is full of stories about the totem
animals and their doings. In these stories animals are the
actors, but they talk and act as would blackfellows. The
narratives often begin in this manner : “ A long time ago when
the animals were all men,” and with the Kurnai, indeed, such
animals are recognised as having been their ancestors, the
“ Muk-Kurnai.” 1
The Kurnai distinguish between those animals which were
“Muk-Kurnai,” and those which are only “ Jeak ” or “ meat,” and
no more. It is not easy to recognise with certainty from these
stories whether the actors in them are thought to have been
animals or men, whether it is the animals which were anthro-
pomorphic, or the men who were theriomorphic. They are men
and yet are animals, this is all that can be said, excepting that
in most cases they were more powerful, both physically and
magically, than men now are.
It is not to be said, however, that all such tales relate to the
totemic animals, for some relate to the supernatural beings also
with whom the blackfellow has peopled the land, the water, and
the sky.
I cannot say whether these tales have been invented to fit
the existing totems, or whether totemy and these fables have
had a simultaneous growth. Perhaps the latter is the most
probable; and this is certain, that when the aboriginal legends
purport to account for the origin of totemy, that is to say, the
1 “ Grreat-Kurnai.”


origin of the social divisions which are named after animals, it
is not the totems themselves to whom this is attributed, nor the
blackfellows, but it is said the institution of these divisions and
the assumption of animal names, was in consequence of some
injunction of the great supernatural being, such as Bunjil, given
through the mouth of the wizard of the tribe.
Very many of these tales about animals have been recorded
elsewhere by other writers on Australian subjects, and it will
suffice if I now complete these remarks by recording several
which are characteristic.
Among the Muk-Kurnai, or ancestors of the Gippsland blacks,
the Crow holds a prominent place, and it figures in one of their
favourite legends which recounts how Baukan nearly succeeded
in robbing the Kurnai of their fire.
The tribe being engaged fishing, Baiun, Baukan, and their son
Buluntut, 1 coming to the camp, took away all the fire, and
began to ascend to the sky by way of Wilson’s Promontory.
Beaching the summit, Buluntut threw up a string, made of
kangaroo sinew, which stuck fast to the sky. He then tested
its strength by pulling on it, when it broke. He then tried a
cord of the sinews of the Black Wallaby, which likewise broke.
Pinally, he threw up a cord of the sinews of the Bed Wallaby,
which held fast. Then saying to Bulunbaukan, “Hold on
round my neck,” he began to ascend the cord, Baukan carrying
the fire.
How, while this was going on, Wagulan, the Crow, had
observed the robbery of the fire by Baukan, and went in haste
to tell the Brown Hawk. He, hastening after Baukan, found
the fire thieves climbing up to the sky by the cord which
Buluntut had thrown up, and he hereupon swooped on them,
and striking violently with his wings, caused Baukan to let fall
the fire. This falling to the ground was seen by Bembrin (the
Bobin), who carefully blew it into a flame, and smearing some
of the fire over his breast, has remained thus marked to this
day. In this manner the Kurnai regained their fire.
Another legend of the Muk-Kurnai says how that long ago
there was a great drought. All the waters were drying up, and
the little that was left was drunk up by Tidelik (the Frog).
The Muk-Kurnai being reduced to great straits assembled, and
endeavoured to persuade Tidelik to give them the water back.
But he refusing, they next tried to make him laugh, so that he
no longer could keep his mouth shut, and the water would run
out. Some tickled his sides, and the Eaglehawk, the Crow, and
all the others danced before him. It was of no avail until at
1 Bulun = two. Baukan is a supernatural dual female being.


length Hoyang (the Conger Eel) came up with lakeweed hanging
round him, and danced on his tail. The sight was so ludicrous
that Tidelik laughed in spite of himself; the water all ran out
of his mouth, the lakes and rivers became filled again, and the
Muk-Kurnai were saved from perishing by drought.
A Wotjobaluk legend is as follows. The portion which I
give is part of a much longer story, all of which relates to
animals :
Two Brambramgal, who were the maternal uncles' of Doan
{Petaurus ?), were walking about and met an old man called
Gertuk (Mopoke), who had a water-hole of his own in the fork
of a tree, which no one knew of, and which he would not show
to any one. The Brambramgal watched him, and at last saw
him go to the tree and drink. Then they said, “ May the fork
of this tree close up over our grandfather !” 2 The tree closed
up and shut up old Gertuk with his dog in the hole. Soon
after Binbin (the tree-creeper) with two friends came that way
and went running up round the tree. Hearing a voice some-
where, they said, “ Where are you ? ” “ Here I am,” replied
Gertuk, “ shut up in this tree.” Binbin took his tomahawk, and
began to knock on the tree to find out where to cut. “ Don’t
cut there,” said Gertuk, “my forehead is there,” “ don’t cut
there, it is where the top of my head is,” and so on, until
Binbin got cross and cut a hole just where Gertuk’s breast was
and cut him badly. He pulled him out and laid him on the
ground. He was bleeding and nearly dead, but his dog came
and licking his wound made him well again. The mark in the
bird’s breast is where the wound was.
Then Gertuk being very angry got a kangaroo skin bag and
went about collecting whirlwinds until he had it full. Then he
tried it and finding it was strong enough to blow the trees out of
the ground he went in search of the Brambramgal whom he
found near Mukbili. 8 He opened His bag and let out a whirl-
wind. The elder Brambramgal caught hold of a light wood
tree 4 which stood fast, but the younger got hold of a pine tree 5
and was blown away with it to a place called Waitwait
Kalk. Being alarmed by hearing the noise of the bittern in the
lagoons he went away further down the Wimmera Eiver.
Meanwhile the elder brother felt very uneasy about him and
went for their mother. She, pressing her breast, sent the milk
like a rainbow falling at the place where the younger brother
1 JaramMp = mother’s brother.
2 Wine halehuk jadtjira ngapa ngauralc.
Let it close up fork grandfather our.
3 A place to the eastward of shown on the maps as Muckbilly.
4 Acacia melanoxglon. 5 Probably Callitris verrucosa.


then was. It was very far off. She and the elder Branibramgal
travelled all day and on the following morning she again pressed
out some milk which fell nearer to them, and so on day by day
until it fell quite near. Then the elder Branibramgal said
“Wait here, mother, while Igo and look for my brother.” He
looked about and found where his brother had been eating a
duck, and at length he came close to him but his younger
brother did not know him. The elder brother took care of him
for several days until a snake bit him and he died. Then his
brother being very sad said, " I wish that gum tree were my
brother! ” He cut it down and chopped a figure of a man out
of it, saying continuously, “ Get up and be my brother ! ” until
the log got up and became a man and recognized his elder
brother. Then the two went far away to the westward and
lived in a large cave until after a time they went still further no
one knows where.
The Woiworung had the following legend:—
The Native Companion 1 and Emu were black people. The
Emu did not like to see the Native Companion with so many
children. So he took all his own away and hid them except one.
Then he went to the Native Companion and said, “Why do you
let yourself be troubled with so many children—see how com-
fortable I am with only one.” The Native Companion replied
“ Yes, it is very well for you with only one—children are a great
trouble —only what can I do—l have so many ? ” “ You had
better kill all but one,” said the Emu. “ I don’t want to kill my
children,” said the Native Companion. “You take my advice and
you will be much better off,” replied the Emu. So the Native
Companion killed all Ids children but one. Then the Emu
brought all his out and said, “ See how much better off I am
than you ! ” Since that time the Native Companion has only
one child.
The Abnormal Totems. —Besides what may be called the
regular or normal totems there are others which are very peculiar
and exceptional. When working out the beliefs of the Kurnai
I found that their only existing totems were two, one being
confined to the males and the other to the females. These
totems, in fact, divided the community into two moieties of dif-
ferent sexes, and it was only after I had obtained a far wider
view of the class systems of the tribes of South-Eastern Aus-
tralia, that I came to see that these Kurnai totems are in fact
common under other designations or under other representative
animals to all the tribes mentioned.
In the Kurnai tribe the Emu Wren, 2 and the Superb Warbler 3
1 Grus ausiralasianus. 2 Stipiturus malachurus.
3 Malurus cyaneus.


are respectively the “ man’s brother ” and the “ woman’s sister.”
The Emu Wren is held to have been among the Muk-Kurnai of
olden times, when, according to the phrase commonly used by the
blacks, the animals were all men. 1
The high consideration given to the Emu Wren is abundantly
shown by the fact that its name is invoked at the Jeraeil,or
initiation ceremonies, over the novices for the purpose of in-
fusing into them the due amount of manly virtues as the
Kurnai see them to be.
Taking Gippsland as a starting point, I find in the coast
country extending thence to Sydney that the Emu Wren is the
man’s brother but associated here with the Bat in the same
relation, while the “ woman’s sister ” is the Treecreeper. 2
Totems of this kind no doubt extend far round the east coast,
for I find that the “ woman’s sister ” was known at Port Stevens, 3
and I have lately heard of it at Brisbane. 4
Proceeding westwards from Gippsland, totems of this kind
are found to have existed among the Woiworung. In this tribe
these totems were double, there being the Emu Wren and the
Bat for the men, and the small Nightjar and the Superb Warbler
for the women. Probably the same totems obtained among all
the tribes of -which the Woiworung were representative.
The Wotjobaluk of the Wimmera Eiver had also these totems
and thus show what were the beliefs of tribes over a vast area
of country covered by the class names Krokitch and Gamutch.
In this tribe the man’s brother was the Bat and the woman s sister
was a small Nightjar.
With these people these were real totems although of a
peculiar kind. They were called “ yaur ”or flesh, or “ ngirabul ”
or “ mir,” just as were the, totems proper. The only difference
was that the Bat was the brother of all the men while any one
totem was the brother only of the men who bore it as their
totem. The Wotjo said that the Bat was the man’s “ brother ”
and that the Nightjar was his “ wife.”
The curious custom of fighting about these totems seems to
have prevailed wherever they were found. I have narrated
elsewhere the Kurnai fights about them. 5 The Wotjobaluk give
1 There were also at that time animals which were women —for instance, the
Superb Warbler and the Leatherhead (Tropidorhynchm corniculatus ) whose
constant chattering is appealed to by the Kurnai in support of their statement
that it was once a woman. There are others, but these will suffice.
2 Probably CUmacteris scandens.
3 Mr. W. Scott, writing to me about the Port Stevens’ blacks, mentions “ a
Woodpecker, the black gin’s gimoi, or friend. The above mentioned Treecreeper is
often called “Woodpecker.”
4 Mr. James Petrie.
5 Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 201.


also a good illustration of this practice. They held that “ the
life of Ngunungimut (The Bat) is the life of a man and the life
of Yartatgurk (the Nightjar) is the life of a woman,” and that
when either of these creatures is killed the life of some man or
of some woman is shortened. In such a case every man or every
woman in the camp feared that he or she might be the victim,
and from this cause great fights arose in this tribe. I learn that
in these fights, men on one side and women on the other, it was
not at all certain which would be victorious, for at times the
women gave the men a severe drubbing with their yamsticks
while often women were injured or killed by spears, although they
were clever at turning these aside or even breaking them with
their own peculiar weapon. 1
Such fights also took place among the Murring and according
to Mr. Petrie also at Brisbane. Thus it is seen that this curious
belief in the two totems and the fights connected with this belief
extended over a large part of South-Eastern Australia, and I
doubt not that on enquiry it will be found to have a still wider
range. 2
Among the legends current among the tribes which were
treasured up by the old men and repeated to the young people
there are also some having relation to these totems which I may
as well record.
These legends as well as those already given were told to me
by old men of the several tribes, and I have endeavoured to
record them as much as possible in the manner in which they
were repeated.
The Coast Murring say that “ long ago, when the earth was
bare and as hard as the sky and without trees, Kaboka (the
Thrush) by his magic caused a flood to cover the land by which
all creatures were drowned except a few of the animals which
crawled out into the dry ground and became human-like
creatures. They were without sex until the Emu Wren
differentiated them into men and women by a curious surgical
operation.”
The Wotjobaluk also have a legend which relates that
formerly the inhabitants of the earth were like unto human
beings, and the Bat feeling lonely made the difference in sex
and thus having obtained a wife, made a fire by rubbing a stick
across a log.
1 Mr. Fison tells me that in one or two of the Fijian tribes there are occasions
on which the women fight with the men. The women are allowed to use sticks
and often inflict ugly wounds, while the men may only retaliate by slinging balls
of clay at them from the end of a stick.
2 Mr. A. L. P. Cameron speaks of these abnormal totems among the tribes in
South-Western New South Wales in “Notes on some Tribes in New South
Wales.” —“ Journ. Anthrop. Inst.," vol, iv, p. 344.


With the Woiworung the Bat (Balaiung) seems to have been
an adversary of Bunjil, and the following is a legend which I
have heard.
“ The Bat is the brother of all the men. A long time ago, the
whole country was covered with long grass so that people could
not walk about over it. Bunjil said to the Bat 1 Come and be
with us on our side.’ But he replied ‘ Ho, your’s is a very dry
ground, you ought to come over to me.’ Bunjil said, ‘ Very
well! then I will leave you alone.’ He then sent his two men
Djurt Djurt 1 and Thara 2 to burn the whole of the Bat’s country,
and he went himself with his children to a place near Mansfield,
called by the white men the Cathedral, where he put them in a
safe place surrounded by stones. The country was burned up
to the Murray Eiver. Bunjil had said to Djurt Djurt and
Thara ‘When you have burned all the country you can stop
there and be stone.’ They are now turned to stone near
Berwick, where yon can see Djurt Djurt carrying Thara. 3 A
few of Bunjil’s children were burned, but the Bat and all his
children were scorched. That is why he is so black and has
such a grinning face.”
It is evident that the institution of the “ man’s brother,” and
the “ woman’s sister ” as totems is very widespread throughout
Australia. I have traced it over an extent of about a thousand
miles, and in tribes having marked differences in language and
in social organization. It seems to be very persistent and
enduring, for it remained among the Kurnai in full force after
the ordinary social organization in class divisions and totems
had become extinct. What may have been the origin of these
abnormal totems I cannot tell. Possibly it may have been
connected with the origin generally of all totems, and to explain
the rise of totemism is as yet one of the unperformed tasks of
anthropology.
The Class Divisions have been subject to Development and Decay.
In the preceding sections I have given my reasons for the belief
that the primary class divisions were originally totems, and also
that the class systems as a whole tyave been developed by sub-
division of the earlier and simpler forms. There can, I think,
be no doubt that the present totem groups are the youngest, and
1 The Nankeen Kestrel, Tinnunculus cenchroides.
2 The Ikrown Hawk, Jericidea Berigora 'l
3 I am told that in old times before white men came, the blackfellows when
they wanted to catch plenty of kangaroos, used to go to these two stones, and
taking a bough, strip off the leaves and throw them down in front of “ Djurt
Djurt and Thara,” then laying the twigs on the leaves. This is the only instance
that I know of anything even approaching a votive offering.


Primary
Classes.
Totems.
Pseudo Totems.
Mortuary Totems.
Ngaui = the sun
Bunjil = a star, &c....
Wurtingani = a shadow thrown
by the sun.
Krokitch ...
Barewun = a cave ...
Batchangal = pelican,
&c.
Jalan = death-adder 1
?, &c
Berik = native cat,
&c.
Gunowara = swan,
&c.
Beal Beal = red gum tree. 2
Mitbagragr = the bark of the
smaller Eucalyptus. 3
None.
Gamutch ...
Ngungul = the sea ...
Wurant = black
cockatoo, &c.
?, &c
Ngui = black duck,
&c.
Jarnia = sea weed.
Darimuruk = a synonym of
the black cockatoo. 4
in some cases of systems framed on the Barkinji type the
primary divisions are totems as much as the totems themselves.
The belief that the class systems have been produced by a divi-
sion of the earlier groups has support given to it by traces of
the process which can here and there be recognized. A good
instance is given by the Wotjobaluk tribe. The two primary
divisions of this tribe are found over a wide extent of country
in slightly varied forms, probably dialectic variations; they have
as sub-divisions not four sub-classes as m the Kamil aroi type,
but six divided into two groups, and these sub-classes are, in fact,
totems. These again have other groups of totems attached to
them, for which in default of a better name I have used the
term “ pseudo totem.” I subjoin the data in my possession,
premising that there are details evidently still wanting. Enough
is, however, recovered to enable me to deduce certain principles
which, I believe, to underlie this system.
This system seems to he a peculiar development of the Bar-
kinji type. It has two primary classes which are recognized as
being the equivalents of the Barkinji class names. 5 But in this
case the totems have advanced to the grade of sub-classes. They
have a markedly independent existence, subject to their primary.
Yet there is not the restriction which is found in some of the
systems of the type named wherein marriage of a totem is re-
stricted to some other totem. In this case a Krokitch of what-
ever totem can marry a G-amutehgurk 6 of any of the totems of
that class, always provided that there are not any disabilities
1 Acanthopsis antarctica.
2 Eucalyptus rostrata.
3 Eucalyptus dumosa.
4 Dari = white, muruk = temple, or side of the head.
5 See p. 38.
6 Chirk is the feminine affix.


arising out of nearness of kin. Another peculiarity is that several
of the totems have a second name, which seems to have been
on the high road to separate existence, or which may be the old
name in process of extinction. Ngaui, for instance, has a second
name, Garchuka, 1 which one informant, a Ngaui man, claimed
as the synonym of his “ mir,” or totem, in fact, that both of these
“ mir ” were his names. But Ngaui was especially his, and
Garchuka came “ a little behind it.” On the other hand another
informant, who also claimed both Ngaui and Garchuka, said
that he was especially Garchuka, and that Ngaui came a little
after his other name. Wherein the difference lay I was unable
to learn more exactly, but it seems to me that Ngaui and
Garchuka are, in fact, very slightly divergent branches of the
same totem. This is, moreover, indicated by a remark made
by each informant as to the pseudo totems to which I shall
refer further on. Krokitch-Batchangal has also a second name
which, however, appears to be more a name than a totem. Its
members are called “ Darauyauun-ngau-ung,” or “ we are warm-
ing ourselves,” a name given to them because fire (wanyep) is
one of their pseudo totems.
I have given three totems of each class as examples, but there
are more ; of Krokitch eight, and of Gamutch at least four.
The pseudo totems are very peculiar. In a former work by
Mr. Fison and myself, these were referred to in speaking of the
Mount Gambier tribe. 2
The two primary classes appear in fact to divide all natural
objects between them. As the aborigines say of those things,
“ they belong to them.” This is not peculiar to these tribes
but is found at far distant places in Australia, and may be
much more general than has been suspected. 3
As the primary class is divided into a number of totemic sub-
divisions, so all the objects claimed by the class are divided
between these totems. Thus each totem claims a certain
number of natural objects which are not all animal, for there
are also a star, fire, wind, &c.
The distinction between the totemic names which are sub-
divisions, and those which are not lies in this. Both are called
“ mir ” but while one of my informants, a Krokitch man, takes
his name Ngaui from the sun, he owns Bunjil, one of the fixed
1 White cockatoo.
2 Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 168.
3 Mr. J. C. Muirhead tells me that in the Wakelbura and other related tribes
in Northern Queensland everything animate and inanimate belongs to one or
other of the two class divisions. A wizard may only use in his incantations
substances which belong to his class. The stage on which a dead body is placed
must be made of the wood of a tree which is of the same class as the deceased,
and so on with other matters.


4
O'
\ 4>. a
\ l h \ % ' 3 <£■/
\\ \% « //
XV Ve-
‘
Munya. \\ /X^S.
0 — ;; /■' N^aui.
•jl unS^____ —
9 / \ O \-
jr/ e * * X
4?/ W
x & V\
<7 S N c '
cp
11
stars, 1 and does not take it for a name at all—he is Ngaui, but
not Bunjil. The true totem owns him, but he owns the pseudo
totem. Light is thrown upon the structure and the develop-
ment of the class divisions by considering the mechanical method
used by the Wotjobaluk to preserve and explain a record of
their classes and totems, and of their relation to those and to
each other.
My informant worked this record out by laying down pieces
of stick on the ground, determining their directions by the sun,
and I took the directions of these sticks by the compass.
The stick No. 1 was first placed in a direction due east 2 then
stick 2 was laid down pointing N. 70° E. They represented the
two suh-divisions of the Ngaui division of Krokitch and the
people belonging to them or forming them were called “ Ngaui-
nga-guli,” or “ men of the sun.” 3 The direction in which the
sticks pointed indicated how the individual was to be laid in
his grave. That is to say, his head was laid due east, or 20°
north of east, as he respectively belonged to one or other of the
1 Probably Fomalhaut.
2 In the Wotjoballuk language North=Wartwut, by which name the hot-wind
is also known; East = Bopel Bopel; South=Wephr; and West = Winjur.
3 Ngaui = the sun, gttli or kill! = man.


sub-divisions of Ngaui. Kgaui is the principal “ Mir ”or totem
and from it all the others are counted.
My informant then placed stick 4 pointing north, indicating
a very powerful Mir of Krokitch, namely, Batchangal. Stick
3 was then placed between 4 and 2, and indicated the Barewun
people. The whole space between 1 and 2is called “ Kolkorn-
Garchuka or “ all ” or “ wholly ” of the White Cockatoo. I have
already said that this is a synonym of Ngaui, or nearly so. The
space between 3 and 4 is called Krokitch-Batchangal, to distin-
guish it from another Batchangal of the Gamutch primary class
which is represented by stick 11.
Stick 6 was now laid down, being Wartwut, the name of
a powerful Mir, whose totem was the Hot-wind, which blows, in
that country from about north-west. Stick 5 placed between 4
and 6 pointing N. 20° W. indicated Wartwut-Batehangal, a
totem having affinities to both 4 and 6. The space between 4
and 5 is called Kolkorn-Batchangal or “all,” or “entirely
Batchangal,” and between 5 and 6 the space is Wartwut-
Batehangal. My informant had now some difficulty in fixing
the directions for the remaining totems of Krokitch, and he
stated that to work it out satisfactorily he would require to get
a number of men together so as to have members of the other
totems to point out their own directions. However, after
consideration he arranged as follows : He placed 8 as indicating
Munya, and on either hand 7 and 9, indicating respectively
Moiwiliik, and a second totem of 8. The space between 6 and 7
he called Wartwut-Moiwiluk, between 8 and 9 Kolkorn-Munya
The space between 7 and 8 he did not name, and I omitted to
ask him. These nine sticks represent the principal totems of
Krokitch. Perhaps there may be more, as there appears to be,
for instance, a vacancy between 2 and 3 and between 3 and 4: on
the other hand if the totems 5 and 7 are sub-divisions of 4 and 6
respectively, the vacancies referred to would be explained on the
supposition that 2 and 3 had not sub-divided. That 7is a sub-
division of 6 is suggested by the statement of another informant
that he was Wartwut but that Moiwiluk also “ belonged to him,”
and by the statement of the informant who made the diagram
of stick that the informant just named was “Wartwut but also
partly Moiwiluk.”
It seems, therefore, that the totems have been formed in this
instance by a process of sub-division, by which for instance the
group Kgaui has been separated into two nearly allied totems.
Munya has also separated into two totems, which are dis-
tinguished, if not by separate pseudo totems, at any rate by
different mortuary names.
Since the totems are counted from Kgaui, and since Krokitch-


Batchangal comes next in order of importance, it may be that
Barewun has been a later development. As the space in the
diagram between Ngaui and Barewun is called. “ wholly
Garchuka ” it seems possible that Barewun may have been a
segmentation of Batchangal.
The synonym Garchuka for both of the Ngaui totems may
also mean that that name is the oldest of all, and that out of it
those two totems were formed.
Analogous suggestions arise from other particulars given in
the diagram.
The mortuary totems are only applied to an individual after
his death. Thus a Krokitch-Ngaui man dying would no longer
be spoken of as Ngaui but would be “Wurti-Ngaui” or “a
Shadow thrown by the sun f a Krokitch-Batchangal would be
Mitbagragr, or the “ Bark of the Mallee,” and so on. How this
has arisen I know not, but it may, perhaps, have been con-
nected with the extreme disinclination of these aborigines to
mention the name of the dead.
The tabular form which I have given of the Wotjobaluk class
system is imperfect, but the details suffice to show that it is a
somewhat abnormal development of the Barkinji type in which
the totems have obtained a marked prominence and have been
in process of further segmentation partly in themselves and
apparently also by the influence of the pseudo totems.
Cases such as that of the Wotjobaluk tribe show a process of
development in the class systems, but there are other cases
where there seems to have been a decay of the class system
tending towards extinction, and of these the Woiworung tribe is
a good example, because in it the process has been arrested by the
annihilation of the tribe by reasons of the “ blessings of civilisa-
tion ”at a stage when one totem still remained extant. Other
totems are recognisable in their apotheosis as stars, as recorded in
the folklore of the tribe.
I have had occasion in other papers to deal with this tribe,
to which I refer the reader for details. 1 The following are
details relating to my above statement.
It was one of a number of kindred tribes all bound together
by the same organisation. They occupied that part of Victoria
which may be roughly defined by saying that in addition to the
Western Port District it extended round the flanks of the
Australian Alps to the Ovens Eiver and northwards, westwards,
and southwards as indicated by the points Seymour, Sandhurst,
Bacchus Marsh, and Geelong. Beyond these boundaries were
1 “ The Jeraeil,” “ Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,” May, 1885. “Migrations of the
Kurnai Ancestors,” “ Journ. Anthrop. Inst.,” May, 1886.


Tadjeri .. ,,
Acliehjar
Phascogale pennicillata.
Ttlrntlng .,
?
Petaurus jpygmceus.
Yukope ..
a crucis ..
p
Dantiin ..
iS crucis .. . •
TrycTioglossus multicolor .
Djtirfc-djtirt 3
/3 centauri
Tinnunculus cenchroides.
Tliara ..
a centauri
Hiericidea Berigora ?
other communities distinguished by having on the north-east side
the Kamilaroi organisation, on the north-west, west, and south the
class organisation of the Wotjobaluk type, and to the south-east
the Kurnai tribe without any class names whatever. Within
the bounds named all the tribes had the two class names Bunjil
and Waa, and they constituted what may be called the “ Kulin
nation,” from a word found in some form in all their different
dialects and meaning “nian,”-i.e., one of their own full grown males.
The social organisation of these tribes was based upon the
above class names with descent in the male line, and the
distribution of the members of the two classes in local totem
clans, which I have before referred to. I cannot pretend to have
obtained a complete list of all the clans of the different tribes of
the Kulin nation, but the information which I have recorded
gives certain trustworthy data. Out of fourteen clans I find six
which were Waa and eight which were Bunjil. Marriage was
of course between the two class names, and therefore since- these
names had received a peculiar local distribution, or perhaps had
been locally aggregated, the marriages had become local as well
as totemic. That is to say, a man being confined to one class
name was also confined by customary law to the choice of a wife
from some one or more localities.
The class name Waa = Crow had no totems, but Eaglehawk
= Bunjil had one totem, Brownhawk = Thara. A native
legend recounts how Bunjil left the earth with his sons and
ascended to the sky in a whirlwind. Woiworung astronomy
points out where they now are. Bunjil is Fomalhaut and
as my informant said, “He is looking at what men are doing.”
The “ sons of Bunjil are shown in the subjoined table. 2
1 Spoken of at p. 59 as BunjiTs “men.”
2 My Woiworung informant used a curious aide memoire for Bunjil and his
sons, and he said it was used by his tribe for the purpose of record. The little
finger of the left hand is used for Tadjeri, the ring finger for Turnung, the
middle finger for Yukope, the fore finger for Dantun, the thumb for Thara, and
the thumb of the right band for Djurt Djurt. Here the record ends.
3 The Wotjobaluk say that Djurt is the brother of Bunjil, who was once a


The first column gives the native name of the totem animals, the
second that of the star. The star which is “ Turnung ” was
pointed out to me but I cannot now identify it.
The totems which Waa must have had seem to have become
totally extinct without leaving a trace behind. My informant,
who was Waa, and who was an extraordinary repository of
information relating to his tribe, knew of none. I am con-
vinced that had there been any legend about the “ sons,” that is
to say, the totems of Waa, he would have known it.
The Woiworung class system when it existed in a complete
form, must have been precisely that of the Barkinji type —that
is, it had two primary intermarrying classes (Eaglehawk and
Crow), each having a group of totems attached to it.
I submit that the instances which I have given shew that we
may still find traces in the class systems both of development
and of decay tending towards extinction.
Conclusion ,
In these notes I have placed on record additional facts as
to the structure and geographical range of the class systems
of tribes spread over almost the whole of the eastern half of
the Australian Continent. I submit with some little con-
fidence that the comparison of the different systems suggests
a probable explanation of the development of the more com-
plicated systems from the more simple ones. The structure of
these systems suggests also that their arrangement with so
remarkable a system of checks upon marriage has not been a
matter of accidental occurrence, or, if I may use the expression,
of the automatic development of their society, but of deliberate
arrangement by a long succession of the aborigines in the past,
who have thus endeavoured to bring their matrimonial arrange-
ments into accord with that which they believed to be right
and proper, and for the welfare of the community.
But while a comparative study of these systems reveals to us
with some certainty their structure and the manner of their
development, it leaves us in uncertainty as to the causes which
led to their first inception, the manner in which the two primary
divisions were formed, and the character of the more primitive
society out of which the two intermarrying classes grew. It
may be a matter of inference that the earlier group was what
we have elsewhere spoken of as an “ undivided commune,” and
man on the earth and who is now a star. Bunjil’s two wires were G-unowara =
Swan. With the Woiworuug Bunjil is Pomalhaut and his two wives are 7 and
f Pisois.


that it would resemble one of the two exogamous groups of the
Pirauru practice, in so far that each level generation had its
marital rights in common, and as a whole was the parent of the
next following generation.
It seems indeed that some such earlier community is implied
by the establishment of the two primary class divisions. Yet
their segmentation, if I may use that word, must have occurred
at so early a period of man’s history as to admit of the resulting
social organisation of two exogamous classes being carried over
the whole of the earth’s surface wherever savage man has
penetrated.
Such a conclusion seems to me to be forced upon one by the
prevalence of this organisation over the whole world arranged
into some form of intermarrying exogamous groups analogous to
those of the Australians.
On this view it may be hopeless to expect to find any record
of the causes which led to the origin of the two classes, or if
we find any tradition which purports to give an explanation it
is one which attributes it to a supernatural agency.
As to the origin of the totem names, I do not venture upon
an explanation. I find no data at present upon which I feel
it safe to generalise. All that I think I may venture upon is,
that if the two first intermarrying groups had distinguishing
names, they were probably those of animals and their totems,
and, if so, the origin of totemism would be so far back in the
mists of the ages as to be beyond my vision.
If others feel that they have a clearer vision, well and good,
but it will be well to bear in mind that no explanation of the
origin of totems and of totemism will suffice which ignores the
Australian evidence as to the development of aboriginal society
out of a status at least as primitive as that of the Pirauru group.
Still less will it avail to deny the existence of the “ intermarry-
ing classes,” or to assert that “ they are a hypothesis only.” 1
They are facts patent to all inquirers, and any one who chooses
can examine them for himself.
Shortly stated, the conclusions to which the facts recorded in
these notes have led me are as follow:—-
(1.) The class systems of Australia have been developed from
the original division of a community into two exogamous groups,
each one being of the Pirauru character, and with descent
counted through the mother only.
(2.) The gradual development of the various class systems
has been accompanied by changes in the status of marriage and
in the line of descent.
1 J. F. McLennan’s “ Studies in Ancient History.” New edition, edited by D.
McLennan. Appendix, p. 315.


Class
May not marry
Palarop
Jirajiok, Palarop.
Nokongok ..
Jirajiok, Nokongok.
.Tirajiok
Jirajiok, Palarop, Nokongok.
Mondorop..
Tirarop, Mondorop.
Tondorop ,.
Tirarop, Tondorop.
Tirarop
Tirarop, Tondorop, Mondorop.
(3.) With the decay of the Pirauru practice, and the establish-
ment of individual marriage, the line of descent has been changed
from the mother to the father only.
(4.) With individual marriage and descent in the male line,
the tendency has been for the class organisation to become
extinct, and for the organisation in local groups to take its
place.
(5.) Among the many causes producing social changes must
be counted the influence of a more plentiful food supply in
better watered districts.
Appendix.
The New Norcia Marriage Laws.
Bishop Salvado, of the Catholic Mission at New Norcia,
Western Australia, shews the marriage regulations of the abo-
rigines in that locality by means of an ingeniously arranged
tree, 1 which is reproduced by Mr. G. W. Eusden in his “ History
of Australia,” vol. i, p. 117. The reader is referred to Mr.
Kusden’s work as being more accessible than Salvado’s.
The New Norcia tribe is divided in six classes, its system
therein differing from that found among the West Australian
natives in the neighbourhood of the N.W. Cape, which is of
the four-class Kamilaroi type, with the usual arrangements as
to marriage and descent.
The six classes are called, respectively, Palarop, Nokongok,
Jirajiok, Mordorop, Tondorop, and Tirarop. Their marriage
prohibitions are exhibited in the following table: —
A glance at this table shows that the six classes range them-
selves into two sets of three each, and the prohibitions reveal
1 “ Information respecting the Habits and Customs of the Aboriginal Inhabi-
tants of Western Australia.” Presented to the Legislative Council by His
Excellency’s commands. Printed by the Government Printer, Perth, W.A.,
1871.


Primary Class A.
Marries
Primary Class B.
Marries
Palarop
1
Mondorop B.
Tondorop B.
Tirarop B.
Nokongok A.*
Mindorop
■
.
Palarop A.
Nokongok A.
Jirajiok A.
Tondorop B.*
Nokongok
Mondorop B.
Tondorop B.
Tirarop B.
Palarop A.*
Tondorop
Palarop A.
Nokongok A
Jirajiok A.
Mondorop B.*
Jirajiok |
Mondorop B.
Tondorop B.
Tirarop B.
Tirarop
Palarop A.
Nokongok A.
Jirajiok A.
an exogamous law, which is strictly binding upon every class,
and partially binding upon each set. A clear distinction be-
tween the two sets is thus arrived at; in fact, each set repre-
sents a primary class, like Dilbi or Kupathin of the Kamilaroi,
but with three sub-classes belonging to it, instead of two, as in
the Kamilaroi system. Distinguishing these primary classes as
A and B, we have :
A = Palarop, jSTokongok, Jirajiok.
B = Mondorop, Tondorop, Tirarop.
In the following table the marriages are shown, those which
offend against the usual exogamous law of the primary classes
being distinguished thus *.
Erom the foregoing we get the social organisation of the tribe
which is as follows :
(1.) Two primary classes.
(2.) Each primary class has three exogamous sub-classes, any
one of which may marry into any sub-class of the other primary
division.
(3.) In each primary class two of the sub-classes intermarry
with one another as well as with all those of the other primary
division.
It will be observed that one sub-class in each primary
division (Jirajiok A, Tirarop B) marries only into the other
division. That is to say, these two sub-classes observe the
usual exogamous rule of the primary classes, and the question is,
why the other sub-classes do not observe it ? One or two


conjectural solutions of this problem might he offered; but our
experience in these researches has made us shy of such solutions
how plausible soever they may appear. If we knew the regula-
tions as to descent and the totemic divisions of the sub-classes
(supposing them to exist here as elsewhere) we should probably
find in them much to help ns. Unfortunately Dr. Salvado not
only does not give these particulars, but he turns a deaf ear to
our appeals for information concerning them, and all our efforts
to obtain the information from other sources have been equally
unsuccessful.
Lokimee Fison.
Description of Plate V.
Sketch map of Australia, showing the geographical distribution
of the various class-systems.
[Re-printed from the Journal of the Anthropological Institute) August , 1888.]
Harrison and Sons , Printers in Ordinary to Her Majesty, St. Martin’s Lane .


Jotirn. Anthropolog. Inst. ,Vbl. XVIII.P1 .V.
| 110 120 130~ I 140 ISO j
I - , 10 |
. ' W 1' S T
r * a;l jj
i J5arkinju type.. KamUarcv type*. Wararnungt*. Abnormal type. AhrwrntuL type,, Abnormal tribes, ' ls " /
| \ type.. \ (Maternal descent) (PaumaL\descent) (no doss divisions.) fir
_ HO 120 Longitude East 130 from Greenwich 140 150 160
Edw°- Weller, lith.






