

G&N pediqree SEEDS
CIPPSLAND & NORTHERN CO-OP. CO. LTD.
SEED DEPARTMENT 492-4 FLINDERS LANE MELSOURNE C.I (REC. OFFLCE)


INDEX
Page
Alsyke Clover 37
Ambercane 51
Barley 58
Bacchus Marsh Sub-Clover . 12, 36
Barrel Clover 36
Beans 67
Beet (Silver) 55
Beet (Sugar) 55
Berseem Clover 38
Birdsfoot Trefoil 37
Bokhara Clover 39
Breeding Table 57
Burr Clover 39
Browntop Grass 21
Carrots (Field) 55
Certified Seeds .... 6,7, 12, 13, 18
Championship Cattle . . .. 30, 31
Chewing’s Fescue 23
Chou Moellier 46
Clovers
13, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41
Cluster Clover 40
Cocksfoot 22, 23
Control of Weed's . . 60, 61, 62, 63
Couch Grass 21
Cowgrass 38
Cow Peas .54
Creeping Bent 21
Crested Dogstail 21
Crimson Clover 40
Danish Cocksfoot 23
Drooping-flowered Glover . . . . 40
“Dwalganup” Sub. Clover .... 35
English Trefoil 40
Erosion Control 8
Farmers’ Seed Sowing Table .. 4
Field Peas 57
Field Pumpkins 65
Field Carrots .. .. 55
Fodder Conservation 66
Garden Peas 67
Giant Colonial Cowgrass ... . 38
Grass Roots 42
Grasses 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29
Grasses Control Erosion 8
Green Manuring Crops .. . . 56, 67
Hard Fescue 25
Hawke’s Bay Strain Ryegrass 18, 19
Hedees 58
Impheo 51
Introduction 1
Insect Pests of Pastures .. 10, 17
Italian Ryegrass 19
Japanese Millet 60
Kale 46, 47
Kentucky Blue Grass 23
Kikuyu Grass .. 28
Page
Lamb’s Tongue .. 27
Lawn Grass 26
Lime and Better Pastures .... 43
Lotus Angustissimus 39
Lotus Corniculatus 37
Lotus Major 39
Lucerne 52, 53
Mangels 54
Marrow-stemmed Kale 46
Meadow Foxtail ~ 25
Meadow Fescue . . . 25
Measuring a Field 55
Melilotus Indica 40
Mixed Pastures 15, 16, 17
Mt. Barker Sub. Clover 34
Mustard (White) 44, 45
Native Grasses ~ 28
Noxious Weeds Control 60
N.Z. Cert. Perennial Ryegrass 18, 19
N.Z. Grown Ryegrass 19
N.Z. White Clover 13
Number of Plants per acre .. 56
Number of Seeds to pound .... 57
Oats ,• 59
Onions 55
Ornamental Trees .. 68
Pacey’s Perennial Ryegrass .... 19
Packing, Despatch, etc 2
PARCELS RATES .... .. Cover iii
Paspalum Compressum 25
Paspalum Dilatatum 24
Paspalum Distichum 42
PASSENGER TRAIN RATES
Cover iii
Pastui’e Culture .. ,( '5
Pasture Improvement,(Pictorial) 11
Pasture Experimental Work in
Victoria 14
Peanuts . 67
Peas 57, 67
Permanent Pastures . . 5, 16, 16, 17
Permanent Pasture Mixtures
15, 16, 17
Pests of Plants ........ 10, 17
Phalaris Tuberosa 29
Planters’ Friend 51
Poa Aquatica 42
Prairie Grass _. . . . 25
Pumpkins (Field) 55
Quality in Pasture Seeds .... 9
Rape 44, 45
Red Clover 38
Red (Montgomery) 88
Rhodes Grass 27
Rib Grass 27
Rough Stalked Meadow Grass .. 25
Root Crops 54, 55
Ryecorn 69
Rye Grasses ... 6,7, 18, 19, 20, 32
NON - WARRANTY
Page
Sacealine 51
Seed Grain 58, 59
Seed Maize 58
Seed Mixtures 15, 16, 17
Seed Potatoes 59
SEED SOWING TABLE .... 4
Service Behind! G. & N 2
Sheep’s Fescue 26
Sheep’s. Burnet .. 27
Sheep’s Trefoil 41
Shelter Trees 68
Show Champions 30, 31
Shrubs 68
Silver Beet 55
Soil Erosion 8
Sorghums 51
Sudan Grass 49
Sowing Calendar 3
Soy Beans 54
Special Mixtures .. .. 15, 16, 17
Strawberry Clover 41
Subterranean Clover
12, 33, 34, 35, 36
Suckling Clover 41
Sugar Beet 55
Summer Fodders 48
Swamp Grasses 42
Swede Turnip 54
Sweet Clover 39
Sweet Vernal 27
Tallarook Sub-Clover 35
Tall Fescue 26
Tares or Vetches 56
Tall Meadow Oat Grass 28
T.H. Kale 47
Tick or Horse Beans 56
Timothy Grass 27
Topdressing Notes 26
Trees, Shrubs, etc 68
Trefoil (Birdsfoot) 37
Trefoil (English) 40
Turnips 54
Vegetative Cover in Erosion Con-
trol 8
Victorian Certified Sub. Clovers 12
Victorian Cocksfoot 22
Victorian Grown Perennial Rye-
grass 6,7, IS
Wallaby Grass 28
Weeds 60, 61, 62, 63
Western District Ryegrass .... 19
Western Wolths Ryegrass .... 19
Wheat 59
White Clover (Certified) .. 13, 41
White Dutch Clover 41
Wimmera Ryegrass . . .. 20, 32, 33
Wood Meadow Grass 28
Yellow Sand Clover 39
Yorkshire Fog Grass 27
All trar seeds, plants, bulbs and tubers are offered and sold subject to the following Conditions of Sale as laid down by the
Seed Merchants' Association of Victoria: “The description under which our seeds, plants, bulbs, and tubers are sold signifies no
.4 more than that we believe they have been taken from reliable stocks, and in no case docs the description signify that the resultant |k
crop will grow true to oar description. Owing to many difficulties beyond human control and other causes, we give no warranty,
express or implied, as to the description, growth, quality, purity or productiveness of the seed or other goods, and will not be W
responsible for the resultant crop. Moreover, the liability (if any) in respect of the goods actually delivered is limited to the price
paid to us for the specific seed or other goods in respect of which any claim may be made, or £5, whichever is the greater. If
these Conditions of Sale are not acceptable, the buyer must immediately return the goods.”


Unsu rpas sed FOR UNIFORMITY
Farmer Frank is the registered character for
G. & N. Pedigree Seeds (Registered), Class 46,
No. 69645.
IK
NIFORMITY in seed quality is possible only by
careful choice of select stocks, and by recleaning the
seed to eliminate inert matter and noxious weed seeds.
FOR your protection, many of the common weeds which
are worthless, are illustrated, and their control dealt
with, on Pages 60, 61, 62, and 63. It will pay you to
know these pests which cost Australia millions .of
pounds annually.
SAFEGUARD your crop by sowing seeds of quality.
Remember, long before G. & N. Pedigree Seed reaches
your drill, it must prove to us its character, quality, type
and cleanness. It must be uniform in every way in
order that germination is uniform and that the crop,
from the green shoot to the mature stage, is uniform
in growth.
FOR over three decades, G. & N. has studied the
interests of pastoralists and farmers, and has striven to
introduce only the improved pedigree and Government
Certified strains. It's an aim that remains unalterably
the same and is your assurance of quality. It has
applied scientific modern processes of cleaning seed to the
satisfaction of Government Officials and growers alike.
LARGE stocks of all seeds, backed by best values,
immediate delivery and intelligent handling of all orders,
is the reason why G. & N. has a reputation for service
that is also "Unsurpassed for Uniformity."
Yours for better crops.
[?]
yL Owing to spasmodic variations in market conditions it is difficult tc
quote prices in this Catalogue. However, a separate price list is forwarded
herewith, and, if you so desire, we will post you regularly current pri<*
lists. Watch G. & N. advertisements in weekly papers for latest prices,


The SERVICE G. & N. Offers!
An officer at work inspecting seed in section of G. & N’s. modern and
approved Seed Cleaning Plant. Every pound of G. & N. Seed is
subjected to this thorough cleaning process.
WE PAY FREIGHT.—On Victorian orders to the value
of £2 or over accompanied by cash, we pay freight to your
nearest railway station. In addition, we pay freight on
cash orders of £5 or over from New South Wales; seed
delivered to your nearest railway station. Packing is free,
and there is no charge for sacks. This concession covers
only Grasses, Glovers, Garden Peas, and Beans, but NOT
Tick Beans, Tares, Roots, Grain, such as Wheat, Barley,
Oat's, Maize, Field Peas, etc., or cheaper classes of fodder.
In the ordinary way, G. & N. Seeds are forwarded
F.0.R., F. 0.8., Melbourne.
Samples of any seed will be forwarded on application.
SERVICE.—It is G. & N.’s aim to give prompt delivery,
and all orders received are executed in time for the first
goods train available. It is to your advantage to order
early.
GOODS’ TRAIN LOADING DAYS.—We desire to draw
our clients’ attention to the fact that under the “nominated
days of loading system,” which has been in force on the
Victorian Railways for some years now, goods are only
accepted for despatch to country stations on certain days
and at specified times.
In some instances goods are only accepted on one specified
day a week, others two days, and others three days per
week, while certain stations have the privilege of a daily
loading from Melbourne.
Clients are recommended to make themselves acquainted
wilh their specified loading days, and, as far as possible,
With the ground ready for sowing, and seasonal
conditions becoming right overnight, it is then
JB you appreciate to the full the value of G. & N. s |Bk
"immediate delivery" guarantee. Always romom- WT
T ber G. & N. —"The Seed House with the Super
Service!"
to send their order accordingly to prevent a delay, over
which we have no control, arising. If unable to obtain
these particulars from the local stationmaSter, write us,
and we will gladly supply the information required.
Most consignments of 14 lb. or more are despatched per
goods train. The freight in this case is/usually much
cheaper, but delivery may take a little longer.
CONSIGNMENT. —We consign expensive seed, such as
Lucerne, Clovers, etc., at Commissioners’ Risk, but the
cheaper grades, such as Millet, Peas, etc., go forward at
Owners’ Risk. It is necessary for us to safeguard our-
selves, as it is only when consigned at Commissioners’
Risk that the Railways will recognize a claim.
INTERSTATE CLlENTS.—lnterstate orders have become
a specialty with G. & N., and large consignments are
being regularly despatched with every satisfaction.
NEW CLIENTS. —In the case of new clients, it is neces-
sary to know just how far credit can be given, conse-
quently it is ah essential matter that cash, bank or business
reference accompany the opening of a new account. This
procedure will save delay and expedite matters con-
siderably.
PACKING.—UnIess orders are accompanied with cash,
sacks and bags are charged for at cost, and will be
allowed for if returned in good condition within ONE
MONTH from date of delivery; details should be
advised by post. All seeds are charged at nett weight,
tare being allowed for the sacks. This is more to the
buyer’s advantage than to have the bags weighed in and
not charged for; which is the practice of many merchants.
When expensive seed is supplied this way (weighed in),
it makes the sacks a much dearer proposition than if they
are charged for, and nett weight of seed given.
NOTE.—When orders are accompanied by cash, sacks
and packing are entirely free of cost.
QUOTATIONS. —G. & N. are in touch with the best mar-
kets in the world, buying in big quantities and buying
for cash. We are always pleased to quote for largo
quantities of seed when we can give the farmer the benefit
of our special buying. When writing, please state the
approximate requirements. All needs can be reserved in
advance for delivery later, by special arrangement.
Any request of yours will have our careful attention and
supervision. Whether it be for supplying of seed, advice,
quotations or samples, the impressive G. & N. service will
be at your disposal.
For the information of readers the
★ TELEPHONE NUMBER of the Company is
M 3141-(9 lines).
★ TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS:
“Gippsnorth” Seed Dept., Melbourne.
★ P.O. BOX NUMBER:
Box 4313, G.P.0., Melbourne.
At considerable expense, this Company has compiled this
book in an effort to help and educate the farmer.
Its functions penetrate deeper than an ordinary seed guide
—its aim is to be a Reference Book that will contribute
towards better farming.
Might we propose you keep this book in your library?
Constant reference to it from time to time, as problems
arise, should prove of valuable and practical assistance.
L. W. Pattin,
Manager, Seed Department.
>&,.»&■« S m e> e e 0 0 p e 0 F~
Mmillis that pays i
V H it a a d a L ‘"^ , '' , ‘ , ''V) "V ti,'


SOWING CALENDAR
JANUARY Get all crops harvested and stacked as
soon as possible. Sow TURNIPS,
SWEDES, THOUSAND-HEADED KALE and KIKUYU
GRASS (roots only). Seedings can still be made of
SUDAN GRASS and JAPANESE MILLET. Late sow-
ings of PEAS and BEANS. Keep MANGELS well hoed,
also MAIZE, POTATOES and other summer crops. See
to insurance of stacks of GRASS and HAY.
FFRRTTARV Where February rains are good, sow
rr/LMAUfIIVI BARLEY, OATS, RYE and VETCHES
for early winter feed. Cultivate stubble and fallow and
prepare land for GRASSES and winter crops. Seedings
can still be made of SWEDES, THOUSAND-HEADED
KALE and KIKUYU GRASS (roots only). See that hay-
stacks are weatherproof.
MARPH Sow winter fodder crops such as BAR-
iUrtIW-'Il LEY, OATS, RYE, VETCHES; also
SILVER BEET, ONIONS, RAPE, etc. Prepare land for
LUCERNE crops for autumn seeding, also prepare and
plough land for cereal crops, and work fallow for autumn
seeding. Make silage of MAIZE and other crops for win-
ter use. Plant also TICK or HORSE BEANS.
ADR IT Sow permanent pasture mixtures of
IVIL, GRASSES and CLOVERS. Prepare
clean seed bed for LUCERNE. Sow BROWN SPANISH
ONIONS and CHOU MOELLIER for transplanting.
DRUMHEAD CABBAGE should be sown in seed beds for
transplanting, provided the soil is in good, friable condi-
tion. Plants from seeds sown last month should be planted
out. Sow RAPE for winter feeding or green manuring.
BARLEY, OATS, DUN PEAS, RYE or VETCHES for
winter feeding or green manuring and TICK or HORSE
BEANS, KIKUYU GRASS (roots only). Seedings of
SILVER BEET can still be made. Dig POTATOES as
they mature. Carry out and spread stable manure. Finish
preparation of land for main cereal crops.
M A V Sow CARROTS, RAPE, TICK or HORSE
iUtt. i BEANS, THOUSAND-HEADED KALE,
and in late districts intended seedings of GRASSES and
CLOVERS for permanent pastures should be completed
this month. Seedings can still be made for winter fodder
crops. Land for MAIZE, MANGELS, POTATOES and
other root crops should be prepared and manured. Trans-
plant CHOU MOELLIER and CABBAGE plants in rows
three feet apart. Push on with ploughing and sowing of
cereal crops and PEAS and BEANS.
TTTMF Sow BARLEY, OATS, FIELD and GAR-
DEN PEAS, VETCHES, RAPE, CAR-
ROTS, CEREALS, etc., for/early spring green stuff for
cows. Land intended for planting MAIZE, MANGELS,
POTATOES, etc., should now be manured and well
worked. Land to be sown later on with POTATOES,
MAIZE and MILLET may be drilled with stable manure
and well worked. Lift and store MANGELS, TURNIPS,
etc. Clean out drains and water furrows. Clean up and
stack manure in heaps protected from the weather.
TITT V Sow CARROTS, RAPE, and in late dis-
tricts, BARLEY, OATS, PEAS and
BEANS may still be sown. Fallow for POTATOES,
MAIZE and other summer crops; in early districts plant
POTATOES. Graze off early crops where possible. Trim
hedges.
“ Agriculture is
the oldest art
and the youngest
science.”
AITrjTTCT Work land where necessary for summer
nuuuol crops. Top-dress grain crops and roll
this month. Sow CARROTS, RAPE, MANGELS, GAR-
DEN PEAS and BEET. Plant also early POTATOES in
forward districts, and sow LUCERNE in mild districts.
MAIZE can be sown for fodder.
QFPTFMRFI? Sow MANGELS, FIELD CARROTS,
oiatirAuncrv onions, garden peas, beet
(SUGAR and SILVER BEET), RAPE, LUCERNE, TUR-
NIPS, SUNFLOWER, PASPALUM, SOY BEANS, and
KIKUYU GRASS (roots only). Plant early POTATOES
and work up fallow for the main crop. Keep fallow for
summer forage crops well worked up with the discs and
harrows. Push on with the fallowing in the northern
districts. Sow MILLET in mild districts.
OfTORFR Sow MAIZE > MILLET and SORGHUMS
UOIUUL/IV where late frosts are not prevalent, also
MANGELS, FIELD CARROTS, SUGAR BEET, TUR-
NIPS, PUMPKINS, RAPE, LUCERNE, PASPALUM,
GARDEN PEAS, FRENCH BEANS, SOY BEANS, COW
PEAS, and KIKUYU GRASS (roots only). Plant main
crop POTATOES in early districts and prepare land for
main crops in late districts. Work fallow.
MftVFMRP'R Sow MAIZE, MILLET, SORGHUMS,
mjvrdUDmv SUDAN grass, peas, french
BEANS, SOY BEANS, COW PEAS, and KIKUYU GRASS
(roots only). Plant main crop POTATOES and weed early
POTATOES. Cut hay and silage.
RFrFMRFR Sow RAPE, MAIZE for fodder; also
MILLETj SORGHUMS, SUDAN
GRASS, TURNIPS, SWEDES and FRENCH BEANS.
Finish planting POTATOES. Cut hay in late districts.
Cut OATS and BARLEY in early places. Plough fire-
breaks where required. Get stack yards and stages ready
for hay.
FOR TWELVE MONTHS OF GROWING SATISFACTION, SOW G. & N. PEDIGREE SEEDS
g^naH^fiKaiiaaß


Quantity
Weight
sold
per acre
per bus.
Amber Cane, for green fodder
(broadcast)
12 to 15 lbs.
60 lbs.
Amber Cane, for green fodder
(in drills)
8 to 10 lbs.
60 lbs.
Artichokes
4 to 6 cwt.
— lbs.
Barley .. ..
2 bus.
50 lbs.
Beans, Broad
2 to 3 bus.
60 lbs.
Beans, French. Beans, Horse or
Tick
2 bus.
60 lbs.
Beans, Soja (Soy), broadcast ..
Broom Corn
2 bus.
60 lbs.
10 to 12 lbs.
50 lbs.
Buckwheat. In drills, 4 bush,
(broadcast)
1 bus.
50 lbs.
Cabbage, Field (to transplant)
4 to 1 lb.
— lbs.
Canary Seed
17 to 20 lbs.
60 lbs.
Carrot, in drills
3 to 4 lbs.
— lbs.
Cattle Melon
2 lbs.
— lbs.
Cauliflower
4 lb.
— lbs.
Chicory, large-rooted, in drills .
4 to 5 lbs.
— lbs.
Chicory, large-rooted, broadcast
10 to 12 lbs.
— lbs.
Chou Moellier, broadcast .. ..
2 to 3 lbs.
— lbs.
Chou Moellier, in drills
2 lbs.
— lbs.
Clover (mixed with grasses) ..
4 to 6 lbs.
20 lbs.
Clover, alone
10 to 15 lbs.
20 lbs.
Clover, Birdsfoot Trefoil .. ..
10 to 12 lbs.
20 lbs.
Clover, Melilotus
12 to 15 lbs.
20 lbs.
Cocksfoot
14 to 2 bus.
20 lbs.
Couch Grass
10 to 12 lbs.
20 lbs.
Cow Peas. In drills, 15 lbs.
(broadcast)
1 bus.
60 lbs.
Danthonia ; .. .\
15 to 20 lbs.
20 lbs.
Grasses, mixed
14 to 2 bus.
20 lbs.
Johnson Grass, broadcast .. ..
20 lbs.
— lbs.
Kale, Thousand-headed (in drills)
2 lbs.
— lbs.
Kale, Thousand-headed (to trans-
plant) ..
1 lb.
— lbs.
Kikuyu Grass
2,500 roots
— lbs.
Linseed
1 to 2 bus.
56 lbs.
Lotus Major
3 to 4 lbs.
20 lbs.
Lucerne, broadcast
10 to 15 lbs.
20 lbs.
Lucerne, in drills
8 to 10 lbs.
20 lbs.
Lucerne, Tree
4 lbs.
— lbs.
Lupins
14 to 2 bus.
60 lbs.
Maize, for green feed, broadcast
14 to 2 bus.
56 lbs.
Maize, in drills
4 to 1 bus.
56 lbs.
Mangels
4 to 6 lbs.
20 lbs.
Melon, Hock
1 lb.
— lbs.
Melon, Water
2 lbs.
— lbs.
Weight
Quantity
sold
per acre
per bus.
Millet, in drills
8 to 10 lbs.
60 lbs.
Millet, broadcast ..
12 to 15 lbs.
50 lbs.
Mitchell Grass
2 to S lbs.
— lbs.
Mustard
8 to 10 lbs.
50 lbs.
Mustard, with Rape
i to h lb.
50 lbs.
Oats
2 to 3 bus.
40 lbs.
Onions
3 lbs.
— lbs.
Paspalum
10 to 12 lbs.
20 lbs.
Paspalum Compressum
5 lbs.
— lbs.
Peas
2 bus.
60 lbs.
Peanuts
30 to 40 lbs.
20 lbs.
Perennial Rye Grass
1 to 1J bus.
20 lbs.
Phalaris, in drills
2 to 3 lbs.
20 lbs.
Phalaris, broadcast
6 to 8 lbs.
20 lbs.
Poa Aquatica
3 bags roots
— lbs.
Potatoes
6 to 8 cwts.
— lbs.
Prairie
2 bus.
20 lbs.
Pumpkin, Cattle
2 lbs.
— lbs.
Rape, broadcast
6 to 8 lbs.
56 lbs.
Rape, in drills
4 to 6 lbs.
56 lbs.
Rhodes Grass
8 to 10 lbs.
20 lbs.
Rib Grass, alone
20 lbs.
20 lbs.
Rib Grass, with other grasses .,
2 lbs.
20 lbs.
Rye Grass
1£ to 2 bus.
20 lbs.
Rye Grain
2 to 3 bus.
60 lbs.
Sainfoin .. ..
20 lbs.
— lbs.
Sheep’s Burnet
20 lbs.
— lbs.
Silver Beet
4 to 5 lbs.
20 lbs.
Sorghum, for green fodder,
broadcast
12 to 15 lbs.
60 lbs.
Sorghum, drilled
6 to 8 lbs.
60 lbs.
Sudan Grass, broadcast
15 to 20 lbs.
60 lbs.
Sudan Grass, in drills
8 to 10 lbs.
50 lbs.
Strawberry Clover
From 1 lb.
— lbs.
Sugar Beet
6 lbs.
20 lbs.
Sugar Gum .
4 to 6 ozs.
— lbs.
Subterranean Clover
5 to 7 lbs.
20 lbs.
Sulla
20 lbs.
— lbs.
Sunflower
12 lbs.
28 lbs.
Tares or Vetches, alone
2 bus.
60 lbs.
Tares or Vetches, with grain . .
1 bus.
60 lbs.
Teosinte, in drills
3 lbs.
— lbs.
Timothy
30 lbs.
20 lbs.
Tomatoes
2 ounces
. — lbs.
Turnip, Swedes
2 to 3 lbs.
50 lbs.
Wallaby Grass
15 to 20 lbs.
20 lbs.
Wheat. In drills for grain .. . .
3 to 1 bus.
60 lbs.
Wheat, broadcast
1 to 2 bus.
60 lbs.
Yorkshire Pog
20 to 30 lbs.
20 lbs.
FARMERS’ SEED SOWING
TABLE
Sowing seed in 1940 is not the hit or
. methods of 1900, When Agricultural Science .
j& compiled an easy-to-follow chart, growers found
'W i( a valuable guide to maximum success and Hr
’ economy. Behind this data are years of close
study of conditions.
k- For economic sowing you can plant
two-thirds of these amounts, under
good conditions.
[?]


PERMANENT PASTURES
March, April and May are the main months for
A sowing in Victoria. Sow early for the develop-
meat of Clovers. As care and skill are necessary
x in establishing Permanent Pastures, these proven r
practices will be of inestimable benefit.
A good grass should be characterized by tha following
features:—(l) Permanence (particularly under stock-
ing) ; (2) succulence, palatability, and high nutritive
qualities; (3) vigor of growth and good carrying capacity;
(4) good seeding habits (generally); (5) resistance to
adverse climatic conditions (drought, frost, etc.). An
ideal pasture should contain as. great variety of good
grasses as possible, combined with leguminous plants like
clovers, trefoils, etc. Only by such a combination (that
is, the supplement of the carbohydrate content of the
grass by the protein content of the legume) can the ideal
balanced ration be provided.
In parts of Victoria, where the rainfall is greater than
twenty inches annually, the farmer will find it advisable
to pay greater attention to the laying down of pastures
sown with introduced grasses and clovers. This type of
pasture, when properly established, is far more produc-
tive than one where a “volunteer” growth of native grasses
and rubbish is allowed to assume possession of the land.
The seeding of native grasses is expensive on account of
scarcity and high price of seed and low vitality of seed.
The type and mixture to sow depends on the character and
amount of rainfall and soil fertility.
PREPARING NEW PASTURES
The N.Z. Dept, of Agriculture Journal says: “Full success
in the sowing of permanent pastures may be expected
only when the seed-bed is in a fine firm condition; the use
of loose lumpy seed-beds is certainly courting failure,
which though it is unlikely to be complete, is very likely
to be particularly costly in its influence on the returns over
a series of years. For instance, loose lumpy seed-beds
quite often are linked with failures of clovers, a poor
development of which is not'consistent with a vigorous
highly nutritious and highly palatable pasture. A short
preparation of the seed-bed does not allow of the natural
weathering of the soil which field practice has shown to
play a valuable role in the economical production of a fine,
firm seed-bed. If preparatory cultivation is not commenced
early enough, a ready alternative to sowing on a poorly
prepared seed-bed at the right time is sowing later on a
well-prepared seed-bed.
Another fairly common practice is to sow down pasture
immediately after the land has grown a summer fodder
crop such as Sudan Grass or Japanese Millet. The pre-
paratory cultivation for such a crop usually leaves the
soil in a fairly suitable condition for the reception of the
pasture seeds, and if the crop is fed off close, one or two
workings with a light cultivator and harrows are all that
is required before seeding takes place.
GENERAL CULTURAL OPERATIONS
The land should be well ploughed during the summer if
possible, and allowed to lie a short time exposed to the
action of the atmosphere before being harrowed down.
All weeds and rubbish gathered by the harrows should
be burnt on the land, and the ashes spread about. The
harrows should be well worked, and the soil reduced to
a fine tilth, so as to be suitable for the reception of so
small a seed as that of grass. A second or cross plough-
ing and harrowing will be amply repaid in the increased
luxuriance and durability of the pasture, as the more the
land is worked and enriched, the more food there is avail-
able for the plant.
If the land be naturally dry or in a dry district, it is
better rolled immediately after the sowing; but if there
Sheep in a G. & N. pasture of Rye Grasses and Clovers on the
property of Mr. Tatterson, Cran bourne.
is plenty of moisture it may be left till the plants put
forth the third blade, or later.
SEEDING
March, April and May are the best times for sowing in
Victoria, as there is then all the winter for the young
plants to make roots and stool out before the spring comes,
when its tendency will be to shoot for seed; but it may,
indeed, be sown in safety as late as August, or even Sep-
tember, if the season be a damp one.
On the appearance of rain, the seed should be sown as
evenly as possible, and covered with light seed harrows
or hush harrow. THE SEED SHOULD NOT BE SOWN
DEEP. A light covering is the best.
Do not mix seed with fertilizer until ready for sowing,
because when left to stand the manure has a decreasing
effect on the germination of the seed, in addition to burn-
ing it. In all cases a mixture appropriate to the type of
land and the quantity of the rainfall is essential for the
best results. The seed should be sown broadcast on a fine,
firm, and clean seed bed. Where weeds are bad, a bare
fallow should precede the sowing of the grass mixture.
MANAGEMENT
Heavy dressings of superphosphate, applied yearly in
autumn, influence winter development more than is
generally appreciated. Experience on many properties
shows that at the end of three years there may be double
as much feed during the period. Thus, a weak link in the
grazing year is greatly strengthened.
Upon natural pastures applications of 1 cwt. of super-
phosphate an acre are confidently advised. Regular
annual dressings especially stimulate winter growth.
The new pasture should on no account be allowed to seed
the first year, as the young plants are thereby severely
taxed, and their future capabilities frequently materially
injured; besides which, this maiden seed, when sown, has
a great tendency to lose its perennial character.
When it is convenient, the grass should be mown as soon
as there is sufficient cut for the scythe. Where this can-
not be done, a lot of young stock may be turned in as
soon as there is a good bite. We prefer first grazing off
with young cattle, because their weight is lighter, and
they are not so apt to pull up the young plants as are
full-grown cattle. Sheep are inclined to nip too close.
The pasture is ready for work, and the usual stock may
be turned in as soon as the plants are sufficiently strong
to withstand being pulled at.
Farmers are advised to guard against over-stocking, and
removal of mineral nutriments by leaching, and by losses
through live stock. Judicious grazing and regular top-
dressings will overcome the drawbacks.
[?]


G. & N. Again Appointed
Sole Distributors For
KYNETON RYEGRASS GROWERS’ ASSOCIATION
(Victorian Government Certified and Genuine Association Seed )
KYNETON PERENNIAL RYEGRASS
Cleaning an “Association" Crop
which is Government Certified.
This appointment, for 1940, is a clear indication
of G. & N.’s desire to be associated with every
progressive move for the welfare of buyers who
demand seed of certified character. It not only
reflects the confidence placed in the Company by
such an important Association, but also means
that G. & N.’s leadership for certified seeds, won
many years ago, receives another endorsement,
establishing beyond all doubt, that here is the
best source from which to procure superior, true-
to-type seeds for the establishment of productive
permanent pastures.
As sole distributors for the entire crop grown
and harvested by the Kyneton Ryegrass Growers’
Association, G. & N. are well able to cater for
their clients’ requirements of this well-known and
recommended strain. In order to receive the
genuine Kyneton Perennial Ryegrass Seed, certi-
fied as having been harvested from truly
permanent pastures of high quality, growers are
reminded to be sure and purchase from G. & N.
only.
The Kyneton Perennial Ryegrass is renowned
Many formers reading this announcement will
. recall the initiative shown by the G. & N.
jA Organization in 1937 when it became the first
Seed House to engage, in a big way, with the W'
' activities of the Victorian Certified Ryegrass Seed
Industry.
for its 4 P’s —Purity, Permanence, Productivity
and Palatability. Government officials commend
seed from this district because it has developed
under relatively low rainfall conditions, and,
naturally, is suitable seed for enterprising
farmers who wish to introduce ryegrass in their
pasture lands.
In Kyneton Perennial Ryegrass, buyers will
secure a long-lived strain of a definite character.
It is highly productive and persistent, adaptable
to climatic conditions and will grow in a wide
range of rainfall districts. The seed is well
known throughout the State for its great virility
and strength of character, and its many qualities
which enable it to stand up to adverse conditions.
Due to the extensive research and experience in
connection with the development of Victorian
Ryegrass Strains over the last few years, much
knowledge of the occurrence of our ryegrass
pastures and the ways to achieve long-lived
grazing areas have been obtained.
The high place that Kyneton Ryegrass has won
in the esteem of Government officials and agros-
tologists is the result of such investigations, and
is evidence of the individual merits of the plant.
By insisting upon genuine Association seed and
by purchasing direct from G. & N., farmers are
assured of Government Certified Supplies which
are accompanied by a certificate bearing a
guarantee that the seed has been harvested and
cleaned under strict Government supervision, and
that the seed comes from old established and
truly permanent pastures in the Kyneton district,
[?]


Victorian Grown Perennial Rye Grass
(GOVERNMENT CERTIFIED)
Critical tests at the Burnley Research Station
a have demonstrated the superiority of locally pro-
duced strains of Rye Grass. Regional strains such |k
as Ballarat, Clunes, Smeaton, Colac, Kyneton, BF
have all shown their persistency and productivity "
under local conditions.
In various parts of Victoria, Perennial Rye Grass of fine
type and quality is being harvested from old pastures, and
with the added guarantee and protection of being certified
for strain by the officers of the Victorian Department of
Agriculture. These strains have been naturally selected
by soil and climate and by special type of management.
Victorian Perennial Rye Grass is persistent and makes
leafy growth. Even in comparison with the best imported
seed, it makes earlier growth in Spring and slightly latex-
growth in Autumn, and as it is adapted to resist the
severity of Victorian summers, it consequently shows a
high survival under dry conditions. It yields palatable and
productive feed and gives heavy crops of splendid grazing
and hay value.
Examination of the products of Victoria’s old pastures
show_ the different regional strains vary slightly, but a
premium is put on the produce of the Clunes district
because it has developed under relatively low rainfall
conditions.
Remarkable instances of the seed persisting over a number
of years are presented in the Wimmera district, where the
rainfall is as low as 18 inches. All Victorian Certified Rye
Grasses grow well under favourable conditions, and they
make luxuriant growth in the higher rainfall areas of the
State and under irrigation.
Victorian Certified Rye Grass is harvested in various dis-
tricts throughout the State, but mainly in Ballarat-
Smeaton-Clunes, Colac and Kyneton districts. It is
reported that this year production is. likely to reach
80,000 bushels. An area of 15,150 acres representing 223
growers, has been registered, and inspected by officers of
the Department of Agriculture,
The areas include 8,400 acres in Clunes-Smeaton-Ballarat
district, 4,100 in Colac district, 1,000 in the neighbourhood
of Kyneton, and 1,650 in various other localities. Growers
can have every confidence that G. & N. stocks are of known
origin and quality. Look for the Government label when
buying, and prove the genuineness of the seed.
The seeds, which come under the Victorian Certification
Scheme, are the produce of areas inspected and approved
by officers of the Department of Agriculture, who also
supervise harvesting and cleaning operations. The work
involves paddock sealing of the seed off the thresher or
harvesting machine, and its subsequent final re-sealing
after it has been cleaned under supervision.
THE METHOD,
When a grower decides to produce Certified Seed, he must
apply to the Department of Agriculture for approval of
the area and examination of the plants in the paddock
from which it is planned to harvest seed. The seed usually
is submitted to a growing-on test before approval. The
seed comes from these areas, and is harvested, threshed
and cleaned under the supervision of a Government Officer,
who also affixes tags and seals to the clean seed and
certifies it.
A TRIBUTE TO VICTORIAN PERENNIAL RYE-GRASS
The Director of Agriculture, Victorian Dept, of Agricul-
ture (Mr. H. A. Mullet), speaking at the last annual field
day gathering at the Burnley Plant Research Station,
A typical stand of Kyneton-Grown Certified Rye Grass, noted for
its productivity and palatability.
stated that it has now been successfully demonstrated
that there is NO BETTER PERENNIAL RYEGRASS
SEED than that grown in Victoria on farms approved by
the Department and sold in containers sealed by officers
of the Department. He strongly urged farmers to sow
only certified seed.
WHAT TO LOOK FOR WHEN BUYING VICTORIAN
GOVERNMENT CERTIFIED SEEDS
1. Victorian Government Certified Seed carries a certifi-
cate of the Department relating to “strain” only.
2. It is borne on a tag which is threaded on the sewing
twine used to sew the mouth of the bag of seed. Both
ends of the sewing- twine are sealed (except in the
ease of small bags), so that the bag may not be
opened without cutting the twine or removing the seals.
A parcel is “sealed” only while it is unopened and the
seal and certificate remain intact.
3. The seals of tin or lead are circular, and bear the
words “Department of Agriculture, Victoria,”
4. In addition to the certificate on the tag, another one
is put on a slip of paper inside the bag before it is
sewn. It is exactly the same as the first. It is used
as a check in handling seeds during certification and
helps to avoid mistakes.
5. They can be purchased with confidence, for they
possess a certificate as to strain.
6. All sacks should be properly sealed and labelled, and
the sewing twine should be unbroken.
The Certificate that accompanies every sack
[?]


GRASSES CONTROL EROSION
By J. Brake, B.Agr.Sc.,
Agricultural Superintendent, Dept. of Agriculture, Vic.
Barrel Medic (Medicagc tribuloidcs) grows well at the Mallee
Research Station, Walpeup.
The advantages of vegetation may be summarized as
follows:
1. Greatly reduces washing action of water on the soil.
2. Binds the soil and prevents leaching out of plant
food.
3. Provides organic matter.
4. Releases mineral plant food.
5. May provide late autumn, winter, and early spring
feed,
6. Increases yields of subsequent crops.
7. If ploughed under improves texture of both heavy
and light soils and increases their water absorbing
capacity.
Land which has been broken up for cropping absorbs
much less water than grass or clover land. A great deal
can be done towards reducing “run-off” of water and the
disastrous effects of erosion by rotating crops in such a
way that the land will be under crop a large proportion
of the time.
The different types of vegetation vary in their ability
to protect the soil. Permanent pasture, including lucerne
and clovers and timber with undergrowth are best, whilst
those less useful are generally those crops planted in
rows such as potatoes, maize, and tobacco. Between the
two extremes we find the small grain crops such as oats,
wheat, and barley and the various annual legumes. All
investigations which have been carried out on soil erosion
control go to show that dense pasture ranks very high
as a preventive of erosion.
In Victoria, the worst cases of erosion are in the hilly mid-
land country and also the mountainous areas of the
North-east. The soils affected may not be of very high
value of themselves, but with little attention being given
to them in the maintenance of a dense cover of vegetation
they are not only becoming rapidly destroyed as soils, but
are being washed down in the form of silt and gravel to
lower elevations, destroying fertile flats and filling up
watercourses and reservoirs.
In light rainfall country overstocking and improper
seasonal use are common causes of erosion. Grazed each
spring before plant food is produced for continuous
growth perennial grasses gradually give wajr before the
competition of the less valuable, quick growing, shallow
rooted, annual grasses and weeds. Top dressing with
superphosphate and Subterranean Clover, inestimably
valuable as they are in Victoria, does not help much in
this connection as the superphosphate assists the aggres-
sive Sub. to outgrow and replace the native perennials
only to leave the ground comparatively bare in late
summer, exposed to the risk of erosion by wind or
water.
In pasture management, therefore, the closest attention
should be given to the stocking of the property to ensure
that the number of stock carried is governed by feed
available in lean years rather than in good years. On
gently sloping grazing land in America erosion is con-
A complete cover of vegetation is the ideal
◄ control for Soil Erosion. In arid areas it prevents w
drift and in heavier rainfall country it checks
"run-off" water. Vegetation is also the source yr
of humus and as such, constitutes one of the
most important parts of the soil.
trolled and the pasture improved by making small
furrows on the contours around the hill sides.
These furrows not only hold up water and provide an
entrance into the soil, but the rush of water down the
slope is slowed up and it is spread more evenly over the
whole surface. Thick grass soon grows adjacent to the
furrow and helps still further in the good work. These
furrows can be simply made with a disc plough from
which all but the back disc has been removed. On the’
steeply sloping land, furrows by themselves may not
prove satisfactory. Here it may be necessary to con-
struct contour ridges on a very easy grade, and place
a few ploughed furrows at intervals on the exact contours.
NATURE’S PART
In any and every case when it is desired to make more
water penetrate, every effort should be made to assist
nature. Encourage the growth of a thick cover of vegeta-
tion in order that the water will be slowed down, keeping
the soil soft and preventing it from carrying mud to
fill up the pores of the soil. Rest the pasture and
prevent fires. Without some rest or reduction in stock
mechanical treatment such as contouring or furrowing
brings slow benefits, but combined with a short rest
remarkable results can be obtained. The provision of
grasses and clovers for drift prevention _ in the Malice
and also the Wimmera is not easy, but in recent years
the Department of Agriculture has made considerable
progress in that connection and encouraging results have
been obtained at the Mallee Research Station, Walpeup,
from Wimmera Rye, Veldt Grass, Barrel Medic, Mulwala
Clover, and Lucerne. In the 14-inch to 17-inch rainfall,
wheat growing country, including the Southern Mallee,
Lucerne is giving good results, permanent stands being
possible providing they are reasonably managed, having
regard to the little amount of moisture that is available
to the plant.
SPECIES SUITABLE FOR EROSION CONTROL
1. In Permanent Swards in Heavier Rainfall
Perennial Rye, Cocksfoot, Phalaris tuberosa, Kentucky
Blue Grass, Tall Fescue, Paspalum, White Clover and
Sub. Clover.
2. For Binding Inland Sand Dunes
(a) Where rainfall is about 14 in. per annum.—Pyp
Grass, Blue Lupin, Burr Medic, Barrel Medic, Evening
Primrose.
(b) Where rainfall exceeds 14 in. per annum.—Marram
Grass, Wimmera Rye, Lucerne, Veldt Grass.
(c) Where rainfall exceeds 20 in. per annum.—Kikuyu
Grass, Buffalo Grass.
3. For Binding Coastal Sands
(a) Saline conditions.—Sand Lyme Grass, Salt Grass,
Coast Rat Tail Grass.
(b) Moderate to low salinity.—Spinifex, Marram Grass,
Kikuyu Grass, Long Styled Feather Grass, Couch and
Sorrel.
4. For Banks and Gullies
The Bent Grasses, English Couch, Kikuyu, Buffalo,
Paspalum, Phalaris, Kentucky Blue Grass, Mat Grass.
„ 5. For Bottoms of Gullies
White Bent, Water Couch, Reed Canary Grass, Lotus
Major.
6- For Binding Banks of Streams
t getter places.—Common Reed, Poa Aquatica
Lotus Major.
(b) Sides and tops of banks.—The Bent Grasses, Couch,
Kikuyu, Buffalo, Paspalum, Phalaris, Kentucky Blue, Mat
CtT&SS.


QUALITY IN PASTURE SEEDS
P erformance— Not App earance
By F. R. Drake, B.Agr.Sc.,
Assistant Agrostologist
(Extracted from the Journal of the Department of Agriculture, Victoria.)
Few commercial commodifies vary so much in
a quality as does the seed used for the sowing of w
Jm pastures. Variations in seed prices do not always Sk
fully allow for these variations in quality; and pv
’ the purchase of cheap seed is rarely justified by ”
results.
HOW SHOULD SEED BE VALUED?
It is usual to buy seed at so much per pound or per
bushel. The actual value of this pound or bushel will
depend on the number of plants which it will produce
when sown and on its freedom from harmful impurities.
These qualities will vary from sample to sample, and
unless they are known, it is not possible to place a value
on a line of seed. Thus a bush ;1 of one line may be
the equal, in plant producing capacity, of two or more
bushels of another line, and yet both lines may appear
similar even on close inspection. Many seed vendors are
now prepared to supply details of purity and germination
with seeds offered for sale, thus enabling a comparison
between lines to be made. In all cases where such
information is not available, intending purchasers are
strongly advised to submit samples to the Seed Testing
Laboratory of the Department of Agriculture, for analysis
and comment before purchasing - . This service is free for
farmers purchasing seed for their own sowing.
HOW SAMPLES ARE TESTED
A visual examination of a sample of seed will reveal
whether it is clean and of bright appearance, but ability
to identify the weed seeds pi’esent requires training and
experience. Its capacity for growth cannot even be
guessed l at, and this information can be obtained only
from an actual germination test, while something more
accurate than a close inspection is required to estimate
the quantities of impurities present.
In the laboratory the sample is first submitted to a
purity test. From this test is obtained the percentage
by weight of pure seed in the sample, and the percentages
by weight of weed seeds and inert matter (chaff, dirt,
etc.) present. A germination test is then carried out,
using the pure seed from the purity test. This test is
quite straightforward for most kinds of seeds, the
unsprouted seedb at the end of the test being regarded
as dead or non-germinable.
THE REAL VALUE OF A SAMPLE
From the two tests described, figures for the percen-
tage of pure seed in the sample and for the percentage
of this pure seed that is capable of germinating, are
obtained. From these it is a simple matter to calculate
the percentage of pure germinating seed in the sample,
and thus obtain a single figure which is a measure on a
percentage by weight basis of the real value of the
sample.
Thus:
Real value, or percentage of pure
... , Purity X Germination
germinating seed =
This real value figure gives then a statement of the
proportion of a sample which is useful and may he
expected to grow when the seed is sown.
In this .way, by calculation of ihe real value figure for
each, two or more samples of seed of the same species
can be directly eompared_ on a performance basis.
The application of this method is illustrated by the
photographs and analyses of two samples perennial rye
grass seed, and the results show how very greatly samples
may vary in actual value.
SAMPLE A.
(1) Original Sample, (2) Pure Seed, (3) Inert Matter, (4) Weed Seeds.
Analysis
c /o %
Pure Seed 98.6 Germination . 96.0
Weed Seeds 0.1 , , y , 98.5X96
Inert Matter 1.4 Real Value
= 95
SAMPLE B.
(1) Original Sample, (2) Pure Seed, (3) Inert Matter, (4) Weed Seeds.
Analysis
% %
Pure Seed 85.6 Germination .. .. 52.0
Weed Seeds 4.5 „ . , T , 85.6X52
Inert Matter 10.0 Real Value .. .. .. JocT - *
= 45
By the purity test a heavy weed infestation of sample
B is shown, while the germination test further reveals
that nearly half of the pure seed is non-germinable. Com-
pared on a real value basis, sample A is worth more than
twice as much as sample B, while the weed infestation
further _ reduces the value of the latter. If the good
sample is worth 12'/- per bushel, sample B is worth only
5/8, and even if it could be procured for this sum, its
weed seed content is far too high and its sale would be an
offence under the Victorian Seeds Acts.


INSECT PESTS OF PASTURES
By R. T. M. Pescott , M.Agr.Sc.,
Entomologist
(A) The Red Legged Earth Mite. (B) Lucerne Flea. (C) Cockchafer.
Thera is no doubt that conditions have been made very
favourable for the introduction and development of cer-
tain types of insects which were not, present in Victorian
pastures only a comparatively few years ago, whilst, in
other cases, native insects have found conditions so suit-
able for their' development and expansion, that they, too,
have become serious pests. It appears, from a survey
of the position over the past few years, that some modi-
fication of px-esent pasture management will be necessary
in the future to make conditions less favourable for the
continued development of these pests.
In Victoria, there are' three main insect pests of pas-
tures, all of which are definitely associated with the
clover content of the pasture. They are the Lucerne
Plea, Svvynthurua viridis L., the Red Legged Earth Mite,
Halotydeus destructor Tucker, and the Cockchafer,
Aphodius sp. There are other insects which are periodi-
cally met with in pastures, such as Cutworms, Canary
Plies, Grasshoppers and Take-all grubs, which are rela-
tively unimportant when compared with .the three insects
mentioned above, as -they occur only sporadically.
The Lucerne Plea, Smynthurus viridis L., while some
ten years or so ago confined chiefly to the south-western
portion .of this .State, is now fairly widespread over the
greater portion of the pasture areas. There is ample
evidence available to show that this rapid increase in
distribution took place over a period of about five years,
some ten years ago when the subterranean clover seed
sown at that time chiefly came from a lucerne flea infested
area in South Australia and was not fumigated.
This insect feeds on quite a variety of food plants,
the chief of which among economic plants are subter-
ranean clover, lucerne and burr clover. Pasture grasses
are occasionally attacked, but only when grown in asso-
ciation with subterranean clover. The insects feed on
the foliage of the clover, eating out the green tissue,
either completely or in small areas of the leaf producing
a generally withered appearance over large areas of
pasture. Particularly early in the season and in periods
of heavy infestation, ■ the growth of subterranean clover
may be seriously inhibited, although it is doubtful
whether actual death of plants ever results. With the
more rapid growth of subterranean clover in the spring,
the plant is usually able to grow away from the greater-
portion of the trouble, the damage not being so manifest
later in the season.
The female lucerne fleas have the habit of laying their
eggs in batches of fifty or sixty on the surface of the
soil. The eggs are yellowish and cylindrical, measuring
approximately one-hundredth of an inch in diameter.
Immediately after being laid, they are covered with a
fine film of “liquid earth,” excreted by the female, which,
on drying, has the effect of consolidating the mass of
eggs, at the same time making them almost indistin-
' guishable on the surface of the soil. It is in this egg
With the great improvement in pastures that Has
a occurred over the past few years through the w
wj agency of topdressing and improved pasture plant jfe
'x types, the incidence of insect pests in postures *
has also greatly increased.
form that the insect carries over from one season to
another through the summer months.
With the advent of general autumn rains occurring
from March to May, according to the season, these eggs
hatch. At about the same time, young subterranean
clover plants appear, these providing the ideal food for
the young lucerne fleas. From then on, until the wetter
months of the year have passed, this occurring about
September or October, lucerne fleas are very active in
subterranean clover fields, producing the typical damage.
The adult lucerne flea is a typical springtail insect,
measuring roughly one-eighth of an inch in length when
fully grown, and yellowish-g Teen in colour. It is capable
of. a rapid jumping motion when disturbed, moving
distances of up to 12 inches at a time.
The control of this insect, once it is established in a
pasture, is, at the present time, an almost impossible
one. Mechanical methods, chemical insecticidal treat-
ments and biological methods have, so far, all proved
unsatisfactory over large areas of pastures. A large
amount of research work is still to be carried out before a
practical solution of this problem is obtained.
However, there is a method available whereby the pre-
vention of fresh outbreaks caused by the use of contami-
nated seed can he obtained. These fresh outbreaks are
the direct result of sowing seed in which are soil par-
ticles containing the eggs of the lucerne flea. It has
been shown by the Victorian Department of Agriculture
' that, if such seed is submitted to a vacuum fumigation
process, then these eggs are destroyed and the germina-
tion of the subterranean clover seed is not impaired. It
is, therefore, recommended to those who intend to make
new sowings of subterranean clover that they insist
upon the seed being vacuum fumigated 1 before completing
their purchase of the seed. The cost of such treatment is
trivial—only a fraction of a penny per pound of seed.
The Red Legged Earth Mite, Halotydeus destructor
Tucker, frequently spoken of as a red spider by farmers
and pastoralists, is also present in all of the pasture
areas of this State. It is undoubtedly a serious pest of
pastures, particularly early in the season, attacking
primarily the clovers, particularly subterranean clover.
The mouth parts of these mites are developed more
for rasping than for piercing. The surface of the leaf
is broken and the sap sucked. This results in a silvery
or bleached area on the plant attacked, and where the
mites are numerous and the bleached areas large, plants,
and particularly young onep, cannot stand up to the loss
of sap, and consequently die. Once the plant is making
strong growth, however, the mites do not appear to do
severe damage. The most severe general damage prob-
ably is done when the mites are working over large areas
of pasture early in the season. Growers rely to a great
extent on early winter feed from pastures, but, where
the mite is in large numbers, this early growth may be
checked! entirely with the consequent loss of the early
winter feed. Later, however, providing the plants have
withstood the early attack, they grow away fx-om this
trouble, and good late crops result.
Like the lucerne flea, the mites make their appearance
early in autumn, shortly after the autumn rains. At
that time egg's, which were laid towards the end of
November*, commence to hatch out, and myriads of small
six-legged mites are to be found. The summer eggs are
laid by the thousands about the surface of the soil, under
clods, dry weeds, or rubbish. These eggs are extremely
resistant to heat, drought, and drying winds, although
some are always destroyed under these conditions.
(Continued on Page 17)


PASTURE IMPROVEMENT
[?]


Victorian Certified
SUBTERRANEAN CLOVERS
(Bacchus Marsh and Tallarook Both GOYERNMEIN f CERTIFIED)
Certified Bacchus Marsh Sub. Clover, belonging to Messrs. G. C. and
A. W. Toose, Smeaton. About 100 acres is certified.
BACCHUS MARSH SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER
Although classified as an early strain, it tends towards
the mid-season variety, and may be regarded as inter-
mediate between the early flowering “Dwalganup” and
the mid-season “Mt. Barker.”
Due to the investigation of pasture plant strains by the
Burnley Plant Research Field, the Government Seed
Certification scheme has extended to cover the production
and harvesting of the Bacchus Marsh Sub. Clover seed.
This strain, according to the Agricultural Department,
has been isolated from fields of clover which have spread
by natural means in the Bacchus Marsh district. The
plant has long runners, is fairly leafy, and the leaves are
larger and a lighter green than those of other strains.
In favourable seasons,
autumn growth and early
spring growth are very
good. Runner formation
is rapid and a good
sward may be formed in
the second year. It is a
suitable plant for estab-
lishment in the drier belt
of country immediately
beyond the districts of
moderate rainfall (over
21 inches), and is recom-
mended for areas which
do not receive quite
enough rain to allow the
Mt. Barker Strain to set
seed.
Prom many sources it is
claimed that “Bacchus
Marsh” is much more
leafy and productive
than “Dwalganup.”
G. & N. have adequate
supplies, and special
values are indicative of
G. & N.’s big buying
for cash.
A typical single plant, showing its
dense leafiness, taken from the pad-
docks of Messrs. G. C. and A. W.
Toose.
Progress in Victorian Pasture Improvement is
accentuated by the extension of certification to .
A the Bacchus Marsh Sub. Clover—an early strain. Bk
Tailarook (late maturing) also is certified by the pr
' Victorian Dept, of Agriculture. Both are ~
specialties of G. & N!
TALLAROOK SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER
(Mother Strain)
Tailarook Subterranean Clover, a late strain which has
been developed in Victoria, forma a very dense, close,
leafy sward. The runners are fine and not long, and the
leaves are numerous. It makes excellent grazing and
remains green late in the Spring, It yields heavy hay
crops and can be cut late in the season when better
weather for hay-making usually prevails. It makes rapid
growth during March, April and May, ensuring good
winter feed. It comes away again in the early spring,
producing a great bulk of feed, and in favourable condi-
tions remaining green till the end of December. After
the clover ripens the leaf does not turn black and go to
powder, but can be raked up into heaps with an ordinary
hay rake for months, thus ensuring good cattle feed.
Tailarook Subterranean Clover is recommended:—
(a) For all districts of good rainfall from April to
November (the average rainfall at Tailarook is 2d
inches per annum); and
(b) For irrigated pastures.
As an irrigation proposition, you have ten months’ green
feed, probably only four waterings necessary (two in the
spring and two in autumn), early March. Excellent dry
feed January and February.
TOPDRESSING
Superphosphate is indispensable to the successful estab-
lishment of subterranean clover. An application of about
1 cwt. or more per aero at the time of sowing is strongly
recommended; also a similar dressing each autumn for
the next two years before a “miss” is perhaps given.
From 3 to 6 lbs. of seed per acre is recommended. If
seed and manure are mixed, they should be sown at once
in order to avoid any possible injury to the seed by the
acid of the superphosphate.
AUSTRALIA'S LEADING DISTRIBUTORS
For many years G. & N. has been recognized as “The
House For Government Certified Seeds,” and special at-
tention has been paid to Sub. Clovers, in which G. & N.
are keen specialists.
Contact G. &N. first if it’s Sub. Clover you need. Every
worthwhile strain is in stock!
•fa" Keen” in name,, and keen in pasture improve-
ment interest! Mr. A. S. Keen, of Gembrook ,
Vie., writes:
“The Subterranean Clover I received from
you last year is a foot high.”
SEED AVAILABLE BY G. & N.
The paddocks from which G. & N. supplies are drawn are
of high standard, and the seed, of course, carries a Govern-
ment Certificate for strain.
[?]


N.Z. WHITE CLOVER
(GOVERNMENT CERTIFIED)
Greatly improved! results are obtained when White
. Clover is a constituent of a pasture. More .
jm should be made of this important clover. In- Ik
vM creased White Clover Content in our grasslands is
' advocated, and particularly the N.Z. Certified
variety as described below.
The great value of New Zealand White Clover in the
formation of artificial grass depends largely on the degrees
of rapidity with which it forms a sward, and thus keeps
out weeds; and on its effect on the fertility of the land for
subsequent arable crops when the turf is broken and the
residues are ploughed down. The evidence suggests that
the seed of New Zealand White Clover should be included
in all mixtures which are to remain down for more than
one year; it hastens sward development, encourages rough-
stalked meadow-grass, keeps out weeds and makes for
fertility. New Zealand White is a clover of great impor-
tance. Its root action is strong and of a dwarfer and
denser growth, and, on account of its more rapid creeping
habit, it can be expected to spread at a quicker rate than
the ordinary White Clover.
From many authentic sources it is claimed to be mors
vigorous in growth and of better feeding value than White
Dutch Clover.
The New Zealand Department of Agriculture proclaims
that the particular feature of this strain of White Clover
is its leaf density, winter growth, and persistent nature.
Under favorable soil conditions in New Zealand it domin-
ates the white clover position in the pasture, and super-
sedes the early-flowering and less-persistent strains. Five
advantages of this clover are:—
(1) It is a high quality pasture fodder stock like and
does well all over the State.
(2) It is easy to cultivate and manage.
(8) It improves land values and is recognized as an
excellent soil renovator.
(4) It balances grain and green crop rations to per-
fection.
(5) Does exceedingly well in mixtures, especially with
Hawke’s Bay Rye Grass.
It attains perfection in temperate districts of heavy and
regular rainfall, and of more recent years it has been
proved that it can be successfully grown in parts where
high summer temperatures prevail, with irrigation. This
has materially enhanced its usefulness as a pasture plant
for Australian conditions.
The advantages of White Clover in a pasture where the
rainfall is over 22 inches are not difficult to assess. As a
gathering of protein, phosphorus and lime for trans-
formation into flesh, milk or wool, it is superior to any of
the grasses under normal conditions, and, apart from the
qualities which it possesses in itself, it materially increases
the healthiness and palatability of grasses growing in
association.
In well-established pastures white clover helps to form
a rich turf of bottom herbage. It is not only valuable for
the actual grazing it affords, but also because with its
rapidly spreading growth it tends from the outset to
compete with weeds. Further, on account of the abundance
of nitrogen-collecting nodules on its roots, it does much
to improve the fertility of the land.
White clover is greatly relished by all classes of live stock,
and like all clovers it possesses high feeding value, being
especially desirable for the production of milk and butter,
and for the growth of young animals.
A luxuriant growth of this clover frequently follows a
dressing of phosphates or lime on poor grass lands,
especially on soils naturally deficient in those ingredients.
A typical area grown from Pedigree Seed. Showing the excellent
production of N.Z. Pedigree White Clover.
FOR BEST RESULTS SOW WITH HAWKE’S BAY
STRAIN RYE GRASS
This practice is recommended by experts and growers,
and the combination provides excellent pasturage.
Certified White Clover stands up to conditions better than
the common varieties of White Clover. We recommend;
20 lbs. Victorian Certified or Hawke’s Bay Rye Grass
and 2 lbs. Certified White Clover per acre.
WHITE CLOVER AND PASPALUM
Generally speaking, the requirements of clovers are a
fertile and not too acid soil and a fair supply of soil
moisture. Where White Clover is naturally abundant in
paspalum pastures it can be taken for granted that its
requirements are supplied, but it is true that the production
of thousands of acres of paspalum pastures could be
improved by the encouragement of clover growth.
Soils which are distinctly acid can only be made suitable
for clover growth by the application of lime. If the
fertility of the soil has been lowered by many years of
grazing it is advisable either to renovate with the plough
or paspalum renovator and topdress with fertilisers. On
suitable areas it may be preferable to plough out the
pasture and grow a green manure or some other form of
crop previous to resowing the area with a mixture of grass
and clover seeds.
Renovation and green-manuring practices, in addition to
increasing soil fertility, also tend to increase the water-
retaining properties of the soil. 1
THE NEW ZEALAND SEED CERTIFICATION
METHOD
When a New Zealand farmer signifies his intention of
becoming a producer of certified seed, his farm is inspected
and a plan drawn showing the location of each paddock.
The paddock is taken as the producing unit. Samples of
the grass are sown in trial plots at the Government Plant
Research Station and results obtained there are checked
up by a field inspection of the seed-producing area when
at its flowering stage. Each grower of certified seed is
allotted a number. The bags are branded and sealed under
the supervision of an officer of the Department in the
paddock at threshing time. Inside every sack is placed an
insert slip. When the seed is to be machine dressed an
officer of the Department inspects and weighs each sealed
sack as it goes to the dressing station. The machine-
dressed seed is then weighed, and all seconds, screenings,
rubbish, etc., are accounted for. These figures are care-
fully checked when the machine-dressed seed is sealed and
tagged. A sample of seed is taken and a certificate issued
in respect of its germination and purity.
fwr mm ’pays >


PASTURE EXPERIMENTAL WORK
By Walter D. Andrew , M.Agr.Sc.,
Assistant Agrostologist
Showing the response obtained from the use of superphosphate on
a Western District Plot.
Pasture experimental work in Victoria is carried out
by the Department of Agriculture on its Experimental
Farms at Werribee, Rutherglen, and Walpeup, and at the
Plant Research Station at Burnley. In addition there
are numerous experimental plots situated on private
farms throughout the. State.
The work at Werribee which has been in progress for
many years, commenced with a study of irrigated lucerne,
but is now concerned mainly with irrigated pastures,
although some dry pasture work is carried out. At
Rutherglen there are in progress manurial, sown species,
and management trials on dry pasture, while at Walpeup
a study of plants suitable for low rainfall conditions is
the main consideration.
The work at the Burnley Plant Research Station
entails a study of the botanical characters of the various
pasture plants in common use and field tests of seed
from areas submitted as suitable for the production of
certified seed.
In the early stages, country plots were limited to_ a
few localities, but in recent years as a result of financial
assistance from an organization known as “The Vic-
torian Pasture Improvement League” the work has been
greatly extended in the dry pasture areas of the better
rainfall districts and in the northern irrigation districts.
Soon after pasture experiments were commenced in
Victoria it became apparent that phosphatic manures
promoted strong pasture growth and that the form of
phosphate most efficacious was superphosphate.
Despite these findings the use of “Super” on grassland
developed very slowly and it was not until after 1930
that the practice gained many adherents.
Comparing present-day pastures with those seen twenty
years ago, .it will be noted that phosphating grassland
has induced a marked change in the botanical nature of
the herbage, for whereas it was formerly composed
almost entirely of grass species, top-dressed pastures are
now dominated by numerous species of clover. Of these
the one most generally valuable is Subterranean Clover,
which, on account of its aggressive habit, is now wide-
spread in the moderate to higher rainfall districts of
this State.
This change in the nature of the grassland brought
about by the use of superphosphate and the encourage-
ment of “sub.” clover marks an important stage in the
improvement of Victorian pastures.
It was with the object' of carrying the improvement
a step further forward that 46 district experimental plots
were established in 1932 in Gippsland and the Western
District under the Victorian Pasture Improvement League
scheme.
The results from these trials confirmed the fact that
soil phosphate deficiency was widespread in Victoria aiid
Farmers are quickly becoming conscious of the
part scientific research is playing in the work
A of pasture improvement in this State. The extent W
SSI of the experimental work being carried out by mm
the Victorian Department of Agriculture in con- "
junction with the Victorian Pasture Improvement
League is described by Mr. Andrew in this article.
showed that in some places it was necessary to apply
lime in addition to Super, while in others, soil potash
limited pasture growth.
This latter finding presented an entirely new angle
on soil fertility in Victoria, for prior to the establishment
of these trials it was supposed that, provided phosphate
was applied', the other minerals in the soil were present
in sufficient amount to supply the demands of the extra
herbage induced by supering.
As a result of these pasture trials it has now been
established that in certain areas where phosphating
has been carried out for a number of years, potash defi-
ciency in the soil has developed. As grassland herbage
contains a relatively large amount of potash its regular
removal as hay or silage from an area will further
accentuate this trouble.
In ordler to throw more light on this subject of soil
fertility, there were established in 1935 under the Pasture
Improvement League scheme an additional six plots in
the Cobden and Larpent districts where soil potash
deficiency was evident and seven were put down in the
Warragul and Mirboo North districts to study the lime
responses which had been demonstrated there.
The most _ recent extension under this scheme has been
the establishment of further experimental plots in the
Lilydale, North-Eastern and Northern irrigation dis-
tricts.
Up till comparatively recently it was considered that
there were about ten elements which were necessary for
the maintenance of plant growth, but as a result of
using highly purified fertilizers it is now recognized that
other , elements such as boron, manganese, zinc, copper,
etc., are also necessary, but only in small amounts.
These are spoken of as the “trace” or “minor” elements
of plant nutrition and in certain localities these may be
deficient in the soil, e.g., in parts of the Wimmera it
appears that the amount of zinc in the soil is a limiting
factor to plant growth.
Research into the habits and characteristics of the
various types of pasture plants has resulted in the
recognition and isolation of various distinct “strains” or
“types” within species.
A large amount of imported rye grass seed, e.g., gives
rise to plants of a very short-lived character, while the
suitability of the various strains of subterranean clover
to environmental conditions which is largely determined
by the length of their growth cycle, varies greatly with
different strains.
Experimental work on irrigated pastures at Werribee,
Kerang, Cohuna, Stanhope and Swan Hill has shown the
desirability of using liberal dressings of Super and pay-
ing careful attention to such details as the frequency
and amount of water applied during the drier months.
A careful study of the botanical composition of the
sward from time to time has revealed' that certain
changes occur in this composition and that these can be
attributed to and correlated with the form of manage-
ment imposed upon the pasture.
Under irrigated conditions it has been shown that
rotational grazing is a profitable practice and by such
means the annual carrying capacity can be substantially
increased.
In order to pass on the information gained from this
experimental work the Department of Agriculture main-
tains an advisory service and farmers are urged to take
full advantage of this if confronted with any pasture
problems.


No. 8
MIXTURES FOR ROTATION CROPPING-
-Three to Four Years’ Ley
Light Soils
Medium Soils
Heavy Soils
With
Without
With
Without
With Without
Name of Grasses, etc.
a crop
a crop
a crop
a crop
a crop
a crop
lbs.
lbs.
lbs.
lbs.
lbs.
lbs.
Perennial Rye Grass
10
12
14
15
15
20
Italian Rye Grass .. ..
4
6
6
7
S
10
Cocksfoot ..
4
6
8
4
8'
Timothy .. .
—
—
i%
2
1%
2
Cowerrass
4%
5
5
5
6
White Clover
1
1
i%
1 Mi
2
2
Alsyke Clover
—
—
1
1
1 %
1
Trefoil (Broad-leaved)
2
2
1
1
Per Acre .. ..
25%
30
32%
36%
36
44%
PERMANENT PASTURES
These mixtures which ore ideal for Australian
a grasslands, suit average conditions. Seed is
mk supplied already mixed unless requested to be
parcelled separately when ordering. You can ir
alter mixtures accordingly if certain varieties are
present in your land.
No. 1
SPECIAL MIXTURE OF 21 lbs. PER ACRE.
This mixture is recommended by the Department of Agriculture as
a standard table for a perfect pasture combination. It is suitable for
most classes of soil, and in practically all districts will give excellent
results.
Perennial Rye Grass, 10 lb.; Italian Rye Grass, 3 lb.; Cocksfoot,
3 lb.; Cow Grass (Perennial Red Clover), 2 lb.; White Clover, 1 lb.;
Alsyke Clover, 1 lb.; Subterranean Clover, 1 lb.; and Strawberry
Clover.
See latest price list for G. & N.’s price per acre for this mixture of
21 lbs. of Grasses and Clovers.
No. 2
G. & N. “SELECTED” MIXTURE
Strongly advocated as a good grass
mixture for a permanent pasture. Made
up of the best quality Rye grasses,
Cocksfoot, and Clovers. It is a mixture
characterized by persistency, perman-
ence and productivity. If Cocksfoot or
any other variety is not required, it
can be left out and made up with
some other variety to the same value.
Suita most classes of soil. Quantity re-
quired per acre, 1% to 2 bus. of seed.
See latest price list for price per bus.
of 20 lbs.
No. 3
"CERTIFIED” SEED MIXTURE
Those wishing to avail themselves of
a good reliable mixture that they can
depend on for permanency, we recom-
mend them to sow certified seed, which
carries the guarantee of. the Depart-
ment of Agriculture, the seed being
certified by the department as being
genuine type, true to name, off old
pastures.
Govt, certified Perennial Rye Grass and
White Clover. See latest price list for
G. & N.’s price for sowing for one
acre, 20 lbs. Rye, 2 lbs. Clover.
No. 4
SPECIAL GRASS SEED MIXTURE
A good, all-round mixture for per-
manent pasture, suitable for most
soils
1 bus. (20 lbs.) English Perennial Rye
Grass, saved off old pastures.
2 lbs. Giant Colonial Cow Grass.
1 lb. White Clover.
1 lb. Alsyke Clover.
2 lbs. Subterranean Clover.
No. 5
MIXTURE FOR ONE TO TWO
YEARS.
10 lbs. Italian Rye Grass.
20 lbs. Perennial Rye Grass.
3 lbs. Timothy.
5 lbs. Cowgrasa.
2 lbs. Rape, or
4 ozs. Soft Turnip.
No. 6
MIXTURE FOR ONE YEAR
To Get Quick Returns
30 lbs. Italian Rye Grass.
4 lbs. to 5 lbs. Cowgrass, or Crimson
Clover.
2 lbs. Rape, or
4 ozs. Soft Turnip.
No. 7
A special permanent pasture mixture
recommended by the Werribee Re-
search Farm:—
12 lbs. Perennial Rye Grass.
3 lbs. Cocksfoot.
3 lbs. Prairie.
1 lb. each Alsyke, White, Red, Sub-
terranean, Strawberry Clovers and
Lucerne.
No. BB
FOR IRRIGATED MURRAY
FLATS (SOUTH AUSTRALIA).
10 lbs. N.Z. Grown Government
Certified Perennial Ryegrass.
8 lbs. N.Z. Grown “Aharon 1 *
Government Certified Cocksfoot.
2 lbs. N.Z. Grown Government
Certified White Clover,
10 lbs. Prairie Grass.
3io lbs. sufficient for one acre.
Mowing a crop of G. & N. Rye Graess and Mixed Clovers on
the property of Mr. J. Merrigurn, Swanpool. The Rye Grass
was “a very extra good sample."
No. AA
AN EXCELLENT MIXTURE FOR
DRY AREASj
WIMMERA RYE GRASS AND
SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER
20 lbs. Wimmera Rye Grass.
2 lbs. Subterranean Clover.
22 lbs. Sufficient for 1 acre. Ready
mixed for planting. Price per acre
on application.
FOR WINTER FODDER
CROPS
No. 9
Vi bushel Rye Corn.
% bushel Dun Peas.
7 lbs. Golden Tares or Vetches,
X A bushel Cape Barley or White Oats.
No. 10
bushel Rye Corn.
% bushel Partridge Peas. 1
7 lbs. Golden Tarea.
y% bushel Skinless Barley or Algerian
Oats.
No. 11
1 bushel Skinless Barley.
15 lbs. Tick or Horse Beans.
20 lbs. Italian Hye Grass.
These mixtures can either be cut and
fed or grazed. They are valuable for
cleansing the land and can be ploughed
in for green manure, which will Im-
prove the soil, adding nitrogen for
succeeding crops.
[?]


PERMANENT PASTURES
Showing the value of the Ultra-Violet Ray test for perenniality.
(Left) —True perennial type showing no fluorescence.
(Right)—The presence of fluorescence indicates clearly that the strain
is not a permanent one. (Dept. of Agriculture.)
No. 16
FOR LAND OF HIGH RAINFALL.
12 lbs. Cocksfoot, 5 lbs. English Rye,
5 lbs. Italian Rye, 2 lbs. White Dutch
Clover, 2 lbs. Alaykc Clover, 1 lb. Sub-
terranean Clover, and 4 lbs. Crested
Dogatail to the acre.
No. 17
FOR HOT DISTRICTS.
Prairie Grass • .. .. 15 lbs.
Cocksfoot 10 „
Rib Grass 4 „
Alsyke 1
White Clover 1 ,,
Perennial Rye Grass .. .. .. 10 „
Hard Fescue 1 ,,
Paapalum Dil 1 „
Sufficient for 1 acre .. ,. 43 „
No. 18
FOR COLD DISTRICTS.
Perennial Rye Grass .. .. .. 20 lbs.
Cocksfoot .. 10 ,,
Timothy 8 ,,
White Dutch Clover .. .. ., 2 „
Red Clover 2 ,,
Crested Dogatail 2 ,,
Paapalum Dil. .......... 1 ,,
Sufficient for 1 acre 40 ,,
No. 19
FOR THE BEST LAND
which can be readily ploughed, the best
permanent pasture is obtained by sow-
ing the following mixture: —
Perennial Rye Grass .. .. .. 15 lbs.
Cocksfoot .. G lbs. to 8 lbs.
White Dutch Clover 2 ,,
Cowgraaa 2 „
Alsyke Clover 2 ,,
If necessary, n little Crested Dogstail
and Meadow Fescue, also Italian Rye
Grass, can be introduced to this mix-
ture, and in wet situations it may be
advisable to add also about 1 lb. of
Strawberry Clover.
No. 20
FOR SALINE SOILS, RECLAIMING
TIDAL FLATS, AND RICH UN-
DRAINED SWAMPS.
a mixture containing a strong element
of Strawberry Clover should be used.
The following has given good results in
Victoria in such eases:—16 lbs. Peren-
nial Rye Grass, 5 ibs. Cocksfoot, 1 lb.
Lotus Major, 1 lb. White Dutch Clover,
and 2 lbs. Strawberry Clover.
No. 21
FOR WARM DISTRICTS.
Cocksfoot Grass IB lbs.
Perennial Rye Grass 10 „
Prairie Grass .. 5 „
Rib Grass 2 „
Alsyke 1 „
Timothy 2 „
White Clover 1 „
Paspaluxn Dil 1 „
Sufficient for 1 acre .. .. 87 ,,
No, 22
FOE MOIST SOILS.
Perennial Rye Grass 20 lbs.
Cocksfoot 6 ,,
Meadow Fescue 8 „
White Clover 2 „
Alsyke 2 „
Strawberry Clover »»
Lotus Major % „
Sufficient for 1 acre .. .. 83 „
No. 23
FOR SHORT ROTATION PASTURE.
When a short rotation pasture to last
from two to four years is required on
rich land in a fairly moist climate, the
following mixture will give good results
for grazing:—20 lbs. Perennial Rye
Grass, 8 lbs. Italian Rye Grass, and 6
lbs. Cow Grass. Where the pasture ia
intended for one or two years a good
mixture !s one consisting of 20 lbs. of
Italian Rye Grass and 5 lbs. of Cow
Grass.
Next in importance to a satisfactory seed bed is
j the mixture, and. Growers must be guided by
Ak climatic and soil conditions. These tables cover
a wide range of individual requirements. There- I y
fore, choose the Mixture that has proved best
for your efimate and soil.
No. 13
FOE NORTHERN IRRIGATION SETTLEMENTS.
Perennial Rye Grass, 10 lbs.; Italian Rye Grass, 3 lbs.; Cocksfoot,
3 lbs.; Cow Grass. 2 lbs.; White Dutch Clover, 1 lb.; Alsyke Clover,
1 lb.; Subterranean Clover, 1 lb. per acre. A sprinkling of Strawberry
Clover ia advised.
No. 15
FOR LOW RAINFALL
COUNTRY.
A permanent pasture for low
rainfall country, 10 Iba. Wim-
mers Rye Grass and 3 lbs. Sub-
terranean Clover an acre.
No. 14
FOR OLD CULTIVATION
PADDOCKS.
A short pasture for old cultiva-
tion. paddocks, 40 Iba. Oats and
2 Iba. Subterranean Clover an
acre.
No. 24
FOR BEST FLATS.
15 lbs. English Rye, 5 lbs. Cocksfoot,
2 lbs. White Dutch Clover, 2 lbs. Alsyke
Clover. 2 lbs. Cow Grass, and 2 lbs.
Crested Dogatail to the acre.
No. 25
FOR COOL DISTRICTS.
Perennial Rye Grass 20 Iba.
Cocksfoot 10 „
Timothy 4 r ,
Crested Dogatail 1 „
White Clover 1 „
Red Clover 1 »♦
Subterranean Clover I „
Sufficient for 1 acre 88 „
No, 26
FOR DRY SOILS.
Perennial Rye Grass 20 lbs.
Cocksfoot 6 ,,
Kentucky Blue Grass ...... 2 „
Hard Fescue 2 „
Cow Grass 2 „
Subterranean Clover 1 ,,
Sufficient for 1 acre 82 ,,
No. 27
FOR OLD PEATY LAND.
If it is desired to establish a good
pasture on old peaty land, Cocksfoot
should predominate, and in such cases
the following is recommended: —
Cocksfoot 15 lbs.
Perennial Rye Grass 5 „
Italian Rye Grass 8 ,,
Cowgrass 2 ,,
White Dutch Clover 1 „
Lotus Major 1 „
Crested Dogstnll 1 ,,
Sufficient for 1 acre .. .. .. 28 ,,
A small quantity of Paspalum or. Sub-
terranean Clover can be introduced if
necessary.
SPECIAL NOTE.—We will be pleased to give special quotations for any of our permanent pasture mixtures.
Owing to the fluctuations of the market, it is difficult for us to include prices.
a
: 118 STHAII THAT PAISI


PERMANENT PASTURES
The first steps in pasture improvement are (1)
determining the species and strains (2) securing
jM the most productive and valuable strains of each Ik
species. Every mixture suggested by G. & N. jir
is based on the knowledge obtained from experi- '
ence with these steps.
No. 28
MIXTURES FOR COVER OR “NURSE” CHOPS
For a paddock that is going out of wheat production, sow with the
last crop:—
Lbs. per acre
Wimmera Rye Grass 5
But for districts enjoying a liberal rainfall this can be varied to:—
Lbs. per acre
Wimmera Rye Grass 8
Lucerne g
.Another suggestion is to sow with grain, as nurse crop, 10 lbs.
Wimmera Rye Grass and 1 lb. Subterranean Clover to the acre.
No, 29
FOR RENOVATING PASPALUM
PASTURES
Lbs. per acre
Wimmera Rye Grass 2
Italian Rye Grass 2
Perennial Rye Grass ... .. .. ... 2
Phalaria Bulbosa 1
Cocksfoot 2
Tall Fescue 2
Subterranean Clover 1
Perennial Red Clover 1
White Clover 1
Sheep’s Burnet 1
Sufficient for 1 acre 15
No. 30
FOR ONE SEASON LEY
Lba. per acre
Italian or Western Woltha Rye
Grass 26
Crimson Clover 10
Sheep grazing on G. & N. Pasture on the property of Mr. W. B.
Lloyd, Stanhope.
No, S3
' ANOTHER SUGGESTED MIXTURE
FOR SOWING DURING LATE
AUTUMN
Lbs. per acre
Wimmera Rye Grass 3
Italian Rye Grass 2
Perennial Rye Grass , *2
Perennial Red Clover 1,
Subterranean Clover Vst
White Clover 1
Sheep’s Burnet .2
Sufficient for 1 acre .. .. ,. ll'Mi
No. 34
TEMPORARY PASTURES
A grazing; pasture for two seasons .
Lba, per acre
Italian or Western Woltha Rye
Grass .. .. 25 to’80
Red Clover .. , ! ' :, 6 •
No, 3J
RECOMMENDED AS IDEAL FOR
IRRIGATION FARMS
1 Lba. per acre
Perennial Rye Grass 15
Italian Rye .. 5
Cocksfoot 5
Cow Grass , .. 8
White Clover 2
Alayke ,. .. 2
Subterranean Clover 1
Sufficient for 1 acre ;tS
No. 32
A MIXTURE TABLE RECOMMENDED
BY G. & N.
80 lbs. of seed to the acre, consisting: of
25 lbs. Western District Perennial Rye
Grass.
2 lbs. Subterranean Clover.
2 lbs. Giant Colonial Gowgraas.
1 lb. Alayke and White Dutch Glover
Mixed.
In the adult stage, the mites measure about one
twenty-fifth of an inch in length, with the body of a
dense, velvety-black colour, and with eight red legs.
They are capable of very rapid motion over the ground.
There are several generations or broods in a year.
Control measures should aim at making conditions so
unsuitable for the mites that they are unable to exist
in any numbers, thus allowing the young plants to become
thoroughly established.
In the preparation of a field: for a subterranean clover
pasture, in order to minimize the effects of mites, fallow-
ing is very helpful. It takes three or four years for the
insects to reach numbers in which they will do severe
damage after a paddock has been first infested. After
ploughing, the ground should he worked down to a fine
tilth, and any subsequent growth of weeds and clovers
on the fallow kept suppressed. Clean fallow during the
early spring and summer will guarantee freedom from
the pest at the time of sowing. Any later trouble can
come only from an invasion from outside areas.
The Cockchafer Beetle, Aphodius sp., has, of late years,
become more or , less an annual pest, particularly in the
western portion of the State. While severely attacking
and, in many cases, destroying subterranean clover, it
also attacks pasture grasses. Damage to such pastures
may become so serious, that all the useful plants of the
pasture are wiped out.
Cockchafers, or white grubs, as they are commonly
called, are very definite in appearance. They are rela-
lively stout, with a long, wrinkled body of a whitish or
creamish colour. When disturbed 1 they curl up into a
crescent shape, the end of the body being swollen and
dark, owing to the presence of food in the body. They
appear sluggish, but by means of their strong legs
are readily able to work their way through the soil;
The larvae or grubs live in a tunnel in the soil during
the day, emerging at night time, when they move about
freely over the surface. Portions of clover leaves, are
cut off, and carried down into the tunnel for consump-
tion later. The soil that is excavated in making the bur-
rows is spread in a crumply pile at their mouths. 1
In areas where the degree of infestation of the pasture
is high, as many as 150 harrows per square foot may he
made, a large amount of soil being thrown out of the
burrows, in some cases sufficient to cover the young
growth of pasture. If this occurs in winter,- when the
growth of pastures may be slow, it frequently happens
that the pasture dies out with the resultant formation
of a hare patch.
The control of cockchafer grubs in pastures is a most
difficult problem, owing to the usually widespread nature
of the infestation, the habit of the grub in working under-
ground for portion of its life and the fact that arsenical
preparations cannot be used normally on pastures. Thus,
over large areas of pastures, it is not possible to recom-
mend any conclusive method of control.
It is thus seen, from the facts presented above, that,
while insect damage to pastures in Victoria may be
serious, very little in the way of a practical solution to
the problem can be suggested at the moment. There: is
certainly ample scope for research work to be concen-
trated on this aspect of insect control.
a. mmm™m....e> e. <?. , ..^.,,^,„,.g.,..,^,„,,,,^ m^
im »»w4PWBMBBgwg^
INSECT PESTS OF PASTURES
(Continued from Page 10)


PERENNIAL RYE GRASSES
New Zealand Government Certified and Victorian Government Certified
A phase in certifying N.Z. Rye Grass seeds. The germination room
of a Government Testing Station.
HAWKE'S BAY STRAIN RYE GRASS
A leafy, persistent type and a truly perennial strain that
supplies luxuriant pastures which for bulk, stooling pro-
perties, type and feeding value, stand unequalled. Re-
commended for permanent pasture seeding and is a rye
grass that responds generously to top-dressing, harrowing
and rotational grazing practices. Though Hawke’s Bay
Rye Grass makes relatively little winter growth, it tends
to be green in summer, and is more suitable for districts
of good rainfall.
As a tribute to the density of growth, leafiness and per-
sistence of the strain, it is interesting to recall that the
original pastures from which Hawke’s Bay Mother Seed
is procured, were put down nearly eighty years ago.
SOW NEW ZEALAND WHITE CLOVER IN
MIXTURE
Sow together per acre one bushel of Hawke’s Bay Strain
Certified Rye Grass with 2 to 3 lbs. New Zealand White
Clover (Certified), for a permanent pasture suitable for
average requirements.
Although Hawke’s Bay Strain Rye Grass is usually sold
in 8-bushel sacks, which are SEALED BY GOVERNMENT,
G. & N. will supply smaller quantities if desired. Where-
ever this occurs, a certificate for purity and germination
accompanies the invoice.
The above is a reproduction of a specimen tag and seal which are
attached to all bags of machine-dressed N.Z. Perennial Rye Grass.
This seal is not broken until the bag is in the hands of the actual
grower ; another safeguard for the purchaser of these certified seeds.
Your safeguard against short-lived and pseudo
A perennial types of Rye Grass, masquerading as
perennial, is Government Certified Perennial Rye
Grass, either the Victorian Government or New T
Zealand Government Certified Strains.
Two main classes of this Hawke’s Bay Rye Grass which is
certified, sealed and tagged by the N.Z. Dept, of Agriculture
are (1) Mother Seed (intended specifically for the sowing
of areas in connection with further seed production), and
(2) Permanent Pasture Seed (recommended for the sowing
of pastures not intended specifically for seed production).
You can rely on G. & N. for genuine new crop supplies.
VICTORIAN GROWN CERTIFIED RYE GRASS
A true perennial local type developed to suit requirements
of soil and climate in various districts. There are several
regional strains, chief of which are Ballarat, Clunes,
Smeaton, Colac and Kyneton.
It is a good grazing variety and persistent leafy type of
perennial rye grass. It makes earlier growth in the Spring
and slightly later growth in Autumn, but naturally, it is
adapted to resist the severity of the Victorian summers,
and consequently shows a high survival under dry condi-
tions.
A specimen tag which is attached to all bags of Victorian Government
Certified Rye Grass in accordance with regulations made under the
Seeds Act, 1935.
Seed is gathered from long-standing pastures which have
received the approval of Government officers in selection
and management, and is Government supervised through-
out all phases of production. Officials certify the strain.
G. & N. recommends Victorian-grown Rye Grass, also,
for enterprising growers of permanent pastures.
w In these days of more intensive farming
methods a farmer cannot afford to gamble
with his pastures. Certified seeds are his
assurance of safety and results. Mr. E. D.
Boag, Tarwin Lower P. 0., Vic., testifies to
certified seed as follows :
“As I have had wonderful results with
seed procured from your firm in the last
two years, I find it very satisfying in
always solving your certified seed.”
..„S a e e e ...s e. e. e ...e~
'THE STBAIS THAT PAYS 3
<7 ri a a §4 7> y s\mmJtmmmtm-' x< ' vt —t " 1- 'S C


RYE GRASSES
Government Agrostologicai officers continually
A ur 3 e farmers to purchase seeds from more reliable k
m sources only. G. & N. have forged to the front m
N as *he "’ore reliable House for the most reliable V
Rye Grass Strains of longevity, purity and fertility.
HAWKE’S BAY STRAIN RYE GRASS (Certified)
The authentic perennial strain of certified purity germina-
lion, origin and strain. Tested, passed, sealed and tagged
by the N.Z. Department of Agriculture. A leafy persistent
type that excels itself for productivity and permanence
and does well even on soils considered too poor for Rye
Grass. Sow with Certified White Clover—l bushel Rye
Grass and 2 to 3 lbs. Clover per acre. Varieties:
Hawke’s Bay Certified Perennial “MOTHER” Seed.
Hawke’s Bay Strain Certified Perennial “PERMANENT
PASTURE” Seed.
PACBY’S SHORT-SEEDED PERENNIAL RYE GRASS
(EVERGREEN)
The ideal variety for sloping rises and highlands. It does
well on all kinds of soil, but on rich and most soils it shows
aggressive development. Of strong growth and hardy
nature, it is a worthwhile quota in permanent pastures,
withstanding very close cropping, shooting up quickly and
growing densely. Seed is small, being not more than
half the size of ordinary Ryegrass.
NEW ZEALAND GROWN RYE GRASS (Lolium perenne)
Much used in all alternate farming mixtures. It is a
hardy grass, and will thrive in almost all soils in the cool
districts. Highly palatable to stock. It grows quickly,
covering the ground rapidly. Sow two bushels per acre.
The G. & N. variety is short-seeded and of special quality.
WESTERN WOLTHS RYE GRASS (Lolium wester-
woldicum)
An improved and slightly earlier form of Italian Rye
Grass, yielding a much greater abundance of fodder. It
will thrive on almost all soils, but the best results have
been got from heavy loam, clay, or land of a somewhat
damp character. For one year’s lay or pasture this grass,
when mixed with Red Clover, can be highly recommended.
On well-manured land the produce of one-quarter to one-
third of an acre provides sufficient food for one cow during
the summer months. Sow two bushels per acre. The
G. & N. variety is machine-dressed and New Zealand
grown.
WESTERN DISTRICT RYE GRASS
Similar in habit and growth to the Victorian _ Certified
Rye Grass; in fact, almost identical with this variety, with
the exception that the pastures from which the seed comes,
although in most cases are Government approved, have
not been registered for certification. Nevertheless, the
seed conforms in every way with the Government Regula-
tiona.
When sown alone, G. & N. recommend li to 2 bus. of seed
to the acre, or with other grasses and clovers, 1 to 1| bus
to the acre. A useful mixture founded on long experience,
and ideal for good rainfall districts, is 15 lbs. rye grass,
4 lbs. cocksfoot, and 1 lb. of white clover.
ITALIAN RYE GRASS
(Lolium multifiorium Itallium)
Sown with Red Clover, it makes a heavy hay crop, and is
also well adapted for green feeding. It is a biennial, hut
if paddocks are closed up at the right period, it will seed
and replant itself in a strong manner. _ .
The seed bed must be fine and firm, and in moist districts
A 12-months’ old Hawke's Bay Rye Grass pasture on Mr. F. S.
Ferguson's holding at Dhurringile.
BELOW—
Italian Rye Grass
showing thick stems
end long leaves.
Inset—Front and side
views of seed.
ABOVE—
English Perennial
Rye Grass
(Lolium perenne),
showing stems, leaves,
etc., and seed in
inset.
March sowings give the best results. Another use for this
Rye Grass is to act as a “nurse” or cover crop, for the
slower growing perennial grasses, and also helps to exclude
weeds, etc., while other grasses are becoming established.
Sow two bushels per acre. The G. & N. variety is N.Z.
grown seed and extra choice.
A* Many a father has put his son on the right
track in the matter of seed selection, _ and
keeping “Pasture Success" a family tradition.
Mr. K. G. Mclntosh, of Katandra West (Vic.),
writes:
"My father has a couple of paddocks of the
Rye Grass Seed procured from you some
years ago, and it stands above all other Rye
Grass and is improving with years.
“I’m starting my block which adjoins father’s
and would be very pleased to get similar
results from your seed as he has."
[?]
m-i FLINDERS LANE,
MELBOURNE, C.l, VIC.


WIMMERA RYE GRASS
Wimmera Rye Grass, show-
ing (right) the vigorous
rooting system, and (inset)
the seed spike.
I. Rigid Rye Grass (Lo lium rigidum). 2. Wimmera Rye Grass
(Lolium rigidum, var. strictum).perenne). 3. Perennial Rye Grass (Lolium
perenne). 4. Italian Rye Grass (Lolium italioum).
A shows flowering spikes in each case; B seeds; C spikelets.
Note how the seed of Wimmera Rye Grass is held by the long outer
gl ume, whe rea s Perennial and Italian Rye grasses the spikelets open
out and the seed shatters very readily. (N.S.W. Dept. of Agriculture.)
(Lolium subulatum Vis)
Pastoralists are loud in their praise of G. & N.
Wimmera Rye Grass for its excellent winter
jj growth and earlier-flowering characteristics,
May be permanently maintained as a self-sown
i crop by light cultivation every second or third '
Autumn.
Wimmera Rye Grass is a very free seeder, and it is this
characteristic, together with the ability of the seeds to
strike on the surface, that makes Wimmera Rye Grass
such a valuable plant in dry districts.
Wimmera Rye Grass has proved itself a profitable winter
grass for wheatlands and dry regions. Being an annual
plant it re-establishes itself from seed each year.
It increases the carrying capacity of land, makes splendid
temporary pastures, and provides excellent hay and
ensilage, in addition to giving green feed for seven or
eight months of the colder part of the year.
The best time to sow is from March to June. Sown in
autumn it can be grazed well during its first winter until
spring, when it is most essential that it bo allowed to
mature -a good proportion of seed. Heavy grazing in late
spring is very detrimental to its persistency, as livestock
are particularly fond of its palatable seed heads. If
allowed to seed well the first season it is not so necessary
to control the spring grazing during future seasons,
except that it might be advisable every third or fourth
season to allow it a fair spell to mature seed. Autumn
harrowing will aid its growth and persistency. Spring
mowing for ensilage and hay will materially aid it, pro-
vided the mowing is not left too late in the 'season.
The seed can be planted by hand, or sown through a top-
dressing machine or wheat drill. The seed makes good
and rapid germination. Provided it is sown under reason-
ably good conditions, Wimmera Rye Grass establishes
itself from very light sowings of from 4 to 10 lbs. per
acre. It makes good winter growth, but will commence to
come into ear in the early spring.
The practice of sowing at least 2 lb. of Wimmera Rye
Grass with a bushel of either oats or wheat should become
universal. A pasture of palatable grass on which all stock
thrive would be obtained. When compared as feed for
stock ryegrass has a longer grazing season. It is also
quite nutritious when dry and has no objectionable seed
to lower the price of wool.
Prom the wheatgrowers' point of view it has the further
advantage of immunity to fungus diseases to which wheat
plants are susceptible, such as smut, flag smut and take-
all. It enriches the stubble and ensures the re-establish-
ment of the pasture the following year.
PREVENTS SOIL EROSION
To maintain a pasture of Wimmera Rye Grass indefinitely,
it should be cultivated at least every second year.
Like cereals, it responds accordingly to the application of
superphosphate, and owing to its deep root system if will
ultimately be acknowledged as a national asset in helping
to solve the problem of soil erosion.
Wimmera Rye Grass thrives on plenty of available
nitrogen, and consequently, unless the stock droppings
are cultivated into the soil, and the soil aerated by
ploughing or cultivation, Wimmera Ryegrass will largely
disappear from Sub. Glover pastures after a number of
seasons.
Wimmera Rye Grass does exceedingly well when sown
with Subterranean Clover, and the practice provides a
well-balanced ration. Further particulars on pages 32, 33.
[?]


GRASSES
Two essentials for Pasture Growers: (1) Maximum
. freedom from weeds in the soil; (2) Maximum v
•jmL freedom from weeds in the seed. You supply the ik
former; G. & N. Seeds supply the latter, at the
™ same time ensuring maximum coverage of the *
sward with utmost economy.
BROWN TOP GRASS (Agrostis tenuis)
A fine-foliaged perennial suitable for and capable of
forming a close, dense turf on second-class country.
Worthy of a place in all permanent pastures—a pioneer
pasture grass—tip-top for primary or secondary burns.
The grass for poor soils, and is useful for coping with
secondary growth. Sow 4to 6 lbs. per acre. Brown Top
is most suitable for making lawns, bowling greens, etc.
CREEPING BENT, OR FIORIN (Agrostis alba.)
Creeping Bent is useful in pasture mixtures, as it gives
early spring and late autumn herbage before and after
other grasses have commenced or left off growing. Its
stems are 6 inches to 3 feet; leaves numerous, flat and
usually scabrid. Being of creeping habit and having long,
fibrous roots, it is valuable in damp or moist situations
and thrives in spongy soil. This variety grows freely on
light land and on peat. Creeping Bent also makes a good
lawn grass, and a little can be included in lawn mixtures
with advantage. Sow alone, at the rate of 20 lbs. per
acre, or 3 to 5 lbs. when mixed. Illustrated on this page.
CRESTED DOGSTAIL (Cynosurus cristatua)
Valuable for uplands and sheep runs. It will, however,
thrive almost anywhere. An important pasture plant on
permanent pasture lands, and particularly on those of
relatively poor quality. The roots penetrate deeply; thus
the plant is adapted for dry soils and can withstand driest
conditions. It makes dense turf, and withstands dry
weather well. Sheep eat it with avidity. A good lawn
grass. Rootstock perennial, stems one to two feet, tufted,
erect, smooth, and wiry. Leaves very narrow, ribbed,
slightly hairy, sheath smooth; ligule short and bifid. It
does not reach maturity until the second or third year.
The crop responds to manuring and a dressing of nitro-
gen and phosphate. On light soil add potash.
It makes little growth during the summer or autumn of
the seeding year and cannot normally be grazed.
Sow alone, 20 lbs. per acre; from 3 to 6 lbs. per acre may
be included in mixtures, according to conditions.
COUCH OR BERMUDA (Cynodon Dactylon)
Valuable in dry situations on account of its long, creeping
shoots, which root at every joint. Stands heat and drought
well, and succeeds where other grasses fail. It is also of
great value for binding loose soil, sand banks, etc. The
seed should be sown in warm weather and after rain, as it
does not germinate too freely. When once established, it
soon takes possession, and is difficult to get rid of when
introduced. Sow 10 lbs. per acre.
PASTURE AWARDS WON WITH G. & N. PLOTS
Another evidence of the high quality of G. & N. Seeds is
to be observed in the number of Pasture Plot Competitions
won by State Schools with G. & N. Seeds.
Owing to limited space we have room for one photograph
only (see above). This Young Farmers’ Club won two first
prizes at a combined Y.F.C. Field Day held at Goornong
last October. The Head Master of the School states; “I
am pleased to say that the pasture trials this year have
been successful. At a combined Field Day the pasture
awards went to Goornong. Phalaris, Sub. Clover (Mid-
Season), Whnmera Rye have yielded particularly well.”
Some of the Goornong Y.F.C. Members standing among Phalaris
Tuberosa grown from G. & N. Seed. This Club won two first prizes
last year. See letterpress below.
BELOW —
Crested Dogstail.
Inset—Seed, front
and side views, mag-
nified.
ABOVE—
Creeping Bent
Grass
seed with and with-
out chaff. magnified.
RTGHT—
Couch Grass.
taamjranwMMiniiKimao


VICTORIAN GROWN COCKSFOOT
(DACTYLIS GLOMERATA)
HARVESTING OPERATION PHASES
Three of the many phases through which this leafy per-
sistent strain passes. It is then cleaned by the most modern
cleaning machinery.
Drying Victorian-grown Cocksfoot in the beat Gippsland hilly country.
Flailing operations on Victorian-grown Cocksfoot.
Curing Victorian-grown Cocksfoot,
When it has ripened fairly evenly and is nearly mature, the heads
are cut off at a convenient height and transported to a common spot
where they are threshed by a hand flail. Careful winnowing removes
rubbish such aB light seeds, empty shells, chaff, weed seeds and other
foreign matter.
An ideal pasture type strain, Victorian Cocksfoot
. does well as a hay-producer or as a provider of .
uniformly fine leafy herbage. Production, pala- m.
tability plus persistency, and the fact it gives pr
good winter growth, commend if os a strain for *
Victorian grasslands.
From old-established stands in the best hill country
of Gippsland has come this improved type of Vic-
torian Cocksfoot, and farmers can be sure that the
seed is of good type, being of finest strain and
naturally grown.
This is one of the best all-round grasses for the
Australian climate, being little affected by dry
weather on account of its deep fibrous roots, and
making its home almost as well in the hot as in the
cold districts. Two to three feet stems, broad leaves
and scabrid sheath is a brief botanical description.
Cocksfoot prefers deep, free loams and peaty soils,
also thrives on somewhat heavier classes of soil.
, Valuable for its summer, autumn and spring growth,
but it is best as early summer feed which-makes it
a valuable variety. As it is by nature a summer
grower it requires fair summer rains.
RAINFALL CONDITIONS
Cocksfoot does best in areas receiving 40 inches or
more of rainfall a year, but is not restricted to these
areas. Its growth after the first season is quick, and
it throws up strong stems from 15 to 4 feet high in
favourable situations.
It is a highly nutritious grass which all live stock
eat rapidly, especially sheep, which are very partial
to it.
SEEDING AMOUNTS
To stint the quantity of Cocksfoot in a grass mixture
is a serious mistake. It should be sown in the autumn
at the rate of 30 lb. per acre. The greatest advantage
of Cocksfoot is its suitability for permanent pasture
mixtures, and it does exceedingly well sown with
Rye Grass and the Clovers. Cutting for hay or seed
and grazing with cattle rather than sheep, tends to
strengthen Cocksfoot. Some true perennial should be
included to fill the spaces between the Cocksfoot.
Red Clover may be well used for early feed.
In this State and in New Zealand it was, and still is,
par excellence the grass for “bush burns.” The
farmers in the hill country of Gippsland and the
Otway resorted to this grass, and on hush burns on
volcanic and grey soils it still has no rival. The fact
that it held out for years on bush burns is the
strongest recommendation of its truly perennial
character. It long survived under harsh treatment
all the other grasses. For renovating rough country,
where the native grasses have disappeared, it still
holds first place, and is being used to a considerable
extent in New Zealand for this purpose, especially
on unploughable land, where the Silver Tussock holds
sway.
Stock are severe on good Cocksfoot, owing to its
palatahility. If not properly grazed, however, it
grows tussocky—and is naturally a tussock grass.
This defect, if defect it is, is easily cured. Farmers
sometimes refer to Cocksfoot that has- got out of
hand as “roughage,” hut a grass that grows so well
as to warrant this appellation has much to commend
it in view of the rough-and-ready methods applied to
its cultivation.
A strong recommendation by G. & N. is behind this
Cocksfoot. It is outstanding in type, germination
and purity and is economical to sow. Guaranteed
Genuine Victorian Grown.
[?]


GRASSES.
"The wheat farmer realizes the great importance
of using a variety adapted to the soil and climatic .
A conditions of his farm. The same precision is k.
Jm needed in regard to the choice of strains of W'
Cocksfoot and other pasture species for each
grassland region." (Dr. A. E. V. Richardson,
Deputy Chief Executive Officer, C.5.1.R.)
COCKSFOOT (Dactylis glomerata) New Zealand Govern-
ment Certified.
A leafy, persistent type, with shorter, straighter leaves
than the Victorian strain, commencing growth later and
maturing somewhat later in the spring.
Cocksfoot is a grass which, unless carefully managed,
tends to develop a considerable amount of stem which, if
allowed to ripen, becomes harsh and indigestible. With
all pasture plants, those which produce the highest pro-
portion of leaf to stem are the most valuable, and this
applies particularly to Cocksfoot. The N.Z. certified type,
b;ith contain a fairly high proportion of leafy rather
than stemmy plants, and under favourable conditions are
capable of yielding a large quantity of palatable leafy
herbage.
New Zealand Cocksfoot seed has a remarkable reputation
in Victoria, and certified seed is now being marketed, as
Mother and Permanent Pasture seed, in the same manner
as perennial Rye Grass. The seed is harvested from old
pastures, mainly about Akaroa, on Banks Peninsula, in the
South Island. The Akaroa Cocksfoot is a good leafy and
high-producing strain, being very similar in all respects
to the best Victorian old pasture type.
DANISH COCKSFOOT (Imported)
A new variety, developed after years of selective work.
It is an improvement on the old strain, being more leafy
in habit, with very soft stalks and few seed heads. An
upright, stemmy strain, dormant in winter and green in
summer. This new Cocksfoot proved itself to be an excel-
lent pasture type, and, under grazing conditions, has a
good dense crown and leafy growth. It grows best in
loamy, friable soil and under good rainfall conditions
produces large quantities of palatable herbage in summer
months.
CHEWING’S FESCUE (Festuea duriuscula, var. Chew-
ing’s)
An improved variety of Hard Fescue and a first-class
pasture grass for sheep. Excellent for light, stony soils.
Chewing’s Fescue, on account of its foliage and evergreen
appearance during winter, as well as because of its hardi-
ness to dry weather, is most suitable for lawns, golf links
and ornamental parks. For pastures, sow alone, at the
rate of 20 lbs. seed per acre or 3 to B lbs. when mixed.
KENTUCKY BLUE GRASS (Smooth-stalked Meadow
Grass) (Poa pratensis) (as illustrated)
This variety grows naturally in dry soil, and has creeping
roots which enable it to withstand a long, dry season. Its
rootstock is perennial and creeping, its stems are one to
two feet erect and smooth, its leaves are flat and rather
broad. It is able to hold its ground against any natural
grasses when once established, and is to be found gener-
ally growing in large patches to the exclusion of all other
grasses. A most excellent grass for lawns and useful in
all lawn mixtures on account of its hardiness to dry
weather. Sow for pastures, 20 lbs. per acre.
If. SEED TESTING
7m the Agrostology Branch of the Dept, of
Agriculture , Melbourne, C. 2, farmers have a
very, special friend. This Depasrtment is
equipped to test any sample of seed forwarded
to them, so that farmers doubtful of the
quality of their seed can secure authentic
Government verification.
G. & N. No. 2 Mixturc on stiff coil on Llic property of Mr. J. Steed,
of Bung Bong.
BELOW—
Kentucky Blue
Grass.
(Poa pratensis.)
Inset —Seed, front and
side view of seed mag-
nified.
A BOVE—
Cocksfoot or
Orchard Grass.
(Dactylis glomerata.)
Inset—Front and side
view of seed magni-
fied.
Specimen showing special tag and seal which are attached to all bags
of certified New Zealand Cocksfoot, by the N.Z. Dept. of Agriculture.
:m v i :eo*?•


PASPALUM DILATATUM
Selected Paspalum Dilatatum Seed comes to you in a branded sack
for your protection.
PASPALUM DILATATUM (Golden Crown)
1 and 2. Spikelet; 3. Portion of plant; 4. Spike.
SOW ONLY HANDSHAKEN SEED
In purchasing Paspalum seeds, growers are urged to sow
the Seed which is Hand-shaken—a very potent factor in
the successful establishment of a Paspalum pasture.
G. & N. will be pleased to quote special rates for
large quantities of this seed. You can rely on the seed
being heavy, new crop and of very strong germination.
Sow a few pounds of White Clover with the Paspalum.
This clover has proved to be the most adaptable under
all conditions to grow with Paspalum.
Dairymen will do well to pause and ponder over
. Paspalum Dilatatum, for here, at this grass, can .
Jk be laid the claim that it is the cheapest form of
vB dairying feed. If you are interested in feeding
’ economy, we commend Paspalum to you in all '
sincerity.
Paspalum Dilatatum is a perennial grass which stands
out as the most permanent for mixtures on practically
all types of soil. It stands hot, dry weather admirably,
yields a large quantity of herbage and spreads quickly;
in addition it makes a splendid winter sward. As this
grass is usually the most green of all the pasture grasses
during the hot summer months, stock are continuously
feeding upon it, and it speaks volumes for its hardiness
that it is able to withstand such close feeding with so
little protection to its root crowns.
Paspalum is a deep-rooting grass and is suited to warm
soil and climatic conditions. It grows well in swampy
situations and in rich, moist lands and is a useful grass
to sow on bush burns in hilly country where there is a
good rainfall in the summer months. Paspalum is a grass
of very robust growth, with strong rhizomes or horizontal
stems beneath the surface, which give rise to new shoots
and roots. It is a profitable grass, producing a luxuriant
and large quantity of fodder, and a quick-growing grass,
producing, as an after-growth after cutting for hay in
January, an excellent and palatable pasturage in the late
summer and autumn. Its palatability is no doubt due to
its rapid growth, and to its succulency at this period of
the year, when other grasses are losing palatability.
Paspalum has been proved a splendid grass, for dairying
and fattening. It is succulent from stem to head, makes
splendid hay and stands any amount of grazing’. Frosts
do not kill it; floods will not injure it; while its drought-
resisting qualities are outstanding.
Keep the growth short. If growing for ensilage, cutting
should be done before flowering begins. The leafy material
packs better, and feeding value is higher. Kept short in
the pasture, the tendency of Paspalum to crowd out the
Clovers is reduced.
SEEDING INFORMATION
The beat time to sow is early spring or autumn. In a good
season Paspalum may be sown right through the spring
to late autumn. It must be always remembered that Pas-
palum seed requires both heat and moisture to germinate.
If sown in cold weather the seed will remain without
injury in the ground until hot weather sets in. Seed has
been known to germinate within three weeks.
As to the sowing amounts it is advisable to sow broadcast
10 to 12 lbs. Hand-shaken Seed per acre; if possible on
burnt ground after Are; or, if on cultivation, work your
ground well, sow, and roll lightly. If on old pastures,
loosen the soil well with harrow after sowing. _ Beware
of threshed and sweated cheap seed —it only gives dis-
appointment.
What proper feeding can do! Mr. J. Soafkin
( Shepparton) writes-. “7 started on 160 acres
at Gilliedton which could not carry 10 cows,
I put it under pasture and finished by carrying
nearly a cow to the acre."
Removal of stock is recommended during the growing
season, to permit the grass to recuperate after heavy
stocking, and, with the removal of stock, the spreading of
the animal manure by running the harrow over, turned
upside down, in order to break up the manure. Top-
dressing in the early spring with 1 cwt. of superphosphate
and i cwt. of sulphate of ammonia.
nnaiK ay n
V/' <)" 1 r ' ■ 1 /jl ■ r ' ■ : '/7 <r s“' *'" ‘' v '*'''' ’ I ' V ' v - Cn '■■■■\K”‘*--“V ,,,, ''ts' ~,,t' V ■ '


The sweetness of cheapness never compensates
. for the bitterness of poor quality. If you would .
avoid this bitterness never risk the high-production
capacities of permanent pastures by sowing cheap
seeds. Buy your seeds on QUALITY and
PEDIGREE like you do your cattle.
HARD FESCUE (Festuca duriuscula)
A dwarf-growing, hardy, robust grass. Slightly creeping
rootstock, stems one to two feet, erect, leaves flat. It
retains its verdure during continued drought in a very
remarkable manner. All kinds of stock like it, especially
sheep. A splendid permanent pasture grass, and also
well adapted for sowing in parks and ornamental grounds
as well as for lawns. Sow alone, 20 lbs. per acre.
MEADOW FESCUE (Festuca pratensis)
The illustration shows its stems, which can develop
to 3 ft.; its flat, smooth leaves, and a front and side view
of the seed, magnified. Meadow Fescue is also known
as Evergreen Grass, Sweet Grass and English Blue Grass,
and is one of the best grasses for permanent pastures.
An excellent grass for elevated districts and in good soils.
Should be included in all mixtures, except for very dry
soils. It does best in moist soils, although it is fairly
adaptable in this respect. Meadow Fescue is very pala-
table to stock, and has first-class fattening qualities. It
makes excellent hay, is perennial, early and nutritious.
Sow alone, 30 lbs. of seed per acre.
MEADOW FOXTAIL (Alopecurus pratensis)
One of the earliest and best grasses for permanent
pastures. Its roots are fibrous and its stems are erect
and smooth, and its leaves are flat and broad. It thrives
well on good and medium moist soils in warm to hot dis-
tricts. It is a fine grass, is splendid feed, and should be
included in every mixture. Sow 10 lbs. per acre.
Commenting on his remarkable pasture
growth, Mr. H. Lowe, of Manildra (N.S.W.),
says, “Last year I obtained a quantity of
pasture seeds from you and this year I have
no hesitation in giving you my order again.
The year that has just passed was considered
by many as the worst for 30 years—my clover
and rye seed was not sown until June, and
yet the results I got toere remarkable. This
year has been terribly dry also and yet last
week we had 120 points, and now the clover
and rye grass is germinating wonderfully.
PASPALUM COMPRESSUM
Poor sandy stretches and in places where Paspalum
Dilatatum does not thrive, Pasp. Compressum is found to
be highly productive. It is suited to warm temperatures,
grows well and makes well-matted roots. It is also
known as Durrington Grass, or Carpet Paspalum. Sow
5 lbs. per acre.
PRAIRIE GRASS (Bromus unioloides)
(Specially selected from superior strains.)
A very valuable winter cow pasture. If liberally treated
with manure, it will yield a great quantity of excellent
fodder. It is highly nutritious, and is probably more
palatrb'e than any other pasture herbage, and is at its
best at a time of the year when other grasses are yielding
little feed. It is a very useful grass for winter and early
spr-my feeding having the advantage over clover that it
will grow at a much lower temperature. It is permanent
if rea unable care is taken in the grazing. Silage of the
very highest quality can be made from it. Prairie Grass
does best in loose rich soils thoroughly prepared. Sow 2
bushels (40 lbs.) per acre. Sow alone for preference.
Mowing a magnificent mixed pasture of G. & N. Rye Grasses and
Clovers on the property of Mr. J. Merrigum, Swanpool.
BELOW—
Rough-stalked
Meadow Grass.
Inset—Front and side
view of seed magni.
fled.
A BOVE—
Meadow Fescue.
Inset —Front and side
view of seed magni-
fied.
ROUGH-STALKED MEADOW GRASS (Poa trivialis)
Similar in appearance to Kentucky Blue Grass, but quite
different in habit and general properties. A splendid
lawn grass. For pastures, sow alone, 20 lbs. per acre.
[?]
GRASSES.


Jersey herd grazing contentedly in G. & N. Grass and Clover pasture
grown by Mr. Freestone (Murchison North), Victoria’s Champion
Dairy Farmer.
B ELOW—
Tall Fescue.
Inset—Front and
side view of seed
magnified.
ABOVE—
Sheep’s Fescue.
Inset—Front and
side view of seed
magnified.
SEED SHOULD NOT BE SOWN DEEP
It has been proved by experience that light
covering is best. Aim for shallow seeding and
secure better results.
Enlist the aid of G. & N. Grasses to fulfil the aims
. 0 f pasture management, which are to increase the i.
carrying capacities of the pasture, and, to prevent
v the pasture from deteriorating, and, if possible, r
to improve it.
SHEEP’S FESCUE (Pestuoa ovina tenuifolia). (Pine
leaved Sheep's Fescue)
This grass succeeds well on poor dry soils, and is oxce!
lent for a sheep run. As sheep specially like this Posoui
it should always be sown in composition with other pas
tures. A popular grass grown on English sheep rum
It is different from other Fescues, inasmuch as it i
densely tufted with abundance of very narrow leave
and slender flower stalks. Sow about 80 lbs. per acr
alone or with other grasses 2 to 4 lbs.
Jl The Imperial Bureau of Pastures and Forage
Crops, (Britain) Bulletin No. 25 sounds a
note of warning on WIND EROSION. "The
main cause of Wind Erosion .... (1) removal
of the natural cover, (2) the use of fire for
destroying either virgin growth or crop or
crop residues, (3) overcropping and bare fal-
lowing, and (4) overstocking, to which rabbits
largely contribute as well as starting blow-
outs by their burrows.
TALL FESCUE (Pestuca elatior, var. fertilis)
In appearance it is like Meadow Fescue, but is large
and of stronger growth. Its leaf is of deep green colour
very prominently ribbed, and the lower sheaths ar
striated, rough, and yellow. A hardy variety for nev
pastures, and recommended for droughty conditions. Idea
when the crop is grown for grazing purposes or in irrigu
tion areas. Valuable in permanent mixtures for hoav;
soils. Sow 20 to 80 lbs. per acre alone, or 3 to B lbs. will
other grasses.
LAWN GRASS SEED (Dwarf Evergreen)
This is a leading variety that produces a fine close turf
A hardy sort, free from weeds. It is of the drought
defying type, and flourishes well in warm weather. Foi
lawns, edging and grass plots, this dwarf overgreei
variety will give the beat results. Any kind of soil ii
suitable, but a stiff black loam or a clayey soil are th<
most popular.
compliment of which we are justly proud.
Read it for yourself. “Like the high quality of
‘G. & N.’ seeds. I find this catalogue the finest
pasture catalogue in Australia.” (Mr, T. W.
Marwick, Greenhills, W.A.)
AUTUMN BEST TIME TO TOPDRESS
Autumn is the correct time to apply fertilisers to pastures
The work should be carried out in time to benefit from the
rains that can usually be anticipated at this period.
Application can be made by drill, spreader, broadcaster, or
in small areas, by hand.
Ordinary superphosphate, as used for wheat-growing, and
containing approximately 22 per cent, water soluble phos-
phoric acid, is recommended for pastures. For natural
pastures, the optimum rate of application is 1 cwt. an acre,
In regions of high regular rainfall and on small properties,
II to 2 cwt. an acre can be used to advantage.
On well-improved pastures, sulphate of ammonia can be
used at 1 cwt. an acre in addition to superphosphate, to
stimulate the growth of perennials, such as rye grass and
cocksfoot, and provide grazing at any particular period
when urgently required.
[?]
grasses ..


A cow usually reaches the peak of production si*
a or eight weeks offer calving. Then she begins ja
J|9 to drop off. The average is about 2 per cent, a |»
week. It cannot be prevented but it can be kept fr
at a minimum by proper feeding.
TIMOTHY (Phleum pratense)
An extremely hardy grass, with creeping perennial root
stock, stems one to three feet, and short, flat, soft leaves.
On heavy loam and clay it produces abundant herbage.
It grows extremely well in a moist locality, but will also
thrive on high and dry places—quite an adaptable type
of good growing grass. When allowed to grow on without
hard grazing until December, it appears to be very de-
cidedly more palatable than either Cocksfoot or Perennial
Rye Grass left until a similar date, which is no doubt due
to its being a late grass. It is very nutritious, and stock
favour it. Two pounds of this per acre sown with oats
for hay will be found an excellent feed for stock of all
kinds. Sow in autumn at the rate of 30 lbs. per acre.
YORKSHIRE FOG GRASS (Holcus lanatus)
This grass grows on poor land, rind particularly on that
of a swampy or moist character. It produces a large
bulk of forage in early spring, but is not considered to
be the best of feed, as stock will often neglect it for other
grasses. It will be found to flourish, however, where other
grasses will not succeed. Sow alone 20 to 30 lbs. per acre.
SWEET VERNAL (Anthoxanthum odoratura)
It is grown chiefly for the pleasant odour it imparts to
the hay crop. Its leaves are hairy, flat and pointed and
its stem ranges in length from I to 2 feet, As will be
seen from the illustration, the Sweet Vernal stem has few
joints. One characteristic of this grass is its brilliant
green colour. On deep, rich, moist soils this grass grows
luxuriantly, and on marshy land it throws up flower culms
all through the summer.
RIB GRASS, OR LAMB’S TONGUE (Plantago lanceo-
lata)
It is particularly adapted for dry pastures and poor land.
Its young growth is much relished by sheep, and is con-
sidered very nutritious. Two pounds, if sown with other
grasses, will be sufficient per acre, or if alone, 12 to 16
lbs.
wl “The grass seed I purchased from, you last
" year was very satisfactory. I think every seed
must have grown” writes Mr. W. Wurlod,
Shoreham, Vic.
RHODES GRASS (Chloris gayana)
A splendid pasture grass for dairying districts, and a
good _ summer hay grass for dry areas. This summer-
growing perennial grass gives dense leafy growth
throughout the warm weather, spreading rapidly by sur-
face runners. It is a quick grower, a drought resister of
renown, producing a heavy crop of hay to the acre.
Rhodes Grass will grow to perfection on alluvial and on
loamy soils, and it will also do very well on light soils,
particularly on those of sandstone origin. It likes warm
weather and dislikes frost. If it is not desired to allow
the first crop to remain, it can be cut for hay, and the
second growth may be allowed to come away before cattle
are turned on to it. Broadcasting is advocated, one half
of the seed being sown in a direction at right angles to
the other half. In wheat-growing districts, where the
wheat drill is available, the seed may be sown through
the drill with superphosphate or some other substance
of the same texture mixed with it. This ensures its
running through the drills slowly. Sow thinly and lightly
6 to 8 lbs. per acre.
"A beautiful pasture, and I don’t think I have ever seen ns good."
says a grower, Mr. Musselwhite, “Rose-Dell," Koyuga, “and G. & N.
Pedigree Seed was sown.”
BELOW—
Sweet Vernal.
Inset, seed with and
without chaff, mag-
nified.
ABOVE—
Timothy Grass or
Meadow Catstail.
liset, seed with and
without chaff.
SHEEP’S BURNET (Poterium sanguisorba)
This is a most valuable fodder plant, and should be
largely cultivated. It is very suitable for dry country
where Lucerne or Clover will not stand. Yields large
quantities of splendid pasture for sheep and cattle. Sow
in the autumn at the rate of 16 lbs. per acre alone, or 5
to 6 lbs. per acre in mixture with grasses.
[?]
GRASSES . .


Hay grown from G. & N. Pedigree Seeds on the farm of the champion
Dairy Farmer, Mr. P. Freestone, North Murchison.
B ELOW—
Wood Meadow
Grass.
Inset depicts a front
and side view of seed
which has been mag-
nified.
ABOVE—
Illustrating
Tall Meadow
Oat Grass.
WOOD MEADOW GRASS (Poa nemoralis sempervirens)
Wood Meadow Grass is a true evergreen variety with
slightly creeping perennial rootstock, erect stems one to
three feet, and narrow-pointed leaves. Wood Meadow
There ore over 800 different grasses being tested
by the Council for Scientific and Industrial
◄ Research, in the hope of discovering more s
valuable types. Research, breeding, trials, are
important factors in this development. G. & N. y
keep in step by specializing in superior strains —
First with the latest!
Grass is particularly well adapted for pleasure grounds.
It does well under trees, and forms a fine sward where
few others exist. Sow 20 lbs. per acre.
TALL MEADOW OAT GRASS (Avena elatior)
It is a useful perennial pasture grass on account of its
early and luxuriant growth. It is an excellent winter
grass. It has a deep rooting system, and when once es-
tablished, grows densely and spreads. Suitable for warm
climates and produces a wealth of nutritious herbage.
Succeeds well on sandy soil, and stands dry weather
fairly well. Sow alone 30 lbs. of seed per - acre.
WALLABY GRASS (Danthonia semi-annularis)
This grass is natural to Australia and the main native
grass of our pastoral areas. It is much relished by
stock, particularly sheep, and is now commanding much
attention. Given suitable soil, the roots penetrate to a
great depth, thereby withstanding drought. The grass is
highly nutritious, and will grow all the year round. It
may be sown with profit and satisfaction in any part of
Australia, and grows well in poor soil. Sow in the
autumn in mixtures at the rate of 3 to 6 lbs. per acre.
Seeded by itself, about 15 lbs. per acre is required.
KIKUYU GRASS (Pennisetum clandestinum)
No grazier or farmer, no matter what may be the charac-
ter and quality and situation of his land or the local
climatic conditions, would be doing himself justice by
remaining unacquainted with Kikuyu Grass, a drought
resister and a safeguard against soil erosion.
It is a strictly perennial grass, producing long runners
spreading rapidly and covering the ground with a dense
turf, stems and branches bearing heavy leafage, flat and
spreading. It grows three or four feet high. The creep-
ing stems will run yards in a season. The grass will not
produce seed in Australia, and is, therefore, notwith-
standing its rapid extension, easily controlled if necessary.
It responds readily to the lightest showers, and grows
luxuriantly under irrigation conditions. About 2,500 roots
are required to plant an acre.
No grass is more easily established than Kikuyu Grass.
The best time to plant is from early spring right into
summer, and in the autumn. Spring and autumn plant-
ing are especially recommended. It can be grazed, cut and
fed green or made into hay.
IDENTIFICATION OF PLANTS, WEEDS OR
SPECIES
Any strange plant should be identified in order
to ascertain how valuable, how harmless or hoiv
noxious it is. Free advice can be obtained from
G. & N. or by forwarding specimen to the
National Herbarium, South Yarra, S.E.I.
A WORD ON NATIVE GRASSES
Although we do not stock many varieties of Native
Grasses, we can arrange delivery for any grass you re-
quire. We supply at regular rates and guarantee all grass
seed supplied. As in our agricultural seeds, we stand
behind each one with our reputation for reliability.
Write us; we will be glad to receive your enquiry.
i the sthah
GRASSES . .


PHALARIS TUBEROSA (Syn. Bulbosa)
Phalaris Tuberosa is gaining in favouritism, and
rightly sol Grazing trials have shown that where
A it required four acres to one beast on rye, k
jM cocksfoot and clover pastures, on Phalaris one jfe
beast was fattened per acre. W
G. & N. Phalaris Tuberosa Seed is GOVERNMENT
CERTIFIEDI Bred for productivity.
PHALARIS TUBEROSA (Syn. Bulbosa)
An excellent winter pasture that stands the severest
frost, growing throughout the coldest period and being
almost as great a drought-resister as Paspalmn, it is the
finest speculation for the Australian grazier. It is
succulent, palatable, and a very hardy grower, with a
deep rooting system, and, once established, it is thoroughly
permanent.
As it is partial to low temperature, it makes extraordi-
nary strong growth in winter, making rapid and wonder-
ful progress. Makes excellent hay, or can be grazed.
Sown in conjunction with White Dutch or Subterranean
Clover, it yields very heavily, resisting drought or severe
winter conditions. When properly grazed, it forms a
close turf, while if cut when flower heads appear, it makes
particularly good hay.
Phalaris likes a fine seed bed and should be sown on the
surface with perhaps just a little rolling. Autumn and
winter sowing is recommended, and a chain harrow is
advised to keep the pasture in good order.
Paddocks of Phalaris may be grazed as soon as the seed-
lings have become well rooted, which, in normal seasons,
is twelve to fourteen weeks after sowing. It is prefer-
able that the paddock should be fed off quickly in the
first grazing, and then spelled until fresh growth is made,
when the paddock can be grazed again. This practice
should be repeated during the first year, but “flogging”
should be avoided to ensure greatest success in subse-
quent years.
Being a grass that produces large quantities of high
quality fodder, it is only reasonable that the better the
soil the better the result obtained, also it is most responsive
to top-dressing.
The continued heavy grazing of the pasture often results
in consolidation of the soil, and the plants may become
root bound. This may be rectified by renovating with a
stiff tyned cultivator, using it both ways, preferably in
early spring. This is most important.
“Phalaris Tuberosa,” states “The Leader,” “is not well
adapted, considering its sensitivity to competition of weeds,
etc., for successful establishment with surface sowings
under indifferent rainfall, but with good rainfall some
success has been obtained providing weeds have been
eliminated by hard grazing prior to seeding. Reference
was made to this quick method on millet stubbles, etc., in
connection with subterranean clover, although, strictly
speaking, the light working given is more elaborate than
in the surface sowing where the drill forms the seed bed
and distributes the seed in the one operation.”
With other grasses or clovers, sow from February to
April, and, perhaps, to the middle of May, but not later,
as the plants will not have time to establish themselves
before the summer starts. If sown alone, 2 to 3 lbs. in
drills, or 6 to 8 lbs. broadcast, is required per acre.
JL From near and far come words of praise for
* G. & N. Pedigree Seeds. From far-distant
Kotara (N.S.W.) comes this letter from Mr.
R. Robinson: “Thanks for your catalogue of
1939 — G. & N. Pedigree Seeds, I wish to state
that I have had tvonderfod results from my
order to you last season, and I have grass
feet high. I believe every seed must have
grown.”
Trial plot of Phalaris Tuberosa at the Burnley Plant Research Station,
Victorian Dept, of Agriculture.
Phalaris Species.
1. Phalaris canariensia, Linn. 2. P. Minor, Katz. 3. P.
Tuberosa, Linn. 4. P. caerulescens, Deaf. 5. P. angusta,
Nees. 6. P. arundinacea, Linn. 7. P. paradoxa, Linn.
8. Showing the internodial swellings—the “tubers," 9. P.
canariensis. 10. The ligule. 11. P. minor. 12. P. caeru-
lesoens. 13. P. paradoxa. 14. P. angusta. 15. P.
tuberosa. 16. P. arundinacea.
[?]


MELBOURNE ROYAL
a The finest stud cattle in the country, if not in the world, appear every year at the .
jM Melbourne Royal Show. Here are some more Blue Riband winners. Photographs
by courtesy of "Weekly Times" and "Leader." Pedigree cattle, like Pedigree seed,
yield more and cost less in the end. '
Mr. C. Nathan’s Ch. Jersey Cow, Mansfield Remembrance
5th.
Mr. R. H. Kerr’s Friesian Cow, Bolobek Ella.
Capt. A. E. T. Payne’s Guernsey Cow, Yarraview Rouge.
Mr. P. J. Maloney’s Jersey Bull, Baron Design (imp.,
U.S.A.).
Mr. T. Hose’s Ayrshire Cow, Burwood Rest 2nd.
Mr. Alex. C. Mercer’s Hereford Bull, Golf Hill Majestic.
a. e e e. jl e.
ifiT strais that pays]
W‘ m c> v V A, —xr~ '" v> 'V


SHOW CHAMPIONS
a Champion Prize Stock which won their spurs at the last Melbourne Royal Show. . . . >.
As pedigree in blood and performance as the famous line of G. & N. Seeds. The
W Champion Seeds that always succeed, and "The Strain That Pays." W
Capt. A. E. T. Payne’s Romney Marsh Ewe, Payne’s No. 71
of 1936.
Mr. J. H. Glenn’s Clydesdale Stallion, Woodbank Specialty.
Messrs. Fairchild and Clutterbuck’s Large White Sow,
Rossmoyne Duchess 31st.
Williamson Bros’. English Leicester Ram, Lochinvar No.
19 of 1937.
Mr. S. E. Jorgenson’s Clydesdale Mare, Box Vale Flash
Princess.
Mi. E. Graham’s Berkshire Sow, Kinilabah British Queen.
i THE STEMS f IKWIhMV THAT MS3
ejr' s —s —<s Vi C '“‘V


A Combination to Develop Pastures
WIMMERA RYE GRASS and
So heavy was this crop of G. & N. Wimmera Rye Grass that Mr.
J. W. Derham of Warrawong Park, Melton South, had difficulty in
cutting.
A noticeable feature of pasture improvement in Victoria
in the past few years has been the increase in the number
of Wimmera Rye Grass and Subterranean Clover pas-
tures established in dry areas, including the wheat belt.
This pasture combination has the special value of grow-
ing well in conjunction with each other and of providing
a well-balanced ration.
Wimmera Rye Grass and Subterranean Clover are free-
seeding annuals that reproduce themselves from seed
deposited on the ground, and which germinate in the
early autumn. They provide abundance of balanced green
feed during the winter and spring months.
Commenting on the virtues of Wimmera Rye-Sub. Clover
pastures, “The Leader” states: “A most valuable function
of the Wimmera rye-subterranean pasture has been in
removing the necessity for growing oats and barley for
winter feed on many properties. Methods of establish-
ment vary a good deal with local conditions, but checking
them all over, it can be seen that the principle of the
quick release of fertility and avoidance of a hard crust,
which would retard seedlings, is common to all of them,
the main difference being whether a cover crop is used or
not. The drier the district, the more care required in
preparation of the ground for sowing, and at the same
time the less seed required if a wasteful competition
between the seedlings is to be avoided. On an average
of a sowing of one pound to the acre over thirty seedlings
to the square yard, it is obvious that if 8 or 10 lb. is
sown there is not sufficient room for full development
of two to three hundred plants to the square yard. A
dense seedling growth keeps weeds out, but rates of
over 10 lb. to the acre are economical only on the best
country; in most cases it is sown with subterranean
clover, and more than the 10 lb. is unnecessary. On soils
which set hard, under the rainfalls common in wheat-
growing districts, rates as low as 3 lb. per acre, with
2 lb. of subterranean, have been found quite satisfactory.
Coming into the irrigation areas, 6 lb. of Wimmera rye
grass, with 2 or 3 lb. of subterranean clover, is an average
seeding, and in all cases superphosphate at the rate of
90 lb. to 1 cwt. per acre is required at sowing.”
WINNING PASTURE
In the permanent pasture of Annual Species Competition,
1938-39, at Kerang, the winner gained first and second
places with two exhibits of Wimmera Rye and Sub. Clover.
ESTABLISHMENT AND
Such hos been the rapid advance of Agricultural Science
that, where only a few years ago it was absurd to think
a that a productive sward could be established, to-day
there stand flourishing grazing grounds. This has
N changed the whole idea of farming in dry areas, wheat
lands and sheep country. Two companion plants which
must receive credit for this change are Wimmera Rye
The “Journal of Agriculture,” in reporting the compe-
tition, states: “On his farm of 500 acres, mostly lignum
country, Mr. Morton has gone in for Subterranean Clevel-
and Wimmera Rye Grass in a big way. He attributes the
relative freedom from weeds and inferior grasses in his
prize paddocks to cultivation in the late summer and to
the suppressing effect of this wonderful development of
clover and rye grass.
“Mr. Morton has had the unique experience of being able
to sell a considerable quantity of rye grass-sub. clover
hay. The hay is collected in the windrow with the aid of
a sweep, and transported to the stack, where, with the
aid of home-made slings and a home-made crane operated
by a horse, it is put into the stack rapidly and efficiently.
“The winning l pasture was sown with a light seeding of
barley in the autumn of 1933, 2 lb. subterranean clover
and 3 lb. Wimmera rye grass being used per acre. No
manure was applied the first year, but 1 cwt. per acre
was applied in the following year. In the last three years
one bag per acre has been applied each autumn.
“A tribute must again be paid to subterranean clover,
Wimmera rye grass, and superphosphate for giving the
biggest impetus to pasture improvement in the Kerang
district during recent years. The first ventures in the
establishment of this type of permanent pasture soon
demonstrated the wonderful possibilities of rehabilitating
large areas previously neglected except for spasmodic
production of oat crops or summer fodder crops.
“The relative cheapness of establishment and the low
maintenance costs were very attractive in view of the
tremendous increase in carrying capacity involved.
“One of the outstanding features of this pasture type in
conjunction with top-dressing has been its capacity to
regenerate and raise the fertility level of the poorer
classes of soil. This pasture now occupies large areas in
the district which formerly were what is known locally
as ‘wind-swept plain.’ In this class of country, before
the advent of subterranean clover and superphosphate,
through consistent over-grazing the wind had almost
completely denuded large patches of soil, leaving in
extreme cases the rather impenetrable clay subsoil
exposed. In the first instance the surface was stiff clay
loam only a few inches in depth. The too-frequent removal
by stock of the sparse native vegetation has facilitated
wind erosion.
“There is a definite tendency to be more liberal in the
matter of top-dressing with superphosphate than in past
years. Although subterranean clover is recognized to be
a relatively low-fertility-demanding species, marked bene-
fit has been demonstrated under irrigation conditions
when the annual dressing has been increased from 1 cwt.
to 1 bag per acre.
“It has been demonstrated that harrowing or light culti-
vation of the pasture sward in late summer, before rain
[?]


of Productivity in Wheat Lands
SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER
MANAGEMENT- HINTS
Grass and Subterranean Clover, which are growing in
areas with unvarying rainfalls, and doubling carrying
capacities. It was G. & N. who first "saw the light" k.
as to the value of this double over 20 years ago, and
has never failed to stress the distinct advantages of r
this companionate crop. Since then thousands of acres
have been laid down successfully to this famous pair.
or irrigation induces germination, will regenerate the
rye grass and l at the same time diminish the proportion
of grasses, such as barley grass, and of weeds. It is
known that in extreme cases, pastures of this type have
been ploughed at this period of the year without having
caused any permanent injury to the establishment of the
clover or the rye grass.”
A surface scarifying, or severe treatment with grassland
harrows, after the seed has set and dropped, and before
it germinates is advisable with both these varieties.
This combination has proved its suitability for country
with both low and high rainfalls, but is particularly
adapted for drier districts. It will give a better mixture
of pasture during the first three or four seasons; particu-
larly is rye grass useful for providing winter feed for
stock when clover is only growing slowly, and not very
relished by stock at that period. Wimmera Rye, however,
like all rye grasses, thrives on plenty of available nitrogen,
and consequently unless the stock droppings are cultivated
into the soil, and the soil aerated by ploughing or cultiva-
tion, Wimmera Rye grass will largely disappear from Sub-
terranean Glover pastures after a number of seasons.
Putting the land under a crop of cereals occasionally will
rejuvenate the rye and not affect the clover.
SUMMARIZED ADVANTAGES
(1) It will double or treble the carrying capacity of
ordinary pastures.
(2) It will furnish self-sown hay of excellent quality.
(3) It retains its seed well attached to the dry straw,
hence the dry feed is specially nutritious.
(4) It makes first-class ensilage.
(5) Once sown and established, it does not require re-
seeding.
(6) It may be maintained at full productivity with an
occasional scarifying.
(7) It can he easily stripped for seed.
(8) An advantage it possesses lies in the palatable nature
of the dry grass during the summer months, when
stock consume it with relish.
(9) Its value as a winter grass, particularly in dry
areas is generally recognized.
(10) It is specially appreciated in the wheat areas, for
land thrown out of cultivation for a definite period
in favour of grazing.
Subterranean Clover materially adds to the feeding value
of the hay, and also increases the yield. Unexcelled for
pasturing sheep, as it gives succulence and nutrition which
stimulate the milk flow in the ewes and fatten lambs. With
the fat lamb industry offering such big rewards to-day,
a combination pasture such as Wimmera Rye Grass and
Subterranean Clover is a blessing in disguise. Dairymen,
too, have not been slow to recognize its milk-producing and
Sheep grazing on a G. & N. Subterranean Clover pasture on Mr. E-
Smith's farm, Wilden Grange, North Murchison.
laxative properties, and vast dairy herds are to-day
grazing on this “Rye Grass-Clover” pasture.
HINTS ON HAY MAKING
Where any considerable quantity of hay is to be made,
the most economical way to do it appears to be to press
it into bales in the field where grown. The crop should
be cut with a mower when it begins to show signs of
maturing, which is usually early in November,.and should
be “cocked” with a horse-ralce on the same day. It should
be taken to the hay-press by push-rakes as soon as cured
and put straight into bales, which can be stacked away
at once. For smaller quantities the hay should be stored
in stacks. The crop should be cocked immediately it is
ready, cocked within a few hours, and carted to stack
as soon as it can be put away without danger of firing
the stack. If water can be squeezed from the hay when
a handful from the centre of the cock is tightly twisted
by hand, it is not sufficiently dry to stack with safety. If
allowed to stand in the field until dry it is still greedily
eaten by live stock, and despite changes in the weather
and much wetting and drying, it remains a most useful
and estimable feed.
HIGHER PURITY CONTENT IN G. & N. SEEDS
The higher the purity content, the greater the yield and
the lower, the ultimate cost. This has special significance
for this combination of pasture plants. The G. & N
strain in Wimmera Rye Grass is bred and selected for
purity, while the new stocks of Subterranean Clover are
renowned for purity and germination above the ordinary.
The G. & N. range comprises “Early” such as “Dwalga-
nup,” for dry northern areas; Bacchus Marsh for moderate
rainfall areas; “Mid-season” (Mt. Barker) for general
purposes; “Late” strain “Tallarook,” for country with
good rainfall; Mixed Strains of Eai'ly and Mid-season,
for moderate rainfall areas.
This letter speaks for itself, “Subterranean
Clover and Rye Grasses purchased from you
have been very satisfactory. The Wimmera
Rye Grass is a splendid density now. I sowed
it with wheat as a cover crop. I intend to sow
dotun the rest of my 1,000 acres eventually—
only 58 sown yet—have been trying different
seeds for different types of land. All have
come from your firm .... very excellent
strikes,” (Mr. E. A. Elliott, Bamgania.)
[?]


SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER
(TRIFOLIUM SUBTERRANEUM)
Subterranean Clover is easily established and maintained,
and it is a great improver of soil fertility. It with-
stands hard grazing, and will grow in association with
both Perennial and Annual grasses. It makes pro-
lific growth under proper manorial treatment, and its
cultivation will double and even treble, the production of
great areas of both dairying and grazing land. Adaptable
to a wide range of soils, it will accommodate itself in
sandy soil in which it makes quick germination and
growth after favourable autumn rains, and provides feed
relatively early and well into the winter. The great value
of Subterranean clover lies as much in its ability, when
properly manured, to grow in soils of low or depleted
fertility, and improve or restore them, as in its capacity
to produce an abundance of nutritious fodder.
SOWING TIMES; AMOUNTS; TOP-DRESSING
On the subject of sowing, the Journal of Agriculture,
Victoria, states that it is usual to sow seed in March and
April, although it is frequently sown later. Early sow-
ings, however, usually give better results. There is a
marked tendency to increase the rate of seeding beyond
the 2 lb. per acre which has been usual in the past. From
4 to 6 lbs. per acre is frequently sown. When seed is
broadcast on existing pasture without any surface culti-
vation, it is desirable that the surface should be broken
in some way, with a pasture-harrow, rigid-tyne-cultivator
or any implement that will break the surface successfully.
The seed and manure may then be sown through a drill
or broadcast by hand or machine.
The response to superphosphate is very vigorous and the
application of 1 cwt. to the acre is advisable.
At Crookwell, New South Wales, in a trial conducted by
the Department of Agriculture of that State, a field of
Subterranean Clover, top-dressed, carried 2.5 sheep per
acre, and natural pasture, unmanured, carried 1 sheep per
acre. The sheep on the clover cut fleeces from 2 to 3 lb.
heavier.
Subterranean Clover is thoroughly persistent in perman-
ent pasture, maintaining itself from year to year as a
self-sown crop. Being an annual, it must be allowed to
form seed in November or December, otherwise it will be
Sub. Clover is looked upon to-day as an indispen-
◄ sable pasture plant for feed and soil nourishment k
. . . ensures green feed, hay or dry feed of fine
quality . . . improves even the poorest of soils . . . Y
kills weeds . . . helps to combat soil erosion.
greatly thinned out of the pasture. Subterranean Clever
should be lightly stocked during its first year’s growth in
order to enable the runners to become well grown and
form plenty of seed. During the first season after sowing,
shut the paddock up from September, so as to allow the
plants to seed, instead of grazing them too heavily.
FOR HAY OR ENSILAGE
Fields of Subterranean Clover make prolific spring growth,
greatly in excess of the immediate grazing needs of the
stock normally carried out on the farm. Hay making or
ensiling is essential if waste is to be prevented and full
use is to be made of the great bulk of feed produced. Hay
yields vary from about 1 ton to over 3 tons per acre,
according to the season, district, rainfall, manorial treat-
ment, and management. From 2 to 2 h tons per acre is
an average crop on well-manured land in districts of good
rainfall (30 inches or more),
•fa Our foreword to this book is “Unsurpassed
for Uniformity.” Uniform seed quality means
maximum germination, which growers of
G. & N. Sab. Clover know to their satisfac-
tion. “I sowed G. & N. Seed on the filled-in
stump holes on Monday last, and yesterday
when I went and inspected it, it was 100 per
cent, strike everywhere. I am very pleased."
(Mr. A. R. Love, Ondit, Vic.)
STRAINS AVAILABLE
Specialities at G. & N. for this season are Dwalganup for
dry areas; Mt. Barker mid-season for general purposes;
“Tallarook” late for country with good rainfall; Bacchus
Marsh early for establishment in the drier belt of country
immediately beyond the districts of moderate rainfall
(over 21 inches), and Mixed Strains.
SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER.
(1) and (2) Plant, showing habit and development.
(3) Leaf, showing whitish crescent-shaped markings.
(4) Flower. (5) Leaflet, with brown flecking.
(6) Maturing seed head. (7) Ripe Burr. (8) Seed.
*... v v v — e. ..g e. e. f e
Taw mu


Subterranean Clover has produced many pure
, breeding strains of outstanding merit, all of which
Jk provide prolific pasture growth under their own jk
individual conditions. There is a strain for every
climate and soil. Every pasture grower should make ™
it his business to become acquainted with each.
EXTRA EARLY (“DWALGANUP”)
“Dwalganup” is a West Australian strain with charac-
teristics which make it highly suitable for areas of light
rainfall and short seasons. This strain has long runners
with one or two laterals only. The leaves are sparse-and
are placed well apart along the runners. The plants com-
mence rapid growth early in the spring, and flower and
set seed early before conditions become unfavourable.
From that aspect “Dwalganup” is different from the mid-
season and late varieties which flower about the middle
of September, and in districts where spring is early and
hot weather sets in rapidly, though they form a burr,
have not sufficient time to seed.
They are heavy seeders, but having long flower stalks,
and setting theix- seed when the soil is usually moist, they
tend to bury their burrs deeply, even to a depth of two
inches.
Its long and very numerous runners are the means
of putting into the _ ground a phenomenal quantity of
seed, which, in a single year, will produce a thicker
pasture than any other variety. It is to be noticed that
in first establishing a pasture, the initial self-seeding by
the Extra Early for the second year can never be lost,
as with other varieties, owing to the failure of finishing
rains because of its very early maturity. Moreover,
failure to re-seed cannot be brought about by stock
eating all the burr, as this is deposited beneath the
ground surface.
As soon as Extra Early has made any real growth, the
plant proceeds to put forth its runners. There is thus
quickly produced a good, solid, bulky feed, very different
from some slushy watery, winter pastures tending parti-
cularly to give sheep the scours.
It should be observed too, that “stemmyness” disappears
the second year, the plant producing abundant foliage
and a dense mat of feed.
Most important o£ all is the amazing ability of Extra
Early (Dwalganup) variety to thrive in the depth of
winter cold, and even in spite of hard fx'osts. In a mixed
pasture, during the whole of winter 1 , the Mid-Season
strains, being pretty well dormant, are completely
swamped by the prolific and abundant growth of Extra
Early, while in the Spring the Early is itself dominated
by the later maturing varieties.
The paddocks from which "Dwalganup” seed is drawn
have been Government inspected and ax*e guaranteed free
from Lucerne Flea or Red-legged Earth Mite. The cer-
tification gives warranty as to strain air cl purity.
LATE STRAIN (Tallarook)
HARVESTED FROM GOVERNMENT APPROVED
PASTURES AND CERTIFIED
“Tallarook” is a late maturing and leafy strain that is
Government approved. According to a. report from the
Agricultural Department, flowering commences under
normal conditions about the middle of October, and the
plants commence to die off about the middle of December.
It is therefore a fortnight later than the Mt. Barker
strain.
This clover forms a very dense, close, leafy sward. “The
runners are fine and not long, and the leaves are numer-
ous. It makes excellent grazing and remains green late
in the Spring. It yields heavy hay crops and can be cut
late in the season when better weather for hay-making
usually prevails,” states one official report.
Recommended for all districts of good annual rainfall, 23
inches or more, and for late districts where the rainfall
may be somewhat less, and also excellent for irrigated
pastures. Sow 3 to 6 lbs. of seed to the acre, and an
application of 1 cwt. superphosphate per- acre at seeding
time, is recommended. Those who have proved this variety
say that the seed may be included in ordinary pasture
mixtures, or sown down in the usual way with an oat
crop. It may also be surface sown on to existing pastures
at the time of top-dressing. If seed and manure are
mixed, they should be sown at once in order to avoid any
possible injury to the seed by the acid of the super-
phosphate.
Left.—Note the advanced runner development of the Dwalganup (easy) strain. Centre.—Runner development
beginning in the Mt. Barker (mid-seaaon) strain. Right.—Tallarook subterranean clover. Note leafinoss and
that runner development has not yet begun. (Vic. Dept, of Agriculture.)
[?]
SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER
(TRIFOLIUM SUBTERRANEUM)


Threshing “Tallarook” Subterranean Clover seed on the property
of Messrs. A. C. Head & Son, “Mundara,” Seymour.
BACCHUS MARSH
SUBTERRANEAN CLOVER (Early)
An appropriate plant for establishment in the drier belt
of country immediately beyond the districts of moderate
rainfall (over 21 inches). More leafy under Victorian
conditions than Dwalganup. This strain is slightly later
Did the montle of leadership for pasture legumes
◄ fall on G. & N. by design or accident? E
Patient and persistent selection and specialization
have contributed towards G. & N's. top-flight p
position to-day. G. & N. leads for Sub. Clover,
Barrel Clover and other Clovers!
in flowering than Dwalganup, although earlier than Mt.
Barker. The plant has long runners, is fairly leafy, and
the leaves are large and light green in colour.
The seed is Government Certified for strain only.
MIXED STRAINS
Grazing results obtained from a combination of different
varieties are far superior than by using one strain only.
The sowing of mixed strains enables you to have two (or
more) crops in one.
Every farmer should compose his pastures of plants
maturing in a continuous succession, one after .the other,
from the very earliest to the latest species. Extra Early
and Mid-season varieties should be grown together in a
20-inch rainfall. In areas of 35-40 inches annually and
upwards, the very late strains should be included.
Mixed varieties provide a substantial bulk of roughage
which when fed to sheep assists in the treatment of
“Pulpy Kidney” disease.
G. & N. Growers can rely on mixed Subterranean Clover
Seed from G. & N. being seed of high purity and ger-
minative content.
BARREL CLOVER (Medicago Tribuloides)
Burr Medic is quite good for feeding in the green stage, but
has the disadvantage of the hooked spine on the burr, which is
detrimental to wool, whereas the burr o'f the barrel clover does
not adhere to the wool. (See illustrations of Burr Medic and
Barrel Medic on next page.)
A n outstanding
legume with amaz-
ing possibilities for
introducing to agri-
cultural areas and
other areas where
Subterranean Clover
does not thrive. Be-
cause Barrel Clover
particularly likes soil
with a lime content
and has a partiality
for dry climates, it
is recommended for wheat land, even on Mallee soil with
a rainfall down to 13 inches.
Briefly, Barrel Clover is most palatable and produces a
large bulk for feeding in the green stages, while the burrs
are very prolific and offer a very excellent dry feed with a
high protein content for the Summer months.
It is very hardy, persistent, will eradicate inferior medics
and weeds; enriches the soil and provides tip-top material
for meadow hay or silage.
Sow 1 to 4 lbs. Seed Per Acre
Sow shallow not exceeding \ in. deep. Autumn and very
early Winter are ideal sowing times. If sown on stubble
land with oats or barley as a cover crop, the plants will
establish themselves and produce a good stand the follow-
ing year, especially if top-dressed with superphosphate.
Easily controlled by cultivation; pasture paddock can be
changed to arable land by normal cultivation methods;
does not pull down crops, nor is it competitive with cereal
crops, but produces heavier yield owing to the storing of
nitrogen in available form for the crop.
Barrel Clover is the best plant to introduce on lands
containing a neutral or alkaline soil, in low and high
rainfall areas.
Barrel Clover seed is certified by the South Australian
Department of Agriculture as to strain, freedom from
weeds and germination test.
An-
Individual
Plant of
Barrel
Medic.
Seed is
South
Australian
Government
Certified.
[?]


NEW ZEALAND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
SEBD-TEBTfSO STATION 1836
Messrs Wright, Stephenson * Co. Lt.
CHR13T7HURCH
P 0 Box 240, I
PALMRR9T0N NoSTU,
PINAL, REPORT. {
Staple deeenbed m Cowgraaq
Merited ClSB?
flUboD Teel No jZ/4b 79 Sample tltind
Semple received, I
PURITT
OBRUWATIOH CAPACITY j
Pore eeed .. 0‘-l.5 r.
OttweroBM.dk ... 0.2 '<
laleftm oo.bi ... ... 34.. 0 t in * dert
WMd-kMdt ... 0. 1 i
Inert mem; ... ... %
Herd wale - - S-. f> * |
Pom gerramuing reed _S1ju5_*
Other wop teede—Spoon*. j
Weed. *m<] *— Bpeelee
ddditioul perticalen
The ebo»e onUyce he. been mede is eeoardeoae «ith the Bnlei (8- it.) itiuod bp (he iDttnielioul Seed teetlog
iteoeietion .
CLOVERS
G. & N. Clovers enhance the general fertility of
◄ a soil, improve its texture and darken its colour, .
and in so doing indirectly improve the growth of Bk
grasses growing in association with them. Ipr
All G. & N. Clovers are carefully chosen from new r
crop seed of high vitality content.
ALSYKE, or HYBRID CLOVER (Trifolium hybridum)
This is a hardy hybrid between the Red and White Clover.
In appearance it resembles Red Clover; it is, however,
more permanent, and will succeed well almost anywhere.
Alsyke is one of the most generally useful of all the true
Clovers or Trifoliums. It is the only Clover that will
flourish in acid soil, and it will stand a fair amount of
moisture. It lasts for five or six years in irrigation dis-
tricts, and is generally very conspicuous in a pasture
during its second year. On account of its wide adapta-
bility, the inclusion of Alsyke is strongly recommended
in all permanent pasture mixtures. Alsyke makes first-
class hay, and in addition it is a good honey plant. The
time of flowering approximates to that of Cowgrass, and
the nutritive value is highest at the flowering stage. The
plant is not hasty in getting old and pithy, as is the case
with Red Clover. After cutting, Alsyke Clover shoots
quickly, but the growth is low, and the total of the after-
math only equal to half the first cut. Still, the plant has
a high value for pastures, and is one of the best clovers
for alternate husbandry. It flourishes in the same deep,
moist soil as Timothy, and makes an excellent companion
to that grass. With Tall Oat Grass, Italian Rye Grass,
and Cocksfoot, it also combines well and yields excellent
forage. Sow the seed in the autumn in mixtures at the
rate of 2 lbs. to the acre, or alone, 10 lbs.
ALSYKE AND WHITE CLOVER (Mixed)
This is a splendid growing mixture offered at special
values. Both these two Clovers make a really first-class
fodder combination, and we recommend very highly its
planting. Seed comes from reliable sources, and is of
best quality.
BIRDSFOOT TREFOIL (Lotus corniculatus)
A perennial Clover, producing an enormous amount of
fodder. The roots penetrate considerably, and the plant is
not much affected by drought. It is recommended for
sowing on light, inferior soils, where it will yield a greater
bulk of herbage than any other. Sow B lbs. per acre.
A copy of the final report by the New Zealand Department of
Agriculture in its elaborate system of teats for germination.
Comparison of two Medicag species. (B) Burr Medic (Medicago
denticulata) with hooked radisal spines, (D) Barrel Medic (Medicago
tribuloidea), spines not hooked. The Burr of the Barrel Clover does
not adhere to the wool. Th advantage is obvious (see letterpress on
page 36).
[Dr, Trumble, S.A. “Journal of Agriculture .”]
Alsyke or Hybrid Clover.
(Trifolium hybridum.)
IDENTIFICATION OF PLANTS, WEEDS OR SPECIES
Any strange plant should be identified at once in order to
ascertain how harmless it is or how noxious. Free advice
can be obtained from G. & N. or by forwarding specimen
direct to the National Herbarium, South Yarra, S.E.I.
ft ft ft ft Arnm—mmmme*. 0 0 e 0 /> ... o _g_ J! e..
- to-hrm


16 days’ growth Red Clover grown from G. & N. Pedigree Seeds by
Mr. P. P. Doyle, Kiah, New South Wales.
Giant Colonial
Cowgrass.
(Perennial Red
Clover).
Berseem or
Egyptian Clover.
(Trifolium
alexandrinum).
1. Flowering stem.
2. Leaf.
Red or Broad Clover.
SEED SHOULD NOT BE SOWN DEEP
It has been proved by experience that a light covering is
best. Aim for shallow seeding and secure improved results.
The value of improved pastures is emphasized in
◄ the C.S.I.R. experiments at Yass (N.S.W.). i
The average weight gain of sheep (3 to the acre)
was 41 09 lbs. per head. Sheep (I to the acre) p
on natural pasture—2l 01 tbs. per head.
BERSEEM, OR EGYPTIAN CLOVER (Trifolium alex-
andrinum)
Makes strong and rapid winter growth. A strong growing
annual, with succulent, fleshy stems and broad soft leaves.
The best time to sow is the beginning of March, so that
the plant may make a good start with the first autumn
rains. It can only be grown to advantage under irriga-
tion, and should be sown on a well-prepared and heavily-
manured seed bed that has been worked down very fine
on top. The crop must be cut and carted to stock, not
grazed. Mowing of the old growth should start as soon
as new fresh shoots appear at the crowns. The first cut
is available for forty-five to sixty days after sowing;
it does not taint milk. Sow 10 lbs. per acre.
GIANT COLONIAL COW GRASS (Perennial Red Clover)
(Trifolium pratense perenne)
A strain of Red Clover saved from old pastures, which
is more permanent than the ordinary variety. It is one
of the most important pasture clovers, and one worthy
of inclusion in all permanent pasture mixtures.
It is a perennial with long tapering roots and solid erect
stems tinged with purple. It flowers a deep purple.
The fact that it can be grown practically anywhere ranks
it as one of the best clovers for growing fodder of the
right type. Sheep, horses, dairy cows and other stock
thrive on Giant Colonial Cow Grass—it can be used for
grazing, cutting for green feed, or for hay. It has been
known to give three cuttings and four grazings in one
season, and is an extremely fine soiling plant. Sow in mix-
tures, 4 lbs. per acre; alone, 10 to 12 lbs. per acre.
RED OR BROAD CLOVER (Trifolium pratense)
A most valuable pasture plant—a biennial—and succeeds
on any moderately good soil in a cool climate, yielding very
heavy crops. Stems are hollow, branching from base,
clothed with fine hairs and the leaflets are oblong and as
depicted in the illustration, they are strongly marked with
a crescentic band. It is generally used in mixtures; is
very easy to cultivate, and, though adaptable for most
conditions, it needs particularly good drainage. For use
as green feed, cut before blooming, but, if required for
silage, wait until the heads begin to discolour. If treated
rapidly after mowing, it will keep for years. Sow alone
10 to 12 lbs. per acre; with grasses 4 or 5 lbs. per acre.
+ PLANT IDENTIFICATION
Should a strange plant or weed make an
appearance in your paddock communicate
direct with G. & N. for free advice, or for-
ward specimens to the National Herbarium,
South Yarra, S.E.I.
RED MONTGOMERY (Late Flowering) Certified
A more permanent type, extra late-maturing, leafy and
suitable for long-term pastures. It is useful for pasture
or hay. If grown for hay it is important to cut the crop
before seed production takes place. Prefers a cool climate,
thrives best on deep alluvial loam soils and produces
more grazing than other pastures in dry seasons, owing
to its deep-rooting habit. Manuring with lime and phos-
phates increases its persistency. Usually in full bloom
by mid-December and may be useful in providing green
feed later than the main pasture flush in spring. Sow
alone, 10 to 12 lbs. to the acre; in mixtures, 2 to 4 lbs.
[?]
CLOVERS . .


Phosphates are essential for the growth and
◄ success of Clovers, either in the form of super-
phosphate, basic slag or basic phosphate. Clovers
respond to the application of 2 cwt. of superphos- Hr
phate to the acre, which pays worthwhile dividends
by ensuring greater yields.
YELLOW SAND CLOVER OR KIDNEY VETCH (An-
thyllis vulneraria)
A hardy, deep-rooting perennial and native of Great
Britain. It thrives on dry, sandy and poor soils where
other plants perish. Being a very valuable drought-resist-
ing forage plant its roots penetrate to a great depth,
making the plant independent of surface moisture. It
should be included in all mixtures for permanent pastures
on thin, dry and poor soils and in localities where drought
is likely to occur. Stock do well on this variety.
SWEET, OR BOKHARA CLOVER (Melilotus alba)
This variety is very good for bees, also very productive;
grows to six feet high in suitable positions, is useful for
ensilage, and remains green and continues to grow after
everything else is dried up. Early autumn is the usual
sowing period. Sow 10 lbs. of seed per acre.
LOTUS MAJOR (Greater Birdsfoot Trefoil, or Beech
Forest Clover).
As a fodder plant for dairy cows, as well as for sheep
and general grazing purposes, Lotus Major or Greater
Birdsfoot Trefoil is one of the most useful, not only
for damp, marshy ground and drained swamps, but also
for dry situations. It does well on widely varying classes
of soil, from stiff clay to sandy loam. The plant is a
true perennial, and readily adapts itself to different kinds
of land. When cut just as the plant is coming into bloom,
it makes first-class hay of excellent quality. It is par-
ticularly palatable to stock, except when it is in flower,
but this is very often the ease with Red Clover and Cow-
grass also. Sow the seed in the autumn (March, April,
May), either alone or in a mixture with other grasses and
other Clovers. A heavy seeding is neither necessary nor
advisable, as Lotus Major spreads itself by the roots,
throwing up shoots at intervals. From i lb. to 1 lb. of
seed per acre is quite sufficient when sown in mixtures
with other grasses and Glovers, and when seeded alone
from 3 to 4 lbs. per acre will fill all requirements.
The value of Lotus Major is now fully appreciated in the
Beech Forest and Colac districts of Victoria.
LOTUS MAJOR ROOTS
Clients sometimes desire to obtain roots of this special
leguminous plant, and we can supply roots of the true
strain valuable for good rainfall districts or for morasses
and swamps or for seepages in irrigation districts.
BURR CLOVER (Medicago maculata and M. denticulata,
Burr Clover or Burr Medic)
A hardy native Clover which produces excellent fodder,
and is specially suited for growing on dry land or hill-
sides. The plant is an annual of trailing growth habit,
prolific seeder, whose seeds are borne in coiled rounded
pods variously studded with bristles forming the charac-
teristic “burr” which gives the Clover its name. It is a
legume of great value, enriches the soil, and cleans the land.
For green manuring the seed may be sown in the autumn,
and the plants ploughed under in the spring before they
seed. Sow in autumn 10 lbs. of clean seed per acre.
LOTUS ANGUSTISSIMUS (or Hispidus), Boyd’s Clover
An annual Clover ideal for poor, inferior soil. It comes
in early, and when stocked in the early stages of growth,
is an excellent fodder for dairy cows. Cut for hay, as the
plants are coming into bloom. Keep it well grazed. A
great variety for soil enriching. Sow broadcast in early
autumn, sowing 4 to 5 lbs. per acre.
A magnificent crop of clover being rolled before carting on a farm
at Mt. Barker, South Australia.
Lotus Major.
1. Flowering stem.
2. Flower.
Yellow Sand Clover
{Anthyllis vulner-
aria).
Showing the long stalk of the middle leaflet in Burr Medic.
Illustration by courtesy of "The Journal of Agriculture.”
[?]
CLOVERS . .


"If Australia is to maintain its position in the
◄ world's market, it will have to plan for increased
efficiency"—thus spoke Queensland's Minister fcr k
Agriculture after an overseas trip to investigate
rural problems. Grassland Improvement supplies v
the fundamental plan for efficiency in primary
production,
CRIMSON CLOVER (Trifolium incarnatum)
A very quick-growing annual Clover, which yields abun-
dantly. It makes a good winter crop, and needs plenty of
moisture for its successful growth. Most soils prove
suitable excepting sandy soils deficient in humus. It makes
a rather good hay, and is readily eaten by all stock, espe-
cially horses. In addition, it is an excellent green manure
crop, and is a wonderful soil improver. It has also valu-
able use as a catch crop for summer fodder purposes.
Autumn is the time to sow, when it will produce a heavy
and lucrative crop in early spring. Sow 10 lbs. of seed
per acre, and in mixture 4 lbs. of seed to the acre.
CLUSTER CLOVER (Trifolium glomeratum)
A very useful Clover which, once established, is very per-
manent. It is particularly well suited for sowing in mix-
tures, and does well in the Western District of Victoria.
Sow in mixtures about 4 lbs. of seed to the acre.
DROOPING-FLOWERED CLOVER (Trifolium cernuum)
A hairless annual herb, with diffuse or ascending hollow
stems, usually trailing for a length of from 12 to 20
inches. This variety has become valuable in very wet
situations. It is highly nutritious and is similar to Sub.
Clover in composition. Grows in a wide range of soil
types, although it prefers moist or even wet situations.
A great soil enricher and sweetener. May be grazed, or
cut for hay or silage. As with Sub. Clover it is best
to cut early. Seed may be sown at the rate of Ito 2 lbs.
per acre with an application of 1 to 2 cwt. superphosphate.
ENGLISH TREFOIL (Broad-leaved) (Medicago lupulina).
Hop Clover or Black Medic
An excellent fodder plant when grown with other Clovers,
for alternate husbandry, and might be more generally
grown in Australia to the farmers’ advantage, especially
on light land. It endures cold better than heat, will grow
freely on almost any soil, and shows preference for such
as are calcareous, because lime is one of its necessities.
Clay marl is its special home.
Sow alone at the rate of 15 lbs. of seed per acre, or when
mixed with other seeds 2 lbs. are sufficient.
The G. & N. policy of complying strictly to
Government regulations (in almost every case
G. & N. Seed is well above the statutory
Standard) makes itself clear as a crystal in
the many letters received regularly from
clients. That same policy was responsible for
Mr. C. Snape, of Drbuin, having such success.
To quote his letter: “The Clover and Rape
seed I got from you last month is doing well.
I think every seed has come up.’’
MELILOTUS INDICA (King Island Clover)
Melilotus is a clover-like plant, and is a great improver
of coast lands, where it thrives best of all. Melilot as a
fodder is equal to Lucerne, and much cheaper in cultiva-
tion. At least six tons of hay can be got to the acre. This
plant is useful for green manuring. Can be pastured or
cut and made into hay. Grown on dry, barren places, is
a highly nutritious Clover, and eagerly sought after by
stock. M. Indicus should only be sown on poor ground
where other crops will not thrive. We do not recommend
it for dairying, as it is liable to taint the milk. Sow 10 lbs.
to the acre.
Drooping-Flowered Clover.
Portion of plant showing
ascending habit.
Cluster Clover.
(A) Flowering Branch. (B)
Seeding Branch. (C) Calyx.
(D) Flower. (E) Clover Seed.
(F) Sorrel Seed. (G) Sorrel
Seed with husk removed.
(W.A. Dept. of Agriculture.)
Crimson Clover.
(Trifolium
incarnatum).
1. Portion of plant.
2. Crimson Clover
leaf.
Perennial White
Clover.
The flowers are
usually white, and
sometimes pinkish.
English Trefoil
(Broad-leaved).
This variety grows
freely on almost any
soil.
.s ~ a . g. e .e e e e —g.
CLOVERS . .


More living seeds per pound mean more uniform
a success and true economy. That's the harvest k
4W you reap when you sow G. & N. Pedigree Seeds.
’ Recleaned and triple-tested under the most '
modern processes known to Agricultural Science.
WHITE DUTCH CLOVER (Trifolium repens perenne)
Does well all over the State, and is one of the best-known
and most valuable of perennial Clovers, and one suitable
for all permanent pasture mixtures in cool, moist districts.
Once introduced, it is quickly distributed by cattle, which
are very fond of its palatable herbage. In mixtures sow
2 lbs. of seed per acre; when planted alone, 10 lbs.
WHITE CLOVER (New Zealand Grown, Old Pasture Seed)
This is a very hardy and long-standing strain
—■ saved from long-established pastures. It is
claimed to be more vigorous in growth and of
better feeding value than White Dutch Clover. It is
a permanent clover of great importance. Its root
action is strong, and it is of dwarfer and denser growth,
and on account of its more rapid creeping habit, it
can be expected to spread at quicker rate than the ordinary
White. It has proved itself a high quality pasture fodder,
much relished by stock. It improves land considerably,
and is acknowledged as a great soil renovator.
It stands up to extreme winter conditions, and has a finer
foliage than the ordinary White Dutch. It forms a very
close mat of creeping stems, and, under favourable con-
ditions, it will make a rapid and abundant growth in
spring. New Zealand grown, old pasture seed.
STRAWBERRY CLOVER (Trifolium fragiferum)
Strawberry Clover is a fine milk-producing fodder, and
dairymen should grasp the splendid opportunities offered
to them by planting this hardy, vigorous species.
Like all other Clovers, it is a rare soil improver, but with
additional advantages. It is an adaptable Clover—fine for
damp, marshy localities, swamps, and rich, low-lying
country. It has a characteristic trailing habit, and throws
out runners and roots as it spreads, and so makes heavy
and rapid growth. Makes fine hay, and is an exception-
ally good milk-producing fodder. Sow between March
and July, as the earth is warmer and greater germination
results. It comes away well before the summer com-
mences. If grown under moist conditions it is partial to
heat. In winter, though unaffected by frosts, it is dormant.
It may well be substituted for White Clover on land too wet
for the latter, and its use is also advisable for salty marsh
conditions.
Once Strawberry Clover is properly established it stands
up under much hard treatment.
From B to 6 lbs. of seed in the husk are required per acre;
but 2 lbs. of good quality shelled seed is sufficient.
It needs hardly any soil cultivation other than top-dress-
ing about every three years. Remarkable results have
been achieved in irrigation areas, but, most surprising of
all is the fact that it flourishes luxuriantly under most
climates and on apparently hopeless land.
Cattle, sheep, horses, pigs and other stock certainly fill
out well on its excellent hay.
Grows well also in mixtures such as grasses and clovers,
and even cover crops of oats, barley, grain, etc.
SUCKLING CLOVER, or SHEEP’S TREFOIL (Trifolium
minus)
An variety, forming a close mat of herbage, and
does well in most soils; yellow flowers; seeds freely and
starts with first autumn rains. Sow in the autumn,
15 lbs. per acre, or in mixtures, 2 lbs. per acre.
Showing the variation in leaf markings of white clover;
(a) Uniformly green; (b), (c), (d) with whitish bands;
(e) with small, dark purple blotches; and (f) uniformly
purple with narrow green margin.
(Vic. Dept. of Agriculture.)
Strawberry Clover
(Trifolium fragiferum)
1. Plant; 2. Leaf; 3. Leaflet; 4. Flower head; 5.
Single Flower; 6. Fruiting Head; 7. Pod and Seed.
[?]
CLOVERS . .


SWAMP GRASSES
Poa Aquatica growing in running water.
POA AQUATICA (Water Meadow Grass)
This remarkable perennial swamp grass, introduced
(known as the King of Swamp Grasses), can be quickly
and economically established in swamps, morasses and
marshy lands by root-planting. The result has been the
conversion of sub-tropical swamps and morass lands into
valuable pasturage. This conversion will extend to
thousands of acres of such lands, and, in the opinion of
one of Australia’s best-known agricultural authorities
(Dr. G. L. Sutton), “will be the means of adding an
immense amount of grass wealth to the Commonwealth.”
A permanent grass, no cultivation required before or
after planting; first planting only planting, and will fend
for itself against flood and fire and heavy stocking’: no
drainage required (Poa Aquatica obviates the expense of
draining, more economical and profitable than draining),
obliterates bogs, makes surface safe for stock, forms
peaty surface in deep water, withstands frosts, never
spreads into cultivated land, confined to land wet and
swampy unsuitable for cultivation, makes waste swamp
lands profitable, reclaims swamps and morasses by sup-
pressing rushes, sword grass, sedges, lilies, mosses, etc.,
by means of its long, strong, underground creeping, as well
as fibrous roots and dense luxuriant upright vegetation;
it is very palatable (having a high sugar content), pro-
duces an enormous amount of valuable fodder per acre,
can be cut or grazed off several times a year.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF POA AQUATICA
“POA AQUATICA, in flower 6 feet, grown Gippsland.
The sample on analysis was found to contain, on dry
basis: Poa Japanese Paspalum
. Aquatica Millet Dilatatum
Protein .. 7-67% 6-43% 6-31%
This grass compares favourably with both Japanese
Millet and Paspalum Dilatatum. The content of protein
is higher in this grass than in the other two. A high
protein content is one of the main considerations in the
value of a grass for a fodder.” (W. RANKIN SCOTT,
Chemist for Agriculture.)
Another analysis of Poa Aquatica, cut at the flowering
stage, was reported on by the Agricultural Research
Chemist (Vic.), Dec., 1936; “The sample has a somewhat
higher protein content than might be expected, in which
respect it is better than a normal meadow hay.” (Poa
Aquatica hay compares favourably with Lucerne hay.)
POINTS ON PLANTING
Poa Aquatica, sent out in sods of roots and stems with
leaves, should be planted whole in the wet soil, mud or
shallow water, from three to twenty feet apart, allowing
leaves, for preference, to appear above the surface of the
water. Poa Aquatica can be planted out at any time of
the year. In the case of dense Tea-tree swamps, the
These grasses are reclaiming swamps and morasses
. in Australia and New Zealand to the tune of
increased profits. Land which was useless swamp
is to-day carrying productive crops, and now worth
£6o an acre. Doesn't that change your idea r
of what constitute worthless areas?
scrub should be slashed either before or after planting
roots; Poa Aquatica has an overpowering effect on young
Tea-tree growth, and destroys rushes, sword grass,
sedges, and cutting grasses. In irrigation seepages or in
swamps that can be kept wet in dry seasons, by using
irrigation water, plant the grass roots where the subsoil is
always damp; under ordinary irrigation conditions, treat
Poa Aquatica as any other irrigated forage crop; in billa-
bongs or in very deep swamps plant out roots along the
edges; and in the swamp, as the water recedes in the
dry season; if water is always very deep, throw light
sods of Poa Aquatica on the surface of the water; they
will come to anchor in swamp growths and grow. Plant
Poa Aquatica roots firmly in shallow creeks or water-
courses or marshy places in gullies and along low-lying
banks of streams. Splendid results are obtained from
this practice; the grass is also a most effective protection
against soil erosion. In dealing with large areas, plant
three to five sacks of roots per acre, 12 feet and upwards
apart. Sold in form of roots in sacks, exclusive of freight.
PASPALUM DISTICHUM (Swamp Paspalum)
Paspalum Distichum is commonly called water couch,
but it has no relation to the common couch grass (Cynodon
dactylon). It is one of the many species of paspalum,
being a close relative of the well-known grass, Paspalum
dilatatum. Paspalum Distichum will grow well anywhere
in Australia on swamp lands, morasses, and on low lands,
and in the beds of watercourses. Like some native glasses,
Paspalum is very nutritious, and is distinctly fattening.
It also grows on salty marshes and sandy soil. It comes
early in the spring, remains green and succulent through-
out the summer and well into the autumn.
By means of a few bags of roots this grass can be estab-
lished over a wide area of swamp or morass land. In
planting out this grass, all that is required is to “heel”
pieces of the roots or stems into the soil; several feet or
even yards apart. The intervening spaces are soon
covered.
This grass is valuable as a soil binder, and should be
planted on the banks of rivers and dams and in any places
where soil erosion takes place. Roots of this hardy grass
can be planted out at any time of the year.
Procedure recommended to be followed in respect of
swampy, morass or marshy land: If the swamp is always
wet plant Poa Aquatica (Water Meadow Grass) ; if such
land is wet in winter but dry in summer, plant Paspalum
Distichum. Both are invaluable to the owners of lands
of the kinds described, and constitute a valuable stock
insurance in times of drought. Swampy lands can be made
very productive by the introduction into them of these
plants. A bag or two of roots will enable the landowner
to permanently establish Poa Aquatica, Paspalum Dis-
tichum, Kikuyu grass or Lotus major. Sold in sacks
exclusive of freight.
HOW MANY TURNS TO THE ACRE?
Often you may have wanted to know what dis-
tance you must travel with a given width of
machine to cover an acre.
This can be done by dividing the width of cut
of machine in feet into 660. Thus, a 6-feet
harvester travels 110 chains to do an acre, a
10-feet machine 66 chains, and so on.
.p ,f> f e e, ... p e.
; the mmmim®mmmrnmmmmmmm
'if v a j .) .)


LIME And Better Pastures
It is said that New Zealand, with similar popula-
. tion and productive area, obtains better results .
from its soil than Victoria. Herein lies a reason!
New Zealand farmers use 500,000 tons of lime
a year as against Victoria's estimated 25,000 r
tons.
Until a comparatively few years ago pasture was taken
for granted, it was considered to be a necessary part of
every livestock or dairy farm, and usually the roughest
and steepest land on that farm was used for grazing.
Rarely did the pasture get any attention.
With the growing need to produce meat and milk as
cheaply as possible, farmers all over the State have come
to realize that pasture is one of the most valuable crops
that can be grown. It furnishes palatable, nutritious
feed at very low cost; and where it is of good quality
and abundant, a reduced amount of supplementary feed-
ing is necessary. With this realization has come a demand
for reliable information on methods of improving pastures.
MORE AND BETTER GROWTH
The problem on most farms is dual. Both an increased
growth of better grasses, and a longer grazing season
are sought. Fortunately, the goal is quite simply and
inexpensively attained. Authorities have found that most
pasture soils respond to liming and fertilizing in a rather
remarkable manner. When a pasture is so treated, three
things may be expected to happen:
1. The more desirable grasses like rye grass and the
clovers, cocksfoot, paspalum, pbalaris tuberosa come in
(either voluntarily or from sown seed) and crowd out
the weeds and poor grasses. The result is higher quality
feed, better gains, and more milk.
2. Pasture growth starts earlier in the spring, holds up
better during the hot, dry summer months, and continues
later into the autumn, thereby lengthening the grazing
season.
3. The quantity of feed that grows on each acre is usually
doubled and often trebled. This permits more animals
to graze on the same land, or the same number of animals
to get more feed. The need for supplementary feeding is
thereby greatly reduced.
LIME AND FERTILIZER ESSENTIAL
The use of the proper fertilizer and liming material in
the required amounts is the first essential to pasture
improvement. In most cases, either fertilizer or lime will
result in some improvement, but when both materials are
used the results are far superior. This is not difficult to
understand.
Practically all pasture land has gone without attention
so long that the supply of plant food has become nearly
exhausted. The plants do not get enough nitrogen, phos-
phorus, and potash to make thrifty growth. So the needed
elements must be supplied. Likewise, the lime content of
the soil has been leached out or removed by the grass to
the extent that most pasture soils are acid and lime-poor.
THE ROLE OF LIME
As soils become more and more acid, several things
happen. The nitrifying organisms, that are so essential
in supplying readily available nitrogen, cease to function;
the phosphorus supply which is so necessary to the growth
of grass and clover becomes tied up in unavailable form;
and, certain toxic or injurious elements like iron and
aluminium become available. As these processes continue,
the more desirable grasses and clovers find it increasingly
difficult to thrive. They finally stop growing and even
the poorer grasses and weeds do not thrive, and erosion
takes command.
Pasture improvement, then, consists essentially of throw-
ing* the processes of nature into reverse, and in this the
importance of lime is quite apparent. It reduces the
acidity; starts up the nitrifying process; makes available
the phosphorus that is in the soil and prevents added
material from becoming unavailable; throws toxic
materials out of solution; and, in general, makes con-
This vigorous growth of grass and clover developed after a dressing
of 1 ton lime with Super at laying-down time.
Effect of one application
of Lime during 5-year
rotation on yield of
crops.
(Authentic Ohio
Agricultural Experiment
Station data.)
FERTILIZED
AND LIMED
FERTILIZED
BUT NOT LIMED
ditions favorable for the growth of the kind of plants
that constitute a good pasture.
LIMING POINTERS
By experimentation it has been found that most run-down
pastures can be improved by applying the lime and fer-
tilizer as top-dressing, although in some cases it is
advisable to plough, harrow and re-seed. When the top-
dressing method is employed on acid soils, the liming
material should be applied ahead of the fertilizer. This
permits it to condition the soil so that the fertilizer will
be most efficient.
The amount of liming material to apply varies with the
requirements of the soil. The usual quantity is 1000 to
2000 pounds per acre, and this should be followed up by
lighter applications at intervals. As time goes on the lime
works down into the soil and the good effects grow
increasingly better.


RAPE
A waist-high yield of Rape, the renowned sheep fodder.
Experience has shown that this great crop develops better
when the soil has been thoroughly cultivated and a fine
seed bed provided. Rape does best on deep loamy soils rich
in organic matter, but it can be grown safely on nearly
all soils except those that are badly drained or of a low-
lying, heavy clay nature. Big successes can be obtained
from peaty soils reclaimed by drainage, and sweetened
by lime and thorough cultivation. Rape, being a warmth-
loving plant, thrives best where the soil has warmed up in
spring to produce a quick germination and a rapid growth.
Rape does best in districts with a mild, humid climate. It
is grown in summer, and, because of its deep rooting
system, contributes greatly to the benefit of the land.
Wherever rape is cultivated, it should be a land-cleaning
crop. It does well: —
(a) After clovers.
(b) Overturned pastures.
(c) On a grass crop that is a ravenous feeder on decay-
ing vegetable matter.
THOROUGH PREPARATION NEEDED
Prepare the land for Rape by breaking up and thoroughly
pulverizing it. If a foot deep, so much the better. This
can be easily done with the sub-soil plough, followed by
the scarifier, but the seed bed should not be left loose
immediately after any deep workings. The land should be
consolidated by the harrows and roller before drilling in
the seed, which should be covered evenly and not too
deeply.
ABOUT SEEDING
The seed may be sown from the first autumn rains to
the end of October, and the plant thrives well in all
States. In some circles where summer rains are fre-
quent, it has been demonstrated that the sowing of
Rape as a catch crop up till February is wise, because
it will be ready for grazing in about May or June.
Should the paddock be in a weak condition, give it fully
B cwt. animal guano per acre. Sow 6 lbs. per acre in
drills, 18 to 24 inches apart, or 10 lbs. broadcast. With
favourable conditions a crop of Rape should be ready
for pasturing in about ten weeks from sowing.
Rape seed is small and requires a fine seed bed. It
should be sown shallow. Half an inch is deep enough.
In loose soils one inch is the greatest depth allowable
to obtain a maximum germination. The heavier and
stiifer the soil the shallower should the seeding be. Many
growers broadcast the seed on the surface, and then
brush harrow, following with a plain heavy roller to
compact the ground.
Fat lomb raisers face a bright future. Everything
a they raise to-day will find a market. Many are it
4M extending operations, at the same time increasing ■fc.
Rape acreage. That is very important, because pr
this quick fattener of sheep and lamb is your
best ally.
TOP-DRESS LIBERALLY
“The Leader” gives some very valuable bints on the
matter of fertilizing:—“A quick-growing cr p like Rape
always benefits by heavy dressings of manure, and it is
usual to add liberal dressings of artificial fertilizers, so
that the plants may not be checked in their growth.
Phosphoric manure, such as superphosphate, should be
made the basis of any manuring mixture for the crop,
but nitrogenous ingredients should be added for most
soils. Rape is a good preparatory crop to precede a
cereal, or for that matter any other crop. The larger
the Rape crop grown on the land the better will the
conditions be made for the succeeding cereal crop.
CULTIVATION AFTER BROADCAST
The after cultivation can only be in the nature of light
harrowing, after the plants have obtained a good hold
upon the soil. Some of the plants will be) destroyed, thus
sowing sufficiently thick to allow for thinning is advised.
CULTIVATION AFTER DRILLING
Begin light harrowing as soon as the young plants appear
in the rows. It should be shallow only, and continued
frequently, until the top of the plants prevent further
cultivation between the rows. When sown on the level,
with all the coulters running, the harrow may be drawn
across the rows prior to the ordinary cultivation, the
effect being to remove quantities of weeds along the
rows, which would otherwise lie undisturbed.
The crop should be allowed to get well up before being
fed off —say a foot or more high—but stock always should
be turned in before the flowering stage. The paddock
should be subdivided to get the most satisfactory results.
RAPE MIXTURE
Risk of loss of lambs on Rape can be minimised to a
great extent by sowing White Mustard with Rape to
counteract the heating tendency. The diet will become
safer and more wholesome. White Mustard should be
sown with Rape at the rate of i to i lb. per acre
NINE POINTS TO REMEMBER ABOUT RAPE:
(1) Don’t let animals crop too close.
(2) Don’t hurry stock on to a Rape paddock.
(3) It is usual to let crops grow 6 inches high at
least before pasturing.
(4) Run sheep through a paddock quickly, nipping
off outer leaves as they go. When they have
done this take them out for a while, otherwise they
will devour the crowns and stems of Rape, and
thus do permanent injury before the plants are
established.
(5) Give your paddocks a spell for a couple of weeks.
(6) Judicious handling of crops is essential.
(7) Do not put lambing ewes on to the crop early in
the morning whilst the crop is wet with rain or
dew. This is a dangerous practice; wait till later
on in the day.
(8) A grass paddock to which the sheep may have
access at the same time that they are run on the
Rape, is of great advantage.
(9) To prevent blowing, use i to i lb. White Mustard
per acre, sown with Rape.
THAT BAYS 1
nm' <r "v y,-'v~~^'y-<i >


Rape is a recognized valuable Rotation Crop, too.
. It leaves sufficient nitrogen (54 lbs. per acre) .
jj available for a 35 bus. crop of wheat; enough Ik
phosphoric acid (26 lbs.) for the same amount; Jir
” o fair supply of potash, and a large quantity of '
humus in the shape of decaying root matter.
Rape (Brassica napus) is a cruciferous plant with small
yellow flowers, belonging to the same natural order as
the cabbage and turnip. It is easily grown, makes rapid
progress, and provides any amount of highly nutritious
green feed. In favourable seasons it is ready for feeding
in from twelve to fifteen weeks, and sheep and pigs can
eat it down when it reaches 6 inches in height. If well
grown it can be safely stocked at the rate of 10 head per
acre. If Rape is sown, as directed, to catch the autumn
rains, and conditions are ideal, it will be available for
stocking before the winter sets in, and will yield succulent
feed when pastures are at their worst.
Treat the young plants well, for every acre of well-
grown Rape ought to produce from 20 to 25 tons of good
food in leaves and roots. Rape grows very rapidly
if kept clean, and an early hoeing either by hand or horse
hoe benefits it wonderfully. It not only grows fast, but
continues to grow late into autumn, and in some dis-
tricts all the winter, until the seed stems are fully
formed. It will prove an unprofitable crop if sown upon
poor land, but it is a remunerative one if generously
treated.
RAPE CAN BE CUT AND FED OR STORED IN THE
SILO
There is no better feed for lambing ewes, as it enables
them to provide a plentiful supply of milk for their lambs
at a time when they are most in need of proper nourish-
ment. In the case of fattening sheep, they can be allowed
to eat as much rape as they will consume. The rate
they lay on condition on this fodder is surprising. There
is no other on which anything like such rapid gains will
be made, excepting Lucerne, and it is doubtful if even
it will yield the same results. It is said that rape-fed
sheep kill much better than their appearances indicate.
The mutton is tender and juicy, and possesses a fine
flavour.
Rape should not he eaten too short during the winter
months, as this allows the frosts to get at the soil, which
prevents all growth until spring.
Rape can be successfully grown in fallow land. By grow-
ing Rape first, the ground can be ploughed again the fol-
lowing winter, and results have proved that wheat grown
on this land gives as good a yield as that grown on bare
fallow.
When sown in the autumn with Rye the two crops combined
have a particularly good effect as a rotation, and where
sown on sandy soils, which must be well manured for the
purpose of forcing as much growth as possible, they have
a greatly beneficial effect if ploughed under in the spring,
when the crop is about 10 inches high. Managed in this
way they can be fed off all the winter and a handsome
profit made from the stock; a green fallow instead of a
bare fallow has been given the land, and the crop that
follows is in most cases better than where bare fallowing
is practised. This system is most applicable to districts
with a 20 to 30-inch rainfall.
WHEN FED TO DAIRY COWS
Rape should only be fed a little at a time, and after the
cows have been milked. It is better to feed Rape with
some other fodder crop, such as lucerne, rather than to
feed it alone. Rape can be fed to calves after weaning.
A fine crop of Giant or Kangaroo Rape that will fatten 3 sheep to
the acre. Note its large broad leaves.
Do not feed in too large quantities, or when wet, or when
stock are ravenously hungry. Scouring is not nearly as
likely to follow Rape feeding if the stock are pastured on
dry grass or fed with a considerable allowance of hay.
VALUABLE PORK-RAISING FEED
Rape can usually he stocked lightly 6 to 8 weeks after
sowing, and, providing the pigs are over 3 months, and
preferably 4 months, they will make surprising gains.
-fa What satisfaction there must he in results
that, to the eye, look 100%. For that degree
of satisfaction, do as Mr. T. Mvllaney, Taralga
(N.S.W.) does, and sow G. & N. Pedigree
Seeds.
He reports: “The results of the seed were
excellent. I suppose 100% germination would
seem absurd, but it certainly looks as if every
seed grew."
GIANT OR KANGAROO RAPE
A tall upright-growing form, with large broad pale green
leaves and a somewhat open crown.
The G. & N. variety grows to a great height; it will
fatten three sheep more to the acre than other kinds. A
truly wonderful variety of Rape, with exceedingly quick
growth. It has a long strong tap-root, enabling it to
stand long periods of drought. The stalks are unlike
ordinary Rape, as they break easily, and are very succulent
right through. Will not taint the milk. It is a great
fattening food for cows, horses, sheep, pigs, etc. Sow 4
to 6 lbs. per acre in drills, 8 to 10 lbs. broadcast.
DWARF ESSEX (English Grown)
A Dwarf form, characterised by a dense crown. An
exceedingly quick grower. G. & N. qualities are choice;
free from weeds. Recommended for spring sowings.
DWARF ESSEX (Dutch Grown)
Another specially recommended Dwarf variety, notable for
its profuse growth of leaves. Purchased direct from
reliable sources. Tested and recleaned and offered at
finest values.
WHITE MUSTARD
Sow with Rape to prevent blowing, i to i lb. per acre.
G, & N. offers excellent quality seed. Special prices given
for largo quantities. Write for quotes, stating approxi-
mate amounts.
CaSSWiaP^— F ™' Mi']
RAPE . .


KALE
(CHOU MOELLIER—MARROW-STEMMED KALE)
Sheep grazing on Chou Moellier. 500 ewes have grazed for 8 months
on 6 acres of Chou Moellier and Swedes.
The experiences of two growers in the cultivation of Rape
and Kale for the fattening of sheep and lambs demon-
strate the many advantages of this method and its value
for sheep farms. Mr. G. W. McDonnell, Mt. Egerton,
found that the cultivation of Kale, preferably Chou
Moellier, marrow-stemmed variety, contributed results that
hitherto have not been equalled by any other fodder. The
Kale in question stood up to both drought, frost and other
wintry conditions, did not cause taint nor bloat, was grazed
down to the last shred of the highly sugared stalk, and
provided, as well as the first enormous crop, a second
growth of fodder from the numerous sprouts which fol-
lowed the first grazing. The strong root system, when
ploughed in, improved the texture of the soil by providing
valuable humus.
This Kale proved a veritable “gold mine.” It increased
carrying capacities, in fact at one time fifteen lambs per
acre were fattened. Moreover, the value of the land
around the district was considerably increased. Some
idea of the amount of bulk food at the disposal of stock is
revealed by the fact that one paddock of seventeen acres
yielded about forty tons of green nutritious fodder per
acre.
CONCERNING CULTIVATION
Though planting at different periods is possible, Mr.
McDonnell found that winter preparations of the Kale
were advisable, allowing the land to fallow for a couple of
months before working the soil to a fine tilth prior to
planting in September or October. The drill was set to
distribute 1 lb. of seed to the acre as shallow as possible,
and by blocking each alternate hoe the rows were about
eighteen inches apart. The mixing of 1 cwt. of super-
phosphate with the seed generally gives a space of from
one foot to eighteen inches between the plants, and no
thinning out is necessary. Neither has the growth of
weeds during the last couple of years been sufficient to
justify cultivation during the growing period. With a
normal rainfall the first of the crop is ready for grazing
in March, and the fodder is available then right through
winter and early part of spring. The stock are not turned
on, however, until the plants are more than three feet high.
It is apparent from many reports received that even under
an abnormal summer such as we have had, if the right
cultural methods are adopted an excess of moisture Is
not a great disadvantage. It is to be hoped, therefore,
that those whose efforts have been marred by the excessive
An impetus hos been given to fat lamb production
j, by the Imperial Government's decision to purchase .
Jk the whole of Australia's surplus meat. With Rape Ik
and Kale it is possible to fatten sheep and lambs BF
~ all the year round and to take full advantage of r
this golden opportunity.
'weedy growths of a wet summer will not give up kale
growing experiments, but will endeavour to give the plants
a better seed bed than was possible, _ owing to the short
time which was given to the land prior to planting, last
August and September.
X Groxoers all over Australia pin their faith to
G. & N. for best qualities and genuine true-to-
type seeds. From Mr. T. G. Adams, Won
Wron, via Traralgpn, comes this tribute; "I
planted 1 lb. of Chou Moellier from you about
first week of January and, although planted
under adverse conditions, returned over h 0
tons of green feed cut in April and May before
full maturity. Also 1 lb. of Swede Turnip
planted gave me about 15 tons with one work-
ing only."
Another strong Kale advocate is Dr. Stewart, the well-
known Corriedale sheep-breeder, of “Carrakoorte,” Mone-
gatta, who, when he saw Mr. McDonnell’s Kale crop at
Mt. Egerton for the first time, instantly recognized its
value from a lamb-raiser’s point of view. Even allowing
for the drop of market prices, Dr. Stewart has formed the
opinion that as a standby fodder for fattening sheep or
lambs, or for lambing ewes, Kale has much to recom-
mend it. Evidence of Kale’s hardiness is revealed in one
of his early crops, which survived 11 weeks of drought
in the early stages and grew into healthy area, and yielded
approximately IB tons of green fodder to the acre.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE PLANT
Every farmer who makes a point of getting the best from
his stock should have a small area in this useful fodder.
Chou Moellier is rich in salt and a very healthy fodder.
The plant is a great yielder of vigorous growth, attaining
a height of up to 6 feet.
Chou Moellier has a very stout stem, which is swollen
in the upper two-thirds of its length, and filled with a
kind of marrow or tender flesh. This forms ideal food for
cattle. The stems grow five feet or more high, with a
diameter of three or four inches in the thickest part. The
leaves are large, abundant, succulent and palatable. Heavy
swamp lands and good bush country are most productive
for Chou Moellier. Light soils are suitable, but they must
be well manured. In fact any land suitable for Rape
and Swedes will grow Chou Moellier.
Plow early and work the soil thoroughly as in the case
of Rape and Swedes. Sow in the early autumn, 2 lbs.
to the acre if drilled, or 1 lb. would be quite sufficient
if transplanted. The drills should be about two feet
apart, and an allowance made for about twelve or fourteen
inches between the plants. Even in dry seasons Chou
Moellier does exceptionally well. It represents early
spring feed in valuable form. A useful fodder sums it up.
X Even from far-off New Zealand, the pages of
this Catalogue are read and appreciated. Mr.
B. Carlyle,. of Pukekohe, N.Z., pays this
tribute:
“Your catalogue is the best of its kind that I
have seen, and I find it very helpful."
i TIB STBAIH <tirw^HtoplJSl
V"“y


(THOUSAND-HEADED KALE. Russell’s Improved Strain)
if a Kale crop competition were held the points
◄ upon which it would be judged are yield per acre, k
husbandry, evenness and quality. These are the Mk
very points which predominate in a G. Cr N. Kale Br
crop, because the seed is of high-bred character,
known origin, clean and true-to-name.
Thousand-headed Kale requires a well-drained condition
of the land. On light land it will not produce a large
quantity of forage. It prefers a good strong soil, and is
particularly suited to peaty soils, heavy clays, and re-
claimed swamp lands.
Thousand-headed Kale can be grown after lea, or it may
be taken after stubble. It does well after clover, over-
turned pasture, or any grass crop, as it feeds voraciously
on the decaying vegetable matter.
In preparing the seed-bed, the aim should be to secure a
firm tilth with as clean a seed-bed as can be obtained.
The surface should not be made too fine, as the crop is
rather delicate in the seeding stage. It is assisted by
working the land deeply and thoroughly, and when giving
the final stroke leaving the surface slightly on the rough
side.
Gives big yields of green stuff. Stock eat this fodder with
avidity, and practical tests reveal that it is of exceptionally
high feeding value. In one instance a run of lambs
gained half a pound per day in eighteen days on Thousand-
headed Kale against a gain of a quarter of a pound per
day for the same period on lambs from the same draft,
but fed on Rape. In one test for palatability, the lambs
showed a preference for Rape, but the opposite result
was secured in another test. All practical feed trials
of the fodder undoubtedly show that the palatability and
the feed values are of the highest order. It need not be
fed off as soon as it is mature; normally it may he left
for several weeks. Successfully grown as a summer and
early autumn crop, and is of great value as a winter
and early spring fodder.
Thousand-headed Kale can be sown in 14 inch drills and
treated like the rape crop on clean land of a medium
character, without liability to water-logging.
Very wide spacing between is recommended, as this Kale
is a very robust grower. Prom 2 to 3 lbs. of seed is
required to plant an acre.
This crop always benefits by heavy dressings of manures
in an available form. Being a very gross feeder, it pays
to be treated more liberally even than rape. A suitable
manure is a mixture of superphosphate, bonedust, and
dried blood, applied at the rate of 3 ewt. to 4 ewt. per acre.
If the soil is enriched by good manuring, a crop yield of
from 20 tons to 40 tons per acre should be obtained.
The crop should be thinned when in the early seedling stage.
A quick method of thinning out is to work the harrows
carefully over the field across the rows. The usual
practice is to leave the crop over the winter lor another
feeding in the following spring. It is a good practice
to mould up the crop before feeding it off in the spring
on land that is at all heavy.
It does not cause sheep or lambs to blow or scour; and
can be cut and will sprout immediately, giving another
good yield in a few months.
Thousand-headed Kale does not taint the milk like rape
or turnips, but it is always best to feed it to the cows
immediately after milking.
In a New Zealand (Southland) Chou Moellier Crop Com-
petition the experience of the winner ia noteworthy. He
sowed 2 lbs. per acre and hand-thinned the crop. Reverted
phosphate at the rate of 1 ewt. per acre was applied
A fine crcop of Thousand-Headed Kale. Note its height as compared
with the pony. (Photo, by courtesy “Commonwealth Agriculturist.”)
through the back box of the ridger, and equal parts of
blood and bone and guano were applied through the front
box at the rate of 2 ewt. per acre.
BEST RETURNS WHEN FED WITH RAPE AS A
COMBINATION
When Rape and Kale plots are sown at the same time,
the Rape, which matures quicker, is first grazed about
January or February. The Kale is somewhat slower in
growth, and comes into use (being, of course, planted in
separate paddocks) as a follow-on fodder for the colder
period of the year, when ordinary pastures are most
scanty.
A strong, hardy plant with a long, edible stem and big,
succulent leaves, Kale is not only somewhat similar in
appearance to Cabbage and Rape, but combines the
qualities of both. Easy to grow, the seed strikes well,
and the plants flourish strongly. Lasts right through the
winter, is unaffected by frosts, withstands disease, and
smothers weeds.
Kale is slower in growth and less palatable than Rape
and has not the same value as a fattening fodder. On
the other hand, it is hardier, and if not fed off too closely,
has remarkable capacity for recovery after being grazed.
THOUSAND-HEADED KALE DIFFERENT FROM
CHOU MOELLIER
These two Kales are quite distinct, inasmuch as Thousand-
headed Kale is of a branching habit, throwing out a number
of broad leaves from a thin stem, something after the
same habit as Rape. Marrow Stem Kale (Chou Moellier),
on the other hand, is grown chiefly for the stem which is
thick and swollen, and without any leaves, but there is
a bunch of leaves at the top. The stem contains the so-
called “marrow” or flesh.
G. & N. IMPORTS PUREST AND BEST
Growers can rely on the G. & N. stocks of Chou Moellier
and Thousand-headed Kale as being the finest strains
imported. Each line ia triple-tested and is passed under
most exacting supervision.
Have a "Germination Test." Before you sow,
know that your seeds core right. Write
G. & N. immediately for free seed samples and
test the Germination and Purity for yourself.
~i ~ ~ - ~ ~i ijMjiiirirr .e>-.e, 0. e c *..■<?.
. THE STBAIH \ THAT PAYS i
o> or —3> d ' % "if «W|jr
KALE . .


SUMMER FODDER CROPS
Abundant fodder supplies for the driest summer. Loading G. & N.
Imphee Sorghums, which in places reached 12 feet in height.
As one authority puts it, “Production at all seasons of the
year is possible, but it can be achieved only by careful
planning and by so arranging the cultivation of the land
that fodder crops are on hand to tide the cows over the
lean periods.”
In this production aim, Summer Fodders are very important
factors, particularly so at those times of the year when
pastures are not producing sufficiently to maintain the
cows in full milk.
Pasture improvement must be supplemented by the cul-
tivation of annual crops for green feed purposes and for
conservation as ensilage.
Summer Fodders are hardy-growing crops which do well
under dry conditions. Another point in their favour, the
ease and economy of establishment.
Naturally, there is a slight extra outlay for seed, fertilizer,
labour, etc., involved in the cultivation of the crops, but
the extra yield of greenstuff plus the feeling of safety and
security provided, are ample compensation. It has been
proved often enough that the cultivation of Summer
Fodders is a highly remunerative practice, and is a cheap
insurance, against drought and fodder famine, that every
farmer should take up.
There is no lack of choice of crops. Past experiences have
demonstrated that the most successful in Victoria are
Japanese Millet, Sudan Grass, Sorghums, Lucerne, Maize,
etc., and in a few of the colder higher-rainfall districts,
Rape could be recommended.
The best time to sow these crops is Spring or early Summer,
after the frosts are over.
Government officials say: “Always select good
pure seed from a reliable source.” Mr. J.
Walker, of Boort, who sowed G. & N. Seeds,
says: —
“The Seed I got from you in October turned
out very satisfactory, both as regards
quality and price. I have one piece of 18
acres in the flower stage 5 ft. high, looking
very nice indeed.”
FOUR CARDINAL POINTS
“There are several points that will bear emphasizing in
regard to the successful growth of fodder. The first is
thorough cultivation, which is absolutely necessary to
secure good results, and which will repay any extra work
involved; a fine firm seed bed is essential, giving a better
condition for the root system to penetrate quickly and
There is a danger that the good grass season
experienced last year may lull many a dairy
◄ farmer into a sense of false security. Don't
make this mistake! Be sure and sow Summer
Forage Crops, and provide a supply of succulent r
green fodder for stock at a time when grass is
dry.
easily, providing as it does a larger feeding area and
greater supply of plant foods. Better water storage is
also secured in this way, and subsequent cultivation made
easier and more effective.
“Secondly, a suitable system of rotation by which the
earliest fodder can be obtained, followed by further
supplies to enable the system to extend over the longest
possible period, thus maintaining the greatest carrying
capacity and the largest profits. This can be done by
growing Japanese Millet in the first paddocks, and having
relays of Maize, Rape, or Sorghum to come in as the
millet becomes exhausted; then such crops as teosinte,
amber cane, or imphee for late summer feed should carry
stock on until the early crops are ready to feed off or
rape and rye have reached the useful stage.
“Thirdly, subdivided paddocks allow of far greater carry-
ing possibilities than with one field of their combined area.
The change from one paddock to another in which there
is fresh untrampled feed acts as a stimulant to stock to
eat more, and the rest given the previously stocked pad-
dock enables the growth of the crop to recover, the leaf
and stem of the plants receiving time to make a fair leaf
surface area, occasionally to take in from the atmosphere
the 93J per cent, of nourishment it derives from that
source. The surest way to kill any crop is to keep it fed
down with no chance to breat e through its leaf system.
This explains the great necessity for allowing Lucerne to
reach a certain growth for cutting in preference to
grazing. Three to five paddocks are generally sufficient,
but more would be advantageous, as the more constant
the change the stock get, in reason, the better they and
the crops thrive.
“Fourthly, a proper system of manuring is only a pro-
fitable business proposition. To take out of the soil more
than is returned to it must result in impoverishing the
land sooner or later, and is equivalent to living on one’s
capital. One cwt. of superphosphate supplies only suffi-
cient phosphoric acid for a twenty-eight bushel crop of
wheat, consequently at least that amount should be applied
to enable the soil to produce that amount and not suffer
ultimately. Even on a fairly rich soil it will pay to keep
up the standard of fertility rather than let it diminish, and
on poorer soils it is imperative in order to give the land
an opportunity to produce good crops.
Liberal manuring of the crop is essential. The manorial
mixture and quantity to use per acre would vary according
to conditions. In dry districts where summer rainfall has
to be depended upon, superphosphate only would be recom-
mended. In better rainfall localities a superphosphate
and ammonia mixture should help towards a greater bulk
of fodder being grown per acre.
Where it is known that lime is deficient, applications of
burnt lime, ground limestone, or gypsum are also neces-
sary, and for Millets in such soils the effect of gypsum has
been noticed. Nitrogen can be supplied by fallowing and
rotation cropping, using legumes, but it is often wise to
use nitrogenous fertilisers where fallowing and rotation
cropping has not been possible.
[?]


SUDAN GRASS
Whot do growers tike best about Sudan Grass?
. "Easily handled . . . useful," says one; "Can be ..
jM grazed-off periodically, or left to mature," says
another; "In dry farming areas there isn't a better pF
™ summer crop than Sudan Grass for grazing or
silage purposes," says still another.
If you live in an area where rainfall is limited or
uncertain, or where the soil is liable to dry out readily,
pin your faith to Sudan Grass for Summer feed, and you’ll
come through with flying colours.
Sudan Grass provides a great bulk of succulent feed
which is palatable to all classes of stock.
Sudan Grass matures very quickly, the first crop being
ready to cut in from eight to ten weeks after seeding. It
can be cut green and fed for hay or used for pasturing.
Early ploughing and thorough cultivation are essentials
to success.
In addition, Sudan Grass is of the vigorous growing
type, and gives two or three big, rich, luxuriant crops per
season, producing an abundance of grain and finest hay.
In ordinary circumstances it attains a height of 5 to 6
feet with a strong flag development and comparatively
slender steins up to 3-16th inch in diameter, but, under
irrigation and in rich soil, it may reach a height of 7 or
8 feet.
It is a very leafy plant that tillers freely. Its stalks are
not as coarse as those of the ordinary sorghum, and on
account of its vigorous growth, It is almost a smothering
crop.
THIS TALK OF POISONING!
The charge of poisoning has been laid against
Sudan Grass, but in every instance the cause
of the trouble has been traced to cross pollina-
tion, due to an adjoining stand of Sorghum or
Broom Millet, or the sowing of impure seed,
whilst this year a poor -■’cs on has caused
considerable damage to ci ..■ ' ! hen revived,
these crops produced fresh growth, which
invariably contained harmfid qualities of
prussic acid.
CLIMATIC AND SOIL REQUIREMENTS
Sudan Grass will adapt itself to almost any soil, on a
light sandy loam to a heavy clay. On rich loam it gives
the heaviest returns. However, light yields may be ex-
pected when the soil is sandy. Being a warmth-loving
plant, Sudan should not be sown in cool, temperate dis-
tricts until October. Late spring and early summer, with
the danger of frosts over, are best sowing times.
It is necessary to prepare the seed bed properly. The
land should be ploughed in the autumn. During the win-
ter months the surface soil should be kept in a loose
broken condition with the harrows or cultivator. Just
prior to sowing, the land may be lightly ploughed or
scarified, so as to destroy weeds, and then harrowed down
to produce a fine seed bed. If the crop is to be grown
under irrigation, the best method is to irrigate the land
just prior to the sowing.
SOWING SUGGESTIONS
The seed may be sown broadcast or in drills. When sown
broadcast, it averages from three to five feet in height;
but sown in rows and cultivated, it reaches over six feet.
We recommend, when sown broadcast, 15 to 20 lbs. of
seed to the acre; or 8 to 10 lbs. through the drill. When
cultivated in rows, the stems grow much thicker than
when sown broadcast. Broadcast seeding produces, if
anything, a better quality of hay, owing to the finer stems.
When grown in cultivated rows, it is apt to be coarse
and not so desirable for market hay.
Ayrshire Milking Herd grazing on Sulan Grass, HurlstoneAgricul-
tural High School, Glenfield, N.S.W. (N.S.W. Govt. Printer, photo.)
Although the depth has little effect on the root system
of the grass, it is considered that to sow 1 inch below
the surface is satisfactory. In irrigation areas good re-
sults will be obtained by sowing with the ordinary seed
drill, using 12 lbs. of seed to the acre, with 1 cwt. of super-
phosphate to the acre. Under such conditions the plants
tiller well, the stems are fine, with plenty of flag, making
a valuable fodder for feeding green or for converting
into hay.
PASTURING
Sudan Grass is ready for pasturing just about the time
other pastures begin to fall. There is no crop for pasture
which is so prompt for this period. It is more reliable
than meadow aftermaths, because in dry, hot seasons they
return very little second growth. Sudan Grass flourishes
in hot and rather dry weather. If pasturing is started
when the crop is about knee-high and the stand is good,
from three-fourths to one acre a cow will furnish pasture
enough for about two months and often longer. If more
acreage than this is allowed, then pasturing may start
when the crop is 8 in. to 12 in. high. The feed is very
palatable, and at pasture stages of growth it has about
14 per cent, crude protein in its dry matter. Cattle
usually increase their milk when turned from other pas-
ture to Sudan Grass.
AFTER TREATMENT
Three things to remember in Sudan Grass Pastures are;
(1) Don’t feed stock off immature or stunted growth.
(2) Put stock on for a short time at first.
(3) Cut and allow to dry for a few hours. And all
risks of poisoning will be eliminated.
When cut for hay, the period of greatest nutritive value,
as with cereals or grasses, is just as the plants are coming
into flower, and the percentage of protein decreases as
the ripening stage is reached. Cut as soon as the head
appears. It can be cut with the ordinary reaper and
binder, and under favourable conditions we consider this
grass will outyield Jap. Millet. Sudan Grass hay, chaffed,
mixed with oats or other suitable concentrates, makes
excellent feed for cither horses or cattle, and is greatly
relished by all classes of stock.
As to manures, it has been found that from one to two
cwts. of superphosphate and bone-dust should be applied.
FREE FROM SORGHUM HYBRIDS
The Dept, of Agriculture has approved of G. & N. Sudan
Grass Seed for it is free from Sorghum hybrid plants
and other diseases. G. &N. Sudan Grass is of unques-
tionable germinating power, and highest purity.
C«a>BiCoP^WimSE9®M»


JAPANESE MILLET
Japanese Millet sown broadcast.
December, January and February are the months of the
year when milk production generally suffers a setback,
because that is the period when grass is at lowest ebb.
Fortunately enough, December, January and February are
the months when Jap. Millet comes into its own and
provides a crop rich in high milk-producing and stock-
fattening qualities.
Recognized by long experienced and prosperous dairymen
as the most useful summer crop, Jap. Millet is specially
valuable for at least five solid reasons:—
(1) Grows quickly;
(2) Supplies big yields of green food during the
summer months;
(3) May be grazed at any time by cows and other
stock or can be cut and fed off green;
(4) Makes good hay and ensilage, and
(5) Is a good milk-producing fodder.
Japanese Millet is a fast grower, stooling out well when
grazed, growing densely and vigorously, and standing
up to repeated grazings.
Jap. Millet, in making rapid, reliable growth under dry
conditions, sometimes reaches 8 ft. in height, yielding 10
to 12 tons of green fodder per acre. It should be sown
during the spring or early summer, and can be fed off
after four or six weeks from seeding. It can be grazed
without fear of hoven and milk taint, or cut; and, being
the most valuable of Millets, it is a great acquisition
during drought.
Jap. Millet will thrive on a variety of soils, from a light,
poor nature, to heavy alluvial flats, but the most suitable
is good mellow loam rich in humus. The plants are
surface rooters, and thrive wonderfully when the surface
is well cultivated and manured with quick-acting
fertilizers.
Drilling or broadcasting G. & N. Seed in the
soil is like putting money in the hank.
Both prove gilt-edged securities by which it is
impossible to lose. Farmers by the thousands
are benefiting by G. & N’s. sure-to-grow
propensities.
“I am very pleased with the G. & N. Seed
received from you on 10th last month. It
is coming away very rapidly, and a
wonderful strike—loo per cent., I should
say,” writes Mr. W. H. Tiekell, Kyabram.
When it is intended to be grazed, it should be stocked
when about six inches high, being fed down fairly close,
which would tend to make stool and become much thicker.
When the land is sufficiently dry to carry a team the
paddock should be harrowed with a set of sharp harrows,
across the drill, and cropped down to six to ten inches.
Strawberry will show her appreciation for Japanese
◄ Millet by giving more milk, and, by a substantial .
rise in her butter-fat production figures. Every
grower of Jap. Millet can reach the limit in
production and also extend the milking season
with "The Dairyman's Crop."
At that time stock could be put on it. With this treat-
ment, Japanese Millet can be kept growing through the
summer, and would carry on an average, from ten to
fifteen sheep an acre.
JAPANESE MILLET WILL NOT POISON STOCK IN
THE YOUNGER STAGES, like the Sorghums are apt to,
and stock like it. Although it will not withstand frost,
it may be sown as early as September in the drier dis-
tricts, and up to the end of December in the moister parts
of Victoria. It should be sown fairly deep, especially in
ordinary weather. It can be sown with an ordinary drill,
with superphosphate, and sown through the manure box.
Sow at depth of 1 to li inches.
The cost per acre to sow Japanese Millet is trifling when
compared with the prices of other summer fodders. When
sowing the seed broadcast we recommend from 12 to 15
lbs. per acre; but when sown in drills, which should be
seven inches apart, from 8 to 10 lbs. are sufficient.
When grown to be cut, not grazed, the seed should be
sown in drills fifteen inches apart, and should be cut well
before seeding starts, about three inches from the ground.
JAP. MILLET SHOULD NOT BE CUT TOO CLOSE,
as the plants suffer in consequence. Cutting can be done
three to four times in the season, and care should always
be exercised in allowing the Millet to lie and wilt before
feeding to stock, especially milking cows. The crop can
be cut with a binder, and the sheaves should be loosely
stacked to allow it to dry without becoming mildewed.
MANURING.—The secret of this crop is to manure it
liberally, up to 6 cwt. to the acre. Fence in brakes and
feed there in rotation, which will provide several crops
of good pasturage during the summer season.
Harvesting should be carried out at the stage when the
crop is richest in nutrients and most palatable and diges-
tible. According to an authority, when the majority of
the seed-heads or panicles have formed in the green
pendulous stage, is the correct time to cut for green
fodder. The green crop contains much moisture in both
stalks and foliage, and in consequence takes longer to
cure than ordinary wheaten hay. If the crop is intended
for silage, it may stand a little longer after heading out,
but it must be cut prior to ripening.
-X. This Seed Guide is prepared at great expense,
but it is worth it when we get such pats on
the back as this typical tribute: “There is a
tvealth of information in this catalogue and
it is a credit to you the way it is got up.”
(Mr. E. W. Huf, Croxton East, Vic.)
G. & N. JAPANESE MILLET IS VICTORIAN GROWN
As growers all over the State testify, it will pay you to
buy from G. & N. —the High Grade Seed House.
All supplies are guaranteed new crop seed, tested under
modern methods and specially recleaned. Special price
concessions are granted for large quantities. State
amounts in mind, when writing.
NOTE.—The Agrostology Branch of the
Department of Agriculture, Melbourne, C. 2, in
addition to carrying out extensive pasture re-
search, is also invested with the duties of Seed
Testing. This gives farmers a much-needed
protection, and gives them the opportunity of
having their seed checked over and tested by
Government officials, providing, of course, a
sample is submitted accordingly.
.*> 5>.,3 c cep a.....#.....,e,.&.


SORGHUMS
Pick Sorghums in your team of drought-resistant
, summer fodders. The sweet juices contained in w
JM the mature stalks make them highly palatable to
dairy and other stock. Because they retain their Br
~ succulence long after maturity. Sorghums make ”
specially valuable winter feed.
Soil and climatic conditions do not handicap Sorghum
growth. Although the heaviest crops are naturally
produced on the more fertile soils, Sorghums can be grown
successfully on a very wide range of soils; in fact, they
will grow on a greater variety and over a wider
area of the State than any other cultivated Summer
crop. Sorghums possess hardiness and ability to with-
stand prolonged dry spells. Sorghums thrive best in
districts having a good rainfall and a long summer season.
In hot, moist districts, it yields an immense quantity of
quality forage. The young plants, when well established,
will withstand dry weather well and rapidly respond to
any rain that falls. If light frosts are experienced in the
autumn, the growth of Sorghum is checked, and heavy
frosts injure the crop, although the leaves and stems do
not lose their succulence for some time afterwards.
Sorghum stands well into the winter, and this is important
for all farmers requiring early winter feed.
PREPARATION OF THE SOIL
Thorough preparation is essential, as the plant roots
require to develop freely in order to provide sufficient
nourishment to encourage a luxuriant growth of the stem
and leaves. Plough the land deeply to commence with
in the early winter, and if very lumpy break it down with
heavy harrows; keep weeds down by an occasional working
with the tine harrow or springtooth cultivator, leaving
the second ploughing until just prior to sowing. The
second ploughing needs to he a shallow one. In districts
with only a limited rainfall it will be necessary to fallow
the ground for four or five months previous to sowing,
thus storing up moisture for the subsequent crop. Bene-
ficial results are obtained from applications of artificial
manures, such as superphosphate, at the rate of 1 to 2
cwt. per acre, or a mixture of equal parts of super-
phosphate and bonedust at the rate of 11 cwt. per acre.
If the nitrogen content of the soil is low, or humus is
deficient, a mixture of 11 cwt. superphosphate and 1 cwt.
sulphate of ammonia should be used.
SOWING
Seeding can be commenced as soon as the frosts are over;
the earlier the better. We recommend sowing thinly in
drills three feet apart, and at the rate of 6 to 8 lbs. of
seed to the acre, or broadcast 12 to 15 lbs, per acre. Large
paddocks can be sown with the wheat drill if a little care
be taken to make the necessary adjustments. In dry
localities and where weeds are plentiful, broadcasting is
not recommended, as cultivation cannot be carried out to
keep down weeds and create a mulch to preserve moisture.
When the seed is up, give the same cultivation as for corn.
HARVESTING
All varieties of Sorghums should be allowed to wilt in the
sun for two or three hours after cutting, when it might
be fed to stock with perfect safety.
Sorghums should he cut when the seeds have just begun
to harden. If allowed to go beyond this stage the pro-
portion of fibre rapidly increases. For ensilage, experience
shows that Sorghum should be fairly mature before
cutting. The stalks may look rather dry, hut Sorghums
should not be cut for silage until the seeds are hard. If
cut too early, the silage is apt to be acrid and inferior
to that cut at the right time.
FEEDING AS GRAIN—When ripe, the heads can be
harvested and threshed, or they may be fed straight to
A fine Crop of G. & N. Imphee grown at Tatnra. Vic.
the stock. If possible, it is an advantage to crush the
grain, or the whole head can be ground without threshing.
EARLY AMBERCANE
A productive, sweet and nutritious variety that provides
a plentiful crop of sustenance right through the summer,
when other varieties fail. It has a solid stalk which on
maturing develops a high percentage of sugar. It will
take large quantities of water in the early stages of
growth, but should not be irrigated after the flowering
stage, as too much water at such periods appears to
encourage aphis. It has been known to yield as much as
25 tons per acre, and one grower reports that 80 acres
carried 1,000 head of sheep for three months. A splendid
variety for silo. Best early. Most suited for irrigation
areas.
SACCALINE, OR SWEET SORGHUM
The ideal late Sorghum. Exceptionally rich in sugar, it
is very palatable and fattening to all classes of stock,
while its succulence and freedom from “pithiness” after
standing through a severe winter are most marked.
One of the very valuable habits of Saccaline is its
persistent ratooning or throwing up of new growths from
the roots when the matured stalks have been cut. It has
■ in several instances stood through the winter, and then
when all cut, thrown up a fresh crop of fine stalks the
following spring, and grown well through the second
summer.
IMPHEE, OR PLANTERS’ FRIEND
This is a late variety that stands cold weather best; thus
it is well-known as the ideal winter Sorghum.' Can be
sown right up to January. They are slow in maturing,
but give a large body of feed in the late autumn. They
can be cut and stored in sheaves, which should be placed
standing upright in a shed, from where they can be fed
to stock throughout the winter. Cultivation between the
rows should be given until the plants are 3 feet high.
They grow well with a fair summer rainfall, and yield
up to 16 or 20 tons per acre.
G. & N. VARIETIES ARE FAR SUPERIOR
Varieties recommended are Ambereane, for early crops,
and Imphee and Saccaline for late crops. G. & N. Sor-
ghums are absolutely pure and the pick of the best.
jL “The G. & N. Sorghums,” says Mr. J. M.
” Preston, Garfield (Vic.), “were very successful,
even though it whs a very dry season. The
height ranged from 6 to S feet over the half
acre, giving a woyiderful lot of feed.”
[?]


LUCERNE
Mr, R. J. Hline, of Rowsley, operating a Bamf .rd Swathturner and
Side Rake on a great crop of G. & K. Lucerne.
As one expert ably states, “The Arabic word for Lucerne
is ‘Alfalfa,’ which, translated, means, ‘the best feed,’ and
no single word could more accurately express Lucerne’s
immense value. It is the best feed that one can have on
a property, and a good acreage of this plant is the
greatest insurance against drought,”
Lucerne is a perennial plant which grows over a wide
range of conditions.
Lucerne thrives best on a deep, well-drained loam with
a porous subsoil. In such a soil the plant is able to send
down its tap root to a considerable depth. This enables
it to gather moisture and plant food from a layer of
soil rarely reached by the routs of other farm crops.
Under favorable conditions Lucerne roots have been found
to penetrate to a depth of twenty to thirty feet. Provided
the subsoil can be penetrated by the roots, Lucerne does
well on a variety of soils.
Lucerne being very productive, will produce during the
summer a succession of growths which are available for
cutting at intervals of five to six weeks. Ordinarily,
under irrigation, five cuts are made, and although these
are not uniform, aggregate yields of five tons of air-
dried hay may be expected. Yields of as much as eight
and nine tons of hay per acre have been harvested.
All land intended for Lucerne should he free from all
creeping-rooted grasses. These grasses will destroy the
Lucerne and reduce the yield considerably. A good stand
of Lucerne can best be secured by sowing it in land that
has grown a root crop and has been well manured and
well cleaned, by sowing it after a hold crop (corn or
potatoes) or on a summer fallow.
The ploughed l land should then be allowed to lie in the
rough state for a month or so and be broken down in
the beginning of summer with harrows. During the
summer months the land must be frequently worked with
harrow or cultivator, so as to allow neither growth of
weeds nor the formation of a hard crust on top.
If the seed-bed cannot be worked down sufficiently fine
with the harrows, a disc cultivator or roller will soon do
all that is necessary. If the land is rolled it should be
ban-owed' immediately after the rolling.
Success in establishing Lucerne in dry districts depends
almost entirely upon the thorough preparation of the
soil, and the ideal conditions to be aimed at are a well-
worked soil, in which the previous year’s rainfall has
been conserved, together with a reasonably finely worked
surface mulch.
It is best adapted for cutting for bay or green foliage,
although it is grazed extensively with satisfactory results.
It must be pointed out, however, that continued grazing-
shortens the life of the plant. Being a legume, the
herbage has a high nitrogenous content, and it is charac-
Ten years ago the Lucerne acreage of Victoria
j was 24,367 acres, and a yield of 35,531 tons
Lucerne Hay. To-day it is 38,273 acres with a W
NI yield of 59,943 tons. There is a steady increase
in "The King of Fodders," but its great all-round y
value merits it being cultivated on a more exten-
sive scale.
terised also by a high proportion of lime and other
minerals. The fii-st sowings of Lucerne in many of the
irrigation districts have remained dense and productive
for periods of 10 years or more, and normally seven years
of useful life may be expected.
MANURING
(a) SUPERPHOSPHATE. Lucerne responds amazingly
to top-dressing of super-phosphate, and results recommend
this profitable practice. It is a fact that a 6-ton Lucerne
crop removes as much phosphoric acid as would be supplied
by 3J cwt. of superphosphate. Best results are obtained
from the use of 2 cwt. of superphosphate in conjunction
with 30 cwt. of gypsum to the acre. The use of gypsum
need not be adopted every year, but superphosphate should
be applied each year. This should be drilled in after the
land has been stirred up with the cultivator.
(b) LIME.—If the soil is at all acid or sour, Lucerne
will not do well. On such soils an application of lime is
necessary. This may be applied at the rate of from 10
to 20 cwt. per acre before sowing or during the winter
renovation of the stand.
SEEDING
March or April sowing, after the autumn rainfall, is
regarded as the best sowing time. The soil is then at its
best, conditions are ideal, and by spring the crop will be
far advanced to benefit from the warmer temperatures.
The fallow should be worked thoroughly during the winter,
and the land should be brought to a fine tilth before
sowing. August or September sowing is also ideal.
The seed may be sown through the grass seeder attach-
ment, or by mixing with superphosphate and sowing the
mixture through the manure hose. The best variety to
sow is G. &N. triple-cleaned Broadleaf. For broadcast
sowing, 10 to 15 lbs. per acre; drilled, 8 to 10 lbs. per
acre.
GRADING
It is very desirable that the land should be graded
properly to permit of even distribution of water, and to
secure uniform growth, as well as to avoid injury to
the stand by water lodging in depressions. Generally,
careful grading- necessitates extended preparation, and
if practicable, the land should be rough-graded a year
prior to the final operation. This permits any filling to
settle.
JL “Experience is the beat teacher.” Why not
” learn from the experience of others, and save
yourself risks? Mr. Bui'rows, of Rosebud,
gladly gives his experience with O, & N. seeds:
“I was very pleased with the seed. As fan- as
I can see at present, I have a splendid ger-
mination with the Hunter River Seed."
HARVESTING
The Lucerne may be either grazed by stock or cut for
hay. The hay is cut with a mower just as the plants
are coming into bloom, or when new shoots are appearing
on the crowns. Unless wet, the hay should, as soon
as possible, then be raked into cocks, where it should be
allowed to dry off. This may take anything from two to
five days, or even longer in cool weather.
Lucerne should not be grazed the first season, nor con-
tinually grazed heavily, but if it is allowed to grow till
it begins to flower, then it can be eaten right down. This
can be done several times in a season.
rw »Mn mJm


LUCERNE
No one could deny that Lucerne is a money-
maker. Latest statistics show the gross value of ,
Jj Victoria's crop as £3ll,92B—average yield hay
per acre, 1-55 tons—average value per acre, wT
’ £B/1/1. You can't dodge facts, neither can you '
afford not to grow more Lucerne!
Lucerne should be subdivided into small paddocks so
that each portion can be fed off in rotation. This allows
each plot to recover after feeding. The value of Lucerne
hay is well known. It also makes first-class silage.
Lucerne has been known in numerous cases to double,
and even treble the carrying capacity of the country.
In addition to its value in furnishing green material for
the cows at the end of the season when green feed is
necessary to maintain the milk flow, it has the advantages
that it can be grazed off by stock or stored up for many
years. Lucerne solves well the problem of conserved
produce in dry periods. It also restores the land to its
former high standard of fertility.
WATERING OF LUCERNE
For the economic growing of Lucerne and sown pastures
it has been found by tests at the Werribee State Research
Farm that about two acre-feet of water should be used
a year, and that six waterings 4 in. each are better than
four of six inches each. This water can also be used by
plants without adding to the water-table.
The following yields an acre show the effect of watering
lucerne, 2 cwt. of superphosphate an acre having been
applied yearly in each instance:—
cwt.
No irrigation 9-2
6 waterings of 2 in 45-2
6 waterings of 3 in 81-4
6 waterings of 4 in 96-9
6 waterings of 5 in 100-9
Six waterings of 5 in. each with no manure gave a yield
of 69-2 cwt. an acre.
SEEDING LUCERNE WITH WHEAT
The “Agricultural Gazette” in publishing the findings of
trials in sowing lucerne with wheat for grazing stands,
says: Sowing with wheat can be recommended in districts
where the annual rainfall is
A magnified reproduction of
G. & N. Lucerne Seed.
propitious, considerable sav-
ing can be effected in the cost of establishing a stand of
lucerne for grazing by sowing the seed with a wheat crop.
It is, however, necessary to make thorough preparations.
The experiments indicate that the rate of seeding of the
cereal cover crop should not exceed 45 lbs. an acre under
average circumstances. On heavy soils which produce a
rank growth it is preferable to reduce the rate to about
20 inches or over, and a
reasonable proportion of the
precipitation occurs during
April to October.
Farmers in regions of uncer-
tain rainfall are advised to
study the figures in each year
for four- or five-year periods,
rather than the general aver-
age over a long-term period.
In that way they should ob-
tain information sufficiently
reliable to estimate the possi-
bilities of the cover crop
method of establishing lucerne
in their particular area.
The tests proved that, pro-
vided rainfall conditions are
This lucerne was cut twice during summer, with binder as illustrated.
Photo. by Mr. T. Holden. “Fair View,” Ganmain, N.S.W.
30 lbs. an acre. Wheat is preferable to oats as a cover crop.
It was found that under normal circumstances the Lucerne
thrived better when the cereal was stripped for grain than
when cut for hay.
RENOVATING LUCERNE.
Should this be necessary, autumn is the season for this
work, and it should be put in hand immediately the last
cutting of Lucerne is taken or when corresponding condi-
tions arise on areas that are being pastured—that is, so
soon as the active growing season has ended—and for this
purpose the last irrigation of the season should be so
arranged as to facilitate eifective cultivation immediately
the crop can be removed and while the soil is moist. On
no account should this work be allowed to wait for suitable
rains. Cultivation should he as deep as practicable, and
may he effected with a rigid-tooth cultivator, using only
very few teeth or—to attain a greater depth—with a
plough from which the mouldboard and wing of shear have
been removed. All grading should be effected, including
re-seeding of bare patches, if any exist, should receive
specially deep cultivation and be well filled up to the
correct level; also high patches should be graded down to
the proper level and specially cultivated.
SELECT PEDIGREE SEED
Because Lucerne is sown with the object of providing a
stand for several years, only the best seed should be con-
sidered. Farmers and graziers are warned of the presence
of so-called cheap seed, but which is false economy to
purchase. It is better to have an examination or test by
the Government Analyst rather than wait until the crop
has grown, then to find it containing injurious weeds. For
long-lived strains and' maximum strikes you can thoroughly
depend on G. & N. Lucerne, which is free from dodder,
weeds and inert matter, is triple-cleaned and Govern-
ment passed. G. & N., in realizing that choice of seed is
just as important as cultivation, care and management,
have won a fine reputation for super-quality strains of
mai-ked merit.
GIANT UPRIGHT BROADLEAF (Triple-cleaned)
A great forage crop for stock. This vigorous grower
is a very valuable variety, and its prolific growth is
distinguished by the way it provides extra cuttings and
better records every year. Giant Upright Broadleaf is
an extremely popular variety among lucernes.
GENUINE HUNTER RIVER
The well-known and highly favoured variety is a lusty
grower. A valuable fodder for horses, dairy cattle, sheep
and pigs. Very productive—very prolific.
r™. sjiAii < rata—imnr jjQgtj


ROOT CROPS
Thorough cultivation, fertilizing and high-quality seed were responsible,
in the main, for this Root crop, which yielded 80 tons per acre.
MANGELS
Sow 4 lbs. per acre. Sow from August to December.
Seed should be sown in drills 21 to 24 inches apart,
thinning out to 12 inches between the plants in the rows.
Given a deep, rich soil, they thrive in a high temperature.
Sliced up and mixed with chaff the Mangel is excellent
fodder for milch cows. Keep the plants free from weeds
in the earlier stages of growth. Sow the Globe varieties
in shallow ground; the long varieties in deep soil.
Under good conditions as to soil and manuring, it yields
a greater weight of feeding matter per acre than any
other crop of its class, keeps sound much longer, with-
stands drought better, and suffers less from disease. The
Mangel contains 12 per cent, of dry matter, two-thirds of
which is sugar. It increases the milk flow without impart-
ing any undesirable taint. For the first few days the
feeding of mangels to dairy cows should be fairly light,
and for cows in profit not more than 20 lbs. per cow per
day. This allowance may be increased gradually, until a
maximum of 50 lbs. to 60 lbs. has been reached by the
end of a week.
G. & N. CHAMPION YELLOW GLOBE MANGEL
A carefully selected high-class variety. It grows a great
weight per acre; has a small top and tap root, and pos-
sesses the highest nutritive qualities.
MAMMOTH LONG RED MANGEL
A very heavy cropping variety, most generally used.
LONG YELLOW MANGEL (or Gate Post Intermediate)
Very heavy cropping variety, with small top,
GIANT HALF SUGAR MANGEL
Superior as a stock food to Sugar Beet.
G. & N. varieties:—Green top, white and rose.
TURNIPS AND SWEDES
Turnips and Swedes are excellent for cattle, horses, sheep
and pigs. They are ready late in the autumn, and if
pulled and stored, the roots, which possess good keeping
qualities, can he used during the winter, when other
forages are scarce. Their bulk, succulence, palatableness,
digestibility of the dry matter, and high percentage of
the sugar contained give Swedes and Turnips a peculiar
value as s'tock food. The amount of seed per acre is about
3 lbs. Sow in rows about 2 ft. 6 in. apart to allow for
intertillage. When the young plants are about 1 or 2
inches high, thin out to a distance from 12 to 15 inches
apart.
As a source of winter fodder for stock. Root Crops
A are recommended. And remember, en oppor- Ik
M tunity often occurs to market a quantity to your jip
profit if vegetable prices happen to be nigh when fr
the crop is grown.
Manuring is important. The average quantity to use is
about 3 cwt. of superphosphate per acre. When storing
be sure to cut off tops.
FIELD TURNIPS
Sow Field Turnips at the rate of 2 to 3 lbs. of seed to
the acre. Seedings may be made in the autumn and the
spring; but the best time to sow is January and February,
as they are then less liable to an aphis attack.
G. & N. varieties include the following:—
WHITE STONE OR STUBBLE—Soft, rapid grower,
useful as a catch crop on stubble.
PURPLE-TOP YELLOW ABERDEEN —Very large, fine
in quality, and very hardy. Recommended,
PURPLE-TOP MAMMOTH—A heavy cropper, well
shaped and very solid.
SWEDE TURNIPS
The best keepers and most nutritious sorts, specially
valuable for pigs. A fertilizer dressing of 4 cwt. per
acre is recommended.
G. & N. varieties include the following:—
G. & N. CHAMPION PURPLE-TOP—The best all-round
variety, hardy and a heavy cropper; one of the most
nutritious.
SKIRVING’S PURPLE-TOP—An improved variety of
very large size.
ELEPHANT PURPLE-TOP—Tankard shaped, immense
cropper.
NE PLUS ULTRA.—Globular in shape, bronze purple in
colour, very fine table variety.
SOY BEANS
In the warmer part of the State Soy Beans grow effectively
and with great results. Sow Soy Beans with summer
crops, and thus get the advantages of a leguminous crop
in summer. Sow the seed about three to the foot in
shallow drills two and a half inches apart. Sow in the
spring.
Apart from its value as fodder, the Soy Bean yields a
first-class cattle cake, flour for bread or biscuits, infants’
food, margarine, cheese, a coffee substitute, salad oil, etc.
As cattle fodder green or dried, it is excellent.
COW PEAS
Being a legume and consequently rich in protein, the
fodder value of the Cow- Pea at all stages of growth,
whether fed green or cured as hay, is exceedingly good.
Cow Peas increase the fertility of the soil—provide green
fodder of the best, supply wonderful hay, in addition to
making excellent silage. Sow after frosts are over, in
drills 3 feet apart, and drop peas at intervals of 9 to 12
inches in the drill. Sow broadcast from 90 to 120 lbs.
per acre.
JrAnother letter that speaks for itself!
“Quite a number of people here, who have
grown Turnips, stated that they have never
seen a larger individual growth, than those
produced from your last lot of Seed."
(C. W. Giffen, Adelaide.)
[?]


The many healthy well-developed Root Crops
◄ grown from G. & N. disease-resistant strains, are k.
standing advertisements as to the practice of lL
specializing on purity, germination and type, y
G. & N. can well claim success for all three.
ONION SEED
Prepare the land properly by deep ploughing and one or
two harrowings prior to sowing.
Superphosphate and bone dust in equal quantities, applied
at the rate of 3 cwt. per acre, will prove beneficial.
The soil best adapted for onions is that of a heavy, loam
character, in good condition, and possessing plenty of
well-rotted manure in its composition. Sow drills 10
inches to 18 inches apart and thin out to about 6 inches
apart (the surplus plants can be transplanted).
G. & N. Onions attain fine market size and good weight.
Brown Spanish (James Strain). New crop selected seed
specially grown for us.
FIELD CARROTS
For cattle, whether in the store stage or being fattened,
for dairy cows in increasing their milk supply, and even
for fattening sheep, Carrots are invaluable. Carrots
thrive in well-manured, sandy soil, but they yield well in
any rich, friable loam if the latter be deeply tilled and
properly drained. Drill the seed in rows from 18 to 20
inches from each other. The space will allow the horse-
hoe to work without danger. Nothing benefits the crop so
much as frequent stirring in the early stages of its growth.
The seed may be sown from May to the end of October.
Thin out the plants to within 9 to 12 inches of each other
in the rows, according to the sorts. Four pounds of seed
required to sow an acre.
Carrots respond to liberal manuring, and not less than
4to 5 cwt, of a good mixture should be applied. A mixture
that has given good results is 4 cwt. super., 1 cwt. sulphate
of ammonia, and J cwt. sulphate of potash per acre.
Repeated hoeing and inter-cultivation are essential to
success. The small leaf growth of carrots renders them
very liable to be choked by weeds, hence the necessity for
special care. On the light sowings recommended it is not
usual to thin the crop, but if this is done the space usually
allowed between roots is from 4 to 6 inches.
Carrots may be stored, but they keep best in the soil, and
may be pulled as required.
Varieties in the G. & N. range of Field Carrots include; —
ALTRINCHAM LARGE RED
This is a large and somewhat coarse variety, a good pro-
portion of the root being above the ground; skin orange
red. Very suitable for cattle-feeding.
WHITE BELGIAN (Horse Carrots)
A very productive kind, grown almost exclusively for
stock.
SCARLET INTERMEDIATE
Suitable for both field and table use.
SHORT HORN (Early Scarlet Horn)
An excellent table variety.
SINCLAIR’S CHAMPION YELLOW INTERMEDIATE
Rich golden yellow. Quite distinct, being wedge-shaped.
Taints neither milk nor butter.
CHANTENAY
Rather short and thick stump-rooted, fine quality, early,
good colour.
SUGAR BEET
Sugar Beet is very nutritious, and especially valuable for
cattle and milch cows. If fed judiciously, they will increase
the flow without tainting the milk. Land should be well
prepared. The seed bed should be in good order and
the final cultivation should, if possible, take place along
with the planting. Moving the weeds is advised with a
cultivator and harrow.
An application of 1 to 3 cwt. superphosphate per acre
is recommended. The best sowing times are September
and October, and the quantity of seed required per acre
is 6 lbs. Plant in rows and thin out 9to 12 inches apart.
SILVER BEET
Sow 4 to B lbs. seed per acre in the spring, from the end
of September, in drills 24 inches apart, thinning out the
plants to 12 inches in the rows. Silver Beet appreciates
a deep, well-cultivated soil. The seed should be steeped in
cold water for twenty-four hours before sowing.
FIELD PUMPKINS
The best month for sowing is October. Two pounds of
seed is required to sow an acre. It is better, though, to
plant thickly to provide for loss by insects. A splendid
fodder for stock and pigs. Pumpkins require plenty of
moisture, and respond well on rich, well-manured land.
Varieties:—lronbark, Turkscap, Mixed Cattle, Triamble.
MEASURING A FIELD
Measuring a field of land is not difficult. Simply
drive along the side and end of the field with a
waggon. In one of the spokes tie a rag and count
the number of turns of the wheel. Multiply the
number of turns by the distance around the wheel
to find the number of feet. This is much easier
than carrying a tape measure.
To find the number of acres, multiply the number
of square feet by 23 and mark off six decimal places.
This is much quicker than reducing the number of
feet to rods.
This method is especially useful when one .wants to
estimate the yield in a given plot, as it requires
no time. A rag can be tied on the plough wheel,
cultivator, hay rake, or any other piece of machinery
being used.
CpfcHMifcOTfc
ROOT CROPS..


NUMBER OF PLANTS
TO AN ACRE SET
AT REGULAR DISTANCES APART
Distance Apart
No. Plants
Distance Apart
No. Plants
Distance Apart No. Plants
3 in. by 4 in. ,.
.. 522,720
3 ft. by 3 ft. ..
.. 4,840
6 ft. by 5 ft
1,742
4 in. by 4 in. ..
.. 392,040
31 ft. by SJ ft. .
, . 3,555
5J ft. by 5i ft. . ,.
1,440
6 in. by 6 in. ..
,. 174,240
4 ft. by 1 ft. ..
.. 10,890
6 ft. by 6 ft
1,200
1 It. by 1 ft. ..
.. 43,660
4 ft. by 2 ft. ..
. , 3,630
Ql ft. by 6J ft. . ..
1,031
XI ft. by li ft. .
.. 19,360
4 ft. by 4 ft. ..
.. 2,722
7 ft. by 7 ft
888
2 ft. by 1 ft. ..
.. 21,780
4i ft. by 4J ft. .
, . 2,150
8 ft. by 8 ft
680
2 ft. by 2 ft. ..
,. 10,890
5 ft. by 1 ft. ..
.. 8,712
9 ft. by 9 ft
537
2h ft. by 2J ft. .
.. 6,960
5 ft. by 2 ft. ..
.. 4,356
10 ft. by 10 ft. . ..
435
3 ft. by 1 ft. ..
.. 14,520
5 ft. by 3 ft. ..
.. 3,904
11 ft. by 11 ft. . ..
360
3 ft. by 2 ft. ..
. . 7,260
5 ft. by 4 ft. ..
.. 2,178
12 ft. by 12 ft. . ..
302
GREEN MANURING CROPS
Grown for green manure. A good crop of tick beans on a citrus
grove. Reprinted from the Vic. “Journal of Agriculture."
TICK OR HORSE BEANS
(GO lbs. to the bushel)
Tick, or Horse Beans, make a useful crop. They are
excellent for winter green manure and as winter feed.
Special mention must be made of Tick, or Horse Beans,
as a field crop for pigs. Pigs can be turned on to the
crop or the crop can be cut and stacked and fed out in
an unthreshod state. This makes a good method of
harvesting.
It has been pointed out in “Farm Economy” that the stem
and leaves are unsuitable for green feed or hay, but,
when mixed with the green stuff or cereals, may be used
for ensilage.
In inland areas the Tick, or Horse Bean, is probably the
best crop to sow. Growing conditions there appear less
favorable for fungus development, which frequently at-
tacks this plant in coastal climates. Tick Beans should
be sown at up to 1 bushel per acre with 1 cwt. of super-
phosphate. Many other crops are successful, but are
not so dependable for the production of bulky vegetable
matter.
Tick or Horse Beans thrive best on stiff, rich soil, and
will succeed on any soil suitable for wheat. The best
mode of growing the Beans is to sow rather thickly in drills
three feet apart. Autumn and early winter are recognized
as the best sowing times for this excellent and useful
fodder. To sow an acre it will require from li to 2 bushels.
They are most easy to cultivate, and their prolific yield
recompenses for any time and trouble expended during
cultivation. A simple method of seeding is to lightly
plough in the seed every third furrow of about 8 inches,
thus making rows 24-26 inches apart. An application of
The ploughing under of green crops does three
things to soil: (1) enriches it with humus; (2)
jA improves its texture, and (3) makes it more
retentive of moisture. From official sources, it is
gleaned that leguminous crops may add as much ”
as 1 50 lbs. of nitrogen per acre.
3 cwt. of complete manure (mainly soluble phosphate
and potash in the rows with the beans) per acre is ad-
visable. It is necessary to cultivate thoroughly between
the rows to check weeds and conserve moisture, which is
required for the crop.
The G. & N. varieties are clean quality growers, thus
showing vigorous growth and returning a maximum yield.
Selected from reliable crops and tested thoroughly by
G. & N. seed specialists. Seed very scarce this season.
TARES OR VETCHES (Golden)
This is a sturdy legume variety that is highly suitable for
green manure, and is recommended as an early crop for
ploughing in. It is a most excellent forage plant, es-
pecially for winter, and forms a fine fodder for milking
cows, and for fattening pigs. It should be sown in the
early autumn, and is usually sown with Barley or Rye
Corn, which gives it support, in addition to increasing the
bulk of crop. This method also results in a well-balanced
ration for stock. One of this crop’s big features is the fact
that it grows well in poor soils, but on good land it is a
record-breaker, providing there is a good winter rainfall.
With other grain, sow 30 lbs. Tares; alone, 2 bushels
per acre.
TURNING IN GREEN CROPS
A plough for this purpose should have a good clearance
between the beam and the “throat,” advises the “Journal
of Agriculture” of Western Australia. A “goose-neck”
plough is ideal. Another essential is a disc or rolling
coulter which, when adjusted correctly, will cut rubbish
and furrow before it is turned over. The normal cut of a
disc coulter is about an inch outside the land-slide of the
plough. This coulter should be set to cut as deeply as
possible, so minimizing the likelihood of the plough jump-
ing out when confronted with a thick growth.
Another necessary assistant in the ploughing in of tall
crops is a chain attached to the plough. This chain has
the effect of drawing down the growth, which then allows
the furrow to completely cover it.
WHEN TO PLOUGH IN
The crop should be ploughed in before the soil begins to
dry out rapidly in the spring. It is decidedly inadvisable
to grow green manure crops in summer.
The green manure crop should be sown during the later
summer, say during February or March, so that the plants
may make good growth before cold weather acts as a
check,
M9i««0D^BaB3O&l


BREEDING
TABLE
Mares
Cows
Ewes
Sows
340
gft£
150
112
From
Days
Days
Days
Days
Jan
1
Dec. 6
Oct.
10
May 30
Apl. 22
Jan.
15
Dec. 2U
Oct.
24
Jun. 13
May 6
Jan.
29
Jan. 3
Nov,
7
Jun. 27
May 20
Feb.
12
Jan. 17
Nov.
21
July 11
Jun. 8
Feb.
26
Jan. 31
Dec.
5
July 25
Jun. 17
Mar.
12
Feb. 14
Dec.
19
Aug. 8
July 1
Mar.
26
Feb. 28
Jan.
2
Aub. 22
July 15
Apr.
9
Mar. 14
Jan.
16
Sep. 8
July 29
Apr.
23
Mar. 28
Jan.
30
Sep. 19
Aug. 12
May
7
Apr. 11
Feb.
13
Oct. 3
Aug. 26
May
21
Apr. 25
Feb.
27
Oct. 17
Sep. 9
J un.
4
May 9
Mar.
13
Oct. 31
Sep. 28
Jun.
18
May 23
Mar.
27
Nov. 14
Oct. 7
July
2
Jun. 6
Apl.
10
Nov. 28
Oct. 21
July
16
Jun. 20
Apl.
24
Dec. 12
Nov. 4
July
SO
J uly 4
May
8
Dec. 26
Nov. 18,
Aug.
la
July 18
May
22
Jan. 9
Dec. 2
Aug.
27
Aug. 1
Jun.
5
Jan. 23
Dec. 16
Sep.
10
Aug. IB
Jun.
19
Feb. 6
Dec. 80
Sep.
24
Aug. 29
July
3
Feb. 20
Jan. 13
Oct.
3
Sep. 12
July
17
Mar. 6
Jan. 27
Oct.
22
Sep. 2G
July
81
Mar, 20
Feb. 10
Nov.
6
Oct. 10
Aug.
14
Apl. 3
Feb. 24
Nov.
19
Oct. 24
Aug.
28
Apl. 17
Mar. 10
Dec.
3
Nov. 7
Sep.
11
May 1
Mar. 24
Dec.
17
Nov. 21
Sep.
25
May 15
Apl. 7
Dec.
31
Dec. 6
Oct.
9
May 29
Apl. 21
NUMBER OF SEEDS TO THE POUND
Reprinted from “Seed and Nursery Trader.” It shows in table form
the result of an investigation as to the number of seeds to the lb.
No. Seeds Lbs. Seed Sown No. Seeds
Seed per 11 . per Acre Per Acre
Perennial Eve 276,635 10 2,766,350
No. Seeds per
Square Foot
63-5
Italian Rye
248,065
5
1,240,325
28-5
Wimmera Rye .. ,.
247,611
S
742,833
17-1
Cocksfoot
448,058
B
2,240,290
51'4
Red Clover
242,622
2
485,244
111
White Dutch Clover
. .. 718,798
1
718,798
16-5
Alsike Clover .. ..
670,076
1
670,076
15-4
Subterranean Clover
. . ., 66,665
1
66,665
1-5
Strawberry Clover .
264,844
i
66,211
1-5
Lucerne
209,970
1
209,970
4-8
3,393,344
291
9,206,762
211-0
GREEN MANURING CROPS
G. & N. Green Manuring Crops, when ploughed
a under, supply a large amount of organic matter .
jm to the soil at low cost, and make it easier to mi
work, as well as preventing erosion and loss of Wr
~ nitrates in the drainage water. Maintain and ”
even increase the fertility of your soil in this way.
FIELD PEAS
This is one of the most profitable pea crops that can be
grown. The feeding value of Field Peas for sheep, pigs,
etc., is high indeed. When sown with oats or wheat, they
make record progress. Field Peas do the soil a good turn,
and, like other legumes, they improve their sowing value
considerably. A good practice for an extra heavy yield
is to prepare the soil well, roll it thoroughly, and then
sow alone li to 2 bushels per acre broadcast, or 30ibs.
in drills, 2 feet apart, but sow not more than 2 in. deep.
The growth in popularity of the crop is illustrated by the
fact that in the 1923-24 season, 4,700 acres were under field
peas; in 1924-25, 9,400 acres were sown to the crop; in
1925-26, 11,200 acres; and in 1933-34, 13,607 acres.
CLIMATIC REQUIREMENTS
In South Australia field peas seem to do well in all the
best wheat districts. Localities with an annual rainfall
of 20 inches or more grow the crop well, but in the drier
parts, where the rainfall is as low as 10 or 12 inches,
peas are not grown. Good crops of peas were seen growing
in districts where the annual rainfall was 17 inches a
year, and they are grown in districts of even lower rainfall.
It pays to fertilize peas, as they increase the nitrogen
contents of the soil, and put it in good condition for future
crops. G. & N. supply Dun, Greys, and other varieties.
PRICES ON APPLICATION
PEANUTS
Although not widely known, pigs are particularly partial
to peanuts, which have become a good stock fodder. The
peanut plant may be grazed, the top made into hay. It
is also valuable as a soil renovator, and is ideal fc r
resting the land. A rich soil is needed, and should be
well worked only to a depth of about 4 to 6 inches.
G. & N. do not stock this class of seed, but are always
willing to oblige clients by obtaining same from a reliable
source.
Other Green Manuring Crops are Berseem Clover, Sweet
Clover, Rape, Mustard, Field Peas, Tick Beans and Tares.
A self-sown crop of Peas prrown for green manuring at Irymple (Vic.)
(Photo by courtesy, Dept. of Agriculture)
A. 3 s ft— a, e 1.,,. ,4 t>.^l,.„g.
[TIE STRUM <ri^fei#i^W^ipiiSiilil«


SEED GRAIN
A crop of balanced feed. Skinless Barley, Oats, Dun peas and Tick
Beans grown at Yarraview, Lilydale. This crop is 4 months’ old.
BARLEY
Barley should be sown at the rate of two bushels broad-
cast per acre or one bushel if drilled. Barley is one of the
earliest of grain crops to mature. G. & N. have long
been recognized for barley. Being one of the sweetest
fodders it is relished by stock, and as an early grain crop
it provides fodder in valuable form.
Important experiments designed to improve the quality
of the barley grain produced in Australia have been
carried out by the Victorian Department of Agriculture
with several imported varieties.
The Barley types carried in the G. & N. Grain Department
are most valuable, and are guaranteed to give early
maturity, sparseness of growth, thinness of skin and
plumpness, so necessary to good samples.
G. & N. CAPE BARLEY is the popular variety, and grows
well in cold climates. It is mostly grown for green fodder
—a quick grower and stools out well.
SKINLESS AND ENGLISH are two other varieties that
have a record for great results.
Write to G. & N. Grain Department for price list and
special quotes for quantities. State approximate require-
ments in mind.
SEED MAIZE
Maize is one of the easiest crops to grow on good land,
and both the grain and the fodder produced are among the
most valuable feeding stuffs for practically all kinds of
stock. The value of the grain is well known for the top-
ping of pigs for market, for poultry feed, for maintaining
the stamina and warmth (particularly in cold weather)
of horses doing arduous work, and for keeping sheep alive
during periods of drought. For green fodder there is no
crop better for stimulating milk production when summer
pastures are short and maize unquestionably makes the
best silage of any crop known.
SOIL REQUIREMENTS FOR SEED MAIZE
Seed maize requires deep, rich and well-manured ground.
To give the best results, the ground should be well-
prepared, and the seed sown from October to June. For
fodder, sow in drills three feet apart, dropping the seed
Good crops begin with Good Seeds. To be sure
a of both, see that your orders for Seed Grain are
Jk forwarded to the Grain Dept., Gippsland & k
xi Northern Co-op. Co. Ltd., 492-4 Flinders Lane,
Melbourne, C.l. (A special Dept., well-equipped pr
and experienced to handle all orders, large or
small.)
from six to nine inches apart in the rows, which require
from half to one bushel of seed per acre. For Grain,
plant in rows three feet apart each way, in which case
one-quarter bushel of seed is sufficient to sow an acre.
It yields on the average about thirty tons of green feed
to the acre; it is a rapid grower; and is suitable for feeding
green to stock during a much greater period of time than
most grain crops. The land should be ploughed in the
autumn and early winter, and crops ploughed early in
spring. The land should then be disced or harrowed,
and brought to a fine tilth before sowing. On nearly all
soils a mixture consisting of equal parts of superphosphate
and bone dust applied at the rate of two to three cwts.
per acre gives wonderful results.
CONSERVING FOR WINTER FEED
Maize can be used for silage. In this way it is advisable
to cut the maize while it is fairly green. At this time
it contains a fair amount of moisture which makes it
pack well in the silage. The right time to cut it, is when
a good many of the ears are dented or glazed. For
fodder, the best stage to cut it is when the maize is a little
more mature than that used for silage. A good plan is
to cut the stalks, leaving three or four standing here and
there and stooking the cut stalks about 200 or 300 per
stock around those left standing. When stocked, tie the
top to prevent the maize falling over and rotting on the
ground. Even when maize has been frosted, It can be
utilized as fodder if taken in hand immediately and made
into ensilage.
A RECOMMENDED MIXTURE
Maize sown with Chou Moellier makes a great mixture,
and has proved its place on all farms that have grown it.
The seed required is about 2 lbs. Chou Moellier with one
bushel of maize to the acre. If mixed with manure and
sown broadcast, then harrowed in, the practice results
in an abundance of fine fodder that stock like. It is
suitable for summer and autumn feeding, and is regarded
as one of the best dairymen’s crops. There are many
varieties, and some of the most popular are NINETY
DAY, FLAT RED, HICKORY KING. Prices and
samples on application, and other varieties quoted if
desired.
Many are the cases we can cite of G. & N. crops
winning high awards in competitions of all
kinds.
Here is a typical example of a Maize success
at an Agricultural Shoiu, sent in by Mr. J. R.
McQuie, of Seville, Vic., who says: “Maize
grown from Hickory King Maize seed (which
1 obtained from you) gained for me Ist and
2nd prizes out of 8 entries at the Woori Yattack
Show on Saturday.”
True enough, "Success is won by merit”—a
quality which is a tradition in G. & N. Pedigree
Seeds,
Send Orders and Enquiries direct to the G. & N. Grain Department
1 Mir silifl tmCm|;:


Almost 180,000,000 bushels is Australia's esti-
. mated wheat harvest this season. The average .
yield per acre is estimated at 13 30 bus., an
increase of 1-49 bus. on the 10-year average,
High-quality seed plays a big part in this amazing ~
grain-gathering.
WHEAT
No other grain crop stands dry conditions better. It is
useful for green fodder as well as for hay, the value of
which is universally known. G. &N. varieties are chosen
by experts from the best sources, and only the best seed
is offered for sale. Some of the best wheat crops of the
season are grown from G. & N. seeds. Sow in drills for
grain i to 1 bushel; broadcast, 1 to 2 bushels per acre.
A dressing of 56 lbs. to 112 lbs. superphosphate per acre
according to conditions of soil, etc., is advisable.
RYE CORN
Rye Corn is another G. & N. favorite—a hardy plant
that makes great winter feed. Stands grazing all the
winter and grows quickly after being grazed. Of the
green grazing crops this is one peculiarly suited for the
grazing of sheep. If drilled at the rate of about 2i bushels
per acre with 3 or 4 cwt. of manure some time in February
or March, an area in Rye Corn will be exceedingly useful
as winter pasturage. It makes a fine preparation for
turnip feeding, and sheep from rye corn to turnips fatten
quickly. Rye Corn shows excellent results when sown
with Rape.
OATS
Oats should always be sown in a number of small paddocks,
in order that each can be spelled in rotation after grazing.
It is advisable to graze comparatively lightly those
paddocks from which it is intended to harvest a crop, and
to sow other paddocks exclusively for forage purposes.
Oats make a good crop for lambing ewes, and when sown
with Clovers, act as a splendid cover or nurse crop. This
practice ensures a much better balanced ration for stock.
A dressing of 1 cwt. superphosphate is advisable. Leading
G. & N. varieties, which not only stand grazing, but
supply record yields of grain, and which are noted for
their tillering powers, are Tartarian, Algerian, Stout
White. Quantity needed per acre is 2to 3 bushels.
JL The man who wisely chooses G. & N. seed is
insuring himself against crop failures.
Mr. E. L. Doddemead, of Wesbum, Vic., is one.
His letter of appreciation to G. & N. reads:
“We were very pleased indeed with the oats
you sent us. A better sample could not be
obtained anywhere else.”
HAY AND GRAIN
The following is an extract from “Farm Economy”
concerning wintering of sheep on top-dressed farms:
“In districts where such cereals as maize and oats
can be produced cheaply, a combination of hay and
maize at the rate of 2 to 3 lbs. of hay, and 3 to 4
ozs. of whole maize per sheep, or of hay and oats in
the same quantities, are well worth a trial. Both
maize and oats are well liked by sheep and are ex-
cellent for breeding ewes. Field peas could probably
be used in place of either of these.
A prolific crop of Maize grown from G. & N. Pedigree Seeds, by Mr,
W. S. Ayres, Glenmaggie.
SEED POTATOES
The ground occupied by potatoes for the several months
is too valuable to take risks with. Seed potatoes, there-
fore, should be carefully chosen so the yield may be satis-
factory. We spare neither trouble nor expense in supply-
ing our customers with selected seed from the best the
season produces, and drawn from localities where the
climate and the nature of the soil are most conducive to
the production of strong, disease-resisting potatoes.
Costs of production do not compare favorably with other
potato-producing States. Winter ploughing is strongly
advised, because it kills weed growth, sweetens the soil
and subsequent working makes an ideal seed-bed. In
potato work too much hand labor is used, and that means
less profits. But in order to cut out excessive hand labor
and to lower your production costs, do as much work with
the team as possible. Sow 6 to 8 cwts. per acre. The
best sowing time is after frosts are over. Open drills
about thirty inches apart and six inches deep. Keep soil
well cultivated and plant tubers about twelve inches apart
in the rows.
“No crop,” says “Farm Economy,” “gives as big a return
for manuring as does the potato crop. Trials over many
years have definitely proved that the manuring of potatoes
pays handsomely.”
Superphosphate should be the basis of any manure mixture,
and it has been proved better than bone dust as a form
of phosphates for potatoes. Potash is useful, and sulphate
of potash is the best form to use, as it produces potatoes
of the best cooking quality. In recent years Government
trials have shown that the use of 1 cwt. sulphate of
ammonia gives a marked increase in the yield of potatoes,
anything from one to two tons per acre on many soils
having been secured.
Usually the quantity of manure applied per acre is too
light to give maximum crops. A dressing of at least from
3 to 6 cwt. super., 1 cwt. sulphate of potash, and 1 cwt.
sulphate of ammonia per acre is about the minimum which
should be used, whilst in districts capable of growing very
heavy crops, the quantity of these fertilizers can be
increased.
For notes on Field Peas, Dun, Greys and any other variety,
see page 57; for Tares or Vetches (Golden), see page 56;
for Tick or Horse Beans, see page 56.
Remember to forward all Communications to the “ Grain Dept.”
; V -'-.- | ' | -*‘. ||||||||,| - | ~ | - | ~ | ' | * |,|,|,| - |,| ~ 1,1 ' 1,1,1, • .fi f e * *■■•■£*
imumm
lt, Vi, f CV"'la
SEED GRAIN . .


NOXIOUS WEEDS CONTROL
By E. J. Pemberton, Superintendent Vermin and Noxious Weeds
Branch, Department of Crown Lands and Survey Victoria.
Worthless Blackberry Bramble and Watsonia growing in Dandenong
Police Paddocks. Good land soon reduces in value after weed-
infeetation takes place.
In this State, control of noxious weeds is vested in the
Department of Crown Lands and Survey and is adminis-
tered by a Superintendent who is responsible to the head
of the Department.
For many years prior to 1922 noxious weeds were dealt
with under the provisions of the Thistle Act 1915, by
the Department of Agriculture in conjunction with the
Shire Councils, who enforced, or actually did not enforce,
the provisions of the Act. A general drift took place in
this important work and the Government of the day was
forced to effect an immediate alteration, and this was
effected by combining the duties of the vermin inspectors
with that of the thistle inspectors. This was done by
bringing down amending legislation in the form of the
Vermin and Noxious Weeds Act 1922. The existing staffs
were used with 40 additional inspectors mostly recruited
from the thistle inspectors formerly employed by the Shire
Councils,
Group conferences were held in six centres of the State,
comprising a representative of each Shire Council within
the group, and recommendations were forwarded to the
Minister as to what plants should be proclaimed noxious
and what animals and birds should be proclaimed vermin.
The State was divided into districts with an inspector in
charge of each.
To-day 54 weeds are proclaimed for the whole State and
60 weeds are proclaimed for particular Shires.
The Act provides that every owner and every occupier of
land shall destroy all noxious weeds on all lands owned
or occupied by him, together with the adjoining half width
of all roads adjoining such land. Government Corpora-
tions are responsible for destruction of noxious weeds
on all land vested in, occupied or controlled by such Cor-
poration. Municipal Councils are responsible for all land
controlled by such Council and for all embankments and
nine feet around all bridges and culverts. The Lands
Department is responsible for all vacant Crown lands.
During the period 1933-1939 gradually increasing alloca-
tions of money have been made to the Vermin and Noxious
Weeds Branch for the purpose of dealing with noxious
weeds on unoccupied Crown lands.
This article is aimed at showing the controlling
, authority in this important work. Unless proper .
jm control it exercised, the problem could quite
easily assume gigantic proportions such as that Hr
’ encountered in America, where, it is estimated,
weeds cause a loss of £600,000,000 annually.
Special attention has been given to control of St. John’s
Wort, Ragwort, Blackberry Bramble, Hoary Cress, Cape
Tulip, Merian’s Bugle Lily, Artichoke Thistle, and many
other weeds.
The Vermin and Noxious Weeds Branch is now working
in co-operation with the Council for Scientific and Indus-
trial Research, the Agricultural Department, and with all
States and with commercial chemical houses in the control
of noxious weeds, and great strides have been made with
advantage to the man on the land and the State generally.
As a result of the work on Ragwort in Gippsland and in
the Otway and Heytesbury districts, many hundreds of
acres have been reclaimed to production. This also applies
to lands formerly infested with St. John’s Wort and
Blackberry Bramble. One outstanding instance of this
benefit is shown in the results, recently published, of the
herd tests in the Traralgon district, where a property
formerly badly infested with Ragwort produced the
winning herd in the test. Many similar instances can be
quoted.
Special attention has been given to preventing the spread
of new weeds, such as Skeleton Weed from New South
Wales and Wild Turnip from Western Australia. Both
these weeds are a serious menace, particularly to the
wheat-grower, who must be ever watchful for their pre-
sence. This applies equally to all strange weeds, and the
presence of any stranger amongst plant life of the farm
should be investigated and, if unknown, the plant should
be forwarded to the Government Botanist for identifica-
tion. Farmers in the past have been dilatory in this
respect and it is only when weeds obtain a firm foothold
that they begin to take alarm, and it is then that it costs
much money to destroy what previously meant a few
minutes’ labour.
The present methods of weed control are;—
(1) Mechanical—cutting, hoeing or ploughing.
(2) Chemical—using Sodium and Calcium Chlorates,
Salt and Arsenical preparations.
(3) Pasture Improvement.
Each method has its place in weed destruction. Many
weeds can be effectively destroyed by cutting close to the
surface or grubbing. Others, such as Ragwort, St. John’s
Wort, Boxthorn and Artichoke Thistle respond more readily
to spraying methods, whilst the most effective measure
of preventing the spread of noxious weeds is a thorough
system of pasture improvement together with judicious
stocking. This is the work which pays dividends, and
when land is so treated there is little room to allow the
establishment of weeds. Noxious weeds is the price
usually paid by the negligent farmer or grazier by over-
stocking and lack of attention to feeding his pasture, and,
in many cases, neglect to properly control rabbits, which
take a greater toll of the products of the land than any
other grazing animal.


CONTROL OF WEEDS
Reprinted from ‘Control of Weeds,” issued by the N.S.W. Department of Agriculture in association with the Rural
Bank of New South Wales.
It has been said that 70% of the weeds thot
A infest our farm lends eon be controlled by
constant, thorough tillage. This article deals with
’ some of the means along these lines of controlling r
the pests and their eradication.
The annual toll taken by weeds is a very considerable
one, and especially in this State, -where agricultural
systems have never been seriously considered to include
control of possibly seriously detrimental plants. Areas
per man are large, and this, coupled with very suitable
soils and climatic conditions, has caused large losses to
the agricultural industry in recent years.
Weeds cause losses in many ways:
(1) They reduce land values.
(2) They compete seriously with crops for available
plant food, moisture and light.
(3) They increase the cost of production by necessitating
extra work and cultivation.
(4) They lower the quality of agricultural produce and'
increase costs of preparing the products for market.
(5) They harbour insect pests and fungous diseases of
economic crops.
(6) Certain weeds are poisonous.
HOW WEEDS ARE SPREAD
Many species of weeds seem to be fitted with devices
specially designed to enable the spread and reproduction
of the type in the face of much opposition. Some (such
as the thistles) have parachute arrangements on the
seeds, others hairs, others again wing-like structures, all
of which enable the seed to be distributed over a large
area by the wind. Some weeds have seeds so small that
they are carried by the wind without any of these helps,
and yet others have seeds that are rolled along the ground
for considerable distances by the wind.
Weed seeds are remarkable, too, for their hardiness
and vitality, being capable of germination under con-
ditions that would not suit more useful species of plants;
in many cases, they are capable of remaining dormant
in the soil for long periods, to germinate when more
favourable conditions result from cultural or other action.
Despite a very rigorous system of quarantine, weeds
continue to find a way into this country, which was once
practically free. It was necessary in past years to
import fodder from overseas, and this was undoubtedly
a prolific source of supply. The distribution and sale
of impure seed and fodder is a serious factor in the
spread of seed of weeds. The extensive movements of
sheep because of seasonal conditions also operate con-
stantly in this way; this particularly applies to burrs
such as Galvanised, Bathurst and Noogoora Burr. Cul-
tivation spreads creeping and bulbous perennials. Our
various transport systems, although a great asset, are
proving also great weed spreaders. Such natural
agencies as wind, water, animals and birds, of course,
always provide ample service as carriers of weed seeds.
The point to be realized, however, is that all weeds
require special conditions if they are to thrive. Such
conditions are due to two main causes:
(a) Depletion of grass cover. This may ba caused by
over-stocking, rabbits and bad management.
(b) Specialized cropping—that is, growing the same
crop in succession for a great many years, thus
providing ideal conditions for certain weeds.
These two factors should be studied by every landowner
as explaining the thriving on his property of practically
any weed.
(Left) Skeleton Weed, showing root system and bases of the branches,
also typical leaf, and (Right) St. John's Wort.
(Left) Hoary Cress, and (Right) Stinkwort.
(Left) Canada Thistle, and (Right) Black or Spear Thistle.
(Left) Thorn Apple, and (Right) Saffron Thistle.


(Left) Cape Weed, and (Right) Hemlock.
(Left) Cockspur, and (Right) Wild Turnip.
(Left) Ragwort, and (Right) Paterson’s Curse.
(Left) Fat Hen, and (Right) Dandelion.
METHODS OF CONTROLLING WEEDS
Once some species of weeds become firmly established,
eradication is practically impossible; effective control of
these is only possible before they obtain a hold. _ Where
weeds have taken possession and landowners realize that
cutting is impracticable they look with hope to the use
of chemicals as a means of destruction; but the question
of cost must be considered, and though chemicals have
been found to be effective in destroying" weeds, the cost
is often prohibitive where the land is badly infested.
Following a large amount of research work the problem
is now being attacked from the control point of view_ in
the case of serious weeds, which has meant a revision
of a large proportion of our farming practices or habits.
ROTATION OF CROPS
Certain species of weeds are continuously associated
with a particular crop, mainly because cultural opera-
tions for the production of that crop are such as allow
the weed to mature without any serious hindrance. A
rotation of crops, including a temporary pasture, must
eventually be ad'opted if our soils are to be kept free of
the serious perennial weeds. Such rotations, of course,
have other important benefits, and their possibilities
from the financial aspect have been considerably improved
by the wide increase in the zone proved suitable for graz-
ing Lucerne, which plant must in future be regarded as
the “king l of weed killers.”
LUCERNE—ENEMY OF ALL WEEDS
The most notable discovery in recent years with respect
to weed control has been the fact that Lucerne is suffi-
ciently vigorous to compete with and dominate practically
all our serious weeds. Cultivation of this valuable graz-
ing crop has been extended to the dry areas with great
success, and large areas of grazing Lucerne can be seen
which have cleaned the soil of Hoary Cress, Skeleton
Weed, burrs, thistles, and other common weed types.
In the north-west, on properties being worked on a
share-farming basis, the practice of sowing l down portion
of the farm each year, using wheat as a cover crop, is
becoming very popular.
It has been claimed that Lucerne does not completely
eradicate some perennial weeds. While this is true, the
weeds have no ill effect on the Lucerne, which is suffi-
ciently strong to reduce the weed, allowing profitable
cultivated crops to be taken off the land for a further
period.
IMPROVEMENT OF PASTURES
As pointed out previously, weeds require special con-
ditions, such as poor herbage cover, if they are to thrive.
Well managed, vigorous pastures smother weeds to a
point where they are not the dominant species. The most
successful smothering plants in the more favourable dis-
tricts have been subterranean clover and perennial rye,
while Wimmera rye grass and Lucerne are proving an
excellent combination in the drier portions, provided the
Lucerne is established first.
It is not only necessary to sow these smothering pas-
tures, but the pasture when established must be carefully
stocked and renovated to maintain its vigour. There is
a large area of the tableland portion of this State that
can be profitably put down to permanent pasture. In this
condition land becomes weed-proof, and it would then
be unnecessary to take special expensive steps to clear
rough adjoining land of weeds.
CUTTING AND CULTIVATION
An enormous amount of cultivation is carried out
annually for destruction of weeds and for the annual type
on arable land this is most economic. Hoeing and mat-
tocking of weeds in grassland is the most efficient method
of cutting established weeds, but this process does not go
far enough in that no stop is placed on germination of
the seed. While hoeing and cutting should be continued,
landholders should at the same time give some thought
CONTROL OF WEEDS (Continued)


to improving the gTass cover to prevent further germina-
tion. In the dry far western districts such measures as
better subdivision and provision of better water supplies,
rotational grazing and the use of small numbers of cattle
should be combined with any cutting of weeds.
Given below are some of the common weeds with sug-
gestions for their control,
SKELETON -WEED. Because of its smothering habits,
excessive powers of reproduction, and its ability to resist
strenuously attempts to eradicate it, coupled with the
fact that normal cultivation of crops tends to stimulate
natural, vigorous growth, Skeleton Weed has become the
most insidious and serious menace wheat farmers have
ever had to contend with.
Skeleton Weed spreads mainly by seed, which is pro-
duced in enormous quantity, and possesses at times very
high germination capacity. The seed is of the ordinary
lettuce type, with a light pappus attached, allowing it to
be carried by wind for long distances, as well as on bags,
wool, transport vehicles and by many other common
means.
Treatment of Individual Plants and Isolated Patches.
In the case of individual plants, the use of salt is recom-
mended. The plant' should be grubbed with a mattock
2 to 3 inches deep and a pint of salt applied to the
exposed root. A half to one gallon of water should then
be poured on the salt, covering it finally with earth to
prevent stock licking it up.
Where the weed is in patches these can he eradicated
by spraying with sodium chlorate. The spray can be
applied when the plants are in a rosette stage, either
before the top growth is made or when a new rosette of
leaves is formed after cutting the weed near the flowering
stage. These periods are generally in August and, if
summer rains are recorded, March. The most effective
method is to spray the foliage with a solution of sodium
chlorate consisting of 1 lb. to 2 gallons of water, wetting
the foliage well, also the groxmd around the base of the
plants.
ST. JOHN’S WORT. Under favourable conditions it
rapidly spreads and crowds out the natural grasses and
other nutritious herbage, and some lands on which it
has become firmly established have had to be abandoned.
Stock will eat the weed, especially in the young stages,
hut it contains an active principle which has a very
serious effect on stock that are grazed on the weed for
some time.
HOARY CRESS. Hoary Cress possesses a deep
perennial root system and is _ rightly considered one of
the most serious pests of cultivation land. The weed is
almost entirely useless. Hoary Cress is a vei*y serious
pest of wheat and oat country, causing reduction of yields
and consequent depreciation of land values. The weed,
however, can be controlled to some extent and the farm
revenue maintained by the use of such crCps as lucerne
and other vigorous pastures, provided enough sheep are
run to keep seeding at a minimum.
In the case of a small infestation, complete eradication
is possible. According to experiments conducted by the
Victorian Department of Agriculture, it appears that
not less than two years' of fortnightly cultivations are
necessary to kill the root system.
Salt is generally regarded as the most valuable killer
of this plant, and farmars should not hesitate to apply
ample salt to isolated plants and small patches.
STINKWORT. This is an upright, much-branched
plant, with lemon coloured, daisy-like flowers. It has a
disagreeable smell, which is noticeable also in the milk
of cows, and even in the mutton of sheep, depastured on
it for some time.
Where the land is heavily infested, the weeds should
he destroyed by cultivating with the disc before seeding,
followed by cropping if possible. Improvement of the
pasture by top-dressing with super-phosphate will also
serve as a means of control by improving the palatahility
of the weed and making it more readily eaten by sheep.
(Left) St. Barnaby’s Thistle, and (Right) Dodder.
(Left) Gape Tulip, and (Right) Star Thistle.
(Left) Bindweed, and (Right) Perennial Rag-weed.
(Left) Nut Grass, and (Right) Bathurst Burr.
CONTROL OF WEEDS (Continued)


I
Any policy to improve pastures must include such
factors as top-dressing in the plan. The intelli-
gent use of the Smith Fertiliser Broadcaster
stimulates the growth and production of pastures
efficiently, quickly and economically. Top-dress
with the "Smith" and "moke more money from
every acre."
m ' ■
"■ A, 3b «.jV
MMM
Mm
%
m
I
BROADCAST
HSFUStfc
The Smith Spreader for attaching: to Motor Truck,
Dray or Waggon.
SMITH®
J^OBOAOCAST/iff!
Wtutfl V
CMITIV
S JmFIi I JL II
6ii Rcdk
FERTILIZER BHOADCASTEB
Tested and proved by thousands of paa-
toralists throughout Australia to be the really
practical broadcaster for putting into effect
the principles of top-dressing for soil fer-
tilisation. It distributes evenly and perfectly.
Simple and economical. Can be operated by
one man. A Grass Seed Sower can be attached
to the Hopper, and Grass Seed can be sown
whilst the machine is broadcasting fertiliser,
or used as a separate unit. Two types:
PORTABLE BROADCAST
CCDTSi I TCD
r* Ei Ink 1 I Bob 9 mm EL Ira
3 p EA DE JR
Oil Bath and Open Gear Models. Will spread
from 75 to 85 acres each day, when drawn by a
horse. Ideal equipment for all requirements.
Mounted complete on steel wheel sulky. Avail-
able also with pneumatic tyres.
Distribution of fertilizer can be regulated
while working, and distribution is satisfactory
even in a high wind. Can also be used for
sowing seed.
Write for Free Illustrated Smith Catalogue
The Portable Broadcast Fertiliser
(Sulky Type.)
Spreader.
BROADCAST SPREADER
FOR ATTACHING TO MOTOR TRUCK,
DRAY, OR WAGGON
Showing the sturdy compact enclosed gears, which
run . in a bath of oil.
As simple as it is efficient. Sturdy completely
enclosed gears run in an oil bath—dust-proof
and oil-proof. Will spread up to 250 acres
per day when worked with a Motor Truck.
Will spread up to 4 cwt. per acre and to a
distance of 50 feet. Also will sow seed.
Other G. & N. Machinery Lines—Haypresses,
Hay Rakes, Simar Rototillers, Lister Separa-
tors, Eclipse Milkers, Bamford Engines, Twin
City Tractors, Electric Pences, etc.
aPPSUNIUJIORTHER^
813 Collins St., Melbourne, C.l v


Quality
The work of fodder conservation is fime-saving
and labor-saving with such modern Haymaking
Machinery as Bamford's 100% British
put —unrivalled tor long life and light draught—
built by Bamford's, Agricultural Engineers to
H.M. the King
MACHINERY
THE
HAY
rag
LOADER
No outside drive required. Pitted with Patent
Pour-Throw Crank Movement which ensures
smooth regular action and perfect balance. All
jerky movements of the rake arm are
eliminated. One set of arms is always in
operation, enabling- continuous even flow of
crop up the chute. Simple. Light draught.
SUPER OIL BATH
Outstanding for Automatic Lubrication, easy
draught, perfect balance, Positive Double
Drive. Patent “Clearway” Cutter Bar guaran-
tees cutting of toughest grasses with ease.
Works silently and smoothly because totally
enclosed gears, running in Oil Bath, reduce
vibration and wear to minimum. Single and
2-speed models, horse or tractor drawn, 3 ft.
6 in., 4 ft. 6 in., 5 ft. and 6 ft.
THE
:otX
PATENT COMBINED SIDE RAKE
An all-purpose implement—R.S.R.2 Side Rake,
Swath Turner, Tedder and Windrower. Of the
Rear Action Type, it will deal with the heaviest
crops without elogg-ing. Pitted with patent
unchokable Furrow Wheel, also new patent
Spring Steel Waved Tines which quickly
deliver the crop to the side in a light wind-
row. Three different models to choose from —
R.5.R.2, P.G.N. and 5.C.4.
The Bamford Hay Loader.
The Bamford Super Oil Bath Mower.
f 9 [T
The Bamford Patent Combined Side Rake,
Swath Turner, Tedder and Windrower.
LTD. .".MSIV.V, 613 Collins St.,


FODDER CONSERVATION
Silage Making on a N.S.W. Farm. Faspalum is being ensiled in this
stack.
“Ample reserves of fodder,” states the Leader, “may
be stored in good years in the form of hay, straw, grain
and silage, which will keep until required, and is
invaluable when the occasion to make use of it arises. If
these were provided the enormous losses represented by the
value of the livestock that die from starvation, the
reduced natural increase and the lessened output of
animal products would not occur.”
THE INDISPENSABLE SILO
The preservation of green forage by placing it in pits or
heaps and covering with earth has been long practised
in Europe. However, silos—special structures built
mainly above ground to contain such material—have been
in use only during the past sixty years. From 1879,
when the first silo was built in the United States of
America, the number has increased to more than half
a million, and the use of silage has increased rapidly
until now it is a factor of vast importance in American
agriculture. The value of silos is not fully appreciated
in Australia, where the necessity for them is as great
as, if not greater than, in any other country.
The principal advantages of the silo are: (1) At low
expense silage furnishes high quality, succulent feed
for any desired season of the year. The cost of a ton of
silage will vary widely, depending upon the price of
labour, the yield of forage an acre and the capital value
or rent of the land. (2) When crops are properly
ensiled less of the nutrients are wasted through fer-
mentations which take place than are lost when the
forage is cured as hay or dry fodder. (3) Silage even
from plants with coarse stalks, such as maize and the
sorghums, is eaten practically without waste. On the
other hand, from 20 per cent, to 35 per cent, of dry
maize fodder, even if of good quality, is usually wasted.
The use of silage thus permits the keeping of more
stock on a given area of land. (4) Crops may be
ensiled when the weather is unfavourable for curing
them into dry fodder. In some parts of Australia the
maize crop cannot be preserved satisfactorily as grain
on account of the dampness, and also because rodents and
weevils ruin the stored grain. Ensiling the crop over-
comes both difficulties. (5) Weedy crops which make
poor hay make silage of good quality, the ensiling process
killing practically all the weed seeds. (6) The product
from a given area can be stored in less space as silage
than as dry forage. A cubic foot of hay in the stack
weighing about 5 lb. contains approximately 4-3 lb. of
dry matter. An average cubic foot of maize silage from
a 30-foot silo weighing about 39-6 lb. will contain 10-4
lb. dry matter, or nearly 2-5 times as much. (7) Ensil-
A striking lesson in the value of fodder conser-
◄ vation is given in the N.S.W. Government Report
that last year the output of butter was 1 3,000,000
lbs. less than the previous year. Inadequate V
fodder reserves cost the dairy farmers of the State '
that amount in production.
ing maize land clears the land early, so that it may be
prepared for another crop. A silo preserves green fodder
such as maize (both stalk and ear), lucerne, beans, peas
or any vegetation for stock feeding.
LUCERNE HAY
Although lucerne hay is richer in protein than red clover
hay, it contains slightly less carbohydrates and is lower
in fat. Lucerne hay is thus somewhat more valuable
than clover hay in balancing rations low in protein,
but when fed with concentrates containing ample protein
it is not superior to clover. The chief superiority over
clover lies not in a higher feeding value a ton, but in
the fact that where lucerne thrives it yields more tons
of hay an acre. By harvesting lucerne for hay as soon
as new shoots are well started at the crown of the
plant, the maximum yield for the whole season is
obtained and the hay is more leafy and palatable. Early-
cut lucerne contains the highest percentage of protein
and fat, the most valuable food constituents, and the
lowest percentage of crude fibre, the most indigestible
portion. The former decrease constantly, while the
latter increases rapidly from early bloom to the full
maturity of the plant. The proportionate amount of
leaves to stems is greater at early bloom than at any
subsequent time, and both leaves and stems contain a
greater percentage of protein and a less percentage of
crude fibre at this time than at any later period in the
growth of the plant.
Since it is rich both in protein and in mineral matter,
especially lime, which is needed in large amount in milk
production, lucerne hay is a most excellent feed for dairy
cows.
GRASS HAY
The making of grass hay has become common in Aus-
tralia during more recent years, and in some districts
the growth of cereals has been entirely discontinued
and sole reliance is being placed upon grass hay for
supplementing the pastures when such a course is neces-
sary. Trials have shown that grass dried under perfect
conditions has as high a nutritive value as when fed in
the fresh state. However, in actual hay making, more
or less of the nutrients are always lost, due to loss of
leaves and exposure to sunlight, dew and rain. Grass
hay exposed to prolonged rain may lose as much as 18
per cent, of the total dry matter. The endfe sought in
making grass hay are to reduce the water content to
about 15 per cent, so that the hay will keep when placed
in the stack, and yet to secure bright green colour, good
aroma and freedom from dust, and to retain the leaves
and other finer parts which, especially with legumes,
easily fall off.”
FEEDING SILAGE OUT TO STOCK
If the silage is chaffed, it should be fed in boxes or
troughs, but if long, can be thrown out on the ground.
It is an acquired taste, and some cattle take a fair
time to become accustomed to it, after which they eat
it lavishly.
It is good feed for dairy cows, cattle and sheep, which
should be given only a few pounds a day for a start,
gradually increasing to a maximum amount for dairy
cows of 35 to 40 lbs. per day.
A cubic foot of silage, well made, should weigh about
40 lbs. A ton of silage will feed about 44 head of large
cattle for one day.
.3> S <? V V
iwtiniri


GARDEN PEAS AND BEANS
(New Crop Machine Dressed Contract Grown)
Contract grown for us under strict supervision.
◄ This practice is a guarantee of type and quality, c
and wins for G. & N. the distinction of being Ik
Australia s largest suppliers of true-to-type Peas W
and Beans. For Pods that top the market, these ™
varieties are money-makers for market gardeners!
G. & N. PEAS
The G, & N. varieties grow well in varying climatic and
soil conditions, and are guaranteed absolutely reliable,
being bred tor productivity and chosen for highest purity-
germination and choicest quality.
60 lbs. are supplied per bushel. Two bushels per acre are
required. _ Sow in drills with space between to allow of
horse cultivation in the early stages of growth.
Start cultivation as soon as the seedlings show them-
selves as thin lines of green across the brown earth. For
the very best results, the soil should be gone over lightly—
enough to shift the surface dust—about every three days,
unless there is a rain.
Cultivating or tilling must be done, weeds or no weeds,
as this important task is a big factor in conserving moisture
in the soil.
“E.E.E.” BRAND
G. & N., being Australia’s original distributors of this
famous brand, is the logical place from where you should
obtain your supplies. In view of substitute seed being
offered to unsuspecting market gardeners to-day, it is
safer by far to purchase direct from G. & N., and be sure
of the genuine line as well as the best prices on offer.
“E.E.E.” Brand distinguishes seed of pure strain and of
maximum purity-growth, while G. & N. is a further protec-
tion for buyers.
GREENFEAST PEAS
A splendid second early variety that is thoroughly re-
commended for market purposes. It is a very popular
sort, wonderfully hardy, vigorous-growing and absolutely
the best for quick returns. Pods are beautifully shaped,
large (see illustration), well-filled, and the flavor of the
pea itself is unsurpassed. Being a heavy yielder bearing
such large luxuriant pods, it is a dependable profit-maker
and is endorsed by successful market gardeners through-
out the State. Greenfeast grows to a height of between
eighteen and twenty-four inches, although in favorable
districts it has been known to exceed that height. Green-
feast carries G. & N.’s thorough recommendations.
FIRST VICTORIAN CROP
G. & N. announce a fine selection of Greenfeast Peas,
including supplies of First Victorian crop grown from N.Z.
seed, guaranteed genuine N.Z. true type, pure strain, and
re-machine dressed.
YORKSHIRE HERO PEAS
A well-known main crop table variety, popular with
growers all over Australia. Yorkshire Hero stands the
wet ground better than Greenfeast, and is without doubt
one of the best market varieties for men on the land. It
is a sweet-eating variety, and in great demand. York-
shire Hero grows to a height of about two and a half
feet. G. & N. have many qualities and all are recommended.
ENGLISH WONDER
One of the best Peas for market gardeners. An extra-
ordinarily prolific bearer, dwarf, growing about 18 inches
high It is an early Pea, coming into bearing before all
others. (The earlier the pea the better the price it brings
on the'market.) New Zealand grown.
For Pods That Pay! A prolific growth of Greenfeast Peas obtained
with G. & N. Pure Strain Seed.
G. & N. BEANS
G. & N. plots -will pay you lots. The range is the result
of intense specialization in careful selection and develop-
ment. Victorian grown and selected from clean areas.
G. & N. recommends with every confidence this group of
selected strains:
CANADIAN WONDER (Dwarf French)
Considered to be the outstanding commercial variety on
the Victorian and New South Wales markets, and well
known for its heavy productivity and high quality. The
pods are long, tender, and very fleshy. A very good green
bean sums it up. Seed should be covered to a depth of
2 inches, though shallow planting is essential for early
crops as the soil is cold, and the seedlings, being weak,
are unable to push their way through any depth pf soil.
The usual practice is to strike out shallow drills with a
plough, and then to drop the seed by hand at the intervals
named. The covering can then be done with an ordinary
light harrow or hoe.
BROWN BEAUTY (Dwarf)
Prolific, large pods, excellent flavour. One of the best
varieties in cultivation. A good market variety.
BROAD BEANS (Leviathan Long Pod)
An immensely popular bean, a hardy grower and a good
cropper. The best time to sow is from May till early in
September. Thrives in any soil, but flourishes best in
deep soil containing plenty of phosphates. This sort pre-
fers a cool climate. Should the soil be dry, water the
drills well before sowing, or the seed may be soaked in
water overnight. In order to prolong the supply, the
pods should be gathered regularly while young and not
allowed to fully mature.
[?]


TREES AND SHRUBS, ETC.
Pinus Insignia as a Farm Shelter Belt.
“ RECOMMENDED ORNAMENTAL TREES. 1
ACACIA—
Baileyana (Cootamundra Wattle).
Pycnantha (Golden Wattle).
ARAUCARIA—
Excelsa (Norfolk Island Pine).
CAMPHORA—
Officinalis, Camphor Laurel. A handsome, ever-
green tree.
CUPRESSUS (Cypress)—
Macrocarpa. A quick-growing shelter tree.
Torulosa. Elegant, compact shelter tree.
EUCALYPTUS—
Corynocalyx (Sugar Gum).
Ficifolia (Scarlet-flowering). One of the most
handsome small trees in cultivation.
GREVILLEA (Silky Oak)—
Robusta (Orange), very ornamental.
PINUS—Insignia (Remarkable Pine).
FLOWERING SHRUBS AND CLIMBERS.
BERBERIS—Varieties.
CEANOTHUS DIVARICATES.
ESCALLONIA MACRANTHA—Scarlet.
GENISTA—Varieties.
LANTANA—Varieties.
NERIUM (Oleander)—
All varieties, single and double.
PLUMBAGO CAPENS1S—Pale Blue.
SPARTUM JUNCEUM—Yellow (Spanish Broom).
VERONICAS—Varieties.
BOUGAINVILLEA—Trailli.
COBAEA SCANDENS.
KENNEDYA—Varieties.
LATHYRUS—(Everlasting Pea).
TACSONIA—Many varieties.
TECOMA—Many varieties.
RECOMMENDED HEDGE PLANTS.
CUPRESSUS LAMBERTIAN A HORIZONTALIS
—from cuttings.
GOLDEN VARIEGATED JAPANESE PRIVET.
P1TTOSPORUM UNDULATUM.
PRIVET, EVERGREEN.
SALT BUSH (Rhagodia Hastata).
We do not handle Nursery lines ourselves; but shall
be only'too pleased to supply quotations for any of
the above. Simply state number and variety of
B plants required. _
"There is nothing quite os effective as well-
j placed avenues of trees." Gives protection for
JM farmyards, orchards, gardens and lands; adds
yS extra selling value to the property. In time of WW
’ drought, edible trees may be lopped off for feed- '
ing purposes without destroying them.
There are five outstanding reasons why every farm should
cultivate trees and shrubs. They
(1) Provide a valuable breakwind for the homestead.
(2) Shelter the dairy herd and stock, thus increasing
their general welfare.
(3) Protect the water supply, and prevent annual losses
of valuable soil by erosion.
(4) Give an attractive appearance to the farm.
(6) Improve the value of the farm.
(6) Can be grown for wood for commercial purposes.
Before planting, the ground should be well worked to
a depth of 12 to 15 inches. Where this can be done by
ploughing and sub-soiling the initial cost for shelter
breaks is reduced. The area proposed to be planted
should be broken up early in the autumn months, leaving
the surface rough. When ready to plant, the harrows
should be run over it. If the ploughing has been done
early in the season, the ground should then be in good
tilth and in proper working condition. Where hillside
planting is being carried out, the ploughing should follow
the contour of the hills as far as possible.
June is one of the best months for planting, but the work
may be done any time between then and the end of August.
Getting the planting done as early as possible is sound
practice. The young trees thus get the benefit of the
winter rains and stand a much better chance of becoming
established before the heat of summer is due. In districts
subject to severe frosts, planting operations may extend
up to early in October. One advantage, however, of early
planting, is that should a tree fail, the failure may be
noticed in time to replant again with a fair chance of
success.
When planting carefully spread the roots evenly in the
hole; fill in with surface soil and tramp the ground firmly
round. If water is available, leave a slight depression
round the tree; put a spadeful of soil around the collar
or neck of the plant, then fill up the hollow with water.
After the water has thoroughly soaked in, fill up the
depression with dry soil, leaving it as loose as possible.
A sprinkling of phosphate should be applied to each plant.
Young trees should be protected from stock either by a
system of treeguards, or if planted in shelter belts, by
running a line of fence round them. Where rabbits are
likely to prove harmful, the plantation will require wire-
netting.
If the trees are to develop, thinning out must be dons
in the future. Thin early, before the bottom branches
die off.
The Eucalyptus Corynocalyx and Eucalyptus Ficifolia
make fine breakwinds and shelter belts for stock.
If the macrocarpa, a quick-growing tree, be selected, it
will be found, if the cultivation is thorough, that in a
matter of five years, or even less, the advantages in shel-
ter from winds will be worth while, and in less than ten
years the shade will be valuable to stock. The pinus
insignis is a fast-growing tree, but it is better for summer
shade than winter shelter. The macrocarpa grows much
closer to the ground, giving a first-class shelter in winter
from winds, which bite and thin the stock. For a shelter
tree, which has useful possibilities for timber, the blue
gum may be used to advantage.
Losses of valuable soil through water or seolian erosion
are increasing each year, but the planting of trees is a
solution to the problem.
Trees are necessary to conserve the water supply and
prevent landslides and siltation of streams and dams.
[?]


'( ri ‘ ■,; ;i 1 ,
Special Note; As net weight of seed is supplied, allowances should always be made for extra weight for
packing, when remitting. For example, the case of 2 lbs. seed being ordered, it would be necessary to
allow 3 lbs. for postage or railing.
General Railway Parcel Rates For Rail Transmission Rates Prepaid
Miles,
not ex-
Lbs. Weight Not Exceeding—
ceed-
ing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
a.
d.
s.
d.
a.
d.
a.
d.
a.
d.
S.
d.
a.
d.
b. d.
a. d.
a. d.
s. d.
25
0
6
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
0 9
0 9
0 9
0 10
50
0
6
0
8
0
8
0
9
0
9
0
10
0
10
0 11
1 0
1 1
1
75
0
6
0
8
0
8
0
9
0
10
0
11
1
0
1 1
1 2
1 3
1 8
101
0
6
0
8,
0
8
0
10
1
0
1
1
1
2
1 3
1 3
1 6
1 6
125
0
6
0
9
0
11
1
0
1
2
1
3
1
4
1 5
1 5
1 8
1 8
150
0
6
0
9
0
11
1
1
1
3
1
4
1
5
1 6
1 8
1 8
1 11
175
0
6
0
9
0
11
1
1
1
3
1
4
1
6
1 8
1 8
1 11
2 2
200
0
6
0
9
1
0
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
6
1 8
1 11
2 2
2 B
250
0
6
0
9
1
0
1
2
1
3
1
5
1
8
1 11
2 2
2 5
2 6
300
0
6
0
9
1
0
1
3
1
5
1
8
1
11
2 2
2 2
2 B
2 9
350
0
6
0
9
1
0
1
3
1
6
1
8
1
11
2 2
2 5
2 9
2 9
400
0
6
0
9
1
0
1
3
1
6
1
8
1
11
2 2
2 5
2 9
3 0
450
0
6
0
9
1
0
1
3
1
6
1
9
2
0
2 3
2 6
2 9
3 0
600
0
6
0
9
1
0
1
3
1
6
1
9
2
0
2 3
2 6
2 9
3 0
650
0
6
0
9
1
0
1
3
1
6
1
9
2
0
2 3
2 6
2 9
3 0
600
0
6
0
9
1
0
1
3
1
6
1
9
2
0
2 3
2 6
2 9
3 0
Miles,
Every
not ex-
Lbs.
Weight Not Exceeding-
Slllfaa. or
ceed-
iddltloiifcl
ing
12
13
14
21
28
35
42
49
56
84
112
part
s.
d.
s.
d.
a.
d.
6.
d.
s.
d.
a.
d.
s.
d.
a. d.
s. d*
s. d.
s.
d.
a. d.
25
0
10
0
10
0
11
0
11
0
11
i
2
1
4
1 6
1 8
2 2
2
B
0 7
50
1
2
1
2
1
2
i
4
i
6
i
10
2
2
2 7
3 0
3 9
4
1
0 11
76
1
4
1
6
1
8
i
10
i
11
2
6
3
0
3 5
3 9
6 0
5
9
1 4
101
1
5
1
8
1
11
2
2
2
6
3
1
3
9
4 6
5 0
6 3
7
4
1 8
125
1
8
1
11
2
2
2
7
3
0
3
7
4
1
4 11
5 9
7 4
8
8
2 2
150
1
11
2
2
2
6
2
10
3
3
4
2
6
0
5 10
6 8
8 4
9
10
2 2
175
2
2
2
10
3
1
3
6
3
9
4
9
5
9
6 7
7 4
9 6
11
2
2 6
200
2
10
3
4
3
7
3
10
4
1
6
2
6
3
7 4
8 4
10 5
12
5
3 0
250
3
1
3
7
3
10
4
3
4
8
6
11
7
1
8 1
9 1
11 6
13
8
3 3
300
3
7
4
1
4
6
4
11
5
6
6
8
7
11
8 11
9 10
12 5
14
11
3 8
350
4
1
4
5
6
0
5
5
5
9
7
1
8
4
9 7
10 9
13 8
16
2
3 9
400
4
6
5
0
5
3
6
9
6
3
7
8
9
1
10 4
11 6
14 6
17
4
4 1
450
4
6
5
3
5
9
6
5
7
1
8
4
9
6
11 0
12 6
15 3
18
8
4 1
500 .
4
6
6
3
6
0
6
8
7
4
8
11
10
6
11 10
13 3
16 5
19
9
4 8
550
4
5
6
6
6
4
7
1
7
9
9
3
10
9
12 6
14 0
17 7
20
8
4 11
600
4
5
6
0
6
8
7
5
8
2
9
11
11
7
13 3
14 11
18 2
21
6
5 4
" ■ ■" ■’ ....
PARCEL
POST RATES
Weight
Scale 1
Scale 2
Scale 3
Seale 4
Over
Up to
lb.
lb.
s.
d.
a. d.
3.
d.
s. d.
1
0
6
0 9
i
0
1 3
1
2
0
9
1 0
i
6
2 0
2
3
i
0
1 3
2
0
2 9
3
5
i
3
1 6
2
6
3 0
5
8
i
6
2 0
3
6
B 0
8
11
i
9
2 9
5
0
7 3
Each parcel shall be charged for separately. When parcels are not prepaid, the freight is twenty-five (25)
per cent, more than the above rates. Minimum, 3d.; maximum, 173. Freights or postage extra on all orders.
LARGE PARCELS— Most Consignments of 14 lbs. or more are despatched per Goods Train. The freight in ij
f'rwvno 'TWAnv.T this case * s usually much cheaper, but delivery may take a little longer. SPECIAL |
WUUS IKAJLn NOTICE.—Turn to Page 2 for information concerning Goods Train Loading Days.
t ;>
PARCEL
POST RATES
SCALE 1 applies to 1
parcels addressed to
—Places within a
SO-mile radius of the
office of posting, ir-
respective of whether
the office of address
is in the same State
as the office of post-
ing.
SCALE 2 applies to
parcels addressed to
other places in VIC-
TORIA.
SCALE 3 applies to parcels
(other than those to which
Scale 1 applies) addressed
to
NEW SOUTH WALES
FEDERAL CAPITAL TER-
RITORY
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
TASMANIA
LORD HOWE ISLAND
NORFOLK ISLAND
SCALE 4 applies to parcels
addressed to places In—
QUEENSLAND
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
NORTH AUSTRALIA
CENTRAL AUSTRALIA
PAPUA
TERRITORY OF NEW
GUINEA
BISMARCK ARCHIPELAGO
(NEW BRITAIN
NEW IRELAND. NEW
HANOVER. ADMIRALTY
ISLAND, etc.)
BOUGAINVILLE
BUKA
[?]


Of all the scientific methods adopted to bring seed to the highest purity and germination
standards none ore more important than the Seed Test and Research Work carried out by
Laboratories. It is in the most modern of these that G. &H. Seeds are bred and developed
true to their pedigree, "By Purity, Out of Quality."
Prepared by 'McFerran Advertising Pty. Ltd., 90 Queen Street, .Melbourne, CM,
and printed by Brown, Prior, Anderson Pty. Ltd., 430 Lit. Bourke Street, Melbourne, C.l.
