

mu TON HOPE




GALLIPOLI
REVISITED
STANTON (HOPE
With a Foreword by
GENERAL SIR lAN HAMILTON
G.C.8., G.C.M.G.. K.C.8.. D.S.O.
ACCOUNT OF THE DUCHESS OF RICHMOND
PILGRIMAGE-CRUISE, WITH THREE APPENDICES.
ILLUSTRATED BY 70 PHOTOGRAPHS, 3 MAPS
AND 8 THUMBNAIL SKETCHES.
LONDON:
W. E. STANTON HOPE, f.r.g.s.
Royal Naval Division Officers’ Association, 195 Piccadilly, W.i.
Trade Agents: Simpkin Marshall, Ltd., Stationers’ Hall Court, E.C. 4.


Sketch map of the Gallipoli Peninsula showing the two Fighting Fronts.
ENGLISH MILES
0 1 2 3 4 5
APPROXIMATE SCALE | I | I | I


FOREWORD
By General Sir lan Hamilton, G.C.M.G., K.C.8., D. 5.0.,
Commander-in-Chief during the Gallipoli Campaign.
THREE days ago I was racing from a big Rally of ex-Service men
in the West Riding of Yorkshire towards another big Rally
to be held at Jedburgh where Sir Bindon Blood, a 92-years-
old veteran, was about to grace a Dardanelles celebration with
his benediction and cocked hat and feathers. Close by my side, throughout
that hectic rush, had been kept the proofs of this story of the visit of a
shipload of pilgrims to cemeteries which, to the outward eye, are
all that is now left of the most wonderful military adventure the world
has ever seen. How to say anything arresting or fresh upon the Dardanelles
theme seemed to me quite beyond my powers.
At an Artillery practice camp called Redesdale, which is situated
on the border between England and Scotland, I had to make a short halt
to inspect the battery of the Officers’ Training Corps of Edinburgh
University whose Rector I have the honour to be. But now, note the
Supreme Spirit disguising Himself as Coincidence ! The moment the
parade was dismissed I was seized by a small group from the Ross Mountain
Battery who, unbeknownst to me, had sailed across the stormy Minch
from Stornoway in the islands of Lewes, with their new 3.6 howitzers
and their stocky little stalking ponies, for their annual training at this
same Redesdale Camp. The very same type of pony they had once
upon a time brought to Gallipoli—the same type of man—in fact, there
were several survivors.
But ah! where were those darlings of the bow-and-arrow
Generals, the 10-pounder screw guns ? Where were the artillery of far-
off battles long ago, alongside which we had fought during 1879 in
Afghanistan? And then again at the Dardanelles in 1915 ? A gap of 36
years but still they would serve very well for the Dardanelles. One half
of the gun carried on one pony, one half on the other. You screwed the
two halves together under fire and then you said your prayers and let
them off if you could. Range about that of a cricket ball. You dare not
fire them over the heads of your own infantry, therefore they must
advance into the front line trenches. Here, obviously, was my fresh
and arresting Foreword ready made.
Were I to put down fifty pages of controversial talk about the
Dardanelles, I could not bring home to German, French, Bulgarian,
Swiss or Russian soldiers a better, truer idea of our War Office in 1915
than by making clear to them the fact that these museum pieces were sent
by the greatest mechanical nation on earth so that their soldiers should
maintain the honour and prestige of their country against modern artillery.


No doubt if it were their object not so much to win the War as to exhibit
the superb quality of their soldiers, this was not a bad way to set about it.
What better illustration could be given to the world of how the British
infantryman, gunner and engineer, if commanded by a thrusting General,
would always be ready to take on the militarily impossible and knock what
marksmen call “ possibles ” out of it ?
Everyone will understand then my joyous acceptance of the
chance thus vouchsafed me of inspecting the battery and of shaking hands
several times over with the Sergeant-Major _who had personally let off
the old ro-pounders in the direction of the up-to-date field-guns of the
Turks. As to the Battery Commander, Major D. J. Macdonald, he had
not only served with the Battery throughout the Dardanelles campaign,
but had been on this very pilgrimage-cruise of the Duchess of Richmond,
to an account of which lam now writing a Foreword. “ Never,” he told
me, in taking me round, “ did I realize fully till I got out there and went
over the ground in cold blood, how often our lives were all hanging by a
hair and how, by never turning a hair, we gave them the knock every
time—the knock-out it would have been with just a little support in good
season. The night of the ist of May was the worst. You remember that?”
Did I remember ! That was the night the Turks came down in
a mass sixteen thousand strong, two thousand in reserve, to the shout of
Allah Din ! and sailors on their ships out in the Straits felt their blood
run cold as they heard the answering cheers and imagined they could
hear the clash of the naked steel as whole regiments flung themselves
against our front line in the darkness. That was the night when, like
peal upon peal of thunder, the Turkish Artillery from both Continents
let fall their shells in fiery showers upon our slender line of battle.
“ On that night,” continued Major Macdonald, and now I
quote his remarks verbatim, “ two of the Ross Battery 10-pounders were
in position about 25 yards behind our front line trench on the left of
‘ Big Gully,’ in support of the ist Battalion of the King’s Own Scottish
Borderers. We had laid out three lines of fire in case of trouble during
the night and sure enough as soon as it grew dark, down came the Turk.
The Ross Battery guns at once opened fire on a small plateau at about
600 yards range. In laying out our lines by daylight, we had considered
this plateau a likely place on which the enemy making a night attack
might concentrate their reserves. Hardly had our guns opened fire
when the breech block of one of them burst, killing a gunner of the
detachment outright and wounding several others. The remaining gun
continued in action until its ammunition was exhausted. Next morning
the plateau was littered with Turkish dead (about 200) and 10-pounder
shrapnel. We think the work done by the little gun on that memorable
night in all probability saved our left flank from being turned by the
enemy.”
Now just consider. The slaying of Philistines with the jaw-bone
of an ass was nothing to this. “ About 200 dead Turks,” said the Battery
Commander, and he is, if I mistake not, one of those men much more
likely to understate than to overstate. The Turks, during that night


and in the morning also under crescent flags of truce, carried off all their
wounded ; and the missile employed against the plateau having been
entirely 10-pounder shrapnel —not a heavy bullet —it is quite reasonable
to suppose that this queer little popgun came into its own that night
and caused the enemy round about one thousand casualties. In the
hands of British soldiers, in fact, the xo-pounder wrought ten times as
much damage as the 100-pounders in the enemy’s Asiatic batteries.
These keen warriors from the far islands, were by no means
satisfied with being the first Artillery landed at Helles ; they were also
the first to land at Suvla. I have told how No. i gun blew its own
crew to pieces during the night attack at Helles ; let me now
tell about No. 2 gun at Suvla. During the battle this gun’s crew
was reduced to one man. He went on serving it alone, quite alone,
through a pelting storm of bullets, until a couple of brave Signallers
ran up to help him. Then the enemy fell back. Men from the Hebrides
trying to open the Hellespont for their warships with guns belonging
to the previous century !
Anyone caring to picture such happenings in Nature’s own
most lovely frame-work, had better —if they cannot afford time or
money to sail to the Dardanelles—get this book written and illustrated
by Mr. Stanton Hope. They did all happen, and indeed these
stories of the Ross Battery are just samples which have been chosen
because they came handy and are new to the public. The Ross Battery
themselves would never claim to be anything more than typical, but
I do claim not only for them but for the bulk of the Dardanelles
troops, a certain very special exaltation of daring and scorn of danger.
Why ? Because every Regimental Officer and all the Rank and File
felt in their bones that here —at the Dardanelles—was a living military
proposition really worth fighting for, and, if it must be so, worth dying for.
Here was a real definite object. The Regimental Officers and
Rank and File were never asked to throw their lives into the general attrition
melting pot —three British lives for two German lives. No, they were
out for Constantinople and the Spires of St. Sofia. Mutual slaughter
was not the motive. Far from it. They were asked to risk their lives
to cut short the War, as when one duellist by a quick turn of the wrist
sends his adversary’s rapier flying clean out of his hand.
lAN HAMILTON


AUTHOR’S PREFACE
Seven-hundred-and-twenty cruise-members travelled in the
Canadian Pacific liner, Duchess of Richmond, on the Gallipoli cruise of
1934 ; and probably seven hundred of these are capable of writing
interestingly of their experiences. This book presumes to be nothing
more than the observations of an individual—one who knew Gallipoli
in the War days and was in touch with affairs before and during the cruise.
“ Gallipoli Revisited ” was not submitted to established pub-
lishers in the ordinary way. Men well fitted to know the financial side
of publishing gave me fair warning that it would be suicidal to produce
anything of the kind. So an inherent obstinacy is partly the reason
why I may now add “ publisher ” to a lengthy list of occupations in
a varied career.
In producing this book I have borne in mind particularly those
who served at the Dardanelles, and who, for a variety of reasons, were
unable to take advantage of the exceptional opportunity presented this
year for revisiting the once familiar scene. Many who travelled in the
Duchess of Richmond had no direct interest in the campaign of ’l5, and
were attracted partly by the inclusion of Naples, Constantinople and
Athens in the itinerary.
Those cruise-members who adapted themselves to the conditions
of a voyage which was partly pilgrimage and were in such ready
sympathy with others more directly linked with Gallipoli, will not begrudge
my aim to interest the men and women unable to make the journey,
to whom the Dardanelles campaign was something fraught with
poignant memory.
Much of interest occurred at sea and in the ports of call, but
no detailed description of the ordinary shipboard activities or of places
has been attempted. I would not encroach on the preserve of the many
tourist books of Naples, Constantinople and Athens, nor steal the
thunder of those remarkable guides at Pompeii who, for a paltry pourboire,
can give succulent details of the private lives of long-dead patricians.
No writer can hope to please everyone. The gentleman on
board who gave me the result of his Shuffleboard heat for use in this book,
will be disappointed to find no record of the event. The material in
chapter 11, appeared in article form in the “ Pictorial Weekly ” just
prior to the cruise. Embodied in chapters V and VI are incidents
recorded in an article supplied from Istanbul to the “ Daily Telegraph ”
Acknowledgment has been made elsewhere of the achieve-
ments of various units which took part in the Gallipoli campaign of ’l5.
If special mention is made of the Royal Naval Division in this book,
it is only because that Division sponsored the cruise. We who served
in that unit at Gallipoli, in France or elsewhere, are proud of the Royal
Naval Division, and I, for one, make no apology for that pride.


The section of modern youth which is so aggressive on the
subject of Peace, would like all pride in naval or military tradition to be
wrapped up in sacking with fire-bars attached, and sunk a thousand
fathoms deep. Men fit to be honoured by inclusion in the ranks of the
Royal Navy, the Army or the Royal Air Force, must necessarily take
pride in their unit ; and this is not synonymous with a love of militarism.
Opinions differ on the subject of the Gallipoli campaign, and
when that campaign has receded a hundred years into history, there may
still be differences among naval and military experts. My own views
have been revised in the fresh knowledge of recent years, and may
be revised further because new facts persist in coming to light. No
sincere writer can produce a book worth reading without stamping it
with some personal opinion, but in this case the temptation to become
controversial has been resisted. This book is intended to give just a
general description, plus a pictorial review, of the Gallipoli cruise.
Whatever the result otherwise, I shall count it success if this
book interests those who served at the Dardanelles, and the relatives
and friends of those who tried to serve their country to the best of their
ability in the day of need.
I am most grateful to Lieut.-Commander Reginald R. Blackmore,
M.C., R.N.V.R., the Honorary Secretary of the Royal Naval Division
Officers’ Association, for his most kindly interest and help so willingly
given. Another good friend of mine, Mr. Edward L. Burton, Honorary
Secretary of the Royal Naval Division Association, has also gone out of
his way to do me many services, for which lam equally grateful. Both
have done much to keep former ranks of the disbanded R.N.D. united
in that fine spirit of comradeship which prevailed during the War. They
and other members of the Associations do not deny their pride in the
success of the Gallipoli pilgrimage sponsored by the Royal Naval Division —
the Division which is dead but won’t lie down.
W. E. STANTON HOPE
The Haven
Gallon Road
Westcliff-on-Sea
September, 1934


ALSO BY STANTON HOPE
TRAVEL
“ROLLING ROUND THE WORLD
FOR FUN ”
Hurst & Blackett, London
George Doran, New York
NOVELS
“ RICHER DUST,” a Story of Gallipoli
“ BURTON OF THE BAZAARS ”
“ FOREST FLAME ”
Jarrolds
Jarrolds
Jarrolds
BOYS' BOOKS
“ RED SEA PATROL ” {just out)
“ DERELICT GOLD ”
“ RIVALS OF THE RAMPANT ”
“ GOLD FOR THE GETTING ”
Hutchinson
Nelson
Sheldon Press
Nelson


GALLIPOLI REVISITED
"By trying, the Greeks got into Troy.”— Theocritus.
Up' The Gallipoli cruise had its birth in
1 Antwerp. In September, 1930, members of the
® 1 Royal Naval Division Association visited the
, v 1 Belgian city which, in difficult circumstances, they
had helped to defend in 1914 when the German
Army was advancing relentlessly towards the
Channel ports.
That was a wonderful four days’ visit.
Anyone who slept more than three hours a
night was unlucky. He missed something. The
Antwerp authorities, the British residents, hotel proprietors and cabaret
owners helped to provide a programme of continual interest. And it was
the success of the Antwerp visit that inspired the resolution, “ Gallipoli
next! ”
Prominent on that occasion was Major-General Sir Archibald
Paris, K.C.8., C. 8., who commanded the Royal Naval Division in Belgium,
at Gallipoli and on the Somme, and whose interest was keen from the
first in the proposal to return to the Dardanelles. Others who gave
encouragement to the project were Captain the Rt.-Hon. Earl
Howe, C.8.E., V.D., of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (whose hobby
is racing-cars and speeding excessively), and Lieut.-Colonel the Hon.
Sir Eustace Fiennes of the Royal Marines.
For the Antwerp visit, the Royal Navy put the destroyers
Teazer and Trinidad at our disposal. Those were the Teazer’s last days
in the Service, and she raced back at thirty-five knots for Chatham —
and the scrap-heap. A group of us stood on her vibrating deck and talked
enthusiastically of “ Gallipoli next,” without, however, any real idea
of how a return to the Peninsula might be achieved.
Fugitive attempts were made to get the idea of revisiting
Gallipoli down to a practical basis. An optimistic spirit was not lacking,
but circumstances were heavily against an organized tour. For two or
three years, General Depression rode at the head of the hostile forces.
Apparently the British Legion were considering a plan of return
to the Peninsula, but their scheme was in abeyance by the summer of ’32.
Undaunted by this decision or by the prevailing economic
conditions, two of the R.N.D. Engineers, Eric F. Wettern and F. W.
Davey, schemed afresh over the convivial tankard. They and several


others were anxious to make the Gallipoli visit a reality, particularly
in view of the fact that 1933-4 was “ Engineers’ Year.”
Perhaps it should be explained that, by the methods of the
R.N.D. Association, one unit of the Division during the period of a year
is made responsible for providing entertainment at the social functions
and getting up any stunts of interest.
Now the Engineers earned much honour for their work in
Gallipoli and France. Whatever the job, they threw themselves whole-
heartedly into it, although their former enthusiasm for making jam-tin
bombs was not always appreciated by the “ poor b . . . y infantry,”
who had to let off these dangerous fireworks.
Full of the old cheery optimism, the Engineers took up the
Gallipoli visit scheme, and worked on the basis that a long period of
preparation would be advisable —at least eighteen months so that people
could make their plans in advance and save up where necessary.
In September, ’32 a questionnaire was sent out to R.N.D.
Engineers, suggesting that a trip should take place in 1934 and inviting
opinions on the proposal to take train to Marseilles and visit Malta, Athens,
Gallipoli and Constantinople, In the following month the co-operation
of the R.N.D. Association was obtained, and a somewhat similar
questionnaire sent to the entire membership. The results, generally
speaking, were satisfactory, though not sufficiently so to encourage the
belief that the R.N.D. could run a Gallipoli trip without the co-operation
of other ex-Service associations, and possibly the public at large.
It was early recognised that a minimum of six-hundred cruise-
members would be required to put the plan on a paying basis. This
recognition was timely, for events proved that only about sixty R.N.D.
people, including twenty-seven Engineers, actually went in the cruise-ship
which had a passenger list of seven-hundred-and-twenty. Wives and
friends were invited to join in, and a large number of relatives became
included.
But there was not much real encouragement during the winter
of ’32 when Wettern and Davey consulted with various shipp-
ing companies and tourist agencies. A number of experts were
prepared to show that the whole thing was hopeless from the start. The
pair refused to give up trying, and went into details of routes, time-tables,
speed of ships and oil consumption, and endeavoured to prove that a
three weeks’ trip to Gallipoli at an average cost of £3O was in the realm
of practical economics.
The whole project was too bold for several shipping companies
and agencies. But the spirit of the Engineers thrives on discouragement.
On the Peninsula, you only had to complain that one type of catapult
made by them slew half your own platoon in a barricade, and the
Engineers would produce an even more ingenious type of weapon. The
cruise organizers were triers, but it was obvious to these optimistic
amateurs that (1) they would require a shipping company to place a ship
at their disposal, and (2) that they would need an agency with an expert
organization to tackle effectively the subject of shore excursions. They


had the scheme and the enthusiasm, but not the money to charter a liner
or guarantee the advertising and other expenses of an agency.
Then two famous companies became fairy godfathers to the
enterprise—the Canadian Pacific and Thos. Cook and Son. This was
early in ’33, but naturally the companies concerned wanted an open
line of retreat ; so they stipulated that unless the R.N.D. Association
could show five-hundred bookings by November, ’33 for a cruise to take
place in April, ’34, they would be under no obligation.
This support by the heavy artillery set the Optimists advancing
again. They worked desperately to consolidate small gains. They got
in touch with the British Legion and the Associations of the 29th, 42nd,
52nd and other Divisions which served on the Peninsula, but found in-
sufficient support. They were seriously short of ammunition in the shape
of money to advertise the proposed cruise, and before long they were
stuck on the wire. In this impasse they fired a red Verey light in the form
of a letter dated July 21st, ’33, asking for reinforcements.
Genuine news items concerning the proposed pilgrimage began
to appear in newspapers and periodicals, and the result was to lift inquiries
to between sixty and eighty a day. The personal interest of the Viscount
Rothermere, patron of our Divisional Associations, was obtained, and
increased interest was taken by the Press of Great Britain and Ireland,
Australia, New Zealand and India.
Both the Rt.-Hon, Winston Churchill and General Sir
lan Hamilton took an active interest in the proposed pilgrimage,
and were helpful in ways much appreciated by the R.N.D. organizers.
The honorary secretaries of our Associations, Reginald Blackmore and
Edward L. Burton, also did useful work in their habitual quiet and
self-effacing manner.
A message received by me from Mr. Winston Churchill before
the ship was due to leave, was later conveyed to the cruise-members :
“ I send all ranks my heartiest good wishes in the wonderful cruise they
are making to revisit the scenes of their glorious deeds and to revive
the memories of so many gallant comrades.” In one of his letters referring
to the ranks revisiting Gallipoli, Sir lan Hamilton wrote : “ We stay-at-
homes will think of them with admiration and would give a good deal
to be with them. Many thousands of glasses here and in India and
the Antipodes, will be emptied in their honour.”
Over four-hundred bookings six months before the scheduled
sailing date was an astonishing record. The news had been spread by
the national and provincial newspapers, and a number of magazines and
periodicals in the Dominions. On a later occasion, when further news
items appeared, so many inquiries reached the organizers that they cried
“ Pax.” The Press proved a powerful ally. Those who regard all
things connected with the Press with profound suspicion, may be relieved
to learn that the work of the “ Press representative ” was undertaken
by request, and freely because of interest in the R.N.D. Associations.
Both Wettern and Davey worked like Trojans. They made
contact with our Foreign Office, the Turkish Ambassador, the Imperial


War Graves Commission, the British Legion at Istanbul and with Tasman
Millington, the Commission’s representative at Chanak. Special con-
cessions were obtained from the Railway Clearing House in regard to fares,
and from the Turkish authorities who waived the visa fee for passports.
The organizers thought of Rum. Lest the troops should need
stimulant on their way to the “ old dump,” they made sure there would
be a supply of Best Jamaica in the ship.
They thought of Beer. The troops had suffered the pangs of
thirst during the summer drought on the Peninsula, but there must be
no suggestion of drought on the voyage. The edict was issued that
adequate quantities of draught beer must be carried in the cruise-ship,
despite someone’s diffident opinion that such things as kegs, firkins and
barrels can’t be carried in a ship through Biscay Bay without adversely
affecting the beer. However, one of the fairy godfathers—the Canadian
Pacific in this case —stepped in and waved the magic wand. The result
was draught-bitter-pasteurised, in beautiful barrels, so that no old soldier
with a taste for beer-from-the-wood should be without home comforts
at sea.
The itinerary of the cruise was amended slightly because so
many people, apart from those directly interested in Gallipoli, wished to
undertake the cruise. Naples was substituted for Malta as a port of call
on the outward voyage, and Malta, which many ex-Service men wished
to visit, could not be included on the homeward journey owing to the need
for a time limit for the whole cruise.
Numerous suggestions were received that Salonika, Alexandria
and Palestine should be included in the itinerary, and one potential
cruise-member expressed an eagerness to visit the old campaigning
ground in East Africa ! Several offers were made by men anxious to
serve as “ batmen ” on board in return for free passage and free shore
excursions.
Meanwhile a Gallipoli cruise organized in Scotland was abandoned
owing to lack of support. One newspaper rapped us gently on the
knuckles for not providing the means for needy ex-Service men to revisit
Gallipoli. Fares ranged between £24 and £4B, a schedule which was
the minimum possible to put the cruise on a paying basis. All ex-Service
associations do their financial best to look after needy members, and it
was rightly considered that funds could be used in a more helpful way
than by providing just a few men with a free cruise.
The Engineers, though, had a five-shilling whip-round, and the
names of subscribers were drawn for the award of one free trip. This
was done during a cheery evening in a West End restaurant, and after
a dozen names had been drawn, the eventual winner was decided by the
waitresses, each bearing a number, playing a game of Musical Chairs.
Two months before the date of departure, the Canadian Pacific
liner Duchess of Richmond, 20,000-ton oil-burner, built in 1929, was
substituted for the smaller ship Montrose. By a special concession,
fares were not raised for the more modern and larger liner, and the entire
number of cruise-members had the advantage of the better Duchess of


PORTS OF CALL
MILES
ARRIVE
DEPART
LIVERPOOL
__ _
.
Fri., Apr.20,10 p.m.
NAPLES
2244
Fri., Apr. 27, 6 am.
Fri., Apr. 27, 8 p.m.
KELIA BAY (Gallipoli Peninsula)
1^1
00
Mon.,Apr.30,7 a.m.
Wed.,May 2,6 p.m.
ISTANBUL (Constantinople)
133
Thurs.,May 3,7 a.m.
—
The ship will steam
up the B
osporus and return
ISTANBUL
29
Thurs.,May3,10a.m
Fri., May 4, 7 a.m.
ATHENS (Phaleron Bay) ..
352
Sat., May 5, 8 a.m.
Sat., May 5,7 p.m.
LIVERPOOL
2746
Sat., May 12,11 a.m.
Richmond accommodation at Montrose fares. The enthusiasm and
hard work of William H. Powell, cruise manager of the Canadian
Pacific, and of J. Petty, head of the cruise department of Cook’s, assured
a full complement of cruise-members for the new ship which was capable
of conveying an extra hundred passengers in comfort. The revised
itinerary for twenty-two days was as follows :
After much striving, a potted history of the Dardanelles campaign
was prepared. The idea was that some of the cruise-members might
like a refresher on the campaign in an easily digested form.*
Shortly before the sailing date, an organizer’s enthusiasm
for Rum led him to give a newspaper the story of the hidden
rum jar, which imparted another flavour to the cruise. From the cutting
sent me from Fleet Street by an interested editor, it appeared that “ an
unemployed man with six children ” had written to the organizers stating
that he had been in the Bth Welch Regiment, and had buried a full jar of
rum near the beach at Suvla Bay.
Later, in response to an inquiry, a map and some instructions
were sent to me by the man, who stated that he had buried the rum jar
before going to guard a well and then was invalided from Suvla with
dysentery. The evacuation of Anzac and Suvla took place while he was
in hospital at Cairo, and so (his statement ran) he was unable to go back
and recover the precious jar. His map, here reproduced, was not
remarkable for detail :
5-AkT LAKE 1
See Appendix A


“ Well, sir, I do trust you’ll have the luck to find it,” he wrote
to me. “ Won’t it be grand since 1915 —best Black Jamaica Rum ! I
could do with some now ! ”
Hidden Rum caused the vigilant Press to prick its ears. Buried
Gold had a pleasant tingle for a news-story, and I am not penitent for having
provided the “ Daily Telegraph ” with an account of gold hidden on
the Peninsula. This was given on the occasion of a send-off dinner
by the Drake Battalion, R.N.D., and—politicians please note —my remarks
were reported correctly.
The late Lord Northcliffe used to say that the three most
interesting topics to readers are women, money and food. It occurred
to me as an interesting fact in connection with Gallipoli, that many
Tynesiders who formed the backbone of the Drakes on the Peninsula,
took with them on active service their “ wealth ” in the form of
sovereigns which were in general currency in pre-War days.
I knew of several men who, distrustful of banks, took golden
sovereigns of varying amounts up to £4O into the front-line trenches
with them. North-countrymen sometimes buried their gold in a familiar
“ hide ” near the alleged rest-camps before going into the line, and in
various cases were unable to recover the hoard later.
One night in December, ’l5 I was passing a tree (of which I
still have a photograph) and saw a man drop a jingling pouch into a hole
that he had dug among the roots. My batman, a cheery North-countryman
named Brady, also witnessed the incident. We were due to go into the
front lines, and the man who hid the pouch was hit a few days later.
Neither he nor anyone else went to the cache because the battalion never
went back to the former bivouac, but left the Peninsula on January Bth,
T 6, the last night of the Helles evacuation.
Before leaving for Gallipoli in the Duchess of Richmond, I had
a letter from a non-com. who served with me during the months I spent
on the Peninsula —Chief Petty Officer C. Callender, D.C.M., himself a
North-countryman. “ I see your trip is treasure hunting,” he wrote.
“ Well, I know that some money was hidden, but it will be very hard to
find . . . Hoping you will find a few of the jars of rum that we buried , .”
Whereas Rum and Gold were given prominence in a section of
the Press because of their general appeal, no newspaper suggested that the
object of the cruise was to conduct an intensive search for “ treasure.”
The object of most ranks was to revisit Gallipoli and honour the dead
we left on Turkish soil on the last tragic night when the campaign was
abandoned.
Official wreaths were purchased for the various memorials,
including the French and Turkish, and numerous other wreaths were
forwarded to the ship. Many of us were disappointed that Captain
Edward Unwin, V.C., R.N., who formulated the scheme for running
aground the River Clyde at the landing and carried out the manoeuvre,
was unable to make the pilgrimage this year. Chatting to him a few
days before the sailing date, it came as a shock to me to be reminded by
him that he had reached the seventies. There is nothing of the sere-and-


yellow in his appearance, and Captain Unwin hopes to “ make the grade ”
on the next cruise.
Nor was there a hint of the eighties in the springy step and
soldierly bearing of General Sir lan Hamilton, who came to see us off
at Euston Station. Campaigning in the military hot-shops of the world
has left him singularly vigorous in body and alert in mind. No man
could better claim to be “ living on borrowed time.” He is the veteran
whose vitality seems inexhaustible ; his enthusiasm remains undimmed.
Of all sailors and soldiers he has the knack of focussing his mind on affairs
from a new angle, and possesses a brilliant turn of phrase which inevitably
makes News of his utterances. With real pleasure we welcomed him at
Euston, and felt honoured by his coming.
Quietly observant in the background before the boat-train
departed was Sir George McLaren Brown, European General Manager of
the Canadian Pacific Company, who had been a strong ally of the organizers.
From the first he had been in most friendly sympathy with the main objects
of the pilgrimage, and smoothed away many difficulties.
Many ex-Gallipoli men remained on the platform when the
4.40 boat-train left London. Among them I recognised Lieutenant
John Watts, R.N.V.R., a survivor of the tragic Fourth of June disaster
to the Collingwood Battalion near the Vineyard at Helles. He had
come to see off the rest of the Watts family including Arthur, whose
youth and physique enabled him to survive severe wounds sustained in
the same engagement.
There, too, was the “ Old Warhorse,” Lieutenant Ernest
Constable, R.N.V.R., a respected town councillor entitled to ship the
South African medals, whose work on the Peninsula never gained the
recognition it deserved —a grand fellow to have with you in fire-trench
or barricade, but not so good in billet when you raised on two pairs,
Knaves high. We would have liked Constable and those other fellows
with us, and there was genuine regret that, for business and family reasons,
they couldn’t make the journey.
A batch of telegrams and letters addressed to the ship, testified
to the interest of other comrades of the War days. Mainly they came from
men who, for one reason or another, were unable to undertake the cruise
but wished bon voyage to those who were going.
The flood of correspondence from all parts of the world till
sailing day, emphasised the fact that Gallipoli is a powerful magnet to
those who served there. The place has an allurement not possessed in
the same degree by other War fronts. No strong desire has ever urged me
to go back to the Somme or Mespot, although since the War I have been
on the battlefields of the Western Front for various purposes. Others
whom I know, have no keenness to revisit France or Flanders.
To all normal men the Gallipoli Peninsula was a loathsome
dump during the campaign, and the entire conditions produced un-
paralleled hardship and suffering. Yet I have never known a Gallipoli
man who wasn’t keen to go back. Why ? To contrast a country healed
by years of peace with the foul shambles of ’ls ? To experience the


novelty of walking freely and safely under God’s sun in that Devil’s
playground where once there was no security by day or night from wounds
or sudden death ?
Or is it the poignant tragedy of the evacuations which makes the
Peninsula a loadstone ?—those nights at Anzac and Suvla, and later at
Helles, where men moved silently seaward like spectres, leaving that
great army of the fallen in the Gallipoli soil ? Men, out of earshot of the
Turks, trod softly in muffled boots those nights, as if fearful that their dead
whom they were leaving, would hear them march away. In the climax
of the campaign, the supreme drama of the evacuations, more even than
the heroic landings, may lie the secret of Gallipoli’s magnetic power
that tugs at the heart and imagination.


“O brave men, and sufferers often with me of worse
things, dispel now your cares in wine; to-morrow we
will journey upon the vast sea.” — Horace.
Nineteen years ago ! My mind pictures
the scene aboard the old Allan liner, Tunisian,
eastward bound through the Mediterranean with
the first reinforcements for the troops who had
“ achieved the impossible ” by forcing the Gallipoli
landing through a lashing storm of shrapnel and
machine-gun fire.
In the troopship, all deadlights were down on
the ports ; no smoking was permitted on deck or
in the lifeboats where squads of armed men
kept silent vigil in the darkness. The ship
steamed on a zigzag course for further protection
against the torpedo of some lurking enemy submarine off Malta or
among the /Egean islands.
Before me, on my desk, lies the Tunisian's menu of the Diner d’Adieu
given by the captain and the ship’s officers on the night before disembark-
ation at Mudros. They did us proud on the night before we were
flung into the Gallipoli cockpit.
Iron Crosses {Plenty)
Consomme George V
Filet de Sole, Jellicoe
Ris de Veau, Joffre
Roast Sirloin of Beef, Britannia
Gigot de Mouton a VAustralien
Choufleur, Beige Boiled New Potatoes
Chapon a la Surrey
Beatty Pudding, Lion Sauce
Jelly, Poincaire Prince Albert Cakes
Rarebit, Lloyd George
Dessert Cafe
Twenty-four hours after doing justice to that special dinner in a
liner’s saloon, we were squatted in the foul dust of a hastily-dug shelter
from the Turkish artillery fire, scooping Maconochie stew from tins
and washing it down with luke-warm chlorinated water.
The Duchess of Richmond, ablaze with light and a dance band playing
will steam unafraid over a course where once death stalked silently through
darkened waters. The fragrance of the earth, the vines, olives, and
wild flowers will waft from the Gallipoli Peninsula, and only some of the


“ old sweats ” over their tankards in the shipboard bar will recall the
once-fetid breath that belched from a land which the guns made a
desolation and a shambles.
Fading names will leap to vibrant life —Pink Farm, Eski Lines,
Backhouse Post, the Eastern Mule Trench, Worcester Barricade, Chocolate
Hill, Lone Pine, Fusilier Bluff, the Vineyard, the Beaches—V, W and Y.
“ * Y Beach! ’ the Scottish Borderer cried
As he climbed up the steep hillside,
* To call this beach is a bit stiff
It’s nothing but a ruddy cliff!
Y Beach ? ’ ”
What of the River Clyde , that marine Horse of Troy which was
run aground under the forts at Sedd-el-Bahr at the original landing ?
Through her open scuttles the British troops decanted into the withering
fire of the entrenched Turks. Afterwards she was used as a kind of pier,
and every man who served at the Cape Helles end of the Peninsula, knew
that familiar landmark.
Undoubtedly, V Beach will look very different without her.
The River Clyde has gone. This historic ship, which some patriots
wanted to keep preserved for a national memorial of one of the most
heroic episodes in British history, is sailing the seas under a foreign flag.
Nowadays, the identity of the River Clyde is hidden by the name
Maruja y Aurora , and she wears the flag of Spain. Aware of the national
interest in the River Clyde, I located her owner, Senor Gumersindo
Junquera, with whom I have had an interesting correspondence about
this ship which is part of Britain’s history.
The River Clyde, under her Spanish name, at present trades
with coal between Gijon and the Mediterranean ports, principally
Barcelona. She carries no passengers.
No repairs involving alteration in the ship’s structure have been
made. The ship still bears the scars of shell-fire on her hull ; and the
metal bulkheads and fixtures in the engine room remain bent from impact
of the Turkish shells nineteen years ago.
A peppering of shot may be seen on wooden rails and companion
ladders. At one time there were rumours of supernatural occurrences
in the River Clyde, but the Spanish officers serving with the ship have
never noticed any unusual phenomena.
Years ago when the River Clyde, under the name of Angela,
was calling at British ports —belonging in those days to another Spanish
owner —the ship was much visited by ex-Service men and others.
British tourists in Barcelona and other ports see her under the name of
Maruja y Aurora, and seldom take a second glance.
She looks just an old coasting steamer, and probably few tourists,
if any, realize that this was the ship hallowed by the blood of Britain’s
youth in the distant War days. Beside her war-time scars, the ship wears
a medallion with which she was decorated in memory of great deeds.


The plaque was given by a Liverpool shipowner and presented through
the Imperial Merchant Service Guild.
It may be some satisfaction to Britons who hold the ex-River
Clyde as something sacred, that Senor Junquera, the present owner,
has a very live respect and interest in this world-famous ship.
On our pilgrimage to Gallipoli there will be many wives who
will have their own poignant memories of the Dardanelles campaign.
Some were among those who, in the War days, worked and
waited at home. They will remember the letters from their men serving
with the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force—letters marked “ Passed
by Censor” and notable for references to apricot jam and the flies. They
will remember the parcels they sent out —parcels, which, alas, too often
never reached the hands of those for whom they were intended.
The flies ! The whole Peninsula was a buzzing fly-trap in the
flaming summer of 1915. The myriads of green blow-flies had to be
seen to be believed. But nineteen years have rolled by. Now the trenches
are overgrown and the land verdant with vegetation. The flies are no
more. Butterflies and bees wing over the former shambles, and lizards
bask in the sunshine.
The heat and flies of a War-time summer, the savage cold and
the winds from the Russian steppes —those memories will recur clear-cut
in the minds of many an old campaigner.
Some time ago the tourists from a holiday-ship visited the War
graves which are so well kept by the Turks on the Gallipoli Peninsula.
Afterwards, one of them wrote a letter of complaint about the undue
shaking-up she had received in a motor-car along the old Krithia road.
The men of the 29th Division, the Royal Engineers, and other
units who helped the R.N.D. in sponsoring this pilgrimage, are not likely
to complain of the discomfort of any hired motor-car! They will recall
too vividly the agony of the long, dragging marches through super-heated
communication trenches, when raked with dysentery and jaundice.
They will recall the icy floods which swept the Turkish dead into our
trenches, and the grim human processions passing down to the field
hospitals ....
The Duchess of Richmond will anchor in Kelia Bay—only a
name to us who served in the campaign. It is on the opposite coast
to Anzac and Suvla Bay, and north of Maidos, the port where the Turks
once had their base.
We shall make our new landing from motor-boats, ride along the
Krithia road in motor-cars, and climb unmolested up the slopes of Achi
Baba and Sari Bair. Many of us want to look over to the far side of Achi
Baba, the grim, fortified hill which defied the British assault throughout
the entire campaign.
We shall swim without hindrance in the blue, shallow waters
of Morto Bay, in view of Asia and the Plains of Troy across the Straits.
Nineteen years ago young men, who had volunteered for service at the
first call of their country, sought recreation in that alluring sea.


Veterans —now nearly twenty years older —bathing again in those
sapphire-blue waters, will recall the droning roar of “Asiatic Annie’s” big
shells fired across the Straits from the mainland. For in those distant
days many a bathing party was broken up by high-explosive.
It will be thrilling to steam into Istanbul—the Constantinople
which was the ultimate objective of the Gallipoli campaign. Somewhere
I have still got a map of Constantinople, a relic of Dardanelles days. An
optimistic staff officer issued it to me for use when we made our entry
into the Turkish city !
Well, we shall soon be in Constantinople, and, better still, we
shall be received as friends by former enemies, who earned our esteem
at Gallipoli as courageous and fair fighters.


“A pleasant association of comrades.”
Catullus.
Shortly after 10 p.m. on April 20th, the
Duchess of Richmond left Liverpool, bound for
the Gallipoli Peninsula. Coloured electric lights
festooned the promenade deck ; the cheers of
ex-Servicemen on the landing-stage and aboard,
beat above the gay music of the band.
This cruising business has been brought to a
fine art. Nothing is left undone by the steamship
companies to make cruise-members feel comfortable
and happy directly they step up the gangway.
Their special efforts in the case of holiday-ships
permit of no cloud of sadness such as normally
hovers over the departure of a liner.
The outward gaiety attending our departure swung my mind
to the scenes of other days. In marked contrast were those pale, frightened
looking emigrants and their relatives at Liverpool before the notice
“ KEEP OUT ” was put up in the Dominions . . . those darkened
ships of War-time which crept silently from the wharf to mine-strewn
seas . , . tearful throngs at Sydney’s Circular Quay, while coloured
ribbons parted one by one and “ Coo-ees ” competed with syrens . . .
equally tearful voyagers garlanded with flowers watching Hawaii slip astern
and the last faint notes of “ Aloha-oe ” mingling with the scent of an
off-shore breeze.
Before the pilot had left the Duchess of Richmond, there were
many reunions. “ Gosh, if it isn’t Busky ! Where the blazes was it
that we last . . ” “You remember me, sir ? I was with you that time
in the Bird Cage when . . ” “You don’t say ! I was on her bridge at
the time, and Johnny Turk slung over . . ”
On previous cruises I have only got to know people by degrees.
Despite residence in the Western States, Canada, Australia and other
democratic countries, I have never become what the Americans term a
“ good mixer.” The average Englishman has an inbred reserve which,
in the long run perhaps, is no worse than the average American’s blatant
familiarity.
But aboard the Duchess I came across old and tried friends at
every turn between 10.30 and midnight. Coming up the main saloon
stairway was the Rev. Bevill Close, Chaplain to the R.N. Division through-
out the Gallipoli campaign. Wearing well, the padre—an inch more
girth, possibly, and a trifle scantier of lock. But the same old padre who
distributed khaki Testaments to the troops, founded the most extraordinary


football league in history (of which more later) and, when threatened to
be turfed off the Peninsula two days before the final evacuation of Helles
because all chaplains were ordered away early, seized on the rating of
stretcher-bearer to be with “ the boys ” till the last.
Within a few yards of one another on deck I saw Captain H.
Wetherell of the sth Australian Light Horse, who had made a special
journey from Brisbane to make the cruise, and Petty Officer J. A. Cattell,
a Canadian who served in the R.N.D., and came specially from Toronto
for the trip.
Moving aft, I heard the pleasant clink of tankards, and having
a good nose for locality, soon discovered the “ Pig and Whistle,” a popular
resort on the after deck. Others were before me, already swopping yarns
between appreciative draughts of the pasteurised brew. One or two
voices raised a sound which always reminds me of Australia’s floral emblem,
“ What’ll ? ” My need supplied, I found myself among a gang that
included Petty Officer Rowlands, whom I did not recognise at first until
he mentioned the last days on Gallipoli, and added : “ I’m the chap you
left in the sap.”
On all sides were men of the Royal Navy, Royal Air Force and
famous divisions of the old Army, united in what partook of the nature
of a large family party. The term “ veteran,” used often in print before
the cruise, was hardly applicable to most of these fellows. The years had
passed lightly over so many that it seemed incredible they should have
been of an age to fight twenty years ago. Greying hair had marked the
passage of time with others, but mainly one noticed the tell-tale “ middle-
age spread.”
Already, I noticed, some of the infantry had collected round
the penny-in-the-slot Radio Rifle, eager to prove that eye and hand had
not lost all their former sniping prowess.
Wherever a large number of people forgather, even though they
have come from the four quarters of the earth, the meeting uncovers
a crop of coincidences. This cruise was no exception. Strangers
discovered that they had been within hand-touch of each other in a hospital
ship; that someone’s old platoon sergeant was someone else’s brother
now growing fruit in New Zealand. From the beginning, our shipboard
life corroborated the well-known fact that men talk more than women.
On the voyage I spent some illuminating hours chatting with
H. W. Nevinson, noted War Correspondent, and John North the novelist,
with charming Mrs. Nevinson the ideal audience. Both these men have
given close study to all the whys and wherefores of the Gallipoli campaign,
and North who has visited the Peninsula two or three times since
the War, has promised a book dealing with the subject of Gallipoli
from a new angle.
It was regrettable that there were not more ex-nursing sisters
on board, but among the few in the passenger list I found the names
of Mrs. M. White of the Massilia hospital ship, and Miss Margaret
Power, V.A.D., who also in the War years shouldered the difficult task
of finding efficient mechanical transport drivers from among greybeards


and C 3. men. No one of our generation is likely to forget the wonderful
work done by women during the War, and so many of us have personal
cause to recall with deep gratitude the devotion of the nursing sisterhood.
Mention has been made that many cruise-members had no
special interest in the Dardanelles campaign, but travelled solely for the
pleasure of the cruise. A few minor problems were solved by the tact
of the ship’s staff, and with hardly an exception, these holiday-makers
showed a sympathetic understanding for the main object of the voyage
and became en rapport with those to whom this cruise was a pilgrimage.
Save for a hail-storm on Sunday morning, the weather was sunny,
and the sea was moderate to Cape Finisterre, south of Biscay Bay, At
one saloon table occupied by a dozen people including Housden of the
Signals and his two attractive sisters, they had a system of drawing
numbers which decided the seating arrangement at each meal, and this
re-shuffling conduced to pleasant variety. At another table for four,
there were four passengers whose ages totalled 320 years.
There were of course the usual few vacant seats for meals, but
surprisingly large attendances at the church services.
In my hearing an elderly lady remarked to a seaman : “ Someone
has been telling me the ship’s keel is built funnily. Is she really safe
when she rolls ? ”
The seaman laughed.
“ Bless you, ma’am, a ship ought to roll! We’d know something
was wrong if she didn’t.”
The lady departed much comforted.
Rumours fasten themselves to ships more easily than barnacles.
Your ship—according to the Fellow-Who-Knows —is either topheavy
or lopsided, has too shallow a draught, or not enough freeboard. Once
when I travelled in the old Hong Moh, a noted China Coast cargo-carrier,
now many fathoms down, I was told she was filled with rats, Asiatic
cockroaches, red stinging-ants and centipedes. It was the only time
in my experience that the Fellow-Who-Knows was nearly right!
Aboard the Duchess of Richmond I was informed early by a first
cousin of the same erudite fellow, that our chartered ship was built all
wrongly below the water-line. Indeed, it became stated freely that she
had a peculiar-shaped bottom, which, in any case, was an ungallant
remark to make about the Duchess. Actually, this ship and her three
sisters of Athol, York and Bedford, were constructed specially for the
St. Lawrence trade, and they have rather less draught than ships of similar
size on the New York run.
But the advantage which enabled the liner to reach Montreal also
made it practicable to include Kelia Bay on our itinerary, for most liners
of this class and size are unable to anchor there. However, the low
swell with much sea-power behind it, which hit us abeam on our passage
down to the Straits of Gibraltar, would have set the Leviathan rolling.
Two features of interest in the get-together stage of the cruise,
were the wearing of identity disks by ex-Service ranks, and the issue
of the rum ration. The disks were larger than the “ tin tickets ” which,


on Active Service, we wore by order round the neck —a part of the anatomy
less likely to be mislaid in battle than a mere arm. Each shipboard disk
bore the wearer’s name and former unit, and was attached to the dinner-
jacket lapel. So everyone else, including your fair partners at the dance,
could tell at a glance whether you once had graced the Sanitary Section,
the Mule Corps, or the Inland Water Transport.
The Rum Issue held more importance for the “ old sweats,” who
rolled along to the after deck, well before the ship’s bugler sounded
“ Rations.” Nor did they omit to bring receptacles in the shape of
tumblers, mugs, bowls and saucepans. With commendable foresight,
several had brought on board the tin canteens issued to them in the war-
days.
Among those present (as the Society reports put it) were the two
chief organizers of the cruise. I saw also several other Engineers ;
indeed, it was difficult to see anyone else near the rum barrel owing to
the crush of them. Remarkable, by the way, how some of the troops
have kept their war-time kit. Uniforms, gaiters, caps, cap-ribbons
bearing “ Royal Naval Division ” in faded gold lettering, issued at the
Crystal Palace depot in 1914, were worn by men who had kept these
articles for mementoes of their first days of service under War conditions.
The issue of grog —rum and water —was made by the ship’s
Master-at-Arms, the sea-faring term for Chief Constable, who himself
had seen much war service as a sergeant-major. Supporting him —
assisting him is perhaps the more suitable term —was the Baggage Master,
a typical ex-non com. of that magnificent unit the Royal Marines.
The combined ship’s bands played the old familiar tunes, and
those not too busy disputing the front pews with the Engineers, gave
tongue in volume that must have carried to the Spanish coast. “If the
sergeant drinks your rum, never mind ...” “ Hullo, hullo ! Who’s
your lady friend ...” Songs never understood by the Germans any
more than we understood their “ Hymn of Hate ; ’’ songs which, aboard
the Duchess steaming south through the sunlit Atlantic, raised a tidal-wave
of memories. “We are Fred Kamo’s army, whatever use are we ... ”
A grey-haired lady among the throng of onlookers, walked slowly to
the stern-rail, the tears rolling unchecked down her cheeks . . .
What matters it that I had nothing of the rum save the fragrance
in the breath of an old comrade who wanted to know whether the free
grog issue would be repeated daily? Yet I would not entirely associate
myself with A. P. Herbert’s sentiment :
“ For though in kindly terms I touch
On this rich stimulant as such,
I cannot say I like it much ;
Indeed, I hate the stuff.”
There may have been Engineers present who did not like it
much, but, if so, they manfully hid their distaste.
The sun aided and abetted the Canadian Pacific in making the
voyage memorably pleasant—a marked contrast, as everyone expected,
to life in a troopship. Ample elbow-room was afforded by a passenger


list of 720 in a 20,000-ton ship which would carry 5,000 men and umpteen
horses if used in the role of wartime transport.
Possibly advancing years make me appreciative of shipboard
comfort, after roaming the world in various capacities from watch-keeping
officer in a warship to stowaway in a coaster’s chain-locker. A hammock
in a fo’castle or in Canada Building at “ H.M.S. Crystal Palace,” once
satisfied my simple need, but now I regard with favour a carpeted stateroom,
an ultra-modern spring bed, the silent ball-louvre ventilation system,
and a steward who solaces my awakening from dreams of Derby Sweep
winnings by China tea and a dish of hot-house grapes.
For me, the luxury of the Duchess of Richmond was not without
irony. In a way, I felt that peace had been sealed with an old enemy,
for on and off during five years of my youth spent in Canada, the
Canadian Pacific and I were generally at loggerheads. In those irre-
sponsible days I rode under their passenger trains and on the roofs of
their freight cars, and once nearly met sudden death at the hands of
one of their brakesmen near the Loops in the Rockies. And as open
confession is good for the soul if not always for the neck, let me admit
that I stowed away in their ship the Princess May at Skagway, Alaska,
and “ jumped ” their famous old Empress of India in Japan. In return
the C.P.R. handed me some pretty rough stuff, but aboard the Duchess
their solicitude for my comfort was enough to wring tears of remorse.
You get things afloat nowadays which the average hard-working
man never sees ashore ; for example, a gymnasium equipped with the latest
apparatus in the shape of electric horses, sculling machine, stationary
bicycles on which you nevertheless can have thrilling races, and a weighing
machine for recording your gain in solid flesh from over-eating.
The musicians of the orchestra and dance band were better
than any I have heard afloat, with the exception of the Royal Marines.
Before the depression hit the musical world generally, most of these
artistes were in symphony orchestras or dance bands ashore, and more than
one was making over £l,OOO a year. The passengers in liners now have
better concerts and dance music than ever before.
The refinements of the lounge, the drawing-room, and the main
smoking-room which was columned and panelled in natural oak, were
neglected by some of the ex-Service cruise-members for two other resorts
which became increasingly popular as the voyage proceeded. Of course,
one of these was the “ Pig and Whistle ” aft, and the other was a simple
compartment for’ard known as The Lido, where much hospitality was
dispensed and accepted daily. The swimming-pool forward had its band
of devotees, most of whom in the earlier stages of the voyage were drawn
from the more comfortably upholstered members of the ship’s company.
For the children there was a delightful nursery aft, and deck
games and parties were organized for their further entertainment. Such
is human nature, that some turned their backs on these delights for a greater
one which they discovered the first day out. This was the Lift near the
main saloon stairway.


Three of the juniors did little else but ride up and down in the
lift during the first few days, and only varied the amusement by sometimes
trying to race it by headlong dashes down the stairway. Their delight
was like that of the African potentate who saw an electric lift for the first
time in a London hotel, and having got in it and sampled its delights,
refused to get out for two hours. Subsequently, he had one sent out to
West Africa and erected in the open air in front of his kraal. Watched
by admiring crowds of his dusky subjects, he rode gaily to the topmost
heights of the palm trees and down again repeatedly whenever in need
of recreation.
Merely by coincidence, the commanding officer of the Duchess
of Richmond, Captain Arthur Rothwell, and a number of the ship’s officers
and crew had served during the War at the Dardanelles.* Four of us
cruise-members made the discovery that Chief Officer V. McMillan,
Chief Officer N. Walker and Purser W. Paddock were with us in the
Tunisian in ’l5 when we went out to Gallipoli. “ The Old Tunisians
Club ” was formed forthwith.
Captain Rothwell, popularly known everywhere as “ Joe ” and
the Sports Officer, H. S. Knight, who is “ Bogey ” to everyone, formed
a strong team and helped to spread a cheery atmosphere.
These were the officers who, serving together in the Montcalm,
performed “ the bravest deed of the year ” by rescuing thirty people and
an Alsatian dog from the foundering Reindeer off Newfoundland. On
that occasion, eighteen tons of oil were pumped from the liner upon the
icy sea to enable “ Bogey ” in charge of the lifeboat, to get alongside again
in the teeth of the Atlantic storm.
The spiritual welfare of cruise-members was not neglected, and
Mass and Communion services were held each morning. Several ex-
chaplains of the Forces travelled with us —among them a number of
Roman Catholic priests—and certainly our pilgrimage helped to dispel
the old superstition that it is unlucky to have padres in a ship.
Note was taken of April 23rd which was spent at sea, because it
was the anniversary of the death of Sub-Lieutenant Rupert Brooke,
R.N.V.R. of the Royal Naval Division, who was buried at Skyros in the
iFgean Sea. Several on board knew Brooke in person, and an ex-petty
officer told me that he was one of those who bore him from the sea-shore
to that quiet olive grove which is his resting place.
“ He leaves a white unbroken glory, a gathered radiance,
a width, a shining peace, under the night.”
The anniversary of the landing, April 25th, known to us as
Gallipoli Day and to the Australians as Anzac Day, was celebrated by
a Memorial Service held on the after-deck while the ship was at sea.
All official and private wreaths for the Gallipoli Memorials and graves
were arranged over the hatch of the after-deck. This service at eleven
o’clock was conducted by the Rev. Bevill Close, assisted by Captain
Rothwell and General Sir Francis Davies.
* For extracts of Captain Rothwell’s report on the Gallipoli cruise see Appendix B.


The ensign was at the peak, and during the two minutes’ silence
the ship’s engines were stopped. In his sermon the Rev. Bevill Close
recalled the gallantry of the professional and non-professional sailors
and soldiers, and the self-sacrifice of all for that which they held dear.
A nation which had such an epic event in their history, was bound to
rise to further heights through hard striving to fulfil the purpose of God.
The service was the more impressive because of two circumstances
which were noticed by many of the large congregation present. A single
cloud rested in the blue sky, and owing to the wind currents aloft, it
gradually took the form of a rough cross which overhung the ship during
the two minutes’ silence. Then a bird which looked like a linnet flew
across the port rail, fluttered over the wreaths and winged directly toward
the cloud. All who noticed these things were greatly impressed, and some
saw in them a symbol from God.
The circumstances recalled to me the curious sky symbolism
toward the end of the Gallipoli campaign. On the occasion when I
went from Helles to Anzac on a busman’s holiday, there was a sunset
cloud startlingly like a blood-stained scimitar suspended lengthways over
the southern end of the Peninsula. Then, just before we evacuated
Helles, there was a misty night sky in which only a crescent moon and a
single star could be seen. The appearance of the Turkish emblem in
the heavens, when nerves were so highly strung at the close of the campaign,
had a tremendous effect on some of my own men in the front-line trenches.
Coincidences ? It may be, but combined with other circum-
stances, these things can be profoundly impressive.


“How sweet it is to remember dangers
when they arc past and gone."— Euripides.
South of Spain the Duchess of Richmond
passed within seven miles of the Orford which
was carrying W. M. Woodfull, Don Bradman
and several other members of the Australian
cricket team to England for the Test matches.
We conveyed our good wishes by radio and
received Woodfull’s acknowledgment.*
In the memory of the sacred bond of
Gallipoli, how trifling appear the bickerings
between the Mother Country and Australia over
a mere game. Both peoples are lovers of sport, and reasonably too. But
for some years cricket, tennis, football and golf have been assuming
an unhealthy importance.
“ . , . teeth gritted, the light of battle gleaming in the eye , . .
nerves of steel . . . refusing to acknowledge defeat, fighting to the last
gasp ! ” That quotation from a daily newspaper was not a wartime
description of British or Australian troops catching and throwing back
live bombs from a Gallipoli barricade, nor of hard-pressed troops
attempting to stem the massed Turkish attack with the bayonet. It is
an excerpt from a half-column description of one of our muscular tennis
girls volleying at the net in a Wightman Cup match.
Opinion was fairly sound in the “ Pig and Whistle,” and no one
worried about dangers arising from youthful political organizations,
whether their shirts were black, red, brown or blue. But some viewed
with serious alarm the prospect of the formation of an International
Football League, with its obvious danger of bloody war over a referee’s
offside decision.
Occasionally, on board ship you get deck-tennis and shuffleboard
enthusiasts who play in the tournaments with gritted teeth and steely
eye, and you feel a sense of pity that they should mar the enjoyment
of their own recreation. But aboard the Duchess, there was singularly
little of the spirit of warfare or pot-hunting, although the prize fund
grew to staggering proportions by the generosity of the cruise-members.
Deck and aquatic sports were in full swing after we had passed
the Rock and were steaming eastward through the blue Mediterranean.
The snow-capped sierras of Spain made contrast to the tawny African
coast, and then one morning we awakened to find ourselves moored near
Italian and Japanese warships at Naples.
• For the Radio Messages connected with the cruise see Appendix C.


Vesuvius was in capricious mood and revealed herself only to
early risers. Before breakfast she had draped herself in mist and
modestly remained aloof until the evening. This was my first visit
to Naples since the year before the War, and I found no cause to alter
the impressions I had gained on that previous visit. Dirt, drying clothes,
strident noises and a variety of smells assailed the senses on the way
into town from the docks.
But who ever stays in Naples? Probably only a small proportion
of tourists from holiday-ships ever see even the best shopping centre of
the city. The main object after landing at Naples is to get out of Naples
at the earliest possible minute. The smoking craters of Vesuvius have
a fascination for some, but everyone makes a point of visiting Pompeii,
which nowadays is reached in rapid time along the new Auto-strada.
Excavations are proceeding at Herculaneum, a site covered by
the homes of villagers. Remarkable discoveries have been made, and they
are leaving all valuables where they are unearthed, instead of taking them
to Naples Museum where so many Pompeiian relics are housed.
No one ever misses Pompeii despite the arduous walking in
the hot stony streets. To me, the visit was like a day conjured from my
youth. There were the same patrician houses with their family skeletons,
the same grotesque pictures and fountains, the same carved sign in the
Via dell’ Abbondanza, the same guides who announced in garlic-laden
breath, “ No ladies dis way—only da gentlemans, please.”
My own hopes of seeing activity on the new Pompeiian excava-
tions were defeated by Italy’s allegiance to the general Mediterranean
custom of the siesta. After attempted bribery and corruption had failed
to shift the workmen from the deep shade, I contented myself with a
photograph of the gang in sweet repose and sought a place of refreshment
where one or two “ old sweats,” fortified by iced drinks, were preparing
picture postcards for despatch to the homeland.
You may travel where you will in the world, and find no more
beautiful motor-drive than this, from Pompeii over the mountains to Amalfi
and back to Naples by the coastal route via Sorrento. Late April is an ideal
season when the vineyards have a sheen like blue-green velvet, the overhang-
ing creepers are in flower on every ancient wall, and the eye is delighted by
the vivid colouring of oranges and lemons.
Those who think the French and Italian Riviera holds the palm
for beauty, should travel farther afield to the coast south of Naples. Here
is the dream-coast of the Mediterranean, the paradise of poets and lovers.
Here in every ethereal-looking port are spread wizards’ spells like webs
to enmesh the traveller and compel him to linger.
In the Hotel dei Cappuccini we ate the usual spaghetti au gratin
and drank the palatable vin du pays. A remarkable inscription on a
terrace commemorates the sojourn there of the American poet, “ Enrico
Wadsworth Longfellow.” There is a proud record, too, of the stay of
Mr. Samuel Morse, the inventor of the telegraph, but in the entire length
of Italy I have never located any sort of memorial to the inventor of
spaghetti. The sight of spaghetti hanging out to dry over the Italian


countryside, may give you no more than a passing thought of its edible
properties. The fundamental use of spaghetti is to add a quota to the
gaiety of nations, and one day a fitting memorial for the inventor may
be set up from a fund organized by Charlie Chaplin and subscribed to
handsomely by comedy-film producers and comic-journal editors.
The hotel where we lunched and drank the vino Cappuccini to
the music of mandolines, had been a monastery in ancient days, and the
present bedrooms are the converted cells of the monks. No more
entrancing site could have been chosen, for the place is perched high above
the blue sea and overlooking the port. On the average sunlit Mediter-
ranean day, the view through the cypress trees is unrivalled, as Longfellow
recognised.
“ Where the waves and mountains meet,
Where amid her mulberry-trees
Sits Amalfi in the heat,
Bathing ever her white feet
In the tideless summer seas.”
This coast which was created for dreaming, assumes a different
aspect, however, when you are travelling back to Naples over a road
more picturesque and thrilling than the Grand Corniche, in a car driven
by an Italian obviously practising for Mussolini’s round-Italy road-race.
However, it was comforting to remember that we were
under the care of Cook’s, who, with their usual forethought for every
detail, had got us all well insured. No one who has read the account of
my travels can accuse me of any bias toward Cook’s or any other tourist
agency. In the past I have wandered alone, if not always unafraid,
into Canton opium dens and many other interesting resorts. But on this
Gallipoli cruise I discovered that there were advantages even to the
experienced traveller who puts himself in their care ; and invariably
their efficient arrangements are a godsend to the less experienced who
have only a short time on their hands.
Excellent cars had been engaged in advance, and there were
several empty ones available lest any of the others should break down.
Many a tourist from a cruise-ship in the Mediterranean has found
hiring a private car more expensive than booking one through a tourist
agency, and has been put to far greater subsequent expense through
missing a ship owing to a breakdown.
There exists the type of tourist, of course, who suspects
everything that is done. Among the cars in one tour was an ancient
vehicle which Cook’s representative wanted to eliminate from the fleet.
But an old lady had a ticket marked with its number, and when it was
suggested to her that she should transfer for her own comfort to a better
car occupied by two other people, her chin jutted like a battleship’s
stem. Suspecting a catch somewhere, she blankly refused and lurched
along in solitary state in that ramshackle vehicle over fifty miles of winding
roads, at the tail of an entire fleet of well-sprung and comfortably
upholstered motor-cars.


On the last lap of the journey from Amalfi, along the new
Auto-strada, our driver made his final effort to beat all competitors to
the winning post. His foot went down on the accelerator, and the
quivering needle of the speedometer went up to the no mark. Two
other drivers of the tourist cars pursued hotly, and one nearly shot
ahead by a brilliant swerve on two wheels. But our man staved off the
challenge, skimmed the edge of the strada, and eventually won by the
length of a bonnet!
When we arrived back on board we learned that the Marquis di
Bella at the head of a deputation of Italian ex-Servicemen had visited the
Duchess of Richmond in our absence. Fortunately, four of our ten
Generals had remained on board, and with the assistance of the ship’s
officers and a few others, had entertained the party with the right kind
of hospitality. The deputation were much impressed, and full reports
appeared in the Naples papers.
The “ sailors’ beacon,” Stromboli, was passed in the night, and
on the following morning our ship steamed through the Straits of Messina
between those beautiful shores where lava hides the tragedies of centuries.
Temporarily, deck-tennis and the swimming-pool were ignored for the
greater attraction of Sicilian scenery and the picturesque traffic of the
Straits. Prominent on the boatdeck was the inevitable Dear Old Lady
who imagined that the ash-crowned volcano was Vesuvius, and, when
informed correctly, was further surprised to learn that Etna was not on
the Gallipoli Peninsula.
The usual delights of holiday-cruising were resumed—gymkhana,
swimming gala, horse-racing, treasure hunt, orchestral concerts, dancing,
Progressive Bridge drives, community-singing and the Talkies. Beside
these we had the advantage of two excellent lantern lectures on the
subjects of Gallipoli and Athens by Mr. H. W. Nevinson, the famous
War Correspondent, and other lectures by the Generals whom the Social
Committee managed to probe into the open from their natural shell of
modesty.
Everyone knows how, during the War, Private Bleat prayed
fervently before laying his head in slumber on the firestep, that one day a
just Deity might arrange a meeting in mufti between himself (Private
Bleat) and Sergeant-major Bluster. The glorious possibility of meeting
the Staff in bowler hats after hostilities, buoyed many a junior rank and
rating in the darkest Gallipoli days—and here, at long last aboard the
Duchess, we found our dreams come true.
Face to face in the lounge or smoking-room, we fired our questions
at exalted lecturers, and they answered as man to man. It was a
salutary experience all round. We learned to appreciate better the
difficulties of the Staff, and the explanations given threw certain episodes
of the campaign into a new perspective. And undoubtedly, further
insight was afforded to them of the minds of the men who were only
the pawns in the grim Gallipoli game of ’ls. In a period of time allotted
after each lecture, anyone in the audience was free to question, comment


or provide information, and all this added greatly to the interest of the
occasion.
The three main landings at Helles, Anzac and Suvla were dealt
with respectively by General Sir Stuart Hare, Colonel J.A.M.A, Clark,
and Lieutenant-Colonel P. Villiers-Stuart. Another appreciated lecture
was on the Helles Evacuation by General Sir Francis Davies who also
exhibited maps and photographs. General Sir Archibald Paris added
further interesting information about the dramatic last days of the
campaign.
It is noteworthy that these lectures were attended largely also
by those passengers travelling solely for the pleasure of the cruise, and
the subsequent Gallipoli visit was made more vital to them on this account.
Aboard the Duchess of Richmond , Generals and ex-privates met
on an equal footing and chatted freely over their aperitifs ; ratings who
had served aboard warships in the Dardanelles, exchanged notes with
men who had manned the guns ashore ; airmen, snipers, bombers, sappers,
Red Cross orderlies and pioneers got into a huddle and emerged with
warped impressions straightened out.
Most popular were the organized meetings held in the truly
democratic atmosphere of “ The Pig ” when anyone could get on his
hind legs and give tongue for three minutes. The brief yarns and
comments, often impromptu, revealed new facets of the campaign which
reflected alternately colourful depths of tragedy and drama, and the sparkle
of human comedy.
There was Gillott, for example, who reminded us of an official
order that, “ if a mule broke its leg, it was to be replaced forthwith by an
intelligent N.C.O. or Sapper.” Then, while one of the Lancashire
Fusiliers was describing his personal experiences at the landing on V
Beach, a former Staff officer prompted him by remarking : “ I suppose
you didn’t get ahead far because the ground was rough ? ” The survivor
answered : “ Aye, sir,” and then by an afterthought, pointed out: “ And—
er, there were a few Turks around.”
Or what more thrilling than the account by Petty Officer Sam
Avons of the sea-blue eyes and tattooed arms, who was Second Coxswain
in the Submarine H i which penetrated the Dardanelles defences and for
seven weeks, in company with E 12, carried out a daredevil strafe of
Turkish shipping in the Marmora ? To get through, the H 1 bucked the
powerful wire nets which stretched for nearly a mile across The Narrows
between Chanak and Kilid Bahr, and tore a hole through them 80 feet
below the surface. The way Avons described it, you could almost hear
the smashed nets rasping over the submarine’s deck and conning-tower.
And then, of course, our friend the Dear Old Lady rose to seek further
enlightenment by asking if the submarine “ went through the same hole
coming back.”
During Avons’ brief flow of oratory, a hundred-and-one small
but interesting facts bobbed up like corks. The submarine’s crew wore
their oil-soaked clothes for the entire seven weeks and all of them were
“ alive ; ” each day a sweepstake was held on the depth at which the H 1


would rest below the surface. The flood of fresh water from the mighty
rivers of Russia finds its way down to the Sea of Marmora and lessens
the density on the surface, and usually the submarine settled on a cushion
of brine ten and twelve fathoms down. The eloquent Petty Officer
concluded his description of the seven weeks’ epic in enemy seas on the
safe return to Kephalos harbour at Imbros. “ Our commander got the
D.S.O. and the First Coxswain got the D.C.M. The Admiral gave the
rest of us a bottle o’ beer apiece.”
Typical of British wartime humour was the contribution by
Stanley Gooch of the Machine Gun Corps. Typical, too, of British
humanity was his treatment of the faithful transport horse at the Suvla
evacuation. After leading down the animal laden with machine-guns,
Gooch discovered that it could not be taken off. “ What do Ido with
him ?” he inquired. The sergeant responded “ Shoot him.” Whereon,
Gooch took the horse out of sight, fired a revolver shot in the air, gave the
animal an encouraging slap on the haunch and sent it trotting up-country.
“ Keep going, mate. The Johnnies will look after you.”
Having survived the fighting from the time of the first landing,
Gooch left Suvla in happy anticipation of rest in the smiling Aegean
Isles. So what he thought of Staff strategy may be imagined, when he
was taken south and landed on the Peninsula to make the final evacuation
at Helles !
The free-and-easy atmosphere of “ The Pig ” also suited Captain
Wetherell’s description of incidents of the Anzac fighting. And he,
by the way, was the officer who suggested the use of a destroyer’s
searchlight beam during the Anzac evacuation, to screen the movements
on the beaches from the Turkish look-out on the promontory of Gaba
Tepe.
Over a modest half-pint of pasteurised beer on an even less
formal occasion, Wetherell reminded me of the experience of his compatriot
Corporal Murray, who at the evacuation was left by error in a front-line
trench “ whence all but he had fled.” A search-party made the arduous
return through the dark communications, and found the Aussie in blissful
ignorance that he was there alone facing the whole Turkish army !
Now and again the stark tragedy of Gallipoli broke through
someone’s light-hearted account of past experiences. A reminder, for
instance, of when the flames swept through the scrub on Chocolate Hill
where the slopes were choked with the dead and dying heard
the cries of the wounded and could do nothing.”
Only by chance you discovered the legacy of mental and physical
suffering left by the War to numbers of men and women in the ship.
Once when a group photograph was taken, I accidentally touched the
knee of the man next to me, and he exclaimed in sudden pain. Sub-
sequently, I found that he had left hospital to undertake the pilgrimage,
and was returning for one more of an apparently endless series of operations
necessitated by the wounds of nineteen years ago.
An air of tenseness was apparent on the day before the ship was
due to arrive at Gallipoli, and groups gathered at the rails and talked


Sketch map of Helles area.
ENGLISH MILES
APPROXIMATE SCALE
quietly as the isles of Greece lifted on the horizon, displayed their beauty
and slowly dropped astern.
At the setting of the sun that evening I stood with several friends
at the stern-rail and idly viewed that ever-fascinating spectacle, the wake
which marks the passage of a speeding ship. Presently my gaze lowered
over the cruiser-stern of the ship, and I saw a ring-dove of a variety common
in the Grecian Islands and Asia Minor, perched on one of the flukes
of the stern-anchor.
The presence of the dove was the more significant in the fresh
memory of the circumstances which attended the Memorial Service on
board, and several cruise-members whose attention was called, regarded
it as another symbol. However, I leave the interpretation to others,
and simply record the fact that a dove accompanied us as our ship
approached the Gallipoli Peninsula.
1
0
1


" Consider that a friend may be
made out of an enemy/'— Seneca.
In the quietude of the /Egean evening a
white-haired lady accompanied by a chaplain,
walked slowly to the stern-rail of the Duchess of
Richmond which was passing between the islands.
Almost unnoticed by anyone on board, the padre
offered a prayer and the lady dropped a wreath
upon the sea, for it was near the spot where the
transport Royal Edward , conveying 1,400 troops,
was lost in August, 1915. Among the hundreds
of young men who went to their death in that swift
tragedy had been her only son.
The island of Lemnos was screened by dark-
ness, but that night on board, many episodes were recalled of the days
when Mudros was a naval and military base seething with activity.
Many former ranks made arrangements with the steward for an
early call on the following morning, the Monday (April 30th) when the
ship was due to arrive at Kelia Bay. Long before dawn, many of them
were on the open deck, muffled against the chill breeze caused by the
liner’s progress. The silence, and the lighthouse beam which marked
the position of Cape Helles, were in contrast to the dull thunder of the
guns and the vivid yellow flashes which greeted the reinforcements who
approached by night during the campaign.
Before five o’clock, the hardy few who had talked in whispers
in the darkness, were joined by numerous men and women swathed in
dressing-gowns or wraps, eager to see the tragic Peninsula lifting into
view with the dawn.
“ How quiet it is.”
The remark was made by an ex-corporal of the 29th Division,
who was standing near me on the port side of the boat-deck. The same
thought must have occurred to other ex-Service men returning to this
well-known scene.
What emotions were raised by this approach to Gallipoli, so
many years after the events which formed the most heroic tragedy in British
history. Men and women talked in hushed tones, like visitors do in the
transept of a cathedral.
Imbros lay on the port beam ; there is no mistaking the contours
of this island, where General Sir lan Hamilton had his headquarters
and where later many Gallipoli survivors went to be “ fattened ” for the
trenches of France.


To starboard was Rabbit Island, useful cover for monitors and
other naval craft, and on the starboard bow were the Asiatic hills, dark
in contrast with the glowing eastern sky.
Those who took part in the original landings on April 25th, ’l5,
were repaid especially for leaving the warm comfort of their state-rooms.
The sky was pink over Asia, and the sea smooth. By a fortunate chance,
Nature reproduced similar weather to that at the landings nineteen
years ago.
The white lighthouse at Helles’ heel and the grey memorial like
a finger pointing skyward, were the first features which struck an
unfamiliar note. Ignoring Kum Kale on the Asiatic side where a minor
landing took place, the returning “ veterans ” gathered along the port
rails to identify the landmarks of the Peninsula.
The battered forts of Sedd-el-Bahr became plainly visible, and
V Beach where the River Clyde was put aground. Lancashire Landing,
round the headland, slipped out of view as the ship steamed into the
Dardanelles, affording a clear view of Achi Baba, Morto Bay and de
Tott’s Battery. Near de Tott’s, an unfamiliar aspect was given by the
French Memorial of snow-white marble. Another landmark beyond was
where the Kereves Dere forms a gully through the cliffs to the sea.
Here roughly was the limit of the Allied advance on the Dardanelles
side of the Peninsula, and farther on, the coastline and general contours
were strange to the majority of us.
Perhaps after the great emotional experience, some in the
gathering crowd had thoughts for the more remote drama of these
historic lands. Eyes were turned toward the Plains of Troy across the
Straits ; someone quoted lines of Virgil about the return of /Eneas to
blazing Troy. Those whose memory carries well to school days, may have
recalled the account in Ovid’s “ Heroides ” of Leander “ the young, the
beautiful and the brave,” who used to swim the Hellespont at night from
Abydos to visit his beloved Hero, priestess of Aphrodite at Sestos, and
who at last was drowned in a storm. From the safe deck of a liner it
needed imagination to take the measure of that swimming feat, which
centuries later, was emulated by the poet Byron and a Mr. Ekenhead.
In the days of the Great War, minesweepers advanced almost to
The Narrows, but our ship proceeded onward through these between the
fortified positions of Chanak and Kilid Bahr, and at 7 a.m. came to
anchor in Kelia Bay, whence the heights of Anzac could be seen across
the Peninsula.
Launches followed us up from Chanak, and the Vali —the
Governor —came aboard accompanied by his lady, the Police Commissar
and several others, to welcome us to Turkish waters.
Previously, a radio message of greeting had been sent to the Gazi,
Mustafa Kemal, who made reply in friendly terms. In the world-wide
fame won by Mustafa Kemal as the Dictator of Turkey, the military
reputation gained by him on the Gallipoli Peninsula has been forgotten
by the public at large. At the time of the landings, Kemal commanded
the 19th Turkish Division, and survivors of the Australian and New


Zealand Army Corps who were there in the early days, will recall the
counter attack which he led against them.
The visitors were received in the lounge, which of nights had
served us also for ballroom. There was something momentous about
that reception of Sureyya Bey the Governor, and the other members of
the Turkish deputation in this liner’s lounge. It was the tangible
expression of the revived friendship between the British and Turkish
peoples, which our cruise helped to achieve.
Obviously, at first, the chief interest of our Turkish visitors
was in the decorations of the lounge itself, a regal apartment in the
Empire Style, with woodwork of silver-grey sycamore and a floor of oak
parquetry. They seated themselves near the grand piano, their backs to
panels of cerise silk, and then the Vali rose to make a speech, in which
he remarked that “ the friendship of the English is very old, and we are
renewing it now.” When coffee had been served, General Sir Francis
Davies made eloquent response, and, recalling “ the former visit,”
regretted that “ we had had to go last time—but the weather was getting
bad.” And he mentioned that he always held it to the credit of the Turks
that they did not often shell when the troops played football on the
Peninsula.
This reference was to the unique Football League founded by
Padre Close who, by some wangle possible only to chaplains, managed
to get footballs to the Peninsula, and then organized games between the
various units. Although the matches were played in “ dead ground ”as
far as possible, the Turks must have seen at times what was going on ;
but no casualty took place during a match, and the Final was played at
Imbros after the conclusion of the campaign.
Before long it became known that in the Governor’s party was a
Turkish gentleman many of us would have given our Maconochie rations
to have met in ’15 —the O.C. “ Asiatic Annie.” Through an interpreter,
I had a long chat with this officer, Mehmet Bey, a likeable kind of man
with bald brown head, typically hook-nose and many rippling crows’-feet
at the corners of his eyes. He told me that “ Annie ” was roughly of n
inch calibre, and that the famous big gun had moved frequently its position
in the In Tepe region of Asia, although she had never “ run on rails ”
as many of our troops surmised.
In the latter part of the campaign, he stated, a British monitor
firing over Rabbit Island in the Aegean Sea, scored a direct hit, killing
five men and putting the gun out of action for six days. In return,
I told him how, on the last night of the evacuation, we had a bugler
posted at Sedd-el-Bahr fort to sound the long “ G ” for warning each
time he saw “ Annie’s ” yellow flash. To which Mehmet Bey responded
that he had heard faintly that warning bugle note across the Straits.
On this visit of the Turks from Chanak I heard the story —told
me once before by a Turk in Bagdad in T8 —that the Chemenlik Fort
had only five shells left after the retirement of the warships, following
the abortive attempt of the Fleet to force the Straits. It would appear
true that the Turks were on the verge of surrender, that the then


Governor of Chanak had destroyed his papers and shifted his quarters
in anticipation of the triumphant return of the Allied ships —those ships
which, to the Turks’ astonishment, made no further attempt on the
following day.
With the complacency so characteristic of the Near East, the
Turkish visitors to the Duchess of Richmond would have been well content
to linger all day in the unaccustomed shipboard luxury. They showed
frankly that they liked the lounge, the grand piano, the coffee and
sandwiches, and that they liked us. But Captain Roth well hospitably
asked them to return and dine before the ship left, and the deputation
went ashore with that section of the pilgrims destined for Anzac and
Suvla Bay.
For convenience during the three days’ Gallipoli visit, the
cruise-members were divided into two parties known as Section i and
Section 2. All R.N.D. members and many relatives and friends were in
Section 1, which included General Sir Archibald and Lady Paris. The
itinerary by Cook’s proved in practice a masterpiece of organization.
ITINERARY FOR SECTION I
Monday, April 30th.
10 a.m. Leave ship in Kelia Bay and take seats in conveyances which will be numbered
and lined up on shore.
The route leads across the Peninsula to Lone Pine Cemetery, Johnston’s
Jolly, Courtney and Steele’s Post and Quinn’s Post; then past Walker Ridge
and the Nek, on the left of the road, and Baby 700 to Chunuk Bair Cemetery
and the New Zealand Memorial. Return the same way as far as Lone
Pine Cemetery, where the road branches left to Shrapnel Valley.
Picnic luncheon (taken from the steamer) at Shrapnel Valley.
After luncheon continue the drive via Anzac Cove, Ari Burnu and Canterbury
and past the Embarkation Pier, the 7th Field Ambulance Cemetery and
Hill 60 Cemetery to Green Hill. Here, time permitting, members can visit
the Lala Baba Cemetery or Hill 10 and the Azmac Cemetery.
The return to Kelia should commence not later than about 4 p.m.
Tuesday, May Ist.
9.00 A.M. Leave Kelia Bay by special steamer. Arrive Sedd-el-Bahr, “V ” Beach,
10.30 a.m.
There are no conveyances at Cape Helles, but the roads and the positions
of the Cemeteries are indicated on the maps.
Picnic luncheon (taken from the steamer) on shore.
3.00 p.m. The special steamer leaves Sedd-el-Bahr, “V ” Beach.
5.00 P.M. Arrive back on board the Duchess of Richmond.
Wednesday, May 2nd.
8.00 a.m. Morning excursion from Kelia Bay to Achi Baba via Maidos, the village
destroyed by the British Fleet’s heavy guns firing over the Peninsula, and
the Valley of Soghanli Dere, the Headquarters of the Turkish Field Ambulance
behind Achi Baba. {The cars will approach as near as possible to the
summit of Achi Baba.) From the top of Achi Baba a view of the entire
battlefields and extremity of the Peninsula is obtainable.
Return to the steamer about 1 p.m. for lunch on board.
Afternoon free.


While watching the other section depart by hired steamer for
Helles, I heard that the Turkish Press had given much space to the
visit of the British pilgrims. The news of the hidden Rum and Gold
had received prominence, and the public had been amused until some
yellow sheet had splashed a story that we had a cargo of spades and
picks aboard the Duchess and intended to dig up the entire Peninsula !
That caused an outcry on the part of those Turkish readers whose
gullibility may have been bolstered by knowledge of the native habit
of changing commodities into gold where possible and burying it for
safety.
Before leaving the ship, one of the cruise organizers who had
been most interested in the Rum map, offered me the use of the
entrenching tools he had brought out with him. This generosity might
have touched me more deeply had I not learnt a few minutes earlier —
as he had —that digging and removing “ treasure ” of any sort had been
strictly forbidden by the Turkish authorities.
Another and less reasonable decree was that a 40 per-cent, ad
valorem duty was charged on all wreaths—even the wreath brought
officially for placing on the Turks’ own war memorial. To save distress
and trouble to the pilgrims concerned, the Canadian Pacific company
stepped in and paid £3l ns. qd. in settlement of the total sum demanded.
It was an unfortunate affair, and gave a bad impression. No blame,
however, attached to the Turkish Customs officials who only carried
out an unpleasant duty imposed on them by their country’s law. The
whole business was just an instance of the kind of Government stupidity
which causes international friction, and our own Government (which
also taxes wreaths, by the way) has provided samples of this asinine
policy which have lowered British prestige everywhere eastward from
Malta to Madras.
High-pooped motor-craft wearing the star-and-crescent flag of
Turkey conveyed our Anzac party from the liner to the shore. A low
sandy ridge was used for a grandstand by the black-clad Turkish women,
who, in the manner usual to Mohammedans, resented the approach of any
tourist armed with a camera. A number of sturdy Turkish soldiers
dispersed curious Turkish boys with hearty clips on the ear.
An astonishing collection of motor conveyances were parked near
the landing-stage, ready to take us across the Peninsula to Anzac and
Suvla. For weeks, the agents of our good friend Thos. Cook, had been
scouring the cities and plains of Asia, and some of these cars and waggons
had come 400 kilos before being ferried across from Chanak.
The assembly of these vehicles and their Turkish drivers was
an accomplishment of no mean order, and Thos. Cook earned another
medal for having arranged for supplies of iced Turkish pilsener and
soft drinks to be available at various points on the Peninsula. Before
British troops land again on a terrain such as Gallipoli, I trust that the
War Office will appoint Thos. Cook a General and send him and his
myrmidons with instructions to arrange for adequate motor transport
and an iced-lager supply in the hostile land. It is long odds the job


will be done in a manner that will raise reinforcements even from the
dove-cotes of the Oxford Union.
In charge of the assorted motor-vehicle fleet was Mr. Whittall of
Chanak, a member of the family which fast is becoming a nation. Go
where you will in the Near East and Levant, and you will find Whittalls,
setting an example for honest commerce, and probably bringing up
little Whittalls in the way that future honest captains of commerce
should be brought up. Like all the Whittalls I have met, our Mr.
Whittall from Chanak combined Western efficiency with Eastern courtesy.
A sudden terrific clattering which echoed over Kelia Bay,
startled some “ old sweats ” into imagining that a machine-gun had been
brought into action to resist the new landing. But it proved to'be only
the engine of one of the motor vehicles, which had responded to the
Samsonian efforts of the native driver, now limp over the starting-handle.
Two of our gallant Generals assisted the ladies into the “ Rolls
Royces ” of the fleet, and themselves rattled off in a museum-piece
which looked as if it might have been used by Joshua for inspecting the
Israelites before the battle of Merom.
A lady of our small party selected a car, having taken a fancy
to the greyhound mascot on the bonnet, and we achieved a bone-shaking
journey over the rough road for nearly three-hundred yards before the
vehicle gave its last dying cough and came, to rest. Help arrived swiftly
in the person of the übiquitous Mr. S. F. White, chief representative
of Cook’s in the Duchess , who had ample spare transport up his sleeve,
so to speak.
What a man in an emergency ! The Dear Old Lady who had
attached herself to us, lost her nervousness and beamed happily in the
presence of this man who swept away difficulties as though they were
cobwebs. He is true to the type bred in the old booming days of British
Columbia, and on the gold-trails of Klondike and the Yukon.
In comparative comfort, we continued our journey Anzac-wards
over a road which, like all Gallipoli roads, is practically impassable after
heavy rain. But the Weather Clerk had been kind to our pilgrimage.
No rain had fallen for many days, and the sun shone brightly from a
clear sky. Our luck was in throughout the cruise, and the entire
Gallipoli visit was favoured by weather similar to that of ideal summer
days in England.


“ Go tell the Spartans, thou that passest by.
That here, obedient to their laws, we lie.”
Conington’s version of a statement by Herodotus
that this epitaph was set over the burial place of
the heroes of Thermopylae ( B.C. 480).
Anticipation is sometimes a more vivid
pleasure or pain than the reality. Often I had
anticipated setting foot on Gallipoli soil in the
belief that this would be one of the great
emotional experiences of life.
Kelia Bay and the hills beyond, however,
were strange country, interesting only because
they had been the lines of communication for
the Turkish forces defending the Anzac heights.
There was no emotional appeal, and other
circumstances being equal, I should have
preferred first setting foot ashore at V Beach as I did nineteen years ago.
Lone Pine ridge provided the first real picture of the changed
conditions from the Gallipoli that was. Butterflies and bees winged
over the clumps of wild flowers among the olive-green scrub which hid
most of the scars of the War. Arched overhead was a sky of turquoise-blue
from which the sun shone with dazzling splendour —a day that would have
been uncomfortably warm for exertion but for the breeze blowing freshly
from the /Egean.
How difficult to link up this peaceful little plateau with the
Hell’s acre of August, 1915 ! In the sunshine and sweetness of a perfect
Spring day, who could visualize the prolonged and bloody struggle here
that was equalled only by the savage fighting for the Vineyard south of
Achi ?
At this southerly part of the Anzac front, the Australians and
Turks fought furiously by day and night, with whetted bayonets and
knives, with bullets and bombs, with rifle-butts, grenades and sticks of
dynamite, till the trenches roofed by split logs were heaped with the
dead and dying —and added to the ordeal were the spasmodic hammering
of the lines by high-explosive and shrapnel from the Fleet and artillery,
and the torturing shackles of those twin demons, Sleeplessness and
Thirst. No survivor—no human soul —will ever total the hopes, the
fears, the triumphs and agonies of a single hour in the fighting on Lone
Pine plateau. In the trenches soon converted into graves, the young
manhood of two resolute nations met death in its most hideous guises,
and with the name of Christ and Allah on their lips, or frothing curses




against the destiny which had led them to this man-made Hell, passed
out for ever as human entities to become but memories, recorded in later
days by names cut in marble and granite.
Who, on a peaceful Spring day in 1934 could visualize the massed
attacks of the Turks—wave upon wave of armed men, doubly armed in
the Faith of the One God, unafraid of death because the cold steel of
the enemy was but the key to the gates of Paradise ? Who after years of
work and striving in a world where hatreds, greed and lusts have grown
anew like rank vegetation after a tropical hurricane, can understand
the ideals, the endurance and self-sacrifice of those warriors of both
forces, by whom the unmatched horrors of Gallipoli were faced heroically
in the belief of a Righteous Cause ?
The years have rolled by and the kindly hand of Nature has
clothed the ugly nakedness of the Gallipoli once familiar to us. The same
beneficent hand has mingled the tang of brine and the fragrance of
growing flowers, to help remove the memory of the putrescent stench
which once had belched from the land and contaminated even the sea.
There has been no reconstruction of this front as in France and
Flanders ; only the hand of Nature, the representatives of the Imperial
War Graves Commission and the Turkish peasants, have changed the
aspect of the land. On Lone Pine ridge we saw reminders of the former
days in trenches which had fallen in and become overgrown, in the shape
of rusted shell fragments, scraps of equipment, barbed wire, iron rations
and human bones. The wind stirring the dust had recently uncovered
many bones on the parapet of an old trench. One of the padres laid
them reverently on a cushion of grass, and paused awhile to pray.
Like an oasis in the rugged, overgrown hills was the Anzac
Memorial commemorating nearly 5,000 dead, and the adjoining Lone
Pine Cemetery with its flowers, its cypress trees and trimmed shrubs.
Official and private wreaths were laid here, including one by Captain
Wetherell the Australian, which bore the inscription, “ In Remembrance
from Comrades of the A. and N.Z.A.C. British Pilgrimage, May 1934.”
From Shell Green to Azmac, the fighting-front is dotted with
cemeteries, each with its white headstones in the cool shade of cypress
trees and shrubs.
On Chunuk Bair we walked up a loose-stoned pathway to the
New Zealand Memorial which dominates the whole area and may be seen
for miles out on the jFgean Sea and from the Dardanelles. More official
and private wreaths were laid here to the men who gained this height
in the face of appalling natural obstacles and a determined enemy. On
the far downward slope whence one may overlook Maidos and the
Dardanelles, is a row of eight headstones which marks the resting-place
of an advance guard of New Zealanders, and also marks the position of
the furthermost advance of the Anzac forces.
But nowhere does the Christian cross stand out in relief. The
Turkish authorities have been well-disposed over the work connected
with our cemeteries, but this is a Moslem land and it was decreed that
the symbol of Christianity must not be conspicuous. The cross is


sculptured only on the sides of the memorials, or carved unobtrusively
in the oblong headstones of the graves.
Owing to the favourable weather and dry ground, some of us were
able to make the journey over the ridges to Chunuk Bair back by way of
Shrapnel Valley to take lunch on Brighton Beach, and then along the
coast, past the western side of the Salt Lake to Hill 10 and Suvla Bay.
Time and again you might imagine yourself just revisiting one of
the pleasant Greek islands, which, to those on four days’ leave during
the campaign, seemed a thousand miles removed from the Gallipoli
fighting-front. On Chocolate Hill where once the flames of burning
scrub swept down on the dead and wounded, I saw a fellow passenger
from the ship strolling up the slope, carrying a picnic lunch and a bottle
of Turkish pilsener. He wore a rather limp starched collar and—a
black bowler hat! On those beaches where once men, raving with
thirst, plunged into the sea and slashed the hoses of water-lighters with
knives and bayonets, men, women and children camped peacefully over
their picnic lunches, or paddled where the cool sea lapped the stony
foreshore.
Jolting onward by car, the coastal cemeteries gave reminder
again that this indeed was Gallipoli, resting-place of a quarter of a million
dead. When we lingered on our way to Suvla we were reminded, too, of
the nature of the fighting which made it impossible to identify a large
majority of the fallen. Roughly two-thirds of the British dead could
not be identified, except that they were known to have fallen. Their
names are on the memorials and even some of the graves are marked
with a name and the words, “ Believed to be buried here.” On this, the
first day of our visit, each cemetery had its pilgrim or group of pilgrims
paying silent homage to loved ones who made the Great Sacrifice.
Everyone commented favourably on the work of Tasman
Millington, the Australian representative of the Imperial War Graves
Commission, the man responsible for the upkeep of these memorials and
cemeteries. He was there in person to give the relatives of the fallen any
advice they needed from his unrivalled knowledge of post-war Gallipoli,
A tourist who had come solely for a pleasure cruise expressed
keen enjoyment of this sunlit, scented land and thought that everything
was “very nice.” The more knowledgeable surveyed the rugged slopes
and nullahs and wondered anew at the miracle of youthful strength and
endurance which enabled foothold to be gained on them. The miracle
of Gallipoli is that the landings were achieved and a hold retained for
months by the invading troops, despite the repeated attempts to “ drive
them into the sea.” Once indeed, when the British called on the Turks
to surrender after severe losses, they actually replied : “ No. You are
between our bayonets and your deep blue sea of which you are so proud.”
During hostilities there had been many days when the sun shone
from a cloudless sky and a breeze blew off the Aegean Sea. On our
journey to Suvla we could see the Salt Lake like a polished granite disk
set among the greenery of vegetation and bordered on the far side by
the sweeping curve of Suvla’s sandy beach. Across the /Egean, the


isles of Imbros and Samothrace appeared to have no more substance than
dove-grey gossamer suspended above the sea. The effect due to a slight
haze on the water, was frequent enough during the campaign; but then
the isles looked more gossamer still —dream-isles that seemed unattainable.
Barbed wire and French wire, much of it remarkably preserved,
revealed how the Turks created new defensive lines immediately after
the evacuations. Nowadays, the scourge of the country behind Suvla
Bay is the wild boars, which breed up to 450 pounds in weight. These
uproot the crops and have become a pest to the peasants who are unable
to keep down their numbers. In pre-war days when Greeks cultivated
Gallipoli soil, the boars were thinned out by peasants partial to pork.
The Turks who have replaced the former Greek cultivators, are Moslems,
and so have religious scruples against pig in any form, and moreover have
not the wherewithal to buy guns and cartridges in this country where guns
were once to be had for the picking up.
The road round to Hill 10 was the worst ever, but numbers of us
made the journey. Maize and other crops grew on the former battle-
fields ; ring-doves and singing birds fluttered among the fig trees. A
pair of storks strutted down to Salt Lake, and a strong-minded lady
insisted in the teeth of a truck-load of ex-Brigadiers and Colonels, that
the birds were pelicans !
The walk from Hill 10 to A Beach was among the terrible thorn
scrub too familiar to the boys of ’ls. Detours had to be made to avoid
the barbed wire which the Turks had put down in T 6 when the campaign
had ended. Tortoises —those old friends of campaigning days—crawled
among the reeds. A girl decided to take one back to the ship for a pet,
but it was an outsize tortoise, and kicked and grunted so fiercely that
she abandoned it to its own wild life.
At Suvla we saw comparatively little to recall the fighting. The
wreck of a “ K ” lighter—one of the “ Beetles ” —lay high on the beach
with the sand silted over most of the hull. On the return motor journey
down the coast, there was not much debris to be seen anywhere on the shore
or in the sea, but the K 72, fairly intact, was still on the beach just north
of Gaba Tepe.
In Shrapnel Valley which we passed again, live a colony of
Russians employed for maintaining the cemeteries. One of them,
Chocklov, was once a well-known tenor in opera at Petrograd, and some-
times, when dusk descends on the Peninsula, the melody of his voice is
heard mounting through the stillness as he returns from Lone Pine.
There is a living spirit in all the hills and nullahs of Gallipoli,
but you cannot become attuned to it among a mixed company. You must
go from among them and be alone.
No bursting shells or bombs, no crackling rifle-fire. Goats and
sheep graze in the valleys. The sea is empty of warships, minesweepers
and hospital ships.
How quiet it is


“Time is
a gentle deity ”
Sophocles.
Only three-hundred people can be accom-
modated conveniently for the excursion from
Kelia to Anzac and Suvla. About a similar
number can be taken by steamboat to Cape
Helles roughly fifteen miles down the coast.
On May ist, the second day of the Gallipoli visit,
it was the turn of our section to journey to the
heel of the Peninsula, while those who had been
there the previous day, went to Anzac and Suvla.
At an early hour we boarded the Deniz is, a
ramshackle steamboat whose deck-plates were
plastered with concrete, and voyaged smoothly
past Maidos and through The Narrows bordered by Chanak and Kilid
Bahr. At both places the battered forts were visible, and some of the old
guns which had done duty in the defence of the Dardanelles.
In parts, the blue surface of the Dardanelles was covered with
small sea-birds, which rose in flocks and swung to port and starboard
to settle again out of the direct track of the steamboat.
The Deniz is was a source of interest in herself. In her heyday
she had been a sea-going cargo-carrier, and after nearly fifty years of
service, could not be expected to compare with, say, the Crested Eagle
on the Margate run. To accommodate our cruise-members, wooden
forms had been arranged over the great hatches, and when the Deniz is
rolled to the swell of a passing ship, we had all the thrill of checking
these wooden forms from hurtling with us into the scuppers eight feet
below !
Our steamboat wore the Turkish flag, her ship’s bell bore the
Italian name Vincenzo Bonanno ; and heaven alone knows how many
other names she had borne in her time. A plate in the engine-room
recorded that she had been built by George Clark, Engineer, of Scotland,
in the year 1887.
What a steamboat! Nearly fifty years of service and still going
strong ! She is a reminder that we can still take pride in the fact that
the British were, and still remain, the finest ship-builders in the world.
Germany may have a flair for dyes and clockwork toys ; Japan may make
cotton goods with the machinery constructed by their expert copyists
from Lancashire machines generously supplied by us many years ago.
But with regard to ships, the world should be drilled to this slogan :
“ Britain Builds Best! ”


The navigation of this wonderful vessel, Deniz is, was an object
lesson to watch. While she held a straight course, the captain remained
comfortably in a wicker chair on the bridge, but for any alteration or
when preparing to anchor, he was galvanized into astonishing agility.
There were two voice-pipes, one on either side of the bridge, and one of
these led to the engine-room, and, presumably, the other to the helmsman.
Hurtling across the bridge, the skipper bawled down one pipe, took a
headlong rush the other way and bellowed into the other, until the desired
evolution was completed and he himself was limp and bathed in
perspiration. That ship was the only one I have ever encountered where
the captain’s outfit might reasonably include a pair of roller-skates !
All eyes were turned on the Gallipoli shore when the old familiar
landmarks again hove in sight. Most prominent, of course, was Achi
Baba, the key to the whole Turkish position in the campaign and the
hill which defied all the Allies’ assaults.
Our steamboat came to anchor a cable’s length from V Beach
with its overshadowing fort and the village of Sedd-el-Bahr. Small
Turkish dhows conveyed us from the Deniz is to the remains of a stone
jetty built in the campaigning days.
Much debris of those war days littered V Beach, and also
Lancashire Landing just round the cape. Many Turkish peasants
watched our landing, and there was a nondescript collection of ponies and
donkeys which could be hired by those who considered the pleasure of
riding outweighed the discomfort of acquiring a few fleas.
A number of unveiled Turkish women sat along the low sandy
ridge where, at the landing in ’ls, a few British survivors sheltered from
lashing shrapnel and machine-gun fire. Gone were all the tents, dug-outs,
stores and ammunition dumps which dotted this place. Gone were the
picturesque troops —the British in khaki shorts, the blue-clad French,
the turbanned Indians, the giant Senegalese and all the rest of them ;
gone the seething activity in the hot sun and the rising dust-clouds.
Gone, too, the River Clyde which was fast in the shallows from the first
day of the landing until long after the campaign had ended.
Despite this and other changes, V Beach impressed those who
knew it as less altered than many parts of the Gallipoli fronts. This
Beach will grip the imagination of tourists long after all direct personal
interest in Gallipoli has faded. For here “ the impossible was achieved ”
by fadeless deeds ; this was the scene of an epic of heroism and sacrifice
unsurpassed in the world’s history.
Holes and splashes in the solid walls of the fort testify to the
power of the Fleet’s high-explosive. Much of the village was in ruins,
but some of the peasants’ dwellings were covered by the elephant-iron
roofing left by the French. The most noticeable change in the appearance
of Sedd-el-Bahr was the new white mosque with its minaret inclined
slightly towards Mecca according to the Mohammedan custom. Peasants
grow figs and olives in cultivated patches on the slope below the fort.
Before the pilgrims went on further exploration, a Service was
held at the Helles Memorial, where wreaths were laid to the fallen. In


the course of this, the Rev. Bevill Close made reference to the R.N.D.
in the following words : “ The officers and men of the Royal Naval
Division have their share in this Memorial, This share I dedicate to
the glory of God and in their memory. In the name of the Father, the Son
and the Holy Ghost.”
Down here at the Helles end of the Peninsula were the same
oases in a country of sand and scrub—cemeteries which mark the site
of the once-familiar places, Skew Bridge, Pink Farm, Redoubt and Twelve
Tree Copse, all well designed and beautiful with iris, stock and rosemary
the flower of remembrance, and the white stones indented with the cross
of sacrifice. Here and there in these cemeteries we saw primroses and
other flowers which beautify the English countryside. Elsewhere trees
and plants from the homeland were growing in the God’s Acres of this
foreign soil. For example, the grave of Second-Lieut. E. Duckworth
of the 6th Lancashire Fusiliers, 42nd Division —“ Killed 7th August,
Vineyard ” —was shadowed by an oak, now ten feet high, which was
brought from England and planted in Redoubt Cemetery by his father in
1922.
Everywhere in these cemeteries was reminder of the savage
fighting and the shambles which made it impossible to recover and
identify the bodies of the fallen ; In one cemetery 500 names and only
5 known graves ; in another, 2,500 names and only 300 known graves.
At Helles we dispersed in parties to find the remains of those
bivouacs, trenches and barricades best known to us. Numbers took the
Krithia road, and others located the Eastern Mule Trench and branched
off to Fusilier Bluff and the Gully Ravine.
In company with a few others, I trod again the old Krithia
road past the cypress grove through which I had last tramped on the
final night of the evacuation, January Bth, 1916. Prior to the campaign,
the Queen Elizabeth —familiarly known in the Navy as the Q.E. or
Lizzie—had raked this area with giant shrapnel shells containing up
to 20,000 leaden pellets, A member of another party showed me two or
three of these recognisable pellets, which he had kicked up in the dust
near the spot where the old Water Tower had once stood.
The French dug-outs on the ridge bordering the thinned cypress
grove, remained well preserved. But then the French had elephant-iron
roofing instead of the tarred blankets supplied to British troops. Several
men recognised the site of their own “ rest camps ” where the lines of
former shallow dug-outs were faintly distinguishable.
There was a standing joke among some of us during the campaign
that some distant day tourists would discover the amenities of Gallipoli
and that a hotel with golf course complete would occupy the site of
de Tott’s Battery, overlooking Morto Bay and the Dardanelles. There
were those, too, who foresaw that Turkish peasants or gipsies might
take a fancy to those shallow dug-outs which “ Red Hat humorists, for
mystic reasons, regarded as our ‘ rest This, indeed, was expressed
by A. P. Herbert, then a junior officer with the R.N.D. on Gallipoli,


and a fellow-sufferer with me of those first gruelling drills in 1914 under
naval non-coms. His verses “ The Dug-out (A memory of Gallipoli) ”
which were written on the Peninsula, had a prophetic touch :
“ It was my home, not ringed with roses blowing
Not set in meadows where cool waters croon ;
Parched wastes were round it, and no shade was going,
Nor breath of violets nor song-birds’ tune ;
Only at times from the adjacent dwelling
Came down with Boreas the quaint, compelling
Scent of the Tenth Platoon.
And there not hermit-like I brooded,
But ant and lizard and all things that crawl
With great grasshoppers by brigades intruded ;
Therein the tortoise had his nightly stall ;
Green flies and blue slept nightly in their notches
Save when a serpent in the middle watches,
Came and disturbed us all.
And I am shocked to think that that same ceiling
Shields now some Mussulman of lowly strain ;
Yet though he knows me not, I can’t help feeling
That something of my spirit must remain.
And if, in that rich air the man should mellow
In mind, in soul, and be a better fellow,
I have not lived in vain.
And it may be, when worlds have ceased to wrestle,
I shall go back across the midland foam
At special rates in some large tourist vessel
To my late hollow in the Sultan’s loam,
And there clasp hands with that uplifted warrior,
Compare brief notes and wonder which was sorrier
To have to call it home.”
Fields of growing crops prevented us from cutting direct to
Morto Bay, but we made a detour down a track from Skew Bridge past
one or two small farms. The peasants had found cheap fencing, and
all the fields were hedged with barbed wire and the twisted iron supports
with which we used to juggle in trepidation on those beautiful moon-
flooded nights in days gone by. Here and there, stuck on these posts
were the sun-bleached skulls of horses and mules. But the Turks in
charge of our hired steeds could give no information as to whether these
grim ornaments were supposed to possess a charm against the blight
or were efficacious scarecrows.
With mixed feelings I stood again at Morto Bay, the pleasantest
spot at the southern end of the Peninsula. The Bay had afforded me
the one truly enjoyable physical recreation during campaigning days,
and on the grey sand between the reeds and the water, my best pal was
killed by shell-fire from Asia.


To those shallow waters had come the splendid men of the
Regular forces and so many of those young men who had joined up at the
first call for volunteers in ’l4. The comradeship of such men alone
made it possible to endure the seeming eternity of the campaign ; and the
waters of Motto Bay cleansed away the filth of the trenches and revitalized
the body. The one disadvantage of Morto Bay was that it could be
watched from Asia, and when bathers became numerous, the Observation
Officer gave the wire to the O.C. “ Asiatic Annie.”
With two companions I swam at Morto Bay in water crystal-clear
and icy-cold. The shores were deserted and all was strangely quiet.
Although I had bathed here time and again in the War days, it needed
this visit to remind me how narrow was the strip of grey sand between
the edge of the gently-lapping sea, and the clumps of reed intersected
by ditches which are the home of the diminutive water-tortoise.
After lunch at Morto Bay, we rode on our hired steeds back
to Skew Bridge, Backhouse Post and the Achi Baba nullah. Finally, we
headed directly up the Krithia road which is defined by dusty cart-ruts.
The Eski Line—chief reserve line which stretched the width of the
Peninsula—was still recognisable, and so were the positions of some of
the supports and redoubts.
Our object was to reach the crest of Achi Baba, but “ Father
Achi ” seemed to recede as we advanced, just as he did during the
campaign. Even in peace-time the hill frustrated us, and lack of time
compelled us to turn back.
However, we reached the former No Man’s Land between our
front lines and the Turks’. To the left of the Krithia road I readily
recognised the Vineyard, once a shambles, although previously I had
never had anything but a worm’s-eye view of it. High-explosive blasted
away every square foot of that tragic acre in the summer of ’l5, yet the
vines which have never been cultivated since, were freshly green in the
Vineyard at the time of our visit, and, I was told, had borne a crop of
grapes for the first time the previous year.
Of course, it was not possible in a few hours to visit more than
a few of the most familiar spots on the Peninsula, and despite travelling
fast along the road back, we found ourselves among the last to return
to V Beach.
Again we had cause to thank our friend Thos. Cook, who had
arranged for a complete canteen shaded with rustic work and foliage,
with iced Turkish pilsener worth ten shillings a bottle, but for which
only two shillings was charged. Again on the Deniz is we found that his
forethought had contributed to our comfort by the establishment of a
well-stocked refreshment bar with drinks of various kinds obtainable
directly off the ice.
It was pleasant on the way back to compare notes with General
Sir Archibald Paris, a military expert with unrivalled knowledge of the
Helles area. It was wonderful how, in spite of the severe disability
resultant from a shell-burst on the Somme, he had covered so much ground
on this one day’s visit to Helles. That General Paris and his charming


lady should have left their home in the South of France to come on this
pilgrimage, was much appreciated by all ranks.
Bucking the strong currents, the voyage back to the Duchess of
Richmond in Kelia Bay, took longer than the outward journey. It was
good to get off the Peninsula to a hot bath and an excellent meal in the
liner ; but there seemed something incongruous about the shoes, grey
with the dust of the Krithia road, set on the carpeted alleyways outside
the doors of the state-rooms.
There had been no time ashore to locate the tree by which I
had seen the purse buried in January, T 5. However, it is impossible that
the I.W.G.C. workers and Turkish gipsies in search of ammunition caches
have dug up any large areas of the war fronts, and despite the contrary
opinion of some of the Chanak residents, I am certain that “ hides ” of
British gold remain in Gallipoli soil. Rumours have persisted in the
Dardanelles towns and villages that a Sedd-el-Bahr peasant unearthed
£45 in golden sovereigns last year, and it is quite possible that these
rumours have a basis of truth.
My friend, Lieut. Connell, R.N.V.R. reported that he had
located a buried jar of rum, but that through over-eagerness he had
struck his entrenching tool against it and the precious liquid had drained
into the ground. To combat scepticism, he produced a fragment of
the rum jar “ for proof! ”
Three visitors had tried to locate a rum cache near Lala Baba,
and stated that they had found cows grazing on the spot. One recorded
in his diary the curious statement of Turkish peasants that one night
they had seen these cows do the Rumba and that occasionally the animals
produced gratifying supplies of rum-and-milk.
Physical fatigue assailed many of us after two strenuous days,
but the excursion by car on the third day had outstanding features of
interest.
The cars took the road from Kelia over a rough road through
Maidos, the village which once was razed by the guns of the British Fleet.
Farther along the winding coastal road, we came to Kilid Bahr, and passed
some of the ancient forts and a number of Turkish soldiers who came
from their barracks to watch silently the procession of motor-cars.
Our chauffeur was an ex-captain of Turkish infantry who had fought
against us, and the eighteen-year-old youth who rode on the footboard
to replenish a leaky radiator with water at frequent intervals, had lost
his father in 1915, killed by a British shell.
Turning from the coast, the cars entered a pleasant valley, the
Soghanli Dere, where once the Turkish Field Ambulance had comfortable
headquarters ; and so behind Achi Baba and round the western shoulder,
to a parking place within half-a-mile of Krithia village.
At last I accomplished two things I had wanted to do for nineteen
years —entered ruined Krithia and scaled the summit of Achi Baba.
My companions were two ex-officers of the Royal Army Medical
Corps, and we were surprised in Krithia by the length of this village,
which, from our front lines, had looked only a few heaps of grey stones.


The treacherous cliffs and nullahs of Achi Baba, the well-sited
trenches and former gun-emplacements, revealed clearly the magnitude
of the Allied task. “ A second Gibraltar,” commented one of my
companions ; and the other near an old observation post on the summit,
remarked : “ From here you can see everything except the unexploded
shells at the bottom of the sea.”
On our way down we came across a fellow passenger, his neck
encircled by a limp starched collar and his coat over an arm, wandering
in the general direction of Kilid Bahr under the impression that he was
heading for the parking place of the motor conveyances. It was absurdly
easy to lose your direction on the slopes of Achi Baba on a sunlit afternoon
in peace-time !
Too often, warm chlorinated water had been our refreshment
after eight days in the Gallipoli trenches. To-day, following two hours’
walk without packs or rifles, we found that Thos. Cook had again waved
the magic wand—and lo ! there was iced pilsener and lemonade, for a
bottle of which many a campaigner in the bad old days would have
cheerfully forfeited a month’s Army pay. A lady who had decided “to
visit Gallipoli this year instead of Majorca ” remarked on the “ dreadful
heat and how lucky the soldiers were to have had cool weather when they
were fighting here in March.” No one troubled to inform her that the
campaign began in April and ended in the following January, nor to
contrast this glorious Spring day with the flaming heat, the dust and
flies of a bygone July and August.
On arrival back at Kelia Bay, I saw a member of the R.N.D.
arm-in-arm with an ex-enemy. The man, Blackburn, whom I knew
well in the war days, lost his left hand ; the Turk had his right arm missing.
Someone interpreted the Turk’s smiling comment on the situation : “ We
are brothers.”
Native vendors on the waterfront offered pottery made of
Gallipoli soil, and the jetty was strewn with the wares of carpet-sellers.
I left Kelia in the last boat in company with the cruise-director, his
assistant and “ Bogey ” Knight, not averse to luxuriating in Canadian
Pacific comforts.
Three days on Gallipoli—not very long for a visit, but enough
to revive a few memories.
But the haunting spirit of the Peninsula cannot be recaptured on
such excursions as ours. One day I hope to return and camp among
those familiar hills and nullahs, and ramble at leisure in this land of bitter
and sacred memories.


VIII
“ The variety of all things forms a pleasure.”
Euripides.
Through a warm mist the Duchess of
Richmond crept to Istanbul and dropped anchor
within a cable’s length of the Leander Tower.
Here at last we were on the threshold of the
city of mosques and minarets, which had
been often in our thoughts during the old
campaigning days.
The itinerary of our cruise provided one day
here, and one day at Athens to break the return
voyage to England. And a one day’s visit
to any foreign place, I am well aware, is quite sufficient for some of our
younger and more precocious writers to gain the “ atmosphere ” for an
eighty-thousand-word novel. But a lengthy description of Istanbul
and Athens does not come within the scope of this book, which is
fortunate, because I do not absorb knowledge so readily.
The motor tour arranged by Cook’s was comprehensive ; across
Galata Bridge for a view of the Golden Horn, and then visits to the
mosques of St. Sophia, Sultan Ahmed and Suleiman the Magnificent,
the Hippodrome, Sultan’s palace and the Imperial Harem (minus the
houris) and so on to the Military Museum and Grand Bazaars. These,
however, were only a few of the interesting places to which the pilgrims
went in the fine cars provided.
Personally, I have always been more interested in humanity
than in history or architecture, and Constantinople had the effect of
making me more satisfied than ever that I had spent seven years of my
youth knocking round the world before Western civilization put a
disfiguring stamp over the picturesque Near East and Orient. Now that
the average Turk looks like any gentleman you may see near the Aldgate
Pump, much of the old colour has been drained out of the bazaars. The
fez is taboo, and the veil is seldom seen owing to the emancipation of
women and the lifting of the purda.
Trams and motor-buses career through the Constantinople
streets ; the face of Mae West smiles at you from hoardings ; a group of
ultra-civilized young Turks examine critically the footballs displayed
in a sports outfitters.
Our own Sydney Puddefoot, former West Ham and International
centre forward, has been lending a helping hand, and boot, in the
civilizing process. Football was in progress on three or four playing
grounds on the day of our visit, but they were scratch games of anything
up to twenty a side, and characterized chiefly by the vocal efforts of the


players. It is said, though, that Puddefoot is training a team of world-
beaters for the coming International Football warfare, but finds it
difficult to restrain the exuberance of successful forwards whose custom
it is to rush yelping to the opposite goalie and award the congratulatory
hand-shake for his failing to save ! Sometimes fire-engines are requisi-
tioned at Turkish football grounds, the firemen standing by with their
hoses ready to quell any violently hostile demonstration on the part of
the spectators.
If some of those hundreds-of-thousands of Turks who laid down
their lives in the Great War could revisit Constantinople to-day, they
might well wonder what political earthquake had struck the country.
Gone for ever is the old kaleidoscope of colour ; gone the ancient writing
that looked like worms and fragments of worms ; gone the dear old
bastinado (once such a boon to juvenile fiction writers) and gone, too,
much of the Faith which helped to make the Turk of nineteen years ago
so formidable a fighting-man.
Whether the majority of Turks to-day really like saxophone
solos on the wireless and film pictures of Mae West, is impossible for the
one-day visitor to judge. An interesting fact was told me, though, that
the Constantinople cinema fans much enjoyed a certain British film
based on a story of Gallipoli, or Gelibolu as the Turks call it. Original
inaccuracies were put completely in the shade, however, by the insertion
of additional “ shots ” taken in Malta by a Levant firm, and showing
British soldiers being soundly licked in battle by the Turks. The result
was that the silent evacuation took on the appearance of the infidels being
driven off the Peninsula before the onslaught of the Faithful, a victory of
arms which set the Turkish film-fans applauding vociferously.
Owing to the hash our politicians made of the Peace, British
prestige has been regrettably low in Turkey, and our pilgrimage occurred
at a propitious time. There is no doubt that the visit of the Duchess
of Richmond with so many ex-Servicemen bearing the olive branch, so
to speak, made an excellent impression on the Turks.
After a wreath had been laid at the Turkish war memorial,
some of us went to a British Legion luncheon presided over by the British
Ambassador, Sir Percy Loraine, and attended by His Excellency General
Pertev Pasha. The menu was : Bar Mayonaise (fish), Pillaf Chanakkale
(a pilau with oil and sultanas prominent), Beef Lone Pine, Ice Suvla,
Fruit and Coffee.
Six-hundred of the ship’s party lunched sumptuously in two of the
best hotels. At one of the hotels was the lady who believed that storks
were pelicans, and it happened she was on a diet. So in the midst of
the bustle, she surrounded herself with perspiring Turkish waiters,
demanded a nut cutlet, and, by resolutely sticking to her guns, actually
got it!
During the short stay in Constantinople, the pilgrims and their
friends saw and did most of the important things, except to take a posy
of flowers to the oldest inhabitant, Zaro Agha (alleged age 160), for whom
unfortunately, the sands had nearly run out.


That night a dinner was held on board the Duchess of Richmond
in honour of British Legion guests, among whom, of course, was another
member of the übiquitous Whittall family.
At midnight, a small brown paper package was brought on board,
addressed to Captain Rothwell who found it contained a buff-coloured
New Testament, and a note from a Turkish woman explaining that
it had been found on the Gallipoli Peninsula. The name on the fly-leaf
of the Testament was Alfred Gurney Golton, and the sender expressed
the wish that it should be restored to the owner or his relatives.
The book was well preserved, and at the end of Revelations were
some characters in indelible pencil written by a Turkish soldier. The
sender had translated this to read : “ The British from Anafarta fled
on October 10th, 1915. The French from Sedd-el-Bahr on November
27th, 1915. Our Division, the 12th, returned to Adrianople November
30th.” Probably, the Turkish soldier had been told by his superiors
that he was going home because there was no one left to fight. Which
recalls that our allies, the Senegalese, otherwise known as the “ Jack
Johnsons,” also left the Peninsula early, in the equally happy assurance
that the enemy were licked and the War was over!
Subsequently, the Daily Mail discovered that Mr. Golton,
a postman crippled by war wounds, was living near London, and the
New Testament was restored to him. While serving as a lance-corporal
in the 2nd Royal Fusiliers, he lost the Testament with all his kit on a night
when the trenches were swept by icy floods.
When the Duchess of Richmond left Constantinople, she steamed
through the picturesque Bosporus to the Black Sea. Then turning round,
she steamed southward on her homeward voyage.
At a point in Lat. 40° 53', Long. 28°39 / E., Petty Officer S. Avons
cast a wreath on the waters of the Marmora, after a short service had been
held in memory of the officers and men of the Submarine Service who
had given their lives for their country during the Gallipoli campaign.
The details of this ceremony were sent by him in a letter addressed to
the Senior Officer of Submarines at Portsmouth.
To farewell blasts of the syren, the ship passed between Kilid
Bahr and Chanak where the Turkish populace turned out en masse to
wave adieu. Sport and similar interests were foregone toward evening
when again the vessel steamed past the familiar contours of the Peninsula.
Men, women and children ranged along the starboard decks and stood
silently to attention as the Helles Memorial swung abeam.
Gallipoli astern, people moved and spoke quietly in the ship,
for the memory of the supreme tragedy was again in the minds of all.
I went alone to the stern-rail and watched the Peninsula recede, the dark
green of the hills and the tawny coast-line toning to softer shades with the
widening distance. The contours of Achi Baba remained visible long
after other landmarks had been lost in the evening haze —the hill which in
campaigning days had changed its aspect from a mound to a mountain,
according to atmospheric conditions and our own varying moods.


When others had gone, a woman remained by the stern-rail
gazing through tear-filled eyes as though mesmerized by the fading
Peninsula. She turned suddenly and spoke, and her words epitomized
the fear which is in the hearts of millions of women in the world to-day.
“ I pray to God that my own sons may never have to go through
the hell of warfare ! ”
That woman had lost all the men-folk of her family in the Great
War ; not one had been left to perpetuate the family name. In her young
girlhood, she had seen the tragedy of worse than death —the greater
tragedy of shattered minds, of blindness and mutilation. As the /Egean
evening drew a veil down over the Gallipoli Peninsula, the Fear which
must have been in her mind so often in the presence of her own two
happy boys, found expression in a tirade against the devilish practice
of so-called civilized nations of settling their differences with high-
explosive, poison gas, bombs and bullets.
Fair Athens brought a needed respite from the emotional tension
of a crowded week. But we were not allowed to forget the War entirely,
for no sooner had the Duchess of Richmond dropped her hook in Phaleron
Bay than a deputation of local ex-Servicemen of the Hellenic Section
of the Fidac under the leadership of a Captain S. Skonses, arrived at the
accommodation ladder to bid us welcome to Greece. What they said
was all Greek to me, but anyway they said it with flowers, and General
Davies departed from the interview bearing beautiful bouquets like a
bride adorned.
Here it may be reiterated that I do not presume to describe
Athens. Those who went on the cruise had the benefit of an extremely
interesting lecture by Mr. H. W. Nevinson, and the libraries contain
authoritative books dealing with the “ star of civilization.”
Personally, I spent the morning in the port of Piraeus ferreting
out air-mail connections, and then pleasantly bargaining for semi-precious
stones in a quaint Athens thoroughfare adjoining the Street of the Shoes.
The fun of this bargaining is that one does it to the accompaniment of
free mastik and sweet black coffee, olives and snacks, while the Greek
vendors register the gamut of emotion from despair to benign resignation
at parting from their spinels at less than twice their real value.
Then lunch at the Hotel Grande Bretagne and a flask of resinous
wine, and so to the Parthenon where our cruise-members, laden with
picture-postcards, pottery, sponges and beads, were being photographed
against the background of that ancient glory.
Nowadays, the Greeks floodlight the Acropolis and play Soccer
before the Temple of Zeus. But judging from the difference in physique
of the Turks in Istanbul and the inhabitants of Athens, I shall back the
former to emerge victors from the First Round when the International
Football League holds its Cup Competition.
The excursions arranged by our mentor, Thos. Cook, included the
principal places of historical interest in Athens itself, plus the modern
Olympic Games Stadium, and a visit to the ruins and museum at Eleusis.
But a weather forecast by the Delphic oracle would have proved useful,
56


for a sudden storm in the afternoon caught many sightseers unprepared
although the scenic effect over the hills and bay was well worth a wetting.
On the homeward voyage, the pilgrims gave themselves to the
normal pleasures of a cruise. The outstanding night for some was the
occasion of the ex-Service dinner held in the after saloon, and the
newly formed Old Tunisians’ Club (motto “ We are Seven ”) insisted on
being photographed on the stroke of midnight. Unfortunately, the
result was too unsatisfactory to reproduce in the pictorial pages which
follow, and the photographer generously attributed the failure to “ the
swaying of the ship.”
Only two of “ the boys ” got adrift. Lost in a maze of alleyways
in the attempt to locate their cabin, they paused at door after door and
plaintively demanded, “ Sprechen Sie Deutsch ? ” At last from within
a cabin came the sleepy response : “ Ja. Who it is ? ” from our only
German cruise-member, a charming girl from Cologne. Whereupon,
one of the lost comrades said with a sigh of relief : “ A’right thanks.
Found our cabin now —y’see, we live next door to you.”
With the exception of the storm in Athens, and the wet night
encountered by the two stalwarts mentioned above, the homeward voyage
like the outward journey, was blest of the gods. The officers and the
crew, all the members of the Canadian Pacific staff on board and of Cook’s,
did their utmost to make the trip a memorable experience, and the
cruise-members greatly appreciated the attention given to their every
reasonable wish. And here a special word for the Cruise Director who
faced the fire of a hundred-thousand questions, and once was rooted out
of his bed at 5 ack emma at Kelia by an ex-officer who apparently had
forgotten the War was over and wanted his rations forthwith for a trip
to Chanak.
Undoubtedly, 1934 has been a red-letter year in commemorating
the Gallipoli adventure. Thanks to Press reports, the Duchess of Richmond
pilgrimage revived the Dardanelles exploits to the public throughout
Great Britain and in many lands overseas. Sir lan Hamilton gave an
Empire broadcast on Empire Day, and special services were held
throughout Australia, New Zealand and Tasmania. A march through the
streets of Sydney, N.S.W., was the largest in the history of Anzac Day,
over forty-thousand troops and veterans parading on that occasion.
According to the Sydney Morning Herald, “ the nineteenth anniversary
of Anzac Day revealed that with the passage of time, the spirit and
sentiment of the occasion have not changed.”
Much else has changed, however. We have grown older and
perhaps a little wiser. Here in the Old Country the reaction is all for
Peace, and many have taken the resolution never to fight again on foreign
soil. Whether we can thus remain at peace and keep our honour, the
future alone may prove, but it is sense to assert for general foreign
consumption that Britons will not be inveigled into further entanglements
abroad, and will fight only if British soil is threatened. One thing is
certain ; the jingoism of Victorian days is dead and will stay dead.


How best a lasting Peace may be secured is a matter of controversy.
Those who advocate a Navy and an Air Force of sufficient strength to
maintain British prestige and safety, may well be doing a better service to the
cause of Peace than those who would leave us “ naked to our enemies ”
and heaven knows, we have made more than enough of these even among
our late allies, owing to the political and financial blunderings of the past
few years. But in the light of past experience, heed may well be taken
of the reasoning of those who fear another mad race in armaments.
In times past, the Turks did their share of blundering and
worse : they played havoc with the Armenians, and their vandal hand
despoiled many an ancient monument in Syria and Mespot. Since our
Gallipoli cruise, they have blundered again at Samos. But as Truth has
pointed out : “ Whatever they have done elsewhere, by their behaviour in
Gallipoli they certainly nailed the lie which Mr. Gladstone fluently
coined when he referred to them as ‘ unspeakable ’.”
We who fought against the Turks bear them no grudge, and
believe we have helped cement a lasting friendship. It was unlucky that
the political jugglings of long ago should have thrown them and us to
fight it out in the Gallipoli cockpit.
“ The great effort of the Dardanelles,” said Mr. Winston
Churchill at the R.N.D.,luncheon before the cruise, “ may safely be left to
history. History comes along slowly and massively like an elephant,
flattening out a good deal of rubbish in its path.”
Much rubbish in relation to the Gallipoli campaign has already
been trampled flat, but there remain a good many solid snags against
which the ordinary wayfarer in search of truth may stub his toes.
Whatever may be the ultimate verdict on the past, the basic
principle of present British policy should be such that no bitter criticism
may arise from the generations of the future. This clear path of wisdom
is the stronger union of the Empire by every possible means, and renewed
settlement and development of the empty fertile spaces of Canada, Australia
and elsewhere by British stock.
The splendid way in which the men and women from the
Dominions rallied to the aid of the Mother Country in the Great War
will never be forgotten here at home. The men and women of Britain
will be ready to rally to the aid of the overseas Dominions should
circumstances ever demand it. By trust, friendship and reciprocity,
the Empire will grow in strength and usefulness, and become a still more
powerful factor for keeping the world’s Peace.


APPENDIX A
THE DARDANELLES CAMPAIGN
IN 550 WORDS AND 20 FIGURES
IN some aspects, the Dardanelles campaign will go down in history as the world’s
most remarkable feat-of-arms. On February 19th, 1915, an Allied Naval force,
under Admiral Carden, opened the assault with the object of breaking through to
Constantinople. During the reduction of the Outer Defences, the Plymouth Battalion
of the Royal Naval Division made landings at Sedd-el-Bahr and Kum Kale, whilst
the Division as a whole were present during the final attempt on the Narrows on March
18th. Although it appears, in the light of present knowledge, that the effort was on
the verge of success, serious losses in the Fleet resulted in the abandonment of the
project and the adoption of a plan which demanded the co-operation of the Army.
At dawn on April 25th, a landing was made on Gallipoli by Allied forces under the
command of Sir lan Hamilton. The five divisions engaged were the 29th, the Royal
Naval, the Ist Australian, the Australian and New Zealand, and the Ist (French)
Division of the Corps Expeditionnaire d’Orient. The 29th Division and units of the
R.N.D. landed at five points round Cape Helles, known as S, V, W, X and Y beaches.
The landings were effected in open boats, reinforced at V beach by the collier, River
Clyde, which was run ashore with a complement of some 2,000 troops. Despite
determined opposition by an enemy in skilfully-sited and wired entrenchments,
the landings were eventually made good, but at the cost of heavy casualties. Meanwhile,
the Australian and New Zealand troops carried out a landing higher up the coast,
at the point subsequently named Anzac Cove. The French Division, after an initial
landing on the Asiatic shore at Kum Kale, were transferred to Helles, and throughout
most of the campaign held the right of the line in that section.
The months of May, June and July at Helles were spent in successive attempts
to overcome the resistance of the Turks, and to capture the dominating height of
Achi Baba and the village of Krithia. The 42nd (East Lancashire) and 52nd (Lowland)
Divisions, together with a second French Division, arrived during this period and took
a prominent part in the operations. Meanwhile, the Australians and New Zealanders
were fighting desperately to consolidate their footing amidst the wild ridges and valleys
east of Anzac Cove.
In August, the arrival of strong reinforcements preluded the launching of a fresh
effort to reach the Narrows. The 10th (Irish) and nth (Northern) Divisions landed
at Suvla Bay, while the Anzac Corps, aided by the 13th (Western) Division, broke
out from the left flank at Anzac in an attempt to reach the key positions on the heights
of Chunuk Bair overlooking the Narrows. The 53rd (Welsh), 54th (East Anglian)
and 2nd Mounted Divisions also took part in the Suvla operations, but once again,
by a narrow margin, our efforts were frustrated by resourceful leadership on the
Turkish side.
After September the lines remained more or less stationary until the end. The
forces at Anzac and Suvla were withdrawn between December 18th and 20th, and the
final evacuation took place from Helles on the night of January Sth-gth, 1916. This
was, perhaps, one of the most remarkable episodes of the campaign, the entire force
making its departure undetected and without a single casualty.
The British battle casualties in the campaign were over 120,000, in addition to
some 100,000 due to dysentery and other diseases.


APPENDIX B
EXTRACT FROM CAPTAIN ROTHWELL’S VOYAGE REPORT
20th APRIL 1934
We cast off from the Stage (Liverpool) at 10.19 P-m., and backed into river,
canted ship and proceeded to 5ea....11.57 Pilot left ship. Midnight proceeded full
speed towards Naples. We had moderate winds and sea all the way to Finisterre,
then wind became fresh and sea more rough, ship rolled considerably but easily.
At noon on the 24th we passed Gibraltar, weather fine and clear.
25th APRIL
Strong winds from Gibraltar to Cape Spartivento, thence to Naples, light variable
winds.
27th APRIL
We arrived at the Breakwater (Naples) at 4.35 a.m. and stopped for Pilot....we
received pratique, hove ship to quay, 5.50 gangway on board. Rang off engines.
(Day spent in Naples.) All passengers were reported on board at 8 p.m. 8.30
proceeded full speed for Kelia Bay.
28th APRIL
Ideal day, warm with light airs, sea smooth, passengers therefore had a good view
of Stromboli and Etna, as well as a good view passing through the Straits of Messina
and along the South Coast of Italy. Thence to Cape Helles the weather was warm
and fine, and the sea smooth.
30th APRIL
4.58 a.m. Cape Helles was abeam, and a very large number of ex-Service men
were on deck, and stood to attention whilst passing the War memorial. 6.12 a.m.
arrived off Chanak ; stopped for Pilot, Doctor and Customs ; 6.26 proceeded to Kelia
Bay. 6.57 stopped and anchored. 7 a.m. brought up, rang off engines.
2nd MAY
6 p.m. all passengers reported on board ; 6.13 anchor aweigh and proceeded.
From Kelia Bay up to the Dardanelles we had very fine weather, but unfortunately
at 6 a.m. on :
3rd MAY
it shut in thick fog and speed was reduced. In consultation with Pilot and
Cruise Director it was decided to abandon the trip up the Bosporus, and if possible get
away a little earlier the following morning and carry out the original proposal. We
arrived and anchored off Leander Tower at 7.40 a.m. Fog lifted shortly after 8 a.m.
4th MAY
6.36 a.m. hove up anchor and proceeded up the Bosporus ; 7.44 turned ship in
Buyukden Bay in sight of Black Sea ; 7.50 proceeded down to Istanbul ; 8.46 passed
close to Leander Tower ; 8.50 proceeded full speed towards Athens. 4.43 p.m.
stopped off Chanak to land Pilot. 4.49 Pilot left; ship proceeded full speed.


gth MAY
From Helles to Phaleron Bay fine weather prevailed throughout. We arrived
at 7.39 a.m. and anchored at 7.42 a.m., 7.52 ship brought up, rang off engines. 8 a.m.
tenders alongside and the usual excursions were commenced. The morning was
very fine, but at 2 p.m. heavy thunder accompanied by rain set in and continued with
short intervals of fine weather until 6 p.m., when it cleared up. All passengers
reported on board 6.53. 6.58 anchor aweigh... Proceeded full speed. From Phaleron
Bay to abeam of Algiers had fine weather with rather a fresh wind at times.
Bth MAY
We had thick fog from 9.30 a.m. until noon, and very calm weather prevailed all
day.
9th MAY
4.52 a.m. passed Gibraltar, fresh Easterly wind, clear and fine, moderate sea.
4.00 p.m. passed Cape St. Vincent.
10th MAY
2.00 p.m. passing Finisterre, strong N.N.E. wind. Rough head sea.
nth MAY
3.30 p.m. passed Bishop Rock, light wind, smooth sea, thence to Bar L.V., had
hazy weather.
12th MAY
4.30 a.m. stopped off Pt. Lynas for Pilot. 7.46 arrived off Bar L.V., proceeded
at various speeds ; 9.55 swung ship off Stage and awaited the clearance of Duchess
of Atholl.... Proceeded to Stage ; 11.02 in berth moored, rang off engines.... 12.09 p.m.
all passengers disembarked.... 12.22 cast off and proceeded to d0ck....3.33 in berth,
moored, rang off engines.


APPENDIX C
RADIO MESSAGES OF THE CRUISE
On April 25th ’34 between H.M. the King and Gen. Sir Francis
Davies
“ On the 19th anniversary of the landing on the Gallipoli Peninsula those who
took part in that campaign now on board the Duchess of Richmond tender loyal
greetings to your Majesty.”
“ Please convey to all on board the Duchess of Richmond who served in the
Gallipoli campaign my sincere thanks for their loyal message on the 19th anniversary
of the landing. George R. I.”
On April 22nd an acknowledgment to Gen. Sir lan Hamilton
of message included in correspondence (referred to in Chap. 1.)
“ Ranks returning to Gallipoli thank you for your kind message and assure you
of their continued regard. All greatly appreciated your coming to Euston.”
On April 26th between the Rt.-Hon. Winston Churchill and
Lieut. W. E. Stanton Hope, R.N.V.R.
“ All good wishes to R.N.D. returning to scenes of their suffering and glory.
Churchill.”
“ Best thanks of R.N.D. for message. We appreciated resolution you displayed
in 1915 and are grateful for interest in our Division still shown in 1934.”
On April 24th, while off Spanish coast and passing. R.M.S.
Orford with Woodfull (captain), Don Bradman (vice-captain) and seven
other Australian Test cricketers en route to England.
“ Greetings from all ranks returning to Peninsula. We recall Australian
comradeship of great Gallipoli Test.”
“ Many thanks. Greeting appreciated. Woodfull.”
On April 29th, between Gen. Sir Francis Davies and His
Excellency Mustafa Kemal, President of the Turkish Republic, Angora.
“ We come to honour our dead on the Gallipoli Peninsula and send you our
deep respect and greetings to your brave and chivalrous nation. On behalf all
British ranks aboard Duchess of Richmond."
“ Tris toucM votre aimable vous adresse a tous un salut cordial pendant votre
pieux pelerinage. Gazi Mustafa Kemal.”


On dates from April 25th to May 6th between Admiral Sir
William W. Fisher, Commander-in-Chief of the Mediterranean Fleet,
who flies his flag aboard H.M.S. Queen Elizabeth at Malta, and Captain
Rothwell of the Duchess of Richmond.
“ Duchess of Richmond on Gallipoli Pilgrimage with all units represented thereon
salute their comrades in arms of the Mediterranean Fleet on anniversary of landing
April 25th, 1915. Would appreciate honour of meeting one H.M. ships during
pilgrimage.”
“ On behalf of the Mediterranean Fleet please thank all making pilgrimage to
Gallipoli for their message. The Navy will never forget the heroic landings of the
Army at Helles and Anzac. Hope if your ship is calling at Malta on return journey
to greet you on board Sir John de Robeck’s old flagship. Admiral Fisher.”
“ Many thanks your message greatly appreciated by all aboard. Regret itinerary
does not include call Malta,will be passing 35 miles due north 2200 Greenwich to-night.”
“ Very sorry not to have seen party at Malta to hear account of your memorial
cruise but quite understand it impossible for itinerary to be altered, bon voyage.
Admiral Fisher.”
On May 2nd between Sureyya Bey, the Governor of Chanak,
and Captain Rothwell.
“To Captain Rothwell, Master of the English cruising ship the Duchess of
Richmond and per his kind care to the honourable passengers.
“ We beg to express the deepest gratitude for the very brilliant visit of your
beautiful ship to our beloved and holy sea and country.
“We will keep the good remembrance of this for a very long time. Please accept
our thanks for your sincere courtesy and friendship shown towards us during your
stay.
“ We wish good and pleasant passage to General Sir Davies who honours your
ship, to the other Generals and all the honourable fellow passengers.
“ Please allow us to reiterate by the present the good and deep feelings which
your voyage and farewell made upon us. We admire your courtesy and magnanimity
and we wish everlasting happiness to all the ladies and gentlemen, English tourists
and wish to express my personal heartfelt and sincerest greeting and thanks.”
Captain Rothwell’s response:
“ On behalf of the passengers, officers and crew on the Duchess of Richmond
please accept my heartfelt thanks for your gallant message. We hope the time is not
far distant when our friendships will be renewed. We take this opportunity of thanking
all officials, including Customs and Police for their co-operation which made our
visit so successful and which we can look back on with the happiest of memories.”


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The following twenty-two art pages contain 70 pictures. Thanks
are due to the Canadian Pacific Company, the Marine Photo Service
and a number of cruise-members for the kind use of some of the
photographs produced. The pictures not acknowledged were taken by
the author —some during the Gallipoli campaign, and the remainder with
an Ikonta folding-camera during the pilgrimage.
Thanks are due also to the Imperial War Graves Commission
and to Messrs, Thos, Cook and Son, Ltd. for the use of three sketch-maps.
The thumbnail sketches at the chapter headings are by the author.


Ernest Charles Watts
Aboard the 47 year-old Deniz is en route from Kelia Bay to Helles. The
skipper is shown in a less energetic moment, in his wicker chair on the bridge.
The new landing at Cape Helles. A Turkish dhow from the Deniz is alongside
the remains of one of the old stone piers used during the Gallipoli campaign.


Marine Photo Service
A Gallipoli cemetery of ’l5. Most
of the crosses are made of wood
from boxes and crates.
Green Hill, a typical Gallipoli cemetery
of ’34, with its sloping headstones.


Marine Photo Service
The Governor of Chanak lays a wreath on the Anzac Memorial.
General Sir Francis Davies is standing at his right hand.


Sureyya Bey, Vali of Chanak (bareheaded), ashore at Kelia Bay. The ladies of his
party depict the change which has come over Turkish feminine fashion.




Marine Photo Service
War debris still on V Beach under the old fort of Sedd-el-Bahr.
The battered village with a new mosque is to the left of the fort.


1915 —One of the minor horrors of war: myself
when young. Back to bivouac after eight days in
the front lines during the dysentery season, when
shaving-water was worth a dollar a pannikin.


The village of Sedd-el-Bahr to-day, where the French elephant-iron roofing is appreciated by
Turkish peasants. A new mosque and minaret are conspicuous among the old battered dwellings.


From E. Lucas






A last look at Gallipoli as the Duchess of Richmond steams out of the Dardanelles. A few minutes
after this picture was taken, all on board stood to attention when the Helles Memorial came abeam.


GALLIPOLI REVISITED
Captain Edward Unwin, V.C., R.N.
who was in command of the River Clyde.
The medallion, for services rendered,
worn by the eic-River Clyde.


Better than the troopship days! Lieut. R. Connell, R.N.V.R. umpires
a match in the deck-tennis tournament aboard the Duchess of Richmond.


Marine Photo Service
The memorial service conducted by the Rev. Bevill Close, M.A. on Gallipoli Day, while the liner was
at sea. The hatch is covered by the official and private wreaths being taken to the Gallipoli Peninsula.


Marine Photo Service


Time’s shrapnel has pitted
these pillars in Pompeii.
Workmen still excavate in Pompeii
—but not in the siesta hour!
Marine Photo Service
Yes, “the boys” greatly enjoyed their visit to Italy !


Petty Officer S. Avons, R.N., casts a wreath on v.:~-
the waters in memory of fellow-members of the
Submarine Service.
A ship’s officer, H. S. Knight, points
out familiar landmarks of the Peninsula.


Stanley J. Gooch
A pink sky over Asia. This beautiful picture was taken of the sunrise
over Kum Kale as the liner steamed past Cape Helles into the Dardanelles.


The Duchess of Richmond at anchor in Kelia Bay with Turkish launches along-
side in readiness to take pilgrims ashore for the Anzac-Suvla Bay trip.
Aboard the Deniz is. How pilgrims proceeded from the liner to visit the Cape Helles area.


Marine Photo Service
A night view of part of the wonderful old city by the Golden Horn.


A. L. Hodgkinson (and special permission of Messrs. L. A. Skinner and E. F. Wettern)


Printed by J. Webster Year
Vearene Works, Prince Avenue
Westcliff'Un-Sea
