

GAMING GODS
M. Forrest




GAMING GODS




Gaming Gods
A Novel . .
BY M. FORREST
LONDON
HUTCHINSON & CO. ( Publishers ). LTD.
PATERNOSTER ROW


UADI AND PAINTED IN ZNOLAND BY
JAKROLD AND SONS LTD. NORWICH


TO
THE MEMORY OF
JOHN FORREST


" With a laugh you catch at the skirts of Life
In a strong and certain grasp,
But the Headsman Chance has a blade for you.
Death flicks them from your clasp,
For the Gaming Gods hold the final trick
And your dying ears hear the black dice click. . .
Thro' your tears you cry on the Healer Death—
‘ Come rid me now of this empty thing
That was once fair life , . I have had my day. .
But the Gaming Gods have their jest to play
And 'tis long, grey life that the counters fling.
You look for thorns, for there seem to be
Only thorns, where your garden grows,—
Then a green joy wakes in each wrinkled stem,
And the dice-box casts a rose 1
—The Gods have tired of their sombre game
And the barren boughs of the desert flame 1 "


GAMING GODS
CHAPTER I
“ The silence fell —the silence fell
Ah I God 1 If You would only speaY
In thunder or in lightning flash
Some memory-drowning, awful crash
To blind the eyes and blanch the cheek.
It might have helped the Hell
Upon whose edge we stood."
The sky was radiantly blue at high noon. Here and
there a speck like a fire-scorched leaf, meant some bird
of prey on watch for a meal, his blood-nourished wings
sheen-bright. The ranges, hill upon hill, crag upon
crag, were streaked with red soil runnels that looked
like badly-healed wounds; further on were peaks,
harebell azure, fainting into the sun-bleached sky fine.
A steep track led from the main road between the
opening in the hills, which in this district took the name
of Hell’s Arch, for here two great black rocks swung
out, fitting insecurely it seemed to the unaccustomed
eye into their grooves of broad solid rock foundations.
They appeared to be balanced by some master trick-
ster’s hand, apexes almost touching, leaving but a slit
of blue between. At the base of the rock, small,
fragile maiden-hair fern and tiny crawling mauve and
green ficus, clumped and arabesqued on the hot stone.


Looking through the arch one saw a lovely fern-bound
way, wonderful with spreading tree-fern and corded
piccabeen palm. It was a strangely beautiful spot, yet
with a loneliness about it one could smell. Cattle
drovers camped near here had known the herd stam-
pede at midnight, going down the wind in bellowing
terror—for which only the determinedly superstitious
could account. It seemed as though Fear intangible,
yet entirely pervasive, dwelt here amongst the birdless
solitudes, birdless save for the planing of these curve-
beaked hawks.
Swagmen pausing here to fill a billy or smoke a pipe,
became conscious of this curious awe, till they craved
the lick of a dog’s tongue along the back of their
barcoo-rot scarred hands, or the dreary caw of a rare
carrion crow—fresh from its bloody feasting on a
“ crawler ” ewe’s eyes.
Sometimes a little wind stirred among the bracken
and sent up a warm, spicy smell of decaying leaf, and
glossy stipe making stairway for the black ants, but
it too died down as though it dreaded to disturb a
crouching fate.
Only the silent butterflies came, clouds of them,
white and sulphur-coloured and sometimes a great
and royal black with blue on its palpitating wings. . .
For it seems that butterflies can woo and mate any-
where, as long as there is sun and light; perhaps they
are too frail to take life seriously—or even death. . .
Between Hell’s pillared arch a man came, riding a
brown horse with a white blazed face and two white
8
GAMING GODS


hind feet. He was a man in the late forties: his
heavy pent-house eyebrows hung over grey-blue eyes,
deep set: he was already beginning to lose his hair
as was made apparent when he lifted his wide-brimmed
felt hat from his low, full forehead. He was dressed
in a soft shirt with a bone collar stud and no necktie, a
pair of ill-fitting tweed trousers, and he rode like a new
chum, not as an Australian bred to the saddle. He sat
forward on his horse in the attitude assumed by the
agricultural labourer indoors, or in unaccustomed
surroundings.
In his youth he must have been a fine man; the
shirt rolled to his elbows showed a powerful forearm,
evidently developed on good Scotch oatmeal; and an
arm that had lifted many a heavy weight of farm
produce, been handy with a pitchfork at harvesting,
and probably “ hurled the caber ” when its owner
competed at Highland sports.
Now, his whole bearing expressed an over-mastering
despair. Black rings were under his eyes, and he
sighed, and swore once as he slipped from the hack and
stood, looking back through Hell’s Arch at the emerald
and russet growths through which he had come.
From the saddle pouch, attached to a high pommelled
saddle, he took a revolver. Perhaps he intended a
shot at the watchful winged blood-seeker, high in the
sapphire dome. Then he proceeded to unsaddle the
hack, flinging the trappings among the fem, and,
removing the bridle, slapped the horse suddenly on the
flank and muttered something which might have been
9
GAMING GODS


“ go home,” or " go to the devil,” his frown seeming
to supply the last phrase in any case.
For a moment he stood where the track ran sharply
down hill towards the river that made water frontage
to this portion of the land, and which, although the
fringe of timber hid it, he could hear, with deep
murmurous note between the volcanic rocks and
paleolithic fern.
The whites of his eyes were red as from loss of
sleep, beneath his brown greying moustache his mouth
shut like a trap.
He had lived a silent man: he would die one, and
the only hope he cherished was that when she heard
how he had died, it might hurt her somehow . . as no
word of his could ever have hurt her. . ,
The kiss of a new lover could always heal any wound
his halting tongue might have essayed to give her.
He had no intention of making his death appear
accidental. A few of his old pals with whom he had
deoch and doris, rather too many perhaps, last night
at the Half-way hotel would puzzle their heads as to
his possible motive. In fancy he heard them debating
as to whether Sandy Malcolm had had " too much
drink.” “It had gone to his head.” He could hear
the Irish doctor’s response that " whisky never hurt
a Scotchman yet.” Grimly he concluded that his
natural pessimism, it would be a nine days’ wonder,
no more, and his niece in Edinburgh would benefit by
his will. He had no one else belonging: his bit of
money might as well be hers. He remembered she


had been a likeable child, and that she had been badly
jilted.
He raised the revolver, with one upward glance,
almost like a prayer, perhaps a relic of those Auld Kirk
days beside the German Ocean. . .
No sound among the fem and listening.boughs, no
sound among the dark rocks, that would presently
echo and re-echo from hill to further hill, the reverbera-
tions of the revolver shot.
Then . .
Crashingthrough thefem, jangling, rocking, fromstone
to stone, thud . . thump. . rattle. . and wild scurry of
hoofs, a trap was coming at break-neck pace down the
sheer declivity of bush track, straight for Hell’s Arch,
Some of those green emigrants flooding the back blocks
just then, with no notion of driving or handling a
frightened horse. That scoundrel Jimmy Rune at the
Half-way pub had probably hired out some young
'un green to harness, and
He lowered the revolver with a curse. He was
reserved Scot enough to wish to do his private shooting
alone, besides, he might further terrify the horses or
invite interference. He must wait till they passed,
A broken swingle bar, hitting the chestnut’s leg
seemed to be the cause of the runaway; the driver
sawed at its mouth in vain. Beside him sat a woman
clutching the iron support at the side of the seat with
one hand, while with the other arm she held a bundle
close against her breast.
A moment Malcolm had vision of her white face, and


big eyes facing death; then she cried out something
he could not understand and flung the bundle clear of
the buckboard and straight at the watcher, as the
vehicle swayed out from under Hell’s Arch.
Mechanically Malcolm dropped his revolver. He had
always been an expert cricketer, and this time he made
a phenomenal catch, as the trap reeled and plunged
sideways down the hill, he held in his surprised arms
something warm and soft and alive, wailing its bitter
protests at being placed in such a situation, to highest
heaven.
At the foot of the bush road, the track the buckboard
took ran straight and steep into the deep swift
currented river.
There was scant hope for the trap and its occupants
escaping a bad smash.
Malcolm believed afterwards that he shouted to them
to throw themselves out too, and take their chance of
broken limbs rather than that of suffocating under an
over-turned trap in the fierce waters. . . But the
reaction had left him sick and shaken, perhaps his lips
moved without words coming.
Presently he put the baby down among the fern,
nothing could actually harm it there. Its robust lungs
would warn snakes away, and where it lay its tiny rose-
leaf hands almost touched the butt of the forgotten
revolver. The Scot’s brain had swung suddenly back
to sanity : the moment had passed—forever. There
was man’s work to be done here : he must go down to
the river.


He remembered how he had once seen a rotten
pumpkin in a home field where the cows had trodden.
He had never seen a human face before as that man’s
face, but the woman’s was a very beautiful one. Her
back was broken, and her body had turned over and
over amongst the churning waters in the before
he found her in a still pool lower down, dragged her
ashore and covered her with fem. At least that lovely
face should be saved from the nibbling fishes. Then
having with his powerful arm brought what was left
of the man to lay beside her, till help could come with
a spade, and a parson perhaps, to put them to rest for-
ever somewhere among the fem in the loveliness of the
haunted land by Hell’s Arch; he went back to the child.
The baby was asleep : her peach-fair cheek on one
fat dimpled arm, her long golden lashes still wet from
her frantic weeping made shadow on her bonnie face.
She was safe anyhow while she lay still.
He could see the glint of the revolver bore. He
picked it up carefully from amid the fem. He had
another use for the bullet now.
Then he heard his tumed-out horse whinneying from
beyond the Arch, as though it had a notion it might
yet be needed. The whinney was answered by the
emigrant’s horse, which lay with a fore and hind leg
broken, on the far bank, with a drag of smashed wood
and iron behind him, that once had been a buckboard.
The revolver came in handy. The horse’s head got
it and freedom from pain at the same moment. The
Scotchman was a dead shot. Its ears quivered : he
s


could see the white line along its belly, as it turned
quietly over.
Blood-nourished wings drifted lower in the blue. . .
Here were pickings. . .
Malcolm returned to the child, the waiting hack, and
his immediate problems.
He was eighty miles or more from the township. He
hadn’t bite or sup for the child, and no accurate notion
as to what six months’ babes fed upon. He had an
idea, from both the black and white the specimens he
had seen, that babies were almost always hungry. It
suddenly opened its comflower-blue eyes and gazed at
him with a friendly stare, commenced sucking its red
thumb complacently. He had to leave it to the risk
of advancing green-head ants as he saddled up again.
He could hardly desert it all night while he rode for
assistance. There were dingoes about here.
Presently he was loosening the bridle rein to ride
back by the way he had come, carrying a fairly com-
placent bundle in his muscular bachelor arms. It was
only when she became interested in trying to put her
pink big toe into her small pink mouth, that he found
this boomerang like attitude almost impossible for a
saddle passenger’s comfortable accommodation. His
right arm ached and, as the shadows began to lengthen
and his horse paced the long road that tunnelled away
among the gum trees and left the ferny ranges behind,
he found himself wondering how on earth he was ever
going to land her safe and sound, in some understanding
woman’s arms.


Fortunately the open air made her drowsy ; she was
heavier but easier to carry asleep, and as she slipped
one small hand into the front of his shirt and gripped
tightly on his singlet, it gave her a certain amount of
security from falling by the way. He blessed man’s
descent from the arboreal ape more than once during
that night ride.
It was a glorious night: the sky so clear, the Milky
Way seemed as fine scarves some wandering goddess
had caught on the spur of a golden planet’s heel. At
midnight the air was chill but the moon rose red
and splendid, over the unbroken fines of timberland.
Occasionally the babe awoke and being a fine
healthy specimen made Malcolm realize it, with frantic
kickings on his already tender ribs.
Alec Malcolm had known what it was to be bailed up
in a shepherd’s hut up North with a dozen blackfellows
tinkering spears at the roof: the shepherd (a disgraced
military man connected with a British peer, who had
commenced life with few brains and destroyed those
few, with strong waters and patent medicines, long since)
gibbering a collect in a corner, with only a dozen
cartridges left for the rifle, but he wasn’t, he con-
sidered, then up against half such a difficult proposition
as that which cuddled close to him one minute, and
kicked him briskly the next, tonight when the air was
impregnated with the scent of wattle, and shy feeding
kangaroo turned to look curiously at the solitary
rider.
Crossing the bend of the river he nearly lost her, for


the water was high here and he had to put his legs up
on the saddle. At this moment she took it into her
curly yellow head to do a kind of war dance on his
spare arm. Malcolm let loose language suitable to
weaner-drafting, and most unsuitable for the ear of
youth. In retaliation she grabbed at his moustache
and hung on till the tears came to his eyes while she
chuckled her unfeigned delight.
From bank to bank the moon-silver whitened the
ripples; the creak of the saddle leather; an inter-
mittent grunt of the plodding horse; the cooing
of baby laughter, and the far away howl of a
dingo . .
Malcolm despite his efforts to keep her still intact in
his embrace, could not but muse on the strangeness of
his position. The father and mother of this lively
orphan lay stark in the awful loneliness of Hell’s Arch,
while he, who a few hours ago, had been totally ignorant
of their existence and on the verge of violently terminat-
ing his own, was sole protector to the morsel of flesh
and blood who had been the immediate cause of keeping
him in the world so much longer than had been his
intention to remain.
Suppose he dropped her now , . in that pool where
the water spiders skated in the moonbeams and
silver mullet sprang and flopped . . suppose he
followed her down . . down among the green water
grasses . . what would it matter a hundred years
hence ?
But there was an element of the ridiculous in com


mitting suicide over one woman with another—
unknown —woman's baby in his arms !
Besides . . was it a fair go ? The kid should have
her right to life . . even did he consider he was
heartily sick of his own . . and if he deserted her
now . . what odds in her favour ?
Just none.
It was part of his creed that a man’s existence was
his own, to be terminated or continued, as he thought
fit. He had been bom on a grey November day by a
dour grey sea: he inclined ever to pessimistic views,
but had all the true Scot’s clear-sighted sense of fair-
ness.
It wouldn’t be playing the game to the kid . .
She was so trustful, drowsing again now, her little
curled fist inside his singlet, touching his hairy
chest.
In a fine and dewy dawn with a knocked up horse
and a mighty thirst, he reached the accommodation
house at the rim of the township. He was too stiff to
get out of the saddle unaided and sat there, sleeping
baby and all, till a teamster who had been slumbering
off his annual spree, arose from under a form on the
verandah and reared up to his help.
Naturally both recovering teamster and just-waking
land lord must have their ribald jest. Alec Malcolm
cared little about that as long as they took this bundle
from his arm and fed and washed and tended it, and
left him in peace for a little in the hard wooden bed of
the “ bridal chamber ” with a long sleever at his elbow,


they could say what they liked and about the child’s
likeness to himself, no matter how damnable and how
foolish the he, and how little flattering to the baby’s
personal appearance.


CHAPTER TWO
" The feet of the wind have found a town,
Where a thin green river ribbons down."
" Streets in bush townships, full of travelling sheep ;
The yellow dust; the yapping of the dogs
And tranquil streets where skipping children play."
Mrs. Maloney’s " Cabin ” as she always called it in
remembrance of her first, her Irish, home, upon whose
glories she was wont to dilate, with such magnificence
and little accuracy, lay on the outskirts of the town-
ship. It boasted but two rooms, but their floors were
boarded over and if she did supplement the broken
glass of the windows with a few clean rags, still the
place was spotless according to her lights, which were
not bad lights considering that she lived on an amazingly
small dole from a son who went droving all the year
round, and who generally asked for some of his money
back before the year was through. To add to this
erratic income she took in washing. She washed for
the priest, and the banker’s wife, and for the single
young men who worked in the weatherboarded bank,
and she did odd jobs at the hotel when their regular
washer-lady was drunk.
So Mrs. Maloney’s cabin smelled eternally of soap
suds, with a faint background of boiled potatoes. She
believed in the potato above everything, especially for
fattening " the child.” Fortunately she diluted it


with plenty of goat’s milk which is good for babies,
and that really nourished the youngster. Mrs. Maloney
was a lonesome soul. She had not a relative in the
country, and had it not been for the consolations of
religion—she was a faithful disciple of the Ould
Faith —and her Saturday night’s friendly gossip with a
neighbour over a cup of tea with “ a dash ” in it, she
had been lonelier still. But you couldn’t depress
Mrs. Maloney for long. Not even when her pet cat
died. She buried it with honours and borrowed
another from Mrs. Stack at the comer shop, Mrs.
Stack always had heaps of spare kittens because she
“ hadn’t the ’art to drownd them.” It was this
kitten that became the source of much joy to little
Amber Malcolm now in her first year, and very active
on her short dimpled legs.
The care of Amber increased Mrs. Maloney’s bank
balance. She had been highly recommended to Alec
Malcolm when he was at his wit’s end to find a home
for his rescued waif, while he went back to take up
a surveying job, hundreds of miles away. Both the
township doctor and the priest vouched for Mrs.
Maloney’s respectability, and everybody for her kindly
heart, and with the Church and the Medical Profession
on his side what man can make a false step ? Mrs.
Maloney's round face shining from a hard application
of yellow soap, and the very way she screwed back her
scant grey hair and fastened it with one hair pin in an
aggressively virtuous knob at the back was in itself a
reference.


Failing to find any trace of paternal or maternal
relative for Amber Malcolm had handed her over to
the washer-woman’s care, pending enquiry by the
languid and solitary policeman of the township.
Nothing came of this enquiry. The people, evidently
new chums, had arrived by coach ; they had,hired the
horse and trap intending to go up river to inspect some
likely spots soon to be thrown open for selection.
They had not mentioned their name to anyone; but
then, English people are sometimes like that, without
necessarily being criminals. Enquiries in the South,
intermittent and then languishing altogether, failed to
elucidate any more than this, they had paid the hire
of the buckboard in advance, and Malcolm with some
expostulation finally forked out for a new one, but
he made the wheelwright take less than he expected,
and he had a hard bargain with a cleaned-out drover
for a horse to replace the one he had destroyed, with
the bullet he meant for himself. Wheelwright and
drover both eventually grumbled, but Alec reminded
them with a short laugh, that legally he wasn’t respon-
sible and being a Scotchman he was only paying for a
sentiment. Gradually the man who sold the horse
and the man who received both trap and horse where
he expected a dead loss, allowed the matter to drop,
only when Malcolm’s name was mentioned shaking
their heads and adding “ a hard ’un that,” as they
spat reflectively into the roadway, or over the mat of
the township bar.
The woman reported Amber’s little garments to be


of the finest, and round her fat white neck was a string
of real amber beads from which in lieu of a better,
and scorning Ermyntrude thrust upon him by the
banker’s wife, Malcolm decided to have her christened.
A commercial traveller —quite sober —who knew
something about stones, declared the beads were
genuine, so the Scot had them put in his strong box at
the bank. Perhaps some day they would be a clue to
the real identity of his find. For the present he must
tackle the job on that new railway and forget, in hard
work, the moment of weakness when he would have
let a pair of faithless eyes and curve of sensuous lips
wreck his life. The men found him a little grimmer, a
little more silent, perhaps he drank more than formerly,
that was all. . .
And for six months he did not see his prot£g6e.
When he did, he was amazed at her beauty. True, the
dead woman had loveliness even in death. What the
father was like it was impossible to say . . there was
no semblance of feature left in the thing he had seen
on the river bank. . .
But here, the flaxen mop of curls that were Mrs.
Maloney’s pride when she carried the child to Mass
with her, and dipped her podgy hand in Holy Water :
the great violet eyes and dainty impertinent nose, the
scarlet mobile mouth. Mrs. Maloney had dressed her
in a starched muslin with a blue sash, the shoulders tied
up with pale blue ribbon, the calves of her fat legs stuck
out, her arms were all dimples and rolls of fat|; she
smiled up at him engagingly, slipped her small hand


into his great roughened palm. " Take Amber ta-ta,”
she commanded.
" Do they always speak so plainly at her age ? ”
he enquired doubtingly. There seemed something
mysterious about this youngster.
" She is forward, that she is,” commented Mrs.
Maloney who was making tea in a brown pot. " Speaks
like a two year old, she do . . but then, the girls is
always ahead of the boys with the tongue.”
He sat down at the clean-scrubbed table: stirred his
tea round with his spoon, he liked lots of sugar, and
observed the child pensively. She lifted her arms
above her head and imperatively demanded to be
taken up. She had conceived a swift affection for this
large man with his stooping shoulders, his slop-made
clothes, and absence of necktie. Muscularity usually
appeals to girl children, and she would not be content
till she was on his knee, a knee unaccustomed to such
burdens. Presently he yielded, grasped her nervously
as one might a piece of fragile but valuable china and
set her where she desired herself to be, feeding her
absently with scraps of bread and butter as one feeds
a favourite dog who had thus been induced to beg.
Mrs. Maloney was distressed. " She’ll have tea and
butter all down the front of her Sunday frock, bless her
sowl, let me get a pinny or bib for ye, ducky.”
Ducky fought valiantly. No bibs or pinnies for her
to hide the Solomon-like glory of her party frock.
Malcolm was concerned at her tears, and thoroughly
uncomfortable. He retreated leaving the struggling


mass of flaming wet cheeks, tousled curls and crumpled
muslin in Mrs. Maloney’s care. Amber was promptly
put in the corner, but in five minutes, smiling like an
angel, was toddling after Alec with reiterated request
for “ ta-ta.”
Perforce he took her down to where the gum trees
hung over the still green river. Some fishermen had
landed a giant cod. A youth was holding its thick
silver-white and pearl-grey body against his own, to
show how big it really was. There was reek of fish: its
red gills palpitating.
Amber became absorbed, and the boy, a good-looking
brown-faced lad, son of the local banker, lifted her up
on one arm, holding the weight of the fish erect with
the other.
Her triumph was complete; she looked roguishly out
of the corners of her blue eyes at Malcolm.
He laughed, but a stab went through his heart at the
memory of a woman who had once looked like that as
she fastened a flower in another man’s coat, and smiled
coquettishly over a bared ivory shoulder at Malcolm's
lowering brows. . .
Were they all like this ? Even these baby things,
loving to play one male against the other ?
The boy found her weight suddenly tiresome, after
all she was a pretty kid, but he didn’t care for kids.
He set her down abruptly, almost roughly.
“ Look out, you’ll hurt the youngster ” said one of
the other men, and Amber beginning to run unsteadily
towards Malcolm, his protection suddenly becoming all


she needed, fell headlong and had a scratched dimpled
knee to show for her brief faithlessness.
Alec picked her up and soothed her, his big hands
covering her yellow hair, talking to her as he would to
a frightened puppy—“ Hold up now, old chap, that's
all right.”
But Leon, the banker’s only son, was starting off for
home with the fish, silvery scales shaded with mauve,
emerald and pearl, swung on a long sapling: he wanted
to display his prowess in the township. He did not
even turn to look at the fretting child.
A jackass preparing for sunset chortled, and his
laugh was taken up by his fellows, and echoed along
the tree-hung creek where a tiny cloud of gnats rose
grey from the rippling water's surface. . . The
sun was on the tree crests turning them to fruited
orange ; shadows grew on the green waters ; a pelican
sat on a black leg a hundred yards up stream, and
fished, his big fat pendulous pink bill a delight to
Amber. . .
She was all smiles again, full of interest in everything
about her. Twin calves, a dark reddish-brown, peering
with their ass-like ears and ungainly russet legs from a
thicket, filled her with joy, but aware of the mooing of
the cow, a new-made and possibly suspicious parent,
made Malcolm insist upon her not straying near to
them, for the mother cow suspects evil intent in a
human’s approach to her offspring and is prepared,
with horns down, to resent it; relic of the days of
savagery when the poor anxious brute was obliged to


hide her little ones away from wild beasts, till they grew
big enough to fend for themselves.
as sunset made pools of crimson lake, and wove
delicate opaline mists on the pattern of the river, Alec
carried the baby home through the dusking ways.
As he set her down at Mrs. Maloney’s door he
realized fully for perhaps the first time, what a lonely
man he had been all his life. Then, quite unexpectedly,
there flashed across his thought an impression of young
Leon, the banker’s son, supple as an Indian, swart,
handsome, careless, walking away with his booty to
show to his tribe while the girl-child fell and hurt
herself unheeded, on the sharp scattered twigs in the
path. Someday this babe, a woman grown, would
need a protector to keep her from grown men who
would do these things to her heart.
For Malcolm knew the ugly and seamy side of fife’s
variegated cloak better than he knew the hopeful or
the bright. He had no faith at all in women, young
and attractive women, and, experience had left him
little faith even in men.


CHAPTER THREE
“ She is a winsome maid of gold and green,
And more elusive than the wind that blows between
The highest peaks of wooded hills between,
To rob the Sultan’s garden of a rose.”
" The white moon bathing in a pool of bloom
.The gold sun loitering in a quivering shade."
As Amber grew older her seasons of special delight were
when Mrs. Maloney’s wandering boy came home for a
week or so. There were, it is true, times when she
found him boringly uneven in his steps and most tire-
somely thick of utterance, and, though there were also
days of large packets of boiled sweets from the township
stores, he was not particularly amusing as a companion,
and Mrs. Maloney who always liked to " keep her face ”
before the neighbours, was divided between urgent
suggestions to him that he was “ better in his bed,” and
a wish to appear, even to the child, as though things
were just as they should be with Michael.
Amber from babyhood disliked the smell of stale
spirits that clung to him in conjunction with his unwary
footing, though one day Malcolm, riding down from the
Survey camp, found the little pink and white morsel
in her check rompers, trying to lift with her chubby
and ineffectual arm, the long thin drover from where
he had fallen by the way. Mike having kept the
pledge for six months had gone right out to it on his


first visit to a bush pub, and Mrs. Maloney was up at
the chapel, this being her day for the priest’s charing.
Malcolm was furiously angry. Not that he was
shocked at Michael’s condition, but he had the con-
servative male’s objection to his women-kind (in this
case represented by a few pounds of dimples and
checked cotton) being mixed up in " a thing like this.”
He swore at Michael, who kept touching his red fore-
lock with a winsome smile and remarking that he was
mighty glad to see Mr. Malcolm looking so well and
to know he had brought his twin brother along, also
looking well if “ your honour doesn’t object.” In
fact, Michael added, if he could only stand he would
be only too pleased to shake hands with his honour,
with their two honours, but something had gone wrong
with his legs.
Between them stood Amber sucking a sticky thumb.
Malcolm picked her up and carried her away from con-
tamination. He decided to speak seriously to Mrs.
Maloney. He might have to find another home for
his adopted child.
Mrs. Maloney, smelling of soap suds, failed to see
the gravity of the situation. She got Michael to bed
and told Malcolm how her son had suffered for years
from “ those there giddy spells ” just like his poor
father, “ God rest his sowl, in Heaven this day.” It
was true ; the weakness had descended from father to
son but there were others in the district similarly
affected after a visit to the Brumby Arms.
Malcolm lapsed into silent cogitation.


Life was not so simple as in the days before he
had an adopted daughter to consider.
But there was no denying she was well looked after,
and well loved by Mrs. Maloney, and the prodigal son,
who only came home at long intervals. Presently he
was going to the South Australian border and might
not be heard of for a twelve-month, by that time
Malcolm might have made more satisfactory arrange-
ments.
When Mike was not suffering from " his wakeness ”
he played the fiddle passably well, and Amber " danced
like a wave of the sea.” So fairylike were her move-
ments and so perfect the time she kept, that the old
priest christened her the Corrigaun, to Mrs. Maloney’s
secret distress for it is well known the corrigaun is an
Irish fairy that dreads the Holy water. Surreptitiously
she anointed the child’s brow as she slept that night
with a little she had stolen from the font itself in a soda
water bottle. Mrs. Maloney still kept in her soul a
fear of the Little Folk. Amber must be defended from
their machinations.
If Amber could dance like the corrigaun there was
no doubt but that Michael could play like the fiddler
of Dee, and though his fiddle was a wheezy old instru-
ment that had seen bad weather and had once been
attacked by the white ants, it was a pretty thing to
see them on moonlit nights, Amber pirouetting in the
patch of light between the dark brigalows outside
Mrs. Maloney’s cabin door, and Michael astride on a
backless chair bowing away for all he was worth: a
3


spare shock-headed grotesque fellow in moleskins and
ragged shirt, for Mrs. Maloney found it impossible to
“ kape him nate,” much like the pied piper of Hamlyn
he looked, as he played.
Perhaps Alec Malcolm would stand in the shadow of
the trees with furrowed brows, his work-scored hands
clasped behind his back, the patch of baldness on his
great head glimmering in the dusk of the tree branches,
chin thrust forward, facing the question of the days
when this flitting sprite would be woman grown.
Slowly he was coming to realize he loved the bairn,
as much, if not more than he could ever have loved the
child that had never been his. He had never cared
much for children, never been able to get on with them :
he thought them noisy and tiresome: he talked to
them when he was obliged to, as though they were
grown-up people : he couldn’t tell them fairy stories ;
he knew no games except cricket and he thought he
had grown too stiff in the joints for that, besides, in
his old-fashioned philosophy girls didn’t play cricket,
and yet children and dogs followed him and tried, in
the latter case successfully, almost fawningly, to make
friends. And he discovered when he watched the child
dancing to another man’s fiddling, that there was a
strong leaven of male protective jealousy in his love
for Amber.
It was on a warm September night when he stood
thus in the gloom of the boughs that he had swift and
unpleasant experience of what the child’s well-being
and life had actually become to him.
30
GAMING GODS


A honeycoloured moon hung over the dark timber
by the river, the wind was sweet with dropping wattle
and dry with dust from the mealy roads, now and then
from the wooded places came the call of the morepoke
hunting, or the distant clink of hobble chains, the
whistle of a late traveller on the main road; the sound
of men’s voices, or the long wail of a concertina from
the scattered township houses.
Barefoot, Amber pirouetted in a pool of silver moon-
light while Michael from his backless chair shouted
encouragement to the tune of "By Killamey’s lakes
and fells ” which he gave with quite remarkable
variations, considering the condition of the fiddle.
Though not acutely conscious of his nearness Amber
was dancing in the direction of her adopted father’s
ambush, when, looking down at the way her little feet
should come, he saw something writhe and wriggle in
the shadow, a swift shining evil shape with slightly
raised flattened head. A black, red-bellied snake
ready to strike at the small arched, brown foot, coming
steadily nearer to it on a wave of melody.
His age-stiffened joints moved with astonishing
agility, he swore, unconscious of the luridness of his
language and snatching up a bit of broken bough lying
close to where he stood, he was quick enough to deal
death to the reptile before it could strike, and that
means some quickness in the spring days when the
winter-torpors have left the cold-blooded body.
Amber was not in the least alarmed : she was indeed
over-keen on lifting the still moving creature from the


beaten dust, and examining it at closer quarters with
all Eve's dangerous curiosity. Malcolm swung her in
his arms and held her a moment against his big, heav-
ing, hairy chest, as a man might clutch at a precious
jewel, Life, the highwayman, was fain to deprive him
of.
Mike was not much perturbed. He believed that
Amber had the virtue of St. Patrick, if she could not
actually drive serpents away she could render them
innocuous to herself. Malcolm wondered if he was
only pretending, trying to make him feel foolish with
the ever-present sense of masculine rivalry, even in
the preference of the baby girl, or if he really had a
superstitious belief that nothing which crawled could
hurt the foundling girl babe. . . It began to be a
jest with Michael that whenever Amber appeared, the
snakes came out to have a look at her. Whether the
district was markedly reptile infested (Malcolm knew
it to be so after the February floods), or whether there
was something, after all, in what the Irishman said,
was at times a matter for confused speculations on the
old Scotchman’s part. Certainly before she was ten
years old Amber had had endless adventures with
snakes, but as she matured, some subconscious develop-
ment always seemed to warn her of their approach.
She would stand, stock still, arrested in midflight
when she had been running helter skelter home from
Chapel, draw back to find had she made one step
further, her bare feet would have landed her right
on top of the deadly brown snake, or the diamond with


its curious light markings. Malcolm sent repeated
injunctions down from the survey camp to Mrs.
Maloney to see that Amber wore thick boots, but the
Holy Saints, as the old woman expressed it, cared for
their own. Amber grew into a ruddy-faced girleen
without as much as one snake bite, though in her walks
abroad the reptilian crews became almost a common-
place.
But by the big river, there had always been snakes
a-plenty and bush-reared children keep an eye open
for them, going like the primitive man, eyes to the
ground through the close grasses.
Malcolm, having saved some money, he decided to
add to this for the bairnie’s sake. Later on he might
select land or buy into a grazing farm. He had had
experience of crop farming in Scotland before he ran
the chain as a young man in an Australian survey
camp, and blossomed out into a full-blown surveyor.
He loved the good red earth as his forebears had loved
it in Aberdeenshire for two hundred and fifty years,
and he would be happy enough with stock to look after
and maybe crops to consider. Hadn’t he dosed his
sick beasts when the rinder-pest got amongst them
long ago, dosed them secretly and defied inspectors
and pulled a fair percentage through.
With the growing girl to make a home for him, there
was something pleasant in that prospect. He had
not previously discovered how lonely life had left
him.
He thrust his hands deep into his sagging pockets:
33
GAMING GODS


the possessive jealousy of the male wanted " the
wean ” to himself under the fortress of his own roof-
tree.
That couldn’t be yet, said Gaelic caution. He must
add to his bank book first.


CHAPTER FOUR
“ Within the stolid sameness of my room
When sly dusk throws the lamp-light on the wall
To hide and seek among the piles of books."
" There is a hollow trail between the trees
Matted with moss and blazed by bird and bee."
In another’s misfortune, Sandy Malcolm presently
found his opportunity.
Drought devastated the land and the bank fore-
closed on the barren acres and the ramshackle old
homestead whose rooms were divisioned with coarse
yellow hessian (so that a whisper in one comer of the
building carried to the far end of the house), while
prickly pear was about the only enduring green thing
on the place, he bought into Rocky Springs for a mere
song, giving two shillings a head for the remaining
lean-ribbed portion of the fleeced flocks, and no sooner
was the deal completed than steady rain commenced
to fall, and the pert emerald blades began to prick
amongst the white bones of poor dumb beasts, that had
died for the need of them.
In the old zinc-roofed house, Malcolm purposed
making his home with his adopted child. At,
approximately, six years she was scarce competent
for the housekeeping, so he was fain to corrugate his
pent brows over the matter. He consulted the doctor,
the priest, and the Presbyterian minister, and lastly


Mrs. Maloney. He thought she might get him a
middle-aged, ill-favoured (this he insisted upon,
pondering the voice of scandal which even the Back
Blocks could not smother) woman to mind the house
and train the child.
“ And phwat about myself ? ” asked Mrs. Maloney,
her kind heart ribboned at the thought of parting from
the babe, who seemed nearer to her flesh than the ever-
vagrant gypsy, Mike.
“ You ! ” Malcolm couldn’t picture Mrs. Maloney
not charing in the township, tidying her cottage,
attending Mass, and going through the twilight to
Benediction, or a gossip with a crony. “ You! ”
“Me . . meself it’s after asking , . do you think ”
her shiny cheek blazed a dull red, “ Do you think I’d
be after letting this poor girleen go alone to the home
of the Calders ” (the “ feckless Calders ” they had been
called in the district before they sold out to the Scot
and took their fecklessness and ill-luck elsewhere),
" without a woman to mother her ? ”
“ But what about Mike ? ” The man’s big hands
moved nervously. This was certainly a solution and
Mrs. Maloney had proved herself kindly and competent,
but it was a solution he had not contemplated though
she was old, highly respectable, and if not actually
ill-favoured, no Helen, and quite unlikely to stir the
bush grundies to outcry.
Mrs. Maloney settled it. Micky could shift for
himself in the cabin when he came to the township . .
‘‘ and perhaps Mr. Malcolm, sir, would —”


But Malcolm shook his head. He did not think he
would have any work for the Pied Piper on his property.
In business matters Sandy Malcolm had the reputa-
tion of being adamant, but Mrs. Maloney trusted to
her own subtlety. “ Later on,” with the connivance
of the little girl, who loved Michael only next to his
fiddle. . .
The feckless Calders had left their furniture standing.
There had been many Calders and there were three
more beds in the hessian-walled rooms than were
needed, but there must always be a guest cham-
ber ready in the bush, for at nightfall oft times
come the stranger within the gates to be fed and
lodged.
Before Mrs. Maloney brought the wean up to Rocky
Springs, Malcolm with the help of a bush carpenter,
lined the living rooms with wood right up to the roof,
put in a window or two, hung a wire and board swing
for Amber under the gnarled wild apple tree in the back
yard, cut down the tall lank growth of herbage which
swept up to the wooden fence, and made several
inroads on the prickly pear.
Not far from the homestead, it had encroached over
an old stockman’s hut to such an extent that the bark
chimney was up-thrust from a forest of broad green
leaf and rich ruby-coloured fruits. In another place
the shafts of a disused rotting dray were rearing through
the cactus jungle. Some people called Malcolm a fool
to have —even for a mere song—bought into a property
that had pear on it, but the major portion of the run


was free, and already the pest had been successfully
treated and used for feeding of stock in dry times.
Malcolm had his own theories for keeping it down and
he listened without remark to the good advice showered
upon him, from importing the cochineal insect, to varied
ways of burning off.
You couldn’t do much in the way of burning off with
a plant that sprouted after being immersed in boiling
fat for hours, as a selector’s wife who used the leaf for
hardening her home made candles could vouch for
" Poisoning off ” held Malcolm’s interest. He believed
in destruction by chemicals. He had not that long
head for nothing, nor had he dabbled in lab. work in
the long dark winter’s evenings in Scotland merely
for frivolous amusement. A man who taught himself
French (without an accent), and Algebra by light of a
stinking fat lamp at night in his tent, with his revolver
on the table beside him, and “ bad men ” among the
blacks in the neighbourhood in the old days Normanton
way, was not going to fail when he attempted to illus-
trate careful theories. But he believed in the still
tongue till one had something to show for one’s theory.
Amber adored the prickly pear thickets. They spelled
to the six year old child, romance. Mrs. Maloney could
scold and warn in vain of death adders, and Malcolm
could admonish with large uplifted finger, and repeated
injunctions that she should not go without her boots,
but barefoot, with flying yellow hair and eyes full
of mischief, floating like a fairy thing towards the
mysterious prickly forests, went Amber whenever


opportunity of backs turned for domestic duties, offered
escape.
She was an exceedingly pretty, but an exceedingly
disobedient little girl, no one was left in doubt as to
that. She was a constant anxiety to both adopted
father and guardian angel of a Maloney, but they
adored her wickedness more than ever child of virtue
was adored.
No harm came to her though Malcolm, having taken
her studies in hand was teaching her to read and
write, and showing no application but considerable
quickness in the uptake, she at least purged all lessons
of monotony.
He had left her one evening in the living room while
he strolled to the hut to have a chat with the over-
seer, and she was setting her mutinous eyes at her
ABC book and droning in her bored voice “ C.A.T,
cat,” and '* R —A —T, rat,” when a sudden terror froze
her to silence.
In the kitchen she could hear Mrs. Maloney washing
up, even the water boiling on top of the American
oven.
But Fear, intangible, black, menacing, was coming
out of the soft scented night towards her . . Fear
nothing could stay, . . Amber’s religious teaching
being divided between the fact that when Malcolm
was down from the survey camp, she had accompanied
his occasional attendance at the Presbyterian kirk
and when he was absent that she went to Mass with
Mrs. Maloney (on the whole, preferred) her now


spontaneous prayer for protection from the unseen ill
took the shape of extracts from the minister’s extem-
pore pleadings to the Deity, which had remained in
her memory, and fervent appeals to “ Mary, Mother of
God.”
Down on her knees before the smoking kerosene lamp
and the little pine table where her lesson books were
spread, she fell, then disdaining the open door leading
on to the verandah which would take her swiftly to
Mrs. Maloney and the washing up, she climbed out of
one of the low windows Malcolm had placed in the
Calder’s wall, and thus ran barefoot through the sum-
mer night towards the lighted door of the overseer’s
hut.
Malcolm, having settled tomorrow’s work, was
coming out, hands plunged in his pockets. She ran
to him, and caught him about the waist.
“ What’s the matter, childie ? ”
“ I don’t know . . something frightened me awful
much.”
“ What frightened you, baimie ? ”
She could not say.
Ten minutes later as, leaving her with Mrs. Maloney
in the kitchen, Malcolm went to the living room for
her lesson books half believing her fear a pose to prevent
the necessity for further study, he found and killed
with a handy waddy, a huge brown snake that was
lying across the threshold of the room where she must
have stepped upon it with her bare feet had she come
that way.


As she grew into a slim slip of a girl, who was master-
ing other things than the three R’s., and was becoming
interested in the little laboratory Malcolm had fitted
up for himself in the lean-to at the end of the verandah,
she kept this kind of “ warning ” instinct. It was
almost, he laughed, sometimes, like the instinct of the
pointer dog for game.
Amber could “ feel ” snakes in the underbrush, and
as she also seemed to lure them out of it, it was, he
added, “ just as well.”
She had her own riding hack now, and sometimes
took a hand at the mustering, enjoying most the
gallops after the wilful weaners amongst the young
sheep: the hardest things in the world to get through a
gate. The wider the gateway, the harder the job,
Malcolm kept the patch of prickly pear where the
old cart shafts still protruded, though eaten by white
ants and rotted by weather, for his experiments. One
half was now shrivelled and yellow, where he had
been busy with his poison syringe.
He wrote toilsome, for he was a slow and difficult
penman, letters to the Government Agriculture Depart-
ment, about his experiences. Sometimes there was
half a column in the city newspapers about him, and
more about his discoveries. If he was not eliminating
the prickly pear, he was at least keeping it from spread-
ing, and the property was paying as it had never even
approached doing in the days of the unlucky " feckless
Calders.” Foundling Amber might be an heiress yet.


CHAPTER FIVE
" Time marched, with a frown, to close the gate
On sun and storm, and on the broken flowers.”
“ Where in the Hell’s that test tube ? ”
Alec Malcolm’s boots invariably creaked.
The black girl, who knew very well what had become
of the test tube, for who could resist it, lying there on
the floor of the little fitted laboratory, and her big and
second toe had worked it successfully towards the
entrance ere she scampered into the timber with it,
could hear those creaking boots from afar. Perhaps
it was because it was such a heavy unelastic tread,
perhaps it was because he walked on his heels like an
honest man. Now he added strange oaths picked up
on Queensland railway construction works and in
far out survey camps, to the creaking of his shoe
leather.
He wore a soft shirt with his invariable bone collar
stud, and no necktie: his felt hat with the grease spot
in the middle of the crown was pressed firmly down to
his shiny bald head, a head which, like Robby Burns'
required an eight in hats to fit it, his slop-made tweed
trousers, a size too large, bagged at the knees, but he
gave as he always did, an impression of individuality,
strength in reserve, to the seeing eye.
“ The most upright man I ever knew,” had been the
verdict of his co-worker in the survey camp, and he


had not alluded to the physical; indeed his enormous
shoulders had always the stoop of the toiling agricul-
turist, or that of the student who pores by uncertain
light over a book held on his knee. Fat lamps and
flickering kerosene had reddened his wrinkled eyelids,
but his grey eyes still saw keenly. He came of a long
lived race, he declared, only accidents could* kill. His
great-grandfather had been murdered with a spade
by an idiot farm servant; his father had his neck
broken coming home from the Fair in a high gig when
the horse bolted in a traffic congested road ; a brother
had died mysteriously in Johannesburg under circum-
stances indicating only too accurately “ robbery with
violence.” Somehow the Malcolms never managed to
die decently in their beds like ordinary folk—“ It took
an axe to kill them,” Alec had often said, for like most
Aberdonians, he enjoyed his jokes grim.
To lose a test tube was no joke. They were expen-
sive, and the mailman had already smashed one when
his pack horse bolted at the Ten Mile.
In the living room a snack was spread for the Boss.
Thick bread and butter and an enamelled pot of tea.
He sighed, drew a chair up to the table and poured
out a cup. Drank it hurriedly, and made himself
cough. He stirred his tea round and round with his
spoon, added more sugar, took a large uneven bite out
of the bread and butter. He had a missing tooth
which he could never summon up courage to " see
about,” in'his rare visits to places where dentists were
possible. He sighed more contentedly. He had


reached the age when material things such as clean
beds and plenty of wholesome food are of primary
importance. Then he set his cup down, outside the
saucer, where it made a ring on the clean cloth. He
was pondering—but not only about the test tube.
Back of his mind he was worried about Amber. For
Amber was seventeen, and she had been a coquette
from her cradle. A naturally shy man with women,
and with the fear which is perhaps a complex of the
confirmed bachelor, of the evil which men do, he
grooved his low, wide forehead with unhappy specula-
tion. Amber often told him he had a brow like prints
of the Neanderthal man in a book on things pre-
historic which had come into her possession, then he
put the tea cup in its saucer with the spoon still in it,
in the middle of his bread and butter plate, and looked
at himself in a little wood-framed mirror the girl had
recently hung within view of the table. He decided
his collar stud was obvious and bony. He might look
better in a necktie.
“ There’s nothing much about me to make a girl want
to stay at home,” he said.
It was characteristic of his mentality that he never
expected mere gratitude to hold anyone long, and he
realized that he was growing old. Hard as nails, he
was yet older than he knew. The tendency to seek in
a woman the comfort which earth owes every man bom
of woman, was in him. As with the little child, the
craving for a woman's sympathy is strong in the aged,
which may be held to account for many a foolish


mating. He had had one set back which had bitten so
deep that he had nearly let out his own life in the
agony of that day which had ended in his finding
another woman’s babe in his arms, and a life swiftly
dependent on his feeding the flame of his own life. He
was not without experience of women of a " certain
class,” experience gleaned in youth and on city visits
from the back blocks. They had not added to his
faith in the sex; naturally suspicious, the piling years
had only helped to groove deeper his distrust of men
in dealing with women, and of women in dealing with
men.
An old scar throbbed as he thought of Amber; he
almost wished she had been bom plain and yet her
physical beauty was as a priceless picture hung upon
his wall; or rather since one tires presently of a
painted thing, no matter how exquisite, as an open
window looking upon the changing loveliness of Nature,
always changing yet intrinsically the same.
Mrs. Maloney for all her cheery spirit, grew feebler
with the years. She was deaf and she worried about
Michael, now verging on middle age, but still her
wandering boy. Malcolm had given him work on the
station in the end, but he was impossible to tether.
During the two years when Amber was being
“ finished ” at the Convent school, Michael had not
bothered Rocky Springs, and Malcolm had felt a
security about the girl which balanced his loneliness,
for the homestead was horribly lonely lacking her
laughter, her dancing feet, her snatches of song. She
4


encouraged the blacks about the place too, queened it
among their settlements, grubby spread blankets, and
bark huts, their hideous mangy kangaroo dogs. She
tasted roast 'possum, and declared she liked its eucalyp-
tus flavour, and though she was presently sick behind
the prickly pear clump, more from the notion of the
“ cannibalism ” of eating the brown-eyed, furry little
friend, than from actual indigestion, she would not own
up to it, but crushed red geraniums in her small,
meddling fingers and rubbed them on her cheek bones,
lest Mrs. Maloney should detect her unnatural pallor.
A person of resource was Amber.
She led the nuns a dance in the convent school, but
they, too, missed her when she went, though they felt
more satisfied about the discipline of the establish-
ment : Amber was ringleader always in any mis-
chief afoot, but her voice in the choir was as an
angel’s.
It was this and more that made Sandy Malcolm
ponder over his bread and butter to the forgetting, for
the present, of his irritation about the test tube.
What was he going to do when Amber had suitors ?
Already the young selectors in the neighbourhood
seemed to find the frailest excuse for coming over to
Rocky Springs. They brought choice tobacco and
stray newspapers for Malcolm : they talked sheep and
dingoes, and poisoning off eagle hawks to him inter-
minably, and he loathed them for it. Because always,
he saw their covetous eyes on his one ewe lamb.
He thought he was strict with her. He counselled


Mrs. Maloney; but who can harness the wind, or
“ meticulously jar " the sunshine ?
The young selectors went away, frost-bitten on one
side and scorched with golden glances on the other.
The worst of it was, that undeterred, they came again .
Though too wise to look for spontaneous gratitude
in a young, full-blooded, life-enjoying creature, he had
always cherished a secret hope that he would keep
Amber with him and find her affection a fire on his
hearthstone, anyway for some years to come . . ten . .
fifteen . . perhaps, though he did not actually wish to
stand in the way of her ultimate happiness, she
belonged to him, the only human creature who had
ever done so for more than a passing week or two.
Now he wanted the fullness of life. Successful with
his experimental work, successful in adding to his bank
account, successful in the breeding of stock, and
fortunate in years of good rains and plenteous grasses,
he felt the crown of his life was in the present. Old
men can’t serve seven years for the Rachels of their
happiness. Only young men have the patience . . the
time . . to wait for things, old men know how quickly
the hour-glass runs out and that whatever is worth
having now, must be swiftly come by. Amber’s
schooling was practically finished; she was learning
to housekeep : she had her own piano now, to listen to
which the blacks from adjoining camps would creep
into the edge of the timber . . rocking themselves slowly
ecstatically, to and fro, while “ Amber, she make music
longa homestead .. my word" She was like a full


blown rose in the grey garden of his days. Surely
she might be left to him without intrusion from
indecently youthful youth, with its thick dark hair,
its bright eyes, straight back and joyous outlook ?
Why shouldn’t the old man reap in the fields he had
sown ? There was no doubt at all but that Amber
trusted and admired him. . . But . . did she love
him ? As she might have loved her own flesh and
blood parents ?
Here he erred from morbid self-depreciation. Amber
loved him far more than she would ever have loved her
own kin. . . And, though this is not an uncommon
attitude in life, we are too hypocritical to allow of it.
Her own folk would have taken her obedience, her
loyalty for granted, have expected her to be bom
loving them automatically. With Malcolm she subtly
sensed the chivalrous attitude came first; he was
delighted by receiving, even when looking for it, any
tribute of affection from her. He would almost thank
her for dropping a careless kiss on his seamed old
cheek. She puzzled and worried him, but he rarely
enforced his authority, there was always surprise
lurking in his eyes to think he had netted this gorgeous
butterfly . . his big hands trembled towards it. There
was so much of the devout lover’s acceptance of his
mistress in the paternal affection he gave to her. , .
And very woman, she must have known.
Now while he considered the young men as probable
suitors over his finished meal, and while the black girl
showed her latest “ find ” to her little lubra cronies


among the huts by the sandy-bottomed creek. Amber,
not three miles away, had dismounted from her brown
hack and was peering over the tall, juicy stemmed
oat grass and the blackbutt plain where the shadows
were lengthening to the end of a golden day, for the
coming, by dust-thick main road and lilied billabong,
of her first lover.


CHAPTER SIX
" Who would believe a purpose gay he has
To hold that Pierette in his arms tonight."
" The bride upon the laird’s breast laughs and glows
He had a way with witches, I suppose II”
She had met him first at a dance given at the Cock-
burns, thirty miles away. Malcolm had not wanted
her to go, and his distress was increased by the fact
that she had a pair of pink satin shoes. " Good God !
Pink shoes! ” he ejaculated his grey hairy eyebrows
meeting. The rose-leaf colour of the shoes troubled
him as a suggestion of lightness in her conduct with
men might have done.
It was the night before the dance, and she was trying
on the shoes, which had arrived by parcel post and the
mailman’s bucking pack horse that afternoon.
Sandy Malcolm went out to look at the moon.
Amber glancing half piqued, half amused through the
doorway after him, could see his tall, bowed form
between her and the moon washed skies and the dark
timber line.
She made a face in the mirror.
Why should he object to her shoes ? Other girls
in the township even, had brought gay shoes up from
Brisbane and Sydney. She had seen them worn in
her convent school days for breaking up though the
nuns preferred the girls to wear black slippers with


pale blue hair ribbons and sashes. They were as pre-
judiced about red and pink as was her adopted
father.
Tomorrow night she meant to put her hair up.
She was just on seventeen, and looked older than she
was. She had a white muslin frock, a pink ribbon for
her hair bandeau. The pink shoes were the prettiest
things she had ever seen. Malcolm gave her a sufficient
dress allowance and Mrs. Maloney had made a good
needlewoman of her, when it was a matter for her
personal adornment, for she hated what is termed
“ plain sewing ” but had quite a Frenchy touch at hat
trimming or the fashioning of her own evening frocks,
besides she was conscious (though Malcolm had said
" feet didn’t matter at all, they were only things to
walk on that she had nice feet. Arched with slender
ankles, despite years of disobedience in the matter of
wearing shoes upon them.
She stood with one pink slipper balanced on her
palm, admiring the high heel. Then she ran after Big
Man . . her baby name for the old Scotchman. Her
laughter blossoming on the gloom of his moody
thought,
" But why not pink, my dear ? ” Her voice held
toleration tinged with a trifle of patronage. One must
humour these funny old folk, she supposed. . .
Youth the heir to the Ages, must try to be patient. , .
He looked doubtfully down at her, sighed, drew her
hand through his arm, patted the back of it with his
own hard palm. Palm that had rarely known leisure


and never luxury, in his days. Well . . well he supposed
youth must have its fling.
But pink shoes. . . Good God !
Possibly they became vaguely associated in his mind
with Painted Ladies. He had been brought up in the
Auld Kirk and no matter how far he had strayed from
its teachings, he could still remember the precautions,
he as boy of fifteen, had taken, contriving to conceal
himself among the rocks by that grey German Ocean,
because he wanted to go bathing on the long summer
days when all the land smelled of stock and gilly flower,
instead of attending the " meeting ” as he was in duty
bound to do. For years, though man grown he had
stubbornly refused to go to the interminable morning
services, he never quite got over the guilty feeling
experienced when he met Church folk on their way
" hame frae the kirk.”
Pink shoes in his adopted daughter came up against
his hereditary conscience, and ancient heritage, of
custom.
Whatever Amber’s parentage, there was certainly
nothing dour nor Calvinistic in her blood. Indeed it
seemed full of the sunshine of some more southern
land, and her eyes held the gypsy fire which has nothing
at all to do with a satisfied Non-conformist conscience.
Tip-toe, she kissed his cheek, and he melted at once,
*.* Why not pink . , Big Man ? ”
He could only shake his head. . .
That night they danced through his dreams those
ribald little pointed shoon. . . They seemed to be


taking Amber far away from him over the rim of the
unseen. . . Once as they danced past him he saw
they were stained with mud . . then away they went
again to the shimmer of endless horizons . . and his
outstretched hands touched but empty air. . ,
He woke suddenly in the moonlit silence of his room
and found his old eyelids wet with tears. . . For
the handicap of Old Age is too great for even a place
in the race of youth. . .
Amber went to the dance. Malcolm would not go ;
the black boy drove her over in the sulky, and Michael
was engaged to play the fiddle, his douceur being many
flagons which had a marked effect upon the music
rendered towards the end of the evening. Mary
Cockbum, who had also been educated at the convent,
was at the piano. The tuner from the township had
been invited and he tuned up between the acts, because
the piano had been in the last flood (the Cockbum’s
place was below the level of the river bank) and it had
suffered immersion through not being roped tightly
enough to the rafters; and the tuning fork also did
very well for an accompaniment when one of the
Cockbum boys gave a comic song. Mrs. Cockbum
had used a pound or so of candles on the floor, and it
really needed sandpaper in spots, but this only added
to the fun, and there were red and blue and yellow
balloons up from Brisbane, disappearing towards
morning at the hands of various small fry amongst
the Cockbum clan, and Ned Brown, the crusty old
bachelor from the Four Mile who had lent his Chinese


lantern (he had once been in Japan), insisted upon its
going home before twelve, but Mrs. Cockbum who had
lived in the bush all her life and was never put-out
about anything, stuck a few more candles in beer
bottles and the illumination was thought almost
brilliant by the hilarious guests.
Never had shoes danced more lightly than Amber’s
pink ones. In a district when men always outnumbered
the girls by ten to one, she was besieged by partners
and gave herself all the airs which newly “ put up
hair ” lends to a girl. The men seemed all very much
alike to her. Some danced on one’s toes, and some
didn’t. Anyway she was having a splendid time, and
more than one shy bushman, blushing to his ears, had
whispered to her she was “ the belle ” which of course
she denied as emphatically as, in her secret soul, she
believed it to be the case. About the middle of the
evening, the Sandersons from the township arrived.
Something had gone wrong with the axle of the buggy.
Dan Sanderson had spliced the axle and Mrs. Sander-
son said she did not mind much, balls had always
bored her since she gave up dancing, but they brought
a dancing man along and now she supposed the pro-
grammes, which Mary Cockbum had made out of
notepaper and blue transfer butterflies, would be full.
But Amber had declined to fill her programme to the
bitter end. Something, she could not say what, had
bade her “ wait and see,” so the hostess brought the
Sanderson’s guest to her.
" You know I used to belong to this district,” he


said as they moved over the uncertain floor with the
sure feet of dancers bom. “My Dad was manager of
the bank.” The township never boasted more than
one bank even now with the district opening up.
“He got a move some years ago. I’m looking at
country —half a mind to go on the land especially after
to-night.” He looked down with meanirfg into her
eyes.
This man seemed so — different.
Other partners came and went, but the dances she
gave to him for the rest of the night were the only ones
that really counted. She felt extraordinarily ill at
ease with him all the same, grew conscious that
perhaps her hair was not dressed in the latest mode,
her frock too long or too short, her shoes not all she
thought them when she first unpacked them from the
cardboard box at Rocky Springs and unfolded the
tissue wrappings with fingers trembling with excite-
ment. . . Everything the new man said and did
mattered so much.
When pallid dawn crept into the dancing room and
discovered red eyelids and pale faces on men to whom
mustering cattle or throwing beasts and drafting sheep
all day in dusty yards was " all in the day’s work,” but
who found boiled shirts and stiff collars and the latest
in ballroom steps—the latest, at least, that had
penetrated to the Back Blocks, very much more
fatiguing than the most strenuous station job, it found
Amber still with unwearied feet, dancing the last dance
with the banker’s son.


That extraordinary primitive creature woman, did
not seem nearly as worn out by the all night exercise
as did the physically stronger sex.
Amber was to spend the day in bed at the Cock-
bum’s and arise for another “ hop in the evening, but
the banker’s son had to ride forty miles further on
today.
He bowed over her hand as she stood, still in her ball
attire, on the top of the verandah steps to say “ Good-
bye.”
“ Goodbye . . my dear,” he said, “ I feel as though
I had known you all my life.”
She dimpled, blushed, looked down, noticed how
shabby in one night the toes of her little pink shoes
had become.
" We will meet again,” he whispered.
She nodded.
Yet neither remembered that they had ever met
before.


CHAPTER SEVEN
" Here did I come, white robed and filletted
To run my loving hands thro’ Nimrod’s hair.”
" The gentle stars swam in the blue above
And little winds came sweet with leafy love.”
The young man’s search for country seemed to keep
him constantly returning to the neighbourhood of
Rocky Springs for a surprisingly long stretch.
Quite accidentally Amber met him as she rode about
the run.
That is, the first time. After that it was the kind of
accident that can be arranged by open suggestion.
The wild oats plain grew to be an unlabelled rendez-
vous and this afternoon while Alex Malcolm pondered
many things from lost test tubes to the management
of maids, Amber was presently holding out her hand
to the brown faced, dark eyed chap who swung from
his saddle and stood looking down at her again with
unmistakable appreciation.
They hitched their horses to the branch of a bending
tree and found a fallen log, grey with the mezzo tints
of age and splashed mustard and red with drying
lichens.
Although she thought more about this man who had
come into her life the night of the Cockbum’s dance,
than was altogether wise, although she looked forward
to meeting him and sometimes wondered why and how


she had first agreed that these meetings were “ not
worth mentioning at home ” yet directly she was alone
with him a cloud seemed to settle upon her spirit
almost as though a warning voice tried to reach her,
through that shield of reason that cried always that
mere instinct often caused one to act unfairly and
foolishly. Scarecrow terrors that had no more founda-
tion than a wisp of straw and ragged coat, an old
hat . . fashioned to keep away the bright birds of
mutual laughters and lovings. . .
Despite this curious shadow that made her at times
feel almost as though she fought something and
crushed it down every time she showed her pleasure in
his society, he was to her winsomely attractive. With
his felt hat shading his eyes and turned up at the back
to show the fine black hair coming to the nape of his
neck like a close ebon cap, the secret fear, just now,
seemed utterly dispelled.
It appeared that he believed in love at first
sight . . big tides that swept over a man’s fife,
carrying him with it, things he couldn’t help . . no one
could help . . love, overwhelming every other con-
sideration. . .
She shook her head, a mischievous humour charging
her nervousness.
“ It would be a very muddley world, wouldn’t it, if
every one snatched at every one they fancied at first
sight . . why some might be married even I ”
At Amber’s age to be married is to be “ really and
truly done for ” as far as Romance goes.


He laughed, but his eyes were nettled.
“ I am afraid you don’t know what love means, my
dear, if you think that fact worthy of consideration . .
Love blows as the wind blows you know—
‘ Love blows into the heart.’ ”
She thought his quoting poetry beautiful . , Who
knew but it might be his own ? All the same
(Australian bush girls are fairly level-headed), there
was weakness in his argument.
Swiftly thought receded to her Big Man with his
rigid notions of morality, who looked upon other
men’s wives as “ sacred,” what answer would he
have to Leon Gaspard’s arguments ?
She was afraid his language would be too forceful to
retain any veneer of civility.
He folded his long brown hands over her small
gloved one. At his touch the cloud dispersed: his
theories became more tenable; young blood leapt to
young blood.
Shadows grew long on the plain. Scented winds
rustled among the juicy stemmed grasses. . .
They saw a shy far out bustard feeding, unaware it
appeared of their proximity, for the plain turkey is
one of the most nervous of birds, and a horseman with
gun stalking it has no chance of " pot luck,” though it
is not afraid of wheeled vehicle and Amber knew it
was Michael’s habit to drive out in the spring cart,
lying prone in the bottom of it till he saw his chance


at the bird, when he went after bustards for the
station larder.
There was no sign of man or gun this afternoon.
The wild oats, pinkish brown stems up to the saddle
flaps of their mounts, shimmered in the dying light.
At the edge of the timber grey ghost shapes began to run
to and fro, curlew, preparing for night wanderings. . .
Presently the sun would go down in a blaze of glory,
already the tree crests were crude ochre in its last
effulgence and then the soft dark would descend and
the kangaroo and wallaby coming thudding by, en
route to their feeding grounds.
Among the crushed wild oats a man with a rifle rose
to his knees and took a cautious look at the two so
close together on the old sapless log.
Their presence had accounted for Michael’s failing to
get within range of his quarry this afternoon, for the
bustard walked warily on the further side of the plain
and Michael had padded the hoof a long way, a thing
the horseman hates, to stalk the bird, perhaps that
also accounted for his ill temper as he glared unseen,
at the other man.
Then, as he spat thoughtfully into the wild oats
jungle and felt in his pocket for his over-seasoned pipe,
preparatory to going back, minus his bag of game, by
the way he had come, he said softly and vindictively ;
“ Sure . . Miss Amber don’t seem to feel the
snake . . this time.”
60
GAMING GODS


CHAPTER EIGHT
“ Can we make feast with a lie between—
Can I hold your fingers and feel the glove ? ’’
“ But why can’t I tell Big Man ? ” asked Amber.
In the moonless dark she could feel his arms like iron
to hold her, crushing her against his soft shirt front
that smelled faintly of nice light-mixture tobacco, a
Russian leather pocket book, and the sprig of wattle
he had slipped inside his shirt to give to her, and had
forgotten.
“ Why can’t I tell ? ” asked Amber breathlessly.
A few feet away she could hear the water rippling
round snag and water weld between its high banks,
deep-grassed from recent showers.
In the shadow of the trees it was so dark, she could
only guess at his brown eager face and his hot impatient
eyes, her veins seemed to run fire even as his own and
she trembled as she spoke but reason prodded still at
that languorous, sensuous spirit.
Why should Big Man be kept in the dark ? Why
must her meetings with Leon be always hidden ones ?
Sometimes it had been really a frightful job to get
away. Big Man seemed suspicious and Mrs. Maloney
for all her deafness and alleged rheumatic joints, was
sometimes inconveniently acute of hearing and active
of limb.
Then Michael. . before he went away on that last


droving trip he was always watching . .watching . .with
a strange almost impertinent query, she felt it, in his
small, golden-coloured eyes. Mike, whom she could
twist round her little finger, yet whose condemnation she
felt, without being able to actually define its cause. . .
That Michael would ever breathe a word to Malcolm
of his suspicions if he had any, she did not for a
moment believe. It would be a brave man who would
speak one word to Sandy Malcolm to defile his women
folk . . and Mike had not that kind of bravery, also
she vaguely realized a manner of enmity between the
men, though both did justice to one another’s virtues,
yet there had always been a species of jealousy betwixt
them over “ the wean ” from her baby days. . .
She had not been so happy lately as she used to be
before Leon came into her days. . . Yet . , could
she hear to be without him now ? His kisses had bred
a hunger in her that must be fed though at times she
felt almost ashamed to meet Big Man's slate-grey eyes
under the pendant brows.
No. She had not been so happy . . but she had been
more rapturous, for Leon had brought a sweeping fire
in her land . . her placid pasturage . . and it would be
cold without it. . , Though the grass grew green
again after its passing, old landmarks would be for-
ever destroyed, old safe fences obliterated. . .
She thought . . could everything be open and above
board, she would be happier than she had ever been . .
she was nearly eighteen . . not too young to be engaged.
But Leon had said he must wait till he had decided


upon a suitable property. With the practicability the
old man had instilled into her she wondered sometimes
how Leon lived without definitely working at anything.
Of course he meant to go on the land when he could
see just the kind of land he wanted. He had looked
at so much about Rocky Springs he should know one
way or the other by this time as to its suitability. She
had a hazy notion that his mother had property in her
own right inherited from an old Aunt who died in
England, and she would give Leon anything he asked
for. But it was not quite . . well . . not the kind of life
Sandy Malcolm would have approved, . . Delicacy for-
bade her questioning him upon matters so sordid as
mere money, sordid at least, compared with Romance,
which “ Swept in overwhelming floods across a man’s
life,” and Leon was much older than she was . .
but. . .
" Well . . Why not tell Big Man ? ”
His answer was to kiss her to suffocation.
A man’s answer that usually suffices . . for a time
at any rate, for so does passion cloud the brain, but
intelligence will have its ultimate return, and when
a woman begins to ask " why ” in her heart and ceases
to utter it from her lips merely, a man needs a firmer
argument than kissing.
She returned to the subject again with the sound of
the murmuring waters in her ears and the gentle sough
of summer winds in gum boughs. A water rat splashed
in the creek, and crossed to the other bank, she knew
had there been any moon she would have seen the


folded cups of yellow lilies in the jade water . . the deep
pool which the blacks declared was bottomless
“ Debbie debble sit longa there ” where she first
learned to swim, the chuckling black girls her in-
structors.
But there was no moon . . and love had clouded all
the innocent mirth and honesty of youthful days. . .
Why couldn’t she tell Big Man that Leon loved
her . . and wanted to marry her ?
Why did Leon ask her to make a mystery of what
she would have been so proud to give to the world ?
Mary Cockbum was older, but she wasn’t engaged
yet. Had not even had a proposal, and Mary adored
dark men. She would be just a little . . agreeably . ,
jealous of Amber’s triumph.
“ Darling ! ” he brushed her face from brow to chin
and back again with his caressing lips “ What does that
matter ? You and I know, and we don’t want every-
one talking. . . Don’t you believe I adore you ? ”
Adore her ? Yes : she was sure he did, and perhaps
it was silly of her to have this nasty prickly tiny uncom-
fortableness in her heart on Big Man’s account . . but
she drew back from Leon’s compelling embrace.
" Leon . . don’t you know my story ? Wait. I’m
not really Big Man’s relation at all .. he just . .
somehow . . found me in the fern . . when I was
thrown from a runaway trap and both my father and
mother were killed and all their luggage, their papers, if
they had any, of identification were lost in the strong,
deep current . . swept away, the buggy turned over in


the river . . the police could never discover anything
definite . . just that my people were emigrants most
likely . . looking for land . . they thought they might
find out in time by tracing all couples who had come
out by recent emigrant ships . . but whether depart-
ments blundered, or whether as they told Big Man,
some of the people were not married at all , . and some
had assumed names. .
He interrupted her quickly. , “ Yes . . Mrs. Cock-
bum told me something of the tale, Sweetheart, and
that you are not really a Malcolm . . though nearly
every one believes you to be the old chap’s relative . .
well, don’t you understand, little woman, that makes it
all the easier . . you really have no one but yourself to
consult . . none . . but me” . . he slid his arm about
her again. " There . . don’t talk, you interrupt the
kissing.” But she pressed small cool palms against his
breast feeling the ridge the sprig of wattle made under
his shirt.
" I want to talk, Leon. Can’t you see what I owe
Big Man ? For picking me out of the fern . . educa-
ting . . and keeping me all these years ? No, don’t
touch me like that . . you . , you somehow make my
mind feel all foggy. . . I can’t think sensibly.” He
smiled in the dark. How well he knew this! There
had been other experiences. . .
" Found her among the fern.”
For a moment he felt sorry for the girl: she was such
a dear little thing . . the prettiest he had ever seen. . .
But he would be far sorrier for himself if he lost hen


He frowned. “ Amber you are a mere child in some
things, try to be more a woman of the world. Love
itself is not a matter of marrying and giving in marriage.
Some of the greatest lovers of history have remained
together for half a century, and have never been married
to one another. Look at the fidelity of Juliette Drouet
and Victor Hugo (he trusted Amber’s knowledge of
these to be vague enough for her not to know that the
fidelity was principally on Juliette’s side). “ Love
blows as the wind blows.”
‘‘ Oh, Leon you always end up with that. . . Isn’t
it possible for people to be in love —and married too ? ”
She thought of the Cockbums. Was Mrs. Cockbum
romantically in love with Joe Cockbum ? He had a
sandy beard streaked with white, and a crooked nose . .
result of an incident in the branding yards, but undeni-
able . . and when he spoke his teeth seemed to shoot
out and he nibbled his words as a rabbit does a lettuce
leaf. Were the Cockbums romantically in love ? She
remembered the blue eyed yellow haired, dimpled little
woman who had stayed at the Bushman’s Rest with
the lean Englishman who walked like a soldier. One
day she had found them kissing each other where the
cross roads met at the coach stop, and how angry Big
Man had been because they talked to her, and the
Englishman showed her a medal, and there were tears
in the little lady’s eyes as they both looked at it. . .
" Was I worth it —the loss of all that ? ” she had said
. . and he . . he had kissed her as Leon was wanting
to kiss her now. Smothering things— evading. . .


And afterwards she had overheard Mrs. Cockbum
say to another woman that the little lady had been the
cause of the tall Englishman’s being “ Cashiered ” and
she had wondered what the word meant, and had got
down the dictionary from Big Man’s shelf and when
she told him why she wanted it, he said she was not to
talk to those people any more because they were " not
married.”
And for quite a long time she had thought
“ cashiered ” had something to do with people loving
each other who were not married.
It had puzzled her then. . . She understood it
better now. But perhaps if the little lady and the tall
Englishman had been in exactly the same position as
herself and Leon, they would have got married too.
Anyway, all the girls she had ever known contem-
plated marriage as the only possible solution with the
man one loved. English history or French notwith-
standing.
Years afterwards she was to remember the smell of
crushed wattle and the faint mingled aroma of fine
tobacco and Russian leather with a feeling of sudden
sickness.
For Leon, folding his arms across his chest, and
standing rigid as the tall soldier might have stood to
be " shot at dawn ” instead of merely cashiered for
running away with his Colonel’s lady, said,
“ It is quite possible to be married without being the
least in love, Amber . . because I’m in love with
you, but . . his voice grew firm with definite—and


perhaps honest purpose at last, “ I am married . . too.”
The water rat was swimming back. . . They could
hear little gurglings and the lap of the widening circles
in minute wavelets against the muddy edge of the
bank. . .
Somewhere in the dark a bird called—a night prowler
with bloody beak and talons. . .
Married. Leon married. . .
She was stumbling blindly through high dewy
grasses and the silky poisonous sweetness of wild
tobacco bloom, stumbling blindly, instinctively,
towards the old homestead where Big Man pored over
a well-thumbed mathematical treatise by the aid of a
kerosene oil lamp. . .
The winged ants annoyed him, and the grey night
moths —Every now and then one beat itself to death
against the white globe which the mailman had brought
through as a special favour, and with great ingenuity
and care . . Squirming bodies with scorched wings lay
in a circle round his book. He damned insect life,
too prolific in Queensland, yawned, wondered why
Amber had gone to bed so early without their game of
cribbage, heard Mrs. Maloney snoring virtuously in her
chaste apartment which was hung with an oleograph
of the Virgin and Child and some blue beads the Pope
had blessed, yawned again, decided to “ turn in ”
too. . .
And in her cool, airy room, which he had with the
aid of the now five-years-dead bush carpenter, lined so
carefully with sweet smelling pine, Amber, fully dressed,


lay on her bed till dawn, now shaken with convulsive
sobs, now burning from head to foot with fierce and
angry shame.
Now crying on Leon that she hated him . . now that
she could never live without him.
And Big Man knew nothing of it, for the days were
long gone of the hessian walls when you could hear
from one end of Rocky Springs house to Hie other.


CHAPTER NINE
" Does she regret a compact that was done in mimicry of Love ?
She does not speak. . .
To her slim pulsing throat the gold tears run.
She does not move, but stands there listening. . ."
Though declaring to herself with all the impetuous fury
of a wounded heart, that she loathed Leon and would
never under any circumstances, speak to him again.
Amber was conscious of a twinge of something horribly
like disappointment when day after day passed without
a word from him.
She seemed to have developed an extraordinary
sharpness of hearing, for the beat of hoofs heralding
the mailman’s approach on the track, were realized by
Amber before anyone else suspected them.
Did a traveller ride to the gate at high noon, it was
to the girl as though he looked like Leon, who rode so
well . . looked like Leon till he was near enough to
tear illusion’s rainbow web and drift it to the four
winds. . .
Life was all the man she hated now, as a little while
ago it had been all the man she loved.
Surely he should have tried to make some better
explanation of his deceiving, his reason for deceiving
her.
It seemed like a fantastic tale. If he was married
why had not the Sandersons and the Cockbums known ?


Why had the district always spoken of him as a single
man ? There must be some mystery here. . .
Had he only said he was married . . to get away from
her .. ? She grovelled in shame at that thought. . but
he had . . oh, surely he had . . dearly cared for her!
Her budding woman’s wisdom could scarce doubt that,
though men were deceivers ever, as Mrs. Maloney sang
in her cracked old voice, on Saturdays when she did
the ironing.
" One foot on land and one on sea
To one thing constant never.”
The poet knew men. . . All men knew what other men
were. She remembered a saying of Malcolm’s, most
of whose best friends nevertheless, had been from the
Shamrock Isle, that " An Irishman makes a good lover,
but a bad husband.”
Then Leon must be Irish in temperament! He
couldn’t be a good husband, if he
Oh, no ! He must hate his wife . . or have grown out
of love of her. . .
Was it true that there remained no romance in
marriage ? That unless one were united like the little
lady and the cashiered Englishman, Romance fled . .
united . . not bound. . . Romance was choked by a
wedding ring—and encouraged to live by the absence
of fetters. . .
Hungry for love, Amber’s heart and soul fought over
issues. Sometimes it seemed to the sunshine in her


blood that cried to other sunshine, that anything was
better than [her desolation of spirit. . . Leon’s
arms. . . Leon’s lips. . . Oh God! How lonely
she was!
Sandy Malcolm began to think his adopted child
needed a holiday and he did not like the reckless way
she rode young 'uns half broken, about the Run,
though there was no denying as Michael often said
“ the hand of her for a horse.”
The most unruly outlaw became a gentle lady’s hack
soon after Amber took him in hand, and her seat on a
horse was as good as her hand. “ Grace itself, the
lamb,” declared Mrs. Maloney though she too dis-
approved of this “ gadding about the country by
herself.”
They did not know that, day after day as the
shadows lengthened, she rode to the wild oats plain,
dismounted, holding her horse’s bridle rein in her
hands, the other hand cupping her chin, sat thus on
the dust-grey log wliich was sunken in the soft mitchell
grass, watching the shadows fling their long dusk
shafts across the way he used to come. . .
She told herself if he came now, she would rise up and
spurn him : she only wanted the opportunity to tell
him how she abhorred him for his treachery, his foul
betrayal of her love.
But the days went on. . .
She confided in no one: perhaps she sensed the
general public a Hathor of browsing benevolence, which
too easily turned to a homed attack. Big Man would


be inexpressibly shocked at her duplicity in having
met Leon day after day, evening after evening surrep-
titiously as no maid should meet a man. . . Mrs.
Maloney . . Michael . . Mary Cockbum . . Mary who
was sentimental and who had “ not been game ”
to do anything hke this in all her days, these were her
“ general public.”
Amber had loved Nature : the ragged roSettes of wild
fruits, a bird’s song, elfin-clear, amongst the light-
woods, her own garden, glistening hke Chinese brocade
with the " powder of flowers ” she sowed incontinently
there, for she hungered always for bright colours, the
creek, tawny amber in the sun, cloudy brown streaked
with crude orange after rain, or deep green as thick
glass in the dry weather, reflecting the pale discs of
primrose tinted lilies . . but now all beauty seemed
but mockery when one saw it alone. . .
The crystal pale moon above the timber: soft burring
of wild bees in the fierce gold nasturtiums ; rose-spurred
trumpets of honeysuckle by the bark-walled harness
room : the amazing loveliness of Morning, coming in
delicate mauves and pearl drawing a rose tinted scarf
athwart the hills. Amber noted all vaguely with her
outer eye but the harp of her soul made no response.
Dumb to all but the sight of a brown faithless face . .
the wooing sound of a treacherous voice. . .
Leon married ?
Leon who had been her knight sans peur et sans
reproche. . . Leon married ! Leon another woman’s
husband . , holding another woman in his arms . .


kissing another woman’s mouth . . turning at night
from sleep to clasp another woman. , .
Pah . . It made her ill to think of it. . .
Pride strengthening her will . . stiffening her back-
bone ; She must forget this man.
It would be easier she was sure, if she had once seen
him with “ that woman.”
Perhaps she was ugly.
Perhaps she was prettier than herself.
Amber slipped out of bed, for on the royal blue of far
hills the morning light grew cold and the year was
at autumn, bright days but nights perceptibly chill,
snatched her hand mirror from the dressing table and
stared at herself in the grey revealing light.
She was as pretty as ever, though paler and thinner
and there were shadows such as eighteen should not
wear under young eyes. • .
“ Oh, Leon 1 Leon! How could you treat me
so.”
She could hear the calves bellowing at the cow pens :
a bit jingling, the throp-throp of horses hoofs: the
station was astir. She heard Big Man taking his early
cup of tea in the kitchen, talking with Mrs. Maloney.
He shouted at her : she shouted at him : but they both
enjoyed the pow-wow. Sometimes they talked prickly
pear —now almost disappearing from the Run : some-
times stock. Mrs. Maloney was keen about “ kaping
pigs,” and Sandy Malcolm wasn’t. It had been a
year’s argument with them already. In the end she
would probably win. She thought it a disgrace they


should have to buy bacon. Pigs . . prickly pear . .
cows . . calves . . crops . . sheep . , drought .. fats
for the market . . rainy seasons. , . How could
they ? Amber sat up in bed, turning the mirror face
down on the coverlet. She drew her knees up, clasped
her hands round them, saw the light dancing over the
cleared patches, and heard a magpie singing as though
its little heart must burst for very joy of Mfe.
She was only eighteen, how many years, how many
grey, empty years before she could be like Big Man and
Mrs. Maloney and find her absorbing interest in things
other than Romance.
How many long, empty years I
Then one day she woke to decide upon a truly
feminine revenge which proved perhaps the wound was
beginning to heal over a little. Leon had always been
very jealous. There was that Macpherson boy with
the yellow hair that crinkled. Someone said he was a
survival from a Greek frieze. If she flirted noticeably
with the Macpherson boy and Don Cockbum who had
adored her for quite six months, Leon, wherever he was,
might hear of it and be annoyed.
It would be a very comforting thing to be able to
annoy Leon, even at a distance.
Of course she would never love again. It is easy to
decide anything emphatically at eighteen, but she
would torture men indiscriminately, and thereby take
revenge upon the sex for all that one of their hated
kind had done to her.
Next day she rode into the township and stayed a


night with the P.M.’s wife, a highly intellectual person
with a blonde chignon, one of those women who always
read learned books in public places with an air of
ecstatic and conscious enjoyment, keeping a finger in
the page when replying to any remark addressed to
them. Above the common herd naturally. She made
Amber feel a Mere Frivolity, when she was with her,
but the girl bore with this that she might wander
through the soft goods department of the big store, and
choose material for a new frock. Which proved, per-
haps, her case was not altogether hopeless.
Big Man began to be seriously upset by the stream
of young men who seemed to find the road where it
turned off to Rocky Springs a convenience and a habit.
His scowls which were probably worse than he intended,
didn’t really deter though they sometimes affrighted
self-conscious bush lads, but Amber left off racing about
the Run alone on half broken horses, and accepted
blushing escorts everywhere. Mrs. Maloney, though
at times holding up her hands in horror at the girl’s
catholicity of taste, hoped that it meant ultimate
" settling down,” and shouted the same thing at Big
Man when Amber was out of hearing, which meant she
must be very far off indeed.
And so the weeks went on and Leon became to all
obvious intents and purposes, a thing of the past.


CHAPTER TEN
•* Old men, who can remember wooden ships
And days of link boys, and when Dickens wrote
His serials month by month.”
Life, laughing in her sleeve, has a mischievous and
sometimes a cruel fashion of dropping human metals
in the crucible of Chance and testing the alloy in
them.
Such a test was Amber’s though it was held over for
nearly five years, and an endless succession of admirers
amongst whom she never appeared to be satisfied that
there was one sufficiently attractive to whom to fling
the handkerchief. If’t 'were given to Bill, then she
would lose Harry’s pleasant companionship, if't 'were
Harry . . well . . Bill was such a reliable fellow,
The multitude made for safety as far as Alec Malcolm’s
happiness was concerned : they did not rob him of his
adopted daughter.
Still she flitted about the old rooms of Rocky
Springs, still argued with him on his Scientific experi-
ments, still listened attentively, sitting on the arm of
the chair he had made out of part of a sawn-off log and
she had upholstered, while he told her of old days in
Scotland, for he claimed descent on the spindle-side
from William Wallace, and on the other from a French
page who came across with Mary from France. He
remembered walking through the snow to town to


buy “ Household Words ” with Charles Dickens’s
serials running through it; remembered the eve of
black frost when he held a stranger’s horse for him and
spent the two shillings the stranger gave to him on a
yellow-back novel by James Grant, and walked home
to hold the torches in the big kitchen under the oak
rafters, to light his father’s guests to their meal, and
these were farming men, like all his forebears. “ Not
gentlemen farmers either” he was always careful to
explain. He recalled, as old men love to do, days of
the Fair at Balochie ; of how a young beast, tied in the
byre all through the winter, when released in spring
days ran and ran in the excitement of its freedom, till
it fell dead from exhaustion ; and from this of how he
was sent to learn dancing at a French Academy, and
of how he ended by loyally punching the master’s
head "for a dumed froggie ” and running away. Of
how at sixteen he ran further and, hungry for adven-
ture, went steerage to America, of how sick he was in
the rat-infested frowsy quarters of those seafaring
days ; of an unforgettable black and orange sun setting
he saw off Nova Scotia; of how returning to Scotland,
like the prodigal son, with some of his romantic dreams
of making a fortune in a strange land dead for ever,
and having but a shilling left in his pocket spent it on
going to the pit of a theatre, and walking home across
country afterwards. . .
Then he would speak of the days when the blacks
were bad at Normanton; of how a man dared not
walk alone but must ride through the ambushed under


growth, and must always make his " myall ” black-boy
keep ahead ; of how near the revolver was to a man’s
hand in those days ; of how he nearly shot a Japanese
boy for bringing native women about the survey
camp . . and Amber would listen and run her slim
young fingers through the fringe of silver hair at the
back of his long head, and occasionally asj: an intelli-
gent question. “ And did you never fall in love with
anybody, Big Man ? ” Then he always managed to
change the subject. In some moods she renewed it
teasingly; in others she let it be. Perhaps far back,
for all his practical spirit, there had been, once, a
romantic love in Big Man’s life . . when he was quite
young, of course.
" It’s a good thing for me you did not many,” she
would add. “lam sure I should have hated an adopted
mother.” He evaded all mention of the tragedy that
had put her in his hands : a certain diffidence, perhaps
a trifle of jealousy of possession over the parents that
had been her own blood, perhaps a fear that she
should probe for details of the occurrence and recall
too vividly to his mind the face of the man who had
begotten her as it lay terrible in its disfigurement.
Sometimes he thought now she forgot, as he often did,
that she was not really his “ ain bairn.” Sometimes
the thought lay in his mind without coming to fruition
that he would go to Hell’s Arch and discover what the
years had done to the graves among the bracken over
which a wooden cross had been set made out of packing
cases discarded by the hawker, but it was a long


journey away from his present beat, rough country
and hard travelling, and after all, it was only a matter of
sentiment. He believed firmly in cremation and no
“ morbing ” over tombs. About these matters he was
entirely practical.
So the years went on in a pleasant valley of good
work accomplished. Perhaps with his somewhat
pessimistic nature he was happier than he had ever
been in the past lay days of coarser, more hectic
pleasuring. Rough and tumble loves that left only
distaste, drinking bouts that sometimes left heartache
as well as headache.
He had one or two old cronies, some who had known
him in earlier days passed through Rocky Springs at
different periods and partook of fluid from the stone
rum jar, with ancient jesting, and just and ever-green
appreciation. Liquor, as it should be with all good
Scotchmen made little impression (unless partaken of
in large quantities, which he abjured now-a-days) on
Alec Malcolm. Robbie Mcßob, who loved his glass
next to his Bible, and kept his Bible handy to his
glass, sometimes left the house with wavering steps
and a leetle deeficulty about mounting his roan horse,
which Michael, a natural sympathizer, was ever ready
to hold near the meat-block for him ; ere he rode he
declaimed Bobbie Bums with one gesticulating hand,
the other on the pommel, but Big Man merely became
a little more serious and went to bed abruptly, to arise
with the magpies next day none the worse for Mcßob’s
call.


The broaching of the rum jar was one of the amiable
interludes ; his real heart was in the girl, his experi-
ments, and the stock raising. His cattle and sheep
had taken blue ribbons at several township shows. He
was going to send the prize ram to Brisbane this
year.
Michael had just returned from a disastrous droving
trip in which he had not only come off ■worst, when the
blood of the Irish Kings (his maternal grandfather had
been an O’Connor) had risen to such an extent that it
boiled over in fisticuffs with the station overseer at
Trelawney, a sturdy Comishman who gave Michael
two black eyes before he could satisfy the drover that
he had been spreading his stock illegally on the Trelaw-
ney grass. Then west of the Bulloo, the cattle must
needs, unsuspected, feed upon the death-dealing wild
fuschia bush, to repletion and the next world, and the
meat-works for which they were intended, were cheated
of half the mob.
Michael’s prestige as a drover, who, if of variable
habits, generally got a fair percentage of the beasts
through to their destination, was seriously affected:
his amour propre more seriously wounded. He returned
to Rocky Springs and played the fiddle till he broke
his strings and had to go into the township for more
cat-gut.
In the township he heard that Leon Gaspard had
been through the place.
" Looking for land again—sure,” said Michael
winking maliciously but quite privately.
81
GAMING GODS


He mentioned the matter to Amber casually in the
station kitchen on his return, and for all her four years
of forgetting the rich colour flamed to the roots of her
hair. She wondered just how much was accidental in
Michael’s airy remark, and how much intentional
probing; but she answered coolly, “Is he ? ” and
turned to Mrs. Maloney with an eager request for hot
scones for afternoon tea, since one or two of her recent
swains might ride over for tennis. Michael who had
helped to “ ant bed ” the tennis court, allowed his
attention to be distracted. Next to his violin playing
he prided himself upon the way he had constructed
this court for Miss Amber. He had argued so fiercely
with the knock-about man, and with Alec Malcolm
himself, as to measurements and distances until Amber
had written to the City papers and confounded them
all with correct measurements vide Southern journals'
" Answers to Correspondents ” columns, whose Editor
of course, could not possibly be mistaken about any-
thing.
This afternoon Michael finding he needed a rest, sat
on a stump in the clearing and watched from afar off,
the tennis champions at work. Leon Gaspard and his
intentions honourable or otherwise in “ looking for
land again ” in the neighbourhood banished to the
hinterland of his mind.
But he was much in the foreground of Amber’s, all
through the golden hours of the late afternoon. Try as
she might to concentrate on racquet and ball, Leon’s
eyes, Leon’s masterful Ups, Leon’s abominable


treacheries, made fresh havoc in acquired tranquilli-
ties.
Though she never could forgive . . had she for-
gotten . . after all ?
This she was soon to bring to the proof.


CHAPTER ELEVEN
" Did the drawbridge rise when the time was ripe
To the quick command of a fairy pipe—
Did you come—a prince in your jewelled state —
Did you come as a palmer desolate ! ’’
How quiet it was tonight!
The scent of the wild tobacco which someone had
told her yielded a drug like opium, came blown across
the paddocks to her; the moonlight spilled silver wine
from its overfull bowl high in mid-heaven, through the
gumboughs overhead.
She could see the outlines of the lily cups and the
smooth thick lily pads in the shining waters, dusked
here and there by an over-arching branch. She could
hear the water rat, probably a descendant of the one
that splashed into the cool deeps that night when Leon
had held her in his arms for the last time . . it made
ever-widening circles from bank to bank as it crossed
the creek. There was an almond of flowering bush
trees, mingled with the sickly sweetness of the wild
tobacco plant; there was a dank, cool odour of weed
and water grass, and she thought she could smell her
own rose bush from her gay garden plot, a plot suffering
recently from the dry weather and about which she
had argued furiously with Malcolm that it was neces-
sary for her to have tank water for her rose bush though
the tanks were not half full i she had declared the creek


water was too hard, and Big Man finally laughed at
her and said “ Well . . well, have it your own way,”
before he left in the buckboard to catch the down
coach citywards for the Brisbane show. . She might
have gone to the show this year, but she had not
wanted to. . . She wondered why . .it wasn’t
Bill’s proximity, nor Harry’s . . it was . .
What was it ?
Surely nothing so shameful as the hope that she
might see Leon again ? Never, if she lived to be a
hundred, did she want to see Leon Gaspard any more.
She flung out her hands as though she thrust a
tangible presence from her. . .
Swiftly as though the strange old warning of the
proximity of evil once more arose about her, she leapt
to her feet. Something had rustled and slid in the
grasses. Perhaps only a harmless lizard that mistook
the warm yellow moon for its beloved sun . . perhaps
in reality the deadly brown snake that haunted river
banks in the warm days. She couldn’t be sure but
the feeling of ill-creatures in ambush nigh to her had
fallen like a cloud on the shimmering night. She stood
for a moment looking at the water where under the
arching trees it made pools of rippling light and
mysterious caverns of dusk, then she turned, climbed
the bank and keeping to the more open moon-washed
ways, began to walk in the paddock where the wild
tobacco grew.
Early August days when in parts of Queensland the
small birds, snipe, dottrel, and godwits are coming
85
GAMING GODS


back from China, from white and terrible distant
Russia and from the hidden places of Northern Asia.
Early August, when the yellow-wing and the white-
cheeked honey-eater have made their days a honey-
moon, when the gay plumaged diamond sparrows are
tunnelling into sandy banks and even in railway cut-
tings nearer the coast when the silver-eyes have made
their nest, and a tide of Spring is rushing to the blue
walls of the world. . .
Spring . . no wonder the girl, since human beings
are made of air and earth and water and sunshine, felt
the influence of the earth tides, and could not sit
within four walls tonight sewing or reading, while the
moonlight lay like spilled white lime in the hollows of
leafy places. . .
She heard the big stud horses snorting in the enclosure
beyond ; the cannon-like contacts of two fighting rams,
which in the defining moonbeams, were finishing a
battle to the death . . though it only seemed to the
death, for in reality neither ever succeeded in injuring
the other, but the irrestible force of their butting heads
made sound like big gun-fire through the stillness of
the Spring evening. . Now she leaned on the top rail
of the red-gum fence and stared into the crowding
timbers. Fragile winds of wattle, musky spiciness of
little unnamed blooms and the pungent wholesome
breath of eucalyptus, came to her. . She could see a
heavy lumbering body crossing a glade with a smaller
clinging body on its back ; a mother native bear with
its precious baby, going to feed on the river gums ; a


’possum scurried with long, clawed, scratching feet, up
a sapling. For this is the marsupial feeding time.
On the river flats the old man red kangaroo would be
leading his does to the places where pleasant grasses
grew, beyond the brigalows perhaps; the dingoes
would be stalking the stupid cross-bred sheep who
never could defend themselves or their young. Homed
cows, mothering new born calves, would be watching
for attack and facing the dog pack, moving round and
round in circles as wild cattle fight the wolves of older
lands. . . But in Amber’s immediate vicinity was
peace.
She wondered how Big Man was enjoying himself,
chaffing the barmaids in Brisbane hotels along with
grizzle-headed friends, railway contractors, bridge
builders, companions of his younger days, who were
as much interested in the machine section at the show
grounds as in the stock parade in the ring.
Then out of the leaf blur and the moon-flooded earth,
out of the blue distant forest aisles, and the wonderful
beauty of the warm Australian night there came a man
to her, young and, strong who vaulted the fence and
crushed her to his heart, and then went on his knees
among the bruised wild tobacco blossomings and
implored her to forgive. . .
For he had never forgotten her, never . . never . .
He had been a damned scoundrel . . a fool . . a
knave . . but he had at least confessed that he was
not free to woo and wed as a decent man should. . .
And he had gone away to forget . . to forget her . .


and the way she had crucified him with her scorn . .
the bitter hate which grew so swiftly from her tender
love. . . Had she never cared at all ? He caught at
her dress as she turned to flee him . . kissed her
palms . . and then springing to his feet, would have
held her in his arms again had she not set her two
little hands firmly against his breast and forbidden
him with gestures that which she could not speak.
For, for all these years of forgetting, for all she
had so long stored up to speak of her contempt, for all
the arrows of laughters she had meant to direct at this
man who had thought he could influence her from any
path she meant to take of outraged womanhood, she
had not word to say. Perhaps because there was so
much to tell . . the words stifled each other at the
egress of her lips.
Nothing!
She trembled from head to foot, with the effort to
tell him she loathed him, his touch, his voice, the dark,
compelling eyes. . .
But she was dumb, and he was not blind. He saw
the tears she would not allow to fall: saw the sweet
quivering of her dewy mouth.
He took her small palm in one of his.
“ Don’t speak,” he breathed, " Let us walk together
a little way . . and then I’ll go—if you tell me I
must.”
Still no word of acceptance or refusal.
Dumb . . blind . . she could not be deaf to the wild
music that had come back into her life. . .


Step by step she paced with him, fighting herself . .
a losing battle with the beloved so close to her . . the
once beloved ? And the treacherous moon transform-
ing an everyday world into a magic sphere where
neither the old-fashioned virtues nor the conventional
" thou shalt nots ” reign unopposed.
Perhaps his wife was dead —and he had come back
to claim her. Could she then forget how he had
deceived her ? Could she refuse to listen to the music ?
Could trust ever grow among those blind rose-hung
alley-ways ? Could
“ Why have you come back ? ” She could scarce
think the voice her own.
He told her again because he " adored ” her and life
was a barren desert without her . . but he did not
speak the words she had expected to hear.
He began to tell her about his marriage. How as
quite a boy, he had imagined himself in love with the
middle-aged star of a travelling theatrical troupe,
who had laid herself out to attract. She had been a
handsome woman in the Indian summer of her beauty,
and he had consented to the strange, ill-assorted
marriage, in the end of a tempestuous wooing from
which he was just beginning to hope to withdraw. . .
He scarce knew how it happened. He had gone down
by the same coach, the same train as the principals of
the troupe to the city. There had been a champagne
lunch at the hotel and they had driven to the Regis-
trar’s . . the comedian . . her old lover, he after-
wards suspected—had given her away. Hard and fast


they were tied, though he left her a week later. He
had implored her to divorce him : because he neither
properly maintained nor lived with her, but she
steadily refused; her reply through his lawyers was
always the same, if he asked her again she would insist
upon proclaiming their marriage to the world. He
wanted her to sue him for “ restitution of conjugal
rights ” an absurd phrase, but that she declined to do :
watched by detectives she gave him no real excuse to
move on his part, and because neither really cared a
toss for one another, the law would have shrieked
“ collusion,” probably in any case, had they wished to
be free. . It was a tricky thing, the law.
Amber supposed it was. . But nothing mattered.
His wife wasn’t dead : he was married : the position
unchanged. Alas! She began to suspect her heart
unchanged as well. . .


CHAPTER TWELVE
" Oh, cap and bells ! you have your kingdom too I ”
" When as a mellow fruit, the orange ball of sunset
Falls among the waiting hills."
The East Lynne travelling dramatic company which
carried with it a Heavy Lead, who was also the owner
and, on occasion, a juggler swallowing knives and fire-
sticks in a perfectly amazing fashion, had met with
bad weather, and just at the cross roads by the river
down went the caravan's wheel into a slough of soft
mud, and snap went the axle. The leading lady who
was fair and fluffy and meant (so she considered) for
better things, got out, sat on a stump and cried. The
stout dame who took the part of the female comic
relief and still made up quite well despite her weight of
years and flesh, took matters in a more cheery spirit.
So many years she had " been on the road " before she
settled down for a time to keep a fruit shop in the city,
proceeds of a matrimonial alliance above her station,
and which yielded her little conjugal bliss, and having
returned at the request of an old friend and admirer
on the boards, to act as chaperone to the leading lady
and as dresser to the company and comic relief when
needed, she recovered all the old philosophy of barn-
storming days in all weathers, and on all kinds of
rough tracks, a philosophy which the failure of the
fruit shop had somewhat shattered, together with the
91


matrimonial difficulty. She was far too feckless, far
too generous, open-handed and unsuspicious to ever
make a success of trade, though she clung grimly to her
marriage licence, because of an ancient wound to her
vanity, and a still deeper one, to her heart.
With her sturdy arm she had helped the men in
trying to shift the bogged wheel: she had held lengths
of wire and rope and the end of a gum sapling, while
they patched up the axle: had cheered the small,
rubicund white-haired proprietor and the handsome,
not-too-clean hero, with her certainty that the other
wagon with the scenery and effects was already high
on its way to the township. They had somehow
missed it at the turning, and the heavy rain had
prevented their judging as to the freshness of the wheel-
tracks ahead. Under her old stage name of Miss
Arabella de Courcy, she was the managing one of the
party. The proprietor who had long since nourished
a passion for her in her spinster days regretted still in
sentimental moments that Arabella could never be his.
When she had been slim enough to play the heroine
in East Lynne, the audience had thoroughly enjoyed
themselves, weeping to a woman.
Over his gin and water he would tell you, till he
nearly wept himself, the triumphs of Arabella’s past.
She had ruined it all by a " secret ” marriage " with a
toff.” A toff who had soon left her to go her ways
alone. . .
Tom Prance, the owner of the East Lynne Company,
thought Arabella was a fool not to sue for desertion,


but as she cheerfully pointed out in the then state of
the divorce laws in Queensland, she would have to
bring more than that against her disappearing spouse
to obtain a decree, also he paid her small allowance
into the bank regular. In the eyes of the law there was
nothing like that: a woman’s rights only commenced
when a man did not plank down. Besides . .
She turned her face away. Tom Prance’s eyes were
not the only wet ones. Perhaps right down in her
foolishly youthful heart Arabella nourished a hope,
unexpressed. . .
Anyway things remained in statu quo and then a
restlessness came upon her after the failure of the fruit
shop and she decided she was not yet too old or too
ugly to take to the roads again with Prance’s troupe.
Tom Prance fortunately did not entirely depend on his
theatrical ventures. He had a little money invested
through a lucky gold mine deal in the old days. He had
sold out when things were on the crest and escaped
the inevitable collapse, but he loved his " career ”
and many of the back block towns loved him.
Sometimes there was " standing room only ” in the
galvanised iron roofed halls when Prance’s company
strutted their little hour, at others the audience was
mostly dead heads and school children who came half
price, but things balanced pretty well, and Tom
Prance did not often come out on the wrong side,
though he paid the salaries of his leads, and no one who
worked for Tom Prance was ever left stranded in the
smalls, while Tom had anything in the bank. At times
7
93
GAMING GODS


they gleaned harvest at a country show, Tom always
carried the clippings from the newspapers in his pocket,
giving the various show dates in the State. Once he
had even run a thrilling drama at a side show in the
Brisbane Exhibition grounds, and the Governor had
come as far as the door ere he had been lured with his
party to a merry-go-round, a blatant, bawling thing,
in the vicinity.
Over the inevitable gin (a small gin, and plenty of
water) Tom Prance had been known to boast of the
time " His Excellency himself nearly came to the
show. . . So help me Bob he did, but there were
some kids with him who wanted the merry-go-round.”
Tom did not believe in merry-go-rounds; he
thought they were dangerous “ and upsetting to the
inside.”
But it was in the outside townships, where little
came save the circus, that Tom reaped, and nobody
minded Arabella de Courcy’s avoirdupois, and the
youth of the neighbourhood rode long miles to clap the
fluffy-headed leading lady, and township maidens
languished over the hero’s dark eyes, whom they
declared they were positive was " somebody in his
own right,” whatever that meant. He sang too in a
saccharine and faulty tenor, and gave them old senti-
mental ballads of the ’eighties, in between the acts,
and if the drama wasn’t going too well Tom could
always " juggle " and the world over young people
love a magician.
Small boys under the polled cedars in township


streets did amazing things with packs of dirty cards,
and dangerous things with open pocket knives, and
young and enterprising throats, after the visits of the
East Lynne touring company. One little mother’s
darling indeed had required medical attention for a
burned thorax occasioned by experimenting with a
fire stick, lacking Prance’s sleight of hand, and the
local doctor (just returned from burying a Chinaman
up the river) read him a lecture on evil communications
which frightened the boy more than the burning.
So much excitement did it cause in the township
that when the parson made his bi-quarterly rounds, he
was able to draw apt illustration for his arresting sermon
on the ultimate end of disobedient children and how,
owing to the Angel with the flaming sword and the
Ass in the path, the lesser burning was perhaps a minor
insurance against the fire-everlasting. He was of the
old school, and rigid. Besides, his wife never gave him
any chance to air his theories, mundane or spiritual,
in his own home. He had to “ let go ”in the
pulpit.
As a rule nothing but joy resulted from Tom Prance’s
visits when the yellow and red placards appeared on the
walls, and the hoardings the goats had left, in bush
townships, indeed when the Man with the Brush and
the Bucket of Paste was seen preparing to make his
rounds to adorn hitherto innocent places with the sign
manual of the East Lynne dramatic co.’s intentions,
fences and sides of buildings that had only known the
placarding of church socials or customary announce


ments of country race meetings for months, became
centres of hectic attraction and the grown ups were
just as intrigued as the youngsters, so the day was
kept free from entanglements.
Even the Police Magistrate’s wife at Dingy-bar
township went "as a matter of duty,” though she did
not exactly explain why her appearance in the one row
of front Austrian bent wood chairs, was so dutiful,
and she went in for intellect, as they knew all the way
up the river. The occupants of the backless forms in
the rear of the School of Arts hall did not bother about
intellect. They went openly and unashamed to see
the show, to weep, to laugh, to wonder.
Now the bills were up in Dingy-bar and the broken
axle meant slow travelling and perhaps arriving a day
late. More work for the bill poster. “ Owing to an
accident, etc.,” the " World-famed East Lynne Co.
which were putting on the thrilling drama ‘ The Bloody
Hand ’ for Tuesday, are unavoidably obliged to change
their date to Wednesday.” This would be pasted side-
ways over “ See Tom Prance as the Gory Avenger in
The Bloody Hand.” Little boys delighted in these
posters because they boldly proclaimed the lurid word
they were not allowed to use in cold blood. •
That the treat should be delayed did not matter
much in this land of lots o’ time, and few amusements,
and the P.M.’s wife could find her duty called just as
well on Wednesday as on Tuesday. Anyway Tuesday
was choir practice and she had felt a little troubled.
In her position she was expected to lend the aid of her


thin soprano to the local choir. She knew very well
where the choir would have been if Tuesday’s date for
the play-actors had held.
So the matter of a broken axle would not affect trade,
but it would mean they must pitch their tent here-
abouts, as the stage further on which they would reach
by midnight at the present rate, was waterless. Here
the creek ran deep and cool the other side of Hell’s
Arch, and a branch track led through the bracken
towards it.
In the westering light, Arabella took a bucket from
the back of the caravan and proceeded down the trail
between the polished russet of the ferns, singing to
herself as she went the first few bars of an aria from
the “ Bohemian Girl.” She never could remember
more than the first couplet
" When other lips and other hearts
Their tale of love shall tell.”
But she sang it over and over entirely to her own
satisfaction. Tom Prance loved to hear her. It
seemed, he always said, “ So home-like.”
Birds were flying to their leafy eyerie beyond the
" No Birds land ” of Hell’s Arch, two solemn kooka-
burra, grey and brownish-white like the limb of a dead
tree were clearing their throats preparatory to their
vocal deoch and doris with the passing day, and from
the road that led to the river through Hell’s Arch
itself, Arabella could hear the beat of horse’s hoofs.


Perhaps a traveller who could give them news of the
missing baggage wagon . . perhaps, . .
She stepped cautiously out on a fallen tree bole that
slanted down, its dry roots in bracken, its long denuded
boughs deep in the stream.
As she leaned forward a large medallion of doubtful
gold she always wore on a black ribbon round her
plump red neck, swung forward and was reflected, a
disc of light in the ripples . . . She knew it was safe,
so did not bother to replace it in her bosom. It had
hung there since impatient youth last kissed her soft
full lips, lips that were not too weak, but merely too
loving. She could see the reflex of her ample propor-
tions in the water. She sighed, but the bucket came
back full. In her prime she had boasted a beautiful
arm : it was also a strong one.
She straightened herself, held on to a slim sapling
that grew down to the water’s edge, and bent Narcissus-
like to the tides, backed, turned carefully, grunted as
she found solid footing on the bank again, and
renewed her ditty—
" When other lips and other hearts "
I am afraid she said " 'arts ” that time for “ h’s ” had
not been part of her early up-bringing, and as she turned
she saw between the grim rocky ramparts of Hell’s
Arch, a girl with the sunset glow behind her and hair
like the colour of the sun at noon, reining her horse and


staring at her over the jade and gold and cinnamons of
the crisping bracken.
A girl, whom she thought was the prettiest creature
she had ever seen in her life, yet with something about
her that made her own heart leap to a swift, admiring,
and perfectly defined antagonism.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
“ Said he, ' Go speak her ladyship if she her lord can tell
That any lips beside my own, have kissed her mouth so
well! ’’’
It seemed to Amber, during the fortnight that inter-
vened between her taking the decisive step, in answer
to Leon’s urgings, of placing the customary note on
the pincushion (only Big Man had never achieved a
pincushion) and encountering him on that moonlight
night, she was possessed of a kind of fever. Cheeks
burned, pulses throbbed. . . At times she really
believed she was sickening for a definite disease . .
something that was not only passionate love.
Mrs. Maloney certainly thought so, and cups of
camomile tea and strange tisanes brewed in brown jugs
pursued the girl, waking and sleeping, but Mrs. Maloney
grew older and more deaf. Often Amber found her
slumbering in her kitchen chair with a holy book in her
lap and her spectacles still over her closed eyes. It
was easy enough to slip out to meet Leon, rain or shine,
for the dry weather had broken recently in a tremen-
dous thunderstorm, and the rendezvous at the wild
oats’ plain saw their tethered horses once more and
heard the old old arguments which the serpent taught
to Eve, and which she handed down to generations of
the sons of Adam.
Always her own heart pleaded with Leon, and at last


she agreed to lay her life in his keeping . . but not
yet . . not yet. Ever she asked for time to consider.
Then he grew angry, swore he would ride away into
the Unknown, and she would never even hear of him
again.
A cold grip closed on her heart, her brain swam.
No . . not that . . not that either. . .
The climax came on an eve of brooding storm, with
black clouds in the west and the earth holding its
breath in a pregnant silence full of the heavy smell of
wattle and the lurking perfumes of a hundred tiny
bush blooms, insignificant yet lending their sensuous
whispering odours, to senses already aquiver, and
nerves on edge with thundery air.
Leon would ride to the rim of the timber where they
had met on that night of enchanted moons, and Amber
would saddle her own hack and fill the saddle pouches
with her bits of jewellery, some money Big Man had
left her for her immediate expenses, and the necessary
clothing.
They would ride day and night as friends might, till
they came to the coach roads beyond the township, and
the ranges. In a week’s time a boat would be leaving
Brisbane for the Far East. Leon said he would arrange
for passages by wire. In those wonderlands of the
colourful East, none would know if the tie between
them was not blessed by Church and State, and then
if Leon’s wife chose to sue (as he hoped and believed
she would) for a divorce presently—it could readily be
made so, and the world would forget and forgive the


fait accompli . . that is if foolish little Amber still
thought the world really mattered in the least.
Amber did not know if she did or not, but she dared
not think of Big Man. Even before she definitely pro-
posed to go with Leon, she had sometimes found her
eyes to fill at the imagined picture of his broad, weighty
figure sitting in his straight, log-hewn chair, his great
shoulders bowed, gnarled hand on knee, between her
and the sunset at the end of the high verandah.
When he came back from his trip to Brisbane (they
would pass him on the road unseen, keeping wide of the
track till the up coach had gone). Ah . . when he
came hack ! And he might be bringing home a present
for the girl who was betraying all his trust. . .
He would come up the steps pretending for a moment
that he did not see her at all, this was his little joke,
and then when she did not spring from ambush as had
been her way from childhood, to feel in his sagging
pockets (his clothes always sagged at knee and pockets),
to kiss, standing tip toe, his seamed old cheek, and to
see his grey eyes deepen to blue as he looked tenderly
at her. . . How would it be with him then—in that
empty house ?
No. . . She must not think. In time he would
grow accustomed to doing without her. He had lived
so many years alone.
Anyway, she had, as Leon constantly assured her,
" a duty to herself,” as well as to Alec Malcolm, and
Leon was painting her life to be with him as one round
of glorious romance. He knew the East ; he was


careful to let the girl see no reverse to the medal,
though what he really knew of the countries he so
vividly painted, was mostly hearsay.
She was not the first woman his glib tongue had won.
He lent her books which proved how glorious a
thing the love of Man and Woman “ naked and
unashamed ” can be. Talked of George Eliot and
Henry Lewes (without the shadow of truth in its
application to their own case) and of other great lovers
of history, Lady Blessington amongst them whose lives
had been made a peerless thing by a man’s devotion. . .
All these First Lovers of the earth, he would be to
Amber.
Perhaps, more than probable, he really thought he
would. His own gay imagery often drugged himself
as the poppy treacle drugs the opium smoker. He
was certainly desperately in love now, in his violent
headstrong way, all the more so for the years of her
scom, and division . . the wasted years. . .
It was midnight when they left the station: the
unshod hoofs of the horses making little or no sound on
the thin grassy bridle track.
A mile or two from the station they would touch the
main road.
Sixty miles from Rocky Springs, they stayed for a
few hours’ rest at a small selector’s house. Passing as
Leon’s sister, Amber shared a room with the selector’s
twelve-year-old daughter, while he lay down among the
bush hay on some sacks in the outhouse. The selector’s
daughter had to be up at dawn to help with the milking,


and she snored the dark through, lying on her back,
rosy and plump. They were Danes, cleanly people
who thought Amber beautiful, and with a strong like-
ness to her brother, though he was so dark. Leon
made a jest of this all through the entrancing hours
of the morning when they rode on fresh horses with
jangling bits through dewy gold-green light-woods,
polished trefoil-leaved kurrajongs, and dark blue-grey
brigalow clumps, about which hung tiny scarves of
silver-white mist. . .
A family of apostle birds quarrelled and gossiped by
the way. On a little open plain they passed a mob of
feeding emu. . . Now and then the flick of a bright
parrot wing lit the greyish-olives of the gum trees . .
across the trail a spider had spun a web of dull umber . .
night dews had decked it with opal and pearl. . .
Amber had insisted that her hack should be turned
loose to make its way back by slow stages to Rocky
Springs. There was no fear of Brownie’s homing
instinct failing him. She kissed his nose and left a
tear on it. . . Somehow she could not bear to take
the horse any further, and Leon had provided a fine
chestnut which, although it had a wild eye, was
excellently paced. Brownie belonged, she felt, impera-
tively to her old life and he had borne her doughtily
through the long stages of the journey.
It was on the evening of this day, they began to
climb into higher country, here and there fem fronds
appeared amongst the coarser grasses, and an out-crop
of stony ridges.


At noon they halted by a tiny creek, silver toned,
reflecting exquisitely the hanging maidenhair and a
wedge of blue sky.
While Leon took the horses on to where the stream
fell into a round basin of rock, for a drink, Amber sat
alone leaning like Melisande to look at her reflection in
the water. The eyes that met her own were strange,
tired eyes, yet with black pupils great’with an inward
excitement . . eyes that seemed half blind as the eyes
of patients after their oculist has dropped atropine in
them , . eyes that see everything . . the greater facts
of life as well as the lesser . . with blurred edges . .
helpless eyes . . waiting the spectacles of experience
to make them realize the value of clear-cut outlines
again. All through the journey she had experienced
that unreal feeling, except when at times she was so
weary her heart stole back regretfully, guiltily, to the
untroubled days before Leon came into her life at all.
" Lean down, lean down to the waters Melisande
Your soul must stand alone.”
Oh no . . not alone ! Leon was to be her great rock
in a thirsty land , . the shadow of a great rock . . how
comforting that was. He had assured her she would
never regret this step, had told her that as soon as she
felt the ship’s boards under her feet, all doubts would
disappear as the morning mists had curled off the she-
oak plain where the black cockatoos were feeding,
when they passed this morning.


As he came back to her now, whistling straight and
strong, his chin held high, his dark eyes caressing her,
she was almost inclined to agree entirely with him.
If she only could feel she had not behaved badly to
Big Man, in riotiously following her love dream —so
far away from him. Big Man would understand, said
Leon. “Do you suppose the old chap has gone through
life without his experiences ? ” She didn’t like that
word. . . “ Experiences.” . . Romantic youth cried
there should be only one experience of this nature. . .
Only one . . and that lasting as life.
So, in the late afternoon, they rode towards Hell’s
Arch. The hills were close to them now, growing out
of the ether, where this morning they had been a frozen
wave of harebell blue, now they were dark mounds,
almost menacing, thickly wooded. Parrots with rose-
breasts and radiant wings flew screeching from tree to
tree. . . There were dark-skinned wallaby flushed
in the clump of timber. . .
The air was sweet and fresh, pure as spring water, . .
A mile or two beyond Hell’s Arch they would pick
up the coach. . . That meant the last stage in their
flight before they came to the railway.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
“ Oh, is it a lie of yesterday
That out of a hidden grave will rise ? ”
As she rode under the poised rocks of Hell’s Arch with
the sun making a nimbus of her hair in ifs dying light,
and came suddenly in view of the woman with the
bucket, Amber was the first to speak.
“ Could you tell me,” she enquired, “ if we are right
for the arm of the river and the coach road higher up ?
My . . my . . companion is riding along the bank to
look for the ford and I said I would turn this way to
see if we were right . . one of us might accidentally
strike it. . .”
Words were tumbling over one another. Something
had made her nervous . . almost ashamed; this
woman with the bucket seemed to stare so. She didn’t
look like a bush woman . . she . . she . .
Amber slid from her horse: glad to be out of the
saddle for a little, and stood close to the woman, tapping
her high boot with her switch, and smiling ingratiatingly.
She felt, when she saw the bucket, that, just then,
she would give anything for a pannikin of tea: it
would be tiresome if they had missed the right track.
Nothing seemed to worry Leon as long as she was
beside him : he bore fatigue and physical discomforts
with an amazing philosophy . , such as she would
never have suspected in him. She was a better bush


woman than Leon was a bushman, as she had noticed
already several times on the journey: her sense of
direction was like a bird’s, but, unlike a bird, she
couldn’t fly over chock and log fences and barbed wire
entrances. This seemed a suspicious neighbourhood,
not given to making short-cuts easy for the stranger
outside the gates.
“ I don’t know if you are on the right track . . we
went wrong ourselves . . but this place is called Hell’s
Arch.” Arabella moved the bucket from one hand
to the other, and straightened her hat with a quick
feminine gesture.
Looking down as women almost invariably do, to
get some idea of the other woman’s standing, tempera-
ment, reputation, or what not, by her garbing, from the
shoes upwards, Amber’s eyes lit and fixed upon the
huge medallion. Oh, it did not need the shaft of orange
light like a divining rod, striking through the trees and
reaching the pictured face in the disc of doubtful
gold. . . Leon had not altered much in the years
between, not enough for an alibi to be possible. It was
Leon, her lover, or his twin brother, and she knew he
had none, who smiled at her with high-held head and
caressing eyes, from this strange woman’s breast. . .
Perhaps swift intuition told her of coils to be unravelled
here. In a quarter of an hour at most, if she did not
meet him, Leon would be here . . joining up the circle
they were making . . in a quarter of an hour as the
timepiece goes. . . He could not bear to leave her
long alone.


" Who are you ? ” she said. The strange fever had
mounted to her brain : her face was flushed, mottled
unbecomingly, and the woman before her flushed too,
then grew pale, rigid.
Never afterwards, could Arabella understand why
she gave her married name to the girl before her, the
lovely girl who aroused such a bitter feeling in her heart,
for all her loveliness.
“lam. . Mrs. Leon Gaspard,” she said.
There was silence in the little clearing for a moment.
They could hear the axe of one of the East Lynne com-
pany ringing on a sapling. They were putting up the
tents. Beyond the stillness of Hell’s Arch, kooka-
burras burst suddenly into evil-echoing laughter.
"Oh 1 no,” said Amber. “Oh 1 no."
Arabella set down the bucket, . . She bristled
with virtuous wrath.
“ I have my marriage lines,” she answered hotly and
thrust her hand into her ample bosom as though to
produce them on the spot. “ And I should be pleased
to know,” with a recollection of her melodrama
days, “ I would be grati-fied to know who you are,
Madame ? ”
The French accent on the Madame, was a haughty
touch incidental to her unassailable position. Prob-
ably the girl was neither maid, wife, nor widow, and
no better than she should be.
" You are Leon’s wife I ”
The chestnut pawed the ground impatiently, suspec-
ting March flies in the vicinity.
8


Leon’s wife . . and, somehow, so different than he
had led her to believe. Girl as she was, she knew that
this woman had honest eyes. She wasn’t . . she
wasn’t. . .
No . . she was not . . she was utterly unlike the
picture Leon had limned of her. . .
It would not be easy to lie to this woman. Her
transparent honesty commanded its return. . .
She could not say she was Leon’s sister . . and any
moment . . he might ride up and find them together.
All Arabella’s perspicuity was at needle point. She
sensed with a woman’s unfailing insight something
here that must be cleared away . . because something
must he saved. . . For a minute she felt as though
some Hand had appointed she should be the instrument
employed. . .
" Who are you , , my dear ? ”
All the mother rose suddenly in her for the protection
of this girl she instinctively did not like, and yet whom
she now pitied, pitied without reason, and yet so
intensely, “ Who are you ? ”
I think she said “ 'Oo har you ? ”
That was a detail in the duel.
** I am.” . . What was she ? What was she —
going to he ? To Leon ? Then she sank down among
the fern, and shook with bitter sobs. The fatigue of
the past two days, the unnatural excitement had all
come to climax at last. She wanted to weep on Leon’s
breast . . she wanted never to see him again. . .
She could visualize Big Man in his rough wooden chair.


with his eyes on the sunset, and behind him an empty
house . . an empty house. . .
It was too late to think on that. . .
s Where Amber had thrown herself down, the glossy
wiry bracken was close and thick, it grew up as though
over some uneven wave of earth, grew luxuriantly on
stems brown as apple-pips, with many a fine green
cowled head that would presently expand into the
umbrellas of the leaves. In falling she had brushed the
thickets aside, and her out-flung hand came in contact
with a rough wooden cross that had long been
awry, and was now submerged in the billows of the
fern.
Smitten with horror, and a nauseating rush of super-
stitious awe, the older woman leaned over her, caught
her arm.
“ Oh, don’t He there, who ever you are, my girl,” she
wailed. " For you are on a grave.” A grave ! Per-
haps some lonely swagman who had been found by a
chance passer-by before the wild dogs or the sparrow-
hawks. Perhaps a mad shepherd who had Hved too
long alone, and on patent medicines and rum, who
had crept here on some leaden eve and destroyed his
miserable remnant of Hfe with red suddenness.
Perhaps the child of some wandering emigrants. . .
Wandering emigrants . . a grave by the river. . .
This was all it said to her. . .
Yet, locked in eternal sleep beneath where their
child’s passion-wracked body now lay, crushing the
fem, the jade fronds and the nut browns of the bracken,


in her soul-tearing grief, were all that was left of the
bodies of the twain who had given Amber life. . .
And over in the timber, where the shadows threw
blurring plumes on the grass and little shy, furry things
began to peer from the green glades, and little feathered
things with sheeny wings, to rustle and perch in the
swinging crests, the kookaburras kept up their wild
hilarity, then dropped into silence above which, here
in the neighbourhood of Hell’s Arch, was only the
sound of a girl’s sobbing and a woman’s low insistent
soothing. . .
Then into the twilit glade, and the hour of reckoning,
jauntily, whistling as he came, rode Leon Gaspard.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
“ Can one thrust with a knife at a plume of mist ?
Can one throttle a ghost with a naked hand ?
Can we taste ' for-swom ’ on the lips we kist —
Do we look for ambush in open land ? "
It was a perfect evening, now that the’heat of the day
was overpast and twilight approached with cool feet
through the fainting land, bringing with her a light
wind full of perfumes one could pick and place in a
memory of flowers. There was the honest clean tang
of box leaves, round as palettes, the high fine scent of
wattle, aroma of mom-blown blossoms weakening in
folded petals, mewing of small birds unseen in the
leaves. . .
On the edge of the verandah at Rocky Springs, Alec
Malcolm sat in his high wooden chair, sat brooding
with great shoulders bent and fringe of soft white hair
brushing his shirt collar, his cheeks bitten deep by
furrows of time, his brows drawn with thought.
And a black thought it was, for a man whom life has
tricked at the last.
In one broad hand that had only just ceased to
tremble he held the fragments of a letter, Amber’s note,
found tucked in the loose rim of his shaving glass. . .
Amber’s note, . .
It explained nothing, nothing. Only it told him she
was going and she hoped he would forgive her . . she
couldn’t help herself she must go . . she would write


and tell him “ everything ” soon, before she left
Australia. . .
“ Couldn't help herself.” Who was the man ? Why
couldn’t it have been done “ above board.” . .
Where was mystery was too often evil, why hide . .
when there was no shamed head to conceal ? Ah
why . . a thousand, torturing, speculations. . .
Why . . why . . why. . ,
He could have risen to rage through the house like
a wild thing. He could have fallen upon his knees by
the little smooth bed, and wept the slow and terrible
tears of age and eternally recurring disillusion. . .
But he was striving with all the force of his powerful
will to “ channelize ” the matter, try to discover some
link of evidence as to why she had gone and with
whom.
He considered the men who had courted her. Not
one of these but could have come openly to Malcolm
and asked for his adopted daughter’s hand. No need
for mystery ... no call for midnight Sittings. . . .
There must have been a wolfdog in the sheep fold , . .
if so . . .
He remembered where he had placed his old revolver
in the bottom drawer of his bedroom cupboard . . .
that there were cartridges tied up in an old handker-
chief on the shelf. , . .
But first he must consider the matter from all
points. What could one do with a throbbing brain
that sent red floods to cloud his understanding ? . . .
No violence. No relating of the matters to the


neighbours. He must find out the course of her flight
and, if possible, the reason for it.
Mrs. Maloney was in the township consulting a
visiting doctor about her “ rheumatiz.” She had gone
off early in the morning in the buckboard, which had
met him at the coach and had decided not to " wake
the lamb before she left. Let the darlin’ sleep in,”
said the old lady: all this she had told to Malcolm
with volubility when he met her in the township as he
descended from the dusty coach, stiff in every joint,
and went across to the hotel for a drink and a bath.
He had suggested her having a few days’ holiday in
the interests of her rheumatics : he and Amber would
manage all right, and he had a surprise in his Gladstone
bag for the girl.
He thought of Amber all the way out in the buck-
board with the black boy driving, of all he had to tell
her of his trip to Brisbane, what a fine show it was,
and about that new chaff cutter, . . The theatres,
too. He had looked in at one or two just to have the
tale of them for Amber . , . fashions even, he had
explored shop windows for her sake and tried to rivet
his attention on the hats. Well, before he reached
the township he had clean forgotten what was fashion-
able in headgear, but it did not matter. Amber did
not really care. . . .
While the black boy took the buckboard to the yards
and Laddie, the white-chested collie, was still jumping
round and round him, and slavering over his hands, he
had sensed the uncanny silence of the place.


A hen was cackling in Mrs. Maloney’s wired-in
enclosure, a crow cawing somewhere monotonously in
the paddock.
His big boots squeaked and complained along the
verandah. The door of Amber’s room was shut. He
knocked.
The young scamp was hiding somewhere , . to
jump out at him as she had done as a mere wean. . .
Presently he looked shyly round her door, removing
his wide-brimmed felt hat.
No one was there. The empty room was full of
sunlight, yellow as wine.
No Amber,
He picked up the bag he had set on the verandah
boards, and went to his own room.
No one there either. He lifted the little circular
shaving mirror she had given him at Christmas, and
looked at his old face, eyelids reddened with fatigue, a
light film of dust filling the wrinkles.
Amber’s note fell to the ground. He picked it up
with a tightening at his heart, as though he had touched
something moist, cold, horrible that had crawled up
from a slimy deep to attack him.
He held the letter at a distance: his long-sighted
eyes caught a word here and there : then with a shaldng
hand he felt in his pocket for his spectacles, deliberately
sat down on the edge of his bed, and read and re-read it.
Then after a while, he walked slowly out on to the
verandah and sat down heavily in his chair.
A depression settled upon him akin to that depression


of earlier years when he had gone to Hell’s Arch to
finish a life grown intolerable.
For a second time a woman had tricked him, the
babe he had “ found among the fem ” as. Amber
phrased it, but he was too old now to think of cutting a
bloody-way out of his grey web of grief. Passion was
but ashes now, to the fire of that past and evil thing.
Hate might be directed against the ’man who had
beguiled Amber away from him, but not at the girl,
nor at his own store of dwindling days. He told him-
self he was incapable of suffering as he had once suffered.
Time had calloused, but he was cruelly hurt in his
unbreakable Scotch pride, he was wounded to the
death in his affections for the girl. “ Sharper than
serpent’s tooth ” had been her thanklessness.
In the paddocks, tall trees printed cool and lengthen-
ing shadows on the grass. He could hear a bullock
bell in the hollow by the creek : lambs bleating in the
stud paddocks. Presently he must go across to the
hut, question the men, try to do it skilfully lest they
begin to suspect, find out by cunning if he could, any
clue to the path of Amber’s taking. It would be a
difficult, a hateful task, but there was no question about
it, she must be found if possible, in time. . . Occa-
sionally hope played with the notion that this was
merely a romantic fancy of hers; she would return
with a shamefaced delighted bridegroom, while she
explained that it was her silly, but wholly charming
way, of “ doing things.” She hated the stereo-
type. . .
117
GAMING GODS


Then he would read again the note she had written
which gave such airy imaginings the lie.
A red head, riddled with grey, appeared over the
top of the verandah supports. Michael, whose copper
crown was a legacy left to Ireland from the days when
adventurous men of Venice journeyed through county
Waterford, and dallied a little on the journeying,
Michael’s small yellowish eyes scanned Malcolm
doubtfully.
Michael! Here was the answer to a difficult
problem. Michael loved the girl, and had played with
her as a child. He remembered swiftly with clouded
moist eyes how she had “ danced like a wave of the
sea ” long since in the township to Michael’s dreamy
fiddling.
Abruptly he turned to the man—
" Mike, which way did Miss Amber go ? ”
It was best to be straight out about it with Michael,
and subterfuge lost time, and time meant so much—
perhaps everything.
“ I know no more than yerself, surr, divil a bit . . .
only that her hack Brownie’s gone, and there’s tracks
from the slip rails.”
Then Michael had been uneasy too, though he could
know nothing.
“ One horse ? ”
“ Two, yer honour . . and . . she has taken the
saddlebags.”
Malcolm looked down at the note crumpled in his
hand.


Then Michael seemed to shoot up on to the verandah
as though violently propelled by an unseen force, a
tall, ungainly and possessed figure, and Michael swore
in a fashion to put any bullocky between Rocky Springs
and the Back o’ Bourke out of commission, and the
name he tacked to his oaths was always that of Gas-
pard . . Leon Gaspard. . .
Leon Gaspard I The old man rose from his chair.
For suddenly it seemed a shutter had clicked open
in his head. . . He could see the still green river with
the hanging gum trees at Dingy-bar: men who were
fishing in shirts and trousers. A youth—a brown-
faced handsome boy holding the gleaming silver and
grey scaled body of the giant cod against his own to
show how great a catch he had made . . the rose-red
gills still pulsated . . there was a strong reek of
fish. . . The boy lifted Amber upon one arm, a
little, dimpled, gold-curled baby. She looked coquet-
tishly out of the comer of her eyes at Malcolm. The
boy set her down almost roughly . . her weight was
tiresome, he was more interested in his fish as witness
to his mettle. Someone spoke—
“ Look out. . . You’ll hurt the youngster, Leon.”
Amber ran towards Malcolm. She fell; he could
see the red wound in her little white kneb: he was
soothing her: passing his big hand over her fair head :
she cried on his shoulder.
Leon Gaspard, the banker’s son, did not even turn
to look at the child.
Strange how he remembered this apparently trifling—


yet how significant—incident now . . with all those
blotting years between. . .
He heard himself cross-questioning the dancing,
oathful Michael, whose red hair stood on end, while
he ran his long spatulate music-loving fingers through
it.
“ Och . . I seen them long ago, yer honour, on the
wild oats’ plain, acting the lover to her he was then
but I knew what others didn’t about the spalpeen ”
string of picturesque epithets. “ May the holy Virgin
curdle his liver. . . May all the Saints see him in
Hell.” . .
Malcolm stood very still.
“ After all ” —he weighed his words —“ after all,
Michael, you don’t know that Miss Amber went with
anyone . . and if she did . . well . . this Gaspard . .
he may be all right.”
“ The Saints forbid I Whist, while I tell ye, Mr.
Malcolm . . the crawler’s a married man I ”


CHAPTER SIXTEEN
" We can build our tower of stubborn pride
With the stones of Things—as they really—are."
The sun was very hot. Tents are stuffy places. Up
and down the centre pole she could see’ants running.
Perhaps they were green heads. If so they might come
across to where she lay and bite her.
Someone lifted the flap of the tent, looked in, and
stole away again.
It was probably Leon’s wife. Leon’s wife ... it
did not matter. . .
A lid had closed down, shut away somewhere,
coffined away, was the dead body of a man. No
matter that his semblance still walked the earth since
that sunset hour last night when he had ridden into
the gathering darkness. It was not pleasant to ponder
on the way he and the woman had spoken to one
another. Denials, refutations, fierce angers, coarse
revealings . . ugly uncoverings. . .
Moral cowards always get angry, it is the only way
they can drive themselves to face a situation, she
thought bitterly . . cornered rats . . foxes with the
hounds on to them . . bared teeth . . blood. . .
She was a hundred years older and wiser than she
had been at this hour yesterday, when she and Leon,
Leon the lover, rode towards the speedwell blue of the
then distant ranges and left the little Danish-Australian


girl on the milking stool beside the red and white
cow. . .
A hundredjyears older . . wiser. . .
She had listened while Leon and his wife—his wife—
defied one another, but it was the woman who had
convinced her, not the man. . .
As an heroic, utterly-misunderstood, youth-
fully-entrapped husband, Leon had collapsed like
a figure built of soap bubbles. Strange mirage
that had tricked her all these weeks . . years may
be. . .
Vituperation, necessarily bitter, had not shaken her
faith, nor Arabella’s accusing him of other women than
herself. It was his own face, his own twitching mouth,
the ominous eyes that could not meet hers, but could
turn only as a snarling dog’s eyes turn upon its punish-
ing master.
And she felt all through that the woman fought for
her. . . Strange surety, strange white light of truth
that seared her very soul, yet before which all Leon’s
vows and flatteries turned to ash.
Presently she knew the first star came out in the sky
and that she stood beside a grave . . a grave whose
little wooden cross she made awkward attempt to set
straight, so crooked it was in the soft rich earth, as
the other two talked at her and about her.
She knew that a short stout figure from the tents
beyond the arch drew near and stood a moment listen-
ing, and withdrew again, she believed with a practical
carrying off of the bucket of water with him, for by and


by there came a smell of hot freshly-made tea on the
night wind.
Some native buckskin and philosopher went on
preparing the evening meal, though there were duels
d I’outrance in the ferny glade.
She knew that Leon put his arm about her: she
knew with cool inflexibility of purpose she unlaced his
strong brown fingers from her own : she'knew that she
turned and asked the woman with the medallion to
take her away somewhere, where she could lie down;
she was too tired to think anything mattered any more,
but sleep.
She dared not think of Big Man lest her heart break
altogether.
She felt the woman’s firm soft clasp about her: she
heard presently Leon’s voice hurried, passionately
pleading: she heard the Other Woman laugh. . .
She heard a horse’s hoofs going away through the
bracken on the stones . . in one place the horse slipped
a little on the flint . . away through Hell’s Arch . .
into silence. , .
And then the Other Woman lifted up her face, placing
her hand under Amber’s chin and by the light of a
nauseous swinging oil lantern in the little stuffy tent,
asked her whether it was too late, whether she would
wish her to set Leon free that he might " in time ”
make Amber his wife. . .
She shuddered back from the imputation . . yet . .
of course . . how natural . . who would believe other-
wise'? but she shook her head, looking into the direct


eyes that had once been beautiful and that Leon, she
knew now, had once emphatically found so. . . She
did not want to hear how, within a week of their
marriage, Arabella had found him kissing another
woman, a flighty girl just come into the troupe ; she
did not want to hear any of the sordid and hateful
things this wife of Leon Gaspard’s could tell. . .
For Truth has swooped like a vampire bat upon the
seductive sweetness of her trust and was sucking away
all the life blood from lovely things, lovely foolish
things her thoughts had harboured during these last
few weeks . . these reckless days. . .
She wanted to explain before she sank down on
the mattress spread among the fern that she needed
no more convincing. Conviction had hammered its
bruising way into her heart long ago. Perhaps at the
very moment when Leon rode into the fem that hid
her mother’s grave. . .
Then very quietly, like any heroine of Jane Austen’s
day, she fainted away into Arabella de Courcy’s ample,
enfolding arms.
With the unflinching certainty with which some
women apprehend the best methods of nursing and
healing the sick in mind, or body, Arabella after
reviving her with plenty of cold water and a cup of
the steaming tea, bitter and strong, went away towards
the inquisitive group by the hooded caravan, and left
the girl to herself.
For there are some things, Arabella de Courcy knew,
that must be fought out alone.


Pity for the girl had swamped all feeling of animosity
now. The matter was cleared up. This girl was a
" different class.” Her private intention was to aid
Leon all she could now in freeing himself from their
legal bond. She did not quite know how it was to be
done, but the time had come, she was assured, to
sacrifice that secret pride, and more secret jealousy, that
had made her cling privately to her married name, by
which no one ever addressed her amongst the East
Lynne dramatic company. Everybody had to sacrifice
at some time or another, and she must try to curb
Leon’s ability to land unsuspecting maidens in such
a position as his fatal susceptibility had placed
Amber.
The girl wasn’t a " wrong 'un,” Arabella had seen
too many of that stamp not to know the gold coin from
the spurious. Something must be done . . keeping
the girl’s name out, of course. . . Besides the hour
was drawing nigh when she, with her rapidly failing
charms, should secure harbourage with the faithful
adorer of many stormy unproductive years.
Arabella was tired of romance : she wanted at last
to be the " honest open ” wife of an " honest open ”
man, and she really was necessary to the welfare and
respectability of the East Lynne company.
As she walked from the tent where Amber lay to
share the caravan with the fluffy-haired lead who did
not want her, she dropped among the rustling glistening
fern her last clinging to the position of lawful wife to
Leon Gaspard, wife unwanted and secret. She decided
<>


to bum her marriage lines, if necessary to the breaking
of the pact.
There was not even a tear to wink away as she made
the decision.
She had left the girl alone all night, but now as
morning warmed the mist-steeped world, they would
soon be yoking up to continue their journey with the
temporarily patched-up axle. The men were busy
giving it a “ strengthener ” now, so she crossed the
russet fern patch and peered in at the sleeping girl.
She really thought she was sleeping.
A few minutes after she had retreated to oversee the
progress of the " strengthening ” and to plan the best
excuse to make to the fluffy-headed one, all curiosity
as “ to why ” the “ strange young person ” should
journey with them towards Dingy-bar, and pending a
revealing of the said young person’s own wish in the
matter, Amber leaned on her elbow, then sat upright.
From under the taut sides of the tent she could see a
smooth black head like oiled silk, a snake, its forked
tongue out, apparently catching flies with enjoyment.
Something had warned her of its proximity, the
curious cloud that always settled on her spirit, a sub-
conscious warning of danger.
Suppose she put herself in the way of snake-bite . .
suppose. . . That would be a solution. , .
A coward’s solution . . dancing . . but afraid to
pay the piper. . . Now her duty was plain. She
must go back to Big Man. He, at least, needed her.
The limpid honesty of his nature seemed like a fresh


unpolluted pool where a girl could steep all her faith,
and have it kept pure for her.
" The most upright man I ever knew.” Who had
told her someone said that of Alec Malcolm in the
Survey Camp ?
He certainly was the most upright man she had ever
known, this saviour of her childhood. All others
dwindled in moral stature beside him.
This should be her penance. She must go back to
him and make a clean breast of it. Thank the Un-
known God who watched from the Unfathomable
Blue, she had found out in time.
She felt no bitterness towards Leon’s wife . . rather
a thankfulness to anyone who had rent the veil. She
was beginning to hate Leon now without compromise
as once she had loved him, for shattered trust never yet
reconstructed a dead love.
She watched the snake for a few moments, until at
the brush of feet coming through the forest of brown
stipes and dusky fronds past the butter-coloured
blossomry of insignificant ground orchids, the glistening
body disappeared as stealthily as it came, as Amber
hoped Leon Gaspard had gone out of her life for all
time.
It was not a weeping nor a broken young person
Arabella discovered straightening her bronze-gold hair
in the suffocating tent, and asking if she couldn’t have
a tin dish to wash her face in. It was a young woman,
pale but capable, who refused to discuss any more
husband or lover, but asked for her saddle horse as she


had a long way to ride that day, kissed Mrs. Leon
Gaspard swiftly on her round perspiring cheek, said
“ thank you ” as a man might have done to a pal who
had saved his life, and then rode away ahead of the
caravan through the honey sweets of the morning air,
on the road back to Rocky Springs. She did not
overtake Brownie, now well on his way to the home
paddocks, she had perforce to ride Leon’s chestnut
horse as far as the Dane’s house. But every stage she
took on horses hired or borrowed, she drew nearer to
Big Man as the haven for her lacerated heart.


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
" Had you come for my arms to shelter in
I had faced flung stones of the world for you.”
Alec Malcolm did not know, as he rode a-hunting with
his revolver in his saddle pouch, that fhe quarry was
fleeing alone to the railway, and the girl he went to
save was drawing nearer to him at every mile of the
dusty road.
He passed the teamsters, camping by the white
gums, as day leaped through the blue gauze of morning:
heard the flutes and oboos of waking birds: saw the
brown water shining like pewter between the trees,
for the God of Light was busy now bringing out birds
and bees and flinging blossoming vines down green
hill-sides and pollen gold-hues of buds on pale foliaged
trees ; touching the grey woolled sheep that fed to the
rim of the wild oats’ plain and drawing them to the
sweetest pastures. Here and there in the loveliness
of a pearly day, that promised dry heat at noon, he
gleaned a word that proved he was on the right track
of the runaways. A swagman had passed them
yesterday—a black boy from Donovan’s selection
noticed two riders on the bush track at night . . one
he was sure was “ a white Mary." . .
So he rode on steadily, taking the green by-paths
where the boughs made cool over-arching tunnels,
where little glades showed the pompous french grey,


rose-breasted galahs strutting, where there was a
sudden sheet of egg-coloured buttercups nodding their
heads in the lush grasses. . . On and on with grim
mouth, bowed head and sloping shoulders . . on and
on, as he had once ridden intent on self-destruction to
find a little dimpled life to be instrument in saving his
own from an untimely end. . .
And now . . and now. . .
In mid-moming he passed a chain of swamp-edged
lagoons. . . Here a number of Native Companions
were looking for frogs in the reeds or after the shoots
of water weeds where they stirred the mud in pellucid
pools by an occasional dancing step. He reined his
horse a moment unseen, and saw them gather for one
of their quadrilles on the bank. This bluish-grey
community seemed to be holding some special festival,
for their long necks thrown back, the sealing-wax-red
gleaming on head and throat, and their wide wings at
graceful angles, they frisked and pirouetted and
skipped and floated " up the middle and down again,"
the black feet trod the rushes and the soft herbage on
the bank till they ceased as suddenly as they had com-
menced their dance, and the whole flock took flight,
disappearing into the blue with extraordinary swiftness,
in a wedge-shaped cloud. . . Amber . . who loved
nature . . how she would have liked to have seen
them. . . For a moment he seemed to have for-
gotten. . . But . . would she . . had he . , ever
really known Amber ? Women. . .
Had he ever really looked beyond the curtain that


hid a woman’s soul . . a woman's individuality . .
curtains . . and curtains beyond . . each more
mysterious . . thicker . . than the other. . .
Noon, and the sky paling, with the heat, to delicate
delphinium blue. Noon, and the rufous wings of a
soaring eagle hawk above the timber. Noon, and a
sweep of plain, sallow grassed, glaring, with telegraph
poles running across it and a windmill and a water
tank visible in the clear air, two miles or more away. . .
There were zinc troughs for watering sheep and cattle
here, but little wind just now to turn the sails and fill
them. The blades of the circular fan were almost
motionless. Mirage danced on the sky-line, and made
an azure lagoon round the distant, cloudy-greens of
wild lime trees. . .
Now, far away, as he paused at the tank and pushed
his wide-brimmed old felt hat back from his forehead,
he could see a tiny speck coming over the curve of the
earth, towards him.
Perhaps the mailman from Sarate’s, or a drover
looking for lost horses, or some solitary wayfarer intent
on a blood feud or a lover’s tryst; like himself, with
his own secret reasons for setting forth, keeping him
like one hag-ridden, for ever forging ahead.
Big Man drew a chunk of bread and salt beef out of
his pocket, and proceeded to cut it up with his knife.
He was old enough not to neglect material things;
without food a man was unable to wisely meet what the
day brought forth of good or evil. . . Sleep, food,
life dwindled down to these in the end for all the


torture of emotions and the rapture of loving and
emotional living.
He had a flask of whiskey in his saddle pouch. He
mixed it with some of the brackish water from the tank.
As he sat very still on the edge of one of the empty
troughs, he could see a plain turkey’s crested head a
hundred yards away. He had a vague idea it was now
close season for bustards. He must warn Michael . .
but Mike always broke the laws when conveniently
possible. . . Irish blood , . hated to conform. . .
The speck on the road grew bigger . . a black dot
on the blue and silver of the sky-shimmer. . . God,
how hot it was ! He thought of the sea by the shores
of Caledonia, of the long grey stretch and the white
boiling of the foam, the amazing beauty of Spring
Morning as she comes in dainty mauves and greys,
drawing her rose-coloured scarf over the steel-blue sea.
Midday with green waters coming in to yellow, whisper-
ing sands. Galway men say you must go to the cliffs
of Galway to see Hy Brasil . . as a young man he had
dreamed he saw it from the rim of the German
Ocean. . . In the long summer twilights . . the time
of the harvest moon . . every now and then came a
magic wave, a sheet of silver caught by the moon in her
twitching fingers and drawn towards the shore to make
her bridal bed in the sands, and as softly withdrawn by
the jealous ocean. . .
He remembered now the smell of stocks in the stone-
walled cottage gardens . . he remembered a lass he
had once walked with to the Corbie Loch. . . It
132
GAMING GODS


seemed women were going to take toll of him all these
years between. He wondered what had become of
Jean. . . Jean what ? He had forgotten her sur-
name. He remembered though, she had put her
tongue out at him and twitted him looking round a
hayrick, when they got home. . . Perhaps because
he had been afraid to kiss her, . . She thought he
was " daft ” . . her tongue was pointed . . moist and
carmine . . the colour of prickly-pear fruits. . .
Far away he heard the dull beat of a cantering
horse . . thlop . . thlop . . on the dry road. . .
From death and women is no escape for man bom of
woman.
He sighed, packed the flask back, looked at his
sweating horse with compunction.
He would like to lie down in the oblong shadow of
the tank and sleep. . .
He couldn’t of course, he must go on, . .
Why must he ? The girl had run away of her own
free will. She would not thank him for trying to haul
her home again . . from her lover, . .
The whole affair seemed very stupid, his pursuit of
the pair even more so : she was like all pretty women,
selfish. She had had her use of him ; she needed him
no longer. No one cared what old men did or thought
. . or felt even. Australia was peculiarly remiss that
way. This was the Land of Youth. Old people were
tolerated, when they were not ridiculed. He was
getting very old: his limbs ached: his eyes were
bloodshot: he was feeling the after-effects of the


unexpected shock of yesterday . . he was very old
to-day.
He looked at his big gnarled hands on the rein, as he
prepared to mount his horse once more. He remem-
bered how Amber had laughed affectionately over the
contrast his hand made to a fragile bunch of flowers he
had once brought to her. She had delighted in the
nosegay . . but she had laughed. . .
" I'm only an old fool,” he said to himself as he
descended heavily into the seat of the saddle again and
urged the horse forward.
The other rider, approaching over the hay-coloured
expanses of dry grass and dusty way, reined her horse
sharply in the track.
For a moment they sat, each on their weary hack,
gazing at one another. Then Amber slid from her
horse, ran across the intervening space and clung to
the dust-whitened foot of his huge riding boot. He
had never got over the new chum habit of riding with
his toes turned out.
“ Big Man,” she wept, “ Big Man I’ve come home
again."
“ Bless my soul,” said Big Man, but he too trembled.
” Bless my heart and soul . . it’s Amber . . it’s my
little girl.”
With his arm round her he led her to the shade of the
galvanised iron tank, sat her down on the grass and
brought out the whisky flask. Then he left her while
he tethered his horse and gave hers a long drink at the
now filling trough, for a wind dry and strong, like the


blast from a monster oven, was sweeping over the
plain.
She looked very strange to him: he did not im-
mediately realize that he had never before seen Amber
worn with fatigue and with a dirty face.
Slowly, in exhausted gasps, she told him the story.’'
Presently his broad hands hanging each side of him,
plucking at the grass, his shoulders more huddled, his
hat drawn over his eyes, he said —
“Then . . there’s no obligation to bring him back . .
to marry you . . when the other woman sets him
free ? ”
" Sets him free 1 ” Fire returned to her blue eyes,
her limp young figure straightened, for a moment she
was the old audacious quick Amber—" Do you think
I’d marry him now if he crawled from here to Rocky
Springs. . . You don’t understand, Big Man, I’m
. . I’m cured. . . He lied. . . Oh Imy God, how
he lied to me.”
Big Man nodded slowly. Yes, he understood.
Amber had shown herself of stouter stuff than he had
done in those dim years when he had felt, and acted,
incredibly, because a woman betrayed. . .
“ Why . , for a little,” she said, her voice low,
hurried, " I thought I’d kill myself with the shame of
it all .. for a little . . then I knew he wasn’t worth
it . . and there was always . . you”
Always you! Ah! . . that was it I Perhaps he
had saved her for a second time, saved her as, long
since, the accident which flung her on his breast had


saved him from pointing the revolver at his own head,
this very revolver, rusted, old, he carried in his saddle
pouch to-day. . .
Then she was down at his feet sobbing in the grass,
two little wet, grimy hands clutching at his sleeve. . .
Very tenderly he raised her. “ There . . put your
head on my shoulder and I’ll tell ye something . . then
we can bury the matter for aye. , . I was once going
to shoot myself . . over a woman.”
He felt astonishment stiffen and calm her, felt her
blue clouded eyes on him with amaze.
“ She was to be my wife . . the only woman I ever
spiered ” (agitation always made Malcolm’s Scotch
accent more noticeable), “ an’ I had romantic notions.
. . It’s a far cry now . . a far cry ” ; for a moment
he was silent, his face tortured with old memories, old
regrets, he seemed to have forgotten Amber, to be
speaking as men have confessed heart’s secrets under
the test of hypnotic sleep . . as Mathias dreamed he
spoke in the court that would condemn him to the
rope. " I would have married her in a moment . .
given the chance . . and she . . after two years of it. .
of waiting, and hoping . . and planning for her release
from a tie . . grown, she said, intolerable . . and just
upon the eve of winning . . of attaining of my dearest
hope . . she betrayed me with my greatest friend . .
a chap I had trusted . . as I trusted her. . , It was
all stark and plain. I don’t want to place names . .
or details . . but there was no damned mistake. . .
It isn’t a pretty tale . . it hurts more to be fooled by


a man than by a woman . . for there is something in
a man’s friendship the maddest passion for a woman
never touches. . . I was down in the mouth . .
fever . . liver . . drink , . I had knocked down my
cheque with a vengeance after I knew . . went mad
in rotten back block shanties . . and more rotten
township pubs. . . I rode down country like a
lunatic . . fell into the black slough where a devil
stands whispering . . always whispering in the ear,
" Kill yourself, be done with it . . what has life that
mocked you so, to give you now ? ” I thought she
would be paid a little when she heard how I had
died. . . Romantic fool . . romantic fool . . but
I believed then. . . I believe now . . she did care
for me, but she was affectible . . wanton, . . One
man away . . another man counted, sick for love, as
she had been to others —so I heard afterwards, she
would have been to me . . so she was, yet, old fool, as
lam still. . . I think she cared. . . I wanted to
hurt her. . . I had not your sense, baimie. . .
I wanted to hurt her with talk and blood. Ah!
well . . it happened I came to a place called Hell’s
Arch ” (“ Hell’s Arch,” her whisper was full of quiver-
ing awe, as she drew closer to Malcolm. . . " Hell’s
Arch ” she moaned. . . She too, had come to Hell’s
Arch and there had found a grave). . .
But the old man went on as though he had not
heard her. “ And there the blackest hour of all lay
waiting. . . The hour when Death stands by
laughing, as gods dice with a man’s will.”


He moved restlessly, laid one hand over hers, and
turned his eyes, blue as Scottish Highland lochs, to her
own drenched blue. " Then . . the Gaming Gods!
Just as I lifted the revolver I heard the sound of
horses hoofs . . then —” He paused : she leaned her
cheek against his shoulder, quick comprehension and a
flooding sympathy obliterating for a moment the pain
of her own sore hurt.
" Then you found me . . among the fern."
“ More or less . . you were flung straight from the
unknown to me, lassie, and . . and , . so . . you
saved me.”
" As . . as the thought of you . . saved me."
‘ There was silence like a prayer between them for a
space. Then came the practical like a wall, shutting
in the past. Alec Malcolm rose stiffly to his feet. He
was just a tired old man, barren of emotion.
It was a long way back to Rocky Springs : the sun
was pitiless : the sweating horses hung their heads.
Needs must. . .
So they rode silently homeward when sunset red-
dened the lagoons and wild fowl cried and settled among
the rushes as they rode on, each dulled with fatigue and
spent torrents of feeling.
The trough of the wave was dark, almost to despair . .
yet as they rode the bond between them was a tangible
thing. No drop of blood in her sweet body was his :
there was no child sprung from the loins of his sturdy
race to call him kith, and she was alone in the world
except for him.


She thanked the unknown " Gaming Gods,” at least
for that exception.
And woodenly, with a brain that seemed inert and
bruised, he was busied weaving a story . . a sheer lie,
if necessary, for the refuting of any vague rumours of
Amber’s flight that the district might have gleaned, as
enquiring birds glean seed in far paddocks.
And more especially for any gossip .to which Mrs.
Maloney might have lent ear in Dingy-bar township.
Michael, he thought, could be trusted to keep mum,
at least when not in liquor.
He decided it would be necessary to travel some of
the fat stock to market and give Michael, of whom he
did not think great things as a drover, charge of the
job. Caution remained a major part of Big Man’s
make up, at least, anyway, he was convinced it did, if
his actions had sometimes belied him. Life had so far
proved him a curious contrast of reckless emotion
and cool canniness, brain and heart eternally at
issue.
A pale yellow moon like a forgotten sunflower of
day was rising over the browns and greens of the
summer-locked earth as they rode into Rocky Springs
head station, Michael, a narrow hovering shade, was
at the horses’ heads in an instant: somewhere, he, too,
had kept vigil “ for the bairnie,” Chained dogs barked
lazily, wouf, wouf, as a matter of duty. The collie
leaping round Malcolm’s horse and slavering affection
over his hands and at his knees, with a romping side
tracking in Amber’s direction.


She was so tired, Michael lifted her out of the saddle
and she went stumbling through the grateful dusk up
the steps and into her room, where she flung herself
dry-eyed on her bed in the dark.
She was so tired that she was conscious of nothing
now but the overpowering need of sleep. If she did
not sleep at once and somewhere, she would die on her
feet.
Somehow she unfastened her riding clothes, some-
how kicked off her shoes, and still partially clothed,
with her bright hair knotted and tousled on the pillow,
she fell as it were from a great dizzy height into utter
oblivion.
Presently Big Man, shading the kerosene lamp with
his hand, looked round the door at her.
She slept like a weary babe, amid the disorder of
her room. Slept like a buffeted sailor lad come to
haven from tempestuous seas.
Alec Malcolm had his doubts about another exis-
tence : he had attended many churches in search of
solutions to problems of reason and feeling: he had
studied various works on theology from the doctrines
of Buddha to the emasculated works of later High
Church dogmatic propaganda, but to him nothing had
been proved. He was inclined to think life went down
into the darkness from whence it came, that man and
beast of the field made dust for the good green earth’s
renewing, and nothing more.
But as he looked at the sleeping girl, come back to
his life again, broken, bruised and worn, yet with no


chains to bind her to old griefs, and prevent her again
coming to a Springtide of peace and joy, he closed his
red-rimmed grey-blue eyes a moment —
" Thank God ” he whispered over the reeking
lamp.


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
" For the world and its hate could make no scores
On a simple heart that was only yours.”
“ He cursed the heart that still remembered trysting in a wood
With that which fell to dust amid the fern. . .
And when he saw her white face like a star
Watch from her lattice how the deer came out
Stamping in moony glades. . .
Wrapped in his silken robe the King crept forth.”
“ It was a funny thing, Amber, for you to ride down
to meet Mr. Malcolm, and then miss him on the way.
He must have had something very nice in his portman-
teau to make you in such a hurry. . . What did he
bring you, Amb ? ”
Amber went across to the drawer of her dressing-
table and brought out a rough piece of turquoise
through which ran a fine gold chain.
“ Turquoise for luck ; try it on, Mary.”
Anything to stop that incessant questioning and
chattering. Mary was quite easily side-tracked. She
exclaimed over the blue stone on her sallow throat.
“ Isn’t he a devoted dear ? No wonder you wanted
to see him ! Oh, lor’ I wish Dad liked giving me things
as much as Mr. Malcolm likes giving them to you;
you are spoiled, aren’t you, Amber ? and yet every
one in the district says he’s a hard man at a
bargain.”
“ I suppose that is why he makes money,” retorted


Amber laughing. Mary had dived under the bed for
the hat boxes as a preliminary to trying on all her hats.
Mary had a passion for clothes. When she rode to
Rocky Springs, Amber liked to have something new,
if only that Mary might try it on. Life just now
was not very interesting, not that Mary in any way
brightened it, and yet one had to pretend to be content
and merry when neighbours called. It was not that
Amber regretted Leon Gaspard. tier contempt for
bars was too overwhelming she told herself for that;
self-contempt too, that, under his influence, she had
learned trickery herself, but there was a vast emptiness
where the colourful love dream had been: a kind of
heart-loneliness that could not be assuaged by the pets
she had collected about her: Michael’s boxing kanga-
roos against whom the young men of the district some-
times squared up, only to come off worst in the finale ;
Brownie, her hack; the affectionate collie dog who,
true to his breed, was friendly with every one and really
had no special favourite unless it were Sandy Malcolm;
the tame paddy melon who put his head up to her bed-
room window in the morning, and to whom she fed
gingerbread; the big grey cat who sat in the sun,
cleaning its brilliant shirt front and snowy mitts, half
the day, and indulged in scuffles with marauding
'possums half the night; the poddy calf she had hand-
fed from a soda-water bottle, when its mother died,
and which she had naturally (being a student of
Dickens) christened “ Pip ”; her garden which she
loved . . none of these could in the smallest degree


fill the blank, the empty niche where a man’s love had
been.
Intermittent flirtations with young selectors in the
district who came over for tennis sometimes distracted
her from inward brooding, but when they had ridden
self-consciously away, in their clean moleskins and
coloured shirts, she would drop her racquet and stare
into the blue dust of twilight and feel how little any-
thing counted against the romance that melted at a
touch, strange veil of illusion spread over a man,
glorifying that which was but, in itself, illusion.
Big Man took to reading aloud to her, in the evenings
when they were alone. He had no elocutionary gifts ;
it was a long monotony like an extempore prayer.
“ I am sure your ancestors were in the church,” she
had said to him once after a chapter of “ Bamaby
Rudge,” for Big Man never tired of the novelist who
had been alive when he was a boy.
“ Why ? ” Big Man pushed his spectacles back on
his low furrowed forehead and looked at her hard from
under his bushy grey brows. “Do I read like a
minister ? ”
“ You do," said Amber, her head against his knee;
" but I like it: it makes me sleepy. . . I think I’m
in church.”
Big Man laughed. Unlike the Irish, a Scotchman
rarely minds a joke against himself: in fact is some-
times the first to relate it.
But for all their comradeship, it is youth to youth
and age to age all the world over. The hunger remained


with Amber, but she fought it pluckily. For comes
pride as a staff where love has failed us.
If she could only care for some other man. One
image to drive out the other utterly; and fill the lonely
heart places. Mary Cockbum now. She was always
in love with somebody, more or less. Just now it was
that red-headed Armstrong youth. He wore green
neckties, and put brilliantine on his hair. Mary
declared she doted on the smell of violet pomade.
Last year it had been a commercial traveller with a
sulky, in which he took Mary driving till her father
forbade it.
Mary sighed over the recollection, “ There was some-
thing deliciously wild about him. Amber,” she said
now, as she tried to get her foot into one of Amber’s
new black satin evening shoes . . unsuccessfully of
course. Mary had broad, useful feet. “ I think he
must have had a fast. . . Men with pasts are such
fun."
“ Are they ? ” answered Amber, tonelessly : then
with animation, ‘‘ Until you know something of the
pasts, Mary, then its all so . . so . . sordid.”
“ Oh, I’m sure his wasn’t sordid ! He had melting
dark eyes . . however Dad suspected him of a wife
up his sleeve, or something . , but really I think Amb,
he was in love with me.”
Mary gave up the shoe and tried on the turquoise
once more. Amber looked at her speculatively. After
all, had she been any wiser than Mary ?
With a woman, it seemed a man had only to convince


her he loved her, to blind her to the most obvious faults,
and the more practice he had at the game, the more
readily he persuaded.
Blind Chance! The Gaming Gods had chosen to
save her; it was in no way her own perspicuity, her
own good sense : she had diced all; risked everything
on one throw: the gods had intervened. Her thoughts
flew back to Hell’s Arch, to the deep green of the gliding
river . . to a bird wing blurring its glossy surface . .
for after years of evading the birds were coming back
to the place long accursed with stillness, again, perhaps
the old ban had been removed the yarning drovers and
teamsters said over their wood fires, injbe “ yarning "
hours. . .
She thought of the bank that went so steeply down
. . down . . down to forgotten things . . to the
dark brown stipes of the green lacquered bracken . .
to the part the lovely and fatal glade had played
in her fife. . .
She must ask Big Man if she could not do something
about that lonely grave . . the crooked cross . . the
overgrowing under-brush. . . It must be railed in . .
they must have a stone erected. Big Man believed in
none of these things . . he often talked of the folly of
mausoleums. . .
She was deaf to Mary’s confidences about the Arm-
strong boy. She could see only a rugged man in slop-
made clothes (for no power on earth could persuade
Alec Malcolm to go to a good tailor ; he did not see
why clothes, except as a covering, mattered at all),


could see his hand with the revolver in it . . his eyes
raised one moment to the far, unfeeling blue. . .
She seemed to hear the Shadows behind the Veil
rattling their dice boxes . . seemed to see herself,
small, dimpled . . as Malcolm had described her . .
part of the stake being played for. . .
Then abruptly the picture changed . . Arabella de
Courcy, the remains of her beauty, l\pr full bosom, her
short panting breaths, the bucket, the water slapping
its zinc sides, a drop or two falling from the rim on to
the fem like crystal tears. She could see a flight of
birds, a spiral on the evening skies . . sunset gilding
tree tops. . .
Chance . . blind chance. She heard her voice
again asking if she were on the right road . . she saw
the medallion swinging on the woman's breast . .
Leon’s pictured face . . Leon himself riding into the
carpets of fem : his horse’s hoofs deadened by lace of
leaf, could smell the crushed aroma of grasses and of
wiry bleeding bracken. . .
Leon I . . never any more . . never any more. . .
Then the tent, the black snake, like wet oilskin . .
catching flies. . . Life was like that . .it flicked a
forked tongue at us. . . Sometimes it missed . .
sometimes it devoured us. . . Life was a snake,
subtle, poisonous . . and the Gaming Gods behind the
curtain flung the dice which fated us to escape the
forked tongue . . or be destroyed by the poison
tooth. . .
Love was like the drop of Death the snake secretes . .


unhappy love, how it crawled in one’s veins, how it
slowly paralysed heart and brain. . .
Now life was safe again . , uninteresting. . . Mary
was a fool. . . She looked hideous in blue . . she
was so sallow. Why must she put Amber’s pale blue
silk kimono about her shoulders ? The day wasn’t
cold. Perhaps she thought it suited her. Deceived . .
slaves to our own vanity . , how easily deceived we
are. . . Perhaps had she not been so readily duped,
things might never have come to such a pass between
herself and Leon.
Insistent through the window to show that everyday
life was never the less full of practical things not
altogether disagreeable, came a whiff of hot tea and
the unmistakable smell of Mrs. Maloney’s buttermilk
scones. Always Mary declared this one of her chief
reasons for coming to Rocky Springs. They could
hear the clink of china, the rattle of a tin tray from the
living room, and Malcolm’s boots that always creaked,
along the verandah from the laboratory. Though well
on in years Mrs. Maloney still drew her hair back
with painful tightness from her shiny apple-cheeked
face; the hair had diminished, but not in her opinion
the necessity of “ kaping it nate,” though it required
but two hairpins now to keep the microscopic knot in
position. She appeared to have a lurking doubt lest
it would not yet, in its second childhood, break out
and do something foolish.
She was anxious to tell Mary Cockbum about the
latest wonderful liniment for the “ rheumatiz ” : a


mixture that smelled like furniture polish and made
Rocky Springs homestead reek again. All the mingled
odours of the laboratory were as nothing to it, and she
" had it off an Indian hawker.”
Despite this commercial fact, Mrs. Maloney was a
good White Australian. She kept a constant feud with
the Chinaman gardener in proof of this. So much so
that Malcolm had been constrained and sternly to
interfere, when sour milk and bad meat made their way
from Mrs. Maloney’s dispensing hands to the gardener’s
hut as “ good enough for any yellow devil.”
Malcolm had heard vituperation on her side rich in
Irish idiom : on the Chinaman’s, a wild untranslatable
yabber, and the piece of beef, rapidly turning green in
the tin dish between them.
He had insisted that Mrs. Maloney feed fresh mutton
to the ‘‘ haythen,” and it had been secret war betwixt
them ever since. No ground nuts and preserved ginger
for Mrs. Maloney at Christmas, though Amber found
these offerings on her doorstep, for the Celestial never
forgets an insult nor ceases to remember a kindness.
When his foot was bitten by the ’guana, an ugly
wound, failing to heal as yellow flesh so often fails,
and the blood of the Irish Kings wouldn’t brook the
notion of waiting on the heathen idol, though no
doubt the contradictory warm Irish heart had twinges
of remorse, it was Amber who brewed boracic and hot
water lotion, which Ah Fan laid at the door of Feng-
shui, a beneficient god of the air this time, and he
believed she had made it of many magic elements.


Faith, and the lotion, managed a cure eventually, and
Mrs. Maloney sniffed but said nothing, save by the
amplitude and variation of her sniffs, at the idea of the
“ white young lady ” waiting on the " yellow ”
hillman. For Ah Fan was of the mountain tribes, a
fine looking man and his skill with vegetables even in
drought time was as full of wizardry, according to
results, as he believed the boracic and hot water to be.
Revenge Ah Fan had upon Mrs. Maloney for this.
She had fallen asleep one winter’s day before the
kitchen fire and her dream had been of a banshee with
long hair screaming by an Irish lake. Not a pleasant
dream but pleasanter perhaps, since more familiar to
her youthful days or nights, than the spectacle which
met her waking eyes when she opened them with a
start.
Three blackfellows, clad only in cotton shirts, well
armoured with spear, nullah and thick wooden shield
daubed with red clay were in possession of her sacred
domain.
King Billy, who in return for the lands of his birth-
right had been presented with a half-moon of brass,
inscribed for all to see “ Billy, King of Dingy-bar ” in
addition to an old shirt which had been Joe Cock-
bum's, was dipping his fingers recklessly into the tin
of brown sugar on the dresser, and licking them clean
with a vast appreciation : the other two were marching
up and down the kitchen, their thin legs bare, a belli-
gerent attitude upon them.
A faint aroma of rum hung about the trio.


Mrs. Maloney shrieked, flinging her apron over her
head as an adequate defence, and imploring the
Saints to come to her rescue.
The Saints failing to respond with alacrity, she had
perforce, in the extreme of her terror, to call upon Ah
Fan for succour. Ah Fan who could not but hear her
cries, went on busily working in the tomato bed. His
face like a golden mask. His hope a sincere and
implacable one, that the blackfellows would “ make
Malonie all the same liket pie.”
The over-proof rum began to lose its potency. They
had stalked here through the bush from the “ Black-
butt Arms ” : they were afraid at any moment that
" Boss Mal-kome ” might ride through the homestead
gate. They had really only meant to frighten the
woman and steal a little flour. They did not realize
she would have given them any mortal thing in the
extremity of her fear without their having the exertion
of stealing it, and so the lesser race gave way before
the —presumably—greater and they went as they came,
brandishing their spears, gesticulating, to all intents
upon the warpath with a ’possum smoked out of an
adjourning log for their only spoil, and were lost to
sight and sound among the blue-green leaf-funnels of
the timberland. Mrs. Maloney retreated to her
private store for a “ drop of the crature,” and from
thence to her beads for spiritual comfort. Ah Fan
continued his absorbing occupation in the tomato
bed. Presently Mrs. Maloney rose from her creaking
knees to shake a fist at him through the window.


But Ah Fan merely let the nations thunder by, and
plunged him in thought again.
For he came of the immutable races.
While Mary Cockburn rode over to Rocky Springs
to inspect Amber Malcolm’s “ things ” and to partake
to subsequent indigestion of Mrs. Maloney’s hot scones,
Mrs. Meerly went in the two-horse American buggy to
visit Mrs. Cockburn.
Mrs. Meerly was an excessively thin woman: thin
hair, thin features, the thinnest legs; a disrespectful
wag had declared, in the district, he considered it very
plucky of her "to walk around on broomsticks.” She
was a widow, but in confidence she had told Mrs. Cock-
bum, and frequently, that this was entirely by choice :
her choice. Timothy Meerly who had been a very fat
man and who had ” gone off sudden ” with ” the
apoplexy ” had left her a station property and a bank-
ing account. She decided to remain on the station if
only to tend fat Timothy’s grave under the weeping
myalls.
This necessitated she should employ a manager for
the place for she was not the kind of “ unfeminine
person,” she told her confidante, to run a place without
a man. She still rode side saddle and thought it not
quite genteel to mix as an equal with the station hands,
though of some of her people she made pets, con-
sequently she was often cheated. Stockmen loafed
round the Blackbutt pub doors when they should have
been working the stock, boundary riders neglected
fences ; dingoes pulled down the young calves, but for


all that the place prospered, though not as it had done
in the days of Timothy who looked after everything
himself.
Mrs. Meerly was a lucky woman. If any rain fell
in the district in dry seasons, it fell at Meerly’s.
Neighbours looking over the Meerly wire fences with
envious' eyes, saw emerald green paddocks when their
own were dry as dust. There was a magnificent water
frontage : the earth seemed to grow everything, in the
stony parts garnets and white crystals had been found,
the latter old miners declared looked like diamonds.
An American magnate passing through, noticed the
purple float on a still pool in the billabong, and said
he was " God dam sure ” there was “ oil hereabouts,”
but Mrs. Meerly was content to drift along in old
grooves. One thing varied and often, and that was
the managers of the station : a continuous stream of
arrivals and departures of the most contradictory type.
From tall fair men of Nordic birth, to the small dark
personage with a Semitic nose and wonderful gift on
the comet. Some wanted to marry Mrs. Meerly, some
she only suspected of wanting to: some were too
honest, pointing out to her the weakness of her “ pets ”
amongst the station hands, the well-fed sleek syco-
phants who spent the time she paid them for playing
“ two up ” behind the huts : some she caught on her
sudden inroads into the book-keeper’s domain (for at
times she arose in her wrath and cleaned the Augean
stables) “ doctoring the accounts.”
Several times she was involved in lawsuits over her


managers. They were always " treasures ” to begin
with, but the moth and rust corrupted.
To-day she had come over in two assam dust coats,
several green gossamer veils and her new boots, to tell
Mrs. Cockbum about the new manager.
He was an Englishman, tall, “ distangue ! ”
Mrs. Cockbum poured tea. Shook her head:
she had not Phoebe Meerly’s advantages in “ the
French ” but she distrusted a man who looked the
language,
“ Does he know anything about stock ? ” she asked.
“ Oh, yes . . . he’s had experience . . . then went
back to city work. . . . He’s out here for his health
. , . has some means of his own . . . highly recom-
mended, Mrs, Cockbum —a judge and two solici-
tors.”
“ Oh, well . . I suppose that’s all right,” said
Mrs. Cockbum. “ Though my husband says it is
better to pay any mortal thing down than go to
law.”
Mary Cockbum, senior, was nothing if not dis-
cursive, but as a rule she looked on the bright side of
everything.
“ I really do think,” added Mrs. Meerly, eating
sponge roll and licking the jam daintily from a thumb
so thin it looked as though it had jumped out from the
palm of her hand like an orange pip—“ I really do think
he’ll be a comfort to me: that I can settle down at
last, to peace and quietness, and tending My Dear
One’s grave.”


Another slice of jam roll, followed by a cup of tea.
“ Your tea is always so nice,” she murmured.
The air was full of summer warmth and stillness.
The shiny horse-hair chairs ranged along the wall in
the Cockbums’ sitting room looked more comfortable
than usual. Only one blue bottle fly buzzed about
the room. The wax flowers under the inverted glass
had not yet begun to melt over their red plush pedestal.
" Cool for this time of year,” said Mrs. Cockbum
gazing at them. She was a little weary of Phoebe
Meerly’s managers.
“ Where is Mary this afternoon ? ” enquired the
lean widow, flicking the crumbs from her second dust
coat with her black-edged handkerchief.
“ Oh, she’s gone over to Malcolm’s, to see Amber’s
things.”
Mrs. Meerly pursed her lips. ” I did hear . . just
a vague rumour . . Bush Telegraph . . I suppose—
some talk of Amber Malcolm and a married man.
Of course no one knows where she really comes
from.”
Mrs. Cockbum flushed, “ You heard nothing but
lies, Phoebe Meerly, if you heard any talk about that
girl. She’s the sweetest child. What you did hear, I
suppose, was that she rode down to meet her adopted
father and somehow missed the coach at the turning.
The mailman saw her . . and he’s the greatest gossip
on the river.”
" But they say . . she wasn’t riding alone ”
“ They say,” Mrs. Cockbum spilled her tea over her


print apron, and it was hot. The scalding fluid on her
knee did not improve her temper, and when Mary,
senior, was “ up ” she was “ up,” so her Joe could have
testified. " Didn’t they say you were in love with that
Robert boy, half your age and engaged to a girl in
Brisbane . . said you pestered him and offered him
control of your property if he would marry you . .
and you not out of weeds. There’s no end to the
preposterous things they say . . . preposterous ” (Mrs.
Cockbum liked the word, it carried weight; she hoped
she was using it in correct application: she made a
mental note to look in the dictionary after her guest
departed). " Amber is as open as the day. Married
man indeed : she has all the single men in the country
waiting for her to fling the handkerchief. . . You
know, Phoebe ” (cooling down and perhaps a little
compunctious for being the cause of the dull red that
had climbed to her visitor’s thin hair, at the shaft
which perhaps wasn’t so “ preposterously untrue ”
after all. Phoebe had been silly about the Roberts
boy) " you know how unkind people are about a bit
of innocent fun sometimes. . . Amber’s all right.
Amber’s all right."
What Mary Cockbum, senior, said " went ” with the
district, for was not Mary every one’s right hand in
time of bereavement, or sickness, and the birth of twins,
or minor afflictions ?
That bit about the Roberts boy helped to " con-
vince ” Phoebe Meerly.
She accepted a setting of prize Leghorn eggs, and


departed. Anyway, there was the interest of the new
manager to occupy her mind.
So the mailman’s confused story shredded and
passed on and died on thin air, under the guarding
wing of Mary Cockbum, senior.


CHAPTER NINETEEN
" Must she go to grey old age, because of one
Who is a shadow now in the Shadow land ? ’’
" What lies hid in the heart of the scrub ?
Do you know—do you know ?
All day long the grey doves croon it—do you know ? "
Mrs. Meerly’s manager had his own quarters: at
least part of the regular bachelors’ quarters on Meerly
was set aside for the manager: the other rooms being
occupied by a few jackeroos getting Colonial experience,
their keep, and thirty shillings a week.
Disrespectful youth looked upon the station owner
as a huge joke, and they watched with all the cruelty
of that youthfulness the fate of the succeeding bosses
and their inroads upon Mrs. Meerly’s widowed affec-
tions, and the subsequent Grand Finish to most of
them.
Bames, who came from New South Wales, and was
a champion footballer, could imitate exactly her funny
little giggle, through which, he always vowed, one
could hear the widow’s bones rattle.
She invited them to dinner at the house on Saturday
nights, and sometimes, a few girls to dance with them,
but not often the most attractive in the district. Mary
Cockbum was one of the usually bidden. Amber
infrequently, though occasionally the half caste rode
with a message to Rocky Springs, and Amber made a
face, and took out her second-best evening frock.


Mrs. Meerly, although one was obliged to be neighbourly
sometimes, had such a fashion of “ moving on ” any
young man who danced more than twice with Amber,
or who had any tendency to take her out to see the
grape vine trellises by moonlight.
There was a wonderful old garden at Meerly. Half
an acre of vines alone sloping down to the creek: a
flower garden that wandered where it willed to the blue
edge of the gum tree paddocks. The house had been
built by some young Englishmen with a fortune to
dissipate. They used to drive a coach and blow a horn,
and the rooms were so large, beds looked like cots in
them, and the fire-places could accommodate a tree.
There was a full-sized billiard table, and the verandahs,
if they did need planing, and were rotting in places,
were wide enough for dancing.
It was the largest house in the Dingy-bar district,
and had Mrs. Meerly been of the fat and cheery spirit,
it would have been the centre of hospitality and
merriment, but Mrs. Meerly was of a thin, discon-
tented and suspicious nature. Added to which she
was, on the surface anyway, painfully conventional.
Of the conventionality that sees evil in otherwise
harmless things. For this reason she would not have
her manager living under her own roof. The few
hundred yards that divided the old shingled quarters
from the house saved the situation in the eyes of Mrs.
Meerly, and the district.
To-night she had decided to ask the new manager
to dinner with her. A Ute-d-tete affair . . was she not


a widow ? And not, she believed, unattractive. Sally,
the half caste girl could help to wait in her new apron
and cook would, if wheedled, make something “ special."
Mrs. Meerly had not been a life long subscriber to
women’s papers for nothing. She believed in “ feeding
the brute," a belief bolstered by heart-to-heart talks
per medium of " Answers to Correspondence ” columns
conducted by males masquerading as “ Mothers of
Many ” . . a fact which would have covered Mrs.
Meerly with maidenly confusion, could she even have
suspected it.
She told herself repeatedly as she donned a new
frock up from Brisbane, grey alpaca relieved with apple
green which accentuated her pallor and her leanness,
that there was nothing outree in a widow entertaining
a single man to dinner. Afterwards they would have
a little music. Mrs. Meerly played the piano, and then
whisky and soda for him and lime-juice, and may be if
he suggested it playfully a dash of the spirit for herself,
and ginger nuts and currant cake and the sponge
roll , . . those new crochet d’oyleys (Sally must be
reminded), and at ten o’clock . . well, if he seemed
sorry to go half past, she would stand full in the glare
of the hall light (always avoid misconstructions) and
say “ Good night ” to him : a good night, gracious on
her part, with perhaps just a hint at the loneliness, the
unprotected state of her condition, and a careless, yet
smiling and low-toned, suggestion that he should come
again soon. . . .
She had played the same tactics with so many since


the convivial Timothy passed over. Sometimes the
new managers had been teetotallers and had shared the
lime-juice and rejected the whisky, but that was so
rare as to be almost negligible. Sometimes they had
drunk all the whisky, and begun to make love to her ;
one had gone so far as to tell her she wasn’t a " bad
old geyser ” and had attempted to kiss her outraged
cheek.
Next day when she had expected the amende honor-
able, he said he had forgotten all about it, a chap
'* shouldn’t be held responsible for what he did when he
was half-seas over.” Shocked at this indelicacy and
disappointed in the apology she at least expected to be
followed by a tentative offer of marriage she had given
him his marching orders by the next coach. Then
she had wept over Timothy’s grass-grown grave, and
vowed herself to eternal celibacy for his sake, . . But
a new manager arrived . . . and after a time history
repeated itself.
Some were cunning, they did not accept her invita-
tions to Ute-cL-Ute dinners but managed to come over
with the jackeroos for the formal feastings instead.
Naturally she never liked these men, but they usually
kept their jobs longer and left at their own free-wills.
Through it all the station work went on somehow.
Anders, the old overseer, who had known Timothy all
his life, saw to that. He was a round, red man of
Timothy’s own stamp, as much alike as are men some-
times having no blood kinship, yet seeming to have
grown into each other’s ways. Although he probably


did not realize it himself, being an unimaginative
person who lived from hour to hour every moment of
his sixty odd years, Anders was the mainstay of
Meerly. He was the one person with whom Mrs.
Meerly was at her best. She felt ashamed to be
directly uncharitable before Anders, who never said
anything nasty about anyone : she respected, in some
vague way the red-faced grey-bearded overseer, and
every one knew what a judge of stock he was. Hadn’t
he insisted upon the Merino as the background of the
sheep industry in Australia long before the other
breeders discovered it ? Anders was always chosen
as a sheep judge at the local show, and it was the
only subject upon which he really became excited.
The cattle work (for Meerly ran both sheep and
cattle) never interested him so much. He was a
lymphatic soul in any matter but the breeding of
sheep.
The new manager arrived at a quarter to seven in a
smart dinner jacket, and (Mrs. Meerly believed) silk
socks. Though of course she did not look as far down
as a male person’s feet. He told her he had been a
long time in the Gulf country. Up there it was white
duck all the time for dress occasions—like old pictures
of sugar planters in Jamaica.
He was a gaunt man : she guessed him to be about
thirty-six, early going grey as men do sometimes who
have had bout after bout of tropic fever.
His doctor had lifted a warning finger. “Go back
to the tropics and your heart . . well . . there’s a


tendency to valvular . . this malaria plays up damn-
ably with the organs.”
Jasper Ormonde had laughed. “ I’m a restless
beggar, you know. I doubt if I could stay anywhere
long . . and if the tropics call again . . then I'm
there again I suppose on the Romany pateran —I’ve
been hungry for Papua ever since I left ”
He looked for his hat, laughed again.
" Go out into the Queensland back blocks for a
while ; a dry inland climate . . breathe the gum trees
and ride round in the sun with your head well covered
. . don’t over-fatigue yourself. . . You’ve had a
few warning fainting fits, haven’t you ? Yes . . I
thought so.” He tapped Jasper’s chest with his square
forefinger once more. “ Heart . . lungs or kidneys
. . you know what fever does . . honeycombs a
chap. . . With you it’s only threatening heart
trouble at present . . you’re pretty fit considering
that you have been so long in India . . and in the
places that sweat a man’s stamina away. . , Not
that the Northern Territory isn’t a healthy enough
spot for the White . . but you had the seeds of malaria
there before. . . Laze round I tell you in the fresh
gum sweet air. God! I wish I hadn’t such a good
practice. . . I’d take it on for some months myself.
I am as keen as a kid on bush life . . real Out Bank
Station . . where a man has room to grow."
“ I thought you’d finished growing, Doctor, and why
not slip the patients up . . or get a locum ? ”
" Locums are either duffers, or better than oneself


. . and grab one's best-paying patients . . the hypo-
chondriacs and women with not enough to do—same
thing—l mean of course with a ‘ better bedside
manner’ than oneself. . . Mustn’t run down my
own ability for my job.”
The two men twinkled back at one another for a
moment.
“ I’ll consider what you say,” answered Jasper
finally. “ But I must have something to do. . .
Perhaps someone wants a station hand.”
A wool-broking firm in which he had some interest
told him Meerly station wanted a manager. Part of
his youth had been spent amongst cattle and sheep
work; he preferred cattle, like most active men,
when he first came from England. Since then he had
been roaming the hotter parts of the world. He went
to Thursday Island : found it full of Japanese, whom
he did not relish, and so came along to Brisbane.
Kicked his heels about Queen Street and in a leading
hotel for a few weeks, felt fed up with everything, and
one day found himself coming to from a dead faint
in the smokers’ lounge, so, unwillingly, at last was
obliged to look up a doctor.
His luck was in for Meerly run was just the kind of
country the doctor advised. He went to a few theatres,
let a barber shave him every day, because in the bush
he would have no theatres and be obliged to shave
himself, and then took train and coach and credentials
to Meerly.
He was a tall, lean man of whom observant people


sometimes remarked he "looked like an explorer,”
others, travelled ones, that he reminded them of the
mummy of Rameses the third in the Cairo Museum.
You couldn’t help noticing him, and it was not only
his straight back and his long legs and six feet of bone
and muscle. He had personality: the kind of man of
whom one does not bother to question whether he is
good looking or plain. He arrested attention, that was
all, and he rarely spoke unless he had something to say.
In fact, he rather avoided people though he managed
to do it so politely he offended nobody. One moment
he was there, then, while you were still hoping to nail
him to a long desultory conversation, such as the
average person with nothing to say delights in, he was
not. A hasty bow, a pair of flying heels, he always
walked quickly, and such strides did he take that the
jackeroos christened him “ The Emu ”on sight. He
had a keen grey eye which rarely softened. He knew
exactly every man’s worth in the working line, and
the " station pets ” began to have a rough time. It
was as though a silent rapier of sharpest steel: a good
Damascus blade came unheralded, to prod them into
action. There was no bludgeoning in Jasper’s methods,
but when he was about, the men worked to the limit
of their capacity, and when he was not, they were
always looking over their shoulders to see if he was
coming.
Anders delighted in him. They would sit on either
side of the empty whitewashed fire-place in the
quarters after the morrow’s work had been arranged,


both smoking, neither exchanging another word, until
far into the night. The business of the day over they
would occasionally have a game of cribbage or even
poker for small stakes, on the greasy pine-wood table
with Anders’ special pack of cards, which was nearly
black with age and use. Sometimes they would have
particular station problems to discuss, but that over,
they relapsed into stillness broken only by the needs
of the game, while thin blue curls of smoke ascended
to the spider-web hung ceiling. Reform was rampant
on the station, and Trolls, who had loafed for eighteen
months on his job, went across to complain to Mrs.
Meerly.
He was met with scant sympathy. Upon which he
became rude and Mrs. Meerly hysterical.
Jasper Ormonde being informed, he asked her to
sign a cheque, filled it in for Trolls’ wages to date, and
said there was no doubt an inside seat for him on the
down coach.
Trolls, who had been telling other disaffected souls
all he meant to do to the new manager, if he dared say
anything to him, went with his tail between his legs,
without as much as a whimper, though he regaled a
sleepy commercial on the coach journey with his
opinion of Jasper Ormonde, and of exactly how plain-
spoken he had been with “ me gentleman.”
It did not hurt Ormonde, and the commercial did
not listen, but it let off steam for Trolls, as the prepara-
tion for a secret repentance of hasty action, and regret
over his last “ soft job,” as he languished in the stuffy


back room of relations, who resented his return to the
city.
Jasper Ormonde created something of a stir in the
neighbourhood with his new methods and his cleaning
out of the old ones.
Trolls’ departure was enjoyed by Mrs. Meerly’s well-
wishers, and with remarks about “ new brooms ” by
the less friendly minded.
Ormonde went his own way with calmness, never
retracting an order nor voicing an unnecessary one,
and he had a way of managing Mrs. Meerly herself
which no previous manager had compassed.
He never flattered her, but was always considerate.
So far, and no further, her obvious coquetries went.
With absolute courtesy he evaded anything directly
personal. He was interested in her garden, even her
frocks, never omitted to notice a new one, and broke
in a riding hack for her himself when her chestnut
staked itself.
The widow’s heart was fluttered, but at times she
felt that she came against a cold wall of reserve she
must presently despair of climbing. None of her
tactical ladders helped her. At last she lapsed into a
chill friendliness : a little chastened perhaps, but in no
way vindictive. She could not but see how satisfac-
tory in every way was the manager —as a manager.
She decided he was " developing,” but he was very
delicate: her part was to take care of him, let him
gradually find her necessary to his comfort. Sally
handed poultry round the dinner-table much more


frequently than formerly, and the vegetable gardener
was harassed to send vegetables to " them blarsted
quarters ” for the blanky bachelors, in a fashion that
hurt his professional pride exceedingly.
But Mrs. Meerly had been married. She recalled
that Timothy was always more susceptible to feminine
charms after a square meal: women being a kind of
sweet on the menu of life, after the meat and wine
have been disposed of.
Jasper Ormonde might imagine himself just a
machine for working Meerly to the station’s advantage.
He might be a " Master of Men ” as she sentimentally
dubbed him, but life had led her to believe that for
every Master of Men there is somewhere in the world
“ a master’s master,” the woman who will master him.
Being spiritual, as she told herself he was, because he
did not drink to excess nor try to philander with the
new housemaid, a pretty red-cheeked girl who had
succeeded Sally as waitress, the spirituelle type of
beauty would appeal to him.
For what the district crudely called " bones ” Mrs.
Meerly described as “ spirituelle.”
Perhaps she also believed that “ continual dripping
wears away the stone.”
And all the while Jasper Ormonde was unconscious
of any feminine plotting. He simply never thought of
Mrs. Meerly as anything but his employer, by whom
he must do the fair thing and make her property yield
reasonable returns.
Then later on, when he was stronger, and that


worrying sense of oppression had gone out of his chest
and his pulse didn’t gallop and then go down to a mere
thread, he would be off once more ranging the earth,
particularly the tropic comers of it, leaving Meerly
the better for having entertained the stranger within
its gates.
His was a simple creed; he knew exactly what he
wanted always. He thirsted always for the far
horizons —Tibet to-morrow, the shores of the Mediter-
ranean, if possible, next week.
Those who knew him best said he should have owned
an airship and darted from land to land by the path-
ways of the birds. Inns and their occupants along the
everyday trail interested him, detained him, not at all.


CHAPTER TWENTY
" Here am I a traveller at the door—
How I puzzle what lies hid behind.
Just a little less—a little more
Turn the key and see what I shall find ! ”
She came to the edge of what seemed an almost
impassable scrub set among the foothills, thick, thorny
underbrush and swinging vines ; trees so old they were
green with moss and mustard-patched with the crude
chrome of lichens.
The spirit of adventure piqued her to explore, and
hanging Brownie’s bridle rein to the dipping branch of
a gnarled wild apple tree, she made an advance on the
green barrier.
Tiresome travelling, but interesting because one
might at any moment come on a limber sliding snake,
or small furred denizen of the wooded ways. The
sunlight sifted through the trees sucked up the mois-
ture and distributed it in a green haze. Overhead the
boughs met in a luminous twilight of clouded malachites
broken here and there by the more daring sunrays that
gathered in a pale yellow pool before her stumbling
feet. Then the scrub thinned ; here were stumps that
showed they had once known the axe, but so long ago
they had taken heart and sprouted in dainty lettuce-
greens and become like little impertinent dwarfs aping
the pride of forest trees. Something like an old track
swerved suddenly to the right though it was thick with


fallen leaves and grass-matted . . surely at some time
or another wheels had run here, horses hoofs had
thudded through, and
Why . . there was a house in the overgrown clearing.
A cottage that had once been a substantial dwelling-
place. Tall dock weed grew up to the rotting verandah,
where the white ants had made a home, but the four
rooms were of hardwood and the* intact iron roof
sheltered them from the wet weather. . . The
wooden door swung on a broken hinge. Underneath
the house, which was built on piles, she could see the
rusted wheels of a spring cart, rotting away like the
verandah, the remains of a sacking bunk; coils of
rusty wire: a zinc-tub, red with rust with a jagged
hole in its bottom, and a wooden cradle.
The house had been surrounded by a garden, but
bandicoot and wallaby had had their greedy will.
Still there were Brazilian cherry trees with currant-red
fruits ripening on the spotted boughs, a plague-smitten
lemon tree whose few wizened fruits were covered with
the thick leaden-coloured fungi of disease: over the
iron tank at the comer of the house, a grape vine
straggled, making a delicate pattern of fragile dusks on
the earth below.
A dog kennel, where a chain eaten by rust looked as
though it had been severed near the collar-end by some
sharp instrument, while at the back of the dwelling,
and about the front steps that led to the railed-in
verandah, was a white clematis in snowy flower. . .
With quickened interest Amber went forward and.


balancing gingerly, crossed the pit-falls of the verandah,
which reverberated hollowly under her tread. Here
and there she could see the brown tunnels that showed
where the termites hid from the light of day. There
was a smell of dry decay, of jasmine, of dust long
undisturbed.
She looked into the two front rooms; the windows
were boarded up. Whoever had deserted the habita-
tion had meant some day—perhaps when luck turned
—to come back to it. A closed door on the left
intrigued her, and to her amaze she found it bolted on
the inside. She shook it, but in vain, for revelations.
Moving round to the side of the house she discovered
the windows of this room were also boarded up.
Some mystery surely! Who could have latched the
room from the inside, how had the man or woman who
closed it escaped from it ? By the window ? There
was a story here. She must ask Malcolm if he had
ever heard of this deserted house.
Some wandering gipsy fancy had taken her to ride
far afield over the borders of Rocky Springs towards
the big run of the absent Richardsons, who lived in
Sydney, but kept a manager on the place. He occupied
a new weatherboard cottage on the far side, and here
the cattle roamed to the edge of the scrub—weedy
creatures, long homed, narrow barrelled, mixed with
scrubber blood. The station was notoriously mis-
managed but the elder Richardson was an invalid and
the younger a waster. Nobody bothered much, only
the neighbours, who were always having trouble with


the Richardson’s " warrigal stock ” getting amongst
their own. “ Boxed ” cattle and straying clean skins
were one of the minor grievances.
Amber had never come this way before: and had
you asked her she would have told you she thought
this part mere jungle, poor country, where grass trees
flourished and little else, unless it be spinifex. Even
Michael, as far as she could recall, had never spoken
of the deserted house.
All the impatient etemally-inquisitive Eve was
awake in her to pry into the mystery of that closed
room. If only she had brought a tomahawk: the
small axe would have prised the door open surely, and
deserted houses in the bush are the property, for the
hour anyway, of the one who finds them.
Amber negotiated the verandah again, walking like
Agag, delicately. She sat on the steps, musing, while
Brownie, left alone on the other side of the leafy
palisade, swished his tail at a March fly and cropped
the lush ends of grass within his reach.
“ I wish some man with a strong arm would come
along,” she said half aloud.
In the white jasmines a pollen-weighed bee burred :
a bird called from the scrub : a grey “ happy family ”
some score strong chattered over a fallen wild fruit.
The mounting heat of the summer’s day drew an
impalpable vapour from moist plants . . she seemed to
feel the fierce menace of the strangling life of forests,
reaching octopus arms to her across the open spaces. . .
She heard a horse whinny beyond the cloud of
12


varied greens, the tangle of the scrub, by which she
had come. Brownie, with pricked ears, essayed a
high, challenging neigh. . .
Someone was coming by the way she had traversed.
. . Whatever would he think when he found her
saddle-horse beyond the tree screen ? He might be a
dishonest person, perhaps a horse thief. And she had
left her watch in her saddle pouch. Her amber beads,
her only heritage, she was wont to call them, she wore
round her ivory throat under her riding blouse. . .
But maybe it was just some innocent station hand
who knew the Rocky Springs brand and would not
interfere with Brownie. She could hear him whistling,
and her forehead contracted. For he was whistling
the aria from " The Bohemian Girl ” which Arabella
de Courcy favoured and which had been Amber’s first
intimation of her.
" Cooee,” the bushman’s “ halloa,”
She lifted her hand to her mouth and cooeed back.
She could hear the new-comer crashing in the under-
growth. Then he came, hatless, into the clearing.
He ceased whistling; he had expected to see a man
somewhere abouts, perhaps come into some scrub-pool
to get water for his billy tea, and had not at all con-
templated meeting a maiden in distress or otherwise.
“ I tied my hack up beside yours,” he said. " Pardon
me, please. . . I really thought there was some chap
here who might share a pint of tea.” He bowed, the
sunlight catching the silver in his thick close-cropped
hair.


“ There is tea in my saddle pouch . . but I was
exploring before boiling my jack-shay,” she answered,
coming into the arid garden. “ There are cherries
here for plucking, but I am afraid they are bitter ones.”
He looked at her slim figure, her lovely sun-flushed
face. The very spirit of youth, backgrounded by
obvious desolation, and things that have had their day
for ever.
" However did you come here ? ”
" Just as you did ! ”
" But why ? ”
" Well . . why did you ? ”
“My quest is easily explainable,” said he. “ A
blood mare is missing from Meerly; as we have reason
to distrust the Richardson fences, I think she may be
running with the scrubbers . . that blazed stallion is
always luring off our stock. . . No one seemed to
be able to find any other explanation for her dis-
appearance : a beauty with the curved neck that shows
Arab strain. . . So I came myself. . . I like
exploring, too I ”
He bowed again, his eyes smiling.
“ From Meerly ? ” she said. “ Then ”
" Yes. . . I’m the new manager . . Jasper Or-
monde.”
The “ happy family ” had moved further on : they
could hear their sharp cluttering still undiminished by
distance. Amber looked thoughtfully at the man’s
shirted arm. Hatless, coatless, she decided he carried
himself like a soldier.


“ Would you say, now . . that you had a strong
arm ? ”
“ A strong arm ? ” He looked down at his shirt
sleeve with puzzled eyes. “As far as muscle goes . .
yes.”
He was thinking of what the doctor had said . , no
over exertion till he was stronger . . that uneven
pulse . . shortness of breathing. . .
“ Rot! ” She was not surely going to require any
labours of Hercules from him.
“ You’ll laugh,” she coloured. " But you will have
an excuse for that to speak a man’s commonplace
about women’s curiosity! I never heard of this
deserted house in all my life. I came on it to-day : the
first time I have ridden to the borders of Rocky Springs
in this direction . . and now that I’ve found it there’s
a Bluebeard’s chamber . , one room I can’t get
into! ”
“ Take care you don’t meet the fate of Bluebeard’s
wife prying into cupboards where no wise wife would
pry-
She took off her little felt riding hat: flung back
her head. “ I’m so hot,” she said —the tiny curls
were damp on her forehead: he thought they were
rings of gold—“ I suppose thwarted curiosity has sent
my temperature up.”
" Which means you are wild to get into that forbidden
room ? How truly feminine , . well . . let us see
what can be done.” He remembered days when he
rowed stroke for his college. He wondered just how


much horse-power he would have to put into his
house-breaking.
They were presently standing in the outer room
where the light came in little zigzags through the
boarded window-frames. The whole place choked with
dust: there was the faint acridity of dry decay mingled
with the fragrance of jasmine blown through the open
door. Somewhere a locust shrilled in warm dusty
grasses, and they paused, laughing into one another’s
eyes for an instant ere Ormonde brought his weight
to bear on the closed door. The rusty latch strained
at its casings : the sere timbers creaked, “ Another
lunge,” encouraged Amber, " and I believe you will be
through.”
To her there seemed to be a shy spirit standing by,
ruffling with pleading fingers her sleeve, begging her
to let dead pasts bury their own dead ; what mauso-
leum of hopes once running high and red, was that
shuttered chamber ? What dream had died on its
threshold —ere nails were driven in window sockets
and boards shut out the light of day—and life ? What
right had they to pry here ? She, whose life with
Malcolm had begun so dramatically beside the ferny
brake by Hell’s Arch ? She whose love-life had seemed
eternally to end there . . at the close of a fragrant
summer’s day ?
And this strange man . . Mrs. Meerly’s new manager
. . what right had she to coerce his strong arm to
crash into other people’s histories like this ?
But deserted houses have no protectors . . like


deserted women, they are at the mercy of the
world. . .
Any stray swagman looking for easily obtained fire-
wood in wet weather might steal a board, stuff that
would bum easily honeycombed with white ants, and
tindered with dry rot , , from the verandah. Some
curiously wanton sundowner might put a firestick in it
to make a blaze, unpardonable crime in the bushlands
yet nevertheless indulged in for apparently mere idle
amusement, and the sundowner, living free on rations
given him by the big stations, was a notoriously
ungrateful rogue. Evidently the Richardsons cared
nothing for the old cottage near their land, evidently
the cocky selector whom drought or some other mis-
fortune had driven from his roof-tree had not returned
again to see what had happened to the old nest.
Dust flew in clouds about them as Jasper Ormonde
shook the door. He was growing obstinate now, and
he put all his strength into the final struggle.
Kookaburras were laughing unseen in the timbers . .
jolly bark-coloured birds who have their own eternal
jesting. . . Easy enough for birds to make fresh
nests. . .
Crash . . the door had yielded and slowly it swung
back, showing the dusk of the bolted room. . .
Amber stepped eagerly forward. . .


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
" Across the street he made, the plucking years
Have laid grey feathers of enduring dust.
Does the wind keep no saltness of his tears
Does the sun store no laughter and no lust ? "
Nothing there. . .
Only inches deep the dust upon the floor, mealy,
untrodden, marked not even by the scurrying paws of
a mouse. . .
Dust . . with one wand of orange light creeping
through a slit in the boards that covered the windows,
proving that day was drawing to a close and the fierce
white light of noontide retreating before that sallow
flood.
Nothing! Only as she stood there, staring into the
twilight of the wooden room, Amber could have sworn
she heard something sigh , . felt something pass her
unseen, unseen, almost unheard and yet perceived, as
though it stirred the subconscious with a remembrance
of cold stark tragedy . . now dust blown to the winds
of forgetting. . .
A breath that was all . . chill . . damp, swaying
the air as weed sways under water on the sea coast . .
troubling the practicability of day with ghostly
things. . .
Jasper Ormonde, standing a little behind Amber,
stared into the emptiness. The walls of the room were
intact; good Queensland hardwood had repelled the


white ants. It must have been “ the best room ”in
the days of occupancy. Here and there were marks
as though pictures had hung on the walls. Advancing,
Amber deliberately disturbed the dust with her foot.
The wand of light peered, reached further, touched a
glitter on the floor.
" Broken glass, I suppose," she said, and bending
down took a small object from the casing of dust. . .
" Why . , it’s an ear-ring.” She shook it: the
light made it gleam dully.
" Clear amber . . isn’t that strange ? . . Perhaps
only imitation . , but even then ” She fingered
the amber beads about her throat. " Amber , . how
. . how queer. Look for its fellow, Mr. Ormonde. . .
Then I’ll have a pair to match my necklace,”
They searched, both with quickened pulses, wonder-
ing over old secrets the bolted room had hidden so
effectually for more years perhaps than they guessed
at. , .
But there was only one ear-ring in that desolate
room.
" I suppose she left in a hurry . . one can imagine
her, heart-broken, saying, ‘ Oh . . well . . let it go . .
it was only an ear-ring. What does that matter in the
wreck of a life ’ ? Or perhaps he said the wagon was
waiting to take them back to the city . . to the coach
roads . . to make good . . and come back when the
drought was over . . or the debt reduced on the place.
. . Perhaps he said, ‘We will come back some day . .
and find your ear-ring.’ I wish, like the Indian


juggler, I could know her story by just placing the
trinket against my forehead, closing my eyes, and
thinking. .
" You might try it.” He was coughing. " But let
us get out into the air . . who knows what deadly
germs may be lurking here after all this shutting out
of sun and wind. . . I would be glad of a few deep
breaths that did not taste of rotten wood . . or dead
hope, Miss Malcolm.”
They went out, into the sunshine. Amber still held
the ear-ring. Under the white jasmine she tried it in
her ear, and turned to him laughing. “ How does it
look ? It’s horribly tarnished . . the metal chain I
mean . . it is silver I suppose . . it has gone so black,
but if the amber is genuine it must be thousands of
years old , . gum dropped from some prehistoric tree
and grown quite accustomed to tombs and layers of
fine earth. Amber is always such an intriguing thing,
isn’t it ? ”
“ Amber is.” He was looking down at her intently.
She coloured, laughed again. “ Now for Brownie . .
I’ll have to ride home by moonlight as it is, I presume
. . but first we will boil the billy, and wash down dust
with some Rocky Springs special tea.”
As they went they plucked handfuls of Brazilian
cherries that shone like the sard from Pactolus’ golden
sands amongst the bright reseda leaves, but found the
fruit squirming with the fine white threads of grubs
accentuating the cherry’s natural tartness.
Once they looked back at the deserted house in


silence. For a moment, to Amber’s alert fancy, a
pallid hand was stretched through the broken door
asking for the return of the ear-ring. Indeed, the
whole building seemed concentrated to observation, as
the prone victim of some brutal footpad, slowly return-
ing to consciousness, might watch his attacker making
off with the stolen goods.
“ Deserted homes where people have laughed . . and
loved, perhaps done all the little everyday jobs . .
thought the normal thought as well as the rare, suffered
the small ills as well as the greater agonies . . do make
one whimsical,” she said as they entered the damp
green gloom of the scrub. “ After all, if I had not
taken the ear-ring, sooner or later some disreputable
swaggie would have pried into that bolted room, per-
haps slashed the door down with an axe in vain hope of
a forgotten keg of beer, or some crazy shepherd have
hung himself in a corner . . it’s much nicer for the
‘ pale impatient ghosts ’ that nice people you . . and
myself . . should be the first to enter in . . even
unasked. . . I will mind the poor lady’s ear-ring for
her . . until . .”
" Until . . what ? ” He was holding a clawing vine
aside, to let her pass.
“Ah , . until ? . . I don’t know what I was
going to say . . there is something creepy about it all
. . and yet Big Man (Mr. Malcolm I mean) will only
laugh at me. . . There is nothing much in a woman’s
ear-ring he will say, in his sensible . . and utterly
Scotch way.”


“ Dice for the Gaming Gods sometimes,” answered
the man. “ Looking at life from certain view-points
everything is queer. . . And yet fellows will tell you
‘ There’s no romance nowadays ’ because there are no
more Flemish lace ruffles and rapiers with Damascus
blades worn by the Macaronis of the period.”
" Human nature doesn’t change,” sighed Amber.
" It’s a truism, I suppose, but I have been delving into
the archaic lately. . . Big Man has an extraordinary
miscellany of books, though he doesn’t read novels,
except to read and re-read Dickens with positive luxury.
I tell him he purrs over Dickens. Amongst his books
is ChaUamel’s ‘ History of Fashion.’ . , I believe he
bought it from some city landlady (who had acquired
a Balliol man’s library for a bad debt) for five shillings !
Big Man always makes bargains. I tell him that’s how
he picked me up.” She chuckled deliciously. Some-
how she felt very much at home with this tall lean
stranger, “ And when he read about the Gallo-Roman
woman with her string bags and women of later periods
with their paint-pots and hair dyes, their frills and
furbelows: their calm refusals to obey sumptuary
laws. . . That old Charles the Ninth of France . .
well he wasn’t old, but very wicked, forbade any
extravagance in dress though he liked shooting Hugue-
nots . . why women were just the same fundamen-
tally, as they are to-day , . and men . . I expect,
too.”
" Come down to the primeval crudities, and passions
are just as stark. . . By George! I thought that


was a snake under your foot! It’s only a frilled lizard
. . a blue tongue . . isn’t he in a rage ! ”
The lizard with its frill erect, like a furious courtier
of Elizabeth’s day, was in their path looking for
battle. Jasper prodded it with a stick, and it retreated,
grudging every inch.
“ No. It’s funny . , but I always fed snakes,” she
said. Then her eyes became aloof, troubled. She
was remembering one occasion when she did not feel
foulness close to her. . . Ah . . how close before she
guessed how vile the thing. . .
Was this man, who seemed so frank, so companion-
able, was he just another Leon ?
The man beside her felt the change. Suddenly she
seemed entirely to elude him. They walked in silence ;
now and then she let him help her over a fallen log or
a high-ridged root in their way. Once he plucked a
trail of red berries for her, and she moved swinging
them from her gloved hand.
Brownie greeted them with amiable interest. He
had apparently been discussing per medium of nose-
rubbings and shakes of the head, local matters with
the new manager’s grey hack. Amber stroked his
muzzle, and took a little bag of tea and some sand-
wiches from her saddle pouch. In a clear space
Ormonde was already collecting sticks and dry leaves
for the fire. Presently it blazed with a resinous
crackling, sending up pale violet flames with ruby roots
on the clear air.
Brown sugar sweetened the milkless tea and they


sipped, like gourmets over a rare delicacy, sitting on a
log.
A flight of white butterflies crossed the tufted
grass ; the shadows were sending dusky plumes from
the timber across the more open spaces. A flash of
emerald and blue and rose meant parrots homing.
Wedge-shaped companies of wings crossed the sky.
“ Won’t they be anxious about you at Rocky
Springs ? ” he asked as he tightened the girths of her
saddle and gave her a foot up.
“ Oh, no. I told them I was questing far afield
to-day. Knight erranting. Big Man trusts Brownie
more than he trusts me, I think. Knows he will bring
the wanderer home sometime before midnight. . .
I’d go just the same, if he didn’t."
“ I believe you would,” answered Jasper. “ I
believe you would.”
Presently, with some malice in her smile, “ You will
have to give up your hunt for the missing stock for
to-day. I’m thinking,” she said; “it is getting too
dark.”
The topmost eyeries of the trees were crowned in
gold. They could hear the thudding of wallabie’s tails
in the closer timber: night birds woke with hoarse
signals. The moon would rise early to-night, breaking
through the horizon dust before the flame of the West
was cold, and while the evening star was still the first
comer in the eau-de-nil of twilight skies, but it was no
time for looking for stray things of which he had no
direction, and, as yet, no sign.


Night swung her perfume-censer low down over the
world ; sunset prepared to spread her fan of flamingo
feathers behind the tree-grown expanse. A small
blundering bistre-hued moth became entangled in the
girl’s hair in its clumsy flight as they rode towards the
chock-and-log where the dead dingo’s brush was stuck
in the gate to show the other wild dogs the end of
thieving rascals, or as witness to the valiance of some
hardy station horse, and determined slayer.
There was magic of “ blind man’s holiday ” in the
air: the world became all grey, outlines blurred:
there was a perceptible chill as they crossed pink-lily
lagoon and heard a frog croaking in the reeds and wild
duck settling on the water.
Beyond the chock-and-log they parted to take their
separate ways back to their home stations. He dis-
mounted, and stood by her horse while she said " Good-
bye,” holding her hand a moment close.
Neither said anything but “ Goodbye,” but the girl
rode on, almost it seemed to him into the gold of the
rising moon with a dream in her eyes. . .
And the man rode away from the moonrise : his head
a little sunken on his breast. . .
But it was in his heart the dream stayed. . .


CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
" Oh, let us take the grey jennet and thro’ the forest ride
Below the babbling water fall.
As white as any bride 1 "
" Come for a drive in my Victoria# It’s the real' land
of afternoon ’ feeling, to sit in the back of a bullock
dray (speed limit about two and a half miles to the
hour), and swing your legs. I may forget many things,
even breaking into Bluebeard’s chamber . . but I
don’t think I shall ever forget the first time I rode in a
bullock dray. . . They had to lift me up then, I
was so small, and I rolled out of the back and crawled
in all dusty and happy. . . Now, Mr. Ormonde, can
you refuse ? Nothing will be required of your strong
arm, to-day, if you agree to come, I assure you! ”
Her placid friendly blue eyes met his from under the
brim of a faded pink sun-bonnet; she wore a blue
cotton frock, brown sandals and stockings, and big
brown gauntlet gloves.
Ted the bullocky was hitching up his team, fifteen
red and white oxen, and one long-homed white on the
near side, the only " black sheep ” in the family.
Ted was going out to bring in timber from the
sawmill for a new shed on Rocky Springs homestead,
and Amber, who had suddenly tired of housework, and
felt again the compelling lure of the Open Wold, had
declared she was too lazy to saddle Brownie to-day to


ride about the Run, she just felt the “ bullock dray
mood ” upon her . . would Ted let her ride in his
" jaunting car " ?
Ted grinned and showed all his gums. Ted was
always grinning even when his team got a wheel down
in a rut and had to be dug out of the mud, Ted grinned
as he plied the whip and cursed, when need arose, his
patient cattle, between smiles. When he wasn’t
smiling, he was singing. Travellers come for the first
time to the district, heard Ted carolling in his splendid
baritone, punctuated by the crack of the whip-lash,
long before the first massive, yoked head hove in sight.
He was fond of his bullocks, and he loved the sound of
his own voice raised in song, and men knew him, and
laughed at him, and loved him all along the rivers,
right down to the coast.
Amber joyed in Ted, his songs and his wide trayed
waggon, with the black and tan sheepdog running
along underneath, and the bent black billy swinging.
She had told Ted she would bring some of the currant
cake that goes by the name of “ brownie ” on the
shearing floor, and tea and sugar, and they would have
a party out at the sawmill.
Then Jasper Ormonde rode into the station with a
message about the strayed mare (who still strayed), for
Malcolm, and finding him out, was not too disappointed
to tarry to pass the time o’ day with the pretty
chatelaine.
No, he would not refuse to “ ride in her Victoria ”
when she asked like that. He put his horse in the


yard, and as the last bullock bent its great mild head
to the yoke, he swung up into the back of the lunging
dray with Amber, and they sat and dangled their legs
according to her direction, and gradually passed out
of sight of the window where Mrs. Maloney, with
speculation in her eye, and linen to mend, with which
Amber should have helped her, was watching them as
keenly as a cracked pair of glasses would allow.
They discussed music, Ted giving them the key, as
he roared “ Do not trust him, gentle lady,” to the
indifferent bullocks ; he encored himself with variations
on " The Wild Colonial Boy,” in which he was more at
home, and from this he declined, by easy stages, to
" The Little Green Leaf in the Bible,” a theme loved
by station hands on moonlit Sunday nights, and in
moods of sentiment. Then they talked books ; a treat
to find anyone who read something more modem than
dear Charles Dickens sometimes, Amber said.
“I do love books that are like real life,” she
added.
" I don’t know that I agree with the photographic
literary art,” contended Ormonde. " Endeavouring to
make a book exactly like life: so much of life is mere
boring detail, constantly renewed. A book should be
composed of the parts of life that are interesting.”
“ The fact of a book’s being interesting depends on
the writer more than on the material,” answered the
girl. “ Some have an arresting style . .it matters
very little what they are telling you, they manage to
convince.”
>3


" True there. . . By George, did you see that, we
went oyer a snake ! ”
They peered over their knees, bodies bent forward,
down to the track, and saw the crushed body of a huge
brown reptile some five feet long, which had been
sunning itself and was too somnolent to evade the
bullock dray’s passing, or else had been already caught
napping by the hoofs of the team.
“ Wouldn’t you have expected it to get away ? I
hope it didn’t bite any of Ted’s pets.”
The red and white bullocks went on undisturbed,
only the long-horned white seemed to have got out of
its stride, and tossed its head and lashed its tail, but
presently it too settled down to the even pacing of the
others. “ The Little Green Leaf in the Bible ” gave
place to “ Keep my mother’s picture from the sale,” a
pathetic ballad Ted had rendered, almost with tears,
from his youth up.
“ Ted’s a married man,” said Amber, “ with a wife
in the city. She is quite an educated woman, was a
school teacher, and they have a crippled son. They
are most devoted, and Ted would like to be with her,
but she had to be near the hospitals, and he says bullock
driving is the only thing he will ever be any good at.
It’s in his blood: his grandfather drove one of the
first teams that ever penetrated this way, and he and
his father were both bom under wagons, in the days
when the blacks were bad in Queensland ; his mother
was speared by natives when he was only a kiddie. He
says he loves the very smell of the hides ; what a cattle


duffer he would have made, if he hadn’t been honest.
Every penny he earns goes to his wife and son. All the
year round you will see Ted in the same shirt and mole-
skins ; he washes them both by turns, on Sundays (so
he always has something on) and his cabbage tree hat
and blucher boots: Big Man says he doesn’t wear
socks; he thinks that too luxurious and dandified.
He never drinks, and only smokes when someone gives
him tobacco. They call him “ stingy ” and “ mingy ”
and he only grins. I suppose because he has just one
object in life . . money, for the missus and kid to be
comfortable.”
Ormonde felt in his pocket. " I must remember that
about the smokes,” he said, " when we reach the saw-
mill. By the way, isn’t your father The Malcolm who
is sticking out for arsenic pentoxide in destroying
prickly pear ? A chap told me about it in Brisbane.
Mr. Malcolm doesn’t talk much about himself.”
" Yes, . . That’s Big Man. You talk cochineal
insect to him and see how excited he will get. His face
won’t change, but his hands will shake like shivery
grass. He says the cochineal will only be useful where
the pear is very thick: not much good where it is
spread about the place. I don’t think there is much
Big Man doesn't know about pear."
“ Wouldn’t arsenic destroy the grass roots too ? ”
“ You won’t find much chance for grass where pear
is . . besides look at the country in drought, bare as
your hand . . cracked brown earth . . nothing else.
. . Then comes the rainy season : in no time the land


has its moss-green carpet . . grass . . grass every-
where. AH through the barren time the grass roots
have been tucked up comfortably, waiting, and laughing
at us for our despair.” She coloured, shook her pink
bonnet, and looked sideways at him. " I’ve been
reared among it all! When I was only ten I’ve
watched the skies when we had a dry spell . . watched
. . prayed for the clouds to gather and hated the elec-
tric blue of the unpitying vault above. It means . .
everything . . but Big Man has been lucky in the
seasons, and he never lets water frontages go. . .
Drought helped to ruin the Calders. Mrs. Maloney
thinks a direct intervention of Providence for our
benefit, but I expect the Calders would have gone
under anyway . . some people are like that. They
just . . miss everything in business or—in life.”
" Was she going to say ‘ love ’? ” Jasper wondered
idly, but a fight between a pair of laughing jackasses
and a 'guana distracted his attention. They jumped
from the back of the dray and investigated. As they
reached the arena, a panic-stricken yellow and black
'guana was scuttling up a blue gum with part of his
long pointed tail missing, and the infuriated birds were
dissecting scraps of that nethermost appendage with
beaks sharp from battle. It required a brisk step to
bring them back to their perch on the dray again—
Ted wandering on without taking the slightest heed to
his passengers, and filling the air with song. Before
they reached the sawmill they could see the thin gauzy
shaft of the engine’s steam on the syenite blue of the


sky ; smell sap from the oozing logs, the sweet choking
odour of the sawdust, hear the whirr of the belt, and
presently they came into the opening where the oil-
black engine phutted and puffed and the long grey
belts slid like huge boa constrictors round and round.
Amber liked to watch the perpendicular strip-saw at
work, see the golden grain of the sawdust fall on the
pyramid-shaped pile below the steel teeth, see the clean
surface of the severed log, or try to count the years of
the tree by the gamet-red and pale lemon whorls in
the wood.
The song of the sawmill has melody always to the
hearts of men. The pioneers with their old wooden
wheels in rushing watercourses, shaped rude timbers
for their primal homes in the wilderness : careless souls
lost both limbs and lives to the strip-saw, or the
whirling circular. Bad master, and splendid servant,
it made boards for the floor of the first House of God
in the leafy solitudes, for the so-called “ School of
Arts," and to its teeth came the precious red cedar, the
rich mahogany, the hardwood, the gracious scented
white pine, the kauri, the fine patterned glossy silky
oak. Housewives collected the chips for the hearth
and the kerosene-tin washing boiler, the sawdust was
used to deaden sound between walls in more ambitious
homes that believed in privacy. Inland children made
castles and ramparts with the sawdust, as children of
the coastal cities make them in the sands by the sea,
and even when the gallant sooty little engines came
puffing into the valleys at the bidding of the Gods of


Machinery and Progress, the touch of romance about
the bush sawmill lingered on.
Within sight of the whirling wheel, Amber collected
chips for her fire, and the two sawmill hands knocked
off for a “ smoko ” and came shyly up and sat a few
self-conscious yards away, discreetly eating “ brownie ”
and trying not to make too much noise as they gulped
down the black tea which Amber, knowing her bush-
man, had so lavishly sugared,
Ted, under the influence of all the tobacco in
Ormonde’s pouch, became discursive, and being a
person of observation, told nature stories of quadruped
and biped inhabitants of the Wild. Ted was one of the
few in the district who had found a black cockatoo’s
nest. " Them coves likes to build high,” he said
reflectively, ramming Jasper’s tobacco affectionately
into the bowl of the old clay he carried in hopes “ some
cove might shout a plug.” " They pick out a holler
tree with dry mud in it, and the eggs is as blanky white
as thistledown, miss. I often argyied with fellers about
it. . . One scientific bloke told me birds were
descended from fish. Maybe, I never studied the
classics myself. I guess it’s as likely as a man was once
a monkey. Lord, though, some men do look as if they
had never got beyond the first stage on the trip.” He
spat over the nodding head of a burnished buttercup,
and reached for the last drain in his pannikin before
he began to smoke. “ One cove I knocked up against,
believed the lung fish on the Burnett come out of the
water at night and eat his grass and frightened the


cattle away. Never seen ’em myself, perhaps that’s
becos I ain’t a drinker.”
The sawmill hands went back to work with a bashful
“ So long ” to Amber, and a sotto voce discussion as to
whether the new manager at Meerly was hanging up
his hat for " Sandy Malcolm’s girl.”
Ted rose to his feet and ambled off in the direction
of his sleepy team. Malcolm’s girl was feeling very
happy, care-free, this afternoon. She took off her sun-
bonnet and let the south wind run its warm leaf-
perfumed fingers through her hair. The smell of pine
in process of being shaped into narrow boards at the
mill; chug of the engine; the soft fall of the aromatic
sawdust, men’s voices through the minor sounds. Ted
singing, as he shook the ashes from his pipe, and
hoarded away the precious flakes of weed in the trouser
pocket whose holes he had tied up with string. . .
Thought seemed to swoon in a haze of green and gold.
Time swam through Summer, flinging opal and aqua-
marine and topaz wave, and foam, white as plum
.bloom, from his cleaving shoulders.
And into the dream of Afternoon he wove the
musings of a man and a maid, musings mutually
pleasant, in a silence between them that held only
peace, and no hint of awkwardness where speech means
a rescue. They might have discussed and discovered
affinities. They felt too content with the hour to wish
to define any deep-seated reasons for that content.


CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
” Like enamelled cups wherein the latest Favourite kept her
rouge,
And where the slaves would rob the henna bush to make her
hair more lustrous for her lord.”
" Dame Gossip is a mighty Queen
And ever her power grows.
She has pointed fingers long and lean.
And an interfering nose.”
It was from her new parlourmaid (who had been lady’s
maid in the city and had private reasons connected
with a little perfectly to be understood jealousy on the
mistress’s part for leaving her metropolitan situation
and going into the bush for a time —this was her story
to her admirers amongst the stockmen and boundary
riders on Meerly)—it was from Rosamund that Mrs.
Meerly first heard the suggestion of a toupee.
“ You really should have one, madam. All the best
people have them for evening wear : quick change, you
know when a lady has to go to a ball or afternoon
reception.”
" False hair,” said Mrs. Meerly peevishly. " I’ve
never worn as much as a switch, Rosamund.”
“ But, madam . . it is the mode ” (Rosamund had a
high school education which included French). "It
gives ton .. it would make madam a girl again.”
In front of her mirror Mrs. Meerly toyed with the
notion. It would mean writing to a hairdresser in


town, and then the toupee might not match her rapidly
thinning locks. She was still toying, when Monsieur
Larone came to the township. He took the house
which had been empty so long at the bush end of the
main street: a weatherboard place with a shop window
where the stray goats of Dingy-bar congregated
beneath the zinc-roofed verandah, and sometimes
mongrel cows, living in the reserve and on a diet of
mixed prickly pear and cabbage stalks from the
Chinaman’s garden which spread its green cloth by the
river, rubbed themselves against the wooden posts and
left a fringe of reddish and white hair in the splinters.
Monsieur Larone arrived by the coach, one mellow
eve, went to the second best hotel in Dingy-bar, and
enquired if there were any shops to let. The landlord
sent him down to Bill’s. Every one who came as
stranger to Dingy-bar was sent to Bill’s for information.
Bom and bred in the township Bill knew every one’s
business. Indeed, he kept a topographical map of the
place in his head, but first he always wanted to know
your business in Dingy-bar, and he never beat about the
bush. Bill, whose other name was Watson, kept the
ironmongery: he was also a saddler: a land and
estate agent: judge at the local races : a horse-doctor,
and when he had time he played the accordion for
local hops. Bill would know at once whether Dingy-
bar had a vacant store or not. Bill did, but first,
sitting on a wooden chair in the middle of the footpath
to get what he could of the river breeze. Bill wanted
“ Mossoo’s ” business. “ Blanky Frenchy ” was his


aside as he spat into the gutter. Bill had always
admired the Duke of Wellington: the only book he
ever read, when he put a collar on on Sundays, was the
thumbed biography of the Iron Duke.
bowed, hat in hand, his black cape, which
gave him such a theatrical aspect, blowing out behind.
He was pink-faced and bald, having little tufts of grey
hair—one each side of his shining pate —a pointed
beard ineffectually dyed, a waxed moustache. He
reminded Bill of a native bear. He told Mr. Watson
very simply that he was emigre from his beloved France
these ten years. He had been in a barber’s shop in
Brisbane: he had a chest trap de mal —the doctor
advised dry inland air. He thought of setting up a
barber’s shop: a hairdressing parlour in Dingy-bar, a
place where ladies could get the accessories that make
for women’s loveliness. Bill’s ideas of beauty parlours
were vague. He felt there was something not quite
respectable in the new arrival’s plans . . but then . .
French. . .
Bill spat again. Then he went into his house and
took down his keys. They jangled fiercely as he
walked, coatless, hatless, collarless, up the street,
followed by the Frenchy. Goats, black, tan, white,
mottled, arose and scuttled into the shadows : a cow
in a restful attitude chewing the cud lifted stiffly to
its knees and thundered off to the Frenchman’s “ Mon
Dieu! what ’ave we ’ere ? ” Reassured he followed
Mr, Watson, as, after unfastening the padlock, and
spitting on the palm of his hand for luck—Bill had his


superstitions about dwellings long closed to the light
of day—he led the way into the weatherboard house.
A flying fox, that had somehow crawled in through a
broken upper window, fled past them with a sound
like scissors grinding on stone, but the place was
sound, free from white ants. . . With a little scrub-
bing and renovating it would make both shop and
dwelling for Mossoo, and the rent was easy : it had been
vacant so long, and some declared it was haunted by
the ghost of the miserly old man who had hanged him-
self in the fire-place. Bill Watson did not tell Mossoo
this: though he guessed it would not be long before
the townsfolk did.
With that consideration in his careful soul he decided
to make the low terms considerably lower, if Mossoo
would take the place for . . say a year . . and pay
the money down on entering. Monsieur gesticulated,
but finally with some outlandish oaths agreed, and early
next morning he was seen with broom and bucket going
to and fro from the galvanised tank to the house. He
swilled and scrubbed and dusted and whitewashed till
he made quite a presentable habitation of the goat’s
rendezvous, and his special hate was directed at these
unpleasing guests. It became the joke of the town-
ship that any for the moment unexplained uproar
could always be accounted for with the remark, “ Oh,
it’s only Mossoo chasing billygoats.” When he bought
a revolver and shot them down—Mrs. McGinnis’ pet
black nanny which little Tommy McGinnis drove in
his goat-cart for the blue ribbon at the township show—


amongst them, the solitary policeman called on Mossoo
and pointed out the error of his ways, and the Mc-
Ginnises summoned him. He paid the fine but reloaded
the weapon. It became le sport to the excitable Gaul,
and the small boys of the township applauded. The
duel which had really forced Mossoo to disappear with
incredible alacrity from his native land had been as
much the outcome of a passion for pistol practice as
from any deeply felt insult to his honour, but the
gens d’arme had different views to Mossoo, and Australia
had offered subsequent refuge. All this was ancient
history, history untold, unsuspected as far as Dingy-bar
went, but the little township suited the Frenchy for
many reasons.
; His business flourished. First, from curiosity, bush-
men went for a hair-cut and a shave before they took
the coach to Brisbane, squatter’s wives submitted to
" treatment,” and grey locks grew red or brown again
as fancy and art dictated. He had all kinds of sweet-
smelling unguents and pomades, only he knew how
little his prescriptions cost to make up, and how much
was crude olive oil or sheer mutton fat. The secret of
the mutton fat lay betwixt himself and the local
butcher, whose hair he cut free. When there was a
ball in the township, girls with towels round their
shoulders sat in the annexe to the shop and had their
“ woman’s glory ” dressed in the latest style, or what
they had heard it to be.
Then Mrs. Meerly arose in her vanity and paid a
visit to Dingy-bar and the barber.


" Had he any transformations ? ”
So low she whispered the word, that he enquired
twice what she wished. Being assured, with finger on
lip, he dived into a secret recess and supported to her
acquisitive eye, twirling it nonchalantly on his right
hand a flaxen wig. It was just the shade, so Mrs,
Meerly fondly believed, of the hair that had attracted
the late Timothy to her youth and innocence.
“ Comhein ? ” She flattered herself she knew a little
French. Monsieur answered in deliberate English that
it was five pounds.
Five pounds ? Was it worth that ? To rejuvenate
herself, to, perhaps, secure a husband again ? Every
one knew men were captured through the eyes and held
through another portion of their anatomy . . at least
so women’s papers told one. . . She really was not
old, but the dry climate had wrinkled her a trifle, and
faded her hair. The next coach would bring her a new
frock from town, grey with a piping of magenta : the
magenta a little daring perhaps—but when it came she
would ask Jasper Ormonde to dinner.
When she had gone, carrying her purchases with her,
the Frenchman, having successfully insinuated the
virtues of his perfumed mutton fat under an attractive
title that suggested the Orient at half-a-crown a jar,
Monsieur having ascertained that the solitary police-
man was on guard over a violent drunk suspected of
sunstroke in the none-too-secure lock-up, took his
revolver from behind the door and went out to shoot
goats. If he had to pay another fine to some other


outraged McGinnis he would not complain. He had
had a most affluent day. “Ah I Ces femmes" he
smirked into his waxed moustaches, and sighted a
black and tan billy, with a wooden triangle round his
neck, scuttling into middle distance. A perfect shot,
but too near the township area ; he must stalk his
prey further afield.
“ You are looking awfully well,” said Ormonde
politely to the new frock as he sat opposite his hostess
in the station dining-room. Rosamund, pretty and
demure behind, changed plates and preferred vegetables.
Phoebe Meerly was looking well. The mutton fat
had softened her skin, the toupee, if it gave her a
slightly unusual aspect was becoming enough in the
meagre light of the red-shaded kerosene lamp.
Mrs. Meerly smiled. He wished she had not. Her
teeth, bluish white, and the work of a travelling dentist,
always reminded him of white-leaded park palings.
“ I wish I could say the same of you.” She shook her
blonde head coquettishly. ‘ ‘ You really need a woman’s
care, Mr, Ormonde—now don’t say you prefer to be
alone . . a bachelor’s life isn’t the life for a man like
you,”
Rosamund returned from a brief excursion to the
pantry with pudding plates.
Ormonde was spared the embarrassment of reply as
he crumbled his bread.
He began to talk about the oncoming local show ;
the chances for the station stock; the ball, to which
202
GAMING GODS


Amber told him she was going. At the mention of
Amber’s name Mrs. Meerly stiffened. A tiny flush
discoloured her sallow cheeks.
She laughed affectedly. Again he considered the
white-leaded palings. He wished she would not laugh.
“ Oh! Amber —Malcolm —as they call her I No
doubt she will have a good time at the show and the
ball. It’s funny, isn’t it, Mr. Ormonde, directly
scandal touches some girls the men*begin to run after
them ? We poor women , . we make our little
slips . . and then Oh I I suppose it's only
natural . . men think if a woman has favoured one
man she may favour another.”
He looked straight at her, his grey eyes steely. He
found it always hard to listen to ill-natured insinuation.
Open accusation was so much preferable. This could
be met and conquered or at least, sifted,
“ Why . , what do you mean ? ”
Mrs. Meerly of course did not mean anything . .
just, oh! . . well she thought Mr. Ormonde must have
heard the common talk in the district. . .
" I have never heard anything against her,” he
answered gently. " Every one speaks well of old
Sandy Malcolm and his daughter.”
“ Daughter ? Yes, perhaps she is, after all, but she
passes as his ward, his adopted child . . well . . well , .
we must be charitable, I suppose . . I always like the
Biblical interpretations. A little more blancmange ? ”
She returned to her attack when Ormonde smoked
in the shadow of the pepper trees that swept the edge


of the buffalo grassed lawn. Amber, she said, was
attractive, but then she knew so much more than most
girls of her age. “ Every housewife knows the kettle
that has once boiled boils easily again."
He deliberately emptied his pipe on the grass,
knocked its bowl free from tobacco ash on the side of
his squatter chair and asked a direct question.
" Do you mind telling me exactly what you mean . .
about Miss Malcolm ? ”
So vividly there rose before him pictures of a slim
girl in riding dress as he had seen her first standing
where the white jasmine blew on the ant-eaten verandah
of a deserted house. Of a girl taking off her hat and
letting the wind and sun have their will of her bright
hair : of a girl asking him with laughter in her eyes if
he had " a strong arm ’’; of a girl leaning forward in
the golden dusty gloom of the interior of that empty
house, the sound of crashing woodwork . . a loosened
bolt . . a tip-toeing into a room that smelled of dry
decay . . how she leaned and picked a shining object
from the floor where a rod of light had indicated
it. . .
” Do you like Amber ? ” she had asked, and then the
air was full of the smell of clean, sweet trees and sun-
saturated turf, and beyond the green canopy of boughs
where a little broken trail ran, their horses whinnying.
, . Amber, in a faded pink sun-bonnet —Amber
swinging her feet by his, from the " Victoria.”
Damn this old woman, with her smearing tongue,
rousing strange doubts of the girl . . nothing to


him . . except the embodiment of youth and merry
purity. . .
Damn the silly, venomous old woman, what did she
mean ? In the shadows her face seemed bluish,
wedge-shaped, like her teeth, he thought, but her face,
unfortunately, was her own . . though to-night she
had arranged her hair in a more becoming fashion,
giving fullness to that hatchet-shaped visage; one felt
somehow when she giggled in that cackling way her
bones clapped together unseen but not unheard, under
her smart new gown.
“ What I mean ” She fingered some fringe on
her bodice, looked sideways, dropped her eyes, fidgeted
her foot in the grass, lowered her voice. Perhaps even
then the memory of Mary Cockbum, senior, and just
what Mary Cockbum, senior, would think, was with
her. But something was stronger. Jealousy for the
youth and beauty that was the girl’s. Jealousy,
pathetic in its way of the rich winey things of life,
where to her life was proffering now a shelf of vinegar
bottles to sample only, a colourless fluid to cause no
man’s pulses to quicken. She grasped at the cup
rapidly slipping for ever from her clutches . . grasped,
and her hands became talons to hold. “ One doesn’t
like to be unkind . . it won’t make any difference to
your friendship for the girl, of course . . it never
does . . with men . . and doesn’t Tennyson, dear
Laureate, say we may rise on stepping stones of our
dead selves to higher things. . . It’s common talk ”
(Oh, Mrs. Meerly!) “ that Amber Malcolm ran away
14


with a married man . . was three days away, before
Mr. Malcolm caught them, and forced her to come
home . . some say he wounded the man, but it was
hushed up, in quite an extraordinarily satisfactory (to
them) manner.”
" How you must have regretted that ! ”
The words left his lips, struck her like bullets.
In the gloom she crimsoned, caught her breath, began
a wavering expostulation.
He did not apologize, he deliberately changed the
subject. Talked of the cult of the merino. The fact
that Cockbums were breeding Leicestershires, that
Richardsons were mustering and droving wild pigs to
market, taking anything they could get; queer move
for people like the Richardsons, supposed to be “ well
in.” He presumed the manager was doing it off his
“ own bat.”
She knew he talked at random : she choked on her
indignation. Somehow she felt undeservedly humili-
ated, and yet, behind it all, that still small insistent
voice there is no stifling clamoured in her heart that it
served her right. Revenge was a two-edged sword, and,
after all, what had Amber ever done to her, except to
grow lovely and to be bom so many years after Mrs.
Meerly first saw the light ?
Yet the sustaining drums of pride beat a triumph.
She had stirred this man. His cold insolence and
indifference were only a mask. He had asked no
questions. He had never doubted but that every word
she said of Amber was fatally true. Through all his


cool contempt, his determined keeping away from the
subject, he had voiced no curiosity, showed no interest.
She was wise enough to believe that this proved his
unhappy, but certain, conviction, that she had spoken
the truth in her accusations against the girl.
They parted amiably over his excuses against coming
in to the dining-room for whisky and seltzer, or the
inevitable lime-juice and sponge roll, before he went
back to his quarters. He promised with perfect
politeness to see about a new saddle for her riding hack,
to tell the groom she wanted the bay to-morrow, to
ride over to Cockbums.
And yet, when she went to her room where a hideous
enlargement over the dressing table insulted the late
Timothy even in his grave, she flung the new, expensive
transformation with an air of intemperate vindictive-
ness on her bed, and dissolved in bitter angry tears.


CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
" I knew that garden in the hush of noon
With the sharp shadow of the buttressed wall
On the fine yellow gravel of its paths.”
Following the custom found everywhere in the back
blocks, passers by might arrive out of the Unknown,
spend a night at Rocky Springs station —for there is
always a spare room and a welcome ready for the
casual wayfarer in the bush —and then go out into the
Unknown again.
Lonely women in the back blocks, whose husbands
and sons are away all day on the Run, often look
forward eagerly to these chance callers. At times they
are men of education and of vivid interests in the world
of cities : they have something fresh to tell, or to recall,
to a woman possibly bom in England to whom the life
of the gum tree lands, where young love tethered her
twenty or thirty years ago, has become something of
an exile.
In sparsely settled neighbourhoods these travellers
were a godsend, but to Amber life was always fairly
full. Young and active, with plenty of friends in the
district, if she chose to ride across to their homes, she
was not of those who watch the road with an unvoiced
prayer that someone, anyone will arrive to shatter
grey monotonies for a space ; and when Malcolm came
home one evening a few weeks after the episode of the


deserted house, bringing with him a thin man in riding
breeches, who coughed as he walked, and whose narrow
cheek-bones showed the unmistakable flush of incipient
or active phthisis. Amber thought over the evening’s
menu, wondered if there were enough stewed apples to
go round, and if she had better suggest to Mrs. Maloney
opening that tin of canned apricots she was keeping
for Sunday’s high tea, and she considered, with a bored
shrug, that now she wouldn’t be able to finish the book
Mary Cockbum had lent her and in which she had
become absorbed, though a sense of duty had kept
her busy this afternoon over a dance frock she was
making.
Wisps of pale peach colour lay about the living-room
through which the evening sun sent last bars of gold,
as Big Man and his guest came to the verandah : there
were reels of pink cotton on the table and a length of
skirt hanging from the sewing machine. Amber
tossed her thimble into the work basket, straightened
her hair at the mirror, pulled her blouse down to her
belt, and went out into the cool gum-perfumed end of
day. The sun was fast disappearing into a primrose
void. Now the air thickened with raw colour, ultra-
marine, cinnabar and gold dust. The kookaburras
were on the stockyard fence preparing to launch their
jeering valediction.
" This gentleman,” said Big Man coming ponderously
up the creaking steps, “ is passing through Richard-
son’s Run : tells me he used to five hereabouts but has
been abroad for years, picking up the auld trails. Ah


. . weel, there’s a bit o’ sadness in it sometimes—things
change so with the years.”
The grey November that had given Sandy Malcolm
birth was uppermost always in the sunset hour. Per-
haps the old man was tired.
Amber slipped her arm through his, rested her
smooth oval cheek against his shirt-sleeve : voiced an
insincerity, and wished the traveller welcome with a
murmured “ Glad to see you,” and a renewed wonder
about the stewed apples.
He had a peculiarly chilling gaze : his white hands
were long emaciated, with damp palms, unpleasant to
the touch. His name, he said, was Shielding. That
conveyed nothing.
Amber went to her room after some discussion with
Mrs. Maloney over the tinned apricots. Stealing a
look round the door at the stranger, Mrs. Maloney had
emphatically declared he wasn’t worth the apricots,
which naturally made Amber obstinate. She insisted,
and the grudging sound of the blunt tin-opener could
be heard through the door as she fastened her white
muslin frock, pulled her amber beads from under her
bodice and searching in the drawer of her dressing-
table, took out the amber ear-ring, laid it against her
rosy ear and fair crisp curls. “ Amber should be a
dark woman’s jewel, I suppose,” she said musingly.
“ But its just like frozen honey. I’ll wear it and try
its effect on the stranger. I don’t believe he ever looks
at a woman. There is something contemptuous about
his lips . . but then he’s very sick, poor man. . .


What clammy hands. . . I nearly jumped as though
I had touched a frog in the dark.”
By the time she was seated at the head of the dining-
room table, where some brick-red geraniums blazed in
their brown stone jar on the white cloth, she had
recovered her good humour. Mary would have to
spare that novel a few days longer: she had promised
to take it back to-morrow. Mary said she wanted to
lend it to the new manager at Meerly.
They had reached the stage of the stewed apples
(after all they made a braver show than she had
expected) and the apricots, when she felt the stranger’s
hitherto indifferent glance fixed upon her with a
piercing and uncomfortably intent scrutiny.
“ Hope he is not going mad on the premises,” she
murmured flippantly to her inner consciousness, and
preferred a plate of the swimming juicy fruits.
But he continued to stare : his prominent top teeth
clenched on his lower lip: the colour rising to his fore-
head ; his shaking hand was extended.
“ The ear-ring,” he said " the ear-ring . . where did
you get it ? ” Amber reddened. "It has rather a
history,” she answered nervously, with a glance at
Big Man as though asking him to be ready to protect
her if need arose. " I was riding one day over the
edge of our Run . . and I came across a deserted
house ”
Big Man paused with his fork in the air, looking
gravely from one to the other. Big Man’s teeth were
troubling him, and he refused with scom the minis


trations of a dentist, so he had to eat carefully on one
side of his mouth. “ Amber rides all over the place,”
he said. “ Goes into all the out-of-the-way comers.
I think she could always get a job as a boundary rider,
if other things failed,”
Sandy Malcolm was beginning to fancy he had picked
up a “ Pea-eater ” in his afternoon’s impulse towards
hospitality, “ Sit down now : have a drop of rum ? ”
But the man continued to stare at Amber, or rather
at the single ear-ring catching the light of the kerosene
lamp, and shining below her shining hair.
“ I found it on the floor of a bolted room . . in the
deserted house,” she said quietly. She was becoming
mesmerized by his fixed gaze.
Suddenly he dropped his head to the table, great sobs
shook his bony shoulders.
The girl ran round to him in quick compassion. It
was terrible to see a sick man break down like this.
What had the mere chance wearing of an odd ear-ring
brought about ? What visions conjured up to this
suffering, and possibly demented, stranger within their
gates ?
The sobbing brought on his horrible, hollow sounding
cough, the consumptive’s cough with a rattle in it, like
the sound of the knuckles of Death beating on the drum
of life. , .
Big Man arose in concern and went clumsily for the
decanter, his brows together . . what in hell was he
to do with the chap ? Perhaps he had had a recent
sunstroke and kept dark about it. Perhaps he was a


remittance man, just over a spree . . these tears looked
like plus whisky. . .
The man lifted up a wild, tortured, tear-stained face
now : he seemed to be making some kind of apology to
Amber for his outburst, his loss of self-control. His
eyes were blue, drenched, fanatical, his red lipped
mouth tremulous drawn oyer his pointed teeth again.
He was struggling for calm, for breath: the cough
ceased. , .
He moved shakily to the door. . .
" Pardon.” He gasped the word. “ I would be
very glad to lie down now . , somewhere . . if you
don’t mind . . a long day . . a harrowing day . .
coming back. . . Because ” —he turned to Amber
from the doorway, bowed slightly, his hand pressed
swiftly to his side —“ because there was a time, dear
lady, when that house was . . not deserted . . that
room not bolted . . and . . that ear-ring had its
fellow."
213
GAMING GODS


CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
" Because I knew a joy had passed
(perhaps it sang Youth’s epitaph)
My soul was hungry evermore—
since I had heard a lady laugh."
Ormonde never for one moment doubted Mrs. Meerly.
Although he felt her obvious spite, understandable in
a measure when one made a mental picture of the two
women, and placed them side by side for inspection,
Middle age, obliged to make way for Youth, arrogant
and armed with natural loveliness, still that compelling
voice of inward conviction left the man assured that,
in the main, the evil tale was not without substantial
foundation. Why he thought so, he could not have
explained, in convincing words. He felt it so, because
he felt it so, and he blamed himself that he felt it so
with any regret. The girl was her own mistress. Their
casual encounters had given him no right to criticize,
no power to influence the restrictions or freedoms of
her actions, her mode of life, but it meant a rearrange-
ment of the impression of laughing innocence she had
left upon him. Spirit of the vernal woods, care free,
gallant, carrying her head , high and looking a cen-
sorious world square between the eyes as is the birth-
right of gallant integrity. Every one had not the
same ideas upon those subjects; there were always
excuses to be made, and circumstances altered cases,
but his rigidity of outlook where it touched the women


of his own family was as severe almost as Big Man’s.
One might look at the world and the world’s ways with
tolerance, but one did not deliberately fall in love with
women who had been the chattel of other men. With
all the male’s inherent unfairness, which deep down
perhaps had its origin in the laudable instinct to keep
the race pure, he placed Amber at once in the category
of the women who, though one gave them every out-
ward respect and inward excuse, were of the great
army men admire but don’t marry. She was a very
charming girl, and it was no damned business of his
if the charming girl had been more or less the victim of
a rotter . . but it detracted a little from the snowdrop
quality of her: the spring water bubbling so pellucid
and fair was slightly clouded by unknown stirrings in
mud not so fair.
He decided to dismiss the matter from his thoughts.
He asked her to dance at the township show-ball, and
found her step went with his own. He had danced but
little since his dropping into the vale of uncertain
health, but he soon got into the way again under
Amber’s influence. The peach-coloured frock had
been a success : a knot of dull green on one shoulder
just touching her milk-white skin gave it distinc-
tion.
Monsieur Larone, watching from the outer darkness,
declared she was tris chic, with emphasis, to the amuse-
ment of the youngest boundary rider from Meerly,
who thought he was talking about “ shicker ” and
became uproarious on the subject. “ I’m sure the


lady ain’t, so early in the evening ” ; then he joined
the other " copper tails,” the expression in the town-
ship for the half of the world who were not considered
of sufficient social standing to be invited to the ball.
A portion of the larrikin element indeed, who had not
received cards, rendered themselves obnoxious during
the evening. Through an abruptly stone-shattered
window a bag of pepper and half a dozen eggs whose
age was quite certain, flew into the select hall, where
wooden posts, supporting the galvanised iron roof,
were being negotiated by waltzing couples, and it was
the days of “ the glide.” The short, stout police
magistrate was amongst those who wielded a broom
to help to clean up the unsatisfactory omelette, part of
which had ruined the banker’s wife’s satin frock for
which she had sent all the way to Melbourne, and the
solitary policeman seemed to have been entirely
swallowed up by the summer’s night.
But then he was amongst the “ copper tails.”
A few jeering remarks shouted from a safe distance
had accompanied the assault of eggs and pepper, and
then the assailants disappeared valorously into the
moonless night. Amber was not in the hall when the
charge took place. Just outside against the white-
painted fence, she and Ormonde had found a wooden
seat under the loom of two drooping pepperinas.
The sky had spread its jewelled stars on its gown of
indigo. There was a faint smell of bush blossom,
eucalyptus, of gum leaves, and the cool breath of
the river that sang the oldest song of the earth in


notes primitive and mysterious, as it flowed by the
township.
They were silent a space, taking breath after a furious
set of Lancers, where they had been vis-d-vis to Mrs.
Meerly and Joe Cockbum, Mrs. Meerly wonderful in a
sheath gown of jet which made her look like a new
knife blade.
Amber broke the silence.
“ Do you remember the day we first met at the
deserted house ? ”
" Of course . . and the ear-ring you found . . by
the way you haven’t matched it yet, I suppose ?
When I go down to Brisbane perhaps I could find
another for you at the jewellers.”
She shook her head, smiled in the dusk unseen.
What an absurd idea . . that she should take jewellery
from him.
" I don’t think I can ever wear it again,” she said
slowly. “ I did one night, and it brought a queer
happening.”
“ Superstitious ! Did a ghost rise ? ”
He lit a pipe “ to keep the mosquitoes away,” he said.
“In a way. . . Mr. Malcolm asked a man to stay
the night, a traveller . , and at dinner he became very
much upset over the ear-ring. . . I don’t know why
I wore it . . there seems a fate in it . . somehow.
Next day, when he was better, he was very ill that
night . . frightful coughing fits . , he told Big Man
his story. Do you know that deserted house was once
his. He lived there with his wife, A drought, and


then fuschia amongst the travelling stock ruined them.
Everything was going, and he decided to take a job
in the city. They had, he said, scarcely anything but
the clothes they stood in: they owed even for their
furniture: the piano was seized for debt. He had
given her the ear-rings when they were first engaged,
bought them out of his small capital . . thinking
Australia was his promised land. I suppose he really
did not know how to run a place; he had been clerk
in a warehouse . . and there wasn’t a good water
frontage. Fancy not seeing to that ” (the tones of the
bush-bred girl were full of shocked awe). “He began
to gamble at races . . at shearing sheds, " two-up,”
poker, anything . . and the fever had him so badly
that when a man he met wanted to give a fancy price
for the ear-rings which he had seen his wife wearing,
he tried to get them from her. . . Then she left him.
Walked straight out into the bush, saying she would
never come back. She took a few things with her, and,
he thought, both the ear-rings. . . That bolted room
had been their bedroom. I don’t know how it came
to be bolted on the inside, unless the man crawled
through the window before he nailed the battens over . .
but he wonders now if she came back after he first left
the place, before he returned to do that final sealing
up: he was drinking, he says in bush shanties .. he
can’t remember much of that time. He thinks she
may have been sorry: have returned to the deserted
house to see if anyone was there . . fancy finding
nothing . . only the emptiness . . the cherry trees


(much smaller then, I suppose), they had planted with
such high hope.
“ A week afterwards, drinking, gambling, loafing in
bush pubs, he heard the body of a woman had been
found in the scrub, but the dingoes had found her
first . . there wasn’t much even for the eagle hawks.
. . It was impossible to identify her. . . It’s a
horrible story.” Her voice sank to a whisper, she
shivered in the warm night. “ Even then, he said, he
was not sure it was his wife . . there had been a
woman, a settler’s wife, deranged through illness, lost
in the thick scrubs . . who was never found. . .
The man wandered away, relatives had helped him to
England, but his lungs became affected, he drifted
back. . . He said he did not know how much he had
cared for her till he believed, from my finding the one
ear-ring, she must have been back to their old home . .
and found it closed against her. . . He said in a
revengeful fit he had nailed up the room, every nail
was driven in with bitterness . . or perhaps it was only
to keep the wraiths of old happiness there . . one does
cling to dreams sometimes . . after the dream is
broken.” Her voice trailed away like music in
distance. . .
A lively polka, with Bill at the accordion, a squatter’s
wife at the piano, and Michael making history with his
fiddle, streamed out on the night,
" I wonder what became of the other ear-ring ? ”
Directly he had voiced it, Ormonde felt how inadequate
his reply to her story had been . . but her last words


had set his mind actively on another trail. . . When
she spoke of dreams was she thinking of . . the
married man who had shattered hers ? He tried to
see her face in the dusk of the tree, but slightly illu-
mined by the glow from the many lamps in the dancing
hall. Only a pearl-white glimmer in the shadow of the
fern-like foliage. He could no more guess at what was
in her heart than he could distinguish her features.
Yet . . how young . . how white she was . . how
lovely she had looked with the snow of her neck and
arms breaking from the peach-pink gown: the dull
green shoulder knot against her delicate skin. . .
What a pity the “ married man ” had not chosen
something less fair to sully !
How should he ever divine the truth ? Know where
to lay the greater blame ? He was wise enough in the
ways of the world to realize that there are women who
play the temptress from the ranks of apparently
virtuous maidenhood . . play it because of some dark
flower of passion sown in the blood by ancestral hands.
Usually man was the aggressor, woman the yielding . .
but . . not always. Yet it behoved the man to
protect the woman most, because the woman was the
sufferer . . always the sufferer . . no matter who
began the game, she paid the score. . .
What manner of man was it who had lured Amber
from the safe way ? He tried to vision him, and failed.
He surely couldn’t be some cheap flatterer who made
a hobby of collecting experiences, with which sub-
sequently to regale the smoking-room.


As she turned surprised eyes upon him, he felt he
had somehow been caught out in a solecism, or at an
unfair trick in an honest competition.
“ Do you know,” she said —he thought her voice a
little reproachful—“ Big Man and I felt we couldn’t
ask him that . . how should he know anyway . . the
dingoes . . the eagle hawks , . even if she was his
wife . . but the thought that she had gone back to
look . . and he had not known . . had nailed up the
room . . perhaps with that clue there in the dust. . .
It’s heart-breaking . . if he had seen the trinket . .
why can’t inanimate things speak! He might have
found her . . they might have reconstructed life. . . .
I cried when I heard it, and I don’t cry easily . . and
he went away that day, coughing, coughing . . leaning
over his saddle. I think he won’t live very long now,
and perhaps . • he’ll find her somewhere. He did not
actually say he was going to the deserted house . . .
but I feel sometimes as though I should go there and
look. . . One does not like to push in where one isn’t
wanted. . . Ido so hate to intrude . . but there is
no saying what may not have happened . . and I just
wondered if you would not mind. . . Big Man is
old . . and I don’t want him depressed . . but
you ”
He closed his hand suddenly over hers, as her next
partner came to the door of the ballroom and looked
searchingly into the darkness.
“ I will go,” said Jasper Ormonde.
15


CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
“ I want to feel their sleep is sweet
That pigeons in the branches coo.
They do not mind the flying feet
And thudding tails of kangaroo.
I think they hear the scrub dove’s note
It means a peace in life denied.”
It was a beautiful spring-like morning when Jasper
Ormonde rode out of the homestead gate, and struck
across country in the direction of Richardson’s boundary
and the deserted house.
Shearing had commenced on the station and he had
had some difficulty in getting away, but pleading
business in the township, and the need for a day off to
attend to it, he had left the necessary orders with the
overseers and stockmen, settled a dispute with the
shearers’ rep. with a firm hand and belligerent tongue,
and even listened to a complaint about the " slushy ”
who had been busied about punching the head of one
of the penner’s-up at five pounds a side, instead of
attending to his duties.
It had been midnight before he got to bed on the
previous evening: there had been so many things to
lay in train for the morrow, but he had slept, utterly
wearied, till somewhere near the house a butcher bird
carolled and dawn lifted with rosy fingers the veil of
night and sleep from a sparkling world. Lavender
mists drew away from the reedy lagoons, wild fowl
222


clucked and settled with folded wings in the clumped
osiers. Now the earth turned from an indistinct blue
to a silver grey sleek as powder, and then on a sudden
to a brilliant green of moving leaf and twig. Where
the trees leaned over the track, the underbrush was
drenched in white dew: it ran along pointed leaves and
settled at the pendant end in drops like precious moon-
stones. A spider swung a damp golden web across to
a cinnamon-scented shrub, sunlight, yellow as apple
cider, pouring through the boughs, touched here and
there with its growing flood a patch of butter-coloured
blossomry: The high fine scent of wattle, the honest
clean perfume of broad-leaved box came to him on a
wind soft as honey. It was a lovely day upon which
to “ ride for the Queen,” even a Queen whose white
robe was a little smirched at the hem. A river of bird
song flowed towards him, a sea of light was in tide on
the earth, a stirring in the green bed of the world.
There was a screen of white cloud across one comer of
the sky. The road he went reared, slid and twisted
among the trunks of silver-boled gums and shaggy
blackbutt, of kurrajong with branches banner-green:
in places a bared bough shone like brown glazed
earthenware. In a little sandy hollow a group of the
Australian hickory, the beautiful “ spotted ” gum
showed their satin-barked boles all patched with salmon
and apricot, silver and biscuit colour, as though an
untidy artist of the Universe had wiped paint-soiled
fingers upon them. Early summer in her quivering
garment of emeralds made life a gracious thing. Cattle


with hides like silk, a mob of horses, part-broken
brumbies, galloped with streaming manes and a flourish
of hoofs that had never known a blacksmith’s hammer
across his way. Through the mounting heat of the
day he saw a shimmering blue silhouette of ranges,
then, through a world saturated in slumbrous heat, he
came to the shallow, shining ford. Presently there
was a faint tang of wood smoke on the silken wind
that, in the gully where he boiled his billy, seemed to
steal the scented souls of the scattered flowers.
Life . . love . . laughter . , death was a universe
away. . . He wondered how it fared with that
man to whom he came questing at the Queen’s
bidding.
A man, shattered in body, with life and love behind
him . . had he really come to this grave of dead hopes
to re-torture himself with things for ever foregone ?
Old memories, old futilities . . all done with . . gone.
. . No reconstructing here.
What would he have done in the man’s place ? He
rode chin sunken on his soft shirt front, musing, while
the chestnut picked his way carefully through the
faint track in the Mitchell grass. How hard it was to
judge for anyone else . . how almost impossible to
follow the golden rule of putting oneself in another’s
place. The man who had run off with Malcolm’s ward,
the married man . . he threw back his head, jerked his
shoulders, as though to rid himself of an evil load . .
in this man’s place would he, Jasper Ormonde, have
been tempted ? Or would he have followed the


Scriptural exhortation to flee temptation ? When he
knew the girl’s influence growing over his senses, bid-
ding him to the obvious. Would he ? She was very
charming, the turn of her wrist, the quick fluttering
movements of her fingers, the way her little round chin
rose from the ivory of her throat " like a bell-flower
on its bed ” —these might have power to drug a
man’s instinct of Right and Wrong, until it was too
late.
Too late ? Surely he would have played the game,
left the girl alone: have bitted and diverted his
reckless impulses into some worthier accomplish-
ment.
It was easy to preach when one wasn’t tempted !
The girl was not in love with Jasper . . had she been,
as she was, God save the mark, with that other " rot-
ter,” would Jasper in the “ rotter’s ” place have taken
the Biblical injunction to heart to the extent of dis-
appearing utterly from her ambit . . leaving her free
to some other chap’s wooing ?
In his own case, it was true he wasn’t married, but
he had not much to offer in the way of sound health,
or of worldly goods to a girl like that. . . Would he
be playing the game with his " touchy ” heart, his
inadequate provision for a widow, . .
He laughed then at his own thought, for the elixir of
life itself seemed to beat in his veins to-day, in this
golden noon with the world at fecund flood. He had
picked up wonderfully since he came to Meerly, Per-
haps the doctor might declare him sound, when he


tapped his chest again and suggested his repeating
" ninety-nine ” under the stethoscope. Given all
this . . . there was yet the memory of the Other
Man. . .
He set his horse at a canter. For the present he
must do the Queen’s bidding, though she be no Queen
regnant of his.
It was hot in the scrub, mosquitoes hummed, bees
made minute thunder in a drowsy, scented tree: a
yellow and black iguana, unwieldy, bloated, from over
dining on the rotting carcase of a sheep the dingoes
must have pulled down yesterday, tried to climb
quickly up a tree bole, fell back, essayed another effort
evidently fearing the man’s approach, but Ormonde let
it be : he had no particular wish to kill anything, and
the ’guana had only completed the damage the wild
dogs had begun. He thought of Amber’s story of
the woman who had once lived in the deserted house,
with a shudder.
As he drew near to the neighbourhood of the lonely
cottage, a shadow seemed to fall on the afternoon.
The smell of the sheep’s carcase; the sight of the
obese, obscene body of the big lizard, the physical
drooping after his long time in the saddle, the annoy-
ance caused by the bloodthirsty mosquitoes and the
sand-flies crawling into his hair and ears, the wild
freshness of morning that had filled his soul with song,
had slipped into the gulf of the past; he must press on,
as he had promised Amber, to see if the chap was here,
and if so, that he was all right, and then trek home


wards through the late afternoon and star-discovering
dusk.
He hung his bridle rein on the leaning bough where
Amber had hitched Brownie on the day they met, and
went on foot through the denser tangles. Dank and
oppressive was the green jungle. Here and there a
pale finger of light crept among the decay. Dead
leaves were thick and mouldy beneath his feet. It was
like walking on a wet felt carpet. The prickly swaying
arm of a creeper ripped the back of his hand. A shower
of black ants from the hollow bough of a tree cascaded
down his shirt, some crawling under the fastening and
nipping unpleasantly. He was glad when he broke
into the open and saw the brazilian cherry trees and
the swinging jasmine vine over the termite-riddled
verandah. All was as he and Amber had seen it weeks
ago. The rank weed grew up under the house, tasselled
now with its apology for bloom. The rusty wheels of
the spring cart: the oblong of the sacking bunk: the
zinc tub : the wooden cradle which seemed to have had
no use in the past . . perhaps it had been bought in
happy speculation over longed-for possibilities. . .
Amber had said nothing about this couple having any
children.
All the same. The grape vine making shadow
like that seen on the sanded floor of a Moorish
arbour. . .
No . . not quite the same . . there had been
invasion here of Life —and Death—: —
Across the steps there lay the huddled shape of a


man. . . And as Ormonde stepped hurriedly for-
ward, a riderless horse with saddle twisted under its
belly, and a broken rein dangling came trotting to the
ruined garden fence, neighing as it came.


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
" A scrap heap is the site of Babylon
The pomp of Asshur is as herbs that die."
It was evident that the previous owner of the house
had not come directly here from Rocky Springs.
As he lay face downward, partly on the step and
partly on the hard earth below, it almost seemed to
Ormonde that he had fallen asleep here, perhaps only
an hour or two ago.
No seeking eagle-hawk, no blood-sniffing wild dog
had invaded the deserted garden. It was as though a
protecting spirit watched over his slumbers; surely
the flesh-devouring creatures of the forest and air
must think there was still life in the prone figure, that
he yet had power to rise up and smite them ; but when
he leaned down over the stranger, Ormonde knew that
he was dead, only just beginning to stiffen perhaps, but
cold and stark . . the unmistakable chill of fife gone
for ever was on the thin hand he tried to lift with his
own. Spilled blood had congealed below the hidden
face. For a moment he suspected foul play : then he
remembered Amber’s words, “ He went away that day,
coughing, coughing, leaning over his saddle.”
A sudden haemorrhage, successor to other lung
haemorrhages, had choked fife out. The face he turned
gently over now with its staring eyes to a sky which
seemed to have forgotten him and his immortal needs.
229


was not a pleasant thing to look upon, Jasper
Ormonde had seen dead men before, he had been in
parts of the world where life goes out swiftly sometimes
at the point of a knife or the plug of a bullet . . over a
card . . a horse . . a woman, but he had not seen
death look uglier than this . . and the morning had
seemed one of aching life, bursting blossom, fruit-
heavy twig, impregnating bees in yielding flower-
cups. . .
And all the while Death had been waiting by the
deserted house. . .
He paused a moment to consider, dropping his hand-
kerchief over those terrible eyes.
If he rode back by the township short-cut, for the
police, the dogs might get the poor emaciated envelope
to-night. True, he might carry him into the deserted
house, lay him down in the room with the shattered
bolt where he had brought a bride on a long-gone honey-
moon, or cover him with the sacking of the old bunk
and the cradle that had known no other occupant.
He considered deeply.
The kookaburras were gurgling in the timber. They
seemed to think of all jokes this certainly the most
exquisite. The bush-flowers wafted a dreamy incense
as though to give of their best ere night wakened their
sun-drawn sweets.
Perhaps with the tomahawk he carried at the back
of his saddle (he had brought it with the intention of
clearing a better trail through the scrub) he might find
some earth loose enough for the digging of a grave.


That would be best, before corruption set in in a body
a woman had once loved. For it always seemed to
Ormonde a horribly indecent thing that the eyes of
men should behold the end of the Ups and hands once
caressed. Hide them away in kindly earth, earth that
understands and where God, if God there be, can reach
down and find them when He will.
Ormonde went back through the jungle and unfas-
tened the half axe from the saddle “ d’s,” and hurried
through the intervening spaces again.
Under the brazilian cherries he found a spot softer
than the rest of the garden. Perhaps earth-worms
had percolated : perhaps night dews gathering on the
branches had dropped and eased the rock-like surfaces
of untilled ground, even then the sweat poured from
him as he toiled, his heart began a sickening pumping,
an uneven beat, and when a voice hailed him from the
far side of the garden he started as though he had
been shot.
" Hello! Digging for gold—or a little private
murder ? " A dark, lean, good looking man, sitting
sideways on his saddle fighting a cigarette, had ridden
quietly into the clearing from Richardson’s side of the
land, and was watching with amusement, a little doubt,
and a good deal of speculation. Ormonde, bareheaded,
indicated with one earthy hand the heap by the steps.
“ Found a poor beggar pegged out all by himself . .
he owned this property once , . Shielding, I believe,
was his name ” (for Amber had told him that before
they parted after the ball), “ You may know some


thing of his story . . it’s a pretty sad one . . if you
come from Richardsons.”
“ I don’t. , . I came through that side, that’s all.
I’m just a passer-by, who once belonged to these
parts —more or less, looking for treasure of my own.
However, that’s by the way. Poor devil . . though I
don’t know why we should pity the dead,” he removed
his felt hat and vacated his saddle. “If everything is
O.K. I’ll lend you a hand.”
" Look at him, if you think I scruffed .. or poisoned
him . . lungs rotten . . haemorrhage . . if you don’t
want a damned unpleasant shock don’t look closer. , ,
I am putting him out of the way of the dingoes and
’guanas. . . I saw the remnants of a crossbred ewe
on the other side of the scrub. Richardsons should
look after their few sheep better than that. Anyway,
the police can exhume him if they are not satisfied.
My name is Jasper Ormonde, manager of Meerly Run,”
" And mine ” —the dark man smiled a trifle watch-
fully, Ormonde thought—“ doesn’t matter just now.
The job is to get him planted, poor devil; indeed it is
the last good we can do him, and the last harm. Some
day, perhaps someone will do the same for us. I have
a good long bowie-knife here, I can help, or change
shift if you like.”
They worked on in the gathering dusk. Nightbirds
began to call in the adjoining woodland places. The
“ ghost bird ” which the blacks believe lures their dogs
away to the warrigals, amongst them. The trees were
indigo against a maroon sky : the sunset fires had died


in the west: the threat of the fierce enveloping life of
the scrub seemed to draw near. They heard a dingo
howl.
They stood up, straightened their aching backs,
eased their strained muscles, and saw the grave had
grown to a deep trench between them, deep enough for
temporary shelter for a man’s body.
A sentiment only perhaps, but, as the dark man had
said, “ all they could do for him now.”
He was a light weight to cany; though a com-
paratively tall man he was hideously wasted, starved
to death by his disease and his added mental sufferings.
The sky was full of stars and the faint curved wire
of a young moon, when they piled the earth over him.
Then they shook hands, said “ So long,” as bushmen
do, for they were riding different ways.
Jasper led the dead man’s horse through the scrub
and got it through finally; though its hide was scaned
by the low bending boughs and tom by the thorny
vines, it came docilily enough, as though glad to feel
the pressure of a living hand. The terrified vigil it
must have kept all day, Ormonde dimly realized, for he
had a great comprehension for the feelings of animals.
It greeted the chestnut with twitching ears and a
nuzzling head. To-morrow he would get one of the
men to take it into the township, and hand it over to
the police. The Law must now take charge of the
dead man’s effects and affairs. Ormonde had done his
friendly part, and what the Queen had asked of him.
He was dead tired, sick with fatigue, had half a


mind to secure the horses and camp out where he was,
but he would be needed early in the morning at Meerly.
He did not wish to give cause to Mrs. Meerly, already
somewhat restive under the failure of her plans and the
power of her new transformation, to dismiss him just
yet.
Some day, sooner or later, he would strike tent, set
up in health, for further fields.
At present . . well, at present he did not particu-
larly desire to leave the district . . but, God, how
tired he was ! Death was a gruesome grey thing, seen
at such close quarters.
The chestnut would bear him safely home to Meerly,
but the led horse irked his arm confoundedly. He
wished he had let him loose, or given him over to the
other man to take to the township, whither he intended
going to catch Tuesday’s coach to the city, he had
informed Ormonde, together with his name, at parting.
When the last dull sound of the hoof beats had
whispered away into distance, and the deserted house
was silent in the starry dark, a paddy melon came
with thumping tail out of the scrub, and stood with
one paw, and its rat-like head, raised, sniffing delicately
at the air.
It crossed the old garden, nibbled a juicy herb, then
halted again, staring with its big limpid eyes at the
freshly turned earth under the brazilian cherries where
the ’possums had been wont to create such havoc, and
the flying foxes screamed their season through.
Then, being a wise paddy melon of sensitive nature,


it decided there was something about the deserted
garden it did not like to-night, so it went away into the
odorous shadows of lightwood and kurrajong and thick
trunked bottle tree to the sandy places where there
were pleasant grasses and succulent roots, and no
entirely unexpected happenings.
And while Night wove her shuttle back and forwards
over the sky beading the blue void with stars and more
stars . . the body of the man lay very still in the unlit
bed of the kind brown earth, from which man came and
to which he returns for eternal healing, at the last. . .
Perhaps beyond these voices in the Great White
Peace, he had found her again. . .


CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
•' I know that I shall never rise to go
To find the unlocked gate I think should lead
To where spring couches in the dwarf peach trees —
Suppose I proved there was but desert there ? ’’
lx was more than a nine days’ wonder in the district,
the telling of how the new manager from Meerly found
the body of Shielding, the one-time settler, at the door
of his old home.
The Oldest Inhabitant arose and with some fluency
and much inaccuracy retold the old tale of the almost
forgotten denizens of the deserted house. Such
publicity did the incident obtain, there being no elec-
tions on at the moment to absorb space in metropolitan
newspapers, that a picturesque story was invented by
that rare bird, a news editor with a literary gift, and
read in many a surburban home under the evening
lamp, in streets far removed from Richardson’s Run
and Rocky Springs. Anon there appeared a claimant
for the effects of the dead man, a second cousin “ in
the grocery,” instructing the sale of the horse through
an agent, to Meerly, and the strip of land and the
deserted house on which the rates were owing, to
Richardsons themselves: Richardsons who had long
looked upon the property as entirely their own, when
they liked to take possession.
He bought himself a piano for his best'parlour out
of the proceeds, and passed in his neighbourhood as a


man who had inherited a substantial legacy, but no
musical ability.
Richardsons removed the deserted house to another
part of the Run by aid of Ted’s bullock team and its
mellow-voiced driver, for one of their overseers to
dwell in, and he, having lately advertised for a wife
and acquired a “ real lady ” from the city by this
means, was a proud man—while the honeymoon
lasted.
Jasper rode over to Rocky Springs to tell the Queen
he had done her bidding, though the bush telegraph
had carried the tale over the wild oats’ plain and the
shallow ford of the river days before.
He arrived to find her shelling peas on the verandah,
very dry peas sent in from an adjoining selection in a
sugar bag, but Mrs. Maloney had said, boiled with a
pinch of baking soda, they would be quite “ dacent ”
for Sunday’s dinner.
She was sitting on the edge of the verandah swinging
her bronze-slippered foot, and she was whistling. He
had heard the flute-like notes as he rode up to the house
and hoped there was nobody with her.
She paused in the middle of a note, and looked at
him, her left shoulder slightly lifted towards her left
ear hidden in its crisp gold curls.
“ Shall I put the kettle on ? Mrs. Maloney has gone
to see Bell’s, the paddock rider’s twins —Michael took
her in the buckboard ; and Big Man is worrying some-
where down the river about a misplaced boundary
_ y»
Peg.
16


“ No, I don’t want any tea at this hour . , thank
you. . . I wanted to tell you I had done your
bidding . . that is all. I suppose you have heard I
was too late ? ”
Her face grew grave. “ Yes, we heard soon after.
You know the mailman and the man with the stud
sheep. They had scraps of the story, pieced together
since . . and the sergeant from Tallibar stayed here
on his way to inspect the grave. . . Every one ”
her voice dropped to a shy whisper—" says how
wonderful you were . . digging the grave with your
tomahawk. . .”
“ Oh . . but didn’t they tell you I had help ? ”
“ Yes . . I believe they said something about a
swaggie.”
" Not a swaggie.” He had seated himself on the jut
of the verandah beside her; his long hand took a
share of the peas for shelling. “ A fellow riding by.
Such a good-looking chap, agile as an Indian, dark,
slim-hipped, wide-shouldered. It’s a long time since
I’ve seen such a handsome, well-built fellow . . good
sport too, he worked like a Trojan. . . I would like
to see him again.”
“ Didn’t he say who he was ? ”
Her steady little hand popped a seven-pod husk
of peas. The pellets rattled down into the tin
dish.
Amber’s little garden to the right of the house was
like a strip of mediaeval Florentine embroidery, rich
in scarlet geranium and hard orange marigold.


Jasper spilled a pea pod, dived over the verandah
edge after it, and returned it to her. It seemed
extraordinarily peaceful here this noontide. One of
Mrs. Maloney’s white hens was clucking over a lot of
fluffy yellow balls just hatched round the corner:
some minah birds were busy in the fruit trees beyond.
" I think he said he knew these parts . . perhaps
you have met him.”
“ How shall I know if you don’t speak his name ? ”
she laughed. “An Adonis knocking about, mysterious
and alone, in the scrub, and I not know him ! ”
“ Gaspard . . Leon Gaspard . . out-of-the-way
name . . that’s why I remember it as I might not
have done had he been Jones or Robinson . . or even
Walker . . do you know I believe there are more
Walkers in the City Directory than even Smiths. . .
Taylors too, the English of the German Schneider . .
there are hundreds of Taylors.” He wandered
on, feeling he was being ordinary, but quite con-
tent.
Then he looked at her. She had ceased shelling peas.
All the colour had left her rounded cheek: her face
was a milk-white bas-relief on the dark wooden wall
of the house.
“ Leon Gaspard ! ”
So he was here again. . . On what errand ?
What had become of Arabella ? What was he doing
here ? Portent of ill surely, wherever he went.
Leon Gaspard. . . She was in the tent again,
the hot grey prison of canvas, watching a snake,


black as wet silk, flicking its cloven tongue, catching
flies. . .
Leon Gaspard. . .
Did Ormonde know anything ?
She stole a glance at him. He was shelling peas
undisturbed. He asked her if he might smoke,
fumbling in his pocket for his pipe. . . Would smoke
upset the flavour of peas ? But his eyes were critical
. . something in their depths began to question : a
look of doubt, almost of chagrin, crept over his
face.
Her whole body became a burning blush. . . Had
she, somehow, betrayed herself ? Or had he known
when he mentioned the name ?
She wronged him there; never, till this moment,
had he even suspected the good-looking fellow who
had played gravedigger with him to be the man who
had smirched the fame of this flower-like girl before
him. . .
Good God! Could she think he knew . . and
deliberately tormented her! His face flushed now
with comprehension and swift compunction. Perhaps
he was mistaken, but she was obviously both startled
and confused . . what could he do to set matters
right ? He blundered.
“ Of course it might not be the same man ”
Her eyes were brave and hard. She looked directly
at him.
" The same man as what ? As whom ? I have not
yet said I even knew him.” She spoke deliberately.


She was holding the tin dish of peas in her lap now.
He saw her knuckles whiten, so close she held the
rim.
Again he blundered, his whole soul crying out to
protect her. “ No, of course you did not. . . I’m
stupid as an owl to-day. . . Of course you could not
possibly have known him.”
“ Why not ? ” She had pluck this woman . . and
what a child she looked with her lap full of peas and
her little bronze slippers dangling over the side of the
verandah, shimmer of fine lisle thread on her prettily-
turned ankles.
He smoked. It is sometimes advisable, when every
word a man speaks puts him deeper in the mire of
misunderstanding.
“ I think I had better put the kettle on. It might
clear your head to have a cup of tea ” —her voice was
expressionless, but as she rose and went into the house,
she dragged her feet on the rough boards, as though
suddenly very weary.
Yet she had been whistling when he came. , .
From the doorway she turned. “We won't talk
about him again,” she added quietly. As she leaned
against the doorpost looking out, her face seemed to
have aged by years since he saw her first to-day bending
over her task. " But I knew him well . . some years
ago. . . I think he was the handsomest man I ever
saw . . but it was all . , outside. . .”
She was gone. He heard the crackle of fresh pine
chips heaped in the stove, and presently the bubble of


water, and then there came to him a waft of the
pungent aroma of freshly-made tea.
But he did not go into the house, nor did he, although
his pipe had gone out, bother to refill it.


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
“ Pierrot and Pierrette starting out to jazz
She scarlet slippered, he with face so white. ’
" Where Youth has been remains for Youth
A memory of flowers.”
The grapes were ripening at Meerly. They hung in
slow dusking clusters : the splendid Black Prince, the
pale camelian Muscatel, the clear beryl-tinted Sweet-
water. Presently there would be glut in the land : the
Meerly pigs would be turned in rearing up on their
short black hind legs or their fat pink and white
trotters, according to their years and complexion, and
drag greedily at the luscious drops, product of warm
trickling sunlight, and wild, white rains, of long, moon-
less nights, and lustrous dawns.
The Meerly hens, clucking amongst the trellises
would grow fat on the lower hanging clusters, or the
rifled and scattered skins. Even then many a ripened
bunch would be left to slowly rot, or dry, hanging like
grocer's raisins that had never found a middleman, on
the boughs, where sere leaves rattled to the fall.
There were serpents in this Eden too : a favourite
haunt of the lithe black snake who twisted himself
about the branches and watched with beady eyes for
the flicker of a white hand among the broad green
trefoil leaves. One needs be careful did one go
a-plucking in the vineyard by night.


Pierrot and Pierrette were not careful. They came
out here under the Christmas moon that looked like a
giant apricot hung in the blue tree of Heaven. Pierrot,
in black satin and red pom-poms, Pierrette in dull
Egyptian red, with a black skull-cap and a red rosette.
From the station house could be heard the music of
piano, concertina and violin. “ Quite a string band,”
Mrs. Meerly had called it pridefully as she went among
her guests attired as Mary Queen of Scots, and surely
was never such a Mary! Mrs. Cockbum, very much
bored as Cordelia, whom, not being up in Shakespeare,
she suspected of being " no better than she should be,”
and her daughter as Portia, in Joe Cockburn's dressing-
gown and the smallest red lacquer tea-tray, could not
think what possessed Phoebe Meerly to wear that low
neck even if the ruff did fatten her face and full skirts
give her bulk. The new manager, if he did make
rather a lantem-jawed Pierrot, still “ looked the
gentleman,” but Phoebe Meerly, said Mrs. Cockbum to
her Joe (completely wretched as Falstaff in a jerkin
and feather pillow from the spare room and high boots
made of brown paper), she was like nothing on earth . .
certainly not a Queen of anything. Joe sighed and
took a draught of sack masquerading as whisky,
his spirits clearing as his physical horizons grew
dim.
Amber and Mary Cockbum had been busy for weeks
over books of fashion and cut paper patterns, rigging
their families and friends out for the fancy dress ball
at Meerly : the great event of Christmastide, for fancy


dress was absolutely insisted upon, and even Rosa-
mund, who waited at supper, wore a Dutch peasant’s
dress she knew to be infinitely becoming. Amber and
Mary, who admired Rosamund exceedingly, had seen
to that, and the groom, who offered to help with the
colossal washing up, was tortured to desperation by
this Gretchen’s coquetries. The girls had worked very
hard over the garments of their hostess when she
decided to ape for a giddy hour the lady whom John
Knox described as " honey pot.” She had preferred
to Ormonde the choice between David Rizzio and
Damley, and Amber had said he should really be
Bothwell . . but he had been very polite, and very
determined, and had begged the girls’ assistance with
the Pierrot suit. Certainly it was much easier to
make, and probably he hadn’t the leg for Bothwell’s
trunks. . . “ How would one obtain costuming for
the arrogant and handsomely attired Bothwell in the
back blocks,” he said. Also explaining insistently to
Mrs. Meerly, “ Clothes never yet made the man.”
What about the famous cartoon of a French king,
which depicted a suit of elaborate clothing taking
snuff . . nothing more. Cruel as witty, witty as
true. . .
He asked her to promise him the first dance, and so
the discussion ended, but the second dance was Amber’s
and after that, another and another. It was hot work
these December nights, and more than one couple dis-
appeared from the dancing floor in the old billiard-
room, on to the verandah and from thence by easy


stages into the green depths of the wandering garden
to be seen no more till the final “ Sir Roger ” ushered
in by the clanging of the bell that sent the station hands
to work in the morning.
For bush dances are all-night affairs.
It was close on the witching hour when Pierrette
and Pierrot found themselves among the grape vines;
. . Voices subdued by distance came from the
verandahs, the supper-room, the garden, but there
seemed no other occupants of the vineyard. So bright
was the moon that it flung an applique pattern of
pointed leaf and heavy pear-shaped clusters of grapes
on the yielding flaky dust below the trellises. There
was a winey smell coming from the berries : a spice of
bush-flowers: the rich poisonous almond of olean-
ders. . .
Pierrot looked down. , . Pierrette looked up.
He wanted to kiss her : he wondered what she would
say—or do. Hideously, there came across his ardour,
the recollection that she was not unused to kissing:
there was no trick of love’s learning that he could
teach her.
Rottenly unfair to consider like that . . because,
was he so immaculate ? A man . . a man was
different . . one did not expect women, women one
took seriously, to be so knowledgable.
Prig! To think like that, when a pretty girl’s face
and lips allured in a fretwork of moonshine and
shadow. . .
Why couldn’t he treat her as any chap with red blood


in his veins might treat a jolly girl at a jolly dance, a
girl he knew to be —unconventional.
His pulses hammered at his wrists. Playing with
fire . . after all he knew about her, . .
Should he ask her right out ? Should he tell her
what he knew. Give her a chance to explain . . and
perhaps hear her agony of little ineffectual trembling
lies, . . Did women ever tell the truth about any-
thing like this . . and if not, then he would have
insulted her in vain. . .
Damned ill-bred , . that’s what he was, and yet . .
he did so long to hear her make a good defence . .
some strong excuse . . something a fellow could
logically believe. , .
How tiny her hands looked, peeping out of the great
white Pierrot frills about her wrists as she picked here
and there a ripe grape, from amongst the tardier
brothers of the bunch.
“ They are quite sweet,” she said : she was holding
one up between her finger and thumb towards his
mouth. “ They are quite sweet.”
" There is nothing in the garden as sweet as you are,
Pierrette,” he answered, bending his head that she
might set the fruit at his lips. He kissed the finger
and thumb and she drew back laughing. " I think
men always say . . silly things . . in the moonlight,”
she whispered. He'caught both her wrists in his hands,
crushing the frills, and quoted :
" ‘ You have two false moons where you should have eyes.
And quick-silver always slips.’


Could you . . like me a little, Pierrette . . even if I
am like other men . . silly in the moonlight ? ”
Had she lain in that other man’s arms in the moon-
light ? He and she, a new Adam and Eve in a new
Eden at the edge of some scented thicket, while the
mopoke owl went to its sanguinary hunting in the
tangled forest beyond. Had another man seen his
dark eyes mirrored in her own ?
“ I like you a lot now,” she said simply, her gaze
candid ; “ but I don’t see why you have to put me in
handcuffs to tell you so.”
Someone was playing the Myosotis waltz up at the
house, haunting and sad, as are all the old waltz tunes
to which gay youth loves to dance.
Had the other man ever held her like this ? . . had
there been any need to hold her to him, and ask her if
she cared ? If he had only known who the other man
had been that day when they dug a grave together,
perhaps there had been other uses found for his bowie-
knife. . .
Rot . . even to think that melodrama! What was
the girl to him ? Neither sister nor sweetheart . . she
had been Leon Gaspard’s before he met her . . Leon
Gaspard’s woman.
Dark with feeling, and the shadow of the vines, his
eyes probed her own. What a slim innocent Pierrette
she looked. He hummed a bar of “Au Claire de la
Lune ” :
" By the light of the moon, my friend Pierrot,
Open thy door for the love of God.”


He must make this girl open the door of her heart to
him, before they parted that night, before the butcher
birds called out of the yellow house of dawn, before the
great silken-hided milch cows came up to the milking
bail from the reedy swamps, and the wild duck were
mirrored in the rose-touched waters of Morning. . .
Bad form, cruelty, caddishness . . all went by the
board. He must know something more than he knew
now . . and then he could weigh the pros and cons
his own way. , .
" Would you mind telling me ” —he felt for words
then blurted out, the moonlight in more than his eyes
perhaps—" did you care very much for this fellow . .
this Leon Gaspard ? ”
The little wrists turned cold beneath the ruffles,
even her eyes seemed to grow pale, but she did not
waver.
“ Very much,” she said ; then, " somehow I think,
someone . . perhaps Mrs. Meerly, has told you some-
thing . . though I don’t know how she could know . .
but if the Cockbums had, they would never have
spoken. . . I ran away with him. I was away—
quite a long time—Big Man came to look for me . .
but . . that was not why I turned hack. . .”
They were calling them from the house : they could
hear the hostess’s shrill soprano . . somebody was
starting a hunt for them in the garden. “ Tally ho !
got away,” shouted the young Englishman from
Farleigh Downs.
Pierrette was gone, gone in a flick of red and a flash


of white, through the rustling foliage, the brown-
twisted arms of the vines, swallowed up in the leaf
defences.
Pierrot stood, looking down where two high red
heels had dented the mealy earth. . .
And he told himself this was the end of carnival. . .


CHAPTER THIRTY
" But thought conceived lives on, and cannot die.”
" He said, ’Tis thus the maiden goes
Who in dark gardens found a rose."
Jasper Ormonde, being of the sex that appears unable
to bear chagrin without some kind of opiate, some-
thing, if no larger than a cigarette to lean upon, sought
for his leather cigarette case directly the last ripple of
leaves consequent upon Amber’s flight towards the
hailing voices ceased.
The help of tobacco to cogitation is undeniable
despite anti-tobacco leagues and medical advice.
Pierrot, left alone, in the warm moonshine, is a sorry
figure without a smoke.
“ Queer thing sex,” mused this Pierrot, " how it
upsets the universe, which wouldn’t keep going without
it. No chap is safe even when he thinks he has
achieved philosophy, comes along a woman's hand to
part the comfortable curtains of security: to leave a
whiff of orris root, a breath of perfumed powder from
her curving throat: a crumpled petal from her wither-
ing posy.”
He moved restlessly, pacing up and down the narrow
space between the crawling vines.
Well. . . He supposed he must go back to the
dance, though there was a sobbing in the violin: an
eldritch note that spoke ghaist lichts and Mrkyard


mould now in the thin-voiced accordion. . . Futility
. . futility . . that was life . . because men had
tongues like a honeyed snare . . and women were soft
and frail. . ,
Something was rustling the vine leaves on his right.
Perhaps Amber had not really gone . . perhaps she
was just hiding, ready to spring on him with a laugh :
her mood changed. A rosy care-free Pierrette . .
wearing the dainty mask of motley— Vesta la
guibba !
He smiled, leaning forward, if she appeared now from
the vine trellis, he would catch her in his arms, and
kiss her for her mischief. . .
To-morrow, this night would be a rainbow bubble
blown. . . Why worry about delicate questions of
Right and Wrong. . . The moon never worried about
anything it saw!
But it was a man's figure that, stooping in the
shadow, disengaged itself from the brown olive-
favoured arms of the vines. He carried a felt hat in
his hand, and was dressed in a silk shirt and riding
breeches. He slid, stealthy as a snake, from the
agitated foliage, and came into the pool of moon-
shine.
" Hello, my fellow gravedigger! You look more
like Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, than the gravedigger
though, despite your costuming. . . What in hell
are you got up like that for ? Phoebe Meerly having
her annual fancy-dress spree of course. . . Never
thought of that . . though I knew the girl I wanted to


see was at Meerly . . and that there was some kind of
shivoo on. . . Is old Phoebe got up as Aphrodite
rising from the foam ? ”
Jasper considered the man.
What a devil of a fellow he was for dramatic en-
trances. Perhaps he had waited a chance to get Amber
alone here . . moonlight and music and the romance
of his way of doing things. . . The man’s shirt
glistened in the moon rays, clung to his shapely
shoulders, showed the ripple of muscle under the
blades.
“ Why are you sweating over the job,” said Jasper.
He loathed the fellow, yet was drawn to him : he could
not but feel the curious fascination his handsome body,
his magnetic personality wielded. . . Poor little
Amber!
Leon Gaspard laughed. " I swam the creek to get
here,” he said. “ Listen to the water squelching in my
boots. I did not know if I’d be —exactly—welcome by
the front door, but I dare say I could have risked it . .
if I had been sure old Malcolm wasn’t round with a
... i f>
gun.
“ What have you done to Malcolm that you are
afraid of his gun ? ” The men faced each other in the
pallid light, Jasper half a head over Leon.
The latter laughed again awkwardly. "He might
think I was after his one ewe lamb.”
“So you are . . aren’t you ? ” Jasper was pur-
posely insolent: his unlit cigarette between a perfectly
steady finger and thumb.
*7


Leon was as cool apparently, " And what’s that to
you, if I am ? ”
" Nothing . . only I like to see a chap come after
a decent girl by the front door.”
“ A decent girl.” Leon looked ugly now, eyes
shifting, scanning the other from head to heel, then he
snarled slowly between lips withdrawn a little from
his perfect white teeth, " My honourable intention is
to try to make her so.”
Jasper’s head was a little forward, he looked
absurdly like a kangaroo dog straining at a leash, a
lean, rather ugly dog, with the scent of his prey coming
on the wind towards him. . . Steady! He knew
men . . even quite good fellows became at times under
the influence of jealousy, brutal, animal, coarse even
over the names of women they loved and otherwise
would have respected. . . Many men indeed became
roaring brutes when jealous. . . Apparently the man
before him was of that type. . .
It would be a fool’s game to punch the fellow’s head
out here amongst the vines of Meerly garden, with Mrs.
Meerly’s envious eyes looking for some way of tripping
Amber . , some way of paying the girl for her beauty
and, most of all, for her unblemished youthfulness. . .
He would be doing the girl no kindness if he gave this
man the leathering he deserved, or rather tried to, for
probably Leon was in better fighting trim than
himself. . .
But God ! How he would have doted on the feel of
his knuckles in the handsome sneering face. . .


“ What do you mean ? ” he asked, pulses beating at
his temples. He felt for a match in his trouser pocket.
“ You’re a married man, aren’t you ? ”
" Was, my dear gravedigger; seems you dig into
more than graves don’t you ? My beloved spouse in
the Lord, will be making her divorce absolute . . oh,
it was heard in camera and you are not likely ever to
know the details . . making her divorce absolute
before her marriage with one Tom Prance, a mummer.
. . ‘ See the East Lynne Dramatic Touring Company
fresh from a successful season before the crowned ’eds
of Eu-rope,’ ” he gave an excellent imitation of a
spruiker for a melodrama outside a travelling show-
tent in a bush township. “ And my dear little
Amber . . isn’t she a sweet thing ? I know you
think so . . may now be made a ‘ honest woman ’
of ”
He was watching Jasper closely, as a man watches
another man who, armed, he suspects of having caught
him cheating at cards.
Jasper noted the grip on his hunting crop : a loaded
stick by all appearances, which he carried.
A man who did the rotten things Leon Gaspard did
would be sure to be a moral coward.
He looked down on him, and lit a cigarette, still
staring hard at the handsome devil, who had held
Amber closer than he could ever hope to do. . .
Perhaps if he kicked him out of the vineyard and
down the slope to the river he would be afraid to come
back again. But moral cowardice did not always


mean physical poltroonery . . and . . was it fair to
Amber ?
He could not believe she would ever have truck with
this fellow again . . but life had taught him the
insecurity of wagering anything on a woman’s whim.
Perhaps Amber wanted to be “ made an honest woman
of.” . , Perhaps she wanted the chance to patch
things up; but why had she turned back ? When
she was well away with the fellow ? Had Big Man
forced her . . had she been waiting an opportunity
ever since—to go to him ?
To him . . to Leon Gaspard with his sophisticated
mouth . . his bold eyes . . who was not worthy to
touch the sole of her little foot. . .
But women every day threw themselves away on
rotters . . and let the good fellows go. . .
Even then, what right had he . . Jasper Ormonde
. . to butt in ? To save the girl ? But she must
know what Gaspard was by now. . . Leon’s attitude
had become more easy : he too, felt for a cigarette.
“ I suppose you think Amber won’t have me now ? ”
he said, the laugh dancing in his eyes. “My dear
gravedigger . . get thee to thy churchyard mould. . .
It isn’t the serious blokes like you to whose whistle
women answer. . . I’ve whistled too many off the
bough for me to believe that.”
His audacity was ever his long suit.
They were playing the Lancers at the house, a rowdy
merry set evidently : he could hear the Englishman’s
voice again : “ Tantivy, Tantivy. . , Yoicks. ’Tally


ho! ” He seemed to want every one to know he
belonged to the hunting counties.
Jasper, at white heat, forced himself to answer.
He was angry with himself too, that, after the other’s
gibe, he answered so gravely.
" I suppose it depends on how many lies you have
told her , . at least, I mean, how many she has found
out. . . She does not strike me as the kind of girl
who could easily forgive a he . . but it is your affair
of course . . only ”
He never knew exactly what he was going to say.
Nobody ever did, for at that moment, a quick step
sounded on the path, the vine parted again to let an
arm white as the moonlight through, and beginning
some merry message about “ supper . . and the
hostess’s orders ” Amber slipped into the moony space
and, holding back a branch of the Black Prince vine,
stood staring at the two men so strangely met.
Then Jasper threw away his cigarette: turned on
his heel, with one parting gibe at Leon Gaspard, who
was summoning all his attractions to bear on the
trembling girl:
"You will be able to discover that matter for your-
self now,” he said bowing to Amber, then walked
quickly away from the twain without once looking
back.
Arrived at the house he slipped unseen into the big
spare room set aside for the men’s dressing-room
to-night, and from thence by a back window, down by
the kitchen quarters and across to his own rooms.


He could make some explanation on the morrow to
his hostess. It was beyond bearing to go back to the
ball, and leave those two . . Gaspard with his devil’s
cunning, his practised love-making, and Amber Mal-
colm, who had once loved him, alone in the enchant-
ments of that moonlit midnight hour.
He changed into his everyday clothes, went out into
the moon-washed paddocks where the breath of the
wild tobacco blew with cloying sweetness, caught his
riding hack and rode forth into the gum-scented bush,
rode till the hack sweated and he cursed himself for a
callous brute, solely on the horse’s account, and a fool
on his own.


CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
" And some sit silently, remembering. . .
Only the dead years know what they recall."
Big Man sat on a stump in the intermittent shadow of
a bough just covering his bald head, which he occasion-
ally wiped with a pocket-handkerchief of huge dimen-
sions. Indeed Amber often accused him of stealing
the sheets from the single beds for his bandannas. He
wore no collar to his soft white cotton shirt: no one
had ever seen Big Man in a coloured shirt, and he also
held to his prejudice against any but bone collar studs,
he was wearing one now : minus a necktie.
Amber had once bought him a gold collar stud, at a
ruinous price from the hawker, but it lay in his top
drawer now, along with a miscellaneous collection of
corks, odds and ends of string—Big Man could never
bear to throw string away: he always thought he
might " come to need it ” —and tabs of worn-out
braces, and a bottle of the only medicine Alec Malcolm
ever took. It contained, he gravely informed the girl,
thirty ingredients, and he had it from a cook in the
survey camp long ago. The cook had once dispensed
for a chemist. Like all people who have a suspicious
contempt for regular medical men Big Man was
credulous about the virtues of a nostrum. For all his
sound Scotch common sense, he had a firm belief in
his bottle of thirty ingredients, and never travelled


without it, though Amber said he kept it more as a
mascot than for actual use.
The heat of the January day was oppressive.
Christmas over, the New Year bonfires burned out,
two men sacked from Rocky Springs for being absent
without leave drinking in the township : the customary
annual happening, Mrs. Meerly’s Christmas week dance
over, Amber had come back very quiet and languid
from that dance, and had remarked abruptly that she
did not think she would ever go to Phoebe Meerly’s
again, but she had vouchsafed no further information.
One significant fact Malcolm had registered, though
no one would have supposed he dwelt upon it, the new
manager at Meerly rode no more to Rocky Springs for
tennis or for tea. He asked Amber one day if the chap
had chucked the job and Mrs. Meerly too, and she had
said she believed he was still there.
Big Man cogitated, sitting on the stump.
By forty-five most of us feel our cherished illusions
are broken bubbles, though, at times, shreds of the
tattered rainbows remain. Long ago Malcolm had
realized that " one life—one love ” applies to very few,
and when it does, it is only for those by nature austere,
or in cases where the loved one proves lastingly satisfy-
ing, and fundamentally atune to ourselves, so much so
that there can be no rival.
He had seen the disasters of too many early marriages
to believe man or woman “ faithful in all things ” : he
did not believe love lasted any more than an ill-
parcelled fire with nothing to feed upon. He believed


that Amber had quite got over the disastrous affair
with Leon Gaspard, but he was not so sure that her
empty heart was not in process of being filled by
another.
Big Man did not like it. The girl was his “ one
wean ” ; he longed to feel sure she would be beside
him when his old feet faltered to the Dark Valley at
last. The men of his race had lived into their nineties.
He might look forward to length of days, and always
that means loneliness, especially for the old bachelor
who has wasted the time when he could have been
forging ties to avail him in the future. Amber was the
star of his days : she never knew quite what she was
to him, but does youth ever know ? It must be
served, and is impatient of any love that hampers . .
unless it be the love of a mate, also young, also with
gay adventure in the soul.
Amber did not seem definitely to care for any of the
young men in the district. The unerring perspicuity
of deep affection, deep and jealous, had taken Malcolm
straight to the fact that she was " different ” when
Jasper Ormonde was about: a nervousness crept into
her manner: she spent an unconscionable time at her
mirror; she “ fussed ” about the hang of a frock: the
set of a sash: the old man was wise: he noticed a
drop of special perfume rubbed into the girl’s throat
when she rested her face against his arm in the familiar
caress. That whiff of perfume was not there when the
other boys rode over to Rocky Springs. Yes : Amber
was inclined to like the fellow . . and since her last


visit to Meerly, he had not been near the place. Had
she rejected him ? Had she regretted since that she
had done so, , . If so . . might he not help in some
way ? Send a message to the fellow to come to dinner
some night . . pick him up accidentally, on the Run,
and bring him home unexpectedly . . see how Amber
behaved. . .
He was damned if he wanted to do it! After all,
Love will find out a way . . and perhaps Amber did
not care. . . Perhaps Leon Gaspard had been a
lesson to her, and she would no more of lovers. . .
But something in his heart gave the lie to that, . .
It was against nature, assuredly against Amber’s
nature, that she should settle down into the old man’s
companion only. . . Perhaps Phoebe Meerly had
scented something of the affair with Gaspard, and had
been talking . . she had a venomed tongue . . and
there was word that she was not hitting it too well
with her new manager. . . Malcolm recalled an
amusing story he had had from the mail man yesterday,
who declared he had seen Monsieur Larone, revolver
in hand, gesticulating wildly and crying, " Bete . .
bete,” and Mrs. Meerly, returned to her assam dust
coat and plus gossamer veils, was alternately declaring
shrilly she had never tried to be " a bait ” to anyone,
and trying to induce the Frenchman to take the dis-
carded transformation off her hands at half the pur-
chase money while a string of black and tan goats
scampered ecstatically down the skyline. He had
another tale to tell, which Sandy Malcolm chuckled


over as being less necessary to swallow cum gram
salts. . . Jasper Ormonde, he said, had preferred a
shilling to King Billy, who, like other harassed
monarchs, was endeavouring to pawn the Crown
Jewels, one of which was a fine specimen of a stone
tomahawk, shaped of serpentine. Ormonde had
declined to deal, but had said “ Here’s a bob. . . I’m
going away soon.”
" Going away for good, Boss ? ” whined Billy sadly.
" Yes,” said Jasper.
" Never cornin' back no more. Boss.”
" Never come back any more, Billy.”
“ Very well, Boss, plurry well better make it two."
Malcolm had come out to sit on the stump because
he was angry. A cockie had selected on the leasehold
by the river frontage which Malcolm had always
looked upon as his own, so much so that he had not
bothered to buy the freehold, and now —as if that was
not bad enough—there was likely to be a lawsuit about
boundaries. He accused the new-comer of removing
landmarks; the thing altogether abominable in the
eyes of owners of big holdings that a mere selector can
commit. Big Man had determined to go forth with
his own tape and plumb-bob and take the bearings
surreptitiously if possible, openly if needs must, before
the case came before the Land Court.
And neither high nor low could the plumb-bob be
found.
Amber was riding somewhere on the Run, and Mrs.
Maloney had lost her spectacles. Subsequently she


found the hen turkey sitting on them behind the house,
but up to this moment they had not been discovered.
He shouted at Mrs. Maloney and she shouted at him,
both accusing the other of being deaf as a post to-day,
and to cool down, he had taken himself into the open.
This stump, when he was not in the wooden verandah
chair, was a favoured retreat of Malcolm’s. It had
been part of a doll’s house imagination had made for
Amber in her baby days. Often he had heard her high
treble from behind it, when she talked to her home-
made dolls : bits of forked stick with rags tied round
them. Her childish atmosphere seemed to cling to it
still.
The old man sighed. Why should he try to summon
any man back ? More than likely to prepare the way
to an irremediable loss for himself . . for he had talked
a good deal with Ormonde, and he knew him to be an
Arab of the earth, who would presently strike any tent
he pitched, and carry his household gods to the ends of
the world with him. Like the Moors, Ormonde took
with him the keys of an ancestral castle long gone to
dust in his Morocco, and bearing them with him to a
far land, made there his castle. Old tradition lingered
with the man only as part of fresh resting-places, fresh
lands. That would suit Amber down to the ground :
she hungered to travel the wide ways of the earth : she
had the gipsy soul, still but half awake in a settled
environment, but the love of a man she loved would
set her feet on the boards of a moving vessel, would
find all the high roads of the world for her. He liked,


he trusted Ormonde, and the hurried visit the fellow
had paid to Brisbane after the finding of dead Shielding
in the deserted garden had given him a clean sheet
from the new heart specialist he consulted. Sound in
wind and limb, traces of fever gone . . or nearly so . .
nothing the years wouldn’t sweat away. . . " God
bless our inland Queensland climate,” he had joked
with Malcolm when they met at the Meerly boundary
just before Christmas. “ I’m twice the man I was
when I came here.”
“ I reckon you’ll always be one of the lean kine,”
Malcolm had answered, eyeing the tall uprightness of
the other rider, his greying hair, his clear granite-
coloured eyes, his lantern jaws.
“ Yes . . I move round the world too quickly to put
on flesh.”
Move round the world ! Yes, and if he took Amber
. . the fire of the old man’s chilling hearth . . moving
with him ? Better let it be . .if there was an
estrangement . . let it rest. Perhaps, when he was
under the sod . . Amber still, maybe, in the fullness of
mature womanhood, might meet with a yet more
satisfactory mate. . . Let it rest. . .
But . . was it just to the girl ? A small voice
insisted that he should give her a chance . . give her
a chance. . . Not allow his own need of her to bribe
him into silence now. . . He remembered suddenly
the man who came to him when he was inspecting
timber for the Government, for railway sleepers for the
new lines. He remembered even the exact sum the


man offered him to pass those green, sappy logs. He
remembered his reply. He remembered another occa-
sion connected with blue metal for the embankments,
nicely packed outside, the best stuff . . faulty rubbish
under the surface. He remembered how angry that
contractor had been when he said “ No,” a No there
was not any gainsaying.
An upright man. Always an upright man. Other-
wise he might have been rich in his younger days.
Men who were honest were slower at making money
than those who winked . . who took douceurs. . .
Men who were “ too honest ” were often left alone. . .
How did he know Ormonde cared for the girl ? How
did he know Amber cared?
Then he seemed to smell the whiff of the perfume
she rubbed into her warm fine-grained skin when
Ormonde was expected. A rugged old Scotchman,
said to be hard at a bargain, who would have dreamed
he saw so much ?
Amber might have known, had she remembered the
big roughened hand wrinkled on the back, work
scarred, that looked so out of place when he carried
her a little fragile posy of bush-flowers. Amber might
have known, but Amber was tired, bored, lonely her-
self, these hot January days. Each one ending in a
thunderstorm, with blue lightnings, rumbling artillery
of thunders and crashing boughs that brought the
legions of rain riding through the world, the torrents
rumbling on the tin roofs, and lashing the thirsty
trees, gusts of wind smiting the verandah posts, rain


bearing on hot roadways and weaving a spumy lace on
the steaming grounds. . .
When dusk fell, the old man was still sitting there.
His figure seemed to have shrunken in the twilight;
his shoulders were bowed so low : his bald head glim-
mered in the shadow. . .
He seemed an old, old man, gone to sleep where he
sat, at the end of the day. . .
But he was not only that. He was the heroic figure
of a great resolve . . a greater renunciation. . .


CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
" I was your mate —had you waited for me—
You did not; you were blind to all
My sword’s grey glint in the twilight pallor.
My love knot, red in the red leaf’s fall."
The missing plumb-bob being discovered amongst the
silks and scraps of lace in Amber’s work-basket where
she had absent-mindedly placed it together with her
cutting-out scissors, and Big Man’s attention being now
concentrated on the more recent fact that he could not
find his two-foot rule, and this was not much to be
wondered at, the black girl down by the billabong
being just now busied using it for the handle of a
fishing rod, along with a bit of cord from Mrs. Maloney’s
washing line and a hook she had filched with her toes
from the floor of the store when the room was having
its annual turn out before the drays, taking the wool
down to market, returned with the yearly bags of
flour, tea, and other goods for Rocky Springs, getting
them in before the rainy season started thoroughly.
Malcolm was in testy humour, and he mounted his
horse and rode off in the direction of the disputed
frontage with scowling brows. Amber always told
him he had no idea how fierce he could look, and with
his bushy overhanging grey eyebrows and his furrowed
forehead, he looked as dour as his warm heart would
never allow of his being.
The collie ran beside him, with lolling tongue and


waving tail, started a kangaroo rat in the high grasses,
chased a disgusted but nimble 'guana up a tree,
barked furiously at a native bear, a plump grey ball
of fur, with two long, protruding ears, clasped tightly
round the stripped branch of a swamp gum, and so
thoroughly enjoyed himself.
It was by the near end of the chock-and-log Big Man
saw Jasper Ormonde’s hack, the reins on its neck,
cropping at the short green turf; Jasper, a little way
off, sat on a log submerged in grass and fringed with
tiny rock fems, smoking a peaceful pipe and staring
upwards to where a rift of blue sky was revealed
between soft sage-green crests.
Malcolm hailed him, “ Coo-ee.”
Jasper looked up, nodded, went on smoking. “ Good
day,” he said, smiling faintly.
Big Man reined his horse. “ Hello. . . Not busy
at Meerly, eh ? ”
“ Not very. Anyway I’m under a month’s notice,
have not waited to be chucked out,” he laughed, “ but
resigned. . . I’m off again . . on the Long Trail."
“ I thocht you would be sooner or later,” said the
old man, “ I thocht you would be.” He always
became noticeably Scotch when thinking deeply and
speaking of one thing with another uppermost in his
mind. “ I kenned sae.”
Jasper strolled over and stood beside him, shaking
the ashes from his pipe. “ Say good-bye to Miss
Amber for me, will you ? I suppose she . . she is at
home ? ”
18


“ Where would she be the day ? Likely she will be
riding out this afternoon or the morrow’s mom: she
is a restless baimie . . like yersel*. Always on the
wander about the Run . . but she’s no away frae
hame.”
So, . . Whatever the end of her interview with
Leon, whatever the ultimate sequel, she had not gone
off with the chap . . yet. . , Perhaps she was wait-
ing for the divorce to be made absolute, perhaps she
was
" I carry no messages,” said Malcolm grimly,
" Maybe ye would come over the night . . or to dinner
the morrow ? ”
Jasper hesitated. Longing to learn the outcome of
the meeting among the vines, his pride forbade his
questioning.
“I am afraid,” he was beginning, but Malcolm’s
blue-grey eyes were proving deep into his own : he
hesitated : fumbling with his pipe, dropped his riding
switch, recovered it, and made a step towards the
feeding hack.
" The way’s there, an’ the will is,” said Big Man
calmly. " You can be riding my way now an’ ye wish.
. . Amber will be right glad to see ye.”
Both men wondered if she would, looking at one
another, fencing issues.
Riding side by side in the direction of Rocky Springs,
Malcolm did not refer to “ the wean ” again. He
talked of Scotland, of how in the summer the stocks
scented all the land, how he had once fallen asleep in


a snow storm coming from the Fair. Then told of the
old days in the North, of Paul the American negro who
was with him in the survey camp Normanton way,
how Paul always slept with a revolver under his head
for fear of the Myall blacks, sure he was destined to
be killed by a spear, and eaten by the cannibal natives.
In the end his fear was fully justified, but they used
to make a joke of it in the camp then. He told of the
time men ran the chain, making ready for the railway
to the Gulf and Thursday Island way : of the drowsy
alligators in the lagoon full of pink lilies, of the cheese-
cloth mosquito nets they were obliged to sleep under,
lest they get fever, or be eaten alive by the winged
pests . . of the trouble with the blacks in ambush in
the tall grasses . . not that it wasn’t the white man’s
fault that the blacks flung spears. The old question
of women, making war between black and white, since
the world began, and most of all, when the imperious
white seized the black man’s lubras. He told of the
Central deserts, of the rotting ground where the horses’
feet sank, of how he had to make little moccasins for
his dog’s blistered feet . . of the places white and
gleaming where only the salt bush grew, salt bush
glistening as though crusted with diamond dust . . of
ventures by flood and field, while the younger man
listened with only half an ear, wondering , . wonder-
ing . . why had he yielded to the unnaturally garrulous
old man’s wish, that he should come to Rocky Springs
again . . wondering . . wondering . . how it would
be with him when he rode home to-night. . .


But not a word did either speak of Amber who'kept
the forefront in each man’s mind.
She was in the canvas hammock, between the two
old wild apple trees, reading. They could see one
small ankle, one swinging foot, a frill of white skirt,
the top of a shining head. . . She slipped out at the
sound of the horses’ hoofs, and stood, now red,
now pale, staring at them. Then she kissed her
hand to Malcolm, waved to Jasper, and went
round by the kitchen to prepare Mrs. Maloney for
guests.
It was a sultry night, but the usual storm did not
break though once or twice there came a roll of thunder
from the ranges and a white-peaked cloud, like a hill
surmounted by a castle, emitted flashes of lightning.
Mosquitoes hummed in the comer of the verandah,
there was no moon, only warm, velvet night, wonderful
with many stars. The lamp sent a fan of orange light
on to the verandah where they sat after dinner —the
men in squatter chairs, Amber on the floor, at the
verandah edge.
Presently Malcolm rose, pushed his chair back, mur-
mured awkwardly that he had something to do in the
laboratory, and went along the verandah in his creaking
boots.
" Whatever has struck him ? He never does any
lab. work now . . after all this discussion over the
cochineal insect . . he looks very old to-night,” added
Amber softly. “ Don’t you notice it ? ” They heard
him swear as he burned his fingers, fighting the kero


sene lamp. Amber sprang to her feet and ran after
him. “ Anything you want, Big Man ? ”
He shook his head, turned a grumpy back. "Go
away and don’t bother me.”
Yet his eyes yearned over her as he heard her go.
An old man’s world is full of loneliness, year after
year, month after month, all that held his youth is
slowly frayed away, he begins to see vivid living as
something through a glass darkly, senses may seem
dulled, but heartaches remain.
And she was his one ewe-lamb.
He sat down at the pine table, fumbling among
dusty bottles and test-tubes, marking time . . giving
youth its chance. . .
He knew they had lowered their voices, knew they
were going down among the trees in the warm dusk
smelling of eucalyptus, and the great mysterious leaf
places where Amber’s hammock swung. He knew
they had love in their hearts, and something to be
explained away . . he did not divine what . . he did
not try to guess. . . Night and stars and the scent
of flowers . . the time . . the place . . the loved
one.
And he knew that he was quite forgotten. . .
Out in the soft gloom of the trees, Amber had seated
herself in the hammock, a white glimmer in the shadow.
Jasper Ormonde leaned against a tree, throbbingly con-
scious of her presence and yet in doubt as to exactly
what he meant to do. Old prejudices crumbled, nature
called in every fibre of his being, to let the past be and


grip with both hands, hard on the present . . for
to-morrow does not belong to any man. . .
In the whispering trees beyond, he imagined the
wraith of Leon Gaspard and all he had been to this
woman, hovering with determined hands, holding her
from him. Without her will, he guessed no man could
thus hold Amber . . Amber with the sun in her veins,
and her unknown ancestry which surely was of lands
where blood ran warm. . ,
There was silence between, and a tale of heart-beats,
then Amber began to hum softly under her breath the
tune of the Myosotis waltz :
" Oh I love for a year . . a week, a day,
But alas for the love that loves away."
" Amber, give me your hand a moment . . no don’t
take it away . . it is already in my heart.”
They were near enough to the house to hear Mrs.
Maloney working the treadle sewing machine. It
needed oiling and loudly complained. Near enough to
see the light of Big Man’s lamp, a white glow on the
frosted window of the laboratory, but they were all
alone in a world woven of rainbows, and of spun glass
—easily broken.
" Well,” she said gently, letting her cool palm lie
in his, “ now that you have it . . what do you want
with it ? ”
“ Dear , . I love you."
She shook her head: he felt her eyes glimmering
upon him in the tree-blackness: “ I wonder."


" Wonder ?” he said. Impetuous words rushed to
his lips : he felt he was suddenly one of the most fluent
of men.
She stayed him. " Wait,” she said.
The wraith of Leon Gaspard seemed in his fancy
to stand just beyond that tree bole, waiting
too. . .
Leon Gaspard I He dropped her hand. . . Of
course . . there was that yet to know. . .
" Are you free ? ” he asked, then, his voice grown
colder; “or have you promised him ” —he need not
name names—" to marry him after all ? ”
She was out of the hammock, a little, quivering
figure of wrath and protest, “You thought I could . .
you dared to think he had only to come back and fling
the handkerchief . . to capture me . . you dared . .
you , . you . . ”
" Hush,” he said. “ You must remember I don’t
know anything. . . Only what you have chosen to
tell me,”
She was still now, only her hands laced and unlaced.
She sat down again in the hammock.
" Sit down,” she said —" down there in the grass at
my feet . . and listen. . . lam going to tell you all
the story now.”
He obeyed her, but spoke irritably, pulses afire,
sweat dropping from his forehead. “ I don’t want to
hear anything . . except that you are finished with
Gaspard.”
“ Oh, yes,” that was final, “ but . . as you say you


love me . . don’t you want things explained . .
ameliorated ? ”
Yes. He did. Grimly he knew the strong and
ancient belief of the men of his race that their women
must be sans reproche, died hard. Down in the founda-
tions of his being something fiercely protested. " Lis-
ten.” Perhaps the girl could prove herself innocent . .
or, at least, a victim . . and not a yielding one. . .
Perhaps she could make black all white if he listened . .
and then . . then he would ask her to marry him, and
go back to Big Man for his blessing . . a clean sheet . .
this she might give herself if he listened. . .
Remove natural barriers. . .
Pah! Who was he to demand of a woman what he
could not give himself? If men were different . . but
were they so different ? Women loved men who had
lapsed from rigid paths before they met them, loved
them and asked no question about the kind of life a
man was bringing to their white tale of days ? And if
a woman could love a man and place her hands in his,
trusting, loving, sure of the rest of his life in fealty to
herself, could not a man likewise trust, cry " The Past
is dead : let it bury its dead : you and I are re-made
from this hour 1 ”
He remembered a man he knew once who had said,
‘‘To marry a woman with a past is like being in a
house with dead bodies being constantly brought into
the other rooms.”
Would it be like that ? If he married Amber ?
Would he be able to forget . . as well as forgive ?


Forgive! Damnable, unnecessary . . insulting . .
word I There was always something to forgive in
others . . something . . much more . . to be forgiven
in oneself . . who had use for perfection anyway ?
The scent of her was about him : he always declared
she smelt like fresh apples and sweet hay . . he could
feel her knee against the back of his head as he sat
with his long spare arms clasped about his own, his
back to her, considering.
The hammock swung slowly : a little wind brought
spices and warm, damp night-smells. . .
Away in his quarters, Michael, just back from a trip
to the city with the teams, began to play his violin,
an old Irish air to which Amber had “ danced like a
wave of the sea,” as a barefoot child, long since, in
Dingy-bar, Through the fret of leaf above, Jasper
saw the stars: her hand touched his hair wistfully,
light as a moth wing.
He threw up his arms, turned and caught her hand.
" Shall I begin now ? ” she asked. He thought her
voice held tears.
“ You will never begin,” he said wilfully. “ I don’t
want to hear anything . . until you say you will marry
me . . there will be the rest of our lives to talk about
it.”
She drew a sobbing breath. She was game, this girl,
because now he knew she loved him.
"Do you realize ? . . No, don't turn your face
away, Jasper, you must hear me now; do you realize
I went away with a man I was not married to . . a


married man whom I knew was married , . and stayed
away with him.” She felt him wince, but kept
steadily on. “ And was away for days . . and now
that he ” —her voice grew firm in bitter scom—“ now
that he has offered to make what he calls amends . . I
have refused to be . . whitewashed by any liar.”
He bowed his head against her knee ; she must not
see, must not guess, the sternness of his mouth. . .
" I realize it all . . and I want to marry you . . I
love you . . I’m not a saint myself . . no man is . .
and nothing else matters at all.”
He knew it mattered, knew with his temperament,
his traditions, his primitive male jealousies, he knew
it mattered damnably. But something else mattered
more. . .
Then she laughed, laughed, bending a warm face, a
softly falling cluster of perfumed hair smelling like hay
and ripe apples, over his hand.
“ Now I must tell you the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth," she said. “ For I really think you
deserve it.”
Perhaps since men are as they are,- things of con-
vention, even in love, he did.
Having failed to find what he was not really looking
for, Big Man went stealthily along the verandah; in
the process his big boots squeaked as they had never
done had he walked naturally, along the verandah and
back to the living room door.


The reading lamp was surrounded by a cluster of
flying ants, wriggling into death with scorched off
wings. The light shone on the back of his favourite
set of Dickens, well ravelled board covers, ranged on
the shelf.
At the door he paused and looked furtively (as a
doomed criminal might glance at the prison yard
knowing he would see the gallows tree there) across to
where a white dress blurred the dusk at the edge of
the trees, like a lily in a shadowed pool, beyond the
stump where Amber had played at dolls, and where
Big Man had hatched a plot that had not failed, for at
that moment he heard the girl’s laughter ringing out
above the wailing of Michael’s violin. Only happy
people laughed like that. , .
Michael’s fiddle stopped dead with the unmistakable
breaking of his “g " string. He could imagine the
man’s puckered Up, the shock of red hair streaked with
grey bent over the fiddle that had failed him. He
could guess at Michael’s soft Irish voice alternately
caressing and scolding the beloved instrument. Poor
old Mike ! He talked a deal to himself nowadays.
Michael . . how he loved the wean . . he used to
fiddle for her dancing when she was a wee bit thing . .
a wee bit thing. . . Big Man went into the living-
room, and shut the door. . . He pulled his spectacles,
which he had been wearing pushed up on his shiny
furrowed forehead, down to the bridge of his fine
straight nose.
Then he went across to the book-case and, taking


down " The Old Curiosity Shop,” pulled a chair to the
table, and with his back towards the place where Love
wove new worlds out of the ancient material of dreams,
he began to read. . .
For, there are always books. . .
