

GAOL
LIFE
Prison Administration in N.S.W.
The “Humane” System Criticized.
The Medical Treatment.
How they die in Gaol.
Prisons as Sweating Dens.
Semi-Starvation,
Degradation,
Ruination.
Some Startling Facts.
Life in the Women’s Gaol.
Etc.
By...
REBECCA ROSS.
Price, 6d.
Copyright.


PREFACE.
Conscious of its defects and fully realizing that it may not
claim to be either amusing or entertaining, the writer of this
booklet places it before the public hoping that its short-
comings may be overlooked in the interest and sympathy a
perusal of its contents should arouse.
For various reasons much has been omitted that might
have been included. But of what appears in the following
pages it may here be stated that there is nothing untrue,
exaggerated or even highly coloured. It is simply a plain
statement of actual facts.
Always hoping that disclosures made from time to time
by ex-prisoners might lead to an inquiry being held into
Prison Administration, the writer has, until now, refrained
from publishing an account of her own experiences in a
N.S.W. Gaol. But apparently no one in power seemed to
care what befell the unhappy prisoner once the prison gates
closed upon him.
The present Minister for. Justice, however, seems to be
more humane, and appears to be taking a keen interest in the
Prison System. There is plenty to justify it. Nothing short
of a Royal Commission would ever bring to light all that
should be known regarding Prison Administration in N.S.VV.
Mr. Holman has only to ask himself this question : “ If the
writer with her limited experience of the gaol could learn so
much, how much more could the powers of a Royal Com-
mission force into publicity?” No one of ordinary in-
telligence would claim that anything of value could be
learned by visiting an institution, reviewing the inmates and
reading official reports. Nor is anyone disposed to place
much reliance in anonymous statements. But the writer
vouches for the truth of the contents of these pages, and is
in possession of other facts sufficient to warrant a searching
inquiry into the whole subject of Prison Administration in
N.S.W.


PRISON ADMINISTRATION.
GAOL LIFE IN N.S.W.
The subject of Prison Administration has been fre-
quently dealt with, and in most instances by man from
his point of view. Some readers may be interested in
the experiences of a woman who served a sentence
in a N.S.W. prison, and who has had the best of
opportunities for studying the system generally.
The subject is one that lends itself to almost endless
discussion and should be, though apparently is not,
of utmost interest to the public generally. Recently
there was a change in the management, the Comptrol-
ler-Generalship passing from Captain Neitenstein to
Mr. MacFarlane, and the opportunity was there at the
time of the change for some useful inquiries to be
made into prison affairs generally. But public interest
seemed to centre itself on the wire-pulling, axe-grind-
ing correspondence that found its way into print on
the question of the merits of the various candidates for
the big-salaried appointment. Or, possibly, so much
having been said (by those who knew little or no-
thing about it) on the subject of the “humane sys-
tem” of the N.S.W. Prisons, the thinking public re-
garded it as being quite beyond any need of outside
interference.
“He has brought about a saving of £40,000 a year
and in view of his magnificent work the Government
could not do less than show their appreciation in this
small way.”
With these words ex-Treasurer Waddell sought to
justify the late Government’s action in dipping into
the public purse and extracting therefrom £SOO as a
parting gift for Captain Neitenstein on his retirement


from the Comptroller-Generalship. As Head Gaoler
of the State, the Captain held a decidedly rosy billet,
drawing £9OO a year, with additional fees running his
salary up to a thousand a year. His position was
that of a petty Czar. His rule was over all gaols and
reformative institutions in the State and their inmates,
and over the officers (warders, etc), numbering some-
where near to 700, and it was practically supreme,
against his decision there being no appeal. He had
the giving and taking of over 600 positions, and he
appointed, dismissed and fined in various amounts at
his own sweet will. The Public Service Board has
no “jurisdiction” over the main body of gaol servants,
only governors of gaols, deputy-governors, superin-
tendents, and the like, having the right to appeal
against what they might consider unjust treatment.
Speaking from the Bench some time ago, the late
Chief Justice Barley is reported to have said:—“l am
of opinion, having a knowledge of most of the gaol
systems of the world, that there is no place where
prisoners are more humanely treated than in N.S.W.
Since Captain Neitenstein became Comptroller-General
of Prisons he has devoted much thought, great care
and consideration to the system under which the
prisons in this State are managed, and I, therefore,
believe that no country in the world has a system
better than that possessed by this State.”
Like so many others, the late Chief Justice’s opinion
was the result of very superficial knowledge, which
could only have been derived from visits, chats with
officials, perusal of reports, regulations, etc., and
similar one-sided sources. It is to be regretted that
holders of high positions, judicial or otherwise, should
whitewash either institutions or individuals, seeing that
such action tends to lull an already apathetic public
into actual indifference.
It is so easy to utter vain platitudes, so easy for the
big-salaried man who has not the faintest conception
of the meaning of the word “want” to lie back at his
ease and express opinions of how humanely and kindly
less fortunates are treated. But the walls of our


prisons hide from the public view evils and abuses that
are not even dreamed of by any save those who have
themselves suffered under the ‘‘humane” system, and
have seen others do so.
Those who break the laws of the State must expect
to suffer the consequences and pay the penalty for
their sins, nor is it for one moment expected that they
should be cradled in the lap of luxury. It is not even
contended that prisoners should enjoy ordinary com-
forts. But the severest critic would not ask that our
prison system be to its victims one of starvation, ruina-
tion.
How has this impression of the “humanity” of the
N.S.W. prison system and administration got abroad?
Simply by hashed-up reports being submitted officially
to the people through their representatives—garbled
reports from which all that might tend to open the
eyes of the public is carefully suppressed, whilst glow-
ing accounts are furnished showing the “good work”
done, the reforms accomplished, the savings effected,
the economies practised, etc.
And why is so little known of the other side ? Be-
cause for various reasons ex-prisoners remain silent
as to their experiences. Principal among them is the
fact that they would not care for their friends and
acquaintances to know just what those experiences
were, how painful, how unnecessarily degrading and
disgusting. Another reason for the silence of the ex-
prisoner is that he does not know how soon, even in
spite of himself, he may again become an inmate of a
gaol, when, if he has been drawn into making revela-
tions during his period of freedom, he would be, to
use the prisoner’s own expression for the treatment
some of them receive, simply “crucified.”
Further, it is not possible for them ever to get jus-
tice or even a fair hearing. To two classes of the
community, lunatics and prisoners, a fair hearing will
always be denied. The prisoner’s complaint is sneer-
ed at and marked “prejudiced.” The lunatic’s is
laughed at with possibly a sympathetic “Poor devil,
quite mad of course.” And how many of the general


public give a thought to the treatment either lunatic
or prisoner receives ? Dry-looking reports and figures
are published. The reader looks askance at them.
Not interesting enough for him, he turns to read the
details of the latest tragedy. And behind prison (and
asylum) walls grim tragedy stalks unheeded.
But it is only right and proper that the people of this
great nation, who boast of their freedom from tyranny,
their glorious principles of justice and fair play, their
splendid march along the road to a perfect state of
civilization, should know something of the treatment
meted out to their less fortunate brethren who, simply
because they are prisoners, are absolutely helpless and
friendless.
When a judge imposes a term of imprisonment does
he ever realize the extent of the punishment? He
knows that he is depriving the prisoner of his liberty,
of all rights as a citizen, of all comforts of life, that
he is separating him from home, kindred, and friends.
If he be mercifully inclined he may find solace in the
thought that the N.S.W. prison system is considered
most “humane.”
Was it ever intended that our prisons should be
huge sweating dens where the incessant command to
the half-starved prisoners is Work! Work!! Work!!!
While to the crushed, down-trodden, daren't-call-their-
souls-their-own warders it is Save! Save!! Save!!!
It is plainly the duty of every man and woman as
citizens to interest themselves in what goes on inside
the prison walls. They may boast to-day that they
were never in prison, never had relative or friend
there, were never on speaking terms with anyone who
has even been under the shadow of the walls. Dare
they swear that they will be able to make the same
boast a month hence? *
“Count no man safe until within the grave
He lies at rest beyond temptation’s power—
No man so high that he can never fall,
No man so low' that he can fall no lower.”
In this work it is intended to deal principally with
the women’s gaol, the writer having the only know


ledge that is reliable, that gained by actual experience.
Until recently women serving sentences of over six
months were in most cases sent to Bathurst Gaol,
while the majority of the others served their sen-
tences in Biloela Gaol on Cockatoo Island, which was
for so long a standing disgrace to the country. Now.
however, almost all female prisoners in the State are
placed in the new gaol which bears the glorified name
of Penitentiary for Females at Long Bay.
Recently Miss Muriel Matters, who some time ago
served a sentence of one month in Holloway Gaol
(England), lectured in Sydney, the subject of the lec-
ture being advertised as “Within the Walls of Hol-
loway.” I attended the lecture. She had a little to
say of her experiences in the prison, but most of her
remarks were on the question of “Votes for Women.”
I was disappointed when she wandered right off the
subject in which I was interested, but when she started
out to praise the New South Wales prison system, as
she eventually did, it was only by a mighty effort that
I could refrain from getting up in the hall and asking
if she knew what she was talking about. Like so
many others, she judged the whole system on ex parte
statements of officials, saw the inside of the gaol
(where everything not wanted to be seen is kept well
out of view), and then “put another nail in the coffin”
of the unhappy prisoner, so to speak, by gushing on the
excellence of the New South Wales prison system.
She wouldn’t have done much harm, only unfortunately
some of the gush found its way into the daily papers.
As the public generally is inclined to the belief that
only the truth finds a place in the columns of the
dailies, and as very few people are aware in how
small a degree Miss Matters was competent to speak
on the subject of our prisons, a certain weight at-
taches to her statements and adds to the false impres-
sion which has already been too long abroad regarding
prison administration in New South Wales.
My experience of prison life began at Darlinghurst.
The trial in which I was concerned having lasted all
day and been adjourned to the following day, I was


taken from the Court-house to the gaol and handed
over to the prison authorities.
A flight of steps leads from the dock down to the
gloomy stone passages beneath the Court-house. Pass-
ing along these one notices with horror the iron doors
of cells, which, however, do not appear to be now
in use. Out of this underground passage once more
into the free open air, across portion of the gaol
grounds, and I was at the door of the Women’s Divi-
sion of the gaol.
Here I was taken charge of by a wardress and es-
corted to a table in the centre of the wing. (The
various wards in the gaols are known as “wings”).
The one I found myself in was a long, dreary-looking
hall (fortunately I did not anticipate beauty or bright-
ness). Two balconies ran right round inside the
wings. On to these the cells opened, the cells being
in rows on each of the three floors, the upper stories
being reached by means of a stone staircase at the end
of the building.
I did not take much note of my surroundings on
that first visit. Though I was only “on remand,” my
trial not having finished, I was put through all the
usual routine performance which marks the reception
of prisoners.
Standing at the table in the centre of the wing I was
told to undress. After an involuntary glance round to
see how many might be looking on, I obeyed the order
with reluctance. I was fully conscious of the fact
that I was in a place where Might indeed stood for
Right.
One wardress took my various garments and search-
ed them as I undressed, whilst another sat at the table
and put me through a regular catechism as to religion,
age, relatives, etc., entering my answers in a book.
So unnecessarily humiliating was the whole perform-
ance of the semi-public undressing that it came as
quite a shock to me when I was allowed the decency
of keeping one garment on, in which to walk down the
wing to the bathroom at the end. Astounding to relate,
I was allowed to enter the bathroom alone, and pre


sently the door was opened and my clothes thrown in.
My night’s lodgings consisted of a canvas hammock
in a stone cell. As the wardress was about to lock
me in for the night, I asked if I could get anything
to eat. “No; certainly not,” I was told. I explained
that at breakfast and dinner time I had not been able
to eat, and was very hungry. She answered that there
was no food in the gaol for me. I still persisted, ask-
ing that something might.be got for me with some of
my money, which, by the way, the gaol authorities had
taken possession of for the night (fearing possibly,
that my cell might be burglarized). The lady turnkey
got wild: “Nothing till morning!” she snapped, and the
door was slammed in my face.
Duly crushed and subdued, I sat down to review the
situation. A long, lonely evening in a cold stone cell
did not promise much entertainment. Then I remem-
bered my papers containing notes taken during the
trial. I wanted them. One of the wardresses had
them. I knocked on the door to attract attention, and
when she came, asked for them and my lead pencil.
She refused to give them to me, against the rules, etc.,
etc. But I managed to convey the impression that they
were very necessary to me, and finally she graciously
promised to try to get permission for me to have them.
After a long time she returned with the papers and
a pen and ink, explaining that the pencil was altogether
against the rules, but 1 might have the pen and ink.
I know “red tape” has always its peculiarities, but
I was puzzled to know why the pencil was debarred.
Was it thought that I might use it as a means of
escape, or as an instrument of self-destruction, or
possibly as a dangerous weapon with which to make
a determined and desperate attack on my gaolers ? And
as I was not allowed a pencil, why the permission to
have a pen ? However, it served the purpose.
Next morning I was given the ordinary gaol break-
fast, and that night when the case was remanded on
until the third day I took care that my tea was sent
in from outside. Later on the third day the trial
ended, the verdict against me, and I had to face the
result.


Then I entered on gaol life.
My first actual experience began at Darlinghurst
Gaol, at about io p.m., when a constable accompanied
me to the female division from the Court-house, and
after much ringing succeeded in rousing the wardress
in charge. She took me to a cell with instructions to
make the best of it till morning, bolted and padlocked
the door, roared out (unnecessarily) “Silence, you
wimmen,” and departed.
No light being available I groped round and found
a hammock slung to the wall. But it had been occu-
pied, evidently by some prisoner on remand, whose
“bail” had arrived after she had retired for the night.
The blankets (no sheets, of course), felt grubby. I
shuddered as I thought of the company I might have.
Consequently, I decided to sit up till morning.
Next day I entered on the routine of bath, photo-
graph (in two positions), the taking of finger prints,
etc., etc., but gaol life in its dreary monotony did not
begin for about a week.
One morning I was given my private clothes to put
on in place of the prison garb. After breakfast a par-
cel was handed to me. It consisted of a cold chop
placed between two “junks” of bread, wrapped in a
blue paper bag. I was escorted to the outer yard,
where “Black Maria” stood. The inside of the vehicle
is divided by a wooden partition into two compart-
ments. In one I sat alone. In the other chains rattled
ominously—seven men sat there chained together.
We were driven to Redfern Railway Station, and as
the van stopped it was surrounded by a curious mob.
I was let out first and hurried into the train, from
which I watched the men, What a spectacle! In
prison clothes and chained together by the arms and
legs, the leg-chains dragging along the platform as
they shuffled across, they succeeded in reaching the
train, while the previously noisy crowd sank into horri-
fied silence. (Since then, however, one of the much-
lauded reforms brought about by Capt. Neitenstein just
prior to his retirement, has permitted male prisoners
to wear their private clothes when being transferred


from one gaoi to another. This concession to twen-
tieth century progress was only granted as a result
of frequent protest and scathing comment voiced again
and again by indignant citizens. However, the chains
remain.)
On our journey to Bathurst we were accompanied
by a male warder, female warder, and two policemen.
One little incident remains in my mind and will when
all else connected with that journey may be forgotten.
A hard wooden stool was the only seat provided for
me in the cramped-up portion of the van where I sat.
A man in railway uniform looked in, hurried away,
and returned with a cushion for the seat. The police-
men laughed—unnecessary attentions to prisoners are,
of course, amusing. But the man irt uniform simply
remarked “Our mothers were women,” and walked
off whistling.
Arrived at Bathurst a walk along the railway plat-
form through a gaping mob brought us to a smaller
edition of “Maria” surrounded by another crowd. Soon
we were at the gaol, and tired, cold aiid hungry, I was
taken by an officer on night duty to the cell which was
to be my “home” for so long a time.
All my belongings (except hairpins) were taken
from me, and an outfit of prison clothes left in their
place. I was given nothing at all to eat. This, I found,
was one of the quite unneccessary cruelties practised
in the place. I had had a breakfact of hominy and a
piece of dry bread at Darlingburst in the morning, had
eaten my mutton chop sandwich before mid-day, and
the journey over the mountains made be intensely
hungry long before I reached Bathurst. Nevertheless,
hungry I was and hungry I remained until next morn-
ing, or to be perfectly truthful, hungry more or less
until about eighteen months later, when I was free to
indulge in a good square meal outside the walls, and
eat as much as I dared after so long a period of
semi-starvation.
I learned that this “go-to-bed-hungry” rule was prac-
tised on all new arrivals, whatever distance they had
travelled and under whatever conditions they entered


the gaol. Hard as I found it, others must have felt it
doubly so. Two women who came whilst I was there
were in ill health, soon to become mothers. They re-
ceived no more merciful treatment. One of them
begged hard for something to eat, and even after her
cell door was locked for the night and the wardress had
gone, we others heard her still calling out for “just a
crust of bread.” But she pleaded to ears deafened by
red tape. As. a woman, the wardress may have been
tempted to give a hungry woman in such delicate health
a “crust of bread”; as a wardress she dared not:
Even in the case of a woman who arrived at the
gaol with a baby two months old the same “humane”
treatment was meted out, but the child suffered per-
haps, even more than the mother, and wailed pitifully
all night with cold and hunger.
Surely there can be nothing but condemnation for
such altogether unnecessary cruelty. Is there not
something sadly wanting in the “humane” system that
ordered such barbarous treatment of helpless women?
The giving of a piece of bread to each prisoner on
arriving after the day’s journey would not have strain-
ed the financial resources of the Prison Department tc
breaking point. One pound out of the forty thousand
“saved” annually would have provided more than
sufficient for such a purpose for a year—or longer.
The first three days at Bathurst were spent in what
was practically “solitary,” that is, kept closely shut up
in the cell, with one hour’s exercise in the yard each
day. Some prisoners had to undergo that treatment
for a month, some two months, some four, according
to length of sentence and number of previous convic-
tions. The “three days’ separate” was an easy matter
compared with the others. In the winter the suffering
imposed by four months in a cell cold as a tomb was
only equalled by what followed when that period ex-
pired, for the next two months had to be spent in the
yard, where the only shelter was a shed open on three
sides to wind, rain and snow. Anyone who knows the
severity of the Bathurst winter may, perhaps, be able
to partly imagine what it would be like to sit for hours


at a time in an open shed, always hungry, and trying
with numbed fingers to get sufficient sewing done to
earn the next day’s food.
On the morning of the first day there was a slight
diversion, A wardress, brimming over with impor-
tance, flung the door open and shouted “Shon!” Star-
tled, I looked up. “Shon!’’ she roared still louder.
This time I stood and simply stared. “Bow to the
Governor!'’ That at least was English, so I peeped
out to look at him. He and a lady stood a few feet
from the door of the cell waiting my salute. I bowed.
“Get on the mark!’’ I looked for the mark and found
one, a white line at the far end of the cell from the
door. I got on to it as ordered. “Bow again!” Order
obeyed. “Put your bonnet on and bow lower!’’ First
part impossible, as no bonnet had been given me. By
this time the governor had passed on on his rounds, and
T sat down to think.
Presently there came to me a non-uni formed woman,
stylishly dressed and with a sweet face and gentle
manner. She was Mrs. Chapman, the lady superinten-
dent, and in passing, it may here be remarked that the
Department was particularly fortunate in its selection
of a superintendent for the women’s gaol. I never
heard her voice raised, never knew her to even speak
angrily to wardress or prisoner. Always sympathetic,
she had unbounded influence over the women. Some
of them, careless as to language, indifferent, callous,
used at times to tell me they would often “play up”
just to break the monotony, only that they just hated
to worry the superintendent. This acted as a deterrent
where fear of punishment would have no effect.
She explained to me what to do in future when the
Governor came on the scene. When the wardress said
“Shon!” (or as some pronounced it, “Shun!” it being
short for “Attention”) I was to bow low so that only
the top of my bonnet would be visible, and retain that
position until he passed. Amusing enough, still nothing
very hard about that.
The then governor was a particularly pompous indi-
vidual, corpulent, dignified, and with an immense ide?


of his own importance. No woman prisoner must
dare look at him unless he spoke to her. In meek humi-
lity, as became her position, she must keep her head
bent, her face hidden, until His Mightiness passed
But I heard of one occasion when he got the “wind
knocked out of his sails,” and in a way that must have
been awfully mortifying to one so important. A prison-
er, a little woman at that, a mere handful, so to speak,
had been playing up and was locked in the punishment
cell. She did some general smashing up, and made
things hum for a time. Finally the governor was to
pay a visit to the punishment cell, and the little woman
was duly instructed to be good and behave nicely.
So she did. He had hardly got two words out when
she made a flying dart at him, and butting her head
against his stomach, knocked him speechless. I heard
she got a good deal of beating and knocking about her-
self while in the punishment cell, but that is only hear-
say, and she can’t speak for herself. She committed
suicide just after she left the gaol.
However to resume. The three days’ solitary gave
me ample time to study my cell and the wing generally
The cells were about 40 in number, 20 on the ground
floor of the “wing,” the others on the floor above
opening on to an inside iron balcony or range which
was reached from below by an iron staircase. The
balcony, stairs and floor of the wing were blackened
and kept highly polished. The cells were very small,
the walls quite bare, the floors of concrete.
The furnishings were an education in simplicity.
There was a small deal table, the top lifting over a
drawer. In this was a wooden box of salt. On the
table were a Bible, Prayer Book, copy of the regula-
tions, comb, tooth-brush, tin quart-pot, tin pannikin,
and tin spoon. A wooden stool, tin jug and basin,
iron bucket, and small strip of fibre matting completed
the furniture. The bed consisted of a hammock fast-
ened by ropes tied to iron rings in the wall (occasion-
ally a rope would break, with the result that the
occupant of the hammock got a shock, a nasty fall
on to the concrete floor being the result). .Sheets were


not provided nor were pillows. There were two rugs
and two single blankets, an extra blanket being allowed
in winter. The hammocks were cool and comfortable
for summer use, but so cold in winter that the cover-
ings apparently generous enough in number, were
quite insufficient, especially as almost all of them were
worn threadbare.
A small opening, barred and in some cases netted
as well, near the ceiling in the outside wall was the
only thing in the nature of a window. During the
summer it remained always open, but, despite that
fact, the cells were insufferably close and stuffy.
Throughout the winter (the “gaol winter” lasts from
ist May to 31st October) a pane of thick glass was
fastened into the aperture, thus shutting out almost
the only fresh air that had any chance of finding its
way in. At the beginning of my second winter I
obtained permission to have my “window” left open.
The doors were iron, bolted and padlocked at night,
and bolted at the various times during the day that
prisoners were kept in cells, that is, during meal times,
all Saturday afternoons, and all day on Sundays and
holidays.
The gaol rule is “one prisoner, one cell,” except in
cases of sickness, when a prisoner may be associated.
In such circumstances, two others are put in the cell,
the “visitors” sleeping on cocoanut fibre mats on the
floor.
During the six months of winter, the blankets were
never aired. Twice a week they were hung over the
range inside the wing, and, as all were put out on
the same day, they had necessarily to be kept folded
up and just thrown in heaps over the railing. On the
other five days in the week they were rolled up.
At 6 o’clock ar bell was rung. By 6.30 we were
supposed to be dressed and have our beds rolled into
“swags,” the rugs and blankets being tied inside the
hammocks. When the doors were unlocked at 6.30
we put the beds out and they were at once taken
away and piled up all together at the end of the wing.
During the whole six months they were not c>nce


taken into the outside air, and for five days out of
each seven they were rolled closely up from the time
we got out of them until bed-time came round again.
It was the same in summer, except that on the two
“airing” days in each week we were allowed to hang
them out in the yard instead of in the wing.
As so much in the gaol seems to be done on the
recommendation of the visiting surgeon, I have often
wondered whether it is considered healthy to sleep
in stuffy cells in blankets that know neither fresh air
nor sunlight, and very little about soap and water.
Mine were not washed once during my whole term of
imprisonment (nearly two years).
On the fourth day I was sent to the needle-room as
it was called, and the actual tread-mill round began.
Each day was so like the one before and the one to
come after that one day’s routine practically describes
all. At 6.30 we emerged from our cells, fully dressed,
bonnets and all on (no prisoner dared venture into the
yard minus her big ugly holland bonnet). We lined
up in the wing carrying our cell pails, and were
marched out, first to leave the pails to be emptied, and
then to the yards.
I often found myself smiling at the sorry figure we
cut. Dressed exactly alike in the ugly prison clothes
and heavy leather shoes, differing in appearance only
in size and in the distinguishing number with which all
our clothes were marked, we must have made a comic
moving-picture as we tramped in single file across to
the outer yard, no one speaking a word, placed our
Pads down in solemn silence and turned and marched
back again, this time to our yards according to classi-
fication.
Here I will digress slightly to refer to what I always
considered a standing disgrace.
(( One of the stock boasts of the Prison Department is :
“Every effort is made to elevate our prisoners.” To
see how far this is carried into effect in some respects,
at any rate, one needs only to briefly study the sani-
tary system. Debasing and degrading in the extreme,
the only thing it tended to elevate was the nose.


in each yard was a recess to be used as a lavatory
by the prisoners. Three sides were closed in—the
other wide open to the gaze of all and sundry. Not
the slightest pretence of privacy, even though male
officials were in the women’s division of the gaol for
a considerable time every morning, and it frequently
happened that men were backwards and forwards in
the division throughout the day. Whatever elevating,
purifying, moralising idea was in the “humanitarian’s”
mind, to permit this disgusting condition of things, it
is useless to try to fathom.
This subject is somewhat indelicate, and rather awk-
ward to handle (in spite of the fact that all “false
modesty” is quickly “knocked out” of anyone putting
in a term in one of H.M. Gaols). The pan system was
in vogue in Bathurst Gaol, and is, I believe, in Long
Bay.
The first duty of prisoners after leaving their cells
in the morning was to march out, carrying their pails
from the cells across to the men’s yard, leave them there
to be emptied, and march thence to their respective
yards. Two from each yard then had to take it in
turns to carry out the pans which had been used in the
lavatories during the previous day. This was most dis-
gusting, and it is not to be wondered at that the bearers
of the heavy, overflowing tubs, often became violently
sick when, after several stoppages for rest, they got
through their work and returned to their yards. Sure-
ly out of that £40,000 being saved annually, a trifle
might have have been spent in making the sanitary
arrangements cleaner, healthier, and a trifle less
degrading!
The morning “pan duty” completed, we remained
in the yards until 7 o’clock. Then we lined up, the
Superintendent accompanied by two wardresses ap-
peared near the gate, and the roll was called (numbers
only, our names never being used officially).
Answering to the call of her number, each prisoner
was expected to say “Yes, ma’am,” to the wardress
with the roll-book, bow to the Superintendent, and
march out of the yard to the wing.


In the entrance lobby of the wing we were given
our breakfast, a piece of bread and dish of hominy.
We were then each locked in our own cells. At 8
o’clock the doors were opened, we lined up along the
centre of the wing, the Superintendent and her two
aides-de-camp again appeared, roll-call, “Yes, ma’am,”
bow, and out we marched again, this time to the needle-
room. Arrived there, we exchanged our bonnets for
small white caps of the house-maid variety, and settled
down to work.
About 10.30 each day quite a commotion, the arrival
of the Governor on his daily round, attended by an
escort and the Superintendent. As his head appeared
above the stairs the wardress in charge of the needle-
room roared “’Shun!” We stood up with heads
bowed. “Carry oh!” called the wardress, the official
procession trooped out, we sat down, and the excite-
ment of the day was over.
At 10 minutes to 12 we returned to the yards. At
12 o’clock the Superintendent and her aides again ap-
peared with the inevitable roll-book, and we went
through the same routine of “Yes, ma’am,” bowing,
etc., and again to our cells, receiving our dinners at the
wing entrance. We were locked up for the hour,
emerging again at 1 o'clock for another roll-call, and
were then marched to the needle-room.
At 4 o'clock work ceased for the day, and we went
back to the yards for 10 minutes, after which some
more roll-call and bowing as we marched to the wing.
The eternal bowing got on one’s nerves after a time!
I don t suppose any one really minded, yet it seemed
so very unnecessary, so little likely to do any good
or serve any useful purpose. Maintain discipline, by
all means, but there are surely other and better methods
than by belittling and humiliating the prisoners, and
making the officials appear ridiculous. Apart from all
the routine bowing and scraping, various other occa-
sions arose when it was also expected. Should one of
us accidentally meet the Superintendent a bow was
exchanged. A prisoner might, though it very rarely


happened, meet the Governor when he was not “on the
rounds.” Whatever wardress happened to be nearest
would shout “’Shun!” and down would go the prison-
er’s head.
I don’t know, and cannot imagine, what would be
expected if a female prisoner happened to casually
meet the Lord High Pan-jan-drum of the Department,
the great Comptroller-General himself, in the prison
grounds. Possibly nothing short of hurling herself
at his feet and bumping her forehead on the ground a
couple of times would meet the requirements of gaol
etiquette, discipline, etc.
A few minutes—all that was necessary—being
allowed us to eat our evening meal, our doors were
opened so that we might take in our hammocks. Pris-
oners undressed, were searched, and were then locked
in for the night.
Here I must again digress. Why in the name of
common sense, search prisoners day after day.
Granted it was to a certain extent a matter of form,
but it had a needlessly irritating effect. In some in-
stances there were complaints, and it must be admitted
with apparently very good cause, of harsh treatment
by wardresses, accompanied by pretty rough handling.
But these were rare. The main objection to the general
searching was that it was intensely humiliating and
caused unnecessary annoyance to women already
fretting under a system which from A to Z inflicts
petty annoyances and maddening humiliations upon
those forced to suffer under it—be they prisoners or
warders.
About 4.30 we were left to ourselves. We had a
long, lonely, hungry stretch ahead of us, fourteen hours
elapsing before the doors were again unlocked. In
winter it was too unbearably cold to sit up even for
the few hours when the lights were on. Sitting on a
hard, wooden stool in a cold stone cell did not strike
one as being at all cosy. Of course, we didn’t expect
gas fires—didn’t expect anything in fact, and in that
we should, no doubt, be considered blessed. But we
were glad to make our beds and turn in.


Many did not go through the formality of undress-
ing or rather, they dressed again after being searched
Night-dresses were not provided, nor were we allowed
to keep a change of clothing in our cells, nothing at
all, in fact, save what we wore during the day. To make
die best use possible of the hammocks and blankets
was a problem. The former were of canvas, and cold
to sleep on. Most of us put the strip of matting off
the floor on to the hammocks, and made up the blanket
bed on top of that again. But the three blankets, small
and worn threadbare, had not the warmth of one ordi-
nary blanket, and the two rugs were about on a par
with them. , .
Added to the scantiness of the bedding and to the
bitter cold of the winter nights, there was always the
merciless hunger from which there was no escape.
Truly the authorities are kind and generous and not
at all sarcastic when they declare in their smug way,
“Our system is not punitive, merely reformative.
Cold and semi-starvation don’t punish. They merely
fill the heart with goodness and the mind with thoughts
of gratitude and good intentions for the future, by
way of showing appreciation of kindness received
where only punishment was merited.
We became more than usually industrious in the
winter if the work on hand in the needle-room hap-
pened to be garments of a fair size, such as men s
flannel shirts, women’s tweed dresses, and articles of
like warmth, and took to our cells as much work as
we could lay hands on. It would have been delightfully
cosy and homelike sitting up in the cold, sewing by an
apology for a lfght. That is what we were supposed
to do when we went to our cells laden with an arm-
full of garments. To what actual use we put the extra
clothes we had become temporarily possessed of the
reader might guess. They formed a very welcome
addition to the reformative system’s bedding.
Much is made of the fact that the cells in the larger
gaols are lit by electricity. Fancy the luxury of elec-
tric light for prisoners! Why any light at all ? Many
of us preferred no light at all, for as a rule it was too


poor to read by, so we took the globes off when the
lights were on. A decent book to read and a fair light
to read by would have meant a good deal to the
majority of us, but we got neither very often, and I
never once had both together.
If the rule had been “no reading allowed” we might
have grumbled, but we would have regarded it as part
of the system and- put up with it accordingly. But
when so much is made of the fact that books and light
are provided, and prisoners are regarded as pampered
favorites of fortune in that they, so utterly unworthy,
are shown such consideration, then both should at
least have been moderately good.
The books in the gaol library number ever so many
thousands, we are told. On each Tuesday, sufficient
books, enough for one for each woman, were sent in
from the men’s division of the gaol. The women who
had already been there some time were, rightly enough,
allowed first choice (out of a very poor lot). Follow-
ing them, we others came according to classification.
Times out of number I have looked through the books,
and not found one worth the trouble of carrying to the
cell. I got thoroughly sick of history and geography—
for weeks at a time few other books save little school
books found their way into the women’s division.
Then I took advantage of a rule made in favor of
the “pampered prisoner”—a rule which permitted the
selection of fifty books from the catalogue. The list
selected was handed in and it was understood that one
of the books I had chosen would be sent in from the
library for me each week. Anticipating an intellectual
treat —for there are certainly some good books listed
in the catalogue of the gaol library—l mentioned the
fact to some of the others. A pitying and rather deri-
sive smile was the answer I received. The result
proved that it was not uncalled for.
Although I remained an inmate for many weary
months longer, I did not receive half a dozen of the
books I had selected. In fact, the gaol library is little
better than a good cause for lots of grumbling and dis-
content.


A gaol library run on reasonable lines would be an
untold boon to an unfortunate body of people whose
lives are not crowned with many blessings.
At 8 o'clock the lights were switched off from some
of the cells, and at 8.30 from the remainder, the wing
being then in darkness save for the light in the corridor.
As a rule, all was quiet but for the striking of the gaol
clock and the regular calling of the four male warders
on night duty.
Kach in turn, “No 1 Post. All’s well!’ “No. 2 Post.
All’s well!” and so on at the top note of each voice
until the four had got through.. At first it was disturb-
ing. Soon we became used to it.
Occasionally we put in a weary night listening to
the cries, moans or shrieks of casual lunatics brought
in for medical observation, but they were usually re-
moved after a day or two to one or other of the
asylums. All these cases were pitiful. All extra pain-
ful to us, confined as we were, and cramped in the
monotonous groove of prison routine, seeing and know-
ing nothing of the outside world save the sky above
our heads when we were in the gaol yard.
Our hearts have ached in pity for the young girl—
perhaps only in her teens —raving throughout the night
in mad delirium, and again it has been a woman ad-
vanced in years, a mother, perhaps, of grown children.
Poor creatures! Their affliction was a crime, and this
glorious country with all its possibilities could do
nothing for them save gaol them, associate them with
criminals, feed them on gaol rations. Only temporary
treatment, certainly, pending their transference to their
—too often —permanent prison. Yet, why at all?
But always the presence of a mad woman in the
gaol upset the prisoners. Two would be told off to look
after her. The three, the patient and her two keepers,
slept in the padded cell, which differed from the. rest
in having the floor boarded and the walls thickly
padded. They were locked in, but were allowed the
doubtful privilege of a light all night.
Night was the worst time in gaol for all. The day
had its work, something to keep the mind occupied,


Night had only—what? For some, remorse. For
others regret. For all, memories that only saddened ;
longings that would come unbidden for sight of some
dear familiar face, for sound of some well-loved voice.
Hope or consolation came to few. Despair had its
victims. Fear possessed many. Some of us tried to
keep bright—our thoughts at least were free —but it
was hard under such conditions of general gloom and
dejection, and shut in as we were within walls and be-
hind bolts and bars. We may have forced brightness
in the day-time, and for appearance sake worn a smile
to try to cheer others, but night, with its long hours
of loneliness, found the weak spots in our armour and
mercilessly broke down our barrier of cheerfulness.
And yet, what of the others? What, for instance,
must have been the thoughts of those serving sentences
for murder? I have caught myself wondering what
this one was thinking of. Did she see sometimes in
her dreams the face of the little baby she had mur-
dered? And that one—was she thinking of the hus-
band she had poisoned ? Were their nights filled with
terror? Was fear their constant bedfellow.
For we were all there, a miscellaneous lot—mur-
deresses and pickpockets, abortionists and shop-lifters,
thieves and robbers, “drunks” and “vags.” guilty and
innocent (nine out of every ten in gaol call themselves
innocent; the guilty are outside) and Socialism was
the order of the day. But whatever we were, good
or bad, innocent or guilty, sensitive or callous, night
in gaol was the worst time for us all.
And so our days and nights came and went, with
few breaks in the monotony. To the unfortunate
dragging out the weary years of a life sentence, only
a crushing gloom, but to us who could see Liberty
ahead, we had the consolation of knowing that we were
piling up the days behind us, each one over our shoul-
der meaning a step nearer the gates.
No work on Saturday afternoons. From i till 2
all except those under separate treatment marched in
line round the yard. Walking singly and two good
paces apart we could not talk much ? but a departmental


official reviewing us at exercise one (lay, extended to
us the privilege of each other’s company, so that for
the future we were allowed to march two deep. With
so little opportunity for exercise, we looked forward
to that hour, which ended only too soon. We were
then locked up in our cells and expected to put in the
time cleaning up, polishing, etc. About 4 o clock we
were let out for ten minutes and then marched back
to cells. One little duty I always performed on Satur-
day night. My sentence covered 72 weeks. On the
wall of the cell I had scratched 72 little marks, scarcely
discernible, and each Saturday night one more was
ticked off. Thus I marked the passing of the time.
Sunday was a dreary day, as also were all public
holidays, the routine on the latter being the same as
on Sundays, save that there was no break of the mono-
tony for religious services.
There was no lying in on Sunday morning such as
one might like to indulge in in the free world outside.
Out of the cells at 6.30, fully dressed and with beds
rolled up the same as on week days. After breakfast
an hour’s exercise round the yard, then back to the
cells to await the Governor’s rounds, then nothing until
the call to church.
The service over, there was nothing to do till dinner
time. After dinner all except the “separates” were
allowed out in the yards for an hour. The rest of the
day was spent in the cells. The majority put in the
time lying on the strip of matting on the concrete floor,
nothing else being available. Mostly with nothing to
read and with nothing at all to do, small wonder we
hated the, Sundays. And they usually had a “weepy”
ending, for over the silent calm of the evening would
float the sound of the church bells from the adjacent
city. Neither bars nor bolts could keep the sweet
sounds from stealing into the gloomy cells, awakening
tender thoughts in the hearts of the lonely occupants.
Truly enough “Stone walls do not a prison make.”
With the exception of Saturdays, Sundays and holi-
days, the days were pretty well all alike. Monday was
washing day, each prisoner washing her own clothes.


As we never got half enough soap to do our washing
with, we put cleanliness before honesty and comman-
deered any we could lay hands on. There was no
“frill” about us. Neither blue nor starch was provided
nor were the clothes either boiled or ironed. Some of
us were vain enough to like our check aprons smooth,
so we mangled them in the primitive fashion of folding
them up and sitting on them. When the clothes dried
we put them in holland bags allowed for the purpose,
and they were then locked away until the Saturday.
Tuesday was uneventful. Wednesday and Saturday
were bath days. The bathroom had three stone or
cement baths, a wooden screen between each two. One
of the three was painted green and had a suggestive
“Q” (quarantine) painted on the end of it. This was
for the use of those suffering from any infectious com-
plaint. I don’t mind stating that nothing would have
induced me to use any of the gaol baths in the ordinary
way of taking a plunge bath—to a shower bath there
was, of course, not the same objection—but had I been
positively compelled to get into one of the baths I
should have chosen the “Quarantine” one. I don’t
think it was once used whilst I was in the gaol. All
and sundry, diseased and healthy, used the same baths,
and it was apparently no one’s duty to see that the “Q”
bath was used by those for whom it was provided.
Letter day came once a month. On a special date
each was given whatever letters had come for her
since the same date in the previous month. This meant
that letters were often lying 30 days in the office before
being delivered to those to whom they were addressed.
This hard and fast rule was rarely broken. I know
of no instance when any exception was made.
We were allowed to write three letters each, once
in every six weeks. When it came to our turn to
write, we had to give up one of our few pleasures in
return for the privilege, the time selected for prisoners’
letter-writing being the much-valued hour devoted to
walking exercise on the Saturday afternoon. That
hour meant so much to us after being indoors all the
week, but, of course, few of us cared to miss the
opportunity of writing.


THE GAOL RATIONS.
HOW PRISONERS ARE FED.
On one occasion I was speaking to Governor Collis
of Darlinghurst Gaol (a man, by the way, esteemed
and liked by all, warders and prisoners alike). It was
a business interview, referring to a prisoner recently
sentenced. The subject of the gaol food came up.
“Oh,” remarked Governor Collis, “the food’s all right.
No luxuries, of course. Just good, wholesome food
and plenty of it. Let me see,” (reflectively), “for
to-day’s dinner they had soup and boiled meat and
vegetables.”
My thoughts ran riot through the various possibili-
ties of such a bill-of-fare. True, I never reached the
dizzy heights of turtle, mulligatawny, etc., etc., but
I did think “Well, that’s not too bad. Soup followed
by meat and vegetables. One might almost eat to
repletion.” Later I had an opportunity—a rather too
extended opportunity—of sampling the soup, etc., for
myself. I have been forced to test the food —both as
to quality and quantity.
. Before and s'ince then I have seen a good deal of
waste, been over-particular as to what I could or
could not eat. But during that period there have been
times when I have been so hungry that I have eaten
with relish tainted meat, meat actually fly-blown, and
drunk the greasy water in which the joint was boiled
(that being the “soup” above referred to). 1 have
been tempted to eat pumpkin skins and other vegetable
peelings, which helped to make up my allowance, by
weight, of food. Many of the women admitted having
eaten the vegetable skins.
I have lain awake many nights too hungry to sleep
and have heard my fellow-prisoners actually crying
with hunger. And that after a hard day’s work. When
one woman in the gaol sees another crying during the
day she does not ask if she is fretting over her child-
ren, perhaps, or others near and dear to her, or pos


sibly over bad news. No! She asks "Are you hun-
gry?" Poor wretches! They can only express sym-
pathy ; they can't help each other.
Before going further into this matter, it may, per-
haps, be as well to give a few details as to the actual
food allowed.
According to the regulations, a prisoner during the
first six months of sentence is given daily 120 Z. bread
(women prisoners, 8oz.) ; Boz. maize-meal (hominy) ;
40Z. meat; Boz. vegetables and five times a week %oz-
rice.
Divided out into the day’s three meals, this means
that breakfast at 7 consists of a dish of hominy (no
milk or sugar) and a small piece of dry bread; 12
o’clock dinner of a quarter of a pound of meat and
half a pound of vegetables; 4 o’clock, same as break-
fast ; supper, any stray crumbs that might have escaped
notice at tea time. Tea is not allowed. I can imagine
the fat well-fed supporter of our “humane system"
exclaiming “Well, what more do you want? Couldn’t
a man live on that?” And I reply, “Certainly, he
could, or rather, he can exist on it.” But all the time
he feels the torture of hunger, and this should not be.
Further, between what is allowed and what the pri-
soner actually receives there is more than a difference.
Sometimes we got our weight in bread, more often
we didn’t. We always got our weight in hominy.
What was lacking in meal was made up in water.
Good sound maize meal properly made and fit to eat
would, at any rate, be wholesome, even if one wearied
of it after being forced to eat it twice daily week in
and week out for months, and that with nothing to
help it down except a little coarse brown sugar, which
is allowed (1 ounce a day) after twelve months. But
hominy as we unfortunates knew it was a nauseous
mass of squashy-looking stuff, served in a tin dish
(which wasn't always as clean as it might have been).
The hominy was mostly stale, often musty, always
grubby, and very often dirty. Evidence, most objec-
tionable evidence at that, of the presence of mice in
the meal, made its appearance very frequently in the


hominy. We could have complained, of course. Of-
ficialdom points with pride to that regulation which
permits a prisoner to do so. One prisoner dared to
complain about the mice. The actual answer the ward-
ress made to her complaint was, “l can’t help it. I’ve
enough to do watching women, without having to
watch the mice, too,” and, smiling at her own wit( ?)
she banged the door in the woman’s face. The grubs
were always there —a good inch long some of them—
and it is safe to declare that nothing short of actual
starvation makes prisoners eat the hominy.
As it constitutes the principal item in two out of
the three daily meals it should, at least, be eatable.
The food is supplied to the gaols by contract, and
public money pays the contractor. If nothing is due
to prisoners, surely it is due to the public that -the
persons responsible see that the articles supplied are
of reasonably good quality, and are not stale, filthy and
uneatable.
We had meat for dinner. After the first six months
the allowance was raised to half a pound. But none
of us ever got weight or anything like it. The meat
was sent into the women’s division weighed for the
day’s requirements. It was cooked and then carved
out, the wardress in charge of the cook-house going
through the farce of weighing each dinner separately
before it was put in the tin dish in which the prisoner
received it. But weight or no weight, she had to make
the quantity go round, and this could only be done on
the system of robbing Peter to pay Paul. Then she
had to weigh out the meat on the gaol-conceived prin-
ciple that meat loses half its weight in cooking, so that
for a prisoner allowed a quarter of a pound she first
weighed out half that quantity, two ounces, and then
took off so much more to make good the general short-
age, which somehow always seemed to exist, whatever
the cause.
As before stated, for the first six months the daily
allowance of meat is a quarter of a pound (40Z.). Only
half that quantity is given to the prisoner—two ounces
of meat! If it were supplemented by a reasonable


quantity of vegetables or bread there might, perhaps,
be less cause for complaint. But, except 2oz. of meat,
all she is allowed is half a pound of vegetables. I
don’t know on what principle the vegetables are
weighed, but I can safely say that to my knowledge no
woman in the gaol got anything near half a pound
of vegetables on any day during the time I was an
inmate, even when skins and bad, uneatable parts were
weighed in also, as they always were. Many a time
my half pound of vegetables has consisted of simply
one potato, more than half rotten. For weeks upon
weeks, no vegetable of any kind came into the gaol
except parsnips, and often these were quite unfit to
eat, and yet we had to eat something. I wonder how
some of the well-fed “humanitarians” would like to
sit down to dinner ravenously hungry, and receive the
wholesome, satisfying dish of two ounces of meat (pos-
sibly fly-blown), and one small, half-rotten potato.
On paper the food allowance looks to be what those
in authority claim for it—“sufficiency without super-
fluity.” Accused of half-starving the prisoners they
would doubtless point to the regulations with an air
of hurt surprise that their generosity should be ques-
tioned.
Medical opinion has been obtained and acted upon
in fixing the various rations, and a scale tabled accord-
ingly, which allows to each prisoner sufficient to keep
body and soul together under whatever conditions he
may be serving his sentence. There is no case on
record of a prisoner actually dying of starvation in
a N.S.W. gaol. They don’t die that way, they drag
through their sentences, whether of days, months'or
years without ever knowing absolute freedom from
hunger. They live through it, and if the sentence has
been of any length, anything more than a “sleep,” they
come out wrecked in constitution, hopelessly unfitted
to take up the burden of the struggle before them.
And to be hungry all the time—can you realize what
it means? ’Tis bad enough to be hungry in the world
outside the gaols. But there is at least a chance of
earning food or at any rate of getting it in some way.


Within the walls, helpless, hungry a;rid surrounded by
others equally hungry, with the knowledge that no-
thing can or will procure for her so much as a crumb
of bread, that she can neither earn, beg, nor borrow,
not even steal it, can you wonder that the wretched
prisoners become desperate with a despair born of
semi-starvation. And yet in their very desperation
they are so pitifully powerless. Of what use to rebel?
Weakened by hunger, absolutely helpless, friendless,
and above all else, prisoners, what easier material could
be provided for powerful authority to deal with.
Should they refuse to work, declare that they are too
hungry to get through their tasks, they are punished
by still further reduction of food. Sometimes in the
daily papers one reads a couple of lines in which it
is casually mentioned that a prisoner has committed
suicide. Can it be wondered at? Death a thousand
times before a long term of imprisonment with all its
accompanying miseries and horrors.
Who is responsible for this iniquitous state of
affairs? Who has vested in the prison authorities this
license to starve, or rather, to torture by semi-starva-
tion the helpless creatures in their charge ? Who will
dare claim that the system is right? Who dares to
justify it? It is neither right, nor just. It is not even
reasonable.
The people of the State are responsible. They own
the gaols. They pay the gaolers (from the Comptrol-
ler-General himself down to the lowest salaried in the
service). There are thousands of men and women
who would not willingly allow the meanest cur that
roams the streets to go hungry. With hearts moved by
tenderest of human sympathy they send help to the
helpless, food to the hungry. But inside the prison
walls men and women crushed and broken by semi-
starvation drag out their weary, cheerless lives. The
evil exists, but there is a remedy for it.
Every man and woman in this State must bear their
portion of the burden, share this responsibility. Man’s
inhumanity to man! If the claims of suffering hu-
manity are not powerful enough to arouse pity, if


rights as citizens <do not clamour to assert themselves,
there is yet another ground upon which this appeal
may move you who read it. How near do the gaol
walls approach your own home circle ? Do not mistake
me. It is no offence to mention prison walls. Do we
not daily read or hear of some hitherto honorable man
or woman yielding to sudden temptation and commit-
ting a crime for which the inevitable punishment is
imprisonment ? Therefore, remember, your own son or
daughter, your own brother or sister may some day be
so tempted, and, being tempted, fall into crime.
lam prepared for argument. These “humane”
people who “reform” by Starving, have their stock
phrases in support of their system. They are backed
up by the medical opinion upon which they have
drawn up the ration scale. Always the same smug,
argument-not-to-be-refuted sort of reply. “Medical
opinion says it is sufficient. The visiting surgeon
would soon detect any case of illness caused through
the prison diet.” Of course it is sufficient, it keeps the
prisoner alive. What more do you want ?
But does it keep him in good health? Does it retain
in him that strength which he will require when his
day of freedom dawns and he walks out of the gaol
gates to take up the daily' burden of hard work side
by side with men in his own walk of life? No. His
constitution is weakened. He finds the next man work-
ing rings round him. The struggle to earn an honest
living becomes too keen, and the chances are that he
eventually drifts back and ends as an “habitual.”
Finally, is it, in the medical opinion, good for a man
(or woman) to be always hungry?
Another well worn argument is “Prisoners can’t
expect luxuries.” Admitted. But neither do they ex-
pect to be fed on pumpkin skins, fly-blown meat, grubs,
filth, etc., and to be so desperately hungry that they
force themselves to eat these prison “luxuries” because
they have no chance of getting anything else.
Again we hear, “Well, it’s their own fault, they
shouldn’t come to gaol.” Of course they shouldn’t.
But they do. And they should not be too harshly


judged. None but ourselves know the circumstances
of our own lives. Not many are entitled to haloes.
There may be any number strong enough to resist
temptation however great. They have much to be
thankful for. At the same time
“Judge not, for in your turn shall you be judged
By one who metes out justice with your scales,
Not thine the right to judge, ’tis His alone
Whose justice, like His mercy, never fails.”
I am not attempting to justify the prisoner nor to
make any excuses whatever for lawbreakers. Such is
not my object. But while they are prisoners they
should be given sufficient food not only to keep body
and soul together, but enough to save them from the
torture of constant hunger.
Further, whatever food they receive should be
wholesome, of at least average quality, and. above all
things, clean. It is not to the credit of the State that
the prisoners in the gaols eat rose-bush leaves, grass,
wood-grubs, etc. Men of sound minds don’t eat such
things unless they are pretty hungry. Nor do they
grovel in rubbish boxes for crumbs, nor squabble
amongst themselves for the privilege (?) of carrying
out the empty dishes in order to scrape off any mor-
sels that might be left unless they are desperately in
need of food. Yet these things happen daily in the
prisons of New South Wales.
The authorities claim that prisoners generally are
protected against shortage in weight of their food
and against being given food of inferior quality—the
latter by the fact that a prisoner-delegate sees and
passes the food as it is received into the gaol, and the
former by being allowed to have their food weighed
if not satisfied that the quantity is right. These two
“concessions’ 1 ’ may be at once set aside as valueless.
The “delegate” farce is worse than useless, as how-
ever much a prisoner may think the food unsuitable, it
is only in extreme cases he dares say so. A prisoner
at Goulburn was on one occasion called on suddenly
to act as delegate. Not knowing the ropes, as it were,
he dared condemn the meat, some of which he could
see was quite uneatable. “What’s that?” shouted an


official standing by. “Not fit to eat, isn’t it? It’s
good enough for ye and the likes o’ ye. Get back to
your cell, and if I hear any more of that talk, ye’ll
be locked up. Where’s the man that ought to be dele-
gate ? Fetch him here!” He was brought, and the
meat duly passed. It may be mentioned here that he
was at the time mentally afflicted, and was removed
that day or the next to a lunatic asylum. Truly a
competent inspector of the day’s food for the inmates
of a large gaol! Needless to say, the first man was not
called on again as delegate.
As to complaints about the weight. They are quite
as useless. A prisoner’s dinner may consist of a piece
of meat much less than 3 inches across and no more
than one inch thick. He complains. Surely the weight
is not there! He has it weighed. Finding a consider-
able shortage he asks for more. The answer 99 out
of 100 times is “You’ve got it in your soup.” Return-
ing to his cell he samples the soup —greasy water the
joint has been boiled in—but the only evidence of
meat having been in it is the grease on the top (or
occasionally a number of goodly-sized maggots).
To complain about grubs, etc., is so much waste of
time. There is no doubt the sympathies of many of
the warders are with the prisoners, yet they are them-
selves so crushed that they must hide their real feel-
ings. One warder at Goulburn to whom a prisoner
had complained about the hominy, showed it to a
fellow officer in charge of the cook-house and pointed
out grubs over an inch long. “Haven’t I seen them
myself, man?” the other asked. “But what can I
do. I can’t help it. I wish to God I could.”
For some reason, which no one seems to know any-
thing about, male prisoners under 25 years of age put
in the first week on bread and water —No. 5 ration it
is called, and consists of half the ordinary 2lb. loaf
daily. There are cases, certainly, when this Middle
Ages cruelty might be overlooked, as for instance, where
young men loaf around the streets too lazy to do any-
thing but steal, and regard gaol as a place where food
and shelter are to be had free. With these, a few days


on bread and water have, doubtless, a wholesome effect.
But to the young man crushed with the burden of
a long sentence, yet requiring nourishment for a
strong, healthy frame, what a striking instance of un-
necessary cruelty! The authorities take care not to
kill him. They make provision for the surgeon to
have him under observation. After seven days he is
given J4lb. °* meat ( cooked weight), )41b. hominy
(inclusive of grubs, etc.), and )41b. vegetables daily
in addition to his bread. What chance has the. young
man from 17 to 25 years of age of maintaining his
health on such a starvation food-allowance? No pris-
oner under 25 years of age is allowed tobacco.
Before concluding this subject of the food, it is
worthy of mention that the soap used in the various
gaols is made from “surplus” fat. In Bathurst Gaol
alone in 1905 over three tons of soap were so made.
That took a pretty fair quantity of fat. Who paid for
it ? The contractor sends into the gaol sufficient meat
(including fat) for the day’s rations. He does not
give the fat. If it is paid for as extra, then it cannot
be called “surplus.” If, as is most likely, it is portion of
the prisoners’ weight of meat, the shortage which al-
ways exists is partly explained. Another instance of
“saving” —robbing the prisoners of the fat to save the
buying of soap.
VISITORS.
Prisoners are allowed to see visitors, but the restric-
tions discourage them from taking much advantage
of the privilege. Only one visit a month is allowed to
each, so that all who wish to see a prisoner must
arrange to go to the gaol at the same time. .At the
visitor’s box is an iron grating through which one
can see dimly the head and shoulders of the prisoner
and hear her voice, but could not possibly touch even
the tip of her finger. An officer stands beside the
visitor and another beside the prisoner. There are
so many subjects barred from the conversation that
nothing but the weather seems permissible. Many pris-
oners prefer never to see a visitor rather than subject
their friends to such humiliation.


An old friend came to see me during my first week
at Darlinghurst. Sympathetically, she remarked that
I must have been very tired after the long trial. “That
will do!” commanded the warder beside her. “You
mustn’t talk about the case.” Presently she men-
tioned some trifling item from one of the papers. “You
can’t talk about the newspapers!” he ordered, whilst
the wardress beside me threatened that if I did not
keep to the rules I would be sent back to my cell and
not allowed to see any visitors. Needless to say, I
took the earliest opportunity of letting my friends
know that I preferred not to be visited.
PRISONERS’ CLOTHING.
As far as clothing goes, female prisoners are not
troubled with prevailing fashions. The winter cos-
tume consists of brown serge dress, grey woollen
stockings, leather shoes, apron of blue and white
check, holland bonnet. In summer the dress is of
striped print, but to go out of the way to be ugly
the stripes run round instead of up and down. Two
summer dresses are allowed, but only one in winter.
Six months in the one dress with no opportunity to
wash it has a rather “grubby” result. Simplicity com-
bined with ugliness marks the style of the dresses.
The skirts are cut straight up and down, regardless
of shape. The jackets are in one piece, without seams
except on the shoulders, and fastened in front with
three metal buttons —an extra button would be an
extravagance. The underclothing is of unbleached
calico, with flannel extra for winter wear. Night-
dresses are not allowed —prisoners should, not be en-
couraged in the extravagance of. a special garment
for night wear. Every garment is marked with the
prisoner’s number, and all the material used in. their
manufacture bears the Government mark, the thin red
line. The clothing, though far from elegant, is com-
fortable, and except in very severe weather, warm
enough.
I ventured to ask once why prisoners are not given


night-dresses. The answer I received was a gasp.
“Night-dresses ! Prisoners !!” I really don’t know
why the suggestion should be so horrifying. Regarded
on the grounds of health and cleanliness, leaving out
all thought of comfort, a change of garment for night-
wear seems a necessity, not at all to be considered a
luxury. The Regulations order the prisoners to keep
themselves in “the highest state of cleanliness.” How
can they do this, voluntarily or under compulsion,
when they are compelled to wear the one set of gar-
ments for a week night and day without change, and
•sleep between blankets that are rarely washed?
THE “REFORM” SYSTEM.
“Every effort is made to reform the prisoners.” The
poor old lie must be pretty threadbare by this time.
So far as I could learn in my experience of gaol-life
little if any effort is made—not the slightest attempt
in any way towards the moral improvement of prison-
ers. They are sent to the gaols and while there they
work. If they don’t work they are punished. Fur-
ther than that there remains little to state.
Certainly, church services are held. The attendance
of each prisoner to at least one such weekly, is made
a compulsory matter. A prisoner declining to attend
church is locked up in her cell during the time of the
service. But even the forced atendance at church be-
comes an injustice to the prisoner. In some denomi-
nations the service is held on a week-day. The prison-
er, knowing she requires to work every minute to
complete her task so that she will not lose the next
day’s dinner, is compelled to leave the work for the
time the church service lasts. And no allowance is
made for the time so lost.
There is generally a short service in something of
the nature of a Bible class also once a week. The
attendance at these is not compulsory, and is con-
sequently small. Prisoners think an empty stomach
the next day too big a price to pay for the privilege
of listening to a prayer and the reading of a few
chapters from the Bible. Tt is hard enough to secure


satisfactory attendances at such classes in the world
outside the gaols, and it is scarcely to be wondered
at that they are not howling successes amongst the
half-starved prisoners. The only point in their favor
in the minds of many is that they break the wearying
monotony.
There seems to be no special effort to reach the
individual prisoner. Advice, encouragement, sympa-
thy —inside the gaol walls these are unknown, save
amongst the prisoners themselves.
A young girl was to leave the prison. A few days
prior to her discharge a certain highly-placed official
visited the gaol. “Well,” he said, “you are leaving
next week. What are you going to do with yourself ?”'
“I’m going back to my mother in America!” Here
was the opportunity for a word of encouragement to
a girl who had simply drifted through an unfortunate
set of circumstances. “Yes, you’ll get to America/
he sneered. “You’ll reach the G.P.O. by one o’clock
and pull up at Biloela (gaol) about four.” I don’,
suppose the brutal reply influenced her future one
way or the other, but she was crushed at the time, for
even prisoners may be sensitive.
A prisoner was in the gaol hospital sick. A war-
dress gave her a religious pamphlet with which to
help pass some of the lonely hours. It was one of
a series that had been approved by the chaplain. Re-
sult —the governor of the gaol in his daily visit to
the hospital noticed it (no attempt to hide it being
thought necessary), and reported the wardress. As a
punishment her pay was reduced and she was inform-
ed that she would be reported on again at the end
of six months in order that it might be decided whether
or not she was “fit to remain in the service.”
Mentioned in connection with our prisons, the ex-
pression “reform system” calls for a full-sized, healthy
question-mark. Who or what does the reforming?
Not the system. The system is “gaol” and only gaol,
and that means (in N.S.W.) work, semi-starvation, de-
gradation, in many cases ruination, but certainly not
reform.


Those who come most in contact with prisoners
are the warders, and they are forbidden by the Re-
gulations (No. 8, 14) to hold any conversation with
prisoners. So, however well-disposed they may be
towards any or all under their charge, they must have
nothing to say to them except as task-masters to
slaves. No attempt must be made at reform in that
quarter.
Compulsory attendance at church may have a re-
forming effect. I don’t presume to argue upon that
point. Should a. prisoner desire an interview with
the gaol chaplain, she is given the opportunity on his
next visit. She is allowed to keep a Bible and Prayer
Book in her cell. If she can read (a fair percentage
cannot), and if she care to seek escape from the in-
tolerable loneliness by poring over the Bible and strain-
ing her eyes to read the wretchedly small print, she
may derive some spiritual nourishment. But this all
means effort from within, or in other words, if the
piisonei thinks she would like to be reformed she
may go to church, read her Bible, and consult the
gaol chaplain. Sufficient for the purpose, possibly,
but failing the moving spring of personal desire for
reform, the much-boomed "reform system” flattens
out into dismal failure.
It may be more successful amongst the men. But
i don t think so. Goulburn Gaol is described as not
a gaol—only a “reformatory.” A certain prisoner,
accused of not saluting a passing official, declared that
he had done so. “Ye’re a liar!” roared the official, “a
liar, I tell ye. Ye never saluted!” This is the way
they speak to helpless prisoners, who dare not protect
themselves, in the reformatory. - ’ How does this
fit in with the “reform system?”
A female warder will accompany all escorts of
female prisoners. So say the Regulations, but during
the time I was in Bathurst it frequently happened that
a female prisoner was sent under male escort to
Sydney, and I remember no instance in which a female
warder accompanied them. The journey was invari-
ably at night, the escort travelling to Bathurst during


the day, and escorting his prisoner to Sydney on the
return journey at night.
I have spoken with one of those women since. She
was brought to Sydney to be released on license. She
and the officer were alone in the compartment for the
full length of the journey. He took that precaution.
It must be left to the readers imagination to guess
what actually took place. The woman had a terrible
struggle against the brute in ; charge Of her. Nearing
Mount Victoria she declared hfer intention of appeal-
ing to the station master for protection. All the effect
it had was to call forth a sneer as to the value of her
word against his. But he took care to keep quiet
until some distance further on. Then he renewed
his disgusting conduct, and the prisoner continued the
fight to such purpose that it was a very disappointed
and angry officer who handed over his charge in
Sydney.
What use to complain? Who would believe the
prisoner’s word against his ? Certainly she was prac-
tically covered with bruises as a result of the strug-
gling, but she knew the uselessness of laying a charge
against him.
That is one case I can vouch for. How many similar
ones have occurred?
So much for the “reform system.” Surely there
is room for inquiry by some of the ladies’ committees
of whom we read so much.
PRISONERS’ WORK.
The New South Wales prisons have been described
as sweating dens. In many respects the description
fits. No outside contractor has a chance in competi-
tion against the Prison Department. Certainly, prison-
ers are paid for their labor —they receive 3d. per week
and keep. Every one of them capable of work of
any kind must perform an allotted daily task, bailure
to do so, means, to use the Deputy-Comptroller s own
words, “No tasks, no dinners,” also the loss of indul-
gences.
These consist of tea and brown sugar (male prison


efs over 25 years of age are also allowed tobacco
after having served a portion of their sentence). No
such indulgences are given at all during the first six
months. We felt it pretty hard doing without tea for
so long—nothing at all to drink but water. The
winter mornings were especially trying. Out into
the yards while the stars were still shining on a bitterly
cold morning, with occasionally everything white with
snow. Half an hour’s tramping about to keep ourselves
warm, and then an adjournment to cold stone cells
for breakfast. Breakfast, a tin dish of grubby hominy
and a piece of dry bread. Can one wonder we longed
for a cup of tea? Possibly we were better without
it, for no one could imagine tea of a worse quality.
Nevertheless, it was prized as a luxury, and there
was much bitter resentment against the various points
shown the prisoners in stopping the indulgence on the
slightest pretext, bor instance, a prisoner would be
off work a day or so through illness—ordered by the
doctor to remain in the cell. Result: no tea or sugar
for the following week, as “she had failed to complete
her task.” Again, there would be a scarcity of material
in the needle-room, not sufficient on hand to permit of
tasks being finished. Same result—no tea or sugar for
any of us during the next week. No fault of ours that
the material was not there—still we had to suffer for
it.
Frequently we would be given tasks that even the
best of us working at our hardest could not complete
in the time allowed. But in such circumstances as
these we were eventually, after much pleading and
frequent appeals, allowed half quantities of tea and
sugar if we managed half tasks in the week.
Occasionally time that should have been occupied in
tasks would be taken up in altering previously finished
work. For instance, during one week a number of
night-dresses were made to the order of the State
Children’s Relief Department. They were cut out
in the needle-room and made according to measure-
ments sent. Later they were returned to the gaol to
be altered, the measurements given having been wrong


in the first place. We were nearly half a week on the
alterations, and were therefore only able to do half
tasks. Result: the next week’s tea and sugar cut
down by half.
These petty meannesses must ensure to the Depart-
ment only a very small “saving” weekly, but it is con-
stantly in evidence that the much-vaunted prison “eco-
nomy” is carried out on the lines of taking care of the
pence.
As an inducement to the prisoners to be industrious
they are given the chance of earning a bonus. Much
has been made of this concession by those responsible
for the granting of it. But the bonus is like the
“saving” before referred to —mostly paper and pufif.
The amount a prisoner is permitted to earn is 3d.
per week, with an additional bonus limited to 9d. per
week for men, 6d. for women.
Not much, it is true, nevertheless a bonus regularly
earned for a couple of years, more or less, would
mean a trifle in hand for the practically penniless ex-
prisoner on release.
But the bonus dangles like the carrot hung in front
of the donkey’s nose—there to urge him on, but he
never succeeds in reaching it. To become eligible for
a bonus a prisoner must complete her task. She must
then do a ,certain amount of extra work on which a
valuation is placed, and she is paid accordingly. Now
for the kindness and generosity! One would naturally
expect that the prisoner, having done a hard week’s
work on semi-starvation allowance of food, would be
permitted to earn the bonus fairly easily, seeing that
the amount possible is so miserably small.
Take one item—the making of aborigines’ clothing,
for instance. Heavy Colonial tweed dresses are made
by the prisoners. The task in this line is a dress a
day (made by hand) —almost an impossibility. Let
same good needlewoman try it—doing the work in the
gaol working time. Allowing for time lost in muster-
ing, marching to the room, etc., the working hour:
are about 6%. On each of two days in the week there
is a further loss of at least 20 minutes for bathing


purposes, and frequently an hour off another day
weekly for church service. The prisoners are com-
pelled to lose their time, yet must complete their tasks
as on full working days.
However, let some competent person undertake to
sew by hand a woman’s heavy tweed dress, button-
holes, seams all back-stitched, over-cast, etc., in the
full time of hours, the work to be done to the
satisfaction of three or four different persons, each of
whom drags and wrenches at the seams to test their
strength. I repeat, the task is an impossible one. But
to earn the bonus of 6d. the prisoner has to make three
extra dresses during the week, and in the working
hours. Should she take the work to her cell to com-
plete in her spare time there is a still further addition
of ten per cent, to the work she has to do. I have
never learned the reason for this gross imposition.
It is interesting at this point to note the sweating,
and the profit the Prisons Department makes out of
it. The prisoner having completed her task has at
least earned her keep—and her 3d. If by: any possi-
bility she could make three more dresses she would
be paid 6d. The Department charges 3s. each for the
labor in them—9s. for the work for which it pays the
prisoner 6d. Under such conditions of “sweating,”
“saving” becomes easily possible.
As far as the women’s gaol is concerned, the bonus
system is a failure. To be at all effective it should
be rendered fairly easily attainable instead of being
prohibitive, as it is in almost all cases. A great deal
has been made out of the fact that it is possible for
industrious prisoners to earn a bonus. It would be in-
teresting to know how many, even of the most indus-
trious, avail themselves of the privilege.
At 6d. a week 265. per annum is the possible bonus.
I am prepared to guarantee that no woman prisoner
has reached half the amount in any one year. At the
very least 60 per cent, of the women never earn a
bonus at all.
Of the work done in the men’s gaols or the success
(pr otherwise) of the bonus system, I know but little, I


believe tradesmen are, after a time, employed at their
trade as much as possible. Long sentence men having
no trade are taught one and kept to work at it. This
appeals to most people as being very satisfactory, as it
undoubtedly is, providing, of course, that the instruc-
tors are sufficiently skilled. But it seems as absurd
as it is cruel to starve a strong able-bodied man into
learning to sew by hand shirts and other clothing.
This, however, is what is done. Men, many of whom
have never handled anything finer than pick and shovel,
are set to work to sew shirts. After a short period
of “practice” they are put on task-work —no task, no
dinner. Can anyone imagine a more stupid rule?
Many a man, more industrious than his fellows, con-
scientious, hard-working, anxious to do anything ra-
ther than be idle, is robbed of his dinner as a punish-
ment for not having completed a set task at sewing.
And if he tried from now till his sun set for ever he
would never do it, simply because it would be impos-
sible for him to learn to sew. Others are taught knit-
ting. They seem to find this easier.
Long sentence male prisoners are after the first
six months supposed to be put to the hardest labor
available—stone-cutting, blacksmithing, excavating,
road-work, etc. They must feel very fit to take up
the burden after six months on No. i ration. The
hearts of the smug exponents of the “reform-by-star-
ving” system must surely glow with benevolent satis-
faction as they see the poor ex-A Division man, white-
faced and weak with hunger, stagger out to put in his
day at blacksmithing, road-work, etc.
THE MEDICAL TREATMENT.
HOW THEY DIE IN GAOL.
The Dean of Newcastle, Rev. Golding Bird, recently
visited Parramatta Gaol, and in a letter to the Comp-
troller-General stated that he was “much and very
favourably impressed” with what he had seen.
It would, no doubt, be considered an impertinence
for me to criticise the Dean, but the opportunity pre


sents itself here for me to tell him it would be wiser,
kinder, and more in keeping with his holy calling to
withhold his praise of the prison system until he had
learned a little more about it than could possibly be
gleaned in one visit to one gaol, or even in ten times
the number to ten times as many gaols. For it must
be borne in mind that while the Prison Department
can point to such words of praise from such a quarter,
it is not likely to move in the direction of much-needed
reform.
The Dean declares that he received a "pleasant im-
pression. both as to discipline and method/’ So much
is published for the public information. But details
are not entered upon. We are not told in what way
the discipline and method pleased him.
The discipline! Did it please this follower of the
lowly Nazarene to see the promptness with which the
prisoner sprang to the salute upon the approach of his
gaoler? Did the ready “Yessir,” "No, sir," delight
the ears of this man of prayer? Discipline! There is
discipline in all the gaols in this State, and without it
the gaols would be each a small hell. But if discipline
is to mean crush and crush and crush again until the
unfortunate victim is a spiritless machine, then the
less of it the better.
The method! It pleased the Dean! And yet, how
much does he know of it? How much, at any rate,
that fits him to voice an opinion?
His letter to the Comptroller-General also contained
the following: "The method adopted in dealing with
cases of sickness, and its result—an empty hospital—
appear most satisfactory."
I fully endorse this. But I add that a case of sick-
ness is got rid of so quickly, dealt with, so effectively,
the patient shuffled off so promptly that the hospital
is merely the stepping-stone to the gaol morgue.
The Dean visits a gaol hospital, finds it empty, and
forthwith gushes about the "satisfactory method of
dealing with cases of sickness.” He bases his opinion
on the state of the hospital. Little matter, evidently,
if the morgue be full, so long as the hospital be empty.


Here, however, is the sort of thing that occurs, and
in dealing with this phase of gaol life I do not wish
to be considered guilty of exaggeration. The facts
speak for themselves. No coloring is required. There
was, fortunately, very little serious illness in the gaol
during my time there, only one case in fact, and in
that instance the patient was simply allowed to die.
Nothing at all was done for her further than ordering
her into the, hospital and another prisoner being called
upon to look after her. She was given neither nourish-
ment nor medicine, nor did she receive hospital treat-
ment of any kind save that she was allowed the privi-
lege of dying in a bed instead of on a hammock.
No doubt it sounds well to say that a hospital is
attached to the gaols and that prisoners in actual ill-
health receive “hospital treatment.” I can only say
Heaven help the unfortunate prisoner overtaken by
illness. If it be not serious the treatment is generally
the curtailment of food to almost vanishing point, and
the stoppage of indulgences (tea and sugar, and in the
case of the men, tobacco as well). Of a surety, no one
hankers after the hospital treatment.
If, however, the sickness is really a serious matter,
the patient is ordered into hospital. There she has a
bed to sleep on, and a fellow prisoner to stay with her
till she dies. I don’t know of any other luxuries she
enjoys. Certainly my knowledge, though more reliable
and considerably more extensive than that of the Dean
of Newcastle’s, is necessarily limited, as there was
really only one case of serious illness whilst I was
at the gaol. I can only give facts. Wild flights of
fancy might lead me into describing the dying woman
as receiving the best of care and attention, everything
being done for her that was possible under the circum-
stances, etc. But that would be a useless lie, for the
facts are known to so many. The unfortunate prisoner
I refer to was allowed to die under such conditions of
criminal neglect, that if the same thing occurred out-
side the gaol someone would be called pretty seriously
to account over it. if not actually to answer a charge
of manslaughter.


However, to get on to the bedrock of facts. Mrs.
Stratton was a woman well and widely known, par-
ticularly in the Waverley district. There was nothing
of the hardened criminal about her. Her life, up to
a certain point was that of a good charitable woman—
the last person one would expect to find within the
walls of a gaol. But something happened that brought
her within the pale of the law. Nothing very heinous,
and I think if the truth were known, she was more
guilty of shielding another than of actual wrongdoing
herself. Of course, that does not count. The fact
remains that she became a prisoner.
She was for some time in Darlinghurst Gaol, both
before and after her trial. Eventually she was sent
on to Bathurst, arrived there on Friday evening
(22/io/’o4), attended church on the Sunday, and
worked in the sewing-room on the Monday.
When the cell doors were unlocked on the Tuesday
morning she was found to be very ill and in great
pain. Too ill even to stay in the hammock, she had
lain for hours on the floor. The wardress reported
the matter to the superintendent and the prisoner
was allowed to remain in her cell until the doctor came
on his ordinary rounds, four or five hours la+er in the
day.
During that period nothing was done for her, not
the slightest attempt made even to relieve her from
pain. A child could see that the woman was danger-
ously ill, yet none dared call the doctor to her before
his usual time for visiting the gaol.
When he came, he decided that she was, to use his
own words, “Certainly very ill,” and ordered her re-
moval to the hospital.
Under ordinary conditions “removed to the hospi-
tal” means that the patient is placed where there is
reasonable hope of medical attention, proper nursing,
medicine, diet and every care that such institutions are
supposed to provide. Therefore, it may appear to the
uninitiated that Mrs. Stratton was given the best of
treatment by being “removed to the hospital.” But
the gaol hospital was hospital in name only. Neither


doctor nor nurse, no one to take charge of the patient,
no one with any professional skill or knowledge to
give even the slightest attention. She was taken to
the hospital as ordered by the doctor, and a fellow-
prisoner was sent down from the needle-room to re-
main with her.
From early in the afternoon she became rapidly
worse and suffered intense agony. Still nothing was
done, no attempt made to relieve the agonising pain,
nor was any medicine or even nourishment provided.
Towards evening her pitiful moaning was awful to
listen to. The prisoners were, of course, helpless
Locked up in our cells shortly after four o’clock we
could only rage inwardly that such a cruel state of
affairs could exist, that a woman, merely because she
was "only a prisoner,” should have to endure such
agony under such terrible circumstances, without any
effort being made to at least ease the pain, and die
almost like a dog, without an attempt to save her.
I don’t know why the doctor was not sent for. Pre-
sumably another case of "red tape,” and doubtless
there was none who dared risk sending "too soon.”
Finally, some time after seven o’clock, the doctor
was communicated with, and told of the woman’s
condition. He replied over the telephone that he would
send some medicine. Later the medicine arrived— a
pill, a pill for a dying woman! But, as one of the
wardresses stated in giving evidence at the subsequent
inquest, she was too weak to swallow it. So there
was nothing to do, nothing but to let her die. In less
than an hour she was dead. She may have died, as
the doctor testified, from cardie syncophy—one name
serves as well as another, and the doctor’s evidence
in such cases is taken as unassailable.
But unhesitatingly I declare that she died from sheer
neglect. Had the facts been made public at the time,
there would have been a wave of indignation from one
end of the State to the other. The public may be
apathetic, may be disinclined to show much considera-
tion, especially for those who happen to be prisoners,
but when a woman is allowed to die under such cir


cumstances, without the slightest attempt being made
to do anything for her until she reaches a stage when
she is beyond all human aid, someone has to answer
for the crime.
In Mrs. Stratton’s case there was the usual inquest,
half the jury being prisoners, the rest ordinary jurors!
The former knew better than to ask awkward questions.
The latter, to. whom gaol and its routine are a
sealed book, might as well not have been present at all,
seeing that the only evidence tendered was official
or medical. There was no one to watch the case on
behalf of humanity generally. Of course, the unfor-
tunate deceased required no representation, and ap-
parently it did not strike anyone that there must be
something wrong somewhere, and that for the protec-
tion of prisoners there should be searching inquiry
into the method of dealing with sickness in gaol.
No one seemed to want to know anything about any-
thing. It was evidently no one’s business to know
whether Mrs. Stratton’s life might have been pro-
longed with ordinary care and under proper treatment.
They wanted to know nothing beyond the actual cause
of death, and as the doctor said a certain thing and
there was no one to even suggest anything else, the
Coroner’s jury could only give their verdict in accord-
ance.
Further, it was mentioned that she was ill before
g.oing to Bathurst at all. That is admitted, but if
so very ill as to be within a few days of her death,
why was she sent from Darlinghurst only to die in
Bathurst Gaol four days later? Again, if so ill on
arrival as to make the fact of her ill-health worth
mentioning at the inquest in order to shift the re-
sponsibility, why was she not put under proper treat-
ment on being received into the gaol ? She should have
been put on light nourishing diet the same as when
in Darlinghurst. Instead, she had the ordinary gaol
rations and the result was fatal.
I asked her why she did not see the doctor and ask
for a change of diet. She said she was afraid of being
considered troublesome. She depended on her case


being attended to sooner or later, as she naturally ex-
pected the doctor would be shown her papers (as re-
quired by the Regulations), and would then see her
and order suitable diet.
But this was evidently not done. The last meal she
had was dinner on the Monday—hard, dry corned
beef and tough, grub-eaten cabbage. By 3 o’clock
that afternoon she was seriously ill. It was 11 o’clock
next day before the doctor saw her. He might as well
have stayed away, as she got no benefit from his
v i s it —not even medicine or nourishment. It actually
made matters worse, as the fact of her being under
medical treatment precluded anyone doing anything
unless under the doctor’s orders. The simplest
remedy, even to ease the pain she suffered, was not to
be thought of —“the doctor had not ordered it.” Cer-
tainly, there was a slight stir towards the end, and
when death was imminent, someone decided to shake
things up a bit. So the doctor (who, by the way, was
considerably over 80 years of age), was spoken to
over the telephone. He asked for a messenger to be
sent down to him from the gaol. The messenger
brought back a pill. Mrs. Stratton was too weak to
swallow it. She died half an hour later.
So much for the “medical treatment” in the gaols.
I was told of a man who was taken into Goulburn
Gaol with his throat cut. He also was an example
of the “medical treatment.” He was simply given
into the care of a couple of the prisoners, and a dish
of hominy was put into the cell with him. Needless
to say, the treatment had its effect. I understand the
poor “not wanted” eased them of any further worry
by dying some few hours later.
Really, it’s a splendid method of dealing with cases
of sickness —the empty hospital of which the Dean of
Newcastle wrote bears testimony to that effect.
Usually the doctor’s daily visit to the gaol was
during the morning. Should a prisoner be ill and be
ordered a change of diet, she could not receive it until
next day, no provision having been made for it when
doling out the day’s rations. Consequently, unable


to take the ordinary food, she would be given no
nourishment until the following day. And in the
meantime, she would not even be allowed her tea, for
all ‘indulgences” are stopped during illness.
A prisoner in Goulburn Gaol, working at the boot-
making, had his hand crushed in the machine, one or
two of his fingers being cut off. His indulgences—
tea, sugar, and tobacco—were stopped. This again is
the “medical treatment”—depriving an unfortunate
man who had met with such a painful accident of his
indulgences—his tobacco having, perhaps, been his
only comfort. Of course, this may be regarded as a
way of “reforming.”
As a rule, prisoners found no difficulty in obtaining
for the asking such medicines as castor oil, Epsom
salts, etc., it not being considered likely they would
impose on the gaol liberality in that direction. An
officer at Goulburn had, however, different ideas. In-
stance, one morning in the depth of winter. A row of
prisoners lined up, shuddering in turn through doses of
castor oil. Presently, the officer in question appeared
on the scene. What are ye doing here ?” he demanded.
Its castor oil ye’re after, is it? Get out, the lot of
you, he snarled, “and get an order from the doctor
if ye want castor oil. Surely no one in his senses
would think the men were taking the stuff through
love of it—thick, gluey castor oil, on a winter’s
morning.
Prisoners considering their health to be suffering
through the nature of their work are given a change
of labor if recommended by the doctor.
One, Annie McCarthy, had served years in the gaol.
Once a big woman, she was worn by semi-starvation
to a mere frame, and her health was always bad.
Often she complained of the terrible weakness and
sickness through hunger. Finally, she felt too ill to
sit in the needle-room. It was too close on the hot
days. She wanted employment in the open air. She
got it (on the doctor’s recommendation).
On the first day of the change I went looking for
her, anxious to know how she was getting on. I found


her staggering through one of the yards wheeling a
load of sand. It came as a shock to me, and I asked
her what she thought of the' change. “They’ll kill me
yet,” she said. “I’ve either to suffocate in the needle-
room or do this,” and she started off again with her
barrow. It was heart-breaking to watch her—even a
stone might have been moved to pity at sight of a
sick woman struggling along with a load of sand in
the blazing sun, on a day when the thermometer re-
gistered somewhere in the vicinity of ioo in the shade.
But her sufferings came to an end. One day not
long afterwards, she was seen to stagger and fall. She
was picked up paralysed. From the gaol she was re-
moved to the local hospital. She was almost due for
release, and the prison authorities evidently preferred
to send her away to die. From the hospital she was re-
moved to an asylum, where she soon afterwards died.
What an excellent method of dealing with cases of
sickness in gaols! No wonder the Dean of Newcastle
praised it!
Another gaol practice which caused much complaint
concerned those women accustomed to wearing glasses.
Their own spectacles, etc., which they had bought
after, in most cases, having their eyes tested so that
they might get glasses suited to their sight, were taken
from them. If they found it quite impossible to man-
age without glasses they were allowed to have a pair
of the gaol spectacles. Many a one suffered with
badly strained eyes and agonising head-aches through
this ridiculous and cruel arrangement.
The case of poor “Matto” Phillips is known to
many. The treatment he received in Bathurst Gaol
drove him mad, and he was transferred to Sydney to
the lunatic asylum.
Some startling facts would be revealed if only a
proper inquiry might be held.
Surely if ever a case called for a commission it is
that of Phillips, the man mentioned above. It is in-
credible that none was appointed. The facts have
surely never been made sufficiently public. Otherwise
there would have been such a general outcry against


the dastardly and brutal treatment he received that only
a searching inquiry, followed by the punishment of his
inhuman assailants, would have appeased the public
mind:
On 22nd April he was sentenced to five years' im-
prisonment. He was removed to Bathurst Gaol, and
five months later was brought back to Darlinghurst,
a physical and mental wreck, battered beyond recog-
nition and brutally kicked into helplessness. He had
lost over 4 stone in weight, his food had to be injected,
and his mind was a blank; Oil closfer examination, it
was found that even aftef the pbdr fellow had been
so inhumanly assaulted he had then been so neglected
that the flies had got to the gaping wounds in his
wrists, where the irons Had cut them, and in various
parts of his body where terrible wounds gave evidence
of the shocking treatment he had received. As a result
the flesh had to be scraped and partly cut away before
the maggots could be removed. He was afterwards
taken to the lunatic asylum at Parramatta, where he is
to this day —a cripple, wheeled about in a chair. Now
sane, he will be released in July, 1911.
Is the Dean of Newcastle still satisfied with the
‘ medical treatment” in the gaols?
But what of Phillips ? What compensation is he to
receive, not only for his terrible sufferings, but for his
permanent injuries, which will leave him more or less a
burden on the mother whom he had been formerly
able to help?
It will surely be recognised that this is a charge
upon the Government. A thorough and open inquiry
should be made into the whole circumstances. Such
fiendish brutality to a helpless prisoner calls for more
than a mere departmental investigation (though it is
doubtful if even that were held). Well-merited punish-
ment should be meted out to the assailants, something
considerably more even than dismissal. And the
injured man should be compensated, though nothing
will ever compensate him for his terrible sufferings and
his now disabled condition.
So much for the “humane system.”


THE OFFICIALS.
We are apparently not yet sufficiently advanced for
a women s gaol to be wholly or even partly a woman-
controlled affair. 1 rue, there are women warders with
a “lady superintendent.” The latter, however, is in
name only, for the holder of the position has none
of the rights that such a high-sounding title would
call for. She is neither more nor less than a fore-
woman over the other wardresses.
All the female officers live on the gaol premises.
This is compulsory, even though their homes may be
only a stone’s throw away. For their apartments, fuel,
and lighting they are charged, the rent, etc., being
deducted from their salaries. All, from the superin-
tendent down to the probationary wardress had to
submit to their rooms being “inspected.” I believe
the superintendent was shown the courtesy of being
notified when her quarters were to be thus invaded,
but to the wardress no such politeness was shown.
Her first intimation would be a view from some distant
point of observation of a party of “gentlemen” dis-
appearing into her bedroom. Occasionally something
like this would be overheard. One wardress (in dis-
mayed whisper to another) : “They’re going through
the quarters!” “Never; how’s your room ?” “Haven’t
even made my bed. What’s your’s like?” “Higgledy-
piggledy! Turned the drawers out last night looking
for a letter and everything’s scattered about.”
Can anyone see the necessity for such an intrusion?
The commonest landlord of the cheapest lodging-
house would not dare treat the lodgers in this way,
but Government officials see fit to inflict the indignity
upon women whose calling compels them to be tenants
of the Government.
It was unfair to the wardresses. There are few
women who care for their bedrooms to be seen in a
state of untidiness, even by members of their own
sex, and when men are the invaders of privacy, the
dislike approaches consternation. The wardresses had
to be fully dressed and on duty before 6.30. In the


25 minutes allowed for breakfast there was only time
to swallow the meal, none for tidying bedrooms. As
the “inspection” was usually a morning performance,
there was no time for preparation, and it is not to
be wondered at that more often than not “higgledy-
piggledy” was the condition in which the rooms would
be found. I have heard that the humiliating bedroom
inspection has of late been discontinued. Surely it
might well never have been begun.
Wardresses are fairly well paid—they would need
to be. There is no entrance examination. It ap-
pears to be merely the matter of the right individual
on behalf of the applicant speaking to the right one
in authority at the right time.
If she proves satisfactory, she is, after three
months’ probation, appointed as a wardress. She is
an inmate of the gaol, but she gets a day off each
month, also two Sundays and two Saturday afternoons.
She is allowed out on certain nights in the week, but,
unless given special “late leave,” must be in the gaol
again by an early hour.
She is entitled to a fortnight’s holiday every year.
With the above exception she is, as far as liberty goes,
as much a prisoner as the prisoners themselves, unless,
of course, she likes to regain her full freedom by
resigning. The work is not hard —in fact, there is
no work connected with it save supervising the prison-
ers, but the hours on duty are long and tedious.
The duties are often unpleasant, even disgusting.
The treatment meted out to wardresses by their official
superiors is humiliating and tyrannical. They live in
constant dread of what might happen. The news that
one of the Departmental officials is on the premises is
sufficient to throw most of them into such a state of
fright that they are on the verge of collapse until he
disappears again. Wardresses with spirit are not want-
ed. The “system” requires that they be as much
crushed as the other prisoners. The slightest breach
means a fine—so many days’ pay. The wardress may
appeal to none. The Comptroller-General is the su-
preme be-all and end-all of everything connected with
her life as a gaol officer.


A trifling oversight is punished by a fine. Some-
thing a shade more serious hneans reduced pay for, say,
six months. A mistake in cutting , a garment being
made in the needle-room is reported and the wardress
has its value stopped out of her pay and is fined as
well. For the merest possible trifle she is reported
and brought before the visiting magistrate. I have
never heard of such a case ending favorably to the
accused. Some, of course, have got ofif with a cen-
sure, but the usual thing is a fine—and for such
trifles! One wonders what charm there can possibly
be in the service that it is able, under such humiliating
conditions, to still retain within its fold such fine
women as some of them are. But what an interesting
return to lay before the House, if only some member
of Parliament would ask for a list of gaol officers
(men and women) fined during a given year, the
offences, and the amounts of the fines. The Depart-
ment must “save” a good deal annually out of warders’
fines.
On one occasion a wardress in Biloela made a mis-
take in cutting some garments being made in the
needle-room. She was fined the value of die matei ial
and so many days’ pay. Carelessly, she made some
trifling comment on this to some of the women prison-
ers and was overheard by another wardress. The
latter must have, a sweet disposition, for she made it
her business to report the matter. The offender was
then transferred to Bathurst, and was theie a week
when she was recalled to Sydney to answer a charge
of undue familiarity with prisoners. This was the
outcome of the informer’s report of the conversation
she had overheard.
One of the regulations provides that a charge against
an officer shall be heard within twenty-four hours of
the information being given, but in this case the ward-
ress was in Bathurst for some days before she was
called on to reply to the charge. The treatment she
subsequently received shows how power can be ab-
used. About 4 o’clock in the afternoon she received


notice to cease work and report herself early next
morning at headquarters. This meant that, after having
been on duty all day from 6.30, she had to prepare for a
hasty journey, travel nearly all night, and attend at
the head office at 9 o’clock in the morning to reply to
a charge, of the details of which she had at best but
a hazy idea. The result was a foregone conclusion—
she received her dismissal straight away.
But this was one of those cases where there were
wheels within wheels. Had there been any Board to
which she could have appealed, a few matters might
have come to light which would probably have caused
at least surprise. But she had previously been
regarded as dangerous, was known, in fact, to have
more progressive ideas than most wardresses, and was
possessed of sufficient spirit to make her a difficult sub-
ject to crush into the state of subjection and servility
required of a gaol officer, so she had to go,' and the
opportunity presented itself to get rid of her.
There seems no sufficient reason why gaol officers
should not have the right of appeal to a Board, the
same as other Government servants have. To have
the unquestioned giving and taking of so many posi-
tions is undoubtedly too much power for any one man.
In the matter of sick leave wardresses were treated
scandalously until within the last few months of this
present year (1910). Should one be so ill as to require
leave of absence, the time away from duty would be
deducted from her next annual leave. In this way it
has frequently happened that a wardress has worked
continuously for considerably over twelve months
without any other break than the day off each month.
Seeing that she must live in the gaol, is not allowed to
receive visitors, works seven days in the week, is sub-
jected to many trying conditions, it seemed barbarous
that unavoidable illness should be regarded as a crime
and the victim be punished. It is to the credit of
someone that at last this should be altered and more
humane treatment be meted out to a deserving body
of Government employees.
The wardress has to work every day, Sunday in


eluded. Of course, it is fully recognised that this is
a necessity, and arrangements are so made that as
many as possible get off on the Sunday in turns, also
on Saturday afternoons. In Bathurst they were able
to so mahage that each had the alternate Saturday
afternoon and Sunday. To be off dtity from midday
bh Saturday until Monday morning meant more to
the wardresses than it would to most people. But
here again, their very limited freedom had to be inter-
fered with, and the official (or officious) order went
forth that a Sunday off must not follow a Saturday
afternoon off, but must be taken ih a different week.
No one khows why,—none dared question. They
simply submitted.
The general opinion at headquarters seems to have
been that the women officers were either incompetent
or too careless to perform their duties properly. Sur-
prise visits to the gaol were fairly frequent, but I
don't remember any instance of anyone being caught
napping. At the same time it must be a fearsome sort
of existence to be constantly on the alert and get
spasmodic attacks of fright every time a gate bell
rings.
The most constant visitor was the Deputy-Comp-
troller, who generally appeared once a month, and
during the time of his stay, usually a couple of days,
everybody, for some reason or other, seemed as if
perched on a volcano which they expected might at
any moment get going.
I don’t know why there should be such a fear of
the man. True, he practically held the position of all
save the superintendent in the hollow of his hand, so
to speak, as though Captain Neitenstein was the head.
Deputy-Comptroller McCauley was certainly the neck
that controlled the head, and his recommendation
seems to have been sufficient either for the giving or
taking of positions. But a position that can only be
held by such abject servility is surely not worth keep-
ing at a cost of all one’s self-respect.
TTe seemed to glory in taking people unawares and
doing unexpected things at unexpected times. To the


Onlooker it would seem as if his duty would have been
better done by leaving some of the things undone and
placing more trust in those officially beneath him.
Most people would think that the management of
a women’s gaol might pretty safely be left in the hands
of women, subject, if necessary, to man-madfe rules
and regulations. But the Deputy-Comptroller is not
one of them. Certainly he had to wait outside uiritil
the main gate of the female division was unlocked.
That done, he would bound through, and at a pace
almost too rapid .for his attendant officer to keep up,
fly through the division with, apparently, a hundred
eyes and as many ears, nothing escaping His notice.
A grease spot on a locker, a tin insufficiently polished,
a wardress wearing her private boots instead of the
regulation article, a prisoner with her hair curled, one
and all caught the Deputy's eye and called for comment.
On one occasion he came into the women’s division
as we were all being locked up for the night. Accom-
panied by an officer from the men’s gaol he searched
the cells—Heaven alone knows what for. At that time
we had a change of clothing in our cells. He searched
among these, in, under, and over the lockers, but I don’t
think he found what he was looking for. When search-
ing my cell he noticed a clean handkerchief, with evi-
dently something rolled up. “Ha! What have you
got'there?” he demanded in a found-at-last sort of
voice; I unrolled it. feeling like a naughty schoolboy
caught with a green apple in his possession. Impatient
to catch someone doing something or find something of
the nature of contraband goods in someone’s posses-
sion, he urged greater speed. “Come, hurry up, out
with’it!” Into the eyes of the wardress came a look
of fear —a catastrophe was surely at hand! Even the
male officer was visibly affected. I opened the hand-
kerchief and exposed to view—a crust of bread—l
had saved it to eat at bedtime.
Surely even far-reaching Duty never called for the
Deputy-Comptroller to personally search the cells-in
the women’s gaol. It not only belittled himself, it was
a decided t© the superintendent and the ward


resses, and an unnecessary humiliation to the prisoners.
On another occasion he came bustling into the kit-
chen. I was at the stove. The. Deputy’s eye missed
nothing. “Hullo! What are you doing here?” he
demanded. “Cooking my dinner,” I replied, inwardly
pleased at being able to admit what waspeCidently to
him a staggering breach of the regulations. He fairly
gasped at the enormity. “Cooking ! A prisoner cook-
ing her dinner!” He swung round and glared at the
superintendent, who began an explanation. A former
Minister for Justice, B. R. Wise, I believe it was, had
struck the brilliant idea of teaching cooking in the gaol.
A primus stove was supplied (which, by the way, we
seldom used), and each prisoner cooked her own din-
ner once a month, said dinner being a slice of meat
cut- off the joint, and one potato. Mr. McCauley had
not heard of the innovation, and he was apparently not
favorably impressed. “H'm! Well, let’s see what
she’s cooking,” and he crossed the kitchen and glanced
into the pan. Nearly lost his breath again. “Chips!”
It was almost too much for him. “Chips! What’s it
coming to? In all my experience of the gaols I never
knew a prisoner to have, chipped potatoes before!”
Seeing that a frying pan was the only cooking utensil
allowed in which to cook the potato, nothing else
seemed possible. Anyhow, for a good ten minutes he
thundered about the trifle, and for the future chips
were off.
I mention these little incidents as showing the kind
of man who rules the gaols, for to those inside it is
plainly evident that whoever may be the figure-head
and draw the salary attached thereto, the Deputy
Comptroller is the head, trunk and limbs of the de-
partment.
Occupying the position he holds it is natural that
there should be many who cordially dislike him, and
quite as many who would hear no word against him.
For my part, I can only say that he seems to go out
of the way to give the lie to his own nature.
Once I had to interview him as spokeswoman for
the women in the needle-room, who found certain of


the tasks quite impossible. I tried to explain the dif-
ficulty to him, but he would hear none of it. Nothing
would convince him that an industrious woman could
not do any of the tasks set. From that attitude he
refused to budge, and ended his arguments thus: “I
was down in Parramatta Gaol the other day, and some
of the fellows complained that the tasks were too
heavy. I just told them ‘All right, boys, no tasks, no
dinner,’ and I can tell you they looked pretty down
on it the next day when they marched into their cells
empty-handed, and smelt the dinners the others were
carrying. P soon brought them up to their oats.”
I looked hard at him. Big, fat, jovial-looking, com-
fortably filling a good-sized arm-chair, he looked the
last man in the world to boast of starving his fellow-
men. From that day onward I have not wondered
when I have heard expressions of hatred against the
Deputy-Comptroller.
Of Captain Neitenstein, the much-advertised “hu-
manitarian,” we saw little. We had read and
heard so much of the “keen personal interest” he took
in the gaols that we felt curious to see him and in
what form he would display any interest he might take
in the prisoners.
As a matter of fact he paid one visit yearly. On
the first occasion whilst I was there he came during
working hours. We were prepared for the great
event. A wave of subdued excitement rose and fell
throughout the gaol. The wardresses were on the
verge of nervous breakdown. All this only made the
whole performance seem the more ridiculous. He
simply stalked through the rooms, wearing his hat
(even the presence of the lady superintendent didn’t
seem to him to warrant its removal), his eyes fixed
on a point near the ceiling. Arrived at the end wall,
he swung on his heel, muttering to the superintendent,
Plenty of work, Mrs. Chapman?” (referring of
course to the amount of needle-work on hand for the
pi isoners) and strode out again. We prison-garbed
creatures bowing in his presence might have been so
many chimpanzees for all he knew to the contrary.


The next time he came was on a Saturday afternoon,
when we were all locked in our cells, so we did not
see him.
He kept himself enclosed as it were in an almost
impenetrable wall of red tape. To approach him in
writing, the prisoner must send through the governor
of the gaol. Even the formula, “Sir, I have the honor,
etc., etc., was not considered sufficiently humble. The
communication must read: “Prisoner
begs most respectfully that the Comptroller-General
will be pleased to grant permission, etc., etc. Even
the officers were not allowed to communicate directly
with His Mightiness. That concession was only grant-
ed, and then it must be in special cases, to the doctors
and visiting clergymen.
However, as the position has changed, so may the
customs also. Mr. Macfarlane, the present Comp-
troller-General, does not give one the impression that
he can only maintain the dignity of his position by
making of himself a tinsel god perched upon a tin
throne in a throne-room of red tape.
At the same time it must be admitted that to those
interested, the present Comptroller has been a dis-
appointment. When his name was first mentioned,
those who knew anything at all about him were
almost unanimous—“ The right man for the position.”
But so far there seems little change. He has been
trusted with tremendous responsibility, given far-
reaching power for good or evil, and if he were dis-
posed, there is so much that he might do for the
general good of those under him—officers and prison-
ers. True it was not to be expected that he would
celebrate his entry into power by any sweeping
changes. Naturally, taking charge of a department
that is essentially so different from all others meant
“going slow” for a while to become familiar with
the inside workings. But it was thought that after
a few months his presence would make itself felt
in a way beneficial to all. Has he also been drawn
into the whirlpool of—shall I say —McCauleyism?
It is even yet hoped that he will come up to expec-


tations, and in the near future prove that he appre-
ciates in full the trust and responsibility placed in him.
He has too well-balanced a mind to submit to being
a mere figure-head, working on a string that someone
else pulls.
Warders are forbidden to form a union. They have
to submit like lambs to tyranny and oppression. They
have been so long crushed and humiliated that, though
the big majority of them are what may be called
thoroughly decent fellows, they are reduced to a jelly-
fish state that is pitiable. If one of them dared recall
the fact that he once possessed a backbone he would
soon be told to go. The power to censure, fine, disrate,
dismiss, each and all of them is in one man’s hands.
Surely no one will claim that this is in accord with the
generally accepted ideas of fair and just treatment of
public servants. There should be the right of appeal tc
a properly constituted Board.
Many an instance of cruel injustice has occurred in
the past. An Appeal Board would go far towards pre-
venting anything of the kind in the future. Occasion-
ally a warder gets tardy justice after having suffered at
the hands of her official superiors. Quite recently at
Long Bay a wardress was reported, a one-sided inquiry
was held, and she was disrated. But in this particular
instance pressure was brought to bear in certain quar-
ters and a second inquiry resulted in her being com-
pletely exonerated from all blame and reinstated. Had
she meekly submitted in the first place, she would
have been another of the many victims to the “sytsem.”
But no one is “winners” for long in the prison service.
The first opportunity, down goes the one who dared to
enter the lists against the powers that be. No oppor-
tunity presenting itself, the very peculiarities of the
system render the making - of one an easy matter. So
the officer in question found to her sorrow. Accord-
ing to the few facts obtainable, it appears very much
as though she has been the victim of a carefully
planned scheme, one might almost call it a conspiracy.
She has again been disrated, and a wardress who stood
by her was at the same time dismissed.


Mr. Holman, as Minister for Justice, should see that
the gaol officers are fairly treated and given a chance
to get justice. The case of the wardress above men-
tioned calls for a full inquiry. No one knowing the
facts could honestly call the treatment she received
anything but flagrant injustice.
Another matter that has a very ugly look as of under-
ground engineering is that of the ousting of Mrs.
Chapman from her position as Superintendent at Long
Bay. She had been appointed by Cabinet, and could
only be removed from office in the same way. With
long years of good service to her credit (five at the
Girls’ Industrial School at Parramatta, a term at Dar-
linghurst, over ten years as Superintendent at Bath-
urst) and an unblemished record, her discharge from
the service could not possibly be obtained. Hei
health had been undermined at Bathurst. A semi-
prisoner, living in cramped apartments within the gaol,
she had the privilege (?) of one whole day, two
Saturday afternoons, and two Sundays each month.
She was also allowed four weeks off each year. For the
rest of the time she was “on duty.” From 6 a.m. to
9 p.m. (with breaks for meals, of course) she was not
a woman—merely part of the machinery, and expected
to break her rest at night, also to take a walk at irregu-
lar hours to see jf all was quiet. Is it to be wondered
at that by the time she had worried through the re-
moval of the prisoners as well as her own private estab-
lishment to Long Bay, she should require a brief rest ?
Actually too ill to be on duty, she remained until the
Penitentiary had been shaped into something like work-
ing order —no light task —and then was compelled to
go on sick leave. Eventually her resignation was
written out in the Prison Department and duly signed,
everything apparently being perfectly regular. But
just how that resignation was obtained, what induce-
ments were held out, how a woman harassed to the
point of distraction, was simply bluffed into, doing what
she would never have dreamed of doing in the quiet
of her own home and after due consideration, must not
be told here. • • A 1


Mrs. Chapman out of the way, the vacant superin-
tendentship could only be filled by a Cabinet appoint-
ment. But Cabinets are evidently easily over-ridden. It
was only necessary to abolish the office, and for the fu-
ture the appointment to the higest position a woman can
attain in the prison service was for the Comptroller-
General to give or take. She may enjoy the same
privileges, draw the same salary, so what matter
whether her designation be superintendent, matron,
or principal female warder?
But the fact remains that this is a fairly high office
in the public service, carries a fairly large salarly, paid
out of public money. Everything in connection with
the appointment should be above suspicion. It is all
very well for the manager of a private firm to appoint
any woman he may select to the principal position. But
a Government Department is a vastly different matter.
The public would like to know something of the
present “superintendent’s" qualifications. It is under-
stood she was formerly a nurse, and was in three
diffeient institutions as such—two under the Lunacy
Department and one under the Benevolent. For what
reason did she leave them, and what references did
she have on entering the prison service ? To wish tc
know this is surely not asking too much. Further, what
particular merit has she shown, what special ability
that she, after only a few years of service, should be
picked out and pitch-forked over the heads of those
who are her seniors in the service by many years ?
Finally, if the filling of the vacancy had been left to
the Cabinet, would the present holder have been given
the position?
Those referred to are only two out of a great many
cases of injustice, the victims in almost every instance
being simply turned adrift to do the best he or she
could, or reduced in salary and so crushed by tyranni-
cal oppression as to be dead to ambition, lost to every-
thing save a keen sense of humiliation at the thought
that it means either submission or resignation. And
as so often happens, the one concerned has others
to help, if not support altogether, it is easy to under


stand that he sacrifices his own self-respect to a very
great extent, rather than fail in what he regards as his
duty to those depending upon him.
“Brevity is the soul of —Prison Reports.” They
are so very brief that many important facts are alto-
gether suppressed, whilst others are so hidden away
in “tables” as to ensure their escape from too close
attention when the report is before Parliament
Prominence is given to the good (?) works, savings
economies, self-praisings, etc., but matters that are
wished kept from public knowledge and yet must not
be quite omitted, are hidden in the obscurity of “tables”
which no one troubles to examine.
***
It is fitting that this article should close with an
appeal on behalf of those unfortunte prisoners under-
going long sentences, dragging out the weary years in
prison. In many instances their cases might well tie
inquired into, and a little more mercy tempered with
the justice first meted out to them. Nine times out of
ten the accused person is prejudged by the very way
in which the Crown states the case to the jury, and
follows with one witness after another supporting.his
statement. The first impression is therefore against
the accused. His defence is followed by another attack
from the Crown, and again by the Judge’s summing
up, which can rarely be said to be wholly impartial,
and seldom in favour of the accused. Found guilty,
the conviction is in itself a terrible punishment to so
many. But he has yet to be sentenced. Too often
the sentence is unduly severe. It must be remembered
that the Judge, is after all, human, and as liable as any
other man to be swayed by personal feelings. Some
little incident at the trial, perhaps a little too much time
taken up by the accused, provokes the Judge to ai^ er -
Probably His Honor is not free from liver troubles,
occasional backache, etc. Whatever the cause, there is
piany a prisoner undergoing a sentence which would


be undoubtedly reduced if there were anything in the
nature of a board to which an appeal could be made.
Prisoners with outside friends can sometimes get
attention drawn to their cases. But in what an un-
happy position is the long-sentence prisoner (often a
first offender) if he be friendless, or if, having friends,
they are so placed or so ignorant of the ways of doino
such things as to be unable to help him.
Mr. Holman, Minister for Justice at time of con-
cluding this book, seems fully alive to his responsi-
bilities, and as he appears to be possessed of a con-
siderable share of human sympathy it is hoped the
unfortunate inmates of our gaols and “reformative”
institutions will benefit to some slight extent at his
hands.
[As it is the writer’s intention at an early date to
go further into the matter of prison administration,
she would gladly receive communications on the sub-
ject, as it is well known that there are many cases that
should be given the light of publicity. Such com-
munications would be treated as confidential.]
Seatty. Richardson & Co., Printers, Paling’s Buildings, Sydney,




