

i


or.
'?t,\
|2f CANBERRA if )






Qathered Leaves
c
c
0
o
*
0
0
o
0
e
(
•
o
o
o
•
•
o
o
«
o
1
Elfrida Hill.


*




\ - > /




-


Gathered Leaves
ELFRIDA HILL.
Foreword by Dr. C. S. MEAD, B.A.
The Australian Baptist Foreign Mission (Incorp.),
486 Albert Street, Melbourne, C.2.


Registered at the G.P.0., Melbourne
for transmission through the Post as a Book.
To—my friends who helped.
Wholly set up end printed in Australia by
Jenkin, Buxton 6- Co. Pty. Ltd.
497-9 Collins Street
Melbourne
1934


C 10354
1 1 JAN 1938
FOREWORD.
r T" ! HIS is a book of Life-leaves which
**■ ordinarily would have been withered,
and cast to the burning. Some of them
were already hastening to the withering.
But God looked out of heaven. He
Whose Heart of Tenderness cannot bear
that anything should touch to its harming
the life of one of the least of these His
children—touch it to withering heart, to
unlovely scorching, or to the loss of its
native beauty—He saw, and from His
Heart of Tenderness sent to Service of
Tenderness those whom He had chosen.
Thus, along Indian by-paths, these leaves
were gathered, touched by the dews of
heaven to a divine refreshing: enabled to
receive the adorning of spiritual colouring,
and made worthy to beautify the altar of
God in His Indian temple.
C.S.M.


HHlEREi*


CONTENTS.
Chapter.
Foreword
Foreword . . , . . . . . . , 5
I. Orakandi: The Coming of the Greathearts 9
11. “Flower” . . . . , . . . . . 15
111. Amrita’s Home . . . . . . . . 23
IV. Amrita . . . . . . . . . . 33
V. Our Garden . . . . . . .. 41
VI. The House of Joy . . . . , , . . 49
VII. Those Others . . . . . . . . 57
VIII. Through Much Tribulation They Entered 65
IX. The Village Bride . . .. . . 71
X. The Widow . . . . . . . . 77
XI. Bimala, the Christmas Box . . . . 83
XII. Because lam a Christian, I Can’t . . 87
XIII. Sunshine Patches . . . . . . . . 97
XIV. God is at His Organ . . , . ~ 207


The glowing ruddy sun descends
Down to the far up-shuddering
Silver-gray world ocean:
Airy images, rosily breathed upon,
After him roll and ever against him,
Out of the autumnal glimmering veil
Bursteth forth the moon,
of clouds,
And behind her, like sparks of light,
Misty, broad-glimmer the stars. ’
—Heinrich
Heine


Mo.
Chapter I.
ORAKANDI: THE COMING OF THE
GREATHEARTS.
“To Thee whose temple is all space.
Whose altar earth, sea, skies,
One chorus let all being raise
All Nature’s incense rise.’’—A.P.
Orakandi. —Where is it? What is it? How did it first
come into being? These are the questions so constantly
asked us. We therefore feel it would be well, in this first
chapter, to say a word to those whose minds may be asking
the above questions as they pick up this little book.
Someone has aptly put it thus:—“ Twenty-six years ago
the Post Office knew it and the police knew it. Otherwise
the village of Orakandi was unknown to the world.” It is
just a small group of islands artificially built up by excavat-
ing a spot in the boggy fertile land of the rice swamps (or
beels, as they are called) of the Faridpur District, Eastern
Bengal.
For miles and miles this swamp stretches its paddy-
green finger-tips over the low-lying country, which is every
year inundated by the overflowing of Bengal’s great rivers,
assisted by downpours of monsoonal rain.
This type of country is ideal for growing rice, the
staple food of Bengal, and also for jute. The people who
live in this district are practically all farmers, and belong to
the downtrodden and much despised Nama Sudra caste.
Sudra means “foot,” and because these farmer folk are of
the lowest Hindu caste, the name applies.
Originally the Nama Sudras were driven into these way-
back swamp lands by the higher castes, who themselves did
not desire to live at close quarters with those of such low
caste.


s
ir
There, too, in that bed country lie fields of glorious pink
lotus flowers, lavishly strewn upon the open waters. Oh!
who could describe those lotus flowers? Their soft, cool
petals and the golden hearts of them as they shyly open to
the blaze of the strong sun’s rays. During the rainy season,
at the time of sunrise and at sunset, every splashing of fiery
glory tinting the cloud-filled sky is reflected in the water
spread out beneath it. Ah, yes! of beauty there is no lack.
But there is also mud—black, sticky mud. The beels are
full of beautiful flowers and their waters full of fish, but
snakes and other deadly things abound as well. The minds
of men who do not know love—or have not allowed the gold
light of love to enter in—are evil, and their hearts as black
and sticky as the mud of their own swamp country.
Years ago some people with great hearts (we shall call
them Greathearts) heard a call and an invitation which came
to them from these same swamps. They came to know of
The swamps or beel country of the Faridpur District
is very beautiful, especially during the rainy season. As far
as the eye can see —north, south, east or west —there extends
an unbroken line of water and fields of waving green rice
above it. Billowing in the breezes which sweep across the
vast expanse of water, the brilliantly green standing rice
crops are a cooling and refreshing sight.
Here and there among the crops are dotted little islands,
which are built up high above the water line and crowded
with small brown mat houses. These are the homes of the
farmers, whose land is almost always under water!
Fruit trees of various kinds grow on the islands, and
tall, stately palms hold aloft their graceful, wide-spread-
ing leaves. To sail across the beds at evening time and see
the dusky outline of a dignified cocoanut, date or Tal palm
tree silhouetted against the silver-grey canopy of the sky
above —the tree’s long reflection quivering in the water
beneath —is an experience which “disturbs us with a joy that
is almost a pain, because of the wonder and sheer beauty
of it.


the darkness of men’s hearts amid the rice-fields, clothed all
in green, so they answered the invitation and they came in
answer to the call for help.
As their boat spread its sail in the lotus starred waters
of that beel country, it was seen that on that sail shone the
sign of a cross, and the cross was red.
The Greathearts were convinced that God meant them
to abide in this country, and so they secured for their dwell-
ing and the carrying on of their work two small islands in
the group known as Orakandi, and there they began to live
among the people.
Healing of the soul and healing of the body were
outheld by them to the wondering and suspicious inhabitants
of the district.
The Pioneer Greathearts were welcomed by dwellers of
those beautiful but sin-riddled villages. The Nama Sudra
community wanted uplift; they wanted schools and medical
aid; they wanted recognition in Parliament. A few wanted
more; they wanted the message which brings healing of
the soul.
These few being healed rejoiced, and a small Christian
Church was formed in the heart of the beels.
An existing boys’ school, situated upon a small island
almost touching that which the Greathearts were now
occupying, was raised to the standard of an English High
School and Bible teaching regularly given.
The Message of Healing for soul-sickness was given to
those men, women and children who thronged the doors of
the Dispensary, where one Greatheart poured forth himself
as he sought to heal soul and body.
A school for girls was soon started, and then little girls
as well as boys came daily, skimming along in their boats
across the water from their island homes to learn their
A.B.C. and the other greater things which the Greathearts
came to make known.
Orakandi was now beginning to be known far and
wide. Preaching in bazaars and outside villages all caused
the news of the Greathearts’ coming to spread to the most
distant homes in the beels. The work at Orakandi grew.
More ground and buildings were necessary, so large tanks,


or artificial lakes, were dug near to the islands already there.
. _ _ _ and the earth thrown up made the islands bigger. More
earth was brought in boats from the mainland far away:
- thisalsowasaddedto helpintheraisin9ofapieceof land ’
the name of which is now known not only throughout the
Faridpur District, but throughout Bengal and in many
Z_ countries beyond the sea.
Oh! the awful, soul-stirring battles against sin, super-
stition and walls of distrust which the Greathearts had to
face in those early days. But love won , and now the names
of those same men and women who waged that warfare are
as a sweet fragrance, as a murmuring sound of music
throughout the length and breadth of the beels.
There was in that land, when the Greathearts first came
to it, a “sore” —a terrible, festering sore. Those who called
for the Christians to come in those early days felt the sore
as a thorn in their own sides and as a blot on the com-
munity life. Tfie sore was the life of the widows of the
Hindu Nama Sudra community. A Hindu widow (even
though she may be only a child when her husband dies)
may never marry again. Among the Nama Sudras of the
beels a widow is not only despised, but their community life
is such that, even though she would, scarcely one young
widow in a hundred is able to keep her purity unstained.
One of the Greathearts, whose frail little body held a
soul throbbing with a passionate pity for those wronged and
helpless sisters, prayed: “God give me widows, that they
might be saved. God heard her prayer. A Home for
Nama Sudra widows was established at Orakandi. At first
the difficulties and problems connected with this venture were
enough to daunt any but a soul so on fire to rescue, teach,
build up and restore these young girl lives, broken by the
evil conditions that surrounded them.
From these beginnings, through much travail and
prayer, has grown the far-famed Orakandi Widows Home
of to-day, housing a big family of over sixty. How many


ua *h"fr| : k,
i
I ( "
have passed from death unto life within its doors! How
many “broken” ones, mended, have been sent singing to
lives of service for the uplift of their Indian sisters!
Some years ago, when it was thought well to give a
name to the Widows’ Home, some of those who had been
among the first to seek the shelter of its protection asked
that the Home be called “The House of Light.” Not only was
this name chosen because the Home stands like a lighthouse
in the beds, throwing its beams of light far over the waters,
carrying a message of hope to the widowhood of the country,
but because the name of that mother who yearned and
pained—giving herself to see this Home a reality—means
“light.”
As the years have rolled by and one and another of the
Greathearts, feeling their fingers weaken on the hilt of a
hitherto firmly-held sword, have had to lay down their active
warfare, their work remains.
It is a living thing, planted, and the light that the Great-
hearts lit is glowing and growing and spreading. It is cast-
ing its beams farther and farther afield in the land of the
Lotus Flowers.


WATER LILIES.
Pale swaying cups of creamy moon-lit gold,
Half-shut as yet, and full of sparkling dew.
Your sweetness to the dreaming stars unfold
And drench the air with perfume all anew.
You seem to be like jewels, richly hung,
Upon the water’s dark untroubled breast,
Or else like lustrous pearls, all careless flung
Into the darkness of some carven chest.
How often have I watched you in the night.
When at your honeyed flower the slow moth sips:
How often have I plucked you in delight.
And pressed your satin coolness to my lips.
—B. G. Hall.


Chapter 11.
“FLOWER.”
"God wearies of great kingdoms, but never of little
flowers."—Rabindranath Tagore.
One morning just before dawn at Ataikola a missionary
sat upon the verandah of a mat house which was her
home. She had chosen thus to live simply among the people
in the little village that was her headquarters.
As it was the muggy time of “the rains” in Bengal,
when even the morning air hangs as a heavy, wet garment
round one, the missionary had risen earlier than usual, and
was snatching a time of quiet for reading and thought before
the rest of the compound awoke. Presently the door of
another small mat house nearby opened. A Bengali woman
came out and, crossing to the other house, squatted on the
edge of the earthen verandah near to the missionary. After
a brief “Namuska” (Bengali form of greeting) to the
Englishwoman, Heron, who was the dispenser, Bible-
woman, general helper and close friend of the missionary,
sat, Bengali fashion, on her heels, with arms stretched over
her knees, gazing out towards the red road which ran past
the compound. Presently both women looked up, as the
click of the compound gate was heard. “Early visitors,”
remarked the Englishwoman, and sighed rather regretfully
as she realised that not even by arising before five o’clock
was she to be allowed any longer for quiet thought and
preparation for the day’s work.
Two figures came through the gate. They were a man
and a woman, the man a typical Mohammedan Fakir or
Holy Man. for there are Mohammedans as well as Hindus
who become wandering Mendicants in the name of their
religion.
Wearing the usual saffron coloured robe, long hair and
beard of a Fakir, the man presented the appearance of a
rough jungle hermit.


Behind him stood a small Bengali woman, a babe of
about one year old upon her hip. A glance was sufficient to
tell those on the verandah one part at least of the sad story
which was coming, for the woman, or girl (she was scarcely
more than a girl), wore a plain white sari without a border!
A widow, and with a Holy Man —oh, yes, this is quite a
usual thing. Widow girls are often given by their own
parents to a Holy Man, or brothers not wanting to support
a widowed sister may hand her over to such an one. She
follows him from place to place, begging for him, cooking
his food and being his wife in all but name. If the Holy
Man tires of her, he may cast the girl off anywhere or at any
time. The widow may be miles from her home or friends
when thus cast off, and her only hope of escaping starvation
is to become attached to another Holy Man, or in some other
way live a life of wrong.
Here was one —just another of India s widows —and her
little unwanted baby girl, coming towards the two Christian
women. As the trio advanced from the gate, the mis-
sionary’s intuition told her what was the reason for this early
morning visit. After low salaams, the man soon made
known their errand. The Hindu widow girl had been with
him for about two years. Now they wished to separate.
The widow’s people were willing to receive her back, but
not with the child. A Hindu widow mßy get back into caste
after wrongdoing if she gives up her child, but never with it.
While the man talked, the little widow wept softly,
though she spoke not a word during the whole time. The
babe was fair and beautiful. It was her babe, and she loved
it. How the missionary’s heart ached to save both
mother and child! Of course, the request soon came from
the man: “Would the missionary take the child?” A long
conversation followed, during which the man and the woman
were told plainly that money was never given for children
adopted by the mission, and that a complete break must be
made with the parents. Finally they agreed to all con-
ditions, and the babe passed from the arms of her mother to
those of Heron. The missionary did not miss the oppor-
tunity of upbraiding the parents for their sin, nor of telling
them of a “better way” and of One who could give them
strength to walk therein.
After handing over the child, however, they were anxious
to be off. and though the little mother’s heart must have
been sore beyond words, she turned and, with that pathetic


I
i/fe\
dull droop of the head, like a cowed dog, followed the man
down the path out of the gate, and soon her white sari was
lost to view as she passed along the avenue of tall green
trees that overhung the wet red road.
They had gone, but the babe was left! We cannot save
all, though we long to do so, but He allows us to help Him
save some, and, oh, what hope and promise in one single
little life! Of course, the babe was frightened and cried
loudly for some time, but after food, being weary, she fell
asleep in the arms of Heron. This gave her guardians an
opportunity to take stock of her without frightening her too
much. “Thank God,” said one. "for sending us a fine
healthy one this time.” So often the little, unloved ones
brought to the missionary are weak and sickly, suffering from
neglect and even from attempts to poison, and thus get rid
of the unwanted life. Flower-like the new baby looked as
she lay asleep with her thumb in her mouth. Eyes now
closed were not so dark as the usual Bengali eyes, but of a
hazel shade. The rounded body was very [air, and Flower
seemed the only name suitable by which to call her. So
Flower she was named then and there.
What a prayer of thankfulness went up from the hearts
of those to whom she had come! The man, her father, was
evil, but he might have been worse. He might have given
Flower to a brothel or to one of the many who would have
coveted the lovely babe in order to trade her fairness and
smirch her purity in years to come.
That morning the Great Shepherd was very near, and,
stretching out His hand of love, He caught the little lamb
ere she slipped down the dark precipice into the abyss
beneath and, handing her to us, He said: “Take this child
and nurture it for Me.”
Just a little Bengali baby, easily passed from one pair
of arms to another! Little did she know what a transaction
had been worked on her behalf that day. Unconscious was
she of all the yearnings of love and tenderness for her own
little individual self which had been so quickly born in the
hearts of the two women who now held her close. She
stirred in them not only that love which any helpless babe
begets in a true woman’s heart, but also she was to them a
token—God's early morning gift—and came to them at dawn.
A flower, beautiful and precious beyond words, because it
was felt that He had sent her.


\
u°
m
I SI %
During the first few days after Flower came those old
fears and misgivings which will come hovered near. What
if the mother should return and demand the child? What if
other relatives came to claim her? This has happened so
often, and with heartaches the little babe has had to be
handed back—to what? To the foul hands of those who
covet such babes that they may bruise the flower’s petals
and drench them with the evil, sullen waters of men’s
passionate desires.
Never shall we forget when Love, the big girl who had
charge of Flower, and beside whom she slept at night, came
running over to us at ten o’clock one night saying Flower
was missing. Love, awaking suddenly, found the little bed
empty. After calling and searching everywhere she came
over to us. We all called and searched everywhere. Not
a trace of the child could be found. The doors leading
from the school compound were all locked. After
endless searching with lanterns, we found a tiny, pathetic
figure just standing quietly behind a door! She had heard
us calling and searching, but sheer, overpowering shyness
and acute sensitive apprehension had led her to hide herself
from us.
When she realised love was waiting for her here, as it
had been in her first home, the extreme shyness vanished,
the pathetic little droop of the lips disappeared, as they
opened to prattle many things in a delightful baby
lisp, which caused loving smiles to come to the
Flower, however, had come to grow in the Good
Shepherd’s own garden. Nothing more was ever heard of
her parents after the day they left her on the Mission House
verandah.
She grew and throve, being unusually well made and
plump for a Bengali baby. For some time she continued to
live with those to whom she came so unexpectedly that day.
A Bengali Christian man and his wife living on the Mission
compound took charge of the little one, and loved her, too.
However, later, when the couple acquired a little family of
their own, the children coming very quickly one after the
other, it was felt that Flower was not receiving quite the
care she needed from the already overburdened mother; so,
when she was almost three years of age. Flower came to live
in our Pabna school. Such a shy, sensitive little mite she
was at first afraid of everyone and everything.


faces of teachers and older girls. In those early
baby days for some reason. Flower developed a
passion for “visiting.” She came over from the school to
visit the missionary in her study quite often. As the mis-
sionary sat at her desk, battling with accounts or tackling
the piles of letters, etc,, always reposing on the desk of every
missionary, she heard an almost noiseless sound of tiny bare
feet on the verandah outside; then a small round figure clad
in red rompers appeared in the doorway. The little head
drooped, as if in great shyness, but the lips were smiling.
Suddenly the face was lifted. Eyes dancing, dimples all out,
and a gentle little voice, with its melting lisp, said: “Masima,
may I come?” Could she come? Well, I wonder could
anyone seeing Flower then have said “No?” Hardly waiting
for the “Yes” to come, with a rush she was upon one, but
with that nearness she was ever satisfied. She would be
quite content to stand quietly by as one worked, her little
baby arms encircling one’s waist and the tiny head laid
down on one’s knee.
After a little talk about such engrossing matters as
(a) the doll which lives by the missionary’s desk, ready to
entertain any sudden callers such as the present one; (b) the
last snake seen on the children’s playground; (c) the beauti-
fully red mosquito bite on the visitor’s own small nose, the
missionary’s work must again be pursued. Though Flower
remained standing close by or sitting on the floor playing
with the much-abused rag doll, she was always so gentle
and quiet that work was not in any way hindered by her
presence.
Visits to the missionary were quite in order and within
reason, but occasionally Flower’s great desire to pay “calls”
led to serious sin! Seeing the school gate open for a few
moments one day, three-year-old Flower decided to go visit-
ing outside! By the time she was missed, and worried big
sisters and missionaries were rushing hither and thither,
inside the compound and outside, no sign of a little fair figure
in scarlet rompers could be seen. We looked up the road
and down the road. The river ran by the road, but we
dared not let ourselves think about that then. At last, after Sk
many distracted folks were hoarse and well nigh Vr ' '-W
the little scapegrace was found calmly sitting in the court- jJr cKA 1 \
yard of a Christian home nearby. She was merely visiting! 11 1
We had not the heart to scold much when we found her x J


safe, but it had to be made plain that babies of three going
“visiting” should at least notify their elders beforehand!
A few years at Boarding School have changed our
Flower from a baby to a still gentle, but very much alive,
little school girl of eight. At that age it was deemed wise
for her to come to Orakandi, as undesirable people were
endeavouring to get hold of the child. Orakandi, being out
of the way, seemed the safest place to keep her. Though
school life has done much to strengthen the super-sensitive
little nature, yet those who love Flower tremble for her,
because of what Life may bring.
Such an one we long to shelter always with our love from
Life’s hurts and rebuffs. Yet this cannot be. The clinging
nature must be strengthened and the character built up in
order to meet the ups and downs of life which must come.
Flower is not a perfect child. Oh, no! Though most loving
and affectionate, she has quite distinct faults, like any other
normal child. One day we heard “words”—yes, “words,”
as the Bengalis say—spoken at the children’s bathing steps.
Bimala, a newcomer, and Flower were saying “words” to
each other, and the words sounded very hot, and they were
certainly coming fast!
A little later Flower, all ready for school, came dancing
into our room, hair freshly oiled and tied with a ribbon,
sari deftly arranged, books in hand, and face bright with
morning smiles. After conversation about some other more
pleasant matters, we remarked that during the morning some
strange sounds had reached our ears, which sounds seemed
to us to come from the children’s bathing steps. Flower’s
head drooped. Oh, but, Miss Saheb, Bimala used a word
at the steps which was almost a swear word.” “Well,” we
replied, do you think it was teaching Bimala to speak nicer
words to answer her as I heard you doing this morning?
Bimala has only just come from a Hindu home, and has not
been in the habit of hearing nice words. It is a pity you
forgot that this morning, isn’t it? But you can still go and
do something nice for Bimala and let her know that you are
sorry, can’t you?”
Very slowly, and with head still bowed. Flower walked
away. Later, peeping outside, we saw two little figures
sitting tight together on the verandah steps; two little arms
were encircling two little necks, a brown face and a chubby


fair face were cheek to cheek! We breathed a sigh of thank-
fulness. Such is Flower at nine, responsive to love or loving
reason, as a flower to the sun’s rays; but hardness or
severity would spoil and mar her absolutely. A year ago
Flower was desperately ill—typhoid. It seemed almost as
if we were going to be asked to give her up. Weeks and
weeks went by without any drop in the temperature, and
how we prayed that, if God could , He would spare her, but
that if He felt she would be safer in His garden above, then
we prayed that we might be willing to yield her up.
God gave her back to us, and now we feel a double
gratitude for this twice-given gift.
“Take this child and nurture it for Me." The Shepherd
who says this knows better than we the delicateness of the
instrument upon which we have to play. The nature so
super-sensitive; the plant, to the growth of which love and
sunshine are an absolute necessity. May He give us a wise
and strong love, which will not seek merely to protect, but
even be willing to stand aside and let cold winds blow upon
the plant, if these are necessary for its strengthening and
growth.


"And when the shadow fades and is no more, the light
that lingers becomes a shadow to another light. And
thus your freedom, when it loses its fetters, becomes
itself the fetter of a greater freedom.—Kahlil Gibran.
"Let only that little of my fetters be left whereby I
am bound with Thy will, and Thy purpose is carried
out in my life—and that is the fetter of Thy love."
"If I call not Thee in my prayers, if I keep not Thee
in my heart, Thy love for me still waits for my love.”
—Rabindranath Tagore.


v>
T
I
Chapter 111.
AMRITA’S HOME.
He is there where the tiller is tilling the hard ground,
and where the pathmaker is breaking stones. He is
with them in sun and in shower, and His garment is
covered with dust. Put off thy holy mantle and even
like Him come down on the dusty soil.”—Rabindranath Tagore.
Amrita, though a Bengali baby girl and of poor Nama
Sudra parents, was welcomed, and warmly welcomed, when
she was born in a little village some few miles from our
Mission Station at Orakandi.
The special reason for joy at Amrita’s birth was this.
Her parents had previously lost, one after another, five
children. Several sons were among the number. One boy
lived until he was two and a half years old; another twelve
months; the other babies died very young.
To a Bengali mother particularly the loss of a child
(especially a son) is a terrible calamity. This is not only
because she has no hope of ever seeing the child again, but
often the mother is blamed by the father’s relatives for the
death of the child. Another big reason in the Hindu mind
for desiring a son is that there may be someone to light the
funeral pyre of the parent when he or she dies. This act is
always performed by a son, if there be one, though occa-
sionally by a daughter for her mother, should there not be a
son to officiate. The Hindus believe that the spirit of the
departed is helped by this act and an entrance into Heaven
assured.
After the death of her fifth child, Amrita’s mother gave
up all hope of any more children, but years later, to her
parents great joy, a little daughter was born, and they hope-
fully named her Amrita—meaning Nectar—drinking which
one cannot die, but lives forever. Fresh life and great joy
came into the lives of the parents with the little one’s advent,
and they procured from the priest many charms, which they
tied round her tiny arms to protect her from any ill-fate that
might be lurking round.
cja


Like most of the men living in the heels or swamps of
the Faridpur District, Amrita’s father was a farmer. He
and his brothers all lived in one home and worked the land
together, sharing the grain and profits. As with other home-
steads in the rice-fields or swamps, their living houses,
granary and cow sheds were built upon a piece of raised
ground, which for more than six months of the year (when
the rice fields are filled with water) is turned into an island.
Amrita’s father, Ketu by name, was the eldest of three
brothers. Always working hard on his land, he had never
learned to read or write, and though he would have tried to
educate one of his sons had they lived, he did not dream of
educating his little girl. If he thought at all about her
future, it was only to keep a look out for a suitable bride-
groom to whom he might marry her early—even though she
were only three or four years of age—and, that done, Ketu
would consider that his duty as a father was quite dis-
charged.
About religion Ketu thought little. His days went in a
ceaseless round of toil, seeking to wrest from the ground
food for himself, his wife and child: also sometimes his
younger brothers and their families. Should a younger
brother fall upon bad times or be lazy or idle, the elder
brother must then take upon himself the responsibility of the
younger one and his family. Consequently a younger
brother often shirks work and responsibility, knowing the
elder one is there to take it.
Though Ketu was not a very religious man, he took part
in the evening *sangkirtons and worship of idols at different
Hindu festivals held in his village. Not to do so would
have caused comment from his neighbours: also he had some
vague idea that, did he not occasionally worship the various
gods, some calamity might overtake him or his.
The most godly thing about this dark, burly Nama
Sudra son of the soil was his love for his tiny daughter.
When he came in from the rice fields at midday for his
bathe and morning meal, he usually found time to take
Amrita in his arms or play with her while her mother was
serving out his meal of rice and highly-seasoned curry. The
little one early learned to squat down cross-legged beside
her father as he sat on the verandah of their small house to
eat. Curried fish and vegetables, hot with chillies and
accompanied by dancing.
Hindu song.


I
Indian spices, were piled on the large round brass plate,
which was the only dish needed for the meal. Amrita s tiny
hand soon managed to take deftly a little rice and, moisten-
ing it with the curry, roll all into a tiny ball, conveying it to
her mouth with that grace and daintiness which only a
Bengali can acquire.
The loving father liked to have the wee child eating
with him from the same dish, calling her in terms of endear-
ment his “elder sister’’ or “mother.” But, alas! like most
Bengali fathers, he did not even stop to think whether such
hot, highly-seasoned dishes w T ere likely to impair his little
Amrita’s digestion in the future.
Ararita’s father of necessity owned a boat. Except for
six months of the year, when the water in the rice fields
dries up, all the work of the field, travelling and marketing,
must be done by boat. From June until December each
homestead on its raised piece of land becomes an island.
Inhabitants of all these island homes have no access to one
another or to the fields where their green rice crops are
swaying in the breeze, except by boat.
On some red-letter days Amrita’s father would take her
out with him in his long, canoe-like boat. Sitting tight like
a little bird on the extreme nose of the boat, she would
watch while her father sought for and pulled out plants of
the dreaded water hyacinth, which had floated on the water
from some other field and found their way into his crop. If
left, this water hyacinth grows rapidly and soon forms a
large floating mass, which works great havoc to standing
rice crops.
Another joy to the little girl was when the harvest time
came round. Not often was she allowed to accompany her
father then, for the men left at dawn in boats, often not
returning until quite late in the day: also all the room in the
boat was needed for the precious grain. Pushing the sharp-
nosed boats into the standing crop of rice, the reapers cut
the ripened grain with sickles, piling it neatly in the boat
alongside. Sometimes they put large brass water pots upside
down in the water and. sitting upon these, propelled them-
selves about on the surface of the water, using their feet as
oars, while they cut the rice and continued to load it. Boats
full, the farmers turned homeward, and as they poled the
harvest towards the little cluster of brown houses that to


them was home they sang lustily a song of the harvest. The
children of the home danced gleefully at the landing stage
as the boats unloaded their sheaves. Amrita, like a small
bit of shining brown quicksilver, darting hither and thither,
was well to the fore. Not so merry were the mothers of the
homes as they watched the unloading of the grain from a
distance or from inside the house. For soon their part of
the harvest work would be upon them! And, oh, the toil of
it! Already for days they had been preparing the large
open space in the courtyard—levelling it, smoothing it, and
finally giving it a coat of cow manure and earth mixed
together, which was applied all over the surface of the
ground with the open palm. The freshly-gathered rice must
be laid out on this prepared floor, after which the oxen,
driven round and round, would tread out the grain. This
done, the women must take control of the harvest, winnow-
ing by means of a small fan-shaped tray; then boiling,
sunning, boiling again, finally crushing and still further
cleaning the rice in a “dheki.” This last is the heaviest and
most arduous task of all.
Amrita’s mother, being the wife of the eldest of three
brothers, was entitled to some authority over the wives of
her younger brothers-in-law. She could order them about,
giving the heaviest burdens to them if she so wished, and
doubtless at times she did so. Nevertheless, being a
naturally industrious soul, and kind-hearted as well, she was
probably not overbearing. When harvests were good and
the home free from quarrels between wives of the brothers
and numerous cousins, uncles and aunts of Ketu, the inmates
were comparatively happy. Especially so Ketu and his wife
since little Amrita had come to them. Amrita had an aunt,
her mother s youngest sister, who, becoming a widow at
seven years of age, was taken by her parents to the Widows'
Home at Orakandi. The young aunt’s name was Khsanta.
Occasionally Khsanta came on a visit to Amrita’s home, or
at times Amrita was taken by her mother to see her aunt in
that mysterious and interesting place now called the Dipti
Bhaban (House of Light), of Orakandi.
There Amrita saw strange Englishwomen— at least she
thought them strange then. They didn’t wear saris, but long,
queer frocks, and. oh, horrors! on their heads white tupis.
Amrita herself at that stage was not troubled with clothes
at all, but she noticed that all the children at Orakandi wore


gr~ )>,
clean garments and they played and shouted merrily, never
seeming afraid or embarrassed by those strange Miss Sahebs
of the long white frocks! Amrita's sharp eyes darted hither
and thither. The pretty flowers in the Mission-house garden
took her eye—Amrita loved flowers. Fascinated, she
watched the shuttles clicking backwards and forwards in the
looms of the weaving room as some of the young widows,
her aunt’s companions and friends, wove gaily-coloured
threads on the large Orakandi looms. Sometimes the
children of the Home would be gathered together singing.
Amrita liked to listen to that. It was different, somehow,
she thought, from the noisy singing of the men of her home,
when they danced before an image of Kali or Durga. As
mother and child were skimming homewards, poled along
in their little boat by Amrita’s father, her uncle or a biggish
cousin, the child plied her mother with innumerable questions
about the white Miss Sahebs she had seen and all that had
been new and strange to her.
One day little Amrita was startled in the midst of her
play with her cousins by sounds of deep distress, followed
by wailing, coming from her parents’ room. That wailing
of a woman! Heard so often in Bengal, and, once heard,
never, never to be erased from memory. All the children
rushed in the direction of the sound. Amrita’s father had
been ill the day before. Fever, yes, just a fever—no one
knew what fever, no one knew what to do. The mother
poured water on his head —she could think of nothing else
to do—and fanned him all through the night as he tossed in
the heat and delirium of high fever. Now, suddenly and
unexpectedly, he had died! Little Amrita was fatherless
and her mother a widow. Oh! could ever a pen tell all that
last means? A widow, despised, ill-used and spurned,
wronged, cheated of her rights—a Broken Pot, as the widow
is called in the Naraa Sudra community. An earthenware
water pot, once cracked, is useless, can never be mended;
fit only to be thrown on the rubbish heap. Even so to the
Nama Sudra mind is a widow. AMRITA’S MOTHER
WAS A WIDOW.
No wonder her wailing and bitter cries rang out over
the water of the beels. What mattered that beautiful pink
lotus flowers raised their heads above the rippling water;
that birds sang in the palm trees beside her home! What
mattered it if the sun, sinking towards the western horizon.


with his departing rays painted glorious majesty on the
clouds spread near his path! What mattered ANYTHING!
The other women stood watching as with streaming hair the
widow stumbled from her brown mat house and, lying on
the ground, prone at the foot of a tree, abandoned herself
uncontrollably to that awful crying, to hear and see which
stabs like a knife through one's very soul.
Days passed; the funeral pyre and the “shrada” cere-
mony (a feast given in honour of the dead) were things of
the past. The work of the homestead was going on as
before, except that now Amrita’s elder uncle was head of
the home, and the authority and responsibility upon his
shoulders.
Things were sadly changed for the vivacious little girl
and her mother. Apart from the loss of the father, who
fondled and cared for her, Amrita gradually, to her surprise,
noted a difference in the attitude of her aunts and elder
cousins towards her. Before, the more rice she could
manage to stow away in her little preson, the better her
father would be pleased, and her uncles would laugh and
tease her. Now, when she asked for more, the aunt serving
her would scowl and suppressed remarks would reach
Amrita’s ears. "Can we afford to feed extra mouths?” "The
mother, too; is not life hard enough without these extra
burdens?”
One day Amrita's uncle had been to the bazaar and
brought home some sweetmeats wrapped in a banana leaf.
The children, Amrita among them, surrounded him like flies,
each little hand held impatiently out, as he endeavoured to
divide the sticky mass into equal portions. The lucky first
recipients were making luscious sounds and besmearing
noses, eyes and their brown naked little bodies with the
delightful stickiness. There was just one portion left, and
Amrita’s little hand was still held out. The uncle, smiling,
was just about to transfer the sticky toothsome morsel from
the banana leaf to the small eager brown palm when a sharp
remark from his wife, standing in the doorway behind, made
him hesitate. He wanted to give it, but —the wife spoke
again, and he handed the portion to a six months’ old baby
in his wife’s arms, turning quickly so that he might not see
the look of disappointment and the quick gathering of tears
in his niece’s eyes.


Sobbing on her mother’s shoulder, the little girl poured
out her story. Yes, Amrita’s mother knew! For weeks past
had she not seen it coming? “We are not wanted here now,
Baby,” she said. She who had been the elder wife, invested
with authority and looked up to by her sisters-in-law, was
now a “broken pot”—nothing, despised, unwanted!
Had she not noted how all the heavy and unpleasant
tasks were left for her to do nowadays? She dared not
refuse, for were not she and little Amrita now living on her
brother-in-law's bounty? True, her husband had worked
and slaved for them , and the land was really registered in
his name. Had Amrita’s mother had a son, she could have
claimed in that son’s name a share or portion of the farm,
but she had no son. Little Amrita, whom she now held
tight to her breast, was all she could claim as her own in the
whole wide world. Yes, and any day—soon perhaps—her
brother-in-law might arrange the child’s marriage to some-
one living in a far distant village. Even Amrita might be
taken from her. And they, her husband’s relatives, were
beginning now to make the child feel her position. Oh,
Life! What was there left? Her jewellery and coloured
bordered saris had all been discarded the day she became a
widow. All she would ever need in the shape of a garment
would be the cheap, coarse, white sari such as she now wore.
The stricken mother-heart wrestled with the problem. Her
child —little Amrita! At last a resolve was made. In order
to keep a home for Amrita and herself she must work hard.
Oh! How she would work in order to please her brothers-
in-law and their wives! She would eat as little as possible,
and the child —what did she eat? Yes, that was the only
way—to work so hard and continuously that, because of her
worth to them, they would be willing to keep her and
Amrita.
The days of drudgery which followed took their toll of
the widow’s health. Eating only her one meal a day, as a
widow must, and working harder than ever before in her
life, Amrita’s mother became thin and her face set into lines
of dull suffering. Though she laboured from dawn until
sunset, and even after, husking rice, parching it. making
fuel for the fires, washing clothes by beating them upon a
wooden board at the water’s edge, bathing and attentively
caring for the children of her sisters-in-law, even carrying
loads of earth in a basket and building up the broken
■ - '


verandahs of the earthenware houses; though she did all this
and murmured not, still—yes, she could see it coming nearer
and nearer —Amrita and she were not wanted, and would
eventually be turned out of the house.
One day Amrita’s mother had a visitor. A boat moored
at the ghat of the home. On seeing the cleanness and type
of boat, all in the home quickly became in a fluster. A chair
was brought from the relative’s home nearby, and, carefully
dusting this with the end of her sari, one of Amrita’s aunts
prepared to welcome the visitor. A small English lady
stepped from the boat and, greeting the assembled women
and children, took her seat on the indicated chair, which was
placed for her in the courtyard. Her eyes, however, quickly
sought for someone. At last they met those of Amrita’s
mother, who was standing aside from the group. Words of
beauty were sung by the missionary, and then a message of
Love and Comfort was given to those gathered, but all the
time Amrita’s mother knew that the visit was for her, and
that an opportunity of speaking to her alone was sought.
At last it came—just a hurried few minutes —when a
squabble between the children diverted the other women's
attention.
The missionary spoke. “Amrita’s mother, you are now
a widow. You know the dangers; you know the hardships.
Your little sister has been with us for years, and you can
see what Christianity has done for her. Within the Widows’
Home is safety for you and your child. Love, too, and
peace. I need not tell you more. You have visited us; you
have seen, you know. Will you come?’’
Such a tremendous step! Leaving home, religion, caste;
becoming definitely associated with Christians. The woman’s
mind could hardly conceive of such a breaking away from
custom and the rules of her widowhood. She could only
sadly shake her head. The other women were back again
and the private moment gone. In the months and years
which followed, the missionary paid more than one visit to
Amrita’s home. After each time the widow’s determination
not to go to the Christians became weaker. Life in her
brother-in-law’s home was now becoming unbearable.
Slaving from morning until night, all that she received
grudgingly given, her own body was worn and well nigh
broken. To add to all her other troubles, Amrita, now
seven years of age, had developed a large open sore on her


X/ V A
/■xf I PBf w~ -W \ x—>
» i f.VI I j
left forearm. None of the herbs or home remedies of which
Amrita’s mother knew healed the sore, which only increased
in size and painfulness as the weeks and months went by.
One day, when it seemed she had reached the limit of her
endurance, the widow’s mind was made up. If going to the
Christians was a disgrace to her husband's people, and if it
did mean breaking caste, what of it? Had her husband's
people been any comfort to her in her time of great sorrow
and need? Had caste helped her? No; she would risk it
all. At any rate, the missionaries were kind. They knew
about medicines. They might be able to heal Amrita’s sore.
Seeing an opportunity, and with Amrita trotting by her side,
the woman set off across the rice fields where the water was
now in places dried up. Walking sometimes over hard, sun-
baked ground, at others wading through water up to their
knees or clambering over bamboo bridges which spanned
canals, at last the mother and child reached the “Home of
Light.”
Years have gone by, and Amrita’s mother, though she
has found the discipline of an institution very trying, and
reading and writing and sewing did not come easily to her,
has learned many lessons. Learning weaving, under the
direction of Manda, that gentle, painstaking Christian
woman—herself a widow—has helped Amrita’s mother
to master with the art —many of the faults and weak-
nesses which Hinduism had not helped her to overcome.
When sickness has visited the home, Amrita’s mother
has been one of our most willing helpers, and though
her tongue and temper at times break loose, we believe
that slowly, but surely, that Love which alone can
“re-make” and “present faultless” the pot cruelly broken
by Hinduism, is smoothing out the crooked places in her
mind, healing the hurts of her soul, and, we pray, winning
her to the feet of the Potter who would make her beautiful
for His service


“You, like a rivulet swift and sinuous, laugh and
dance, and your steps sing as you trip along - - -
You, like the lightning’s flash, slender and keen, pierce
the heart of the turbulent darkness, to disappear in a
vivid streak of laughter.”—Rabindranath Tagore.


Chapter IV.
AMRITA.
"Branches clash together in the forest, and the leaves
rustle in the wild wind, the thunder clouds clap their
giant hands and the flower children rush out in dresses
of pink and yellow and white.” —Rabindranath Tagore.
“Oh! Miss Saheb, what are you doing?” A crisp,
inquisitive little voice the other side of the fence asked the
question. Looking up from a flower bed, over which we
were bending in our Orakandi garden plot, we saw
the ever-restive body and rather sharp-featured brown
face of Amrita. Eyes, as usual, dancing with
smiles, for yes, this nine years’ old piece of quicksilver
laughs with her eyes as well as her lips. At that
moment the eager little nose was pressed tightly against
the garden fence, and the dark-brown eyes looked through
spectacles of wire netting! The scarlet border of a white
sari gracefully wound round the slim body and thrown over
the left shoulder, and the black hair, slightly curly, hanging
round the "never still” shoulders, all seemed to be a part of
the picture of animation this elfish child invariably creates.
Hardly could she wait for our reply—why are grown-
up people so slow? The little feet were unable to keep still,
while the busy brain was wondering and the sharp eyes
endeavouring to see what the Miss Saheb was doing in her
garden.
“I am picking the buds from these tiny zinnia seedlings,
Amrita, for the baby plants are too young yet to bear
flowers. Would you like to come in and help me?’
It took about two seconds for the owner of the flattened
nose to find the garden gate and arrive at the flower bed.
Rapid brown fingers worked deftly alongside the clumsier
and slower large white ones. In other walks of life, too,
how often this is so!


“£>. r>.„
The sore which she had brought with her to the “House
of Light” did not respond at once to the Miss Saheb’s
medicine, as Amrita s mother had hoped it would do. It
took a painful operation, two periods in hospital, some
drastic treatment and a daily dressing for five years before,
at last, little Amrita s thorn in the flesh was healed. Per-
haps the angels know something about it; they surely, too,
were listening when, before bedtime in the children’s cottage,
a circle of little ones knelt in prayer. “Please. God,
make Amrita’s sore better.” “Yes. please God, heal my
wound, that I shall be able to swim in the tank again with
the other children. Has not a Father to whom each little
lotus flower is so precious noted the bright braveness of the
little patient all
these years? When some of us were well
Amrita worked silently for some moments. Amrita
silent always means that the nimble brain is specially active,
and usually, if nearby, we soon get an inkling of its trend.
Ah! It was coming. The quick brown fingers stopped
moving among the green leaves. The child stood up. Hold-
ing in one corner of her sari the round buds she had
gathered, Amrita said with a sigh: “Miss Saheb, I don’t like
doing this very much.”
“Why?” we asked.
“Oh, look! See the two leaves of the plant placed
either side of the little bud look like a mother’s two hands
spread out to protect her baby.”
After again bending and picking a few more of the
deeply-pitied “flowers' children,” Amrita jumped up. “No,
I cannot; I shall pick no more. I feel like King Herod killing
all the babies of Bethlehem.’ In a flash she was gone from
the garden, and we were left to ponder on the ways of
Nama Sudra elves born amid the lotus swamps of Orakandi!
Ever since coming to Orakandi with her mother two
years before, life had been one joyous adventure to Amrita.
How quickly the “terrible” look that nearly all our new ones
bring with them had slipped from that quaint little face!
Scarcely pretty and rather dark of complexion, Amrita was
not spoiled by unwise elders, as is often the case with very
fair children, unless a sharp watch is kept to nip buds of
pride while the plant is still very young.


nigh hopeless and Amrita’s own mother in despair about the
child’s affliction, Amrita herself amazed us by her hopeful-
ness. Once some people visiting Orakandi told Amrita
about the Girl Guide movement. One day when her dress-
ing, always a painful operation was about to be done, Amrita
said: “I am going to be a Girl Guide. When things hurt, a
Girl Guide laughs.” The brown lips were then tightly com-
pressed, and not a sound escaped her during the whole
ordeal. Previously there had been times when her nerves,
unstrung by the weary years of suffering, had given way.
and hysterical and loud crying had accompanied the cleansing
and dressing of her wound. This day, however, when all
was over and the last bandage in place, the little lips, white
with the pressure behind them, opened and a radiant smile
burst forth. “I didn’t cry, anyway, did I?” When in
hospital the child charmed everyone —doctors, nurses and
patients alike—by her sunshiny nature and always hopeful
bravery that perhaps “next week” or ‘‘next month the ugly
sore would be quite healed. So many happy things were
forbidden to Amrita because of her “thorn.” Games which
necessitated catching hold of hands, romping with the others,
and the swing, were all taboo. The last was Amrita s
greatest cross. The swing—how she loved it! To stand by
and see other children soaring into the air or whizzing round
and round until they were too giddy to stand was some-
times more than flesh and blood could bear. She mounted
the swing or she swam in the tank! Next morning, when
blood was seen on her bandage, a stern voice demanded,
“What were you doing yesterday?” Yes, little Amrita, with
all her loveableness, and she is a great favourite with didis*
and masisf, as well as her playfellows, can transgress quite
deeply at times!
Once, when she and Anila were left alone in the dis-
pensary—which they had offered to clean —a tin of strongly-
scented "pow-dah” (powder) was the cause of her downfall.
It was during Bengal’s most awful of awful months, Septem-
ber, that seeing a grown-up tired and weary, these two lively
little spirits, with a genuine desire to relieve and help the
weary one, said; “Miss Saheb, you go and have a rest. It is
Saturday morning and there is no school for us. We shall
clean the dispensary for you.” They set to work happy as
Big sisters.
f Aunts here applied to teachers.


two little larks, because out of hearts full of love they had
undertaken this task.
Stretched on a cool mat bed upstairs, the “grown-up”
listened to the busy sounds beneath. Swish, swish, water
on the floor now; then the sound of the broom being
vigorously applied! A tap turned on for a moment! They
were testing the tank where sterile water is kept. All
medicines were under lock and key, so that there was no
danger from that source. Yet she who was sent to “rest”
had mental visions that could hardly be called restful. Not
wanting to crush the helpful spirit of the young enthusiasts,
she had agreed to leave them the floor to wash and fresh
papers to be arranged on a shelf. Oh, that clink of a glass!
Had they decided to scour the medicine glasses as a sur-
prise? How many would survive? Amrita’s voice sounded
above the banging, swishing and general din. “Anila, more
water. Now, you little ones, run away; we are very
busy.” (Evidently a group of the “tinies” had toddled to
the verandah, anxious to investigate the cause of the uproar.)
BANG! Oh! what was that? Only the broom knocked
forcefully against the wooden shutter! Silence for some
time, then the noise of the dispensary door being shut and
padlocked; then no more sounds from that direction. The
“rest” being now over, we were rather anxious to see just
how much damage had been done below!
All looked spic and span—floor rather wet, certainly—
but shelf fresh with new paper and boxes of weights, empty
bottles, corks, etc., all neatly and nicely arranged. It was
not until the afternoon that a teacher came to report that
our two little helpers of the morning w r ere covering them-
selves and all the small fry with “pow-dah.” Oh, dear!
What a disappointed pain shot through us as we quickly
guessed what had happened! Later, as two little girls with
drooping heads were telling their story, Amrita said: “Oh,
Miss Saheb, we didn’t dream of taking it! We were just
dusting the tin and we smelt it! Oh, lovely! We said, ‘No.
that would be stealing, and then—and then—it smell so
lovely—and we took it.”
How our hearts ached for the now pathetic little helpers
of the morning! They had been so happy in helping, and
it had all got caught up on a horrid cobweb and turned into
a blunder.


%3
This story may shock some of our readers and make
them disappointed in Amrita. But please, if you are tempted
to be shocked, just consider and remember that Amrita’s
ancestors for generations back had thought it no great sin
to take things belonging to others. The Orients love scents.
Strongly-scented powder or soap is almost irresistible to
them. Let us add that the case of a “powdah" was the first
and absolutely the only time that Amrita has ever been
known to steal.
We feel sure that day’s sad experience, the joy of
happily being helpful, all marred and spoiled by the moment
of weakness, has taught her a lesson which perhaps could
not have been given any other way.
One day, as a crowd of the babies and some of the
bigger children were clustered round us, we talked about
“eyes.” With a dozen or more pairs of those lovely dark
brown Eastern eyes turned towards us, “eyes” seemed an
easy subject to handle.
“Miss Saheb, why have we only got two eyes?” some-
body asked.
“Only two eyes that we can SEE,” was the reply, “but
I think we all have another kind of eye somewhere. I
wonder who could ?”
Amrita, clapping her hands with excitement and with
dancing eyes, could not refrain from interrupting lest some-
one else get in before her. “Oh! I know, I know. Miss
Saheb; let me tell.”
Then in the dramatic Eastern way of telling a story,
emphasising almost every word with hands or movements
of the head, Amrita expounded. “Besides these two eyes
of ours” (first and third fingers of her left hand pointing at
her own bright orbs), “we have within us” (hand laid on
her breast) “another eye. It is called the eye of our mind.”
(Touches forehead.) “These two eyes” (again pointing to
them) “show to us the many things around us. All the
beautiful trees and flowers” (here a sweep of the right arm),
“our friends and many things. When we shut our eyes,
however” (shuts her own tightly), “we cannot see anything.
Within our minds” (hand placed on forehead) “there is
another eye. Sometimes it is open, but sometimes our minds


are asleep and the eye is closed. If that eye is open and a
temptation comes —such as seeing something which we
should like VERY much, but which belongs to another—
then we see that to take it would be sin. We see that it is
an ugly thing to steal, and we turn away. But if that eye
of our mind is shut in sleep, we do not see the ugliness of
the thing we are about to do —and—we do it.”
Yes, little Amrita, you are not the only person who has
found out by bitter experience and strong crying to heed
the warning: “Awake thou that sleepest .... see that ye
walk circumspectly.”
A Bluebird Flock (Indian Brownie pack) has been
started among our little ones at Orakandi. We feel that it
is helping very much the children of Amrita’s age. What a
day it was for them when the first “six” were enrolled!
They were Rupi, Amrita, Flower, Bhudu, Usa and Susila.
Quietly they made their promises of loyalty and helpfulness,
and how well we all know that the very striving to keep
faithfully these promises, even though at times they fail,
leads to the achievement of their hopes and ours. Amrita,
as leader of her “six,” is radiant, and now that at last the
terrible sore has quite healed she is able to take part in all
the games and exercises of the Bluebirds, even to swimming.
It was the first day of the opening ceremonies of our
beautiful little Orakandi church. Amrita’s mother (or
Amrita’s Ma—Bengali for “mother”—as we call her, for a
Bengali mother is not called by her own name, but by that
of her child), came to the room where we were busy prepar-
ing floral decorations for the church. What a changed
Amrita’s Ma from the one who, distraught and harassed,
had entered the Home five years earlier! Fuller of face and
figure, clean and neat in appearance, and with a quiet smile
upon her face.
“Miss Saheb,” she said, “I want two rupees” (about
three shillings) “out of my money bag. I need it.”
Such requests for money from the widows (though
their own money, which they have earned by sewing or
other work), are usually questioned, but this was NOT.
We knew that it was in the mother’s heart to make a truly
sacrificial gift of gratitude to the One who had done so
much for her child. All money which the widows earn is
put into bags bearing their names and kept by the one in


N li
charge. As the widow needs to buy small things, such as
soap, oil or hairpins, she comes to the missionary, and the
amount needed for the purchase is taken out of the bag.
Were this not done, money would be spent wrongly on
tobacco, betel nut and other forbidden things.
But Amrita’s Ma was not going to buy anything with
her three shillings; it was for quite a differint purpose, as
we well knew.
Some days before this request of Amrita’s Ma she and
the missionary had a quiet conversation. The widow, with
tears in her eyes, dwelt again upon the length of time she
had waited and watched for Amrita’s disease to be quite
healed. “How many times,’’ she said, “did I think God was
going to take her—my sixth and last baby—from me, as He
took the others? He has spared her, and now almost healed
her sore. When it is quite healed, and I am hoping it will
be by the time our new church is opened, I want, with
Amrita, to make a thank-offering to Him.”
The church service was over and the congregation
slowly dispersing. Upon the Communion Table was a new
brass tray. During the service the preacher had indicated
that any who had gifts of love to offer might leave them
upon the tray at the close of the service.
A woman in a clean white borderless widow’s sari and
a little girl in Blue-bird uniform walked hand in hand down
to the table. The money was reverently—oh, how
reverently!—placed upon the brass tray. They turned.
Amrita’s Ma’s sacrificial gift of gratitude was offered. As
the mother and child returned to the porch of the church
we think that the angels, too, rejoiced with them that day.
"Come —my child. At sunrise open and raise your
heart like a blossoming flower, and at sunset bend your
head and in silence complete the worship of the day.”
—Rabindranath Tagore.


"And I must work through months of toil.
And years of cultivation,
Upon my proper patch of soil,
To grow my own plantation.
I’ll take the showers as they fall,
I will not vex my bosom.
Enough if at the end of all,
A little garden blossom.”
—Alfred, Lord Tennyson.


Chapter V.
OUR GARDEN.
“A garden is a lovesome thing, God wot!
Rose plot,
Fringed pool,
Fern’d grot
The veriest school
Of peace: and yet the fool
Contends that God is not
Not God! In gardens! When the eve is cool?
Nay, but I have a sign;
’Tis very sure God walks in mine.
—T. E. Brown.
We have a garden at Orakandi; in fact, we have two.
From our verandah we look across a green patch which
would like to be a lawn, only it cannot be. for the poor
thing has not been sown with the right kind of grass.
Chrysanthemums, growing in vessels which are placed on
the grass, shake a profusion of glorious blossoms in the
sunlight.
During the cool season, when the chrysanthemums are
with us, our ordinary “green patch” becomes a thing of
glory and of joy. How certain are our Orakandi children
that the fairies hide round the lower-most branches! We
have seen the tiny tots fairy hunting, creeping lightly on
brown tiptoes —fingers on lips—while excited little heads bob
up and down betwixt grass and flowers.
Beyond the would-be lawn, patterned with its feathery
whiteness, is our English garden. Tis quite a proper little
garden, with beds and paths neatly arranged. At certain
times sweet peas, antirrhinums, phlox, gladioli, and even
roses, dare to face the Indian sun and bring to some hearts
sweet memories of home and other gardens tended long ago.
Our flower plot this, and how we love its sweetness!
Nearby in another space grow our vegetables, and
though India’s millions of creeping, flying and running pests


(*Y
'
claim a large portion of the fruits of our gardening labours,
we can still proudly walk between rows of carrots, beet,
peas, cabbages, cauliflowers, onions and lettuce growing in
our cool season garden.
"A garden is a lovesome thing, God wot!” True, and
heartease comes, tired nerves relax, as often, after a day
which has brought things sordid and saddening, we turn to
cur flowers and are glad again.
But we would tell of our ‘‘other garden.” where paths
do not always run straight or in a proper manner—where
beds hold, as well as flowers, some wild soul-plants, whose
nature is to grow in lawless confusion: untrained until we
train them; sometimes needing to be tied with restraining
cords, cut, pruned, desiring more water or digging than we
have time or strength to give them. Other happy plants
seem to grow and flourish with very little care. Sometimes
they amaze us by showing a sudden flower we had hardly
expected to see so soon. Recently transplanted from a
dank, dark Hindu atmosphere into the fresh sunshine and
love in our garden, these responsive ones absorb its very
strength and purity into their own lives, reflecting in their
faces the song of thanksgiving which they will later learn
to sing with their lips. How we thank God for these! How
we write home about them, that you, our helpers, may rejoice
with us for the flowers brought forth!
In the days ‘‘when we were very young,” a story read
told of a little girl who thought of all her friends as flowers
in God's garden. She allocated them as she felt their
natures demanded. Some were tall, stately hollyhocks;
others shy velvet pansies. There was an old man of her
acquaintance of whom she found great difficulty in disposing.
His nature was so adverse to all sweetness that the little
maiden wondered how she could put him into God’s garden
at all! She solved the problem, suddenly exclaiming, “He
is one of God’s onions, that’s what he is.”
Onions! Yes, we have onions, too, growing in our
garden at Orakandi! The “turnips” and the “cabbages”
grow alongside of them. They grow not in our front garden
patch, gay with brightest flowers—those joyful, recom-
pensing things reflecting the very sunlight in their faces.
These last are the plants which at once catch the eyes of
visitors to our garden. But the onions! Yes, there they are.


The turnips and the cabbages as well! The onions are the
plants in our garden which drive us oftenest to our knees.
Yet even onions are capable of flowering.
Labanya (Beautiful) was her name, but “onion-hke
her disposition. Unfortunately, she was rather a well-
developed onion when she came from her Hindu village
home to our garden in Orakandi. Fifteen years old she
might have been, and had been widowed almost since she
could remember. To her life seemed all criss-cross; inci-
dents planned on purpose to vex her! Unwanted in her
late husband’s home, she was not happy in that of her own
father. A young stepmother, who had not much patience
with the obstinate, persistently sour stepdaughter, did not
help matters.
Finally this onion was brought to us by her father. He
is a respectable man and really wants his daughter s good.
Oh, those first, never-to-be-forgotten days following the
transplanting of this particular onion! With sulky face she
did the duties she was forced to do, but even when much
kindness and diplomacy were tried sometimes open defiance
would follow.
How this onion did make our eyes smart, as we sought
to help her throw off some of the roughest of outside husks!
We were not successful, but, taking our smarting eyes and
the onion-like one to the Master of the Garden, we besought
Him to remove the ugly parts.
Two years passed. Two years of what fierce battles,
what striving, what times of despair and hopelessness! But
there were times, too, when a victory gained caused stars of
hope to shine in our poor struggling one’s sky.
We had sickness in the Home—a bad case of typhoid.
One night it happened that Labanya was doing duty with
us during the long hours of the night as we watched beside
the one so near to death. Once, while our patient slept.
Labanya spoke, very softly. “Oh, how different, she said,
“is everything here from life in our Hindu village homes!
Such care and such nursing of the sick would NEVER be
seen in our homes. WLat a change this life is to us! After
\|>-
a pause, very shyly and hopefully she said. Miss Saheb,
don’t you think I, too, have changed since I came here?’’
“Wbat makes you think you have changed? we asked.


<#
*)
V*
“Oh, I know I have changed!’’ said the suppressed, but
eager, voice. “Though lam still obstinate and rebellious at
times, lam nothing to what I was in my own home. That,
however, which proves to me that I have changed is this:
The things which once I loved, those I now hate, and the
things about which I did not care, those I now love.’’
Very softly and shyly she proceeded to explain. “When
first I came to Orakandi my mind was such that, if any of
the other girls said a thing which was wrong or unclean, I
listened and laughed with them. Now, if anything of that
type is mentioned in my hearing, I cannot bear it. I have
to turn and rebuke the speaker and. if she will not desist, I
must cover my ears and flee from that place.” OUR
ONION HAD BLOSSOMED!
In the stillness which followed, broken only by the
flapping wings of myriads of night insects afloat in the hot
air, our heart sang praises.
For the splendid joy of Triumph,
Praise, praise I sing.
Passing, passing human telling,
Joy to see THEE conquering.
Praise, praise to Thee, my King.”
There was another. She was a “cabbage." Hard of
heart, with leaves pulled tightly together, that we might
know nothing about herself, our thirteen-year-old “cabbage”
presented a hard and uncompromising exterior to the world.
Bindu, the Bible-woman, who brought the sad little widow
from her home at her own father’s request, laughingly said.
Miss Saheb, we shall name her Happy! For it is the very
opposite of everything about her. If she finally becomes
happy, ’twill be the greater triumph.”
So Happy we named her, and unhappy she remained.
She refused to do anything but sit on the verandah of a class-
room, knees drawn up to her chin. Stormy eyes baffled us
if we went near, and when spoken to she absolutely ignored
the speaker. Cruelty had been meted out to her in her
husband’s home, and her father, too, sick of her “cabbage”
ways, had treated her unkindly and practically turned her
out of his home.
Poor, desolate
hardened “cabbage”!


Here, in the new place, kindness, love and care were
waiting for the ill-used child, but she would have none of it.
The other girls tried to coax her to a better frame of mind,
but she drove them off. Finally she announced that she was
going home.
“But your father won’t have you,” said Bindu. “You
can’t swim all the way to your village and, as you haven’t
a boat, how will you manage it?” laughingly asked some of
the younger ones.
But she was a “cabbage.” Unnoticed she slipped out
of the gate and, accosting some men passing in a boat, asked
them to take her to her village. Fortunately for Happy,
they refused to do so.
After about a week of the above attitude, and when
most everyone’s patience was well nigh exhausted, the
“Cabbage’s” father came to see her. He most emphatically
and rather cruelly told her that she need never run away
home to him. for he wouldn’t have her.
After this visit our poor Happy seemed to become some-
what resigned to the situation, and decided to remain in the
Home. She, however, still refused to take her part in any
duties or to attend school. We had realised at the first
that a weary wait was ahead of us before we could hope
for better things. We also knew that we were ignorant of
one-half of the injustice, wrong, cruelty and sorrow which
had made the little girl a “cabbage.” Oh! the weary battles
and sore heartaches for us all until she learned that she
must obey rules, attend classes and refrain from stolidly dis-
regarding any injunctions given to her. Less wearying,
certainly, was the second stage, when with sullen face and
injured look the girl went about her work, doing only what
she was compelled to do.
But who could be happy with a thunder cloud always
in the garden? Constant overtures were made by teachers
and girls, and then, one day, like a daisy in a desert, a
flicker came to the “cabbage-like” one’s lips. We won’t call
it a smile, lest the smile feel insulted! More flickers followed.
We are sure all the little fairies watching clapped their
hands when one day our “cabbage” of the tight heart picked
up a baby in her arms—and smiled! Cabba*ge flowers are
golden!


Happy we call her still, and happy we feel, as we see
the quaint little face wreathed in smiles. Only a few months
after her own arrival, as we saw her helping new widows,
coaxing them and giving them big-sisterly advice, we had
to smile. And again the psalm of thanksgiving arose.
Once visiting a friend in Australia, we found her in her
garden picking flowers. Such a beautiful garden it was! A
whole hillside ablaze with gayest garden plots and bright
shrubs. Tulips, roses —ah, surely every flower that ever
bloomed was in that garden! The tender of the garden was
at the very bottom of the hill, bending over a rather un-
sightly patch. Her arms were full of the blooms she was
gathering. "These,” she said. "I am gathering to decorate
the church.” They were cabbage flowers! The blooms
brought forth by a struggling cabbage plant. Golden
blossoms which shot from the centre of its hard heart. Fit
flowers these to lay at His feet.
Bright flowers predominate in our Orakandi garden,
but thank God that, after much tribulation for everyone, even
onions burst into bloom, and that cabbages hold little sur-
prises of joy and love between the closely-held leaves with
which they seek to hide their hearts.
"There’s not a pair of legs so thin, there s not a head so thick.
There’s not a hand so weak and white, nor yet a heart so sick.
But it can find some needful job that s crying to be done.
For the Glory of the Garden glorifleth everyone.
Oh, Adam was a gardener, and God Who made him, sees
That half a proper gardener’s work is done upon his knees.
So when your work is finished, you can wash your hands and pray
For the Glory of the Garden that it shall not pass away!”
And the Glory of the Garden it shall never pass away!”
-Rudyard Kipling




"I can bear a melancholy man, but never a melan-
choly child, Into whatever quagmire the former sinks,
he may raise his eyes either to the realm of reason or
to that of hope; but the little child sinks and perishes
in a single black poison-drop of the present time. - - -
Fancy a butterfly crawling like a caterpillar with his
four wings pulled off, and you will feel what I mean.
—Jean F. Richter.


mgr: \J J
By/ j .1*^
" V
Chapter VI.
THE HOUSE OF JOY.
"Every child comes into the world with the message
that God does not yet despair of man.”
—Rabindranath Tagore.
"Better to be driven out from among men
be disliked of children.”
than to
Some folks visiting our compound might call it a
“magpies’ nest,” for out of school hours such a continual
stream of chatter and merry laughter is to be heard in the
vicinity that the small building possibly justifies the name.
The children themselves, however, named their cottage and
called it the “House of Joy.’’
Sometimes very young child widows come to us, and
from time to time older ones bring babes with them when
they come to the House of Light. Thus we have acquired
a family of little ones, and it was felt needful that they
should have a place apart from the rest of the Home, where
they might live a natural child life, untrammelled by any
rules and conditions unsuited to their years and away from
the sometimes questionable influence of new and older
widows.
In their simple cottage life we are able also to give the
children the extra care, food and attention which are every
little child’s due.
Our compound is shaped like a horseshoe, a large bath-
ing tank—artificial lake—filling the centre space. Thus it
will be seen that even during the short dry season, when water
recedes from the rice fields which surround our island home,
water is always lapping the edges of the greater portion of
our compound. To be away from water would be a terrible
trial to our children of the beels. Out of school hours half
their time is spent with it, boating on it or fishing on the
green bank by it. It is the extreme left wing of the horse-
shoe which we have chosen for our children s corner. The


fall
p-— R
girls' day school, which some ninety little Hindu girls from
outside villages attend, is situated on this part of the island.
As our garden and house somewhat divide this portion from
the Widows’ Home, it seemed the best corner to place our
infants. Another thing which led us to decide thus was
that a seldom used weaving room was already there, in a
position facing the courtyard, which is at present the school
children’s playground. This room, with a little alteration,
was easily made into the children’s cottage. A kitchen-
diningroom was erected at the rear, and a garden which had
been prepared next to the cottage was given to the children
for their very own. In this somewhat secluded little spot,
away from our “cabbages” and “onions,” our children live
a happy family life. One Masi (teacher) and one Didi (big
sister) live with them, giving the necessary care, and some-
times ADJUSTMENT, needed for the smooth running of
life within the House of Joy.
Amrita and Anila were the biggest of the children when
the cottage was set up, and with what delight and enthu-
siasm they helped in the preparations! Tiny new beds were
made from packing cases—thanks to the Christmas Boxes.
The little beds were all fitted out in the same way. For
each there was a small mosquito net and a scarlet rug for a
covering, and beside each was placed a mat made from an
old bag and bound with a bright colour. At the foot hung
a white, envelope-shaped bag to hold the mosquito net in
the daytime, and on this bag the name of the occupant of
the bed was worked in red.
A few bright children’s pictures for the walls, a coat of
red paint on some old boxes (which held the children’s
treasures), a shelf for school books, and our House of Joy,
long dreamed of, was a reality. And in all the preparation
the children, even the small ones, had helped. How often a
tiny finger, seeking to push a rebellious large needle through
sacking, was sucked and minutely examined, after which
the owner of the finger, with compressed lips and deter-
mined eyes, again tackled her task! How much more the
cottage has meant to our children, and how much their very
own it has become, because of pricked fingers and hammered
thumbs!
Not only to the children is their cottage a House of Joy
and of refreshing. Often when, after battling with sullen
powers of darkest evil outside or seeking to cope with “sour


onions” or ‘‘hard cabbages” in our own older family, we
find our steps leading us to the House of Joy. As merry
rascals run pell-mell to meet us, big brown eyes dance a
welcome, small hands hold our fingers and incessant chatter
rings in our ears, a rest and a tremendous thankfulness
come to us. As the Bengalis say, “The fire goes from our
minds as a cool wind blows upon it.” Never do .we turn
and look upon our merry crowd of little brown pixies but
we say, ‘‘Oh! Lover of little children, that these are safe,
unutterable praise to Thee. Keep them pure and beautiful,
ever the joy and refreshing they now are; but oh! Lord, the
others.”
We see a vision of all the other little children, wee
wives and child widows in Hindu homes, where they are
held by iron bands of “fate,” their childhood ruthlessly torn
from them and their faces dulled with that “look.” Yes,
that ‘‘look,” impossible to describe, which should never be
seen on the face of any child.
Even some of the natural, care-free children romping on
the playground by their House of Joy had the look when
they came. Thank God, it takes sometimes only days before
it departs, and how we pray that quickly they may forget.
Being children, they do. and the new life, with its regular
hours and lessons to be learned, does not present the diffi-
culties to them which it does to those who come to us when
they are older. The children respond to and flourish in the
love that they find awaiting them: therefore, every little child
sent to us is a special joy. How much easier and full of
hopeful possibilities is the path before her, compared with
that of a widow who comes to us when seventeen or eighteen
years of age!
Each evening before bedtime is story hour in the
House of Joy. The little coloured mats beside each bed are
brought out and spread on the verandah, and there, in a
happy cluster, we all take a trip along the Golden Road to
Fairyland. Always there must be a story first. Although
this hour is the happy time when we all relax from school
rules, we older ones, shedding our years and for the moment
placing heavy responsibilities in the background, yet our
children have their own ideas as to how matters should
proceed, and sometimes compel us to stick rigidly to them.
Sometimes, ere one has had time to pause for breath after
the first story has been told, “Another story, another story,
is demanded.


iJ / T
mjIkA ( s
Once two-year-old Prakash, our youngest boy, was
thrust forward. Talking was to him a rather recently-
acquired art, so that we were rather surprised when excited
voices exclaimed, Prakash can tell a story now, Miss
Saheb: Prakash can tell a story!” So, nothing loth, Prakash.
in broken baby Bengali, told his story. “Once there was a
king’s son, and—and—and”—(after some thought) “he
went out for a walk—and he walked—and he walked—and
he walked —(another long, thoughtful pause, then trium-
phantly) and he came home again.”
Sometimes we talk over the first story, the children
criticising or applauding the feats of the hero or heroine.
At other times the children's mood (governed a good deal
by the atmosphere, we have noticed), is such that we all
draw very close to one another while confidences are
exchanged and deep, deep secrets are revealed. There are
some evenings when the children seem to turn into veritable
little question boxes.
"Miss Saheb, has that little cloud a mother? But God
takes care of it, doesn’t He? God is its Father, so He will
make it warm if it gets cold during the night, won’t He?
Where does the cloud live when it is not in the sky?”
Miss Saheb, what colour is the ground in your country?
Can the man in the moon see us?”
Do fishes have grandmothers?”
Rapidly a dozen little voices shoot the questions at us
until, with whirling brain and pleading for mercy, we suggest
that each child take it in turn to ask a question. Often the
children elect to tell stories themselves. Weird and won-
derful are the plots unfolded! Sometimes it is the product
of their own busy brains; sometimes a most amazing and
unorthodox edition of some Bible story, embellished by the
teller’s own imagination; sometimes it is a bloodthirsty
romance culled from no one knows where. The story-
teller is not embarrassed, but rather encouraged to greater
exploits amid the gruesome by exclamations of thrilled horror
and looks of pretended fear on the faces of her audience.
Mostly, however, our babes love best the beautiful stories.
Tales of self-sacrifice and heroism appeal more to them than
even the humorous story, though the latter is often in great
demand.


is
At times, during those awesome and terrible tropical
storms that sweep unhindered by forests or towns across
the open water and come crashing down upon us at
Orakandi, we have been anxious lest the little ones be afraid.
Strange to say, they seem less affected by the tempestuous
hurricanes than their elders are. One stormy day, when the
children were all gathered together in a room watching the
fury of the universe outside, lest the shaking of the house
and blinding lightning should make the more nervous ones
fearful, a sing-song was suggested. Our children dearly
love singing, and so such a suggestion is always hailed with
delight. This day was no exception to the rule, and it was
demanded that one of their number start a tune. Flower’s
clear little voice rang out (she has a beautiful voice and
always leads the children's singing), and soon, despite the
raging elements, song after song filled the little room.
Once, while they were pausing for breath and while a
particularly loud crash of thunder seemed almost to rend
the heavens above, Amrita exclaimed, “We are singing
INSIDE and God is playing His music OUTSIDE.”
God is very real to our children. They talk to Him in
prayer as naturally as they speak to us. Each evening our
story hour closes with an evening song of praise and prayer.
In a circle the children kneel round us, brown hands
folded and each little head bent. Very reverent they are.
for the Eastern mind is naturally religious, and these little
ones know God as a Father of Love, and, with the perfect
trust of a child, they speak to Him as such.
Prayers over, all scramble into bed, for there are no night-
dresses to be donned in Bengal! (The children sleep in
the garment worn during the day. a clean one taking its
place in the morning.) Like a lot of young rabbits, each
scuttling into its own little burrow, the children dive under
their mosquito nets. Little last whispered good-nights or
very private confidences are given as, going from bed to bed,
we tuck in a little mosquito net here or an end of quilt there
which, if left, would allow the treacherous mosquito to enter
the net and feast upon the fresh young limbs, causing the
dreaded malaria fever, which ravages both villages and
towns alike throughout Bengal.
It was one night at this “tucking-in time that Flower
called us to her bed. With our head under her net we


listened while this quiet, most sensitive of all our little flock
whispered, “I don’t want to sleep in this bed any more.”
“Why, Flower, this is a nice bed close to the window,
where you get any breeze there is about.”
“Oh, but that is it! I wake up up and look out of the
window. On moonlight nights I see the trees, and—they
look so big I am afraid.”
Poor little super-sensitive soul! What are we to do for
you? How best help you to overcome these groundless fears
and dreads? Sitting on the bed, we talked of God, who had
made the trees; of how “big” He was, and yet how kind—
so kind that He had made the trees in such a way that little
birds might nest in them, secure from all alarms. While
blower’s little bed held her safe and warm, the kind trees
outside were taking care of the baby birds sleeping in their
branches. The fair little face was soon snuggled into a tiny
pillow, the hazel eyes drooped and Flower was asleep.
Oh! how different each little plant in this our seedling
plot, each one of them needing individual attention and care,
and we with so little time to give them! Yet, oh! what
wonderful possibilities in these young lives, so early learning
to love the beautiful! What a responsibility for us! “Take
this child and nurture it for Me. God give us wisdom
and understanding, we prayed, as we left the House of Joy.
And pass my bud, to perfect flower,
Dread not the bitter blast of wind,
Thy Maker doth command its power,
It knoweth not to be unkind.
Haste thee, my flower, unfold and see
How good thy Gardener is to thee.”




O Lord, who didst come with infinite power and in
infinite love to save men from disease, unhappiness
and sin, and Who on that road didst come to the
unfathomed agony of Calvary; teach us, whose love
and power are so puny, how we may pray about sin
and suffering, and for those in the clutch of either.”
—Lillian E. Cox.


Chapter VII.
THOSE OTHERS.
Look! Can you see how the hands are quivering?
Hands hell-hurt, hands heaven-seeking, hands hopeless.
They are Orakandi Widows’ hands.
The curse has fallen.
The hurt hands tremble, the seeking hands reach out and
implore.
In vain are they clasped. There is none to help, nor any to
hear the wailing of wounded women. —C. S. Mead.
“Lord, what a lot of broken things there be!
Life's littered floors - - - -
Like some rich children’s nursery
Are strewn with splendid broken things,
Here lie crushed crowns, there crumpled wings.
Spoiling of angels, heritage of kings,
Swept to the doors."
And now it is of some of “those others” we would tell —
those whom we longed to save and bring into our House of
Light that they, too. forgetting the past, might regain their
lost and rightful heritage of happy youth, but —they were
swept past us!
One morning early, while the dispensary was full of
mothers and babies who had come for treatment and advice,
a child with wide, terrified eyes rushed into the room, plead-
ing with us for protection. Showing on her limbs and body
cruel wounds which were bleeding, she poured forth that
“usual” tale so often heard, yet the hurts of which we are
powerless to alleviate.
“My husband! He has beaten me again and again. Hide
me; take me into your place of shelter. Miss Saheb. I can
endure no more!”
Looking at her, we knew that it was true. She had
reached the limit of her endurance. The distraught, fear-
stricken face; slim, trembling figure and imploring eyes


might have made a heart of stone weep. In the agitation of
her flight she had allowed the headpiece of her sari (with
which all married women cover their faces) fall from its
position. A tangled mass of short curls covered the child’s
head, but, alas! above the forehead, in the parting of her
hair, was the red streak of vermilion which declared her a
wife, and therefore beyond our power to aid. Had she been
a widow we might have saved her, for a widow is to a certain
extent free, no one having a legal right over her actions
should she have strength enough to assert herself. Though
pity, horror and boiling indignation wrung our very hearts
at the sight of the young wife before us, all we could do was
to give ointment for her wounds and advise that she return
to her husband’s home as quickly as she could. For the
longer she was away the more angry he would become.
Possibly, we suggested, if she ran at once , her absence
might have been hardly noticed and her punishment for
running away not be too severe. The girl, however, could
not face the return.
The next day we heard that the girl was dead! “Died
of cholera’’ was the report! We felt sure this was a lie, and
our older widows, indignant at the subterfuge and crime,
made minute inquiries of the women living in the runaway
child s village. After some attempts to hide the truth, they
finally told the breaking, soul-searing tale of just another
hell-hurt Bengali child. After missing his wife, the
enraged husband followed her to her parents’ home. Devil-
possessed with rage, he seized the shrinking child. Binding
her to a post in the yard, he beat her until his anger was
cooled and the suffering child spirit had fled! Seeing her
dead, the people of her village, anxious to avoid a scandal,
sent to the nearest doctor for cholera medicine, meanwhile
quickly preparing the mutilated body for the funeral pyre
Oh! how we longed with unutterable longing to place
arms of protection round the terrified little figure and stand
between her and the brute whose property she was! But,
alas! the law will not allow any interference between husband
and wife, and we ourselves would have come under that
law’s severe condemnation had we dared lift out a helping
hand to this tortured child. Our Hindu cook happened to
be a distant relative of the runaway wife. and. annoyed at
the disgrace she had brought upon her father’s home by her
flight, he took her to her parents, who lived in his own
village.


As it is usual in India to burn a body very quickly after
death, no inconvenient investigations were made at that early
stage. A body reduced to ashes tells no tales! Later, when
we felt it our duty to press for the murderers to be brought
to justice, previous cunning scheming made it impossible for
the necessary evidence to be found. When a Justice of the
Peace finally visited the village, did not all swear that the
great enemy—cholera—which tarries not when once it has
laid hold of its victim, had carried off the child, even ere
she had time to greet all the relatives of her father’s home?
When she was taken ill. had they not done all in their power
to save her? The bottle of cholera medicine, with the correct
date upon its label, was produced as absolute and final proof
of their righteousness.
Convinced of their guilt, yet unable to prove it, the
Christian J.P. returned wearily from the village.
"In Bengal there is none to help and none to hear the
wailing of wounded women.’
Bmdu, our strong-minded Bible-woman, herself a
widow, and one of the first to enter the Home at its incep-
tion, is ever on the alert to hear of and follow up any young
widow, especially a child widow, who is in danger. A
veritable Elijah is Bindu, and her denouncement of un-
righteousness, especially against widows, has made many a
strong man tremble.
Wading through water, boating for days on end, or
walking for miles across rough ploughed rice fields, she
travels from village to village. Quickly her eagle eye
searches out the young widows, and her instinct scents the
dangers surrounding them. Any word of a young widow
whom it may be possible to save, and Bindu is off to search
out a way whereby that salvation may come about. Usually
she seeks to awaken some quickening of conscience in the
father or other guardians of the girl, and endeavours to
make them promise to assert their authority and bring the
girl to the House of Light. Sometimes, however, Bindu sees
that she must strike while the iron is hot and, while her
hearers are under the influence of her arguments, she presses
the young widow to come away with her then. Bindu knows
that only too often a father, uncle or brother, though in his
own mind he may be convinced of the right, has not the
strength to stand up against the opposition of his relatives.


Though he may have promised to bring the widow to the
Home, he lets the matter drop, and the sullen black waters
have sucked under another young victim!
One day, hearing suddenly of a beautiful young widow,
ten years old, whose parents might be willing to save her,
Bindu, hardly waiting to eat, was in the boat and off. The
village was far away, and the boat trip across the beels took
many hours. With our prayers we followed the little skiff
as it skimmed the shining water, parting the high-standing
rice crop like a shuttle in the loom.
It was dark when the boat returned. One look at
Bindu s face and we knew that she was suffering the cruel
pangs of defeat. Hardly dared she speak, but almost
roughly dropped a few sentences which made us aware of
the whole pitiful tale of wrong. “Child given to a Holy
Man a few days ago; gone right away.” Another fair
young flower crushed, its petals smirched by the black sin
and wrong ere they had time even to unfold.
We are aware that this chapter does not make pleasant
reading, but we who have dwelt on “Life's littered floor” at
Orakandi have seen the “crushed crowns” and “broken
wings” swept past our doors! Shall we keep silent? Having
looked upon those buds which lie bruised and broken, wilter-
ing upon the open water ways of the beels, shall our lips
be sealed?
That those who read may be oppressed, with an oppres-
sion which shall drive them to their knees, we would speak
of a few—yes, only a few—of the things which we have
seen and heard.
A young girl widow, anxious for a life of purity and
peace, came to us unknown to her relatives. Coming with
friends to the great annual Hindu Festival at Barani, which
is held near Orakandi, she slipped through our gates and
told us she wished to remain in the Home. After she had
been with us a few days, relatives came for her. She refused
to go with them, and, being a widow, she had a right to do
so. For days the men hung about the place, each morning
coming to the Home and demanding an interview with the
girl. We knew it was no use to refuse them conversation
with her or they would resort to unlawful measures in their
determination for an interview. The young widow, Sarogini
by name, remained firm in her decision to stay, despite warn-


ings, promises and enticements of every kind put forward by
her persecutors. On the occasion of the fourth or fifth inter-
view, when a number of men relatives were again assailing
the girl, a sudden sign was made by one present; then two
others leapt forward. Picking Sarogini up by force, they
fled, running. The attack was so sudden and unexpected
that we were unprepared. A policeman nearby was sum-
moned and ran after the girl’s captors, but, being beaten off
with a stick by one of them, he returned helplessly to us.
There was nothing more we could do, though we tried.
“What does it matter to ME?” was the remark of an
educated and influential neighbour whose aid we sought to
enlist.
“Lord, what a lot of broken things there be!”
Puma, one of our older Christian widows, had been
visiting a village called Gopalnathpur. As she was leaving
the village outskirts, a beautiful, fair young widow accosted
her. "I am going with you to Orakandi,” she said. As they
walked through the rice fields and entered the boat. Puma
heard the other’s story.
Her name was Susila. Motherless and with her father
away working in another village, she had been living with
an uncle. A wicked man of the village, seeing the girl with
little protection, began to lay his devilish plans. Being
afraid, Susila sent a message to her father, pleading with
him to come and protect her. He did not come or send any
message. Fearing lest the net being cast around her feet
should close, in her dire extremity Susila sent again for the
only one on whom she had to call. He failed her, and,
determined to save her honour and escape from the repul-
sive sin which, like a snake, crept daily nearer and nearer,
Susila decided to flee. Puma’s visit to the village that day
gave her an opening for which she had been seeking.
On seeing the girl’s face when she arrived with Puma
at the Home, we were struck with its beauty and purity of
expression. Here was one, we felt, who would naturally
blossom forth into beauty of soul as soon as the “gold light
of love” shone upon her. Two days she was with us, and
even in such a short time her gentle ways had endeared her
to us all. THEN her father came. Knowing of her terrible
plight and fear of the evil pressing upon her, he had not
troubled to come to her aid; but, hearing that she had fled


“Can such a thing happen to you when I, your father,
alive?” said the wily man.
Then was the only time Susila answered her father in
any but a meek and respectable voice. Indignantly she burst
forth, “Father, you say that. Did I not appeal to you again
and again for your protection and you heeded not? Can I
trust you to protect me now? I CANNOT, and I will not
go with you.”
After many more attempts to break down his daughter’s
determination, the man who should have been her protector
took from a bag he had been holding a large knife. For a
second we feared he was going to attack Susila, but, laying
the blade at his own throat and holding it there, he said.
If you say again that you will not come with me, I will
draw this blade, and you will be responsible for the death
of your own father. Now, will you come?”
The girl, unnerved by her father’s dramatic actions and
the awful results it might bring, hesitated, burst into tears,
and in a broken voice of hopelessness said, “Yes; well, I
suppose I will have to go.”
Then COME, shouted the man in a loud voice of
basest victory.
With bowed head and slow footsteps Susila followed
her father out of the gate. She was young, and the test had
been too great.
With stricken hearts we watched her walking away
from us—away from the only place which could have pro-
tected her purity and led her to the One in the light of
whose Love we had hoped to see her unfold a lovely flower
in our garden.
to a Christian place of safety from such sin, he lost no time
in following her up. We had no alternative but to call
Susila and allow her father to converse with her. Timid,
yet brave, she answered clearly all his questions, telling him
that she had come of her own free will, and meant to remain
in the House of Light.
“What!” said he, “when I, your father, need you and
grieve for you. Would you break my heart?”
Then Susila told him again of the awful danger and
dread which had driven her to flee from her uncle’s house.


■
Yes, and as we continued to watch the two retreating
figures, another joined them—a man.
“THAT MAN!” exclaimed Puma. “ ’Tis the man who
seeks her destruction. Her father, probably receiving money
from his daughter’s would-be destroyer, has trapped her into
his hands.”
It was even so. We cared not to watch any longer.
Yet never can we give up praying that some day, somehow,
Susila may find a way of escape from the galling fetters
which bind her. But, oh! had it only been possible to keep
her ere the sin forced upon her blight the clear beauty of
her soul!
Oh! those “others.” We cannot understand! We can
only fight on more fiercely 'gainst the powers of darkness,
where such foul things have birth, praying and striving for
that day when India shall grow a conscience and have
strength to cast from her these things which mar the glory
of a land otherwise so magnificent and beauty strewn.


"Thou has been a strength to the poor, a strength to
the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a
shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible
ones is as a storm against the wall.”—ls. 25: 4.
"I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort
them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.”
—Jer. 31: 13.


Chapter VIII.
THROUGH MUCH TRIBULATION THEY
ENTERED.
"On the waters float lotus-flowers, pictures of lovely woman-
hood as God would have it be.
But see, ere unfolding, these buds lie bruised, broken.
In Bengal waters they wilt and wither untimely.
But where there shines the love of Christ there is revival;
flowers bloom again. Bathed in the gold-light of that
gleaming love, soul-petals re-form, grow strong, and are
moulded into the beauty of glory which the Artist-soul
of God had purpose-dreamed.” —C. S. Mead.
A new young widow of twelve was brought to us by
Kiroda, one of our older widows, of whom she was a distant
relative. The new one, Suki by name (alas! meaning
“glad”), wailed and wept for days after her arrival in the
Home. Oh! the weary times of waiting and of watching
until this stage passes! Finally Suki desisted, and later,
when she had really settled down in our midst, the cause of
her previous demonstration was made known, as she opened
her little heart to our grey-haired motherly Daya. Pointing
to a tiny island, the palm trees of which could be distinctly
seen across the water from Orakandi, Suki said, “On that
island is my father-in-law’s home. There I suffered untold
cruelty and wrong. Finally they put me in a bag, tied the
mouth up tightly and, throwing it into the water underneath
a thick growth of lilies, they left me there to die. Kicking
and tearing with all my might, I managed to make a hole in
the bag and escape. Swimming about for some time, I
finally saw a boat coming in my direction. I hailed it. The
men were kind and, picking me up, took me to my mother s
home. Therefore,” said Suki, “when I first came here I
wondered what new terrors awaited me, and I cried much.
for my fear was great.”
Truly, how little we know of all the cruel torments to
mind, body and spirit inflicted upon the young widows before


they come to us, making them sometimes the strange, difficult
problems which perplex and, alas! at times sorely try our
spirit!
Jogamaya was one who, though not particularly ill-
treated in her home, was, like nearly all young Nama Sudra
widows, in grave moral danger. Widowed as a tiny child,
after her husband’s death she had returned to her father’s
house. Her mother died while Jogamaya was still young, and
the father and five brothers with whom she now lived made
rather a pet of the little girl. In course of time the father
died, and when Jogamaya herself became older she realised
her position of difficulty and danger. News of the Orakandi
“House of Light” had been carried across the waters to her
village, and Jogamaya determined to seek its shelter and
protection. She begged her brother’s permission to come to
us. This being flatly refused, Jogamaya ran away from her
home in an attempt to reach us. Her brother followed and
overtook her as she fled through the rice fields. She was
forced back. Three times she fled, and the last time reached
us in safety. Relatives soon came clamouring at our doors.
Even Jogamaya s mother-in-law was among the number.
Weeping and showing signs of tremendous grief, they im-
plored the young widow to return with them to her Hindu
home. The testing time was very severe, for Jogamaya
dearly loved her brothers. However, she was old enough to
know that her own purity was the price she must pay if she
yielded to their entreaties. When her old mother-in-law, in
a last great effort to coax the girl, touched her feet*, the
battle was almost a victory on the side of evil.
Prayer was ascending inside our house for the young
girl as the battle waged in our courtyard. God stepped in.
strength came to her, and, tearing herself from her people,
Jogamaya remained in the House of Light.
It was an Easter Sunday morning some years later. A
holy little service was being held upon the green banks of our
large tank. Lines of our widow girls, in their clean white
saris, stood near to the water s edge, reverently watching
as our grey-haired noble old Bengali pastor baptised one of
their number.
Jogamaya has arisen from the baptismal waters! A
new light has dawned upon her face as at last that TRUE
LIGHT has entered her soul.
This act is usually done only by an inferior to a superior as an
act of devotion and reverential respect.


V '' i • l
“Through much tribulation.” surely , but she has
ENTERED!
Rupi was one of a big family, and her father desperately
poor. Like many such fathers in India, he solved the
problem of feeding his little girls by marrying them off as
soon as he could. Therefore, when Rupi was three or four
years of age, she was married to a man who was already a
widower. And while still quite a child she went to live in
her husband s home. Here the small child-wife was expected
to share all the heavy work of a village farmhouse with an
older sister-in-law. Weary and sore from carrying heavy
burdens, and doing work far beyond her strength, the
naturally affectionate child often longed for someone who
cared, and who would give her a little love. But there was
no one. The unnatural life told upon Rupi; she grew thin
and her face hard and drawn. Very occasionally her father
would come and take her home on a short visit. With what
joy she looked forward to these rare occasions! Alas! they
were few and far between, and only too soon her husband
would arrive at her father’s home in order to take her back.
How she cried! She wanted to stay “just a little longer” with
her mother and the little brothers and sisters whom she
loved so dearly. But she was now her husband’s property,
and back she had to go. The excuse given was that it was
“inconvenient” for her sister-in-law to manage all the work
alone. When Rupi was eight or nine years of age her hus-
band died. The little widow, however, continued to live in
the home of her brother-in-law. The child was fair, and evil
men abound. Not long after she became a widow some of
these did their best to run away with her. Among the men
was one who even claimed distant relationship with Rupi.
Seeing her wearing an old and torn sari, this evil one said
that he and the others would take her to the bazaar and buy
her a nice new garment. Pleased by the prospect, and
touched by their kindness, the child delightedly entered a
boat they had brought.
On the way. however. Rupi sensed that something was
wrong and rather cleverly managed to manoeuvre a visit to
an uncle of hers en route to the bazaar. Once in that uncle s
home she told her story and was saved from the predicament
of the moment. From her uncle’s home Rupi was sent to that
of her own father. There she was happy and comparatively
safe. However, in that home there were many other mouths
i rzi


After the parents and other children had disposed of
a good meal of parched rice, they departed once more in
their little boat.
Amrita took complete charge of Rupi. and for a day
or two her ministrations were of necessity constant and
anxious. Rupi was a little slip of a child, some eleven years of
age, and had been widowed for three years when she came
to us. She was thin, with hollow cheeks, the little face
drawn by sorrow and semi-starvation. Such a pathetic droop
about her mouth, and those sad eyes looked incapable of
smiling. For weeks we sought to bring a smile into them,
but it was a whole month before the vestige of one appeared.
Rupi had, however, a lovely shock of curls hanging round
her shoulders, and these somewhat relieved the hardness of
her little face.
Eight months have passed; looking through our window
we have a vision of a sparkling, vivacious child in a scarlet
frock, a shock of black curls flying in the wind, as in play
she dances round the children’s playground. Yes, it is Rupi!
Grown plump, pretty as a fresh flower and full of life and
to feed. Bad times came to the father; crops failed and he
went into a decline—and finally there came a day when there
had not been any food in the home for three days.
Desperate, the parents decided that if Rupi came to the
House of Light there would be one less mouth to feed, or one
less child to starve in the home.
It was during the floods of 1931 when the water came
right over the compound and lapped our verandah steps
that Rupi s parents, in a tiny boat, sailed across our court-
yard and landed upon a verandah! We then heard all the
story, and Rupi was finally handed over to us. The mother’s
tears flowed at the time of parting, but she was very brave,
and so was the child. Wise little Rupi, though so young,
knew the desperate poverty of her father; she knew the
unhappiness of her late husband’s home, and she even knew
a little of the dangers of a young widow’s life in these parts.
Though she had never seen us before, she trusted us; she
trusted her parents’ judgment, and without any fuss or
crying she walked into the Home, led by Amrita, whom we
had called because she is about Rupi’s own age.


energy. Day by day, merrily her laughter rings out, as
diving in the bathing tank, swinging on the swing, or playing
games with the other children she revels in the newly-found
childhood which Hinduism had so long denied her. Again
we ask ourselves, can it be Rupi? We think of those first
days, when we despaired of ever being able to make her
smile. Now her smile is a thing illuminating and infectious.
Fair, beautiful of form and feature, clever, happy of nature,
and capable in all household arts, Rupi has brought to us
much joy. Since those first few days when she was left with
us by her parents, and fretted sadly for the little brothers and
sisters she loved, Rupi has not in any way been a difficult
child, but is one of those who have responded instantly and
in fullest measure to the “gold-light of love.”
Our hopes for her run very high, and our prayer for
her is this: “Oh! Holy Lord of all hallowing, keep undefiled
forever this house that has been lately cleansed.”
“Through much tribulation.” Even so, but still another
little child-widow HAS ENTERED.


"A young child's tears are bitter, Lord,
But Thou canst make them sweet,
A young child’s thoughts are deep, so keep
Them fresh like cliff-top wheat.
Keen is a young child's happiness.
Wilt bless his laughing eyes?
Hold out Thy Hand to him, O God,
And heed Thy servant’s cries." —Thomas Moult.


r
Chapter IX.
THE VILLAGE BRIDE
—"Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.”
"No word that ever was spoken
Of human or god-like tongue,
Gave ever such god-like token
Since human harps were strung.”—A. C. S.
Such a soft cuddly wee thing she looked! Fair dimpled
limbs and rounded chubby face. A baby girl of three years,
and in appearance very like any one of that army of toddlers
who each morning joyfully trot off to our Free Kindergartens
in Australia. At the foot of a large spreading mango tree,
the dimpled one, Subhadra by name, watches intently the
ever-fascinating game of mud-pies which her elder brother,
aged six, is playing. Only, not being acquainted with
English pies, these children of the Sun, with the same good
old mother earth and water, prepare alluring curries! Broken
stems or seeds make realistic rice, and with sticks or soft
leaves for fish, what more is required to complete a feast of
untold joys?
Busily the boy works, stirring, pounding, rubbing the
mixture in his hands, then placing it to “cook” in a piece of
broken pottery placed over an imaginary fire.
Fascinated, Subhadra watches the actions of “Dada”
(elder brother), as she calls him, for no Bengali child will
address or allude to a senior (even though it be her own
brother or sister) by name. It would be an impudence on
the younger one’s part to do so.
Innocent of all clothing save her own pretty creamy
skin, the child squats, Bengali fashion, upon her heels, the
fair chin resting on her knees. The intent face is serious
almost stolid, one might say at a glance. But wait a moment!
Dada, after several tries, has at last turned out a truly
bewitching “fish curry.” Subhadra, who all this time has


lit
5 '
hardly stirred, springs up and, executing a wild succession
of bounding leaps, in excited tones pleads for the privilege
of the “first bite." Stolid, did we say? True, in repose the
little face, with its mass of tangled black hair, can look
almost stolid. The hazel eyes (which often go with a very
fair Bengali skin) are inscrutable. But let some pleasurable
surprise come! Like a sparkling stream suddenly let loose,
the smiles and dimples come racing one another to illuminate
the “stolid” face to a thing of vivid animation. The excite-
ment of the moment over, the naked little figure again adopts
an attitude of quiet, watching the marvellous feats of
“Dada.”
Save for the cows who are tied up in a shed nearby,
the children playing under the mango tree are the only
occupants of the courtyard. Four mat houses placed in the
form of a quadrangle face the courtyard. Three of them
boast verandahs. The earth floors of these verandahs—and,
in fact, the whole of the courtyard—have been carefully
smeared over with a mixture of cow manure, earth and
water. This gives it a hard, clean surface, which can easily
be swept and kept tidy. The fresh morning air plays softly
round the little ones, tossing Subhadra’s curls and sending
upon her a shower of tiny white flowers from the branches
over her head. Presently a door opens and a man clad only
in a loin cloth comes out. Seeing the children playing, a
light comes into his eyes, for Bengali fathers do love their
children, especially when they are young. Advancing, he
picked up little Subhadra and teasingly said, “What! outside
in the courtyard for all the village to see. and this your
wedding day?” This remark brought back to the boy’s
memory the promise of certain thrills he had almost for-
gotten. ‘ Father,” he said, “how many curries will there be
at the feast to-night?”
Soon the household was awake and the excitement of
the day commenced. “All the world loves a wedding,” and
particularly so the Bengali world.
It is the custom for Bengali brides and bridegrooms to
fast on their wedding days, but, on account of her tender
years and having a devoted father, three-year-old Subhadra
was allowed a little food early in the morning. After this,
however, there were no more meals all day, and no more
games in the courtyard with “big brother.” She was kept
strictly inside her mother’s room, and saw little of the decora-


tions of coloured paper and quickly planted banana trees
with which the simple village home was made gay for the
wedding. Relatives and friends from every direction arrived
as the day wore on, and all went to peer at the bride as
she sat on her mother’s bed, half afraid and half enjoying
the excitement of which she somehow knew she was the
centre. Towards evening the tired child, nearly asleep with
hunger and weariness, was roused up to be dressed in her
bridal array, for had not the sound of the bridegrooms
coming been heard in the distance? The eighteen-year-old
boy who was to be Subhara’s husband was on his way to
the home of his bride. Even now the bride’s father and
some uncles and cousins had gone out to meet him. Women
relatives now proceeded to decorate the over-wrought babe,
who should have been tucked up for the night in her little
bed. They put on her a minute sari of red silk, the portion
covering her little head pulled well down over the face, that
not an inch of its chubby fairness might be seen, for so must
a bride’s face be veiled. Then were added the ornaments,
necklaces, bangles, tinkling anklets, and even ear-rings in
the tiny ears! After the unruly locks had been well oiled
and bound in some sort of knob at the back of the baby
head the creamy feet were painted round the edges with a
scarlet colouring. The last finishing touch, a bright spot of
vermilion between the eyebrows, was applied and the bride
was ready!
The exploding of paper bombs and playing of primitive
music announced the arrival of the bridegroom, and now the
real wedding ceremony was about to begin. All night long the
noise and confusion lasted. The priest droning in Sanskrit the
long marriage service, which scarcely anyone understood, let
alone the boy and little child who were that night being
united for life. Great was the noise and excitement when
at last, at the auspicious moment, the bride, carried in the
arms of her father, was borne seven times round the boy
bridegroom, who sat beneath a cluster of banana trees
erected in the courtyard. Into the baby hands of the bride
were placed sweet-scented flowers, which she scattered upon
the head of her husband, also doing obeisance to him at the
end of each detour round him. Finally bride and bridegroom
were seated on the ground opposite each other, and the
priest placed the baby hand in that of the youth and. holding
it there, bound both hands tightly together with a red cord.
Little Subhadra —was a wife!


-j/.:
The next day went in feasting and general festivities.
The great event of the day came when the bridegroom and
his party started for home, taking the bride with them. It
is the correct thing for a bride to weep loudly when leaving
her father s home for that of her husband, but there was no
need to tell Subhadra to cry. She screamed and clung
wildly to her mother as these strange people (whom she had
never seen before in her life until the night before) sought
to lift her in the waiting duli (a kind of curtained chair
carried on mens shoulders), which was to convey her to
the river bank, whence a steamer would take her to the home
of her father-in-law. Never for one night, and scarcely for
a whole day, had Subhadra been separated from her mother
and father, who were her everything. The tender, but firm,
hands of her father now undid the clinging baby fingers as
they clutched at her mother’s garments. Forcibly she was
placed in the chair and the curtain dropped. Quickly hoist-
ing the chair to their shoulders, the bearers set off almost at
a run for the river’s bank.
The next few years of the little wife s life were spent
partly in the house of her father-in-law and partly in her
own home. How happy were the months spent with her
father and mother, when she played with big brother as of
yore! There she was free to run about, uncover her face,
and, best of all, there were always the dear mother arms
waiting to receive her when childish sorrows or hurts came
her way. How she loved the evening trip to the river bank
with her mother! With a tiny water pot carried gracefully
Who heeded that a little baby girl s cries rang out,
"Oh! mother, mother; father, father; oh! alas! alas!”?
Passers by on the village pathway heeded not. Some
who knew the child well might have felt a pang of pity, but
tney all considered that Subhadra s father was a wise and
conscientious man to thus early arrange the future welfare
of his one and only daughter.
Who heeded? Yes, there was one who in her own room
placed her hands over her ears that she might not so clearly
hear the cries which cut her to the heart. Weeping,
Subhadra’s mother remembered the day when she, a tiny
bride, had in this way been carried off from the arms of
her mother.


®L
on her own fat hip, she followed her mother, who walked
ahead, carrying a large bright water pot of heavy brass.
Together they walked down into the shallow water and
dipped their vessels in the stream. With a deft and graceful
swinging movement the filled water pots were swung to a
resting place on the carrier’s hip. Now followed the return
walk. The pots, filled to the brim with water for cooking
and the family’s general use, must be kept in position by the
left arms encircling them. Though she stumbled and per-
spired under the weight of her burden. Subhadra uncon-
sciously realised that she was now doing a woman’s job.
and was secretly proud of the fact. Proud, too, was she of
the tiny streak of red vermilion which was smeared daily in
the parting of her untidy hair. Was she not now a wife,
and the magic red streak proclaimed the fact to all whom
she might meet? During the periods spent in her husband s
home, Subhadra was not desperately unhappy. True, as
soon as ever able, she was expected to help with all the
heavy farm work —cleaning and winnowing of rice, prepar-
ing of fuel for the fire, top-dressing the courtyard, sweeping,
washing and cooking. She must also be ready to wait on
her husband when he sat to eat, standing behind and fanning
him while the meal lasted. That over, she must prepare his
hookah (pipe made from a cocoanut and long wooden
stem), filling it with coals and tobacco. If her husband
chose to sleep after smoking, the little wife must be ready
to fan him, that his sleep might be restful and refreshing.
All these things she took as a matter of course. Even angry
words, or maybe blows from her mother-in-law when the
child failed to please, were not thought cruel or unjust. For
was it not a mother-in-law’s privilege to make the young
daughter-in-law grow “straight”?
Always the child looked forward to and dreamed of
that glad time when once more her father would appear and
carry her off to the little village home beside the river, where
was love and a brief return to the happy days of childhood.


Pluck this little flower and take it, delay not! I fear
lest it droop and drop into the dust. - - - Though its
colour be not deep and its smell be faint, use this
flower in Thy service, and pluck it while there is time.’’
—Rabindranath Tagore.


Chapter X.
THE WIDOW.
"He who ever watches over frail birds, senseless beasts
and tiny insects; He who cared for you when you
were yet unborn, my heart, shall He forget you now?
—Kator.
During one of those happy seasons when Subhadra,
now about nine years of age, was rejoicing in the freedom
of a visit to her father’s home, a message came from her
husband’s village. Subhadra’s husband was dead! Now
the pretty, fair child had become that most despised of all
things in the Nama Sudra community —a widow!
Wailing, as custom demanded, and discarding most of
her pretty jewels (a few were left out of pity for her youth),
the child realised that a terrible calamity had come upon
her. But to her parents the blow was heavier. Their only
daughter, now as useless, despised and spurned by the
general community as that piece of broken pottery
Subhadra’s mother had thrown on the rubbish heap a few
days earlier! A widow! Subhadra’s father bowed his
head in grief. He knew that a child fair as his little daughter
would be wanted by some; those who would crush and bruise
the purity of the flower and blast the fair young life. While
she was a wife they would not dare; but a widow—when is
she safe?
The father (for he was a good man up to his light)
was troubled exceedingly, while he blamed Fate for writing
such disaster upon the forehead of his daughter.*
After the first shock and when outward mourning for
her husband was over, nine-year-old Subhadra rather
rejoiced that her husband’s people did not demand that she
return to them. She had not brought them good luck, and
* The Hindus believe that the goddess Laksmi writes upon the forehead
of every babe all that will happen to it during its lifetime. This
is “fate,” what is woitten cannot be in any way evaded or changed.


could, therefore, now remain in her father’s house. The
next two years were happy ones for the little widow, for
though the stigma of her widowhood was brought forcibly
upon her at times, she was with her parents. Big brother
was now eleven years old and had been married to a baby
girl of nine months , and another wee brother had come to
Subhadra’s own home.
One meal a day is the portion of widows, and never
must they appear at any festivity such as a wedding, or at
any other time of gladness. The widow’s presence would
be sure to bring ill-luck and disaster, so the Hindus say.
Subhadra soon learned to follow the rules of her widow-
hood and to hide her face from those who would curse her
for the ill-luck they feared the sight of her face would bring
them.
Alas: another sorrow was about to fall on that little
village home. Subhadra’s father fell ill and lay dying. His
widowed daughter was then his greatest concern. Who
would care for her and protect her from those evil ones?
The dying father knew that neither the thirteen-year-old son
he was leaving behind nor Subhadra’s own mother
would be able to protect her. There was a man whom
Subhadra’s father admired —his “guru’’ (religious adviser).
He sent for him. When the man came, the dying father
placed the responsibility for his daughter's safety upon this
friend. Later, after her father’s death, the guru took
Subhadra to his own home, which was in a village near
Orakandi. Even there those who sought the child’s harm
threatened her. Seeing this and knowing of the Mission
Home for Widows at Orakandi, the guru came to consult
us about Subhadra. During the interview the man seemed
very perplexed. He wanted to secure the girl’s safety. He
realised that outside the Home there was no safety for any
widow, even for a child of eleven. On the other hand, he
feared the Christian influence. Would we promise not to
baptise her by force and not to re-marry her, as he had
heard the Christians did? After a long talk, his fears
seemed somewhat dispelled, and, as we were that night going
to show the lantern in a village adjoining his home, he
promised to bring the child along to us there. Too often
young widows have been promised—have been almost inside
the sheltering doors of the Home, in fact—then the Evil One
has made a last desperate effort and got them, even as we


almost felt their hands were in ours. So that night we dared
not build our hopes too high, but we prayed that this,
another little widow, might not be given to feed the sordid
waters of Hinduism.
It was 10 p.m., the lantern talk was over, and, being
anxious to return home, we looked around for the guru.
There he was standing with a group of other men. and he
beckoned us to a house nearby. Inside that house we caught
our first sight of Subhadra. Sitting on the floor, with a set
and stolid expression upon her face, she seemed not in the
least alarmed at our appearance nor interested in our advent.
Seating the two missionaries and our faithful Bible-woman,
Bindu, in a semi-circle opposite Subhadra, the guru proceeded
to make a formal speech. He was so emotionally perturbed
that we feared he would make the child afraid and she
refuse to come away with us. Addressing her, he said,
“Subhadra, you know that your father placed you in my
care. I want to do nothing whereby unhappiness will come
to you. You see these ladies; you have heard of the
Orakandi Home for Widows. I do not in any way com-
mand you, but are you willing to go with them? ’
It was a tense moment, A child of only eleven! Never
had she seen white people before. Was it likely that she
would agree to come away with us? Especially at night,
and in a strange boat. We looked at the fair face, and we
knew the terrible danger for so young and attractive a
widow.
But she was going to speak. Slowly and most distinctly
came her reply: “I will go to Orakandi.
How we thanked God as we breathed a deep sigh of
grateful relief! The guru, however, was not satisfied. Again
he spoke. “Subhadra. these people are Christians. I do
not know a great deal about them. I have even heard that
they beat widows, and you may have many hardships to face
if you go with them. What have you to say?”
No change of expression on the stolid face, but, clearly
as before, the reply: “I will go to Orakandi.
There was one more test, and it was a hard one.
trembled again for what her reply might be. The guru said.
The guru said
“If you decide not to go to Orakandi. do not think that 1


aST
Oh, here was a test indeed! Could the child’s love for
her home and her mother stand it? But once again quite
definitely came the same reply: ‘‘l will go to Orakandi.”
At this the guru rose and, placing the hand of Subhadra
in ours, he said, “Take her; I hand her over to you. Before
witnesses she herself has chosen, and, should she be un-
happy, I am exempt from blame.”
It was midnight before we left the village. Scarcely
could we believe that we really had her safe in the boat with
us. Occasionally a little sob from Subhadra broke the still-
ness as we skimmed along the water of the beels towards
the House of Light, whose doors alone can protect such
little ones from the surging sin without.
She was very stolid for a few weeks, but we soon began
to see the stolidness giving way to outbursts of animation
and glee. As time went on and the child developed into a
big, lively girl in her teens, we sometimes wished the quiet
stolidness had not departed quite so quickly.
The new Subhadra, with well-nourished body (no
widow’s rule of one meal a day to be kept in our Home),
an abundance of surplus energy, with merry laugh and, sad
to relate, loud voice, is not quite so easy to steer into ways
of wisdom as perhaps the “stolid quiet one” might have
been. Though decidedly hoydenish in many of her ways
and always doing the wrong thing, Subhadra is a good
child. Often we are forced to smile at her clumsy attempts
at righteousness, but the “will to do” right is with her, and
her happy, good-natured attempts to be really helpful are
truly laudable.
As Subhadra’s voice is the voice most often heard raised
in conversation, and as it is her laugh that invariably rings out
just when it should not, the word “hush” is very familiar to
her. One evening, as we sat preparing some notes for the
next morning’s classes, a voice at the door called, “Miss
Saheb, may I come?” It was Subhadra, and she looked very
serious. What was coming, we wondered? “Please, I want
some medicine.” She has developed into a very well-built
shall turn you out or in any way be displeased with you. I
shall send you back to your own mother and your home
again.”


/#
S
girl and she looked the picture of blooming health, so we
asked for what ailment medicine was needed. With sober
eyes and unsmiling lips she replied, “I want a kind of
medicine which will make my voice soft and gentle.” While
we fought to restrain a smile and sought for something out
of the waste-paper basket at our feet, Subhadra continued,
“Yes, Miss Saheb, you know how my voice is always
getting me into trouble! There was that day at the pump
when you said. ‘Hush. Subhadra’; then that day when, as
we dived into the bathing tank, you said, ‘Less shouting,
Subhadra, please.’ Another morning in our kitchen you
said, ‘ls that Subhadra’s voice I hear?’ I have been thinking
that, as there are medicines for so many other things, how
good it would be if you could give me one that would alter
my voice and make it soft and quiet.
After a heart-to-heart talk, Subhadra went away
realising, we hope, that the medicine she needed was already
in her hands, and that it was labelled “Self-control and
Refinement.” Dear old blunderbus Subhadra! Such a
mixture, and so often failing. Her faults, however, arc
mostly those of any lively, undeveloped young adolescent,
and are not serious ones.
Her care for Bura M.er, the old invalid grandmother
of the Home, is very beautiful to see. and. though as yet
Subhadra has not made any profession of Christianity, we
know by her love and care for the sick ones when it is her
turn to be “nurse” on duty in the Home, by her quick desire to
help a tired “grown-up.” and by her eagerness to join in the
little ones’ evening prayers, that Subhadra is learning to
love those things which are beautiful and, we trust, to rely
on the One who alone can give her strength to follow after
them.


"Above the edge of dark appear the lances of the Sun:
Along the mountain ridges clear his rosy heralds runr
The vapours down the valleys go
Like broken armies, dark and low,
Look up, my heart, from every hill
In folds of rose and daffodil
The sunrise banners flow."—Henry Van Dyke.


Chapter XL
BIMALA, THE CHRISTMAS
BOX.
“Oh, fly away on silent wings, ye boding owls of night!
Oh welcome, little birds that sing the coming-in of light!
—H. V. D.
The cool season, so longed and waited for by those of
us who have known cooler and less humid climes, was with
us at last. There was also a Christmas feel in the air!
Mysterious rustles of brown paper could be heard from
time to time within the house. Parcels and letters with
holly-sprigged wrappings were arriving by post from
Australia.
Ever and anon from the widows courtyard or the
children’s cottage came fragments of song. Christmas carols
were being practised for the “Big Day, as the Bengalis call
Christmas.
Our children, all agog with expectant excitement, were
finding the intervening days before Christmas interminable.
We, as a large family, had already received one Christmas
Box. Bimala, a tiny widow of eight years of age, had
been brought to us by her mother a few days earlier.
Seated inside the house, we looked out upon the wide
verandah of cur bungalow, its white pillars making a
delightful frame to a picture of vivid colour. We saw a
profusion of white, russet and mauve chrysanthemums grow-
ing. Their blossoms, massed in clusters looked like giant
posies held high above the green grass beneath. Fairy-
like traceries of shadow from the trees overhead fell upon
the flowers and mingled with the soft sunshine which bathed
the whole scene in its light.
As we watched and offered up a song of thanksgiving
for the lavish beauty of the scene before us, a small figure
in a bright golden-coloured garment slipped into our picture.
It was our “Christmas Box,’’ received a few days before.
Standing on the verandah and gazing wonderingly at all the
newness about her, the child suddenly caught sight of us.
Instantly she darted out of vision, only to re-appear
cautiously and peep questioningly round the door frame at


V*
s
PrJit’
V r '
V*" C
us. Merely an eyelid of ours needed to flicker and our
golden-frocked Christmas Box was instantly right out of our
picture. We liked her best in it! She reminded us of a wee
brown and golden butterfly flitting about, and a butterfly
belongs to a background of flowers.
After quite a prolonged entertainment provided by this
"Peep-bo" game, the Christmas Box became bolder. When
we ventured a smile, though on the point of flight, she
hesitated and finally stood still, right in the very centre of
our picture.
"Come,” we said, and after some hesitation the little
figure slid to our side. There were many new and strange
things for her to see inside the room. Coloured pens and a
brightly-bound notebook upon our table were full of
mysterious delight to her. In an amazingly short space of
time all fear and shyness left Bimala, and she chattered
freely, telling us of her home and family. It hurt us horribly
to note the matter-of-fact way this small brown child of only
eight years old told us naturally and unreservedly the tragic
happenings of her own young life She had been married
when little more than a babe. Possibly because she was of
a dark complexion, she was not a favourite in her husband’s
family. It may have been that, to their superstitious minds,
some small thing about the child-wife—such as the space
between her toes or a mark on her hand—savoured of an ill-
omen, and they were afraid. Howbeit, for some reason she
was not loved. The unkindness of her mother-in-law and
father-in-law to Bimala made even her seventeen-year-old
husband annoyed.
Boys in India are invariably spoilt, and from their very
babyhood anything they like to demand is procured for them,
if it is at all within the power of their parents to obtain it. The
anger of these children is never checked. Though a small
son, in a fit of rage, strikes his mother, or in his frenzy rolls
screaming in the dust, the mother does not attempt to check
the display of anger, but rather, smiling, is secretly proud of
the manly exhibition! Is it any wonder that, when these
boys grow up to be men, being beside themselves with anger,
they commit the deeds which ‘ bruise and break” such as are
mentioned in ‘‘Those Others”?
Bimala’s husband was just such a wild, passionate,
unrestrained boy. One day, being thwarted in some way
by his parents and being temporarily mad with anger, in
order to ‘‘pay them out,” he committed suicide. The boy’s
parents, wild in their grief, turned upon the young widow.


<rleJ
Joel
HS/
SHE, they declared, was the cause of all this dispeace and
misery which had come upon them, and upon their beloved
son. Angrily they bundled her out and sent her to her
father’s home. Some months passed, then Bimala’s father
died, and her mother, now a widow, had to earn food for
her children by working in the homes of some of her
wealthier neighbours. She had two boys who were younger
than Bimala, but she would not part with them, for were
they not her sons and her only hope for the future? Bimala
had a father-in-law, and, in hopes that he would again take
and feed the child, Bimala’s mother took her back to the
home from which she had been lately banished. Fierce was
the indignation of the mother-in-law when the small, ill-
fated widow appeared in the courtyard. To the grief-
stricken woman’s crooked mind, Bimala was most assuredly
the cause of her son s death, and the child s presence in the
home could not be tolerated. Seizing a broom, the mother-
in-law beat little Bimala and drove her and her mother from
the home. The two widows, mother and daughter, perforce
had to return together to their own home. It was after this
happening that Bimala’s mother, who was already acquainted
with our Bible-woman. Bindu, decided to bring her young
daughter to us. And so she had come —our little Christ-
mas Box,” as we called her.
“Oh, fly away on silent wings, ye boding owls of night!
Oh, welcome, little birds that sing the coming-in of light!
For new, and new, and ever new,
The golden bud within the blue,
And every morning seems to say
There’s something happy on the way,
And God sends love to you.”
What bitter experiences and tragic sights had clipped
the young wings! Only eight years old, yet in mind a
matter-of-fact woman. Yet now she had come, leaving
behind all the ‘‘dark, boding owls” and other things which
belong to the night. Something happy was on the way for
her! She would forget, and joyous hope came with the
thought. “O Lord, may she quickly forget,” we prayed.
Welcome, welcome, welcome to her! For had she not, being
released, come now as a ‘‘little bird to sing the coming-in
of light ? “For new, and new, and ever new
The golden bud within the blue’
is saying to us, “I am your Christmas Box, for my label
says, ‘And God sends love to you.’ ”


Does the lish soar to find the ocean,
The eagle plunge to find the air—
That we ask of the stars in motion,
If they have rumour of Thee there?
Not where the ■wheeling systems darken,
And our benumbed conceiving soars!
The drift of pinions would we hearken
Beats at our own clay-shuttered doors.
The angels keep their ancient places;
Turn but a stone and start a wing!
Tis ye, ’tis your estranged faces
That miss the many-splendoured thing.
Yea, in the night, my Soul, my daughter
Cry, clinging Heaven by the hems;
And 10, Christ walking on the water.
Net of Genesareth, but * Thames!”
—Francis Thompson.
Our minds in place of "Thames,” sing "Beels.”


I
Chapter XII.
BECAUSE I AM A CHRISTIAN. I CANT.
"Call upon Me in the day of trouble. I will deliver
thee, and thou shalt glorify Me.”—Ps. 50: 15.
It was during the hot, fiery month of May, before the
coming of the monsoon had drenched the quivering heat of
the atmosphere with its weight of humidity, that Guna, one
of our older widows, returned from a visit to her village
home. Guna’s village lies along the banks of a deep canal
which was long ago cut by slaves, and now winds its languid
way across and through the wide-spreading rice fields of
the beel country.
Guna, who does not appreciate discomfort, was weary
from her long journey in the little boat, but on this particular
occasion she met us with a pleased and satisfied smile, for
behind her walked a thin slip of a girl in widow’s garments,
whom she had brought with her. The girl’s age might have
been anything from fourteen to sixteen years. After Guna
had taken the new young widow into the Home and handed
her over to someone’s care, she returned to tell us the girl’s
story.
“I had to bring her, Miss Saheb,” said Guna, “for 1
found her in grave moral peril in a village near my home.
Her name is Maina (the name of a small brown bird very
common in India), and she is of the Barber caste, so much
despised among the Nama Sudras. Her parents are dead,
as also those of her late husband. Maina has no one to
protect her but a careless, unloving uncle; therefore evil men
are on the alert to trap her.
“The girl has been a widow ever since she can re-
member; so, of course, she was married as a mere babe.
Her uncle seems to care little what becomes of her, which,
in a way, is rather fortunate, for when I asked him to let


Maina come along with me he made no objection. The uncle
let her come and she was not unwilling, and so—well, here
she is.”
Yes, there she was, and for several weeks we wondered
what we had got. Some of us even feared that Maina was
mentally deficient, because she was so silly. She giggled
foolishly when spoken to, hiding her head and refusing to
answer. She insisted upon keeping her face entirely covered
by her sari. Save for this foolish manner, which made us
rather anxious, Maina was little trouble, as she was obedient
and quiet.
It was when Maina had been with us about two years
that one day her sister-in-law, a woman much older than
Maina, came to see her. The girl was overjoyed; she who,
unlike so many of the other widows in the Home, never had
a visitor. Her face shone with a gladness which was
As time went by we realised that the ‘‘giggling period”
was merely the result of nervous shyness. When she came
to know us all and feel at home, Maina dropped her giggling,
cast aside her veil, and showed to us a very thin, sharp-
featured little face, with unusually big brown eyes. She
was a tiny figure, weighing only four stone when we weighed
her. At school she was slow, but her sewing was beautiful,
and at housework she shone brilliantly.
We soon, too, discovered that Maina had a great love
for children. Very proud and happy was she when, some
time later, it was her turn to be housekeeper in the Children’s
Cottage. This duty usually lasts for one month only, but
at the end of her time in the House of Joy we found Maina
and the children so loth to part that the little housekeeper
was left in charge for a second month.
When the anniversary of Maina’s coming to us came
round and Guna prepared to set off on her annual holiday
to her home, Maina, with tears, begged to accompany her.
that she might visit her uncle and little cousins. We knew
it would be unwise for this to be so, so all we could do was to
reason with and seek to comfort the disappointed little soul.
Maina was very sore in heart, and, whenever in after
days other girls went to visit their homes, she always
wept that she had no home to which she felt it was safe for
her to go.


pathetic to see. A few weeks later a message came to Mama
from this sister-in-lay, saying, “1 am very ill; plead With the
Miss Sahebs to allow you to come and see me. Mama
was, of course, impatient and eager to go. After talking
the matter over with our older widows, we decided that
Maina might be allowed to go and see her sister-in-law.
provided that Bindu, our valiant protector of young widows.
went with her.
Maina was jubilant and full of radiant importance on
being at last one of those who could turn to her fellows and
proudly say, “I am going on a visit to my relatives.
Toqamaya, whose home is very near to the village where
Maina’s sister-in-law resides, begged to accompany Bindu
also. and. as she had long been promised a visit to her home,
the request was granted: so the two young girls wore shining
faces that day.
It was early morning when the three widows set out in
the little boat. Bindu was smiling her slow, understanding
smile as she noted the eager anticipation of the younger
ones. With Bindu, our Bible-woman. in charge, we did no
feel very anxious, yet no girl ever visits her Hindu home or
relatives without our prayers for her ascending many times
during the day. Sometimes we know there is ternb e
danger, and we count every hour as it slips by, longing for
and yet dreading the return of the boat. But this day we
thought there was little to fear, and we went on with the
day’s tasks unperturbed in spirit.
When night fell and nine o'clock came, however, and
those who had set out in the morning had not returned, we
found ourselves again and again on the verandah, listening
for the splash of a boat paddle in the water or seeking to
pierce the night’s shadows for a boat’s dark outline.
By ten o’clock we were anxious and doing little but
listen, first on the front verandah and then at the back o
the house. At last we heard a sound we knew well—the
banging of the boat oars upon the tin of our back fence as
the boatman carried the awkward long poles on his shoulder.
Hastily we ran to open the gate, and oh I how quickly our
eyes looked to see if all the women were there! Yes, than
God. they were there—Bindu, Jogamaya and Mama—but
it did not need a second glance to tell us that they had been
through a tempest of experience since leaving us in the
morning. While the boatman put away his oars, sail and


while waiting for Bindu to speak.
Possibly we could not do better than tell the story just
a* Bindu told it to us that night. It was dark outside on
the steps where we were sitting, but a rather dim light from
a lantern streamed through the open doorway behind us.
There was sufficient light for us to see the outline of the
widows’ white saris, and, less distinctly, their faces as they
sat close to us on the cement-covered steps.
Glorious red hybiscus blooms hung on a bush almost
touching us where we sat, and in the breathless stillness of
the damp night atmosphere it seemed as if they, too, hung
still, waiting, even as our hearts were waiting for the unfold-
ing of the troubled minds beside us.
At last, with shaking voice, Bindu began to speak
Then, forgetting herself, she told her tale as only an
Easterner can. “We are here,” Bindu said; “yes, but it is
only of God’s mercy that we are here this night. Less than
a few hours ago I thought that I should never behold
Orakandi again. Truly can I say this day the Lord Himself
delivered us.
other tackle in the shed, we led Bindu, who was shaking
with emotion, as far as our verandah steps. Maina, like a
silent little spirit, slipped off to her room, but we two mis-
sionaries sank down on the steps beside Bindu and Jogamaya.
We knew that something very terrible must have happened
to them. Puzzling, we imagined a dozen different calamities
“A great door was closed upon us, and as when Peter
was in prison God sent an angel to open the door and set
him free, so this day the Lord Himself opened our door and
set us free. Had it not been so. ere this some at least of us
would have been dead. You know that when we set out
this morning the arrangement was that we should drop
jogamaya at her home on the way to the village of Maina’s
relatives; then on our return journey we were to pick
Jogamaya up and all come home together. You also know
that her home is very near to the one Maina and I
were about to visit. Telling Jogamaya to be ready for us
before dusk, we left her in her brother’s care, and within a
quarter of an hour our boat had reached the home of
Maina’s sister-in-law. The people of the village seemed
quite pleased to see us, and Maina was surprised and
delighted to find her sister-in-law in the best of health.


"As we sat in the courtyard, women who had seen our
boat moor at the edge of the island came from every direc-
tion, crowding round us and asking questions. You know.
Miss Saheb, that such a gathering of women willing to hear
all I had to say was an opportunity not to be missed. I
started to preach to those gathered there, and they listened;
oh. how they listened! Maina was sitting near to me, and
once as I spoke I noticed her sister-in-law beckon to her and
say something. Maina moved to the outskirts of the crowd
to hear better what the woman said. When I finaLy stopped
preaching and looked about for Maina I could not see her.
I thought she had probably gone to eat betel nut or some-
thing of the sort, for I could not see her sister-in-law either.
After awhile, not seeing either of them, I began to look here
and there and ask the other women where Maina was.
Presently the sister-in-law reappeared and said that Maina
would be with me in a moment.
"I was not anxious until time went on and on and still
Maina did not return to me. At last I determined to go and
search for her in the other courtyards and buildings of this
large homestead. From some of the women I soon gathered
that Maina s sister-in-law is a woman of evil character, and
she lives with the owner of this big house, though unmarried
to him. He is a Hindu priest of a very inferior order. After
hearing this I became thoroughly concerned, searching and
calling for Maina from room to room. On the verandah of
a house that stood somewhat apart from the other buildings
I saw the priest, the master of the house, sitting, and even as
called I heard Maina’s voice answer me from inside this
house. Here I am, Didi! come quickly.’ I hurried to the
verandah, but the door was shut on the inside. I said,
‘Maina, open the door and I will come in.’ She answered
me through the mat wall. ‘I cannot; they will not let me.’
I hurried round to a tiny window which was at the side and,
looking through, I saw Maina crouched on the floor. A
youth stood at the door on the inner side, and he was smiling
a cruel smile as he kept Maina a prisoner, refusing to open
the door. I spoke to the boy through the window, nicely at
first, telling him that his behaviour was impolite, to say the
least, and asked him please to open the door at once and
allow Maina to come out to me. as it was time we were
setting out on our homeward way. The boy refused to
do so. I then went round to the priest, who was still sitting
on the verandah. Telling him what was going on inside, I


/■? X
4l., Wif
fii
asked him to speak to the youth. He flatly refused to da
so, and I soon knew that he was in league with the others in
a plot to capture Maina and not allow her to return to
Orakandi. Yes, I saw it all in an instant then. The false
letter, saying Maina’s sister-in-law was ill; then Maina
decoyed away from my side, invited into the room to partake
of some friendly * ‘pan’ or sweetmeats: then the door shut
and she caught in their cunning trap.
“I ran hither and thither, but the women of the house
only looked at me in a hostile way; there was none to help
me. I could only pray, ‘O Lord , help me.’ as I strove to
think of some way of escape for Maina. Presently she
called from inside her prison, ‘Oh, Didi, do not go away and
leave me here!’ I answered, ‘Never fear, Maina; I will not
go without you.' Tiny and physically weak as she is, Maina
finally tried to struggle with the youth who held the door,
but as she sprang towards the door he each time threw her
backward on the hard floor. I could only rush to the little
window and tell her not to despair, as God would frustrate
the plans of wicked men. Maina next flew to the window,
seeking to tear a way through the bamboo lattice, but the
boy who had been appointed her gaoler, with blows and his
greater strength, soon threw her, bruised and shaken, to the
ground once more.
“Again and again I appealed to the owner of the house,
saying, ‘Sir, you will surely not allow such a thing as this
to take place in your home.’ He sneered and said, ‘I would
advise you to go—go home quickly and quietly—or I warn
you some harm will come to you. Anyway, why do you
need to worry about that young girl? She is nothing to you.
Why can’t you go home and leave her?’ At that. Miss
Saheb, I could be polite to him no longer and I said, ‘lf I
weren t a Christian I could, but because I am a Christian I
can’t!'
“Then I turned upon the man and I told him what I
thought of him. It was no use expecting any help from
him, so I walked away to seek aid elsewhere, but I knew not
where to turn. Seeing my great distress of mind, a young
educated man of the village, who had a really nice face, called
me aside and, politely addressing me as ‘Didi,’ said, ‘What-
ever happens, you must get away from this village before
nightfall. If you attempt to stay the night they will kill you.
* betel nut.
IjT, j ‘ />-


~~ > >
c.
Do not risk your life for this young girl of a low Barber
caste: it would not be right.’ The boy was earnest and
sincere. When he found that with Christians such a course
could not be even thought of. he seemed impressed and said.
‘Didi, if I can help you I will, but do not delay here: it is
getting towards evening, and you must not be in this village
after dark.’
"Not knowing what else to do or where else to seek
help. I thought I would go to Jogamaya’s home and talk the
matter over with her. The people saw me sail away from
the village, and doubtless thought that I was returning to
Orakandi. Jogamaya was ready waiting for me when I
reached her home. She got into the boat, and I told her
about Maina’s terrible position. She agreed with me that,
whatever happened to us, we could not go off home leaving
Maina in her awful plight. My mind and nerves were
exhausted and I felt beyond thinking out any plan of action,
but Jogamaya quickly formed one. ‘We must return at once,
Didi,’ she said, ‘but not to the village where Maina is. That
island is a large one, and I know people who live in quite
another part of it. We shall go to them, under cover of the
dusk. You must not be seen by any of those who saw you
this afternoon. lam new to them, and they will not connect
me with you, as I was not with you to-day. I shall leave
you and the boatman in the home of my friend; then I shall
go alone to the house where Maina is and seek for a chance
to speak with her or help her to escape in any way I can.
"This plan was followed, and in the evening, after Joga-
maya had slipped away in the darkness, an awful burden of
my responsibility with regard to these two young widows
came upon me. Some time later Jogamaya returned and hur-
riedly told me that we must be on the alert and near to the
boat for she had managed to have speech with Maina. After
I left the village at dusk, the people had released Maina and
told her to sweep the courtyard. It was when she was thus
occupied that Jogamaya managed to speak with her. Plans
were afoot in the home where Maina was a prisoner to send
her that very night by boat to a Hindu temple at Nabadip,
where she would be forced to live a life of sin. This
Jogamaya heard, and So, she said, I told her where our
boat was moored, and that she must watch and seize
any chance to run and board the boat. I told her that
we should be on the watch to follow her and row away
from the island before she was missed.’


“After a while,” continued Bindu, “we saw Maina dart
down the bank and enter the boat. We immediately fol-
lowed her as silently as we could, only to find when we went
to push off the boat that while we had been ashore the oars
had been stolen. Even as we, stunned, could hardly think
out the next move, there was a shout from the other village.
Maina had been missed, and men and boys were running
along the bank towards our little boat, and we had no oars!
We thought all was now lost, but this was where God
stepped in.
Our predicament could hardly have been worse; those
men rushing towards us were ready for anything, and several
of them brandished knives. But suddenly from the opposite
direction came four other figures. As they reached the boat
I was able to recognise the young man who, in the after-
noon, had said he would help me if he could. After his
conversation with me he had evidently set off to another
village where lived three Hindu priests, superior in priestly
rank to the one who had planned Maina’s capture. He
prevailed upon them to come to our aid. God caused these
men to arrive just at the critical moment of our direct peril.
Hindu priest or no, I jumped from the boat and fell weeping
at the feet of the oldest priest, and implored him to intervene
on our behalf and protect us. The men who came thronging
from the home of the wicked priest fell back at the sight of
these others, to whom they began to make salutations of
lowly obeisance.
“After hearing the whole story, the oldest of the three
priests upbraided those who had acted so wrongly. This
action of yours,’ he said, addressing them, ‘will cause our
district here to have a bad odour in the minds of all those
who live in and near to Orakandi. Next he demanded that
the stolen oars be produced and Maina allowed to go un-
molested. As I stepped once more into the boat I whispered
to the old priest. Oh, Father, do not you move from here
until we are well out of sight, lest they follow and attack
us. Hurry, daughter, hurry,’ was all he said.
Oh! Miss Saheb, what a fearsome journey home it has
been! As our boat slid along in the grey darkness my eyes
ave never left gazing behind us, dreading every moment
i A — > that I should see boats following us. Scarcely would I
) 4j allow the girls even to whisper in the boat, lest someone


somewhere should be listening for us. Oh! the dread and the
strain of that awful journey fleeing through the darkness,
until at last I saw the lights of Orakandi in the distance.
God has delivered us, and how can we thank Him?”
The night was far spent before we arose from the
verandah steps. Bindu and Jogamaya, who had passed
through such a terrific storm, were calmed by the outpouring
of their experiences. The reality of God’s intervention and
the shining splendour of the thing He had done for them
that day gilded the mountain tops of our adoration as we
worshipped Him in silence.
After our talk was over and Bindu, with the measured
music of a triumphant psalm, went to her room, one of the
younger widows, who had been awakened by Maina’s
entrance, came to us, begging for linament to rub the bruises
which poor little Maina had sustained in her frantic efforts
to get out of the room in which she had been imprisoned.
It was a sad and chastened Maina we saw the next
day, but her terrible experience was a lesson to many of the
other younger widows who, though they know we feel it
unwise, are constantly pleading to visit their Hindu homes.
It was perhaps nine or ten months after Maina’s appal-
ling experience that a good Christian man of Jessore, who
had years before married one of our Orakandi girls, but was
now a widower, wrote to us, asking if we had any good girl
who would be willing to be a mother to his children. The
would-be bridegroom had a little girl away at boarding
school and a wee boy of three at home. We immediately
thought of Maina, of her love for little children, her capabili-
ties in household matters, and her great longings for a
“home.” Maina agreed to see the young man if he came to
Orakandi, and finally after meeting they chose each other
and a very gladsome and pretty little wedding took place.
Maina is very happy in her new home. Her husband
and all her neighbours sing her praises, and the wee step-
son, we are sure, is a great comfort and joy to her.
In a letter written to Orakandi, Maina says: “Everyone
here loves me, and I am very happy.”
How different her lot might have been had the plans of
that wicked priest not been shattered!
So once again “the stream seeks its end in peace”—
and a garden of flowers.


“He that will humble himself, and go to a child for
instruction will come awav a wiser man. If children
can make us wiser, they surely can make us better. - -
Their eagerness, curious about everything, making out
by a quick imagination what they see but a part of—
their fanciful combinations and magic inventions,
creating out of ordinary circumstances and the common
things which surround them strange events and little
ideal worlds, and these all working in mystery to form
matured thought, is study enough for the most acute
minds, and should teach us, also, not too officiously to
regulate what we so little understand.”
—Richard Henry Dana.


Chapter XIII.
SUNSHINE PATCHES.
"Lord, ’tis Thy plenty-dropping hand
That sows my land;
All this, and better, dost Thou send
Me, for this end:
That I may render for my part
A thankful heart.” —Robert Herrick.
When asked a question concerning the seasons of
Bengal, a missionary answered: “We have three seasons.
They are —hot, hotter, hottest.”
Of necessity, we dwellers on the plains of Bengal are
early risers. Bed has no charms for us after 5 a.m. (except,
perhaps, during the short cooler days of December and
January), for there are no blankets to be pulled up round
one’s shoulders, and pillows feel musty and uninviting from
their contact with the damp, mouldy atmosphere.
Mosquito nets, which must be used all the year round,
also help to keep off any drowsy breeze which may be wan-
dering round our couch. So arise we do ere King Sol has
peered over the edge of our watery horizon. Soon his
strength will fight ours, so we endeavour to get as much
work as possible done before his power shall be at its full.
By six o’clock the bell for morning prayers has sounded
through the compound, and the widows, in their white saris,
begin to come from every direction and, ascending the steps
of our bungalow, take their places upon mats spread on the
verandah. The girls sit in rows before us, our Bengali
helpers in the background, and the children in front. What
a hallowed wonder and gratitude bestirs within us every
time we look into the faces of those gathered thus before us!
We think of the one who prayed years ago, Lord, give me
widows,” and we look upon the abundant answer.


'l
There are happy, fresh young girls, full of vim and
vigour; others whose faces still bear the impress of
experiences which can never be written; older women who
have won through and risen to positions of responsibility
beside us; then the little children, with all the future before
How often, just as we are hastening to complete some
task before the prayer bell rings, a deep little voice calls at
our door, NTiss Saheb, may I come? We glance up to see
three-year-old Ranu standing in the doorway. Her diminu-
tive skirts gathered up in a tightly-held bunch before her.
her free hand thrust into the bag thus made, is intended to
awaken most intense curiosity on our part. Unfortunately,
we know that the children’s morning meal of dry, parched
rice is given out just at this time, and that the bulge in
Ranu s garments is a good guarantee of that small infant’s
healthy appetite. However, not for worlds would we appear
to have any inkling of the joyful surprise awaiting us.
Ranu’s bright brown eyes have a you-can-never-guess-
what-I-have-here look in them as she waits for permission to
enter. Behind her ears have been thrust large red hybiscus
flowers, their scarlet loveliness showing to perfection against
the creaminess of her soft baby skin. Behind Ranu stands
them. “Inspire us. Lord, to thank Thee worthily.” Our
hearts offer the silent prayer.
Morning prayers at Orakandi have begun; joyously the
hymn of praise rings out, as those girls, women and little
children worship. Across the garden, the water of the
tank yes, and even across the wide beels to surrounding
islands—the notes of the song are carried.
School children living on nearby islands have often said,
“We always hear your hymn sung in the morning.”
Thus begins our day’s work—or, rather, the school
routine part of it —for all housework in the Home must be
finished before the prayer bell rings. We, too, have bread
to set. and often many other tasks; even callers to be inter-
viewed before six o’clock strikes.
Frequently patients wanting medicine or to have dress-
ings done are sitting on the dispensary verandah before that
hour. Men desiring employment are impatient in their calls,
and always there are our own children flitting about. It is
such a temptation to spend time in their eager and exhilarat-
ing company.


four-year-old Abinash, and behind him again Prakash, aged
two. Both boys are clutching mysterious bulges in their
clothing.
Their eager eyes cannot be resisted. lam very busy,
but you may come just for a minute.” we reply. Ranu, who.
though the girl, always must be first, marches into the room.
Suddenly drawing forth the hidden hand, she thrusts it, full
of parched rice, into ours, saying, “For you.” Abinash
follows her action. “For you,” he repeats, and lastly wee
Prakash. in delightful baby Bengali, lisps the same formula.
Ranu, the leader, has trained her followers well. She
remembers our words, and her quick eyes have noted that
we have no spare moments for any further conversation at
that hour. As soon as their offerings have been made she
turns to the boys. “Come.” she says, “the Miss Saheb is
busy now; come outside and eat your rice.
Unquestioningly they follow her, and we are glad that
our appreciation is taken for granted and we are not forced
to eat before the donors grains of rice offered by the dear,
hot. grubby little hands of our early morning visitors.
Only a tiny incident in the long hot day. but a glow
has come to our hearts, and our minds, full of the tasks
ahead, have been enriched by the melody and simplicity of a
little child's natural and spontaneous love.
Later in the day we see the same little group of children
in the shade of a tree, seated with a few more babes of
similar age and interests with them. They are busily stirring
mud and cutting leaves and flower stems to an even and
equal length. As we cross the courtyard a shout goes up.
“We are preparing a feastl Yes, such a feast, many kinds
of curries, and we are going to invite you to the feast. The
meal is not cooked yet, but later, when all is ready, we shall
call you.”
True to their word, when next we cross the compound
we are called, and after a “peri” (low wooden stool upon
which Bengalis sit when eating) has been hastily brought
from the children s kitchen, we sit and pretend to partake of
the many delectable dishes set before us. A great feast.
Oh, such a feast it is!” the bobbing onlookers exclaim.
Ramu serves, while other cooks and helpers dance round
excitedly, then stand breathlessly waiting for each exclama-
tion of deepest relish and delight which is expected as course
— ■ i • i
after course is set before one.


New dishes, we fear, are sometimes hastily prepared in
order that we may continue to provide an entertainment for
the merry young cooks. Perceiving such preparations on
foot and glancing at our watch, we rise reluctantly (?).
praising to our utmost ability the skill of the cooks. Firmly
averring our inability to partake of even one more morsel,
we depart to the tasks surrounding us. followed by cries of
“Come again another day; we shall cook even more dishes,
and the feast will be equal to that of a wedding.”
Once more we find our duties seem lighter for those few
minutes or so of foolishness. Such is the power of a little
child.
To go beyond that fence, and especially trespass along
the narrow neck of land between the fence and the tank of
the Boys High School, is a very daring sin indeed.
Scarcely could we believe our ears; so, to test them, our
eyes peeped through a small hole in the fence. Amazed,
we saw our blatantly disobedient infants. They, quite
oblivious of the stern eyes upon them, and a-quiver with
excitement, were bending down near the water’s edge,
trying to peer under the leaves of a water plant growing
some feet from the bank.
One Sunday morning a children’s address was given in
the church. The preacher told the story of a little boy upon
whose shoulders Conscience, in the form of a tiny boy a
few inches high, always sat. When the boy did right and
kind things, this tiny creature grew fat and rosy, but
dwindled into a pale, sickly infant when wrong or unkind
actions were performed.
Our children were greatly struck with this story and
talked about it for days. It was during the week following
the Sunday s address that it bore rather startling fruit.
Crossing the children’s courtyard we stopped suddenly and
wondered if our ears were playing a trick on us. Could it
be our children’s voices outside the high iron fence which
runs along the eastern side of their courtyard? Excited and
rapidly-spoken sentences came floating over to where we
stood. Yes, yes, he is there. I saw him.” “Wliere?
Where?” “There, there; look, he is hiding under that water
lily.”


Some little while later when, in our position of respon-
sibility. we felt compelled to ask some inconvenient and
pressing questions, Amrita, as usual, spoke for the band of
now confused little maidens. ‘‘You sec, Miss Saheb, she
said, “it was like this. We were all playing quite happily
in the courtyard, when suddenly Sunila happened to peep
through a little hole in the eastern fence.” (Our hole, one
may suppose!) “As she looked she called to us. saying. ‘I
can see that tiny boy. Conscience, about whom we heard
last Sunday! He is in the water; now he is sitting on a
water lily.’ Miss Saheb. we didn’t think of anything then
except that the little boy. Conscience, was there. We forgot
altogether that it was forbidden to go outside the fence, and
we dashed through the school house round to the bank
near by the spot where Sunila had seen the little boy. We
were just looking. Sunila was showing us where she
had seen him, in a place under a large water lily, and we
were called.”
The children’s action was a case of flagrant dis-
obedience, however thoughtlessly done, and as such could
not go unpunished, especially with young Ranus and
Prakashes taking note of proceedings. Nevertheless, we
found our own minds skipping backward into the dim past,
when wonderful and bewitching scenes rose before our
young imagination, and, recounting such, we were punished
and told we were lying. Consequently, a sympathetic chas-
tisement was meted out to the erring rascals that afternoon.
We frail humans are very prone to make mistakes, and
those mistakes frequently bring us many hours of bitter self-
reproach and sorrowful regret.
One mistake made some years ago, however, brought
forth such an undeserved harvest of sweet things that the
clouds of regret were shot through with lances of most
brilliant sunshine. A serious offence had been committed in
the Home, and we were much saddened thereby. All the
evidence seemed so plainly to lay the fault at the door of a
certain girl that we were unwillingly compelled to believe
her guilty. She knew the conclusion we had regretfully
formed, but remained calm and unmoved thereby. A little
later further evidence came to light which proved our first
judgment to be a complete mistake.
Oh! the regret and distress we now felt, to think that
we had misjudged and falsely accused an innocent girl!


&''4r^-^sq
Concern for the pain she must have felt at her unmerited
punishment, and fear lest bitterness of spirit should have
poisoned her young soul, made us greatly perturbed—so
perturbed that we did not then feel ready to call for the
injured girl in order to offer her our apologies and express
the depth of our regret for the great blunder committed.
As we were quietly sitting with downcast head, seeking
to realise fully the whole complication in its new light, there
was an almost imperceptible movement behind the chair upon
which we sat. Unseen hands slipped a garland round our
neck. It was an Indian garland, with all it means! Starting
and glancing round, we saw the girl whom we had mis-
judged. On her face was a beautiful smile of perfect under-
standing and forgiveness. There was no sign of the bitter-
ness we had so much feared; in those soft brown eyes only
sorrow for our sorrow. In the beautiful manner of the East
she placed her lovely token of forgiveness and devotion upon
us, and with a smile she sealed the offering of understanding
and of love.
The following incident, though it did not take place at
Orakandi, keeps clamouring to be related here. Manik is a
little Hindu outcast boy of the sweeper class, whose mem-
bers are composed of untouchables so greatly despised by
the orthodox Hindus of caste. When we first made the
acquaintance of Manik he was about seven or eight years
old. He used to visit us at the Mission House in Comilla
as he went to and fro from his daily work. Manik, though
so young, had to work for his daily rice. Occasionally,
when driving along a street or through the bazaar, we met
him, and he would run along beside us chattering all the
way. We asked Manik to come to Sunday School on
Sunday morning, and because he was very dirty we gave
him a piece of soap, telling him to wash well both his body
and his garment before he left home the following Sunday.
Delighted with the soap, Manik enquired, “Shall I wash
once or twice? Three or four times would be well,” we
suggested.
The next Sunday, when children from various homes in
the town were assembling for early morning Sunday School,
we espied a thin little figure coming jauntily up the garden
path. His face and his garment were cleaner than we had
ever seen them before. The high caste children already


assembled looked askance at little Manik, and when it was
time for him to take his place on the mats with them their
indignation broke loose. A sweeper child to come near
them! They pulled their garments closely round them in
horror!
The situation was decidedly difficult, but the teacher in
charge of the class where Manik had been placed handled
it very skilfully. Calling Manik to her, she offered him half
of the chair which she was occupying. From his exalted
position Manik was able to cast triumphant glances of scorn
at the high caste children. We are not sure that he did not
make some faces at them, too!
Sunday School being over, the children dispersed in all
directions, and the teachers found their way to the Mission
bungalow for a welcome cup of tea. While they were
enjoying it screams were heard, and, rushing out, we found
poor little Manik surrounded by a crowd of our Sunday
School scholars, who were pelting him with small bits of
brick. Manik’s teacher was the first to run to his rescue,
and she quickly dispersed the crowd of young aristocrats
who were behaving so badly.
It was an evening some days later that, returning from
our work in town, we found Manik waiting for us on our
front verandah. He had fastened on a string a miserable
little mongrel puppy. “This,” said Manik, “is my dog. I
love him and he loves me.” Here he threw his arms round
the dog. “Now I am going to give him to you.” Turning
to his teacher of the previous Sunday, Manik continued,
“You shared your seat with me last Sunday, and you
rescued me when the big boys would have stoned me. This
doggie is the thing I love most, so I’m going to give him to
you. I know you don t like dirty things, so Ive washed him
clean with soap. He will love you very much in time, and
sit right up on the front seat with you when you go out in
your gari (a vehicle of any kind) to the houses round about.
We wanted to cry and we wanted to laugh! The
animal was a pitiful apology for a dog, and we could not
imagine ourselves allowing it on our compound, let alone
taking it driving with us when we went to our Zenana work!
Yet the child’s action brought a lump into our throats.
How to save him from hurt, be truthful, and yet not keep


the dog, was a problem. We ventured to suggest that the
doggie would need much care and we had so little time.
"Oh, your house-boy can bathe him," said Manik.
"But its food?” we hesitated. "We hardly know what
kind of food a little dog of this type is accustomed to.”
(This was very true, for such dogs are the scavengers of
the town.)
With a nod towards our house-boy and cook, who were
laughing, standing at a respectful distance, Manik said.
"They know.”
After many careful and delicate attempts to extricate
ourselves from the meshes of this awkward position, we
finally made ourselves and Manik happy by saying, "The
little dog is ours, and we think it very, very kind of you to
have given him to us. As you know, however, we have to be
away at our work all day. We really couldn’t take the
doggie with us, and he would be so lonely, left all day here
in the house. We think it would be so nice if you would
take care of our little dog for us. Take him to your house,
and then he won’t be lonely or uncared for, as he might be
when we are away from home.”
Perfectly happy, with a miserable-looking little brown
dog tucked under his arm, Manik departed. "I’ll bring him
to see you sometimes,” he shouted as he walked through the
gate.
"He that will humble himself and go to a child for
instruction will come away a wiser man.”




Toss up the sheaves of beauteous sounds we’ve
heard, a loving phrase wafted by tender voice, a
ripple of childish laughter, song of the bird,»the winds
of spring, bidding the world rejoice. There for our
reaping. All the beauteous things we did not sow and
yet may garner now.”
—Wilhelmina Stitch.


Chapter XIV.
GOD IS AT HIS ORGAN.
"God is at the organ!
I can hear
A mighty music
Echoing far and near.”
—Egbert T.
Sandford.
God, the Master Musician, sits at His organ, which
surely is the heart of India.
Fain would He play upon her and hear as a response
to His yearning touch upon the ivory keys that sublimest
music for which the organ was created.
There are shattered keys, broken reeds, discordant
notes! The organ is not ready to respond, yet with infinite
patience and the eagerness of love the Musician is lavishing
His care upon her note by note, part by part. He is mend-
ing, replacing, retuning, cleaning and waiting —yes, waiting,
with immeasurable constancy and tirelessness —until He can
win from His instrument the music of His heart. He who
sees in the future the perfection of a symphony of which
India alone is capable does not grudge the time needed for
the tuning and perfecting of every note. Oh! heart of India,
what music you hold silent within you!
What tremulous trills of joyousness, vibrating passions
of devotion; what richest chords of majestic worship you have
yet to yield to your Master! Note by note, soul by soul,
must the work be done.
Before our eyes, slowly yet steadily, it proceeds.
A Nama Sudra widow, whose inharmonious life held
nothing but discord, under the Master s hand has been able
to sound forth triumphant music of bravery and courage,
which surely has stirred the hearts of those who know of
Bindu,


A Mohammedan school boy, the jarring note of whose
life was arrogant fanatical religious pride, has become a
Christian preacher of strong, fearless gentleness. Patient
under persecution, faithful, earnest, he now radiates love to
those he once despised. The tone of this retuned note is
surely one of a crystal exaltation.
There was a struggling, failing girl who, though she
retained not the discordant notes given forth ere she met her
Master, was weak and her life-music was somewhat disap-
pointing. Her Musician, with compassionate understanding,
took her to Himself. By her sweet patience in sickness,
and by her fearless and beautiful death, has been sounded
the music of a note which will ever vibrate thankfully in the
hearts of those who knew her.
A passionate and unrestrained woman, whose face and
whole nature were the reverse of beautiful, now with a new
light in her eyes gives all her time and love to the care of
little babies. A pure, fresh sound rings out as the Master
fingers this key.
A crushed, despairing one, utterly hopeless about
herself and her future, yields herself and finds that, under
the hands of the Master Musician, her soul rises to peal a
note of brightest hope and gladness.
A high caste Hindu man, whose very name proclaimed
to all his aristocratic birth, came face to face with his Master.
He then decided to give his life to work among his low
caste brethren. Lest the fact of his superior birth prove
a hindrance in his way to the hearts of the lowly ones he
serves, this same man dropped his former name (of which
he was inordinately proud), taking that of a servant. He is
now known to all as “The Servant of Jesus Christ.” Later,
as a preacher, this man suffered much persecution.
One of those whom he fain would have served and
helped v/as ignoble enough to destroy one night every plant
in the greatly-prized garden of the preacher. When asked
what steps he would take in the matter, this one-time proud
Hindu man replied, “I shall bear and forbear, even as my
Master did. I must by love win this foolish youth who
seeks to do me harm.”
Music! Abounding, lavish, majestic music is held in
the heart of India.
c_\ /yf


A
.> -W„ ir
The Master Musician works on and, amid toil, disap-
pointment, sweat, heat, burning, mildew, joys, fears and
exaltations, we must work with Him, For there is a sound-
ing in our ears and a stir in our hearts. The strains of a
distant chorus surely approaches nearer as notes are per-
fected to harmony and sensitive response.
The Musician is patient to work and to wait until the
great throbbing, vibrate heart of India shall respond in
passionate devotion, and a Hallelujah Chorus from notes
at last made perfect shall rise above snow-capped Himalayas,
the steaming plains, and echo in waves of majestic sound
around the feet of her waiting, loving Lord.
[The End.]


IV'-


Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Jenkin, Buxton & Co. Pty. Ltd.
"Rialto,” 497-9 Collins Street, Melbourne.




j r* I






.


I




V> - J 1
(51 CANBERRA =
V /. V y i
V\fcßAßy Qfr
CANBERRA ) =
11l


♦
