

Gay Life
IN
MELBOURNE.
SYDNEY: SIR ROBERT BEAR, BOOKSELLER, 67 & 69 MARKET STREET.
BRISBANE: JOHN PIKE, 181 EDWARD STREET.
MELBOURNE: W. H WILLIAMS, JUN., PRINTER & PUBLISHER.


Gay lift in Melbourne
Help! Let me up, you cur!*
Such were the cries which rang out on
the mldiMgh; air, a* a young was
passing through a gloomy Melbourne
avenue. The tones were unmistakably femi-
nine, end, without a moment's hesitation, he
ran Inwards the spot whence issued the dis-
tressful sounds. But, quick as he was, he ar-
rived only in time to see a masculine form rise
from the ground, race across the street and dis-
appear In the darkness of the Pitzroy Gardens.
Satisfied that it would be useless to pursue
the fugitive, he turned his attention to a
confused mass of dainty draperies huddled
upon the footpath. Lighting a match, be
peered down upon a young and strikingly
beautiful face, somewhat distorted by an ex-
pression of agony and terror. Presently he
found two charming eyes gazing up at him
pleadingly, and, answering the thought in
them, he said—
M It’s all right, miss : he’s gone, and you
needn’t be frightened of me,”
His frank manner appeared to reassure her,
i and with his assistance she straggled to her
feet and leaned against the fence, while he
picked up her parasol and hat and restored
them to her. In the attitude in which she
was standing the light from a lamp fell softly
on her countenance and confirmed him in his
first impression of her fresh young beauty.
Apparently she had not suffered much
from the ruffian's attack, and, smiling cheer-
fully at her rescuer, she said—
s‘ A thousand thanks for your help= You got
here just in the nick of time.”
“So it seems,” he answered. “Who was
the fellow ? Do you know him ? ”
44 1 couldn’t be sure. He came out from be-
hind a tree-guard and attacked me before X
could get a good look at him,” was her reply.
What do you suppose bis object was!
Robbery, ehf” be asked.
Evidently she was doing her best to muster
up a blush* m seated lost a little
no, X don't think It was robbery,
exactly. However, as he did not effect his
purpose, whatever it may have been, we won’*
discuss the matter, please/*
“She takes it pretty coolly,” thought b*f
companion. “Have I struck pure unadul-
terated innocence or smoking impu-
dence?” Then, to sound her, he asked—
“ How is it you happen to be in such a
lonely street at such a time of night by your-
self ?
41 Oh/* replied she, with a peculiar smile,
••you see I stayed rather late with a friend—
a lady friend—missed the tram, and w&k
taking a short cut home to auntie's. 57
“ So you live with auntie, do yon ?”
41 Yes, and as her house isn’t far perhaps
you will be good enough to me borne,”
she said. 44 They'll be wondering what on
earth has become of me.”
Of course he jumped at the chance of es-
corting her, and equally of course—she being
pretty and he being bold—as they walked
along he edged bis atm around her waist and
put in a little hug where he thought it would
do the most good. She did not seem to mind
in the least, but snugged up to him in a man-
ner which suggested that she knew exactly
how to repay him for rescuing her from her
assailant. What his precise thoughts were
cold prints refuses to express.
Down that street, across another, second
turning to the left and first to the right, and
they reached auntie’s house. It was gay
wsth lights and sounds of music and laughter.
“ Auutie’a evidently got a party to-nighfc ?"
queried the young man.
."Oh I no, just a few friends/’ she replied,
with that peculiar smile on deck ?;gain.
Jl Suppose you come in and let me introduce
you.”
* 5 But won’t auntie think it queer if you take
in a stranger at this time of the paorsjlnjgf*
be asked, still puzzling his mind over the
question of pure, unadulterated innocence
and smoking hot impudence.


1“ Not a bit oHt,” she replied confidently.
I'll tell her how yoa rescued me from that -
ir. and that’ll warm auntie up to a sense ot
le'true state of the poll. We’re not society
>lks, yoa know ’’ . ..
The free and easy dyle of her chapter cer-
ualy aroused his -mspicions, but her charm-
i2 face and eloquent eyes infatuated aim,
nd with his heart going about eight beats to
he bar he prepared to follow her,
“ First of all," she said, “ your name!
“ Lionel Norman. And yoars ! ”
“ Vfarguerite Delorme.”
Then she led him into the room, which was
Hied with mascaline and feminine gaiety.
?rivolity in paint and powder and evening
iress reigned over the scene. Presently,
ip came auntie, a massive creature with a
quintuple chin and jewellery in profusion.
She also wore an Irish accent on which you
:onld have hang yonr overcoat „
“Shure, it’s late ye arr, this night, Rita,
ihe said. “ I was afther wondering it ye d
be at all. Who’s yer friend,
innyway?”
Forthwith Rita introduced the young man.
who, although bold enough with her in the
gloomy street, was not at all at ease in this
gorgeous and lively room.
But for all that he noticed with extreme
surprise that amongst the men of the party
were a dandyfied bank manager whose mar-
riage to a society belle had been duly and
gushingly chronicled in Punch ; a cocky-little
theatrical agent, just returned from a New
2-aland tour ; three young swells from Too-
rak, and others who ranked from flash book-
makers to comic singers. The women were
also a mixed lot, startlingly free in language
and costume, and with an indescribable air of
which should have satisfied him as
10 their true characters. 80% he was under
the glamour of Bita s charms, and coiiid not
bring himself to believe that she was the
willing associate of each persons. He was
qui kly undeceived.
“Come over to the table and have some
wine,” said Rita. “Auntie chargee £1 a bottle
I for it. but it’s worth double the money every
"Resolved to see the thing through, Norman
accompanied his dear deluder, paid for his
wine and proceeded to dispose of it with the
able ’ assistance of the, pretty Marguerite.
It was poor enough stuff, but it colored her
pretty cheeks to scarlet, and made her wob-
ble her words in a manner paintul for bet ad-
miter to hear. .
Suddenly one of the friskiest ot the ladies
sailed out —
“Rita, Rita, what sort of a game nave you
been having? Auntie says you’ve been kid-
ding her that a man assaulted you in the
lo <■ t- p fj. i **
“ Wbat was the Johnnie after?” asked
another.
«< Well, what do yoa think ! ” was the sig-
nificant
“ Don't baliere a word ol it,” broke in one
of the Toorak swells. “If roa’d been
knocked about as you say, you'd have been
marked tor Ute.” .
Instantly Rita placed one foot on a chair,
flirted her skirts up, whipp-d a stocking
down, and showed a large, ugly bruise on a
white and dimpled knee.
“He smashed me down on the footpath,
and that’s what I got,” she said angrily to the
swell.
The sight of the plump and pretty limb
tempted him, and he put out a hand to seize
it. Rita dropped her draperies, and eluded
his grasp. “None of \our funny business
with me 1 ” she cried defiantly,
* And none of your mock modesty witn
me,” he replied, rising up and moving threat-
ening!y towards her. “I know too much
about von for that,”
“You lie 1° she shouted; “you know no-
thing about me, and you never will know
anything.” , 1 .
“The only thing I don t know about you is
your price,” he retorted, " but Tve got money
enough to buy you,”
For answer she caught up a glass ot wme
and dashed the liquor in his face. This and
the laughter of the ladies inflamed him to
such a degree that he rushed at her with up-
lifted hst and a murderous glare in bis eyes.
Rita, fairly terrified at his look, scrammed
over a chair to get out ot the way,
•* This is the first time I've ever known
Rita to run away from a man,” said one *air
creature, whose low-cut bodice plainly re-
vealed her palpitating charms* Bat that
there was no joke about the matter was
clearly visible to Lionel Norman, and as
the* swell seemed likely to capture the gir.
the young man took a hand in the business.
“ Damn you ! Fight a man, not a girl, you
long cad,” he exclaimed, and dashing at the
infuriated toff he seized him by the collar,
forced him back over a chair, and, with a
swinging blow from his powerful right, he
seat him crashing to the floor, half-stunned
and covered with blood. But before Norman
could recover, auntie’s sweet voice was heard
above the uproar, .
“ Fire him out 1 ” she cried, fire trie blasted
Johnny troo the frunt dure,* and obedient to
her command three of the bookmaking fellows
grabbed Rita’s breathless champion, ana alter
a short ru/gle succeeded in bundling hun
out on the street, and then, throwing his hat
after him, shut and locked the door, *Mit they
need not have given themselves so much
trouble, for Norman, though boiling with rage*
was not fool enough to think of renewing the
bfttrle against such odds, and wended ms way
homewards, with his heart on fire with love
For the charming and mysterious Marguerite.
««Innocent or impudent, I must see her once
m ore ” was bis dominant thought, and igy
what circumstances he did jEjg
will shall proceed faithfully to relate* v


CHAPTER II.
AN INTERUPTED MARIAGR.
Norman coaid thmk only of the bewilefeinf
Marguerite. Sains or sinner, she w*s the
star whose beaming light be mast tallow
whithersoever it might lead him—to happi-
ness or rain. He had money and leisure. and
that kind of resolution which combats all
difficulties. He had youth and health, there-
fore he had hope and enthusiasm. What was
it that tbs Toorak swell had said to her? “ I
know everything about you —except your
t price I” Well s if she was to be. bought, be
would boy her. H iha were to be won, he
would win her. After a*l s she had resented
the impertinences of that swell with genuine
indignation, not with the coarse coquetry of
a girl who bore the iaeffacabie brand of de-
gradation. True, she had indulged in an ex-
cessive amount of drink, and had overstepped
the bounds of modesty by exposing her lovely
legs to tha lascivious gaze of evil men, but
was not that the impetuous action of a wo-
man whose word had been doubted in the
most insulting manner, rather than the con-
duct of a wanton, who merely desired to dis-
play her charms through vicious vanity?
And so be reflected, and wondered, and pon-
dered, and then resolved to face Auntie, and
seek another interview with her fascinating
niece-—if she were her niece.
In the daylight. Auntie’s villa had a seedy,
up-ali-night look about it, much resembling
the appearance of Auntie herself when that
good lady opened the door,
1 Kita Delorme, is it, yer after ?” she said,
when he had told her his mission. “Faix,
it’s ioike yer dom cheek to be afther askin’
me about her. Shure, if it's her fancy man
ye arr ye wud be knowin’ where she is betther
than hi can tell ye. Go to the divii wid yer
woman that pricinds she won’t let a gintieman
Ink at the leg of her I ”
14 Tell me where I can And her and I’ll give
you half a sovereign,’* said he, as soon as he
could get in a word edgeways.
“ Kape yer haifjim for Rita 1 She’ll jump
at it,” was all the consolation he received,
and the door was slammed in his face. But
before he had reached the gate, a young girl,
flashily dressed, but pretty in a pertish way,
opened it. and as soon as she saw him ex-
claimed—
- 4* Wot ho I You’re the bloke wot dealt it
out to the toil wot was messin* ’round Rita,
ftint you J"
'* Yes ; and you can have this if you tei! me
where she is,” he replied holding up the half-
sovereign.
14 Slime ! arf a thick f un I Rye—-oh 1 I’m
your mutton. She took sherrock this mom-
in', an' said she was goin* out to see her sis-
ter spliced. No. 9 Twise street, South Mel-
bourne,”! And her. Parse over the splosh,
sonny and when he had nasaed the coin
over she went on—“ You’re an all-right
biokey, you are ; so I’ll tell you somethin’,
Eita s a bit shook on you, and, take it from
ms, ibe’s a little bit of gmff, aad
ilia’ far. S’kmg,* and went on he; way S#
the house
An hour afterwards, Norman was m Twiaa
street, South Melbourne, and had. no difficulty
in finding No. 9. A couple of hansoms out-
side reminded him that Rita’s sister was to be
“spliced,” and the sounds of merrimeat and
the tones ot a piano announced that com-
pany were assembled within. But how
could fee, a stranger, intrude on that festive
scene f The answer came in the shape of Rita
herself, who had observed him through tha
window, and now came out to meet him.
44 1 knew you’d come,” she said. 41 1 suppose
Dulcie told you?”
“Daicie? Oh ! you mean the girl at
Auntie’s ? ” he replied.
41 Yes, Dalcie Fisher—that’s Auntie’s slavey.
She’s a bit of a bare, but all right to me.
I told her to put you on my track if you
called. Bat come inside and I’ll introduce
you. My sister’s going to be married pri
vateiy. Not a word about Auntie’s. They’re
ail on the dead square hereand, without
more ado, she conducted him into a comfort-
able parlor, and made him known to the
company.
There were no spielers, or fancy men, ot
painted and powdered prostitutes, here, bus
a select little assemblage of about a dozen, in-
cluding Rita’s sister —rather of a quiet, bar-
maidish type —her lover, sod a clergyman.
44 We’re waiting for a couple ot friends, *
whispered Rita to Norman, “and then the
operation will begin.” * Scarcely had she fin-
ished speaking when through the open front
door there bounced a female figure evidently
carrying a larger load of liquor than was good
for it. Before anyone could stir, she had
whirled into tae parlor, furiously crying—
-4‘ 1 want my bloke. I’ll stop his funny bus*
• T • i >i
BIHOS3 x Will/
“Great Scott!” said Rita to Nonaan, “There
will be the devil to pay now. That’s Diamond
Kate, from Lonsdale street, and she know*
a bit about my sister's mash.”
Evidently she knew a good deal about him.
and meant to let others know it too; for.
facing the said mash, she poured out a tor-
rent of recrimination and abase, intermingled
with shocking language.
44 You dog I ” she yelled ; “you'll turn on
me, will you? You’re going to marry this
pretty-faced tart, are yon ? Yah J You’ve got
two chances, you have. I’ll spoil your gfrfet
beauty,” and, seizing bold of a heavy ink-
stand, was about to hurl it at Rita’s sister,
when Rita rushed forward and caught her
arm.
48 None of your Ldfasdale street black-
guardism here, Diamond Kate.” she said
firmly. 44 You’re not at Mother Kordy’s now*
with a push behind you. Leave my oistet
alone ; she’s a respectable girl.”
Instantly recognising Rita, the infuriated
Kate gave vent to some of her sweetest
nressiona. those reducible to mint h&in


•• Respectable !—is she! Yews, she was
blooming respectable when she was aimed
out of TriHesrs pub for going through a tot!
for fifty quid, wasn’t she ! And she was bloom-
in' respectable when the cops found her in
Jimmy Ah Changes with a drunken jockey
from Caulfield. Yuss, my colonial! She’s as
pare as they make ’em, 1 don’t think. *'
Phew I You should have seen Rita’s lovely
eyes dash with anger !
“You lie I” she screamed. “She was
ever at Trillen’a or Jimmy Ah Chong’s.”
“Then it must have been you,” retorted
Diamond Kate, who was about to proceed
further, when Rita, losing all control of her-
self, rushed at the Lonsdale street harpy,
and, before Lionel Normnn or any of the
others coaid intervene, had her hand on
Kate’s throat, and was trying her level beat
to choke the black life out of that evil tonged
creature. Bat Kate came from Mother Kur-
dy’s, and had taken part in many a brutal
tussle at that delectable establishment: so
that, on rallying trom the first shock of Rita’s
sudden attack, she threw off her antagonist’s
frantic grasp, and proceeded to make matters
warm for the little beauty. For about two
minutes, despite the efforts of the men to
separate them, there was the wildest confus-
ion of petticoats, shoes, stockings and. hair
imaginable, each combatant kicking, biting,
scratching and screaming like a veritable
maniac. Diamond Kate’s costume was soon
reduced to rags, as she had not much
else on, it became plainly evident that her
fine figure was all her own. So with Rita.
With one mighty grab* Kate seized the bodice
of her opponent’s dress, and rip I rip I went
the stuff to the accompaniment of language
as bad as can be imagined. And next,
Kate drove her teeth into Rita’s plump leg—
for the second time revealed accidentally to
Lionel Norman—and made that beauty yell
blue murder.
That was enough for Norman. At the
sound of his charmer’s painful scream, he
dashed in among the kicking feet, and, seiz-
ing Kate by an ankle, literally hauled her off
Eita, and buried her across the room with
such force that she struck the amazed and
scandalized clergyman full in his very full
vest, and sent him crashing down among the
fire-irons. Meanwhile, Rita’s sister had
quietly fainted away on the sofa, where her
beau was vainly endeavoring to bring her to
by the very original method of dashing the
contents of the inkstand over her face and
finery, while one fair bridesmaid was sobbing
fitfully behind the piano, another throwing
her skirt and petticoats over her head,
evidently in the belief that she had hoisted
her dress only ; and the chairs, tables and
ornaments were scattered about in fearful
confusion.
That was the last Norman saw of the
scene; for Rita, who had slipped oat of the
room just as Diamond Kate and the parson
went down, quickly returned with a hat and
cloak os, tad mm passing out of the front-
door, when he noticed her, and ran after her,
M Don’t atop me ! ” she said. "My sister
and her friends will know all about me now,
so 1 want to get away and hide myself.”
“Bat where do I came in!” he asked,
somewhat plaintively. ** I came down to see
you, and now you’re going to disappear again.”
11 Well,” she said, "this blessed row ha£
upset my plana, and I don’t know exactly
what my next move is. But, if you want to
see me particularly, be at the Town Hall,
Collins street, to-morrow night at eleven
o’clock.”
M Coliina street at that time of night!” her
exclaimed. *’ Good God I then you are
"No, no!” she broke in* "Don’t be
alarmed, dear boy ; I’m not one of them*
Don't you believe all those lies about ms. 111
send Duicie Fisher to meet you there, and
she’ll teii you where I am. Good-bye. They’re
coming oat, and I can’t face my sister again,”
and in two minutes she was being whirled?
away in a hansom citywards, wbiie Norman
cursed the continuance of his bad luck, and
infatuatedly longed for the meeting with
Duicie, who was to put him once again on the
track of his fate. Fortunately for him, he
could not foresee the mysteries and dangers
into which that fate would lead him. But,
as Kipling puts it, that is another story, and
will keep well for the next chapter.
CHAPTER III.
A PRIVATE OPIUM “JOINT.”
Arriving at the Town Hail shortly before?
eleven o’clock on the night appointed, Lionel
Norman occupied the time of waiting for the
tricky little Duicie in observing the move-
ments of the loungers and passers by. Some
of the moat notorious of Melbourne's gay
women—daughters of joy, as the French call
them—were there in ail their war-paint and
powder, busily intent on snaring and raining
as many victims as possible. Diamond Kate,
looking none the worse for her fight with
Rita at South Melbourne, was flaunting up
and down with Madame Berlin, one of thg
oldest, ugliest, and most vicious of brothel i
mistresses, her fat, coarse face being abun-
dantly creased with the marks of infamy and
gluttony. Beneath an electric light stood
the hard-featured Bettis Karnody, whose:
career from music hall ballad singer to flag-
rant prostitute had been one long streak of
hideous dissipation. Along Swansjbon street
paced the jaunty figure of that little Swiss
courtesan who was the principal in a fright-
ful entertainment provided at her St. Kiida
Road house lor the delectation of some Eng-
lish cricketers a few years ago; while in com*
pany with her was another foreign harlot, I
who once bit a piece out of the cheek of a
constable who was arresting her. Several
very nnpicturesque gentlemen belonging to
the profession of . bludge-rs—vile creatures
who live on the degradation of evil women—
hovered around the scene, and various younr
*


*4oois who fondly believed themselves to be
men of the world, dashing Bohemians, and so
lorth, leered and ogled the females with that
fatuity which is the common characteristic of
the species.
Several of the gaudy butterflies accosted
Norman, and endeavored to cajole him in the
interests ot their business, but tie was in no
mood to listen to their shoddy and stereotyped
endearments, and could only wjader disgus-
tedly how such wretched creatures could ever
attract any man with two eyes m his head,
and what was the special reason for a pre-
sumably sane Government permitting such
«cum to pollute the streets ol so fine a city.
But these reflections were quickly cut short
by the appearance of Dalcie Fisher, fairly
swaggering along in the pride of a startling
yellow and black costume, and a hat crowned
with swaying feathers of a most extravagant
-Size. Clearly she “ had 'em all on,” and was
immensely satisfied with herself, as, swing-
ing her parasol, and surging her skirts about
her ankles, she smiled at one swell, nodded
to another, saluted Betty Karnody with a
“What oh I "gave a “ Good-night, old dar-
ling,” to a blear-eyed, bald-headed reprobate,
old enough to be her grandfather—and might
have been for all she knew—and so worked
her passage down to Lionel Norman.
“Sorry to keep you doin’ a perish," she
said, “ but got sich a lot o' bloomin’ friends
that I couldn’t git 'ere any sooner."
j I thought you worked for Auntie,” he
Sara, smiling at her apology.
“ Yass, so I do,” replied she, “ but I always
f©t one night out on me own, an' then — well,
'm one of the girls, you can bet."
“And Rita—is she one of the girls too?”
he asked anxiously.
“Not much, she ain’t,' Dalcie answered.
" There ain't no cockroaches on Rita. She
never played this game in her natural."
“ W r hat game does she play then?"
“Just what I’m goin' to hang you on to.
Come an’ oil me neck, an' then we'll go out
an' see *er.”
Accepting this as an intimation that she
desired him to treat her to a drink, Norman
accompanied her to a public-house, where she
oiled her neck with gin and bitters, and away
they went in a hansom towards South Yarra,
All his questioning could elicit no informa-
tion from Dulcie as to the nature of Rita’s
present occupation, so he had to exercise
patience until they arrived at a quiet house
ia a quiet street not a thousand miles from
the Botanical Gardens.
“ ’Ere y'are,” Dulcie exclaimed as the cab
stopped. “Let yourself in with this key, an’
fou'il see your mash in half a tick, S'iong,"
“ But are you not coming in ?”
“ Scarcely. M’ve got a diamond ring wait-
ing for me down in St. Kilda, so I’ll drive on
an' pick you up on my way back."
“ More mystery,” thought Lionel, as Dalcie
mnd the cab disappeared, “ but Fll get to the
of ii this trip against any odds.”
Letting himself in with the key which
Dalcie had given him, oe found the house
quiet, save for the sound ot sort singing which
issued from an upstair** ro im Fodowmg
that sound, he cams co che op-n door of a
brilliantly-lighted and exquisiteiy-fucaisaed
room, and there, extended on a couch, and ia
a graceful undress which suggested more
tnan it revealed, lay his lovely Rita! Her
eyes were half-closed in dreamy rapture, and
she was humming a waltz song in lazy happi-
ness.
He rushed forward. Good God ! what did
it ail mean! Was she ill, or drunk? The
next moment she had heard and recognised
him, and in the act of rising dropped from
her hand an opium pipe. Then it all came
clear to him. She was that most accursed ol
all sinners—an opium smoker. The heavy,
pungent odor of the room, the pipe, tray,
needle and lamp, all the horrible parapherna-
lia so necessary to of the devil
drug, drove the truth home to his heart with
tenfold force, and he stared aghast at the
fateful discovery of her secret.
But Rita was by no means too dazed to
notice bis demeanour. Looking at him wist-
fully. she murmured—
“ Now you know my secret, dear boy, bul
don't judge me too harshly. I can't help
smoking, but 1 manage it privately, and keep
away from the Chinese dens ; so I’m not sc
bad as you think me. Look here, 1 haven't
smoked for two days* and I don't see how thi
devil I stood it. If I had gone without it
another night I’d have felt like eating a pipe.”
•‘lts not for me to preach to you/' hi
answered, with an effort. “Dalcie did not
prepare me for this sort of thing, and so I
was naturally surprised to find you here and
in this condition. Besides, I thought that
opium smoking was confined solely to the
Chows' dens, or other equally low places.”
“Not a bit of it,” was her rejoinder.
“There are two or three places like this,
where respectable people can enjoy them-
selves without publicity, and you’d be sur-
prised if you knew how many society women
indulge in the habit. *
“ But you—you are not a society woman?”
he queried.
“No, I’m a—ho, well, I’m a damned young
fool to listen to you. If you don't like me as
1 am you can go to the devil.”
Apparently, he was quite as much of a
young fool as his charmer was, for hit
passionate response to her outburst was—
“ I do like you as you are, and we'll go to
the devil together if yon'il stick to me on the
journey.”
“ That's true blue,” she answered. “ You’w
a good, straight fellow, and Fve thought a
good deal more about you than about any-
body else Fve ever known ; so say the wan)
and 1 am yours truly,” * '
Just here occurred an interval for refresh-
ments, the bill of fare consisting entirely oi
embraces and kisses, for which each showed


ONE OF THE GIRLS.
Gay Life in Melbourne.


« remarkably healthy appetite, men f .**,
Seabed and laughing, released heraeit -rom
his ardent area, and said commaadingiy—
‘s Now, as I am not goim to have you_ al-
ways preaching at me tor opium smoKing,
yon will go into the next room, and br ng a
pip® and we’ll have one together, anen we II
amts on that score.
The enamoured Norman did her bidding
without a murmur, and °“ K “*9 p"u»
showed him bow to prepare the horrible stutt
and extract the delusive gratification from »t.
And he. intoxicated with the thought that
she was hia, and his alone, reclined there
on the couch with her, eager todebase him-
self and his manhood at the whim o. so -ait
and frail a woman. . „
"Now,” she said, when the primaries
were over “make yourseli at home.
miatrees of the house won’t be back to-mgu
so that we can enjoy ourselves aadiaturoed.
Bat she was mistaken, for hardly had she
spoken when were heart, pending
the stairs, and in another minute a stylish
woman atepned into the room. u , f
“You wretches !” she exclaimed, what
have you done with my sister?
“Your sister 1” said Rita. Vvhat do you
mean! There’s no one here but ourselves.
How did you get in?” _ Qllror j
18 The front door was open, and I walked
in,” the stranger replied. Tell
plore you, where she is. 111 LuO it
you’ll only let me take her home.
88 Madame,” said Norman, I can assure
yon that we are alone, must have mis-
taken the bouse. 5 ’ „ T *
“ No, no ” was the agitated reply. I wO<-,k
her out of here once before, but sue has run
away from home again, and I am sure sue is
here. For God’s sake, let me see ber; let me
gave her before it is too late.
“ Look here,” exclaimed Rita, angmy, your
sister is not here, and if you don c leave you a
be thrown out.”
“You poor, miserable creature, wul you
not let me save her from falling as low as you
have fallen?” . „ .
“ By thunder! this is too strong, oneo
Rita * “ Tm as good as you are any day in
the week, and I teH you your blooming sister
isn’t in this honed.” . . ,
But the stranger evidently placed no taita
in Rita's word, for she began to cad out -
“ Agnea 1 Anees ! —where are you, dear.
A^Look A bere, old boy,” said Rita to Nor-
man, “you’ll have to put her out Shell
rouse up the whole blessed neighborhood.
He hesitated to offer violence to one wno
was evidently a lady, and Rita, a.,
that hesitation, said quickly—
“ If you don’t get rid oi ber, you can ciear
out yourself. - A nice sort of a Jay you are to
9 f ’
Then Norman hardened his heart, descend-
ing * step*" lower in his abasements ana.
placing a hand on the lady’s shoulders, saia-*«
11 Get out of here, and don’t make a show
of yourself. Your sister is not here, so go ! ”
58 You vile thing 1” she said, throwing his
grasp off with more contempt than *
believe you’d murder me ii that creature there
ordered you to.*’ _ - „ . ..
That home thrust knocked ali the manli-
ness out of him, and seizing her again he
fairly ran her out of the room, down
stairs, and out of the gats, just as he had
been fired out of auntie’s when he first met
Ei«*a- Ou his return the latter was just toss-
ing off a glass of brandy, and be could not
help thinking what a beautiful fiend was she
for whom he had cast aside his last shrea of
manhood., . _ M
“Do you know who that woman isi sns
asked him.
“No; do you!” _ „
“ Yes, she is the daughter of Dr. —-*
mentioning the name of an honored medico,
“and the sister she is seeking was*ruined ana
introduced to this life by a married man old
enough to be her father. But let us have a
smoke ; I’m dying for a pipe, and I suppose
you’re in no hurry to go home/ 7
But again there was an interruption m the
shape of a clattering at the front gate, which
Norman had locked. Rita put her head out
of the front upstairs window.
“ Who’s there! * . I|T ,
11 All serene,” replied Dulcie’s voice. Ive
got my diamond ring, and. if your blokey a
ready i’ll drive him into town.”
11 He’s gone home an hour ago, said Rita.
•• Dicken 1 you can’t kid thia cbicben. Tell
him to hurry up, or —" . .
But the rest waa lost in the bane with
which Rita abut the window, and Dulcie,
with a grin on her face, drove into the city
alone.
CHAPTER IV.
MOTHER KURDY’S.
Lionel Norman’s opium sleep in the bouse
at’ South Yarra lasted till long after day.
break when be awoke with a shudder and a
horrible feeling of utter weariness. His eyes
seemed on fire, his head was heavy, and his
limbs stiff and sore. That is the usual pen-
alty paid by one wno yields to iue tienuish
fascinations of the poppy drug. It sucks the
life from the brain and the nerve from the
body, and leaves its victim a pitiful thing, as
wretched as mortal being can be. Rut **
den stimulant came to arouse his nickering
Jt was the sound of the front C-*te
closing with a sharp crash, and reached
the window just in time to see the graceful
figure of Rita Delorme turn the corner os the
street. That startled him into instant action,
and dressing himself as speedily as possible,
he raced out after her only to encounter fail-
ure. - Once more she was lost to him.*» All
that day he spent in searching for her, bat b«


cosld not Sad Dalcie at Aunt!e ? », her
house at poath Melbourne was closed* and he
coald arrive at no cine to her whereabouts,
in the evening he went back to the opium
joint at South Yarra, .hoping to find her re-
turned, bat coaid obtain no scrap of informa-
Llon about her, and disconsolately made bia
▼ay back to town, and wandered aimlessly
about the streets in despair.
, Towards halt-past ten he was passing
tnrough Exhibition street on his way to the
-.own Hail to search for her there, when he
noticed a stylish woman accost an elegantly-
dressed man, and, after a tew words, turn
down towards Lonsdale street with him.
Surely he could not be mistaken—it was
Rita I Then opium smoking was not her only
vice, as she had endeavored to make him be-
lieve. She was a cunning, false-hearted har-
lot, who had tooled him with her theatrical
professions of love. Nervously he followed
the couple, and had ju-t made up his mind
to confront them when they entered the door
of a two-storeyed house in Lonsdale street,
and left him staring at the building with hor-
ror-struck eyes. Harlot I Liar! He had
b ?wled her out in her infamy ! She was a
common street troll; a soliciter of men on
the street highways ; a nameless, shameless
wretch, who sold her beauty to the first
comer !
There was so use in blinking the fact any
longer. The house she had so familiarly en-
tered was Mother Kurdy’s, the gilded home
of ev i , the most infamous in a city where in-
famy was privileged. In a moment his mind
w«s made up ; he would enter even there and
tax her with her callous deceit. Naturally,
there was no embarrassing formalities of in-
troduction necessary. He merely staggered
along the pavement as though drunk, and
immediately two painted devils, in flaring
frocks and hair, were at him like
tigers at their prey.
tk Ah. there, darling, won’t you come in
and see the canary?” said one debilitated
charmer, while the other attempted to fondle
his watch-pocket and feel his apparel for
coin, an operation known in local slanguage
as •* fanning.”
Pretending to be delighted with the liber-
ties which they took with him, he acceded to
their invitation to step inside, and an instant
later was in the heart of the most notorious
bro* hel in the city.
It was fly-time at Mother Kurdy’s, the time
when the flies were buzzing around the web,
and the spiders were in clover. The room in
which he found himself was gaudy and tawdry
—a dissipated, effeminate young man thump-
ed a piano ; females of ail ages and styles
lounged about the apartment, laughing,
swearing, drinking, quarrelling, and showing
their airs and graces (and other things), and
the atmosphere was & cloudy with cigar and
cigarette smoke. Depravity and recklessness
marked every countenance with its indelible
ftaiss, md the 51 tnn* reels as it warn
fast and furious* Those of the girls* who re*
ceived guests and never walked the streets
were scattered around attired in loose robes
and shppers* and had their cheek t eyes, eye*
b f°* s , »«d lips painted in glaring' red and
biack (the latter, of course, on the eyebrows
on!y)and took every painato make as voluptu-
ous pictures as they could. On one sofa a well-
known wrestler was dallying with Batty Ear-
mod? m very free and easy fashion, the said
Betty having one arm around his neck and
the other about the neck of an ex-detective,
and was inciting tnem to treat her in a
manner which clearly showed that she was
?°, Jydy, Two song and dance men, who
had dropped in after doing their “ turns ” at
the theatre, were amusing themselves by
pouring beer down the ample bosom of a girl
Whom they held down on the table, and most
of the other girls were busily beguiling half-
drunken young fellows to shout more liquor.
Amongst the company, as the society papers
put it, were a notorious and successful jockey
who afterwards went to England, a lawyer
just struck off the rolls for tampering with
trust funds, an ex-M.L.A. who, in Parliament,
used to profess piety, a colored heavy weight
pugilist known as Black Caesar, whose speci-
alty was playing the piano with his nose, an
Irisfa-American variety manager whose thea-
trical ventures were financed by a Scotch
bawd, a Yiddish bookmaker whose brutish
conduct had driven one pretty stage girl to
the Yarra Bend asylum, and another to the
river, and others not necessary to indicate.
They were not all in one room at the same
£. me » , bnBineBS was brisk and Mother
Kurdy a clients had the free run of most of
the house. Consequently. Norman, not see-
iog Kita in the piano room, concluded that
she was occupied, and resolved to wait for
her reappearance After having made a n*me
for himself by " shouting ~ drinks, he settled
quietly in a corner and watched the antics
of the company, who were getting very fes-
live, and indulging in various pranks which
were much too warm for cold print. Acroba-
tic anu contortionistic feats were performed
oy Betty Karmody and two others, assisted
oy the well-known wrestler, on the large
taoie, the entire absence of modesty and very
scanty attire of the performers not detracting
from the display in the least. Black Csesar
gave his notorious performance on the piano
to sb*seKB of laughter, and even Norman,
grave and anxious as he felt, could not help
grinning at the spectacle of the colored artist
picking out the melody of 14 Up came Johnny
mu h c ?“ mer S ” with his bi R black nose’.
b*arbine Miller, sometimes known as
Bih Martin, a large young woman with
immense ega showing beneath the shortest
or snort skirts, and a massive bosom rising
ana failing like twin balloons, volunteered a
song, of which the only printable versa ran
something like thiss—


l>efiois sod ghamos west oeurtfai* oo« day
A s w*co little collegia oamed Molly O* Shaft ;
They blarneyed and ceased in Ibeir neat Irish w%y t
Ami Mo<4v was moighry with that same.
But- wceu the cUys passed and the salt say they
crossed,
4ad px»r .uo.iy found that her heart had been lost,
fche didn’t know which of the two bhoys to blames
Juse as the applause was dying away, the
so and*} of a scuffla and a cry of “Help!”
came from an fedj nmin* room. Without an
inscans’s reflection the impetuous Norman
jumped up, ran down a passage towards the
aosse, and, bursting open a door, discovered
a uaii-dressed young man being held down on
a bed by two women, one of whom was
kneeling on his chest, while the second had
one banl on his throat and in the other a
gold watch and broken chain. The back of
the kneeling woman was towards Norman,
but he knew instantly shat she was the one
whom he had followed,
“ My God ! Rita ! ” he exclaimed, and then,
seising her by the shoulder, toppled her on
the bed face upwards, and looked at her. It
was not Rita. He had been deceived by the
similarity of figure, but a glance showed him
the hard, bold countenance of Diamond Kate,
which no more resembled that of his myste-
rious little beauty than a tiger resembles a
lamD. At the same moment, the man on the
bed threw off the other girl and gained the
floor. Norman saw that he vr&s the elegantly-
dressed young tellow who had entered with
Kate.
M By thunder I they’ve robbed me," he ex-
claimed ; “they’ve got my watch and chain,
and they'd have bad my purse only for you.”
“Well, here’s the watch and chain,” said
Norman, grasping the girl who held the jewel-
lery and snatching it from her,
“ What the devil have yon got to do with
it ? ” screamed the woman. M They’re mine ;
he gave ’em to me ’cos 1 stopped with him at
the Corfee Palace larst night”
“Not a bit of it,” said the young man. V I
wouldn’t be found dead in the same paddock
with you. Look here< old man, they thought
I was drunk, and when I objected to them
going through me they flung themselves on
me, and threatened to brain me. I would
have slaughtered them only that I don’t care
about striking women.”
“Weil, let us both get out of this place,”
said Norman.
“Yes. a nice chance you’ve got,” said a
voice behind him, and, turning round, saw
Mother Kurdy and a crowd of both sexes.
‘“Who the ’ell are you to come ’ere a’ inter-
ferin’ with my girls ? ” and her flabby, vicious
face was horrible to look upon as she glared
at him.
11 If you attempt to prevent us leaving, I’ll
bring the police down on you, you filthy old
hag,” said Norman,-endeavouring to pass.
“ The police don’t interfere with a respect-
able 'ouae like mine,” she replied, barring
bis passage, ‘* and I’ll show you what kind of
an old ag I am. Weil tear the bloomia*
clothes c>ff you, my buck, afore we’ve dons
with you.”
For answer, Norman elbowed her asida*
and pushed his way ro door, followed by
the man he had assisted. But be h>d a tough
gang to deal with, and had not gene many
paces when a fellow as big as himself aimed
a vicious blow at him which just missed its
mark,
“Make it willing, Andy,” said Diamond
Kate, who was standing oa the bed. “ Pull
his bloomin’ arm off, and hit him over the
head with it.”
But the crowd in the little room gave Andy,
the bully, no scope to display his boxing
powers, and in endeavouring to get a wrest-
ling hold on the sturdy Norman he met his
match, and was flung violently into the pas-
sage, where he lay half-stunned. Following
up his advantage, Norman pushed his way to
the piano room, and was congratulating him-
self on getting out of the trouble so easily,
when, in turning to see if his friend still fol-
lowed him, he was struck on the forehead by
a flower vase thrown by the effeminate young
man who had been banging the piano.
“ You miserable set of curs,” said Norman
angrily, as the blood trickled down hia face.
“You’re fplucky enough in a push, but there
isn't a man amongst you who*s game for a
fair fight.”
“ Ain’t there! ” cried a voice from the
stairs. “I’ll fight you for £lO any time you
like, and ruin your pretty Rita afterwards;”
and, looking up, Norman saw above him the
very Toorak swell whom he had knocked
down at Auntie’s.
“ Well, I’ve stiffened yon once, and I’ll
stiffen you again,’ retorted Norman, “ but I
don’t fight in a brothel.”
“Anywhere you like,” replied the other.
“Bring your money down to Mick Nathan’s
to-morrow afternoon, and I’ll give you all the
stoush you’re looking for.”
“ I’ll be there,” said Norman, “ and if you
fail me I’ll hunt you up and smash your face
in wherever I meet you,” and without
further interference he and his new friend
passed out into the night.
CHAPTER V
THE FIGHT AT NATHAN'S.
Everybody in Melbourne knows Mick
Nathan, either personally or by reputation,
while his athletic hall is the great rendezvous
of the boxing fraternity and their following ;
so that Norman felt somewhat nervous as he
stepped into that popular sporting resort on
the day subsequent to that on which the
Toorak swell had challenged him. Although
he had had some little experience in the art
of pugilism, he had not mingled much with
professional fighters, and was rather inclined
to be prejudiced against them He pictured
them chiefly as beetle-browed, heavy jawed,
bullet-headed monuments of muscle, Joyously
seeking for the gore of their feilowcreatures,


excepting wheu
ia ibei? sore aaißs«iS6at of pound-
lag somebody's features into sanguinary mash,
wheQ they became murderousl y-happy. Bat
there were no “Beer pardons” about this
young man ; so, Controlling his natural diffi-
dence, he entered the back bar with the easy
air of a champion American nag, and found
hk new friend. Montague Tilkins, waiting
for him, and passing away the time in chat-
ting with a weli-known sporty and teasing
a very fine and fluent old cockatoo.
Over a glass of brown stuff, Tilkins inform-
ed him that arrangements had been made for
the contest to take place at four o’clock—it
was then two —and that Mick Nathan had
promised that the affair would be conducted
fairly and squarely.
“What! Mick Nathan himself!” said
Norman, in admiring amazement.
"S’sh* He’ll hear you ; he’s over there,”
aaid Tilkins, indicating a group seated in the
corner of the bar.
M But which is Nathan ? ” asked Norman,.
dropping his voice to a respectful whisper.
"The sturdy, burly man, with the rubicund
cheeks and pleasant smile,” answered Til-
kins ; “ he’s got a bit of a bow-window on
him, but he was one of the best in his day*
and that’s not so long ago. Looks like a
prosperous member of Parliament, doesn’t
he?”
41 And that tall, slender, young man, with
the pensive look in hia eyes, and the beautiful
moustache T
11 Man alive I ” exclaimed Tilkins, in utter
astonishment, ,# do you mean to say you don’t
know who that is f Why, where on earth
have you been hiding yourself?”
“Well, I haven’t been about much lately,”
stammered the other, feeling as though he
should apologise for his ignorance, 41 but is
he—is he anyone important?”
11 Important! Lord bless your innocent
soul, why, that’s Billy Williams ! but not the
fighting man ;* and Tilkins stepped back to
watch the effect of his startling announce-
ment Then, seeing that Norman had failed
to grasp the full value of the information, he
leaned forward and impressively whispered—
M Billy Williams, of the Hawklbt f ” and as
the name of the popular paper sank into Nor-
man’s ear that young man’s eyes opened wide
with astonishment at the wealth of talent
with which his friend was acquainted.
•• Further than that,* continued Tilkins,
14 he has consented to be stakeholder for your
match, so come over and be introduced to
him and Nathan,” and, to Norman’s delight,
when be was introduced to them, he found
that their fame sat lightly on them, and they
proved to be as affable and even genial as
commoner mortals.
i’ll tell you what,” said Nathan, 41 that
young fellow you’re going to meet is a tough
*un, and knows how to use his hands, take
\y word ior it”
81 Do you know him T* asked ;
M Know him ? 1 should say I did,” was the-
reply of the ex-champion, “ He’s the aon of
old Tom Kmdur, the big Bsndigo brewer, and
Uvea with his mother and sisters in a swell
house at Toorak. Got more money than
sens**, if you ask me.”
14 You’re right there, Mick,” chimed in tho
pensive Billy WtHiams. 11 I’ve had to touch
him up in our paper once or twice, and I can
promise you he didn’t like it Once he got
fired out of the Opera House for fooling
round Rickards’ girls, and another time he
had to clear out of an East Melbourne house
where he had been carrying on with a mar-
ried woman. He was in such a hurry that he
didn’t have time to put on his coat and vest,
and had to walk to Toorak at two o’clock in
the morning slap bang through a hail storm.
We had a picture of him jumping out of the
window while the husband was letting him-
self in the front door with his latch-key.- He’s
a bad egg, but he’s all right with the gloves*
I saw him whollop out Scotty Mcßain with a
solar plexus in a fair dinkum go, and I’m
satisfied he knows the game. But you look
as if you could give him plenty of trouble,
young fellow.”
' “ Well, I’ll do my beat/ 5 modestly answered
Norman, wondering what sort of a weapon a
II solar plexus” was, what might be the pre-
cise meaning of "a fair dinkum go,” and
wishing that he could speak the language
with the beautiful fluency of these experts.
At this juncture, Tilkins announced that
Horace Kindur had arrived with haif-a-dozes
friends, and in very short order the prelimi-
naries had been arranged, the stakes placed
in the care of Billy Williams, and the contes-
tants were ready to enter the ring. Kindur’s
friends were all of the top-hatted, clean-
shaven, well-dressed brigade, noisy and
boastful of their man’s prowess, while Kin-
dur himself was rigged out in the scanty and
unpicturesque attire .of the professional
boxer, and was evidently full of confidence.
Norman, on the other hand, had merely
stripped off everything but his shoes, trouser®
and under shirt, had no friend to see him but
Tilkins, and betrayed no emotion kind.
The audience was smail but select, consisting
of a noted featherweight champion, a sport-
ing barrister, a large, heavy, angular, be-
spectacled journalist from a sporting paper,
Kindur’s friends, and about a dozen others.
Jacky McGowan acted as referee, Tim Hegar-
ty held the watch, and a pugilistic doctor
from Collins street (one of Mick Nathan’s
pupils) was credited with possessing sufficient
intelligence to count ten. Nathan himself
stood near the door, to check intruders.
Not having the facile pen of a boxing re-
porter, the writer enters on the details of the
contest with fear and trembling, and trusts to
be pardoned for any defects therein which
may be discovered by the keen eye of the ex-
perienced reader.
So far as height, weight and build went,
i the men were pretty evenly matched, bul


A private refreshment room—Page 14,


"while Norman’s clear eyes and wholesome
cheeks betokened sound health, his oppo-
nent's dissipated features and the heavy lines
about his mouth and eyes spoke forcibly of an
impaired constitution. So that if skill was
on the side of the latter, Norman certainly
bad the advantage in stamina. As the com-
batants approached each other in the first
around, there was a very marked difference in
their respective attitudes, Kindur dancing
about with ail the airs of a flash professional,
while Norman calmly adopted defensive tac-
tics. But seeing that his opponent was ap-
parently anxious to commence operations, he
manoeuvred with the object of drawing him
off his guard. Suddenly he hot his right
hard on the ribs, while Kindur returned
lightly and skipped out of range. Following
up, Norman again landed on the riba. A
clincn followed, and on breaking away Hin-
du r was short with a left lead, while his
right went round the head, Norman at the
same moment sending a pretty left on the
chin. Losing his temper immediately, Kin-
dur rushed Norm in to the opposite aide of
the ring, when he shot out left and right, and
missing with both, went nearly through the
ropes with bis own impetus. That round
finished without much harm being done on
either side, but it convinced Norman that his
opponent had not the wind to last long, and
was no better boxer than himself.
“Time 0 had no sooner sounded for the
second round than Norman jumped in, send-
ing left and right on the face and head with
good effect, while Kindur, amidst the cheers
ot his friends, returned with a flush left and
right on the neck, and forced his adversary to
the ropes, where he closed. Again in the
centre, Norman found a landing place on the
ribs with a “snorter” which seemed to para-
lyse Kindur, and brought admiring ejacula-
tions tr m the professionals in the hall.
“Love me!” the noted featherweight was
heard to exclaim, 11 but that was a fair beaut.
It’s any money on one,” That one was Nor-
man, who opened the third round by hooking
his man on the jaw. Then, after some smart
countering, he walked round the ring, and,
turning suddenly, bashed Kindur in the face,
A couple of light exchanges followed, and
then Norman upper-cut his man twice in suc-
cession, and next, like lightning, smashed
a straight left on the stomach, and with a
groan the boastful Toorak swell went down,
never to rise again—that is until he had been
counted out, while Norman received the con-
gratulations of Tilkins and the featherweight
and a few more on his victory,
Kindur continued groaning,, and looked
fearful with the mingled blood and sweat on
his face, and Norman, in the softness of his
heart, went over to him, and offering his
hand, said sincerely—
i. “ Shake hands, old fellow. You’re a better
than I am, but you’re out of condition,
all,'’ which, to say the least of it, way
ehafit&kie.
But Kindur was not built to underetau
and appreciate manliness* and, rising with an
effort, he spat at Norman venomously, and,
with horrible maledictions, cried passionate-
ly—
“Corse you 1 you damned cadi I don’t
shake hands with your sort. If I hadn’t been
boozing last night I'd have slogged the hide
off you.” Then, with a sudden fiendish
thought, he sneered—“ I suppose you got that
£lO off Rita Delorme, you miserable hound.”
This was more than Norman could stand
even from a man in such a weak and excited
state, and with a threatening gesture he adh
vaaced towards Kindur, and said—
“ Dare to say a word against that girl, and,
by thunder I I’ll ram your foul tongue down
your throat,” and in another moment there
would have been a pretty riot with him and a
couple of Kindur's friends, who were prepar-
ing to attack Norman, But Mick Nathan
rushed up trom the door, where he had been
discussing the contest with the pugilistic doc-
tor, and, getting in amongst the angry group,
said imperatively—
“ Out you go! the whole lot of yon. You
have had your fight fair and square, and, if
you ask me, the best man won. . at I don't
allow any cross-barneying or bad .anguage in
this hall, so you'd better smoke.”
As Norman had no further reason for re-
maining, having received the stakes from the
amiable Billy Williams {who, by the way,
offered to make a match for him through the
Haweust), he immediately left the hall and
called a cab, into which he and his friend
hurriedly jumped. They were driving round
the corner of Swanston street, when
espied Dulcle rushing passionately in the di-
rectron of the post-office, when he immediately
chased her in the cab, and, on jumping out
and facing Duicie, was frantically appealed
to by that young woman in manner follow-
ing—
-11 Mister Norman, Mister Norman, for
Gawd* sike, come'n see Rita. She's yellin' 'er
blessed 'ead orf for yen She's took poison
'cos ske reckoned yer didn't fink nothin' of
'er no more. Lumme, she is bad. S'elp me,
if I don’t fink she’s dyia'. Come on, come
on,” and, without having time to ask any
questions, he was whisked away with Dulcia
to a terrible scene, which may be better de-
scribed in the next chapter.
CHAPTER VI.
IN BITA’S BEDROOM.
When Norman once more ted his hungry
eyes on Rita's beauty, she was tossing about
in agony on a bed in the back-room of a dash
city hotel. The pillow and sheets were crim-
son with the blood which had gushed from
her month, and her face was pale and drawn
with intense suffering,** Ever and anon, an
ear-piercing shriek thrilled through the apait
merit, only to be succeeded by groans and
bitter lamentations, in which she repeated


Norman’s naaae 8 sometimes with indescriba-
ble fondness and sometimes with stinging
scorn.
M Ob," she was saying mournfully as be en-
tered ibe room with Dulcie, “ he is so brave,
so strong, so good that I can't help loving
him. Bat he's like all tbe rest—-he wanted
lo know my price* My price !” she screamed
with spasmodic energy ; “good God ! couldn’t
the fool see that my price was every beat of
his heart, every throb of bis pulse, as he has
every beat and throb of mine ? But no, no,
he's like all the rest; every woman is to be
bought, he thinks, I wonder if he has a wife
and what heb price is ? w Then relapsing in-
to tenderness, she murmured —“Dear boy,
Just put your arms around me, as you used to
do, kiss me with those rich, ripe lips of yours,
bold me close to your breast and say, ‘ Rita, I
love yon ! Rita, Rita, two against the
world } ? That's my price, dear boy ; the only
payment I want from you for my body and
soul."
Norman was about to rush forward to com-
fort and claim her, mistaking her ravings for
reality, when Dulcie stopped him by saying—
“ Don't take no notice. The doctor bloke
said it'd be all right if she broke out gassing
Tommy nonsense. But, lumme, aint she
dead sweet on you ?”
M So you've got a doctor, I hope he s a
good nne, s
“Well, he aint a reg'iar doctor yet, yo?!
know, he's on’y one of them student blokiea,"
said Dulcie ; “ but he's cherry ripe, is Mister
Yosenmell. He was downstairs tickling the
planner, so I called him up, an' he guy her
somefin' as'd make her jerk up most of the
poison, and send her into a nice by-bye."
“ But I must see him and pay hlm, ,, said
Norman.
11 Oh I don't flurry yer fat about that/' Dul-
cic responded, “ I guv him a couple of rums,
an' he's back at the planner as lively as a flea
on a hot blanket, if you see him he'll on'y
bite yer ear for arf a dollar for more boose-
juice,"
So, as Rita bad sunk into what the viva-
cious Dulcie termed “ a nice by-bye, * Norman
sat watching her for an hour, and when she
awoke was rewarded for bis patience by see-
ing the healthy color return to her cheeks,
and her lovely eyes grow lovlier still with won-
der and delight at bis presence. A few words
explained tbe mystery of her disappearance
and attempted suicide. She had heard him
muttering in his opium sleep at South Yarra,
“ I know everything but her price," and be-
lieving that he looked upon her as a girl cast
down in the depths of vileness, she had
quitted the house in shame and disgust, re-
solving to see him never again. That belief
had worked such havoc with her brain and
heart that, in a lit of despair, she had swal-
lowed some poison, and almost shut out the
light of life from her soul.
“You must go now, dear boy,'* she said,
after her story was told, “and i must have
another IHtle sieep and then get up and
But you*U come in to-night, won't you ! ”
M Come in I—ln where I” he asked*
“ Ob, I forgot that yon don't know what*
Vm doing. Well, I’ve got a billet in the*
private bar here, so you'll have no difficulty-
la finding me this time/ 9 ahe answered.
•*A private bart” he exclaimed in con-
tempt “ Why* that's only one remove from.
a _ *
“Yes, I know, dear, 9 * she broke in. “It
isn't too ‘cherry ripe,* as Dulcie my%. We
water the Walker's, and hocus the Heneaspy,.
and muddle the mashers, but when I iont you
I didn't care what I did. But my week s up-
to-night, and I’ll turn the business no tor
ever, straight wire," smiling at her return to
the old free and easy style.
So with a promise to see her later on, Nor-
man left Dulcie with her, and went down the
stairs, happy once again in the knowledge
that she still belonged to him, and only a few
hours separated them.
Owing to unforeseen delays, he did no** re-
turn to the hotel—better known as the Mar*
Trap Club than by its licensed n^me —until*
nearly eleven o'clock. He found Rita in the
private bar, looking almost her old self, and
busily attending to the liquid wants of several
well-dressed individuals of the smart book-
maker, variety-actor, and man-about-towa
type. Although the bar was small, there were
four girls, including Rita, presided over by
the 41 boss," Clara Parke, a large-bosomed,
dark-haired woman,' whose past career bad
been a record of the grossest kinds of immor-
ality. She leased this bar from the landlord
of the hotel, and cheerfully paid a large ren-
tal for the privilege of running it in her own
peculiar way, and that way, it may safely be
said, was of the red-hottest kind in the city.
Presently moat of the customers crowded
in front of a fair, hand painted, golden-
haired girl, who wag firing off a very rude
fairy tale ; so Rita was left free to chat with
Norman.
“A nice lot, aint they t" she said, indica-
ting the guffawing customers. “They a!!
think they s re so awfully clever, and yet those
girls take them down as easily as falling off a
log. That fair girl, Alice the Nut, makes £5
or £6 a week out of that big hookmaking chap,
and yet all the time her real fancy man is a
hansom cabby on the Collins street rank,
whose rent she pays out of the bookie’s
money. Then there's that variety star. He
gets £25 a week for dabbing a bit of red paint
on his nose, wearing a red patch on the bosom
of his pants, and howling comic songs, and he
doss half of bis stuff in with Clara Parke, and
the other half at the races.”
“ There must be a terrible amount of liquor
sold here to need four girls to serve,” observed
Norman.
** Oh I well, you see, net hei ,ij *q
| sell drinks,* was the response. M My dear boy,
I surely you're not m areeu that you haven't


Gambled to the game. Why, bless you, Clara
doesn’t pay any of them except me/'
64 Doesn't pay them f* said Norman. “You
mean to tell me they work here solely for
*be love of the thing."
“ Well, scarcely,” she replied ; 11 bet there
always plenty of pickings whan there are
•o many mugs about You see* by feeing hare
ibey can't be run ia for having no lawful vis-
ible means of support, and they have excep-
tional chances of meeting foolish fellows with
plenty of cash f who are just so many gold and
silver mines to them. It’s—it's—oh ! well,
it’s better than strolling about the streets. ”
“And those rooms there beyond the piano
—what are they for ?”
It is not quite certain that Rita blushed,
bat she decidedly hesitated before replying.
“Oh! they’re the private refreshment
rooms. You see, if a customer wants to
have a quiet drink away from the bar, he can
have it in there, and Clara or one of the others
will attend to him.”
“But where does the profit come in?"
queried inquisitive Norman. “ They're cosily
furnished, and drinks at 6d. a time wouldn't
pay for them.**
She did blush at that time, and drew vague
figures on the counter as she said—
“Oh ! they pay for the famishing ail right.
You see drinks served in there are more ex-
pensive than out here. You could easily
«pend a halt sovereign or a pound over a
couples or whiskies in there, but then the ac-
commodation is so much better."
“Halt a sov. or a quid tor a couple ot
whiskies l " exclaimed Norman, in disbelief.
,e Why, no would be ass enough to do
4hat "
“ You forget the special attendance of Clara
or one of tbeotbers," observed Rita, still keep-
ing her eyes counterwards, but something in
her tom* made Norman suddenly bend to-
wards her and whisper anxiously—
“ What on earth brought you to this place ?
It’ll ruin your character for ever.”
“I told you before that I didn't care what
I did when 1 thought you despised me," she
answered,
“Yes, but why didn't you get into a re-
spectable private bar ! There are any amount
of Ihem in the city."
M Because the respectable ones want refer-
ences, and Clara was content to take me on
my face value,” she said. 11 But I’ve told her
I'm going after to night, so don't get on to me
any more about it/'
“All right,", was the answer, “But tell
me one thing. I noticed you drinking with
those fellows as I came in; bow is it you
don't get drunk? ”
“ I drink nothing but sherry," said Rita.
“ But sherry taken so often is as bad as any-
thing else," he urged.
•• Ah ! bat my sherry is cold tea and water,
with three drops of wine in it, so that if a
aaan is suspicious I let him smell it* and he's
satisfied that Fm not having him." she ex-
plained with a sly smile.
At that moment there was a burst of laugh-
ter from the crowd, and Norman saw Clara
Parke noming from one of the private rooms
dressed ia the kilt and other accessories of a
Highlander, who stood by the piano with the
woman’s skirt on. The kilt was more than
commonly short, and displayed Clara’s splen-
did legs and lacy lingerie to an extent only
paralleled by a stage fairy. On her head was
Scottie's bonnet, and as she pranced about in
a ludicrous and exaggerated imitation of a
Highland fling, or tried to kick the big
bookie’s belltopper off his head, those fine
limbs and the voluptuous attitudes into which
she threw herself drew admiring applause and
rude remarks from moat of the spectators,
and encouraged her to higher Sights of devil-
ment. Seizing the big bookie round the neck,
sue broke into a wild, whirling dance, and, as
gaiety is infectious, Alice the Nut scrambled
over the counter—exhibiting legs almost as
shapely as Clara’s—and joined in the madness
with the variety star. The other two girls
followed suit, and in five minutes that private
bar was the scene of as reckless an orgie as
the most vicious could desire.
But soon the fun was turned into a riot,
for Clara, bounding about with the bookie*
cannoned heavily against Alice the Nat, and
knocked that “ perfect lydy " on the broad of
her back, or the broadest part of her back,
whichever way you like to put it. Up jumped
Alice, and, like lightning, smashed a tumbler
at Clara’s face, and in a second the room
echoed with the sounds of oaths, thuds and
veils Norman turned to implore Rita to quit
the place, but was only in time to see her
dart down the passage which he knew led to
the back bedroom. Quick as he was, she bad
entered and banged the door before he
reached it, but with a mighty shove he burst
it and clasped her in bis arms.
“ Thank heaven I it’s you/’/she. exclaimed
breathlessly. “ I thought it was one of those
drunken beasts after me.”
44 Weil,” he said, diplomatically, “ asfone
of those drunken beast may come after you,
let me stay and protect you. ”
“W'hat ! At this time of night I Do too
want to ruin my character for ever?” she
said, without a great show of anger, however.
“ But you can’t stay in this hole any longer,"
he protested.
“No, but dear boy, as soon as I get my has *
and cloak on you can get me a bed at the
Coffee Palace,” she replied, and as it turned
out be experienced no difficulty in adopting
her thoughtful suggestion.
CHAPTER VII.
RITA'S STIRRING STORY
“Rita,” said Norman, about a week after
they had settled down in a snug little cot-
tage in Fitiroy, “tell me the story of your
life. You mu it have bad a hard time of it, I


gmncf, and have men more queer things than
mmt girls of your age.”
11 Wall, dear boy, it’s not at all a pretty
story.” she answered: “there are a good
blushes in it. Besides, it’s risky for a
girl like me to confess too much* because I
haven't been precisely an angel, you know,
and you may throw it ail up to me when you
get tired of me.”'
“ Bat as ! don’t mean to get tired of you.”
he said, “you can take ail risks and fire
away ”
“ Very well, then, I Witt fire away.” Rita
observed, “ and I’ll commence firing from the
time I was thirteen years of age. That s
when my troubles began. I was living with
my mother, brother and sisters in Hobart,
and we had a lodger, a bank clerk, and a
friend of my brother* That blessed bank
clerk ruined me • ”
,c Ruined you I Wfeat, at thirteen years of
age I ”
“ Yes, at thirteen years of age. But. mind
you, I was as big and plump as a fifteen year-
oider, and even then had legs as pretty as
you could see anywhere.”
“lean quite believe that, judging from
what they are now,”
“ Please, keep away and don’t get spoony,
dear boy, or I’ll never get on with my story.
Weli, these pretty tegs attracted this fellow’s
attention, and when we were alone he took
every opportunity of teasing me about them.
I remember hka saying once, 1 Rita, I’ve seen
the prettiest legs in Australia I'—he was
a Melbourne chap— * and now 1 see the pret-
tiest in the world.’ Fancy talking to a child
like that—the brute ! Well, one evening when
all the others were away at a concert and he
was gammoning to show me a photo album,
he pulled me down on his knee and began to
get so rude that I was frightened, and, jump-
ing up. ran into my brother’s room, the door
of mine being shut. He pursued me and
violated me, threatening afterwards that if I
told anyone we'd both be put in gaol. That
scared me, for I was an innocent, timid lit-
tle kid, and so 1 said nothing, but I’m sure, if
my brother had known about it, he’d have
killed him.’*'
“ Killed him ! Skinning alive would have
been about what he deserved, Rita.”
“ Well, having once accomplished his pur-
pose. the beast lost no chance of repeating
the offence in spite of my endeavors to avoid
him, for you can’t believe how ashamed I
felt, and how I hated the eight of the wretch.
And so it went on for two years, when one
day be left us, and shortly afterwards I found
myseif doubly his victim, for I was—ahem !
—in an interesting condition. ”
“Good God I At fifteen!”
“Yes, at fifteen. Well, I didn’t know
what to do, but at last I told my eldest sis-
ter, married and old enough to be my mother
almost, and she, thinking only to keep the
disgrace from the others, sent ms to Mel-
bourne to a school-friend of hers. Then.
when my baby came, it was taken from
put out to nurse and there died/’ and a leas
fell gently from her eye, as the song says,
Norman soothed her lovingly for about fire
minutesj and she continued—
“ When I was well enough to get about
again, I determined to do something for my-
self and be dependent on nobody. My idea
was to go upon the stage, and because I had
lovely legs 1 managed to get on in a panto-
mime, in which Nellie Stewart was principal.
But that did not last long, and when I was
thrown out of work, and felt desperate, I
answered a a Age advertisement for a handy
girl, and was engaged by Madame Thorn, who
was afterwards mixed up in a wife murder in
Sydney.
° Madame Thorn ! Great Scott! she was
one of the worst S”
“Ah, dear boy, but I didn’t know that
then, and when I did find out her awful
character I stayed on with her simply be-
cause I could get nothing else to do. Oh I
what a horrible house it was, and what a
fiend that woman proved to be ! I remember
once she attempted to blackmail a wholesale
soft-goods merchant for £SO, but was coolly
and promptly told to go to the devil, and do
her worst. Two months afterwards she en-
ticed him into her house under pretence of
introducing him to # a beautiful girl from
Shepparton, and. after extracting £5 from him
for the introduction, showed him into a
room wherein lay his wife in a half-drunken
and very-partially clothed condition. She*
had been deliberately and debauched
through Madame’s desire for revenge on the
husband.”
“ Holy Sailor i I never heard anything so
terrible ! ’’
“Oh I she was a perfect devil. She lost no
opportunity of picking up a nice young girl to
be used as a plaything by one or other of her
dissipated clients. One of the most constant
of those clients was a bank-manager, now in
gaol for fraud and embezzlement. Madame
made as much as £SOO a year out of this
human hog. Sunday alter Sunday, he used to
drive bis wife to church, leave her there, and
proceed to Madame’s, where he indulged m
the most vicious practices until it was time
for him to meet his wife again at the charch
and go home to lunch.”
11 Well, I’m glad to know he’s in gaol. U’s
a pity he didn’t get dogged.”
“Yea, and Madame, too. I can tell you
that when she managed to get a young girl
into her clutches she lost no time in convey-
ing the news to one of her tnendsC* 6he used
to write— 1 Come up. Something nice ; ail
yours. Hurry.* She was too cunning /to pul
name or address. She sent that kind of note
one day to a gentlemanly blackguard, who at
the time was entertaining same friends and
his wife, who had not been a particular
friend of his for ©ome time previous Tea
minutes later he Jett for Madame a, bat just
at the door was met by hie brother-in-law—


For I punched him with my umbrella—Page 17.


%kmn an M.P.—who thrashed him so sound!
that the dirty cur was under the doctor’s car
for a fortnight/’ ;
“ And you, Rita t Didn’t Madame sell yo
to any of these dirty curs ! ”
*’ Oh 1 you bet she tried her level best, bu
my first experience of the brutality of me
kept me severely off them, no matter wha
they offered me, or how she rounded on m
for not making better use of my good looks
as she used to say.”
“Well, how did you come to leave, anc
what did you do afterwards ? ”
“I left because a blessed tcff burst th
door of my room open one night and tried
assault me. 1 could hear Madame chuckling
on the stairs, and that made me so mad thai
I hit him on the head with a poker anc
stopped his and her funny little game. Then
1 cleared out, and t a couple of days afterwards
went as housemaid in a ladies’ school a
Hawthorn.
11 Well, that was a decided change from
brothel/’
M Rather ! But there were some queer go
ings-on there, all the same. You can be-
lieve me that some of those innocent looking
young ladies who attended that school used
to play some peculiar pranks amongst them-
.selves, I.wouldift like to tell you all they
did, and I’mnot particularly squeamish—with
you, at any rate, dear boy. Some day, some
one will write a full account of that hie and
—get two years for it/'
M Humph I I’ve heard it isn’t all piety and
prayer-books at some of those tip-top estab
bailments, ’
"If they’re all like the one I :.vas at—well,
I would not care about a daugnter of mine
being educated there, but of course that kind
is the exception. But I'll tell you a funny
thing about Mrs. Miff, the principal, and my-
self.”
“ What! Did you two play peculiar pranks,
coo! ”
Weil, it was rather a peculiar prank.
You see, Mrs, Miff was struck on a hand-
some young visiting master who used to teach
the violin, and he seemed pretty partial to
her, too—-at least, till 1 poked my nose in.
He lived in a cottage in Auburn with a house-
keeper old enough to be his mother. He had
asked Mrs. Miff to take* supper there with
him, but as he was supposed to be a bold
bad young man, she said she’d only go if I
went with her—-as a sort of restraining in-
fluence on the giddy professor. Of course I
jumped at the chance, and, as he had never
seen me, proposed that 1 should dress up as
a boy and] pus as her nephew, and she con-
sented.”
’’And a charming boy you made, I can
guess.”
M Yea, I didn’t take up so much room in
a chair as 1 do now, and I looked about as
nice as they make ’em. But the professor
seemed mighty disappointed when he saw
me, and as I afterwards learned soon tumbled
that 1 waa a girl, though he said nothing
about it then. Twicfc a week we visited him,
1 always as a boy, and Mrs. Miff got more and
more sweet on him, and I began to reel
a bit mashed on him myself—worse lu *k.
Anyhow, one evening she was too ill to go,
so she sent me with her apologies, telling me
to atop no longer than was necessary. Yon
see, our ideas of how long waa necessary were
quite different, for as a matter of fact 1 did
not get back till two o’clock next morning.
And you should have seen your lovely Rita.
Cheeks flushed, eyes heavy, short hair disor-
dered, and appearance .strongly suggestive of
drink—as it might well have been. 1 tolcj
Mrs. Miff that the professor had had friends
there—quite a little party—and had made me
stay longer than I meant to. * Well, Kita,*
said Mrs. Miff, ’there are two things which
assure me that you are a dreadful litt.e liar—
and worse> The first is that his housekeeper
called here and told me that you were having
supper with him alone, and he had seat her
on an errand.* ‘And the second?’ 1 asked,
rather flabbergasted. ‘That you have the
professor s trousers on I’ And, by Jove, old
boy, when 1 looked down 1 saw that she was
perfectly correct.’*
14 Ha ! ha I ha ! ” laughed Norman. “ And
I suppose you left the school after that?"
“ Yes. and so did the professor. More taaa
that, we got married a week afterwards, and
he is the reason, dear boy, why 1 couldn't oe-
come your lawful wedded missis when yoj
asked me the other day.”
“He’s alive, then? But how did he coins
to leave you? **
‘ I left him. You see, he wanted to rua
little harem of his own, and was carrying on
a very strong game with two or three day pu-
pils of the schools he taught at. He had got
one so gone on him that, while 1 was staying
with a friend —really and truly, a lady-friend
—for a week, he peraauded the girl to come no
our house one night I returned very unex-
pectedly about midnight and, going straight
to our room, found to my utter amazement
that my beautiful hubby had that girl for
company—and she wasn’t in her out-dour
costume either, 1 can tell you. They had
been having such a dog of a time together
that they didn’t hear me. but they felt me,
tor 1 pounded him with my Isabella—l mean,
umbrella—till he waa sad and sorry, and then
1 turned on the girl and laid on to her in the
way naughty little schoolgirls should be
treated. Then I hunted them both out, slept
the sleep of the just, and found in the morn-
ing that they had both cleared out, and 1
haven’t seen him since. ’
“And is he alive!”
“ Oh I yes ; he’s living with that girl in Gee-
long, but as I was giad to get rid of him—-he
wasn’t a dear, good feliow.like you, old buy—
I haven’t troubled to hunt him up. Ai ter
that I barmaided at, various pubs, and had
just left one, and taken lodgings at Aunties,
without knowing the character of the place.


when I met yon—and here I am, yours truly
from now till kingdom come, dear boy. I
told yon mine wasn’t a pretty story, but at
any rate you now know the best and worst of
me.”
M Well, the future shall make up for the
past,” said Norman, “if my luck keeps up.
And that reminds me that I have to meet a
man about some money in an honr.”
n WheraabontsT”
•• Outside Bowes*. Tattersalls Club, in
Bourke street,” and what that meeting led to
yon will learn later on.
CHAPTER VIII.
AT THE CLUB.
The man whom Norman had to meet was a
member of the most progressive and popular
sporting club in Melbourne, that institution
familarly known as Bowes’ Tattersalls, where-
in do congregate and intermingle the racing
man who has always got the latest informa-
tion from such-and-such a stable ; the other
man, who knows more about draw-poker than
a Bishop knows about his Bible ; the third
party, who takes his billiards as regularly as
he takes his meals, and a multiplicity of
other individuals who are up to every point
in every game in the marvellous city. There
are some whose lives are passed in risking
small fortunes on the speed of a horse, or
the turn of a card—restless, daring spirits
who would speculate on anything from a
Melbourne Cup down to the number of corns
on a ballet-girl’s toes, rather than not specu-
late at all. You will find very few frivolous
little triflers amongst the frequenters of this
famous club, although there are members,
mind you, who prefer the cosiness and solid
comforts to be found here even to that excit-
ing chase after the elusive ooftish which dis-
tracts the majority. But to those who desire
to rub shoulders with the gilded bookmaker,
the neck-or-nothing plunger, the popular
young actor-hero of Bland Holtian melo-
drama, or the many other bright and sharp
needles in this metropolitan bundle of hey,
Bowes’ Tattersalls is the club to subscribe to.
All this, and much more, had Norman’s
friend related, after which they passed up-
stairs to the club itself and its many attrac-
tions. In the billiard room Norman was in-
troduced to George, the assistant secretary,
who, his friend informed him, was consider-
ably bossed by certain members, but, never-
theless, proved, even on such short ac-
quaintance, a most obliging young man, and
on very friendly terms with most of the
members.
“Has Dad John come in yet?” asked
Norman’s friend, as George stooped down to
pat “Dodger,” a smart little fox terrier and
the pet of the club.
“ Haven’t seen him to-night,” was the reply.
49 Want him particularly ? ”
* M Well, he promised to meet me here and
tell me something particular about an affair
that happened to him some 60 years ago, thats
all,” and he explained to Norman that Dad
John was about the oldest member of the
club, poor but proud, and quite an interest-
ing character in his own peculiar way.
“And there’s another,” he added, indicat-
ing an elderly man who was holding forth to
a small crowd on some racing event of the
Lord knows how far back. “ That’s Billy
Marsden, the man with a wonderful memory.
Impossible for him to forget anything, it
seems. In everything concerning horse-rac-
ing, hang me if he isn’t a walking Centaur’s
Index, with all the back numbers glued on
his memory box, and also a great authority
on the Yidisher language.”
“And what is his particular excuse for
living?” asked Norman.
“Excuse ! Humph ! He’s a member of the
Victorian Club, and a man doesn’t want any
better excuse than that, I reckon. Give old
Billy his due, he’s a cool and clever bluffer
at draw-poker, and willing enough to allow a
friend to bank with him. A born gambjer,
but not a bad fellow, take him all round.”
The game in progress not being particularly
interesting, they made their way to another
portion of the club, where the essentially
gambling game of draw-poker was the princi-
pal feature of the sc°nery.l Here Norman
was made known to Joe Nelson, the hon.
secretary, who appeared to grow enthusiastic
only on the subject of a certain fine and re-
splendent building into which the club pro-
posed to remove.
“Then,” said Nelson, "when we’ve got
room to move according to our strength, this
club will hum like a blow-fly in summer
time. ”
The principal excitement was centred
about a table at which several of the most in-
veterate poker kings were very busily engaged
in taking each other down to the best of their
ability.
hot on the game, all of’em.” whis-
pered Norman’s guide. “ The luckiest of the
lot is Harry Lamington, or, as we call him,
1 Ironsides.’ He’s as cool 1 Dodger’s ' nose,
and has scooped in a small fortune with the
broads. Listen to him now with his I Ve ry
well, play for sixteen.’ It’s turtle to tripe that
he holds a routine flush, and has ’em all dead
as a ten year-old corpse.”
“And who are the others?” asked Nor-
man, beginning to feel that he had struck
tip top company at last, and was getting it at
wholesale rates, too.
“Well, that good-looking Yidisher is
Barney Hal let; you know him , of course.
His numerous and very conspicuous talents
don’t need any flaring advertisement at this
day and date. His reputation’s been boomed
like a patent pill, and you couldn’t enumerate
all the tricks he has up his sleeve if you tried
till the cows come home. Lord love you 1 why
that man could talk the wires out of a
phonograph if there was anything to be made
out cf It.”


01 And the member opposite him?
“One of Barney'd particular pals, Joe
Harris, a booxie who knows boxing all the
way from A to Z. Some say he’s got a very
large rat on English cricket, and there’s no
doubt he’s a very staunch supporter of the
Britishers. He’s solid and white ; but when
he backs his fancy he generally loses,though,
win or lose, he’s too old a bird to flatter a
feather. The fourth man is a racehorse
owner, and one of the best judges in the
colony, and now, as is he quitting, Til have a
cut in myself, so put up a fiver and stand in
with me,” /
Nothing loth, Norman loaded his friend
with the necessary ammunition, and that
friend proceeded to fire away with a
which betokened that he, too, was a born
gambler, like Billy Mar^den.
Sad to say,Norman was not especially well
versed in the complexities of draw-poker, but
he assumed what he believed to be a most
knowing and expert attitude, and watched
the transitions of the noble game with at
least a £5 interest. But although he did not
quite comprehend all the mysteries, and
could not have identified a “ straight ” from a
bag of peanuts, or have taken his solemn so-
help-me as to the precise value of a pair of
jacks, he contrived to look wise, and throw
in an exclamatory, “Great hand, by thun-
der!” or “Never saw such Chinese moz.
eince Aunt Ann died ! ” just where he thought
it would wedge in best.
That the fluctuations of the play were more
than commonly exciting be judged from the
heated remarks of several evidentlv-adept on-
lookers, such as President Turner, George
Langley and several others, who, it appeared,
could not restrain their feelings despite the
remonstrances of the players to keep order.
Also, by the exultant expression of his
friend’s face, he easily gathered that that
worthy’s good luck was on deck, and the
fiver expanding like the proverbial mush-
room, or that Irish youngster who grew so
quickly that although his parents endeavour-
ed to keep him decently clothed in some of
their own garments, yet
* ‘ Hiq tether’s old breeches shrank up to his knees,
And bis mother’s old stays were a very tight
squeeze.”
As a matter of fact, when the players fin-
ished for the night, Norman’s friend had got
the best of the sport to the grateful and com-
forting extent of £6O, which they proceeded to
share as they prepared to go downstairs and
home.
“By the way.” asked Norman, as he was
separating the bank notes from the coin, M do
you think the bookies here play square, or all
they know ? ”
“On the dead square, I should say,” the
other replied. “ You see, if they tried any
crook business and were found out, they
would be expelled from the club, and that
would mean that the Y.R.G. would not regis-
ter them again. But I say, don’t flash that
money so much. There's some red hot spieleti
—of course, unconnected with the club —who
bans? about the street door, and but the
warning came too late, for, like lightning, a
fellow grabbed the notes from Norman's
hand, and darted into Rourke street, while
two others, evidently the thief's associates,
attempted to block the victim's path, and
give the fugitive time to lose himself. But,
as you may have noticed, Norman was a
tough customer, and prompt to act in emer-
gencies, so, settling one obstructor with an
unholy bash on the jaw. and thrusting the
other aside, he reached the street just in time
to perceive the flying spieler on the opposite
side turn down a passage leading to Little
Bourke street.
The chase was sharp but short, for seeing
that Norman was certain to catch him, the
robber stopped and showed fight, which was
not exactly the best tbmg tor him, as Nor-
man set to work once more without parley,
and getting him against a wall landed him a
vicious upper-cut which drove his head
against the bricks with that dull, sickening
thud which you may have heard of before,
and then passed him two or three, which dia-
figured the fellow's face so that Magistrate
Panton himself would not have recognised
him—and nobody has had a better chance of
knowing him. Then Norman regained his
money, and made his way back to Bourke
street, where the first person he met was hjs
tricky little friend, Dulcie Fisher.
“ Blew me I here's luck I ” she exclaimed on
seeing him; “ jest the identical blokey I was
looking for."
“ Why, anything wrong this time, Dulcie ! "
he asked.
“ No fear,” came the answer ; “ but there s
a rye-buck sheoak ball on to-morrow down
the frog an* toad—that's the road, you know—
an' I wa finkin’ it you an’ Rita wanted to have
a shine bit o* fun you might come down wif
me. It'll be cherry ripe, I kin promise yer.”
“But what is a sheoak ball, and wh\ch
particular frog and toad do you mean! tT ne
enquired.
“Well, lumme, if you ain't a bloomin' kid
in long togs I" she replied. “ Why, a sheoak
ball is a larrikins' hop, and the frog and toad
is Simpson’s road," and though scarcely any
wiser, Norman not only promised to go, but
kept that promise, and, as you will see, had
as wild and woolly a night of it as he had
ever had in his life before.
CHAPTER IX.
THE SHEOAK BALL.
For the edification ot those not familiar
with the picturesque slanguage of the Mel-
bourne larrikin, it may be necessary to ob-
serve that a sheoak, or tanglefoot, otherwise
the poorest kind of colonial beer, forma the
chief item of the liquid refreshments imbibed
at larrikins’ dances, and is usually purchased
in 11 rabbits," or billycans and old bottles,
and drank out of the same utensils.


AT THE CLUB.


There is no gaudy ostentation about an
affair of this sort. The admission is a “ bob ”
ior gents and a “sprat M for lydies, and the
only arbitrary rule about costume is that you
must wear socks or stockings, according to
your sex f The music is jerked out to an ac-
cordeon regardless of cost or time, and there
are no beastly formalities of introduction be-
tween blokes and donahs. The M.C. is boss
of the room until the sheoak begins to take
effect, when matters become much mixed,
and every man and every girl goes strictly
“on their own/’
As Rita had declared that she felt too un-
well to attend this brilliant festival, Norman
and Dulcie concluded to go by themselves.
And you should have seen Dulcie! As she
put it herself, she “had 'em all on,” and
with a flaring red blouse, a pink and white
skirt, just short enough to show neat legs in
“railway” stockings—red and white stripes—
a pair of high-heeled shoes, and an enormous
bat with four gigantic scarlet “fevvers ”
sweeping over it, she was as flash and proud
a little donah as ever plastered a fringe with
mutton fat. At her suggestion,* they went
down to Simpson's r oad like toffs on the
tram, and soon found themselves in a Col-
lingwood dancing den which was filled with
enthusiastic tarts and blokes evidently bent
* on having a very high old time of it.
“Hold on,” said Dulcie, as they entered ;
“don’t make no bloomin’ no.«e. Ginger
Mac's givin’ 'em a song. He’s a real corker
on the warble, I kin tell you ; he ought to be
•■on at Rickards', be ought/’
The singer was a red-haired bottle-ob with
-large, splay ears, and a mouth like a dog ken-
nel, and, in a voice worn and ragged with
bawling at his daily trade, he was giving vent
to the Simpson's Road National Anthem, com-
monly known as “Her Smith Street Fringe,’’
which went something like this t
You should see 'er at the Horty darnciu # wif f er lump
o' coke—
That's *er bloke ;
Wif *er 'air upon 'er block so strlte, a real fair beaut is
she—
N.T.B.
In 'er clobber, skirt an' blouse an' belt, an* all rieht
up ter Dick,
Oh I she's a toff Is Emmer when she’s done up in good
nick.
Wtf a smile upon *er norf an* souf, an* in 'er 'at a
dinge,
She knocks the peba all balmy wif *er rippln* Smlff
street fringe.
“ Rye buck, Ging.," cried Dulcie, as the
charming ballad terminated. “Sling us
‘ When muver gets on the wine-oh/ It's a
senferraental,” she whispered to Norman,
“an' the way Ging. does it it'd bring tears to
yer mince pies—I mean yer eyes.”
But Ginger declined an encore, saying his
“froatwasas dry as a hempty 'Ennessey/*
*but promised to oblige again after he had
oiled that “ froat" with some sheoak.
Then " Spring orf your tails, biokies, an'
"hook on to yer bits of muslin,” commanded
the M.C., and in two minutes the accord eon
was blurting out the “ Sons of the Sea *
waltz, and the crowd were dancing with a
ludicrous and exaggerated earnestness*. Evi-
dently “hopping” was to them a matter oI
much seriousness, and no more absurd sight
could be witnessed than that of two greasy-
haired partners clutching each other as
though they were about to wrestle, and
solemnly spinning round on tiptoes, the
girl with closed eyes and a mouth open like
a dead fish, and the man breathing sheoak
into her face, and leaving a large, palpable
stain on the back of her dress where his hot*
greasy fingers clawed her.
Norman thought that he might as well join
in the fun, and accordingly made his way to
where a sulky-looking, fair-haired girl waa
seated, and had just asked her to have a turn
with him, when a long, angular larrikin,with
a week’s growth on his chin, and no collar or
tie, rolled up, and said—
“ Say, blokie, where are you puahin* your
barrow? Wot's yer game wif my bit of
stuff?”
Norman explained that he had just request-
ed the lady to dance with him.
“ Garn ? ” exclaimed the other ; “ wot sort
of a nark are you, tryin* ter edge in yer oar
wit my moll. Blime, a man ought to pass
you one,” raising his hand threateningly.
But as he saw Norman was big and bulky
and did not flinch, the threatening fist was
turned towards the girl.
“Look here. Liz,” the owner of the fiat
grunted/* I ain't goin' ter stand none of yer
tunny bizness. Didn't I tell yer I'd deal wif
you if you started mesain* around other
blokes ? ”
“ Well, I wasn’t doin’ no ’arm, Stoney,*
answered the girl. “ Lumme, carn't a gent
speak ter me wifout you gettin' yer bloomin'
shirt out ?”
“Garn now, or I’ll wooden yer,” was all
the satisfaction she got. “ Strike me iai»
you’ll cop out if I ketch you darncin' wif any
bloke but me, take my colonial for it,” and as
Norman saw that the girl was scared by tbs
attitude of her “ lad,” and was not anxious
to make matters worse by interfering! hs
concluded to go without hie waits, and re-
tired from the scene.
When the dance was over, Dulcie, who had
evidently been enjoying herself immensely,
came to him and said—
“ See that bloke I was darncin’ wif? That's
Sonny Wheeler, the king of the Road push *
—and how proudly she said it I— “ Well, hs
was tellin' me that a push from Church
street's cornin' up here ter smash this clique
up an' serve out stoush, so there'll be stacks
of tun before it’s all over. Ever seen Sonny
use his dooks—l mean his hands ?
Norman pleaded ignorance, and she went
on—
“Oh I he’s a red-hot member, Sonny in
You ought ter see him dealin’ wif the cope
when he's tanked. S'dp me, there ain't


—Mm* la BUn 1 'Olt’s plays *arf so good. But
C*poae you com* an 1 'ave an oh-my-dear,*
M What the dence is an oh-my-dear f 99 asked
Ihe bewildered Norman.
* ▲ beer, of coarse,” was the reply, and,
fallowing his lively little friend,he was led to
a place behind a small platform, where the
•heoak was flowing freely, and handed a
Wily can from which to quench whatever
thirst he happened to have about him. He
had just managed to gulph down a lipfull
when * * biff I bang!!” sounded on his ears,
and he turned to find Stoney, the long, angu-
lar larrikin, pounding another ruffian with
frightful ferocity, while Liz, the sulky one,
was crouching by with a terrified counten-
ance.
“By I * bellowed Stoney to his oppo-
nent, "Til learn you ter go pullin’my tart
about.” Woof L bing ! biff t " I’ll kick the
bloomin’ stuffin’ out of you.” Biff! bang I
woof I “ Wanted ter ’ave a cook at ’er Dutch
pegs, did you?” Biff! woof 1 bang! "Til
give you Dutch pegs, you bloomin’ fag end of
a spit,” the biff I bang ! business indicating
the sound of his fists against the other
fellow’s features. Apparently Stoney was
wildly jealous, and objected to anyone having
a " look” at Liz’s 11 Dutch peg*,” or, in other
words, a look at her legs. His rival went
down a mass of blood and groans, and Stoney,
rounding sharply on Liz, said—
•ij Patten yerself on that, you bloomin'cow ! ”
and sent her reeling against the wall with a
vicious blow on the cheek. Norman made a
•tep forward to give the brute as good as he
had given the girl, but Dulcie, seeing blood
in his eye, pushed him into the dance room,
saying—
" You don’t want ter mix wif that tripe.
That Stoney’d kick the daylight out of you,
or smash you wif *arf a brick. Why, he’s
on’y jest come out of the jug for downin’ a
cop wif a drain-pipe. He’s a bloomin’ bludger,
that’s wot he is, an’ Liz ’ll stick a knife in
him one of these days. Come an* ’ave this
seotch’itch wif me,” and as the accordeon
began blurting again Norman spent his anger
in an erratic schottische. By this time the
sheoak had commenced to influence the
crowd, and the whirl of petticoats and legs
all sorts and sizes which went flying over
that floor was something fearful and wonder-
ful to behold. There was bashing and bang-
ing and mugging and hugging of the very
warmest brand, the heated atmosphere,
excitement and drink banishing every little
shade of propriety from both sexes.
After the schottische, a nasty-faced girl
volunteered a step dance,but Norman noticed
that very little attention was paid to her per-
formance, for couple after couple were dis-
appearing up some ricketty stairs to a kind of
hayloft. Be turned to demand an explanation
from Dulcie, but found that that little donah
had also disappeared, and the next sensation
he had was a crash overhead and the appear-
ance of Dulcie’s railway stockings through
the flimsy root He had only time to stand
aside when farther crashing and yelling was
heard, and Dalcie came tambling through to
the floor, clasped in the arms of Sammy
Wheeler, king of the Road push, and follow-
ed by the falling bodies of other couples who
had gone upstairs previously. Nobody was
much hurt, though their language was about
as bad as it could be, and Norman had only
time to gather that they had been romping'
too heavily up above and had smashed the
floor in, when showers of stones came
through the windows, the front door was
burst open, and the Church street push had
arrived to serve out the promised "stoush.”
Such shrieking and cursing and fighting were
never known down the Road before. Sonny
Wheeler, seizing a bottle, and backed up by
fellows and girls, advanced towards the in-
truders and gashed the leader's cheek with
one blow of his weapon, and then the
"stoush” became general. Sticks, stones,
fists, bottles were combined in one wild, con-
fushed slaughter, blood and hair flowing and
flying freely. Skirts and petticoats, coat*
and shirts were torn to shreds, and Norman
wondered how he was going to escape alive.
But in the midst of the din Sonny’s voice was
heard shouting—" Do a guy, chaps ; here’s
the bloomin’ traps,” and just as Norman
saw the police helmets at the door, Dul-
cie, bleeding and tattered, ran up to him and
said —
" Come on ; the cops are on the job ; we’ll
’ave ter clear, or they’ll shove us in,” and
darted through a back door. Norman, fol-
lowing, found himself in a dark lane, and
from there dodged through a back-yard and
along the passage of an hotel till he found
himself in Victoria street, with Dalcie wildly
waving a tram to stop. HalLan-hour after-
wards they arrived at his little cottage only to
find it in deep gloom. * .
" Rita must ’ave gone to the roses red—i
mean, bed,” said Dulcie. But on entering
they could discover no Rita in bed or else-
where.
41 Good God ! what’s happened this time ? ”
exclaimed Norman.
"P’raps this’ll tell us,” suggested Dulcie,
picking up a note from the dressing table,,
and reading—
-11 * Can’t help it. Gone down town to have a
pipe. I was dying for it.—Rita,’ ”
" That cursed opium again ! ” muttered
Norman. "But what does down town mean.
Dulcie? I thought she went to South Yarra
for that sort of thing.”
" Police bust up that place,” said Dalcie.
41 She’s gone ter some Chow’s this time, I
reckon.”
" Then, by God, I’ll have her out of it if 1
root out every Chow’s den in the city,” Nor-
man said determinedly, and as soon as Dulcie
had smartened herself up they went ou*
again to search for the missing Rita amop't?
the foul garbage of Little Boorke street.


CHAPTER X.
IN THE SLUMS.
Kyea in the sweet and full light of day,
HtSTswarke street and its purUeus cannot
wTTJSSi of. iawgination, be considered
_ ol virtue and cleanliness, the crowd-
ing together of pestilential Chinese, another
undesirable and gwl-smelling foreigners, in
and nauseous rookeries, making the
and miserable in the
Seme ft the time of this story it
ka’ very worst aspect. What, then, were
its characteristics at midnight, when Norman
and Dulcie picked their way through^ its Io ■
«nme auarfcers in search ot beautuul but way
53Cl Yellow, hideous scum; the
peculiar and abhorrent; fi i: .
slant-eyed Chow delights to wauow,
vuf of
a ssi
"Hi SowKfSrand exSde ail mam
3 ? nastiness for tbe sake of the rents
revived by S bellied, hypocritical landlords.
Xo passed the plate roundl to church. pe-
Minted an outward appearance of smug reapec
tlbilitv and yet fattened on the yice-begot-
of disease-ridden prostitutes and
“SriS>J Chines... *Wi™
SLfcXwSl 'in lMWoneble and
n * gnfjy be-gemmed themselves wuh bnl-
Uant Sery, and lived their butterfly lives
in tU vaidd sphere of pinchbeck colonial
amiall the time were dependent for
considerable portion of their wealth on
she extortionate rents extracted from tKeg
bSSSSTof the city. No sanitary or build-
laws* 5 affected them ; twenty-fonr sin-
struck filth -emitting Chinese wretches might
herd together in the space property made-
t<3 x or OI >p under conditions at which even
iTSSSTiSSt«™ -» w h “ "°Sid°Ua e .
nnmnAnH money-grabbing owners couia evaae
the Law with the complacent air
of privileged persons who know that Autho-
rity would crawl at their feet, and offer no in-
terference to their consciousless methods of
money-making. . ,
Thank God, a brighter day has dawned,
and the city is slowly but surely being purged
of some of its horrors.
To Norman, who bad had no previous ex-
nerience of the depth of Little Bourke street
Triteness,* s 'the succession of beastly scenes
through which he passed came as a vivid
and paralysing shock, and tot some time he
could hardly realise that he was not tortured
bv same terrible dream. Den after den he
found devoter! to the worship of thedevil-drug;
yellow and white men. and battered bus and
girls of tender years, all sitting, lying or
pawling about in fearful and degrading de-
votkm to the opium pipe. The lamp, tray,
tHipe meedle .held them sn ft mighty tbraJl
from which their souls fouadno «acap& The
fnnnina slit-eyed, evil-looking Chow , the
cadaverous, tentem-Jawed larnlanjt e oa
dripping, blear-eyed, grey-hawed hat. ot, t e
pony-fringed, fbuUongued, baid«aed young
IK»ord; the lank-limbed, short-frocked, .efiant
I of sixteen—all intermingled in this
b accursed sink of dep '^ v 0
foul as any creatures who ever gropea
mack-heap. How they managed
[1 in such a foeted atmosphere is beyond
ken of decent man to imagine and yet
y dreary, noisome hovel visited th„i night
Phewr ,W eSi?m“d Dulcie, as they ascen-
the ricketty stairs of a typical den, H
i aint as strong as Keen s, 1 m a bloom
So strong,” said Norman, ‘‘.that I can t
eve that a girl of Rita’s dainty character
Id have anything to do with such offal. >(
Ah but that’s where you make a bloomer,
ponded Dulcie. "The most surpriam
ng about this bally business of opium-,
ikin’ is that real fair toffs of lydiea come
£ for a pipe. Why. it was on’y a mouf
, that a rich banker’s daughter was found
the D.s stark senseless wif smokin, an
ten back home. Three days afterwards
. „ nv her people the go-by, an ( went up o a
ow camp at Maryborough, an too*, no wif
s ugliest yeiler devil you ever
a when the opium grabs em the best ot
By this'time, they had reached the landing,
I thrusting open a door came on a ae
aich will live long m Norman s memory,
retched out on a mattreaa side b} side, per
ctly unconscious, were a handsome, sty is
rl and a well-dressed young man, bane.
ie profound depths of an opium sleep rrom
hich they would not wake tor hours. _
‘• Th'reyou are,” said Dulcie, pointing to
„ Bt figure,, “ <h«.».» « 4“J*
i ßita, from tip to toe,, and ye. see what
ae’s come to.” , . ,
Norman gfized and ahudderea.
•* Thank God, it is not Rita.” he ejaculated.
Do you know who she is, Du.cie . ,
“ Yuss ; that’s Minnie Lumley, daughter of
uuatter Merton, and wife of Lumley who
a nataon up at Woontabadgery. bhe a
ieen edicated up to the skies at the Sydney
Tr.i varsity, took her bloomvn ; degree use
rater, married Lumley, old enough to be her
.Id man guv tracts cut round the Chow
samp at* Nitalla, got ruined there, sbppe
town to Melbourne, an as been hnocki g
i .i. thp Hrnma lor four months. Tier old
M" tM u, ”oS hlot.e, wen. off chump,
when he heard of her di-gr -,ce. an’ blew orf
tne ton of his lumpo lead —I mean, his ti-ad
—wi°*a revolver. She’s got pnnsummwn,
an’ll throw in her alley in a week or two, take
m^,t \Vhat! you mean that she is doomed for
death. DulcieT.” exclaimed Norman m hwrr^.
•* Tnet'a it, was the reply. Dr. i ixaii ws9


Ihe Jlbe a stiff ’an inside of a monf. Bat
M 6 ’ 8 on,jr a Ba“P>e. You
, “* dn .t be, *eve the number of decent girls
nnt bizne^^R 6 t 0 deaf froo this °P>on»*
Xms;!' “»-
*thT ’ ed . tbro , a 8 h Piggery after piggery
me to u ' ° bnorio as character until they
’?. a narrow and grimy lane at the back
,he Alexandra Theatre. Here they entered
ten Ten t. ‘be front of
" devoted to the Chinese lottery
ts ’ t “u’ Jhnugh there was no marking tic*
, [ime Oi the morning the anart-
jnt was chock-a-block with disainateH
f tcf ieß of either sex. The chief figure in
rripri WlB a hnxom, black-haired young
•Tried "oman, drinb-sodden and utterly
T. wbo -. havi ng Placed a fine leg on a
i •’ i having the calf measured by a
t ? i9 COarße Series on
din-it b he waß examining, and
,b to . f l'u deavorß to ei P<>se more of that
rmnr h pth er V gaze ’ CftUßed Norman to
more than ordinary attention to him
1 to h,s surprise be recognised him Ts
ted < n rw d . Ur ’ Wh -’ m he bad fou ght and de-
ted on two occasions. The thought strnek-
i instantly that this man might have had
iethmg to do with Rita’s disappearance
think was to act with Norman so ad vane.
C h7m rd »h he he waß about’to ques-
onent’ lef^*L K ( mdUl i’ rec ° gniain K his old
himself large ‘ ,e «ged girl, and plac-
himself before a door, said defiantly—
r thunder, yon won’t sneak her from me
time, old cockalorum.”
wfthtn th Norman ’ co that Rita
with.n the inner room, aemed him and
r a brief struggle, hurled him aside and
:ed open the door. No socmer & he
\ BO * ba ” tbe sound of a pistol shot was
d ’ an< l a bullet whistled by him and went
mg into the wooden partition.
- a ‘’Btand C L.£° a cried Rita’s
I win kill yon r° r ‘ b 7 thC L ° rd * hat made
KVhSlt* ilar he shouted.
? 6 Bfaoot * d «ar girl; lam come to save
ten from out of the gloom came a pair of!
mag white arms, which were thrown
d hie neck, andf between tears and
ifne. b '“”" d Rit “ told h “ «“««■ «t
“ e rSc\ b » hS?'°S?d
3 to work his will on me U he kept me
for a week, bat I’d have killed h?m“r
than that he should have bad
dr Gawd’s sike, get her awav " aain
e, rushing in. '• That pieto* shot has
Jt smart,”° P * 1 * hero ' ll * troobte if
£ s
a,onf! with me,” eaid one of the
vene the e v’h^ d f ° re Norman coaid inter!
Sb and y in h^ h, ? Pe< ? hl ? 9We etheart into a
lnS d ° f Win ome with Norman
Iv »> wtfh ?h k6d ° p as a drunk and disorder-
nighttb the prospect of remaining there all
CHAPTER XI
THE CITY POLTCK COURT.
when* iu<r ; ken do *n its shatters
wnen JN ormau arrived to see hoar Rita farpri
and was preparing for business in a yawning
just-got-up-and-don't-like-ic sort of fashion *
tl rsfrtrnni ed everyone from the bench to
8 * dr ® nk awaiting sentence. Three or
1-n Ki« y " hea u 0,(1 j QBci ces nodded sleepily
“ft*- ea9y chairs; inspector pored over
a charge sheet; the clerk of court was mo!
boi-° TL y ’vl!? ark,n^ t 0 witneSB in the
sh’U -be r tt t™’ fh> oi 9hal > gi . V . e in thiB caBe
tru's’X ier a„i h -.° ,e trn n nothin’burrer
tru s elp yer Qud ; a doz*n loafers snread
themselves around at the back of the court
against 6 The ™m CC ° ' Beveral constables lolled
against the wall, and expectorated along th«
aisles; a tew weary-eyed reporters and seedv
faTed 61 dil D a r nidlreH°r r ir the table ; and a bee'r?
tacea, dilapidated-looking woman yawed to
and tro, and groaned dismally as ahe waiter
of fhp r eaU W K h - f u r having painted a portion
f The °dr„Tb" ght red the night before.
drn nk cases were fearfully numer-
ous and monotonous. “ Elizar Hinn Jones ”
the sergeant would yell out ; and when Elizar
Hann Jones appeared. “Call Constable Mu“
cahay would be the next command and the
Wft!kn b V 1 th red : headed Home Ruler, would
walk up to the witness box, caremlly dispose
his helmet at his feet, and stand at attention •
inf- klMl ? g t he " Bak ” *»th * smack
like boxing a cheek, would proceed with his
£ n e ““V B Laa ‘ night * a * th’ hour av two
minutes before eleven, yer warships, Oi was
walkm down Bourrke atrate wid meseif iist
beyant th’ Theatyer R’y’l, straight fornmst ye
as ye cross th strate from th’ Opery House
yer warships, an’ th’ crowd was party thick
£ ld P aypl ® strollin’ oop an’ down, an’ lufcin
th’^n^h 0 -^ 8 av th ®, Bhop s. an’ shtandin' be
th gutthera, an—,’ eta, etc , taking about
in two ma *M?a t ° h 9ay lr what b ! ah( ? ald have said
la ahe known? asks the conrt,
when the sergeant reads out—" She’s been
here twelve times for drunkenness, four times
fw uuoltong behaviour, eight times for^s-
“ Hi FLSr&r timeS
*u U 1. twenty shillings, or a fortnignt,” and
i? Probably tb e next case
ahini« Bame * h* l * *he sentence will be ten
the W oßti^ r !t Ven dajra - ; °* a m °nth without
the option, the mconsistency of police court
3os tic* being a bye-word m tbe land.


RITA.


Sometimes the witnesses afford a little
amusement, but, as a general thing in ibis
court, they are as dull as smoked glass. Take
the average man and you will find bis evi
dence runs something iike this :—“ Mumble,
mumble —pns'ner—ys y’r ’uauer, yi y’r
y’r woochip—mumbie, mumble—larst Mund’y
—yi mean Toosd'y—no, y'ronner, never ter
me knowlidge, y’r wutchip—mumble, mumble
-er-er-er-yum-hum-mam-y’r wotchip ta’no,
not as yi'm * weer on, y’r ’onner,” and so on, till
the court gets disgusted, and orders him
down.
The average woman is even worse. She
sits on tae witness form, “ Call Betsy Jun-
kins,” says the sergeant, and away goes the
coastab es yelling in the passages—“ Bessie
Jigging” “ Jessie Biggins,” “ Essie Jecyn*,”
while Bersy’s lace reddens till she looks
like the lad moon on a summer nignt, sidles
across the court in the most absurd fashion,
begins to teei that everybody is looking at
her, and wishes to goodness she had put on
her pace dress instead of her black one she is
wearing. When the oath is administered,
she rubs her dry lips over the open page->,
and drops the book on tne floor, likewise
overturning her parasol, and making much a
clatter that, as she confine to her neighbour
afterwards, “ I declare I felt riddy to drop
where I stood.” Then she stands with trembl-
ing knees and downcast eyes, picking fluff
off her skir«, and wishing the floor would
open up '*nd swallow her, till the inspect-
or says, “Now, tell the bench what you saw,”
and she tells it something after this :
“Your wiships, I was s-standing at my door
talking to Mrs. Mai—Muiiagher,.tae Unyover
there” (pointing) “in the o*ae bodes a pel
white skirt, with the baby on her knees with
the pelisse, next to the lair young man with
the soft 'at.” Yes, yes ; never mind them,
go on with your story,” says iha magistrate ;
and she goes on—“ And whne I wa* stand-
ing there I see a man with a black oeard in grey
pants and a red neck-tie come over irom
Elba’s hotel, which is next door to the iau >-
dry out one, and exactly opposite tne —*
“ Never mmd where it is,” says the benen,
“ tell us what yoa saw.” “ I—l p-piease, sir,
didn’t see noth mg, sir.” “ What do you
mean 1 Didn’t you see the prisoner ? ,} Betsy
looks at him—a young man with an air of
settled criminality on his face—-“No, sir ; {
never seen him in my iue.” “ What ! ” ex-
claims the bench, “never saw‘mm before?
What are you giving evidence about then?**
“On I if yoa please, yeronher, about Mrs.
Nicholises burgi'ry.” “ But this is a case of
indecent assau c/ suys the benen in disgusted
astonishment; “ there must be some mis-
take her>V mid there is. Betsy’s name has
got mixed up with tne witnesses in the as-
sault case, but cm course nobody is to blame
—trifles like that are not unusual, and alleged
regularity is soon restored, while Betsy goes
back tolier seat, and to her friend, the lady in
she blue bodice and white skirt, #ho gives
her opinion of the magistrate ill words which
would probably get her a month for contempt
if ILa Nibs heard it. e
In a laudable endeavour to pleat the city cf
some of its scum, the police bring up various
street-strollers accused of soliciting. They
consist chit fly of dirty, diseased old and
young hags who hang about the west end of
Funders street, and ruin halt-drunken young
fellows or whoily-drunken sailors and Lre-
tuen. These horrible women are generally
fined 55., and warned never to do it again,
and the warning is usually so effectual that
they go straightaway and resume their filthy
practices at the fir«t opportunity. But while
pienty of the smaller fry of prostitutes are
nealc wob—not very severely in any one in-
stance, however—it is especially noticabie
teat the well-to-do and equally despicable
harlots who haunt the pnuc pal thorough-
tares of the city are left entirely unmolested.
T hey can swagger about insulting respectable
people, and decoy and bids to their heart’©
content, without iear of having to face the
City Coart s or answer for their glaring immo-
r di y m any way whatsoever.
Tne only striking case before the bench on
this particular morning was that of two
young gins, aged ti te* n and sixteen, who
had been found by Constables Stokes and
Tucker m a den in Brogan’s Lane, off Little
fljurke street. It w*s a case of more than
usually ocpiavity, Although so
young, each girl was hideously ripe in the
lowest forms of vice, one owning to having
bved With two Chinese market gardeners at
Coburg for six Wi eks, while the other had,
iwo itoomh?j betoie arrest, given birth to a
chad, the'rather of/*inch, she said cooby,
w *s either Shirker Mat-, a notorious burglar,
or O.u key Johnson, a b»utal South Mel-
bourne coloured individual and an equal y
notorious garoc er— sue couldn’t a.:y which,
T e c .o*taoie*—who know cne slums of Mel-
bourne a l * we*l as anyone—nad raided the
Brog a's Lane den at two o’clock one morn-
ing, and found tee g t rls, intoxicated and ai-
m > t naked, dancing tot the gratification of
iw > evil-minded joc&eys from Caul tie id, a
Cn nere fish hawker, and a big buck iarnkm
from Bouvene street. And this further
glunpse iuto >he vicious life of Gay Mel-
bourne m*ide Norman wonder at the supme-
ness of the authorities in neglecting to root
oat the dens where such scenes were pas-
sible.
Rita's case was very shortly disposed of.
Even alter a night in the cell, and despite her
and agitated appearance, the excep-
tional beauty of her face and figure a
vivid impression on all who saw her. < From
the expression of the presiding magistrate’s
he was evidently considerably
astonished to find such a lovely creature
brought up on the debasing charge of
“ drunk and disorderly,” and aiter the very,
briefest evidence from the arresting con-
sfcaole-s, be discharged her without comment


and she was restored to tbs sympathetic care
of Norman and Dulcie. .
Outside the court the three crowded into a
hansom cab, and sue it was journeying to-
wards Nicholson street Rita passed an arm
round Norman's neck, and kissed him with
charming tenderness.
“ Dear old boy,” she said, softly, I warn
to tell you something. I have determined to
go on tne stage 1” ~
“ The stage I” he exclaimed. Why,
what’s the matter? Are you tired of me H-
read* ? ”
“ Not, a bit of it,” she replied. 11 lam tired
of being each a bally bother to yon. BcM-ire-,
I x don’t want to live on yonr money, auJ
I d like to do something for myself.
“On 1 tommy rot,” he said. ‘ money is
of no use to me without you. And, anynov.,
wha* could you do on the stage ;
“Bl’me” chimed in Dalcie. ' wot could
she do? Why, w<f them lovely legs of ners>,
she’d knock the Johnnies kite ' ign. 1 v«
got a decent pair of Dutch pegs n ysel
showing half a yard of them— they te pot-
at-cks compared wit Rita's.’ -
“ Bui I don’t intend to show my lovely
legs,” said Rica, with a smite. “I®
they ate lovely for my bey s sake, :>ut A m u-»t
joing to make tn**ui public property. lo leii
you the truth, Fm after an engnaea ent at
the Queen’s music hail to sing bahads.
11 And when do you s^art?” was ad uor-
man could aa‘t, so amazed was he at teas sud-
den intelligence. „
“I’m to be given a trial to-morrow, was
the reply. “ And, by tne way, Dulcie. if you
don’t mind showing your pr«t;y Dutch p gs 1
can get you on too. but you’ll nave to appear
in tights.” . . . . *
“ enough,” cried Dalcie, evidently
elated at tne notion “IM show as much 1 1
'em as yoa like, tights or no tights. Lamm*,
won’t tf e pusii roll up to ’uve a cook ac me
shape I ” .
“But I’ve heard that the manager of the
Queen’s is a bit *oo fond of taking liberties
wun pretty gins,” said Norman, who pre-
ferred to keep Ritas beau,y to himself.
“ Ye-, I know,” answered Rita. ”He hfcea
to get 'em into his office, and pretends he
ttuiss measure their legs, and wants to take
them t supper after the show ; but, believe
tne, dear old boy, he’d nave uo chance oi
playing funny tricks with yours truly. Im
going there to sing, not to be examined by
him as if he weve a doctor.”
•• and where do I come in !’ asked Norman.
“It’ll make no difference oetween us, dear
boy,” she rcp ied. 41 You’ll come m first, last
and always. It won’t be too much trouole to
see me home each night, will it?
Norman’s answer may be guessed, and by
the time tnev reached the house it had been
settled that Rita and Dolcie should try their
lack at the Queen’s. But how they pre gresaed
there, and what naughty little scenes they be-
held, you will learn by reading further on.
CHAPTER XII.
BEHIND THE SENES.
!The Queen’a Music Hall, at which Bita mm£
ulcie were to appear, was by
?raon who had made a little money in th#
rapery trade, and, thereiore, considered 1
imseif quite competent to run a variety
iow. Il\s “ Vaudeville and Minstrel Co.
as composed of cheap and shoddy proe.,
ho pad been ghastly failures at every other
all at which they had appeared, and yet con-
mued io > fleet the sirs and attitudes ot
mogmsed “stars.” The serio-comic
as a large-bosomed, large-hipped piece ot
umsy vuigarii v, who had formerly been bar-
laid m a very “shy” hotel. Her voice waa
ras-py, gin and bitters organ, and her style
f beauty about as elegant as a horse-trougm
ut, nevertheless, she was always described
n the bills as vivacious and charming, and
enerally appeared with a wig of hideous:
eiiow hair a-hanging down her back, and
er skirts half-mast high, wnich left her
nobi y knees and a lot of tawdry under-
mining very tally exposed. In this ndi-
ulous attire, and probably swinging a giddy
it*e slate, and causing hideous roars of
mghter by delicately hitching up her garter,
r ostentatiously scratcmng her leg, she
rouid yed out inane rot, of which the follow-
:ig is a hastily concocted example
Vnenever I meet with a spoony young mash,
Vho loves me and doesn’t mind spending his
cash, . u
£ he wishes to squeeze me ojr kiss in tnc
1 1 I •
hang down my head, and I slyly remark,
No, you mustn’t; no, you mustn t ;
ikia says 1 mustn’t let a boy do that;
No, you mustn’t; no, you mustn t,
Ma says 1 mustn’t let you—but he does.
Hiea as an encore skips on again, with the
lame smirks and smiles and hitchings and
icratchings, and opens out in tuis fashion:
My sister’s fond of peeping
When there’s loving couples round,
Upon her tip-toes creeping,
Never making any sound.
And when 1 ask her reason,
Ask her what there is to see,
She winks her eye so slyly,
And always says to me*—
11 Don’t ask questions, child,
You wouldn’t understand.
Wait till you are a woman
And a lady in the land.”
But though she will not tell me.
What the lun is, I confess,
Tho’ she thinks I am too young to know.
I’m old enough to guess.
And that is the kind of slush grown-up
people sing and other grown-up people guffaw
at, and certain alleged press critics describe
as " piquant ” and “ mirth provoking.” Lotd
help our sense of humor, if that kind of tripe
is funnyd And imagine it thrown at youbf


’fifteen stone of fat and flabby barmaid. The
<Jneen’s also possessed two hard-faced danc-
ing girls known as the Lingerie Sisters, who
received 255. per week tor the most ordinary
steps, assisted by the continual exhibition of
certain under garments from waist-band to
knee-embroidery. They had originally been
tobacco jerkers at a local factory, possessed
about as much intelligence as a door-mat, and
supplemented their income by bare-faced
prostitution after the show each evening.
But the great draw of the show, the per-
former who was advertised in letters a foot
long, was Lawrence Greedy, formerly a
capital cobbler in the east end of London,
and now known to fame as "the greatest
comic and character artist on earth. En-
gaged direct from the London and Con-
tinental theatres at an enormous salary.”
His specialty was the dreary ditty which
coarsely deals with such matters as drunken
sprees, gay girls on the razzle dazzle, wives
just on the point of becoming mothers, and
indecent suggestive incidents in the careers
of spooney lovers. He had only to paint his
nose, bedaub his cheeks, and scream out an
infinite number of idiotic verses with scarcely
concealed smut in every one of them, to evoke
shrieks of laughter, and seal his reputation
as a "refined and inimitable humorist.” The
writer does not happen tc have any of the
original songs 6n hand, but the following
may be taken as a faithful imitation of the
"refined humor” of Greedy and bis class.
Here is the dreadfully funjiy thing, in quite
the latest style :
My friend Jones and I went round the town,
Where we met two charming girls named
Brown.
Jones ot course he had the chink.
So invited them to drink,
And we had a jolly spree
Just the four of us, you see,
And we went a-rolling home at half-past
three.
Brilliant stuff, isn’t it? Kind of drivel to
make you laugh out loud, and swear the
singer is the finest comedian in the world.
And the pro. thinks exactly the same thing
himself, as he bobs around preparatory to
singing an equally refined and humorous en-
core in this strain :
When I was a youth my old dad used to say,
Never worry, no matter what comes in your
way,
And I always have tried to keep op to his
plan,
But you can’t very well when yoo’re a married
man,
And the nurse says to you, with a grin on her
jaw,
u Run quick for the doctor this minnte,”
oh lor !
Then you have to hurry,
There is no time to wait,
Oh 1 yes, you’ve got to h snf,
Or you may be 100 lute
Yes, when the. bother first begins
And yon wonder if it'll be one ortwins,
Oh I then you have to hurry, hurry, hurry.
The very idea of an ex-cobbler having to be
dragged ail the way from London to tickle
colonial audiences with that stuff is an insu t
to common decency and our boasted civilisa
tion, but it is the kind of insult which was
at you every time you entered th
Queen’s music hall—and there has not bee
any noticeable improvement at even bette
known places ip later days.
Rita’s voice was tried and pronounced gooc
enough by the leader of the orchestra, so
that she did not have to undergo an interview
with the manager in his private office. Bu
Dulcie had to face that ordeal, the ex-drape
hearing her case with closed doors. When
she re-appeared, her flushed tace and untidy
hair, to say nothing of the fact that he
blouse had somewhat become unfastened
caused Rita to exclaim—
“ Why. Dulcie, what’s the matter! Did he
attempt to insult you ? ”
f| “Oh. he was a bit tunny,” was the reply
‘ I jest let him have a squint at my legs jest:
to show him they was rye-buck, an’ then he
wanted to mess me about, ktddin’ me he c
give me five bob a week extra, but 1 put him
orf by promisin’ to meet him after the show *
and she turned away to avoid answering an?
more embarrassing questions.
I suppose anyone of you would have
given a guinea to have had a peep into the
ladies’ dressing room on the evening of
Dulcie and Rita’s first appearance. It was a
grimy little place beneath the stage, badly
lighted with fitful jets of gas. and filled to
the brim with half-naked women and girls.
There is no music hall or theatre in Mel-
bourne which has even moderatelv comfort
able accommodation for stock performers,
and the Queen’s was one of the worst. The
combination of a hot night, gas fumes and
the peculiar odor of lovely woman in the lump,
made an atmosphere by no means redolent
ot Eau de Cologne. Seventeen females had
to dress and undress in the space which
should have been allotted to half-a-dozen, and
the majority of those seventeen apparently
had not washed more than their hands and
faces for weeks. Underclothing originally
white and clean, but now filthy from too
constant wear, lay about the chairs and floor,
and gave forth a perfume which might have
been appropriate to a glue tactory, but hardly
anywhere else.
Girls of all sorts and shapes were getting
into tights, or standing before cracked
mirrors, grease-painting their faces, and alt
the while carrying on a running fire of re-
marks the very reverse of polite. Bare
bodies and legs were conspicuous objects
enough, bat not so conspicuous as the serio-
comic ex-barmaid, who, having peeled off her
ordinary attire, was lolling on a huge pro-
perty basket, cooling her fat, and clothed
•nly in her modesty—and you can guess how


mad there was ox that. Just as Duicie and
Kila entered, almost stifled with the sicken
ing smell of the place, a tall, long-legged gir
sneaked behind the ex-barmaid and gave he
a smack on her flabby flesh which made her
Jump and scream pain. The nex
instant she turned to rush at her assailant
but toppled over the basket on her face, anc
presented such a tempting surface for punish-
ment that several other girls with shoes
stockings, hair brushes, and naked hands, fei
on her with one accord, and spanked her til
they could spank no more. Evidently she
was no pet of the ballet, but what the par-
ticular reason of the assault was Rita anc
Buicie never learned, as the stage manager’s
voice was heard in the passage, and every-
one hurried on her dressing operations, till
ail were soon ready for the stage.
Space will not permit of a full description
of Duicie as she appeared standing by a little
table stripped of every stitch of her usual
“clobber,” as she called it,'and wondering
how the deuce she was ever to get into the
pair ot blue cotton tights which were to
adorn hej: tnat night. But of all the trim anc
pretty figures so plainly apparent in that:
dressing room, Dulcie’s was the trimmest anc
prettiest, and more than one girl gave a com-
plimentary pinch or slap to her firm pink
tie*h betore rue tights were drawn on.
“ Lumme,” said Duicie, admiring hersell:
in the glass, “I’d knock the ‘push* to-nigbl;
all right, Rita. But, I say, wot sort of a
bloomin' fix’d I be in if these tights was to
split! Blime, the blokes'd f be a' gettin* their
money's woxf then, eh ? 99
However, the tights did not split, and
Duicie’s first appearance on any stage was
decidedly attractive. Rita, too, warbled a
ballad with success, while her beautiful face
and dainty figure aroused enthusiastic admir-
ation from the whole house. Flowers were
showered on her, Norman in the stalls lead-
ing the applause and throwing a wreath
which muse have cost him a small fortune.
In fact, the first part passed off admirably,
and Duicie and Rita began to think that the
stage was a mighty fine institution. But
when they returned to the dressing-room
daring the interval, and saw the scene
there, they were not quite so enthusiastic.
Several girls had smuggled in bottles of
beer, and were swigging away in high style,
squatting on the floor or chairs while chang-
ing their costumes. And the stories they
told. Well, they were warm—-decidedly
warm. Just about when everyone was half-
undressed, a stampeding was heard down the
passage, and before anyone could guess what
the matter was, two drunken swells reeled
into the room I iThunder 1 you should have
heard the shrieks of the girls, and have seen
tne scramble to cover up their nakedness 1
Bpt it was too late! Those awiul fellows
had seen enough to set them chuckling,
and chaffing, and criticising the various legs
aw though they hadn’t seen a woman’s figure
for a twelve month. Rita was all right, a$
she was fully dressed, but Dulcie— well, m
she just happened to be peeling off thoa&
blue tights and was only about half way
through the operation, you can imagine the
appearance she presented. Finding that
there was no means of concealing their
cnarrns trom th*-* rhde gaze of -the swells,
several of the girls began to hurl things ar
them, in an endeavor to drive them from the
rooms, while Rita slipped out to gather male-
assistance, Sue had only been gone two
minutes, when one of the fellows, with a big
cigar in his mouth, lurched and fell heavily
on a heap of gauzy skirts and underwear be-
longing to the Lingerie Sifters, and in an
instant the clothing was in flame-'. In that
draughty apartment the fire quickly gamed
way, and the smoke tilled the room. Tigits,
petticoats and other inflammable material
caught by sparks and flunes, and with
yells of terror the girls attempted to escape
by the only door. The scene became horrible*
beyond description, and it seemed as though
tew would escape alive. One ot the Lingerie
Sisters tell down m a taint, and Dulcie, in.
•waiting to assist her, lost time, and, slipping;
on the greasy fl >or was soon wrapped In
flames and half-choked with the smoke. She-
felt herself burning, and, as she afterwards
put it, made sure she was going to “ throvr
her marble in,” when Rita, brave girl, rushed
m regardless of the danger, and, at the risk
of getting burnt herself, seized her little
iriend by the arms and tried to drag her to
tne door. Fortunately for both of them,
Norman, the manager, and aomfc firemen,
arrived at the instant, and, by their united'
efforts, both girls were carried from the build-
ing, more dead than alive,
Rita soon recovered, but poor little Dulcie
was fearfully burned about the body and
legs, and all she could say, as the cab drove
them to Norman’s house, was—“ Hug me-
tight, Rita, old pal; if I'm going to skin the
gutter, it’ll be easier wif you wit me. Yer a.
bloomin’ brick, Rita, you are.” And then she
swooned, as Rita’s hot, blinding tears fell on
her little “ pal’s ” pain-torn face. It was &
sad ending to a gay day, but they had many
more gay days before them, after all.
CHAPTER XIII.
DULCIE'S STORY.
It was some two weeks before Dulcie be-
came convalescent, and you may be sure that
during her days and nights of suffering and
weakness Rita and Norman watched her with
unremitting attention. The Queen’s Music
Hall had been closed up, and Rita had not
sought any other engagement, stf that she
might the better be able to look after her
little friend. That little friend had been
horribly scorched about the body, but bore
the pain with unflinching courage, her only
complaint being that, as she expressed it,
she was forced to be “such a nark” to fchs


tor cot Norman and his mistress. It was
during her convalescence that they persuaded
*her to tell them the story of her very rocky
career. Divested of such slang as might be
foreign to most readers, it ran thus :
“I dunno puffin’ about my old man,”
Dulcie began, “ but Fve got all sorts of
reasons to remember my old woman. She
was a corf-drop, take my word for it. We
was livin’ in a dirty little street up Norf Mel-
bourne, an’ as soon as I wus big enough to
toddle she used to get me runnin' the rabbit
for ’er—you know, free-penn’rth of boose
juice in a bottle. An’ bow'd she soak it in I
Lumme, she was the strongest I ever knew
at th° game. Booze, booze, from mornin'
till night, an’ when she didn’t ’ave no money
of Vr own she’d pawn her bloomin' clobber,
boots, petticuts, an' all sorts of fines ;
and when they wus up the spout she’d pop
anyfiog of mine she could get hold of.
aeen us sometimes wifout a bloomin’ rag to
our backs, ’cept a old blanket or two wot she
conldnt get nuffin’ on. Of’en an’of’en the
police would run er in for drunkenness an’
bad langwidge, an' she’d do 'er forty-eight
hours, or week, an* come ’ome an' break out
worse chan ever, an’ knock ’ell outer me wii
a big stick fur not doin’ nuffin at all.
“ When I was about ten, she took up wif
a bloomin’ man as used to graft at a boot
fact’ry, but as soon as Vd got 'er under ’is
ium ’e didn't do no bloomin’ graft no more,
bu r made ’er go out an' earn money any way
she could. Then *im an’ ’er’d booze it up
together, an’ row, an* frow tings at each
other somefing drefful. Oh ! I tell you, 'e
knocked ’er about crool, an’, as for me, 'e'd
fink nuffin' .of downin’ me wif 'is fiat, or
kickin’ me about like a bloomin' dorg. Then
’e’d tnng other men ’ome, an' women too,
an’ tu n the place into a drum, so that the
police’ kep’ movin’ us about from street to
street, till I used to forget exactly where we
lived sometimes. After about a year of this,
'e sent me out sellin’ flowers round the pubs,
an’ it I didn’t bring back as much as 'e ex-
pected I’d get the toe-end of 'is boot, or a
bash wit a lump of firewood, jest to liven me
up, 'e sed.
“Well, I was growin* up a pretty big bit of
a gal, an’ sellin' flowers 'ad learnt me a fing
cr two, but some'ow I kep straight, an' 'ad
made up my mind that I wouldn’t go cronk
like muvver ’ad. ’Er fancy man tried to kid
me to go on the streets and bring men 'ome,
but I wasn’t on for any of that kind of biz-
ness, an’ I. sed so. Then 'e tried to 'ave a
loan of me 'imself, but muvver caught 'im
cine time, an’ 'eaved a brick at 'im, an' 'e let
me alone. )But 'e wus that bad 'e used to
put some of ’is boozin' friends on to try an'
make me go wrong. One night I'd come
'ome dead tired from trampin' round wif my
flowers, an’ was doin’ a doss on some sacks
in a little back room, when a bloomin’ bloke,
named Splodger Mick, who’d done 'is bit of
time for garrottin’ an’ burgl’ry, sneaked in,
an', finkin I was asleep, started maulin’ me.
Up I jumps, an' fetches 'im a lick across ’is
chivvy chase—'is face, you know—wif my
hand, an’ then we ihad a tussle round the
room. Jest as'e wus ketcbin’me again, I
yelled blue murder, an* im come the old
woman's bloke. Finks I, I’m all right now,
but, blime, if, instead of ’elpin’ me, 'e didn’t
give me a stoush over the jor, an’ tellin' me
not to be a bally chump, an' not to make so
much fuss over nuffin’. I’m blowed if ’e
didn’t clear out again, an' lock the Rory
O’More—l mean, the door. Course Splodger
fought it wus cherry ripe for him then, an’ ’e
come at me again. 1 tell you I fought it was
all up wif me that time, an' I screamed
an’ screamed again till I fought my froat
would crack, an’ in comes muvver, half-
tanked, wif a bloomin' bootmaker’s ’ammer
in ’er ’and. I yelled out wot Splodger wus
after, an’ muvv°r rushed at *im wif the
’aonmer, an’ guv’ ’im a bash on the ’ead which
sent ’ira spinning Bad as she was, she
wasn’t goin’ to see a kid like me ruined. But
the row brought in 'er bloke again, an' after
roundin' on 'er for interferin' where she
'adn't no right—that's wot ’esed—she fetched
’im a wipe across the jor, which got his shirt
out spmefin' fearful. 'E rushed at 'er like
a bloomin' bull, an', enatchin’ the 'ammer
from 'er, an’ yellin’ as if 'e wus fair balmy, ’e
swung it down on ’er fore'ead wif a sick'nin'
crash, an’ she flopped to the floor like a brick
tailin’ from a chimbley. Then 'e jumps about
two foot in the air an’ come down on ’er
chest wif ’is big bob-nail boots, an’—well, I
dunno, but they tell me I went screamin’ orf
my pannikin. Ennyhow, when 1 comes to
know myself again, muvver was all smashed
up an’ dead, an' 'er bloke was put away safe
in the lock-up, Two monfa after’rds they
broke 'is bloomin' neck wif a rope up at the
gaol for murderin' muvver."
“Poor little Dulcie," said Rita; “what a
horrible time you must have had of it.’’
“ Yuss, it was a bit rough on a kid like me,"
the invalid rejoined. “ Well, I wus took
away to a bloomin’ reformatory for gals,
where I put in two years, an’ learned more
rotten bad games than I'd ever ’eard of afore.
Phew t Some of them gals there knew more
than their mowers taught 'em, take my word
for it. An' that's where I fell in too. You
see, there wus two there that I pal'd in wif
from the start, an’ they ’appened to be the
worst in the place. Strong as Keen’s, s’elp
me, them gals wus. They'd been sent in
from Carlton, where they'd been livin' wif
some red-hot blokes in a bloomin’ shanty,
like a lot of Chows. The fings they told me
they'd done you wouldn't believe. One game
of theira was to ’ang about railway stations
till they met some of them old men who’re
always lookin' for nice little galsT They bof
had all right fat legs, an’ wore skirts which
did'nt, eome down to their knees, an’ they bof
looked innercent an' juicy. When a old gent
come up to one of 'em as’ guv her lollies, an’


talked sweet to 'er, 'she'G act cimnin an
simple, until ’e’d fink it was all ryebuck, an’
arsk ’er to go for a ride wif 'im in a train,
an' ’e’d give ’er a shillin’. Coarse she’d say
yuss, an’ ’e’d get ’er a ticket for a express
train to Brighton or somewheres. Once in
the bloomin’ train, it’d be all pie for ’im, that
old bloke ’d fink, but that’s jest where ’e’d
fall in the fat, for as soon as 'e started enny
funny bizness wif ’er she’d knock ’im silly by
tellin’ ’im she'd scream an’ give ’im in charge
for faultin’ ’er onless ’e guv ’er a quid, or ten
bob. An* I tell you them old coves used to
ante up every time; sometimes a quid, some-
times arf, sometimes onl’y five bob, >est ac-
cordin’ ’ow they stood, an’ them gals told me
they made whips of money some weeks.
That’ll tell you what sort of bally angels they
wus. Anovver game of theirs wus to pay a
tanner a night for the loan of a babby from a
woman up their way, an* they’d go skigin’
outside pubs in town, kiddin’ the people the
babby was their little sister, an* that their
muvver wus in the ’orspital dyin’of consump-
tion ; an’ they did pretty good at that game too.
But one night they couldn’t get a babby no-
ways, so they wrapped up a big doll in kid’s
clobber, an’ went out wif that. But their
moz wus dead, for some woman noticed that
it wusn’t no live babby, an* told a coppej, an*
*e run ’em in, an’ they got sent to the reform-
atory. , , T
“After some time they told me that, if I
wus on for runnin’ away, they could put me
up to it as easy as failin’ orf a log, an* they
told me ’ow. A bloke they knew used to
serve meat at the Reformatory, an’ once one
of ’em ’ad slipped away in ’is cart, an’ stayed
a ’ole night night wif ’im, an’ ’ad come back
wifout being found out, so they knew he wus
all right They sed the free of us could
squeeze into the back of the cart easy enough,
so I agreed to go. One night, jest as it wus
gettin’ dark, the bloke comes wif ’is cart, an’
started carryin’ meat into the store, an’ me
an’ May scrambled in the back and waited for
Louie. But Louie couldn’t get away from the
matron, and May sed she wouldn’t go wifout
’er, an’ sneaaed out again to see wot wus
keepin’ ’er. While she wus away the butcher
bloke came back for some more meat, an’,
seein’ me squeezed up in a corner, ’e pinches
my leg and ses— ‘ Rye-oh,’ an’ then blowed
if ’e doesn’t bang the door, an’ there wus me
shut in the dark, lyin’ on a side ot mutton,
sn* wif me bloomin’ *ead on a big lump of
drippin’. Then up ’e jumps an* drives away,
wif rae rollin’ about like a dead pig, all grease
an* mack from ’ead to foot. Course I couldn’t
see nuffin’, and didn’t know where we wus
goin’, but after about an hour we pulls up,
an’ the the door. ‘Wot ’ol*
aes he, * you’re% nice prime bit of mutton,
you are. Blime, there’s plenty of fat on you,’
an* pinches me again, an’ pulls me about,
an* digs ’is fingers in my chest as if I was a
bloomin’ sheep ; and the more I rolled about
the more he teased me. Fink** T this bloke’s
a bit fanny, an 1 if I don’t look oat for myself
I’ll fall in—an’ so I did. When *e let me out.
I was a pretty sight, I can tell yon, wif bits m
fat all over me, bat I felt worse when I looks
aroand an 9 finds myself at a little shop on a
bash road, wif nuffin' bat bloomin’ big trees
all about ’Where ami!’ sea Le *Yer at
my diggin’a,’ ses 'e/an 9 I’ll fix you as soon
as I shove the 'horse in the stable,’ an’ then
*e scoots round the Johnny Horner—l mean,
the corner—wif the cart, an* leaves me won-
d’rin’ wot sort of a game this was.
’Well, when he comes back ’e takes me in-
side the shop, an’ ’elps me to get the grease
orf me a bit, and then gives me some beer
an’ sausages. Then ’e tells me 1 needn’t get
scared, ’cos there’s on’y ’im in the place, an*
nobody’ll ever fink of lookin’ there for me.
’Well,’ I ses, ‘if yer the on'y one’ere, I’m
goin* to clear oat. I ain’t the bloomin’ mug
you take me for, an’ 1 ain’t a-goin* to stop
wif no bloke in no ’ouse alone.’ ’ Garn,’ sea
*e, ’ wotcher givin’ as T May and Louie told *
me yoo was a all right tart, an’ would keep
’ouse for me.’ ’ Not me,’ ses I; 1 1 ain’t takin’
any ; nuffin like that afore marridge.’ 1 Well,
you’ve got to stay,* sea be.’coa if you clear
out you’ll get copped and scragged back again. ’
I saw I’d run again a snag, but I wasn’t goin*
to let ’im ’ave a loan of me. So I sea, 1 Well,
I’ll stop to-night, but I’ll doss in the stable
wif the *orse.’ ‘Dicken,’ ’e sea, ’you’ll doss
’ere, an 9 I’ll doss wif the ’orse.’ ‘Straight-
wire! 9 I ses. * Tubs,’ ses ’e, ’ straight wire,*
an’, like a bloomin’ chump, I believes ’im an*
stays.
“After a bit, orf ’e goes to the stable, an’
I turns in, an’ I’d no sooner laid me ’ead on
the weeping willow—l mean, the pillow—
than I was orf dead, after lockin’ the door
an’ winders, cos I was a bit suspishua of that
butcher-bloke, from the way'e'ad pulled me
about in the cart. An* I wasn’t no bad judge,
either, for after I’d been by-bye some time,
I wus woke up by a noise, an’ saw a trap-door
in the ceilin’ open, an* the butcher-bloke
cornin’ down a ladder, which ’e must ’ave
let down first 1 Lumme,’ finks I, ‘ there’s
goin’ to be trouble ’ere; this bloke knows
too much for me ; an’ I ups an’ sends the
ladder an’ ’im spinnin’ on the floor. Bat it
wasn’t no good. 'E frcatened to chuck me
out in to the bush if I kicked up a row. an’—
well, s’elp me, it wasn’t my fault, but I
stayed on at that bloomin’ shanty free weeks,
and I couldn’t kid ’im to doss in the stable
either.
“Then, one day when ’e wus away, 1
sneaked five quid ’e’d planted in a keg of
lard, an 9 scooted orf to a railway station an’
comes to town. After toggin’ myself oat wif
shine new clobber, an’ knocking aboat a bit,
you can reckon there wasn’t much of that
five quid left, and 1 ’ad to look for graft
Fust place I got wus at a bloomin’ red-hot
eating-house, down by the river, an’ I tell you
it wus a strong Joints For seven an’ a kick a
week 1 wus on me bally plates of meat-4


mean, me feet —ten bloomin’ hoars a day, an*
'ad to doss in the kitchin*, an* put up wif
boosy sailors pallin’ me about, an’ the boss
worryin’ me life out wit hia funny games, an'
the missis rounding in on me lor stringm' ’im
on—so she sed; but, s eip me never, I
wouldn’t ’ave been found dead wif ’im in a
paddick, so at last 1 clears out, an’ went on
me own once mere,
"Then there come one day when I was
dead broke, an’ ready for anyfing, so I goes
to Foy an’ Gibson’s sale, an’ in fcae crowd gets
me 'and on a lydy’s purse jest as a bloomin’
D gets his ’and on me, an’ I wus ’auled orf
to the jug again, an’ got a monf. When I
comes out the Salvation Army gals gets ’old
of me, an’ keeps me for a monf or two, but I
got struck on a bloke when we wus singin*
down Simpson’s road. He wus an all-right
lad, I tell you. an’ we had some good times
togevver when I wus livin’ wif ’im, but at
last ’e got shot in for five years for dealiir
wif the cops, an layin’ out a barmaid wif a
lemingade bottle. So I knocks about the
road for some monfs, till I got run in again
cos I wus caught bathing in the river near
Studiey Park wif free or four blokes an’ tarts,
an’ got put away for six weeks. But when I
come out I dodged the Army that time, an’
went to graft as slavey at Auntie's, where
you bof first saw me, an' if I get over this all
right you won’t see me go wrong no more, I
can tell you.”
It was a long and painful story of the life
that scores of poor girls such as Dulcie have
lived, and as she told it, with many gasps
and breaks, and not straightforwardly as here
set down, both Rita and Norman were visibly
affected. But before many moie days passed
Duicie was almost her old self again, and
could get about ao briskly that they were
able to leave her one night and attend a
large public bail, at which, as you will hear,
some scandalous proceedings made it an
•vent to be vividly remembered.
CHAPTER XIV.
AT THE BALL.
it was one of the great annual festivities
of Melbourne—a gorgeous, popular public
ball, over which society had been gloating in
anticipation for many weeks beforehand.
Furthermore, it was a plain and fancy dress
affair, which gave the modest dames and
maidens every latitude to dress as immodestly
as they pleased. Full-bosomed mothers of
families were there, proudly displaying those
fail bosoms in dresses which began not very
far above the waist, and seemed more suited
to wet-nursing than any ocher occupation.
Other matronly figures were attired in skirts
brief enough to show plump matronly legs,
while it was noticeable that many young
ladies, who would have blushed luriously and
virtuously at having to lift their petticoats
a few inches high in crossing a muddy street,
look care, on this occasion, to dress them-
selves in garments sufficiently short to reveal
more or leas graceful and appetising limbs.
And it may be said, in passing, that if
society ladies more frequently exhibited their
legs in public the days of the ballet would be
few in the land. But in that vast show of
beauty and elegance the most beautiful and
elegant form was that of Rita. Even
Norman, who had viewed her under many
and varied conditions suited to the display of
her charms, had very seldom seen her to
greater advantage than on this particular'
evening. Her dress, at each end, revealed
just enough to make the wicked eye ot man
hungry to observe more. Her supple, tempt*
ing and perfect bust palpitated unde* an airy
bodice, from which her lovely shoulders just
peeped forth, while her equally lovely legs,
encased in dark silk stockings, were visible
to the distracting extent of two noble and
swelling curves. Her wealth of rich fair
hair, and the radiant happiness beaming
from her beautiful eyes, completed a delicate
and ravishing picture of health and grace.
Norman trembled tor fear some spot of her
old naughtiness would break out this gay
evening, and lest the admiration she evoked
would turn her pretty head, and lead her to
encourage the advances of some of the swell®
who were so palpably struck with her.
‘‘Don’t flirt too much to-night, Rita,” he
said to her, "for, once you lose control or
yourself, your passions may drive you the
devil knows where.”
“ And don’t you preach too much to-night,
dear boy,” she reponded. " You brought me
here to enjoy myself and I mean to; bat you
needn’t be afraid that I shall act the giddv
goat.”
Not much relieved by her flippant reply,
he watched her dance away in the arms of
a tall, striking-looking Highlander, and wa*
already regretting lie had escorted her
thirher.
Not being much of a dancing man, ha
seated himself in a shadowed nook, and eyed
the festive scene and flitting costumes with,
some interest. The ball was described a*
"select, 55 but for ail that certain shady per
sons had, somehow or other, procured ad-
mittance, so that the bloated mistress of a.
brothel rubbed shoulders with the haughty
wife of a Toorak aristocrat; and other harlots,
in all sorts of attire designed to attract at-
tention— and custom mingled freely with
young ladies of the highest respectability.
And it was carious how many well-esteemed
men of the city seemed to have a familiar ac-
quaintance with these creatures of vice.-
"For God’s sake, don’t speak to me here,
Madeline,” whispered a staid lather o: a.
family to a bold-eyed prostitute in a gipsy
dress. " You mean oid beast,’ 5 Norman heard
another notorious woman say to a very digni-
fied merchant; "you aint paid me that JtTl
you owe me yetwhile a third, accosting a,
wealthy individual who hands round toe
plate u* ahurch, fiercely remarked " If yom


doe t (come round an’ square up with me
quick an* lively, I’ll show you up in the
North Melbourne court.” Then there was
an old gentleman, whose very bulgy waisi;-
coat must have prevented him from seein
his toes for years past, who beckoned a gay
girl to him, and “ The old woman
and girls are going to leave for the last train,
Bell, so keep a kiss for me till one o'clock.”
But what the meaning of alLthese whisperings
was Norman, of course, cdhld not give the
tain teat guess.
Presently there came along to his vicinity
a handsome young man and charming young
lady, evidently continuing a conversation
previously started. Bhe was very coy anc
thoughtful, while be was equally tender anc
persauaive.
I thought,** he was saying, oblivious o :
Norman a nearness, " that you loved me with
an jour heart and soul, Agnes.”
Ah, you know I do, Fred,” was her
answer, but—oat you should not ask me to
•acrmce my honor to my love.”
.. " Bat th « e wo ,Q»<i be no risk,” he pleaded ;
your window looks out on the garden, the
aid people will be sound asleep, and the dog
knows me. Besides, it is only anticipating
our marriage by a tew weeks.”
But before the girl had answered they had
passed beyond Norman’s hearing, and he was
left to draw his own conclusions as to the
subject oi their discussion. After about half-
an-hour thus spent in observation and medi-
tation, he suddenly discovered that Rita was
hf^ lr !h h . e . A further glance told
. 1“ the tall Highlander had also van-
18dfd-, Bein * * young man who knew «z-
-actly how many beans make five, he resolved
to see if the two disappearances had any con-
nection, and immediately started on a tour o
investigation. 1 here were many sly corners
e peeped in at, only to find sly couple
spooning violently,.but neither Rita nor th
»nkilta was amongst them. The mor
he i a *\l ed the mote hot and jealous he grew
and the more determinedly he vowed to take
Rita home immediately he did find her. A
length he came td an alcove screened with
,® av / cur tamB, which, however, hung a few
feet from the floor. Beneath the curtains he
could see a pair of dainty feet and bewitching
egs, and beside them the clumsier shoes and"
tartan-clad hmb* of Dugald McHowateon, or
whatever the fellow a internal Scottish name
was. lie halted to calm himself, and was re-
»h;„Kd h l a little pantomime
which made his blood boil with rage. That
little pantomime consisted in a large brown
da “ d caressing one dainty ankle for an in-
•tant, then the ankle was drawn back in indig-
nation—or temptation. *■ Again the brawny
“^ BCaliue Angers were stretched towards the
eilk-etockinged leg, and adminis-
*B„rt 9d a P'fy/ul little pinch just on the arched
outlme of the superb calf. But the superb
ealf was evidently in a tantalising mood, and
•oqusttishly swished itself away, and the agi-
tated swaying of the short skirts above be-
tokened that a gentle little struggle wasv
going on behind the curtain between the kilt®
and the petticoats* i’hcn four legs were
drawn closer together, the petticoats were
raised to the same height as the kilts, and
two bare, bony knees, and two round, silk-
stockinged, pink-gartered dittoes came to
view in one even row. * How much further
toe pantomime might have proceeded we can
never know, as at this juncture the impetu-
-OUB 3 oxm ? n tore the curtains aside, and.
with hashing eyes and clenched fiat, con-
fronted—an unknown Highlander and an
equally unknown lady 1 Norman stood stock
still for a moment, and then bolted away, too
confused to apologise, though it is sate to as-
sertthat his confusion was not a circumstance*
compared with that of those whom he had
disturbed.
In an evil frame of mind, consequent upon
having made such a fool of himself, he wai
making his way towards the throng again,
when he espied Rita issuing from a retiring
room with a young and exceedingly slender
woman, attired in plain dress—plain dress in
this case evidently meaning a costume which
makes almost everything pretty plain to th&
beholder. As soon as she noticed him, Rita
left her companion and approached him with
a smile on her face. But that smile was.
speedily turned to a frown when he broke*
out wita—
-41 Where the devil have you and your
damned Highlander been all the time?”
w* don’t know what you mean,” she said.
My damned Highlander left the hall after
our first dance, and I have been having a.
cosy chat with an old friend who was &
governess at Toorak.”
‘What! That creature with her skinny
bosom hanging oyer her dress,” he exclaimed
irritably, “A nice sort of a governess she
looks. Learnt ail she knows in Lonsdale
street. I’ll bet.’*
“ Whatever is the matter with you to-
night? asked Rita in astonishment. M She’s
a very nice girl, and knows nothing of Lons-
dale street. She’s just been telling me that,
lf lirT e toa 1 can f? et he* old position.”
Oh 1 you can’t fool me,” he said savagely.
You haven t been talking with that thing
all this time. You’ve bten spooning with
some swell, I suppose, and playing all sorts
of nasty pranks with him.
•* 00tfe , ( I a * him. and laughed heartily.
. Wfa y. dear boy,* she said, " you’re boil-
mg over with jealousy Just because I’ve
spoken to a man or two.”
For some peculiar reason, no man likes to
be accused of jealousy, and Norman was no
different m that respect from others. There-
fore, he indignantly denied the soft impeach-
ment, and finally concluded— ‘
• .■k°°K here, K ta, you’ve lost your head
with vanity to-night, | can see that. I sup-
pose some idiot has been complimenting you
on those fine legs which you’re so fond of


■bowing. Anyway, you’d bettor come heme
with me now before you make yourself
Botorious.”
As a matter of fact, «he had bees as good
as gold all the evening, and, consequently,
had not enjoyed herself very much, and
would have been glad to leave, but when he
assumed that tone to her, and made such un-
founded accusations against her, her natural
quick temper asserted itself*
" I won’t allow you or anyone else to speak
to me like that,” she retorted, hotly. "It
was at your suggestion that I wore this cos-
tume, and you ought to know by this time
that the only idiot who is permitted to have
anything to say about my line legs is your-
self.”
Norman was so taken aback at this unex-
pected outburst that he could only mutter
some words not usually taught at Sunday
schools, and Rita, thoroughly wound up, con-
tinued —
“And, what’s more, I’m not going home
now ; I’m going to stay till four o’clock if I
want to, and if you don’t like it you can lump
—1 mean, you can do the cfther thing.”
“Ob!” he rejoined, viciously, “I see you
want to have a row, so that you can get rid
of me, and sell your beauty to other fellows.
All right, my fine lady, I won’t stand in your
way. If you won’t come home with me now,
you can go to—blares ! ” and, flinging himself
round, be made his way to the cloak-room,
jambed his hat on, and pushed his way
through the crowd to the exit door.
And Rita? Her little flame soon burnt
out. but her self-respect would not allow her
lo follow him after his cowardly insults, and,
having had a soothing little cry in the retir-
ing room, she returned to her friend, and en-
deavored to find solace in the mazy dance.
But she was too much upset at the quarrel
with her lover to enjoy herself, and, becom-
ing depressed and gloomy, finally promised
10 go out with her friend on the morrow and
secure that position as governess at Toorak.
11 That’ll show him,” she reflected, 11 that I
can do without him—and he’s sure to find a
way ot‘ making it up soon.”
On their way to get their wraps prior to
departing, she and her friend went into the
refreshment room for some ice-cream, or such
frivolity, and had only just entered when a
tall, handsome, middle-aged woman also
made her appearance. At the other end of
the apartment, the old gentleman with the
bulgy waistcoat was in high feather with
Belle Hinkins, the young prostitute whom he
bad asked to keep a kiss for him till one
o’clock. Evidently he had been drinking
heavily, and with one arm around her waist
he had drawn her down on his knee, and
eeemed to be devouring her neck with huge
enjoyment. The tali lady’s black glances fell
sharply on him, and in a few strides she had
reached him and gripped him by the collar.
“You cruel, filthy old wretch,” she ex-
claimed shrilly, shaking him furiously. “You
thought I had gone home with the girls, did
you! Ugh I You disgusting brute 1 ”
" M—m—my dear,” the scared old boy
stammered, "I—l—was only just sp—speak-
ing to this young lady about you. She—she’s
a dergyman’s daughter, and—l—thought—”
,f Clergyman’s daughter ! ” broke in his
good lady, "She’s a vile wretch, who ought
to be burned. This is bow I treat such
things,” and, drawing a riding whip from be-
neath her cloak, she rained blows on the
face and back and bosom of that “ clergy-
man’s daughter” with all the strength vir-
tuous indignation had roused in her. Swish !
swish! went the pliable whip on the soft
pink skin of the harlot, till her blood flowed
in tiny rivulets, and her screams and curses
and struggles to escape turned the place into
a temporary Hades. Then, expending all her
remaining force in a stinging blow on her
wicked old husband’s bloated features, the
infuriated lady dashed out of the room and
the hall. Rita and her friend followed, and
half-an-hour later our little heroine was in
bed at a coffee palace, still resolved to go out
as a governess, but hoping and hoping that
Norman was not allowling Dulcie to console
him tor her absence.
CHAPTER XV.
SOCIETY'S SINS AND SORROWS.
Rita had no difficulty in securing the en-
gagement at Toorak, and at once entered up-
on her duties. She should have been a proud
and happy girl at having thus become asso-
ciated with one of the society families of
Melbourne, but I am afraid she was not suffi-
ciently sensible of the great honor thrust
upon her. And yet, for the magnificent
salary of £lB per annum, all she had* to do
was to wash, dress and teach three children,
assist the lady’s maid in robing and disrobing
the young lady of the house and the mistress,
play the piano at “At homes ” and evening
parties, and otherwise dispose of her time
from seven o’clock in the morning until
eleven at night, excepting on such nights as
the heads of the house happened to be out
late, when she had to wait op until two or
three o’clock in the morning. But that sort
of thing did not occur more than three or
four times each week, so that, as you can
see, she had plenty of time on her hands.
And they were all such nice people to work
for ; such kind, obliging and considerate old
souls as you would hardly expect to find so
tremendously high up in the world of rank
and fashion. The master had originally been
Tim Robinson, a sporting barber in a very
small way in Fitzroy, who, having made a con-
siderable sum in speculative land trans-
actions, had promptly turned Tim Robinsem
into T. Mountjoy Robynsyn, Esq., acquired
a fine Toorak mansion from a building
society which had too many on its hands,
and jumped head-first into the deep and
muddy waters of Melbourne swell life. And


“The young lady was jambed in the doorway”—See page 36.


what a wonderful splash he had made ! His
horses and carriages wew noted for their
splendour, his liveries were as famous as the
Ooveroor’s, his dinners and soiree* musicals*
were recherche and brilliant, and his wife was
always oostnmed a la grande dame, although
there were some who remembered when she
was a coarse-featured barmaid at a certain
sporting hotel, and wore eighteen-penny print
blouses, and diamond rings at 4a. the barrel.
How T.' Mount joy Robynayn continued to
make money no one had the slightest idea,
but that he did make it, and in bushels, all
society waa certain from the gorgeous estab-
lishment he kept up. True, the butcher,
baker, grocer, milkman, dressmakers and
tailors, grumbled at having to wait four or
five months for their money, and then not
petting too much of it; but it must be re-
membered that such low classes of people
are always importunate and greedy, and never
sufficiently grateful to the aristocrats who
gracioub’y patronise them. Fah ! they should
be only too glad .to serve such fine folks as
the Robyasyns for the honor alone, instead
of thrusting their “ little bills ” forward in
such disgustingly grasping fashion.
Rita, however, was especially well-treated.
She could have bread and treacle, and splen-
did tea at per lb. three times a day if she
liked ; and at least twice-a-week there was
cold neck of mutton, or tripe and onions
beautifully warmed up. or some ether dainty,
while many a time she has revelled in the
luxury of bananas and cold plum duff. In
fact, she fared at least as well as the gropm
and footman, and scarcely any difference was
made between her and the three children.
Oh 1 I can tell you, the liberality of these
aristocrats towards their Inferiors is not half
to fully realised as it should be. If the tacts
about the management of many swell estab-
lishments around Melbourne were better
known they would astonish you, 1 am sure.
Then Miss Roaina Mountjoy Robynsyn was
neb a sweet pet Beyond a slight cast in
one eye, and the least morsel of a limp in one
left and a tendency towards ginger in the
hair and pimples on the chin, there was
scarcely a daw to be found in her style of
beauty. Furthermore, the waa not at all
haughty towards Rita in her conversation,
but rather treated her with the familiar con-
taderatioa of one lady towards another. Thus
h was— 14 Mow, then, don’t stand there like a
tool, but shift yourself, and get me them
there blue silk stockings or M Look alive
now, and find me some blooming soap; it’s
way morning for a wash, and you’re as slow as
a funeral. And she was so generous in
speaking of her friends too—but then all
society ladies are that. For instance, the
same m day to change her afternoon
Jeeth lor her evening set, and while Rita was
lacing her skirt skin-tight over her hips, her
charming young mistress said—“ Gracious,
Fve just been round to Mrs. De Flibbers,
and found her daughter Maud 111 in bed. Her
ma says its only a bad oold, bat that won>
wash with me. She’s been carrying on with
Captain Fiatfoot; that’s what’s the matter
with Maudie. Serve her right if she had
twins.” “ But,” said Rita, “I thought Mies
De Flibbers was too much of a lady to carry
on with any man.” “So she pretends,""
snapped the other, “ but she’s a sly one, and
if she aint caught this time, I’ll be much sur-
prised. It isn’t the quiet ones that are the
most virtuous, ami Ive seen Maudie with
that captain in a position which didn’t say
much for her modesty.” And yet Maud De
Fiibbera is Miss Robynsyn’s bosom friend, v
and they use the same towel at tne baths in
summer time.
Her ma was of a somewhat similar stamp.
In her sweetest moments she always talked
to a man as though she were coaxing another
drink out of bun. and, to Rita’s surprise, had
a,private brandy flask in her dressing-gown,
which she had incessant recourse to. Some-
times, in the stilly hoars of the night, this
good lady and her husband would carry on a
discussion at the top of their voices, each
speaker being buoyed up sky-high with
strong liquor. On one occasion Rita heard
just enough to make her open her eyes to tne
widest extent with astonishment. Evidently
the worthy couple were in bed, as the wife
remarked—“ For heaven’s Sake, Tim, keep
your cold ieet off me, you’re rolling about like
a log.” “Shut your mouth',” was the ele-
gant retort; “you’ve got a breach strong
enough to hang your hat on. Been drinking
again with that damned Mrs. Ciooly, i sup-
pose.” “ There’s no Mrs. Ciooly here now to<
drink with,” the lady snarled; “she ran.
away with an officer she met on the mail boat
coming from England, and Ciooly’s only
waiting to get a divorce so that he can.
marry that Sydney belle, Miss Marjorie Dim-
ster.” “ What 1 that Miss Dims ter who waa
deserted by the heavy swell from London—l
forget his name—and was sent away to New
Zealand to be confined quietly.” “Yes,
that’s the girl, Tim ; she left the baby with a
nurse in Dunedin, and forgot to call back tor
it. Ciooly knows all about the scandal, and
also that she was found in the manager’*
room at the Primrose Club at two o’clock in
the morning ; but her pa will give £IO,OOO t*
the man rash enough to marry her, and
Ciooly wants the money badly.” “Ah, well,
£IO,OOO is a good price lor damaged goods.,
but old Dimeter can afford it He s swindled
a good dr at more than that out of the Sydney
public in floating wild-cat gold mines. By
the way, isn tit abput time Rosina caught *
husband, Sarah ? She's got past the chicken
age, you know, and will be on the shelf soon
unless she harries op. ’ “ Well, I m sure 1 w
done my best for the girl, Tim, what with
tennis parties, balls, concerts, and everything
else where men are to be met/ iShe hid a
good dance with Captain Fiatioot, but Maud
De Flibber uas attracted him lately, and I
believe they are engaged.” “So that’s what


wade Miss Robynsyn so spiteful about
Maud,” though Rita; “she’s been cut out
with the captain.” “Weil,” said Tim, be-
tween yawner" if Rosie doesn’t catch some
one soon I don’t know where she’ll be. I’m
on my last legs, Sarah, and expect the bank
to sell me up in a month or so at most Good
—night—phew 1 What an atmosphere ! I
wonder that breath of yours hasn’t put the
gas out”
As before stated, this little glimpse into
society private life considerably amazed Rita.
Mrs. Ciooly was on the top branch of the
social tree, always foremost in charitable and
religious proceedings, and renowned for
efforts to instil virtue into the minds of the
members of the Young Women’s Tea and
Toast Society, and yet she had eloped with a
mail steamer officer. Then, again, Marjorie
Dimster, who was gushed over and photu’d
by all the society papers as a model of beauty
und modesty—“ the tu plus ultra of refine-
ment,” the lady reporter ot Punch had styled
her—was the mother of an illegitimate baby
which she had deserted, and her father was
glad to pay £IO,OOO to get rid of her I Also,
*he had been caught/in a man’s room at two
o’clock in the morning, ju*t like any common
street troll; and her father a swindler, and
the Robynsyn* dead broke, and—“ Well,”
thougnfc Rita, “hang me it the morals of
society appear to be any better than those
used in Little Bourke street, only society
is rich enough to hide its dirt from the com-
mon gaze.” But she was destined to be even
more astonished before her experience of
high life morality was terminated.
It happened one night that the Robynsyns
had a brilliant dinner party on, among the
guests being Lieutenant Capsiraw, one of the
most stylish of mashers, and a weal toy man
—so it was reported. He was to stay at the
Robynsyn’s house that night, and it was very
evident that Miss Rosina meant to capture
him if possible. As a matter of iact, Cap-
straw believed Rosina to be a rich heiress,
And was after the money he supposed her
lather would give her. It took Rita and trie
lady’s maid four hours to prepare the anxious
maiden for the conquest. “Oil,” she said,
Alter her dressing was almost completed, “1
meant to have a wash, but then*’* no time
now; so, Rita, pearl powder my back and
chest as far as me skin show*/’ and accord-
ingly her lean back and scraggy bosom were
powdered half an inch thick ro conceal the
dirt and freckles to the limits of the very
low-cut corsage; and in all other way* possible
the darling girl was tricked out to command
the lieutenant's amorous attention.
And bow did she throw herself at his head !
What with pretending to blush when he
looked at her, and tittering at every remark
be made, and sitting a* dose to him as pos-
sible, she fairly Rum herself at him. The
warty itself was remarkable for grace «nd
tashion. There was the wealthy old widow,
Jfra. Motly, who, it was rumored, had on one
occasion been surprised in the arms of her
coachman; Miss Eugene MacDoodie, jaal
returned from a European tour ordered by a
very obliging doctor; Mr. Joseph Hattigan, a
pious and respected squatter, who kept up a
superb establishment in East Melbourne, and
a quiet little villa in South Yarrl; with a
quiet little ex-milliner in it; Mr Edwin Gar*
land, the pink of fashion, who was a marvel
of liberality to the outer world, but starved
and thrashed his wife at home ; the plump
and placid heroine of a nasty divorce case*
wherein she had been proved to have been
grossly intimate with three co-respondents;
and others whose names were to be found in
society papers week after week. In tact, it
was a very high-toned affair altogether, and
reflected immense credit on the Robynsyns.
Towards midnight the guests departed, all
saving Lieutenant Capstraw, who went to his
room with a little note which Miss Rosina
had slipped into bis hand.
Shortly after the house had lapsed into
silence, Rna heard Mrs. Robynsyn cry to her
husband, ‘‘dim, Tim, there’s somebody mov-
ing about dowlistairs. For the Lord’s sake,
who it is.” Then, Robynsyn, who had
been sitting up with a bottle of whisky and a
box of cigars, stepped softly downstairs
towards the direction of his daughter’s room,
from , where the sound proceeded. The
nearer he got to her door the more certain be
w*s that he heard voices and kissing. In a
moment he had thrust aside the curtains of
her dressing chamber and was in kev bed-
room, and m the full glare of the jtfaa came
face to with Lieutenant Capstraw and
his own virtuous daughter, Rosioa, the latter
attired in garments which showed' that the
was ready for bed. In a flash the girl at-
tempted to escape through another door, her
accomplice trying to assist her, but the father
was too quick for them, and with a vigorous
movement the young lady was jambed in the
door way, with one long and not unshapelf
leg lully exposed to the knee. The lieutenaaf
was in an undress uniform, and the disar-
rangement of the bed-clothes was a prominent
and significant feature of the scenery.
“Y ,u scoundrel 1” exclaimed Robynsyn;
“ what are you doing in my daughter**
room?”
“He broke in and attempted to assault
me, p*,” said Rosina. “I was just going to
scream when you came.”
“That is not true,” said Capstraw, M 1
came here by your daughter’s invitation/’
“Oh! how can you tell such stories t m
squeaked the girl. “ You forced your way ha,
and when I jumped up you threw use on Ihe
bed, and—”
“ I’ll soon show who’s telling the truth,*
broke in the lieutenant, palling a note front
his trousers pocket “ Read that, hi/ aad
Robynsyn read— f
*‘ Aiy ro m is exactly cppesil* years, and pa aaC
»a sleep apstoin.—Smujl 4


That settled sweet Rosina's business. The
aext morning she was packed away to an
aunt’s at Ballarat, and the lieutenant is still
banting for a suitable heiress. Tbe lady's
told Rita that he was not the first guest
whom the charming lady had informed of the
locality of her room, so that we may assume
that in her anxiety to secure a husband she
discarded tbe usual matrimonial prelimina-
ries, and selected her partner on a plan which
at least had the appearance of originality,
though I believe that other ladies well up in
riie social scale have not been above adopt-
ing similar methods of securing a favored
lover’s undivided attention.
It would perhaps be 100 much to say that
Rita was very severely shocked at this sud-
den revelation of some of society's peculiar
pastimes, but at any rate she was determined
to leave the .Roby nsyns and return to an at-
mosphere which smelt a trifle sweeter, and
Just exactly how she did leave them will- be
related in the succeeding chapter.
CHAPTER XVI.
MURDER MOST FOUL.
Some little time after Miss Rosina Robyn-
•yn had been sent away for being too eager to
make her male friends acquainted with the
exact position of her bedroom, Rita was sur-
prised to see a hansom cab stop at the house,
and Horace Kindur and a fragile, fair-haired,
pretty little, sleepy-eyed lady descend there-
from. Kindur, you may remember, was the
swell whom Lionel Norman bad fought and
beaten on two or three occasions for insulting
Bata. On this evening he and the pretty lit-
tle lady were dressed in faultless fashion, and
teemed well-known to the servant who
opened the door and showed them into a
dra wing-room, there to await Mr. Robynsyn,
at bis good lady was away. From one of the
children Rita learned that the lady was Mrs.
Horace Kindur, whose recent wedding had
been the topic of fashionable circles, and who
was considered to have been extremely lor-
Innate in having married Kindur, as bis
family were in the first flight of the bon ton.
Presently Kindur left bis wife and went to
k&ve a look at the horses and gardens, and
Bobynsyn and Mrs. Horace remained alone.
Am toon as the door had closed on her hut-
hand, tbe little lady turned to her companion,
and taid— \
“Mr. Robynsyn, you have known Horace
and me for many years, therefore I want yoa
to do me a little favor. WiU you lead me
V £2OO, Marion ! ” he exclaimed, in amaze-
ment. “ Why, what need is there to borrow
anab a sum? Your husband is a rick man, I
believe”
“So I thought,” the replied ; “but I have
been deceived. He has been in the hands of
the Jews for years, and at the present time
hasn't £lO to call his own. It he doesn't
£2oo in a week's time, he will be put in
forgery."
11 Good God f” said Robynsyn, 49 this %
terrible news. Bat, my dear, I'm sorry to say
I can’t help you. Times are close with me,
and 1 want the Utile money I hare got. Why
doesn’t he apply to bis mother—she is a
weal thy woman f 99 $
“His mother and sisters are in England,
and he has no other resources,” the little
beauty replied, crossing to the couch where
Robynsyn sat. M Dear Mr. Robynsyn,” she
went on pleadingly, “if you fail us we are
lost You have heaps of money, and
£2OO will make no difference to you. 99
“ As I have already intimated, Marion,” he
said, stiffly, “ I regret your trouble, but 1 can*
not assist you.”
Then one dainty arm nestled about his
neck, two ripe lips were pursed up prettily to*
wards his mouth, and a sweet little voice
murmured—
“ Only £2OO, dear, dear Mr. Robynsyn, and
I will pay you back myself in—any—way—
you—please.”
There is no doubt that it was a tempting
moment for Robynsyn, with that seductive face
and bewitching figure so charmingly offered
to him, but he was proof against even such
winning graces, and, almost pushing her from
him, said gruffly—
“ Once for all, I have no money to lend or
give ; so you must try your coaxing on some~
one else.”
A hard look came into her eyes, the corners
of her rose-buddy mouth were drawn down in
sulkiness, and a faint flush rose in her ex-,
quisite cheeks. Even iher voice seemed to
have grown harsh and cold, as she said—4
“You are an old miser, and I have offered
you terms for your wretched money which
only a bloodless ghoul like yon could reject,
but I am determined to have that £2OO before
1 leave the house. Ones again, will you give
it to me ?”
“No I” he snarled.
Stepping quickly to the door she locked it„
put the key in her pocket, and} facing him
again, said, softly but determinedly—
“ You see my husband on the lawn there
talking to the gardener. Well, unless I have
that money, I shall scream, he will come to
my assistance, and I will swear that you have
grossly insulted me. You will first , get a
sound thrashing, and afterwards be publicly
exposed as a beastly eid scoundrel What
do you say now t 99
“ I say that net eve* your husband would
credit such a story. You look rather too neat
and trim, my pretty little blackmailer, to sus-
tain such a charge. Anyone could see that
the only hand that’s bee* on you lately is
your dressing-maid’s.’ 9 p
“Then 1 must manufacture a little evi-
dence,” she retorted, and in a second her hat
was flung to the floor, and the coils of her lovely
hair loosened till toe tresses swept over her
face and shoo idem in radiant disorder. Just
as quickly she unfastened her bodice, disat
ranged acme frilly work bsnealb, leaving hen


gleaming white neck and bosom artfully dis-
played, and then, placing her foot on a chair,
whisked up her creamy draperies, tore balf-a-
yard of delicate lace from a white petticoat,
and unclasping a silk garter, let it fail on the
carpet.
“ Now,” she said, when these cunning ar-
rangements were completed, “ there is evi-
dence enough to get you five years and a
flogging. Will you give* the £2OO, or shall I
scream ?*
It did not take her victim two seconds to
realise the full depth of his danger, and he
was about to close the bargain, when a recol-
lection of the recent scene with his daughter
and the lieutenant flashed across his brain,
and he said—
“ Even these lady-like preparations for my
sacrifice are of no avail. You will not get a
penny from me.”
For a moment she was clearly staggered,
having evidently concluded that she must
triumph. Then, rushing to the window, she
threw it up, shrieked again and again,
knocked over a chair, and sank to the floor
with her clothes so craftily crushed about her
that her ungartered stocking, covering the
Blender but graceful leg, became particularly
prominent. Meanwhile, R obynsyn sat down
and snickled.
Barely had the little lady finished her last
scream when her husband dashed through
the open window, followed by the gardener.
As his glance fell on his recumbent wife he
stepped towards her and raised her.
“Marion, Marion, what's the matter?
What made you scream?” he asked, hur-
riedly.
“Oh 1 Horace,” she gasped, clinging to him,
and half-closing her eyes, “ that man—Robyn-
syn—took advantage of being alone with me,
and—and—made overtures to me—and—and
—when I indignantly refused to listen to him
he —he—oh I Horace, I think he has hurt me
—he seized hold of me in the moat insulting
manner, and—”
Breaking in upon her explanation, Kindur
strode across to Robynsyn, and, shaking his
fist at that calm individual, roared—
“ You hoary-headed old villain, I’ll break
every bone in your body.’
“Horace, Horace,” exclaimed his wife,
“ don’t kill him. He is too contemptible a
wretch for you to soil your bands with. Touch
him in the packet, that’s his sorest point”
“ Perhaps you will allow me a word,” said
Robynsyn, not at all alarmed at Kindur’s men-
acing attitude. “ Your wife has madeadis-
tardly charge against me, but do you really
think 1 would £>e such a fool as to assault her
in this room when at any moment someone
might come in ? ”
“ Don’t listen to him, Horace,” the lady im-
petuously cried. Why, the very first thing
he did was to lock the door.”
“Then,” shouted Robynsyn, triumphantly,
“if I locked fe3v“»or, how is it the key is in
pour pockwith a quick movement
he whipped his hand into her dress, drew
forth the key, and flourished it aloft. Marion
was fairly caught, and, beyond stammering
something about Robynsyn having put the
key there —a ludicrous assertion, on the face
of it—could do nothing but gasp and glare.
For a moment Robynsyn laughed victo*
riously at her ; then, turning to the stalwart
and open-mouthed gardener, said—
“Jaggins, throw this young man out, and,
if his little devil of a wife won’t follow quietly,
throw her out too.”
M Ohl you can’t bustle me that way,” sneered
Kindur, “Whether Marion put the key in
her pocket or not, I can’t say, but the state
of her clothes shows that you have insulted
her, so pay up the £2OO, or we will prosecute
you.”
“Oh 1 so you know that she wanted £2OO
out of me, do you ? 99 retorted the old man.
“I thought she was working this little game
by herself, but I’m quite convinced now that
you have been coaching her up in the pretty
art of blackmailing. Now, will you go out
quietly, or shall I send for a constable, and
give you in charge?”
It did not taKe them long to decide, and
five minutes later they were going down
Toorak road on a tram, burdened with the
bitter thought that their blackguardly plana
had been baffled, and that all the tricks were
in the old man’s hands. Pretty Marion had
spoiled a £5 bodice and two guineas worth of
lace, ruffled her hair and her temper, given
Robynsyn a free and generous view of her
pretty legs, and yet was no nearer the £2OO
than she had been two hours earlier. Rob-
ynsyn had the laugh at her and her darling
Horace —but that laugh did not last long.
When Mrs. Robynsyn came home two days
later, her husband narrated the little scandal
to her, she told it to Rita, Rita afterwards
confided it to the writer, and so the true par-1
ticulara of the affair come now to be placed
before his readers, in order to show bow in-
accurate and garbled was the yeraion of the
story subsequently published in a certain
Melbourne paper, which insinuated that
Robynsyn had been threatened by Kindur
with a loaded revolver, and that Marion had
obtained £IOO from the old man. That is not
the truth.
On the night after Mrs. Robynsyn’a return,
Rita retired to bed about twelve, but was de-
barred from sleep by thoughts of Norman,
which kept her tossing and turning in irrita-
ting wakefulness. In this mood her ? fcten-
tion was attracted by the sound of stealthy
steps on the grave) walk outside her window.
Listening anxiously, she felt convinced that
someone was attempting to enter the house.
In looking between the blind slats, she dis-
tinctly observed a tall, manly figure carrying
a ladder towards the wall. At first she
thought—and hoped—that it was Norman
preparing to pay her a surprise visit, but aa
the figure ascended the ladder she bad no
difficulty in recognising Horace Kindur. In


tfearand trembling, she watched him mount
op to the window next to hers, which opened
on a landing, and then him step in-
side, and, so far as she could judge*by the
occasional creaking of a plank in the passage,
he was stealing towards the other side of the
house, where the Robynsens’ room lay. With
her heart in mouth, she tip-toed towards
her own door,*Resolved to follow and see what
evil Kindur was up to, and was gently fumb-
ling at the handle, when the door was softly
opened from the outside, and before she had
time to scream her lissome figure, clothed
only in a loose 41 nighty,” was clasped in a
pair of strong arms, and her mouth covered
with hot, ardent, masculine kisses. Half-
iainting with fright, Rita endeavored to
struggle hut to her amazement the be-
loved voice of Norman whispered in her ear—
“ Hush, dear, it’s only I—Norman—so you
needn’t be alarmed. Let us go in and lock
the door.”
But her surprise and joy were so great that
she could only lean against the wall, and re-
ceive in blissful silence an additional instal-
ment of hearty hugs and; kisses, which pre-
vented her from speaking for some moments.
And during this satisfactory performance it
flashed across her that she had been mis-
taken, and it was really her lover, and not
Kindur, who had ascended the ladder, so,
when she found her voic«, she said—
Dear boy, you should have been more
careful ; some one might have seen you com-
ing up the ladder.”
“The ladder!” he answered. “What
ladder ? I came in through the kitchen door,
which was purposely left open for me by the
housemaid, who is an old pal of Duteie’s.”
“ Good God I then it was Kindur ! ” she ex-
claimed. “Oh I Lionel, let us go after him.”
Kindur!” said Norman. “Why, what
e ,? ce * a d° in o here • la he alter you,
“Oh! no, no,” she responded. “Butlsaw
him sneak in at the next window, and I am
sure he has gone into Robynsyn’s room after
money. Let us—oh ! ray God, w mV that?”
It was, the sound of heavy, sickening blows
and angry voices which had startled and in-
terrupted her. Norman darted'into the pas-
sage, saw a stream of light issuing from an
open door, whence the noise proceeded, and
ran towards it, followed, with tottering feet, by
Rita. Norman, far reasons not necessary to
explain, had taken his boots off in the kit-
chen, and so reached the room in silence, but
at the lighted doorway stopped short m hor-
ror, just as a revolver shot rang through the
house. God 1 what a terrible scene met his
gaze ! Head downwards, across the bed, hung
the form of Mrs. Robynsyn, her night gar-
ments saturated with blood flowing from
hideous wounds on the head and neck, evi-
dently inflicted with a short iron bar which
lay on the floor. In one corner was a small
iron safe, with the door open, and jewels
flaehihg the light of a branch of -candles,
while on the carpet before the safe lay Robyn*
syn, g-roaning in deadly agony from a bullet
wound in his forehead, and crouching behind
a couch was Horace Kindur, a smoking re-
volver in his right hand, and his evil face
blanched and hideous with murderous pas-
sion. The truth was plain. His
movements at the safe had awakened Mr. and
Mrs. Robynsyn, and in his r *ge at being de-
tected he had battered the poor lady to death
as she attempted to jump from the bed, and
had shot her husband as he had endeavored
to protect his property.
But, berore all this had become clear to
Norman, he bad advanced towards the mur-
derer,* who suddenly shot up from behind
his covert, and fired point blank at Norman,
with such erratic aim, however, as to entirely
miss his mark and shiver a small mirror.
By this time the whole household was
aroused,‘and thronged the passage and door-
way, the women shrieking and crying, and
the men attempting to get past them and
capture Kindur. Norman, as soon as the
last shot had whistled by him, seized a chair,
hurled it at the murderer, and then rushed to
secure him at the risk of his own life. But
Kindur easily evaded him, and, raising the
weapon once more, placed it to his brow,and,
as the voice of the pistol rang out again, tell
forward on the floor dead, and bathed in his
own blood I
Next day, when the excitement had some-
what subsided, and the inquest was over,
Norman said to Rita—“ What are you going
to do. now that you are out of a situation
again ? ’
She looked wistfully at him, and replied
slowly—“1—I don’t know. I suppose Til
have to look for another place.”
“Then come back to your old position in
Nicholson street,” he suggested,
“ But you said at the ball that I wanted to
sell my damned beauty to other men,” she re-
joined. “Have you forgotten that?”
“ No,” he answered, manfully, “ but I want
you to forget it. Besides, next Tuesday will
be Cup Day, and.if you like we'll go and have
some fun to make up for all you've gone
through lately. Dulcie is going out with a
new ‘bloke’ she has mashed, and I couldn’t
enjoy myself alone.”
Probably you can guess her answer.
CHAPTER XVII.
DULCIE’S NEW MASH.
During the short time previous to Cup Day,
Rita was most amazingly busy in worrying
the life of the dressmaker whom she had en-
gaged to build her a costume which should
arouse admiration and envy on the lawn ; and
this interesting occupation, coupled with an
eager and expensive chase after 4 dream of a
hat, and many more preparations
feminine readers can imagine
than I can describe, left her v
for other distractions. D


-quite recovered from the effects of the fire,
was more fortunate in having had longer
notice of her young man’s intention to escort
her to Flemington on the great day, and filled
in most of the intervening evenings by
furiously spooning with that young man in
the back parlor.
There was no doubt that she was mashed
on him from her fringe to her feet, while
there was equal certainty that he was the
kind of “ bloke ” that any girl in her class
would feel proud of belonging to. Although
bis name was Slopper Speckletottle, that was
not his only claim to feminine admiration,
for at an earlier stage of his career he had
been a member of the. Fitzroy “ Forties,” had
cheerfully “ done his bit of time ” for various
assaults on the police, and had been pals
with the brother of a man who had been
hanged for shooting a publican. Further-
more Slopper owned his own pony and cart,
and was quite a prosperous man in the rabbit
and fish-hawking profession, earning, on an
average, as much as 7s. a day. For some
weeks past he had “chucked up the push for
his donah,” and threatened to become quite
a respectable member of society, which
Dulcie did not mind at all, as she had visibly
improved under Rita and Norman’s influence,
and, besides, she could always look back on
his past records with pride. Rita and Norman
used to chaff her about her Speckletottle a
good deal, but they could never shake her
in his many virtues.
“Take it from me,” she said one day,
“ Slopper’s an all-right lad, wifoat any flies
on *im. * BHtne I you should see that bloke
use ’is ’ands 1 I tell you Vs a fair corker,
that’s wot Slopper is. I reckon, if ’e could
get one fight on at the Demo., ’e’d astonish
’em up there, an’ there ain’t no better boxin’
place in Melbourne than that”
“The Demo. I” said Rita. “Whatever in
the world is the Demo., Dulcie?”
’* W’y, bless yer socks, the Demo, is the
Democratic Club,” replied Dulcie ; “ I fought
ev’ryone knew that. Slopper ses it’s the on'y
place worf ’avin’ a go at now, but they won’t
take *im on ’cause of ’im ’avin* belonged to
the Forties. But Vll git ’is charnce yet, an’
I promise you Vll shake fings up w’en ’e
starts. ’E’s dym* to take on Fred. Preston,
but Preston ses Slopper’ll ’ave to fight’is way
up fust.”
“ But is boxing his only accomplishment ? ”
naked Rita, smiling at her little friend’s en-
thusiasm.
“Not much,” was the answer. ” You ain’t
never ’eard ’im on the ..accordeon, or you
wouldn’t arsk that Talk about Professor
Ireland or yer German bands—well, you
ought to ’ear Slop, givin* us ‘The Peb’s
Polker* an’ : you wouldn't want nuffin else.
An’, it you arsk me, there ain’t no better
bloke at steppin’ than Slopper. I seen all
them darncm’ blokes an’ tarts at Rickards’,
but they’re on’y bloomin’ kinchens at the
game ’iongside o' ’im More’n that, ’e run a
two-up school one time down the Road, an
wns matin’ a pile of splosh at it w’en the
cops come an* broke it up. I know Slopper,
an’ there aint nuffin that bloke carnt do. ’E
ought to be in Parlyment, ’e ought, wif ’is
cunnin* ways.”
“But wouldn’t you have liked a more res-
pectable fellow?” asked Rita, with a mis-
chievous intent to wind Dulcie up a little
more.
“’Spectable ! ” she exclaimed, with open
eyes. “ Lumme, w’y Slopper wears a w’ite
cbllar ev’ry bloomin’ day in the week I An*
then, look at ’is pants—there aint no mole-
skins about Slop,, I can tell you I ’Spectable I
w’y that bloke’s old man drove a ’ansom keb
once, an’ *ia muvver ’ad a apple stall in the
market for ten years. ’E ain’t no bloomin’
Lord Braasey, I know, but in ’is class Vs a
toff, an’ ’e don’t put on no side wif it, either.
Wait till you see ’im in ’is Cup clobber, that’s
all, Blowed if ’e ain’t goin’ to wear cuffs
an’ a dickey, an’ Vs ’avin’ ’is pants made at
the same shop as Jockey Morgan, wot rides
for ’Arry ’Aines. Ob I I tell you, there ain’t
a tart down the Road wot wouldn’t be proud
to go out wit Slopper next Toosday.”
“By the way, Dulcie,” said Rita, “you
haven’t told me how you came to know him.
Were you introduced?”
“ Interdooced I” cried Dulcie. “No fear I I’ll
tell you ’ow it wns. You see, I wus down at
a darnce at Fitzroy one night, w’en I saw
Slopper *ave a bit of a barney wif a bloke from
Norf Melbun, a big lump of a joker who
fancied ’is fat somefin awful. Well, I finks,
that big cove’ll chew the other feller’s ear
right enuff, ’cause, you see, Slopper’s tough,
but he aint a giant. But, s’elp me, that big
bloke didn’t ’ave no possible wif ’im? Slop,
jest plugs ’im on the Jor, kicks ’im on t*he
knee, an* then falls on ’im an’ arf chokes ’im.
Finks I, this bloke’s worf knowin’, an’ w’en
he started playin ’is accordeon for the next
darnce I got fair balmy on ’im. But my mo»
was out that night, an’ I couldn’t get no
chatnce to talk wif ’im. ’Bout a week
after’ds I went down the Bay wif Scotty Smiff
an’ some of the push, an* Pm blowed if the
fust pusson I seen wasn’t Slopper. Finks 1,
this is cherry ripe, ’cause, you know, if a tart
carn’t snap a bloke down the Bay she must
be a mug. Well, I seen ’e ’adn’t no bit of
skirt wif ’im, so after a while I sneaks away
from society an’ goes for a walk round the
boat on me own. But I couldn’t stand much
of that, ’cause me new crabs—l mean, boots—
wus givin* me wot-for, so I goes downstairs
an’ takes ’em orf to give me plates of meat a
cool, an* jest as 1 wus puttin’ one of 'em on
again down comes Slopper. He walks around
a bit, and then ses to me * Wot ho there!’
I knows by the nice way *e ses it that Vs on
for a mash, so I ses to *im, ‘ Rye-oh, gills,’
jest to string ’im on like. ’ Wot’s yer game
down ’ere?* *e ses; ‘yer bloke slung you?’
4 My troubles about blokes,’ I ses ; ‘it’s these
bloomin’ crabs givin’ me jarro,’ I ses. So ’e


takes up the one that aint on, an* stretches it
wif 'is fingers, an* then ’e goes to pnt it on.
1 never said nuffin’ for a bit, but I spotted
im 9 avin* a sly cook at me legs, so w’en ’e
sea 1 My oaf, you’ve got an all-right pair of
Dutch pegs/ I landed *im one on the ear-’ole
as ’ard as I could ’it. ‘Blime,* ’e sea,
•you’re a bit swift & Wot did yon want to
bang a bloke like that for?* 'Cause I don’t
want none of yer funny business,* I sea ; ' you
leave my legs alone.’ ‘Well,* ’e ses, 'you
are a dead nark. Carnt a bloke look at them
Dutches wilout meanin’ no ’arm ? ’ ‘ Qarn I *
I ses ; ' I aint come out of no infant school.
You aint dealin* wif no Stumpy Liz now.* I
sea that ’cause I’d ’card ’e’d slung up Liz,
an’ I wanted to know if it was the troof,
' Wot do you know about Liz ? ’ ses ’e. f Not
as much as you do,’ I sea. 1 Garn,* *e ses ;' I
aint seen Liz this monf or more.’ ' Fair din-
kum?’l sea. ‘Yuss,* *e ses, 'fair dinkum.
W’y, lumme, I aint been out of the jug more’n
a week or so.’ That settled it. As long as
I knew ’e wasn’t ’avin’ no truck wif Liz I
didn’t mind 'is funny ways, so after Vd fixed
me boot—*e was a bit slow over it, but I
never said nuffin—we goes up an* *aa a darnce,
an’ a couple of drinks, an’ a bit of a squeeze
an* a mug or two in the corner of the cabin,
an* I gives ’im my new silk wipe—’anker-
chief, you know—an* *e gives me a tanner
wif a *ole in it orf ’is chain, an’ev’ryfing went
as right as rain. I’ve ’ad a few blokes,’
Dulcie concluded, ' but Slopper’s worf the lot
of ’em put together. E can have my last—
that’s wot I fink of ’im.’ ”
M But, Dulcie,” said Rita, “ I thought you
went down with Scotty Smith. What became
of him?”
11 Dunno,” was the indifferent response.
M I didn’t want no Scotty Smiff after I’d
snapped Stopper. I did ’ear that Scotty went
around skitin’ about dealin’ it out to Slopuer
fur gettin* me away from ’im, but wot sort
of a time would *e ’ave wif Slopper ! W’y, a
bloomin’ kid in arms could stall ’im orf wif a
penny squirt,'’ and Dulcie’s scorn at the very
idea of Smith attacking her well-beloved
Speckletottle was simply magnificent.
Curiously enough, it happened that the
writer was sauntering about Studley Park on
the following Sunday, thinking of his sins and
wishing he had had more fun out of them,
when to his surprise and delight he saw
Dulcie and her Speckletottle idol swaggering
along with an air that plainly showed that
they were very highly pleased with them-
selves. # Dulcie was dressed rather more
quietly than usual, while Speckletottle (whom
the writer saw for the first time) proved to be
a long, lantern-jawed slab of a fellow, dressed
in a light suit with very large, black stripes, a
brand new felt hat with the Collingwood
football colors in it, and a thin red neck-tie,
which, from a distance, looked like a stream
of blood flowing from his throat. Despite
bis angularities, he appeared wholesome and,
as Dulcie said, " tough,” and before his days
of reformation must have been an especially
ugly customer for the police to tackle. The
writer, with his usual modesty and humility,
desired to avoid an interview with this inter-
esting couple, but Dulcie was to too sharp for
him, and nudging her beau coaxed him aside,
and introduced him as “ Mister Speckletottle,
wot Rita told you about, sir. In a deep,
fried-fish sort of voice, Mister Speckletottle
said, M Dulce ses yer a rye-buck bloke, so tip
us yer mudhook,” and, the ceremony of hand-
shaking having been performed, Slopper
looked hard at nothing for half-a-minute,
then saying, “ S’long, blokey. Push your
barrow, Dulce,” swaggered off with his quaint
little mistress, who was evidently proud at
having displayed her prize to one who, as she
phrased it, "grafts for them bloomin’ noose-
paper rags.”
From sheer curiosity, this humble individ-
ual followed them slowly down a track lead-
ing to the river, and was rewarded by wit-
nessing an incident which gave further proof
of Dulcie’s passion for Slopper. They had ap-
proached a small crowd, and were exchanging
salutations in the picturesque and expressive
language of Coliingwood, when Slopper turned ,
round, winked at a very showily-dressed girl
who was by herself, and then, leaving Dulcie
to talk tosome friends, went along to converse
with the other. The demeanour of Dulcie at
this proceeding was beyond all adequate de-
scription. She scbwled, bit her lips, shuffled
her feet angrily, swished at her skirt, and,
finally, turned her back on her friends, and,
if expression goes for anything, evidently
swore an adult-sized swear oPthe most bitter
nature. Presently, Slopper said something to
the girl which caused her to playfully slap his
face. Then there were razors in the air.
Dulcie, maddened at this evidence of famili-
arity, fairly ran down the path, and laid on
to Slopper with her parasol with all the fury
and strength aroused by steaming hot jea-
lousy. Slopper took it all good-humoredly,
avoiding the blows when he could, and laugh-
ing a heavy, hoarse laugh when she got home
on him, but at last she planted one on hist
cheek which nettled him, and caused him to
push her away roughly. More enraged than
ever, she attempted to reach him again, but
as he dodged her she found herself face to
face with the showily-dressed "lydy,” who
laughed derisively at her impotent anger.
That was enough for Dulcie. Screaming
out, "You bally faggot, I’ll atop yer bloomin’
grinnin',” she smashed the handle of the
gingham into the other’s face, and then fell on
with tooth and nail. Rip, rip, went a cotton
blouse, and rip, rip went an amazon skirt,
and the principal outside garments of the
showily-dressed one were in rags ! Then, in
desperation and rage, she clawed and clutched
Dulcie as vigorously as Dulcie had clawed and
clutched her, Slopper and a crowd looking on
in exuberant enjoyment ® Down went Dulcie
on the broad of her back, her neat feet and
pretty legs tilting at the air, while her oppo


sent knelt on her chest and breathed heavily.
Then Dulcie made a violent effort, grabbed
the other somewhere in the region of the
placquet and rolled over on top. So they
went screaming, swearing, struggling and
rolling till suddenly they reached a peak of
the river bank, the soil gave way beneath
their weight, and in an instant they had
splashed heavily into the water, before they
had realised their danger. The drat to come
spluttering up, with her hair and covered
with slimy mud, was Dulcie, who had hardly
time to yell “Slopperf Slopperf" when
Slopper hopped in without hesitation and
regardless of his Sunday suit, and dragged
her to the bank. To put it briefly, a photo-
graph of her in her half-drowned state, with
her clothes all tattered and torn, one stock-
ing rumpled down to her shoe and showing
her bare and dripping leg, and dirty water
streaming from every part of her, would have
sold at a shilling a time amongst her friends.
However, no material harm was done, the
other girl was hauled out without difficulty,
Slopper took Dulcie home in a friendly vege-
table cart which was out holidaying, and
Dulcie forgave his base conduct in speaking
to the other girl, in consideration of his
promptness in dragging her from her muddy
bath. How they and Rita and Norman went
to the Cup, and what they did there, will be
told in the naxt chapter.
CHAPTER XVIII.
AT THE CUP.
I hope my readers will not accuse me of
exaggeration when 1 state that, on the morn-
ing of Cup Day, Rita and Dulcie were up at
five o’clock preparing themselves for the great
event, although Dulcie had not to meet
Slopper Speckletottle till ten o’clock, and
Rita and Norman could see no goodjin reach-
ing Flemington until after luncheon. Through
the halt-open door #f the bathroom Norman
caught a glimpse of Dulcie vigorously towel-
ling herself, and has assured the writer
that she presented a spectacle which he did
not at all regret having witnessed. Standing
in a small bath, with her fringe rolled up in
curling pins, and clothed only in her native
beauty, so to speak, she sputtered and rubbed
away with an energy (and a towel) which
made her firm flesh glisten rosily, and threw
her trim form into attitudes calculated to
vastly please the artistic senses. Not that
there is anything at all artistic in curling
pins, which, to the eye of a mere male, look
hideous on the loveliest head. Even Rita,
who had bad her beautiful hair in these ugly
little mangles ever since seven o'clock on the
preceding evening, looked as though some
nasty black slugs were squirming on her
scalp. No woman should allow her husband
or lover to see her in curl papers or curling
pins if she desires him to retain respect and
admiration for her.
When, after about four hours’ operation
before her mirror, Dulcie appeared in ail ther
bravery of her Cup “ clobber," she was a>
sight to dwell In a man’s memory for many
moons. The very largest and reddest feathers
sweeping over a hat placed
rakishly on one side of her head, a flaming
scarlet blouse with four silver brooches crawl-
ling over it and covering her extremely tempt-
ing bosom, and a glaring green skirt with
wonderful yellow ribbons streaming down the
back of it, were the most conspicuous
articles of her attire, while red stockings and
tan shoes with heels three inches high were*
by no means to be overlooked. She disdained
gloves, possibly because she desired to display
three large silver rings and one of ebonite
with a peart heart in it And with all this
brilliant toggery she was evidently highly
elated, and fairly colored with delight when
Rita and Norman, in the generosity of their
hearts, complimented her on her taste and
striking appearance.
“You see,* she said, as she swaggered
about, “Stopper’s goin’ out a fair shine toff,
an’ I didn’t want ’im to be 'shamed of me.
It’s a bit quiet sorter get-up, I know, but
then I remembered that Rita told me not to
tog out too flash, so 1 ’aven't. Lumme, I
reckon me an’ Slopper'd surprise ’em on the
lorn, if we went there, wouldn’t we ? ”
Norman assured her that there was no
doubt of that, and expressed the hope that
they would have an enjoyable day.
“Oh I yes. By the way,” said Rita, “ what*
have vou got on, Dulcie ?"
“W’y, carnt you see?” she replied; “m«>
blouse, an’ ”
“No, no, 1 don't mean your dress,” said
Rita; “but ”
“Oh ! 1 tumble,” broke in Dulcie. “ Well,
I’ve got me new stays, an’ that lovely chemmy
you guv me, an’ a lace petticut wot Slopper's
sister lent me, an them there garters wot
Slopper sent up, an’ a brand new pair of *
“Good gracious I” Rita interrupted with a
laugh, “ I don’t want to know about your un-
derthinga. Dulcie. I mean have you got any
wagers on the races ? ”
“Ob! 'ave I got enny splosh on the gee-
gees! Well, no, I aint; but Slopper knows a
feller wot knows a bloke as is right bower
wif a cove as rides for Wilson, an’ 'e’s goin' to
give ’im a cert for the Cup w'en we get out;
an' if I get a chanst I’ll put you two on it
’Arf-past nine 1 Blime, I must smoke ; Slop-
per ’ll chew me bloomin’ lug if I'm late.
S'long ; ’ope you’ll 'ave a rye-oh time. If I
I aint back by midnight, you’ll know I’m all:
right, 'cos Slopper ’ll be takin’ care of me,”
and, with a wink which conveyed more than
her words, she bustled off in a state of glee
and excitement
By the time thofeaneom arrived for Normam
and Rita, that fair charmer, almost as much
excited as Dulcie, had contrived to array her-
self in a manner which suited her sweet face
and graceful figure to perfection. For the
benefit of my lady readers, JL have gone to th#


trouble of having a complete description of
her costume furnished by an expert, and
therefore have every confidence in asserting
that Rita wore something fluffy about the
neck, with bodice and skirt to match. In
r this glorious raiment she looked dainty and
1 lady-like, so that even her very dearest female
friend could not have found a fault with her.
When Norman looked at her, and recalled
her past experiences with Auntie, the opium
den, and other horrors, he was almost per-
suaded that he had been dreaming hideous
dreams, and that no single sin had ever
tainted the former life of his lovely compan-
ion. Looking and thinking thus, the poor
fellow became desperately sentimental, and,
with the accent of a Family Herald hero, he
murmured—“ How beautiful you are, Rita,”
and attempted to follow up this foolishness
with an embrace. But, with a smothered
shriek—which is also Family Heraldish —she
edged away from him, and said hastily—
“ For heaven’s sake, dear boy, don’t touch
me I One of those energetic hugs of yours,
and goodness knows how many strings and
-things might burst, and I’d never get my-
self right again in a day. I’m feeling as
happy as a bird now, but if I get home with
all my pins, and tapes and hooks in good
order, I do believe I’ll offer up a prayer of
to the guardian angel who looks
after girls with new clothes on.”
So, being brought back to earth by this
practical and truly feminine outburst, he set-
tled himself steadily down to the business of
pleasure.
And now, if you will kindly imagine four-
teen pages of lucid and glowing description
of the mighty crowds hastening Cupwards in
all manner and variety of vehicle, and fur-
thermore picture for yourselves the serious,
ridiculous, humorous and brilliant sides of
the mankind and womankind all bent on the
jaunt of enjoyment, you will confer a
favor on the humble writer, and have the
satisfaction of knowing that you have lost
nothing of the slightest importance. Let it
be taken for granted that Fiemington race-
course is the finest in the world, its appoint-
ments the most perfect possible for mortal
ingenuity to devise, and its patrons just the
lot of people under the sun, especi-
ally when they have not been under too
onueh of it.
At the grand stand entrance Rita and Nor-
man noticed a richly-dressed, buxom woman,
who was, even at this time of the day, under
4he influence of drink,, and making the air
foul with language of the very worst charac-
ter. In her excitement she was dancing
.about angrily, and swishing her skirts around
mo energetically that all those who did not
*care to turn their eyes away could not fail to
xemark a considerable amount of as fine a
pair of legs as ever the most critical could de-
sire to Her trouble was soon evident.
Those very vigilant offioers, detectives Tucker
mad Stokes, had* barred her progress into the
quarters of the “quality,” for the simple and
sensible reason that she was too well-known
to them as a notorious and sin-sodden prosti-
tute. She had tried to wheedle, bluff and
bounce them, but they held firm, and the
more she perceived that her efforts were una-
vailing the more her beautiful temper seethed.
“ It’s a nice game to chuck me out,” she
yelled, peppering her discourse with oaths as
plentiful as sands on the sea-shore ; “ a nice
bloommg game, I don’t think. There’s any
amount worse than me in there, only you
daren’t stop them. Look at that toff there
carting in another man’s missis ! And what
price that fat old pig who was so drunk in
Collins street yesterday that she fell outof
her carriage on to the pavement? She’s from
Toorak, so of course you’ve got to go down
on your knees to her. I was never caught
under toe blooming bed of a coachman like
that rich Miss Torton, that’s just gone in.
Oh I I know these toffs, I tell you. You
didn’t say a word to that Mrs. Miffles, either,
and, take my tip for it, she’s a red-hot cup of
tea. Why, I saw her in the Woman’s Hospi-
tal twice before she married that old swell,
and I know the woman that’s looking after
the kids on the quiet now. If you stand her,
you’ll ” But at this juncture she was
bustled out of hearing, just as Rita, who had
been quivering with fear, whispered to Nor-
man—
“ Goodness me! that’s Diamond Kate.
I’m awfully glad she did not notice me.”
When once in the thick of the fashionable
assemblage, of course Rita, being a womanly
woman, had eyes for nothing but the gorgeous
display of millinery and dress at every point
of the compass. She was like a boy in front
of the finest contectioney shop in the universe
—wonderstruck and bubbling over with de-
light at the distractingly lovely scene before
her.
“ Would you like to go and see the horses P*
Norman asked her.
“ Horses I” she returned, looking at him
in surprised amazement; “why, I’d give
all the horses in the world for that duck
of a hat on the fair girl in front of us. Please,
dear boy, don’t take me away from all these
lovely gowns; I never had such a treat in my
life before.”
“Oh ! well, I want you to enjoy yourself.
Now, what would you like to do most?” he
enquired, indulgently,
“Well, at the present moment,” she said,
rapturously,” I’d like to walk stright up to
that handsome woman in the mousselaine de
soie and ask her the name of her costumiers.
I never saw a skirt hang so divinely. I won-
der who she is? ”
Oh ! she s of no account. Her last achieve*
ment was to go in swimming entirely naked
before a crowd of men at Sorrento. She’s aim-
ply a born sinner ” he answered. *
Well, retorted Rita, “If she sins as
be lutifuiiy as she dresses, she must be having
a perfectly glorious time of


So e-ncbanted wa* she with the marvellous
show of iomiaine frippery that she did not
notice the hard set faces of the women who
wears hacking borsea with the bookies, or in-
vmt*tag cold cash in sweeps. But the gamb-
ling erase had caught many of the fairest of
society *s daughters, and what With their
tongues glibly cackling racing slang, and the
ungraceful positions they contrived to get in-
to to witness any race they were interested
in, their charms were by no means enhanced
m the eyes of as calm an observer as oar
friend Norman. There were dignified- cok-
ing dames there who had pawned b&lf their
Jewellery for money by which they honed to
make a pile ; married women who, for the
same reason, had been slyly but deitly rob-
bing their husbands tor weeks past; tine
women who had not hesitated to prostitute
themselves in order to obtain the cash where
with to speculate 5 and as the excitement
grew higher their countenances became
harder and more sordid-looking at each
moment Truly, lovely woman never aonears
more unlovely than when she is rushing and
crowding around the beaks of the book-
makers in the'rud flu*h and fever of betting.
As to Rita, her soul was with the dresses,
and even when a wild roar went up as
Cap ho»ses were started, and every other
neck was craned to watch the great contest,
she could only look on idly, and wonder
where the pleasure c«me in of getting your
very nicest clothes crushed and soiled in an
eft rt to follow the movements of two dozen
horses,Mostly obscured by clouds of dust.
And I’m afraid that when a seven-sione Jew
money-lender, who had been waving his arms
wildly, and perspiring in streams, flopped off
from a seat and alighted on her toes, she
rapped out a hasty little “ Damn I” and con-
eluded that seeing the Cup was rather tire-
some than otherwise.
But presently arose an incident which kept
shat day - green in her recollection for some
considerable time afterwards.
In the press and surge caused by the rush
to witness the Cup, she had been separated
from Norman, and was feeling tired and
dusty and fretful, when shs felt a hand mov-
ing outside her dress in the neighborhood of
her swelling thigh. “ Oh I” she thought,
“ here’s some brute of a fellow taking advan-
tage of the crowd to feel my legs,” and at-
tempted to edge away. But she was walled
In too strongly, and remained quiet until she
left! the hand sneaking up to her pocket.
Then, realising the situation, she turned half
around and caught at the wrist of a tall, well-
dressed man, who immediately gave her a
sough shove, and, shouldering his way through
the throng, ran in the direction of the
Koda. Through the passage he had forced,
1 stg-zagged alter him. denouncing him as
a pickpocket, and haix-a-dosen mem also
started to chase him. She had not gone far
when someone stopped on the hem of her
siart, and with a cruel sk-r-r-r the beautiful
garment was torn from her waist and, falling
at her feet, tripped her, and her sprawl-
ing headlong in the dusti Fortunate y, s&e
had an almost equally beautiful white pet-
ticoat on, but it was somewhat short, and
when in her rage she arose and resumed her
running her long and lissome legs were ex-
hibited to a much greater extent than she
would have cared about had she had time to
think of such things. The thief was si;ll in
view, but he had not gone much further be-
fore Rita saw Norman rush forward and fetch
him a clip on the jaw which felled him au»
neatly as could be imagined. Norman was
soon in possession of the facts, looked*
for the purse which Rita said had been stolen
from her, but without success, the fel or
having probably thrown it away as he ran.
“Never mind,” said Norman, his an r°r
rising as he saw the tearful and dusty plight•
of Ric**, “be shan't escape. Have a g<»>i
look at him, Rita, to make sure tnat he ready*
is the man.*
Rica looked at him, and he gazs-1 at
surprise in his eyes and disgusted astonish-
ment in hers. Then she turned away, ancb
the tellow laughed.
“ Do you recognise me! ’ he asked, mock-
ingly.
“ Yes; only too well,” she replied, with a»
shiver.
“Then,* said Norman, “if R’a possible to
find a constable in this crowd I’ll give this
man in charge.”
“I’m not at all afraid,” remarked the man,
coolly, “ because I‘m quite sure that this dear
and lovely lady will never give evidence
against me.”
“ And I’m quite sure she will,” Norman
said.
“ And I am quite sure I 1 won’t,” whispered
Rita, “because I do know him too well—h*
is mv husband ) ”
“Your husband I” w*s all that Norman
could gasp in his amazement, while Rata
again whispered—“ Dear boy, let him go to
the devil. It would do ns more harm than
good to prosecute him ; ” and Norman, feeling
the force of this argument, turned his back
as the fellow slunk away and was lost in the
crowd. However, if they thought they had
got rid of him so easily as all that they were
greatly in error, as the future revealed to
them.
Meanwhile, after Rita had recovered her
skirt, and had it fixed on decently by the
skilful aid ol an attendant in the ladies’ retir-
ing rooms, they sought their hansom, and,
with all their usual bright spirits knocked
out of them, returned to their home, possibly
the most miserable couple of all the thou-
sands who had set forth for the Cup that day.
Rita mourned tearfully over the wrecjjr of
her beautiful costume, and the dusty and
crushed appearance of her dream of a hat;
while Norman cursed, not loud but deep, at
the peculiar late which seemed always to
heiog bltteraeee to both ol them in the midi


Df enjoyment. And so they sat and sulked
tntil c! se on midnight, when a thundering
knock was heard at the door, announcing the
reinm of Duleie. © Halt a minute’s obser-
vation made ii evident that she nad been
having a high old time of it. She staggered
and hiccoughed under a heavy pressure of
-drink ; her clothes were half off her hack and
bosom, her parasol was in tatters, two flut-
tering dingy rags were all that remained of
the once bright and beautiful yellow ribbons,
mnd her gorgeous feathers now flopped and
dropped and lurched in a dissipated way,
which made them seem as drunk as their
.owner.
Al l that Duleie could say intelligibly was—
blopper’s—hie—bloomin’ well run in—
I don’t care damn—hie—f’r anybody.
Whoop ! Washertime ? *
But, atter sluicing her under the tap and
toppling her into bed, where she started
hugging the pillow with an energy worthy of
something better to hug. she promised to tell
them all about it next day.
CHAPTER XIX.
DULCIR AT THE RACES
This is the heart and kernel of Dulcie’s des-
cription of her day of delight and disaster at
<she Gup.
When she swaggered off from Rita and
Norman, she was “as ’appy as a flee on a ’o
blanket/’ to use her own expression, con
<aciom that she looked quite the “ Jydy/' and
filled with anticipations of the glory of driv
inar out with Slopper in hia own fish anc
rabbit cart, which had been duly arwl vigor
ously cleaned up for this very special occasion.
But when she caught a glimpse of
waiting for her, her heart almost failed
her. FJe was too magnificent. From the
crown of his black soft felt hat to the sokes
of his fancy boots, he was M a fair toff * beyond
anything she had conceived. His Cop ratt
was of the very lightest material, with broad
black braid outlining the coat, vest and
pockets, and striping the sides oi hia
trousers, which were skin-tight to the knees,
and thence flowed out till they almost covered
the toes of his h oots. A watch-chain made
of sixpences embellished his vest; a thin, red
<aiecktie streaked down a highly-starched
“dickey,” and white cuffs reached almost to
bis knuckles. Thus tastefully attired, and
with a cigar—one of a doaen M two-fors * he
&ad laid in stock—in his very wide- mouth,
wa* it any wander that Dulcie was struck
dumb with admiration at his gorgeous ap-
pearance ? f$ I don't see *ow enny tart could
he expected to tog up in 'is style/’ reflected
Dulcie, who was becoming more and mere
dubious about her own costume, and wishing
she bad stuck a few more feathers in her hat,
when Slopper welcomed her with, 41 Wet ’o,
Dnteef strike me pink, 1 1 you aint a bigger
sweil than wot I am." Lumme, won’t we
em to-day out on the c&mm I H where*
wpen Dulcie relapsed mis happiness again
at the knowledge that Stopper was as much
struck with her grandeur as she was wit a
his. (
Then off they went, to the admiring com-
ments of four dirty gutter boy* and Stopper’s
sister, that lady having to forego the pleasure
of accompanying them, as she was in that
interesting state when there’s no knowing
what might happen in a moment of excite-
ment. Oh ! but what a triumph it was lor
Dulcie when they dashed past the hotel
where Sturany Liz was sweeping ont the bar.
How proudly Dulcie sat up, and with what a
short, cold nod she acknowledged Liz’s greet-
ing of “Rye-oh, Dnlce; rye-oh, Slop. See
you’ve got ’em all on.”
I am quite satisfied that Dulcie would not
have changed positions with Lady Brassey at
that moment, while Slopper pumped away a 1;
his cigar with the air of a bloated aristocrat.
Bye and bye, they got in the stress and storm
of Flemington road, where it was Slopper’s
delight to drive dangerously close to fine
carnages and chaff the liveried coachmen and
footmen, or pass some of his pals in furniture
vans and on lorries with “Wot 'o there.
You’ll ’ave to get out an' walk if you want to
see the Cup. W’y didn’t you’ire a’earse?”
Now and again, when there was a straight
run, he would band the reins to Dulcie, faoiet
out bis accordeon, and liven up the proceed-
ings with shrieking music, all of which, added
to a few long beers on the road, served to
bring them to the coarse in a most wonderful
state of excited delight. ■
They quickly found themselves in the
midst of a crowd of spielers, guy -a- whack
bookmakers, and others, all busily intent on
knocking as much fan and profit ont of the
day as was possible. Slopoer strutted around
like a turkey-cock, while Dulcie was proudly
conscious of Che fact that her feathers were
the largest and reddest in ah Chut immense
throng. But before she had been tea minutes
on the course she tumbled into trouble.
Slopper had left to go and have a word with
the “ bloke ” who had promised to put him on
to a good thing for the Cup, and while stand-
ing by herself looking at a three-card trickster
nnggetty lump of a fellow attempted to push
past h*>r.
“W’ ere the ’ell are yoa shovin’ ? ” said Dal*
cie, angrily.
“Garni” h,e retorted eloquently, "yoa
ought to be stuffed, yon ought *
“ W’jr, bCime, if it ain’t Scotty Sniff I ” eh*
exclaimed, suddenly. “ How ’re you poppies*,
Scot t * 1
“ Holloa I Dolcie,” the gentleman returned,
“ who’d ’ave thought of seem* you ’eve ! Are
yer cm yer own?”
Oh 1 my bloke a gone altar answer Mokct*
she explained.
“ Well, yer loefem’ peine,” Seotty declared,
M Them there toga el yonra moat ’em cost a
bit oi Hsto9ku o mm an’ ’&**« drink for tkm
sake of the mriy old ten jimnw I In


Feeling rather piqued at Siopper having
left her, Dulcie turned to accompany Scotty
to a refreshment booth, when suddenly that
same Scotty was pushed aside violently, and
die angry voice of Siopper demanded—
“ Say, blokey, wot’s yer game with my tart,
hay ?” O
“It’s air right, 510 p.,” said Didcie. trem-
blingly. “ Scotty wasn’t doin’ no ’arm. We
was o«’y ’avin’ a bit of a yarn.”
“Yuse,” growled Siopper, “I know all
about you an’ yer short shirt. That bloke
was arskin’ you to ’ave a tiddley with ’im.
Blime, I'M punch ’is block orf if I ketch ’im
messin’ aroun’ you. Think I brung you out
’ere to go anappin* other blokes ? S’eip me, a
man ought to give you one on the kisser for
♦yeraelf. ”
“ Look ’ere, 510 p.,” said Scotty, “don’t get
yer bloomin’ shirt out with Dulcie. ? She
warnt doin’ no ’arm. Strike me, carn’t she
speak to a bloke without you getting on to
*er ? ”
“Gam, now,” answered Siopper, “or I’M
put a ’ead on you. Clear to ’ell out o* this,”
and he advanced so threateningly towards
Scotty that that individual dodged away, say-
ing, as he went —
“By thunder ! on’y wait till I get my push ;
U’ll deal it out to you, you big cow.”
“ Now, look ’ere,” said Siopper, turning to
Dulcie, “ I don’t want none of yer funny biz-
ness with me. If I ketch you at this game
again I’ll stiffen you. See!”
“ But, Slop , s’elp me. I wasn’t doin’ nuffin,”
*he ventured to say. “ Scotty comes up to
me, an’—” **
“Dry up I ” was all he said, and it was re-
markable how quickly Dalcie obeyed that
•command.
Presently, in more pleasant accents, he
remarked —
“ Jerry Biggins has given me the straight
griffin for the Cup, an’ I’m goin’ to ’ave ’arf a
jim on Spitfire. I can get on at fifty to one,
an’, s’elp me, if the bloomin' gee-gee wins,
jou’n me’ll ’ave a shine bust up on the
gaunts.”
“Couldn’t I ’ave a bit on too!” asked
Dalcie, anxious to placate her beloved
Speckle tottle. “ I’ve got ’arf a jim, Slop., an’
1 might as well do it in as not.”
“Good enuff,” he said; “pass the stuff
over, an’ PH shove it on for you with an all-
right book 1 know.”
Dalcie hesitated, and he cried angrily—
" Harry up, carat you! Blime if you aint
as slow as afuneraL”
“ But I carnfc get at it,” she replied. “I’ve
got it fixed in me bloomin’ garter, an’ I don’t
want *ll these coves cookin’ at me legs.”
" Gam ! it won’t take yo« ’arf a mo. to nick
it out,” he returned, and Dalcie, dreading to
Mile him again, made him stand in front of
her, and, stooping down, stealthily raised her
petticoats to get at the coin. But she wasn’t
wsaie stealthy enuff, for as soon as a to
length of ker stocking cri»« into view, a mmm
in the vicinity cried—
‘•Lord love me, pike the tart showing kef
legs. That’s a bit strong:.”
Down went Dulcie’s skirts indignantly at
the same moment that Siopper rushed at tke
rash observer, and hit him a swinging Wow
between the eyes.
. “That’s a bit stong, too, ain’t it,” yelled
the infuriated Speckletottle. “ Come an*
’ave another with me. I can serve it ont till
tke cow’s ’ome,” and as the stranger sparred
at him Siopper let drive a second smasher,
which completely settled him. However,
some of his friends gathered round Siopper
and threatened to have his blood, and them
is no doubt that there were the makings of a
piping hot row all ready there, when a roar
from grand stand, kill and flat betokened
that the Cup horses were coming out, and a
general scatter was made for the best vantage
points. Meanwhile, Dalcie had managed to
slip the half-sovereign from its cosy hiding
place, and at once handed it over to Siopper,
who proceeded to place a pound on Spitfire
with a clear-eyed, seedy young Jew, who was
bawling out the odds through his nose, and
was apparently doing a large business.
With the help of tapper’s vigorous should-
ers, Dalcie managed to get fairly towards
the front of the crowd just as & second
roar of “ They’re off I ” rent the air, and the
great event of the year commenced. Bui
Dalcie was small, and even by tip-toeing
could not see much, whichfact being noticed
by the considerate Speck)etottle, he, regard-
less of the jeers, protestations and barrack-
ing of those behind, hoisted her on his
shoulders, pick-a-back fashion, and so afford-
ed h«r an almost uninterrupted view. But
in his excitement to witness the progress ol
the horses, he wa« constantly swaying about
and jerking her up and down, so that in the
course of a few moments her clothes were
rumpled up above her knees, her hat was all
askew, and her black hair cams tuna Wing
about her neck. Just imagine what a comi-
cal figure she must have looked in suck a
state, and with her plump red and whits less
sticking out from Siopper’s arm-pits ! Matns-
ally the fever of tks crowd got hotter and
hotter as the horses entered the straight for
the run home, and Stopper kept poor Dales*
bobbing about till it seemed as though hsv
head would bob off. Suddenly she gave a
piercing scream as Siopper in kw excitement
to witness the finish grabbed her legs with a
grip as though he were endeavoring ts pnfift
out handsful of flesh. Shs kicked tmS.
squirmed painfully, but it was not until tks
crowd yelled out the winning number that
Siopper realised her position. Then he Ist ga
all holds, and she dropped backwards and
stood for half-a-minute on her head, with fees
clothes all anyhow, and her Isas kicking At-
fully at lais back. C
As soon as he had righted her. and Mss had
seen in a glanes that most si ms ptipb m


been 100 intent on watching the judge’s board
lo have taken any notice of the complete dis-
play of underclothing which she had furnish-
ed, Dulcie whispered—
“ Did Spitfire win, Slop?”
“Win be damned I” was bis emphatic
answer. “Why, I’ve just heard a bloke say
that he was scratched. Pm goin’ to get that
quid out of that bookie, or, by gosh, I’ll
wooden the gory swindler.”
“Oh! Slop,” implored Dulcie, “don’t get
acrappin’ any more. You’ll be gettin’ into
trouble wif some of them blokes.”
“That’s all right,” he replied restily. “If
he don't give that jira, I II chance the trouble.
I’ll pull his bloomin’ liver out, that’s wot I’ll
do.
But when he arrived at the bookie’s post
he found only an angry lot or backers who
were lamenting the absence of the Jew who
had taken their money, and was not now on
hand to pay the winners. The fellow had
proved a “ welsher.” and loud and were
the wailings and cursings of those he had
duped. But Dulcie, who had followed Slop-
per in fear and trembling, spotted Mr. Welsh-
er hiding behind a cart, and immediately
acquainted Slopper with her discovery. In
second the crowd were at him before he had
a chance to run or seek a fresh refuge, Slop-
per, crying “Gimme me quid, you cow 1” be-
ing the foremost, j Like a wild animal, he
dragged the spieler from the cart, and as the
crowd shrieked “ Kill him ! kill him ! ” Dul-
cie’s mash pounded him with sickening
blows, while men and women scruffed and
pulled him until his clothes were a ot
rags and his features were covered with
blood. At this juncture helmets were mingled
amongst the throng, and a constable attemnt-
ed to pull Slopper away from his victim, but
that maddened hawker swung round alertly,
and with a single bash grassed the policeman
as clean as a whistle. Other constables set on
himi and, although he bit, hit, kicked and
struggled with skill, strength and passion,
they soon brought their batons into play, and
stretched Speckletottle out as senseless as a
log, Dulcie had rushed forward with *ome
wild hope of rescuing him, but the officers
merely pushed her away, and advised her to
clear out, or she would be locked up. Even
the clods of bad language which she hurled at
them in her rage failed to move them, and w hen
■he saw her Slopper lifted and carted away
■he let out one awful curse, and went, off into
violent hysterics. Beer and lemonade were
dashed over her by reckless but sympathetic
bystanders, but it was half-an-hour before she
recovered sufficiently to know what had hap-
pened. Then, without any mock modesty
this time, she withdrew another half-sove-
reign from her garter and, with the expressed
determination to go and get blazing drunk,
she accepted the offer of a friend to see her
into town. >From that time to her arrival at
Norman’s house she had no clear recollection
of anything, save abundance of booze, a fight
with a half-caste girl in Little Bourke street,
and the efforts of a Chow to persuade her to
try an opium pipe and remain with him till
morning.
“ That sickened me,” she said, in conclud-
ing her story. “I was fair tanked, but the
very idea of a bloomin’ old Chow wantin’ to*
mash me turned me up, so I wholloped ’im
across the jor, an* made tracks somehow or
other for ’ome. But, oh ! ” she pleaded to
Norman, “ you will go up to the gaol an’ £ee
Stopper, won’t yer? I dunno wot they’ve done
wif is ’orae an’ cart, but I wouldn’t iike’im to
fink IM turned < og on ’im ; an’ if you’ll on’y
tell ’im I’d sell me bloomin’ soc<<s tor *im
Vll know ’e’a f*till right Dower wif me. Blime,
I believe if Slop’d walk in ’ere now an 5 je*t
bang me over the chivvy, an’ call me ’is
bloomin’ bit of sairt, I-d die ’appy.”
Alter which you may be sure that Norman,
consented to go and see Slopper, but for the
adventure he met with there you must again
have patience.
CHAPTER XX.
THE MELBOURNE GAOL.
On finding that Slopper had been sent to*
the Melbourne gaoi f or a month, Norman,
lost no time in securing the necessary order
to enable him to visit that highly important
but singularly unpopular public institution,
and, with the aid or a friendly member ot
Parliament soon succeeded in his object.
Having never previously entered the place,
either voluntarily or involunlarily, he was*
naturally bitten with curiosity to see an es-
tablishment wnere so many of Melbourne’s
prominent men had commenced a career of
gloomy privacy, and if his impressions of the*
gaol are not strictly accurate it is to be hoped
that none of my readers will be able to correct;
them from their own experience.
The mere mention of a gaol invariably re-
calls the contention of Lovelace to Althea,
that “stone walls do not a prison make, nor
iron bars a cage,” but I venture to think that
a term of confinement in the Russell street,
quarters would convince anyone that the
stone walls there help to make as efficient a.
prison as can be imagined. It is much easier
to get inside them than it is to get out again,
while it the iron bars do not form cages then
all the dickey birds who have been secluded
behind them must have been suffering from
extraordinary The very sound of
the outer door closing on him after he en-
tered sent a shudder through Norman’s frame,
while the most casual survey of the grim and
gruesome interior caused him to congratulate
his lucky stars that he could retire from the
unenticing premises whenever he so desired.
Even at the office, where his order was scru-
tinised with as much care as though he had
been a desperate and blood-thirsty villain,
the aspect of the stolid prison clerks and the
senior warder, by whom he was to be guided
through the weird mazes of the institution*


•ent a shiver down his spina cold enough to
refrigerate butter for the London market
Bat probably the very nastiest sensation he
had ever experienced in bis life came over
him when he afterwards cast bis eyes upon
the half-dismantled scaffold, where so many
men and some few women had been dropped
through the slot, like a penny in an automatic
weighing machine, with a suddenness which
had completely taken away their breath. He
'had never seen a man “ turned off,” but he
'had read ail about the fitting of the rope
(Collar round the neck of the cowed and trem-
bling condemned, the click of the lever, the
opening of the trap-door, the dull, sickening
thud—which you also may be familiar with—
and the dangling body of the very recently
deceased ; and the mere sight of the murder-
ous structure made him feel as if he had been
half-hanged himself, and was not yet fully
restored to sensibility. All great prisons pre-
sent much' of a likeness with their stern,
cold corridors, massive, cruel-looking doors’
plain., hard labor and exercise yards, frowning
vwitlls, armed warders pacing their observa-
tion heights, and sheds or rooms where the
festive pastime of oakum-picking is indulged
in, and the Melbourne gaol Is no different in
these particulars from its brethren, excepting
in being larger, more gloomy and more gener-
ally depressing to the gentle spirits who tem-
porarily inhabit it. 1 nave known of prison-
ers who have grown so accustomed to it that
they have returned repeatedly with hearts as
light as though they were returning to their
homes, their only important objection being
that they have to undergo the novelty and in-
dignity of a bath on each re-entry prior to
being sent to the south wing and then trans-
fetred to the separate cells or the labor yard
according to the governor’s decree. The
governor, at the time of which I am writing
was the kind of official by whom it might
have been a pleasure to be governed in other
circumstances, and was usually familiarly re-
ferred to by warders and prisoners as “the
old man, excepting in such cases as where
extra punishment was ordered, when he was
coarsely indicated as “the old ” the
language of the average gaol-bird being nain-
tuUv frequent and free, 8 p
Norman found Slopper Speckletottle in
wnat is known as a separate cell, which how-
ever, he occupied with another prisoner.
Ine said cell was a dreary apartment, with a
stone floor, and furniture consisting chiefly
of a bed board about 6ft. long by 2ft. 6in
wide, and not by any means the style of room
which any man with a longing for comfort
and luxury would willingly select. However,
bloppet did not appear to be greatly cast down
by h'S present cheap and nasty accommo-
dation, nor at all embarrassed by the branded
and ungraceful costume which he had been
forced to substitute for the Cup “ clobber ”
whicn had previously adorned him. As in-
ainuated before, he had h-. -me fairly familiar
with these things in : rorty” old days
and, as he pointed out to Norman. “If a
bloke kicks up a barney in this bloomin’
peter, be don t get no sugar candy or sponge
cake by it, take my word for it," Norman
was about to make some remark, when his
attention was attracted to the other prisoner
who was knocking at the walls with a stick
and evidently also with a very defined object'
and not m any mere aimless spirit of amuse,
meat. Slopper noticed Norman’s enquiring
glance, and answered it curtly with—
“Killin’ bugs; that’s wot that bloke’s
dom.
“ Bugs 1 * repeated Norman in disgusted
amazement; “ why the cell looks as clean as
a new collar. ’
u io fcke chief warder, who
bad also been observing the insect-slayer
tnough without the interest that novelty
would have afforded him, " but for these ani-
mals. We can’t get rid of them no matter
what remedies we try. They’re like som-
prisoners—always coming back to us ju^c
when we hink we have cleared ’em out for
the last time.”
“ Well, they don’t some in with me,” said
blopper, ' an they carnt be after the tucker
cos there aint enough of that for a man t >
leave a crumb. Blime if I aint always as
ungry as a bloomin’ ’orse. My oath, wot sort
of a feea 11 I ave w’en I get shut of this crib !
iell Dulce to lay in stacks of aavs. an’ spuds
an onions an’ laggots an’—course I mean if
she aint turned dorg on me.”
n t a Ba *d Norman, promptly.
In fact, she told me to assure you that she’d
sell her socks for you if it would do you any
good.
“ D jd she f’’ exclaimed Slopper, fairly beam-
ing with delight. “ S’elp me, she’s a corkin’
bloomin’ trump, Dulce is. Won’t we ’ave a
bean-oh w’en I get out I I’m satisfied she’d
do this month with me if she could, an’ 1
wouldn’fmind ’avin’ ’er ’ere, I tell you—she’d
keep the bugs orf me right enuflf, Dulcie
would. Look ’ere, tell ’er-Iyuss, that’ll do-
te*, 1 er I m fair, blarsted well shook on ’er
an fair wet through to the skin with thinkin’
about er, will you? Lnmme, I’d like a kies
from er with ’er mouth full of tobaccer juice
that’s wot I’d like!” and, seeing that he
needed no further consolation, Norman pro-
mised to convey the affectionate message to
Dulcie, and left Slopper and his cell-mate to
the mercies of the insect tribe.
As no long-sentence convicts serve their
time at this establishment, Norman had no
opportunity of viewing those eminent land-
boom doctors and heartless financiers who
have been severely gaoled for swindling cred-
ulous shareholders and depositors, and rob-
bing countless widows and orphans.? But
several very notorious and evil-looking spiel-
ers, smashers, till-thieves, pickpockets and
such small fry of crime were pointed out with
a certain amount of pride by his warder-
guide, and he had the satisfaction of knowing
that many garrotting blackguards, wife-kick-


IX husbands and ruffians of similar kidney
ire effectually prevented from playing their
cioua pranks in public for some little time
any rate. However, had the number ot
•ute-beasta he saw there been doubled it
ould not have been any great disadvantage
> the respectability of the city. One of the
riaon clerks, whom he had seen conversing
imiliarly with the governor, he had at first
lit certain was a former influential city mao
r ho had been convicted of detestable roguery
nd oentenced to fit teen yea&s, with hard
door, but a moment’s reflection showed him
hat he must have been mistaken, for every-
ody knows that our prison discipline is so
•eriecc and inflexible that no amount of in-
iiience could possibly be brought to bear to
ecure an easy position and comfortable work
jr such a scoundrel, no matt r what fine
riends that scoundrel might have outside.
)i course not. The very idea ot favoritism
md privileges at the Melbourne gaol or any-
vhere else was so absurd that he,could not
imagine however it had entered his head.
However, he soon had something much
note sensational to tuink about, for just as
pey were about to leave the labor yard a
•ryot ‘‘Take that, you hog;” followed by
mother voice groaning “My God I I m done
or I ” caused the senior warden to turn and
’UQ back just as a shot was fired by an over-
coming guard. In a moment the cause of
and commotion was apparent,
or a slouching prisoner had a blood-dripping
suite in his hand, and on the ground writhed
i young warder whom he had stabbed, in the
back, . The shot fired by the overlooking
mard had done no damage beyond splinter-
ing a post, but before Norman could get
nearer to the scene a second shot struck the
convict on the arm and caused him to drop
his weapon. Instantly, however, he caught
up a stone water-jar and hurled dt at the
senior warder just as that official was about
to dash at him. and down went the senior
warder. By this time, several other officials
had raced to the fray and were industriously
urging the other prisoners into their cells,
fearful that they might catch some of the ag-
gressive convict’s complaint, and create a
general disturbance. Norman seized the
situation at a glance, and, with his usual im-
petuosity and disregard for possible personal
mutilation, he jumped to the senior warders
g picked up the jar and hurled it back at
t »ie ruffian who had made so savage a use of
it. Following up this missile with a rush, he
managed to grapple the felon’s throat with
his right and deliver a fairly' hearty blow
with his trusty left. But the man with
the broad arrow trade-marks over his cloth-
ing was not a chicken—not even a boarding-
house chicken—but a powerful fellow who
had bad some considerable success as a gar-
rotter m those intervals when he happened
to be outside the gaol walls ; and the arts of
his interesting profession came back to him in-
stantly he felt himself grabbed, and after a
moment’s struggling he succeeded in getting
on Norman what I believe is called the
•‘hammerlock.” Anyway if I have not gol
the technical term correct, Mr. Broad Arrow
had certainly got the accurate hold on Nor-
man, and for once in his life that plucky in-
dividual felt that he had bitten off more than
he could chew. In fact, the strain of the
felon’s hold was so great that Norman felt
that something must break fairly immediately,
and had a very decided opinion that that
something was likely to be his own precious
neck. Knowing that he could never repair
or replace that important portion of his anat-
omy, he put forth all his despairing energies
to liberate himself, and was successful in so
far as to shift Mr. Broad Arrow’s hold to a
less dangerous position. All this time —which
was only a few mements, however—none of
the armed warders dared to tire for fear ot in-
juring or killing Norman, and so the lattev
had to battle entirely by himself.
The senior warder, who had been only
slightly hurl, at length said—“ We must rush
them,” but he said it in so loud a tone that
the garrotting prisoner heard it as well as tbs
warders, and evidently felt tViat it was about
time that he asserted himseU more distinct-
ively than Norman had been giving him a
chance of doing. Accordingly, and with as-
tonishing promptitude, he went through some
motions utterly indescribable by the writer s
and by means of a throw familiarly known to
such gentry as the Flying Mare, sent Norman
flying through space at auch a giddy rate that
when he landed on the grouncj some tew
yards off he had not the least knowledge of
where he was, or of anything that had hap-
pened. I know that, in the interests of the
readers of these sketches, he should havs
knocked Mr. Broad Arrow cold and squirm-
ing with one powerful blow of his unconquer-
able right fist, but the plain solid truth-
warranted to stand any climate—is that the
beastly blackguard knew too much for our
game but rash hero, and laid him out on that
prison yard as unconscious of his surround-
ings as the buckle on a girl’s garter.
However, Mr. Broad Arrow reaped no bene-
fit from his ungentlemanly action, for as ne
threw Norman aw *y so disdainfully the war-
ders made a rush, and in a very few minutes
he was in a cell from whence no noise could
reach outside, and where several very diligent
and muscular warders lost no time, in—
ahem ! —conveying to him a sense of their
great displeasure at his unruly conduct.
As to Norman, he was too much of a hero
and a gentleman to do any such disgraceful
thing as die, and disappoint my readers, so #
with the help of the doctor, and the doctors
brandy, he speedily recovered the majority of
hia senses, and left the gaol with nothing
worse than a bad headache and the bitter-
ness of having been practically wspeo on ■he
floor by a mere low convict, ' 1 hat was gal-
ling enough, bat nothing to the terrible tiding#
received trom Rita on hi# return home.


CHAPTER XXI.
AN ARISTOCRATIC BBOTHEL.
No sooner had Norman departed on his
to the gaol than a pert young girl brought
'Bita a note from her husband, which ran
thus:—“l am dying. For God’s sake, come
immediately, just to say you forgive me.” An
address in Jolimont was given, and on being
questioned the messenger testified that “the
gent was pegging out with cornsumpshun,” ao
with as little delay as possible Rita went off
with her in the cab in which ahe had arrived
Norman’s dear lady-love had not the leas
spark of affection for her husband, bu* to
such an appeal as he had sent she could not
harden her woman’s heart, and felt sure tha
Norman would not blame her for complying
with a dying man’s request so pathetically
put.
The outward appearance of the house a
which the rlrivpjr drew reii* was of the quietly
oraer, ana two-sioreyea. ia .
might have been the residence of a bishop-
only that bishops have palaces and mansions
provided for them—or a retired and gentle-
manly merchant, or, in short, anything but
what it really was, viz., an aristocratic house
of assignation, where vice was ministered to
in a more refined manner—if there can be any
refinement in such matters—than at any
other brothel in the city. It was managed by
a lady of middle-age and elegant face, figure
and costume, who had formerly mingled in
society as the wife of £ professional gentle-
man very well known to many of you. On his
dearth it was discovered that his property had
been wrecked in boom transactions, and his
widow left very much poorer than she had
anticipated, whereupon ahe had started a
high-class boardinghouse, which had deve-
loped into the present high-class brothel.
With the assistance of halt-a-dozen girls of
the subdued graceful demi-monde type, Mrs.
De Vere—as I propose to call her—succeeded
in building up a business which was under-
stood to be handsomely remunerative, her
“clients” being, without exception, persons
of liberal means. Her assistants did not
descend to the usual practice of walking the
streets after dusfc, and soliciting custom from
passers-by in the bold and flaunting manner
of other prostitutes, but were peculiarly* deft
in the art of capturing suitable gentlemen on
the Collins block during the fashion-
able afternoon* kour, or at theatres, public
balls, concerts and similar functions. Fur-
thermore, two of them worked professional
men’s offices in a uniform somewhat resem-
bling that worn by nurses, thus securing pri-
vate audience with many men in the course
of a day, and being enabled to tout for Mrs.
De .Vere’s establishment without bringing
themselves under the notice of the police, or
making public the fact ,that certain profes-
sional men of staid aspect and solid standing
were really immoral hypocrites. Occasionally,
too, Mrs. De Vere supplied lady-like girls as
companions for giddy gentlemen who were
going to Sydney, or New Zealand, or elsewhere
for a holiday, and needed a temporary wilt
for the tour. It brief, Mrs. De Vere under-
took, 44 with promptness and despatch,f to
cater for the vicious needs of any man whose
position in the city was assured, and who
cared to pay the exorbitant charges she made.
It is aurprising.to reflect that she found cus-
tomers innumerable, and that those cus-
tomers were mainly married men, with lux-
urious and comfortable homes, and wives
Uhth whom they might have been more grati-
fied than they were with Mrs. De Vere’s girls.
But it seems to be the peculiarity of many
husbands to find attractiveness in any women
but their wives. Perhaps you have noticed
that fact.
Another feature of Mrs. De Veres business
was pandering to the vicious inclinations of
well-to-do women who desired to be as
naughty ** possible, without the risk of being
»\au uu o uru On almost any afternoon or even-
ing,
place to meet male friends, or female friends
whose practices were anything but lady-like,
and indulge in all manner of wickedness,
washed down with champagne, wines, beei
or spirits. Many well-known women have
spent a gay afternoon or evening here, an.i
afterwards pretended that they had been on
an extended shopping tour, or calling on
friends* whereas, could the husbands only
have known the exact nature of their con-
duct—or misconduct—they would have had
substantial grounds for some of the nastiest
and spiciest divorce cases ever known in this
sunny southern land. In the course of soma
investigations undertaken for the purposes
of these sketches, I had an opportunity of
witnessing two dainty ladies, half drunk and
half naked, romping about one of the rooms
like the worst of bad women, for the edifica-
tion of a male person who has attained some
notoriety in the medical profession. Of
course they did not know that any outsider
was observing their very improper antics—
and their legs—or they might have been even
more shocked than I was.
However, none of these matters were
known to Rita, and when that lovely lady'
was shown into a cosy and elegant drawing-
room, she at once received the impression
that she was in a home of the most decided
respectability. At a very fine piano a very
fine young woman was playing with evident
skill, while Mrs. De Vere herself sat grace-
fully in a lounge-chair, intent upon some
utterly useless piece of fancy needlework. On
making known her mission, the proprietress
informed Rita that her husband was up stairs, t
and would be down directly.
44 But,” said Rita, surprisediy, u I thought
he was dying, and could not move.”
44 Ah, my dear,” was the reply, 44 1 am sure
you will forgive him for his deception. Ss
is not seriously ill, but so fond of yop that
he was dying to see you, and knew that noth*


CHINESE LOTTERY SHOPS.


«ng lees than inch a note as he sent would
"bring yon to him.”
“Then he might have saved himself the
trouble of sending it,” said Rita, rising an*
grily, “ as I shall go straight home again,’ 9
and in earnest of her intention she stepped
towards the door just as her husband ap-
peared at the threshold.
“ My dear and charming wife,” he said, ad*
vancing to her, “ you would surely not go
without seeing your loving husband. That
note was a lie, but you will forgive me for it
when you know how I was longing for a sight
of your beautiful face, wont you?* 7
Rita looked at him with the utmost scorn
that that beautiful face could express, and
without a word endeavored to pass by. But,
seeing her intention, he adopted a more
serious tone, and said—
“ Ah, you are anxious to return to the em-
braces of your fancy man, but I have some-
thing important to discuss with you ; some-
thing that may affect hit happiness, so I’m
sure you will listen. Besides, I don’t mind
telling you that you can’t leave this house
until I have don* with you.”
** What does this mean ?” exclaimed Rita,
turning to Mrs. De Vere. “Are you a party
to th*s man’s trap?”
“That man is your husband,” returned the
elegant brothel mistress, “and has a right
to all a husband’s privileges. It is not my
business to interfere between man and wife.”
“ And as your husband I do not desire to
do you any harm, * he observed. 14 1 merely
want to introduce you to a friend o( mine,
and have a quiet chat with you. My friend is
in the next room. Will you come ? ”
Hardly knowing what to do, Rita followed
him into a luxurious apartment, occupied by
three stylish girls, arid an elderly, well-
dressed man with a bald-head and evil-look-
ing mouth.
44 This is the lady of whom I spoke,” said
Rita’s husband to the man, who smiled and
leered admiringly as his glance took in her
fascinating face and appetising figure. ‘* And
these,” indicating the girls, “are friends of
Mrs. De Vere, and of anybody else who can
afford their friendship.”
Still pondering on the mystery of it all,
Rita bowed slightly, and allowed her hus-
band to seat her on a sofa by the side of the
P*her man, who began paying her compli-
ments of a rather coarse character. She
made no demur, for the simple reason that
«he was anxious to know what it was that
was likely to affect Norman’s happiness, but
when she found the old wretch sneaking one
arm about her, and endeavoring to unfasten
her bodice, she pushed him away and said to
her husband—
-14 If you have anything to say to me, be
quick about it, as I am not going to stay here
to be insulted.”
41 Pooh ! pooh ! don’t get so skittish,” he
returned. “My friend is naturally struck with
fine figure, and is able and willing to pay
you to listen to him. I assure you, old fel«
low, her legs are simply perfect. I’ll venture
to say there’s not such another pair in this
room.”
44 Well, I’ll give £b to the girl with the
best,” the old brute said, grinning.
Instantly three skirts were raised rather
more than knee high, and three pairs of
shapely legs exhibited without any fuss—
although there was considerable frill shown.
“ Splendid I splendid I ” chuckled the elder-
ly man/ 44 Have you anything to beat those,
madame ? ” to Rita.
For answer Rita rose from the sofa, and
saying— 44 1 thought this was a respectable
house, but I see it is nothing but a cursed
drum,” again attempted to leave, but her hus-
band swung her around to the sofa again and
forced her full length down.
“So she won’t have her pretty legs looked
at, won’t she?” he sneered. 41 Here, Fanny,
Maud, Gertie, lend a hand while we measure
her, aud I’ll bet £5 she beats the lot of you.”
Then, despite her straggles, they kept her
extended, while a big, plump, blonde girl
took a handkerchief, jraised Rita’s exquisite
petticoats sufficiently for her purpose, and,
with the old brute looking on and chuckling
in great delight, proceeded to measure those
lovely legs both at the calf and thigh.
“ We’re done,” said the blonde, as she fin-
ished her task. 44 1 can beat Maud and Ger-
tie, but I’m not a patch on this girl. I never
saw such wonderful legs in my life,” and, as
the others expressed the same opinion, and
the elderly individual exclaimed “Bee-miful 1
What a shape ! What a size i ” there was no
need for further examination, and poor Rita
was released But her troubles were not yet
over, for this outrage had so affected her
nerves that when she endeavored to stand up
she swayed and fell back in a heavy taint.
What happened then she of course did no*
know, but her next experience was finding
herself in an upstairs room, with her husband
holding smelling salts to her nose.
“Now, my fine lady,” he said, as soon as he
noticed her recovery, “I am going to finish
with you. I have sold my rights over you to
my old friend for £25, and in five minutes he
will be here to take possession of his property .
Your fancy man struck me on the racecourse,
and this is part of my revenge. The other
part is reserved for him personally. 111 have
his damned life for that blow I” and hie
fiendish tone made Rita shrink in horror.
She sat up on the bed and looked about
her as her devil of a husband turned to leave
the room. The door opened and the old
beast with the evil-looking lips appeared. A
few words passed between the mens Rita
heard the jingle of money as the price of her
sale was handed over, and in another instant
the key had been turned in the lock, and she
was left to the mercy of this grinning, horri-
ble old ghoul, who had come to claim the ful-
filment of his blackguardly bargain. He ad-
vanced towards her rubbing his hands aa


though anticipating triumph, and working
his lips in a manner which made Rita long to
be able to strike him dead.
“Just one kiss from those ripe, ruby lips,
my pretty one,” said this lecherous old
scoundrel. “Yon have nothing to be afraid
of now, my dear.”
M If yon have the smallest instinct of a gen-
tleman, sir,” she answered, quivering with
horror and indignation, “you will this
room without further insulting me.”
“ Now, don't he cross with me,” he returned,
. with a ludicrous endeavor to be soothing and
irresistible. “Isn’t it better to be my own
darling and have all that my money can lav-
ish on you, than to be the mistress of such a
fellow as I am told you have been living
with !”
He waited for a word, but Rita was too en-
raged to speak. “You look very fetching in
your tantrums,” he continued, edging closer,
“ but we can occupy our time much better
than in quarrelling. Come, kiss me, and be
my sweetheart,” and, evidently thinking she
was relenting, he caught her by the arm. At
his hateful touch all the demon in Rita
surged up, and with all the force her disgust
lent her, she landed him such a healthy and
unladylike blow on the face that he was sent
sprawling against a toilette stand so heavily
as to knock it over, and down he went with
it, the jug cutting his face severely, and the
water from it drenching him to the skin. At
that moment the handle of the door was
turned, and Rita, catching up a chair, faced
round, resolved to defend herself as well as
•he was able. But to her surprise and de-
light Dulcie rushed in with a poker in one
hand, and followed by a constable,
“ Blime, we’re on’y jest in time,” she ex-
claimed at sight of the disordered room. “I
know this bloomin' place, an' w'en I seen the
note you'd dropped at ’ome, finks I, that
bloke's got Rita on a strwag, so I comes down
•re, an' gets this cop—Vs an' old mash o'
mine—to 'elp me. Shall I give the old bloke
one on 'is block wif the poker, Rita ?”
“No, never mind him ; only get me out of
this horrible place, Dulcieand as the pre-
sence of the policeman prevented anybody in-
terfering with her, you may imagine that she
was on her way home again in a very short
•pace of time, very depressed over the con-
stant succession of troubles heaped upon her,
but relieved at her timely escape from the
•nare of her scoundrelly husband, and the
disgusting attentions of the elderly beast.
Having related most of this adventure to
Norman in much less time than it has taken
to tell it here, Rita finished up by expressing
anxiety for her lover’s future safety.
“He threatened to kill you, dear boy, and
he is a dangerous man to have for an enemy.
Couldn’t we go away to Sydney,or somewhere
out of his reach ? ”
“Nonsense,” replied Norman. “He may
threaten and bluff a helpless woman, but that
kind of cur isn’t built to attack a man. I fae&
certain he won’t attempt to harm me.”
But that same night he had the stronger
reason for changing his opinion.
CHAPTER XXII.
A NIGHT WITH A MADMAN.
It happened that the very eventful nighi*
which I am about to describe was stiflingly
hot, consequently Dulcie, after undressing,
threw herself on the outside of her bed, and,
attired in a very short and skimpy white
garment—the name of which is none of your
business—tossed about rerslessly, occasionally
fetching portions of her plump, pink flesh
smarting thwacks in an endeavor to slaughter
the very rude mosquitoes who ravished her
tempting body. By degrees, however, and
towards midnight, she found relief in sleep,
and was just revelling in a splendid dream in
which she and her beloved Slopper were en-
joying themselves, when the sound of a heavy'
thump from the direction of the front door
aroused her into a sitting attitude, and
brougnt her to a state of drowsy wakefulness.
However, after listening intently and hearing
no farther noise, and judging by the silence
of Rita and Norman’s room that thoaeitwa
were slumbering in peaceful unison, she
murmured, “Some drunken bloke on the
razzie,” and sank back into the arms of Slop-
per once more, meaning, of course,the Slopper
of her dreams. But in another instant she
was again suddenly awakened by a fearful
crash of glass, and a terrible scream from
Rita. “Holy sailor! Wot's up now!”
thought Dulcie, jumping from the bed, just a*
the noise of splin ering timber struck her
ears. Smash ! smash I came the sounds of
frightful blows on the woodwork, and she
could hear Norman commanding Rita to be
quiet. Carefully tip-toeing to her door,
Dulcie peeped around the corner, and along
the passage saw a tall figure madly hacking
away at the front bedroom door with an axe.
In the dim light of the passage his feature*
could not be identified, but Dulcie knew in
an instant that the man was Rita’s husband,
bent on destruction and probably murder.
“Let me in, you hog,” he yelled, “or I’ll
break the damned door in. That woman’*
my wife, and by God I'll kill you and her be-
fore this night’s over.”
“ Get out of the window, and leave me to
manage him,” Dulcie heard Norman say to
Rita, and the latter’s answer came, “ I won’t
leave you to be murdered by that wretch.”
“ Good iron,” thought Dulcie, as she heard
Rita’s plucky reply. “Rita's a bloomin'
brick, that’s wot she is.”
Judging by the noise of rattlingearthenware,
she assumed that Norman was shifting the
heavy toilet stand against the door. But he
was too late, as the repeated assaults on the
door broke the lock, and, with a shout of
triumph and vengeance, the midnight i&»


trader burst into the apartment with np-Jilt-
cd axe in hands, and shocking oaths falling
from his lips. But as the bed was m the
centre of the room, and Rita and N-rman o
the other aide of it, his evident schemeof
slaughtering them was thwarted for the mo-
mer.t As he stood there hesitating before
attacking them, the man’s appearance was
absolutely horrible. As was atterward aaee
rained, he had broken through the front
parlor window, the jagged glass of which had
gashed his cheek and hands, and in wiping
the perspiration of excitement from his face
he bad smeared himself with blood. His
eves, too, were bloodshot, and gazing wi
suppressed maniacal fury, while his set teeth,
his torn and dusty clothing, and his menacing
attitude as he stood with the
mid-air, were sufficient to throw Rita into a
state of mortal terror, and cause even Norman
to think that perhaps his last hour'had
Rita, strangely enough was first to speafe
as with quivering lips she nerved herself to
"SPotl what harm have we d-done you ?
Wh-what d-do you want? Is it m-money .
Money be damned ! he cried. 1 don t
want any of the money you’ve earned by want-
ling the streets, you harlot 1 >, . ~ .
Then her terror took wings to itself at this
anjust and, no longer quivering,
but superbly indignant, she said—
“ You lie! I never walked the streets in
mv life, you cur ! I am no harlot, although
you would have lilted to make me one, you
miserable bludger ! ” _ .. ..
" I’ll cut your pretty head off if you call me
a cur and a bludger,” he yelled advancing.
»• you art a damned harlot; you are that
man’s mistress, and a toy for any other man
who chooses to pay your price !
“ By God, if you insult her I ll kill yon, de-
spite your axe,” said Norman, raging at the
fellow’s brutal words, and endeavoring to re-
lease-himself from the frantic clasp of Rita,
whose beautiful arms were wound around
him as though she would shield him from
danger. Like a flash her husband rushed
forwards and brought the hideous weapon
down upon the bed within a few inches of
where they stood. Norman instantly whirled
Rita around so that his body was between
her and their murderous assailant, and pusn_
ed her further back until they both reached
(be most distant corner. , „ ,
Literally grinding his teeth, the fellow s
fnry seemed to burst all bounds,auc, swinging
his axe again he shouted—
“l’ll kill youl I’ll kill you 11 111 kill
vou 111” and darted around the foot of toe
bed in order to face them. Bat the aigh» of
hie reflection in a mirror stopped him, and,
apparently supposing that be had another
person to deal with, he snarled—
“To hell with yon 1 ” and with one blow of
bis axe smashed the glass into a thousand
•toms. Horrible was his rage then. He
eeemed to have gone mad in a moment, and
in his ungovernable passion strove to wreaS
his vengeance on the furniture. _ B j ood J
blood 1 I must have blood! ”he shrieked, and
crash went the water jug.
“ Come on, you devils,till I slaughter you 1
and a fearful blow shivered the basin.
“ Til finish you, you dog ! and crash went
another utensil, till the toilet table and ware
were strewn in pieces over the room, and tne
chairs were splintered like matchw o<L
Then a costume of Rita’s hanging at the back
of the shattered door attracted his maddened
attention, and, seizing it as a terrier seizes a
rat he tore it with his teeth, jumped on it
with both feet, as violently and triumphantly
as though he were jumping on the body of
nis wife, and, finally, rolled with it on the
floor, thumping, tearing and kneeling on it.
a " Ah, you thing 1 you beautiful harlot I 1
have got you now and well go down to-
gether. Curse youl corse you! Youll not
sell your lovely body any more my fine !a *y.
Your soul is mine and the devil s. Down to
hell 1 down to hell we’llgo when I ve strangled
you. I’ll bite your nose off; I H pull your
eyeballs out; I’ll tear your lovely 'egs to
nieces; I’ll grind your charming chest to
powder, you devil, you prc'ty, damned prosti-
Surely never was a man more thoroughly
mad. He had beaten the skin off his hands
as he struck the floor, his hja were white
with a thick froth, and his eyes glittered with
a vicious fire of homicidal mania, Norman
had been too horrified at the awtul spectacle
of a strong man writhing in his madness to
do anything, while Rita le i I ' nea , a ? ain9^ h t^ l ®
wall with her eyes averted, and her whole
frame shaking with sheer fright. But when
the madman commenced rolling on the floor
Norman came to his usual resolute selt, and,
clambering over the he seized the axe
which the maniac had dropped, and was
about to retreat with it, when t the other
became aware of his presence and his inten-
tion, and grabbed the weapon also. Norman,
as you have had opportunities of knowing,
was a fairly powerful man, but he had never
contested with the strength which madness
gives. In spite of all bis efforts, he was
drawn, still gripping the axe*hanule, from tot
bed to the floor, each opponent striving to
wrest the weapon from the tenacious hold of
the other. It was all Norman could do to
bang on, but he managed to do that, for he
realised most acutely that he would be a
dead man the moment the lunatic regained
possession of the axe. Therefore, he braced
himself for the task, and for a few minutes he
was engaged in the most terrible tug-of-war
imagination can conjure. Rita a husband
glared more madly than ever, and through his
closed teeth grunted and cursed with the
savage bideousness of a fiend.*' It seemed as
though Norman’s strength could never hold
out against such a teariul rival. Rita, who.
limbed on to the bed and erouobed the**


watching the straggle with the interest of one
w o knew that her life might also depend o
the issue or the combat, felt so sure that her
(over was becoming worsted that her pent-o
nerves gave way, and with a despairing shrie
f er hSlh " a°. th " be ' l T *? at distract!
, ? r husband s attention for a second, and a
m eye glanced at her he roared—
‘My God ! I thought I’d killed you ! Bn
ill make certain this time, you devil |” anc
iettmg go the axe, he attempted to rush paai;
Norman and attack his fainting wife Bar
that movement, of course, left Norman with
the weapon in his power, and, raising it. h
exclaimed— B *
Stand back, or I’ll brain you f 99
Mad as he was, the threat and the ster
attitude o Norman had sufficient infiuenc
oyer his antagonist to make him pause Bu
his brain was evidently aflame with the on
object or killing Rita, and with a wild rush he
jumped at Norman with such violence as t
knock him over, and again the two struggled
but this time on the floor. Fortunately Nor
man in failing had dropped the axe out o
reach. The madman, however, was on ton
kneeling heavily on Norman's chest, and all
triosrevesting tom from breathing. It wa
ell the under man could do to punch the
other's face, and his blows were not of suffi
cient force to trouble him. Norman felt him
*elf growing weaker and weaker, and the
maniac, evidently becoming aware of tha
tact, raised him«elf slightly, and then struck
our plucky friend a terrrific blow on the jaw
which laid him out as still as a log of wood.
Then it was that Ritas life was in the mos •
awful danger. Her husband rose to his feet
looked murderously at her, and fairly veiled—
“ Now, I'll drink every drop of your blood,
my line lady. lil crunch your bones beneath
my feet 5 111 throttle you till your eyes anc
tongue drop out. You won’t escape this time
I have to carve every inch of you up.”
Then he slowly mounted the bed. He was
m no hurry, evidently fearing no intervention
and Knelt down to gloat over the inanimate
oody ot his beautiful prey. And surely Rita
had never looked more fascinating. Her only
garment, a “nighty,” was disarranged by her
recumbent attitude, so that the witcheries of
her peifect bust and glorious legs were re*
vaaled almost wittiout obstacle, while her
features with the marble snowiness of un-
consciousness, were perfect in their atatue-
likp purity. Even her ferocious husband
with his madness still hot upon him, was
softened by this sudden picture of her charms
and paused over her like some foul and hid-
eous animal over its victim, » Apparently in
wonderment, he gently passed his hand over
her tace, her shoulders, arms, chest and legs
even to her dainty toes, marvelling at the
firmness and delicacy of the fine skin, and
the wondrous moulding of the splendid limbs.
I'ion t believe God knew enough to make
another like you,” he said, in a kind of hoarse
whisper. And I threw you away, like a
damned foot Threw awar the In-rr^.t
”'^ an } eve r.» et eypa on ” Then, widsTa
sudden fury, But, by the Lord, if I’re lost
my beantr he w . iU . e,rer bav « you again,
my beauty. I< will choke you slowly to mat#*
you plead to me for yonr life ; I will’ promise
StthTor »°“ If i y °? Will be “y fora smgle
rorid 1„ ""*!? hour : tben j wben 1 haveen-
faeed honeymoon, I will spit in your
f angh at you * describe how I
yoar , fancy man, and then kill you
—yes, kill yon like a dog I ”
* and hissed her on the lips, at first
*,!' U ' y a® fkouarh in tribute to her beauty, but
hot l?lnnd Ct vmb . tbaf sweet mouth sent the
hot blood coursing through his veins with.
»nd h J? aBB1 °n that he seized her in his arms,
a “ d . k r* d h t r - f u ace ‘ arCQ9 > neck and bust
with a fire which seemed to burn her skin.
br^2 bt ba ck her wandering senses in a
flash, bor a moment she evidently imagined
that she was in the loving embrace of Nor-
“lV 0r A he Bmiled happily, and put out one
?«°nk i u to car , eB9 bim . murmuring tenderly,
On ! how you love me, dear boy, and. I—oh I
adore you madly.” Then, as the amorous
maniac became more wiidlv endearing ab
most stifling her in his hot clasp,’ - her
eyes slowly opened, and a glare of terror ex-
tended them to their fullest width as she
recognised her husband, and with a despair-
mg scream of “Help! Help 11” B be endea-
vored to rise. But there was not a sane
ounce of him now, and, with a roar of rage
be gripped her fair throat in his strong bands
and was clenching his teeth as he compressed
her wind-pipe, when a pane in the small win-
dow was broken, the muzzle or a revolver
thrust through, a sharp report and a flash of
smoke followed, and the madtftan leaped to
the floor with a bullet in his leg. At the same
moment, Dulcie, still clad in the one short
skimpy garment which shall be nameless,'
threw up the window—which Norman had
unlocked when he urged Rita to escape—and
climbed in, regardless of the scantiness of her
attire and the extensive exposure of her trim
figure.
Without a moment’s hesitation, the intre-
pid Duicie dragged Rita from the bed to the
floor, and stood over her as the maniac was
about to jump across to them. Pointing the
revolver at him, she exclaimed—
“S’efp me, I’ll shoot yer bloomin’ ’art out
if you shift a peg, old blokey. You've got
rats in yer garret, that’s wot you’ve got, you
murderin’, measly savidge. Now, you back
out of this room, and shut the Rory O’More
after you, or I’d fire again an’ make yer toss
yer marble in.”
But threats h id no longer any influence
over him, and with a ferocious snap and snarl
he leaped on the bed. Duicie fired, t but
missed, but, luckily, Norman had recovered
bis senses, and making a grab at the madman
seized him by the leg, and hauled him to the
floor. This tuns the struggle was quickly
over partly b...;ause his wounded leg had


weakened the lunatic, but mainly' because
Dulcie rushed around and knocked friw
senseless with two blows from the butt-end’
t)f the revolver. Almost at the aameMnstsnt
she front door was burst open, and the pass-
age and room filled with two constables and
several neighbors whom Dulcie had previously
aroused. For that little heroine, after re-
maining in the passage long enough to see
that she could do no good then, had hurried
out at the back door arouncLto Nicholson st,,
and, more than half-naked, had raced down
till she met the police, then raced back and
called for assistance on neighbors, and,
finally, remembering that there was a revol-
ver in the dining-room, had grabbed it, hast-
ened by a small garden to the bed-room win-
dow, and so arrived with the result already
described.
In' very short order she had brought the
half-dead Rita to consciousness, and was
kissing and crying over her in delight,
while the others helped to secure the madman,
and hurry him away in a cab. Norman, after
aidingjn this work, went to the corner where
Dulcie was soothing Rita with, “ Don’t blub
enny more, old gal; nobody ain’t ’urt ’cept
the cove wif the dilly block. Mr. Norman a
Isle o’ Wight—l mean, all right—an*, tank
Gord, yer as right as rain.” Then there was
another kissing and crying scene between
Rita and Norman, and the heartiest thanks
and praises lavished on Dulcie tor her timely
bravery, until that young woman, blushing
with pride, said—
“Oh 1 knock orf pokin’ borack. I ain’t
done nuffin for you to make all this bally
barney about. Blirne, don’t you fink Id do
more’n shoot a bloomin' ratty bloke for you f
An* I say, Rita, there’s some coves peepin’
in at the winder, so you’d better shove some-
fin’ over yer Dutch pegs,” at the same time
throwing a skirt to Rita,
“But what about yourself, Dulcie!” said
Norman, indicating her semi-nakedness;
“they can see a good deal of you too, eh ! ”
“ Lumme,” she cried, seizing the coverlet,
and wrapping herself in it, “I clean forgot
that I didn’t’ave me proper clobber on. If
they aint seen good Dutches afore, they’ve ’ad
a treat this time, wif Rita an’ me,” and so,
pulling the window and blind down, and
laughing at her exposure, she succeeded in
banishing much of the fright from Rita, and
then, leaving her to Norman’s more certain
consolations, returned to her room, and slept
the sleep of the brave. Whether or not Rita
and Norman also sought relief in slumber, I
cannot relate, but when they arose in the
morning Rita was so much restored to her
old sweet self that it was very evident the
last part of that dreadful night had been more
blissful to her than had the first.
After the usual law’s delay, her husband
was committed to the lunaiic asylum “during
the Queen’s pleasure/’ and they thought they
had seen the last of him. i&'But, in a tempo-
rarily sane moment, he expressed the desire
*>* am intfervtbw with* andl Hbmmm
was curious" iv visit
of Mfelßourne's well-known* men' andl mmnm
were drrumingcotrtr their nmnincall oanseu;, they
went down’ to* the institution’ together;, wifctt#
what sin2Ut f r and terrible results* will' b®
related in the succeeding sketch.
CHAPTER XXIII.
AMONGST THE MANIACS.
Melbourne should be deeply interested 1
in its lunatics, for amongst therm are*
many who- were formerly/ highly-respected,
citizens and* citizenesses, and carried out.
iheir political! or social duties with so much
(iecency and serenity as to point to the con-
clusion that absolute sanity/ is not essential
-in* the political) and social world. It is* a.
common mistake to suppose that all the in-
mates of an> asylum for the "dotty/’WDul-
cie would call! them, are ridiculously or vio*-
jently mad every day and all day/long. Nbth-
ing could be further from the truth—except;
an Age political leading article, ora
travelling? circus programme. We have*
heard two asylum deb&ters discusa the ques->-
tiorra oft Women’s Suffrage, or Free-trade and !
Projection*, jpst: as* adroitly* as members of.’
Parriaraent;, though II don’t push, that for-
warriiaa/avidence oiitha*formers’ sanity.
There ii<f)o» aora deceptive person^than thei
individual) afltictedi with* monomania;: the*
perron i«:ituane on* one point ctwly.. Trv/iy t
will converse discreetly* even wiseiyr.out
aidi’4en»6ubj£cts until yourrblood boila at the*
injustice of - detaining him, or her, in an asy-
lum^.and you determine to write to the papers*
and the whole horrible business* of a.
sane person beingrimprisoned* amongst the-
insane. Bnfc you* happen to
on the matter which affects the patient, anil
—whoop!—that patient’s reason flies off the*
handle, and you are in the midst of the mad*-
dest riot of words and actions imaginable.
Then you haul down your colors, and-slinkc
away, firmly convinced that the asylum doo-.
tors know rather more about such things thaDi
you do.
On the day on which Rita and Norman went
out to see the formers husoand, they were
fortunate in being placed in the hands of an
intelligent guide. His grueaomely humour-
ous temperament led him to view the patents
as so many curious and wild beasts* in a
menagerie, and a printed catalogue of the
animals in the cages was all he lacked to
complete his happiness. / To Norman’s
amazement, he saw, amongst others, a man
who only some few years ago was held to be
one of the smartest and moat popular lawyers
in the city. His downfall was women of the
most dissolute and shameless type. A second
easily-recognizabla natient, was previously a,
prosperous city shopkeeper, a man ; of verjj
large and powerful franui, who, notwithv
standing that he had an attractive wife andh
pretty daughters, ;ave hih&clf


AT BRIGHTON BEACH.


allurements of bawdy women until his brain
weakened, and he waa conveyed to the asy.
lum in the babbling, drivelling stage of idiocy.
A one-time popular musician, too, was now
an inmate of this saddest of all public insti-
tutional - Temporary success had dazzled
him, turned his brain, and, finally, sent him
to the asylum, where his chief delusion was
that he was the leading tenor in the
finest opera company in the world, and
the greatest composer the world has ever
seen. This latter belief, by the way, is by no
confined to recognised lunatics, but is
common to many tin-pot musicians roaming
free in our midst. Anyone who has listened
to them raving over the merits of their pain-
fully common place compositions will readily
endorse that opinion. Also, a poet, madder
even than his brethren of the outer world,
waa carefully inspected by the visitors, Nor-
man remarking, after hearing some verses
from the lunatic—“ Humph I They don’t
sound any worse than Marshall Hall s, any-
how. But perhaps he is in one of his sane in-
tervals?” “Not a bit of it,” replied their
guide. “When he’s all-right, he never goes
on with that nonsense.” “Ah, well, thats
where he differs from the others,” returned
Norman ; M they’re always at it.”
Rita’s attention was particularly attracted
to a tab, fair, handsome, middle-aged man,
who looked at her so admiringly that, woman-
like, she could not conceive that any man
with such good judgment could be “silly,”
as she phrased it.
“Oh I he’s as mad as they make ’em,” said
the guide. “ He was a wealthly young tellow,
a member of one of our first families, and en-
vied by half the men in town. Got struck
on a popular young actress, married her, dis-
covered that she was the fancy woman of the
manager, and brooded over the trouble so
much that he had to be sent here. Been out
two or three times, but every chance he got
he threatened to murder his wife, and I don't
think he is likely ever to get out again.”
“And the wife? Does she ever come to
see him?” asked Rita.
“ Not much,” was the answer. “ She sticks
to the manager—who, by the way, has a de-
serted wife in South Yarra, and is just as
often in America and England as Melbourne.
Bur he fancies every tall woman is her, and—
halloa I hanged if he doesn’t believe you are
his missus.”
The poor demented creature had approach-
ed and gazed at Rita with sorrowful eyes,
which presently grew glaring as his pbrenzy
worked on him, till at length he shook bus
head, laughed harshly, and roared—
“ Out of my sight 1 you miserable wretch !
I will have nothing further to say to you,
adultress 1 You tricked me with your sweet
voice and quaint, pretty ways, but I know you
now for the foul creature you are. Away I
Away ! Never enter my house again, or I’ll
o* d»r the servants to throw you out Go
bacK to the stage, you she-devil I Go and
bask in the applause of the people, and them
return to the arms of your paramour. Don’t:
lie to me any more. Don’t act the virtuous
wife to me again, since I know that you
stayed a whole month in a Sydney hotel with
that man—that thing, whose own wife has.
been almost starving, while you two have
revelled in abandoned luxury. Why didn’t
you bring the child—his child !—the child ofe
your sin?”
So visiole was his madness developing into
violence that, at this point, a keeper inter-
vened and led him away, while Rita said—
“ Poor fellow ! How cruelly bis wite must
have treated him.”
“Oh I well,” said the guide, “he wasn’t al-
together a saint himself. I’ve heard he kept
a private harem, and disgusted his wife with
his violence towards her and ms beastly ways
v/hen intoxicated.”
The comparatively large number of young-
men and youths incarcerated as hopeless
idiots surprised and shocked both Rita and
Norman. Some had inherited their brain
disease, but many more had acquired it
through early tollies and indulgence. Others*
were even more disgusting, but in ways not
fitted for mention in cold print Three men
who had lost their all in the land boom, and
had gone gently crazy when the crash came,
conversed quite delightfully until a chance
remark brought up the cause of their trouble,
and then their brains went to pieces, and they
cried, raved and cursed the names or those
who had ruined them.
It was especially touching to witness the
antics of grown men whose brains had be-
come unhinged late in life. One imagined
himself a balloon ; another was quite certain
he was a lady’s lap-dog—it was said that he
had had that position in earlier days ; a third
announced himself as the spirit or Shakes-
peare, come to decide the question whether
Hamlet was mad or only pretending, and this*
madman argued that Hamlet was as sane as
himself I Therefore, perhaps the Shakes-
pearean Society will take note that
matter has at last been settled beyond all
discussion. A former country clergyman had
the impression that he was a little boy, and
pranced around the yard with a piece of stick
tor a hobby horse in great glee. An ex-bank
manager, known to everybody who knows
anybody, confided to Rita that he was the
original cat with nine lives, and, purring at
her in the most ludicrous fashion, he said—-
“ Stroke pussy 1 poor pussy I stroke pussy ! n
but when he evinced lurther feline character
istics, and attempted to rub his head against'
her legs, in true cat style, Rita wasn’t taking::
any. Of course, the real maniacs, the poor-
devils with their brains on fire, were not on
view, moat ot them being confined in small,,
cir- ular, leathernpaddeci cells, where their
heated rage could be given vent to without.
danger to themselves or anybody else*>
Several others Rita was not permitted to see,*
as the very sight of a feminine iorm infuriated


ibem to a trightfol extent, when they became
as dangerous as any ocher wild beasts de-
prived of their mates.
* Why, the very sight of a pair of stockings
or woman’s fal-de-rala on a line would be too
much for them/ said the guide
11 1 have heard,” replied Rita, slyly, “that
there arc men iust as easily affected outside
the asylum.”
After chatting awile, Rita, seeing that
Norman was interested in the keeper’s con
versation, mentioned to the latter that she
would like to have a look at the woman’s
•quarters. Just then a warder passed by, and
Rita was handed over to the care of a her-
culean wardress, and the two wended their
way to the female wards. Here, as in the
case of the men. she was struck with the
number of young girls who were confirmed
idiots, some from inherited taints, ahd others
again through tr.fti.oed folly and in.
dulgence in oram-wrecKing
One poor Mttle creature, hardly in her
teens, was pointed out as the victim of a
'horrible assault, which resulted in sending
-her crazy. Another, a finely-formed young
"woman, who had been afflicted with religious
mania, wanted to go and civilize the savages,
and ended by becoming incurably insane!
Her principal belief was, strangely enough!
that God had punished her for not having
become a missionary by turning her into a
dancing devil; and in Rita’s presence she
shortened her skirts to ballet length and
broke out into a wild, giotesque dance, which
brought her splendid limbs into immediate
publicity, finishing up by turning head over
heels in order, as she said, "to kill the devil
by sending the blood into his head.”
There were quite a number of women, of
all sorts and sizes, afflicted with erotic mania,
wnich, Rita was instructed, impelled them to
the grossest acts of indency and the vilest
language at sight of a man. Like many not
adjudged lunatics, they were boiling over
with love-passion, but, otherwise, exhibited
little signs of brain-weakness. Amongst
those were girls who had attempted suicide
through being deserted by their seducers ;
mothers who had murdered fheir infanta in
arms through the madness of milk-fever ;
women whose nerves had been over-strained
in watching by the sick-beds ot their beloved ;
women who had become insane through ex-
cessive drink ; and many others, demented
through different causes, were viewed by
Rita with a sympathetic heart; and the
thought that so many of them were in this
piteous condition through the lust and black-
guardism of man gave her additional pangs.
Probably the most singular patient in this de-
partment was an enormously-fat, heavy
woman, whose great grievance was that she
had not been placed in her proper quarters.
1 Know I am mad,” she confided to Rita,
‘and an asylum is the beat place for me, but
-why should they dress me in women’s clothes
and shove me amongst this crazy lot of
females.”
“ But where else could they put you?” en-
quired Rita.
“Why, with the other men, of course,*
was the prompt reply.
“ Oh 1 then you believe you are a man ? ”
said Rita.
‘‘Of course I’m a man,” she answered.
Why, bless you, I’ve got the dearest wife in
the world at home, and Pm the father of the
prettiest twins you ever saw.”
“ Wed, I never saw a man with such a figure
as that,” said Rita, indicating the patient's
gigantic bosom. “ And surely, if you were a
man,others besides yourself would have found
it out before now.”
“Oh! they know it, but they want to
humiliate me/’ was the reply. “If you don’t
believe me I’ll give you my wife’s address,
and you can ask her. If she assures you that
T an* Via- lanaKajad ajvrl thu rtftddy of those
ntttie oeaunes, you uuc convinced then,
won’t you? I suppose she’d know what sex I
am, eh?”
Rita, seeing that to argue with her would be
to anger her, promised to make the necessary
enquiries, and was turning away smiling at
the tunny idea when a young wardress ran
into the room, and banged trie door to in
great agitation.
, “Oh I” shp cried, “one of the moat vio-
lent male patients has got loose, and he’ll
murder someone before they t-ike him.” .
“Is he coming this way?” asked Rita.
“No, I don’t think he can get this far,”
was the reply. “ But perhaps we can see
him from from this window,” and, mounting
on a cable, they peered through a small
window which looks out on the road by the
woman’s buildings and the resident doctor's
quarters.
In a minute they saw a wild beast in
human form come tearing down the road,
followed by five or six men, amongst whom
was Norman.
One glance was enough for Rita.
“ My God I ” *he said, “ it’s my husband I ”
He seemed to be dashing along without
any definite motive, yelling out inane words,
and glaring with maniacal fury. Suddenly he
stumbled and the foremost warder made a
grab at him, but in a moment he was up
again with a large stone, which he hurled at
his pursuers. Then away he went again, till
he reached a slope leading to the river, when
he turned and faced those who had been fol-
lowing him. A burly warder and Norman
flung themselves upon him, but he wriggled,
kicked, bit and fought with such phrenzied
strength that they could not hold hitrf, and
with a cry of “Til foil you, you fiends of
hell I ” he swung up to an overhanging branch
tree, and standing upright for an instant,
hurled himself down with the plunge of a
diver. Then a fearful scream rent the air f
and for a moment he could be seen squirm-
ing in agony, and’when they ran down to him


they found him dead, with a horrible wound
on the head, and his neck broken ! The
tacts were palpable. Instead of diving into
free and ample depths his head had struck a
large stone barely covered by the water, an i
death must have been almost instantaneous.
He presented a ghastly spectacle as the shal-
low, blood-stained water washed by him, and
it was with a shudder that Norman looked
his last upon an emeny who bad met such a
frightlul fate.
Rita was t< Id that her husband had drowned
himself,the more shocking details being with-
held from her,and all that she could say was—
“ I am sorry ; but, thank God, he had no
chance to harm you, dear boy.” The dead
man had done his best to ruin her and all
that she held dearest so that any more
sympathetic expression / would have been
only unnatural and forced.
On arrival home they found Dulcie busy at
a sewing machine.
11 Hulloa I what are you making?” asked
Norman. ‘'By the shape, they look like—”
“ Oh ! they aint wot you fink,” said Dulcie ;
** they’re bike bloomers, that’s wot they are.”
“ And what in the world are you going to
do with them?” asked Rita.
‘ I’m a goto’ to shove 'em on me Dutch
pegs as soon as they’re ready,” Dulcie said.
Lumme, don’t you know that Stopper's out
of the jug Yuss, he's done 'is monf, an* on
Bonn' Day me an’ 'im's goin' to 'ave a bean-
oh at Briting Beach, that's wot’s the matter
wif yers trool*.”
" But what have bicycle bloomers got to do
with Brighton Beach ? ” queried Rita.
“Ev’ry bloomin' fing,” was the reply,
“ 'cos me an' Stopper's goin’ down on bikes.
See ? ”
And they did that and many other funny
things as you shall presently hear.
CHAPTER XXIV.
AT BRIGHTON BEACH.
Fortunately, this particular Boxing Day was
brilliant with sunshine, and, indeed, by the
time Dulcie had pulled on her bloomers that
morning it was already as hot as most people
care about. Our little friend's cycling cos-
tume, built for this especial occasion, was
undoubtedly a work of art, and reflected the
greatest credit on her skill and taste. Not
having any proper pattern from which to de-
sign the pants, she had mapped them from
certain garments with which she had a much
closer acquaintance, and which are advertised
in the most respectable papers as " knickers.”
Consequently, their style of architecture was
somewhat startling, as they fitted with alarm-
ing tightness at certain prominent portions of
her plump figure, hung somewhat loosely at
other parts, and were drawn in at the knees,
over which hung airy frill-work. On my own
authority, I could not say what the material
was, but the color was and looked
like a blaze of fire when the sun got on it.
The blouse was equally gorgeous, being of m-
bright blue, while the stockings were her*
favorite red and white, and her shoes a lemon
tan. In this attire, crowned by her Cup hat,
with new and much larger feathers in it. I
have no hesitation in saying that Dulcie had i.
no fear of being missed in the crowd. She *
had hired one of the noted “ Gloodfast ” bikes,
and, having gone through the usual bumping
and bruising practise tor the previous two
weeks, had every confidence in her ability to *
do the run to Brighton Beach in safety.
Stopper Speckletottte, newly discharged
from gaol, and bent on having a razzie which
should make up for lost time, also rode a .
“Gloodfast,” with tow racing handles, and
when he and his donah pedalled off down
Nicholson street hill to the city they had no *
difficulty in attracting the attention of all
whom they met or passed. When Dulcie *
really got to work, those fiery legs of hers*,
jigging up and down on her low-geared ma-
chine, were well worth anybody’s notice, and
as she wobbled about in Stopper’s zig-zag
tracks, all over the shop, with her feathers
bobbing above, and her buxom bust heaving
heavily, even the horses shied in wonder*
ment, and the tram men were kept perpetually
jingling their bells in agitated warning.
Stopper bent as tow as possible, and joggled
his shoulders about wildly in emulation of
Jerry McJudkin, the great Coliingwood cycl-
ing champion, who had recently won the five-
mile handicap at the Dog Leg Gully Sports,
and would have won the Austral only that he
happened to be doing two months* at the
time, and so could notenter. Stopper's idea
was that he was a coming Bill Martin, & -
champion of champions, and he had never
had such a fine chance of showing-off before
Dulcie as on this occasion.
“Come on, Dulce,” he shouted ; “ I'll give
you a sprint as far as the rub-a-dub-dub on
the Johnny Horner,” which meant the pub.
on the comer.
“ Slop., I’m wif you,** answered
Dulcie. 11 I'll give you ago for an oh-my-dear,”
otherwise a beer, and away they wobbled.
Perhaps some of you remember your early '
experiences of biking full tear down a hilljr
tram track before you could manage your jigger
as well asyou thought you could. Well,/that was
Stopper's case. He tore away from Dulcie,
with head over handles, body fearfully agi-
tated, and tong legs working energetically.
But as he got properly started down the hill,
his machine took control of the proceedings,
and, utterly disdainful of such a clumsy rider,
carried him along at a pace which snatched
his breath away. He could not guide the
thing, and he could not stop or jump off, and
if ever anybody's hair really stood on end
Stopper's must have done when he took a
scared took ahead and saw that his infernal
bike was whirling him straight for the rear of
a water-cart in full working order. But hit
time for reflection or action was short, for
in a moment his machine had side-siidded 00


~)the wet track, and the boastful Speckletottle
was flung clean under the cart, and fairly
soaked in the spurting water. Duicie, for-
tunately, had started slowly and kept her
<brake on; therefore, she arrived safely enough,
and found her drenched Slopper with a
skinned ear and forehead, wounded hands and
torn.trousers, but, on the whole, much more
sound than anyone would have expected from
the fall he received. The wind was pretty
well knocked out of him, but as Duicie push*
ed through the crowd which surrounded him,
he managed to gasp—
“ I’m cherry ripe, Dolce, old gal. Lucky J
wasn’t goin* at me top bat w*en that bloomin’
cart got in the way,” and Duicie to this day
believes that he was only riding leisurely (for
such a speed king) and wasn’t run away with
at all. The bike had also escaped annihi-
lation miraculously, and after half-an-hour’s
repairs to man and machine at the rub-a-dub-
dub, co>mbined with whisky, Slopper express-
ed <himself as “ Isle o’ Wight,” meaning all
right, and they resumed their journey Bright-
onwards. Evidently Slopper had received a
Wesson from his fall, as hs attempted no more
sprinting exhibitions, and once when Duicie
challenged him to a trial on the Brighton
road, he shook his head, and said, “Not me •
Fm not takin’ ’enny. You can ’ave it on yer
little alone. I feel as if me bloomin’ear’s bin
chewed orf by a ’ungry dorg.”
“ Well, come an* *ave a tiddleyat the fount-
ain/’ said Duicie. “It’s ’ot enuff to fry
spiders, and Fm sweatin’ like a bally bull-pup
in a oven. Blime, if these fancy pants of
mine aint sticking to me like mud to a
'blanket.”
And when she got off the machine to have
the tiddley—which was a shandygaff, by the
way-—she cytainly did look rather comical,
with the cherry red bloomers glued to her
term in spots, her neck streaming *with per-
spiration, and her face red and dirty trgm heat
and dust. But, bless your innocent hearts,
ehe was happy enough. All this trouble and
discomfort was in the day’s enjoyment, and
Duicie, like so many more, would have con-
sidered a holiday a failure unless it made her
as tired as a day’s hard work. At the hotel
they were joined by dozens of friends all bent
on rip-roaring fun, most of them arriving in
carts, vans, lorries and other vehicles of a
similar type. One or two of the lads made
merry over Dulcie s flaming bloomtyrs, and
pinched her legs and dealt hearty snaacks on
other portions of her tempting figure, but
SI upper’s menacing attitude on the one hand,
Ind the jealous anger of their own “Toms”
on the other, prevented them from going as
far as they would have liked at that game.
Finally the beach was reached without further
mishap.
As I presume you already know, Brighton
on Boxing Day is the favored resort of the
elite of Col ling wood, and other equally aris-
tocratic suburbs, and it was in its best fettle
on this occasion. Ail the Mary Anns and
Bridgets who had a day off were there with
their “ boys,” dolled up regardless of expense,
while huge families squatted by the water,
munching boiled mutton sandwiches, liberal-
ly sprinkled with sand, and drinking cold tea
and milk out of ginger bottles and billycans
with immense zest All along the beach
youngsters of either sex frisked in the sea in
the most indelicate state of undress—accord-
ing to several prudish and withered old
maids—and many very full-grown girls, who
in the city would blush to raise their skirts
above the mud, here paddled about with
clothes hoisted and huddled about anyhow,
and exhibiting all the varieties of underwear
in the market But probably the most re-
markable thing about a holiday crowd such
as this is that girls who at other times appear
sadly flat-chested and angular suddenly de-
velop amazingly plump bosoms and rounded
hips. 1 have heard it said that this pecu-
liar change is due to stockings, handker-
chiefs and other articles being judiciously
stuffed beneath blouses and bodices in order
to imitate the desired fullness, but I try hard
not to believe in such a cruel deception.
Duicie’s wonderful costume attracted all
eyes as she wheeled slowly along the parade,
and very audible remarks were passed on her
by virtuous married ladies who were sitting
down gossiping, with their best dresses pinned
up and their pink flannel petticoats making
them look like so many old clothes-baskets.
Younger females, radiant in their 4£d. prints
and bargain sale biouses, turned up their
noses in scorn as they witnessed Dulcie’s dis-
play of her figure, and said—
-11 Wonder she aint ashamed to show her-
self, the bold thing ” —“l’m sure I’d just as
soon come out in me shift’!—“Oh ! she aint
no better’n she ought ter be ” —“ I can’t see
what the fellers can see in such an impident
wretch,” and so on in the usual style of
virtuous damsels who wouldn’t for the world
be the least little bit wicked—in $ crowd.
Of course the great amusement was a
dance, and here again Dulcie was the princi-
pal figure, while Stopper proudly jerked an
accordeon borrowed from a friend. But all
the time he kept one eye on Duicie and what-
ever partner she happened to have, so that
when one of them squeezed her a trifle too
closely, or otherwise showed a desire to mash
her, Slop, would hurl out a warning word,
thus—“ Now, then, Ginger, sling it; no
bloomin’ funny bizness with that tart ”
V Keep yer ’ands orf, Darky ; I aint goin’ to
stand no messin’ about, you know ” — ll Blime,
Sandy, you’ll cop out in art a mo. it you get
pinchin* her Dutch pegs again, take it from
me,” and his known ability as a pugilist pre-
vented trouble. That was during the first
hour or so, but later, as the sun began to have
its effect on them, and the adjournments to
the hotels became more frequent, Slopper
had to “ slouch ” two or three who were .en-
deavoring to pursuade Duicie to go off with
them to secluded spots in the ti-trees and eo


|oy the cool of the shade. The swing-boats.
Aunt Sallies, and merry-go-rounds kept her
in full excitement for some time, and the
sight of her straddle-legged across a wooden
horse, yelling out like agockey in a Cup finish,
and jerking up and down in sheer and reck-
less enjoyment, would have done your eyes
good. ,In fact, so excited became the feelings
of one “ perfect gentleman ” belonging to a
South Melbourne “push,” that he jumped up
behind Dulcie, and, catching her round the
waist, fairly hugged her while the merry-go-
round did a lap or two. Then the machine
stopped, and Slopper got to work with his
clever right, and fairly slogged the rude South
Melbourneite’s face to a jelly.
“ Now, you smoke out of this,” he said to
Dulcie. “I aint goin* to stand no blokes
mauling yer fat about. See?”
“But, 510 p.,” argued Dulcie, “it aint my
bloomin’ fault if a cove gets ratty over roe
shape, and wants to mug me. Lumme. it’s
a bit strong if yer goin* to spoil me fun over a
lark like that”
" Garn ! ” was the jealous one’s retort.
“ When yer out with me you ain’t goin’ to’ave
no larks with other blokes, that’s straight.
Shift yer barrow down the beach, or else
come down and have a darnce.”
But unfortunately for Dulcie she became
sulky, and, having a few more beers than she
could carry comfortably, resolved to show
Slopper that she was no little pug-dog to be
ordered and bullied. So, with a defiant twist
of her body, she turned and left him, and
joined a group of girls and lads who were
larking and drinking down by the water’s
edge. The fellows were chatting the girls,
and trying to induce them to paddle in the
water.
“Come on, now, Mag,” said one lantern-
jawed hero from a Collingwood factory;
“ give yer plates of meat a wash. They’ve
been a bit high since larst Queen’s Birthday.”
“Me feet is orl *sght,* said Mag ; “they
aint like yer socks, wot’d kill at a mile.”
“ You must ’ave warts on yer knees, Lil,”
said another, “so yer frightened to pull up
your duds, an* bathe yer broomsticks/’
* “ That aint it,” chimed in a third fellow,
with streams of tobacco juice down his chin.
“ Lil’s got her brother’s football pants on, an’
she don’t want ua to know it”
Oh 1 they were bright and airy wits, these
gentry, and made the girls giggle and yowl fit
to burst themselves at the funny things they
said. But when Dulcie came up, the lads
fastened to her, and suggested that she should
lead the way into the water.
, “ Yuss, come on, girls,” said Dulcie, plump-
ing down and taking off her shoes and stock-
ings and precious leathers ; “you ought to
ave a wash once a year wevver you want it
or not.”
But all persuasion was of no avail—they
were not the kind to look upon washing as
inn—so Dulcie, turning up her pants at the
knees like a boy, and therefore showing the
prettiest and whitest pair of legs on tbs
beach.paddled In with the gentleman decorat-
ed with the tobacco juice, and proceeded to
splash about in high feather. „In the midst
of her enjoyment she espied Slopper harrying
down the slope with a stride which meant
trouble for somebody, and she had half an
idea that that somebody might be herself.
“ My Sunday troubles on him,” she said to
herself—as she afterwards told Rita—“ he’s a
bloomin’ Noah’s Ark—a fair dead nark to-
day—an’ I’ll show ’im wot I link about ’im.”
In pursuance of this plan, she began to
splash water over her tobaccory companion
playfully, laughing loudly all the time. On
his part, he found it great fun to slap her wet
and naked legs, and by catching her hands
whirl her around, and indulge in other silly
little games which fairly enraged Slooper.
who had reached the water’s edge, and glared
furiously at them,
“ Come out o’ that 1” he yelled. “ By Gob,
I’ll smash the pair of you w’en I get you.”
“Oh 1 go an’ lose yerself,” replied Dulcie.
“I’m full of you an* yer bloomin’ skite,
Yer’ve got beetles in yer arcade, that’s wot’s
up wif you,’ 1 !
Phew ! A raging lion—as seen at the Zoo-
was nothing to Slopper as he heard this
startling and scornful defiance. For about
half a minute the air was thick and foul with
frightful language, then, boots on and all,
he dashed into the water with blood in his
eye. Nobody can run very fast or dodge very
nimbly even in two teet of water, so that be-
fore long he had grabbed the tobaccory in-
dividual and dealt him a blow which seemed
to shift his jaw. Then Slopper went for
Dulcie. Twice she eluded him, but at the
third attempt his long arms wound around
her, and he tried to drag her to the beach.
“Come on,” he cried, as she resisted, “or
s’elp me I’ll smother you.”
But Dulcie was obstinate and wouldn't
come on, and as he went for a tresh hold she
slipped and down they went splashing through
the water, Dulcie underneath and Slopper
spluttering and swearing like fury. Then as
Dulcie would only get up as far as her knees,
he reached for a good hold by which he could
hoist her, grabbed a handful ot cherry red
material, and rip I rip I rip 1! went the stuff,
till as he hauled her upright a remarkably
large section of gleaming white sfcin shone
out in the sun, and roars ot ohs! and rude
laughter notified them that the spectators on
the beach had noticed the mishap and were
enjoying it to the fullest extent.
“ Oh I my Gord, you’ve busted my bloom-
ers,” cried Dulcie. 11 1 can feel the breeae on
me skm. For hevmg’s sake, Slop., carry me
out an’ *ide me, or I’ll drownd meseltV’
And Slop., stunned by the accident, lifted
her up in his strong arms, and carried her so
skilfully that not a soul in the crowd had
another chance of observing the exact extent
of the damage done to her costume.
That was at five o’clock, and for three


tioora Dalcie and Slopper remained amongst
the trees, no longer snarling at each other,
btit gloomy and surly, and when dusk arrived,
and Dalcie had repaired the rent with Slop-
per a white handkerchief and sundry safety
pins, they were observed to sneak out of the
scrub, sorrowfully mount their bikes—Dalcie
being especially careful—and wobble slowly
homewards. It had been a disappointing
day to them, but, after all, thev experienced
nothing half so horrible as had Norman and
Rita in their absence.
CHAPTER XXV
THE TOTTIES’ PICNIC.
After having seen Dulrie and Slopper off
on their bicycles, Rita and Norman put in a
quiet morning at home, ami towards the
afternoon started for a little drive in the
direction of Heidelberg. They chose that
neighborhood in the innocent belief that on
such a hot day other holiday-makers would
patronise the bay beaches, and, consequently,
they would have the peaceful time they de-
sired. But, to their annoyance, they found
Heidelberg road quite gay with vehicles filled
with merry parties of well-dressed men and
women. It was quite evident that something
very especial was on the tapis.
“ Why, my goodness, there's Betty Carmody
and Diamond Kate,’' exclaimed Rita, as a
buggy passed them.
“ Yes,” said Norman, “and there are four
ballet girls and two barmaids in that drag,
with six swell fellows to keep them com-
pany/'
“And I’m sure I saw old Martha and
Madame Rustle, from Lonsdale street, in that
hansom, said Rita. “Why, whatever have
we struck?”
Just then a dog-cart drove alongside of
them, and the cheery voice of Montague Til-
kins, Norman’s second in his fight with Hor-
ace Kindur, hailed Norman.
“Hulloa! old fellow. Coming out to the
picnic? ”
“ What picnic?”
' Why, the Tofcties’ picnic, of course. Don’t
you know that Charley Hardtrost and Jubilee
Jones have invited all the nice girls iq town
to a spree? They’re going to do it up in
style, too ; so you’d better bring the missis
along and have a high old time of it.” And
with a wave of his hand he drove ahead.
Two minutes decided the matter. Norman
did not want to go, but Rita did ; so of course
they went. As they jogged along, Norman
explained that Charley Hardfrost and Jubilee
Jones were two West Australian sports, who
had been lucky both in Coolgardie mining
and in striking the Melbourne Cup winner.
They had for some months been squandering
money on all sorts of so-called pleasures,
principally among gay women, stage girls of
the lower order, and flash barmaids.
“Ohl well, we needn’t join the crowd,” said
Rita, but we can remain apart and stik
watch the tun.”
The picnic was in full fling by the time they
arrived, and certainly it would have been
ham to discover a more noisy and light-
hearted crowd anywhere on that particular
Boxing Day. Hardfrost and Jubilee had been,
wonderfully liberal in their invitations, which,
had included all sorts of Totties in the mar*
i£et, from fashionable harlots and popular
music-hall stars down to pert and pretty
chorus girls, Barmai is were not as well re-
presented as they might have been, in conse-
quence ot a holiday generally being their
busiest time ; but still a lair* 6 sprinkling olr
these festive human beer-pumps rolled up.
Johnnies and would-be Johnnies, actors,
singers, a few bookmakers, and many much-
too-well known men about town provided th#'
masculine element, while there was no sunt
of material for both eating and drinking.
Quite early in the proceedings, it was very
evident that the lydies” were not going to*
allow any foolish notions of propriety to in-
terfere with their day’s fun. When they sat
around on the grass they did not trouble
themselves about huddling their skirts tightly
round their ankles, but just flopped down
anyhow, so that, after a fair amount of drink
had been disposed of, an expert in legs would
have had a fine opportunity of passing his-
judgment on such matters without the slight-
est difficulty. In fact, Dolly Hugbard, from
the private bar of the Mug’s Arras, and Amy
Hottkisa, from the Gaiety Theatre, made-
quite exhibitions of themselves by turning
low branch into a trapt-ze, and performing;
feats on it which most people pnesent had
only seen done by professionals in tights.
Dolly, however, missed her awing on one
occasion, and fell so heavily on her placket
that she had to be carted into a tent and
rubbed down with whiskey before she could
even stand again.
One of the most interesting events was a
bike race between several plump and pleasing
lottiea around a rough and rocky track. The
prize was £2, the only condition being that
each girl should ride a man’s jigger. We have
all long since become accustomed to seeing,
lady cyciists in appropriate costumes and
oa proper bikes, but I fancy that the spectacle
of a dozen females mourned on men’s
machines ahd with their ordinary skirts and.
petticoats on must have been something out
of the common run. But, bless you, they
didn’t care. Some of them were ballet girls,
and, therefore, thoroughly used to exposing
their legs to crowds ot men each night, and
on this occasion the £2 was the item of inter-
est to them, many of them never having got
that much per week—as wages. Space for-
bids a detailed description of this race, which
—on account of its novelty, I suppose—at-
tracted immense interest amongst the men.
Betting was freely indulged in, and as the
contest proceeded one could hear the im-
promptu bookies crying, “Two to one on Pin^


Stockings, six to four the Red Garters, twenty
Jo one against Frills/* and soon, the riders
being indicated by whatever distinctive mark
happened to strike the eye of the spectator.
Following were the results :
Irene —Fight large and angry
bruises, mostly where she*d have great diffi-
culty in looking after them,
Amy Hottkiss—lncapacitated from praying,
owing to bashed knees.
Florrie Fewclos—Jagged left ear, and
wrecked time-payment set of teeth.
Lily Longpega—No definite details, as Lily
blushingly declined to state exactly where
she suffered moat.
Gladys Octavia—Gashed knee-cap, and
pained feeling in the region of the corset.
Hilda Hughard—'Ten inches of calf-skin
missing; sprained voice; temper completely
gone.
Fannie Shortsox—Swelled head, and tired
teeling from sitting down suddenly before she
was ready.
Jennie Splitchin —Very bad language, and
dislocated eye-lid. Doctor declared she
would not be able to wink for a month.
The prize was awarded to Mossy Maude, of
Lonsdale street, who had the advantage of
riding without skirt or petticoats.
Barely had the excitement over this com-
petition subsided, when the sounds of femi-
nine voices raised high in dispute at-
tracted the crowd to a gathering of women
around one of the luncheon tables. A dis-
cussion had arisen on the interesting subject
of man, and how to mash him, the principal
speaker being Flossie Grove, whose ample
form filled a chair just about as full as it
could hold. * Flossie was a woman who had
great ideas on social style, and she had come
to this picnic determined to show that she
knew how to dress appropriately for such an
occasion. Therefore, she had attired herself
in a pale violet-color costume, cut half-mast
high, with off-the-shoulder sleeves, and car-
ried a bouquet which she handled like a
boxing glove, while all her jewellery consisted
of two very brunette freckles on her billowy
bosom, and her well-known vaccination
mark.
As Rita drew near, Flossie, who had
known her at Auntie's, said—“Oh, here’s Miss
Delorme; she ought to be able to tell us
something interesting about the men,**
Rita, however, replied that she always felt
timid in discussing men in front of girls who
knew so much more about them than she
did.
“When did yon first feel timid with the
men!” asked Flossie, with a sneer.
“About twenty years ago, dear.” replied
Rita, promptly, “ when you first began to be
free with them/’ and the crowd agreed that
Rata had scored.
“Oh !of course,” said Flossie, angrily, “you
pretend to be very modest. But what would
we all be but for man, mighty man, the con-
Joioff whose magic wand brings Joy and
happiness to so many womanly hearts
Flossie quite imagined she waa a born orator
— ll whose influence ia alike powerful for evil
and good. What would we be without him.
Fd like to know f * # #
**old maids/’ came the answer from Rita
who, it may be remarked, had been refreshing
herself with iced champagne.
“You , ll be one, in any case," exclaimed
Flossie.
•‘And you won’t be one, in any case,” re-
torted Rita; and for some reason or other it
was felt that Flossie had again got the worst
of it
“Lydies, lydiss, give me a chance,” cried
Flossie, who waa fast being worked up into
a fury. ‘‘Let me see—where was I? Ah t
yes—l bad left off—”
“ If you had left off much more it wouldn't
have taken yon a minute to drees,” interposed
Rita, pointing to Flossie’s expanse of bosom,
‘and if you had left off all you have put on
your face you’d have saved a lot in paint.”
At this Flossie fairly snorted, and, jumping
up, dealt Rita a stinging box on the eat\
which brought tears of pain to her eyes. In
an instant everybody was in commotion.
Rita a temper was roused to its worst, and a*
she stood there biasing her beautiful eyes at
Flossie she looked the loveliest young demon
imaginable. Then, with one long stride, shf
reached Flossie* grabbed her by the low-cuo
dress and tore away a yard of stuff, thereby
bringing the bosom into even more publicity.
With her teeth set and her breath going
hard with passion, she swung Flossie around
furiously, and then, as I am a living man,
shot out her clenched right nand as sure and
straight as a female Tic* Hegartyj, and
knocked Flossie spinning against the frail
table, which gave way under the shock and
went down with a deafening clatter of
crockery and glassware,
“By thunder I she*!! kill you,” said Amy
Hottkias to Rita. “Why, Flossie can use
her hands like a man. Joe Choyinski taught
her, and he said he’d back her against any
woman in Melbourne,”
“ I don't care if fifty Joe Choyinakis taught
her,” said Rita. “ I’ll knock her big, tat
chest in if she interferes with me again.”
By this time willing hands had pulled
Flossie up and poured a nobbier of wine into
her. Thus refreshed, she yelled out—
“ Make a ring, or, by the Lord, I’ll skin her
alive.
Somebody else knew of a set of gloves at a
hotel just down the road, and these, having
been procured, all preparations for a regular
set to were arranged, and the two women
faced each other in true boxing style.
Flossie, plump and sturdy, was stripp* I to
the waist, and also had her skirt off; waile
Rita, tall, perfectly formed and supple,
had merely discarded her stays and blouse,
and pinned her skirt up. Flossie was much
the elder d the two, and really did know a
good deal of the soisaoe of boxmg, Rua’s


knowledge having only been gained in a few
bouta .with Norman jut for fan. She had
never fought in this way for keeps, while
Flossie had several acalpa to her record.
Probably that made Flossie much too con-
fident, for at the signal she immediately got
to close range and peppered Rita with half-
arm blows which lacked force and conse-
quently. did no damage. Rita hit more like a
woman, in a round-arm and somewhat wild
style, but when she did land on her antago-
nist that "lydy* realised what strength was
in this long-armed, lithe beauty. Alter the
first round both were somewhat scant of
breath, but more champagne brought them
cap all right at the sound of the gong—two
bottles clashed together—and Flossie put in
work, repeatedly getting home on Rita’s
chest and cheek, and finishing up with a tap
on the nose which brought blood. But, in-
stead of dismaying her, the sight of the red
stuff merely made Rita more determined, and
as they faced each other for the third round
it could be clearly seen that she was on her
mettle. Noticing that Flossie was puffing
painfully, she adroitly kept out of range of
that short person’s clever left, and. assisted
by her much longer reach, succeeded in
planting several remarkably heavy blows on
her opponent’s massive bosom, until Flossie
was gasping like a stranded fish. Then,
rushing in, she twined one arm round
Flossie’s neck, and, having !her thus in chan-
cery, pounded away till the fat one’s face was
..■a mass of blood. Up to this stage the fight-
ing had been carried on fairty, in accordance
with prize-ring rules, but now Flossie resorted
to true feminine tactics, and, seizing Rita’s
long golden hair, which had come down,
tugged away till Rita actually screamed, and
in trying to escape fell, and bringing Flossie
down with her and underneath, got astride of
her and smashed the glove on to her face un-
til she was dragged off by Norman, who had
been asleep under a tree, and, consequently,
had been out of the fun until then.
Flossie was carried away to a tent senseless,
while Rita was taken to the river by Norman
to cool off and he washed down. She had
sustained no very serious injury, but pos-
sessed a beautiful eye. which threatened to be
as black as the ace* of spades ; a swollen lip
and nose; a nasty wound on her chest where
Flossie had bitten her in the final struggle,
clothes wofully torn.
But half-an-hour’s repairing set her up
fairly bright, and they prepared to return
home in the buggy, when they saw an excited
fat, old woman running away from a crowd
<of half-drunken Totties. A glance showed
that the frightened fugitive was the notorious
hag, Madame Rustle.
“Ach,” she cried to Norman, " take me oop
In your buggy. •’ Dose tarn girls vill kill me
if dey vos catch me.”
But Norman preferred not to interfere, and
in two minutes more than a dozen lusty bar-
dots bad surrounded the scared woman*
M Ach t mein GottJ vet yon ▼ant vid me?'
she stammered. 11 Hof I not been goot to
you, Norah and Minnie, so vy vas yon vant to
make drouble t”
“ Gam, yon old cow,” one replied. “ You’ve
just told everybody that Minnie bilked a swell
of a watch and chain and fifty bloomin’ quid
last night, and we know yon made him boozed
and collared the stuff yourself. Come on,
girls, let’s duck the old devil," and in less
time than it tafces to tell it, half a dozen of
them had seized Madame, and half carried,
half dragged her to the water, where, despite
her shrieks, they fairly flung her in. How
she got out Norman did not know, as he was
anxious to get away from such a gang, and
drove home as fast as possible, feeling that
he had had enough adventures to last him a
life time. But there was a fresh one in store
for him almost immediately.
CHAPTER XXVI.
A LARRIKIN WEDDING.
1“ There’s goin' to be stacks of fan down the
Id of wheat next Toosd’y," said Dulcie to
ta and Norman, one evening, “an* I flnk
u two’d enjoy yeraelves up to the knocker
you wos to go wif me an* Slop.”
“ And what is the fun, and where is the
■ld of wheat?” asked Norman.
“W’y, a bloke an’ a tart’s goin’ to be
diced,” replied Dulcie ; “ that’s the fun, and
le field of wheat is Derby street, off Smiff
,reet. There’ll be darncin’, an’ as much
xwse-juice as you like. You two’s bin
loultin’ a bit lately, I notice, an’ ’ere’s yer
larnce to ’ave a shine time of it.”
“Oh 1 but they mightn’t want us,” said
ita. “They don’t care about people not in
reir own class.”
" Well, tog yerselves up in proper clobber,
ud don’t put on too many bloomin’ airs, and
ou’ll be cherry ripe,” said Dulcie; and as
lita declared it would be “simply lovely,”
ad Norman did not mind what he did so
mg as he pleased her, they agreed to accom-
any Dulcie.
Rita dressed for the occasion as she would
lave done for a fancy-dress ball, and certainly
ooked as fetching a " tart ” as yon could see
n all Collingwood. Her front hair was
Mastered over her forehead like the true
‘gorblime ” type of Smith street fringe ; she
lad a plaited tail hanging down her back ;
aer blouse and skirt were almost as loud as
Dulcie’s, and she showed enough of her neat
legs in green and white stockings to meric the
admiration of even Slopper-hinaealt Norman,
too, was attired with equal appropriateness,
with soft felt hat, bell-bottomed pants, no
collar, thin, red neck tie, and all the other
accoutrements of a “ lad ” of the real “ push ”
character. ■ ,
" Wot oh, blokey,” said Rita, when ready
for starting, “’ave a bloomin’ cook at ma
Am I rye-buck t ”
“Yuss,” he replied, with ah equally fail


imitation of the larrikin style, u Tar an* otl
iright bit o* skirt, yer are. An' there atst no
bloomin’ flies on yers trooly* either. 91
who wm eyeing them intently, rang
oot a merry peal of laughter at their laudable
to act their assumed parts natur-
ally, and said—
Lumme, yer orl right, yon two* ocry I
never seen slch a beeyoutifal t&ri as Rita.
W y , 'arf the blokes'll be fair ratty over *er,
She’ll be the rortiest bloomin’ Torn in the
whole push. Bat you’ll r ave to change yer
inonnikers.”
"Why, what’s the matter with mine? 99
asked Norman; "they’re bell-bottomed
enough, surely, and Rita isn’t going to show
tiers ”
"Oh 1 I don’t mean yer pants, 9 ' said Dulcie,
*’ but yer names. You’ll be Toff Mills, from
•t'ort Melbourne, and Rita’ll be Doll Saunders.
But, say, Toff, W’a the bird-lime! It must
be settin’ late.”
“ The bird-lime?” queried Norman,
“ Yuss. Well, yer a eronk kind of lad not
to know wot the bird-lime means.” said Dul-
de. “Wot’s the time! if that’ll salt you
better.” &
"Oh! I see. It's just half-past seven,”
answered Norman.
"Then we’d better swim out. cos we've got
to meet Slop., an’ be there at eight,” respond-
<eu Dulcie, and, without further delay, they
■departed.
The wedding itself was quite the least im-
portant feature of the proceedings, and tool?
place in a front room before a select
dozen or so. It seemed to be an average op-
eration. The bridegroom, Andy Skinner
was an uneasy-eyed, gloomy young fellow*
with a lurching gait and a slouching mouth.
A mouth like that with a grin about it would
/give one a human idea of hell, but on this oc-
casion there was apparently nothing to grin
at. It was a matter of stern necessity, this
marriage, for the ghrl had loved him not
wisely but very much too much, and his em-
ployer had threatened to discharge him unless
he did the “ honest” thing. The other party
was eyelaahless, and lean oi cheek. She was
weeping in a humble, penitent way, as though
she wept excuses for giving the others so
tmuch trouble. It is not nice to see an eye-
lashless woman crying. It reminds you of
biood dripping from a sheep’s carcase.
Plainly, it was an effort for this girl to get
married. It even seemed to distress her
clothes, wmch hung about her in a limp, un-
coil rh way that gave bar angular form a moat
awkward appearance—considering her con-
dition. otte was 1 seconded ” by a young
girl who whimpered in a sufficiently bumble
and apologetic manner to denote S' close re-
lationship to the bride, who was. in fact, her
sister. &
ihere is not much time or sentiment waat-
ea over an affair like this. The parson went
tbroaga his jargon at his beat speed, and the
mug was placed on the wartr third finger of
the new Mr a, Skinner* Then the signature#
wereaffixed, savagely by the man, apologetic*
at *y by the sisters, professionally by the par*
son. and the gi hues * handed over to the
bride, and the transaction was completed.
A prosaic, ugly, painful wedding, but hide*
ossry common*
ihe after proceedings were the work of
x*nay g mother, who had determined to cele-
orate her sor/s marriage in style, and show
i>erby street that she knew what waa fitting
for such an auspicious occasion. Therefore,
a large hay loft at the back of the house had
been cleared out for dancing. You went down
a ladder to the harness room for refresh*
ments just as you go down the grand stair#
at CTipvernment House—and the whole place
was brilliant with lamps.
, b,ita attracted a good deal of attention as
sne approached the ladder to ascend to the
ball room, hut she attracted a good deal more
w f 3ho started to climb dem golden
stairs, for, be it remembered, she wore short
ssirts and very gay stockings, and possessed
quite the finest pair ot legs possible to con-
ceive. Consequently, the artiul fellows who 1
nad stationed themselves at the foot of the
ladder, under the transparent pretence of
having a smoke, grinned delightedly as they
noticed'how carefully she attempted to avoid
embarassing disclosures—and failed.
1 Blow me,” one gentleman remarked* 11 1
amt seen nothin’ like them Dutches at no
bloomin’ theaytre. ,,
M oath I” returned a companion,
they re fair nppin’. Dulce ’as a orl right
pair of er own, but, lumme, they’re only bil-
liard cues alongside that other Tom’s.”
By thunder ! I’d like to be ’ere w’en she
comes down, said a third, and various other
complimentary allusions proved that Rita
bad at last made a decided hit in select
society.
Presently the bridal party entered, and im-
mediately the band, consisting of an accord-
eon and a mouth-organ, struck up “ I ainfe
a ’ s< nPu to ” an( * a 8 an encore “Oh I sir,
you il nave to marry me now.’* and then the
nm commenced to flow. Both Norman and
Kita entered into the spirit of the scene as
though it was the greatest treat they had ever
had in their lives. Even the novel expe-
rience of her partners spitting streams of to-
bacco juice over her shoulder during a
waltz was borne with cheerfulness by Rita,
or DoL, as she was known ; and the strong
odor Oi cheap hair oil and fried onion breath
which was wafted up Norman’s nostrils from
various donahs he danced with failed to de-
press his spirits.
“ s *y. Doll,” said one fellow to Rita, “aint
I seen yer chevy chase somew’ere afore? ’
Me face ! ” rejoined Rita. “ I dunao, but
1 ve ad it wia me a long time now, an ? I’ve
** *° a many places/’
F re> non , e of yer aKagia* orf,” he said*
alluding to her sarcastic tone, # * Straight
wire, oow, didn’t you use to pal up wid Sailo#


Rnggleg, wot got nix moons Id? stabbin* a
bloke?”
“ Not me,” replied Rita; “yer’ve ran agan
a snag.”
“ Weil,” he continued, M wus you ever bar-
maid at the,Hit or Miss, over South?” (Mel-
bourne.)
“ Wrong again, cocky,” she answered; ,J yer
clean orf the track,”
“Well, blime, I’ve seen you some bloomin’
w ere,” he persisted. “ I'd know that dial o'
yers enny w’ere. Wot price you'n me hookin'
up together, eh ? Tve got a good collar down
at Sawkina’ boot factory, an’ never make
iess’n two quid a week.”
“Wot! you want to splice me?” queried
Rita, highly amused. *
“Not mei” he said, emphaticallyno
bloomin’ splicin’ for me. I aint that k ind of
a mug. Bat there aint no need of wot the
toffs call lorful marridge, We could hook on
till we wus chock of each other, an* then
sling it.”
“ You aint got no possible wid me,” said
Rita. “ Taint no bloomin’ moll, you know.”
“ Well, don't get wet,” he urged. “Come
up to the gallery at Rickards' wid me on
Sat'day night, an' we'll see ’ow we get on ”
“Not good enough,” Rita declared. “ W’y
my bloke'd stiffen me if 'e *eard I wus goin'
to the play wid another bloke. See ? ”
“Weil, I'll tell you wot,” said this very per-
sistent admirer, “ let's go down tor a tiddley,
then we can slip away round by the stable
an* ’ave a quiet little yap (ch&t) widout yer
bloke knowin'.”
“Dicken f” retorted Rita. “W'y, you
must think I’ve jest come down in the larst
shower. Not me; I'm not such a bally mug
as orl that,” and, disgusted at his language
and manner, she left him without ceremony.
Just at that instant Teddy the Nut mounted
a chair, held up his hand for attention, and
said—“Lydiea and gents,—l aint much on
chin music, but I've bin arsked to sy that
Some blokes 'as pot up the splosh for a pre-
sent to Mister and Missus Andy Skinner, an'
we 'opes it'il prove useful to’em. Trot it
out, Shorty.”
Then, amidst loud explosions of laughter
and many coarse jests, Shorty wheeled into
the centra of the room a brand new peram-
bulator, and left it in front of the humble and
eyeiaahless Mrs. Andy. Probably the matter
was merely meant as a bit of fun, and not a
studied insult to the poor girl, but, neverthe-
less, it made her wince painfully and burst
into tears. On the other hand, it drove the
morose Andy into a lit of rage—not from
sympathy with his wife, but because he felt
that it “showed him up,” and in a minute
he had Teddy on the floor and was pounding
*s.m as hard as he could hit He made short
work of the Nut, and then turned to find
Rita endeavoring to console his wife.
% is Ere, you leave my missus alone, 5 he
growled ; “ she don't want none of yer sort
tnessin’ about 'er,”
# * Good gracious !’* said Rita, fofgettinf her
assumed character, M you needn 9 * get angry
with me. I was only attempting to soothe
the poor girl/'
81 Was yer ?” he sneered. 14 Wall, she don’i
want none of yer sootherin’. Clear to J ell
outer this.’’
‘'Don’t be so narsty,” sobbed his wife*
14 She aint mean in’ no barm, Andy/ 9
“Shat yer bloomin’ jor,” the brute said,,
“or I’ll give yer somethin’ to blab over,”
“Oh ! don’t get yer shirt out, Andy,* the-
poor thing had just managed to stammer,
when with a tearful oath he struck her with
his open hand a hard, craei blow on the
cheek.
“Take that, yer swine, and don’t give me
no back talk.” be roared. Instantly, Rita,
bred witb indignation, exclaimed—
“ You cowardly hound, you deserve to be*
flogged to death.”
“Gam I’ 9 he commenced, “1*1! smash yer
bloomin’—” when amidst cries of “Shame I M
—“ Brute ! “ Cow 1 “ Hog 1 “ Let ua^
deal wid ’im!”—and other threatening ex-
clamations, every girl in the room, excepting
Rita, rushed the cur, and energetically at-
tacked him. . Not being fine ladies, but hard-
working girls, who had led hard lives, they
just sailed in with hands and feet,
of propriety, and, in five minutes, what with
scratches, kicks, bites and blows from ging-
hams, Andy Skinner received the roughest
mauling he had ever bad in his life, or had *
ever deserved. Certainly, he managed to
damage two or three of his opponents, bat
the numbers were against him, and they
finished up by literally throwing him down
the ladder. Unfortunately for him, he land-
ed on top of Rita’s persistent admirer, and
that gentleman having, just enough Colling-
wood whisky in him to make him unpleas-
antly aggressive, promptly pummelled him
until he was carted into the house as sense-
less as a stone jug.
Naturally, this broke up the party, and
Norman —who, with the other men, had stood
by to assist the girls if required—and Rita
were preparing to leave when blooper rushed
up, and said, “Enny of you seen Dulce? She
slipped me up arf a hour ago, an’ I aint seen
her since.”
“I seen ’er ’avia 9 a tiddiey downstairs wid
Sandy Smiff,” replied someone, “an ? she aint
never come up ’ere again.”
Slopper wasted no words, but in the twink-
ling of an eye had slipped down the ladder,
and into the harness, or refreshment, room.
But no Duicie was visible, and, strangely
enough, no Sandy Smiff. Slop swore mighty
oaths as to what he would do when he found
them. Then, seizing a lamp, he went around
the yard peering into dark corners of the
stables, and shouting now and again, “Come
out o’ that, you two ; I can see yer ; ” bat as
he couldn’t see them, and they did not come
out, he only became more furious at each
failure.


At length Norman, who helped in the
search m order to protect Dulcie from Slop-
per’ 8 vengeance when she was discovered,
said, peering into a dingy loose-box, “Fetch
the light here, Speckietottle; I laacy I see
something belonging to Dulcie. f ’
*And when the light was brought, and ex-
• ammation duly made, it turned out that Nor-
soan was perfectly correct—he had seen some-
thing belonging to Dulcie, and that some-
thing wag an extremely pretty foot and plump
leg sticking out from a heap of straw in the
loose box. Slop, recognised the plump leg
in an instant, and with another mighty oath
exclaimed—
-11 This means stoush for two. right enuff.
Come on out of that, you devils, yer game's
Up, H and seising hold of the protruding leg
fairly hauled Dulcie out by her Dutch. And
what a Dulcie I Drunk, speechless, straw
sticking all over her, and clothes bunched
about her in the most ungraceful—and dis-
graceful—fashion.
5 ‘ Now, then, for Sandy” said Slopper.
“You look after her, an 5 1*11 deal wid the
biokey ; ” but, though the straw was tumbled
about to its last stick, Sandy Smith, luckily
for hi rase! t, did not come to light. Further-
more, after Dulcie had been doused under
the tap till something like sobriety was re-
stored, it was elicited that she h&d never
been with Sandy at all, but that, having had
100 many tiddlies with a pal of hers, Polka
Foil, she had sought the seclusion of the
straw above, and slept the sleep of those who
take more drink than they can hold without
spilling some.
As they drove home in a cab, Rita express-
ed her disappointment by s&jing to Norman—
!l Our pleasure is always being spoilt by
something or other, isn’t it! For the future,
we had better stay at home like hermits,”
“ Well, I can’fc.promise that,” he replied,
■ s as Slopper is going to take me round the
Cbihese lottery shops to-morrow night”
And it happened that to-morrow night
proved to be particularly exciting.
CHAPTER XXVII.
CHINESE LOTTERY SHOPS.
It is somewhat amusing to reflect that,
while preachers vehemently pound pulpits
and exhort their dearly-beloved brethren to
ponder over the awful iniquities of race-
course gambling, and keep off the grass, so to
speak, they say little or nothing about the
horrors surrounding the Chinese lottery shops
of Melbourne. And yet there is mote dirt,
evH, and general foulness in the atmosphere
of Little Bourke street and its alley ways
than in any other given section of the city.
Certainly, many reforms have been effected
in this nauseous neighborhood, but until
every Chinese gambling shop is permanently
closed we are not going to take the trouble
of congratulating the authorities ou their
As the evening on whim Norman and Slop
per toured this quarter was not a Saturday,
they did not see Ghowtown at its, absolute
worst, but, nevertheless, they managed to ob-
serve enough to make Norman, at least, won-
der why such a plague spot was allowed to
exist in the centre of so noble a metropolis.
The heads of the police department have al-
ways contended that there are insurmount-
able difficulties in the way of procuring evi-
dence sufficient to convict the Chow lottery
bankers; but, considering the ease with
which strangers can gamble in any one of
scores of shoos, it certainly does seem to the
outsider that ordinary intelligence and energy
properly and promptly exercised coaid sweep
aside all alleged obstacles and remove the
lottery evil from the face of this fair city.
Norman put this view of the case to Slop-
per, whereupon the latter, with the larrikin’s
supreme contempt for the Chow, said—
“ W*y, strike me fat, if 1 couldn't get a push
of pebs from Fitzroy wot ’d clean ev’ry
bloomin’ yeller dorg outer Lilly Bourke as
easy as failin’ orf a roof.”
Of course that was skite, but if ever a place
wanted cleaning out it was that same Little
Bourke street. Norman followed Slopper in-
to dozens of horrible hovels crowded with
the scum of the white and yellow races ; and
although he was no kid-gloved young man,
ready to faint at an ordinary bad smell, the
fearful stench through which he bad to battle
in stye after stye was the strongest thing of
the kind he had ever experienced.
“Howon earth do all the wretched women
and girls here stand this kind of thing ?” be
ftsk^d
“Stand it I” exclaimed Slopper, 11 w’y, it’s
all pie to them. As long as they can get
their whack of opium they never trouble
their blocks about the bally stinks. Oh I
they're red ’ot, I can tell yer. , There’s donahs
an' 'aybagg livin’ amongst the Ghows wot
don’t go outside Lilly Bourke from one end of
the year till t'other. W'y, s’eip me, Po’ka
Poll’s old woman lived in one of them kipaies
for seven year, 'an never west furder than
the pub on the Johnny Horner in orl that
time. An’ she aint the on’y one, take It from
me. Some of ’em don’t seem never to eat.
drink, wash or walk, but jest lay aroan*
smokin’ opium till they rot an’ die. By fiord,
yer couldn’t kid me at it. I’d sooner toss in
me marble right off the reel than stay dead
for the rest of me life like they do."
“Weil, I s m glad to see that you appreciate
the wretchedness and e’nl of it ail,” said
Norman. ,
“Mel” ejaculated Speckle to ttle. “ Well,
Pve got ail sorts of reasons to preachiate it,
considerin’ as ’ow me old man done in orl ’in
splosh with the Chows ev’ry week, and then
finished up by cuttin’ ’is throat *eos he didn’t
have a bean to buy opium with. Bui ’ere’s a
bank, Mister Norman, so if you want to set
the game, ’ere-g yer obamce. 0
The M bank * was a missr*b*F small room,


with a cheap counter, a bench at two, and
walls pasted with lottery tickets. JBshlnd
the counter were two ugly, moon-eyed Chinese,
while the bank’s clients comprised larrikins,
weii-dressed young men who looked like
clerks, Jactors of the inferior order, stage
hands and working men. Slopper initiated
Norman into the method of the business,
which, as I am afraid too many of you know s
is simplicity itself. To those not familiar
with the process, it may be explained that for
sixpence or a shilling you buy a small paper
ticket marked off into eighty squares, each of
which bears a Chinese character. Then with
brush and ink you mark off any ten of the
eighty squares you may fancy, and deposit the
ticket with the banker, who gives you a dupli-
cate. The bank also has a ticket with
twenty squares marked off, so that when
the bank is drawn, if five, six, seven, eight,
nine or ten of your marks correspond with a
similar number of marks on the bank's tick-
et. yon receive a proportionate prize, but
nothing at all for one mark, or for two, three,
or four marks. The highest prizes are : Ten
marks, £75; nine marks, £35; eight marks,
£3l ; seven marks, £3 15a. ; six marks, 9s. ;
and five marks, Is. Probably its attractive-
ness lies in its very simplicity, for the game
can be played by any tool—as you may see
every day. *But the chances against you—pre-
suming you to be tbe fool—striking a ,y one
of the prizes—even the six marks—are simply
enormous, in fact, well nigh incalculable,
&ad I do not intend to strain mv mathemati-
cal brain just to give you the exact figures.
Men have played the game all the year round
and never struck an eight-mark prize, while
mne and ten marks, although of course occa-
sionally recorded, are as few and far between
as the proverbial angels’ visits. There are
also what are known as £l2O banks, in which
of course the prizes are smaller, and the tick-
et costs only sixpence. But it is the sixpen-
ny ticket which leads hundreds of men and
mere boys to ruin. The sum is so absurdly
small and the gamble so easy that the begin-
ner marks a ticket just for the fun of tbe
thing. Then he loses and marks another, or
he wing a small prize, and so ia encouraged to
try again, until the gambling habit grows on
him, and every spare sixpence be has, or
which h© does not think his employer will
misa, goes into the capacious maw of the pig-
tailed bankers.
That is all bad enough, but. not by any
means the worst. To gamble at this game
at ail he must frequent the most horrible of
little dens, and as he often has to wait some
hours till the bank is drawn and the fate of
the ticket known, he can hardly avoid coming
into contact with the lowest female and male
vermin of the city, and so gradually descend
to the blackest depths of degradation. The
majority of the Chows about these places are
a very inferior order of beast, and thrive on ail
manner of immorality, so that the young
fellow who desires to be thought a dashing,
I lowing lass dbqart .tew dpftr a vsrf
ort ate© .tel gd front forking a ticket tc*
irding with .the most loathsome niriotg, ib--
lining in opium-smoking and spending days
id nights in evil eabins peeking With every
iscription of viieaesi. There ate men living
aongst the Chows who started their down-
ed career at a sixpeny lottery bank in a
ere spirit of cariosity, and to-day are simply
recks of their former bright manhood—
awiing, diseased wretches whose lives are
ing out in daily misery.
The lottery shops are as open to the public
are any other places of business, but
irious other gambling games, such as tan-
n, pak-ah-pu, and others, in which demi-
ses, dice or cards are used, are carried on
ther more secretly, and do not attract so
any palefaces as yellow devils. Still, a
operiy-organiaed police raid on these rooms
ould land a big shoal of white men, from
leged “toffs ” to “gangland working men.
tirthermore, in the dens devoted to fan-tan,
ik-ah-pu and leong sam, one rule is to shift
om room to room every few hours each
ght, and another is that all women are
porously prohibited. All the same, it is not
> very long ago since an ex-detective was-
■covered in one of the fan-tan rooms with a
ncy female in what the divorce courts call
a compromising position,“ and he had
ther a hot time with the irate Chows.
Bat all this while perhaps you will be won-
ting what the deuce Norman and Slopper
ive been doing. Well, mostly they were
ivmg several drinks, and diving up dirty
airs into dirtier rooms, resolved to see as
uch of slum life as they could. It was all
ore shocking than interesting, but nobody
tempted to molest them, and Norman had
quite made up his mind that he would get
through this night without an adventure.
However, towards midnight they found
themselves in a network of slimy lanes be-
tween Little Bourke and S Lonsdale streets,
and from the upper window of a ramshackle
tenement Norman was startled to hear ©
feminine voice utter his name, and say— M
“ Push that door open, and come up. 1
want to tell you something about Rita.”
The magic of that name was enough fat
him, and without questioning ha opened the
door.
“Don'tbe a bloomin' chump,” said Stopper,
“or you'll be tannin’ agen a snag.” ’
“Oh ! if she knows Rita it's ail right,” rs«
plied Norman. u Yon stay here, and if I
want you I'll whistle.”
** Rye-oh,” said Siopper, indifferently. 14 If
there's enny stoush about I'm yer mutton."
Thereupon, Norman groped his way up the
little, creaking stairs and presently found
himself in an almost bare room, lighted by a
common stable lamp, and tenanted only by a
young girl whom he recognised a a one of tke
Lingerie sisters who had been engaged at Ibe
Frivolity Theatre at the same time m Hits
and Daicie. Her onoe bright features saw


looked dissipated and evil g and the gay short
skirts of the smart little dancer were replaced
by a dirty, loose garment sufficiently scanty
to show a fat but dabby bosom and a con-
siderable amount of fat and dirty leg, Nor-
man stared at her in amazement, and said—
“ Well- what do yon want to tell me about
Rita f
“Oh I that was only a bluff,*’ she an-
swered, laughing. 11 1 saw you and another
fellow poking about Sam Ling’s shop about
an hour ago, so when I spotted you just now
I thought you were on the raazle and might
like to have a chat with me.” *
“ Weil, it*i like your confounded cheek,”
he said* turning to go. “ What do you think
l’d s m in you to make me want to chat with
you I”
“Don’t get your hair off,” she responded.
•* You aint Lord Muck, you know. Give us a
couple of bob before you go, anyway/'*
“Not a penny,” he said. “L wouldn’t be
found dead in the same paddock with you,”
and be went to open the door, when in scuf-
fled a sturdy, middle-aged Chow.
“Wha’ fo 1 you got cUmn fella here?*’ he
said angrily to the girl. “You damn cow,
me killee you. You takee my money ; me
keepee you ; you gee other fella; you damn
piostitute, no damn good. Wha’ fo’?—wha*
To’ ?” and before Nbrraan could interpose he
whipped a carving knife from bis belt and
struck the girl to the floor with a wounded
shoulder. Instantly, Norman seized a stool
and hurled it at the yellow fiend, and then
rushed in and pinned him against the wail,
clutching his wrist so that he could not use
the knife again. So for a minute or two
they struggled, till Norman, fearing that his
slit-eyed antagonist would get tree and stab
him. yelled out for Siopper, and in a minute
that worthy was in the room, and catching
the Chinaman by the throat half throttled
him, while Norman screwed his wrist till he
was forced to drop the knife.
“Now, stand by,” said Siopper, “an* see
me deal out stoush to ’im,” and be proceeded
to deal it out with a liberality which covered
the wall with Chinese blood. With a final
powerful blow he knocked the Chow sense-
less, just as the girl scrambled up and
stumbled out of the door.
“She’s gone for ’er push,” said Siopper,
noticing her disappearance. “ There’ll be
too many for os to bash, so we’d better do a
guy.”
“But surely she wouldn t help the China-
man after the brutal way be has treated her,”
Norman remarked,
“ Oh 1 you don’t know these donahs,” Stop-
per replied. When they get dead shook on
a Chow they’d stick to ’im even if he cut
their bloomin’ livers cut Come on ; it ain’t
much of a drop from the red ot cinder,” and
followed by Norman he scrambled out of the
“red hot cinder,” otherwise the window, and
in five minutes they were in Swansfcon street,
where they hired a cab and drove home to re-
l&m their experiences to Rita and Dulcia
But what Hita and Dulcie had to relate la’
them was much more interesting.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
A HARLOT’S DEATH-BED.
When Norman and Stopper had gone to
pick their way through the slims of the
slums, Dulcie persoaded Rita to accompany
her on a visit to a girl who iivsd a short dis-
tance away, and was dangerously ill.
“ I dcmno *er proper monniker,” said Dul- -
cie, “but she’s called Polka Ppll, an’ up to a*-
few monis ago she was one of the moat slash-
ing tarts on the streets; used' to be wif
Madame Brusseils an' Annie Wilson, an* that*
push. Now, she’s fair on 'er uppers, wifout
a bean to ’er name, an’ wif somefing the-
matter wif ’er chest. All *er flash pals ’as
slung ’er, but she done me a good turn once,
an’ I don’t forget it.”
Good-hearted Rita readily agreed to go with
Dulcie, and on the way the latter entered in-
to a further explanation regarding the in-
valid.
“ Polka Poll,” she said, “comes from Yass*
in New South Wales, w’ere ’er mower used
to run a eatin’ ’ouse w’ich did a big biz
amongst the Chows, an’ as some of ’em
splashed the splosh pretty freely, the. old
wbman used to allow ’em into a parlor an'
let ’em chat wif ’ec daughters, Blanche,
Maggie and Poll. But the muvver got mash-
ed on a old Chow an’ become a reg’lar red ot
opium smoker, an’ wus. One day she found
one of the yeller ’ogs in bed wif ’er eioest
gal, Blanche, an’ kicked up 'ell’s delight, but
the Chow told er she wouldn't get no more
opium if she put ’im away, an’ so the damned
’og never said nuffin. But Blanche soon got
full up of the Chow an’ the dull life, and
cleared out for Sydney. This made the Chow
fair mad, an : ’e stopped the old woman’®
allowance of opium. So to smoof ’im over
she kidded the second girl, Maggie, to take
’er sister’s place wif ’im. Maggie was willin’,
an* for soma time there was no furder trouble.
But the Chow got full up of her, an’ tried ! i&
level best to sedooce Poll, but Poll wasn’t
takin’ ’enny, an’ didn’t care a brass monkey
for wot they might freaten *er wif, and made
up ’er mind (to keep straight. But they wus
too many for ’er. One night them too devils*
’er old woman an’ ’er sister, Maggie, actshally
collared ; er an’ ’eld ’er an’ kept ’er from yell-
in’ w’ile the measly bloomin’ Chow ruined
’er. That knocked ’er tin can in. She went
clean orf ’er onion, an’ was orful ill for moor®
an* monfs, an’ w’en she got well she come
down to Melbun an’ started as one of Muvver
*oward’s gals. ’Er old woman’s bin livin®
I among the Chows in Little Bourke for years,,
an’ is the worst old 'aybag in the city.”
“Good God 1 what a terrible story I ?> said
Rita.
M Yuss,” affirmed Dulcie, “ an’ you can take
my word for it she was the prettiest tart oa


the town not eo very long ngo, and fair!*
made the gaunt* fly when she ’ad ’em. Sh= a
a bit above my class, you i*now, but she’s orful
down on ’er socks now, an’ is liable to frow
seven enny time.”
’’Throw seven, Dalcie?” queried Rita.
“Yuss; peg out, you know; turn up ’er
-daisies; join the angles, as the Army blokes
ees.
“Oh! join the angels,” said Rita. “You
mean that she is dying.”
“Yusa, that’s the bizness,” replied Dalcie.
'*Bat ere we are, an’ Poll won’t mind ns
walkin’ right in. She amt no Lady ’Ope-
toun.”
They found themselves in a small and ai-
mosit hare room, a bed, chairs and table form-
ing, the only furniture. Pdlka Poll was in
bed, evidently painfully ill, her wasted frame
and thin, dashed face showing the unmis-
takeable ravages of consumption,
* # Fra eo glad to see you, Dulcie, and you,
too, Miss Delorme,” she said, after Rita had
been introduced. “Pve been lying here
thinking of my past sins, or all that I could
remember, and wondering if I would see a
friendly face again before 1 die.”
" Oh ! you aint goin* to croak,” said Dulcie.
" Why, you don’t know wot a color you've
got in yer cheeks.”
“ Naturally—in my cheeks,” was the res-
ponse. “ The grave-diggers know that sign.
I have not had so many medical men amongst
my friends not to have learnt the symptoms
ot consumption. Why, when I got up this
morning I could scarcely stand. But, after
all, that may have been because I have eaten
nothing since yesterday morning.”
“You had no appetite, perhaps?” said
Rita, sympathetically.
“On the contrary, I was hungry ail day;
but there was nothing in the house to eat,
and I had neither money nor credit,”
“Oh! how dreadful,” said Rita, “But I
will run out and get you something. What
would you like?”
“Nothing, thank you,” she answered.
* Frank—my last mash—brought me a bottle
of brandy a couple of days ago, and Fve been
living on that. It keeps the lamp alight, but
it burns the wick too.”
“ Frank I ” said Dalcie. u Oh 1 that fellow’s
no good.”
“ Isn’t he? Well, do you suppose I should
care for him if he was? If I had a decent
man for a lover, I’d feel like a tkief in the
hands of a detective, I know he looks with
contempt at me, but as we gay girls”—she
laughed harshly—“despise those who love
us, we can only love those wh© despise us.
I—” ©
“ Wot’s the matter? Wot are you stoppla’
for!” asked Dalcie.
“ Nothing much. Only every now and
again I feel as if I should suffocate. There ;
Fve thrown up a little blood, and now I’m
all right again.”
“ Bl,t how yoncoush,”"*id Rita ; “it make*,
siiudder to hear you.”
such a life as 1 have lived is not
nkely to leave me healthy,” she said, bitter-
*y. I o-night i have been walking about
the streets since seven o’clock attempting to
earn a little money to pay my rent, but it was
so warm and muggy that I got wet Cnrough
with perspiration, and now my bac*
ice.
But why didn’t you sit down and rest
yourself? asked Rita.
it r* } couldn’t sit down,” was the reply.
1 must keep on the move, for if I rest I be-
gin to think, just as 1 was doing when you
came in. Then I get disgusted with myself,
and think of suicide. Oh 1 it seems as if
hands with iron claws are tearing my breast,
and lacerating my vitals.”
“ You ought to take care of yourself.” said
Rita.
s< “ Take care jof myself,” she said irritably ;
1 what rot I How can I take care of myself?
I can’t afford it. A nice way it would be to
receive my gentlemen friends—such as they
are, the beasts—if I were wrapped up in
flannel and saturated with eucalyptus.”
14 But. still—”
“Oh 1 it is a gay life,, ours,” she broke in,
impetuously, 44 It those who choose it knew r
where it leads and how it ends, there would,
be more sewing machines sold, and less paint
and powder. When I think of the poor girls,
who live good, honest lives, virtuous girls
with fathers and mothers, who are tempted
to sin because it seems so gay, so tall of
pleasure and attraction* 1 shudder. If I
could only get hold of one of them for a
quarter of an hour, just as she was about to
take the fatal step, she would never take it.”
41 Ob ! you’re a bit down on yer luck now;,”
said Dalcie, who had been listening with
tears in her eyes, “and finga look a bit blue,
but you’ll be cherry ripe presently.”
“Yea,” Polka Poll rejoined. “ I forgot—l
forgot that. We are called gay girls. In
France they call us the Daughters of Joy 1
how appropriate ! Well, once on the road we
must follow it to the end ; there is no getting
back for us, however much we may long for
it. But where is the pleasure? To last when
we are hungry. To eat wnen we have no ap-
petite. Drink, without thirst. Love, with-
out love. Laugh when we’d rather cry.
Wake when we d sooner sleep—and, oh ! the
shame of it all ! And the end ! —the gutter,
the Chinese den*, a drunken death. Bah I ”
“But some get rich at this trade,” said
Rita.
* Yes* Brussells, Wilson, and all that
beastly gang. They are more to be despised
than the others. Their riches make them
worse—make them fiends without a spark of
mercy for anyone. Oh I this life, if it is Irfe I
what shame ! what solitude ! what weariness !
Belonging to ail the world, except' to oneself.
Being at the beck and call ot a miserable
creature like Brussel is, who sells you line sc


*mueh merchandise, and treats yon like a dog.
Recommencing this existence every morning,
*%nd seeing before you a series of days and
"years exactly similar. To what degree of
abasement must a girl arrive to accept this
■awful monotony ot vice and misery I What
at the most can one get out of it? A little
money now and again, occasionally a new
dress, a champagne sapper, the theatres, the
races, and, afterwards, wretchedness and the
•.grave.”
“ Bat,” nrged Rita, 61 did you never think of
working ?“ j
“Ah I” she said, 88 the capacity for work is
the first thing lost in a life like mine. In spite
ot myself, there was always something in my
dress—my manner, which advertised by de-
gradation, and no honest door was open |to
me.
“ You'd ? ave done orl right on fthe stage/"
said Dulcie. W*y t when I fust knew you,
you ad as good a pair of Dutch pegs as I ever
seen in me natural/'
“ Yea, and look at them now,” Poll said,
kicking off the clothes, and exposing long,
emaciated limbs, which seemed nothing but
skin and bone.
“ The time was when my legs were the talk
of the town. Men have paid £1 merely to see
as tar as my garters, and managers have
offered me good salaries to appear in tights.
Bub,l thought that the life I was leading then
was the best in the world, and the money I
made the easiest ever earned. And now I
can’t even pay my rent/’
“ Bur. you*d a shine gold bracelet larst time
1 saw yer at Andy Skinner’s weddin*/' said
Dulcie,
“Oh ! that is a sample of my life/* Poll
said, smiling sadly. “One of the Bruasells*
friends gave me the bracelet under tne pre-
tence that it was solid gold, but when I took
it to a jeweller the man laughed, and told me
I had been swindled, as the thing was worth
only half-a-crown. What a mean cad the
fellow must have been.*’
“Well, you could hardlv expect to'meet
gentlemen at such places,'’ said Rita.
“Oh ! I don't know/* Poll declared. “All
sorts go there. Real gentlemen have been
interested in me, but, one after another, they
left me in a little while. After all, they were
right, for it would have been no benefit to
them to have thought seriously of me. I
have had neither virtue nor love ; perhaps it
is because 1 have never been in love that I
have never been virtuous. I mean the pure,
spiritual feove, which.is so much higher than
the mere animal passions which influenced
me. My death will affect nobody/'
“ But it is impossible that you are dying,"
said Rita ; 11 you seem so calm and peaceful,"
“Ah i you may think so," Poll said, “ but I
have a fire in my chest—l aa/guffering the
tortures of the damned. 1
And in saying this she put her arms
around Rita's neck and kissed her. Bat as
she did so, her features contracted, she put
her hand to her chest as though to stay the
fire, and then fell back on the pillow, while a
white froth mounted to her lips, and a film,
as of death, passed over her feverishly-bril-
liant eyes. Dulcie began to cry like a child,
and Poll shook her hand in gratitude ; then,
concealing her face in the pillow, burst into
tears, which had been too long restrained.
Poor, wayward girl I She had bartered her
soul for happiness, and the price had never
becfn paid her.
Suddenly she leaped out of the bed with
great, staring eyes, and screamed as though
in mortal agony.
“My God IPm burning !" she cried, “ i
am in hell ! Look/* and she pointed to a
bottle filled with a greenish liquor. “ With
my last half-crown I bought this, the most
deadly poison on earth. My pain is too great
to bear. This will free me—will give me
death and the peace which I have never
known in life.'’ And before either of the
others could prevent her, she had seized and <
drained the bottle, then fell heavily to the
floor, struggling in horrible convulsions. She
raised her head and evidently desired to
speak. But the hand of Death was upon her,
and as Dulcie and Rita strove to Hit her she
piteously cried—
“ Save me I save'"me! I do not want to
die S **
“For God’s sake, run for a doctor/’ said
Rita, almost swooning with horror.
But it was took late. Hardly had Dulcie
left the room, when Polka Poll ceased to live,
and when the doctor arrived they could only
gaze in awe and wonder at the countenance
which had lost its agonised contraction and
was illumined with an angelic serenity.
Polka Poll was at length in peace, and an ex-
pression of joy seemed to pervade those im-
passable features, as though the white soul
of the girl, disengaged from the corrupting
body, had nestled upon the fair brow.
When the shock which both Rita and Dui-
cie had received had somewhat passed away,
and they were able to walk home, Rita, with
her sweet face shrined in sorrow, said—
“ What a life, Dulcie dear ; and, oh I what
a death I I've fearfully wicked myself,
and often tempted to do wrong, and I can
only than* my lucky star—and Norman—that
I did not live her life and die her death."
“ Me, too/’said Dulcie. “I’ve bin a bit
cronk in me time, and wus jest on the touch
of goin' on the streets w'en you fust met me ;
but, alter seein' poor Polka Poll, I reckon a
•spectable life's the best game, an’ bjime
if I don't marry Slop right away and settle
down."
And you shall hear just how she managed
it


CHAPTER XXXIX.
IN "PUSH” SOCITY.
fia pursuance of her determination to
marry Speekletottle at the earliest possible
opportunity, Dulcie went down one evening
to discuss the matter with that young gentle*
man’s married sister, and prepare plans for
his speedy capture. That sister, Mrs. Tickei-
tom. was a lady who had herself married Tic-
keltom rather hastily, for reasons which be-
came very apparent two months later in the
shape of twins. Since then she had been
producing similar tokens of wedded bliss with
machine-like regularity about every twelve
months, despite her husband’s frequent ob-
jections, and was now well on the way with
her seventh. Consequently, she might be re-
garded in the light of an expert, and a shining
example to Dulcie and others to go and do
likewise.
The Tickei toms lived in a frowsy little
back street in Fitaroy, in a seedy little house,
furnished only with absolute necessaries, and
not too many of them. It was just the kind
of little street which you may see in moat
suburbs, where married ladies gossip all day
long—when they are not quarrelling—and
have the peculiar habU of carrying their
babies upside down. Also, they are sociable
to an extraordinary degree, borrowing half-a-
cup of milk, or a pinch of tea, or a flatiron,
Just as they want them, no one ever seeming
to see the necessity of laying in a full stock
of milk, tea, or flatirons for herself. Those
of their children who can toddle are early
trained to run the jug or bottle down to the
pub for beer, frith some such command as
*an’, Jennie, tell ’im not to dror no froth on
It, ‘cos froth makes mother hiccup, an’ father
finds ’er out.” Most of the Saturday’s money
is gone by Tuesday, and then dresses, shoes,
blankets, saucepans and other household
gear are pawned to ensure a supply of jug-
juice until Saturday comes round again.
But mark you. these little back street folks
have their social prejudices as much as any
enlightened class. Thus, Mrs. Macgruel, the
wife of the draper’s man, tosses her head and
•nears loftily at Mrs. Nicholas, looks down
upon little Mrs, Smithers, whose husband
drives a sanitary cart in the dead of night,
and distributes a perfume along his tracks
which he could cut with a cheese-knife, and
Mrs. Smithers positively ignores Mrs. James,
whose good man rune a baked ’tater and sav-
eloy can. Frequently the street is livened up
by the customers of a dirty brothel kept by a
drunken old hag and her daughter-in-law, or
by some good man coming home and jumping
on his good lady’s chest just because she had
stepped in next door for a few minutes to
tell her neighbor that the price of fried flab
had go&e up, and that the baby had actually
•aid goo goo,” or “gurgle-gurgle ** when she
had given him a piece of bread and fat, and
had run the few minutes into three hours,
quite forgetMng to get her good man's tea
seady. Bui as Jumping on wives' cheats is of
almost daily occurrence, it arouses no indig-
nation or sympathy. Husbands must hare
some amusement after their hard day’s graft
Mrs, Tickeltom had lived in this street for
years, although it was a favorite haunt of the
“ Cherry-tree push,” one of the worst gauge
of ruffians on the police By smash-
ing windows and bashing residents this push
had established a reign of terror, for every
member was capable of gouging out his
mother’s eyes unless the old woman ” gave
him beer-money, and no other female was
safe from being half-kicked to death if she
incurred the displeasure of this cowardly
crowd. The few police were helpless, the
publicans were frightened to refuse free
drinks when the “Cherry-tree” demanded
them, and any stranger passing through the
street would be lucky to reach the end of it
right side up.
Mrs. Tickeltom, a red-haired and pigeon-
toed lady of angular aspect, was delighted to
see Dulcie, and before five minutes had
passed was fairly enjoying herself to relating
what misery she suffered, detailing all the
omplainta of the children, and going into
he smallest circumstance of the latest scan-
dals of the neighborhood.
“The very orfullest thing ’appened on’y
larst week,” she said. “That pore young
ereecur, Mrs. Ellis, wus Jest gettin’ into a keb
to be drove to the Women’s ’Orsepiddel,
’en she fell an’ disappointed ’er ’nsband of
their fust child.”
"Hoh ! *ow horfal,” said Dulcie, sympathe-
tically.
“ Yuas, wasn’t it,” rejoined the other, “ an'
the pore thing on’y six weeks married, too,”
In fact, judging from her conversation, it
appeared that no lady in that quarter ever
get married until there was actual and press-
ing need for it.
Thus they gossipped on until dark, Dulcie
receiving much wise advice about husbands
and wives, etc., etc. Likewise, an inter-
esting discussion ensued on the question
of fashionable frippery, such as fichus,
Torchou lace, voile, and so forth ; and. as
Mrs. Tickeltom was a lady who usually
wore her husband’s socks and iace-up
boots, and old hats, and generally had her
skirt pinned up about her waist, and never
on any account brushed or combed her wispy
red hair, naturally she posed as an authority
on the latest fashions.
While they were thus enjoying themselves
up to the handle, a stranger came lurching
down the street in a manner suggestive of
tarrying too large a load of intoxicating
liquor. Lik« a lisfesh. the word went round
’amongst the Cherry-tree push, and Hoppy
Globias immediately rushed into the pub, se-
cured an empty beer bottle, and proceeded co
head off the unsuspecting victim: floppy’a
method of attack was simplicity itself.
Concealing himself in a lane until the man
had paa@#4, he stepped out quickly, raised


the bottle* and baab ! "bash f—the stranger
was knocked down on the foot-path, bleeding
and almost senseless. Then ap came the
test of the push, and proceeded to “ fan" the
fallen prey, every pocket being gone through
for money or other valuables. But this vic-
tim was especially unfortunate. In the first
place, he committed the dire offence of hav-
ing nothing on him but a clay pipe and a
heavy smell of rum, and, secondly, he showed
fight, and, scrambling to his feet, positively
biffed Hoppy with a beauty on the north and
south, commonly known a§ ths mouth.
Promptly* Hoppy kicked him in tbs groin,
and when once down again the paafa ‘‘dealt
wid *im ” with their usual lack of courtesy.
Shirty Jack walked over him on his knees,
thereby breaking a rib or two, while Lumpy
Lou rammed a handful of mud in his mouth,
Joker Styles bit a piece out of his nose,
and the others lent a hand—or a foot—where
they thought it would do the most barm.
Finally, Hoppy got up and said—
“ ? S's 'ad ori 'e can 'old, chaps. Let’s come
over to Mother Morgan’s kipsy an’ strike 'er
for 'art a jim.”
“'Old on,” said Lumpy Lou, “I ainfc 'ad a
kick at this bloke yet.” and, walkingup to the
poor senseless, battered stranger, he deliber-
ately kicked him twice on the jaw, and then,
evidently proud of having distinguished him-
self, turned to join the others. But it hap-
pened that Stopper was hastening along to
see bis sister, and at this last brutal act of
Lumpy Lou s he caught the Cherry-tree hero
by the throat, pinned him against the fence,
and then sent a pile-driving blow on bis face
which laid his cheek upon, and made him
look even mors ugly than Nature bad fash-
ioned him.
“ Cart that ome, an* feed on it,” said Stop-
per, “aid if it aint a bellyful there's plenty
more w ere that come from.”
Lumpy wasted no time in vain argument,
but dodged away from Speckletottle, ana
gave the “ push ” cry for assistance. Back
came the push, headed by Hoppy, and Slop-
per, with a “ Biime, this aint no comic hopera
I’ve struck,” hauled himself over bis sister's
back fence, and bursting in upon Mrs. 4 Tic-
keitom and Dulcie—who, by the way, was
just displaying some new embroidery on an
u n d e rga r m e n t —exci ai med—
“ The Cherry-tree clique's on ter me. Lock
the front Rory O’More, shut the red-'ot cin-
ders, an' look out for stacks of trouble,'*
These commands were no sooner issued and
obeyed than smash went a piece of Macadam
through the front-room window.
“ You aint got no charnce,” yelled Hoppy.
We'H pull yer blromin’ liver out afore we've
done wid you, Slop.''%
S&rp, replied in language not usually used
in polite society, and through the broken
window buried a piece of firewood which
caught Shirty Jack on the nose, and made
him yell for vengeance.
“ Bneak cmt the back w&y. au* fetckia some
rocks, ** mid Slopper to Dulde, and that
plucky beauty, with a confident "Rye-oh,*®^
hurried out, and soon returned with a supply
o f ammunition.
"Now, make up the Jeremiah,” ordered
Stopper. “ an* we’ll give ’em somethin’ ’ofc for
supper,” and soon Dulcie had a roaring Jere-
miah, or fire, going, while Mrs. Tiekeltom
crept under the table, and moaned, between,
heavy weeping, “ Hob, hi know this’ll bring
bon a haeeident, an* bi’ve bin takin* sich care
of meseif.”
In the meantime, the push smashed the
other windows, and then turned their atten-
tion to an attempt to break in the door. But
before they could succeed, Slopper crept to
the door, suddenly opened it, and launched a
furious kick which landed on Hoppy’s knee,
and made him even hoppier than before.
Then the door was banged to once more and
bolted, and, as the crowd came up to it
again, Dulde mounted on a chair, and through
the fan-light poured a dipper-full of boiling*:
water on the heads of those nearest, agonised
squeals and blood curdling curses proclaiming
the scalding effects of her manoeuvre. |Thi®>
action caused the attack to be changed from
front to rear, and in a few minutes a dozen
wild and blood-thirsty scoundrels had broken,
in the back gate, and fired a volley of road-
metal with telling precision, little Gerald
Tiekeltom being hit hard in the bosom of his>
pants, his sister, Violet, failing with a wound-
ed head, and Mrs. Tickeltom’s jug of supper
beer, which stood on the kitchen table await-
ing insertion, being shed over the floor in
shocking waste. To add to the contusion,
Mrs Tiekeltom dropped into hysterics, and.
her youngest child—up to date—fell Into the
fire, whence he was rescued by Dulcie, and
promptly cooled off in a tub of washing sude.
which stood handy.
Stopper had fired off all his rocks, and now •»
decided oa a piece of generalship which should •
effectually rout the enemy.
“ Duice,” be said, “ there’s on’y one thing:
for it—we must get the Bali street push outer *
this gang. I’ll give you a ieg-up over the aide,
fence, then you scoot through Mrs. Macgruel’s
yard, an’ up the lane, an’ through the tack of
the rub-a-dub-dub, and down Dirty Dick's*
alley to Bull street, an’ tell Jumbo Miller
that 'Oppy’a push is ere, an’ there's plenty of
biff biff goin' on. Say Slopper warnts 'im,
an’ Vll do the rest.”
“ Not me,” said Dulcie. 18 I’m goin* to stop >
wif you, Slop. W’y. afore I could smoke-
back wif Jumbo an’ his pebs you might be
smashed to deaf.”
“Garn, now,” he said, <s an* # s’eip me, Fib
marry you next week.”
Or course no girl could hold out against such,
temptation as that, and, consequently, Dulcie,
who had her own reasons for deairing an.
early marriage, ©specially with Stopper, has-
tened away to bring up reinforcements. Mean- -
while, Slopper scrambled through the kitchen*
and wash-house to the wood-shed, and from *


SEASIDE SINFULNESS.


that vawtage pof.nl fired wood and coal und
atones, and even an axe at the Cherry-trees,
very one of the said
trees with the axe, and disabling two others
by well-directed shots of coal. But the
Ticket toms bought their wood and coal by
the sixpenny worths, consequently his ammu-
nition was rapidly becoming exhausted, and
unless relief arrived promptly his situation
would be extremely critical. Already a gin
bottle, aimed by the experienced band of
Skinny Mitchell, had gashed Stopper's cheek,
and Hoppy had given the command to “ rush
the cow, and kick his daylights ir,” when
down the lane scampered Jumbo Miller and
ten of the Bull street push, headed by Dulcie,
whose skirt had been torn off in climbing the
rence, und whose face was begrimed with
coal dust. Furthermore, she had lost one
shoe, had no bat on her head, was bleeding
from a cut on the forehead, and carried in her
hand a picket which she had torn from a
fence. Many of the others also had pickets,
while Jumbo wielded a length of lead pipe,
and bricks and stones were plentiful amongst
them.
Siopper greeted his allies with a yell, and
then got to work amongst the Cherry-trees,
who were completely disconcerted by the
appearance of Jumbo's force. For ten min-
utes as healthy a fight as ever Siopper could
desire raged about the Tickeitom mansion,
even Dulcie, with her trusty picket, getting
into the heart of the melee, and laying about
her with a* 1 energy which many of those she
attacked remembered for weeks afterwards.
Jumbo threw Hoppy over a neighboring fence,
where an mastiff proceeded to
chew him, and Siopper jambed Lumpy Lon's
head into a dust-box. from which he crawled
out more dead than alive, while when it came
to an interchange of kicks the Bull street
commando —as it would be called in these
days—fairly paralyzed their opponents, and
then jumped on them with both feet. An-
other attack and the laurels would have been
with the Bulls, but suddenly Andy the L-g
yelled 11 ’Ere’s a copper, chaps,” and with one
accord every man of both armies, excepting
Siopper, Jumbo and Dulcie—and Dulcie had
proved herself manly enough, taka my word
for it—raced down the lane and into the
street, and fell on that policeman with an
unanimity which was marvellous, considering
how they had just been bashing one another.
But a constable to a larrikin is a red rag to a
bull.
No sooner was the lane cleared than Siop-
per remembered the stranger who had been
the cause of the fray, and, with Jumbo, Mrs.
Tickeitom and Dulcie, went out to inspect
him. Jumbo lifted the poor fellow up, and
SBLid—
“Hullo, it this is the bloke they went
through they didn’t gee a bean, I'll take my
oath.”
“How do you know?” asked Dulcis*
“ 'Cos,” replied be, with a L*er, “ he pasted
down Bull street afore come 'ere, air—
well, mf push don't leave nuffin 9 for the nejs*
lot* *
“Well, Vs broke up pretty bad —” began-
Siopper, when, with a scream, Mrs. Tickeltons*
exclaimed—
“ Ho, Haleck I Haleck I Yuss, it's my*’
Tickeitom i Ho I wot shell hi do? Hi know '
hi'll 'ave a haccident now. Ho ! this'll be me**
death,”
“ But surely the push would know Tickei-
tom,” said Dulcie, who was not acquainted!
with him.
“They aint 'ad no show." said Siopper,,
“'cos Vs bin in gaol for nine moons,”
“ An’ now let us put 'im to bed, an"
then we'ii get in a load of beer an' make a,
night of it. You can stay ’ere
Daice, an’ go ome in the moroia’."
And a very good night they managed to make*
of it, though Dulcie has always declined to-
explain even to Rita how they found separate-
sleeping accommodation for her in so’sinalla*.
house.
“It don't signerfy 'ow we managed it,'*"
was all she would say, “ Siopper 'as promised *
to splice me as soon as i can get me clobber-
ready.’'
Before which time, however, Rita and
Norman had managed to tumble into another
adventure.
CHAPTER XXX.
SEASIDES SINFULNRSS.
One day Rita came into the room where
Norman was seated, plumped herself down
upon his knees, kissed him about fourteen
times in rapid succession with splendid
markmanship. and then, in unusually demure
tones, said—
“l’ve been thinking, dear boy, that if you
can spare the time some day, we—we—might-
get—married/*
“ Do you think you could stand the shock?’ 5
he asked, gaily,
“ Please, don't jest about it,” she pleaded,
very seriously. 11 You know I wouldn’t bother
you about it unless I was sure it was good for
me. I suppose you wonder why I have not
mentioned it before, but well, it only occur-
red to me lately.. Between ourselves, dear
boy, I—I—” and although they were alone,
she whispered something which caused him
to start, and say earnestly—
“Oh i if that’s the case, there's no time to
be lost. Marriage might not to be a failure
with us, at any rate, considering how long w®
have been training for the event."
“ And in the spite of the fact that I carry a
penalty,” she responded with a sly smile,
happy at having gained her point—and her
husband. f
Their wedding was the quietest of quiet
affairs, but in deference to Rita's wish—and
there are times when a lady's lightest long*
iag must be indulged—they immediately went
off to a well-known sea-aide resort for their


Ikoneymoon, “Jut *i Mid Norman, “ we
l ihdtxt had enough honeymoons before mar-
tfiage.” *
This particular watering-place was, for a
brief time, besieged by the very pink end
pine-apple of fashionable society. In fact,
gay Melbourne seemed to have transferred
its gayest and wickedest portions to M where
the ocean’s waves do sport and roll,** so that,
amidst throngs of the 11 upper ten,” any one
with the inclination could also have a hot
time with ladies of easy virtue from Lonsdale
st., and East Melb. The main attraction of
the place was an attempt to introduce Con-
tinental bathing, where people of both sexes
coaid dress as indecently as possible, and in-
- spect one another's almost unfettered forms
in the fail light of day. The scheme was
started by two or three so-called ladies of
Toorak who possessed pretty legs and charm-
ing bosoms, and desired to make, such fas-
cinations as public as possible 4 Further-
more, from gazing on the manly shape of
scantily-attired cyclists at Austral Wheel
meets, they had acquired a strong desire to
see as much—or even more—of their gentle-
men friends, and concluded that mixed bath-
ing would afford them as good a chance—and
view—as anything else. The idea caught on.
Men were tired of observing the ballet
through opera glasses, and curious to com-
pare the limbs of their lady friends with
those of the theatre girls, and for these and
other reasons this particular watering place
speedily became popular. Then a very no-
torious old harlot, scenting much profit,
went down to inspect the prospects, and after
two days' survey telegraphed back the signifi-
cant order—“ Send three girls ; business
bound to boom/’ and so, without loss of
time, the gilded vice of the city was rampant
by the sad, sea waves. By the way, the rea-
son of the sea waves being so sad must surely
be because there is so much innocence
wrpcked nn the beaches.
When Norman and Rita arrived, the mixed
bathing was in full swing. Vice and virtue,
in the very flimsiest of bathing costumes,
paddled in the shallow water together, or
flirted with the masculine element on the
shore, with a freedom which, in some cases,
afterwards made pretty reading in divorce re-
ports. Even Norman, hardened wretch as he
was, experienced a shock when he saw men
and women and young girls strolling about
the shore or squatting on the sand in attire
which left precious little to the imagination.
Legs which, in town, were modestly hidden
from the vulgar gaze by petticoats and skirts,
and whatever other undergear women wear,
were here displayed with a generosity which
the boldest stage girl might equal, but never
surpass, while palpitating busts were to be
viewed by the dozens, most of them in ex-
tremely good order and condition, and ripe
for inspection, **
Even trie superficial observer could see that
Piety’s legs were of a very varied order of
Thus, a very fasbiosabU damt
whose graceful igmre has besa tbs delight of
scores of ball-rooms, was hem dissevered to
possess legs of the pipe-elcuss so far sus
thinness went, and, in addiflba, was most
painfully bandy. A very swell banker’s lady
proved to be even more knock-kneed than the
generality of her sex, while dfe bewitching
damsel, who was the belle of Melbourne for
one season, was injudicious enough to reveal
the fact that she bad shin banes m sharp as
grass-cutters. But amongst tbe others there
were limbs of most enticing shapeliness, with
delicate ankles, bewitchingSy-esrved eaives*
and bounteous thighs of exceptional beauty.
And you may be sure that these latter were
exhibited with a liberality which showed
their owners knew good things when they
saw them, and wanted others to know them
equally well. The men, too, appeared with
an absence of ceremony and ctothiag«-which
kept many feminine eyes rivetted upon them.
** Oh," exclaimed one of a group of girls,
standing near Rita, hasn’t that fellow got a
lovely shape, i never saw him with his
trousers off before. Isn’t he awfully hairy
about the lege?”
“ Oh! I think I’d prefer that cue floating on
bis back, 55 said a companion. “ Why, he’s
got skin as fair as a girl’s. M
“And there’s a beauty on that rock,” put
in a third. “ Oh, my ! What a fine, big fel-
low ! I like ’em big and strong, because they
can protect you so well.” r
‘‘ And these,” remarked Norman to Rita,
as they strolled along, “are society young
ladies who, in town, wouldn’t look at a man
in his shirt sleeves, but can gloat over and
criticise hall-naked men such as those.”
“Two of the girls,” said Rita, “are sisters
who used to live in a house on the St. Kilda
Esplanade, from where they looked down on
the baths through telescopes. And yet if you
told them they were not ladies they’d give you
in charge.”
“ Well, here are a couple who don’t put on
airs,” said Norman, indicating two harlots
who appeared from a bathing box.
“No, nor much else,” replied Rita, as they
came nearer, and discovered the fact that
they were absolutely undressed, save for short
bodices and shorter skirts. Their feet, legs
and shoulders were bare, and a moment later
as they tumbled each about in an inch or two
of water they commanded the direct attention
of every spectator on the beach.
They had previously caused much sensation
by leaving the door of their feat&ing box open
while undressing, but their present perform-
ances were even more startling*# Climbing
on to an old boat, they stood at the bows, the
observed of ail observers, while the wicked
breeze flapped their shockingly brief skirts
about in a way which made even the most
hardened society women turn away and pre-
tend to blush, Tfeere was no doubt that they
had uncommonly h&ttdsoßae mud plump
and m they jumped into the water, ana


DULCIE


•limbed np again, and tried to clamber up the
mast, and rolled one another over the sand,
there was a roar of admiration from the men,
and a murmur of indignation from many of
the women, especially from those whose legs
were not so plump and handsome. Even
Rita, .Who knew that her own limbs were
much more beautiful, and, therefore, had no
reason to be envious, turned contemptuously
away, and said— , v ,
" Disgusting creatures 1 Why, 1 wouldn’t
show my legs like that before this crowd for
anything/’ which was rather a rash assertion,
as she did show a good deal of them to
that same crowd not many minutes later. It
happened thuswiae. Norman left her there
while he went up to the hotel for a drink, and
hardly was he out of sight when the two
Totties, who had heard her heated remark,
resolved to have revenge. Therefore, as she
was strolling along, they scampered out of
the water, and running full tilt at her, sent
her sprawling over a large sandhill, and as
she landed on her back her feet went up in
the air, and’for half a minute she lay with her
new silk stockings, her pretty cream garters,
and an abundance of fleecy embroidery, or
whatever it was, plainly, too plainly, visible
to the naked eyes of laughing men and
women,
“So we’re disgusting creatures, are we?”
exclaimed one of her assailants. “Well, what
price you? You’re showing a bit more than
your legs, now, take my word for it.”
“You dirty harlots,” said Rita, enraged be-
yond control, “you oughtn’t to be allowed
amongst decent people. I’ll have you kicked
out of this place before the day’s out, see if
I don’t,” and she righted herself, and shook
the sand out of her dress in superb indigna-
tion.
“Oh 1 you will, will you ?” one of them said.
“ Well, we’ll deal with you before we go, any
way. Come on, Bess, we’ll give this bloom-
in’ toff a swim, 7 ’and the two of them ad-
vanced towards her with such threatening
gestures that poor Rita grabbed up her skirts
and took to her heels in the direction of the
jetty.
Not a man in the crowd attempted to inter-
fere in her behalf, but just looked on and
guffawed at the spectacle of two
women chasing a third female attired in the
height of fashion, with her clothes half-mast
high, and her cream garters most pleasantly
conspicuous. Naturally, the chase was short,
and Rita, feeling that she would be caught in
a few more strides, in sheer desperation clam-
bered into the boat as those she had despised
had done—thereat the men rejoiced more
than ever. just as she reached the port
side the two girls jumped heavily on the star-
board side, and the old boat was rocked so
violently that Rita was driven off her balance
and, amidst shrieks of laughter, went flying
through space into the shallow water, while
the merry little wavelets rippled gleefully over
her, ran along her lovely silk stockings,
spoiled the pretty cream garters aad the-
prettier embroidery, or lace, or whatever waa
beyond, and, in a word; her from
her dainty shoes to her costly and enchanting
bat It was a great deal for a little water to
do, but it did it so effectually that, when will-
ing hands helped her up and on to the dry
beach, she was saturated' most thoroughly,
her magnificent golden hair was all astray
and dripping with salt water, and the thought
of the dreadful appearance she presented so
wrought upon her feelings that she sobbed
piteously in sight of them all. Then a kindly
young girl wrung her out as well as she could,
and led her back to the hotel, where dry
clothes and hot tea recovered her sufficiently
to enable her to search tor Norman. And
where do you thing she found him ! Actually
and positively, he, her own true lover, who
had, only a few hours previously, taken hit
solemn so-help-him that he would love and
honor her, was discovered in the company
of a nasty, cheeky, bad, bold, wretched, lazy,
good-for-nothing harlot—which is exactly how
Rita described her. More shocking still, he
was hob-nobbing with her in the moat bare-
faced and beastly fashion, drinking chain-
pagne in Rita’s own private room. Merciful
Powers 1 What kind of a honeymoon was
Rita having ! It wasn’t sufficient that she,
and her cream garters, should be held up to
the ridicule of the crowd, and soaked through
and through in the horrid ocean, but to add
to her misery she must catch that deceitful
wretch of a husband having a gay old time
with a gay young girl I
The explanation was rather more simple
than it looked. While Norman was having
his drink at the hotel, there came to him thie
gay young girl, whose character was such
that as soon as she saw a well-dressed young
man “on his own,” she immediately set to
work to capture him. This she did by boldly
accosting him and presenting a card on which
was inscribed, “Flossie Lovejoy, Lonsdale
street, Melbourne. Gentlemen waited on for
orders. Terms (strictly cash) on application.”
After perusing the card, he perused the face
of Flossie, and identified her as one who had
made a name for herself by her expertness in
drugging the drink of foolish men, and then
looting them.
“Suppose, old chappie,” she said, “we have
a bottle of wine and a private room? ”
With the intention of bowling her out in
her little game, he agreed, and, ordering the
champagne, went off to the apartment where
Rita presently peered at them through the
dividing curtains.
Feeling sure that she was on the royal road
to success, Flossie became most hilariously
sociable, qocking her neat legs up on the
table, relating “fairy tales” of the warmest
complexion, and assuring Norman n that she
had never met a man for whom she would dc
as much as she would for him, in fact, “ kid-
ding” him with all the*art of hes^well- known
profession. Norman jingled his money


DULIE'S DISASTER


temptingly, watched her eyes sparkle greedily
ad she heard the alluring sound, and gradually
pretended to be overcome by the liquor. In
fact, he did it so well that Rita, who jast ap-
peared at the curtains, muttered drunken
brute ” jto herself, and Flossie prepared to
polish <m her victim. . ,
“Let’s fiinsh this bottle, old chappie, she
said, “and then I’ll talk love to you till*the
cows come home,” and as Norman gurgled
out “Or-righ’ ole Tier,” she filled his glass,
and then, as his eyes seemed closed in boosy
drowsiness, she poured in a small portion of
an opium decoction known as “knock-out
drops,” and designed for the purpose of drug-
ging the unwary. ,
“Now, drink to the merry time we re going
to have,” she cried, but she was wrong, as
there was not going to be any merry time for
her just then, for, as Norman grasped the
glass, Rita exclaimed— .
“ Don’t touch it, Lionel; she’s poisoned
it! ” *
He straightened himself up with a look of
surprise at Rita, then rising with the glass of
drugged liquor in bis hand he seized the
cUqhz *d Flossie, and thundered —
M Drink this wine, you thing, or I’ll brain
you with the bottle,” and straggle as Flossie
might she could not escape from his grip un-
til he hi l forced the doctored stuff between
her teeth He still held her till the drug be-
gan to work and she began to sway, when he
let her fall to the floor with a bang which
showed how strong a dose she had prepared
for him. “ That’s what she meant for me,”
he said, laughing.
“ Yes, and it’s no more than you deserved
for carrying on with such a woman,” respond-
ed Rita, warmly. M You ought to be ashamed
of yourself leaving one to be insulted and
half-killed while you amuse yourself with
such dirty trash as this,” indicating the re-
cumbent Flossie.
But a few words explained matters to her
satisfaction* and after she had described her
experiences on the beach he said—
“ Well, this girl is one of the gang, and
we’H punish her for the misdeeds of herself
and her companions.”
“Oh! you mean to have her locked up.’ 1
said Rita.
“ Not at all. Oo and get your tennis rac-
quet and I’ll tell you what to do with it,” and
when she returned he placed the half revived
Flossie across the table face downwards
and —Rita and her tennis bat did the rest
Moreover, it was done so efficiently that Flossie
aould not sit her bicycle with comfort for a
week afterwards, by which time, however,
Rita and Norman had returned to Melbourne,
and participated in the greatest event of all
in sketches—the marriage of Slopper
and hii tcias and tricky little Dulcie.
CHAPPER XXXI.
DULCIE’S DISASTER.
Undoubtedly, the busiest and noisiest place
in Melbourne on Saturday night is the East-
ern market All the shops and stalls are
dressed in their very best trim, the thorough-
fares are crowded with bustling women bar-
gaining with might and main; donahs from
most of tbs suburbs flounce about keenly on
the mash, and the big buck larrikin is
strongly represented* To the true donah
from Fitzroy, Collingwood and Richmond, the
market on Saturday night is the same as
Collins street block to a lady of fashion—the
place where she can parade and swell around,
and show off her airs and graces amongst
others of her own kidney. Hundreds of
sturdy middleclass fathers and
here as regularly as clockwork
tables, fruit, flowers, confectio
purchases, and beneath the t
with the capital baa<L provided
Myers and others, playir# pleasant
the animated throng? e* *ry where*
is one not easily to be forgotten.
It was a place of pleasant memories to both
Dulcie and Slopper * ci erefote. it is not a
matter of surprise that vHSJ should have de-
decided to visit it together on the last Satur-
day night of their an wedded lives* And how
demure Dulcie looked when gome of her o i
acquaintances barracked her with a
oh 1 Dulce ; see you’ve got ’em all on,” for, you
see, she was almost as good as a married lydy
now, and quite too dignified to encourage any
11 funny business,* such as used to delight her
in her more skittish days. Slopper, too, was
so much on his best behaviour that you would
never have dreamed that he bad bashed
policemen, and “done time,” and belonged
to one of the very hottest pushes not so very
long ago. But it was all too good to last
In an unguarded moment DulciC caught him
winking a most immoral wink at a tidy piece
of goods behind a lolly stall.
“ Sling that game, now. 510 p.,” she said,
indignantly.
“Wot game, Dulce! * he asked, looking
rather foolish. “ S’elp me, I aiafc doin’ noth-
in 1 . M
“ Oh! don’t kid yersell I jest come off a
Christmas tree,” said she. “1 copped yea
doin’ a knock wif that tart You aint got
me under the whip yet, you know, so nark it,
and act straight, or Yli aling ms ’ook ’ome.”
“ BUme, you do gel yer ahirt out over noth-
in’,” he grumbled* “Carat & bloke even ’ave
a cook at a bit o’ skirt t *
“Notw’enVs goin* to splice annover bit
o’ stuff,” said Dulcie so decidedly that
Slopper walked on in amazed silence, and did
not attempt to repeat the offence with which
she had charged him. But this rebuff, and
the awful strain of being so stiffly respectable
told on his nerves, and made him irritable
and grumpy. So, to relieve his ieeiingi, he
turned to a shooting gallery, and, saying


ijnicie, " See me take this bloke down," paid
his money, took up a rifle and proceeded to
fire at a target with all the cockautedness of
a Dr. Carver. ,lf he could succeed in bitting
the bull’s-eye aod ring a bell he would win
half-a-crown, and that was his intention.
But this kind of shooting is not quite so easy
as it looked, and Sloper paid for a good
many shots without scoring. Consequently,
when Dulcie, tired of watching such tame
sport, pulled him by the arm. and said—
“ Come on ; yon aint no Texas Jack. W 'y,
all the blokes is iarfin* at you,” he shook her
off roughly, and remarked savagely—
“Go an’ chase yereelf. I’m goin’to ring
that bloomin’ bell if 1 stick ’ere till I rot."
Then, with amusing deliberateness, he took
aim and fired, but although the shot went
wide of the centre a bell rang, and Slopper
turned to the proprietor with triumph in his
eyes.
“ I knew I’d sock it," he shouted, gleefully.
” Gimme arf a dollar, boss, quick and lively.
The boss laughed scornfully.
- "That was a bell on another target that
yon heard,” he said, loading up another
gun.
“Garni” said Slopper, “you carat come
that game with me. I rang that bally b«l!
right enuff, so parse over the arf bail, or
there’ll be trouble.”
" Git back to yer kennel,” put in a third
man, “you never rung no belL W’y, you
couldn’t ’it that target wid a axe,” and be also
laughed scornfully. But his merriment was
short. . .
"By thunder!” exclaimed the enraged
Slopper, "if I carni ’it that I can damn easy
biff you,” and he landed him a sweet and
heavy right-hander on the jaw, which dropped
him like a log. But they had had to deal with
rough customers before at that gallery, and
so, without wasting any words, three men col-
lared Slopper, and, with a promptness which
lett him no time to resist, bundled him out-
side, and sent him flying against a stall, which
his weight brought down with a fearful
clatter. Instantly, a very buxom young
woman, who was in charge of the stall, ran
at him screaming, and cuffed him on the ear
with stinging force. Slopper turned around
to smash his assailant, bat, finding himself
confronted by a woman, hesitated.
•• Lnmme, if yon woe a bloke I d stiffen
yon," he said. , , . .
•• Til deal wif *er," interjected sprightly
Dulcie, who had followed him, and, like a
little fury, she rushed at the woman and
smacked her cheeks with open-handed blows
which sounded like pistol shots. Then the
stall-keeper closed with Dalcie, and by su-
perior weight brought her heavily to the
ground amongst the dehria, the crowd which had
collected guffawing with immense enjoyment
aa Dolcie’s petticoats became disarranged in
Ibe scuffle, and the tact that her red and
wbita stockings were held up by suspenders
very plainly evident.
I# NU i Nit! * crlad t#meoae in the crow*,
11 the cops are coming! Do a guy, or you’ll
gel nicked/’ and Slopper, realising that
actions speak loader than words, hauled his
little mate from beneath her antagonist, and
in a few minutes they bad scudded into Little
Collins street. Dulcie was winded, but not
hurt, and a whisky and lemonade at. the Adam
and Eve Hotel soon restored her to her self.
Slopper was anxious to go back and wreck
the shooting gallery, but Dulcie declared moat
positively that if he attempted any such fool
ery she would “chuck” him, and he was
forced to abandon the project, which was
fortunate for him, as he might not have got
off so easily a second time.
As Dulcie could not keep away from the at-
tractions of the capital band before alluded
to, they re-entered the market at a different
point from where the wrecked stalj was
situated, and resolved to keep clear of rows
for the rest of tha n
“I doGft care wot ennyone ses or does,
said Dulcie, emphatically, “you don’t kid
this chicken into ©any more trouble.”
Unluckily, however, it happened that, quite
unintentionally, they had entered just beside
the lolly stall where stood the tidy piece ot
goods whom Slopper had winked at, and,
there, right before Dulcie's horrified eyes,
that tidy party deliberately winked a most
immmoral wink at Slopper. Holy Sailor 1
how did the angry blood rush to Duicie’s
cheeks 1”
“Strike me yaller,” she exclaimed, “ if this
aint as strong as Keen's ! But, by the Lord,
I’ll stop ? er funny little ways.”
“ Wot’s up? ” asked Slopper, who had
failed to notice the eye-assault committed on
him. “Thought you wot goin 1 to act the
lydy ? *
"Damn the lydy I” retorted the furious
Dulcie. “ D’ye fink I’™ B oin ’ *f> stand a fing
like that afore me very mince piee t Not me,
Cully. You can go an’ fry yer face for orl I
care. I’m goin’ to take it out of that tart,
and while Slopper stood amased, not know-
ing what the matter wae, Dulcie marched up
to the stall, and, with arme akimbo and eyea
flashing, said—
“ Look ’ere, woe you winkin’ at my bloke I ’
‘’You’re drunk,” returned the other, un-
flinchingly, " and if you don’t cleat out I’ll
give yon in charge.” 1 .1, ,
Of course this wae no way to soothe the
savage breast of Dulcie, who, white with
passion, leaned over the narrow counter,
shook her clenched fist at the lolly girl, and
foamed — y,
•• You’ll give me in charge, will you ! W’y,
you frog eyed, dirty, miserable, two ends of a
sav., I’ll tear your bloomin’ socks orf an’ stuff
’em down yer froat”
“Will you clear out?” asked the other,
placing her hand on a soda syphon.
“ Not me I ” replied Dnleia, da&anily, “ aw'
you ea*at make ma.”


“Oh ! I’ll make you soon enough/ 1 said
Sweets.
“Not you I” said Dulcie, it aint in yer
bloomin' * ; but she never finished, her
speech, for whizz I fizzi s-s-s-quirt! whizz!
went the syphon, and in a moment her hat
and face were drenched with soda water, and,
haif blind with the sudden spray, she could
only splatter and swear and wipe her eyes,
while Siopper once more dragged her away.as
the lolly lass pealed forth a hearty volume of
derisive laughter.
“Wot did you want to fasten on to that
piece for ? ” asked Siopper, as she was putting
herself straight in a quiet corner;; 11 she never
done nothin’ to you.’ 1
“You big, long, lyin’ galoot/’ she burst
forth, “don’t you try to give me no taffy.
Fink I didn’t see you two carryin’ on, wink-
in’ an’ makin’ signs, an’ maskin’ each other,”
in which, of course, she exaggerated with the
customary injustice of her sex when angry.
“ Dicken ! ” he said, “ you must be ori your
block. That comes of puttin’ soft stuff in
ver whisky. You says you’ll act the lydy an’
keep out of trouble, an* then, blime, if you
don’t go an’ get up a barney with a tart as
never sed a bloomin’ word to you. A nice
sort of a cheese-an’ kisses (missus)you’ll make
for a married man.”
“•Well, if you don’t like it, you can lump
it,” she returned viciously, ,k You carnt kid
me she didn’t parse you a wink wicked ernuff
to make you leave yer ’ome an’ pal in wif
’et.”
“1 never saw no wink,* declared he so
emphatically that Dulcie was convinced he
spoke the truth.
“Straight wire, Slop. I*
“Straight wire, Dulce.”
“ Wish you may die if yon ain*l tellin 9 the
troot, Slop. ?”
“ Yuss, Dulce., s’elp me/
“ Strike yer breff, Slop. ? *
“ My bloomin’ oath, Dulcie.” and aiter this
satisfactory declaration Dulcie was so certain
that she had been in the wrong that she
melted at once, and in their old tone of com-
radeship they adjourned again to the pub,,
where Dulcie took her whisky without “soft-
stuff” in it this time. Then she had another,
“jest,” as she put it, ss to show there aint no
hannahmosity between us, old boy,” and a
third “ to wash the others down,” so that by
tue time they crossed to the market again
she was ripe for any sport.
The first person they met was a lanky
young girl, Eva Panhandle, who was to be a
bridesmaid at Duicie’s wedding. She had
also been tackling spirituous liquors to a very
noticeable extent, and was accompanied by a
smart-looking little fellow whom she intro-
duced as ? Jerry the bloke wot’s
teaefain’ me daracin’/ 9 Mr. Biddle had a
large bag of tomatoes in hk hand, and his
pockets bulged out with onangtes, while Miss
Panhandle was calmly musiehing a hot
saveloy, i
“I’ll show you some steps/’ she said,
the band struck up a lively dance, and in a
moment her long and bony legs were kicking
the air merrily, while her skirts were grabbed
up a foot or so from the ground.
“That’s a bit before yer time,” she cried
breathlessly to Dulcie.
“Not much, it aint,” was the reply, as
Dulcie also hoisted her petticoats, and flashed
her fancy stockings about in harmony with
the band. And she danced so much better
than Panhandle that that lengthy lady lost
her lovely temper, and saying, " Well, you
can’t kick like this,” sent her foot flying
against Duicie’s once-a-week, or cheek, with
force enough to bruise it,
11 By funder,” cried Dulcie, ** if I fought you
did that on purpose, I’d— 99
“ Well, wot’d you do?” broke in Eva.
“Now, don’t get barneyin’,” interposed
Jerry Riddle, advancing between the girls.
“Oh! you go an* chew spiders,” Eve re-
torted, and with another kick sent the
tomatoes flying out of his hands. Instantly,
Dulcie grabbed one of the largest and juiciest,
and with wonderfully accurate aim landed it
full squasn between Panhandle’s eyes/ Back
came the half-eaten saveloy, hurled by Eva’s
angry arm, and was received by Siopper on
his white shirt front. Again and again Dulcie
flung tomatoes at her opponent, sometimes
hitting Eva, sometimes hitting Jerry Riddle
till at length the latter began to reply with
pulpy oranges, some of which Siopper caughV
and returned with threefold force, Panhandle
had also picked up some tomatoes, and soon
Dulcie’s face, wherever the ripe, red fruit had
squashed against it, was covered with juice
and pulp and orange pips almost as badly m
was Eva’s, You could bear the stuff go ping 1
against each girl’s stays, and [other parts of
their wardrobe, while Jerry and Siopper, after
the first attack, simply held back and laughed
to bursting point. Finally, Panhandle rushed
at Dulcie with wildly-flying arms and such
a savage look on her face that Dulcie stepped
back in fear, and Eva’s foot, catching her an
unfair blow—unfair because it was below the
belt—she went toppling down backwards in
amongst a stall fall of dogs, parrots, cocka-
toos and other live stock, and fell plump on a
toy terrier, flattening him out like a beetle
mashed under a sledge-hammer. A second
later, Eva. being unable to stop in her head-
long rush, came tumbling over her, and, what
with the cries of the fallen girls, the barking
and snarling of the dogs, and the terrific
screeching of the cockatoos and parrots, the
noise became simply deafenings A retriever,
evidently mistaking Panhandle’s right calf for
a bone—and it really was not much better-
set his teeth to It. and made her howl as
horribly as some ol the curs about her, while
Dulcie, on attempting to rise, found that a
vixenish bull pup had a good grip on the rear
part of her skirts, and a cockatoo on a stand
held her blouse in its beak. So that w’
Jerry Riddle and the steli-h
8 4
Gay Life ia Melbourne.


dialed DsScte up, the dog and cockatoo hung
on and clang to her closer than ever, the bird
eventually being pulled away with a big piece,
of blouse in his jaw, thus bringing Dulcie*s
white and plump bosom to the light. Then
she jerked so hard from the dog that she
literally tore herself from his bold, and as his
grip extended to skirt and petticoat, both of
which Jcatne away at the waist, Dalcie was
left standing in just the very clothes she least
desired to be seen in. She had to pay half a
crown for a second-hand skirt to go home in*
while Jerry Riddle and Siopper made a master
of ss. soothe the angry feelings of the dog
and bird man, and Panhandle simply had to
have a shilling’s worth of brandy before she
could limp to the tram. And yet, in spite of
all these disasters, Duicie turned up on her
wedding day in as good condition as any man
could desire.
CHAPTER XXXII.
DOLCIE'S MARBIAGE.
According to most fact and all fiction, it is
customary with a happy bride to be in a per-
feet glow of blushes, and a delightful state of
tremor, from the moment she rises on her
wedding day until she enters the bridal cham-
ber, and nervously awaits the coming of her
husband After that, we have no reliable in-
formation on the subject, except that—so the
most popular novelists tell us—on the follow-
ing morning she appears at breakfast rather
late, with a new look in her eyes, a particu-
larly languid manner, and a peculiar habit of
breaking into hot blushes and looking guiltily
at the table cloth whenever her husband
glances at, or speaks to, her.
No doubt this timidity of behavior is very
natural and proper, and perfectly charming,
but Dalcie did not happen to be a timid cha-
racter, and on her wedding morn neither
blushed nor trembled when the thought of
how that day would end occurred to her.
However, she was in the seventh heaven of
rapture over a beautiful dress and some dainty
frilly underthinga which Rita had presented
to her, the said frilly things being of a more
choice and enticing description than any-
thing which had previously embraced Dulcie’s
warm and wholesome limbs.
“ Lumme,” she exclaimed, as she tried
them on, “ wot sort of a toff am I goin’ to be 1
Aint it a shame the push carnt see me now?
It’s a pity to put even such a shine dress over
'em, aint it ? 99
“Yes/’ responded Rita, “but it can’t be
helped. You know one half the world doesn’t
know what lovely things the other half has
got on, though they’re always trying to find
out. Besides, Slopper’s admiration should
satisfy you. i;
“Slop I Oh I he’ll go clean orf’s bloomin’
block when J e sees ’em,” said Dulcie, clasping
her buxom bosom in a deliciously tight pair of
brand new stays.
11 Most men would,” rejoined Rite gail*
Norman tapped at the door and said~
•'May I come in?” Daicie giggled and Rita
smiled.
’* Well,** answered the latter, 81 as Daicie is
jnst now as you would most like to see hep
of course you can't come in.”
*' Bat,” added the bride, ** there aint no-
thin s to stop you ’avin* a cook frough the
key-hole, w which sage advice he promptly
acted upon, but has ever since firmly de-
clined to reveal the result of his observations.
Perhaps he was shocked—perhaps not.
I* inally, when Dulcie was arrayed from top
to toe, she was so pleased with her reflection
ra the mirror that she went dancing around
th f room in great glee, and breathlessly said ;
1 By funder I I ought to be in the papers.
I ought. I know what 111 do ; 111 send a in-
vite to the editor of the B E j s an orl
right sort of a bloke *e is—Siopper an* lm *a
ad many a tiddly at the Demo-an’ VII put a
prescription of me clobber in Is paper, an*
p raps shove me photo in, too. 111 write it
now, an* send it down by the kid next do >r, ,J
and halt an hour later the following card was
received at the Hawklbt office i
ipiSc
H \^l '^aJUaj^,


Punctually to lh« hour of si* unlock the
w orl right sort of a bloke ” turned up at a
little hall which Norman bad hired for the
ceremony and subsequent festivities, and
I and himself amongst as merry a company
any man could desire. Dulcie, in her
autiful new dress, received him with hearty
ithusiaem, and a bottle of English beer,
id in a quiet corner the Haw klbi moistened
g beak and surveyed the lively scene. Eva
inhandle and Rita were the bridesmaids,
bile Jerry Riddle and Norman looked after
ie interests of Slopper—as the boxing re-
>rts put it—and a very gentlemanly pal of
opper, known as Oyster Scruggs, was de-
ited to give the bride away.
But even in the short time before the cere-
lony, Dulcie and Siopper had to receive so
iacy compliments from friends and drink so
i&ny hearty good wishes that they were
oth rather “bosky,” as Jerry Riddle termed
, and as Dulcie approached tbs little stage
rhcre the parson awaited them her feet got
dxed np with her unaccustomed long skirts,
nd, notwithstanding the support of Oyster
cruggs, on whose arm she was, she fell head-
ing on the stage steps, alid presented a free
nd liberal view of the very things which
forman had had a peep at through the key-
ole. Rita promptly picked her up, but so
nraged was she that she turned round to
lyster and accused him of having deliberately
ripped her, ....
“ Wot’s that?” cried Slopper, bustling for-
rard ; ,# downed you, did *e T Blime, Oyster,
, man ought to deal wid you.**
"I ain't done nothin*,* said Oyster, "an*
ven if I ’ad, you aint the sort to deal wid
qp, Slop.** Oyster had evidently had a few.
" Gam !** responded Slop ; " if it wosn*t me
addin’ day, I’d smash yer bloomin’ jor,*
,nd advanced threateningly.
“ Now, that’s enough,” interposed Norman.
11 Dulcie is wrong, Scruggs did^ not trip her,
\o there's no necessity fora row.”
“Well, if you so,” said Dulcie, “it’s
ye-buck. I don’t want to make no trouble,
10 shut up Slop, and let’s go ahead wif the
uneral.”
But Dulcie was sulky, Slopper and Oyster
ooked all sorts of terrible things at each
)tber, Mrs. Tickeltom began howling dis-
mally possibly because nobody ever does
iowl, joyfully, Rita and Norman went over
:o the Hawklet man and beseeched him not
io mention the affair in hia paper—and yet he
iid—and things got so mixed up that the par-
don, who was palpably nervcv-js, began to
mumble the marriage service over Eva Pan-
handle and Jerry Riddle, who happened to be
l anding np*r him with their arras around
*ach otber.#He had hurried as far as "Wilt
thou have this mar. ! ” when Eva shot up one
of her long legs, knocked the book out of his
bands and said—
“ Dicken I Wot yer givin’ as! I aint takin*
no man.”
* your pardon,” sfeu&merad the
clergyman, picking tip the volume* * B—a—*
somebody's going to be joined in the holy
bonds. I know.”
Then Eva attempted to pull Dulcie forward,
bat she resisted and said— ■
“Oh ! I’m full up of this roc. ’Ere’s ms
lovely drew* tore, an* I’ve got a bash on
me knee somefin 5 orful, an—well, I’m ort
this splicin' Job, I am.” .
” Wot nonsense.” said Eva. 51 Think of the
shine ’ouse you’ll ’ave, with the spankin’ new
carpets an’ chairs an* things.
" Yuss, an* the spankin’ new doable bed,
with a rye-back spring mattress good enough
for the Prince o’ Wales an’ ’is missis/* said
Jerry.
•* Think of all the lovely things you nave
got on which Slopper won’t see unless you
marry him, ! put in Rita, who had again come
forward.
Evidently the last suggestion convinced
Dalcie, as, saying—" Well, I don’t want to do
Slop, out of no luxuries,” she placed herself by
his side before the parson. Mumble, mumble,
mumble. M Wilt thou have this woman to
be thy wedded wife f ”
*• My bloomin’ oath I ”
Mumble, .mumble, mumble. ‘’Wilt thou
have this man to be thy wedded husband ? ”
** Yuss* Lmnme, ain’t that what I’m ere
for?” a
More mumble, mumble, mumble, and the
deed was did. Dulcie Fisher was transformed
into Mrs. Specklefcottle, the ring shone on her
fourth finger—the marriage service counts
the thumb as a finger—and Slopper became
master of all that tempting pink flesh, with
honorable and legal right to admire all the
dainty frilly work from a more convenient
point of view than any key-hole afforded.
As the bridal party descended the platform
steps, the band, two accordeous, a Jew's
harp, and a mouth organ, struck up—Oh !
what a difference in the morning,” and to
this inspiriting air Dalcie and Slopper
marched to the refreshment table, while Eva
Panhandle and Jerry Riddle executed a can-
can dance round the nervous parson, which,
however, did not shock him sufficiently to
prevent him from taking more than one sly
glance at Eva’s lively legs as they hoisted her
petticoats high in the air. Afterwards, there
was whisky and a waltz, rum and a schofc-
tische, beer and step-dancing, until nearly
everybody became more or less elevated.
Even the comparatively-modest girls became
careless of their attitudes, and revelations
afforded by crossed legs were numerous and
interesting. Just at this juncture, somebody
turned out the gas. In a moment screams
and titterings were heard from all quarters.
,4 Oh! someone pinched me call/' shrieked
one girl. None of yer funny bisness now,
Jerry,” Eva Panhandle protested.# 41 Ho*
Aleck, somebody’s a-squeezin* me,” cried Mfi,
Tickeltom to her husband. " You fool i you
kissed me bloomin’ nose,” a shrill voice e:*»
dimmed, while Ibe eomade #1 hearty
4


longed mnggmg advertised the fact that so
opportunities were being lost
“ Lumme, this is orl right, old cock/* came
thrmgh the gloom in Dulcie’a well-known
tones. 14 Uimaie a couple more fair on the
ki^er.”
Everybody laughed. Then Stopper’s harsh
voice from another direction thundered out—
-44 WVre the blazes are yon, Daicie ! Wo
sort or a gams are you up to?**
** Mr God, S op./’ Daicie was heard to gasp
,4 » , elp me, I fought it wos you ! ”
,s ‘Ere, strike a light someone,” shouted
Stopper, agitatedly, “Quick an* lively, now
s'*on and sodden ! By gosh J someone*!! ge;
12 stone ot stoush over this.** The gas was
turned on again and lit, and the scene pre-
sented was something to recollect for a life-
time. Half the girls were being enthusiast-
ically hugged in all manner of attitudes ; two
or three were sprawling on the floor; in a
corner by the stage Jennie Winkle and
Harriet Kipper were kissing each other in
mutual enjoyment, and several fellows were
at the side-table swigging liquor. But the
two m)st notable discoveries were that the
pardon —who had sunk his nervousness in
long b^ers—was just whipping his arms from
Eva Panhandle’s waist, and that Dulcie*s
face was flushed, her hair awry, and her
beautiful dre s most conspicuously creased
and crumpled. >
Slop per was white with fury, and for an
instant could find no words to express his
sentiments, Then he burst out—
“By God, if you aint strong! Tell me who
the bloke was, or I*ll parse you one that’ll
stiffen you !”
Dulcie broke into tears.
“S’elp me, Slop., I did fink it woa you/*
she sobbed. “ W’en the bloomin* gas went
out L wos arf asleep, an* I fought you
grabbed ’old of me an’ mugged me an’
pulled me about lovin’ like, Finks I, Slop’s
a bit sudden; ’e might wait till we get
’ome, bat it*s cherry-ripe, finks I, cos we’re
spliced, an* so I wos jest ’opin’they wouldn’t
turn on the gas for a bit when I heard you
sing out from over there. S’elp me, you could
*ave knocked me down wif a fewer.”
“ Aint you got no idea who it wos ? ” asked
Stopper.
“No, I donno,” she replied, “ but whoever
*e is ’e ’as got one of me garters, ennyhow.”
11 Wot! Did you let *im ”
“ Blime,” she broke in, “didn’t I tell you I
fought it wos you orl the time? You don’t
suppose I wos goin* to kick at me own *ua-
band messin* me about, do you ? ”
“ Well, w by the Lord, if I find the bloke
that’s got that garter, I’ll—’’began Slop., when
the very identical article dropped from Oys-
ter Scrugg’s pocket to4he floor with a jingle
made by the silver buckle. Oyster fairly
shivered as Stopper atrpde.up tp him.
“ Fair dinkum, Slop,/’he started tp«ay/“I
—picked it ap altar Iks l&rst A&nm, law-
“Whoosh I” that was all Slopper said, but
as he said it with his fist Oyster went down
heavily, a mere heap of senseless, quivering
humanity.
“That 1 !! learn 'im to keep’is’and orf my
missus’ tog*,” remarked Slopper quietly, as
a couple of fellows lifted the unconscious
Oyster, and fired him into the street. “Now,
Du ice, you and me ? ii smoke ’ome to the roses
red (bed) an* discuss this matter on our own.
But if enny of you blokes or tarts cares to
come down wid us I’ve got some jug juice
there, an’ you can s ave a round wid me.”
Most of them fell in with the proposal, and
as they were walking down the street Jerry
Riddle said to Eva Panhandle—
“ Did that bloomin’ parson sneak one of
yer garters too? ”
“Now, don’t sling orf at me,’’she respond-
ed. “Me an’Dulce was in the same fix. I
thought you wos teasin’ an’ ticklin’ me, an*
I’m biowed if it wasn’t the blessed minister.
Take my word for it, he’s a bloomin’ corf
drop, *e is, but ’e didn’t get as iar as me
garters, enny how.”
Dulcie’s new home consisted of a neat suite
of rooms over a freshly-decorated fish and
poultry - shop which Slopped was going to
run. Here the “jug-juice” was produced
and dispersed in a cosy little parlor, after
which Dulcie proudly proposed to show her
guests over the premises. Ample admiration
was bestowed on each aptrtcuent as it was
visited, and at last Dulcie sa;d, “ Now for me
bedroom. But where’s Eva and Jerry? Eva
sed she wos dyin’ to see me new double bed,
an’ Pm blowed if she aint gone.”
“ Oh I they disappeared some time ago,” said
someone. “I saw ’em on the stairs ’avin a
spoon, but they aint been seen since.”
“Well, never mind ; come on,” said Dulcie,
and led the way. But on,arriving at the door,
to her surprise, she found it locked. She
knocked, and a scuffle was heard from in-
side.
“Who’s there?” shouted Slopper.
“It’sh orright, Shlop.,” said the voice of
Jerry, and in a moment the door was opened
end that individual presented himself ; *n a
state of anything but sobriety.
“Wot the’ell ere you doin ’ere?” asked
Slopper.
44 Well,” hiccupped Jerry, “you sbee me
an' Eva ’ad drop too much, an’ we wos-. rym*
to get down shtairs (hie) an* go ’ome u’hen
we ah tumbled (hie) into this room an wos
just tryin’ (hie) to find door again when (hie)
—beg pardon—w’en you comesh up.”
“ Tunny fing the Rory O’More wos ioc red.*
said Dulcie.
..r Yesh * wosn’t it I” said Jerry, c00i7,%
T hash worst of these noo doors, they lockst
emselvea. Gome on, Eva, Dulchie wants
show you ’er noo bed.
“If she ? aan’t seen it already she’s got no
c&araoe*” said Dalol& testily. “Out you go,
Iks pate al you,” a»d bey bad I*go, whilst


.♦feSi saris giggled as though JerryandSvahad
provided them with an exceptionally good
joke, and then they went too.
And now, dear readers, ont yon all mast go.
Having brought yon to the very threshold of
the bride and bridegroom’s chamber, yon
cannot expect to be taken any farther. We
will leave Dalcie and Stopper to meditate on
the pleasures of matrimony, the many adven-
tures they have encountered since oar first
acquaintance with them, and the prospects of
a prosperous future, with a few little Dolcies
and Stoppers to wear their mother’s old
petticoats and their father’s old trousers
in the' good old time to come. The
marriage was not so very long ago, bat
already Dalcie dandles a small, rad-headed
aditlon of her husband, while any evening
you happen to drop in at the shop—where
yon’ll find a plate of fried fish and chips
equalled by none—yon will see both Dalcie
and Slopper living in the happiness of being
"cherry ripe” with each other, and the
proud parents of a “rye-buck kinchin,"
rather too carrotty, it is true, bnt the very
image of his father—-which is always a matter
for congratulation.
.As to Rita, dear, beautiful, womanly Rita,
fne writer paid her and Norman a visit at
their pretty home at St. Kiida only a couple
of weeks ago, and was assured, with a tender
and be twitching smile, that since the recent
arrival of a perfect iove of a golden-haired
baby girl, Rita ksa had neither time nor in-
clination to recall her past experiences of ss
many scenes of Gay Melbourne.
Sensational Books.
D\m\s\es \ k Daughter NJ'vce.
Gay VAfe/xn W\e\bourne.
Gonfess'vons a o\ly Barma\d.
Queen Ibe S\ums.
Mar\on Edwards *, Tbe Man AN Oman.
OBTAINABLE FROM
W. H. WILLIAMS, Junr., Little Lonsdale'Street, Melbourne
Sir ROBERT BEAR, 16 Park Street, Sydney.
ALBERT & CO., Central Arcade, Perth.
E. G. ASHER, Wellington Street, Perth.
J. PIKE, 180 Edward Street, Brisbane.
*
Price (includin Postage)—-Is. Id. each.


