

f _ I iSef 1 i
I M a ’■'" I 11
I V I H ns
l [ . I B if
’ | f A .vi-v • -c & Ua
k »«■. M ■" - 'JH»‘ «T E * ' d
ft - ME ‘ V r M
% ' -diHr i
n afi 95 jv
» m
m \ S S jg
JCTi 3} # >te /J
Jl I I//I
Jjrf/ I fp«.,«^vi||S
® j I v11^
& j I \ f - H 9 jS
f J? ■ j? 1 S _ -tfig* H# SB, JQgnSq


s?






GEM OF THE FLAT


I




THE CAMP BY THE RIVER


GEM OF THE FLAT
CONSTANCE MACKNESS
With Illustrations
SYDNEY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET


Printed by
W. C. Penfold & Co., 183 Pitt Street, Sydney
Angus & Robertson Limited
London ; The Oxford University Press
Amen Corner, E-C.


Page
• • • • I
10
16
•• *• 2 5
•. 34
.. • • 44
5i
36188
CONTENTS
GEM AND THE FLAT 1
A DIP INTO DEAD DAYS 10
Chapter 111
THE NEW MASTER 16
A FALSE ALARM 2 5
INTRODUCED BY A PIG 34
A GIRL FRIEND 44
Chapter VII
THE LONG BUSHIE 5 1
THE FIRST DAY AT SCHOOL .. .. 59
Chapter IX
A BATTLE LOST AND A BATTLE BEGUN 70
Chapter X
THE FLOOD 8 5


Chapter XI
THE SMOOTHING OF THE WAY .. 102
A SURPRISE PARTY 108
IDA’S REBELLION 121
Chapter XIV
MAKING FRIENDS 133
KEPT IN 141
MUFFIE’S VICTORY 150
THE RIVER CAMP 161
FELICIA i 77
Chapter XIX
NED GOES VISITING 193
MAN PROPOSES 204
GEM PAYS A CALL 216
Chapter XXII.
GEM’S LETTER 234


Chapter XXIII
RIVAL COOKS 244
THE INSPECTOR OF SCHOOLS .. 258
THE TABLES TURNED 270
THE LADY DODGE 288
Chapter XXVII
THE PARTING OF THE WAYS .. .. 3°5


4


ILLUSTRATIONS
The Camp by the River
Needy Flats -
Frontispiece
- Facing page 18
Gem picking apricots in Gran’s garden
Pine Cliff, where Ned shot rock-wallabies
The bluffs and hills near Gem’s home
Gem driving home Muffle’s cow
j) >» 35
> > > > 66
„ ~ S3
>) >) 146
View from the River Camp
Yankee Joe’s hut -
~ 163
> > > > 25




Chapter I.
GEM AND THE FLAT.
The village of Needy Flat straggled down both
sides of Needy Creek, on the inland edge of the
central tableland of New South Wales. A
stickler for exactitude would have called it
Needy Flats, for the scanty population was not
restricted to the top flat; there was the village
proper, with its two hotels, its church, school,
store, post-office and nearly twenty white-washed
cottages, all with galvanized iron or stringy
bark roofs. But lower down the creek, as it
curved in and out in vandyke pattern, there were
six more flats, all occupied. On the seventh and
last, two miles from the village proper, lived
Gran Gold-Eyes and his little grand-daughter,
Gem. People called it Marshall’s Flat from the
name by which the postal authorities knew the
old man. Further down stream the country
was rough and hilly till, eight miles off, one
reached the village of Junction Flat, where
Needy Creek ended its own career and joined
the river , a tributary of the Lachlan but
The River par excellence to local people.


One warm January evening, when the busy
mosquitoes on Marshall’s Flat were robbing
the sunset of its charm, Gran Gold-Eyes sat
smoking on the doorstep, and Gem was on an
empty butter-box beside him.
“They’re worse than ever to-night,” she
grumbled, with a vicious slap at her tormentors.
“Lately we’ve been having about a hundred to
the square inch; now there are more like a
thousand, the pesky pests!”
“I suppose it’s their way of apologising for not
being with us last night, owing to the wet,” said
Gran Gold-Eyes. “But, bless your heart, little
woman, don’t let a few miserable specimens like
those sour your even temper! I’ve known ’em
a sight worse.”
“Where?” asked the child sharply, for she
feared he was teasing her.
“Up in North Queensland. They were so
thick there that you couldn’t tell where the sun
was, unless you looked for it with a telescope.
If you stepped away from one place to another,
the clear space left for a second was as good as
a photo of you; better, in fact, for if you were
cross-eyed or had a squint it didn’t show up.
And the size of them! Why, one night I left
a tot of water near my bed, and when I woke up


I spotted a big hairy-legged chap draining up
the last drop of it and winking at me.”
Gem smothered a laugh beneath her hurt
dignity. “There you go, Gran, laughing at me
again!” she protested.
“Laughing? Not me,” he declared. “Tm
looking as glum as young Dawson did when
they got him to marry the wrong girl.”
“Why you must always think Tm a baby,”
she stormed, “ I don’t know. I was twelve last
week and you oughtn’t to make fun of me. It’s
wrong of you, Gran, really wrong of you.”
“When I was a kiddie,” said the old man, “they
licked me into shape with a birch rod instead of
a tongue-banging; I’ve heard your sweet little
mother say too, that she’d done solitary confine-
ment in a bathroom in her time.”
“I suppose you deserved it though,” said the
child; “but I don’t do things I know I oughtn’t
to, and don’t you think Tm very sensible for
twelve ?”
“Anyhow, Miss Perfection, that same little
mother of yours wouldn’t call mosquitoes ‘pesky
pests and wouldn’t bullyrag her own grand-
father.”
“May be,” said Gem doubtfully.


“May be? Why, May bees don’t fly round in
January; it is certain sure she wouldn’t.”
“Oh! Gran,” said the child, changing her tone
to sorrowful entreaty, “how do you think I’ll
ever grow like dear little mother —sweet and
good and a lady? I want to be like her, and I
mean to be like her some day, only it s hard
when there’s nobody to tell me how. You are
only an ordinary sort of a mining person, if you
are clever and nice, and you can’t teach me.”
“Why, Great-grandmother Girlie,” said he,
patting her head with awkward tenderness,
“don’t you fret your poor little heart out because
an old man who is getting cantankerous with
years plagues you a bit at times. I’ll wager you
will be as sweet a lady as your mother yet, and
that is saying a lot.”
Gem was comforted. “Tell me about her
again, Gran, please, and my father too, she
coaxed.
He put his pipe down obediently. “Y ou see,
little woman, life was pretty hard on them both,”
he said. “When I was a boy in England, my
people settled I was to be a parson, and they
kept me at school doing Latin and Greek day in
day out. I didn’t find it hard, but I wanted to do


and see things and be free, and not waste my
time on what dead old heathens did and wrote
thousands of years ago. All my people were
good and proper, and they liked Latin and re-
spectablity and stiff collars, while I didn't.
“So I ran away to sea at fourteen. Pretty soon
I was sorry, but too proud to own up. ihe
brutality I put up with on that boat cured me
of my fancy for a sailor’s life, and when the crew
deserted for the gold-fields, I cleared out too,
got work to do, and finally landed up in \ ictoria.
“Since then I have been only an ordinary sort
of a mining person, as you say, but I have never
been sorrv for it. Pve been my own master anu.
free and healthy and hearty, and I should have
been pleased to see your father taking after me.
“But he had my people’s love for Greek and
Latin, and I could see plain enough he only
needed teaching. So I spent what money I’d
saved to give him the best education he could
get out here. He was studying law, but in the
meantime he wrote a book that was praised a
good deal and brought him next to nothing.
“Then he met your mother at the University
They were both clever, both wrote poetry, and
they ended in getting married. He threw up
law for the time and became editor of a country


paper. But her people never forgave her; they
were rich and ambitious and she was their only
child. When her father died, he didn't leave
her a farthing, and the letters she wrote her
mother came back unopened. Then you came,
and they were so proud and happy that they
even begged me to go and see you, forsooth!”
‘“And you did, I know,” interrupted Gem. “Oh!
Gran, what kind of a baby was I ? Surely I
was pretty when I was tiny?”
“All I know,” he went on, “is that you didn’t
howl much; you grinned most of your time, as
though being poor was a rare old joke. But
your father died, Gem, when you were two years
old. He got typhoid and we couldn’t pull him
through. Your mother wrote to her mother
again, but no answer came. I stayed there with
you both and got work easily enough, for I
could earn as much with my hands as your poor
father could with all his learning. I never saw
your little mother cry or grumble, Gem, but she
just pined away all the same, till she caught a
bad cold and couldn’t shake it off. Before she
died, she asked me not to write to her people
about you, for she thought they might teach you
to be hard and selfish, or might be unkind to
you; so I brought you home to Needy Flat,


where I owned this place and could get back to
my gold-digging.”
Gran took up his pipe again and puffed away
silently, while Gem pondered over the story that
she had heard so often and always asked for
again.
“And you are going to send me away to school
next year, too?” she asked at last.
Gran sighed. “Yes, of course,” he said; “I’d
like to this year, but our savings wouldn’t last out
long enough if we dipped into them too soon. So
I have written to the new master to say you’ll
start school on Monday, and I’ve asked him if
his sister will teach you extra things and help
you in any way. They say she is very clever,
and she looks kind and nice; I saw her when
she came on the coach.”
For a minute or two there was only the puffing
of Gran’s pipe or the droning of the mosquitoes
to break the silence. Then Gem exclaimed
suddenly; “Gran, am I a good child? Don t say
yes just to please me, but am I really and truly
good?”
“Yes, really and truly.”
“I’m glad of that; I wouldn’t like not to be,
for I think you’re a very good grandfather.”
Gran patted her head and laughed. He always


tried to ward off her thoughtful moods with jest-
ing or teasing.
“And now,” he said, “as I have been getting
chicken-pecked and mosquito-bitten at home till
it is likely there’ll be none of my handsome face
left soon, I’ll go up town, get the papers, and
have a yarn at the store. Anything you are
wanting, Mrs. Housekeeper?”
“Candles and salt, and don’t forget to ask at
the post.”
Gran came back from a search for his hat,
wearing a new one. “How does it suit my style
of beauty, Miss Critical?” he asked.
“Didn’t know you had one,” mocked Gem.
“It doesn’t run to saucer-sized eyes, anyhow,
Miss Pert,” he retorted.
Gem always fired up at an insult to her per-
sonal appearance, for the dead mother whom she
longed to resemble had been pretty. “If ladies
made personal remarks,” she observed loftily,
“there are things I could say about your face
that would make you want to bury it.”
Gran laughed good-humouredly. “I’m not
exactly a beauty,” he admitted, “but I’ve seen
a few chaps whose looks would stop a clock
sooner. How long can I stay out to-night,
Little Boss?”


“As long as you like,” she said, “and longer,
for I am fairly sick of you. Mind you bring home
the paper; I want to read about the bushranger;
he was seen at Brendon the day before yesterday,
only forty miles away.”
“But Brendon is a rich mining place, and there
is some excuse for his being there. Even nowa-
days bushies would have more gumption than to
come to this dead-and-alive hole. You surely
are not afraid, little woman?”
“Afraid!” laughed Gem. “Of course not; but
bushrangers in books are so interesting that I
want to know all about this one.”
Gran seemed half inclined to stay, but she
teased him. “I told you long ago I was sick of
the sight of you,” she said.
And he went.


Chapter 11.
A DIP INTO DEAD DAYS.
Gran Gold-Eyes had won his name by his luck
in “spotting” the precious metal, as local par-
lance put it. If a quartz vein anywhere held gold
it was he who found the vein and the gold too.
Many a re|ef had he discovered, but never a
big one; in between such windfalls, he sank
shafts that were often “duffers,” or fossicked in
the creek-bed. But his savings grew with sad
slowness of late, for Needy Flat was almost
worked out, and the more energetic part of its
population had already drifted away to newer
fields. It was the endearing talk of Gem’s baby-
hood that had tagged on the “Gran” to his name.
His boyhood days of Latin and Greek and re-
spectable dnlness seemed like some half-forgot-
ten dream to him now; for, since the days when
Ballarat had dazzled its thousands with visions
of wealth, he had wielded pick and shovel. For
forty years he had lived on the Flat, dropping
largely into the speech and life of its people. It
was there that he had met and married a simple,
bright-hearted bush girl. It was there that his


motherless boy had played and dreamed his
dreams of that life which was to slip from him
so soon. And when Gem’s mother was gone too,
it was to the old Flat that Gran brought their
child. One summer evening, with his swag on
his back, the old man had returned, wheeling
the baby before him on a barrow.
It was fortunate that in a bark hut on the
next flat there lived a queer, kind-hearted old
woman who came to his help. Mrs. Wood had
brought wp half-a-dozen strong sons on a lonely
bush selection; they had all gone out into the
world and had far-scattered homes of their own
now. She had tried to live with each in turn,
but heart-hungry for the loneliness and freedom
of the hut where she was often near starvation,
she always came gladly back from plenty. Some-
times the sons remembered her needs, oftener
they forgot, and she lived on the little she could
earn by rearing turkeys, doing sewing and even
fossicking. Gran’s few shillings a week for
minding Gem, making her clothes and washing
them, were a boon to her.
But, except in the matter of sewing and wash-
ing, Gem was long since emancipated from her
rule. Grandfather and child “batched it” in the
old house on Marshall’s Flat. Gem was house-


maid and housekeeper, but Gran was a king
among cooks and gardeners. It was a house-
hold of mutual tyranny. Gem was a wilful
little woman, with a love of her own way and a
belief in her own ideas. Full of ambitions and
aspirations herself, she lectured the old man at
times on his shirt-sleeved, collarless content-
ment ; in her dreams she saw him as he might
have been —a frock-coated grandee, envied and
respected—and she resented the gap between
the dream and the reality. But if she had never
been punished, Gran had his own methods of
discipline; the child was his chum, with a chum’s
freedom, but he teased her into the way in which
he thought she should go. And no child was
ever more anxious to tread in that way than
Gem; she took life and herself very seriously,
and Gran had only to hint a difference between
her conduct and her mother’s to bring her to a
penitent frame of mind.
She was thin and brown and would have been
a decidedly plain child but for her large and
beautiful blue eyes that now dreamed and now
danced. She was a bookworm and a dreamer
like her father, but with it all no child was ever
more practical. She had a definite purpose in life
towards which she worked with unflagging reso-


lution; she meant to be a lady some day,
cultured, capable, charming, and she educated
herself towards that end. Gran taught her
lessons in the evening, even brushing up his
Latin for her benefit; and during the long days,
while he worked his cradle at the creek-side or
wielded his pick, she read her father’s books and
acquired a knowledge beyond her years. But
there were other things she sought after too;
from novels and from a book on etiquette which
she had persuaded Gran to buy her, she was
storing up a fund of peculiar information about
the way ladies spoke and acted.
Save for Gran and a few of his mates her life
was void of friendship. Needy Flat was a
poverty-stricken, wicked little place, and the
child could not forgive its ignorance and the
narrowness of its outlook on life. She did not
understand that, amidst those sun-parched hills
and gullies where the earth yielded so little
treasure to the miner’s pick and so little green-
ness to the farmer’s shovel, ignorance and vice
must creep in; but she felt and loathed their
presence. The men drank and swore; their
wives scolded and talked scandal; sometimes
when Gran took her with him to the post-office
or store she saw the children fighting, and she


scorned them one and all. The people at Needy
Flat were common people, she said; her mother
had been a lady, and she would be a lady herself
some day.
The only children who lived near her were
the Morrisons, who were two flats above and
about a quarter of a mile away. Once they had
owned nearly all the land about, but the father
was a weakling who had gone to the wall during
a bad drought. Morrison’s Point, with the
house and garden on it, was all that he had left.
He might still have been a happy man, for he had
had a brave wife and children who loved him;
but the wife had been dead for three years, and
he tried to drown his sorrow in drink. And
so the home on Morrison’s Point was not a
happy one. Love and courage had reigned
there in the sunshine of the mother’s true heart;
but when a poor child of seventeen was
called on to take up the mother’s burden, to look
after the home and four younger children, one
a baby but a few days old, and to bear besides
the disgrace of the father’s weakness and the
added poverty it brought, love and courage fled.
Gran and Gem only knew the Point as the scene
of scoldings and wranglings, audible at times to
neighbours and passers-by.


Gem’s chief friend was Yankee Joe, Gran’s dig-
ging mate, who lived on the opposite flat, not
far away from Mrs. Wood. He was a tall,
straight man with a genius for telling entertain-
ing lies. Gem had long since ceased to believe
them, but she relished them none the less, and
often dropped into his hut for a talk, when she
was sure to be regaled with sugared meat,
buttered pancakes or some other of Joe’s queer
dishes.
And so the long years of her childhood had
been slipping by in the old house on Marshall’s
Flat. Fed on books and dreams, glorying in
arguments with Gran, playing wonderful games
for one, paddling in the creek, or climbing on the
hills and amongst the cliffs, where every flower
or bit of moss was known and loved like a
friend, she had grown up almost unknown to
the people around her, a quaint little mortal,
quaintly attired in the style of Mrs. Wood’s
youth.


Chapter 111.
THE NEW MASTER.
The Public School at Needy Flat was built on
a windy hill that rose above the village. It was
a long weatherboard room, roofed with galva-
nized iron. At the rear were four big windows,
bare of blinds, through which the burning after-
noon sun streamed in upon the backs of the
pupils. There were chinks and cracks between
the board walls and in the raised floor, so that
in winter the room was like an ice-chest. One
terrible wind-storm had almost blown it down,
and it still had a slightly intoxicated look, lean-
ing to the back, where it was propped up with
stringy-bark poles. The master’s residence next
door was a comfortable cottage built of brick;
a brick school-house had been talked of, but the
mine that had attracted population had been
closed down, the number of children on the roll
steadily dwindled, and the new school-house
was never built.
Frank Gray, the new schoolmaster, had
arrived with his younger brother and two
sisters a week before the Christmas vacation


ended. The time had been spent putting furni-
ture in place, unpacking boxes or trying to
coax life back into the miserable flowers that had
withered away while the cottage was untenanted.
It was on the Friday afternoon before school
began again that he first visited the oven-like
room that was to be the scene of his future
labours. In the teacher’s desk he found a letter
addressed “To My Successor.” When he re-
turned to the cottage, holding the epistle in his
hand, there was a smile on his face that attracted
the attention of Maida, the elder of his sisters.
Alaida Gray was a fair, slight girl, with eyes
that simply beamed kindness, and she sat by the
window of the little sitting-room, a branch of
Kentish cherries in the waistbelt of her white
frock.
“What a home nest you have made out of
this place already!” said Frank with cheery
admiration. And indeed the room was a sight
to gladden eyes weary with the sun-glare out-
side. The wall-paper was green, the white
curtains had green borders, the cushions were
green and white, the piano and tables were
adorned with bowls of maidenhair and roses,
and there were small palms and pots of aspara-
gus fern in china jardinieres.


“It is beginning to look like home,” she said;
“but why were you smiling, Boy?’”
He repeated the offence. “My predecessor
has left me a letter,” he explained, “from which
it appears that even here I shall have the honour
of teaching a genius.”
“Oh! I have heard about him,” said Ned,
the saucy schoolboy of the family, who was
reading a book on the floor, having chosen that
spot for its coolness. “An infant about an inch
and a bit high and a year old accosted me in the
village yesterday and said, ‘I ’ears as ’ow yer
clever, but there’s a chap at our school as could
lick yer inter a cocked ’at, an ’is name’s Muffle,
an e’s an awful donkey.’ I didn’t tell that sur-
prising inch and a bit in pants that he was mis-
taken about my handsome self, but I deduced
the fact that you would have a genius to teach
and a few babies to nurse; hope you will enjoy
mending their bruises and calming their squalls
when they fight or fall down.”
Frank, smiling at the pleasant prospect held
out by his teasing junior, sat down on the
lounge beside Maida, and together they read:—
“My dear Successor,
You have never heard of me, and I have not
the least idea who you are likely to be, yet I am






writing to ask you a favour. For a score of
years I have taught where you are coming to
teach, and even on this old hill, out of what you
may consider poor material, I have turned out
some men and more women whom I am proud
and grateful to have known. But I have never
had a genius to train till now, and I am leaving*
him to you. I meant him to go for a matricu-
lation pass and honours at the Senior Kxamina-
tion and secure a scholarship or bursary for
the University. He has the brains, and I have
given him the coaching in school and out; will
you ? His name is Alexander Morrison, but
they call him Sandy for his hair, and Muffle for
himself. He is a nincompoop, I fear, with
nothing in him but a brain; but, ye gods! where
did he get that? And sometimes I wonder
sadly if nincompoopishness and necessity will
work the “mute, inglorious Milton” act on it, or
if he will get there some day.
As for your other pupils, remember they
have been brought up amidst hard toil and ig-
norance, always away from culture, often near
vice. Some are dull, some are troublesome,
some are lazy, some are bright enough and good
enough, and you will soon know the worst and
the best of them. But be good to my nincom-


poop, if you can. Besides brains, in the list of
his assets I might mention poverty, a miserable
home-life, and the pathetic look of a poor dog
that asks for kindness, scarcely expecting it, and
feeling no resentment at not getting it. Next to
a grass-grown grave on the Flat I think that
poor-dog look is what I shall miss most. Be
good to him, please.
J. H. WRIGHT.
(Whom you will hear described as ‘the
cracked old schoolie we used to have.’)”
“What a pathetic letter !” said Maida. “Of
course you will do what he asks, Frank? I will
help the Nincompoop with his French and any-
thing else you like.”
“Indeed I shall be glad of the chance to help
him,” said the master.
The door opened and Kathleen Gray came in.
She was a pleasant-faced child of eleven with
pronounced domestic tastes; if Frank was per-
force the father, and Maida the mother of the
family, Kathleen grandmothered them all in her
quaint, gentle way. She was never so happy as
at home with her dolls and pets; to help in the
house was her keenest delight, to darn the family
socks and stockings her pride.
“A letter for you, Frank,” she exclaimed; “the


butcher-boy kindly brought it; and you didn’t
bring the tray across that I took you your tea
on, and you promised faithfully you would; let
me have your key and I’ll go over for it.”
“Sorry, Puss,” said Frank; “but Ned will run
across for it.”
“Oh! will he?” asked Ned. “Don’t you make
rash statements; they are not becoming in a
teacher;” after which pleasant rejoinder he pro-
ceeded to bring the tray across and then flung
himself down in his corner again.
Meanwhile Frank had read the letter and now
passed it on to Maida. “Another candidate for
your teaching,” he said.
The letter was from Gran. It ran:—
“Dear Mr. Gray,
“My little grand-daughter, Gem, has
never been to school before, but I want her to
go to you on Monday. She has come about to
the end of the little learning I have not for-
gotten. I wished to send her to a boarding-
school, but have been obliged to postpone it for
another year. The little one lives all alone
with me and has never been with other children;
so if she seems a bit unusual at first, please put
it down to her queer upbringing. She wants
especially to be a lady, as she says, and is eager


to learn music, dancing, French, and what she
tells me books tell her is called deportment. I
thought perhaps, if Miss Gray will not think it
a liberty, that she would help my little one a bit
in such things after school. If so, you could
let me know about terms by post, or I could
come up and see you. You are not likely to
wander down our way, but in case you do in-
quire, Gold-Eyes is the name hereabouts be-
stowed on
Your obedient servant
John Marshall.”
“That’s the old man whose house we passed
right down the creek,” said Frank. “Are you
going to undertake her, Maida? But really you
have quite enough to do already with this place
and our appetites on your conscience.”
“It depends on the child herself,” said Maida
smilingly.
“Then I shall let him know that you will
inspect the candidate before deciding?”
Maida laughed at his nonsense. “I don’t want
to tie myself down,” she said, “but I really used
to love teaching and it will be a pleasure to help
her if she is a nice child. Tell him Ido not care
to give her regular lessons, but will be glad to


help her when I can. Or go and inspect the
would-be lady yourself.”
“It will be a walk anyhow,” he said; “I’ll go
after dinner.”
“After the girls again!” exclaimed Ned, who
had apparently been buried in his book and deaf
to what was going on. “What a terror you are,
Frank! You shock me, you really do.”
“I must be decidedly bad if I shock an in-
corrigible young scamp like you,” said Frank
amiably. “Couldn’t you find a chair to sit on,
Ned, instead of lolling about like that?”
The boy got up with lazy good humour.
“Monotony is always to be avoided,” he said;
“so I’d advise you to dilute your paternal re-
proof with a little of something more palatable,
old man. Why not borrow a few of Kath’s en-
dearing names? There’s your critical self, for
example, whom she addresses as ‘You dearest
Big Bruvvie’; but don’t get conceited about it;
the youngster that brings the milk, and answers
to the name of Dumpling, is as big as a barrel,
as round as a full moon, and as incapable of con-
versation as a cauliflower, yet she describes him
as ‘a dear little pink-cheeked laddie, so quiet
and so good.’ ”


“Even Kath could not apply a description like
that to you,” laughed Frank.
“Since I take after my big brother,” retorted
the boy, “I can’t expect to rival the silent
Dumpling’s virtues.”
“Saucy again, Ned?” interposed Maida. “I’m
glad, for I wanted an excuse to make you help
Kath set the table, while I dish the dinner.”
“Anything you like to bring a meal nearer,”
grinned Ned; “I’m starving; besides, poor old
Frank is simply pining to be off girl-hunting; it
will be an act of charity to feed him up and let
him go.”


Chapter IV.
A FALSE ALARM.
So it came about, on that Friday evening more
than a dozen years ago, that as Gran went ‘‘up
town” for his papers and the schoolmaster came
down the creek to see him, Gem was left alone
on Marshall’s Flat with her thoughts and dreams.
Sitting still on her butter-box, she pondered over
her mother’s story, her schooldays that were
about to begin, and the doings of the Long
Bushie as chronicled in the daily papers. When
the clock struck eight, she made tea and put
the pot on the ashes to keep it warm for Gran,
turned the lamp low, and set about locking up.
It was a queerly built place, the two living
rooms being quite separate from the rest of the
house. The dining-room had no windows, but
instead two French doors opened upon a
verandah. These Gem locked, hid the key as
usual, and stepped into the kitchen. The door
communicating with this room was in a corner,
near to its own door, which opened into a stone-
paved yard and a flower garden. Gem placed
the key in the lock, as a reminder to Gran to


fasten the door on his return, blew out her light,
and prepared to go in to her bedroom.
Just then she heard a man’s brisk step,
certainly not Gran’s, and the gate clicked. She
shut the kitchen door involuntarily, stood inside
and listened. Only a rough path led past the
house; what did a stranger mean coming there
at night? When he rapped at the door, she
cowered back against the wall. Through the
crack the moonlight showed the dim figure of
a tall man who seemed, to the eyes of
frightened twelve, to tower up to the roof. It
was the Long Bushie, of course, the bushranger
whose robberies had created such a sensation in
the district. Getting no response to his knock,
the stranger pushed the door open, hiding the
child behind it, and walked in. Seeing a light
in the next room, he went in and sat by the table.
In those awful minutes Gem had thought of
every terrible thing that could happen; it flashed
upon her that none of the literary heroines she
loved would have given way, as she did, to
trembling limbs and galloping heart. As her
courage came back, she realised that, as the bush-
ranger had his back to her, it was possible to
trap him. She crept noiselessly from her refuge,
sprang at the dining-room door, and pulled it to.


To turn the key in its lock was the work of a
second, and then, with heart wildly thumping
again, she rushed away for help. An exclama-
tion and then a shout followed her, but she
heeded not. It seemed only a few seconds till
she was battering at Yankee Joe’s door, but he
too had gone “up town.” She turned her steps
to the next flat and there, at the foot of the
Morrisons’ garden, she met the local policeman.
“Oh! Mr. Green, please, please come back
home with me,” she cried. “I have locked the
Long Bushie in our dining-room, and all you
have to do is to take him now.”
The policeman laughed. “You funny little
tot!” he exclaimed incredulously.
But overwrought nerves had made Gem’s
temper a little stormier than usual. “Do you
think 1 am a baby just because I am only
twelve?” she demanded. “I tell you he is there,
but I suppose you are afraid to tackle him.”
“Well, little woman,” he conceded, “I’ll go
along and have a peep at this mare’s nest, since
you’re so dead sure you’ve nabbed our Bushie,
It’s only a whip o’ your thumb from here to
there anyhow, so let’s make a move.”
Quickly as he walked, Gem kept pace with
him; when he reached the door however, she


held back in terror, while he boldly turned the
key in the lock and threw it open.
But no furious lawbreaker sprang at his throat
or rushed to freedom over his trampled body.
Instead, the stranger rose, with comical puzzle-
ment knitting his brows, and his would-be captor
burst into peal upon peal of roaring laughter.
“So help me over the paddock-rails, it’s you!”
he shrieked. “If this isn’t rich—richer than
pork sausage and Christmas cake —you can take
me round and exhibit me for a nigger-brained
Irishman. Don’t mind me cackling like an old
hen.”
The young man was smiling in sympathy.
“I don’t quite understand the joke yet,” he said.
“I came here to see Mr. Marshall and met an
old mate of his across the creek who told me
that his neighbour had gone up town with his
little girl. He advised me to wait inside, to
escape the attentions of the mosquitoes, and
promised to inform Mr. Marshall of my presence.
I acted on his advice, only to find myself locked
in by a sprite, or something of the kind.”
The policeman rocked himself about on a
chair. “Oh, it’s rich! Save me, but it’s rich!”
he roared. “You scared six months’ growth out
of the sprite that locked you in, and packed the


poor little kiddie off to find someone to secure
the Long Bushie! I hope you like your new
title.”
“Poor little girl!" said the stranger. “What
a fright I must have given her!”
There was humiliation and anger in Gem’s
heart. Oh! She had been foolish, she had
been foolish! But that policeman—what right
had he—how dared he —laugh at her? What
man in a book would have been such a brute?
Her eyes sparkled with anger as she walked in
and confronted him.
“You’re not a gentleman to laugh at me,” she
said. “I just detest you, and you can get
away home this very minute. Go now—now,
I tell you.”
The policeman ceased his merriment a little
guiltily, but the twinkle lingered in his eyes.
“Right you are, Miss Bushranger-Trapper,” he
said. “So-so, Long Bushie.”
But the stranger interposed. “It is unkind to
tease the little one,” he said. “Many small
people would have got the same mistaken idea
into their heads, but I doubt if any other would
have had nerve enough to capture the intruder.”
Gem looked at him gratefully, as she stood at
the door and watched the policeman out. The


beams from a calm, round-faced moon lit up the
yard, and she remembered that, when that same
moon had topped the hills, she had vowed on
that self-same doorstep her oft-repeated vow,
“I shall be a lady some day, clever and good
and everything else.”
“Oh! if you please, Mr. Green,” she said.
“Well, Miss Fire-Away?” he queried, turning
back from the gate. “Any more jobs for me,
eh?”
“I didn’t thank you,” she said stiffly, “for
your kind help. lam sorry it was all in vain.”
Then a troublesome' lump rose in her throat.
“Oh! I didn’t mean,” she sobbed, “I didn’t mean
to be nasty and say things.”
“Neither did I, Chickabiddy,” answered the
policeman gently. “I wouldn’t hurt you for the
world. Keep your pecker up, and as for peckin’
at me, you’re welcome to keep that up for ever
and a day.” And he nodded in friendly fashion
and walked off.
Gem gazed frankly at the visitor whose
identity was still a mystery to her. After all
she was glad to find she had been mistaken
about him, for the wisdom of her action began
to look doubtful now; in books, bushrangers
always had something to excuse their crimes;


and when they did come in contact with ladies,
the latter, instead of assisting in their capture,
were so kind and wise that the lawbreakers for-
sook their evil ways and all ended happily. That
was what she should have done.
‘Tm very glad you’re not the Long Bushie,”
she said. “It would have been dreadful to think
afterwards I had helped to send a poor man to
prison when 1 might have talked him over.
That’s what a lady would have done.”
He was careful not to smile. “Seeing I am
not a bushranger, but only the schoolmaster,”
he said, “let me apologise for the fright I have
given you.”
Gem’s eyes opened wide with horror. What
terrible thing had she done thus to give way to
temper before her teacher, towards whom in
anticipation her mind was all awe and respect?
Her lips quivered again. “Please sir, don’t be
vexed with me for being so cross and stupid.
Indeed, I’m not always naughty like that, and
Gran says I am very good.”
“Why, little one, of course I am not vexed,”
he said. “It is good of you not to be annoyed
with me for frightening you so.”
He coaxed her to talk to him about her books
and herself, and then told her about Maida and


Kathleen. When Gran came in, he found them
chatting happily together like old friends.
Then, while the two men talked in the dining-
room, Gem started the fire again and made fresh
tea. She had learnt to deal out hospitality to
Gran’s old mates, but a supper of corned beef
and johnny-cake did not seem exactly the right
thing to set before a schoolmaster; however, she
added a dish of greengages to give variety to
the feast and found, to her delight, that he did
ample justice to it, especially to the plums.
“We have been used to living in Sydney,” he
said, “where a convenient Chinaman leaves
fruit every day, and we find it strange living
where there is no fruitshop and a Chinaman calls
but once a week.”
“If you care for those plums,” said Gran, “we
have so many that half of them are always left
on the trees for the birds; in fact, we have fruit
going to waste here till after midwinter, and I
can easily leave you some each time I go up
town.”
Gem slipped away to the storeroom, where the
picked fruit was kept, and filled a basket with
early apples to send to Kathleen. “I hope you
and Kath will be very good friends,” said Mr.
Gray, as he thanked her for them. “She is such


a quiet little mouse that I should like to see her
running wild for a time, till she looked as sturdy
as you do.”
“But I don’t want to run wild any more,”
expostulated Gem. “I want to be a lady. Please
thank Miss Gray very, very much for promising
to teach me music and other things. I will
try ever so hard to please her.”
However much her grave earnestness amused
him, he showed no trace of it outwardly, and
Gem loved him for it, and because he actually
lifted his hat, when he said good-bye, just as
story-book men did. But when she thought the
evening over in bed, she was sadly worried about
that hat-lifting. Ought she not, perhaps, to have
bowed in return? And what was the proper
way to bow? She lighted her candle and
practised before her cracked mirror from jerky
nods to stately curtseys; but were any of them
right? And if so, which?


Chapter V.
INTRODUCED BY A PIG.
The washing-up, sweeping and bed-making
were over by ten on Saturday morning, and Gem
went down to the creek to play. This and That
and Tother, the white cat, the black cat, and the
ginger cat, followed her, purring and rubbing
lovingly against her stockings, one of which,
alas! was torn. But jealousy led to an angry en-
counter between This and That, and Tother in-
quisitively followed after as, spitting and snarl-
ing, they fled through the garden.
Gem went on alone, meaning to swing on the
branches of the big willow-tree, but the
manoeuvres of a black pig delayed her. Gran
had pumpkin vines in the lower end of the
garden, and some grew out between the palings
of the fence and trailed over the steep bank of
the creek. Half-way down the bank hung
temptingly a fair-sized green pumpkin. The
pigs had eaten everything lower down, but this
was just out of reach. As Gem came near, the
black pig, left behind by its fellows, was standing
up against the bank on its hind legs, trying in
vain to reach the prize.




Is* S3*
- -•" ■/ triTrf <C :
Gem picking apricots in Gran s garden


She stood and watched it, with a smile of en-
joyment curving her lips. Six times it balanced
itself on its hind legs, but six times got no more
than a delicious odour of pumpkin. “Now it has
given up,” she thought, as it moved out into the
bed of the creek to inspect the tantalising feast.
But it had not. It stood for several minutes,
with its head slightly on one side and a comical
look of consideration on its piggy countenance.
Then it scampered up the creek to a place where
the bank was easy of ascent, walked back along
the top and began to gnaw through the vine
stalks. With a genius for bad luck, it tried
every wrong one first, but at last the breaking
of the final stalk was followed by the thud of
a falling object that convinced the animal its
ingenuity was rewarded; with a grunt of delight,
it scrambled over the bank and seized its well-
earned booty. Gem laughed aloud and clapped
her hands in admiration.
“Mr. Porky Grunter is a cute customer ali
right, isn’t he?” asked a voice behind her.
She turned with a start. A boy was standing
near and now came forward, lifting his hat.
Good morning, he said, with a cheerful smile.
“Hope I didn't take a rise out of you, but I didn’t
want to spoil our friend Porky’s little game.”


He was a tall boy in a grey suit and tan boots,
but what Gem noticed first was that he wore a
collar and tie and lifted a hat with a school
badge on it—all certain signs that he did not
belong to Needy Flat. Then she saw that he
was carrying the basket she had filled with
apples for Mr. Gray; he must be the school-
master’s brother, of course.
‘'Good morning,” she replied primly. “Oh!
why did you bother to come all the way down
with that basket? I could have got it on
Monday.”
“Oh! that was only the excuse, you know.”
“Excuse ? For what ?” she asked wonderingly.
“For the pleasure of making your acquaintance
of course,” he said, “and now His Serene Perki-
ness has kindly introduced us, let us consider
ourselves friends.”
His rejoinder was so unexpected, his smile so
ingratiating, that Gem laughed and forgot to be
prim. “Gran says man is the only reasoning
animal,” she smiled.
“Don’t believe it,” said he, “unless Porky is
the exception that proves the rule. Say,
there’s some toffee in the basket for you.
Maida made me a stack yesterday to take back
to school. I have to go to Sydney in a couple of


days, you know, and she thinks it’s good stuff
to help a chap wipe his weeping eyes when
home-sickness gets him down.”
“Oh!” said Gem. ‘’How lovely! I’ve never
had any taffy but what comes from the store.”
“Maida’s can lick that hollow,” said the boy
proudly, “but it’s not toffy to say taffy, you
know” ; and he hoped she would see the joke
and not recognize its age.
And Gem, seeing it and not having heard it
before, was suitably impressed and showed it by
laughing aloud. “You are a funny boy,” she
exclaimed, and looked him over carefully from his
neat tan boots to the badge on his hat.
He was a handsome lad, with a certain lazy
grace and a smile that betokened complete satis-
faction with himself and the rest of the world.
He returned her inspection with equal interest.
’’Dropped to all my points yet?” he inquired, still
smiling. “I reckon I'd know }'Oti again in a
moderate fog.”
I didn t mean to be rude,” said Gem uneasily.
“I did, though,” he replied cheerily. “What’s
the use of being friends if you can’t? We may as
well take one another s beauty in openly as try
to squint at it on the sly. May I carry the
basket up for you?”


Gem meekly led the way, but the boy did most
of the talking. “By the by,” he continued, “1
know your name, and I believe the pig forgot
to mention mine; it’s Ned Gray.”
“Mr. Gray said he had a little sister,” confided
Gem, “but he didn’t mention a brother.”
“Folks don’t generally go round boasting of
the family black sheep, the skeleton in the cup-
board, and that sort of thing, you know,” he
explained lightly.
“You don’t look much of a skeleton,” retorted
Gem, stealing another admiring glance at him.
“That’s because I manfully try to hide it by
eating a lot,” he grinned; “in other words, I’ve
got a good appetite.”
“Oh!” said she, so eagerly that he laughed
again, “would you like some apricots or plums
to eat?”
“Like everything nice,” he admitted, and
added unblushingly, “That’s why I knew you and
I were going to be chums.”
“I’m not nice, though,” said Gem soberly;
“I’ve got a bad temper; but some day I shall be.
for I am going to be a lady.”
“Oh! are you?” he inquired with equal
solemnity. “I wouldn’t, if I were you; it’s a
beastly slow biz.”


‘Tin going to, all the same,” affirmed Gem.
“Well, anyhow, don’t start pretending you
can’t eat more than a canary bird; it makes a
fellow feel awfully uncomfortable, when he’s
longing to tuck in himself, to see a girl pecking
forlornly at a few crumbs.”
“I believe you’re laughing at me,” she said,
but smilingly. “Ladies don’t have to pretend
to have small appetites.”
“Some do, though,” said Ned. “I stopped at a
place once where it used to give me cold shivers
down my spine to see the two girls starve, but
one day I spotted them pegging in privately
between meals, and ’pon my word! they didn’t
need instruction in the art of putting pudding to
bed.”
“This is the best apricot-tree,” said Gem,
pausing. “I’ll empty the taffy —I mean toffee
-—out of the basket and we can fill it up again,
but we’ll want the fruit-stool to reach the ripe
ones.”
“Here, that’s my job,” said Ned, as she began
to haul the heavy stool to a fresh position.
“Hello!” he exclaimed, as he climbed to the
top and sat upon the edge. “A gentleman already
in possession! Wonder will he bite?”
“It must be Timothy Titus, my pet gecko,”


said Gem. “He’s nearly always down here, but
he never bites. I feed him on breadcrumbs, and
the cats all know they mustn't touch him.”
Ned held the little grey lizard up by the tail,
with a grin of mischievous enjoyment on his
face. “Here, old chap, don’t wiggle and wriggle
like that; let a fellow have a squint at you, can't
you ?
“You cruel boy!” stormed Gem. “Put him
down at once. I told you he was mine, and you
have no right to torment him.”
“All right,” said Ned obediently; “but don’t
get waxy over it. I only wanted to take a rise
out of the comical little beggar; he was eyeing
me in such a cheeky way.”
As the gecko still kept its ground on the fruit-
stool and inspected the audacious intruder more
in surprise than indignation, Gem forgave the
boy, climbed up beside him, and helped to pick
apricots.
“Must be rather jolly being here alone with
this big garden and nobody to warn you you’ll
die of overeating,” said Ned, “but I wonder you
don’t get lonely or frightened, seeing you’re a
girl.”
“Girls have more sense than boys,” said Gem
hotly; “and I don’t get lonely a bit. Gran comes


home early every afternoon, and I always go
and have dinner at his work with him and Joe.”
‘‘l suppose there are other youngsters about
here for you to play with, though?” said the
boy wonderingly.
“I don’t know them,” said she, “except Muffle
Morrison, and I’ve only known him since
November. He’s a very nice boy; my cat got
caught in a rabbit-trap, and he found it and
brought it home and tied up its sore leg for me.”
‘‘Say, he’s the chap that’s reckoned so clever,
isn’t he?”
‘‘Gran says Old Schoolie—that’s what every-
body called Mr. Wright—thought he was a
genius.”
“Schoolie?” commented Ned. “Must re-
member that name for Frank, when kidwhacker
gets stale. But, I say, why don’t you make
friends with the other people about?”
“I don’t want to,” said Gem.
“I like knowing everybody,” he explained.
“There’s an awful lot of fun to be got out of
the queerest old sticks. I know nearly all the
people now, and I’ve only been up here a week.”
He began to give her a mimicry of the quaint
language and sayings of several local identities,
and ended by imitating Yankee Joe telling one


of his impossible snake yarns, rendering perfectly
the old man’s look of solemn innocence and his
cracked yet drawling voice. The boy sat on a
limb of the tree, and the girl gazed up at him
from the top of the tall stool. “Don’t I knock
some fun out of them now ? he asked.
Gem had laughed heartily all through,
especially when he mimicked Joe, her intimate
acquaintance with the old man vouching for the
naturalness of the imitation; yet she turned on
him rather indignantly. “You pretend to be
friends with people, and then go away and make
fun of them,” she said; “and you’ll go home to-
day and make fun of me and the pig and the
lizard just the same, I know.”
“Indeed I won’t,” said Ned forcibly. “My
taking them off won’t hurt them in the least.
Do you think I’d have done it for you if I d
thought you’d go and talk about it and hurt
their feelings?”
“I might, for all you know,” said she.
“But you wouldn’t. I can tell by your face
you’re the sort of chum a fellow could trust,
said he, with the winning smile he bestowed on
nice old ladies to whom he had been very saucy
and to whom he meant to atone by most unblush-
ing compliments. For how could he tell her that


he did not generally enjoy people’s hospitality
and then make fun of them, but that to-day the
temptation to win more of her admiring glances
had been irresistible?
And Gem, not being used to such flattering
looks and words, capitulated and smiled upon
him again. They filled the basket with apricots
and plums, and the boy ate till he was tired. He
enjoyed Gem immensely, for he had never met
a girl like her before; and when he said good-
bye and lifted again the hat made glorious by
its badge, he said, “Since the pig introduced us
it would be piggy of us not to be friends, you
know.”


Chapter VI.
A GIRL FRIEND.
It was Sunday morning and Gran Gold-Eyes
was frying the eggs a rich golden-brown. Gem
spread out the newspaper that did duty as a
tablecloth, and set the plates with unwonted
quiet. Yesterday Gran had brought the news
that the Long Bushie, and the real one this time,
had been captured by Policeman Green, and her
thoughts were busy with his fate.
“Well, what big idea’s jigging round under
your topknot and tying up that tongue of yours
now?” inquired the old man, as they sat down to
breakfast.
“What makes him so long. Gran?” she asked.
“I take it him stands for the cat’s father,” he
said, “and I suppose it’s fashionable with the
meow-meows to run to length rather than
height.”
“I meant the Long Bushie, and you know I
did,” she reproved him.
“If I’m not mistaken,” said Gran with solemn
gravity, “there was a time when he went in for
mining and fell down a shaft that was extra


narrow near the bottom. He was a fat man in
those days, but at the tearing rate he fell not even
being a tight fit for the shaft could stop him;
and the squeezing he got drew him out into a
lanky giant.”
Gem’s voice was scornful. “You ought to
know I wouldn’t believe such silly old grand-
mother tales,” she said. “I do think you might
tell me what makes him so tall, instead of lau^h-
o
ing at me.”
“Laughing? Not me,” protested Gran; “no
more than you were when that dentist at Bren-
don pulled out your wrong tooth. As for who’s
to blame for his extra inches, Miss Curiosity,
nature is sort of responsible for most people’s
good looks. But don’t get angry, Little Boss, or
where is the lady that is to be?”
Gem chased her frown away with a self-confi-
dent smile. \ou may be as piggy-wiggy as
you like, Gran, and laugh till you’re tired,” she
declared, but I shall be a lad} r some day.”
“Laugh ?” protested Gran. “Not me—no more
than a rabbit that has come out to look for
his own dinner and seems likely to give Miss
Pussy Cat bunny pie for hers. I believe you,
honour bright, Gem, even if I’m not equal to
your best assorted queries.”


“Books say an inquiring mind is a good thing,
retorted the child.
“In its right place, mayhap,” he grinned. “A
broom’s a useful bit of furniture to best the dust
with, but when Tom Carter’s wife takes to teach-
ing him early rising with the bald-headed end of
it, I reckon he doesn’t find it exactly a boon and
a blessing.”
Gem pondered this sage hint all through break-
fast and the dish-washing and floor-sweeping that
followed, but she was still unconvinced when she
left Gran mixing up a pudding and wandered
down to the creek to play. She paddled up the
stream, leaving her shoes on the bank, to make
flat stones “skip” on the big waterhole at the
foot of Yankee Joe’s point. But it was dam-
med up with a rough dam of sand and stones till
it seemed twice as large as usual. She was
surprised, for she knew of no miner working
there who could have done it. Still greater was
her astonishment when she saw a child out in
the centre of the waterhole.
It was Ida Morrison, who lived on the next
point. Generally, Gem would have turned back
and gone elsewhere to play, but surprise and
curiosity drew her nearer now. Ida was on the
water in a queer boat made of half a hollow tree


trunk that had done duty as a miner’s trough;
the ends were covered with zinc, the rowlocks
were made of bent hoop-iron, and the oars were
fence palings. Gem had never seen a proper
boat, and her admiration for the maker of this
queer craft was whole-souled and eager.
“Did you make that boat yourself?” she asked,
when the rower came near the bank.
The girl looked up in surprise. She wore no
hat, though the sun was blazing down on her
mop of brown curls, which framed the perfect
features of a picture-child, with eyes blue as sap-
phires and red, red lips. Quick as a flash, she
put her tongue out at Gem and made a grimace;
she hated the child who lived so near and never
came out to play, who slipped inside if ever a
little Morrison passed her door. “Mind your
own business, Miss Superior,” she jeered. “If
)mu’re too good to look at me, you’re too good to
look at my boat.”
Gem was crushed, but she did not retort in
kind. Most of all she despised the children of
Needy Flat because they wrangled and squabbled
“in such a vulgar way,” and she did not mean to
contract the habit; affectionate bickerings with
Gran at home were quite a different thing, of
course. But she was not compounded mainly of


pride and priggishness. Like every girl, she
often sighed because she was not lovely, and the
beauty of Ida’s face, which she had never seen at
close quarters before, fascinated her. But I
like looking at you, you're so lovely,” she urged,
with the frankness that Gran’s education had
developed.
Ida too was a girl and therefore mollified by
the compliments besides, she had quarrelled with
all her family and was lonely. “"W hat are you
fishing for?” she said. “I did make the boat
though; get in and try it.”
Gem needed no second invitation; with an old
milk-tin she bailed out the w T ater that leaked m
while Ida managed the oars.
“I’m glad you got in without upsetting us,”
said the latter. “I let that silly Muffie in yestei-
day and he capsized us. \ou ought to have
heard Mollie growl because my clean dress got
we t; —not that I care for her though! ’
“I know Muffie,” said Gem. “Gran says he s
so thin that he’d split a hailstone if it fell on
him.”
“Yes,” said Ida, “he’s very thin. If I was a
boy, I’d leave school and go to work and get
away from this place. But he san awful muff,
and that’s why w r e call him Muffie. Old Schoolie


says he’s ever so clever, but he hasn’t got as
much gumption as a sheep and can’t see things
as plain as the nose on his face. He can’t fight
for sour apples either; I always get the best of
him when we have a row;—but I’m not afraid
of anybody.”
Gem scarcely knew how to reply to such a
declaration of defiance, so she changed the sub-
ject and stated: “I’m going to school on
Monday.”
“Old Schoolie’s gone,” said Ida. “He wasn’t
a bad old stick, but I had the greatest fun
tormenting him. He couldn’t make me cry,
e ' when he caned me for poking my tongue
out at him. He often said he would expel me,
but he didn’t.”
“Mr. Gray wouldn’t do things like that,” said
Gem confidently; “he’s a gentleman.”
“A conceited prawn, I suppose,” said Ida
loftily. I m not going to knuckle down to him
anyway.”
So Gem changed the subject again and talked
of books. “I’ve got a pictorial atlas of the
world,” she said, “with the loveliest pictures of
Red Indians and niggers and snakes; don’t you
want to come and see it?”
Indeed, no, said Ida. “I don’t want your


crabby old grandfather turning up his nose at
me.
“Gran’s not crabby,” said Gem loyally; he s
a dear, and he would be ever so nice to my
friends.”
“Who said I was your friend?” demanded Ida.
“I want you to be,” said Gem, very humbly
for her.
“Hum!” said Ida doubtfully. “I may turn
round and pitch into you next week, if I feel that
way; but you can come to school with me on
Monday, and as long as we are playing speaks,
you’ll be better than that galoot of a Muffle any-
how.”
I id a t I —I—Ida! called a voice from
over the Morrisons’ fence. “Come home and get
your dinner or you won’t get any, Mollie says.”
“There he is now,” said Ida, without replying
to the boy. “I’m hungry or I wouldn’t go, but
I’ll look out for you on Monday.”
“I’m so glad you are my friend,” said Gem.
“I never said I was,” declared Ida; but she
smiled as she climbed over the fence.


Chapter VII.
THE LONG BUSHIE.
In the afternoon Gem felt lonely for the first
time in her life; there was little pleasure in soli-
tary games after she had once tasted the sweets
of companionship. As a last resource, she went
down the creek to a mossy spot, under the cliff
of Blue Nose Point, where her cattle-paddock
had its abiding place. Here were little fences,
calf-pens, cow-sheds and bails that her pocket-
knife had fashioned from willow sticks. The
cattle were leg bones out of beef, and their calves
were similar ones out of mutton; knucklebones
out of real cattle made her goats, out of sheep
made her kids; there were bones of different
shapes that represented even such queer animals
as llamas and yaks.
Begun as a game pure and simple, the cattle-
paddock had become much more to Gem; it was
the home of her dreams. The people in books
had always seemed real to her, and she
frequently carried a story past its author’s con-
clusion; but she never thought it out in words;
its characters became real friends whom her
GD 51


imagination could conjure up; with its help she
saw them smile, or heard them talk. Starting
from all sorts of different sources, she had a
dream world now that was all her own; most of
its people were creations of her own, but some
were stolen from novels and shaped afresh in her
mind.
The central figures of her fancy were two boys
and a girl, who had had their rude beginnings in
the three dressed clothes-pegs that did duty as
two shepherds and a milkmaid in the paddock.
From their lowly beginnings they rose to be the
children of a wonderful professor, but were soon
promoted to the dignity of an earl’s offspring. The
professor continued to exist as their wise and
witty guardian; he founded a great university
for boys, where he taught those strange dis-
coveries of his by which all diseases became
curable and death ceased to exist. The children
were all perfect in beauty, in wit, in charm, in
heroism; but the clothes-peg with the most
battered head was the favourite and had been
metamorphosed into the boy earl who made of
his slum property a quiet retreat of homes and
gardens for some of London’s weary poor —that
o
was a reminiscence of reading All Sorts and
Conditions of Men. A perusal of Uncle Tom's


Cabin had turned him also into the owner of a
huge slave plantation in Kentucky; unable to
free his slaves while he was a minor, he ruled
them as a benevolent despot of the most delightful
type, and yet found time to be his guardian’s right
hand in that strange university where boys
taught boys the marvels of the universe. He
was charmingly naughty, sublimely heroic,
prettily chivalrous, astoundingly clever. Within
the last few weeks, greater glory still had come
to him; the Yellow Peril had attacked the
Western World, kings were killed off by Oriental
anarchists, generals lost heart, and the world
was only saved by his heroism and the practical
application he made of his scientific knowledge.
He had just been crowned King of Federated
Europe, but he was still the dear boy Jack, a
king of hearts first of all.
Gem had only to close her eyes in bed at night,
or sit in her cattle-paddock with the clothes-pegs
lovingly clasped in her hands, for the real world
with its little vexations to vanish, and bonny Mab,
lively Jack and quiet Will brought in their train
"hat ideal world of beauty and perfection where
heartache is cured and all things are as we desire
them. They were the sweet secrets of her girl-
hood, coloured with her own hopes, tinged with


her own little sorrows. But who can afford to
laugh at the lonely child’s fancies? Surely not
those of us who have had our own cattle-pad-
docks in childhood’s golden land! Surely not
those of us who have gone heart-empty, heart-
hungry, because we knew not the magic art of
cattle-paddock making!
But somehow Jack would not be Jack to-
day, even when romance was to glorify him, and
a wilful, winsome cousin had been invented to
capture his heart. The real world was taking
too tight a hold for the dream one to keep its
sway, and it was rather sadly that the dreamer
started home.
As she climbed the opposite bank, suddenly she
came upon a tall, thin man lying amongst the dead
thistles. In spite of her last mistake, no doubt
was in her mind but that it was the Long Bushie,
neither was she in the least afraid this time, but
was ready straightway to play her part as the
Lady Merciful. The man’s face was weak and
wilful, but not bad, and it was evident that there
was something wrong with his foot, from which
he had removed the boot.
“Is your leg hurt?” asked Gem gently. “You
mustn’t stop here, you know, or they will catch
you.”


The voice was so gentle that the man answered,
crossly though it was. “I suppose they will, con-
found them I My ankle is sprained.”
“If you could just get across the creek to that
big tunnel in Blue Nose Point you could hide
there and I could bring you food,” she urged.
“It's locked, confound it! I’ve been there.”
“But it belongs to my grandfather and I can
get the key,” said Gem, moving off.
Blue Nose Point was pierced with several
shafts and a great tunnel, that were the outer
evidences of the best reef Gran had ever struck,
but it had been worked out years ago. At the
far end of the tunnel was a shallow shaft, down
which a venturesome lad had once fallen; since
then the tunnel had been closed with a huge iron
door that Gran had found abandoned at an old
mine.
When Gem returned, thankful to have escaped
Gran’s observation, the man had limped over to
the tunnel’s mouth. She let him in and put
down the provisions she had brought.
“There is hot water in that billy to bathe your
ankle, and this rag is to bandage it,” she said.
“I’ll slip down at nights, when Gran is asleep or
out, and bring you things, for I might be seen in
the daytime. I’ll have to lock you in though,


or somebody might come prying here and find
you.”
She was excited and elated with her great
secret; it was pleasant to be playing a heroic part
in a real romance, and self-satisfaction made her
so good-tempered that Gran s teasing at tea-
time could not ruffle her amiability. “Talk of
angels,” he said. You’ll be sprouting wings
soon ; I believe I can see the pen-feathers grow-
ing on them now.”
She went to bed as early as half-past seven to
encourage him to retire betimes, but it seemed
hours before his snoring announced that he was
asleep. Then she stepped from her low window
and, loaded with a bundle of blankets and eat-
ables, staggered through the garden and down to
Blue Nose Point.
The captive in the tunnel regarded her with
a kind of wondering appreciation, but he was not
profuse in his thanks. He gave her an account
of his wrongs, mingled with boasting of what he
had done and threats of what he would do. He
had been put in prison, in the first place, for
something he did not do, though circumstantial
evidence was strong against him; so he had
escaped and lived by plunder. Captured again
by Green, he had once more won freedom, and


he would make the country pay for it yet, con-
found it! Just let her wait and see what he
would do when his ankle was right!
Gem heard his tirade in silence, but she spent
her spare time planning ways of reducing him to
penitence. Night after night she came with
provisions, being careful to hide her tracks by
walking in the water of the creek and on the
rough stones near the tunnel. Gran wondered
why the food supplies ran short and wondered
too why Gem failed to be up with the daylight
as of yore, but he not a man given to asking
questions. Sometimes she talked to her captive
in w'ords that were carefully thought out in
advance and seemed to her beautiful and wise.
Living through the scene in imaginative anticipa-
tion, she saw him gradually awakening to a
realisation of his evil ways, overflowing with
gratitude to her, pledged to a good life in a new
land. Then she would help him to his friends,
and disguised he would get away to America.
In after years, when he was famous, he w r ould
tell how r Gem Marshall, like an angel of light,
had saved his life from ruin and made him a man
again. She wept delightful tears in bed over
the affecting letters he would write her; but
somehow, when the sinner was actually before


her, the grand speeches fell flat and failed to
convince.
The man would listen and grunt out: “You
don’t know what you are talking about, young-
ster. You’re a brick of a kiddie, but I’m not
going to lie down like a dog and be kicked for
what I haven’t done, even for you.” Then he
would launch out again into complaints of his
wrongs and boastings of future revenge.
But Gem did not despair; she was only sorry
that the ankle recovered so quickly, for she was
quite certain that, given time enough, she would
win. How could she possibly fail —she, Gem
Marshall, clever Gem?


Chapter VIII.
THE FIRST DAY AT SCHOOL.
Needy Flat children were early risers; most of
them were early school-goers too, prompted not
by love of learning but by desire to play in com-
pany. Gem and Ida arrived long before half past
nine on Monday morning and found more than
a dozen young people already assembled and
busy at “steal clothes.”
Muffle Morrison was sitting alone in the porch
where the “dinners,” tied up in oatmeal bags,
hung side by side with more or less disreputable
headgear. He was reading Livy, Book 11. with
a iook of deep content upon his face. With the
going of “Old Schoolie” the great fear had
haunted him that his dreams of an education
would come to naught ; the new teacher might
be unable or unwilling to instruct him. But Mr.
Gray, already in his schoolroom, had seen him,
recognized the “poor dog” eyes and sandy hair,
and called him in. You are Alec Morrison, are
you not? ’he asked. Muffle was grateful for the
name, Old Schoolie had called him Alexander,
but here was a man who, unasked, found a way


round that derided title. But he only said “Yes,
sir,” in his usual timid way.
“Mr. Wright left word for me that you have
been working for the Senior Examination; do
you wish to continue?”
“Oh! please sir, yes,” he replied.
“Then I shall be glad to help you after school
and in any spare time I may have during the day.
This week I shall probably be too busy in school-
time, getting my classes into shape, but you can
work on alone. Miss Gray has promised to
undertake your English and French and wants
you to go across to her after playtime; 111 see
what work you have done at three.
Muffle felt as though a great burden of fear
had rolled off his shoulders, but he only stam-
mered “T —t —thank you, sir.
The master was pleasantly surprised in his
pupils, after the sketches given of them by his
predecessor. Save for the Morrisons and Gem,
he found them dull on the whole, but most of
them were quite capable of imbibing knowledge
skilfully given in small and palatable doses.
Then too, he knew how to interest and manage
children, for he had a humorous way, an authori-
tative manner and a firm voice that saved him
almost all trouble. The school lunch-time was


supposed to last from half past twelve to two,
but it had long been limited to half-an-hour, for
all the children brought their “dinners” with
them; as a result, school was over at three in-
stead of four.
Muffle had always worked back for an hour,
and Mr. Gray took him and Gem across to the
cottage when the rest were dismissed. “It is too
hot over here to work comfortably,” he said.
Gem had been put into the upper, or third
class. She had never heard of some of its work,
such as parsing and analysis, but had dipped
laigely into the English poets and historians;
and when reading lesson came, she demon-
strated so well her ability to read and spell any-
thing in the class book that Mr. Gray let her
miss the lesson and go across with Muffle for
French. She had lost her heart instantly to the
sveet-faced girl who welcomed her so kindly,
and so she chatted cheerfully at every chance.
But Muffle was too shy to venture a word be-
sides answers to questions about his work. He
knew the translation of his authors almost by
heart, but his pronunciation was startlingly Aus-
tralian. Maida, who had lived next door to a
French family most of her life and could chatter
in their language almost as well as her own,


found it difficult to understand him, though the
correctness with which he wrote the language
convinced her he would be sure to pass well in
an examination that was not oral.
Gem had to begin at the beginning, for Gran
knew no French, though he had taught her a
little Latin. She was happy because Maida
promised that she might study English with
Muffle and kept her till lunch-time doing Mac-
beth. And now that school was out she was to
have her first music lesson.
Kathleen had just brought tea into the little
sitting-room and begged to be allowed to pour
it out.
“Where is that young scamp of a Ned? You
don’t mean to say there is spice-cake for tea and
he hasn’t scented it yet and put in an appear-
ance?” asked Frank, as he made himself com-
fortable on the lounge.
“Out shooting poor wallabies again,” said
Maida. “I guess you found the barn hot enough
to-day, Frank; it is nearly 90 degrees in here.”
“It wasn’t exactly cool enough to freeze the
laziness out of me,” he agreed, “but I dare say
I’ll get acclimatised soon. You are surely not
going to hurt my feelings with one of those tiny
cups, Kath?” Kathleen was all concern at once.


“Oh dear! I am a donkey,” she said. “I got
your big cup down on purpose, Frank, and then
forgot to put it on the tray, but I’ll get it now.”
“Don’t bother, Puss,” he said. “I was only
teasing you; I am not too shy to have a second
cup ; but Kath was back with the big one almost
before he finished.
Gem was interested in such a storybook pro-
ceeding as afternoon tea and wanted to hand the
cups and the cake round. But Frank shook his
head and smiled. “That is a masculine preroga-
ti\ e, he said, and as I am too lazy, Alec may
have the pleasure.”
Muffle stammered “Y-y-yes, sir,” in red-
faced embarrassment, and succeeded in getting
through the pleasure without dropping anything;
but he was too shy to have a second piece of
cake till Fathleen said ‘Please do, Alec; I want
somebody to keep me company while I have
another bit.”
Muffle took her speech with serious earnest-
ness, and was busy despatching the cake when
Ted appeared at the open door, hugged Maida,
pulled Kath’s pigtail affectionately, and smiled at
the rest of the company.
Shot a duck of a wallaby,” he announced


triumphantly. “You can watch me skin him
after tea, if you like, Kath.
But soft-hearted Kath declined. “I don’t know
how you can kill the poor pretty things, she
said, and Maida added, as she poured out his tea,
“I suppose you washed your hands then, Ned.”
“Actually did, Little Best-of-All,” grinned the
boy, “and that’s a surpriser for you. I say, you
greedy people have only left me one piece of
cake.”
“I believe you cut about half of it to take with
you,” reproved Maida.
“That was ages ago,” said Ned unblushingly,
“and I polished it off straightway. You didn’t
expect a chap to keep spice-cake waiting—at
least, the adorable kind my adorable sister makes
—did you? There’s another out in the pantry
though, isn’t there?”
“That is for to-morrow,” said Maida.
“All right,” said Ned cheerfully, “but you’ll
be sorry next week when you think of me, a
poor downtrodden worm at school, dying of
home-sickness too.”
Maida laughed at the awful picture conjured
up for her future contemplation, but relented
about the cake. “You would be sure to coax it


out of me before bedtime to-night,” she said,
“so you may as well start on it first as last.”
Ned returned from a raid on the pantry with
a huge slice in his hand, and chatted as he ate it.
“Believe I met our mutual friend, the pig, to-day,
Gem,” he said. “Anyhow, I struck a black porker
with a white tip to his tail and a knowing look on
his handsome phiz, who grinned at me out of the
left corner of his right optic.”
Then he turned his attention to Muffle. The
happy, lively, saucy boy and the unhappy, quiet,
shy one had already been regarding each other as
creatures of an unknown species. Ned, with his
gay and confident bearing, made Muffle feel more
awkward than ever. “Going to imbibe extra
knowledge after school?” inquired the former.
“You have my sincerest sympathy. Wait till
you forget some wretched mathematical
formula and you will be surprised at the number
of good English words—not slang, mind you—
there are for fathead. I’ve been through the
mill with my respected brother and I know.”
Oh!” said Gem. “You told me yourself, Ned,
when I asked you if Mr. Gray were very strict,
that he was—was— ”
“Well?” asked Ned, quite unabashed.
But Gem had suddenly remembered the boy’s


exact words. “Perhaps Mr. Gray wouldn’t like
me to repeat it,” she said.
The master laughed from his comfortable post
on the lounge. “I have grown so used to Ned’s
polite remarks to me and about me, he re-
marked, “that they have lost their power to
sting.”
“Well then,” said she, “you said that Mr. Gray
was an awfully good sort with a specially soft
spot for girls, but his education had been
neglected along certain lines, and the slang line
chiefly.”
The master laughed again. “Ned is doing
his best, by precept and example, to make good
my deficiency in that line, ’he said. W ell, Alec,
if Gem is going to begin operations on the piano
here, we must go into the dining-room to work,
there is no rise waiting for Ned to finish.”
But Ned departed, cake and all, to inspect his
dead victim, Maida opened the piano, and Kath
began to carry the tea-tray out. Frank took it
from her. “That is too heavy for those small
arms of yours, little woman, he said.
Muffle was generally the least observant of
boys, but gratitude and affection sharpen the
eyes; he was anxious to please the man who was
generously helping him and spoke to him in such


> ftp * Jf / J 4' . ■^y^flJ
K^^BBSSk 1 ' ' ' ’a iKS 1 '' k ■ £ ■ i«
■Pr5^yjP* r 3BJP5* . ... gKIS I Sv ujtf .^w :
(Si
. a
is
-2
£
i
U
o
V-
o
-C
(Si
~0
2
OJ
i-
-1)
_c
£
(A
d
D
c
CL


\


a kindly way, so he treasured up for future use
tl;e knowledge that Mr. Gray liked cups handed
round and trays carried for his sisters. He
added to his list daily, but the novelty of such
attentions made him extra awkward in render-
ing them and Maida thought him a remarkably
obliging but clumsy boy. He noticed too how
Kath came after her brother, bearing his slippers.
“Oh! Frank, do take off your boots and wear
these,” she urged; “you’ll be surprised how much
cooler it will make you.”
Frank obeyed cheerfully. “What about
Brother Ned’s constant injunctions not to spoil
me?” he asked.
Kath smiled. “Ned’s a terribly saucy boy,
though he is such a dear,” she said.
Muffle’s sisters neither voted him a dear nor
seemed to care about his comfort, and the con-
trast made him feel a little lonelier than usual.
Gem was a very unmusical child and found the
piano a wearisome puzzle, but she attacked it
with an earnestness that never dreamed of
failure. Maida kissed her good-bye, when the
ordeal was over, and the child could not re-
member having been kissed before, for Gran did
not indulge in embraces. As she lay awake in
bed that night, busy with her dream friends, she


made frequent chances for Jack and Will to kiss
Mab, and every time the dream kisses came she
felt the same thrill of delight.
“What think you of your new pupils?” asked
Frank of Maida, when he had sent Muffle home.
“Gem is a darling,” she replied. “She is the
quaintest mixture of self-confidence and humility.
She told me she didn’t feel a bit shy of us because
we were just like the nice people she knew in
books.”
“And what of the Nincompoop?”
“Poor lad, I fear he is rightly named. He
has a wonderful memory, but absolutely nothing
in him. He and Gem did some Macbeth with me
to-day —both have read it through before. Alec
knows every note in the book by heart, but Gem
sees it all. I asked them for their opinion of
Banquo, and Alec stammered, ‘There isn’t any-
thing in the notes about him, Miss Gray’ ; but
Gem chimed in instantly: ‘He wasn’t a bad old
chap really, but he must have been a muttonhead
not to guess Macbeth had it in for him, and I
don’t think much of the way he stuck to Macbeth
when he jolly well knew he’d killed Duncan.’ ”
“The language of our little lady-to-be needs
some pruning,” smiled Frank; “but I don’t agree
with you about the boy. He is a shy youngster,


rather hungry for affection —and sometimes for
a square meal, to judge by his looks. But I’ll
wager that a fund of silent doggedness goes
along with those ‘poor dog’ eyes”
But Maida smiled and shook her head in an
aggravating feminine way.


Chapter IX.
A BATTLE LOST AND A BATTLE BEGUN.
Gem was not popular at school, partly because
of the little airs of superiority in which she in-
dulged. When the children of the Flat sneered
and jeered she looked at them with such scorn
that they felt they had the worst of the argument
and disliked her accordingly. But they hated
her more because of her frocks. Gran had been
sensible that Mrs. Wood’s ideas of fashion were
behind the times even for Needy Flat; not want-
ing Gem to be laughed at for her odd clothes, he
had sent to a Sydney shop for “four school-frocks
for a girl of twelve,” for which the child had
been duly measured. The frocks were dainty
little muslins, prettier than the Sunday frocks of
the few girls who indulged in such luxuries, and
that was a crime local jealousy found it hard to
forgive.
Gem could not understand a sentiment so
foreign to her own generous nature, but only
tossed her head and entreated Ida not to notice
such “vulgar spite.” Ida, however, was of a
different stamp; Gem was her friend, for the


week at all events, and she was eager to wage
a wordy warfare on her behalf. When Gem
came from her music lesson on Wednesday, she
found most of the children on the post office
verandah, where they usually waited till the mail
coach came in.
“I say, kids, here comes the Queen of the Mud-
heap, wagging her tail as usual,” jeered Kate
Ellis. “Yah! She thinks no small potatoes ot
herself, and that skimpy old frock I wouldn’t
pick up.”
Gem 'passed the remark over in disdainful
silence, but Ida rushed into the breach. “All
the world knows the Ellises are too honest to
pick up what they can’t carry away,” she retorted.
“That tongue of yours’ll get you into trouble
some day, youngster,” cautioned a miner in
muddy moleskins. But Ida put the offending
member out at him and bade him mind his own
business.
Rag Ellis, the brawny bully of the Flat, joined
in with sneers at Ida’s father. Just then Muffie
came creeping down the road, his mind busy
with the eccentricities of the nine points circle,
and he bumped heedlessly into a slow-stepping
goose that turned to hiss and snap at him.


“Here comes the Muff; fight him Rag,”
shouted the small fry on the verandah. To
make Muffle fight and watch him get knocked
about would be a pleasant diversion in a dull
day, for the inoffensive boy, so foolishly good-
natured, so stupidly absent-minded was regarded
as fair sport. It was a part of the Flat’s
etiquette that, no matter how much brothers and
sisters quarrelled in private, they publicly sup-
ported one another. A quarrel was never a
matter of individuals, always a breach between
families; when the girls disagreed, their brothers
were expected to join in with their fists. So
the cry was eagerly taken up. “Hey! Sandy
Morrison,” they shouted, “you’ve got to fight
Rag Ellis. Kate’s quarrelled with Gem and she
hasn’t got a brother to fight, so you’ve got to
do it, ’cause you live near her and Ida’s on her
side.”
Muffle looked helplessly about him. Ida did
not often quarrel, for the other girls, standing
in awe of her tongue, generally let her be; but
once or twice he had been forced to use his
fists in her cause, and he had never yet found
any satisfaction in letting himself be knocked
about by a boy with better muscles, because the
latter’s sister had called Ida a “two-faced cat,” or


some such thing. “I don’t want to fight,” he
said; “I’m going home.”
But Rag Ellis blocked his way. “No you don’t,
coward! You’ve got to fight,” he said. “Come
on over into the paddock under the hill.”
“I’m not a coward,” said Muffle miserably,
“I haven’t quarrelled with you and I don’t
want to. You know quite well you can beat me
too; you’re older and bigger and heavier.”
“Don’t fight, Muffle,” begged Gem; “run
away. Fighting is vulgar, and that big brute
will hurt you.”
But Muffle had never yet got up the courage
to run away, so he was hustled by a crowd of
jeering boys out of the village street and round
under the far side of the hill on which the school
stood.
And, of course, it fell out as he had foreseen.
He was slow of eye and slow of hand, while Rag
Ellis’s fists came down like sledge-hammers.
Muffle’s lip was cut, his nose bleeding, his fore-
head bruised, and he himself crying with hope-
less rage under the bully’s taunts and blows,
when the master bore down upon them. In the
excitement of the fight, his approach had gone
unnoticed; but the battle-ground was just near


the well whence he was forced to carry water
for his garden, since he dared not rob the tanks
in summer. With a stern command he stopped
the combat and checked the wild impulse of the
onlookers to take to flight. He caught Rag
Ellis by the shoulder, boxed his ears and shook
him soundly.
“Now go home and complain to your mother
that I ill-treated you,” he said; “and if ever I
catch you again touching a boy not your own
size, I’ll give you the thrashing a cur deserves.
As for you young ruffians” —this to the smaller
boys —“you will please take a warning by this.
There may be times when a boy is justified in
having a fair fight; but if I catch any of you up
to brutality, I’ll cane him in a way he will not
forget in a hurry.”
The boys were only too glad to slink off with
a meek “Yes, sir,” but the master took Muffle
with him. “Come in the back way to my room,”
he said; “you’ll frighten Miss Gray if she sees
such a deplorable spectacle as your face.”
He got him warm water to wash off the gore,
sticking-plaster for his lip, and vinegar to bring
the bruise out of his forehead. You’ll re-
member, Morrison,” he said, but not unkindly,
“there is to be no more of this foolishness.” He


had made a shrewd guess that the fight was not
of Muffle’s choosing, but hoped that his prohibi-
tion would make it easier for the boy to refuse
future challenges.
Muffle said “Yes, sir,” with his usual meekness.
He was full of shame and bitterness, for he had
been seen in defeat, and actually crying, by the
man in response to whose kindness his whole
heart had gone out in eager affection.
“You are not strong enough,” the master went
on, “to fight a solid, thick-set fellow like Ellis. In
fact, you are not nearly as strong as you ought
to be for your age. You won’t do justice to that
brain of yours unless we get you physically fitter.
you had better do half-an-hour’s exercise every
day after school, before you go on with your
lessons.”
Muffle murmured an obedient assent, though
he privately grudged the time from his books
and thought the wood-getting and wood-cutting
at home more than enough exercise for him.
My father made me practise boxing every day
when I was a boy,” the master continued, “and
I mean to teach you.” The boy thanked him
gratefully, if without enthusiasm, but the master
did not forget the promise. Every day when
afternoon tea was over, he instructed him in the


art of self-defence. Muffle loathed it, but affec-
tion for the teacher gave more zeal than liking
for the science, and the slow hand and slow eye
became quicker; he learned where and when to
strike, how to parry blows, how to disconcert
his antagonist, while his muscle continually
improved.
But, as he walked home on the Wednesday of
his defeat, he had no vision of a time when he
would be physically fitter, and felt only the bitter-
ness of the unfit present. He could not have
explained why he turned off the homeward path
to climb the ridge where the cemetery held his
mother’s grave. He had never been there since
that dreadful time, three long years past, when
they had laid her there, and home had ceased to
be home, in any real sense, for her children. But
perhaps it was the glimpse he had had into the
family life of the Grays, over which love and
cheerfulness shed a bright influence, that stirred
some forgotten chord in his memory.
He climbed the rough wooden railing and lay
beside her grave, seeing again the brave little
brown-eyed woman who had smiled when the
world went wrong, till it seemed to go right
again. Home had been home then, a place of
mutual love and help, where it was easy to be


good, for everybody was good in return. Now,
home was a place where father slank in and out,
despised and knowing he was despised; where
Mollie overworked and scolded, Ida delighted
in impertinence and refused to do her
share of the odd tasks that were all left for
Muffle to grumble over; where Peter, egged on
by Ida, teased Baby to tears and was slapped by
Mollie. What would Mr. Gray think of such a
home? How good he was to his sisters! But
then, how good they were to him I Miss Gray
smiled him the cheeriest welcome, Kath worried
as to his comfort every day and constantly pur-
sued him with his slippers or cool lemon drinks.
Surely that was the secret. If only all the
Morrisons agreed to be nice to one another, it
would be easier for them all. But even simple
Muffle knew that to suggest such a thing to Ida
of the hard heart and jeering tongue was an
impossibility.
As he lay and pondered on the hopelessness of
it, he remembered his mother’s last words to
him: “Alec, my boy, life at its best needs some
courage to live it; have enough to be good to
your sisters always, for it will be harder on
them.” And how much had he done to help
them? He began to walk slowly down the hill,


with his swollen face and red eyes. He had
drifted off his mother’s path, but as he walked
he set his face deliberately to regain it. People
often said that, if Muffle Morrison began a thing,
he was too big a simpleton to leave off, no matter
what happened. Once he had been sent to
Junction Flat for a bag of flour, when the local
storekeeper ran out of that commodity. Start-
ing home with the bag on his back, he was over-
taken by a terrific storm of hail and rain. In-
stead of taking shelter in a culvert or under a
tree, he plodded stolidly on; the hailstones cut
the rim off his hat, made his face bleed, and tore
holes in the bag; the rain made dough of the
flour and a white stream trailed behind him,
but still he walked on. And so it was with Muffle
still; set his face in the right direction, and he
could be trusted to go doggedly on to his goal.
And now by his mother’s grave he set his face
towards making home home again on Morrison’s
Point.
Tea was over when he got there, dragging a
limb of wood behind him; there was no money
to pay for carting wood, no horse even to drag
it, and Muffle had to bring and cut all that was
needed. Ida was out playing, but Baby told
him cheerfully: ‘You is a naughty, bad, witkit


boy to make you's face so ugly, an’ Mollie's not
goin’ to give you any tea for not tomin’ home.”
Mollie came out. She had a face as lovely as
Ida’s, but there was a dreary look about the eyes
that would make a mother’s heart ache, and
sometimes a hard look about the mouth that was
sadder still.
“What a muff you are to go fighting fhat big
Ellis bully again!” she said. “It serves you right
for your stupidity. And where have you been
all this time ? There is no wood cut even to
light the fire in the morning, and if you think
I am going to bake and iron all day and then
keep tea waiting for you, you are mistaken.”
“I’ll go and cut some wood,” said Muffie, with
unwonted docility. He always did as he was
told, but generally grumbled as he did it.
Mollie softened, for she was fond of the boy
at heart because he was clever and willing, per-
haps also because he was a muff and to be pitied.
“You had better get something to eat first,” she
said; “1 have left the teapot at the fire.”
Muffie made a hurried meal in silence, washed
his plate and cup, cut wood till his shoulders
ached and piled the wood-box near the stove full
to the top. “Do you want me to pump water
for the garden?” he asked.


“It is too late now,” said Mollie, “and you’ll have
to do your lessons.” One thing she was always
sure of; Muffle must work in the afternoons, but
he must have the evenings for his books; he must
pass his examination, he must get away from the
poverty and degradation of Needy Flat. Then
some day he could take Baby away, and Baby
was the one person in the home who never saw
the hard look on Mollie’s face and never had a
hard word; for the big sister loved the mite of
three with a love that was almost adoration.
The boy did his lessons in silence, while Mollie
put Baby to bed and sat at the table darning
socks. She was too proud to let the world
know how hard things were with the family, and
overworked herself keeping the big house spot-
less. She remade old frocks left from the
years of prosperity to keep the girls neatly clad,
so that no one had ever seen a Morrison untidy.
But she had no energy left to make life
pleasant for herself or the children. The little
money the father gave her from his weekly wage
as manager of old Mrs. Cox’s farm provided
only the necessaries of life. There were always
things put by in case a visitor came, but the
children sometimes went hungry. She made
jam from the fruit in the garden, and they turned


A BATTLE LOST AND A BATTLE BEGUN Si
away with loathing from bread and jam meal
after meal, for often there was nothing else.
With eggs and milk and fruit in plenty she
could have provided the longed-for something
else, but she was generally too weary and miser-
able to care; for life seemed a bitter thing to the
lonely girl who at fifteen had been called home
from the careless happiness of boarding-school
days to face poverty, and at seventeen had
looked into her mother’s grave and faced worse.
The only pleasures left to her were books
and Baby’s love. She too had been brilliant at
school and had early begun to help Muffie with
his work; they had come to the stage now when
they were both learners together, but to-night
she was too tired to work.
Mollie rested her head on her hands at last,
and with the new vision he had won Muffie saw
and pitied the weary attitude.
“Poor old Mollie!” he said. “Is your head
aching?”
She looked up in surprise. “That is nothing
uncommon,” she said.
“I’m awfully sorry,” he said; “you go to bed
and I’ll make you some hot tea.”
“Oh ! I wish you would do your work and leave
me alone,” she said ungraciously. But Muffie


started a fire in the stove, made the tea, and
brought it to her with some bread and butter.
She took it with surprised gratitude. “You
are the best of the whole bunch of us, Muffle,”
she said, “you and Baby.”
Muffle found words troublesome things that
would never come at his call, but he stammered
out a little of what had been working in his mind.
To his astonishment, the girl began to cry. That
physical weariness, hopelessness and a headache
should leave nerves easily affected was no
wonder, but to Muffie it was a novel and pitiful
sight. He put his arm round her with an
awkward attempt at comfort.
“Poor old Mollie! Don’t mind about it like
that,” he said. “We’ll all get away some day
and we needn’t be so miserable here if only we
were a bit better to one another. Peter would
be nicer if we got round him, and we could
leave Ida alone, instead of rowing her back when
she is cheeky.”
But Mollie only sobbed heartbrokenly.
“And if you want me to do things for you,”
he promised, “I’ll do them without growling,
really I will. Mr. Gray is ever so good to his
sisters and Mother told me to be good to mine.”




|p ~~ :
CO
'e
1)
o
C 3
U
C
co
L 5
-13
c
co
J3
_£3
1)
_C
H


“You are a good old sort, Muffle,” she said,
“and I don’t see why we shouldn’t try it.”
Mollie went off to bed and said no more, but
when she got up in the morning she found that
the boy had lighted the fire and even set the
table for breakfast. Her headache had gone and
her heart warmed at the new thoughtfulness.
“Put forks out, Muffle,” she said; “I’m going
to make omelets for breakfast" —and the family
had faced the day’s work on bread and jam for
a week!
Peter cheered for joy. “I’ll fetch chips to
make the fire burn,” he shouted. Even Ida re-
joiced at the prospect and neither teased nor
stormed. Altogether they had the most cheerful
meal they could remember, and Mollie actually
caught herself singing as she washed the dishes.
So a little of the cloud of dreariness lifted from
the big house on Morrison’s Point. Many a time
Mollie forgot her good intentions and grew im-
patient, but Muffiie’s mildness, when the cross-
ness was vented on him, or some thoughtful act
of his, reminded her, and the times of her forget-
fulness grew ever less. Peter and Baby felt the
pleasanter atmosphere and responded. Only the
father still slank in and out in silence and un-


noticed, only Ida still taunted and jeered, and
was lazy and wilful as of old.
But Ida was scarcely in the house save at meal-
times now. She and Gem had developed one of
those friendships that glorify girlhood; they were
never happy apart, they did their lessons in com-
pany, they dreamed of each other at night. And
Ida away with Gem was a different girl; the
bold defiance faded from her eyes, only eager
interest remained. Gran found her a good child
and wondered why he had ever thought it neces-
sary to bid Gem beware of the children on
Morrison’s Point.


Chapter X.
THE FLOOD.
Muffle and Gem were very good friends. It
came as a shock to Gem to find he was the
cleverer at lessons; but she was honest and
generous by nature, admitted his superiority, and
admired him for it; for, if he were cleverer than
clever Gem Marshall, it must follow as a natural
corollary that he was indeed a wonderful person.
So she was kind to him and always chatted to
him on the way to school. The boy eagerly
gathered up the first crumbs of public liking that
came his way and was ever ready to do her a
good turn. After school, he stayed so late that
he usually had to walk home alone, but on
Fridays Gem had her music lesson and then
practised for half an hour, so that he caught her
up as soon as she was out of the village.
One of their Friday chats was a particularly
happy one for Gem, for a big burden had just
been lifted off her shoulders. All her determina-
tion could not make the piano anything but a
misery to her, and she had left her music-stool to
ask Miss Gray a question. Frank and Muffie


were working on the back verandah, to be as far
away as possible from the piano, but the master
had come in to rummage in the dining-room
book-case for a book, and Gem came just in
time to hear him asking Maida: “Say, little
woman, how much longer are you going to let
Gem inflict those harrowing discords on us?”
“Long enough,” Maida replied, “for the poor
mite to realise she has no talent for music, and
long enough to insinuate by chance remarks that
piano-playing is not essential to being a lady; I
am not sure that she would believe the fact, if
I stated it point-blank.”
Gem came into the room eagerly. “Please,
Miss Gray,” she entreated, “don’t be vexed that
I heard what you said; I came to ask you a
question. And needn’t I really learn the piano?
Really and truly, doesn’t every lady know how to
play?”
*‘No, dear,” said Maida gently. “A lady only
plays to give people pleasure, and a great many
ladies, who know they could not do that, never
play at all.”
Gem kissed her in the delight of her relief.
“I wish I had known I bothered you so, Mr.
Gray,” she said, “but I won’t be a pest any more.
I'd just like to bang that piano.”


“Don’t mind my rude remark, Gem,” he en-
treated. “I am sorry you heard it, but hope you
will feel relieved enough to forgive me.”
So it was with a happy smile that Gem greeted
Muffie, when he caught her up, though the day
was warm enough to kill cheerfulness. She told
him gleefully of the closing of her musical
career. “Wasn’t it sweet of Mr. Gray to
apologise for saying my playing was harrowing
discords?” she asked.
Muffie agreed with alacrity. If he had not,
like Gem, learned the adjective “sweet from
Kathleen, he had an equal affection for Kath-
leen’s brother.
“That’s two of my black woes gone,” she said;
and Muffie, as in duty bound, asked the other.
“It’s because of my book on etiquette,’ she
explained. “You see, my mother was a lady . . .”
“So was mine,” interrupted Muffie.
Gem accepted the statement politely, but
privately thought the immediate progenitors of
nobody else at Needy Flat could have been on
the same plane as her favoured parents. “I am
going to be a lady too,” she went on, “and, of
course I have to begin learning the way now.
I’ve learned heaps from The Book on Etiquette
and, if ever I go to a big school and a bishop


comes to examine us, or an earl to give out
the prizes, and gets taken with me and wants
to talk to me. I’ll know how to address them.
“But last night it worried me terribly. It said
lots of people were courteous to visitors and yet
stamped themselves as ill-bred by the way they
talked to their parents and relatives and the
people in charge of them, and it had never struck
me before that that meant Gran. Gran and I
think tons and tons of one another, but we
always say clever things at one another and
argue, and I thought I would have to give it up.
“I was awfully miserable, for it would be very
hard to stop; besides, it’s no end of fun when I
get the best of Gran. Anyhow, I told him about
how I had to begin being respectful, but I
reckoned I’d tell him what I thought of him be-
fore I began on the courtesy-to-guardians con-
cern.
“And so I said it was mean and wrong of
him to have brought me up so badly, so as I’d
have all the trouble of undoing it and bringing
myself up over again. And, do you know, Gran
found the loveliest way out of it, and isn’t it
queer I never thought of it?—l’m Gran’s mate
as well as his grand-daughter. And old mates
always have jokes on one another and say sharp


things; it’s their way of being chummy, for it
wouldn’t do for them to hug like girls.
“So you see, when Gran treats me like his
mate —and he always does —I can answer back
like a mate. If he thinks my hair’s untidy and
says ‘What little girl’s been chasing goblins
through a gooseberry bush and forgot to take
her hair off first?.’ then I can say ‘Guess I’d
rather have hair a bit wild than be wearing
boots never been cleaned since the year one,
anyhow.’ But, if Gran said ‘Grand-daughter,
your hair is very untidy,’ then I’d have to say
‘I am very sorry, Grandfather; I shall do it at
once.’ Now wasn’t Gran clever to think of
that when I couldn’t?”
Muffle agreed that he must be a man of parts.
“I wish it would rain and get cool,” he said.
“Mr. Gray had an awful headache this afternoon,
and he said he wasn’t used to our heat yet. If
only it would rain!”
For days, indeed, black clouds had rolled up,
only to drift past and away. A few drops had
fallen during the morning, but it was still oppres-
sively close and hot.
But miles away, where Needy Creek had its
source, a very deluge dashed itself to earth, and
the black clouds that had drifted past the thirsty


Flat poured down unceasing streams. Every
gully hurled its muddy torrent to the valleys,
every tiny stream leaped its banks and roared its
way creekwards; and still with unabated fury
raged the storm.
Muffle and Gem hurried their steps, because
the far-off lightning they could see reflected
made them hope for rain before night, and the
boy had wood to cut. They were on the hill
above his home when, attracted by a noise like
that of a distant wind, he glanced up the creek,
whose winding course was visible for a mile.
“Gem, look!” he cried.
It was a strange sight that met their gaze.
The storm waters had reached The Flat and a
flood was sweeping down the bed of the creek.
It was not one of the usual kind that rose bit
by bit and foot by foot; like a great wall of
water it tore along, curling over at the summit
like breakers; far beyond the banks it spread,
covering the lower parts of all the flats.
Muffle saw and understood that it meant peril
for Gran and Yankee Joe, who were working in
a tunnel right in the bank of the creek on
Marshall’s Flat. He flung his books to Gem.
“Keep on this side, whatever you do; don’t try
to cross,” he shouted, as he ran down the hill.


In puzzled bewilderment, Gem watched him
fly along and break his own advice. He knew
that the shortest way to reach the men was to
go in a straight line across the stream above
his home, through Joe’s paddock and into the
creek again; but he wondered if he could out-
distance the flood, despite his start and the wind-
ings it had to follow. He dropped his hat, tore
his coat and scratched his arm on Joe’s barbed
wire, trod down the old man’s lettuces, strug-
gled through a bank of blackberries, and reached
the mouth of the tunnel, shouting “Quick!
Quick! Hurry for your lives; a terrible flood
is almost here.”
Gran dropped his barrow of dirt, and Joe
came running at his heels; at the tunnel’s mouth
they could hear the roar of the monster that
was almost upon them. Each seized an arm of
the exhausted boy and scrambled with him to
safety. In two minutes water twenty feet deep
swirled over their work, and its shallow outer
edges caught them as they climbed the point,
and surged round them up to their knees.
Joe looked ruefully at his garden, under water
across the flood, though the house was built on
the highest point of the flat and therefore safe.


But Gran thought of Gem and would have
started out to meet her.
“She is all right,” said Muffle; “I told her not
to cross. There she is now, just this side of our
place.”
Gem arrived soon and wept frantically on
Gran’s neck. The flood had taken her by sur-
prise, and she had only realised that it meant
peril to Gran when it was too late to help him
herself; she had watched Muffle’s wild career in
terrified hope, running in sympathy on her side
of the creek.
“Oh! Gran, I am a wicked, selfish, cruel child,”
she sobbed. “I never thought of you, I never
thought of you, Gran. If you had been drowned,
it would have been my fault. Oh! I can’t bear
to see that cruel, cruel flood.”
Gran was worried over her state of trembling
terror. “There, there. Little Boss, don’t you
fret,” he coaxed. “Of course, you didn’t think
of us at first, for that flood was a surpriser, equal
to knocking the thought out of anybody.
Splinter here,” and he indicated Muffle, who was
still white-faced and panting, “is the best
example of presence of mind I ever came across.”
“An’ I reckon he’s made two friends that’ll
have good cause to remember him,” said Joe.


“That they will,” declared Gran.
Gem flung herself upon the boy and hugged
him in a way that made him exceedingly un-
comfortable. “I didn’t do anything, Gem,” he
said, “and thank you for bringing my books.”
He would have started home, but Gran said:
“Not you, Splinter! Joe will go round and let
your family know you’re here, and we’ll have
a record supper to celebrate that we are still
alive and hearty.”
When Joe had gone on his errand, the children
recovered their breath and spirits and went out
to mark the monster’s course. Both their
gardens were largely under water, and still the
flood was rising. The big bridge that spanned
the creek at the village came floating down,
almost intact, drifted into Joe’s garden, tore the
fence away and disappeared downstream. “Let’s
follow and see if it lodges again,” said Muffle.
But Gem caught his arm in sudden terror.
“Oh! Muffle, Muffle, do you think the water is
into Blue Nose Tunnel? Run, run quickly till
we see.”
Muffle, knowing nothing of the captive in the
tunnel, did not understand the reason for Gem’s
anxious haste, but he followed her in meek


wonderment. Opposite the tunnel, the valley
narrowed in and the stream was only about
two hundred yards wide, but the water must
already have been more than a foot deep in the
great drive. If the flood that hurried past with
such velocity, like some relentless giant, con-
tinued to rise, the Long Bushie would be
drowned. Though there were two shafts
up from the tunnel, there were no ladders
to mount them; to force the heavy gate without
the help of tools was not a very possible task;
there was room beneath it for the water to get
in, but between its top and the rocky roof of
the tunnel the space was only a few inches.
Gem was too terrified for tears, and almost
too much so for words, but she managed tremb-
lingly to tell the tale to Muffle. ‘The Long Bushie
is locked in that tunnel, and the key is here with
me. I found him when he got away from Green
and saved him in there. I keep the key in a
pocket inside my dress to have it handy when
I take him food. And now the bridge up town
is gone, and there is no way of getting across.
He will be drowned.”
Muffie looked at Gem and then at the flood.
“Oh! Muffie, what can I do?” she pleaded.
“Can’t you think of something? You’re a boy.


We could never make anybody on the other side
hear us and go and get him out. What shall I
do, Muffle? What shall I do?”
But Muffle only looked and thought. Needy
Creek in flood and drought had been his play-
fellow since his babyhood. He knew it in its
every mood and loved it. He and his dog
Bustard reaped a rich harvest of wood from
every flood; the boy fished it out with an iron
hook on the end of a clothes-prop, or flung
stones at far-out logs till the dog swam in and
guided them to land. There never was a small
flood but Ida was bribed into carrying his
books, boots and coat, while he swam home or
rode home on floating logs. He could swim
splendidly, but he knew well enough that the
strongest swimmer would be powerless in such
swiftly-moving water. But the current came
in at every curve. A little further up the creek,
it was right in near their side, whence it swept
across to a point just below the tunnel’s mouth,
all the big logs and most of the smaller timber
travelling down with the current.
“You give me the key, Gem, and I can get
across on a log,” he said quietly. “But didn’t
you know the Long Bushie had been pardoned ?
A fellow named Pratt got so sick that he thought


he was going to die, and then owned up that
he bagged those bullocks, for stealing which the
Bushie got his first sentence. Seeing the poor
chap had been been jailed for what he didn’t
do, nobody wondered that he broke loose and
robbed. And, you know, he never hurt any-
body and his father paid up every penny that
he stole. So everybody got up a petition about
it, and he has received a free pardon. There’s
been stacks in the papers about it for more than
a week.”
Gem began to cry. “Oh! Muffle, I am the
silliest, wickedest girl,” she sobbed. I m always
thinking I’m a wonder and then muddling things
up. If I hadn’t been so conceited, I’d have
asked somebody else for advice, and my poor
Bushie would have known by this that he was
free. I’ve been too busy lately ever to look
at the paper and Gran hasn’t mentioned it. But
you can’t swim across, Muffle, you can t! ’
“Yes, I can,” said the boy firmly.
“Couldn’t anybody make a boat?” suggested
Gem, tearfully still.
“There never was one on the creek but Ida’s,”
replied Muffle, “and that’s far away now, for
sure; but a log isn’t nearly as likely to sink or
capsize.”


He was taking his wet boots off as he spoke,
and then divested himself of socks and coat also,
while Gem said never a word. She who was
usually so fertile in resources, so sure of her-
self, felt helpless and hopeless, while Muffle,
generally so full of doubts, was perfectly calm
and confident. He put the key in a pocket of
his trousers and tied it in with a piece of string.
“Don’t you worry, Gem,” he said. “Warn Joe
we’re going to camp in his hut and eat him
out of house and home, and you go round and
tell Mollie after tea.”
He waited where the current curved in closest
to the left bank for a suitable log. A huge
black one, with great arms on either side, so
heavy that it travelled but slowly, came by soon.
He swam towards it and escaped the swifter
part of the stream by catching hold of one of
the great branches that stretched to the left.
Clambering on to it, he crept along till he
reached the main trunk, but stopped at the
longest right-hand branch, out upon which he
meant to travel when he neared the other side
of the flood.
Gem sat where he had left her, with eyes
straining out over the stream, her breath coming
in sobbing gasps. She had always longed to be


taking part in great things, but had never
dreamed that the part of waiting and watching
could be so hard.
Muffle was not at all afraid. There was a
queer, excited feeling inside him, but it was not
an unpleasant one. He was frightened when
Rag Ellis made him fight, frightened often when
the boys of The Flat bullied him. But he and
the Flat children did not know or understand
one another, and here was the water that he did
know and understand and that somehow seemed
to know and understand him. Amongst the
Flat children he had no confidence, but felt a
muff; in the water, he felt at home and sure of
himself.
And the water that he loved befriended him.
The log sailed in, as he had hoped, to the right
side of the stream, and from far out on its branch
he escaped the swiftest part of the flood
altogether. When he left his perch, he had still
some distance to swim, however, and had to
battle with all his strength to avoid being swept
down. He was forced to rest for a few minutes
before wading into the shallow water at the
mouth of the tunnel
The bushranger, with nothing but a stick of
wood to help him, was trying to cut out the


gate-post and free himself, when the boy reached
him. Gem saw them both emerge, wave to her,
and start out for Joe’s hut, and there was
nothing left for her but to go home alone to
Gran’s feast. She was as sturdy a child as the
bush held, yet her poor little legs shook as she
made for home; once they failed her altogether,
and she fell upon her knees.
Gran was coming out to look for her. “Where
is Splmter?” he asked. “And,” noticing her
white and tear-wet face, “what on earth is the
matter, little woman? Is there anything wrong
with the boy?”
“No, Gran; Muffle is all right, but he’s a hero,
Gran, a hero like those in books,” she sobbed.
Gran picked her up, carried her in to the big
couch in the dining-room and filled a pannikin
with sweet, hot tea. “You drink that, Little
Boss, and have something to eat before you
talk," he commanded.
“That’s right,” said Joe. “Her face is as pale
as if she had murdered a white turnip and
splashed its blood all over her.”
But Gem could not smile at his comparison
or make more than an attempt at drinking her
tea till the tale was told and Muffle’s heroism
applauded.


“Well I never 1” ejaculated Joe. “If you two
youngsters ain’t a pair o’ peaches, I 11 eat my
hat, an’ it’s a mighty dirty ole noddle-cover too.”
But Gran petted Gem, who had told the tale
with her head buried against him, a most un-
usual proceeding for such an independent little
person. He coaxed her to eat some of the feast
he had cooked.
Gran’s emblem might have been a frying-pan,
he used it with such fine effect. His special lines
were puftaloons and pancakes, but he was an
artist at fried potatoes, fried tomatoes, and
curry cooked in a pan. To-night he had pre-
pared fried bacon, eggs, tomatoes and potatoes,
with apple-fritters for dessert, though only Joe
did full justice to them. Gem was anxious to
let Muffle’s family know of his feat, and it was
in vain that Gran begged her to go to bed and
let him be her messenger.
“Muffle saved you, Gran, and he went across
the flood for me,” she said, “and I must go when
he asked me to.”
The old men walked round with her and
waited on the hill to bring her home; and there
they sat and talked of their little girl —for Joe
always claimed a share in her too —and of how


wise and wonderful and altogether better than
any other little girl she was.
The Morrisons heard the child’s tale in
wondering silence, “Do you mean that Muffle
swam across that flood, our Muffle?” asked Ida.
“Yes,” said Gem; “and he saved Gran and Joe
too, when I hadn’t the brains to think of them.”
“B u t —but,” said Ida incredulously, “he’s such
a galoot.”
“He’s a hero, said Gem, “a hero like people
in story-books.” And she began to sob again,
as she did every time she thought of his perils.
“Muffle a galoot, Ida?” said Mollie. “Some
day you’ll find out, as I have, that he is worth all
the rest of us together.’’ And she put her arms
round Gem and comforted her with a sweet
womanly sympathy of which she would have
been incapable a few weeks before.
Ida was very quiet all the evening, but it was
she who remembered that Bustard, Muffle s dog,
having barked himself hoarse with delight and
wonder at the flood, had been forgotten at tea-
time, and she gave him a royal supper for his
master’s sake. And when night had come and
even Mollie slept peacefully, it was Ida who lay
awake and shivered at the thought of Muffle
afloat on his log.


Chapter XI.
THE SMOOTHING OF THE WAY.
At that particular time the Sydney papers
were short of exciting news, and they made the
most of the closing incidents in the Long
Bushie’s career as an outlaw. It was to Green
he told the tale, and the policeman repeated it
with fine embellishments of his own. A special
reporter come up to photograph the tunnel and
the two children who had played a part in the
little drama, and the papers had much to say
of “the boy hero of Needy Flat” and “the
plucky bush maiden who remembered that her
sex’s mission was mercy.”
Muffle read the accounts secretly and was
made uncomfortable by them. But, if he felt
embarrassed by the public interest he excited,
he was made happier by it. To have been
accounted by your neighbours a muff, and sud-
denly to find the same neighbours seeking
to glorify themselves and their village by
acclaiming you a hero, cannot but gladden the
heart. To be sure, there were people who said
he was such a simpleton that he had not realised


the risk he took, and had only succeeded because
a special providence watched \over fools; but
such whispers did not disturb his content.
Gem read the newspaper accounts till she
almost knew them by heart. They filled hei
with secret pride and delight, though she did
not exactly like the talk of “a simple little bush
maiden with a brave and kindly nature” ; she
rather wished she had told ‘ that stupid leportei
man” that her mother and father had been a
lady and gentleman, that she herself was going
to be a lady some day.
The flood went down in a single night, and
Muffle crossed on Saturday and had his celebra-
tion feast at Gran’s. But not even the sausages
and pancakes that graced the board filled him
with the delight that Monday brought, when
Mr. Gray rang his gong for silence at noon and
stood up to speak.
“Children,” he began, “I have something very
pleasant to say. lam proud of teaching a boy
who is bound to make his mark in the world
with his fine brain, but I am prouder of teach-
ing one who is a man and a hero already. I
know you are equally proud of having him for a
schoolfellow, and I want you to show it in three
hearty cheers for Alec Morrison, in whose


honour you are to have a half-holiday. Now
then, boys, hip—hip—”
The boys and even the girls took up the
cheer and shook the roof with their acclama-
tions. Muffle could only stammer and look
foolish, but his heart was full of gladness.
That Mr, Gray should be proud to teach him,
Muffle Morrison, the galoot I It was perhaps
the happiest moment in his life, and from it
came the dawnings of self-confidence and self-
assertion in the boy who had let himself be
bullied and despised.
In the cottage on the hill they discussed him
over their lunch. “What about the Nincompoop
now?” asked the master, with an I-told-you-so
tone in his voice.
Maida answered the tone rather than the
question. “Yes, and you were right,” she said;
“but I didn’t wait until to-day to find it out.
Last Saturday I discovered he had something in
him, if only an exaggerated affection for you.
While you were down helping the local youths
make the tennis-court, he came up and begged
to be allowed to cut wood for you. You didn’t
like cutting it, he said, while he loved it; he told
the lie so eagerly that I hadn’t the heart to
refuse him the joy of doing something for you.


especially when he had come two miles for the
chance.”
“He knew I should be out, ’ said Frank, for I
mentioned the tennis-court, but what made him
fancy I had such objections to wood-cutting?”
“You were talking nonsense on Friday, when
he was getting his books together to go home,
explained Maida, “and you announced mourn-
fully that duty called you woodwards, quoting
Brother Ned’s ‘Why was I born so beautiful that
I must work so hard?’ I dare say he is wonder-
ing yet what there is particularly handsome
about your square face, Boy, unless his infatua-
tion goes the length of crediting you with
beauty: anyhow, he decided to spare you some
of the work.”
“I noticed a marked improvement in the pile,”
confessed Frank, “but took the gifts the gods
provided without questioning.”
Meanwhile the children were on their home-
ward way. It was when they parted at the
Morrisons’ gate that Gem said: “I suppose this
is the end of a most exciting chapter in our lives,
as books put it.”
But she was wrong. The newspapers with
their photos and fine words did not reach The
Flat till Wednesday, and that same mail brought


a postscript to her chapter, in the form of a letter
from the Long Bushie. He did not call her
an angel of light,” or use any of the expressions
she felt would have been fitting; indeed, it was
a matter-of-fact sort of letter, though it con-
tained a most important piece of news.
“When I found the water coming into the
tunnel,” he wrote, “I tried to cut steps up the
little shaft with my pocket-knife. Hanging on
to a bit of rotten timber for support, I pulled
the whole concern and a few buckets of dirt
down, and there in the wall was a quartz vein
with the gold in big hunks in it. Tell your
grandfather at once to take out a fresh lease of
the hill and work it again. I don’t want and
won’t have any share in it, but ask him to have
one for you and one for that youngster that
swam across to let me out. He is a brick, that
kid.”
Gran’s mining-lease of Blue Nose Point had
never expired, and he and Joe returned to work
there the very next morning. The vein was a
particularly rich one, but the gold in it was only
a “pocket.” The old mates had already tried it
in other places and found not a colour for their
pains; ten feet further in, the gold disappeared
completely. But after three weeks’ work the


pocket “panned out” four thousand pounds,
clear of all expenses. Gem and Muffle had fine
new bank-books, with a thousand pounds to the
credit of each, though it was arranged, re-
membering the weakness of Muffle’s father, that
they could only draw the interest while they
were under age.
But Muffle had his own immediate postscript
to the chapter too, and it was one that meant
a great deal to him. The goodwill of two
energetic old neighbours is something worth
having to a boy with a good appetite and a
great deal of wood to carry. They not only
vied with each other in feasting him, but Gran
lent him his horse to draw wood, and the weary
work that had left him with aching shoulders
every day in the week was concentrated into
a few hours each Saturday morning. The
Bushie’s mother sent him a ten-pound note for
a present, and that was put by to pay his ex-
penses when November and the Senior Exami-
nation should come. She sent him a letter too,
full of all the loving gratitude the Bushie left
unexpressed in words, and the boy felt as if the
little dead mother sleeping on the brown hill-
side had somehow smiled upon him from her
grave.


Chapter XII.
A SURPRISE PARTY.
Gem was dreaming in her cattle-paddock one
Sunday afternoon, intent on making the alto-
gether fascinating Jack rescue the maiden of
his choice from such a flood as that across which
Muffle had floated to save the Long Bushie. It
was an unsatisfactory episode to work into his
career, for every time she caught a glimpse of
the young king’s aristocratic face, with its sap-
phire eyes and perfect features, it aggravatingly
changed into Muffle’s insignificant countenance
with its grey eyes and sandy hair. A pucker
of annoyance wrinkled her brow, that her dream-
world should be thus spoiled by the intrusion
of the real.
“Bone-hugging doesn’t seem a particularly
happy task,” a man’s voice suddenly announced
right beside her.
Gem looked up, but with unmixed delight
when she saw Mr. Gray and his sisters, for they
were a part of the real world whose intrusion
she gloried in. Gran was Gran, of course, and
Ida was her chum, but her heart’s devotion was


lavished on Frank and Maida, for they had
pitied her unmothered and unsistered state and
been extra kind to her in consequence. So her
eyes beamed delight, as she stepped over her
miniature fences to greet the chance comers,
a leg-bone still clasped in her hand.
“This isn’t a bone at all, Mr. Gray,” she said
severely; “it’s a spotted cow that gives a bucket
and a half of milk, two inches deep in cream,
every day; and that isn’t a clothes-peg, as you
might fancy, but a handsome shepherd who
drives the spotted cow home to the bonny milk-
maid you are nearly treading on.”
He moved aside gingerly. “I wouldn’t rob
her of her unusual beauty for anything,” he said.
“We have come down,” explained Maida, “to
look for that reef of jasper you brought us such
nice specimens from, Gem. Could you find out
for us how to reach it?”
“It’s three miles away,” said Gem, “and I have
never been there. Gran got the rocks for me.
Please will you come over home till I ask him?”
Kath was an affectionate, clinging little thing,
with a turn for sentimentality when she could
get over her shyness. She was teaching the
Flat girls the use of endearing epithets and the
practice of constant kissing. She linked her arm


in Gem’s now and hugged her. “I’m going to
stay and play with you, Darlingest, if you will
have me,” she whispered.
Gran was comfortably asleep on his bed, but
Gem showed no respect for his slumbers when
a service to the Grays was in question. He
came cheerfully enough, however, and insisted
on accompanying the geologists. “It’s a tricky
place to get at,” he said, “and you would most
likely take a wrong turning.”
He protested too when Maida asked Kath to
be back by five, so that they might get home
in time for tea. “You will be dead beat if you
walk at such a rate, Miss Gray,” he said. “Gem
and I are not exactly civilised, but eating does
happen to be one of our little habits. By the
time you have tackled Piper’s Hill you will be
ready to look an uncivilised meal in the face
without blushing, I’ll warrant you. I reckon if
you can endure cracked plates, we will find
plenty to cover them.”
“You are very good, Mr. Marshall,” said
Maida, “and I shall be delighted to do my share
towards emptying the plates.”
“And I have uncivilised propensities myself,”
smiled the master.


“How nice that you’re going to stay!” ex-
claimed Gem. But all the afternoon there was
worry lurking beneath her joy. How could
such honoured guests be worthily entertained
when the teapot had a broken spout and the
cups were mainly tin pannikins ?
When the elder people returned to Marshall’s
Flat, the children were not back. “So much the
better,” said Gran. “If my little girl were here,
she would only fret and frown because there
■/
are no serviettes for you, or because the forks
are brassy.”
Maida, who refused to consider herself as
tired or likely to be so, insisted on setting the
table, and Gran carried it out to the grape-
vine shelter where he and Gem often had tea in
summer, and showed her where the crockery
was kept.
“All I ask, Miss Gray,” he said, “is that you
spare me any new ideas in table-decoration.
We’ve had pink roses blowing into the butter
for a week, because Gem took you a bunch and
observed them artistically scattered —to quote
the wee woman herself—down the centre of
your table.”
“I’ll be very discreet,” Maida promised
laughingly.


“I rather fancy I should shine as a cook s
assistant, if I had a chance,” urged the master.
So Gran set him to peeling and slicing pota-
toes, and he sat on the table to do it, since chairs
seemed scarce, but soon Joe came over and
helped him with his task.
Maida contented herself with putting green
grape-leaves under the dishes by way of deco-
ration. “Very pretty, Miss Gray,” commented
Gran, “but the vines will be bald with Gem’s
imitations. There’s bread in that box and
butter in the cooler, and I reckon you'll find
biscuits and jams and the remains of a turkey
and an apple pie in the safe.’’
“Turkey?” said the master. “It wants my
brother Ned here; he vows that next to himself
in this weary world he loves a roast turkey best.
“Looks .as if we had an inkling you were
coming,” said Gran, “but in reality we bought
and killed that bird to save its life; Mrs. Wood,
our neighbour, rears turkeys, and this particular
specimen fell so much in love with our best
peaches that I am sure I should have potted it
soon.”
Gran fried tomatoes, potatoes, and bacon, and
was just finishing a dish of apple fritters for
dessert when Gem and Kath arrived, with the


Morrison baby between them, Kath’s face was
flushed and her smooth hair actually untidy.
They had entreated Ida to come home to tea,
but in vain, for though she professed herself in-
different to all the world, her eyes always fell
when they met Maida’s trustful gaze. Whether
it was part of a teacher’s policy or not —for
Maida had taught for a year before her mother’s
death —the master's sister always looked at
children as though she knew they meant well
and would do well, and somehow they tried un-
consciously to live up to her expectations. Ida
only came in contact with her in sewing-class,
for she carefully avoided meeting otherwise the
only person who made her feel uncomfortable.
But Baby, playing under the big willow-tree
under Muffle's care, had graciously promised to
come instead. “We’ve had the loveliest time,”
cried Kath. “Muffle found a rope and put up a
swing for us on the willow-tree, and we chased
millions of little bully-frogs and caught a big cray-
fish, and we’ve borrowed the sweetest, duckiest
baby; she’s Ida’s sister, and Muffle asked his
big sister to let us have the loan of her for a
bit.”
Baby shamelessly deserted her girl admirers
for Frank, who was ready to toss her up and


ride her on his shoulder, and she seated herself
beside him at tea.
“What’s you’s vewy own name, Mr. Gway?
she asked.
“That’s my own name, little fairy,” he said,
“Frank Gray.”
■/
“Fwank’s a pwetty name,” she declared
graciously. “Muffle likes you vewy much,
Fwank.”
“That's very kind of him,” he said; “what
about you, Miss Milk-and-Roses ?”
“Zat’s not Ts name,” she laughed. “You’s a
vewy silly man, Fwank, an’ you is cwuel to eat
a poor turkey birdie.”
“But I am hungry,” expostulated the accused.
“Zat does not matter,” she replied severely.
“I is hungwy too, an’ I eats ’matoes an’ ’tatoes.
I would not eat a turkey birdie —only I’s
naughty wooster.”
“An’ why would you eat him?” asked Joe.
“Him’s vewy naughty; him will not say him’s
pwayers,” she explained. “All ze uvver woo-
sters says cockadoodlydoo ebberly mornin’, an’
Ts white one won’t.”
“It’s a big leghorn hen,” explained Gem.
“Muffle says Baby thinks it must be a rooster,


because it is so big, and is always chasing it
with a stick to try and make it crow.'’
“You’s a naughty, bad, witkit girl, Gem.”
declared Baby indignantly. ‘Ts wooster is a
wooster an’ him will not say him’s pwayers.”
“Do you always says yours, little sweetheart?"
asked Frank.
“Ebberly night an’ ebberly mornin’,” she de-
clared virtuously; but, suddenly remembering,
she added “Why, bless I’s pwecious heart, I
forgot zis vewy mornin’ ’cause I wan out to
scold ze wooster, an’ I wanted to say I’s pwayers
most partickerly.”
“Why?” asked Gran.
*
“ ’Cause I wanted to pway for Wag Ellis to
get a dwefful big whippin’. Muffle’s poor doggie
wented up to him’s place an’ him tied a tweacle
tin on him’s tail; ’twas tied on so tight what it
would ha’ cutted anybody’s tail off too!” Baby’s
eyes filled with tears at thought of the outrage
to poor Bustard’s feelings, but Kath, whose
smiles were swallowed up in sympathy, said
“Never mind, pet; he’s a very bad boy.”
“A naughty, bad, witkit boy,” agreed Baby
sternly.
“Gran, how can anybody be so mean and


cruel?” asked Gem. “Why aren’t people always
kind to one another and to animals?”
“That’s how I always get peppered with hows
and whys,” explained Gran, “Seems to me,
though, I once heard of a rabbit that went about
the bush wanting to know why cats ever ate
bunny pie, and why they couldn’t get up a taste
for green apples instead. It wasn’t two jiffies
before a hungry puss polished her off, and the
moral is that if every rab looked after her lazy
self Mrs. Tabby would sometimes go supperless.”
“Now Gran, you’re preaching again,” reproved
the child.
“Preaching? Not me,” he declared; “no more
than a little girl I once heard of who tried to
say her prayers, when she had a great fright,
and found herself saying ‘Mary had a little lamb’
instead.”
“It’s piggy-wiggy of you to make fun of me,”
she protested. “You see,” she explained to her
visitors, “I once found Rag Ellis and another
boy stealing our strawberries, and I told them
I’d tell Gran unless they went away at once.
They went, but came back at night, when Gran
was up town and I was in bed, and stoned our
house with hundreds of pebbles that made a
terrible noise on the galvanized iron. I thought


it was the end of the world and got under the
bed, so as not to be killed straight off. I tried
to say my prayers; but when it was all over,
I found myself crying and saying ‘Mary had a
little lamb.’ I told Gran, but I didn’t think he’d
be mean enough to talk about it.”
Everybody laughed, and Joe put in: “Guess
them boys hain’t talked about it much since.
I heerd the lovely shivoo, an’ ketched ’em from
the rear an’ gave ’em the primest lickin’ they’d
ever come within cooee of.”
Everybody did the fullest justice to Gran’s
dishes, notwithstanding cracked plates and tin
pannikins, and the turkey grew ever slenderer.
Baby aired her quaint opinions quaintly, and Joe
told five tales of bullock-drivers, each more
entertainingly impossible than the last. It was
only when Muffie came over for Baby, that the
circle round the table broke up. Kath entreated
to stay long enough to help wash up the dishes,
though Gem was secretly worried because there
was no proper towel to wipe them on, and
wondered what Kath would think of a piece of
torn tablecloth doing duty in that capacity.
But Kath did not seem to notice it, and Gem
took heart again and whispered: “I am the
silliest donkey, Kath. I’ve been worrying be-


cause we hadn’t nice plates and things for you,
and now because there isn’t a proper towel.
And it’s so stupid of me, when we haven’t any
others and you’re so nice that you don’t seem
to mind.”
“But we’ve had the loveliest time,” protested
Kath, “and your grandfather is just the
darlingest old dear, Gem.”
“I know,” said Gem proudly. “He is just
grand and ever so clever, but he won’t wear his
coat in the summer, and he will wear a cap
inside, and he only laughs when I tell him he
ought to have a stiff collar, like Mr. Gray.”
“That’s very sensible,” said Kath, who loved
to see her world comfortable. “Why, when
Frank used to go out camping with other
boys for his holidays, they never wore collars,
and they got into the terriblest old coats.”
“Didn’t Mr. Gray wear a collar either?” asked
Gem, in astonished unbelief.
“He didn’t,” answered the young man for him-
self, as he came in at the door. “I say, Gem,
what does p-r-i-m spell?”
“It doesn’t spell me anyhow,” she declared
indignantly. Then she remembered he was the
schoolmaster and apologised formally. “I am


very sorry I forgot and was rude, sir; I beg
your pardon.”
But he laughed good-humouredly and asked:
“What kind of an all-round beast do you think
me, Gem, to invite a retort and then mind it?
I was only teasing, little one; you didn’t really
mind, did you?”
Gran’s upbringing had made Gem strictly
honest; she had resented the hint, for her
acquaintance with the word prim was confined
to the sour old spinsters of story books. So she
answered truthfully: “I did mind just at first,
Mr. Gray, but it was very silly of me, and I
don’t care a bit now. You’ll think I’m a dreadful
spitfire, always flaring up when I’m teased; but
I’m really getting better; several times lately,
when Gran has laughed at me, I haven’t got
angry; have I, Gran?”
Gran, standing at the kitchen door, seemed
lost in thought. “Perhaps if you could just
remind me of any particular time. I’d remember
it, Little Boss,” he said; “I wouldn’t like to for-
get such a unique event.”
Gem rubbed her head lovingly against his arm,
in a way she had learned from watching Kath
with her brother, and laughed up at him. “This
is one of the times,” she said.


“Well, if it really is a unique event,” said
Maida, “it is a fitting place for us to let the
curtain fall by saying good-night.”


Chapter XIII.
IDA’S REBELLION.
It was Friday afternoon, and Ida was in one
of her worst tempers. She was jealous of Gem’s
growing affection for Kath and, happening to
sit next to the latter in drawing-lesson, delibera-
tely leaned over and scribbled on the horse’s
head the child had nearly finished.
Kath was the soul of neatness and her eyes
filled with tears at the sight of the spoiled work.
But she was a generous little creature and made
no fuss; she moved further up the seat and with
her eraser rubbed out the scribbling and most
of the head as well. No amount of rubbing, how-
ever, would make the page look clean again, and
she was hopelessly trying to patch it up when her
brother walked round to see the books.
“I am afraid you have been careless, Kath-
leen,” he said; “that drawing was nearly finished
last day; what have you done to it?”
Kath announced timidly that she had spoiled
it when rubbing out some wrong lines, where-
upon Ida laughed aloud. Her proudest boast


was that she dared do anything and was
never ashamed of anything she had done.
“What is the meaning of that laughing, Ida?”
asked the master.
“Your precious sister is a story-teller” she
asserted rudely. “I scribbled on her book.”
“Then you are not very grateful for her kind-
ness in concealing the fact,” he said severely.
“If you cannot help interfering with other
people’s work, you must sit by yourself. Go
down to that empty form near my desk.”
Ida gathered up her belongings noisily,
stamped down the room and affirmed “I shan’t
do a stroke of work here, so there!” True to
her word, she sat in sulky inaction all the after-
noon; but, when three o’clock came and the rest
were dismissed, she was really rather frightened.
She wished Mr. Gray would cane her, as “Old
Schoolie” had so often done, and let her go, victor
still in her uncrushed defiance; but she trembled
lest he should expel her, supposing she refused
to give in; the prospect of a succession of stay-
at-home days, with only the doubtful pleasures of
teasing Baby and defying Mollie, did not please
her. Yet she was so obstinate that to give in
seemed impossible.
The master sent Muffle home, with a half-


promise that he would go down and help him
in the evening, and with a message to Mollie
that Ida would be late, as she had to finish lessons
neglected in school. He was really rather
sorry for the pretty, wilful child, and reasoned
with her kindly; but Ida listened in stony silence
and sat for an hour, refusing to open her books.
Her persistence began to worry him, for give
in she must, and he did not like to contemplate
extreme measures.
Maida came in just after four, and Ida’s eyes
dropped at once. “Frank,” said his sister,
“won’t you come in for a cup of tea? I have
just made a fresh lot. And may Ida come too?”
Frank agreed at once, hoping that the child’s
stubbornness would melt in the light of Maida’s
kindness. But Ida muttered “I don’t want to
go.”
Maida put a hand on her hot little head and
said gently “Please, do come, dear,” and Ida
found herself obeying, to her own surprise. She
meekly took the tea and cake given her, and
Maida was wise enough to leave her unnoticed
and talk to Frank. When the master had
finished his tea, he said “I’ll bring your books
in here, Ida; it really is too hot in the school-
room.”


But the child began to cry. “I don’t want to
do it,” she sobbed; “I’m not going to do it.”
Maida put her arms round her and darted
Frank an explanatory look that she hoped he
would understand. “You poor little girl!” she
said tenderly. “You poor dear little girl!
Frank, I think it is cruel to keep a tired child
working all this time in that hot barn, most
cruel. There, little one, never mind; you shan’t
be treated like that.”
Frank looked annoyed. It certainly was
rather hard to have his peace of mind destroyed
by a defiant child, to be admirably patient with
her, and then to be told that he had been guilty
of cruelty. But he did set such store by
Maida’s opinion, and did so dislike hearing a
child cry, that he only said quietly: “I am sorry
if I have been unkind in any way, but while Ida
is one of my pupils she must obey me.”
But Maida’s words had just the effect on Ida
she had hoped for. The child was rude and
wilful, but she hated injustice and was too
proud to let the master bear her blame. “It
isn’t Mr. Gray’s fault,” she sobbed; “I wouldn’t
do any of my lessons this afternoon.”
Maida kissed her. “Don’t mind, dear; you’ll
do them now, and I’ll help you. Come along to


my room, and we’ll wash those tears away and
soon get finished.”
Ida went meekly, allowed Maida to bathe her
hot face, and settled down to make a copy of an
old cottage in her drawing-book and to do a page
of parsing. Maida stayed long enough to sketch
in the outline of the cottage, and then went
back to her brother, “Please forgive me for
attacking you, Frank,” she entreated. “It was
just an old schoolmarm’s dodge. That child has
so much honesty in her face that I was
sure she would not shelter herself behind in-
justice to you, so I tried it. Now she is busily
doing her work, and you must not bear either
of us a grudge. I can’t help pitying and liking
the saucy little person, and feel sure she has a
great deal in her.”
“Of selfishness and unpleasant temper, yes,”
said Frank rather crossly.
But Maida pulled his hair smilingly. “Don’t
be ungenerous, Boy,” she reproved him. “The
child has the makings of a fine woman in her,
and you must not visit my sins on her head.”
Frank never could resist Maida’s smile. “Pax,
little Big-Heart!” he said. “You shall be as
good to the poor little beggar as you like, and
I’ll take your verdict on her and call it my own.


I’m off to do penance watering the garden now.
as I want to go down and help the Nincompoop
to-night.”
‘Then I’ll keep Ida for the week-end,” said
Maida; “you can ask her sister’s permission.”
When Frank came in, tired, to his dinner, Ida
brought him her work neatly done; and, since
watering roses is the surest way to forget life s
little annoyances, he took it with a smile of
pleased approval, and chatted to her as cheer-
fully as to his sisters. Kath, always eager to
hold out the olive branch of forgiveness, soon
convinced Ida that it was possible to have three
in a friendship instead of two, and the cloud of
bitterness that had blackened the day quickly
melted.
It was still daylight when Frank reached
Morrison’s Point, and Mollie was sitting on a
garden seat telling Baby and Peter stories.
Baby had tried to drive Peter away, a course in
which Mollie would have supported her in the
days when her heart had only been big enough
to hold one of the family, but now she had said
gently “Peter likes stories too, darling” ; and
Baby, being a wee person who borrowed her
attitude towards the rest of mankind from
Mollie, gave in and was very nice to Peter.


When Frank came in at the gate, they made a
pretty picture amongst the roses, but Baby
broke it up. “Good-day, Fwank, she called out
as she rushed gleefully to meet him; “You can
kiss I if you likes.”
“So you haven’t forgotten me, Miss Smiley-
Eyes?” he asked, as he gave the permitted
salute and then lifted her to his shoulder.
“There is something in my pocket for the queen
of my heart, but she must find it herself.”
Baby slid down, his arm supporting her, till
she was on a level with his coat pocket, where
she put in a pretty hand and drew out a small
box of chocolates. “I saided I did love you,
Fwank,” she vowed. “Zank you vewy, vewy
much, an’ I will give Petey some, an’ Muffle
some, an’ my darlin’est Mollie some, an’ only
keep one for Ida, ’cause she’s a naughty, bad,
witkit girl.”
As Baby fled to show and share her booty,
Frank advanced to Mollie, who had risen and
was gathering up the children’s playthings.
Miss Morrison, is it not?” he asked, lifting his
hat. “I hope you have not been worried about
Ida; her lessons were not finished till late, and
my sister kept ,her to .tea; she will be very
pleased if you can let her stay for the week-end.”


“It is very good of Miss Gray to be so kind to
her,” said Mollie. “I cannot tell you how sorry
and ashamed I am that she has been so trouble-
some ; it is such an ungrateful return for your
kindness in helping Muffle.”
“That is really a pleasure,” he replied, “and
Ida is sorry now and quite forgiven.”
“It is fair to tell Mr. Gray,” said Mollie
falteringly, “that it is not altogether her fault;
she was the dearest little girl in the world, when
my mother was alive, and perhaps if I had been
older, or wiser, or kinder, she might be that
still.”
There was such a note of weariness in her
voice that Frank could not help being drawn
pityingly towards her, and when she took him
in to Muffle he found her no less lovely than
Ida. Her voice had seemed familiar to him, but
her face was even more so; she reminded him
strangely of the one girl who had nearly won
his heart in the past; indeed, they were alike
enough to have been sisters. But what possible
relationship could there be between bonny, light-
hearted, wealthy Felicia Mackay, the adored
adopted daughter of a leading society dame,
and this overburdened, sad-faced bush girl; be-
tween Felicia, who smiled and danced her way


through life, always cheery, always charming,
and this child whose eyes were dark with
troubles borne but not always conquered?
While Muffle stammered his thanks, and
knocked over two chairs in his eagerness to pro-
vide one, Mollie found Baby to put her to bed.
“Wait till I says good-night to Fwank,” urged
the little maid; “an’ I must say I’s pwayers on
ze wosy cushion on ze lounge, an’ you must not
asturb I at I’s pwayerin’, Fwank.”
“Not in here to-night, pet,” coaxed Mollie.
“Mr. Gray wants to help Muffle and we must
not interrupt.”
“But I doesn’t mind Fwank,” replied Baby
condescendingly. “Him can listen to ze afor-
mance.”
“Please, don’t let me interfere with Baby’s
sacred rights and privileges,” urged the master,
smiling.
“She loves to kneel on my best cushion
because of its pink roses,” explained Mollie.
“Come along then, little tyrant.”
Baby climbed upon the lounge and put her
little knees carefully on the spray of painted
roses. The pretty, dimpled hands were folded
in front of the small solemn face, and she
stumbled through “Gentle Jesus” and the Lord’s


Prayer. “Now I’s own pwayer,” she exclaimed,
warming up from duty to interest.
“Never mind to-night, darling,” pleaded Mollie,
worried as to what queer form the mite’s
requests might take.
But Baby eagerly began: “Dear God, Ida is a
naughty, bad, witkit girl to-day, but Muffle is
vewy good, an’ Petey is warver good, and I is
tebbly good, an’ Fwank is here too, an’ him is
vewy good an’ bwinged I chockies. Please send
I a lil wee baby sister to play wiz—l’ll send back
ze angel what bwings she, weally an’ twuly. I
is gettin’ nearly tired of askin’ for she, an’ if
she doesn’t come soon I’ll change she for a
pussy-kitty wiz gweeny-gway eyes, an’ pwaps
I’ll get zat. An’ please God bless all ze nice
peoplies vewy much, an’ bless I an extwa big bit
for givin’ Petey some of I’s chockies, an' bless
ebberlybody, amen.”
Thereupon Baby threw a parting kiss to
Frank and Muffle, and allowed herself to be
carried off to bed. Mollie stayed with her till
sleep silenced the busy little tongue, then she
visited her pantry to cut slices of the cake that
was kept for visitors, and made coffee for supper.
When Frank rose to go, she said “Do stay and
have supper, Mr. Gray; it won’t keep you
waiting long, for the coffee is made.”


“Thank you,” he said, “but you must not let
me be a trouble, Miss Morrison.”
Mollie eagerly disclaimed the trouble. She
made delicious coffee, however rarely she
practised the art, and Frank showed his
appreciation by having a second cup. “Do you
play tennis, Miss Morrison?” he asked, as he
drank it. “I have been admiring that beautiful
racquet.”
“I used to years ago,” she said, “but our court
is covered with nettles now. A sister of mine
who has not lived at home for years, sent me
the racquet the other day.”
“I wish you would come up to the Flat and
join our new club,” he said. “The boys about
have helped me make a court, and nearly every-
body between fourteen and forty has joined;
my sister and I are the only two who have ever
played before, and you don’t know how grateful
we shall be if you help us coach the recruits.”
Mollie, embittered by overwork and worry,
had drifted away from all local acquaintances
and rarely went out; still, she was young and
human and longed to grant the request; but,
when Peter was due to begin school and could
not for lack of the money to provide a respectable
pair of boots, she dared not contemplate the


half-crown subscription she had heard of. “I
am sorry, Mr. Gray,” she said, “but I really have
no time to play.''
In the big house, surrounded by the comfort-
able furniture left from days of prosperity, he
did not guess the true reason and only pitied
her that she was so tied down by home-duties.
It was next day that he remarked to Maida:
“While you are lavishing your kindness on the
Nincompoop’s small sister, I wish you could
spare a little time to make friends with the big
one. She is strangely like Felicia Mackay, who
lived next door to us.”
“Dear little gay Felicia, who flirted with you
over the garden wall, and had half the men we
knew at her feet?” asked Maida. “I'll try, but
she may not ; want my friendship. Old Mrs.
Lane, when she comes to wash and scrub, tells
me all the gossip I will listen to, and she says the
Morrisons were very rich once and are still
terribly stuck-up.”
“Don’t you think life must be hard enough on
that poor child without anybody thinking harsh
thoughts of her?” he asked.
Maida smiled with affectionate malice. “You
said she was like Felicia; didn’t you, Frank?” she
asked.


Chapter XIV.
MAKING FRIENDS.
Maida tried with tactful slowness to break
through the pride, or shame, or weariness that
kept Mollie aloof from her neighbours. She
was wise enough to begin by asking favours in-
stead of granting them, and Muffle and Ida
carried messages home asking for flower cut-
tings or directions for making jam. At last,
Maida ventured a step further. “Please, Alec,”
she entreated one day, “do ask Miss Morrison
to take pity on my ignorance. Gem’s grand-
father has promised me as many apples as I
care to take from his garden, and I tried to
make jelly yesterdav; I followed the directions,
and yet it is nothing like the pot that Ida
brought me up on Monday. Will you ask your
sister if she will let me go down and watch
if she makes any more jelly this season, or
if she could find time to come up and instruct
me ?”
The result was that Maida went down to
Morrison’s Point that very week. Mollie racked
her brains thinking out a dainty luncheon that


could be provided mainly from the eggs and
milk and preserves she had in plenty; Peter,
coaxed into a good temper by a promise of cake,
had on his best manners as well as his best suit,
and Baby was pleased to be very charming to a
sister of her beloved Frank of chocolate fame.
So Maida found her welcome a warm one, and
was surprised at the tastefulness and neatness
of the big house, especially when she discovered
that Molhe had no help at all. “I think you
are a marvel,” she said. “Frank is always fussing
for fear I am overworking, and yet I have only
a six-roomed cottage and Mrs. Lane comes every
week to wash and scrub; then Frank does the
garden and many an odd thing besides, while
Kath has an insatiable appetite for helping. I
don’t know how you can do all this and find
time too for the things that matter more —
making the family happy and comfortable; I
should be too cross ever to say a pleasant word.”
Mollie did not admit that that sometimes
happened with her, but she was struck by the
gently given hint that there were things that
mattered more than dish-washing and dusting.
“What is there I could leave undone though?”
she asked.
“Heaps of things,” said Maida. “A person


with the genius for laziness that I have would
find them easily. Close up half the rooms in this
big house and stack away half the furniture;
dig up all the small flowers in your garden and
plant shrubs and trees that will not require so
much watering and weeding; dress Baby in blue
print instead of white muslin—”
But Mollie demurred at that. “I love her so
in white,” she said.
Still she took Maida’s advice to heart and
acted largely on it. Thus finding more leisure, she
found it easier to do “the things that mattered
more,” the things which she had already set
out to do in Muffle’s company. Besides, Ida
troubled her less in these days. The child was
tricked by Maida into promising to be always
good at school, and though Frank smiled in
secret at his sister’s scheming he was grateful
for its success. When Ida had admitted that she
was sorry for her defiance, Maida said: “I wish
vou would let Ida come in and do her lessons
with me for a time, Frank. The other children
will only tease her now she means to try and
be good, and it takes more courage than we
have a right to expect in a little girl to live down
a bad habit in face of other people’s sneers.”
But Ida flushed up. “I’m not afraid of any-


thing, especially of the stupid Flat children,”
she vowed. “They won’t dare laugh at me.
I didn’t really promise I would be good in
school, but I shall, and always too.”
Maida kissed her. “Dear,” she said, “I am
glad you are such a brave girl; courage is what
I most admire.”
And Ida was pleased and proud, but bound
by her own word to virtue, with a schooltime
limitation, of course, for which she was rewarded
by permission to learn French with Gem. Frank
found that she kept her promise loyally. Kate
Ellis jeered at her new meekness, but Ida’s
tongue was sharp enough to crush Kate. “I
didn’t play up to make fun for you, but for my-
self,” she said, “and I haven’t such a love for
you and your sixpenny-sized freckles to keep
it up for your sake. I don’t get any fun out
of trying to annoy such a long-suffering stick.”
But nobody but Maida the worshipped and Gem
the fellow worshipper knew that it was all for
love of the big heart and kindly smile of the
long-suffering stick’s sister.
And at home Ida became less of a thorn in the
flesh. Her love for Maida, her friendship with
Gem and Kath, the new interest she took in her


work, occupied her and left less time for mis-
chief, while the new patience of Mollie and
Muffle gave less opening for squabbling. One
thing she did that touched Mollie greatly.
Guessing the reason of her sister’s refusal to
join the tennis club, she told Mr. Gray that
Mollie had changed her mind and she paid him
the half-crown subscription out of the money
she had made by selling a large speck of gold
that she had picked up after a storm, when the
raindrops had left it bright and clean on an old
heap of “wash dirt.”
“Oh! Ida, how good of you!” exclaimed Mollie,
when she told her.
But Ida tossed her head. “Don’t thank me,”
she said. “It was only because I didn’t want
people to say you couldn’t join the club when
even the Fishers, who have about half a meal a
day, are members; but you needn’t think I’m
going to join the butter-wouldn’t-melt-in-your-
mouthies; you and Muffle are enough silly saints
in the family already.”
Mollie flushed, but it was with pleasure; could
it be that her new desire to be kind and gentle
had been so evident in her daily life that even
a critical small sister saw it? She felt helped
and repaid.


Mollie went to tennis the very next Saturday;
indeed, she went up early enough to have lunch
with the Grays. Frank had suggested it
casually to Maida, on the plea that a girl who
walked two miles in the hot afternoon sunshine
would not feel inclined for tennis afterwards.
Maida acquiesced, with a smile playing about
the corners of her mouth; she did more, for she
dropped a gentle hint to Gem, who straightway
invited all the Morrison children to tea with her
on Saturday night. Ida had told her that her
father was going out to the river fishing all the
week-end. and having thus disposed of any
necessity for Mollie’s going home to tea by dis-
posing of her family, Maida meant to keep her.
Frank took the note asking Mollie and Baby
to lunch when he went down on Friday night
to help Muffle again; there was no rebellious
Ida to prevent afternoon work this time, but
he easily discovered a desire to go and see some-
body about something after school, and some-
how those evening visits became a settled
custom.
“Kath sends a message too,” he said, as Mollie
read the note, “that she will be very disappointed
if Baby does not come.”
“Of course I will go,” answered Baby for


herself, “an’ I will take Kath one of I’s dear HI
chickies what ze shabby piano twied to eat.”
“A shabby piano with a taste for poultry”
laughed Frank; but Mollie translated the phrase
into a savage goanna, and went on to accept the
invitation, while Baby proceeded immediately
to chase her chicks. When morning came she
insisted on taking a pair, that they might gloat
in company over their lucky escape from the
hungry iguana. Kath was delighted with the
gift and instantly foresaw herself making
enough, by selling eggs to Maida, to load all
her adored family and friends with presents.
Mollie enjoyed the tennis, but even more the
cheerful teatime and the pleasant talk that
followed in the cool little sitting-room. She had
a voice which, though not big, was sweet and
true; it had only been trained during her last
term at boarding-school, but she sometimes
practised the songs sent her by the absent
Sydney sister. Frank sang too, and they dis-
covered some duets that suited their voices and
practised them, to Maida’s accompaniments, till
Mollie declared that Baby would never get home
for sleepiness, if she stayed any longer. Frank
was waiting at the door, with his cap on, when
she said good-bye to his sisters. “It is such a


long way, Mr. Gray,” she objected, “and you
must be tired already.” But he made a pretty
speech about the pleasure it would give him.
“Besides,” he said, “Baby is my sweetheart, and
so it is my bounden duty to see her home.”
Mollie wondered to find herself talking to him
in the happy, natural way of her childhood, but
Baby felt rather neglected, though Frank insisted
on riding her on his shoulder; at all events, she
was the only one of the trio really glad to find
Muffie waiting by the roadside, just out of the
village. Mollie was pleased the boy had thought
of her, still she wished he had not; Frank was
glad he knew enough to be somewhat chivalrous
to such a lovely sister, yet secretly voted him
a nuisance; and Muffie, belonging to the un-
observant race who never see when they are or
are not wanted, found no excuses to scamper on
ahead with Baby.
The tennis became a weekly institution with
Mollie, and so did tea at the Grays’. Maida
prevailed on Ida to see to that meal at home,
and Frank, having dropped a very plain hint to
Muffie, henceforth escorted Mollie home, un-
bothered by the gallantry of her young brother.


Chapter XV.
KEPT IN.
Gem and Ida were detained after school for
lateness. They had started early, but in fond
delight in each other’s company had talked and
played the hours away. Then, on one of those
wild impulses of childhood, they ,had walked
through the creek to Needy Flat; they rubbed
their boots in dry sand till, the moisture being
mainly removed from the outside, they only
looked extra dirty.
“I’m afraid we’ve been an awful time,” said
Gem; “perhaps we’ll be late.”
And indeed it was nearly eleven when they
reached the school. “We’ll be kept in,” said
Ida; “don’t you notice he always keeps in any-
body that comes late and doesn’t bring an
excuse ?”
“I would like to be kept in just for once, to
see what it’s like,” said Gem, but her voice
sounded somewhat doubtful.
The master summoned up a stern countenance
to greet them. “Why are you little girls so


late?” he inquired. “Did you not leave home
at the usual time?”
Gem looked up at him trustfully. “Please
sir, we left extra early,” she explained, “and
so we thought we had a lot of time to spare
and stopped to swing on Thompsons’ willows,
and we didn’t think we were there so specially
long.”
Who could be very angry with two little
people, one so pretty and one who explained her
sins away in such a sweet, confiding manner?
The master’s voice softened. “In future you
must come straight to school,” he said, “and you
must do the lessons you have missed now and
miss your extra French, so run across and tell
Miss Gray not to expect you.”
The culprits went sadly enough, for they loved
the French lesson that came immediately after
recess three times a week, loved it mainly because
they loved the teacher so. But Maida discovered
their wet boots, and when Frank came across at
play-time for his tea she asked that they might
stay with her, to dry their shoes, and do their
other lessons after school. So at three, when
everybody else was dismissed and Muffle went
across to the cottage to work with Mr. Gray,
Ida and Gem were left in the schoolroom with


five sums and a map of Tasmania to exercise
their pencils on.
“Bring your work across to me when you
finish,” said the master.
It was after four when they came, but the
maps were neat and the sums correct. Even
Muffle had just gone, and they found Mr. Gray
working in the garden.
“You have been a long time, little scape-
graces,” said he; “I am afraid there has been
more play than work. And may I suggest, Gem,
that if you court present colds and future rheu-
matism by such pranks as this morning’s, you
will hobble about in your prime, instead of
gliding gracefully in the manner of the ladies
you aspire to emulate.”
“Miss Gray doesn’t glide,” corrected Gem;
“she walks.”
“There are exceptions to prove every rule,”
he smiled; “but now you must run away home.
I can see Alec with Tom Ellis outside the post-
office, and you had best go down and save them
from coming to blows again.”
“Oh! they have never had a fight since,” said
Gem; “Kate hasn’t quarrelled with us.” Maida
could have told the reason why that feud had
died in its infancy. She had guessed the cause


of the hostility shown to Gem at school, and by
seemingly chance remarks urged the advantages
of a more tactful manner. Gem saw the remarks
were intentional and frankly asked: “Please,
Miss Gray, will you tell me what I’ve been doing
that’s wrong, and I’ll try to reform. Gran has
made me used to listening to my sins straight
out, with a big bit of polish added to make
them show up more, so I won’t be hurt a bit.”
So Maida delivered a little lecture on the
tolerance and courtesy a lady must cultivate.
“A lady is really superior in making no show of
superiority,” she ended.
“Oh!” said Gem, as though a new light had
broken in upon her, “I suppose that is just how
} r ou do with me —never make me feel uncomfort-
able about the silly things I do, but just live in
hopes I’ll pick up the right ideas. It is just
like the way you didn’t notice our tin pannikins
when you came to tea; so I ought not to turn
up my nose at the tin pannikin manners and
minds of Kate Ellis and the rest. How queer
it didn’t strike me before! I generally think of
things.”
Maida kissed her. “Dear little Gem,” she
said, “I shall be ever so pleased if you keep on
friendly terms with the others.”


Gem made up her mind instantly to seek and
obtain popularity. “Miss Gray,” she said, “I
do love you; I love you just like people in story-
books do.”
“And I love you like people out of story-books
do, pet,” said Maida.
So Gem had passed through various stages
of condescension to a workable understanding
with the Flat children, and could proudly tell
the master “Kate hasn’t quarrelled with us
since.”
“Glad to hear that,” said he. “It might be
too big a shock to Ellis’s good opinion of himself
to find that Alec could beat him.”
Ida looked up with surprised interest.
“Could Muffle really lick him, Mr. Gray?” she
asked.
“It would surprise me greatly if he couldn’t,”
he replied; “but, of course, he won’t prove my
words, for I have forbidden them to fight again.”
He winked one eye solemnly behind Ida’s back,
as she stooped down quickly to gather up her
books.
“Come along, Gem,” she commanded; “I
want to go home with Kate Ellis most particu-
larly.” Gem went obediently, but was soon back
again; Ida had sent her for a forgotten First


Macmillan, without which Miss Gray’s French
lesson could not be prepared. She found Frank
reading on a verandah seat.
“Please, Mr. Gray,’’ she asked, “may I go in
and get our French book? Ida left it on the
piano this morning.’’
“Yes, certainly,” he said.
He noticed, when she returned, that her eyes
were shining with fun. “Mr. Gray,” she said,
“you’re what Baby would call a naughty, bad,
witkit man. I saw you wink when you said
Muffie could beat Rag Ellis; I'm sure you just did
it so that Ida would stir them up to fight.”
“Don’t you think you are steering close to
being a naughty, bad, witkit girl, Gem,” he
retaliated, “seeing things you are not supposed
to?”
She shook her head. “But I think you’re a
darling, all the same,” she went on, “ a regular
darling; my book on etiquette hints it is wrong
to call a gentleman a darling, unless you are
related to him or engaged to him; but some-
times, like to-day, I just can’t help it; so I may
as well be killed for a sheep as a lamb and tell
you again that you are a dear and a darling,
and I would just hug you if that book didn’t
sort of say it was wrong,”


iW. f%2J- Fti i'
' ** f ml * J
few p ' > I®-: 4
y . ‘'nW' »/•
; I*-* */^i k '. ';■
; m§fj; ■ % " // ■ W)^\
/ %*' 'r >^ r ' ’ -* •*’ - *
'■iSSJp *,4' > / ; : v '
j0vr • *M-'-*'* •■ •- ‘ 4^ v - *
5af£; * **
i*-;& m »•• f jp j -afj* ;«
VWaif* ™ > lit <■*■ *£-; ,
m 0 $Tr>il
rf r- ■- • •*
Wf : • ■•*. >& ig.fr :. I •■■ ; -.r.*
o
C/ 3
' V
V£
3
S
u
E
o
_c
00
_ c
' C
-o
E
o




He smiled at her eager outburst. “Don’t you
think you may as well go the whole hog while
you are about breaking that mighty author’s
creed?” he asked.
“ I never thought of that,” said Gem. She
was not given to being bashful and went to him
at once, her eyes still bright with fun and
affection, and gave him a hearty kiss.
“ ‘Going the whole hog’ isn’t a nice expression
for a schoolmaster to use,” she said severely;
“I might learn it.”
But he evaded the point. “Since when have
you begun to study the ethics of engagements ?”
he asked.
“It’s not any queer thing like that; it’s just a
book on etiquette, and so it must be right,” she
explained.
“Granted,” he said, “but may I remind you
that if you spoil sport you will be a naughtier,
badder, witkiter girl?”
“I don’t do piggy-wiggy things, Mr. Gray,”
she replied indignantly; “besides, I want Muffie
to give Rag Ellis a dreadful licking.”
Her look was so vindictive that he ventured
a protest. “But, little girl, I have always under-
stood that ladies were on the side of mercy.”
“So they ought to be,” agreed Gem rather


sadly; “but I don't care twopence for that, and
I’d like to be there to see Muffle hurt him.”
“Has that boy been trying to annoy or tease
you?” he asked, with a look that boded ill for
the possible culprit.
“Oh! no,” said the child quickly; “it’s not
that; but Muffle swam across that dreadful flood
for me, and yet Rag Ellis calls him a coward;
and I can’t forget about that flood, Mr. Gray,
and when I try to go to sleep at night I see
Muffle on it. You can’t understand how terrible
it was to watch him go across, and yet Rag
Ellis calls him a galoot!”
There were tears quite visible in Gem’s eyes.
“Don’t think about it, little one,” he urged;
“only remember what a chance it was for Alec
to show what was in him, and how grandly he
rose to the chance.”
“But what if he had been drowned?” she
asked, with a sobbing catch in her voice. Life
was so full of joy to her that she shuddered at
the thought of Muffle, cut off perhaps by his own
act of heroism from the brightness and sweet-
ness of sunshine and birdsong, of human liking
and laughter.
“But he was not,” said the master firmly;
“and even if he had been, little one, you could


not wish his deed undone; the grand failures are
even a higher inspiring and helping force in the
world than the grand successes.”
Gem had never heard him talk so seriously
before, but she was comforted; how nice it was
to think of Muffie as a high inspiring force, a
grand success! She wiped her eyes on a hand-
kerchief that was somewhat grubby after a day’s
service, and smiled out on the world again.
“I’m as silly as a turkey-chick,” she said, “and
that’s the silliest, weepy, squeaky creature that
ever aggravated anybody; but I’m not going to
be chicken-hearted any more. Good-bye, Mr.
Gray.”
He smiled back at her, and after her as she
walked to the gate, a smile of sympathy and
liking. It was not hard to guess who was his
favourite pupil, however kindly an interest he
took in the Nincompoop —the Nincompoop who
was, at that very moment, waging a bitter
battle secretly engineered by him.


Chapter XVI.
MUFFIE’S VICTORY.
The coach was in when Ida reached the post
office, and the children were making for home;
but she caught the rest up before they topped
the hill beyond the village, and by the time they
were descending its far side Kate Ellis had
listened to an unfavourable review of the repu-
tations of her entire family, and had been in-
formed that she herself was as sensible as a
dead mosquito and as beautiful as a squashed
tomato.
Rag supplemented his astonished sister’s feeble
retorts with his usual remarks about Ida’s father,
and finally called on Muffle to settle the relative
merits of their families by the test of war.
“Schoolie’s not here to pet you now, galoot, or
wipe your tears away,” he sneered.
“I don’t want to fight,” said Muffle some-
what sullenly; “it’s silly, and Mr. Gray said we
were not to.”
“Oh! what a nice excuse when you’re afraid!”
jeered Rag. “Pretend you’d like to, but you’re


such a good little prawn that you mustn’t! Yah!
come and fight, will you?”
“All right,” said Muffle angrily, but surprised
at his own willingness.
They flung their coats ofif, and all the boys
who lived down the creek stood round to watch;
the girls moved on, except Kate and Ida, who
were too keenly interested in the fray to re-
member that Flat etiquette demanded their
withdrawal. Ida had always bitterly resented
Muffle’s defeats as a family disgrace, and now —
surely, surely, Mr. Gray could not have made a
mistake! Kate was on fire with indignation at
the unprovoked attack upon herself, and ached
to see Ida’s tongue repaid by Rag’s fists.
The fight was not a long one. Perhaps Rag’s
strength and weight would have given him the
a ictory if he had not been somewhat of a coward
and quite unused to anything but easy conquests.
But when Muffle parried his first blows and got
in a few hard knocks at his face, Rag blubbered.
Muffle’s confidence and his wrath rose at the
sound; rage quite foreign to his quiet nature
seemed to possess him: he remembered every
insult Rag had ever heaped upon him, and
rained blows upon him till the frightened bully


roared for mercy and carried his bruised and
humbled head hurriedly from the field.
And Muffle jeered at him and longed to have
him back beneath his fists. “Who’s the coward
now?” he shouted. “You looked hard for a lick-
ing and you got it, and you’ll get another if ever
you interfere with me or any other chap.”
As the victor put his coat on, half-a-dozen
admiring little lads hastened to help him. Kate
had hurried forlornly away, but there was Ida
waiting, with pride on her face and his school-
bag in her hand.
“Leave it under that briar-bush till I come
back,” said he; “I’m going up to tell the master.”
“Don’t be a fool, Muffle,” she urged.
But he actually spoke up for himself. “You
don’t know anything about it,” he said. “I’m
not going to take a million favours from him and
break his orders almost under his nose without
owning up; he said there was to be no more
fighting.”
He set out with such an air of finality that
Ida said no more, but she carried home the bag
of books.
On the hill-top Gem met Muffle. “Did you
beat him?” she queried eagerly.
“Till he squealed and ran away,” affirmed the
boy proudly.


“Oh! lam so glad! Ever and ever so glad!”
she said.
“But,” he objected, “you’re always saying
fighting is vulgar and brutal.”
“So it is,” she agreed; “but I don’t care a bent
ha’penny for that. I wish I’d been there to see
you trounce him.”
Muffle was not used to a feminine lack of logic,
and so he wondered somewhat at Gem’s incon-
sistent attitude, as he went his way to confes-
sion. He wondered also as to the reception he
would get; a caning was what the master had
threatened for future combatants, and he had
an awkward habit of keeping his word. Mr.
Gray was still busy with his paper on the
verandah, when the boy walked up the garden-
path to him.
“Please sir,” said Muffle—and the master
noticed that for once he did not stammer
“Please sir, I came to tell you that I have been
fighting with Rag Ellis.”
“Well?”
“You said you would lick any fellow T up to
brutality again, sir.”
“Well, I hope you have done it for me this
time.”


“But / licked him till he bellowed, sir.”
“Well?”
“Aren’t you going to lick me, sir?”
“Not unless you are particularly anxious for
it; of course, I don’t mind obliging you, but I
hoped my day’s work was over.”
Muffle could not help thinking that for once
his hero was dull of comprehension, but it
seemed useless to try and explain further. So
he said “Thank sir,” with a feeling of relief
that the confession was over so easily. He was
half-way down the path when he remembered
that he had not said good afternoon and had
not lifted his hat; turning back awkwardly, he
saw the master lying on the lounge, convulsed
with silent laughter.
Mr. Gray caught the boy’s eye and, with a
twinkle still in his own, asked, “Did it ever strike
you, Alec, why I have been teaching you
boxing?”
“For exercise after school, so that I can work
better,” said the boy, surprised at the question.
“Of course, it couldn’t be to help you cure a
bully of one kind of swelled head by giving him
another?” continued the master.
Then at last comprehension came to Muffle.
His poor dog-eyes were lowered to hide the


tears of gratitude that welled up into them; that
anybody had actually liked him well enough to
plan beforehand a way of escape for him from
a boy’s bitterest humiliation, helpless defeat! He
only said “Thank you, sir,” again, and found it
hard to say even that.
But Frank called him back once more. “By
the by, Alec,” he said, “Ned is to be home next
week, and we have planned to spend our Easter
holidays camping out on the river. Would you
care to come with us? Ned is going for the
Senior when you do, you know, and you will be
able to compare notes. Kath is asking Ida and
Gem. but we all hope you will come too.”
Muffle’s third “Thank you, sir,” was even a
more miserable specimen than its predecessors,
but he was up at Needy Flat at daybreak next
morning, before the family on the hill were out
of bed, and he dug the whole patch that Frank
talked of turning into a vegetable-garden. But
on Friday afternoon he went home happy, and
yet somewhat ashamed; the rage that had
possessed him in the hour of victory had gone
and he was even sorry for Rag.
The Ellis family lived on the fourth flat, but
Rag had not gone home, whither the indignant
Kate had carried the news of his downfall to


half-a-dozen unsympathetic small brothers. He
stopped among the tall cherry suckers at
the foot of his garden, and tried to face a
future in which he could no longer lord it over
all the small fry of the village, but reflection only
made the prospect look the drearier. And Gem
came suddenly upon him there, as she pursued
the Morrisons’ cow that she was driving home
for Muffle.
She had regretted not being present to see Rag
get his punishment; but always she had thought
of him with his look of jeering insolence that
called for punishment; the bully minus his air of
jaunty defiance, his bruised face unwashed, the
bully sobbing with rage and pain, was a different
matter and called for pity.
“Poor old Rag,” she said, without waiting to
think about consistency, “don’t mind about it
so; nobody will dare torment you, for they know
can beat all the rest of them; and Muffle
is not a mean sneak; he’ll let you alone, for sure.
Besides, if anybody does start chaffing you,
remind them that Mr. Gray teaches Muffle
boxing for exercise, and you’ve never had a
lesson at it.”
She sat down on the grass beside him and
straightway produced half-a-dozen other retorts


for future jeerers, and so she helped the beaten
bully to win back his self-respect, and Rag
proved he was not all bully by the gratitude that
made him ever after her loyal friend.
So Gem drove home Muffle’s cow to spare
him a hunt for it; and not very far behind her
Muffle drove home Rag’s cow that he had
noticed amongst the dead thistles on the second
flat. Gran was having tea when Gem arrived,
and was rather worried by her lateness, but she
greeted him immediately with the news of
Muffle’s victory, and in his delight he forgot to
inquire further into the how and why of that
lateness. “And Splinter licked him!” he kept
ejaculating. “Just think of it!”
But when Gem thought of it, she saw again
Rag’s swollen face, and felt more and more
miserable till everything seemed wrong with her
world.
It was long after dinner, and the master had
watered his garden and was busy making a set
of bookshelves for Kath’s room, when Yankee
Joe. up town in search of a yarn and a pound of
butter, brought him a note from Gem. “Our
little girl’s plumb misruble over somethink,”
said the caller, “ an’ she says she was bad at
school an’ wants to tell yer she’s sorry; but there


ain’t enough badness in that there kid to scare
a half-grown muskeeter; an’ if yer reckon there
is, young man. Gold-Eyes may stick to it that
you know your own business best, but I reckon
p’r’aps yer don’t.”
There was most evident disapproval in the
tone and look; for Gem was something of the
light of life to her grandfather’s mate too, and
when she came home red-eyed and looked
drearier the nearer bedtime approached, an-
nouncing that she had been bad at school, it was
quite natural for him to deduce that the master
was to blame.
But the latter took the disapproval meekly.
“I don’t understand it,” he said. “To be sure,
Gem played on the way to school —”
“And what small party wouldn’t oncte in a
way?” interrupted Joe.
“ and came late,” went on the master; “but
neither she nor I was very concerned about that,
and we parted the best of friends.”
“Well, p’r’aps you’d read that there an’ see
if there’s any answer to it,” said Joe, slightly
mollified.
Frank read the note, with only the least twitch
of amusement at the corners of his mouth.
“Dear Sir,” ran the tear-stained epistle, that was


nevertheless in Gem’s copy-book hand, “I wish
to apologise for the things I did and said to-day.
You are so very nice that I quite forget about
you being my teacher, and I get to feel chummy
instead of respectful. lam very sorry now for
talking to you just as if you were an ordinary
person and I shall try not to be disrespectful
again. lam awful sorry too for saying things
about poor Rag Ellis; his head is all bunged up
and it must be very miserable to be beaten when
you are not used to it. Will you please forgive
me? Your dutiful pupil, Gem.”
The master took his fountain-pen from his
pocket and wrote :
“Dear Little Chum,
Do not worry about what you did or said
to-day; I liked it. Is it not rather cruel to
condemn me to be only a schoolmaster out of
school as well as in? I hoped that you regarded
me as a comrade too. In school, of course, all
little people, even little sisters and little chums,
have to toe the line, but after 3 p.m. is it not pos-
sible for me to be, as I should like to be, only
your friend.
Frank Gray?”
“I hope that will make things right,” he said,
as he handed the note to Joe; and feeling that


some explanation was due to the child’s old
champion, he added: ‘’Little Gem has strangely-
exaggerated ideas of the respect due to her
teacher, and is worrying lest some harmless
remarks of hers annoyed me; the note is to let
her know that I did not mind at all.”
Joe thanked him and shook hands warmly.
“I shouldn’t wonder, young chap, but what you
do know your own business best, after all,” he
said.
Gem came early on Monday and brought
Frank a buttonhole of pink rosebuds and maiden-
hair. “I think it is the loveliest I have ever
had,” he said, as he pinned it in.
She was pleased, but too honest to take such
praise all for herself. “I gathered the roses and
fern,” she said, “but I couldn’t make one nice
enough for you; so I asked Mollie, Ida’s sister,
to help me. She was ever so busy, but she’s
such a dear that she even made three for me
to pick the prettiest one out.”
Frank said “Indeed, I am very much obliged
to you and to Miss Morrison too.” He glad-
dened her heart by wearing it all day, but she
would have been surprised had she known that
he carefully kept it afterwards, when its fresh-
ness and beauty had departed.


Chapter XVII.
THE RIVER CAMP.
Ned Gray held a scholarship at Sydney High
School. He lived at Strathheld as a paying
guest of Madame Rossin, a kindly French lady
who had been a friend of his mother. He was
supposed 'to be working hard for the Senior
Examination, and indeed studied with great
diligence French and German, his favourite sub-
jects. Having been all his life a friend of the
Rossin boys, who spoke French at home, Ned
had learned to chatter in that language almost
as well as in English. When he was nine years
old, his father had left him for a year at a school
in Berlin and he had been interested in German
ever since ; thus, having secured the medals for
both French and German in the Junior Examina-
tion, his school expected him to do the same in
the Senior and so to win the scholarship that
would help him through his University course.
But Ned was not as clever as his brother; he
found his ordinary lessons somewhat difficult
and did not always bestow the time and interest
on them that might have made them easier. His


quarterly school report showed such weakness in
mathematics especially that Frank had given
him what the boy called “a terrific blowing-up”
and a warning that he would fail to get a
matriculation pass at all unless he “bucked up.”
No boy could have been more cheerful than
Ned. He was always ready to do anything for
anybody, but he was incurably saucy, though to
do him justice, he took any amount of snubbing
for it with the utmost goodwill. His father had
been a decidedly stern man and Ned had been
perforce a meek little lad till he reached eleven,
since then, Frank had been his guardian and the
boy appreciated the change. Perhaps Frank
had had too generous an acquaintance with the
virtues of the rod himself to believe very much
in Solomon’s maxim; at all events, he let Ned
have a loose rein, and took his playful im-
pertinence with cheerfulness or met it with
sarcasm. It was rarely that he lost patience
and administered a serious rebuke; but when
he did, Ned was always honestly impressed and
tried for a day or two to revive the politeness
and prompt obedience of his earlier boyhood.
Besides, he was genuinely fond of Frank and
never thought of really annoying him; it was
only that he vastly enjoyed what he called
“taking a rise out of the old chap.”




-..*? > '-w^Sfi 51 * ■ 1 ■gmqmp *v
I
VK
“ ■' f ,c


Before a day was over, Ned was recognized
as the life and fun of the Easter camp. The
party was larger than had been first intended.
When Gem had been asked, it turned out that
Gran and Joe had already promised to take her
for three days’ fishing, and a little persuasion
induced them to join forces and extend the three
days to six. And Maida had asked Mollie and
the little ones to come. Mollie demurred at first,
but her father would not hear of a refusal just to
stay at home and look after him; so she came,
with a heart full of gladness, for nothing in the
world seemed to her quite so desirable just then
as camping out on the river.
The tracks were too rough for riding and
everybody had to walk the five miles out
everybody, that is, but Baby, who was
proudly perched behind a huge pile of pro-
visions on Gran’s pack-horse. They put up two
big tents, one for the three little girls, one for
Maida, Mollie and Baby, and built huts of oak-
boughs for the men and boys of the party.
Gran brought fishing rods and lines for every-
body, and amongst his provisions were all the
materials for filling his pan with potato chips,
apple fritters or bacon and eggs; and Mollie
brought a huge billy-can that did duty nicely as


a saucepan, and a dish to mix puddings in. Ned
hugged her when she promised a boiled pudding
every day, and apple dumplings to start on. “I
hope you won’t faint, Miss Morrison, if I tell
you that I love you,” he said.
“If it is only cupboard love, I think I can
stand the thrill,” retorted Mollie. She felt
strangely young and light-hearted, as though
she was still the happy schoolgirl of long ago,
and so she jested with Ned, played games with
the children and chatted cheerily with all the
grown-ups.
Ida was the quietest of the party. Unless
playing with Gem or Kath, she would sit by
Maida and scarcely say a word; she had a sharp
tongue, but had trained its sharpness to the use
of cruelty, and could not at first join in the good-
tempered sparring of Gem and Ned. Even
Muffle in congenial society blossomed out and
began to talk. He had been so taught to regard
himself as nothing but a simpleton plus a brain,
that it took him some time to realise there were
actually people interested in him; but when he
did, he found his tongue and even forgot to
stammer. Ned teased him, as he teased the
rest, but he had a genuine respect for the boy


who swam the big flood and was bound, accord-
ing to Frank, to do wonders in the Senior.
It was on Easter Monday that, having cooked
and eaten a six-pound cod caught by Joe and
termed a whale by Baby, they sat and talked
under the she-oaks in the twilight; a big log-fire
was brightly burning near, for the evenings were
decidedly chilly.
“Doesn’t it give one a dreamy feeling listening
to the sighing of the wind in the trees and
watching the shadows on the water ? asked
Maida.
“Life, what is it but a dream?” quoted Frank.
“Now don’t dish us up that bosh, old boy,”
pleaded Ned. “There isn’t enough butter about
it in this part of the world in summer time —it’s
oil —nor enough dream about it anywhere.
‘ Life is mainly graft and trouble,
Getting up and working double.’
is what a certain poet meant to write and hadn t
quite enough brains for.”
“We ought to have someone to sing to us,”
suggested Gran. “Won't you, Mr. Gray?
Frank cheerfully agreed, on condition that all
who knew the chorus joined in. Ned shouted
the refrain louder than anybody and then re-
marked to Frank: “Say, old chap, it would take


a lot of your sort of squawking to sweeten a cup
of tea.”
Gem attacked him hotly. “You are a very
rude boy,” she said.
“Take after my big brother,” explained Ned.
T. he idea of blaming IVlr. Gray for your
bumptiousness!” she retorted indignantly.
But Frank laughingly intervened; “It is a bit
my fault, little one; whether from laziness or
good-nature, I have neglected to give him the
many lickings he has deserved since his manners
and morals became my sad responsibility.”
“Don’t you find fault with Ned, Gem,” said
Gran drily; he s a nice little boy—only wants
one thing to make him perfect.”
V\ hat s that ? asked Ned, falling into the trap
out of curiosity.
“S’pose you never heard of the way Tom
Carter first got up courage to ask his girl to kiss
him?” asked Gran.
“No,” said the boy.
“W ell, he had a bad lip—bee stung it, or some-
thing—and she poulticed it for him. Tom told
her then that it felt heavenly; in fact, there was
only one thing it wanted to make it perfect; it
wanted licking—that's you, young hopeful!—and
would she do it? Well, she did it and she


married him, and now she licks him with the
slender end of the broom and keeps her pretty
lips for telling him what she thinks of him. ’
Ned roared good-humouredly, and Frank ex-
claimed: “I suppose that is why Tommy Carter,
in the letter he wrote for his first composition
lesson, told me ‘Mother broke the broom and
Daddy won’t buy a new one.’ ”
“There’s a duck, Ned,” interrupted Muffle.
Ned had been disappointed to find that Muffle
had not the slightest interest in killing things;
he had brought his gun from Sydney only to
discover that his shooting would be mainly a
solitary pleasure, for Muffle loved all animals
and was too soft-hearted even to fish with any
enthusiasm; still he did not mind pointing out
chances to Ned.
“Blow me for a bantam!” exclaimed the latter,
looking in vain for his gun. “M here did I put
my precious bird-potter ?’
“Your language, young man —” began Frank.
“Is choice Australian,” interposed Ned; “but
then it suits me; I’m Australian.’
“A fairly choice specimen too.” was Frank’s
comment.
“Now hear him work the fine sarcastic vein!”
exclaimed the boy. “It’s a pity though, old


man, to desert your grand paternal air; that’s
your forte.” He began to hum—
“The heavy-father line,
That’s where I think I shine.”
“I say,” he concluded, “Old Man Winter will be
top dog up here soon; it is too chilly for my
share of youth and beauty already; your winds
are the sort that haven’t the courtesy to go round
a chap, but cut straight through.”
Wait till winter does come afore yer
grumbles,” said Yankee Joe. “It is that cold up
here that you have ter light fires under the cows,
ter thaw the milk, afore yer can milk ’em.”
\ es, said Gran, “even your words freeze
round you, and a chatterbox like you would get
smothered in his own frozen eloquence.”
“I’vq often heard of white lies,” said Ned,
with a grin of mischief, “but now I understand
the expression; it would be your anecdotes told
in wintertime.”
“Ned!” expostulated his brother indignantly.
All right, old chap; don’t get your hair off
over a trifle.” replied the boy; “Gran’s big
enough to take care of himself.”
Gran laughed. “If you were my boy—” he
said.
“I know,” interrupted Ned; “You’d be a proud


papa; sorry I can’t oblige you, but I’ll do the
next best thing; I’ll be a brother to you; here’s
my hand on it, and let me do you a brotherly
service straight off by reminding you that old
birds are not caught with chaff."
“Old?’’ said Gran. “Thought by your green-
ness you were young, but it may be second
childhood coming on. However, what I was
going to remark, old bird, is that if I had a
proprietorship of your perfections I’d invent a
patent dish-washing machine, worked by the
power of your tongue; they turn Niagara to
account to get electricity, and it seems a waste
not to use your tongue."
Ned laughed. “I say, you fellows," he en-
treated, “stop yapping at a poor crushed school-
boy who has had all the spirit bullied out of him
in class, and spin us some yarns, do.”
“Oh! yes,’’ urged Gem; do tell us some
yarns, loe."
Joe was always ready to produce impossible
anecdotes. “M ell." said he, “since Ned here
is dead nuts on shootin’ I’ll tell about the
best day’s work o’ that kind I ever done. Me
an’ a mate was out one day when we come to
a lake covered thick with black ducks; we both
had guns, but only one bullet atween us. Any-


how, I goes one side o’ the lake an’ he stops
the other an lets fire. The bullet whizzed
through seventy-nine ducks, an’ by that time it
was slowed down so that I jest put out my hand
an’ caught it. Then I fires back, an’ that
straight that it potted a hundred an’ four little
beauties an’ dropped gently into me mate’s
pocket. We kep’ it up, firin’ acrost ter one an-
other, till all the ducks was dead or gorn; we
rowed out on the lake in a boat an’ gathered up
our game. We got ten cartloads o’ birds for sale
an’ made quite a tidy little fortune out of ’em.”
Don t stop, urged Xed; “fire away again.”
“What about your best day’s fishing, Joe?”
asked Gran.
V\ ell that, said Joe, “that really was queer
now. The river was awful low oncte an’ there
warn’t no water left, excep’ in a few odd big
holes, an’ they was jest thick with fish; they’d
ate everythink there was to eat, an’ then the
big chaps polished the little uns off; then they
starved for a bit, keeping a mighty wary eye on
each other too. Well, I come along an’ flung in
me line. First fish grabbed the bait an’ got
hooked; second fish, seein’ him occupied, dug his
jaws inter number one’s tail, number three does
ditto ter number two, number four ter number


three, an’ so on. I hauled out the line, an' you
bet I reckoned I had a whale that there time,
Baby! But I seed it warn’t nothink but one
fish hangin’ onter another; when I counted ’em,
I’d got two hundred an’ one, an’ all big chaps.
I had to sell ’em cheap, ’cause o’ the bites in
their tails, but I made a good bit out of ’em.”
“Your turn now, Ned,” said Muffle.
“Yes,” said Gem, who was still fascinated by
Ned’s hatband, “tell us something about your
school; heaps of funny things must happen
there.”
Ned grunted. “Depends on what you call
funny,” he said. “If old Scotty raked you over
the coals for ten minutes, because you couldn t
do some useless equation, and told you you
might just as well bring a frost-bitten pumpkin
to school as your fat head, you might feel like
sniggering, but I don’t.”
“Never mind. Ned,” said Gran; “if he does
take some of the conceit out of you so cruelly,
you have plenty left to get along with; not that
you are the best provided with that commodity
I’ve ever struck though, for I know a chap with
a face that would frighten a gorilla by moon-
light, and if you praise his good looks he’ll
swallow it and simper like a kid.”


‘‘Your turn, Mr. Gray,” said Joe. “What’s
the queerest answer you have ever had at
school ?”
“It’s not fair to tell tales on the little people
here, said Frank, though the young* idea buds
as brilliantly at Needy Flat as elsewhere; but
a bright lad at Paddington once told me that
woman suffrage meant the way you had to put
up with the silliness of girls without telling
them what you thought of them, while you could
tell an ass of a chap straight out that he was
one.”
“Now you, little Best-of-All,” urged Ned.
Maida smiled. “I have never found anything
more entertaining in my life than the concert
up here that Frank took me to lately,” she said.
“A man with a face and voice so Irish that he
must have been born within ten feet of a pig
and a potato-pot, sang Scotch songs half the
evening; and when a lady visitor with a really
nice voice sang a song full of pretty trills, an
old man near me shouted out ‘No more of that
shivery-shaky, blanc-mangey stuff, Miss.’ Which
reminds me that I intend to get up a concert
to provide funds for a school picnic, and Miss
Morrison is going to sing at it.”


“That’s the first I have heard of it,” laughed
Mollie.
“But your name is down on my programme
without fail,” declared Maida, “and so is
Frank’s.”
“That’s the way I am henpecked,” said
Frank.
“And Ida, Gem and Kath have all to learn
parts in a bright little play that is to open the
concert,” continued Maida.
“How lovely!” exclaimed Gem. “There has
never been a play up here before —only songs
and recitations. Do let me be a lady with my
hair on top.”
“Yes,” said Maida; “you are the humorous
rich aunt, Ida is the charming heroine with a
touch of the tomboy about her, and Kath is the
quaint old housekeeper; I'm sure Kate Ellis
could be trained to do Sentimental Susan nicely,
but what I am to do for my hero I don’t know,
unless I victimise Frank again.”
“Haven’t you got a lovely liar part for Joe?”
asked Ned.
Frank got up and stood the boy on his head
till he apologised, which he did after much
laughing and struggling. “I hope that has let
a little of the impertinence run out,” said the


master, releasing his captive; “and now you go
down and ease your conscience, if you have one,
by hauling in all the lines and seeing if they are
right; there may be a fish or two on.”
Ned went, whistling cheerfully, while the
other children roasted apples in the fire and
handed them round on sticks, rather the worse
for ashes. He had only seen to half the lines
when he scented the apples and reappeared.
“Sure your own conscience isn’t beginning to
be a bit burdened, old man?” he inquired.
“Mine is feeling quite easy, thank you.” “Oh!
big bruvvie!” entreated Kath, with a reminis-
cence of her babyish talk that Frank could
rarely resist, so he made room for the culprit
beside him.
“Here’s an apple I’ve roasted for you, Ned,”
said Gem, “ and it’s just done to perfection.”
“What a brick you are!” exclaimed Ned,
gratefully taking it. “My word! if the Flat
boys are up to snuff they’ll be down at the Jewel
Box, helping themselves to apples while you
are away,”
“Why\ do you call our place the Jewel Box?”
demanded Gem. ’
“Reckon it must be when it enshrines such a
gem,” grinned Ned.


“They are more likely to be up town stealing
books from the Donkey Shed —reckon it must
be so when it houses a neddy,” retorted Gem,
indignant as ever at being teased.
He laughed. “I didn’t know gems had such
sharp points,” he declared. “Consider yourself
duly flatironed, Ned Gray, and have another
apple, do.” He had another, and yet another,
and still more, for his appetite was a standing
joke amongst his family and friends.
And so the days at the river passed. They
swam, fished, walked, talked; Ned shot wild
ducks and helped to eat them, indulged in much
lively impertinence and endured much whole-
some snubbing, baited the girls' lines and un-
hooked the fish they caught, was always ready
to get wood or boil the billy, and made himself
generally useful and entertaining. He delighted
especially in teasing Muffle and Gem over their
evident worship of Frank; at first, some such
remark as “Say, Alec, don’t you want to go
round and hold Frank’s cup for him, or swish the
mosquitoes off while he eats in peace?” would
make Muffle half rise, to see if there was any-
thing he could be doing, till Frank explained:
“It’s only Ned playing the clown; don’t mind
him, for he can’t help himself.”


But finally Muffle “ceased to bite,” as Ned
put it, and there was only Gem to aggravate
into taking up cudgels for Frank. The boy
would make the most atrocious statements about
his brother’s temper and appearance, with a face
as innocent as a babe’s, and Gem would tell
him forcibly what she thought of him. “You’re
the ungratefullest, piggy-wiggiest pig of a boy,”
she told him one day, “and if I were Mr. Gray,
I would cane you.” “No, you wouldn’t,
Sparkler,” said Ned; “if you were he, you would
be the same good-natured old stick-in-the-mud.
Goodness me! Don’t you know when a chap’s
joking? I’m well aware what an all-round
good sort the dear old boy is, but a fellow
would go mouldy if he couldn’t knock a grin out
of something somehow.”
They came home on Thursday afternoon, for
Maida had declared that she and Kath simply
must have all of Friday to darn and mend and
brush and press Ned’s clothes, before he returned
to Sydney by Saturday’s coach. The Morrisons
had parted happily from the rest and were walk-
ing up alone through the garden, when Felicia
came to meet them—Felicia, in a dainty frock
of silk and lace, pink roses in her waistbelt, and
her arm linked lovingly through her father’s!


Chapter XVIII.
FELICIA.
Felicia Morrison had arrived at Needy Flat
late on the previous Saturday afternoon. It was
six years since she had seen the poor little village
last and then she had been only fifteen; but
things altered slowly at the Flat, and everything
seemed strangely familiar in its ugliness and
dreariness —the brown, bare hillsides, the dusty
road, the straying goats and fowls, the bare-
footed children, the galvanized iron roofs. She
expected no one to meet her, left her heavy
luggage at the post office and set out to walk
to her old home, carrying a light suitcase. She
was wearing a well-tailored coat and skirt and
the fur at her throat was soft and rich.
Felicia herself was beautiful with the radiant
beauty of a child. She was small and dainty,
with little gracious ways that had made men
her slaves even before her golden curls were
up. People who admired her said that Felicia
was as golden-hearted as she was golden-haired,
and in truth she was a sunshiny little soul, with
a smile that was always ready and with kindly


words for all the world; she laughed and sang
and danced her way through life in the prettiest
manner.
A few people who knew her better said that
Felicia was shallow. She was brainy, every-
body knew that, in spite of the fact that she was
a queen of idlers. But did she really care for
anything or anybody but herself ? She had girl
friends who were “darling” and “dear,” but when
they passed out of her life, did she ever think
of them again? She listened to the beggar’s
tale and generously gave him half a crown; but
when he was gone, did ever a thought of the
sorrows he hinted at cloud her joy? There were
one or two who knew that in the country she
had brothers and sisters to whom life was not
so kind as to her; and she wrote her next sister
gay descriptions of her parties, and sent her her
pretty frocks when they had seen a few
functions in town; sometimes she sent sweets,
books, songs or toys as well; but did she really
care to find out how it was with those brothers
and sisters to whom she signed herself our
loving sister Felicia”? And Mollie, at Needy
Flat, read the dainty little epistles with a bitter
smile on her face, and wrote cold, formal notes
in reply, for she was too proud to mention the


things Felicia ignored; and the same smile was
on her face as she cut up the dainty frocks to
make best dresses and silk hats for Baby. Felicia
forgave the cold replies that came to her chatty
letters; it was characteristic of her that she
always thought the best of people. “The poor
dear is so busy with her housekeeping,” she ex-
plained to Aunt Mackay, whose adopted
daughter she was and whose name she generally
took. “Why, I remember once, when you took
a trip to Tasmania and left me in charge, the
cook nearly drove me distracted and the
gardener was really disagreeable over gathering
the flowers I wanted.”
Aunt Mackay’s sarcastic comment was “Her
housekeeping is possibly much less strenuous
than yours.”
But it was little that Aunt Mackay cared. She
was a rich, proud old lady, who tried to cheat
herself into the belief that she was happy. Years
before, at her husband’s instigation, she had
closed her heart against her only child, because
the girl persisted in wedding a poor man whom
she loved. The old man had died with never
a sign that it had cost him anything to deny his
child ; but Aunt Mackay was a woman, and some-
times she saw ghosts. There was a neglected


grave in a country cemetery that she had once
stolen up to see, and there were nights when
she still heard the wind sighing among the long
grass that covered it, and the sighing of the wind
turned to a sobbing that tugged at her heart-
strings; and in the morning her face would be
grey, and lined, and ugly, and she would be
extra cross and sarcastic; but Felicia would be
charmingly amiable to her, till her temper im-
proved, as the sunlight dispelled her ghosts
again.
It was Felicia’s amiability and beauty that had
first made Aunt Mackay wish to adopt her.
Even as a baby, the child had been pretty and
gracious, and when she was six and Aunt
Mackay closed her door and her heart on the
daughter who would not be ruled in the matter
of love, Felicia’s mother received the first urgent
entreaty for her eldest-born. Aunt Mackay did
not think much of Mrs. Morrison, her own
youngest sister; she described her as “the soft
little fool who married that sawny simpleton,”
and vowed aloud that she need not expect other
people to help bear the consequences of her
folly. Mrs. Morrison did not ask for help when
the bad years came and her husband was ruined,
but for Felicia’s own sake she yielded to the oft-


repeated prayer and allowed her widowed sister
to adopt the child.
The parting with home was not much of a
wrench to Felicia, who had always spent much
of her time with Aunt Mackay; in fact, she had
lived with her to attend daily the school in
Croydon at which Mollie was a boarder; for
Aunt Mackay did not distribute her favours im-
partially; she lavished them in royal fashion
on one and ignored the rest, keeping Felicia
away from her family as well as she could. So
the girl had found her path strewn with roses;
there had been love and comfort at home, then
petting and luxury at Aunt Mackay’s. Even
when the mother she had loved died, Felicia
could not come home, for she was travelling in
Europe; so she was not on the spot to feel the
dull pain of realisation, to touch and handle a
thousand things that spoke of the loved one who
would never speak again. She wept tears of
real grief, and then dried her eyes to discuss the
relative merits of different black materials; with
her fair complexion and yellow curls, she looked
lovelier than ever in mourning. Stuart Johnson
begged to paint her portrait, and Stuart was
such a dear boy, and it was such fun having
afternoon tea in his studio —Mollie could not


imagine what fun it was, said one of her London
letters home.
And so Felicia had gone her thoughtless, merry
way through life, till love came to stir her nature
to its depths and make the sunbeam into a
woman, strong to help and comfort. Nobody
could understand Felicia’s love-affair; it was the
joke of her circle, for she lost her heart to the
Reverend John Arthur, a giant physically, intel-
lectually and spiritually. That the great strong
man, his heart on fire with lofty missionary zeal,
should have yielded to the charms of the dainty
maiden surprised no one; but that Felicia,
famous for merriment and not for seriousness,
courted by countless eligible youths, should yet
have given her whole heart’s adoration to the
man who capped a brilliant academic career by
refusing a rich city church and accepting a post
as head of a big missionary school for Chinese
boys in Hongkong, seemed almost incredible,
yet it was true. Aunt Mackay pleaded, scolded,
jeered, but all in vain; she was older now and
weaker and could not summon up the courage
to close her heart on Felicia, as on the dead
daughter of the dead years, so she had finally, if
reluctantly, agreed to the match. She had settled
five hundred a year on the girl and told her that


was all of the Mackay fortune she must expect.
“I don’t fancy William’s thousands wasted
on niggers and Chinamen; I would as soon
see them spent on monkeys or pug dogs, she
vowed; “but I want to feel sure you will never
want for anything; I have tied up that five
hundred a year so that your precious John can t
get at it, and even you can only get it year by
year to give him. It seems to me I shall have to
go up and take my pick of your younger sisters,
for what I am to do when you’re in Hongkong
1 don’t know; perhaps that Baby one that
Mollie raves over might be too young to show
traces of the country bumpkin and pretty
enough to be worth dressing up.” Then Felicia
proffered a request that she had been longing
and yet afraid to make; might she herself go up
and see her people? And Aunt Mackay had
replied that she was welcome to have her own
way in little things, since she persisted in taking
it in the one big thing that mattered.
So Felicia came unannounced, with a heart
overflowing with a new sympathy. It was lo\ e
for the Reverend John that had taught her that,
in the light of his worth she viewed herself, and
felt small and mean and unworthy; but love
taught her soul to expand; she grew lovely


where she had only been pretty; tender where
she had only been amiable; pitying where
she had only been good-natured. And so there
was shame in her heart as she walked home;
how would they welcome her, these brothers and
sisters? Had they too weighed her in the balance
and found her wanting? Would they forgive her,
be glad in her gladness and let her lavish on
them some of the love that filled her heart?
It was time for the evening meal when she
reached Morrison’s Point, but the doors were
closed and there was no light visible. She
knocked and called out, but no answer came; she
opened the front door and walked through the
house, but found nobody; she was giving up her
search in despair when, in the last room, she
found her father asleep on the floor.
Felicia slipped out in horror and disgust. So
that was what the brothers and sisters had been
putting up with, and never a word to her! Her
disgust was swallowed up in infinite pity for
them, and finally for the father himself; she had
never suffered shame and want through his
indulgence, and so she did not feel the bitter-
ness that made the others treat him as an out-
cast. She remembered how kind and generous
a father the quiet man had been in the days of


prosperity. “Poor old Dad! What he must
have suffered to come to that! And I haven t
known and haven’t cared to know, selfish
creature that I am!” she thought, as she sought
the room that had been hers in childhood and
was evidently Mollie’s now, to sob out her
sorrow.
She waited till midnight, but when nobody
came and there was no sound from that inner
room, she undressed sadly and tried to go to
sleep in Mollie’s bed. It was daydawn when she
fell into an uneasy slumber, and the sun was
shining in at her window when she heard some-
one moving about in the kitchen. She re-
membered that it was the Easter Sunday sun,
and a silent prayer rose in her heart that some-
how it might be indeed a resurrection day for
the father who had fallen so low. She slipped
on a dainty morning dress that was in her suit-
case, coiled her rebellious curls at the back of
her head, and went out. The father was just
about to begin a cheerless breakfast at the un-
set kitchen-table. He was sober again and only
looked old and tired. Felicia went to him with
outstretched hands.
“Daddy,” she said, “Daddy dear, you haven’t
forgotten me —Felicia, your own first little girl


have you?” Her arms were round him before
he could answer, and she was kissing him, half-
crying, half-laughing. In jerky little sentences
she told him that she had come last night and,
thinking everybody away—there was no mention
of the peep into his unlovely room—had gone
to sleep at last.
”I—l must have gone to bed,” he said, “and
Mollie and the children are camping out on the
river with friends of theirs; but I’ll go out and
tell them, else they won’t be home for nearly a
week.”
But Felicia begged him not to. “I couldn’t
bear to spoil their holiday,” she said, “I’m just
so glad to have you all to myself for a bit. You
don’t know how I’ve longed to come, but Aunt
always objected before; anyhow, I have a whole
happy fortnight now.”
Between them they set about preparing a
more appetising meal than the bread and butter
he had put out. “I couldn’t be bothered just
for myself, he said; and Felicia made fun of
her own ignorance and merrily took a lesson in
frying eggs and bacon.
And so it was right through their week
together. To do her justice, Felicia had never
exerted herself to win the youths that fell hope-


less victims to her charms; but now she exercised
her every fascination, wore her loveliest frocks,
and indulged in every pretty artifice that love and
pity could suggest, to charm the shy, shabby
man who was her father, for she was fighting
hard to save him from himself, and fought with
every weapon she could manage.
It was a strangely happy time for the lonely
man. His week evenings were always spent
alone in his room, reading or working out chess
problems; his week-end evenings were spent in
lonely shame, Mollie washed and mended his
clothes, cooked his meals, and that was all.
The other children’s looks were looks of con-
demnation and even Muffie’s new-born charity
did not reach as far as the father he blamed.
Only a few days before, Baby had scornfully
refused his efforts at friendliness; “You’s a
naughty, bad, witkit man,” she had told him
severely; “You wastes ze money an’ I’s darlin’
Mollie can’t buy Petey shoes to go to school.”
But Felicia begged him to teach her chess and
took him out walking; she entreated to know
all about his work, and Mrs. Cox, and Mrs. Cox’s
little boy who had just been drowned, and she
even insisted on going out to see Mrs. Cox.
Felicia discussed books with him and enticed


him to shave off his beard, because she was
quite certain that it would suit him better; she
talked to him in a confiding way that won his
heart, told him of John and John’s perfections,
and of her own sense of unworthiness; she asked
all about the other children, about Mollie
especially.
“She is a good girl,” said the father; “nobody
knows what she has had to do and put up with,
and yet it surprises me how she does it all;
and lately she seems to have grown so kind and
good to the others.”
“I guess she is worth a dozen of me,” said
Felicia, “and yet I have had all the roses and she
has had all the thorns.”
Then she told him of her sad conviction that
she w'as to blame, that she might perhaps have
found ways to help, had she been less thought-
less. “I’m just a selfish girl, Daddy,” she con-
fessed, “but oh! such an ashamed one. They
have had too much to bear and I have not made
it easier.”
It was in the twilit garden, where Mollie’s
chrysanthemums rejoiced the eye, that they
talked, and somehow the silent man’s heart was
opened. “Yes,” he said, “they have had too


much to bear, but it is I who have made it
harder.”
And he told her hesitatingly of his weakness,
of how life had seemed a blank when his wife
died, of how he had yielded to despair, feeling
that happiness and hope had gone for ever, and
of the self-indulgence that had followed.
“But those children —Mollie and Muffle—have
shamed me,” he said. “They have made
happiness and hope for themselves lately.”
Felicia’s sympathy was like oil and balm
poured on rankling wounds; perhaps that was
why he promised her that, come what might,
he would never drink again.
“I meant to try, anyhow,” he said. There’s a
dear little girl named Gem, who comes here to
play with Ida, and a week or two ago I overheard
her plotting to reform me. ‘Your father is too
nice a father to let go on like this, Ida,’ she said;
‘he is never crabby or cranky; if he were my
dad, I d make such a fuss over him and be so
adorable to him that he wouldn’t go up town
at all on Saturdays; he would want to be at
home with me.’ Evidently she got Ida to join
her in a conspiracy; several nights they came
in to ask me questions about their work or my
chess, and on Friday they begged me to take


them to climb Pine Peak on Saturday. I hadn’t
the heart to disappoint that eager-eyed little
maid, and so for once I was saved from my folly.
Then Easter came and took the little woman
with her wonderful eyes and generous heart
away, but I hope she guesses that she helped
me.”
And so Felicia, in a dainty frock of silk and
lace, pink roses in her waistbelt, and her arm
linked lovingly through her father’s, met the
brothers and sisters when they came home.
None of them hailed her coming with delight,
but Felicia did not seem to see the rebuffs; her
tact and sweetness melted down their oppo-
sition and she won her way in a day into the
inner family circle. More than that, she brought
the father with her, drew him into every con-
versation, included him in every plan, and the
rest accepted the situation wonderingly, and
said nothing, though Ida, coached by Gem,
welcomed him warmly.
On the afternoon before Felicia’s departure,
there being no barrier between the two big
sisters now, they sat on the carpet, on either side
of Felicia’s half-packed trunk, and talked freely
and lovingly.
“Mollie dear,” said Felicia, “I haven’t any


right to make suggestions, for you mustn’t think
I don’t know how piggy-wiggy I have been, as
that quaint little Gem would call it; but could
you just be extra kind to the dear old dad? He
has promised me never to drink again, and it
is bound to be a hard fight, though I know he
will keep his word, if he is anything like he used
to be.”
Mollie was silent for a time with joy and
gratitude. When she spoke, her voice was
shaky. “Oh! Felicia,” she said, “I just seem to
keep on learning lessons in humility; it was
Muffie who made me ashamed first, then the
Grays with their kindness, and now you; and
not so long ago 1 nearly hated you. I m coming
to see that that most of the troubles I felt
resentful about were due to my own selfishness.
I don’t deserve all the kindness and goodness
that have come my way lately.”
Felicia got up to hug her, but she only said:
“Darling, I know your Grays quite well; they
used to live next door to us in Strathfield —you
remember the grey stone house with the
beautiful garden? Save for our own, Mrs. Gray
was the finest mother I ever met, but the father
was a stern, self-important man. He had been
a Cabinet Minister for many years and was


very wealthy, though nearly all his money was
invested in shares in the banks that failed during
the big drought years ago; but people say they
will get his money back some day. The father
died soon after and they moved into a little
cottage; Maida gave up her ’Varsity course and
went to teach at our old school, while Frank
took a post as teacher in the Education Depart-
ment. He finished his Arts course by evening-
lectures, but had to give up all thought of
studying law. Then Mrs. Gray died and Maida
gave up her teaching to keep house. I saw them
rarely after they left Strathfield, and only heard
incidentally that Frank had been sent somewhere
into the country.”
Mollie’s eyes were wet with sympathy for her
fnends. “Can it be that they have had all that
to bear, and yet are so cheerful and brave?” she
asked. “Oh! it’s just another lesson for me.”


Chapter XIX
NED GOES VISITING.
It was Friday, the day after the river party
returned and the day before Ned travelled back
to town, and he had an engagement to spend
the afternoon amongst the pears in the
Morrisons' garden.
Frank was writing letters in the dining-room,
where Maida was sponging and pressing various
suits of Ned’s, when the boy came in to say
good-b}’e. His straw hat was on one side of his
head, and with his navy suit he wore a hideous
green and purple tie and bright, reddish-coloured
boots with pointed toes.
“My dear boy,” said Frank, “you surely don’t
know what a common little larrikin you look!
Where did you get that tie ? Really, I must re-
quest you to take it off, and to burn it, while you
are about it. And how any boy with the elements
of good taste in his composition could choose a
pair of boots like that gets over me; to look con-
spicuous—”
Ned interrupted cheerfully: “Awful lot of
breath you waste jawing! I'm not one of your


three dozen innocents, you know, that a gener-
ous Government pays you a few paltry pounds
per annum to string that stuff off to.”
“Indeed, you are not,” said Frank; “you are a
fine specimen of the hobbledehoy tribe, fifty per
cent, appetite, fifty per cent, conceit, and nought
per cent innocence.”
“Well, don’t get wrathy over my perfections,”
said Ned. “A yapping pup, a meowing puss and
a growling old woman would all be improved by
a drowning.”
Maida looked up somewhat indignantly.
“Ned,” she said, “how can you talk in that un-
dutiful way when you don’t mean it? And you
simply must take off that atrocious tie and those
abominable boots; I could give them to Mrs.
Lane, when she comes to wash on Monday, for
her boys.”
Ned always obeyed Maida when she “put her
foot down,” as he described it. However, he
tried coaxing first. “Ah! don’t you be down on
a chap too, little Best-of-All. I can’t help the
tie; an awfully nice little thing gave it to me and,
as I couldn’t sport it in town, I want to wear it
up here so I can truthfully tell her, when she
inquires, that it was much admired. Most of
the people here, to judge by the girls’ bright pink


sateen frocks and the boys’ bright blue velvet
suits, will think it a charming colour.”
“That disposes of the tie,” said Maida, “but
what about the boots? No ‘awfully nice little
thing’ gave you those.”
“My solitary squeakers?” said Ned. “They
were a bargain —got them for a dollar less than
any pair I’ve ever had, but you ought to hear
them tune up when I walk!"
“Well, buy no more of such bargains,” said
Frank. “I’m sure I send you plenty of money
for your ordinary expenses, and if you really need
more, you have only to ask.’
Ned laughed rather guiltily. “Yum;” he said,
“but if you had been ass enough to get your
pocket picked, would you own up and ask for
more? Some clever chap got off with the two of
the best you sent about five weeks ago and I was
on my uppers, I can tell you —couldn’t take the
tram to school even when it rained and couldn t
go to church for lack of a silver coin; couldn t
buy a dearer pair of boots than these monstrosi-
ties, and couldn’t get my old ones half-soled.
That beast of a Scotty used to haul me out to the
board to work trig., and then sneer at my
squeakers by talking about fellows that were all
noise and no brains to back it up.’


Frank laughed. “Well, I reckon you have
earned the right to dazzle the bush with them,
if you want to,” he said; “but you should not
have been such a foolish fellow, Ned; you should
have let me know.”
“Thanks, old chap,” said Ned; “you’re too
jolly good to me, but I was so riled with myself
for being such a flat that I couldn’t squeal. Now,
Fve promised the Mighty Muff to go down and
make love to his pear-trees; so, with the help of
my purple tie and orange boots, I’ll try and cut
you out with the lovely Mollie d la kissable
potato-trap.”
Frank got up and boxed the boy’s ears
soundly. “If it weren’t your last day at home,”
he said severely, “I’d make you pay more for
that impertinence. You might at least be
respectful when speaking of ladies.”
Ned was decidedly surprised, yet seemed
amused at the chastisement meted out to him.
“Five minutes here while I feel sorry for
myself!” he exclaimed. “I say, old chap, tell us
v/hen you are going off pop next time; I kept a
wary eye on you and the door when I made that
brilliant remark about a growling old woman;
you sit down to it like a lamb, and then


flatten a chap’s ears for calling a mouth a
potato-trap.”
“There is such a thing as the last straw, my
boy, which you may find to your cost yet,” said
Frank, without any relaxing of the stern lines
about his face.
“The last straw?” inquired Ned. “Oh! yes;
it broke the camel’s back or flattened the
neddy’s ear, was it? Never mind; I found out
what I wanted to know, and it was well worth a
clip.”
“And what was that, pray?” asked Frank
impatiently.
“The name of my future sister-in-law. I
suspected it began with M, and now my sus-
picions are verified. There is nothing like know-
ing early and getting on the soft side of the dears
from the start.”
Maida interfered again, for she could see that
Frank was really angry. “If you are going out,
Ned, go now, and don t be such a graceless
young scamp. There is some hot teacake on the
kitchen-table which you may sample before you
start, though you don’t deserve it; don t cut the
big fruitcake that I made for your hamper.”
Ned hugged her with a grin of anything but
penitence and proceeded kitchenwards. He was


back shortly, leaving a diminished cake-supply
behind him, and popped his head in at the door
again. “I say, Frank,” he began.
“Well, young cub,” inquired Frank, whom
Maida had completely mollified, “what fresh
impertinence this time?”
“It’s just to remind you not to be chump
enough to water the garden before tea; I’ll do it
afterwards. And if you get time to set your
thinking-gear going, just reflect that you ought
to grow a moustache and not look such a preci-
ous kid if you want a fellow to be respectful to
you.”
The rest of the family had begun dinner when
Ned got home, but he soon caught up with them,
in spite of talking all the time. He had returned
with a huge basket of apples and pears.
“Some to crunch in the sweet by-and-by, and
some for the coachman and yours truly to munch
to-morrow,” he explained. “And what do you
think ? Muffle’s going to land up at the coach in
the morning with a turkey for me, just ready for
the baking-dish. It’ll put dear old Madame
Rossin in a love of a temper for a week, and
won’t I have a good time! Told you there was
nothing like getting in early with the girls; the
pretty Mollie—don’t look fierce, Frank; I asked


her if she minded and she said never a bit—just
adores me now, and all because I was such a
magnanimous, forgiving chap that I sang your
praises. Told her how good-tempered you were,
and she invited me to have afternoon tea, told
her how generous you were —remember that
to-morrow, when you part up for travelling
expenses —and she pressed me to have another
bit of cake; told her what a dear, affectionate,
indulgent brother you were, and she produced
some hot apple tarts; told her you must be in
love, you wore such a seraphic grin when pre-
tending to read the paper, and she straightway
offered me the turkey if I would do the deed of
death and rob him of his head, for the soft-
hearted Muff jibbed on jobs like that. You can
be quite happy, Frank; she loves you all right
listened to the whole rigmarole without looking
bored.”
“If yon talk such nonsense, Scamp,” said
Maida severely, “I shall make you pack your
own trunk, and pack it neatly too.”
“Ah! you couldn’t be so stony-hearted, Best-
of-All,” grinned Ned. “You might start me at
it, but I should sit on the edge of the bed and
groan and you would soon appear.”


“Well, then,’ said Maida, “tell me sensibly
what you have been doing this afternoon.”
“Why, what do you think?” he exclaimed with
sudden recollection. “Felicia Mackay is down
there; her real name is Morrison, and she is their
sister.”
“How strange!” declared Maida.
“I’m not at all surprised to hear it,” said
Frank; “I have never seen sisters more alike.”
“Oh, apple pie !” exclaimed Ned rapturously, as
the pudding came into view. “What joy! There
is nothing so nearly approaches our virtuous big
brother for perfection, as roast chook or apple
pie.”
I must say, Ned,” declared Frank, “you have
a special capacity—”
“For apple pie,” interrupted Ned; “don’t say
impertinence, old man; I know I’m an all-round
brilliant chap, but pie is my special line, so please
don’t dole me out any of your elegant, ladylike
serves, Maida. As Wordsworth tried to say:
‘And I could wish my lips to be
Bound each to each with apple pie at tea.’ ”
“Feed him up well, Maida, do,” said Frank;
“he has to put in decidedly better work this term,
or he’ll catch—”


“Tongue pie,” groaned Ned; “don’t I feel it in
my bones? But go slow on your jawing, angel
pie; I’m going to slog in, honour bright, only
you two don’t realise the family brain ran to
seed before it reached me, and you expect me to
do anything Frank could, and it’s not in me.
“Well, I have done growling for this time,
Boy,” said Frank. “I have no doubt you will do
your best when the time comes. Now, I know
whose socks Kath has spent the afternoon darn-
ing, so it is up to you to wipe the dishes for her;
you can give me a hand at carrying water after-
wards, if you really want to, for I shall not be
half-finished when you young folks get through.”
“Right oh!” Ned agreed cheerfully. “I’m a
dab at pots.”
He was out in the garden helping, in a very
short time. “Are you in your best temper after
dinner, Frank?” he inquired, as they filled their
buckets at the well.
“That means you have done something or you
want something,” said Frank; “out with it.”
“Well, I riled one of your lovely lambs to-
day,” Ned confessed; “never dreamed she’d
howl, but she did, so I thought I’d better own up
and catch a wigging for it.”
“Who was it?” asked Frank.


“Gem,” said Ned, in a shamefaced way.
“Now, Boy,” replied Frank indignantly, “you
surely haven’t been rude to that dear little girl?”
“I was only funning. She’s so dashed fond of
you that I was teasing her about it. I said that
if you asked her what p-r-i-m spelled—Kath told
me that—she ought to have asked you what
p-r-i-g spelled, and she fired up something awful;
wouldn’t let me explain it was only fun, slammed
the door on me —I was sitting on the step —and
told me to go home; said things through the
window, too, that wouldn’t warm a chap’s heart
on a frosty morning. I gathered anyhow that I
was a creepy-crawly, wiggly-waggly insect
compared with you, and that you were a two-
penny tin god, dipped in gold and lined with
silver. I didn’t want to part on bad terms with
the little kid, so I went back after I’d been at
the Morrisons’, and she was sitting on the door-
step howling. Of course I felt a beast then and
apologised, but she laughed and said she was
only crying because she had been silly; then she
lectured me as if she’d been my grandmother
about the way I behaved to you; ’pon my word,
I could hardly keep a straight face, but I didn’t
want to rile her again and was as mild as milk
puddings. So she forgave me and we had a good


old yarn; she is a nice little kid though, for when
Gran hove in sight from his work, she grabbed
a book as if she’d been reading it. ‘Gran knows
I always do a weep over this story, so he won’t
wire into you about my red eyes,’ she said. It
was nice of her to think of that, wasn tit?
“Gem is always generous,” said Frank, “and
I am glad you made your peace with her.”


Chapter XX.
MAN PROPOSES.
it was after dinner on the next Friday even-
ing, and Frank was looking for a Latin book
before going down for Muffle’s weekly lesson.
“Ida tells me Felicia is there yet,” said Maida;
“she is going away to-morrow.”
“Bonny little Felicia!” said Frank. “It will
be pleasant meeting her again.”
“And Felicia is engaged,” said Maida warn-
ingly.
“What of that?” he cheerfully inquired.
“Only this, Boy, that I used to think you were
in love with her.”
“In love with Felicia?” he exclaimed, with
unnecessary warmth. “My dear girl, how can
you be so absurd?”
“Well, you were fond of her, Boy, you can’t
deny that,” retorted Maida.
“Felicia,” said Frank, with the same warmth
of denial, “is a charming girl, and she and I were
very good friends, nothing more.”
“Since she is evidently not in love with you,”
smiled Maida,“l am glad the secret sympathy


was undeserved that I used to waste on you as
a lover forced by misfortune to make no sign.
But why should you be annoyed, Boy, at being
accused of caring for such a dear little girl?
“I suppose I am a peppery beast, as Ned
informed me by way of farewell,” he confessed,
“but you girls do get the most ridiculous ideas
into your heads. I like Felicia immensely, but
I don’t altogether envy the Reverend John;
Felicia would make an ideal fair-weather com-
panion, but life isn’t all sunshine, and I don’t
think she’d help a man over the hard times
much; she is a merry child, not a woman, and
though I like merry children, I prefer women.
“And know nothing whatever about them,
silly boy,” laughed Maida, loyal to Felicia, whom
she had met again through the week.
Frank answered nothing at the time, but as
he said good-bye he stooped over and kissed hei
unexpectedly. “Guess I know they are a little
aggravating” he said, “even when they are the
Best-of-All, and I know they don’t always get
the last word.”
He was at the gate and whistling before
Maida could reply; but she went inside again
with a tender smile on her face at the thought


of the best-loved brother who was in such a
boyish mood, she knew why.
As Frank walked briskly to Morrison’s Point,
he did not bestow a thought on Felicia; never-
theless, she met him at the door and took him in,
when their first greetings were over. “Come
and see,” said she, “ what a fashionable lady I
have made of our quiet little Mollie; I look the
domesticated one now.”
“Felicia has been dressing me up for fun,”
said Mollie, blushing rather guiltily as she came
forward to take his hand; her hair was dressed
in queenly rolls and puffs all over her lovely
head, and she was wearing one of Felicia’s even-
ing frocks that showed a shapely neck and
pretty arms.
“Now don’t you admire my handiwork?”
asked Felicia.
“Yes —no —that is, you have made me a little
afraid of Miss Mollie,” he said.
“To tell the truth, I don’t seem at home with
myself,” said Mollie; “how shall I ever get on
friendly terms with dish-washing again?”
“Frank Gray, Frank Gray,” pouted Felicia,
“you are just the same rudely truthful person
you always were. Why did you put such ideas
into her head? But that is why I am going to


ask you a question.” She went over and sat
next to Mollie on the couch. “Am I pretty.
Frank ?”
“Very, Felicia,” he said.
“Charmingly pretty?”
“No doubt about it.”
“Well, which is prettier, which is lovelier,
Mollie or I?”
“Oh, Felicia!” exclaimed Mollie.
But Felicia laughed. “Frank doesn’t mind
me,” she said. “We are chums of long standing.
I feel quite ancient when I think how many
years I have known him and his virtues. Don’t
you remember, Frank, when I was a schoolgirl
and tried to flirt with you over the garden wall,
and you were so abominably slow that you
would discuss how many snails there were on
your flowers, instead of gently insinuating that
I was the loveliest of them all?”
“What! of the snails?” he asked.
“Horrid man!” said Felicia. “But never mind
your former sins of omission and present sin of
commission; answer my question nicely, like the
good boy you always were; which is the prettier,
which is the lovelier, Mollie or I?’
“It is easily answered, if you really want to


know,” he smiled; “you are the prettier, Miss
Mollie is the lovelier.”
“Uncomplimentary as ever to me,” said Felicia,
“but I forgive you, because you have sense
enough to see the right answer and courage
enough to give it. And did you know I am
engaged ?”
“John Arthur is a splendid fellow,” he said,
“and deserves his good luck.”
“I know what you are thinking,” said Felicia,
“what other people think too, that John is to be
pitied for falling in love with a frivolous, foolish
girl; but I’m going to try and be good, Frank;
nobody knows how hard 1 am going to try, and
nobody else knows quite how grand John is.”
There was a look of such infinite yearning,
such loving aspiration, on the pretty face of
Felicia, that Frank felt his hasty division of the
laurels between the two sisters had been scarce-
ly fair to the elder one; Felicia was lovely too;
there was the old mischievous fun in her face,
but something better too.
“You quite misread my thoughts,” he said.
“I was reflecting that John’s Chinese boys will
think you a sample of the angels he will tell
them about, and that he will feel like agreeing
with them.”


Felicia was pleased. “You don’t mean to say
you are beginning to make pretty speeches in
your old age, Frank?” she queried. “Where
have you been learning?"
“From your face,” he shamelessly affirmed.
“Alec,” said Felicia, “you needn’t get your
books ready; you are going to take me across to
say good-bye to Gem. Never mind Frank; put
all the blame on me; he is not my schoolmaster
and I’m not a bit afraid of him. He deserves to
be kept waiting for the nonsense he has beei>
talking.”
Mufifie looked aghast at such a proposal, but
even a shy, awkward young brother can be be-
witched by a girl long practised in the art of
charming, and he went.
“I thought you thought the world of that dear
boyshe inquired, when they were out of
hearing.
“But I do,” said Mufifie reproachfully. “He’s —
oh! You don’t know how grand he is.”
“Then give him an innings occasionally,” said
Felicia.
“Why ? —what ? —what ?
“I’m certain sure you’ll be a man before long.
Alec,” laughed Felicia, “you are so blind. Do
you think he comes down here for the pleasure


of doing work for you that he could easily man-
age in school?”
“But he does come to work with me,” urged
Muffle.
“Not he,” said Felicia; “he comes to see
Mollie, and all the time he said pretty things to
me, he was looking at her.”
Muffle gasped with astonishment. Granted
that a certain man was almost your divinity, and
that it was suddenly suggested to you he was a
victim to the fascinations of your sister, whom
you loved but knew to be human, would you not
gasp too?
But his gasp was followed by a quick recollec-
tion of many incidents not previously correlated;
the recollection furnished proof conclusive that
Felicia was right. Frank decided, on later
Fridays, that Muffie could not be as wrapped up
in his work as of yore; he was always forgetting
the lesson hour and coming in late, but the
master took his good luck without the shadow
of a reproof that might mar it.
And so Ned came for his holidays and re-
turned, and Felicia too came and went, and life
went back to its usual round on the hill and down
the creek; but somebody down the creek grew
ever lovelier in the eyes of somebody else on the


hill; and somebody certainly grew happier and
wondered wdiy life had ever seemed hard to live,
or cheerfulness a difficult virtue, for was there
not a Friday in every week, and a Saturday’s
tennis as well?
And one day there came a rollicking epistle
from Ned to Kath that said: “Ask old Frank,
for his hair's safety, to steer clear of the wiles of
bush maids as long as he can, though I must
admit that one of them makes scrimmy cakes,
to judge by those we sampled at the river; and
if there is a better qualification for wives than
baking top-lot pastry, it has escaped my know-
ledge. Just choose a moment when little Best-
of-All is looking extra tenderly at the photo of
her dear, darling, distant cherub of a brother to
hint that she could easily get a recipe of that
French pound cake and send a couple of samples
of her skill to this address; there is a poor thin,
heart-broken fellow here w T bo might be saved
thereby from dying of homesickness, and a
French cake would help him with his Racine,
that is a dead cert.”
And wffien Kath was washing her dishes and
the big brother and sister had their turn at the
letter, Frank said: “The young cub w'as a bit
too cute, -wasn't he?”


Maida’s smile meant that she did not think a
large amount of cuteness necessary to fathom
Frank’s state in a week.
“Little Sis, would you mind?” he asked. “You
must not think I don’t appreciate your giving up
your own career to make a home for us, and you
possibly find it ungrateful work at times; I
couldn’t bear to do anything you minded.”
“I’ll be very glad, Boy,” said Maida, her eyes
alight with sympathy and something else.
“Of course, I haven’t said anything to Mollie
yet; she knows me so little that I have been
afraid to. Maida, do you think there is any hope
for me ?”
“I think there might be,” said Maida, whose
observation told her there certainly was.
“It is ever so good of you to be glad, little
Sis,” said he.
“And ever so selfish,” she smiled; “for how can
I get married myself and leave you with nobody
to henpeck you just enough to keep you good
and happy? I know you would not be the latter
without some woman to spoil, Boy; and besides,
how could I take Kath to Mexico?”
“Maida!” he exclaimed in delighted surprise.
“Do you mean Billy Mitchell? And I have
longed for a chance to punch his good old head!


I thought he had gone off with never a word,
after making you care a bit,”
But Maida’s eyes were shining with love and
trust. “It was a mistake,” she said; “he wrote a
note that never reached me, and even then came
to see us off from Sydney, but came a day too
late.”
Maida knew a story that explained the mis-
take, but for Ned’s sake she had kept it secret
from Frank. It was the boy who brought in his
trunk from town the wonderful letter from
Mexico that begged her to make happy Billy
Mitchell, a mining engineer who had been
Frank’s chief friend and who was now manager
of a big Mexican mine; and Ned gave it to her
on his first night home at Easter with a very
shamed confession. “Billy Mitchell sent me this
letter for you, as he didn’t know your address,”
he said, “but I’ve got to tell you something first
that’ll make you loathe me, I suppose, little Best-
of-All. I thought he was a beastly cheeky
bounder to think of taking you out to Mexico,
as I guessed he was. I used to go round and see
Tom Mitchell pretty often, and a few days before
we came up here in January, Billy gave me a
letter for you; I managed to lose it and told him
there was no answer. He looked awfully cut up,


but he asked me when we were going away. I
said ‘a day before’ under my breath, and then
‘Wednesday night by the Western Mail’ loud
enough for him to hear. He went to see that
train off too, for Tom told me after I got back
to town. I began to feel uncomfortable about it
right off, for I thought you looked pretty miser-
able that night; and you said to Frank, Tt is
strange your chum, Billy, hasn’t come to say
good-bye or to see us off’ ; Frank said ‘Don’t
believe I ever told him when we were going,’
with an Fd-like-to-comfort-you-but-Fd-like-to-
crack-his-cocoanut-for-him look. I tried to con-
vince myself you didn’t care a brass farthing for
the bounder, but I couldn’t quite. He cleared
out to Mexico the next week, but I got his
address from Tom and wrote and told him what
Fd done. He is a jolly decent chap, little Best-
of-All, for he wrote back that he didn’t wonder
I thought he had a cheek to want anybody as
all-round grand as you, and he forgave me, and
asked me to send you this letter now.”
Maida forgave him too, for that wonderful
letter made it easy to forgive and love all the
world. It told of a good man’s love for her; he
was under agreement to stay three years, but
could get off long enough to come home and be


married, if only she would agree. Dear little
Best-of-All, as that wise young brother of yours
calls you, will you not let me come?” he urged.
And the wistful look went away from Maida s
eyes, and Frank’s heart rejoiced to see her so
merry. “It is the boy coming home,” he
thought; but Ned went, forgiven in secret and
loving openly more than ever, and still the glad
light lived on her face.
And now Frank knew the reason for it and
rejoiced afresh. “Billy is a jolly fellow and a
brainy fellow,” he said, “and an all-round good
fellow too.”
But he did not stay long to rejoice with her.
He forgot to water his garden and went out with
its last rosebud in his buttonhole. And Maida
knew where he had gone and was not at all
surprised when Ned got his cakes without any
baking of hers, and averred in his next letter
that “sisters-in-law-to-be were a jolly good spec.
Frank came back a happier man than ever, for
Mollie had promised to marry him at some
indefinite future time. Love and happiness
beckoned her brightly, but love and happiness
had taught her duty too. ‘ There ate the
children and Father who want me yet, she said,
and Frank was forced to leave it at that.


Chapter XXL
GEM PAYS A CALL.
The Sunday after Frank asked Mollie to
marry him, happened to be his birthday.
The morning frost had melted and the day was
bright and sunny as Gem walked proudly up to
Needy Flat, a birthday present under each arm.
Her pride was largely due to the “best” frock
that she was wearing. The shop from which the
summer dresses had been procured had sent a
catalogue of winter fashions by post to “Miss
G. Marshall, Needy Flat,” to the child’s huge
delight.
Gran had said “Ask Miss Gray to pick out
the dresses that would be best for you, Little
Boss, and we’ll send for them;” but Gem was
worried about the price. The cheapest one illus-
trated was twenty-five shillings, and lately Gran
had had bad luck at his digging; he and Joe had
sunk three “duffers” running, and of course
there was no question of touching their capital,
the interest on which was to keep her at school.
So she had asked Maida rather sadly if there
were no way of getting cheaper ones. Maida
had laughed to scorn all talk of trouble and


insisted on making them for her; “We can make
three for the price of one of those,” she said,
“and out of navy serge that will wear well.”
But Gem had set her heart on a red dress. She
loved gay colours and had always admired the
pink sateens smothered in cheap lace that the
girls of The Flat delighted in. She had learned
indirectly from Maida that these frocks were not
in such good taste as simple white muslins or
blue prints, but even now her eyes would flash
with gladness at the sight of a Flat belle in her
bright attire, till memory corrected them and
bade her disapprove. Still, a red dress could not
be wrong, for had not Kath one of dark red
velveteen? The result was that there were two
navy serge frocks for school and a red cashmere
for best, and it was the latter she wore as she paid
her call.
When she knocked at the door, it was Frank
who let her in, with felt slippers on his feet and
the look of a man who had just been asleep.
“Why, Gem,” he said, “is it you? Please come
in. I am sorry Kath and Maida will not be back
for an hour or two; they have gone to see poor
old Mrs. Lane, who is very sick.”
“But I came to see you, Mr. Gray,” she said,
“to wish you a happy birthday.”


“Indeed, it is very kind of yon to have come so
far for that, little one, and you are certainly
helping to make it happy by coming.”
“But I think you were asleep,” she said regret-
fully.
He smiled away the regret. “Not I,” he said;
“I was wide awake. Maida let me off going out
with her, to celebrate the fact that I had lived
through a quarter of a century safely, and just
because I was allowed to stay in and had no
letters to write, I could not get to sleep; so you
can guess how grateful I am for your visit.”
“But I mustn’t stay long,” explained Gem.
“Gran said half-an-hour would be heaps, for you
had too much of other people’s children all the
week.”
Frank laughed and said that it depended on
who the children were. “If you will excuse me
for a few r minutes,” he added, “I’ll start a fire
and we’ll have some tea. Maida left my favour-
ite gingerbread ready for me, but I was too
abominably lazy to get it just for myself.”
But Gem entreated to be allowed to get it, so
eagerly that he consented. “You little people
all spoil me,” he said, as she returned presently
with the tray and the steaming teapot.


Gem shook her head. “Kath says you are a
very easily managed man,” she said; “she says
you don’t even get annoyed when breakfast is
late or the porridge burnt, and that the only
thing that makes you even a tiny bit angry is
when Miss Maida gives your old coats and hats
away.”
j
Frank laughed, for it tickled him immensely
to discover quiet, demure, little Kath, whom he
thought of as a half-baby yet, discussing with
her friends his merits as a manageable man. I
am glad that if Kath must give my reputation
away, she gives me a good one,’ he said.
“Of course, I’ve only told you in confidence,
as chums,” warned Gem.
“I quite understand that,” he said
“I wish I had somebody to spoil,” she contin-
ued sadly. “I just envy Kath having two
brothers. Gran won’t let me spoil him; he likes
doing things for himself, and just laughs at me;
I don’t think a man has got any right to prefer
holes in his socks to darns.”
“Well, you are practising the spoiling very
nicely on me,” said Frank comfortingly; this
is a delightful cup of tea.”
“I made you a birthday-present, Mr. Gray,”
she announced shyly. “Miss Maida showed me


how to knit a silk tie, and she said you liked navy
blue best.”
“Why, what a lovely one!” he exclaimed.
“Indeed, I shall value it very much, for itself
and for your kindness in doing it for me.”
“And Kath said you liked sweets as much as
girls do,” she continued, “and so I’ve brought
you some.” .
“But isn’t giving me two presents spoiling me
with a vengeance, little comrade?” he inquired.
“I should like to give you dozens,” she replied,
her big eyes looking affectionately at him, “but
I couldn’t save up any more money. You see,
I had to buy the prunes and sugar and things
myself, or it would have been Gran’s present.
Mollie helped me make them.”
“They look delicious,” he said, “and what a
huge boxful! If Ido not get sweetened up on
these, I must be a very sour person. Will you
eat my health in some, Gem, and I’ll eat to
yours ?”
She took one reluctantly, being careful to
avoid the ginger creams, which she considered
the nicest of all. “I had a letter from Ned
yesterday,” she said, “and he asked me to bring
you a message, Mr. Gray. I think it is very rude,


but it would be a bit mean to Ned not to give it
to you, for he is my chum too —not very much
my chum like you and Miss Maida, of course —
and he wrote me the loveliest letter. I have never
had a letter before, except from my bushranger
and his mother, and I was so glad about it. Do
you mind if I give you the message? Ned only,
meant it for a joke; he explained that very care-
fully; he said I needn’t stick up for you, for you
were big enough to knock him into the middle of
next week, if you wanted to. Do you mind
about it, Mr. Gray?”
“Not a bit,” he declared cheerfully. “I rather
enjoy Ned’s sauciness when he is not here to
remind me that his bringing-up is my respon-
sibility.”
“I suppose he didn’t guess it would come too
late to have much point,” she went on, a mis-
chievous light in her eyes. “He sent this, as the
latest way to propose, and asked me to give it to
you with his most dutiful regards.”
Frank took the sheet of paper handed him
and read: “The latest way to propose, based on
commonsense instead of sentimentality;
Woman, I want a sock-darner and cake-baker;
if you will take in exchange a frills-and-furbe-
lows-buyer and suitable object for growling at


in all weathers, say the word and let us be
spliced.”
Frank’s smile answered Gem’s as he looked
up. “Why did you say it came too late to have
much point?” he asked.
“Ida thinks,” she acknowledged hesitatingly,
“that Friday night you asked her, and yesterday
she was just deliciously sweet to us all.”
“You and Ida are as bad as Ned for finding
out things,” he said; “why, I’ll warrant my own
little sister hasn’t a thought of such a thing yet.”
“Kath thinks it would be terrible if Mollie only
wanted one bridesmaid and chose Baby; she
thinks she and Ida ought to be, and they want
bangles, not brooches, for presents.”
“You young people are too much for me,” he
said.
“But you are not angry with us for knowing,
are you, Mr. Gray?” she pleaded.
“Angry?” said he, with a look on his face that
the child thought beautiful. “I am just so happy
and proud about it, Gem, that I should not mind
all the world knowing.”
Reassured by his look and words, she handed
him another parcel. “Ned asked me to give you
this book afterwards, as a real birthday present,”
she said.


“I am going to be revenged on that young
man,” he vowed, smiling at the title, which was
Too Slow; “his own birthday comes next week
and I shall illuminate and frame a copy of that
proposal and send it along with some such note
as this: ‘Dear Brother, many thanks for your
useful hints on the art of proposing. I had
intended sending you a postal-note, but think I
cannot do better than give you instead a framed
copy of your priceless document; otherwise, you
may forget or lose it, before you de\ elop a little
sense and a moustache and need it as a model.
Thanking you for your dutiful expressions of
goodwill, etc.’ I'll think it out and get in a few
extra digs at the cub, and send it a mail before
his postal-note.”
“What fun!” said Gem. “But Ned did some-
thing so awfully nice, Mr. Gray. He thought I
might be disappointed at getting your book
through the post and finding it wasn t for me,
so he put in a box of chocolates for me too,
\vasn’t it ever so nice of him?
“Ned is a kindhearted young scamp under-
neath his nonsense,” he agreed.
“It cheered me up when I w T as just dreadfully
dumpy,” she confessed.
“Why, what was the matter, little one?”


“Mr. Gray, have you ever had a big disappoint-
ment —not just a little one, but a real big heart-
breaking thing?”
“Well, I have had one or two that have made
the world seem out of sorts for a time; but
generally they mended, or else I grew older and
wondered why they had ever worried me.”
“Do you think lam clever, Mr, Gray?” Her
big eyes gazed wistfully at him, and he told her
the truth without any hesitation. “Very clever,
Gem,” he said.
“I thought so too,” she admitted sorrowfully;
“but perhaps I was only just conceited. Gran
often hints I’m conceited, but all the same, he
thinks I’m a wonder, for I hear the things he
says to Joe about me. The night after we came
home from the river, Gran went across to Joe’s
and I felt so lonely that I envied Ida having
Baby and Peter to play with, if she liked, and I
just longed for people of my own too, and I
thought how I’d spoil them, though perhaps I’d
really be cantankerous to them and fly into
tempers if they teased me.
“So I just thought that, instead of crying
about it, I would write it into a poem;
poems always seem to be soulful sort of things


you feel. So I wrote a poem, called Somebody
to Spoil, and it seemed so nice that I just cried
and cried over it. I sent it to The IVeekly Mail,
and when Gran’s paper came yesterday I looked
in the Answers to Correspondents and it said
‘Somebody to Spoil: We advise you to spoil
this effusion with a good hot fire. \ou are
evidently a young lady fresh from school
and may do better on a less bread-and-
butter diet. The fact that they rhyme and
are about the same length does not make poetry
of your lines; there is such a thing as metre —
look it up in your dictionary.’ So I looked up
about metre in the back of my Macbeth, and I’d
never known about feet in lines before; I knew
poetry sounded nice, but I fancied your thoughts
came that way naturally, if you were clever, and
my poem really did sound nice, Mr. Gray.
“Anyhow, I was so angry with myself that, all
the way home, I kept saying ‘Oh, donkey!
double-dyed donkey!’ or T am an ass, I am an
ass,’ and I was so busy saying ‘ I am an ass,’ that
I fell into one of those holes in Miller’s Gully
and got wet up to my knees. And when I told
Gran about it, and he said ‘So you were,’ I just
flew into a rage, and I thought I had quite given
over getting into tempers, quite.”


Frank was inwardly amused, but too fond of
her and too concerned about the tragic woe on
her young face to show any traces of merriment.
“And,” she continued sadly, “I don’t think I’ll
ever be a real lady, Mr. Gray. “I don’t see how
a girl can, when she knows better all the time
and yet can’t keep from telling her own grand-
father that he is piggy-wiggier than a pig and
crabbier than a cross-eyed Chinaman. And I
wanted to be great when I grow up, and now I
don’t suppose I ever shall.”
“I think you will be a great success as a
woman someday, Gem,” he said.
“But I want to be a great poet, or author, or
something,” she protested.
“Well,” he replied, “it is too early to despair
of that yet. Great poets have often written
rubbish in their youth.”
“Oh! but mine wasn’t rubbish,” she explained,
her poor hurt self-confidence beginning to
revive, “and that horrid man thought I was
about eighteen, so that is a little bit hopeful,
isn’t it?”
“It is,” he agreed seriously; “but why don't
you try stories first?”
“I did write one about the Duke of Portland,”
she explained, “but it struck me there might be


really a man with such a title, who would be
annoyed at finding himself described as a villain;
so I didn’t dare send that to the paper. And
then, when 1 try to write stories, there seems
such a lot to explain that all the nice talky bits
get swamped. I’d like to be clever like you,
Mr. Gray, and write things for the papers; Kath
told me you did.”
“When I was a boy, Gem," he said, “I tried
to write a book; of course, nobody would publish
it, but the disappointment taught me not to
attempt big things till I could manage the little
ones. So I have put off trying another book till
I know more of life, but in the meantime I do
occasionally get little tales and sketches
accepted.”
“And you so wonderfully clever!” said Gem, in
admiration of such self-limited genius. “When I
write my compositions and think they are so fine
that you will surely give me five marks and you
only give me four, you show me how much more
nicely I could put things that I wonder you gave
me more than two. So I’ll give over trying
poetry and big things till I m very old —eighteen
anyhow.”
“That’s right, Gem,” he said heartily; “but


don’t give up altogether; you will find pleasure
in it, even if you never become famous.”
But Gem did not like to contemplate such a
possibility, and changed the subject abruptly.
“Mr. Gray,” she asked, “why have I such a bad
temper? Gran says my father didn’t. I told him
it must be because he didn’t bring me up proper-
ly, that he ought to have put me in the corner
when I was a naughty little girl, and I’d have been
cured by this. He said nobody stopped me
standing in a corner, if I wanted to, that there
were four in the room and I was welcome to
them all. So I just thought I'd punish myself
for calling Gran such names, and see if standing
in the corner would do me any good. But Gran
is terribly aggravating and such a dear, Mr. Gray;
he just told all the funniest jokes and stories he
could think of, till I had to laugh and laugh; and
then he said ‘Come and get your tea, Little Boss,
and quit those tomfool notions; you’re good
enough for all the grandfather you’ve got, just
as you are.’ Then he gave me sixpence and
talked about my little mother, because I love to
hear about her so, and he spoiled me terribly,
and I know I ought to have been slapped and
sent to bed, Mr. Gray, I know I ought.”
“Why, Gem,” he said comfortingly, “you will


grow out of your small share of temper as you
get older. Perhaps your mother was like you
when she was a girl.”
“She might have got a temper from her
parents,” agreed Gem. “Piggy-wiggy is too
affectionate a word for them; they were so hard
and cruel that, just because my father had no
money, they wouldn’t have her for their daughter
any more, not even when my father died. 1 hey
were very rich too, and lived in a beautiful big
house in Strathfield that I have a picture of.”
“Strathfield ?” said Frank. “That is where I
lived till a few years ago. I wonder if I have
ever heard of your mother. W hat was her name,
Gem, when she was a girl?
“Gwendolen Enid Mackay, said 'the child,
“But they called her Gem too from her initials.’
“And was ‘Marston’ the name of the house?”
“Yes.”
“Then I lived next door to your mother and
saw her often when I was a small youngster, and
your grandmother is the Aunt Mackay with
whom Felicia lives.”
“Oh!” she cried in amazement. “Is she
really? Ned says she is a hard-faced old tartar.”
“Ned is a chattering young jackanapes,” said
his brother shortly.


“But I'd never, never be able to like anybody
that was cruel to my pretty mother, and so I’m
sorry I found out about her; it is horrible to
have to dislike some real person instead of a
vague sort of anybody.”
Frank remembered a time when Mrs. Mackay
had come back from Europe and almost immedi-
ately taken ill; his mother had gone in to do
what a friend could, and somehow had got near
enough to the bruised heart under the hard face
to hear its story. Afterwards she had taught
him to regard with pity the poor woman who
had been her own worst enemy, who had stifled
the voice of her heart to please her husband, and
whose pride kept her from relenting till it was
too late and she came back from Europe to find
her daughter dead. So he spoke of her to Gem
with pity.
“Little Gem,’’ he said, “this world is too small
a place to have room in it for hard thoughts of
others. People who do wrong need all the
sympathy we can give them; they get punished,
and punished more than we could desire, without
our lifting a finger. Do you not know that
wrongs come home to roost, just as the chickens
do?”
“Unless the crow eats them,” said Gem, trying


hard to smile and be loyal to the grudge that had
grown up with her.
“Yes,” he said, “unless the crow eats the
chicks; but there is no crow to dispose of our
wrongdoings, Gem. They live on and hurt
ourselves. When you have a quarrel with Ida
and are ready to kiss and make it up and she
will not give in, who is unhappier, you or she?”
“Ida,” said Gem. “She tells us afterwards how
she wanted and wanted to be friends, and some-
thing wouldn’t let her, though she was as
miserable as could be.”
“And in that I think Ida is like her aunt and
your grandmother,” he said. “Try to imagine
what you would suffer, little one, if you did a
hard and cruel thing, that hurt you all the time,
and you had in your nature that queer something
—pride, or obstinacy, or whatever it may be
that would not let you undo the wrong.”
“Poor Grandmother!” said Gem, the eyes that
had tried to smile misty with tears now. “Do
you think it was like that?”
“My mother was a friend of hers,” he said,
“and Ido believe it was like that. But come, we
must not let ourselves be miserable like this.
Have you realised that you are Ida’s cousin, and
will be mine someday?”


‘‘Oh!" she exclaimed in delight, “that is
perfectly lovely. But Ido believe I’ve been half-
an-honr; have I, Mr. Gray?”
“I am afraid you have,” he said, though he
guessed it was nearer one and a half; “but
couldn’t you stay now and have tea with Kath?”
‘Td better not,” said Gem sadly. “Gran
didn’t say I mustn’t stop, but he never does say
I mustn’t straight out, so it seems mean to get
out of it that way.”
“I suppose it does,” he said. “If you wait till
I find a respectable pair of boots, Gem, I’ll walk
part of the way with you and come home with
Maida and Kath.”
It was when they were opposite Mrs. Lane’s
cottage and had to part that the child remem-
bered something and gave him such a smile of
mischief, after the serious solemnity of her
calling countenance, that he understood why
Maida had privately christened her Miss
Mixture. “Mr. Gray,” she asked, “did you tell
Miss Maida about what I told you in confidence?
You know how Ida and I love her so that we
just longed to call her Maida, and just imagined
we could sometimes and called her photo that,
for the lovely thrilly feeling it gave us. I


believe you did, for she told us on Friday that
we might, except in sewing-class.”
“I may have just hinted at it,” he confessed.
“Then I’m going to pay you out,’ she
threatened.
“Be as merciful as you can,” he pleaded.
“I’m going to call you,” she said, making
ready to run when the act of daring should be
accomplished, “I’m going to call you Frank!
But he only laughed and lifted his hat to the
little runaway. She brought him a second
buttonhole on Monday, by way of atonement,
and went into the cottage garden, where he was
putting up a trellis for a climbing rose, to give it
to him.
“Thank you, Miss Marshall,” he said; “and,
by the by, my name is entirely at your private
service.”


Chapter XXII.
GEM’S LETTER.
Gem wrote a letter after tea on Sunday and it
took a long time, for letter-writing was an art
she had scarcely practised out of composition-
class. The mail coach took it away on Monday,
and a postman delivered it on Tuesday afternoon
to the neat little maid that opened the door at
Marston in Strathfield. Mrs. Mackay read it
along with a dentist’s bill, an invitation to dinner
and a request for a hospital subscription. She
put it away and said never a word to Felicia, who
was reading out snatches of her own home
letter, the one that told the news of Mollie’s
engagement.
“I am glad she has done something so
sensible,” said Aunt Mackay. “Young Gray’s
mother was the best friend I ever had; he comes
of a good family and is bound to be something
better than a bush teacher before long. You
write and tell Mollie I’ll give her her trousseau
and her wedding, and settle two hundred and
fifty a year on each of them from the day they
are married, provided Frank comes back to town
and lives in his old home.”


Felicia marvelled at the burst of generosity.
“And/’ continued Aunt Mackay, “I have
talked often enough of going up to see those
girls; telegraph to Mollie to expect us on
Saturday. You say she would never part with
Baby, but if I took Ida there could be no reason
for delaying her marriage; you could have a
double wedding next January. Your father can
surely look out for the younger boy, and the
older one seems likely to look out for himself
soon.”
Felicia wrote the good news to Needy Flat at
once, but at night, when she had kissed her aunt
and gone to bed, that letter of Gem’s was read
a second time, though there was nobody by to
notice that the old hand which held it shook.
“My dear Grandmother,” ran Gem’s careful
round-hand, “Most likely you won’t ever want to
make friends with me, but don’t worry about
that and think that perhaps you ought to; for I
am ever so happy, and Gran and I are quite rich
and have a lot of money saved up to send me to
school next year. We love each other very
much; he cooks the meals and I wash the dishes,
and there is plenty of time to talk and play and
learn my lessons. We are not very lonely either,
for there are This and That and Tother, the cats,


and Timothy Titus, my pet lizard, only Mrs.
Wood’s cruel dog Nigger came to our place and
killed him last week. I am only writing to let
yon know how very sorry I am for you, and to
tell you not to fret about what you did to my
dear little mother. Once I used to think I could
never like anyone that was bad to her, but now
I know it must have hurt you all the time, and
you were just longing to go to her and kiss her
and call her your little girl again, only somehow
3 r ou could not. And when thinking time comes
at night in bed, and 1 think about my dear Daddy
and my darling Mother till I seem to hear them
talking to me, it is just lovely. But how terrible
it would be if people came to me then that I was
frightened to see, because of what I had done to
them! Grandmother, don’t mind about it now.
I shut my eyes this afternoon, when I was walk-
ing home, and I seemed to hear my little mother
telling me to forgive you as she did. lam sure
she did, Grandmother, and my father too, for
Gran says they loved each other very much and
were very happy together. Good-bye, Grand-
mother, and don’t you worry any more.
Your little girl’s little girl,
Gem Marshall.
P.S. —I ought to have told you that I am not


a very good child. Sometimes I get into terrible
tempers, but I am always sorry afterwards, and
I will never think hardly of you any more.
G.M”
People had envied and congratulated Mrs.
Mackay all her life through; nobody had ever
yet dared talk of being sorry for her. And now
it was a bush child, living in a hut perhaps, whose
grandfather cooked the meals and who washed
the dishes herself, who was sorry for her, in spite
of all her pride and wealth. But Mrs. Mackay
did not see the exquisite irony of Gem’s pity; she
only felt a tired, lonely old woman who needed
it; the bush child’s sympathy found a way
through the make-believes and pretences that
encased her heart, and blood cried out to blood
after all the years. Once, before she had married
the hard man who changed her outlook on life,
she too had been ‘not a very good child,’ she too
‘sometimes got into terrible tempers, but was
always sorry afterwards;’ so she longed with a
longing quite unlike her usual trained indiffer-
ence, to get away at once to Needy Flat and find
and love the child who had dared to be sorry for
her.
But there were appearances to consider,
appearances and Felicia, and it was not till


Saturday night that they were housed on
Morrison’s Point. Mollie had worked late and
early for the comfort of the old aunt who had
promised such wonderful things for her and
Frank, and she made the best bedroom a sight
for tired eyes.
Aunt Mackay was pleased to be pleased with
everything. “So you have grown a beauty after
all, my child,” was her greeting to Mollie. “If I
had known that, you should have had some
Sydney society, but you shall have your fill of it
after you are married.”
She asked Ida if she would live with her after
Felicia’s wedding. “Not all the time, child,” she
said: “I am too old to stand anybody so young
for a full three-sixty-five days a year, but I can
send you to boarding-school and have you for
the week-ends and holidays.”
Ida, with her father’s consent, accepted, but
she stated frankly: “I’m not likely to go down
on my knees with gratitude for it, Aunt Mackay.
We’ve had some pretty bad times here, and I
really minded them as much as anybody; if you
had helped us then, I’d have loved you and been
grateful; but now, when things seem going right,
I can’t feel very thankful because you want


somebody in Felicia’s place, but I’ll try to be
good.”
“Gracious! child, who wants to know what
your feelings are?” exclaimed the aunt. “Behave
yourself, and trust me to see you have a good
time, that is all.”
To Muffie she said: “I can’t stand boys at any
price, and you are too like your father, whom I
never could abide; but I hear you have a brain
that is a credit to the family, so get that mathe-
matical scholarship Felicia prophesies for you,
and I will pay your expenses at St. Andrew’s
College.”
When Sunday morning came and she had
complimented Mollie on the breakfast, she
demanded: “Now where does old man Marshall
live? His grand-daughter is mine too, though
I suppose you never guessed it, for I did not even
tell your mother about my daughter’s marriage.”
“Gem told us the other day,” said Mollie, and
Muffie undertook to escort her across to
Marshall’s Flat; but when she saw the house,
she sent him back and went her way alone.
Gran, who was in the kitchen peeling potatoes,
had somehow expected the visit, since Gem had
told him of her letter, and Muffie had mentioned
his aunt’s arrival. He was not a man who liar-


boured hatred, but he had once loved his son as
he loved that son's child now, and perhaps that
was why he treated the visitor with formal
politeness, took her into the dining-room, begged
her to be seated, and pruned his speech of bush
expressions.
“You wish to see me, Mrs. Mackay?” he asked.
“Yes,” she replied; “and I don’t believe in
beating about the bush either. I want the child,
though I have never seen her. If you care for
her, think of all I can do for her, and give her to
me. I shall not teach her to despise you or
prevent her seeing you.”
“You couldn’t,” said Gran proudly. “Gem is
not likely to forget her own flesh and blood.”
Grandmother Mackay bit her lip. “It is for
her own sake,” said she.
“That you ask for her?” said Gran. “I am
sorry, but Ido not think it is. It is for a whim,
or to ease your conscience, not for the sake of
my little girl.”
“It will be to her own advantage then,” she
urged.
“I am not even sure of that,” said Gran,
“though I don’t think anybody could really spoil
Gem now; but she shall choose for herself.”


He walked to the end of the garden and called
her, and when she answered he returned to the
dining-room and waited. Gem came up from
her cattle-paddock with cheeks flushed from run-
ning, and hair that was rather untidy.
“This lady is your grandmother,” said Gran.
The child went over to her with welcoming
smile and outstretched hand. “I am very glad
to see you, Grandmother,” she said, somewhat
primly; “I hope you are not tired after your
journey up.”
“Your grandmother wants you to be her little
girl instead of mine,” said Gran quietly, as though
what he valued most in life were not at stake,
“and I have said you shall choose for yourself.”
“I can give you everything you want in the
world,” said the grandmother eagerly.
“But I want Gran most,” said the child gently.
“It is very good of you to want me, Grand-
mother, and I will try to love you and be a bit
your girl too; but my father and mother both
gave me to Gran; we have been mates always
and we just belong to one another now, so that
I couldn’t unbelong if I tried.”
Mrs. Mackay entreated and explained, but
Gem was firm. Yes, she would like to visit
her grandmother some day, if the latter would


have her; yes, when she went to school next year
she would spend week-ends with her; and she
would love her and be grateful and write her
letters every week; but she was Gran's girl, and
what Gran wanted that would she do.
Grandmother Mackay had to be content with
that and a promise that the child would see her
every day of her stay at Needy Flat. Gem gave
the promise readily, for her kind little heart was
full of sorrow for the old woman’s disappoint-
ment. “I would be your child if I could, Grand-
mother," she explained, as she accompanied her
back, “but I can’t help loving Gran more than
anybody in the world; anyhow, I’ll be as much
yours as I can.”
Mrs. Mackay kissed her good-bye, and that
was an honour she never bestowed on any
Morrison, save Felicia. She told them nothing
of her interview with Gran, but she talked gaily
all the morning and retired to her room with a
bad headache in the afternoon.
But Gem went back to scold Gran. What
had he meant by daring to entertain for a
minute the idea that she should live with her
grandmother? He did not love her as he ought
to; he certainly did not love her as she loved
him! He should have said no at once to such


a proposal. Perhaps, he would not have cared
if she had gone 1 Perhaps, he would have been
glad to get rid of her, because she was bad-
tempered sometimes —but only very, very
seldom!
And Gran took it all very meekly till she
relented; she laughed a little and cried a little,
and told him he was a very bad old grandfather,
but good enough for her anyhow, good enough
and a big bit to spare.


Chapter XXIII.
RIVAL COOKS.
Maida had been asked by the Langs to spend
a few days with them at Wallandee Station.
The big homestead was fifteen miles away from
Needy Flat, but she had met the Lang girls at
a tennis match. To her surprise she discovered
that she had been at school with one of them;
yet, because Ned was due home for his mid-
winter holidays, she was reluctant to accept
their invitation, and only did so when she found
that Billy Mitchell’s sister was staying with
them at the time.
The Langs had once been friends of the
Morrisons, but for years had forgotten them;
meeting Mollie at the same tennis match and
finding her preventable, they invited her too.
Had Mollie followed her own desires, she would
have refused; but Felicia, who was up on
another flying visit, urged her to accept; so
Mollie, happy enough to cherish none but kindly
and forgiving feelings towards all the world,
packed up her own prettiest dresses along with
some borrowed ones of Felicia’s and went with
Maida.


Felicia rejoiced in the chance to try her hand
at housekeeping, but it was Ida who really did
the most. The child had altered strangely; she
had become a quiet little girl, so helpful at home
that Mollie never tired of singing her praises;
but when she sang them to Maida Ida was quite
repaid. Mollie’s constant kindness gradually
won the child over, till she laid aside her old airs
of hostility and defiance at home. Especially
she made the father her care; she had a
sympathy for him as a fellow penitent that the
others lacked even amidst the respect and affec-
tion he inspired in them again by the steadfast-
ness with which he kept the promise given to
Felicia; so it was Ida who learned chess, simply
that she might play a game with him each night,
and the chess-lover never dreamed that the child
who took to it so well regarded it as work
rather than play.
And so, when Felicia lightly took Mollie's
task upon her shoulders, she could count upon
an able and willing helper, and so confident did
she feel that she suggested that Kath and her
brothers should stay at Morrison’s Point while
Maida was away.
But Frank laughingly refused. “We will show
you that we are not afraid of your cooking by


coming to dinner one night,” he said; “but I
wouldn't for anything inflict my own appetite,
plus Ned’s, for three days on a poor little novice
in the art of housekeeping; besides, Kath would
be broken-hearted if she lost the chance of pre-
siding over our destinies.”
And indeed the prospect filled Kath with un-
mixed delight. She had straightway obtained
permission to invite Gem and Ida up for lunch
on Wednesday, the day after Maida left, and was
overflowing with eager desire to give them, as
well as Frank and Ned, a good time. It had
always been one of her grievances, if such a
sunny, kindly little mortal could be said to have
grievances, that Maida would not let her cook.
“You are far too small, pet,” the big sister would
say, “and would be sure to burn yourself; be-
sides, you must have time to play, and you do
so many things already.”
Maida even now left strict injunctions as to
the things she must not do. “I am leaving you
plenty of cakes and pastry,” she said, “and a big
piece of corned beef already cooked. I have
shown you how to make porridge and custard,
and you needn’t cook anything else, except vege-
tables, eggs and toast; if you had preserved
fruit and custard for dessert every day for a


month the boys wouldn’t grumble; you must not
worry yourself trying experiments, and Frank
will be sure to be vexed if you light the fires
yourself.”
Kath listened to it all meekly, and meekly
took the menu for every meal drawn up for her
guidance, but at heart she was thinking that it
surely would not be very naughty to make some-
thing that Ned liked very much, just to show
him how glad she was to have him home.
She was naturally a sleepy little mortal, but
she planned so earnestly to be up early on
Wednesday that she wakened a dozen times
during the night. Finally she crept out on tip-
toe at six, though seven was the usual getting-
up hour on the hill. She lighted the fire in the
stoV e —for surely Maida must have meant the
dining-room fire; nobody could get burnt with
a stove I Frank came out at seven to find four
pots steaming on the stove, a plateful of un-
inviting scones on the table, more waiting their
turn to be cooked, and Kath weeping in despair.
“Why, pet,” he said, “ what is the matter?
\ou should not have got up so early, or else
you should have wakened me to help you. Don’t
cry, little woman.”
Kath clung sobbingly to him. “Oh! Frank,


I’ve been as naughty as anything,” she confessed.
“I disobeyed Maida, and I never, never did
before, and the sago is all wasted and the scones
are no good, and I thought they would be nice,
and then Ned would be pleased and you wouldn’t
be vexed, as Maida said you would, because I
lighted the fire.”
“But I’m not vexed, sweetheart,” he said; “if
you chopped me up into tiny pieces, you wouldn’t
find the sign of an angry feeling. Come, tell
me all about it.”
“Maida said I was only to make porridge and
toast,” she sobbed, “but Ned just loves sago and
scones, and I thought I would make them
instead.”
“Well,” he encouraged, “sago and scones are
both very nice.”
“But I’ve wasted such a lot, Frank. I got the
biggest saucepan and filled it almost to the very
top with sago and covered it with water; and
when it started to boil, it all swelled up till there
wasn’t room in the pot. I had to empty half
into another saucepan, and then they both began
to flow over, and now there are four lots of
sago, and we couldn’t ever eat it all.”
Kath wept copiously again, as the enormity
of her offence struck her afresh. “Never mind,


pet,” said Frank, “Ned and I will make away
with much of it, you shall see, and your chickies
will be grateful for the rest.”
“But the scones are so heavy,” she sobbed,
“and I did everything it said in the cookery book,
and I’ve often watched Maida make them, and
they’ll all be cooked long before eight and won’t
even be hot for breakfast, and the sago is done
now.”
“We will have breakfast as soon as they are
ready,” he comforted; “Ned is awake and I’ll
tell him to get up.”
“But the table isn’t set and if I go away the
scones will burn —oh! oh ! I can smell them now.
Frank opened the oven for her and lifted out
a slide covered with black unlovely things.
“We’ll soak these for the chickies too,” he said,
“and I’ll set the table while you cook the rest.”
It was a very red-eyed little woman who pre-
sided over the teapot at breakfast, though Frank
talked cheerily. Ned was immensely entertained
by his sister’s cooking experiments. “My word,
Kath,” he said, “you will be able to set up as a
miracle-worker soon, if you can turn one pot
of sago into four. Don’t you go throwing any
out either; it comes in handy between meals,


eaten with preserved peaches, and Ida is sure to
bring up a pot of cream to improve matters.”
Frank generously ate three scones, but Ned
viewed them critically and only took one to end
up with. He cheerfully told Kath afterwards
that, if he could not make better, he would con-
sider himself a “downy gosling.” “I gave one to
that stray mong, that is trying to adopt us,” he
added, “and the poor dog’s funeral will probably
be to-day.”
To his consternation, Kath began to weep,
and Frank bore down upon him, indignantly pro-
testing “you might have some consideration for
your little sister’s feelings!”
“Oh! big bruvvie,” pleaded Kath, pitifully
wiping her tears away, “Ned was only saying
such funny things that I laughed till the tears
came; you don’t know what funny things he
says.”
“Too funny altogether,” declared Frank
severely.
“Well,” said Ned, “how was a chap to know
the tap of her waterworks turned on so easily?
Girls are such donkeys that what they grin at
nine times they howl about the tenth. Never
mind, Kath, I’ll wash up for you.”


“Look here, Ned,” said Frank, “you spent last
evening hinting for extra pocket money to waste
on cartridges; and though I am not anxious to
encourage your truly British love of killing
things, I will give you half-a-crown if you can
make scones as good as Kath’s and five shillings
if they turn out better. I promise to judge
fairly, but you must have only one lot of
materials and no help, and if yours are worse
than Kath’s you must eat every one of them.”
“I’m yours,” said Ned eagerly. “I’m hard
up for ammunition for this afternoon, and little
Best-of-All isn’t home to coax any cash out of,
while you are such a close-fisted skinflint that I
gave you up as a bad job last night.”
“They are to be done by eleven,” said Frank;
and Ned retracted his promise to wash up the
dishes and studied a cookery book instead.
It was nearly eleven when Gem and Ida
arrived; and while the latter gave Frank a
message from Felicia, the former went kitchen-
wards with a basket of apples for Ned. She
found him sitting on the only clean corner of the
table, looking rather floury and wearing a smile
of mingled chagrin and amusement.
“Have you made your scones?” she asked,
having heard of the competition from Kath.


“Made them?” queried Ned. “Yes, but they
have unmade me. Old Frank will go round
with such a grin of triumph on his face for the
rest of the day that I shall feel like squirming.”
“It will do you good,” said Gem, but her smile
was sympathetic. “Are they very bad?”
“Boat-sinkers,” said he, “burnt black on the
outside, raw inside and salter than the briny
deep. Best of the joke is, old Frank advised me
to make half quantities and I refused; wasn’t
going to do maths, when 1 needn’t by working
out the half of two and a quarter cups of flour.
I should like to burn that false deceiver of a
book; it said two spoons of salt and didn’t
mention what kind; guess now it must have
been dolls’ teaspoons, but I used tablespoons
which it suggested for measuring something
else.”
Gem tasted one, but a taste was more than
enough. “Throw some of them out,” she
suggested.
“Can’t,” said Ned dolefully, “it’s a wager, and
it’s a point of honour to pay up when you lose.
What bites me the hardest isn’t having to eat
them, awful as they are, but having to see Frank
gloat—l said 1 should consider myself a downy


gosling if I couldn’t lick Kath as a scone-baker,
you know, and he will rub it in.”
“It will do you good,” said Gem again; “you’re
always plaguing Frank, and I shall enjoy seeing
the boot on the other foot.”
“Go on!” said Ned. “He gives me back as
good as he gets most times; in fact, he generally
gets the best of me, unless he’s too lazy.”
“He is not lazy.”
“Isn’t he really? And isn’t it rather the pot
calling the kettle black for you to abuse me for
cheeking Frank, when you’re so saucy to Gran?
Kath wouldn’t say the things to me even that
yon say to your grandfather.”
“But Gran likes it,” urged Gem; “I said
I would be polite always, and he didn’t want
me to.”
“Good reason why—he knew you couldn’t if
you tried; but Kath wouldn’t do it, so there,
Miss Dig-it-in-to-a-chap-when-he’s-down!”
“But Kath is so good naturally,” protested
Gem. “It isn’t a bit fair, Ned; I try and try
to be good and I can’t, and Kath says she never
thinks about it, and yet she is always perfect.”
“She is a nice little youngster all right,”
agreed Ned, “but I like them with a bit more
of the virago in them, like you.”


“Why?” she asked, swallowing the insult for
the sake of the preference.
“Because you are such a bit of fun,” teased
Ned; “it’s as good as a circus to raise your ire.”
“You’re a rude, horrid boy,” she declared,
“and I hope Frank makes you eat every single
scone, black bits and all.”
“A chap expects his money’s worth at the
circus,” complained Ned; “you are getting too
painfully tame; you haven’t told me I’m piggy-
wiggy yet, and what about the ‘no gentleman’
ticket ?”
But Gem was getting to know the boy.
“You are just trying to get me wild,” she said,
“ and you won’t have the satisfaction; a rude,
silly boy like you isn’t worth getting stirred up
about.”
Ned laughed. “Well, leave off sticking pins
in a chap,” he entreated, “and tell me how I can
eat those monstrosities; they’re the worst joke
I ever perpetrated anyhow.”
“You can’t eat them with all that salt in,”
she said forgivingly; “Frank will have to let you
off.”
“Not he,” said Ned. “There’s a basin of cold
pea-soup left from yesterday; I’ll warm it up
and put a couple in for toast, as I like soup


salty. I could cut one up with my vegetables
at dinner too, instead of putting salt on them.”
Kath came out to make morning tea, and Ida
and Frank were with her. “Well?” said the
latter.
“It isn’t well for me,” said Ned. “You can
taste one to prove it, if you like, but I’m humane
enough to let you oft' trying them and own up
you don’t owe me two-and-six.”
“Sorry you are such a downy gosling, my
boy,” said Frank, with mock sympathy. “Like
to try your hand on anything else?”
“On you,” suggested Ned, “since the stupid
thing that wrote that cook-book isn’t here to
Punch —bound to have been a woman though;
nobody masculine would have been such ”
“A downy gosling,” interrupted Frank.
Ned got manfully through a scone at morning
tea, by sandwiching it between bread and
butter. He managed three more with his
soup and vegetables, but left a huge dishful
behind when he got his rifle down for the after-
noon’s shooting.
Frank dived a hand into his pocket and pro-
duced half-a-crown. “I reckon I have had more
than two-and-six worth of pleasure out of taking


you down, Ned,” he said, “so here is death to
some more innocent beasts.”
“Sure your joy hasn't reached the five bob
limit?” asked Ned.
“It did,” said Frank, “but ‘joy is a very joyful
thing,’ as Rosie Smith’s composition book tells
me, so I am keeping half for myself.”
‘‘Oh! well, I suppose you’re not a bloated
capitalist,” admitted Ned. “If you want to start
killing kids or other insects yourself, you are
welcome to my scones for ammunition.”
“A downy gosling is the bird I intend slaying
with them,” said Frank sweetly.
But Kath coaxed him as soon as Ned had gone.
“Oh! big bruvvie” she pleaded, “it was all my
fault first, and poor Ned will die of thirst if
you make him eat any more of those salty
things.”
Frank pulled her ear playfully. “I suppose
the young scamp’s reformation is so improbable
that it isn’t worth making a little girl unhappy
over it,” he said, and threw the scones out.
But he was careful to tell Ned, on the latter’s
return: “If the dog showed signs of sorrow on
eating Kath’s, it wouldn’t look at yours.”
“Good reason why,” said Ned; “the silly mong.
followed us and scared every animal a mile


around; we couldn’t get a shot till we made a
rope out of our hankies and tied him to a tree;
when we returned to set the lovely creature free,
he had decamped, with four and a half hankies
to the good. Hope there are some of Kath’s
scones left; I want to eat one and have the
pleasure of complimenting her on them. I
thank my lucky stars I wasn’t born feminine to
have a hubby’s dinner to cook; he would never
have got outside a scone anyhow, if he had been
left to my tender mercies.”
“He would have been a downy gosling if he
had tried one,” commented Frank.


Chapter XXIV.
THE INSPECTOR OF SCHOOLS.
At Needy Flat, the midwinter vacation lasted
only for a fortnight, but Ned rejoiced in a month.
When he first arrived, he had entreated Frank to
make him work at his mathematics for two
hours every day. The big brother found keeping
his junior up to the mark rather strenuous work,
but he did it; and Ned confessed later that he
learned more from Frank than in the year at
school, for he cordially disliked his mathematical
master, and his lessons suffered in consequence.
Even when school started on the hill again,
Frank continued the morning coaching of his
brother.
It was on the Monday of Ned’s last week at
home that the school-inspector came to Needy
Flat. But the coach could not cross the creek,
which was somewhat flooded, since the bridge
swept away by the great flood had never been
replaced. A narrow suspension bridge, that had
an unpleasant habit of swaying about, had been
put up for foot-passengers, and the postmaster
met the coachman and took his mailbags across
it to the village.






It took several trips to get the mail of even
such a tiny place as Needy Flat across, and on
the last, just as the inspector was gathering up
his belongings and preparing to trust himself
also to the swaying plank, an accident happened.
The bridge “turned turtle,” deposited a big post-
master and a small mailbag in the stream, and
refused to right itself.
The postmaster could swim well enough to
rescue his bag and reach land safely, a forlorn
and indignant figure; but the inspector was left
on the wrong side of the stream, somewhat
amused, but equally forlorn. When he dis-
covered that the two hotels and nearly all the
dwellings were across the creek, and he must
either stay in a house blessed with many babes,
and visited by measles, or camp in a bark
“humpy” with an old man not famous for cleanli-
ness, his amusement died a natural death.
Ned borrowed a pony that could swim so
well that its reputation had been described as
“fishy,” and he rode it across to offer Frank’s
sympathy. But there was little save sympathy
that he could offer.
“If you can’t ride, Mr. Lawson, you had better
not tackle Squiggs,” he said, patting the pony’s
damp neck. “I lay along his back to keep out


of the water, and yet landed more wet than dry,
and he gets the idea into his head occasionally
that he is a duck and can dive; he can swim any-
thing from a giant teardrop to a baby ocean, but
he likes his rider to get a bit of a swim too.”
“Then I must make the best of my bad luck,”
said the inspector, philosophically, “and be grate-
ful that I can get a bed and a meal of sorts in
this hut.”
Ned smiled. “Old Jonah Walsh lives on
tinned meat and johnny-cake,” he said, “ and the
former is the cheapest brand buyable and the
latter would split a battle-axe.”
“You are a Job’s comforter, my boy,” smiled
the inspector.
“Well,” said Ned, “the only good thing
about old Jonah is one tale he tells, and
that isn’t good enough to pay for his dirt
and his diet. Once he got drunk, wandered
into a deserted hut on the way home,
lay down in the fireplace and slept. When he
woke up before daylight, he saw the starlit sky
through the slabbed top of the chimney and
thought he had fallen down a shaft. “Hello!”
says he, “ I have been up to my old dodge again.
I must have had a glass too much to fall down
this digger’s hole. Anyhow, it is timbered,


above, and I guess I can climb out. He
managed it safely too, but when he stepped out
of the top, with scratched hands and a mouth
full of soot, he fell to the ground outside. ‘Well,
well, well!’ says he. ‘What a place for miners’
holes this is! A chap can’t step out of one with-
out dropping into another.’ ”
The inspector laughed, less at the tale than at
the boy’s enjoyment of it. But an idea came to
Ned. “We have some friends a couple of miles
down on this side of the creek,” he said, “and
I do believe they would put you up for the
night.”
No sooner said than done. Ned mounted
Squiggs and rode down to interview Mollie, and
incidentally to sample Felicia’s first attempt at
gingerbread.
“Why, bring him here, of course!” exclaimed
felicia, who generally spoke first. “Nobody
human could help feeling cross after a night of
discomfort, and we can’t have him starting out
to examine Frank’s school in anything but the
best of tempers. Take your cake along and be
oft now, Ned. Mollie will cook him the swellest
little dinner, and I shall wear my prettiest frock
and talk him into the most angelic mood possible
to a mere man.”


When Ned returned with the grateful in-
spector, a cheery fire was burning in the spare
room, Felicia was waiting to greet them with a
delicious cup of tea, and Mollie had planned to
replace Jonah’s tinned meat and johnny-cake by
soup and chicken, apple-pie and cream.
Gem, coming in with Ida from a day’s play,
beard of the great man’s arrival. To her he was a
dignitary to be regarded with awe unspeakable.
The King and the Governor alone ranked above
him; he was something like a Lord High Execu-
tioner who held Frank’s fate in his hands, for
could he not give the school a bad report? His
voice was grufif, his beard fierce, his eyebrows
bushy; and how was she to know that this man,
big-bodied, big-brained, and big-hearted, hid
under his fearsome exterior a rare kindliness, a
fatherly interest in all young lives? Many a
teacher, struggling with loneliness and dis-
couragement in the backblocks, could testify
that he came as a friend to help, not as a foe to
spy. But Gem knew him not and trembled lest
he might fail to appreciate properly her hero,
Frank. She knew nothing of a tiny green grave
where, twenty years before, he had laid his little
daughter beside her dead mother, knew nothing
of the baby curls that were his most sacred


treasures, knew nothing of the roguish little
nieces that dared to climb upon his knee and
fearlessly search his pockets; and so, having
come over to help wash the dishes up, that
Mollie might be free to entertain the man of
might, she sat with Ida and Muffie in the dining-
room and frantically tried to revise all the year's
lessons.
The inspector came in and found them there,
asked questions and looked at their work. He
was astonished to hear that Muffie was studying
for the Senior Examination, equally astonished
to find Gem and Ida poring over “First Mac-
Millan.” “And you little ones do French and
Latin too?” he asked.
“Yes, sir,” said Gem, proudly. “We are the
upper division of third class, and Mr. Gray
teaches us all sorts of things that other teachers
in the bush don’t know themselves, I’m sure.”
The inspector smiled at the eager little face.
“Needy Flat seems very fortunate in its teacher,”
he said.
“Oh! we know it, sir,” she replied, her eyes
ashine with fond pride, “and we all 10 - '. e Air.
Gray very, very much.”
Next morning, since the flood had disappeared,


Muffle went early to call in at every house and
entreat every child to be present, but Gem and
Ida escorted the man of might to school. Gem
laid herself out to entertain him. She told him
little anecdotes about the diggers they met, and
edified him with a selection of Joe’s lies.
Especially she made him laugh with her descrip-
tion of an old man they fell in with, who was
swearing hard at the crushed remains of a hor-
net that had stung him. “That is Syrupy Sun-
day Bill,” she said. “He drinks and swears all
the week, and reads the Bible all Sunday; he
wouldn’t even wash a cup up on the Sabbath.
But Gran says that Bill was camped away out in
the lonely bush once and just pined for vege-
tables. His mate suggested that they should
try some of the young green thistles for cabbage,
and they did. The thistles had narcotic pro-
perties—Mr. Gray told me what to call it, but
he is so clever that he knows everything—and
they put the two men to sleep from Saturday
afternoon till Monday morning. When they
woke up they thought it was only Sunday, and
for six weeks they were a day out in their
reckoning. All day Sunday Syrupy worked
and swore; and all day Monday he read the
Bible and groaned and prayed, till some scrub-


cutters came along and caught him and thought
he must be mad.”
Gem knew she was interesting him, and during
the intervals between the anecdotes, if she could
possibly find an excuse for dragging Frank’s
name in, she sang his praises as man and master
as innocently as though she had not lain awake
for hours and planned it all in imagination. Ida
loyally supported her, and neither realized their
object was painfully patent; but though the
brown eyes twinkled beneath the fiercely bushy
brews, Mr. Lawson gave no hint that he saw
through their loving wiles. They did not
guess inspectors valued other things besides a
correct knowledge of Canada’s exports, Marl-
borough’s battles and kindred subjects, and they
would have been astonished beyond measure to
know that he saw with gladness a good man’s
influence running through their young lives like
a green-banked stream in a brown country-side,
the virtues of loyalty and affection springing up,
beautiful and refreshing, in its course.
Inspection was not the ordeal they had
dreaded. Not all the questions asked were easy
ones, of course, and some little people were
seized with a variety of stage-fright and forgot
everything; even Gem began by putting the


Andes where the Alps ought to be. But he
stopped and told them a tale of his own school-
days that made everybody laugh; at once they
recovered confidence and really did good work.
As he looked at Gem’s eager, anxious face, the
inspector was glad that he could honestly re-
joice her heart with unstinted praise. He told
the children that they were a credit to them-
selves, their school, and their teacher, and he
asked that the afternoon might be a holiday.
Then Maida gave him early lunch and he caught
the mid-day coach.
The delighted children ate their “dinners” and
then some hurried home, while others went off
into a corner to plot a piece of mischief for the
evening. But the Morrisons and Gem waited
for the party from the cottage, for it was a week-
old promise that they should all have tea on
Morrison’s Point. Gem’s heart was full of pride
and delight, for she was convinced that her
clever scheming had helped to win such a golden
report for the school, and she could not help
boasting of it to Ned.
But he laughed at her. “Rubbish!” he said.
“Of course, he saw through you; he told Frank
at lunch that one of the little girls who brought


him up must be clever, to judge by her ingenuity
in inventing excuses to praise her teacher.”
Gem’s face fell. “Oh! was he angry?” she
asked. “Are you sure he meant me?”
“Certain,” said Ned, deserting truth for ro-
mance; “he described you so perfectly—all eyes
and tongue, and temper.”
Gem’s nerves were raw after a wakeful night
of scheming and worrying, and she did what she
despised herself for afterwards, she burst into
tears. “I don’t like you, Ned,” she said.
The boy was penitent at once. “Oh! you
gullible goose, Gem!” he exclaimed. “Of course,
I was only teasing you. Don’t howl, or I won’t
tell you what he did say, and it was jolly nice
too.”
“I don’t want to know, and I don’t like you,”
sobbed Gem.
And Frank must needs choose that moment
to appear. Gem laughed her tears away and
pleaded for Ned, but Frank persisted in lectur-
ing him. “Ned should be ashamed of himself
to tease you so,” he said, “and he had certainly
no right to repeat what he overheard any guest
of mine say.”
Ned was sorry and subdued for a time, but


reaction soon came, and while Kath washed the
dishes up, he wiled the time away teasing
Frank on the old subject of his love for Mollie,
till the latter was moved to tell him that his wit
was a compound of slang, bad taste and imperti-
nence.
Maida lectured the boy about it when Frank
had gone out of the room, but he told her half-
jestingly that it was Frank’s own fault. “If the
dear boy didn’t like it,” he said, “he should have
threatened me with his kid-whacking implement
in my earliest youth; it isn’t consistent to
grumble now at what he has stood for ages.”
Frank returned in time to hear the remark
and was really angry. He told Ned that he was
an ungrateful young cub. “If it is not consis-
tent for me to grumble at what I have stood for
ages,” he added, “let me remind you of the
homely old proverb that there are more ways
of killing a dog than choking it with butter.”
Ned did not see any immediate application of
the maxim, though he was honestly sorry and
apologized.
Frank only said curtly: “I am glad you have
the grace to be ashamed, but you don’t expect
me to fall on your neck for that, do you?”


Ned was silent, but he secretly pledged him-
self to more considerate conduct for the future,
and sought in his mind for ways of nraking it
up to Frank, who was angrily seeking in his for
a way, not inconsistent with his past tolerance,
of punishing the boy.


Chapter XXV.
THE TABLES TURNED.
Frank’s opportunity came that very day. Rag
Ellis told Gem, Gem told Ida and Kath, Ida told
Ned and Muffle, Muffle told Mollie, and Mollie
told Frank in confidence of the mischief that
had been plotted by a dozen little people at
school. It was very windy weather and twelve
of the elder children, who lived on the village
side of the flood, planned to go at midnight to
the schoolhouse, remove the poles that propped
it up in the rear, and push it down. They calcu-
lated that the wind would get the blame, while
they would not only get a better schoolhouse
but holidays while it was being rebuilt. Rag
had been asked to join in, but he bore a grudge
against the plotters for the lack of respect shown
him since his defeat by Muffle, while he felt
much goodwill for Maida, who had given him
a part in one of the plays for her concert and
won his heart by her kindly smiles; so he refused
and revealed the plan to Gem.
The children assembled on Morrison’s Point
immediately discussed means of baulking it. To


tell Frank would be mean, to stop it themselves
would be fun, was the general opinion.
Ned saw in it a chance to ease his guilty
conscience and so became the ringleader in the
counterplot. After tea he got permission to ask
Muffle and the two girls to go up and spend
the night at the cottage; Maida at first objected
that there were not enough beds, but she yielded
when he urged “We are willing to camp any-
where, little Best-of-All.”
He had been reluctant for a time to let the
girls take any part in his scheme, vowing that
‘they always bungled things and gave the show
away by giggling or squealing’ ; but Muffle
reminded him indignantly that it was from Gem
all their information came, and the girls were
admitted as allies.
Ida suggested dressing up as ghosts and
frightening the intruders, “But there are girls
amongst them,” said Ned, “and old Frank would
be ramping mad if we scared them into
hysterics; we don’t want any high strikes, as Joe
would sav.”
It was finally agreed that the defenders should
wait under the schoolhouse, the back of which
was built up on piles, and greet the attackers
with a volley from Muffle’s garden hose. The


boys were to wait behind and carry up two
pieces unseen by Frank, which were to be
fastened on the taps of the schoolhouse tanks
and turned on the intruders by the hidden
defenders. The girls were taught a particularly
harrowing battle-cry that had in it the wail of
a curlew, the howl of a dog and the screech of
a train whistle; all in concert were to utter this
terrible yell when the hose began its icy work.
They were stationed within the building pro-
vided also with the magnesium wire left over
from lighting up the tableaux at Maida’s concert.
Ned had nailed pieces of it up on strips of board,
and they were to light up the scene from the
windows, as soon as their yell was done. The
water, the noise and the light would surely
strike cold terror into the hearts of the twelve,
and Needy Flat schoolhouse would be saved.
Frank had only smiled when Mollie told him
of the punishment intended for the plotters, of
whose projected crime, of course, he was to be
absolutely ignorant; but, on the way home he
asked Maida and the girls to excuse him for a
minute or two while he called in to speak to
Harry Thompson—and Harry was the chosen
captain of the twelve!
He told the boy simply that he knew all about


his planned mischief, that it was a very serious
thing, but that he had fortunately discovered it
in time to save them from the deed and its con-
sequences alike. Harry was, however, to col-
lect his band and bring them to the village, but
to lead them in stealthily to the cottage, where he
would be waiting for them. “Some of the others
have found out your plan,” he said; “they were
not mean enough to tell me, but they intend to
give you an unpleasant reception. I am going
to help you turn the tables on my young brother,
their ringleader.”
Harry Thompson having meekly agreed,
Frank rejoined the girls.
Rooms being scarce at the cottage, Ned had
a bed in his brother’s room, but he prevailed on
Maida to let him share a shakedown in the
sittingroom with Muffle. As for the girls, Maida
suggested that she should take Kath into her
room, but the idea so nearly led to tears that
they were left together, Kath and Gem squeezed
into a single bed, and Ida on the tiny couch.
They all got into bed and waited in their clothes
for half-past eleven, when they were to slip out
and take up their posts.
As Ned went out, he noticed his brother
writing in the dining-room, but Frank made no


inquiries as to what he meant by wandering
about at such an hour; so the boy jovially
remarked “Sonnet to her eyebrow, eh? Why
don’t you go to bed at a decent hour, instead of
poking up when you are jolly well not wanted?”
“Must work when the inspiration comes,”
said Frank sweetly.
But as Muffle followed, he called him in softly.
“Look here, Alec,” he inquired, “will you do
something to please me, even though it seems
a little mean?”
“Yes, sir,” said Muffle readily.
“Thank you. I want you to turn traitor to
Ned. Go out with him, but slip back when the
blind goes down at the dining-room window.
The schoolhouse gate and the one into my garden
will be fastened, but I have taken two palings
out behind the pepperina tree in the playground;
come back that way, bringing your hose with
you and giving him no warning.”
“But sir,” said Muffle, “you don’t know why
“Nobody is going to attack the school to-
night,” said Frank; so Muffle went, if somewhat
unhappily.
As the three girls tiptoed past the door, Frank
called them in too. He put an arm round Kath


and patted her head, for he knew she was an
easily frightened little maiden. “Kathleen,” he
asked, “are you ready to be a good girl and obey
my wishes ?”
But Kath began to cry with disappointment.
“Oh! big bruvvie,” she coaxed, “don’t send us
bacK to bed; we are not going to do anything
naughty, really.”
I know, he said ; you think you are going
to help Ned give bad colds to some young
scamps who deserve them; but I want you to
help me play a joke on Ned.”
“It is mean,” objected Ida.
“Ned deserves a little meanness at my hands,”
he said; “in fact, he deserves a thrashing, but he
is getting too big for such medicine, and I am
planning this for him instead.”
“I know he was a terribly bad boy,” admitted
Kath sadly; “but he’s ever and ever and ever so
sorry.”
It won t hurt him to be made a little
sorrier, he urged. “Come, little woman, surely
Ned can take a joke when he is such a keen
hand at playing them on other people.”
So Kath capitulated. Gem was already eager
for vengeance, if Ned had been so rude. Had
she not, that very afternoon, heard him ask


Frank if his face hurt him? To be sure, the
master had crushed him by retorting “Consider-
ably more than your wit does, young man,
though that is not saying much.” Frank’s face
was only strong and kindly, but Gem thought it
handsome and could not forgive the insult; so
she won Ida over by reminding her that Ned had
been inclined to scorn the help of girls as
bunglers and gigglers. Thus they all agreed
to slip back silently through the gap in the fence,
when the dining-room blind should go down.
The night was inky dark, the children had
planned to be absolutely silent while waiting,
and when the girls left their post inside, and
Muffie slipped away from his end of the school-
house, Ned, stationed near the tank at the
other end, neither saw nor heard anything to
make him suspicious.
A few minutes before midnight Harry
Thompson brought his twelve stealthily up to
the cottage door, and Frank took them in with-
out a light. But in the dining-room the lamp was
burning, though a rug over the window hid its
p-low outside. And the astonished children saw
o
that he had made coffee and had cups and
saucers waiting, as well as two big tins of
biscuits, plundered from the pantry.


But first he talked to the twelve, and it was
a kindly, wise little talk that made them all feel
ashamed. What he blamed the eight boys for
most, he said, was that they had induced the
girls to join in, for it was the sort of thing he
knew girls would never willingly undertake.
The girls felt uncomfortable and yet pleased;
they had really been prime movers in the plot,
but there came to them immediately the con-
viction that they had never liked the plan, and
the determination never again to be led by the
boys to desert their superior virtue.
“Now," he concluded, “we are going to have
some supper, and we shall give Ned, who is
waiting for you over yonder with a watery
welcome, a glimpse of the feast.” The coffee
and biscuits having been handed round, he ran
up the blind while Gem and Ida illuminated the
scene with their magnesium light. As the
sudden glare caught Ned’s watchful eye, he saw
the party in the dining-room and wrath filled
his soul. He pointed his hose at them, but the
water fell short and Frank had closed the window
by the time he got near enough to try again.
A high paling-fence, surmounted by barbed wire,
surrounded the playground and separated it
from the cottage garden, and Ned did not at first


attempt to scale it; but, when he found both
gates roped up with knots impossible to un-
ravel in the dark, he endeavoured to climb over
opposite the window, where the light showed
the position of the barbed wire. But Frank had
fixed Muffle’s piece of hose on the cottage tank
and turned a current on the climber that sent
him back, soaking. He called Frank a “beast”
from 'the other side of the wall, only fto be
assured sweetly “Oh! yes; I am beginning to
take after my little brother.”
It was a bitterly cold and windy night and the
shivering boy was forced to descend from
indignation to entreaty. “Do come and let a
chap in,” he pleaded.
But Frank only said: “Don’t want a cold bath,
thank you; I had one this morning and took an
hour to thaw after it.”
Then Ned bethought him of the girls, freezing
in the cold schoolhouse, as he imagined. “You
had better open the gate,” he advised; “Kath
and Gem are howling and even Ida’s looking
pretty white about the gills.”
“Clever boy you are,” said Frank pleasantly,
“to see her colour so nicely in the dark” ; and
Gem came to the door and cruelly entreated him
to have some coffee.


Then Ned’s indignation found a new object.
“I don’t blame old Frank,” he said; “he owes me
one, I know; but you kids are the meanest
sneaks an apple pie was ever wasted on. Fancy
being called Gem and acting like paste!”
“Ask nicely to be let in and own up you are a
silly rabbit,” commanded Frank.
“Fd rather be a silly ass,” said Ned scornfully.
“All right,” retorted his brother cheerfully,
“be one and stay on that side of the fence.”
Finally Ned gave in, for he was frozen; he
admitted his relationship to the tribe of foolish
bunnies and meekly promised to bear no malice
towards Muffle and the girls, forced into desert-
ing him, so Frank explained, by the obedience
they owed their teacher. Then the humbled
boy was let in and, having changed into dry
clothes, regaled with coffee and biscuits.
“Now it is time for you young people to get
home to bed,” said Frank to the plotters; “and
remember, not one of you is to dare be late or
absent to-morrow; if so, the boys will get a
thrashing and the girls will get —forgiven.”
Needless to say, they were all in time next
morning. This one episode was enough to win
Frank a devotion from them that all his merits


as a teacher and a man could not have inspired;
he had shared a joke with them, he had given
them a midnight supper instead of a punishment,
he had helped them to a sweet revenge on one
who had planned their undoing. Henceforth, he
was more than ever the adored of his school,
but he sometimes smiled ruefully to himself
when he reflected that it was partly due to
vindictiveness against his brother.
“Now, Ned,” he said “you and I are going to
see these little girls home, for Kate and Cicely
live further down than any of the boys. Gem,
Ida and Kath must go to bed at once, and Alec
too; you must not touch the cups and plates, for
we really owe this party to Ned and I intend
him to clear up. I would help you, my boy,
only I have to write a sonnet to her eyebrow.”
It was an hour later when the two brothers re-
turned, and Ned had not enjoyed the interval.
Frank treated him, during the homeward walk,
to playful and sarcastic remarks about the
night’s happenings, till the boy began to see the
application of the proverb his brother had
quoted; so being really goodnatured and
repentant, he laughed and said: “You’ve done
me brown all right, but I deserved it. Still, I
have had as much as I like of being toasted over


the coals, and believe I’d prefer being choked
with butter.”
“Would you?” asked Frank, and straightway
treated him to oily condolences on his lack of
sense and kindred misfortunes, reminding him
that he had still his appetite to boast of, for that
was real and unique.
When they came in, the cups and saucers had
all disappeared, and Frank angrily wakened
Muffle up to inquire if he had dared disobey him;
but Maida came smilingly out in a cosy dressing-
gown and confessed that she had done it. “You
have taken quite enough starch out of Ned’s
conceit, Boy,” she urged; “I don’t want to see
it too limp, so I turned the tables on you in your
turn; you deserve it for using up all my best
afternoon tea biscuits, which are not procurable
locally.”
Frank laughed when he found Maida was the
culprit, and went off to bed. So Ned thought
he was forgiven and came into the dining-room
next morning jovially inquiring if Frank had
risen early to finish the sonnet to her eyebrow.
“No,” said his brother sweetly; “I was busy
thinking out an article on the holy joy of training
the young idea, but I have written an apology


for not completing the sonnet and you are to
take it down to Mollie after breakfast.”
“I’m hanged if I will,” vowed Ned indignantly.
“You will do as I tell you,” said Frank sternly.
Ned knew that tone of voice too well to defy it,
but he felt that he was being treated unjustly.
“I think it’s jolly mean,” he said sulkily, “to use
your authority over me to make me help make
myself ridiculous.”
“Mean?” said Frank. “So it is; but didn’t I
tell you I was beginning to take after my small
brother ?”
“And I am jolly sorry I did try to save your
wretched old barn of a kidwhackery for you to
be ungrateful enough to turn on me.”
“Ungrateful?” inquired Frank. “Of course, I
am; take after my small brother.”
Ned winced, for had he not indeed given
Frank cause to call him ungrateful? All through
breakfast he was subjected to a merciless fire of
sarcasm and, if he ventured to retort, Frank
interrupted with “Excuse me, Ned, but would
you see if Gem will have some marmalade?” or
“Sorry, old fellow, but I think Ida is waiting for
the toast.”
After breakfast Frank handed him a note for
Mollie, apologising for closing it up. “As you


did not get up to do Algebra this morning,” he
added, “I shall want you from four till six.”
“But I’m going wallaby hunting with Jim
Carter,” protested Ned, “and we don’t want to
be back till dark.”
“Sorry, but you must,” said Frank; “I shall
be out this evening.”
Mollie read the note and passed it on to the
boy, with a “So you have been teasing Frank
about me, Scamp?”
“Dear Mollie,” Frank had written, “Ned
thinks I should have composed a sonnet to your
eyebrow by this, but I have been too busy mend-
ing his manners. I should be glad to know if
you think they have improved at all.”
So Ned told her the story, leaving out only
those things he had said to Frank originally, but
admitting they were “pretty piggish.” Mollie
lectured him a little, but he said: “Well, I am
sorry about it, and I have told him so twice, but
he’s got his knife in me still; it was that remark
I made about it being his own fault that got him
fair mad; and when he is roused, there’s no
woolly lamb about old Frank. Reckon I can
take a bit of chaffing any day, but I don’t like
it without a stop.”


“That’s just what you treat Frank to,” remind-
ed Mollie.
“But then I tease him about you,” he argued,
“and he oughtn’t to mind that much, when he
adores you so; but I’m being roasted and toasted
over being made a fool of last night, and there’s
no joy in that to console a chap.”
“The third time is supposed to prove it,” said
Mollie; “tell him again that you are sorry. As
for a boy’s manners, the best way to judge of
them is to watch him eat cake.”
“You are a brick, little Second-Best,” said
Ned. “But don’t you cut a lot of big bits and
one mingy 7, poky little piece, to see if I take it.”
“I’ll make them all big and won’t count them,”
she promised.
While he disposed of several and a glass of
milk, she wrote a reply to the note, giving it to
him to read before it was folded up. “Dear
Frank,” she wrote, “Ned’s manners are im-
proved to perfection point. If you try the mend-
ing process any further, they will not be able to
stand the strain and there will be a terrible
reaction, so be warned in time.”
“Old Frank has got jolly good taste in ties,
but better still in girls,” said Ned, giving her a


brotherly hug; “and I will eat humble pie again,
if it is only to please you.”
He was home before four, and sought Frank
with his books as soon as Muffle had gone. He
handed him Mollie’s note and asked: “How
many times have I got to own up I was a beastly
young cad before you’ll make it pax?”
“I reckon this one will do,” said Frank. “In
my opinion, Ned, you deserved a pretty vigorous
application of the cane yesterday; but, as you
hinted, it would have been inconsistent of me to
administer it; besides, I didn’t hanker after the
job particularly. So I have paid you back in your
own coin, but please don’t aggravate me into
doing it again; it is too strenuous a task for a
naturally lazy man, and though I have enough
malice in my composition to enjoy it when it is
actually afoot, it leaves a mean—Gem would say
‘piggy-wiggy’—feeling behind that is not pleas-
ant company.”
“There’s nothing piggy-wiggy about Gem,”
said Ned,“ but she is a trick of a kid. What do
you think of this billet doux she left with Kath
for me?”
Frank smiled, as he read: “Dear Ned, I have
been the piggy-wiggiest pig to you and I am
ever so sorry about it. I couldn’t help being


glad Frank paid you out for cheeking him, but
it was mean of me to kick a fellow when he was
down by asking you last night to have some
coffee when you couldn’t, and by grinning when
Frank made fun of you. He made you promise
not to bear us a grudge for turning on you, but
I will let you off in my case. You can come any
time you like and tell me what a sneak I was and
call me all sorts of nasty names, and I won’t get
a bit annoyed about it. lam making you a grey
tie to go with your new grey suit, and I do hope
you will accept it from your very mean, very
sorry friend,
Gem.
P.S. —You can even say I am not a lady and
I’ll just own up it is true; but please don’t say I
shall never be one, Ned; I am going to try and
try till I get over being piggy-wiggy. G.”
“You must not tease the little girl about that
letter, boy,” said Frank.
“I’m not that sort of a beast,” replied Ned
virtuously. “Gem and I write regularly ever
since I started it at the time of your birthday;
she sent me a case of pears too.”
“I know,” said Frank; “she asked me whether
it was unladylike to send presents to a young


gentleman, and 1 opined it was perhaps permis-
sible once in a way.”
“Glad you did,” said Ned; “they were ripping
pears. Say, Frank, do you mean I am never to
chaff you any more unless I want my life made
miserable for it?”
Frank laughed at the lad’s mournful face. “I
don’t mind being told,” he said, “when I chance
to hint at tiredness, that wooing is a
strenuous job, or hearing brilliant remarks about
her honeyed lips, when I innocently admit a
liking for honey; it is downright impudence I
object to.”
“Well, I won’t give you any more of that,”
said Ned; and he honestly tried to keep his word.


Chapter XXVI.
THE LADY DODGE.
Spring had come with all its quickly-passing
beauty to the old Flat. The tender green of new
grass hid most of the scars left by mining,
golden-crowned wattles scented the air, and the
hills were gay with buttercups and flowers that
the children called soldiers and bachelors’
buttons.
It was the last Saturday in September and
Muffle had gone hunting orchids and ferns for
Maida. Ida accompanied him, but Gem crushed
down her longing to join them and stayed at
home. As the new year that was to see her em-
barked on her career as a young lady drew
nearer, she set herself strenuously to prepare for
it. The Book on Etiquette, often neglected in
the first delights of school and friendship,
emerged again from its retirement and was
studied more than ever.
Gran smiled in secret at the courteous convers-
ation that tried to replace the old free and easy
intercourse at home. “I thought we had agreed


to be mates as well as relatives, Little Boss,” he
protested one day.
“But Gran,” she argued, “I’ve got to practise
being proper and polite, or I shall forget about
it in town and be thought a country bumpkin.”
She worried Maida for directions as to the
special virtues a lady ought to cultivate, but
Maida laughingly told her “A smiling face and
clean shoes.” Gem hated especially the latter
recommendation, but no hatred could kill her
resolution, and her shoes were religiously black-
ened every morning.
Frank treated her queries more seriously. “A
lady is a truly womanly woman,” was his
definition, that started the child off on a new line
of endeavour. In her books she studied especi-
ally the doings of any girl described as being a
little woman, and tried to copy Kath’s demure
gentleness and feminine tastes. There was one
girl who had soft, cool hands to soothe the
fevered brow of a headachy father; there was
another who read to her old grandfather and
wrote letters for him; a third had a genius for
tidiness and mending and gave “those womanly
touches that make home home.”
With these ideals to guide her, Gem set out to
darn Gran’s socks, and was vexed because she


could not quite convince herself that she enjoyed
it; and all her reward was a grumble from Gran,
who vowed he was so used to holes that he
preferred them, and would she please inflict no
more lumps and knots on him?
The womanly touches that were to make home
home worried her most. There was no doubt
that the house on Marshall’s Flat looked a
bachelor’s camp, where the useful predominated
over the ornamental; there were tables with
brown oilcloth coverings, couches without
cushions, windows without curtains. Gem com-
pared it sadly with the dainty little cottage on
the hill or the big house on Morrison’s Point,
and felt ashamed. And shame in such an
energetic little person begat resolve.
She began on her own room with an earnest-
ness that left no time for play; Ida, who loved to
be out of doors, was pressed into the campaign,
and Kath, with inborn housekeeping zeal, needed
no pressing. Gem’s moneybox was rifled to buy
cheap green and white muslin and a green wall-
paper. They papered the room themselves and
spent their afternoons sewing; white curtains
bordered with green —a humble imitation of
Maida’s dainty ones —and a white bedspread,
edged with green and with a crooked green star


sewn on the middle, were ready in a week, for
Mollie lent them her sewing-machine and Kath
knew how to manipulate it. Then followed a
cushion-cover, a pillow-sham, a table-cover,
a pin-cushion, and a nightdress-sachet of similar
design. Gem honestly disliked sewing, but she
was delighted with the result; often she would
slip on the best red dress, sit on her solitary
chair, with the cushion at her back and a view
of her new glories before her, and practise being
a lady —bowing especially.
She began on the dining-room next, but Gran
interfered. He did not care to see the serious,
worried look on the child's face, or to contem-
plate the unnatural primness she was anxious to
cultivate; but he was wary enough not to reveal
his real reasons. He could not abide curtains and
fripperies that got in the way, he said; and of
what use was a white cushion to a tired old
digger in moleskins? It would simply mean that
he could not lie down on the couch for fear of
spoiling some silly concern; he did not see why a
man could not be left in peace, so there! Gem
stormed at him for his lack of the finer percep-
tions, but she gave in, as he knew she would,
when he professed a personal dislike of the
womanly touches that make home home. Her


conscience forbade making him miserable, and
so the dining-room and kitchen remained un-
curtained and unadorned.
However, there was still the garden to reduce
to that ordered beauty that should proclaim
aloud the feminine hand. When her ladylike
aspirations began upon it, it was a lovely wilder-
ness. Wistaria and Scarlet Rambler roses rioted
all round its fence; lilac bushes grew in a row
just inside, with great clumps of white may in
front of them; then came a perfect tangle of
rosebushes, never pruned or trained, which flung
their long flowering arms across what had once
been paths, and met and intergrew, till it seemed
as though there were but one huge bush, bearing
blooms of varied hues. The smaller plants,
which had grown in neat little beds when Gran’s
wife was alive, were long since smothered
beneath the conquering roses.
Now Gem determined that orderly beds,
bordered with large quartz pebbles from the
creek, separated by clean swept paths, and
graced by bushes trimmed into neatness, should
replace the lovely neglect. Days of work made
little impression on it, save that two rosebushes
were tied up to stakes and wore a clipped, shorn
look that certainly lent no added grace to the


scene. Where their branches had once trailed
their pink and white blooms, yellow pebbles
marked the outline of a bed into which mignon-
ette, violets and daisies were to be transplanted
from Mollie’s garden. But the bed had still to
be made, and digging was slow and hard work.
Little of it was finished on Saturday, when Gran
announced that the sausages were cooked and
Gem had to fly off and set her table.
As soon as she had done hearty justice to the
meal, she made ready to tackle her digging
again. “Excuse me, please,” she said, in Kath's
appealing voice, as she left her seat.
Gran grinned behind the paper he was
reading. “Why, what crime have you com-
mitted?” he queried. “Killed a cat, or a cater-
pillar, or only a Chinaman?”
“No wonder I can’t grow into a lady like my
mother,” said Gem indignantly, “when she was
taught how and I don’t even get encouraged if
I try to teach myself. Oh! please Gran, don’t
torment me about it; it’s hard enough to
remember all the little points, as it is. When
you were a boy, you must have known how to
behave properly, and you could help me if you
liked.”
“Anything to oblige you, Miss Marshall,” said


the old man grandly. “I’m afraid seven days of
politeness in the week would be too big a dose
for me to begin on, but I’m ready to make it a
Sunday institution, if you spare me the rest.”
“And you won’t tease me all Sunday?” she
asked. “1 knew you would be a dear about it,
Gran, if you just realised how important it is to
me, and 1 will love you more than ever.”
She worked till dark with a pleasant conscious-
ness of happy times coming, and in the morning
she wakened up with the same glad feeling.
Generally, if she were not out early, she was
aroused by Gran’s cheery voice announcing
“Time to be up, chickabiddy; don't you hear the
kettle boiling and the chicks asking for their
corn?” But it was only when he heard her
moving round that he called out to-day: “Break-
fast awaits your leisure, my dear grand-
daughter.”
“Thank you, Grandfather,” said Gem serious-
ly; “I do hope 1 have not kept you waiting.”
“Pray don’t mention it, my dear young lady,”
said Gran, with equal solemnity.
When she came out, she found that he had
discarded his offending cap and was wearing a
coat —his best one, too; he had cut serviettes
out of an old newspaper, and the table was


adorned with flowers. He escorted her to her
seat with exaggerated courtly grace and address-
ed orders to an imaginary maid.
“I trust I find you refreshed after a good
night’s slumber, my dear,” said he; “and what
do you think the day’s weather is likely to be?
No prospect of rain, I fear.”
Laughter and indignation struggled in Gem.
There was no doubt that Gran was making a
farce of it all, and she was disappointed and
angry; yet there was a rebellious side to her
nature that always sympathised with him, as
though he had been some mischievous child that
entertained while it aggravated. “Ohl Gran, do
be sensible,” she pleaded; it’s piggy-wiggy of
you to be such a sausage.”
“A piggy-wiggy sausage! A pork one, I
presume you mean,” he remarked solemnly; and
amusement triumphed in Gem; she lay back in
her chair and laughed till the tears came.
“My dear grand-daughter, calm yourself, I
entreat you; I fail to understand the reason for
this unseemly mirth,” said Gran. “Are you
perchance ill? Shall I summon the physician or
ring for your maid?”
Gem got up and brought his cap, pulling his
hair as she put it on him; then she dragged his


coat off, took away his mock serviette and kissed
him. “I was laughing,” she said, “because you
are the piggy-wiggiest pig of a man that ever
lived, and yet I’m silly enough to like you better
than if you weren’t.”
“So the lady dodge is off?” he inquired.
“No indeed,” said she. “I am going to be a
lady, Gran, but I shall not try and drag you into
it again.”
Though it was Sunday, the garden had no rest,
for Gem understood work to mean gold-digging
for Gran and lessons for herself; wood-chopping
and gardening were quite legitimate Sabbath
occupations.
Ned, who had a week’s holiday at Michaelmas,
had arrived home on Saturday and came down
about three, to find her red-faced and panting
from vigorous digging in the warm spring
sunshine.
“Hey! give me that shovel,” he commanded,
his first greetings being over; “that is not a
girl’s work.”
Gem handed it over cheerfully and looked on
admiringly at his more successful efforts.
“What on earth did you bobtail those grand
old rosebushes for?” he inquired.
“They were untidy,” she explained, “and a


lady ought to have things orderly.”
“The lady dodge still?” he asked, using the
very term that Gran had lighted on. “Why
don’t you be satisfied with being a nice little
youngster, and not make your miserable life
miserabler over bosh? It’s better to be a jolly
good sort than an affected little simperer any
day.”
“But I don’t want to be a simperer, Ned; I
only want to do the things a nice girl should,
though everything I try seems to go wrong; I
can’t even be a comfort to Gran; he never gets
sick for me to nurse him —”
“That’s nothing to lament about,” interrupted
Ned.
“But he’s the independentest nuisance of a
man,” she confided. “He doesn’t like me to read
the paper to him, and he says he can’t bear
darned socks. If I thought he was only pretend-
ing, so that I’d have more time to play, I would
just keep on darning them; but he’s such a
contrary man that he may really like holes best,
so what can I do?”
“Leave him in peace, of course,” decided Ned.
“But I want to be a lady,” she objected.
“Believe you’ve mentioned the fact before,”
he said, “and I reckon you’re on the wrong tack.


A real lady, I take it, is one who makes a fellow
feel better pleased with himself and this rummy
old world he has got to grub along in somehow,
not one who makes him feel uncomfortable.
What is wrong with little Best-of-All’s style?”
“Of course, she is perfect,” agreed Gem; “but
she helps Kath darn your socks, Ned, and she is
most charmingly polite, just like people in
books.”
“Anyhow, she doesn’t poke round doing
things for you that you would rather have
undone,” said the boy eloquently. “When I had
to stick in bed with a sprained ankle, she didn’t
litter my room up with flowers, but she cooked
my pet dishes and left my socks undarned to stay
up and yarn or play draughts with me. She may
blow a chap up a bit for little things, but when
the big ones come along she saves him from
making an ass of himself. She manages old
Frank, and he doesn’t know it and yet enjoys it;
she manages me, and I do know it and enjoy it;
and she will lead that big Billy Mitchell round,
like a lamb by the nose, and he will never guess
it and be as happy as a king.”
“Flow do you mean Maida manages you?”
asked Gem soberly.
“I never know she is at it till it is too late to


get obstinate and prevent her,” said Ned, “but
here’s an example. You know, I’m not dead
keen on the sawbones dodge the Pater intended
me for, but Frank sticks out that I have got to
try it. If I were really brainy, I’d own up it was
a duty to use my mighty intellect for the benefit
of the human race; but seeing that I shall only
make a second-rate doctor, I don’t see why I
can’t be a first-rate stockman up in North
Queensland instead, and go on the land
eventually.
“Anyhow, I used to hate school, and once I
wagged it and went fishing at Bondi with some
other chaps. Frank found out and the fat was in
the fire, of course. When I planned to go camp-
ing up the Nepean for a week-end with the same
fellows he put his foot down and said he wouldn’t
have me go anywhere with them. He so rarely
objected to my goings and comings that I got
mad and vowed I jolly well would go. Of course,
it was awful cheek, for I was only a kid of four-
teen, but I fancied myself a down-trodden inno-
cent at the time.
“Frank was out himself that Saturday, but I
quite meant he should find me gone when he
came home—and not up the Nepean either, for
I was going to light out for the back country.


I was big for fourteen and might have got work
before I used up the few shillings I had, but the
chances are a policeman would have hauled me
ignominiously home before I got far. Anyhow
it wouldn’t have taken me long to realise I had
been an ungrateful little beggar and a thumping
big ass, but then it would have been too late
to set things really right.
“Maida heard our argument, but she chatted
away to me as if nothing had happened, for if
she had started lecturing I should have got sulky
and would not have listened. By-and-by, she
got the talk round to old Frank, and before I
knew it she had me admitting he was looking
seedy, and what a wonder it was he could keep
so good-tempered when he wasn’t well and had
such a pack of worries on his hands.
“In next to no time, with gentle hints from
her, I remembered how decent he’d always been
to me, and I sneaked up and stowed away the
things I had begun to pack. I twigged then she
had been managing me, but for the life of me I
couldn’t feel injured again, and when Frank came
home he found me in his room, blackening all
his dirty boots for him. He began to talk so
mildly about it that I guessed Maida had had a
turn at him. So I said what seemed the decent


thing and added: 'Has little Best-of-All been
managing you too?’ ‘What do you mean?’ he
inquired. ‘Well,’ said I, 'l’m willing to wager
she has found time since you got in to hint at
my perfections and how boys will be boys.’
“Then a light began to dawn on his mind and
a grin on his brow, and we both had a hearty
laugh and went down to tea better friends than
ever; and bothered if Maida didn’t have apple
pie for tea and asked Frank if he couldn’t treat
us all to the theatre! Don’t know whether that
is what you call a lady or not,” ended Ned, “but
it’s my idea of a sister.”
Gem sighed. “I shall never be unselfish enough
for that,” she said, “but I’ll have to try harder
than ever, for I do want to be the right sort of
a lady, not a sham one. I’ve been thinking too
much of what I want to do and be, and not
enough of other people. Would you mind if I
run in to Gran for a minute, Ned? There is
something I want to tell him particularly.”
Gran was lying down reading, but she gently
pulled his paper away, rumpled his hair up and
whispered: “Please Gran, when I said you were
the piggy-wiggiest pig of a man that ever lived,
you did know—didn’t you? that I really meant
I was the piggy-wiggiest pig of a girl? But I


didn't mean it and I won t ever be so selfish
again.”
Gran looked up in surprise at the big eyes,
misty with sorrowful appeal; but he knew a
way to change her mood. “W hat has that
abominable boy been saying to annoy you?” he
asked. “I’ll pack him about his business quick
and lively.”
And, of course, Gem was up in arms at once.
“He’s not an abominable boy,” she said; “he is
very gentlemanly and chivalrous and is digging
my flower-bed for me, and you know you like
him ever so much, Gran.”
“Well, if you are sure he hasn’t been pestering
you,” said Gran, cooling down with apparent re-
luctance, “I’d —I’d—”
“What?” asked Gem.
“Give him some afternoon tea, since he is used
to that gentlemanly and chivalrous institution
at home.”
“Oh! Gran, you are a dear to think of it; it s
just because I’m selfish that I didn’t.”
“The kettle is boiling,” said Gran; “I thought
you would maybe want some tea.”
He knew that Gem had recovered her usual
spirits when he heard her call gaily through the
window: “Don’t dig any more thank you, Ned.


for I have changed my mind about the garden;
I'll grow daisies in the bit that is done and the
roses will soon cover the rest again. And will
you have proper afternoon tea —thin bread and
butter and biscuits and a tray-cloth, if Mollie
will lend me one —or will you have cold bacon
and a boiled egg and the remains of a plum-
pudding?”
“Improper’s the word for me every time,” said
Ned with alacrity, “if it means pudding,” and
he came in and sat on the kitchen-table to eat
it.
Presently came a call from Gran on the dining-
room couch. “If that gentlemanly, chivalrous
boy has got to his third cup yet, he might bring
me a mug of tea and something to keep it from
feeling lonely.”
“Why, to be sure!” said Ned cheerfully. “My
best apologies for waiting to be asked.”
“Oh! Gran, I was sure you wouldn’t have
any,” said Gem penitently, “because you never
do between meals.”
“But I don’t refuse a good thing when it’s
going,” said Gran. “I don’t know whether I’ve
ever told you my private opinion of your hand-
some self, Ned,” he added softly, as the boy
brought him the tea and a plate of provisions.


“You’ve told me a few home-truths on
occasions,” grinned the boy.
“This is another,” said Gran, “\oure a good
fellow, my lad, and I’m grateful to you for help-
ing my little girl over the hard places.
Ned looked and felt uncomfortable and hurried
back to his unfinished feast, for he had left off
at jam tart overspread with condensed milk; but
as he walked home later, his heart was full of
a manly tenderness towards all girls, and towards
one in particular whose wonderful eyes, which he
sometimes saw even in his dreams, were bright
with gratitude and friendship as they smiled him
a farewell.


Chapter XXVII.
THE PARTING OF THE WAYS.
Gem was having a last play in her cattle-
paddock, for it was almost the end of December,
and on the morrow she was off to town to stay
with Grandmother Mackay for the January wed-
dings and to get her school outfit ready.
1 here were to be three weddings all at once.
The Reverend John Arthur was back from
Plongkong, impatiently waiting for Felicia, while
Billy Mitchell was on the way from Mexico to
claim his bride. Mrs. Mackay had asked Maida
to be married from “Marston” too; “Your
mother, my dear,” she said, “was the best friend
I ever had, and you must not deny me the
pleasure of mothering her daughter now.”
And, of course, Mollie and Frank were to be
married on the same day and live in the old
home of Frank’s boyhood, with Kath and Baby
to keep them company. The proprietor of one
of the big daily papers, whose son Frank knew
and had once saved from drowning, had offered
him the post of sub-editor; and the master,
accepting gladly the work he loved, had said a


final good-bye to his little flock when the
Christmas vacation started.
Ned and Muffle had passed the Senior Exami-
nation successfully, both securing the scholar-
ships they coveted, and Muffle doing so brilliantly
in all subjects that several medals and the prize
for general proficiency had fallen to his share
as well. When the results came out, Frank and
Mollie put their delighted heads together and
decided that it was quite possible for Ned to be
a College man along with Muffle —or Alec, as
he certainly must be called now by everybody!
They were all going by the morrow’s coach —
or coaches, for an extra vehicle had been hired
for the purpose —the girls bound for Aunt Mac-
kay’s and the boys for the Mitchells’ hospitable
home. Peter alone was to remain with his
father, but the big house on Morrison’s Point
was to have a new mistress. As far as Mollie
could discover, it was Mrs. Cox who had herself
suggested to the shy, quiet man that they should
help to mend each other’s loneliness; the girls
were astonished beyond measure, but full of
Madness for his sake and Peter’s. They knew
o
that he had always liked and admired the kindly,
uneducated woman whose selection he managed
so well that it was fast growing into a station.


Her land adjoined the little that was left to him,
and it was pleasant for her too to leave her
lonelier, rougher home, haunted by its memories
of dead happiness, for his, where Peter, a some-
what dull but affectionate lad, was ready to be
taken to her heart and mothered in her little
lost son’s place.
So the father was to run down for a day, to
see his daughters’ wedding, and then return for
his own. And Gem, as she spent a long after-
noon of farewell in her paddock, thought of all
the unexpected events that had happened in
the year to alter the current of her own and
her friends’ lives, and for the first time she
seemed to see clearly the hand of God in human
affairs; how strangely and how wisely things
had worked together for ends they had none of
them foreseen!
But, as she meditated, she worked. She was
digging a shallow hole in which she meant to
bury her cattle and the clothes-pegs that had
grown in fancy to a king and his kin; some day
she planned, when she was quite an elegant
young lady, she would return to dig them up and
remember what a queer litle girl she had been.
But not all the rosy future could make her


farewell play a really happy one, for the old
Flat called her. Ned might describe it as ‘an
ugly little burnt-up hole, near the last barbed-
wire fence, you know, where poor old Frank and
the girls are going blue-mouldy,’ but to Gem it
was lovely. Its gnarled and stunted gums might
compare unfavourably with the slender-shafted
trees of the coast woods, but they were all she
knew, and beautiful to her with the beauty of
brave, kindly, honest friends. There was not a
tree or plant or bed of moss near that did not
have somehow an existence and feelings of its
own for her, and though the Flat had lost its
springtime garb of green, and its ringbarked,
rocky hillsides were brown and grey with dead
grass and fallen timber and bare earth, she felt
that in leaving it she would leave a part of her-
self behind.
And suddenly Ned appeared and broke in upon
her reverie. “Old Frank flew down after lunch
to see Mollie,” he announced, “so I thought I
might as well trot along with him and drop in
to see some of you folks; but Alec has gone out
to see Mrs. Cox, and Ida’s doing nothing but
pack and unpack that trunk the old dame dla
much money sent, and all she will say is: ‘Shall
I wear the blue linen coat and skirt, or the silk


blouse and serge skirt with the dustcoat on
top?’ ”
“You shouldn’t speak rudely of my grand-
mother,” said Gem severely; “she sent us all new
trunks and lovely frocks to travel in.”
“You might be civil to me for once, Gem,’ he
pleaded. “People in love are no company; old
Frank is in such a maudlin state that I can
take his best ties without riling him; I took the
one you made him to-day, right under his nose
too, and he didn’t even spot it.”
“1 wonder you condescend to wear it, seeing
who made it,” said Gem scornfully.
“Must mar my fatal beauty somehow,” he
grinned; “ don’t want to leave too many broken
hearts behind me.”
“You are very rude and conceited,” said Gem.
“Suit my conduct to my company,” he re-
torted. “Look here! How can a kid with as
much sense as you have got spend her time hug-
ging and lugging round those dirty old bones?
It’s worse than Kath’s silly dolls. Can I come
inside this cute little fence, which is the only
sensible thing about it, and inspect the animals?”
“You may not,” said Gem; “I wish you would
go where you’re wanted and not interrupt me
when I’m busy.”


Ned only grinned. “There’s no need to get
waxy over it,” he said; “I’m off home again, and
I wouldn’t have come, if I had known there
would only be a pack of girls to talk to.”
Gem called him back penitently. “Muffle is
coming to our place to tea, and Ida,” she said,
“and Gran has promised us one of his best fried
feasts; you had better come, Ned.”
“Sounds awfully nice,” he admitted, forgiv-
ingly, “but I want to have tea with little Best-
of-All; won’t have many more chances, alas!”
“Well, do go over home and help yourself to
cherries and apricots,” she urged.
It was after she had seen Ned emerge from
the garden and start home that Muffle came,
on his way back from visiting Mrs. Cox. The
sliprails were down in the tiny fence and the
gate open, when he got there, for Gem had seen
him coming. But Muffle waited outside and
talked, and even a casual observer would have
noticed the improvement in the boy; he was
thin, but no longer gaunt, and though his eyes
were still affectionate, they had lost much of
their timidity. “I have always wanted to get
away from the Flat,” he said, “and now I just
hate it; nothing will ever be the same again.”
“Yes it will,” said Gem; “we will.”


“You won’t,” he said; “you will grow to be a
fine young lady and only like bright fellows like
Ned, who can talk a lot, and I shall be just the
same old simpleton, I know.”
“But I always like old friends best,” said
Gem seriously, “and I knew you weeks before
I knew Ned.”
“Can I come into your paddock, Gem?” he
asked.
“Of course, you can,” she said, with never a
hint at may. “I wouldn’t let Ned in, but then I
only have very old friends in here, and the ones
that don’t laugh at me.”
“What do you do down here, Gem?”
“Oh! I play and think about things; don’t you
ever imagine nice things?”
“Oh! often,” he said. “I fancy Frank’s a bit
sick and I cut his wood for him and water the
flowers and go in and read to him.”
“I think about Frank too,” said Gem, “and I
fancy him doing all sorts of fine things. I make
up sort of stories about people that are not real,
you know, and I bring him into the stories and
give him the loveliest luck.”
“How clever you are!” said Muffie admiringly.
“Such a lot of people have said good-bye to
me,” Gem went on, accepting his compliments


as her due. “Mr. Green, the policeman, came
this morning, for he and I often have a yarn
when we meet; and you know he reminded me of
how I took Frank for the Long Bushie and
teased me about it, and I only laughed back and
didn’t get into a temper at all? He even said:
‘You are not the spitfire you used to be.’ I
could have hugged him for it, but I only said:
‘No, and I’m not conceited either now’ ; and
he said: ‘To be sure, you are not.’ I didn’t
think about it at the time, but I have been
wondering since if he were laughing at me.”
“It would be like his cheek if he were,” said
Muffle indignantly. “You never are conceited.”
“I used to be though,” said Gem meekly, “and
I used to fly into terrible tempers till Frank
cured me.”
“How did he?” asked Muffle.
“Well, you see, one day after school I thought
he was laughing at me, and I said the piggy-
wiggiest things to him. Of course, I remem-
bered and was sorry in a minute, and he gave
me a wee bit of a lecture about being thought-
less and hasty —the sort of talk he can give that
makes you just hate yourself and love him.
When I got home and thought about it, I just
cried and cried for shame. Then I heard Gran say


to Joe: ‘Gray’s a fine fellow, but he has hurt the
little woman’s feelings mighty badly, and if it
were not for the fact that I once heard a kid-
whacker say he would like teaching if only he
could kill off all the parents first, and I don’t
want to earn such a bad name for grandparents,
I would give him a bit of my mind about it,’
Joe wanted to go up and fight him, and when I
thought what a darling Frank is, I felt like going
out in the kitchen and storming at them; but
suddenly it struck me how funny it was to have
Joe wanting to fight Frank for being next-door
to an angel, and I laughed and laughed and went
and told them what donkeys they were, without
getting angry at all; and, from that day to this,
I have never been in a real downright rage.”
“Why, Gran’s home!” exclaimed Muffle. “See
the smoke coming out of your kitchen chimney.
I must run and give Mollie a message before I
come across to tea.”
“Please bring Peter with you,” said Gem; “he
must feel a bit out of it, being the only one to
stay behind.”
“What kind things you do think of!” said the
boy. “But you always were the nicest person—
next to Frank, of course.”


Gem was delighted at the tribute and quite
agreed with its limitation. She put her last
cattle in the hole and buried them, bestowing
several tears on the most battered clothes-peg
before consigning it to its dark abode, and then
she went home. Ida, Muffle and Peter arrived
as she was setting the table, and the two girls
straightway discussed the difficult question of
what to wear.
Gran had fried sausages, eggs, cheese, toma-
toes and potatoes, and was finishing up with pan
upon pan of apple fritters when Ned appeared
at the kitchen door. “Thought I smelt a rat,”
exclaimed the boy.
“Wrong, young man; it’s fritters,” said Gran,
with the smile of welcome he always had for
Ned; “if you want any, put a little more wood
on, for Splinter’s dreaming and the girls are
in love.”
“Hope it is with me then,” said Ned, turning
stoker with alacrity. “If they reciprocate my
tender sentiments, I’m deeply grateful, I feel so
left out in the cold. Fancy being practically
turned out of your own home for a beastly
bounder of a wooer and forbidden, on pain of
death, to put in an appearance at tea! And
cold chicken and salad and hot potatoes, apple


snow and plum cake and scones for the menu
too!”
“But why?” inquired the girls.
“Well, to make a short story long, as the wag
said ”
“But you’re not a wag, Ned,” interrupted Gem
laughingly.
“All right,” he said, “I owe you one for
that, Miss Gleam-and-Glitter, and I'll pay you
back when I light on a remark as brilliant and
crushing as yourself. But to go on with my
tale of woe, you know Frank has worked
for a year in his garden and raised, in the vege-
table line, a gorgeous crop of grubs, plus three
tomatoes and two cucumbers. We were going to
have them for tea to-night—had dinner at noon,
as Maida wanted the afternoon free for packing
—to celebrate his success. We had two chooks
for dinner, and two lordly birds at that, and I
counted on the remains for tea. I walked in
about four, to see how the land lay near the
pantry and Kath ordered me out for tea, look-
ing as joyful over it as if something as nice as
strawberries and cream had happened along,
instead of that Mexican bandit. He might have
had the decency to wait in town for little Best-
of-All, instead of trotting up here, as soon as


his boat landed, to spoil our last day. And
Kath reckons he is such a whopper that there
wouldn’t be enough chook for him and me.
What do you think of that for miserable news?
Nothing but one of Gran’s fried feasts can go
near consoling me.”
“Isn’t Frank going home to tea?” asked Gem.
But Ned roared. “No jolly fear!” he said.
“You would think he and Mollie were soon going
to part for good, instead of running in double
harness. I’m sorry for their poor little
chaperon. I took the liberty of cutting
through your garden, Alec, and met her shoo-ing
leatherheads out of the cherry trees. She had
sevenpence-ha’penny all in ha’pence, and every
time Frank wanted to get rid of her he gave
her one to go the rounds of the trees again.”
“Somebody ought to rescue the wee woman,”
said Gran.
When Muffle, who took the task upon him-
self, reappeared with the delighted Baby, the
rest were sitting down to table. “Hello! Chat-
tering Cherub, got any more ha’pennies?”
inquired Ned.
“Four,” said Baby, proudly displaying the
coins.


“My word, won’t I give old Frank some
knocks about it!” exclaimed Ned.
“It’s simply horrid of you to tease him so,”
said Gem.
“Go on!” protested Ned. “If being engaged
is such bliss, he ought to pay for it by making
a little sport for other people. I say, Dimpled
Duck, what does Frank call Mollie?”
“He doesn’t call she at all,” said Baby scorn-
fully;” she waits at the gate for he.”
There was a burst of merriment from the
whole table, and Ned exclaimed: “Ha! ha! that’ c
one I’ll get home on His Lovership—she waits
at the gate for he, forsooth! Tell us some more
tit-bits, Interesting Infant.”
“Don’t you, Baby,” said Gran; “he is a
naughty, bad, wicked boy, and for two pins I
would make him wash up all the dishes.”
Ned was quite unabashed. “Say, Gem,” he
declared, “when we’re grown up and engaged we
will get spliced straight off and save all this
fuss. It’s all right after you’re married —you
can cut out and leave her at home to darn your
socks; but before, you’ve got to be for ever get-
ting indigestion rushing through your dinner to
see more of her.”


“You’d better wait till you’re asked,” said
Gem loftily.
“Ladies don’t do the asking, though,” he cor-
rected.
“Wait till you’re packed off with a plain ‘no’
then,” said Gem. “I’m not going to marry you;
I’m going to marry Muffle.”
“But —but—but I don’t want to marry any-
body,” said Muffle apologetically.
“My troubles!” retorted Gem. “I was only
thinking you would want somebody to look after
you.”
“You should have closed with my noble offer,
Miss Crushing, when you had the chance,” said
Ned. “I mightn’t feel so gallant another time,
for I don’t go much on the marrying dodge;
there’s too much fetching and carrying for the
dears. Talk about the nigger and the white
man’s burden; it’s nothing to the white woman’s
burden that her poor hubby has to take up —a
million or so parcels to carry for her, and her
pet dog to lug along as well.”
“So old and yet so free from cynicism, Ned!”
exclaimed Gran in mock surprise. “We ought
to put you in a glass case and exhibit you.”
“The dear girls would only smash it to get
in and hug me,” said the boy shamelessly. “Say,


Gran, this really is the jolliest meal I’ve ever
put away.”
“Ditto,” said Joe, “ ’ceptin’ one.”
“What was that?” inquired Ned. “Spin it
out, like a good chap,”
“Well,” said Joe, “I war waltzin’ Matilda
oncte an’ camped about sundown for tea. Hadn't
nothink to eat but dry bread neither, but I puts
me billy on ter boil an’ sits on a big black log
ter smoke. All at oncte, the log begins ter git
a move on, an’ I seed it war a whoppin’ black
snake as I’d been a-sittin’ on. I didn't kill him,
’cause there warn’t nobody by ter be bitten; but
jolly soon I heerd a rooster’s faint crow, an’
I’m blowed if it didn’t come from that there
sleepy snake. I snuck up an’ killed him an’
split him open an’ ketched a big live rooster just
as he hopped out ter stretch his wings. I fried
him an’ had him for tea, an’ I must say he tasted
better even than this tuck-in o’ Gran’s.”
“I could tell a better snake-yarn than that,”
said Ned proudly. “Once there was a chap out
back on the plains where timber’s mighty scarce,
and this is how he got enough and to spare of
it. He was digging with a wooden-handled hoe
one day, when a huge black snake, springing at
his face, bit the hoe-handle instead. The poison


made it swell till he cut a huge pile of wood
off it; it kept on swelling, and he got timber
enough out of it to put up a big house; still it
wasn’t done, and he got palings enough to fence
in his whole selection, and firewood enough to
do him to this day.”
“Excuse us looking bored, Ned,” said Gran,
“but that’s one of Joe’s own that we’ve all heard
before.”
Ned didn’t even look crestfallen. “Heard it up
the creek,” he confessed, “but I'll palm it off as
my own in town anyhow.”
And so they chatted and laughed through tea,
only Gran failing to do full justice to his fried
feast. And then the dishes were washed, the
visitors departed to finish their packing, and
Gem was left alone with Gran, who read the
paper and said never a word.
She sat on the doorstep, chased hungry
mosquitoes, and thought. In the tender twilight,
most of all, the old Flat called her. Her heart
was full of thankfulness for all the glad and
beautiful things that had come to her there, for
school and work, friends and fun, home and love.
But the distant hills, over which the coach-road
ran, were deeply, softly blue, and beyond them
the magic unknown, the great wide world,


beckoned, and her feet were eager to be straying
in the new paths. But Gran read on at his
paper, as though the morrow were not next-door
to the end of the world. “I don’t believe you
care, Gran,” she said, “I don’t believe you care
I’m going away, and I’m so miserable I don’t
know what to do” ; and she clung to him and
cried.
But Gran patted her head and told her that
he did care very much, and that she was the
best and dearest little girl in all the world; but
he did not sadden the child’s heart by telling her
that the sun would never seem to shine so bright
again for him when she had gone. And Gem
only felt very humble and loving and told him
that she would always care for him more than
all the world.
But when she lay sleeping peacefully, with a
dream smile playing amongst the traces of her
tears, it was Gran who sat and smoked till his
pipe went out, and still sat on, forgetting to light
it again.
W. C. Penfold & Co. Ltd., Printers, Sydney.




CATALOGUE OF BOOKS
PUBLISHED BY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON
LIMITED
PUBLISHERS TO THE UNIVERSITY
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY
The books in this Catalogue may be obtained through
any Bookseller in Australia, New Zealand and
all other English-speaking Countries.
Intending purchasers are requested to write direct
to the publishers if they have any difficulty in
obtaining the books required.
English and Foreign trade orders should be sent to
the publishers whose names appear in the body of
the Catalogue; where no other name appears,
they should be sent to the Oxford University
Press, Amen Comer, London, E.C.
The costs of postage stated herein apply only to
the Commonwealth of Australia.
July, 1914.


WHERE THE DEAD MEN LIE
AND OTHER POEMS.
By Barcroft Henry Boake. Second edition, revised
and enlarged, with memoir, portraits, and 32 illus-
trations. Cloth gilt, gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco,
gilt edges, 6s. ( postage 2d.)
J. Brunton Stephens, in The Bulletin: “Boake’s work is
often praised for its local colour; but it has something better
than that. It has atmosphere —Australian atmosphere, that
makes you feel the air of the place —breathe the breath of
the life.”
AT DAWN AND DUSK: Poems.
By Victor J. Daley. Fourth edition. With photo-
gravure portrait. Cloth gilt, gilt top, 3s. 6d.;
full morocco, gilt edges, 6s. ( postage 2d.)
Bookman : ‘‘These verses are full of poetic fancy musically
expressed.”
Sydney Morning Herald: “The indefinable charm is here.
and the spell, and the music. ... A distinct advance for
Australian verse in ideality, in grace and polish, in the study
of the rarer forms of verse, and in the true faculty of poetic
feeling and expression.
WINE AND ROSES: A New Volume of Poems.
By Victor J. Daley. With portrait. Cloth gilt, gilt
top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, 6s. ( postage
2d.)
Daily Telegraph: “Most of his verse is tinged with sad-
ness —as in most Irish poetry —but there is a fine imaginative
quality that lifts it to a far higher plane than that of the
conventional melancholy rhymer. There are poems in this
book that recall the magic of Rossetti .... Victor Daley
has left his mark in the beginnings of an Australian literature.”
HOW HE DIED, AND OTHER POEMS.
By John Farrell. Fourth edition. With memoir,
appreciations, and photogravure portrait. Cloth
grit, gilt top, 3s. 6d.: full morocco, gilt edges, 6s.
{postage 2d.)
Melbourne Age; “Farrell’s contributions to the literature
of this country were always distinguished by a fine, stirring
optimism, a genuine sympathy, and an idealistic sentiment,
which in the book under notice find their fullest expression.”


“ SNOWY RIVER ” SERIES.
THE MAN FROM SNOWY RIVER,
AND OTHER VERSES.
By A. B. Paterson. Fifty-seventh thousand. With
photogravure portrait and vignette title. Cloth
gilt, gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, 6s.
(postage 2d.)
Athenaeum: “Swinging, rattling ballads of ready humour,
ready pathos, and crowding adventure . . . Stirring and en-
tertaining ballads about great rides, in which the lines gallop
like the very hoofs of the horses.”
London: Macmillan & Co., Limited.
RIO GRANDE’S LAST RACE,
AND OTHER VERSES.
By A. B. Paterson. Seventeenth thousand. Cloth
gilt, gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, 6s
(postage 2d.)
Spectator : “There is no mistaking the vigour of Mr. Pater-
son’s verse; there is no difficulty in feeling the strong human
interest which moves in it.”
London: Macmillan & Co., Limited.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF
BRUNTON STEPHENS.
As finally revised by the author, re-arranged and
printed from new type, with photogravure por-
trait. Cloth gilt, gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco,
gilt edges, 6s. ( postage 2d.)
The Times: “This collection of the works of the Queensland
poet, who has for a generation deservedly held a high place
in Australian literature, well deserves study.”
Datlt News: “In turning over the pages of this volume,
one is struck by his breadth, his versatility, his compass, as
evidenced in theme, sentiment, and style.”
THE SECRET KEY, AND OTHER VERSES.
By George Esses Evans. Second edition, with por-
trait. Cloth gilt, gilt top, 3s. fid.; full morocco,
gilt edges, 6s. (postage 2d.)
Glasgow Herald: “There is . . . the breath of that
apparently immortal spirit which has inspired . . . almost all
that is best in English higher song.”
The Bookman: “Mr. Evans has written many charming and
musical poems . . . many pretty and haunting lines.”


IN THE DAYS WHEN THE WORLD RMS WIDE,
AND OTHER VERSES.
By Henry Lawson. Twentieth thousand. "With
photogravure portrait. Cloth gilt, gilt top, 3s. 6d.;
full morocco, gilt edges, 6s. (postage 2d.)
For cheaper edition see Commonwealth Series.
The Academy: “These ballads (for such they mostly are)
abound in spirit and manhood, in the colour and smell of Aus-
tralian soil. They deserve the popularity which they have won
in Australia, and which, we trust, this edition will now give
them in England.”
VERSES, POPULAR AND HUMOROUS.
By Henry Lawson. Eighteenth thousand. Cloth
gilt, gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, 6s.
(postage 2d.)
For cheaper edition see Commonwealth Series.
New York Journal: “Such pride as a man feels when
be has true greatness as his guest, this newspaper feels
in introducing to a million readers a man of ability hitherto
unknown to them. Henry Lawson is his name.”
WHEN I TIMS' KING, AND OTHER VERSES.
By Henry Lawson. Tenth thousand. Cloth gilt,
gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, 6s.
{postage 2d.)
Also in two parts, entitled “When I TToa King ” and “The
Elder Son” {see Commomcealth Series ).
The Spectator: “A good deal of humour, a great deal
of spirit, and a robust philosophy are the main characteristics
of these Australian poets. Because they write of a world
they knew, and of feelings they have themselves shared in,
they are far nearer the heart of poetry than the most accom-
plished devotees of a literary tradition.”
ON THE TRACK AND OVER THE SLIP RAILS.
By Henry Lawson. Twentieth thousand. Cloth gilt,
gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, 6s.
{postage 2d.)
For cheaper edition see Commonwealth Series.
Daily Chronicle; “Will well sustain the reputation its
author has already won as the best writer of Australian short
stories and sketches.”


WHILE THE BILLY BOILS.
By Henry Lawson. Wth eight illustrations by F. P.
'Mahony. Thirty-second thousand. Cloth gilt,
gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gill edges, 6s.
(postage 2d.)
For cheaper edition see Commonwealth Series.
The Academy; “A book of honest, direct, sympathetic,
humorous writing about Australia from within is worth a
library of travellers’ tales . . . The result is a real book —a
book in a hundred. His language is torse, supple, and richly
idiomatic. He can tell a yarn with the best.”
CHILDREN OF THE BUSH.
By Henry Lawson. Eleventh thousand. Cloth gilt,
gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, 6s.
(postage 2d.)
Also in two parts, entitled “Send Bound the Hat ” and “The
Romance of the Swag” (see Commonwealth Series).
The Bulletin: “These stories are the real Australia,
written by the foremost living Australian author . . . Lawson’s
genius remains as vivid and human as when he first boiled
his literary billy.”
JOE WILSON AND HIS MATES.
By Henry Lawson. Eleventh thousand. Cloth gilt,
gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, 6s.
(postage 2d.)
For cheaper edition see Commonwealth Series.
The Athenaeum; “This is a long way the best
work Mr. Lawson has yet given us. These stories are so good
that (from the literary point of view of course) one hopes
they are not autobiographical. As autobiography they would
be good, as pure fiction they are more of an attainment.”
London: Wm. Blackwood & Sons.


“ SNOWY RIVER ” SERIES, ETC.
FAIR GIRLS AND GRAY HORSES,
WITH OTHER VERSES.
By Will H. Ogilvee. Revised edition, completing
twentieth thousand. With portrait. Cloth gilt,
gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, 6s.
{postage 2d.)
Scotsman : “Its verses draw’ their natural inspiration from
the camp, the cattle trail, and the bush; and their most charac-
teristic and compelling rhythms from the clatter of horses’
hoofs.”
HEARTS OF GOLD, AND OTHER VERSES.
By Will H. Ogilvie. Fourth thousand. Cloth gilt,
gilt top, 3s. 6d.; full morocco, gilt edges, os.
{postage 2d.)
Daily Telegeaph: “Will be welcomed by all who love the
stirring music and strong masculine feeling of this poet’s
verse.”
LAURENCE HOPE r S
LOVE LYRICS.
Uniformly bound in fancy boards with cloth back.
ss. {postage 3 d.) per volume.
TEE GARDEN OF KAMA.
Daily Chronicle: “No one has so truly interpreted the
Indian mind—no one, transcribing Indian thought into our
literature, has retained so high and serious a level, and quite
apart from the rarity of themes and setting—the verses remain
—true poems.”
STARS OF THE DESERT.
Outlook: “It is not merely that these verses describe
Oriental scenes and describe them with vividness, there is a
feeling in the rhythm—a timbre of the words that seems akin
to the sand and palm-trees and the changeless East.”
INDIAN LOVE.
Spectator : “The poetry of Laurence Hope must hold a
unique place in modern letters. No woman has written lines
so full of a strange primeval savagery —a haunting music—
the living force of poetry.”
London: William Heinemann.


TO-MORROW: A Dramatic Sketch of the Character and
Environment of Robert Greene.
By J. Le Gay Brereton. Paper cover, Is. 6d.
(postage Id.)
Sydney Morning Herald: “The first Australian play of
literary worth.”
SONGS OF A SUNLIT LAND.
By Colonel J. A. Kenneth Mack ay. Cloth gilt,
3s. 6d. (postage 2d.)
THE RISING OF THE COURT. AND OTHER
SKETCHES IN PROSE AND VERSE.
By Henry Lawson. With picture cover (Common-
wealth Series ), Is. (postage Id.)
Queensland Times : “These stories show Lawson at his
best, and Lawson at his best is not to be beaten by short story
writers in current literature.”
AN OUTBACK MARRIAGE: A Story of Australian Life.
By A. B. Paterson. Ninth thousand, with picture
cover (Commonwealth Series). Is. (postage Id.)
Scotsman: “The chief virtue of the book lies in its fresh
and vivid presentment of the wild life and the picturesque man-
ners of the Australian bush, while in form and stvle it claims
recognition as a work of considerable literary distinction.”
THE OLD BUSH SONGS.
Collected and edited by A. B. Paterson. Thirteenth
thousand, with picture cover (Commonwealth
Series), Is. (postage Id.)
Daily Telegraph: “Rude and rugged these old bush songs
are. but they carry in their vigorous lines the very impress of
their origin and of their genuineness . . . Mr. Paterson has
done his work like an artist.”
GODS AND WOOD THINGS.
By L. H. Allen. Paper hoards, Is. (postage Id.)
Sydney Morning Herald; “Mr. Allen is one of the select
band who are saturated with classic lore and who seek to
translate the beings of pagan mythology to the Australian
bush. ‘Gods and Wood Things’ contains both prose and verse
—the latter rhapsodical, the former mystical.”


THE COMMONWEALTH SERIES.
Picture covers, Is. per volume ( postage Id.)
HENRY LAWSON.
Prose.
Ah Soon
While the Billy Boils (First and Second Series)
On the Track
Over the Sliprails
Joe Wilson
Joe Wilson’s Mates
Send Round the Hat
The Romance of the Swag
Verse.
When the World was Wide (First and Second Series)
Popular Verses
Humorous Verses
When I Was King
The Elder Son
The Rising of the Court (Contains Prose also)
A. B. PATERSON.
Rio Grande’s Last Race (First and Second Series)
An Outback Marriage (full-length novel)
The Old Bush Songs (edited only by Mr. Paterson)
WILL OGILVIE.
Fair Girls ") A reprint in two parts of the favourite volume
Gray Horses ) “Fair Girls and Gray Horses.”
BRUNTON STEPHENS.
My Chinee Cook, and Other Humorous Verses
CHARLES WHITE.
History of Australian Bushranging (in 4 parts, each com
plete in itself, and well illustrated)— The Earlv Davs:
1850 to 1862; 1863 to 1869; 1869 to 1878
GEORGE E. BOXALL.
History of the Australian Bushrangers—
Part I.: To the Time of Frank Gardiner
Part IT.: To the End of the Kelly Gang


BUSHLAND STOBIES.
By Amt Eleanor Mack. Second edition, with
coloured illustrations and decorated cloth cover,
3s. 6d. {postage 2d.) [Shortly.
Academy: “It is not often that we have the pleasure to
welcome from Australia a hook of so many charming short
stories as are contained in the volume before us.”
Scotsman: “Charming and simple nursery tales, appetisingly
touched with local colour of the Bush.”
Birmingham Daily Post; “There is a daintiness and dis-
tinct charm in these fairy tales.”
SCRIBBLING SUE, AND OTHER STORIES.
By Amt Eleanor Mack. With coloured and other
illustrations and decorated cloth cover, 3s. 6d.
(postage 2d.) [Shortly.
These stories are written in the same happy vein as “Bush-
land Stories.” Miss Mack’s intense love of nature is reflected
in all her books, and her readers, both young and old, are at
once attracted by the natural ring of her ivork.
GEM OF THE FLAT : A Story of Young Australians.
By Constance Mackness. With coloured and other
illustrations and decorated cloth cover. 3s. 6d.
(postage 2d.) [Shortly.
“Gem of the Flat” is a story of Australian bush children.
The local colouring is distinctly good; the children are alive,
and talk like real children; the incidents are natural and well
described. The style is fresh, the dialogue well managed, and
the story as a whole is interesting and pleasant, with a good
tone about it.
DOT AND THE KANGAROO.
By Ethel C. Pedlet. Illustrated by F. P. Mahony.
Third edition, with decorated cloth cover, 2s. 6d.
(postage 2d.) For school edition see page 30.
Sydney Morning Herald : “ ‘Dot and the Kangaroo’ is with-
out doubt one of the 'most charming books that could be put
into the hands of a child. It is admirably illustrated by Frank
P. Mahony, who seems to have entered thoroughly into the
animal world of Australia. The story is altogether Australian.
. . . It is told so simply, and yet so artistically, that even
the ‘grown-ups’ amongst us must enjoy it.”


THE CHARM OF SYDNEY.
A collection of prose and verse quotations referring
to Sydney and surroundings, chosen from the
works of famous authors and travellers, including
Robert Louis Stevenson, etc., etc., with three-
colour frontispiece and 40 drawings by Sydney
Ure Smith. Uniform with “A Bush Calendar,”
cloth, 3s. 6d. {postage Id.) [ Shortly.
STORIES OF OLD SYDNEY.
By Charles H. Bertie. With 53 pen and pencil
drawings by Sydney Ure Smith. Cloth cover,
printed in colours, 3s. 6d. (postage Id.)
Sydney Morning Herald: “A charming and interesting
little book . . . they live and breathe, and he has contrived to
make actual to us those remote and almost incredible days
. . . Mr. Smith’s admirable illustrations are an equally im-
portant feature of the book, which, in addition to its interest,
presents a great antiquarian value.”
CHRISTOHER COCKLE’S
AUSTRALIAN EXPERIENCES.
By “Old Boomerang” ( J. R. Houlding). Revised
edition, with 2 portraits. Cloth gilt, ss. (postage
2d.)
Originally published under the title “Australian Capers,”
this volume has been out of print for many years, and copies
which have come into the market secondhand have been pur-
chased at enhanced prices. The author has at last consented
to its republication and has thoroughly revised it. As a
picture of Australian life thirty or forty years ago the book
is worthy of a permanent place in our literature, and it con-
tains plenty of fun and humour for both old and young.
THE MOTHER STATE: The Physical Features, Natural
Resources, Geology, Scenery, Climate, Industries and
Commerce of New South Wales.
By J. M. Taylor, M.A., LL.B. With 85 illustrations
and maps. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. (vostage 2d.)
This is the only up-to-date general description of New South
Wales available for sending to friends abroad. All the in-
formation is drawn from the latest authentic sources and the
illustrations and maps add largely to the book’s interest and
value.


BIOGRAPHY.
SOME EARLY RECORDS OF THE MAC ARTHURS
OF CAMDEN, 1789-1834.
Edited by Sibella Macarthub Onslow. With
coloured plates and numerous facsimile reproduc-
tions of original documents. Cloth gilt, 15s.
{postage 6d.) % [Just out.
This volume will be recognised as a classic, giving at first
hand an insight into the times and the mode and manner ot
living of a pioneer family during the first forty years of
civilised story in Australia, and above all the trials of the
pioneer of the wool trade.
Uniform with the above.
LIFE OF CAPTAIN MATTHEW FLINDERS, R.N.
By Ernest Scott, Professor of History in the Uni-
versity of Melbourne, author of “Terre Napoleon”
and “Life of Laperouse.” With numerous por-
traits, maps, manuscripts in facsimile, etc. Cloth
gilt, 21s. {postage 6d.) [Just out.
This is a handsome volume of over 500 pages, octavo, and
the only adequate biography of Flinders. Access has been had
to all known sources of information, including the Flinders
family papers, the Decaen papers at Caen, the Bibliotheque
Nationale (Paris), the Mitchell Library (Sydney), and the
Melbourne Public Library. Much entirely new matter is now
published for the first time.
LIFE OF LAPEROUSE.
By Professor Ernest Scott. With Chart of Voyages
in the Pacific, and 13 illustrations. Cloth, 3s. 6d.
{postage Id.) For school edition see page 31.
This story of Lapfirouse’s work as an explorer and his close
association with Australia is a most important contribution
to our history. The illustrations are from authentic sources
and very interesting.
LIFE OF CAPTAIN CHARLES STURT.
By (Mrs. Napier G. Sturt. With portraits and other
illustrations. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. {postage 6d.)
This is a cheap re-issue of the expensive London edition,
and makes a fine presentation volume.


THE ANNOTATED CONSTITUTION OF
THE AUSTRALIAN COMMONWEALTH.
By Sir John Quick, LL.D., and R. R. Garrak, C.M.G.
Royal Bvo., cloth gilt, 21s.
The Times: “A monument of industry.”
THE STATE AND FEDERAL CONSTITUTIONS
OF AUSTRALIA.
By K. R, Cramp, M.A., Examiner, N.S.W. Depart-
ment of Public Instruction. With portraits and
illustrations. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. ( postage 2d.)
N.S.W. Public Instruction Gazette: “Not only sound and
scholarly, but is written by a teacher of long experience.
• • • - Has th» additional advantage of being absolutely up
to date .... Altogether an admirable piece of work .”. . .
An interesting, very helpful, and very necessary handbook.”
HISTORY OF AUSTRALASIA:
From the Earliest Times to the Present Day.
By Arthur W. Jose, author of “The Growth of the
Empire.” Fifth edition, thoroughly revised, with
many new maps and illustrations from rare
originals in the Mitchell Library. Cloth gilt,
3s. 6d. ( postage 2d.)
Tee Bulletin ; "It is the most complete handbook on the
subject available; the tone is judicial and the workmanship
thorough . . . The new chapter on Australian Literature is
the best view yet presented.”
HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
By H. E. Barff, M.A., Registrar. With numerous
illustrations. Cloth gilt, 7s. 6d. ( postage 2d.)
Published some years ago in connection with the Jubilee
Celebrations of the University, this volume contains the
official record of its foundation and growth.
HISTORY OF THE AUSTRALIAN
AGRICULTURAL COMPANY, 1824-1875.
By Jsssb Gregson, Ex-Superintendent. With por-
traits, cloth gilt, 6s. ( postage 2d.)
IN MEMORY OF ALBERT BYTHESEA WEIGALL,
Lede Headmaster of Sydney Grammar School.
By Professor M. W. 'MacCallum. With portraits
and illustrations, cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. ( postage Id.)


miscellaneous.
THE JUSTICES’ MANUAL AND POLICE GUIDE.
A Synopsis of offences punishable by indictment and
on summary conviction, definitions of crimes, meanings
of legal phrases, hints on evidence, procedure, police
duties, etc., in New Uouth II ales.
Compiled by Daniel Stephen, Sub-Inspector of
Police. Third edition, thoroughly revised, with a
chapter on Finger Prints by Inspector Childs.
Demy Bvo., cloth, 7s. 6d. (postage 3d.)
The Magistrate: ‘‘The three editions afford an illustration
of the rapid increase of size in successive editions of law books.
The first was a little book, the second was a great advance on
it and the third, which contains about half as much again as
the second, is a well-got-up work of nearly 500 pages. Its
principal claim is in being accurate, handy, thorough and
copiously indexed. The index references number o%ei 2,500;
HISTORY OF AUSTRALIAN BUSERANGING.
By Charles White. In 4 parts, each well illustrated
and complete in itself. See Commonwealth series,
page 10.
HISTORY OF THE AUSTRALIAN BUSHRANGERS.
By George E. Boxall. New edition, cloth gilt, 3s. (Id.
(postage 3d.)
Also published in two parts, see Commonwealth Series.
THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF
BOILER CONSTRUCTION.
By W. D. Cruickshank, M. I. Ivlech. E., late Chief
Engineering Surveyor, New South TV ales Govern-
ment. Second edition, revised and enlarged, with
70 illustrations. Cloth gilt, 15s. (postage 3d.)
Journal of the Marine Engineers' Association: “A
practical treatise on the construction and management of steam
boilers . . . will be found of great value to practical
engineers.”


A POPULAR GUIDE TO HIE WILD FLOWERS
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By Florence Sulman. With 51 full-page illustra-
tions. Cloth, 3s. 6d. (postage 2d.)
Sydney Morning Herald: ‘‘This book can be taken into the
bush, and by its aid practically any dower identified without
previous knowledge of botany. It' is a book that has been
badly needed.”
A second volume is in the printer’s hands and will be pub-
lished shortly.
SOME FAMILIAR AUSTRALIAN
WILD FLOWERS.
Photographed by A. E. Sclman. Paper cover, 2s.
{postage Id.)
Ihis is the best representation by photography of Australian
wild flowers in book form, and it* is particularly suitable for
sending to friends abroad. A second series is in preparation,
the publication of which will be notified to all who send in
their names beforehand.
THE PLANTS OF NEW SOUTH WALES :
An Analytical Key to the Flowering Plants {except
Grasses and Rushes) and Ferns of the State, with a
list of native plants discovered since 1893.
■ A. Dixon, F.1.C., F.C.S. With Glossary aud
49 diagrams. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. {postage 2d.)
A BUSH CALENDAR.
By Amy Eleanor Mack. Third edition, revised, with
42 photographs of birds, flowers, bush scenes, etc.
Cloth, 3s. 6d. {postage Id.)
Literary World: “A pleasant little book . . . There is
much to interest those who have no personal knowledge of the
antipodes . . . and to those who know the country, the vivid
descriptions will bring back many happy recollections.”
BUSH DAYS.
By Amy Eleanor Mack. With 39 photographs.
Cloth (uniform with “A Bush Calendar”), 3s. 6d.
{postage Id.)
T. P. s VV eekly (London) : “A delightful book of descrip-
tive studies in nature.”
Book Lover; “A succession of memories of happy times
with nature.”


SCIENTIFIC AND PRACTICAL.
THE BUTTERFLIES OF AUSTRALIA:
A Monograph of the Australian Rhopalocera.
By G. A. Waterhouse, B.Se., 8.E., F.E.S., and G.
Lyell, F.E.S. With 4 coloured and 39 photo-
plates, and numerous figures in the test. Demy
4t0., cloth gilt, 42a. ( postage 6d.) [ Just out.
Every Australian butterfly known to science is here des-
cribed, and every species is figured. The authors’ positions
in the entomological world is sufficient guarantee that the
work could not have been done better, and in addition to
sifting the literature of the subject they describe for the
first time many new species and sub-species from their unique
collections.
AN INTRODUCTION TO
THE GEOLOGY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By C. A. Susshilch, F.G.S. Second edition,
thoroughly revised and greatly enlarged, with
folding coloured map and 100 other maps and
illustrations. Cloth gilt, 7s. fid. ( postage 3d.)
[Just out.
The first edition of this most readable and useful work was
exhausted very rapidly. The second edition embodies the
results of the most recent researches recorded by the N.S.W.
Mines Department, the Royal and Linnean Societies, and Aus-
tralian Museum, with the addition of much information not
hitherto published. It is a thorough “stock-taking” of present
knowledge, and will not be superseded for many years.
AUSTRALIAN HOUSE DRAINAGE PRACTICE.
By H. G. Wills, A.R. San. 1., Lecturer at Sydney
Technical College. With 109 illustrations. Cloth
gilt, 7s. fid. ( postage 3d.) [ Just out.
This book is indispensable to builders, master-drainers,
journeymen and students alike —the only book on House Drain-
age suitable for Australasian conditions. Everything is ex-
plained in a thoroughly practical manner, and the illustrations
and diagrams are exceptionally valuable.


DAIRYING IN AUSTRALASIA'. Farm and Factory.
By M. A. O’Callaghan, Chief of Dairy Branch,
Department of Agriculture. Contains over 700
pages and more than 200 plates. Royal Bvo.,
cloth, 10s. ( postage 5d.)
The Dairy (London) : “It gives in clear and unmistakeable
language the whole of the dairy manipulation from beginning
to end . . . His book is of world-wide application and use-
fulness.”
MILK AND BUTTER TABLES:
With Notes on Milk and Cream Testing.
By M. A. O’Callaghan, author of “Dairying in
Australasia.” Demy Bvo., Is. ( postage Id.)
HERD TESTING RECORD BOOK.
Designed by M. A. O’Callaghan for Herd Testing
Associations and Stud Cattle Breeders. 200
leaves, foolscap size, strongly bound, ss. (postage
Is.)
THE HOME DOCTORING OF ANIMALS.
By Harold Leeney, M.R.C.Y.S. Fourth edition,
thoroughly revised and greatly enlarged, with
nearly 100 illustrations. Bvo., cloth, 12s. (id.
(postage B d.)
London: Macdonald & Martin.
SIMPLE TESTS FOR MINERALS: Every Man his oxen
Analyst.
By Joseph Campbell, M.A., F.G.S., M.I.M.E. Fourth
edition, revised and enlarged (completing the
twelfth thousand). With illustrations. Cloth,
round corners, 3s. 6d. { postage Id.)
Ballarat Star: “This is an excellent little work, and should
be in the hands of every scientific and practical miner.”
Bendigo Evening Mail: “Should be in every prospector’s
kit. It enables any intelligent man to ascertain for himself
whether any mineral he may discover has a commercial value.”


AUSTRALIAN MILITARY HANDBOOKS.
HINTS TO YOUNG OFFICERS p
In the Australian Military Forces on the Art ot Com-
mand, Mess Etiquette, Dress, Military Courtesy,
etc., etc. Stiff manila cover, Is. {postage la.)
[Just out.
INFANTRY ROCKET BOOK n <, n
With prefatory note by Colonel M . Holmes, U.0.U.,
Y.D., Nominal, Section and Attendance Rolls, and
Duty Roster. Second edition, revised and en-
larged. Pocket size, limp cloth, Is. 6d. {postage
A concise’ guide to Regulations, Field Training, Musketry,
Camp Duties, etc. _____
THE ART OF INSTRUCTING IN AIMING AND
FIRING, AND IN MINIATURE RANGE AND LAND-
SCAPE TARGET TRAINING.
With 15 illustrations. Stiff manila cover, Is. 3d.
(postage Id.) . . .
Contains: —Elementary Instruction in Aiming and Firing,
Grouping Practices, Application Practices. 5 isual Training.
Military Vocabulary, Fire Orders. Indication and Recognition
of Targets. Regulation, Direction and Control of Fire Fire
Direction Practices, etc., with complete Set of Rules for Minia-
ture Range Competitions.
SOLDIER'S MUSKETRY SMALL BOOK.
Stiff manila cover, 3d. {postage Id.)
Includes Hints on Shooting, Judging Distance Grouping
Practices, etc., with a large number of diagrams tor keeping
a Record of Scores in Instructional and Standard Test Prac-
tices in Tables A. and B.
OUTPOSTS, AND ADVANCED, FLAFK AND REAR
guards’.
Stiff manila cover, Is. {postage Id.)
With a special chapter and sketch map describing tlie
telling-off and posting of a piquet on Night Outpost Duty.
GUARD AND SENTRY DUTIES.
Stiff manila cover, 9d. {postage Id.)
A complete guide to the Guard Duties of Field Officer and
Captain of the Dav. the Commander, Sergeant, Corporal, and
Private Soldier of the Guard, etc., with Copy of Guard Report.


AUSTRALIAN MILITARY HANDBOOKS.
LIGHT HOUSE POCKET BOOK.
Compiled by Lieut. D. C. Howell Price, A. and I.
Stall. With Nominal and other Rolls. Pocket
size, limp cloth, Is. 6d. (postage Id.)
A concise guide to Regulations, Field Training, Camp Duties,
Equitation, etc.
AUSTRALIAN LANDSCAPE TARGETS.
Approved and adopted by the School of Musketry,
Randwiek. 5 specially selected Australian Land-
scapes in panels, each measuring 60 inches by 30
inches, reproduced in natural colours and mounted
on white canvas, 355. per set; unmounted, 17s. 6d.
per set. Also sold separately.
A detailed description, with photograph of each target and
cost of postage, will be forwarded post free to any address on
application.
THE JUNIOR CADET MANUAL.
Including the authorised Physical Exercises, Organ-
ised Games, Miniature Ride Shooting, First Aid,
Swimming, Life Saving, Squad Drill, etc. Edited
by Lieut. R. Stupart. With about 150 illustra-
tions. Cloth, 4s. 6d. (postage 2d.)
CADET HANDBOOK.
Compiled by Lieut. R. Stupart. With Attendance
Roll for Section Commanders. Second edition,
revised and enlarged. Pocket size, limp cloth, 9d.
{postage Id.)
A concise guide to Appointment and Promotion for Officers
and N.-C.O.’s. Including Syllabus of Exams., Syllabus of
Training, Duties of Non-Coms., Guards and Sentries.
RIFLE EXERCISE AND MUSKETRY INSTRUCTION
FOR CADETS.
Compiled by Lieut R. Stupart. Second edition,
greatly enlarged. Stiff manila cover, 6d. {postage
Id.)
Includes Care of Arms, Rifle Exercises, Aiming Instruction,
Firing Instruction, Muscle Exercises, Tests of Elementary
Training, etc. \\ ith Sketch of Rifle showing all parts.


MISCELLANEOUS.
SEMAPHORE ALPHABET MADE EAST.
An easy method of learning how to Semaphore in a
few hours by means of a pack of 30 cards, show-
ing Sender’s Position “Front View.” 9d.
(postage 2d.)
This is the standard system of Signalling and is of universal
application.
CALENDAR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
Demy Bvo., linen. 2s. 6d.; paper cover, Is. (postage
3d.) [Published annually in June.
MANUAL OF PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS HELD BY
THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
Demy Bvo.. paper cover, Is. (postage Id.)
[Published annually in September, and dated the
year following that in tchich it is issued.
THE PLACE OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES IN
A MODERN UNIVERSITY.
By R. F. Irvixe, ALA., Professor of Economics in the
University of Sydney. Paper cover. Is. (postage
Id.) [JuM out.
AUSTRALIAN CONDITIONS AND PROBLEMS FROM
THE STANDPOINT OF PRESENT ANTHROPO-
LOGICAL KNOWLEDGE.
By W. Ramsay Smith, D.Se., M.8., etc. Paper cover,
6d. (postage Id.)
THE TEACHING OF MATHEMATICS IN
AUSTRALIA.
By H. S. Caeslaw, M.A., D.Se., F.R.S.E., Professor
of Mathematics in the University of Sydney.
Paper cover, 2s. 6d. (postage Id.)
This is a Report prepared for the Commission Internationale
de VEnseignement Mathematique, and deals with the work in
the Secondary Schools. Technical Colleges, Teachers' Training
Colleges, and Universities of Australia.


THE HANDLING OF STEAMSHIPS DUPING
HURRICANES ON THE EAST COAST OF
QUEENSLAND.
By Francis J. Balydon, Lieut. R.N.R., Master
Mariner. With coloured diagrams. Royal Bvo.,
cloth, 3s. 6d. ( postage Id.)
RACIAL DECAY :
A Compilation of Evidence from World Sources.
By Octavius C. Beale, a Commissioner of the
Commonwealth of Australia, 1907, and of the
State of New South Wales, 1903. With numerous
diagrams. Popular edition, 2s. 6d. ( postage 3d.)
Daily Telegraph : “A positively monumental accumula-
tion of fact and quotation and argument on this gravest of
all subjects.”
PROLEGOMENA TO A CENSURE
OF OLD WRITERS.
By Jean Hardouin, S.J. Translated by Edwin
Johnson, M.A. (Lond.), author of “The Rise of
Christendom/’ “The Rise of English Culture,”
“Antiqua Mater,” “The Pauline Epistles Re-
studied and Explained,” etc. Crown Bvo., cloth
gilt, 6s. {postage Id.)
CHURCH SERVICES, FOR USE BY LAYMEN.
Prepared on the Authority of the Presbyterian Church
of Australia (State of New South Wales). Cloth
gilt, 2s. 6d. {postage Id.)
PRACTICAL 810-CHEMISTRY.
By H. L. Kesteven, D.Se., Lecturer at Sydney Tech-
nical College. Paper cover, 2s, 6d. {postage Id.)


MISCELLANEOUS.
COOKERY BOOK OF GOOD AND TRIED
RECEIPTS.
Compiled for the Presbyterian Women’s Missionary
Association.
Thirteenth edition, enlarged, completing 170,000 copies.
Cloth boards, Is. (postage Id.)
Extract from: Preface: “The aim of this book has always
been, not only to provide wholesome and economical recipes
for capable housewives, but to help those who have not had
the benefit of maternal guidance and home training. It is
significant that many discerning women have made a habit
oi giving a copy of the ‘Presbyterian Cookery Book’ to every
new bride of their acquaintance.”
COMMON SENSE HOUSEHOLD COOKERY BOOK.
Compiled by the Cookery Teachers’ Association of
N.S.W. Cloth boards, Is. (postage Id.) School
edition, prescribed by N.S.W. Department of
Public Instruction for use in Primary Schools,
limp cloth, 9d. (postage Id.) [.7ms# out.
Over 10.000 copies already sold. The virtue of this book
it that it sets out each ingredient and every stej) in method
separately and distinctly, so that even the veriest novice has
no difficulty in following the directions.
DISHES WITHOUT MEAT.
By Alice Jevons. Paper cover, Is. (postage Id.)
As the title implies, this is a vegetarian cookery book.
The recipes are simple and suitable for home use.
A JUNIOR COURSE OF FIRST AID :
For Boy Scouts, Girl Aids, and Primary Schools.
By George Lane Mullins, M.D. With 30 illustra
tions, 6d. (postage Id.)
FIRST AID IN NURSING :
For the Bush and Country, and for use in Schools.
By Mrs. W. M. Thomas (Sister Dickson). Illustrated
Limp cloth, Is. (postage Id.)


AN INTRODUCTION to the infinitesimal
CALCULUS.
By H S. Caeslaw, M.A., D.Sc,, F.R.S.E., Professor
of Mathematics in the University of Sydney.
Second edition, revised. Demy Bvo., cloth, 5s
(postage 2d.)
London : Longmans, Green & Co.
ELEMENTARY GEOMETRY, PRACTICAL AND
THEORETICAL.
By C. Godfrey, M.A., and A. W. Siddoks, M.A.
Second edition, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. ( postage 3d )
Also published in two parts, cloth, 2s. each
(postage 2d.) Key, 65.; Answers to Exercises, 4d.
London: The Cambridge University Press.
PRACTICAL PHYSICS.
■B} J- A. Pollock, Professor, and 0. U. Vokwiller
Assistant Professor of Physics in the University
of Sydney. Part I. With 30 diagrams. Paper
cover, 3s. 9d. {postage 2d.)
MATHEMATICAL TABLES.
Edited, with Introduction, by J. D. St. Clair
Maclardt, M.A., Chief Examiner, Department of
Public Instruction. New South Wales. Cloth gilt
3s. 6d. {postage 3d.)
following Tables: Seven Figure Logarithms
(1 100,000) ; Logarithmic Sines, Tangents and Secants;
Natural Sines, Cosines, Versed Sines, Chords, etc.; Natural
Tangents; Natural Secants, etc.
Not for sale outside Australia and New Zealand.
ABRIDGED MATHEMATICAL TABLES.
B - y S - Barracl ough, 8.E., M.M.E., Assoc. M. Inst.
C.E. Cloth, Is. {postage Id.)
Logarithms, &c., published separately, paper cover, 6d.
{postage Id.)


BRUSHWORK FROM NATURE, WITH DESIGN.
By J. E. Branch, Superintendent of Drawing, Depart-
ment of Public Instruction. Prescribed by the
Department of Public Instruction, X.S.W., for
Teachers’ Examinations. With 19 coloured and 5
other plates. Demy 4t0., decorated cloth, is. 6d.
(postage 3d.)
THE CUTTER’S GUIDE.
A Manual of Dresscutting and Ladies’ Tailoring. By
M. E. Roberts, Lecturer at Sydney Technical
College. Third edition, revised and enlarged, with
150 diagrams. Cloth gilt, 7s. 6d. ( postage 2d.)
Tailors’ Art Journal: “To all those inquirers from whom
we have had continued correspondence asking for information
as to the ways and means of perfecting their knowledge in the
rudiments of ladies’ dressmaking and tailoring, we can safely
say that no book is better suited for their purpose than this.”
GARMENT CUTTING FOR GIRLS.
A Course of Scientific Garment Cutting for Schools.
By M. E. Roberts. Prescribed for use in Girls’
High Schools. With 50 diagrams. Paper boards,
2s. fid. (postage Id.)
DRESS-CUTTING MEASURE BOOK.
For Students and Pupils using “The Cutter’s Guide,”
and “Garment Cutting for Girls.” fid. ( postage
Id.)
THE FORTIAN SEWING BOOK.
Ruled in inch squares for use in Schools. 3d.
(postage Id.)


ADDISON’S DE COVERLET PAPERS.
Edited by A. B. Piddington, K.C. Revised edition,
prescribed for use in Se<*mdary Schools. Limp
cloth, Is. 6d. ( postage Id.)
SHAKESPEARE’S AS YOU LIKE IT.
Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by M. L.
'MacCallum, M.A., B.C.L. (Oxon). Prescribed
for use in Secondary Schools. Limp cloth, Is.
(postage Id.)
SHAKESPEARE’S HENRY V.
Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by M. L.
•MacCallum, M.A., B.C.L. (Oxon). Prescribed
for use in Secondary Schools. Limp cloth, Is.
(postage Id.)
HISTORY AND CIVICS FOR QUALIFYING
CERTIFICATE, SCHOLARSHIP AND BURSARY
CANDIDATES.
By J. A. Broome. Limp cloth, Is. ( postage Id.)
QUALIFYING CERIFICATE MATHEMATICS.
By S. W. Cantrell, B.A. Limp cloth, 9d. ( postage
Id.) Answers, published separately, 6d. ( postage
Id.)
QUESTIONS SET AT THE QUALIFYING
CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS, 1911-1913.
With Answers to Arithmetic Papers by A. J. McCoy.
Limp cloth, 9d. {postage Id.)


GEOGRAPHY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By J. M. Taylor, M.A.,. LL.B. Fourth edition,
revised and enlarged, with 13 folding maps and
67 illustrations. Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. ( postage 2d.)
ENGLISH GRAMMAR, COMPOSITION, AND
PRECIS WRITING.
By James Coxway. New edition, revised and enlarged.
Cloth gilt, 3s. 6d. ( postage 2d.)
A SMALLER ENGLISH GRAMMAR, COMPOSITION,
AND PRECIS WRITING.
By James Coxway. New edition, revised and en-
larged. Cloth, Is. 6d. {postage Id.)
THE AUSTRALIAN OBJECT LESSOE BOOK.
Part I.—For Infant and Junior Classes. Second
edition, with 43 illus. Cloth, 2s. 6d. ( postage Id.)
Part ll.—For advanced Classes. Second edition, with
113 illustrations. Cloth, 2«. 6d. ( postage 2d.)
GEOGRAPHY OF AUSTRALIA AND
NEW ZEALAND.
Revised edition, with numerous maps and illustrations.
6d. {postage Id.)
GEOGRAPHY OF EUROPE, ASIA, AFRICA
AND AMERICA.
Revised edition, with numerous maps and illustrations.
6d. {postage Id.)
THE AUSTRALIAN LETTERING BOOK.
Containing the Alphabets most useful in flapping,
Exercise Headings, &0., with practical applica-
tions, Easy Scrolls, Flourishes, Borders, Corners,
Rulings, &o. Limp cloth, 6d. {postage Id.)


COMMONWEALTH MANUAL TRAINING
SERIES.
Concrete Guide to Paper-Folding for Design.
Is. 6d. (postage Id.)
Pupils’ Paper-Folding Books for Classes I. and 11.
Class 111., and Class IY. Id. each.
Teachers’ Manual of Cardboard Modelling for
Classes 11. and 111. (Lower). Is. (postage 2d.)
Pupils’ Cardboard Modelling and Drawing Book.
WIRE WORK FOE ROTS AND GIRLS.
By Charles E. Dawson. With 25 Diagrams. Paper
cover, Is. 6d. (postage Id.)
These exercises are the outcome of practical work in manual
training carried out by the author.
TOY-MAKING FOR BOYS.
By Charles E. Dawson. With 23 diagrams. Paper
cover, 2s. (postage Id.)
AUSTRALIAN SONGS FOR
AUSTRALIAN CHILDREN.
By Maybanke Anderson. Is. (postage Id.)
A NEW BOOK OF SONGS FOR SCHOOLS AND
SING 7 LG CLASSES.
By Hugo Alpen, ex-Superintendent of Music, De-
partment of Public Instruction, New South
Wales. Is. (postage Id.)
THE AUSTRALIAN PROGRESSIVE SONGSTER.
By Dr. S. Mcßurney. Part 1., for Junior Classes;
Part 11., for Senior Classes, 6d, each (postage
Id.)


AUSTRALIAN SCHOOL SERIES.
Grammar and Derivation Book, 64 pages. 2d.
Table Book and Mental Arithmetic. New edition,
greatly enlarged. 34 pages. Id.
History of Australia and New Zealand. 80 pages. 4d.
Illustrated.
Geography. Part I. Australasia and Polynesia, 64 pages.
2d.
Geography. Part 11. Europe, Asia. America, and
Africa, 66 pages. 2d.
Arithmetic and Practical Geometry—Exercises for
Class 11. , 50 pages. 3d.
Arithmetic—Exercises for Class 111., 50 pages. 3d.
Bible History for Schools, with Scripture Class Helps.
Illustrated. 64 pages. 4d.
Practical Geometry. Classes 11. and 111. With dia-
grams. 2d.
Classes IV. and V. With diagrams. 4d.
Classes 11., 111., IV. and V. (combined). 6d.
Practical and Theoretical Geometry. Book 11. 6d.
THE METRIC SYSTEM OF WEIGHTS AND
MEASURES, AND DECIMAL COINAGE.
By J. M. Taylor, M.A., LL.B. 6d. ( postage Id.)
BOYS’ AND GIRLS’ AIDS TO ARITHMETIC :
A Series of Diagrams for the Guidance of Pupils.
Paper Cover, 6d. ( postage Id.)
NEW TESTAMENT LESSONS.
By Rev. John Burgess, D.D. Paid I.—The Life of
Christ. Paper cover, Is. ( postage Id.)


SUPPLEMENTARY READERS.
THE CHILDREN’S TREASURY
OF AUSTRALIAN VERSE.
Edited by Bertram Stevens and George Mackaness,
M.A. With notes. Limp doth, Is. 3d. {post. Id.)
This volume contains all the best verse written in Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, suitable for junior classes. It has
been adopted by the N.S.W. Department of Public Instruction
for supplementary reading in primary schools.
SELECTIONS FROM THE
AUSTRALIAN POETS.
Edited by Bertram Stevens and George Mackaness,
M.A. With notes. Limp cloth, Is. 6d. {post. Id.)
The contents have been selected from the published work of
Gordon, Kendall, Paterson, Lawson, Ogilvie, Daley, Essex
Evans, Brunton Stephens, Mrs. Foott, Dorothea Mackellar, and
many other well-known writers. In addition, the book con-
tains a number of fine poems not obtainable in any other
volume, and it is easily the best, if not the only, collection of
Australian verse entirely suitable for young readers. It is
prescribed for use in the High and Secondary Schools of New
South Wales.
TEENS: A Story of Australian Schoolgirls.
By Louise Mack. Illustrated by Frank P. Mahony.
Limp cloth, Is. 6d. {postage 2d.)
GIRLS TOGETHER: A Story of Australian Schoolgirls.
By Louise Mack. Illustrated by George W. Lambert.
Limp cloth, Is. 3d. {postage 2d.)
DOT AND THE KANGAROO.
By Ethel C. Pedley. Illustrated by F. P. Mahony.
Limp cloth, Is. 3d. {postage Id.)
THE TOM TITS’ NEST, AND OTHER FAIRY
TALES.
By Amy Eleanor Mack. Paper cover, 4d. {post. Id.)


READERS AND COPY BOOKS.
LIFE OF LAPEROUSE.
By Professor Ernest Scott. With illustrations.
Limp cloth, Is. 3d. (postage Id.)
THE STORY OF W. C. WENTWORTH:
AUSTRALIA’S FIRST PATRIOT.
By Lewis Deer and John Barr. With portrait and
illustrations. Limp cloth, Is. (postage Id.)
THE AUSTRALIAN COPY BOOK.
In 10 carefully-graded numbers, and a book of Plain
and Ornamental Lettering, Mapping, &d. (No.
11). Price, 2d. each. Numerals are given in each
number. A.C.B. Blotter (fits all sizes), Id.
CHAMBERS’S GOVERNMENT HAND COPY BOOK.
In 12 carefully-graded numbers and a book for Pupil
Teachers (No. 13). 2d. each.
The letters are continuously joined to each other, so that the
pupil need not lift the pen from the beginning to the end
of each word. The spaces between the letters are wide, each
letter thus standing out boldly and distinctly by itself. The
slope is gentle, but sufficient to prevent the pupil from ac-
quiring a back hand. The curves are well rounded, checking
the tendency to too great angularity.
ANGUS AND ROBERTSON’S PENCIL
COPY BOOK.
In nine numbers. Id. each. No. 1 initiatory lines,
curves, letters, figures; 2 and 3, short letters, easy
combinations, figures; 4, long letters, short words,
figures; 5, long letters, words, figures; 6, 7, and 8,
capitals, words, figures; 9, short sentences, figures.
THE REFORM WRITING BOOKS.
With directions for teaching writing on the Reform
system. Nos. 1, 2, and 3, Id. each; Nos. 3a, 4 and
5, 2d. each. Pamphlet on The Teaching of
Writing, Is.




'


*


1508
02233162


