

PftyvS
- f \ ?"? f.V /
OOW W/
# \
PHILIP D. LORIMEK
PUBLISHED BY J. BUTTOK, PARHAMATT A.
MACQUARIE PASS.
ARGUS PRINT, CHURCH AND MACQUARIE STREETS,
PARRAMATTA.
<
r?( !
ARGUS PRINT, CHURCH AND MACQUARIE STREETS,
1 PARRAMATTA.
cn
M
$ ??


.
*
?
'
.
/? ?)
%
O


FRacc|uarle Pass.
On waving slopes that spread from base of mountains,
Where yet their awful majesty is heard ?
Through strains that come in torrents from the fountains,
That teach the song of freedom to the bird;
There is response to morning's voice arising
From all that love the beauty of the day,
To welcome now another new and sweet surprising
Held in the brightness of the summer?s ray?
Here it would seem that loveliness is resting
Ere she ascends to be the mountain?s bride,
Her seat is there ?for it ?there?s no contesting,
Enough?she knows, it claims her, as its pride;
But ere she lays aside her bridal veiling?
She hears the majesty of glory?s call;
And with desire to crown Jehovah?s hailing,
She enters then attired in Beauty?s Hall.
Tongarra wakes?-and fast adorns her tresses,
With the brilliant hue of flame-tree flowers;
And lilies twine around her their caresses
And honied are her gladsome morning hours?
Nigh to the Pass she stands, and with her stately bending,
She meets the kiss of Light with maiden grace,
That beam to her own loveliness is lending
A charm that dignifies her comely face ;
And to the notes?the call of lourie?s praising?
She turns her ear so sweetly glad for song.
And with the mighty mountain?s cheer-upraising,
Her voice is highest?loudest in that throng?
O?erarched with ferns and palm trees spreading branches
The steep ascent o?er shelves of rock is made,
O?er stray bold heads, where grand the water launches
Down to the chasms dark?where all is shade?
Here is the home the fairy seeks when telling
Of those strange stories oft we hear in years.
When yet the face of man, knew not his dwelling
And dreams were long undreamt that gathered tears.
The tufted knots of grass, and roots, empowering
The poet?s fingers as they lightly stray
Upon his harp, are softened by the flowering
Of Christmas Bells, in Austral?s azure day
Bock after rock?and then in lofty musing
Comes there a song to ears that tells of home
?Tis the Goburra choir ?they are amusing
Their happy lives ?where freedom?s pulses roam;


Their laugh rings out ?and o?er the headland sweeping
A mildness breaks upon Macquarie?s Head
Where the huge fern robed sand stone tower is keeping
Its sacred watch o?er charms to beauty wed?
And now ?on mountain top the Pass is ended
And other scenes of gladness come in view
The stretching vale toward Albion Park is blended
With ev?ry shade of green, ?neath smiling blue?
The waters ?neath the whisp?ring oaks are nearing
And soon will take their part in ocean roar?
The surges know the streamlets are appearing,
And glad to welcome them?they line the shore
With stately forms of spray, and billows foaming
So that the mountain?s voice may nnw be crowned
With regal pomp?where high the clouded doming
Is proudest?when on it, the storm has frowned ?
A thousand hills, and cone-shaped spurs are leaning
?Gainst lofty bare ribbed mountain tops and range
Dark Bong Bong looks upon the sheltered screening
That copses yield to homes in Winter?s change,
And like a monarch, mighty in his reigning
He holds his sceptre in the thunder cloud
While round him Nature draws a wild disdaining
And yields him her permission to be proud.
The meadows far, where Dapto fair is dreaming,
Are soft enshrined with purple, misty dyes,
Anon, through break of clouds?the sunbeams gleaming,
Bring to her calms, the touch of golden skies.
She rising smiles, with pleasure ; and unweary,
Looks on her breast, and finds a garland there.
Her pathways wend to scenes that are not dreary
And lo 1 her arms caress the herds they bear.
Thus Iliawarra in her grateful changing
Brings to the soul of man her pleasures sweet j
Seems it that glory is anew arranging
Her comely face, where God and man may meet:
For well has High Decree, in His Creation,
Foreseen the bent of human minds to crave.
For joy?known only now through inspiration,
When scenes litre this come ?tween them and the grave?
Man turns to them?and in his clayey holding
He drinks delight?where love is shed abroad.
Then are the hands of beauty seen unfolding
Her Royal gates that leads man to his God.


oid Ricj ree, near Hickman s Hotel
I look on thee oft?Oh ! thou marvellous tree
In thine evergreen robes on thy throne?
So gracefully arched with thine arms o?er the free
Who have left thee a shrine of thine own.
When young in my years, when enamoured with light
With the flood of the sun on my brow?
I?ve sat near thy roots, overwhelmed with delight
Of thy form, which is awing me now.
And yet! there?s no change in thy high drooping head,
In thy limbs that are bearing its height,
No branch of thy trunk is yet numbered as dead
Nor a bough that is marked with a blight.
While round thee, the vines, that are close to thy base
Where the former ones grew, and have died,
Are climbing thy height?with their younger embrace
For thy love, which they tenderly hide.
I stand at thy feet, while thy boughs are the fringe
That embroider the blue and the grey,
When Light in the West wears a deep golden tinge
That is crowning thy age of to-day.
That age which is lost in decay, long ago?
Through the fading of memory here?
That?s hid in the sands of the centuries? flow
Like an hour, that?s forgot in a year.
Oh! say?hast thou aught of a treaty with Time
To be still?on its borders of green?
That thy younger leaves overshadow thy prime
With the soul of a beautiful scene ;
How many have looked upon thee in their youth
In the hour of life?s charming display?
Have lived their long lives while their moments in truth
Were to thee ?but the gleams of a day.
The dawn of their lives, breaking full on each brow?
When they saw in thy majesty?thee.
Thy colossal limbs, that were then, as they?re now,
The real strength of an evergreen tree.
They?re gone to their graves, but thou knowest them all
With their aged white looks on their head,
But their deaths to thee, only widened the pall,
That is thine?for the face of the dead.


sbe P Ive Island Rarm,
I roam in the shades of the Five Island farm
Through the wild tangled woods that are there?
For gladly my heart is enticed with the ebarm
That dispells ev?ry worry and care.
The low-lying lands, where the nooks bring to sight
A soft glimpse of the sea, in its calm?
I fondle the more, as I leap with delight
At the voice of the bird in its psalm.
High, stately, red gums, with the stringy bark?s shades
O?er the rich growing herbage of green?
Are sheltering herds in their royal arcades
In the midst of a beautiful scene.
While the blue peeps through from the ocean in bays,
With the ripples that dance on its face,
Is a poet?s dream in the light of his days
That forever endears his embrace.
Mount Keira I see in the calm of her reign,
As a guard or a natural tower,
Not terraced for war?looking over the main,
As a foe in its silence or power.
But as Austral?s own?in her garden divine
In the beautiful land of her flowers?
Where her glory dwells, and is girt by the vine
As the queen of her groves and her bowers.
And the range that dips to the south at her side,
With its Gabo and Kembla in sight,
Where copses are dense, where neighbours reside,
In the far away fairy-land height?
Are the spells that bind ev?ry breast with a charm,
Ev?ry heart to the glory of day?
To the home that is on the Five Island farm?
To the home on the banks of the bay.


ire at t|?e Five Islands Farm.
How bare is the farm?since fire swept away
Ev?ry trace of a home that had been,
How changed is the dream ?where the heart cannot stay
Where it lingered so often to glean.
Every tree we adored?every bend of the bough?
That in youth covered hearts in the shade?
In silence we wail, for the loss of them now
Fills the heart with the woes, fire has made.
I look on the farm but I cannot gaze long
For I miss a dear home that was there.
A silence prevails where it once was all song
When the home was all lovely and fair?
How sudden the change when the eyes cannot clasp
An old scene none can ever forget.
But memory holds evergreen in her grasp
An old roof where ? our long ago ? met.
How keenly the flames, and the winds in their sweep
Did their work, with an eaoer desire
Scarce giving alarm to arouse from their sleep,
The tired dreamers surrounded with fire?
So quietly on flew the flames in their stealth
And all steadily sure of their gain
Completing the wreck, when the most of the wealth
Was the fire fiend?s own ?in its reign.
Oh ! vainly I look for the willow-bough?s bend,
But the willows proved food for the fire?
They stood as a shade, when the heart of a friend
Said good-bye to a home with a sire,
The ? old long ago ? often heard a farewell
Uttered there?with a pang or a sigh,
And an aged man, where his offspring now dwell,
Often clasped a true hand with good-bye.
?Tis hard to lose all, and to see one?s roof go
In the peace and the darkness of night,
To see our old joys ta?en away by a foe,
By a foe? that is deadly in might.
I look for that home?but alas! it has gone,
That old roof that hid many a charm,
Where many a friend hailed the face of the dawn
As it smiled o?er the Five Islands farm.


(s|>l?e Butcl? er Bird s
I know of a song that is heard ev?rywhere
That is soft, and is true in its tone
Now rang in the spring?on the houghs that are there,
To the gold, that embroiders their throne.
At noon the bird sits, never hid from the sun,
As it courts the bright sheen of the day ;
And carols ascend when the day has begun
To the birth of the wattle tree?s spray.
The butcher bird sits in his glory alone,
While his mate is at home in her nest,
Her ears are in love with his rapturous tone
As she steeps his sweet voice in her breast.
She hears the coarse cry of the forest arise,
But she heeds not that sound, or that call;
For he is her king, and is all to her eyes,
Who is monarch in song?over all.
So leaps my heart too, to that so stirring song
As I hear it aloft in the trees;
For soon it is caught, and is treasured along
By mine ear, with the sweep of the breeze,
I hear it at noon, but ?tis never beneath
Any shade, but the love of the sun,
For there it can sip ev?ry flower for its wreath
For the heart of its favourite one.
I wear it in heights in my heart, as a pearl
That is pure as a jewel can be?-
?Twas uttered as song, from a bird to unfurl
A new dream, for my spirit to see.
It?s rich in its tone, and there?s none to compete
With the thrill, or the wildness of voice,
As its echo dies, at the wattle-spray?s feet
Bound his mate ?who is queen of his choice.
$ of a Place.
I know of a place where my love cannot die,
In the folds of my nature it gleams;
So tenderly kissed by the smiles of the sky
With the sweets of my fairyland dreams
Unknown to the sight of the world, and its press
Where my soul slowly loiters to find
A joy ev?ry day, or some beauty to bless
In the wondering calms of my mind.


Ey?ry morning when there, I can breathe the new air
As it skips from its birth on the hills;
And can hear its song, as my own I prepare
To the tuna of the rippling rills.
To the music sweet, as it drifts through the leaves
On the boughs, overhead, with the breeze,
And mingling along in its flight, it receives
Ev?ry song at its birth from the trees.
My love cannot die, for on beauty I rest
While my heart, she can win in return,
For I dream of her near her beautiful breast,
And in sleep I delightfully learn?
How tender her touch, in the aisles of the wood,
Where the flower is upraised by her voice;
How her hands are full of her wonderful food,
That is mine, as my natural choice.
As poet I sing with my thoughts?without rein,
As I look in the eyes of love;
I am nature?s child?-and I sing in her strain,
With her God, as my Guidance above.
She kissed me at birth, and I clung to her breast
While I lived in the joy of her bowers
Till she led me here with her charms for a rest
To the End, with her garden of flowers.
Delight is a friend if we use it aright,
When we hold up our hearts to the sun,
Though shades may be sought to relieve our poor sight
Ere the half of our journey is done.
But here, as I sit, my delight is abroad
On its wing?every wonder to trace
It brings to my soul, the full presence of God,
And my joy is soon writ on my face.
And I fancy now?you may wish to know where,
Is that place, where my love cannot die,
Where the moments wake into hours ?neath the glare
?Neath the dome of a beautiful sky:
?Tis out in the wilds, in a range near the sea
Where the slopes ever turn to the sun,
Where the richest voice is the song in the tree,
Ere the heat of the day is begun.
Where cedars, and oaks, andjthe possum wood grow,
As companions to palms that are rare,
Where thickets are dense, and the ev?ning?s glow
Is alive with the songs'in the air.


Where turpentine shades fall on streams that are near
That are flowing away to the sea.
Oh! love cannot die when there?s none held so dear
As thy name ?Illawarra?to me.
ynandeira.
There?s peace on the hills in the winter?s short day
When the cattle are fed from the stack;
When hay is yet sweet, ere it smells of decay,
And there?s plenty for all, and no lack?
This winter is well?Unanderra smiles now
O?er her pastures, so lovely and green ;
The farmer?s broad laugh is the token I trow
That is smoothing the loss that has been.
Pale bride of the hills, where thy presence is sweet
To the lovers of all that is fair,
Unanderra ! arise from thy evergreen seat,
To thy throne, that is beautiful there.
Sweet rest of the fern, where thy calms ever dwell,
In the homes that around thee are full
Of kindliest thought that the weary know well,
As they drink thy new milk in the cool.
Uneven thy walks, but how cheery to know
That each leads to a home in the end
Where much of life?s grief in life?s trials below
Feels the clasp that?s sincere from a friend.
?Tis then that we feel, how humanity can
Be endeared to us all by its worth
By the hearty grip from the hands of a man
Whom his nature has homed upon earth.
Like to pearls round thy neck, ev?ry scene is a dream
That is read by the charmed, as he views
Bv?ry shade well cast o?er a fairy land gleam
With its delicate tints and its hues.
But softly I ask?Unanderra?from thee
A lone grave from my beautiful one
Where wildness can sleep near the song on the tree
That awakes at the rising of sun.


?
?
?
?
'


liiF
3 1508 01741495 9
NAT lONA I
! 'BRAKY OF AUSTRAt A
