

GENERAL RULES
TO RE OBSERVED UNDER
THE MINES REGULATION ACT OF 1881
The following General Rules shall, wherever reasonably practicable, be observed in every mine—
Ventilation,
(i.) An adequate amount of ventilation shall be constantly produced in the mine to such an extent that the shaft, winzes, levels, underground stables,
and working places of the mine, and the travelling roads to and from such working places, shall be in a fit state for working and passing
therein.
Gunpowder and blasting.
(n.) Gunpowder or other explosive or inflammable substance shall only be used in a mine as hereunder provided (that is to say)—
(«.) It shall not be stored on the surface of or adjacent to the mine, unless in such place and in such quantities as are in writing approved by the
Minister or Inspector.
(b.) It shall not be stored in the mine in any quantity exceeding what would be required for use during six working days for the purposes
of the mine. And if stored in the mine, it shall be kept in a drive or chamber separated by a door fixed across such drive at least thirty feet
from any travelling road.
(c.) It shall not be taken for use into the workings of the mine, except in a securely covered case or canister, containing not more than eight pounds.
(d.) A workman shall not have in use at one time in any place more than one of such cases or canisters.
(e.) In a mine, no iron or steel pricker shall be used in blasting, and no iron or steel tool shall be used in tamping or ramming.
(/.) A charge which has missed fire maybe drawn by a copper pricker, but in no case shall any iron or steel tool be used for the purpose of drawing
or drilling out such charge.
Man-holes to be provided in self-acting or engine planes.
(m.) Every underground plane, whether self-acting or worked by an engine, whim, or whip, shall, for the use of persons travelling thereon, be
provided (if exceeding forty yards in length) with some proper means of signalling between the stopping places and the ends of the plane; and
shall be provided in every case, at intervals of not more than twenty yards, with sufficient man-holes for places of refuge.
Spaces in horse roads.
(iv.) Every road on which the produce of the mine in transit exceeds ten tons per hour over any part thereof, and on which the load is drawn bv a
horse or other animal, shall, for the use of persons travelling thereon, be provided at intervals of not more than one hundred yards with
sufficient spaces for places of refuge, eacli of sufficient length, and of at least three feet in width between the waggons running on the tramroad
and the side of the road.
Keeping spaces clear.
(v.) Every man-hole and space for a place of refuge shall be constantly kept clear, and no person shall so place anything in such man-hole or space
as to prevent access thereto.
Fencing of entrance to shafts.
(vi.) The top, and all entrances between the top and bottom of every working or pumping shaft, shall be properly and securely fenced; but this
provision shall not be taken to forbid the temporary removal of a fence for the purpose of repairs or other operations, if proper precautions are
used; and every abandoned or disused shaft shall be fenced or securely covered in by the lessee or registered owner thereof, and its position
indicated on the surface by a post with a notice thereon affixed.
Securing of shafts.
(vil.) Where the natural strata are not safe, every working or pumping shaft shall be securely cased, lined, or otherwise made secure.
Drive and excavation to be protected.
(vm.) Every drive, and every excavation of any kind in connection with the working of a mine, shall be securely protected and made safe for persons
employed therein.
Division of shaft.
(is.) W h crc one portion of a shaft is used for the ascent and descent of persons by ladders or a man-engine, and another portion of the same shaft is
used for raising material, the first-mentioned portion shall be cased or otherwise securely fenced off from the last-mentioned portion.
Signalling.
(x.) Every working shaft in which a cage is used, and every division of such shaft in which persons are raised, shall, if exceeding fifty yards in depth,
be provided with guides and some proper means of communicating distinct and definite signals—
(l.) From the bottom of the shaft, and from every entrance for the time being in work between the top and the bottom to the top, and thence to
the engine-room; and
(-•) Eiom the engine-ioom and top to the bottom of the shaft, and to every entrance for the time being in work between the top and the
bottom of the shaft. ° 1
Cover overhead.
(xi.) A sufficient cover overhead shall be used when lowering or raising persons in every working shaft, except where it is worked by a whim,
or whip, or windlass, or where a person is employed about the pump or some work in the shaft.
Proper ladder or footway.
(xn.) A proper ladder or footway shall be provided in every working shaft where no machinery is used for lowering or raising persons employed
therein. 1 J
Slipping of rope on drum.
(xin.) There shall be flanges or horns on the drum of every machine used for lowering or raising persons, and also, if the drum is conical, other
appliances sufficient to prevent the rope from slipping.
Break.
(xiv.) An adequate break shall be attached to every machine worked by steam, water, or mechanical power, and used for lowering or raisin'-- persons,
and also a proper indicator showing to the person who works the machine the position of the cage or load in the shaft.
Person in charge of machinery.
(x\.) No person under the age of eighteen years shall be placed in charge of or have the control of any steam engine used in connection with
the working of a mine. No person in charge of the steam machinery working in a mine shall, under any pretext whatever, unless relieved
by a competent person, absent himself or cease to have continual supervision during the time such machinery is so used.
Means of egress to be kept ready for use.
(xvi.) TV hen the only means of egress from a mine is a machine worked by steam, water, or mechanical power, such machine shall be always kept
ready for use whilst any person is heloAV in the mine. 1
Fencing machinery.
(xvii.) Every fly-wheel, and all exposed or dangerous parts of the machinery used in or about the mine, shall be kept securely fenced.
Gauges to boilers and safety valve.
(xviii.) Every steam boiler shall be provided with a proper steam gauge and water gauge, to show respectively the pressure of steam and the height
of water in the boiler, and with a proper safety valve. Once m every six months every boiler shall be subjected to hydraulic test, and the date
and full description of every such test shall be entered in a book kept by the mining manager or other person in charge of the mine, and the
entries in such book shall, on demand, be open to the perusal of an inspector under this Act. The pressure of steam in any boiler shall not
lie allowed to be higher than that shewn by the last preceding test to be a safe pressure for that boiler.
Wilful damage.
(xix.)_ No person shall wilfully damage, or without proper authority remove or render useless, any fencing, casing, lining, guide, means of signalling,
iif a mine Cr ’ ° Uim ’ au » c ’ 10111 5 Jr( ‘ ak > 11K hcator, ladder, platform, steam gauge, water gauge, safety valve, or other appliance or thing provided
Boring rods to be used.
(xx.) In every working m a mine approaching a place likely to contain a dangerous accumulation of water, boring rods shall be used for the purpose
of perforating the ground m advance ol such working, and no drive, gallery, or other excavation shall be made Avithin a dangerous distance of
such accumulation of Avater. °
Mining manager in charge of a mine to inspect.
(xvi.) rhe mining manager shall, once m each week, carefully examine the buildings and machinery used in the Avorkiug of the mine, and the
condition of the mine itself, and shall record in writing, in a book kept for that purpose, his opinion as to their condition and safety, and any
repairs and alterations required to ensure greater safety to the persons employed therein.
Temporary removal of fence from shaft.
(xxil) When a fence has been temporarily removed from an entrance to a shaft, to admit of the carrying on of ordinary mining operations, a
fr toW Ts tte case m“be 6 "" Y " Cr ° SS entranoe “ ot less than four more than five feet from the floor of the brace, chamber,
Contravention of this section an offence.
•,, f Evei 7 P erson who convenes or does not comply with any of the general rules in this section shall be guilty of an offence against this Act; and
sh-m hsif l hl^oP^Prl C ° n p t r en f 10n ° (V 01 ' non - com P lian . ce yth, any ot the said general rules hy any person whomsoever being proved, the mining manager
a also he deemed flinty of an offence against this Act, unless he proves that he had taken all reasonable means by publishing, and to the best of
his power enforcing, the said rules to prevent such contravention or non-compliance.
Rules to be posted on conspicuous places.—Penalty for defacing notices.
A printed copy of the general rules as aforesaid shall be posted in the office, if any, and on a building or board in sonic conspicuous place in
3 CC ff° U with every name. And every person who pulls down, injures, or defaces a notice hung up or affixed as required hy this Act shall for every
such offence, be liable to a penalty not exceeding forty shillings. 1 * ’
JOHN M, MACROSSAN.
Department or Public Works axp Mines,
Brisbane, 2nd January, 1882.
AUTHORITY : JAMEb C. BEAL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. WILLIAM STREET, BRISBANE.
