

GENERAL RULE
AND
BY-LAWS
OF THE
AMALGAMATED SHEARERS UNION
OF AUSTRALASIA
AS REVISED AND ADOPTED BY
THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE,
OF THE A S.U.,
HELD AT BOURKE, N.S.W., FEBRUARY 1890.
NEWPORT.
PRINTED AT “THE SHEARER" RECORD” OFFICE, NEWPORT, MELB., VIC.
1890.




P R E F AC E.
Experience has proved that all the privileges the
working classes now enjoy have been gained through and
by their Trade Unions. As disunited individuals they
are at the mercy of their employers, but united they can
obtain all that is just and right. As almost every class
in the community are now organised for the furtherance
of the interests of their own particular callings, those
who are not members of some society whose duty it is to
look after its members* welfare, must of necessity suffer
injustice and wrong j because, without union with their
fellow workmen of the same occupation, they are unable
to resist those encroachments on their rights and privileges
which are certain to be made by those whose self-interest
leads them to trespass| on | the rights of their fellow
men.
No society can expect permanency without rules and
regulations. The are, however, of no use, if not read
and observed, but remain only a form without force. On
the contrary, when due attention and obedience is paid to
their wholesome and salutary orders, peace and concord
arise, which animate the members to union and friend-
ship. Let, then, each of you read and fully digest the
following rules, and it will be discovered that, by strictly
adhering to the same, the evils attendant upon our
respective occupations will be avoided, while the advance-
ment of the rights and privileges of labor, the cultivation
of brotherly affection, and mutual regard for each others
welfare, cannot fail to be the result ; and every good
member of society will admire and respect the noble
triumph you will have obtained by your united exertions
and perseverance.




GENERAL RULES
OF THE
AMALGAMATED
Sheares' Unoin of Australasia.
NAME,
i. /This Society shall be called the Amalgamated
Shearers’ Union" of Australasia, and shall consist of
as many local branches as may conform to the following
rules.
OBJECTS.
3, (I.) To correct the rights and privileges of
shearers throughout Australasia, (is,) To secure and
maintain a fair rate of remuneration, by the adoption
of prices and rates of wages suitable to the circum-
stances of the several colonies and districts, (hi)
The adoption and enforcement of just and equitable
agreements between employer and employe, (lv.) To make
such agreements as will prevent undue loss of time in
travelling to sheds, and to ensure the carrying out of
agreements made by shearers and shearers’ cooks with
sheepowners. (v.) To protect members (against exorbitant
charges for rations or horse accommodation, (vi.) To
provide relief for members in case of accident whilst
engaged in the occupation of shearing,
GOVERNMENT,
% The government of the A.S.TJ. shall be composed
of a President, two Vice-Presidents. Treasurer, and
Secretary, who shall act in concert with one representative
from each financial local branch, and shall form an Execu


tree Council, any five of whom shall form a quorum, which,
shall meet to transact the business of the Union when
required. That each officer shall remain in office until the
ensuing Annual Conference Meeting, unless he misconduct
himself, or the local branch of which he is a member has
withdrawn from the A.S.U, If either of the above take
place he shall no longer be an officer of the Union, such
vacant office to be tilled by the officer next in rank ; the
lowest vacancy thus caused shall be filled at the ensuing
Executive Connell meeting, hut no officer shall be
compelled to fill any vacancy thus caused,
4. That each recognised local branch appoint and pay
its own Council representative, but under no circumstances
shall a local branch be allowed to send more than one
representative to the Council meeting. The officers of the
A,S,U, shall have power to call the Executive Council
together when deemed necessary, J
g. That a committee of two members be elected from,
the Council, who shall act with the President, Vice-
Presidents, Secretary and Treasurer, in all cases of
emergency ; but, before so acting, the committee shall
make known to ail members of the Executive Council,
either by circular from the President, or if necessary by
Council Meeting, the particulars of such emergent cases
as may arise between the regular meeting of the Council
and the Annual Conference, The said Committee, if
called upon, to be paid out of the General Fund of the
A.S.U. ‘
CONFERENCE AND COMMITTEE,
6. That a Conference Meeting be held annually in the
month of February, at which the President, two Vice-
Presidents, Treasurer, Secretary,, two Auditors, and three
Trustees, shall be elected or re-elected ; such- election
to be by ballot, and to be by an absolute .majority of those
voting.


7. That each branch shall appoint its own delegate to
Executive Council as soon as convenient after each
Annual Conference.
S, That Council and Committee Meetings shall be
held in the most central places, which shall be determined
by the Officers, but the Conference shall be subject to
removal to such places as the .majority of representatives
assembled at such conference may deem suitable.
9. That Conference shall be constituted of members
from the various local branches belonging to the A.S.U.,
who shall be duly appointed and paid by the respective
branches. The names and addresses of such representa-
tives to be forwarded to the Secretary of the A.S.U. at
least fourteen days previous to the Conference taking place.
Each local branch shall, be allowed to send representatives
on the following scale :™
1 to 500—One Representative.
500 to 1000 —Turn do.
Over 1000 Three do.
No branch to be allowed to send more than three repre-
sentatives. In all cases the Secretary of each branch
(providing he Is not the Secretary of the A.S.U.), shall,
by virtue of his office, be one of the delegates to represent
such branch at the Annual Conference.
DELEGATES’ CREDENTIALS.
10. That each representative to the Conference and
Council Meetings shall be provided with proper creden-
tials, duly certified by the Chairman or Secretary of the
local branch he may represent.
EXPENSES OF CONFERENCE AND COUNCIL
MEETINGS,
11. Expenses of Conference and Council Meetings, and
also of Committees, such as stationery, porterage, and rent


of rooms, &c., shall be paid from the general funds of
the A.S.tT.
DUTIES OF OFFICERS,
12, The duty of the President shall be to preside at ail
meetings, inspect and thoroughly examine and sign all
money claims against the Un ion previous to their payment ;
he shall be empowered (subject to rule 4) to call Committee
Meetings in ah cases of emergency, and generally to ensure
the well-being and objects of the Union ; and. in case the
votes at any time be equal, the Chairman to have a
casting vote,
13, The duty of the Vice-Presidents sbal.l be to assist
the President at all meetings of the Union, and in the
absence of the President, one of them shall occupy the
chair, and conduct business. He shall perform all functions
indicated lor the President to the best of his ability and
judgment, pro tern,, if the President through sickness or
absence is unable to do so,
14, The Treasurer shall keep an account of all moneys
received as a check against the Secretary, and shall under
no circumstances pay, lend, or otherwise appropriate any
of the funds belonging to the Union to any local, branch,
member, cause, or purpose whatever, except in accordance
with the rules, resolutions, and minutes of the Council and
Conference Meeting ; he shall, at all times, give ample
security lor the money entrusted to his care, such security
to be approved of by the Executive Council, He shall
not retain la his possession any sum. for a longer period
than forty-eight hours ; he shall not be responsible for
results following legal action only for what he received,
15, The duty of Secretary shall be to keep a correct
account of ail moneys received and expended, attend all
meetings, and take minutes of the same ; he shall zealously
attend to all correspondence, and answer such questions as
may be asked in accordance with the rules and regulations


of the Union ; he shall write returns according to
instructions Irons the Council or Conference, have them
printed and posted to all the local branches, and insert, no
matter in them except in connection with business^ of the
Union ; he shall correspond at least monthly with the
branches : he shall keep; a 'memorandum book, and insert
the date of postage of all correspondence and letters
received ; he shall sit with, the Auditors when auditing
the yearly accounts of the Union, and shall, insert ins
name and address in all letters and returns, enter in his
account book a detailed account of all moneys
from all branches, or from any other source, with date oi
receipt, also a detailed account of expenses for carriage or
purchase of goods, arid all legal expenditure; he shall also
keep an account of all moneys, goods, &c., sent to any
branch, with the name of the branch and date of sending
same; he shall also write any correspondence the
Committee may instruct him, and do all other things for
the advancement of the Union that the President may
direct; send a digest of all business to come before the
Council Meeting as early as possible, and for Conference
Meetings at least one month before such, meeting, to all
and. each of the branches ; he shall hold office for twelve
months, but the Union shall have power to depose the
Secretary for neglect of duty, or for the misappropriation
of money or goods of the Union ; he shall in all meetings
be allowed the right of speech, or vote; he shall not retain
more than. £zs in hand for more than forty-eight hours,
and shall forward to Treasurer duplicate bank-slip for all
moneys banked,
AUDITORS’ DUTIES,
16. The .Auditors shall take the Treasurer and
Secretary’s books and balance-sheets, with ail receipts,
compare them with bank pass-book and vouchers, and
report on same to Conference. Auditors hading any
deficiency to state the particulars in their report, and lay
same before the following meeting.
ELIGIBILITY FOR OFFICE, '
17. No person other than practical shearers shall be


eligible for election or appointment to any stipendiary
office in the A.S.U. This rule shall not apply to any
person in office at time said rule was passed,
18. No person shall be permitted to hold any office or
attend any Council or Conference as a representative who-
le not a financial member of the A.S.U,
SECRETARY ART) AGENTS TO FIND SECURITY.
19. The Secretary and all Travelling Agents of the
A.S.U. shall find security for £ too before entering upon
their duties as Secretary or Agents.
POWER TO MAKE BY-LAWS.
20. The Executive Council of the A.S.U, shall have
power to frame such by-laws as may be necessary to
carry into effect the objects of the Union.
POWER TO MAKE LEVIES,
2.1, In case the funds in hand are insufficient to meet
the requirements of the Union, the Conference or Council
shall be empowered to lay a levy upon the various local
branches, the amount of which shall be in accordance
with the number of financial members the local branch
contains, and sufficient per member to meet the require-
ments of the A.S.U.
REPRESENTATION OF BRANCHES,
22. The President, Vice-Presidents, Secretary, and
Treasurer, or any of them, shall not be allowed to
represent any local branch as representatives so long as
they hold office, but at ail Conferences, Council and
Committee Meetings shall be allowed a vote.
DEPUTATION EXPENSES,
23, The President, Vice-Presidents, Secretary, and
Treasurer, when deputed to do business on behalf of the
Union shall, for every day so employed, receive such sum
as the Conference may from time to time determine, and
second-class railway fare to and from such place of
business.


34- All deputations appointed to carry out the
principles and objects of the Union shall receive such sum
per day as may be determined upon by Conference, and
second-class railway fare. No deputation to be considered
legally appointed unless they are appointed, by Council or
Conferences, except in cases of emergency.
CONDUCT OF MEETINGS,
25. For the purpose of obtaining good order and
facilitating business at all Council or Conference Meetings
connected with the Union, the following regulations shall
be observed~
{1) The examination of all representatives’ creden-
tials.
(2) The names of all representatives to be called
over.
(3) Appoint Standing Orders Committee,
(4) Proceed with business according to programme,.
(5) The privilege of speaking on any subject shall
belong to him who first rises to address the
meeting,
(6) No representative allowed to speak more than
once upon any one subject, without the
express consent of the President. The mover
of any resolution to have the privilege to
reply.
(7) Ail questions to be decided by a majority of
votes,
(8.) All votes to be counted [and declared by the
President or the scrutineers, but any two
members may demand a division.
(9) No representative shall be absent from the
meeting without permission from the Presi-
dent.
(10) No intoxicating drinks allowed in the meeting..


(ji) Representatives not answering to their names
when the roll is called shall be fined sixpence.
(12) Any representative disobeying the President ? by
refusing to comply with the foregoing; regula-
tions} shall, be fined one shilling,
(.13) AM lines to be appropriated to the funds of the
Union,
ORDER OF DEBATE. '
26. The Standing Orders Committee shall arrange tb©
order of business to be laid before Annual Conference fo r
each day’s sitting, but shall be guided by general rule.
NOMINATION OF OFFICERS,.
27. No person shall be elected an officer of the
A.S.U. unless duly nominated by some branch of the
Union ; such nomination to be forwarded to the Secretary
•of the A.S.U, at least one month before date of the
Annual Conference Meeting.
INSTRUCTIONS TO LOCAL SECRETARIES.
28. The Secretary of each local branch shall make a
■correct return every twelve months to the Secretary of
the A.S.U., stating the number of members the local
branch contains, and the full amount of funds in hand,
together with the state of affairs in such branch. Also
list of all members of such branch. Printed forms shall
be supplied by the Secretary of the A.S.U.
OFFICERS’ SALARY.
29. Salaries and allowances for officers shall be fixed
for ensuing year by Annual Conference.
WHERE BRANCHES MAY BE FORMED.
30. Branches may be formed in such, districts or
colonies as the Conference or Executive Council may
decide upon and shall be governed and guided by the
rules and by-laws herein provided.


FUNDS AND BANKING.
31, Each branch shall, after each annual audit of
accounts, transfer ail funds over and above amount
required for working expenses to the Secretary at the
central or head office of the Amalgamated Shearers’
Union of Australasia to be placed to the credit of said
Union.
32, Should any branch require assistance it shall be
in the power of the Executive Officers and Committee to>
vote such sum as may be required from the General
Fund.
33, All funds of this 'Onion shall be placed in the City
of Melbourne Bank, or such other bank as the Union
may at any future time think proper ; and three members
shall be elected by the Union as Trustees, who shall
insert their names in the manager’s or bank books for the
prevention of fraud and the security of funds.
34, The whole of the funds and property of ths A.S.U,
shall be vested in the three Trustees elected at the Annual.
Conference to be held in trust, for and subject to the
control and direction of the Conference or Executive
Council, Said Trustee shall have full power and authority
to invest, use, or otherwise dispose of the said funds and
property in such manner as they may be from time to
time directed in accordance with these General .Rules and
provisions of the Trades Union Act 1884. and. act amending
the same-
-35, No funds shall be withdrawn except by cheque,
signed by one of the Trustees, the Secretary, and the
Treasurer, and countersigned by the President ; and no
Trustee shall sign bis name to any cheque without
receiving a sealed note from the Secretary of the A.S-Di,
such note to be also signed by the President. All Trustees
shall enter their names and addresses in the books of the


Secretary of the A.S.U., and renew the same if they change
their residence.
ALTERATION OF RULES.
36. No new rule shall be made, nor. any of the rules
herein contained, or hereafter to be made, shall be
amended, altered, or rescinded, unless with the consent of
a majority of the representatives present at the Annual
Conference Meeting, provided that copies of the same
shall first be submitted by the Secretary of the A.S.U. to
the various branches at least two months prior to the- date
of holding such meeting. Any branch wishing to alter or
amend any law must send such alterations or amendments
to the Secretary of the A.S.IL at least three months before
the Annual Conference Meeting,
37. Whenever the Certificate of Registration Is with-
drawn! or cancelled by the Registrar, the real and personal
property to which the Union is beneficially entitled shall
be applied—first, to payment ail just debts and liabilities
of the Union due and owing to persons other than persons
being members thereof ; secondly, to the payment of all
just claims of members and persons claiming any relief or
other benefit from the Union ; and thereafter shall be
divided among the members equally,
38, The Secretary shall draw up and transmit to the
Government Statist, before the first day of February, in
every year, a General Statement in the form and comprising
the particulars prescribed by or under the provision of the
22nd section of The Trades Union Act 1884, and shall
deliver to every member of or depositor in the Union, on
application, a copy of such statement,
39, The Secretary shall transmit to the Registrar,
before the first day of February in every year, a statement
of officers and a copy of all alterations of rules and new
rules made by the Union during the year ending the 31st
day of December then last past, and a copy of the rules of
the Union as they exist at that date.


40. Every person having an interest in the funds o
the. Union may inspect the books and the names of the
members, at all reasonable hours, at the office of the Union,
or other place where they are kept*
DISSOLUTION,
41* The Onion may at anytime be dissolved, providing
that a vote of the members be taken, and two-thirds of the
whole number of the members good on the books vote in
favor of dissolving and winding up of the Union. Such
vote shall be taken by ballot,
42. In the event of any branch being dissolved, from
any cause whatever, all funds or property of any kind in
possession of the said branch shall become the property
of the A.S.IJ,
OFFICE.
43, The Central or Head Office of the Union, and the
place where all communications may be addressd, is
Albert-street, Creswick, in the colony of Victoria*
W* G. SPENCE, President, Creswick, Victoria.
J. A. COOK, Vice - President, Hindley - street,
Adelaide, S.A,
C. POYNTONj Vice-President, Cape Clear, Vic.
A. POYNTON, '] ["reasurer," Port Augusta, S.A,
D* TEMPLE, Gen. Secretary, Creswick, 'Victoria.




BY-LAWS
OF THE
Amalgamated Sheares' Unoin of Australasia.
MEMBERS.
1, Branches shall consist of persons who follow the
■occupation of shearing during the season j and shearers
cooks. Others may be admitted as honorary members,
OBJECTS.
2, (i.) To protect the rights and privileges of shearers 5
and shearers 5 cooks throughout Australasia. (ii.) To
secure and maintain a fair rate of remuneration, by the
adoption of prices and rates of wages szritable to the
circumstances of the several colonies and districts, (hi.)
The adoption and enforcement of just and equitable
agreements between employer and employe. (iv.) To
make such agreements as will prevent undue loss of time
in travelling to sheds, and to ensure the carrying out of
agreements made by shearers with sheepowners. (v.) To
protect members against exorbitant charges for rations or
horse accommodation, (v.) To provide relief for mem-
bers whilst engaged in the occupation of shearing,
MEANS,
3, That for the purpose of carrying out the objects of
the Union, each member shall contribute the sum of Tea
Shillings per annum. Means shall also be raised by
payment of entrance fees, levies, donations, &c.


GOVERNMENT,
4, Each Branch shall be governed by a Chairman;,
two Vice-Chairmen, Treasurer, Secretary, and a Com-
mittee of twelve, all of whom shall hold office for a
period of twelve months,
5, Three trustees shall be elected, who shall remain
in office during the pleasure of the Union, and may be-
removed at a meeting specially called for the purpose, A
Special Meeting shall be called to fill any vacancy or
vacancies that may occur.
OFFICERS’ DUTIES.
6, The Chairman shall be the recognised head of the
Branch. He shall preside at all meetings in connection
with the Branch and Committee, &c,, and see that the
business is conducted in a proper manner. He shall sign
ail cheques passed for payment, and other documents
requiring his signature as head of the Branch- He shall
be' empowered to call Committee Meetings in all cases of
emergency, and generally to ensure the well-being and
objects ox the Union ; and in case the votes at any time
be equal, the Chairman to have a casting vote.
7, The duty of the Vice-chairmen shall be to assist
the Chairman at all meetings of the Branch ; and in the
absence of the Chairman, one of the Vice-chairmen shall
occupy the chair, and conduct the business. He shall
perform all functions indicated for the Chairman to the
best of his ability and judgment, pro iem., if the Chair-
man, through sickness or absence, is unable to do so.
8, Tbe duty of the Secretary shall be to keep a
correct' account of ail moneys received and expended;
attend all meetings, and take minutes of same. He shall
zealously attend to all correspondence, and answer such
questions as may be asked in accordance with the Rules
and Regulations of the Union. He shall write returns
according to instructions from the Committee, and


forward where required. He shall keep a memorandum
book, and insert the date of postage of all correspondence
and letters received, and keep copies of same. He shall
sit with the Auditors when auditing the accounts of the
Branch, and shall insert his name and address in all
letters and returns ; enter in his account book a detailed
account of all moneys received from all sources, with date
of receipt; also, a detailed account of all expenditure ;
shall write any correspondence the Committee may
instruct him, and do ail other things for the advancement
of the Union that the Chairman may direct. He shall
regularly pay over to the Treasurer all moneys, and shall
in no case hold in his possesion a larger sum than
sterling for a longer period than forty-eight hours. He
shall hold office for twelve months, but the Branch shall
have power to depose him for neglect of duty, or for
the misappropriation of money or goods belonging to
the Union, and he shall in all meetings |be allowed the
right to speak and vote.
9. The Treasurer shall receive and pay ail moneys
belonging to the Union into the Bank, in the names of
three Trustees, and shall under no consideration pay,
lend, or otherwise appropriate any of the funds belonging
to the Union, to any member, cause, or purpose whatever,
except in accordance with the Rules, Resolutions, and
Committee of General Meeting, He shall sign all cheques,
and duly take receipts for all payments made by him, and
shall not retain in his possession any sum of money
exceeding £$ sterling for a longer period than forty-eight
hours. He shall, at all reasonable times, produce the
Bank Pass-book for inspection by the Chairman or
Trustees, whenever demanded.
AUDITORS’ DUTIES
10. Two Auditors shall be elected at the Annual
Meeting, who at least once a year, and at other times
when instructed, shall take the Treasurer’s and Secretary’s
books and balance-sheets, with all receipts, compare them.


arid draw up a correct report on same. They shall
attach to each audit and report, an inventory of goods.
Auditors finding any deficiency in money or goods, to
state the particulars in their report, and lay the same
before the following meeting,
MEETINGS,
ii. That Branches shall meet at least twice each year
as a General Meeting of Members, at such time and
place as the Chairman and Committee may from time
to time determine, and at the appointed hour the Chair-
man and members present shall rise and uncover, and the
Chairman shall declare the meeting opened in the
following mariner, viz, ; —I declare this meeting duly
opened for the transaction of all business that may be
laid before it in connection with the Shearers’ Union of
Australasia,
I 2» The Annual Meeting of all Branches shall be
held in the month of January in each year, at which
reports and balance-sheets shall be received, and officers
elected as per by-law 41.
13. Any officer, th*» Treasurer excepted, not taking
his seat when a meeting has been duly opened, will be
considered to have committed a neglect of duty, except a
written apology be sent to the chairman • and no officer
shall leave his seat while the meeting is on without
appointing another to it ; and any officer, Treasurer
excepted, absenting himself from three consecutive
meetings shall forfeit his seat.
ORDER OE DEBATE.
.14, Any member desiring to propose a motion or
amendment, or of discussing any matter under considera-
tion, must rise and address the Chairman ; and no
member when speaking shall be interrupted unless called
to order, when he shall sit down, and the member so
calling to order shall be heard in preference to any other


speaker, and the Chairman shall then decide without
discussion on the point of order before the subject is
resumed, or any other subjected entered upon.
15. No member shall speak to any motion after the
same has been put by the Chairman, and the voting has
been given either in the affirmative or negative.
16. When two or more members rise to speak, the
Chairman shall call upon the member who, in his opinion,
rose first in his place.
17. A member may speak once to any motion before
the meeting, and to any amendment proposed thereto,
and upon a motion or amendment proposed by himself.
18. That any member proposing or seconding a
resolution shall be held to have spoken, and the mover
only shall have the right of reply.
19. Whenever the chairman rises during a debate,
any member then speaking, or offering to speak., shall sit
down, so chat the chairman may be heard without
interruption.
AMENDMENTS,
20. A. question having been proposed, may be
amended by leaving out, substituting, or adding words ;
and such amendment shall be resolved by a majority of
votes,
21. An amendment proposed and not seccnded. will
not be entertained or entered on the minutes.
22. Amendments may be proposed to any amend-
ment, as if such amendment was an original motion.
23. When amendments have been lost, the original
question shall be put,


STANDING RULES AND ORDERS.
24, Every member on giving notice of motion, shall
read it aloud, and give to the secretary a copy of such
notice, together with his name, and the day proposed for
bringing on such motion.
25, No notice entered on notice papers shall be
proceeded with unless the member who has given such
notice, or someone authorised by him, be present when
the business is called to order. Notices not so proceeded
with shall be struck out.
26, Any motion not seconded shall not be further
debated, but shall lapse.
27, So soon as a debate upon a question shall be
concluded, the chairman shall put the question to the
meeting in a distinct and audible manner.
28, The question being put, shall be resolved in the
affirmative or the negative hy a show of hands, unless the
ballot be demanded,
Nc>TE.™~~Notices of motion will only be required for the
purpose of rescinding- or altering rules, or some previous
resolution involving any departure from the usual routine
of business.
SUSPENSION OE STANDING ORDERS.
29, It shall be competent, by a vote of two-thirds of
the members present for the meeting to suspend any-
standing order herein contained, providing the object of
such, suspension shall not be the rescinding of any
resolution previously adopted by the Union,
SPECIAL.
30, If any member attend a meeting intoxicated, and
interrupt the business, he shall be requested to withdraw
forthwith; in the event of not complying, he shall be
fined ss, Members leaving the meeting without the


-consent of the chairman to be lined 2s. 6d. At all
meetings a guardian shall be appointed, who shall take
charge of the door.
31. That the whole of these rules shall, as far as prac-
ticable, regulate the proceedings of all meetings in
'connection with the Union.
QUALIFICATION TO TOTS.
32. Any member of any branch {except honorary
members), shall be allowed to vote at all general meetings
of any branch, irrespective of whether he belongs to such
branch or not, provided that such member is financial,
and entitled to vote as per by-law 56.
33. Mo member shall be allowed to vote at any-
meeting of the Union, without he first produces certifi-
cate of membership, or except other satisfactory proof is
given that he is financial and entitled to vote as per bye-
law 56.
POWER TO POSTPONE MEETINGS.
34- The officers of any branch are empowered to
postpone general or committee meetings when deemed
necessary,
QUORUMS.
35. At ail general meetings of branches for election
of officers, not less than 25 members shall constitute a
■quorum.
Note,-- -This rule shall not necessarily apply to
branches where District Committees are in existence.
36, At all meetings of Branch Committees five
members of the committee shall constitute a quorum,
and may transact any business, of which due notice shall
have been given to the whole (or as many as possible) of
the officers and committee of the Branch.,


POWERS OF COMMITTEE.
37. Any member of committee, except the Treasurer,,
absenting himself from three consecutive meetings of the
committee, the latter shall have the power to strike him
of the list, and another shall be elected in his stead,
38. That if any of the officers or committee ol the
Branch do anything contrary to the rules of the Union,
the co Tirnittee shall have power to suspend them until
such suspension has been laid before a General Meeting,
of the members for their approval or otherwise.
39. The Committee shall have power to expel any
member wilfully and persistently acting in direct
contravention to any of the rules of the Union, or acting
in such a manner as to seriously prejudice the interests of
the A.S.U., in any other way not provided for in the
Union Rules, Any member expelled under this Rule
shall have the right of appeal to the Executive Council or
Annual Conference, who shall consider the case, and have
power to readmit such member should they deem it
advisable. Any member expelled by the Committee of a
Branch has herein provided shall cease to be a member of
the A.S.U., and the Secretary of the Branch expelling
him shall immediately notify all other Branches of the.
expulsion, and the cause of same. Any member expelled
shall not be readmitted by any Branch without the
sanction of the Executive Council or Annual Conference.
NOMINATIONS,
40. Names of members willing to stand for election
.to the offices of Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary or
.Auditors, must be sent into the Secretary fourteen days-
before the date of the Annual Meeting in January, with
signature of proposer and seconder attached. Said
. nomination shall be published previous to the Annual
Meeting.
- ELECTION OF OFFICERS,
41. In the event of there being more candidates


nominated than are required for any office, an election
shall take place, and shall be conducted by ballot in the
manner following, viz. : —The Secretary of Branch to
supply the Secretary of each District Committee within
his district with ballot paper, to be by him distributed to
members, and after same have voted, to be returned,
sealed, several days previous to general meeting, to Branch.
Secretary, who shall hand over same to returning officer
and scrutineers, who shall have been previously appointed.
Said ballot to be duly checked, and returns announced at
the general meeting by returning officer. Members who
have not previously voted to be allowed to vote at said
meeting.
ELECTION .OF COMMITTEE.
42. Branches shall arrange whereby their committees
shall, as far as practicable, consist of representatives from,,
and elected by the District Committees in their respective
districts. The arrangements to be made so as to secure
the election of as fairly and widely representative com-
mittee as circumstances will permit. The number of
committee not to exceed that provided for in By-law 4,
EXPENSES OF COMMITTEE.
43. Each member of Committee of a Branch repre-
senting one or more District, Committees shall be paid
for his travelling expenses, and such sum as the Branch
may determine for his lost time when attending Branch
committee meeting. He shall furnish a written report
of business clone at such meeting, to the first meeting of
the District Committee or committees he represents, and
in the event of him failing to do so he shall forfeit all
claim to remuneration. The officers of the Branch shall
also be paid travelling expenses, and remunerated for
lost time, in accordance with the above, when attending
committee meetings, except the Secretary, who shall only
be allowed the travelling expenses.
QUALIFICATION FOP OFFICE.
44. No persons other than practical shearers shall


be eligible for election or appointment to any stipendiary
office in any Branch. This rale shall not apply to any
person in office at time said rule was passed.
45. No person shall be eligible to hold a seat on the
committee of any Branch, who is not a practical shearer •
•and. no person shall bold any office in any Branch, who is
not a financial member of the Union.
46. Subject to By-laws 44 and 45, any financial member
■of the A.S.tJ. of A. shall be eligible for election or appoint-
ment to office in any Branch, whether a member of such
Branch or not,
DEFINITION CLAUSES.
47. Wherever the word member occurs in general
rules or by-laws for government of Branches, it shall
mean a member of the A.S.U. of A,
48. Honorary Member shall mean other than those
who are practical shearers and shearers’ cooks,
POWER OF BRANCHES TO MAKE BY-LAW OR
AMEND SAMS,
49. Branches shall be allowed to adopt By-laws to
meet any special requirements of their respective districts,
■subject to approval of the Executive Council or Annual
Conference. Branches shall also have power to amend
By-laws (except those relating to government), and shed
working rules, to meet special local requirements, subject
to approval of Executive Council or Conference.
BRANCHES TO HAVE CONTROL OF AFFAIRS IN THEIR
OWN DISTRICT.
50. Each, Branch shall have control of affairs in its
own district, and other Branches shall not. interfere in
any way.
FINANCE AND BANKING.
51. Each Branch shall after each annual, audit of


accounts transfer all funds over and above amount required,
for current working expenses to the Secretary at the
central or head office of the Amalgamated Shearers’
Union of Australasia to be placed to the credit of the
General Fund of said Union.
52. Should any Branch require assistance, it shall be
In the power of the Executive Officers and Council to
vote such sum as may be required from the General
Fund,
53. All funds of the Union shall be placed in such
bank as may be decided upon at the Annual Conference
in the names of the Trustees, who shall, insert their names
in the bank books.
54. No funds shall be drawn, from the bank except by
cheque signed by one of the Trustees, the Secretary, and
Treasurer, and countersigned by the Chairman and Vice-
Chairman ; no Trustee shall sign any cheque without
authority in the form „of a sealed note, signed by the
Chairman and Secretary.
ENTRANCE FEES.
55. Up to 31st December, .1890, the entrance fee for
Cooks and Practical Shearers shall, be 10s., and for
Learners 2s. 6d. After aforementioned date the entrance
fee in all cases (including Learners), shall be two pounds
CONTR IBUTIONS AND FINES ON UN FINANCIAL
MEMBERS.
56. The contributions in all cases (except Honorary
Members), shall be 10s. per annum, ‘payable in advance , for
each year. Members having shearing before Ist January
in each season must pay up subscriptions in Jirstshed, to
•entitle them to vote or hold office. Members not having
a shed previous to aforementioned date shall be allowed
to vote or hold office if paying subscription before said
date. In any case, whether a member has been shearing


or not, contributions must be paid before Ist January, in
advance, each season, otherwise the member shall be in
arrears, and not entitled to the protection of the Union
until he has paid a fine of ios. in addition to his annual
subscription. The payment of such fine, with the sub-
scription, will re-entitle the member to the full benefits
and privileges of the Union, including that of voting and
holding office. Members neglecting to pay contribution
at sheds, the Union Representative shall forward list of
their names, numbers, and name of Branch they belong
to to the Secretary of the nearest Branch of the Union,
who in turn shall forward copies of such lists to each
of the other Branch offices. All subscriptions and
fines due from members must be paid, or otherwise satis-
factory arrangements for payment of same must be made
before such member can start work in any Union shed.
HONORARY MEMBERS SUBSCRIPTION.
57. Any person may be admitted a honorary member
of the Union on payment of an annual fee of one guinea
(without entrance fee).
CERTIFICATES OF MEMBERSHIP.
58. On payment of entrance fee and contribution, a
not transferable certificate of membership will be issued to
the person making such payment, provided that such
person is deemed a fit and proper person to become a
member of the Union. Members must produce certificate
of membership to Shed Representative before starting
work.
UNIFORM CERTIFICATES OF MEMBERSHIP THROUGH-
OUT ALL BRANCHES.
50. One uniform form of certificate shall be used by
all Branches of the Union ; the color of certificate to be
changed each year, and the financial year printed thereon.
.MEMBERS HOLDING CERTIFICATES TO HAVE
PREFERENCE.
60. When drawing for pens in shed, all those who


hold financial certificates of membership shall have
preference to those without.
DUPLICATE CERTIFICATES.
61. Any member losing his certificate of membership
will be granted a duplicate of same, on producing a
statutory declaration that his certificate has been lost or
destroyed, whichever the case may be. Declaration forms
for this purpose will be available on application to
Resident Agents, Travelling Agents, Secretaries of District
Committees, and from all offices of the Union.
NON-ELIGIBLE MEMBERS,
62. No Chinese or South Sea Islanders shall be enrolled
as members of the A.SJJ. of A.
RESTRICTIONS RE NON-UNION SHEARERS.
63. No non-union Shearer shall be allowed to shear
with members of the Union, unless such Shearer first
purchase certificate of membership, or otherwise undertakes
to pay necessary fee and contribution to Shed Representa-
tive out of the first money earned.
64. Any member shall be allowed to shear with the
•sheepowner or his sons (in their own shed) without the
latter being compelled to join the Union,' providing said
sheepowner or his sons have not shorn in any other shed
for payment since the establishment of the A.S.U.
MEMBERS NOT TO ACCEPT ENGAGEMENTS THROUGH
MIDDLEMEN.
65. No member of the A.S.U. shall accept engagement
in a shed through any person other than sheepowners,
their managers, or secretaries, or authorised agents of the
A.S.U., under penalty of a fine of five pounds {£s), for
each offence. No fee shall be charged to either
sheepowners or members in contracting engagements
through the Union.


CONDITIONS RE APPLICATION FOR ENGAGEMENT.
66, A member, when applying for engagement in a.
shed, shall send name and address, and state number of
certificate and name of Branch to which he belongs, I u
the event of the member not turning up at the shed
to fulfil, engagements he shall be fined £ i, unless
satisfactory reasons are given for his neglect ; the sheep-
owner to supply shed Representative with name and:
number of offending member,* also name of Branch which
he belongs to, same to be sent to the Secretary of the
Branch having control of the district wherein the shed is
situated.
FINES FOE SHEARING NON-UNION.
67, Any member violatingthe Union rules by shearing
in non-union sheds shall be fined £5 for the first shed, six s
pounds for the second, seven pounds for the third shed ;
said fines to be paid or otherwise satisfactory arrangements
for payment of same to be made before the member will
be permitted to work in any Union shed. Should the
member feel aggrieved thereat he shall have the right of
appeal to the Committee of the Branch having control of
the district, who shall have power to remit any portion of
the fine or fines, or increase same should they consider
the circumstances justify such course. All appeals to be
dealt with by the first Committee Meeting after cases have;:
been reported. The Shed 'Representative shall forward!
all particulars re fine cases to the Secretary of the Branch;
having control of the district wherein shed is situated.:
Members shearing in more than three non-union sheds to
be expelled from the Union,
MEMBERS TO BE GUIDED BY THE MAJORITY.
68, Any member refusing to be guided by the decisi@ni
of the majority of members at sheds and strikes, shall be;
fined 1 os. for each offence. The Committee of the Branch
to have power to refund such fine (on appeal), should they
deem that circumstances justify such being done.


CHARGES AGAINST MEMBERS.
69. Any member bringing a charge against another
member, which, on inquiry, shall prove frivolous, shall be
liable to a fine of two pounds.
70. Any officer or member using undue influence
with any sheepowmer in the choice of his Shearers will be
lined £ 1 for each offence.
DISPOSAL OF FINES.
71.. All fines imposed under these Bye-laws shall be-
paid into the A.S.U. Accident Fund.
LABOR BUREAUS.
72. Where practicable, a labor bureau, or general'
registry office shall be worked in connection with each
Branch. The profits from such offices to go to the funds
of the Union.
REPORTS A.ND BALANCE SHEETS.
73. The Secretary of each Branch shall issue an
Annual report and balance-sheet of the Branch, together
with separate balance-sheets, showing receipts and
expenditure of each agent (whether travelling or resident)
also balance-sheet showing monies personally received
and expended by secretary.
74- Any Secretary of a Branch failing to supply the
Secretary of the A.S.U. with copy of Branch balance-sheet
within fourteen days after completion of annual audit,,
shall be fined in the sum of five pounds {£s).
75. Any Secretary supplying certificate books to any
other than duly authorised agents, shall be fined a sum
not exceeding five pounds,
RATES OF SHEARING.
76 No member shall shear under a minimum price in
each colony as follows :
Queensland, New South Wales and South Australia.


(excepting the South-eastern district of latter colony)—-
f t oer too, without, rations.
i
The South-eastern districts of .South Australia and
colony of Victoria (excluding the stations in latter
colony, as hereunder referred to) —17s. 6d. per 100, with-
out, or 15s, per 100, with rations.
The minimum price to be paid at all stations in Vic-
toria, from Swan Hill to Adelaide Border, having a
frontage to the River Murray, shah be £ 1 per too,
without rations, same as in colonies mentioned in first
part of this rule.
In all cases rams (over nine months’ old) to be paid
for at not less than double the above rates.
Note. —All parties interested will understand that the
above rule does not debar members from accepting, and
sheepowners from paying higher rates than the above
should they choose. The Union only fixes the minimum
rates —not less than the above prices must he accepted.
SPECIAL RULES REGARDING MACHINE SHEDS.
77. In all sheds where shearing machines are used,
sheepowners shall provide all machinery and requisites,
knives and combs included, (and experts if required) free
of cost. Sheepowner shall also (at their own expense)
keep the said machinery, &c., in proper working order,
and the knives in good cutting trim. In cases of
stoppages, through breakages, shearers shall be recom-
pensed tor lost time, or allowed to go on shearing with
the hand shears.
SECRETARIES AND TRAVELLING AGENTS TO FIND
SECURITY.
78. All Secretaries and Travelling Agents of Branches
must find security for £ 100 before entering upon their
duties. Said security to be approved of by the Com-
mittee of the Branch.
TERMS UNDER WHICH MEMBERS SHALL ENGAGE.
79. No member shall accept engagement under any


rules or agreements other than that approved of and
adopted by the Union. In cases where Sheepowners do
not require the printed agreement, members may accept
verbal, agreements, but in ail cases where verbal agree-
ments are adopted, the Onion Rules must be strictly
complied with. la all cases it shall be optional to
Brandies whether the roles are posted in sheds or not.
COOKS.
80. In all sheds where they provide their own rations,
Shearers shall choose their own Cooks, except where
Cooks act conjointly for Shearers and Sheepowners. In
such cases Cooks rnajf be engaged by Sheepowners. In all
cases cooks must be members of the Union, and shall
produce certificate of competency signed by Shed Repre-
sentative, who must have been duly authorised to sign
same by resolution of members in his shed,
81. Cooks shall be paid not less than three shillings
per man per week in any shed.
82. No Chinese or South Sea Islander shall be
engaged in the capacity of Cook.
OGEES’ COMMISSION.
83. In ail settled Branches the amount of commission
to be allowed local Agents and Secretaries of District
Committees shall be ten (10) per cent. In any new
country taken, up it shall be in the power of the Executive
of the A.S.U. to allow and sanction a higher rate of
commission than the above should same be considered
advisable,
ALL CERTIFICATES AND RULES TO BE PRINTED AND
SUPPLIED THROUGH HEAD OFFICE,
84. All Certificates and .Rules for use of A.S.U, shall
be printed through Head Office, and supplied to each.
Branch.


IMPORTANT RESOLUTIONS
ADOPTED AT
THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE A.S.U.,
HELD AT
BOURKE, N.S.W., FEBRUARY, 1890.
TO BE ADHERED TO BY ALL PARTIES INTERESTED
WOOLPRESSERS.
1. That it be optional to wooip.ressers as to whether
they join the Union or renew certificates for the
present. That at present; the A,STL does not desm it
advisable to legislate for the requirements of wool-
pressers, but that prior to next conference the different
branches of the Union shall take steps to obtain all
necessary information to guide the conference in laying
down a satisfactory and equitable scale of prices for wool-
pressing, and code of rules to regulate such work.
CHINESE AND SOUTH SEA ISLANDERS.
2, That all Chinese or S outh Sea Islanders who joined
the Union prior to passing of By-law 62, shall be
entitled to the full benefits of the Union, and shall not
be debarred from engagement as shearers or shearers’
cooks so long as such persons remain financial on the
hooks of the Union, notwithstanding By-law 62, which
is hereby understood to apply only to those Chinese or
South Sea Islanders who have never been .members of the
A.STL
N.8,~~-At the conference evidence was given, showing


that only eight persons can claim protection -under the
above resolution, that being the number of Chinese and
South Sea Islanders who received certificates previous to
passing of By-law 6z f in [BB7,
QUEEKSLAND UNION.
3. That this conference is of opinion that it would be
in the best interests of the shearers of the colonies that
an amalgamation of the Queensland Shearers’ Union
and the A.S.U. should be brought about, and that
further steps should be taken to do so ; and that in the
interim financial members of each Union be recognised
as Union men, and work in common together under the
rules and agreement which have been adopted, and are
recognised by the Branch or Union having control of the
district in which the shed is situated.
4. That a member of the Queensland Shearers’ Union
be allowed to join the A.S.U, without payment of
entrance fee, and shall receive the protection of latter
Union,—--without payment of eontribution—for such time
as his certificate in the Q.S.U. is financial. The Queens-
land Shearers’ Union to reciprocate and extend the same
privilege as the above to members of the A.S.U.
At the aforesaid conference held at Bourke, the fore-
going resolution re Queensland Union was agreed to by
Mr. Farming, on behalf of said Union.


NOTICE.
Copies of Agreements for the respective colonies
mi ay be obtained on application at the Head Office, Cre«~
wick, Victoria, to
D. TEMPLE
Secretary.


RULES
RELATING TO OFFICE SYSTEM OF
ENGAGEMENT.
1, Sheepowners may engage all Shearers and Cooks
required through the Union office in the district
sn which their sheds are situated, and may send a list of
names of members they wish to engage. In the event of
it being impracticable to supply Sheepowners with any or
with but a portion of the men named, the Union will take
steps to provide the Sheepowner with a full complement
of good competent workmen, provided that the said
Sheepowner is agreeable to such arrangement.
2, Members, when applying to the Union for engage-
ment, may name five or six sheds in which they wish to
be engaged. Should these be supplied, the Secretary
shall inform the member, and give a list of sheds (if any)
which are not yet supplied. Any member wishing
engagement in any particular shed to give his reasons for
same. In the event of there being more applicants than
are required for any shed, the members shall be reduced
by ballot to the lot required. Such ballot to be
conducted in accordance with the instructions of Branch
Committee.
3, Members wdien applying for engagement in any
shed must apply to the Branch having control of the
district in which the shed is situated. Members when
applying, must send correct name and address, and
number of certificate, and state name of Branch to which


they belong. No applications for engagement shall be
entertained unless the applicant is a financial member of
the Union.
4. Members may, while at work in a shed, apply to
the office for next shed, and so on throughout the season,
and will apply as early as circumstances will permit.
Should any member be unable to fulfil his engagement, he
must immediately send notice to the Branch having
control of the district in which the shed is situated.
5. Representatives in each shed shall forward notice to
the Secretary when they expect the shed in which they are
engaged to be finished. If possible such notice shall be
forwarded fourteen days before the completion of shearing-
in that shed. Sheepowners will be required to furnish
Representatives with information.
6. A copy of the agreement under which Shearers are-
engaged, shall be sent to each shed and be placed in the
hands of the Representative of the Union at shed,
N.B. Members will understand that it is not compul-
sory to engage through the office. The above rules only
apply in cases where sheepowners prefer to engage their
men through office.
PRINTED AT “ THE SHEARERS’ RECORD" OFFICE, NEWPORT.
