

General Rules
of the
Tasmanian
Workers’ Political League.
1d.
1d.
EXECUTIVE:
(Elected 1911.)
President,
Mr. J. E. Ogden, M.H.A., Moonah.
General Secretary,
Mr. James Guy, M.H.A., 32 Gunn Street, Inveresk, Launceston.
Assistant Secretary,
Mr. J. A. Lyons, M.H.A., Devonport.
Treasurer,
Mr. John Earle, M.H.A., Labor Chambers, Liverpool St., Hobart.
Messrs. Jas. Belton, M.H.A., Wynyard; G. F. Martin, New Norfolk;
C. Stephens, Moonah; J. A. Lyons, M.H.A., Devonport;
J. R. Ross, Zeehan.
Daily Post Print, Hobart.




TASMANIAN WORKERS’ POLITICAL
LEAGUE
NAME.
1. The organisation shall be known as the Tasmanian Workers’ Political
League, and shall consist of an unlimited number of members divided into
branches as herein provided.
OBJECTS.
2. The objects of the League shall be: —To promote just and good govern-
ment by : (a) educating the electors upon the prominent legislative questions
of the day, (b) endeavoring to secure fairer representation of the whole
people in the Legislatures of the Commonwealth, State, and other local bodies.
MEMBERSHIP.
3. The League shall consist of
(a) Branches whose members shall have subscribed to the Platform
and Constitution
(b) Trade Unions accepting the Platform and Constitution.
4. Branches shall contribute to the Executive one-fourth of the amount
of members’ ord,inary contributions.
5. Quarterly tickets of membership, dated January, April, July, and
October of each year, shall be issued to male members for the sum of one
shilling; and yearly tickets to women, dated from the quarter in which they
are issued, at one shilling. Each ticket shall bear a declaration that the
holder thereof is pledged to loyally support the principles and rules of the
T.W.P.L., and to vote for the selected Labor Candidate.
6. Trade Unionists shall be entitled to all privileges of membership in the
League upon payment to the General Secretary, through their Unions, of 1/
per member per annum.
ORGANISATION.
7. Notice of the establishment or resuscitation of a Branch League must
be sent to the General Secretary with contribution (as Per Rule 4) before
being entitled to use the name.
8. Branch Leagues may be established in each Electorate or part of any
Electorate and upon establishment the members shall jointly decide the
location of headquarters for their Electorate, which place shall be then
officially recognised by the Executive.
9. The Executive, through at least one local paper, and by instruction to
the Secretary, may declare any Branch bogus for disloyalty to the Platform,
or disobedience to the Executive decision, and may authorise the establishment
ment of a new Branch, provided that the Branch implicated is first notified,


10. Branch meetings shall be convened whenever necessary, but any
twelve financial members shall have power to convene a special meeting after
notice to the branch secretary four clear days before the date of such meeting.
11. Branches shall have power to make their own by-laws. Such by-laws
must receive the sanction of the Central Executive, and they may exclude or
expel undesirable persons; but any person expelled shall have the right to
appeal to the Executive, and then, if necessary, to the Conference.
12. No member shall be permitted to vote on the same question in more
than one branch, and no member owing more than six months’ contributions
will be permitted to take part in League business.
FUNDS.
13. The funds of the League shall only be applied to the purposes set
forth herein. All payments shall be made by cheque signed by President,
Treasurer, and Secretary.
14. Local Branches of the League, or Divisional Councils, may recoup
candidates for State or Federal Parliaments their election expenses. The
Executive shall pay organising expenses (only when authorised) and may re-
coup Senatorial candidates their election expenses.
15. Every Branch Secretary shall forward a properly audited balance-
sheet, report, and list of members to the General Secretary 21 days before the
Annual Conference.
EXECUTIVE.
16. The Executive shall consist of a President, Secretary, Treasurer, and
five League members selected by Annual Conference. All members of the
Labor Parties shall have the right to speak at all meetings, except those of
the Central Executive. Any member of the Executive absent from three con-
secutive meetings without satisfactory excuse shall forfeit his seat, and the
Executive shall appoint another person to the vacancy.
17. The Executive shall summon the Annual Conference, and any Special
Conference it may deem necessary, or which shall have been demanded by a
majority of Branches.
18. The Executive Shall have the power to recommend to any Branch the
withdrawal of any candidate whose past career proves him unworthy of con-
fidence, provided that such candidate has first had an opportunity of defend-
ing himself. The Executive shall have power to interfere in the selection of
candidates in cases of fraud, or when appealed to by a Branch.
19. Any member of the League may be nominated for office on the Central
Executive, provided that his nomination paper be signed by two members of
the League, in addition to his own signature consenting to nomination. The
Annual Conference may also receive nominations at its sittings.
20. The Executive shall submit to the Annual Conference a report and
audited balance sheet, together with a statement of the general position of the
League. Copies of the Report shall be supplied to Branches at least 14 days
prior to date of Conference.
ANNUAL CONFERENCE.
21. A Conference shall be held each year at a time and place to be fixed
by the preceding Conference, notwithstanding the Executive is empowered to
alter time and place of meeting in cases or urgent necessity. In the case of
any branch being represented by other than a member of the branch, such
delegate must be elected by a majority of the members of such Branch; and
the General Secretary, advised by the Branch Secretary before the opening
of Conference. Each Branch shall be entitled to representation at conference
according to the following scale: —Up to 200 members, 1 delegate; 201 to 500,
2 delegates; 501 and over, 3 delegates.
22. No delegate shall be entitled to more than one vote. Branches may
give credentials for alternate delegates to act in the absence of their delegates,
but no delegate shall have power to transfer his authority. All elections at


Annual Conference to be decided by absolute majority vote.
23. Delegates to Special Conference shall be elected on the same scale a&
to the Annual Conference, but failing an election the delegates to the last pre-
ceding Conference shall be held to be the delegates to Special Conference.
PARLIAMENTARY.
24. The Executive shall have sole charge of all matters relating to elec-
tions not expressly vested in Branches or Divisional Councils.
25. Each Divisional Council shall select its own candidates, who shall have
previously signed the W.P.L. pledge and shall have forwarded an attested
copy of same to the General Secretary. In the event of more than the re-
quired number of candidates being nominated a ballot shall be taken under
the same system of voting as that which is provided in the Tasmanian “Elec-
toral Act, 1907.”
26. Candidates’ nominations must be in writing, and signed by not less
than six bona fide members resident in the Electorate. No resident shall sign
the nomination paper of more than the number of candidates decided upon
to be run in the Labor interest.
27. No person shall have the right to nominate a candidate unless such
nominator shall have been a member of the League for at least three months.
No person to be eligible for nomination as a candidate who has not been a
member of some branch of the W.P.L., or affiliated union, or inter-State Labor
organisation, for six months immediately preceding nomination.
28. The roll of members eligible to vote in the selection of a candidate
shall close three months before the commencement of the ballot.
29. All nominations for candidates to contest Federal or State electorates
must be submitted for endorsement to the Executive before going to ballot.
30. Any candidate personally canvassing for votes shall be disqualified for
selection. Candidates for selection may address meetings of members of the
League on general political principles if a Branch so desire it.
31. All candidates for the Federal or State Parliament shall satisfy the
Executive or the local Branch officers that their nomination and deposit is
placed in the hands of the Returning Officer one week before nominations close
In the event of any candidate not complying with the above, the Executive
shall haVe the power to nominate and run as the pledged candidate the next
on the pre-election ballot; failing his acceptance, a selection of their own.
32. Any members contesting State or federal elections in other than Labor
interests shall be deemed guilty of disloyalty, and may be expelled; such per-
sons shall be debarred from re-joining the League except by permission of the
Executive.
33. Members elected to Parliament under the auspices of the T.W.P.L.
shall form a distinct party.
34. In electorates represented by a Labor member or members, the Divi-
sional Council Presidents shall by advertisement call for nominations for a
pre-election three months before each General Election; such pre-election to
be called for without prejudice to the sitting member or members, who will
be eligible for pre-election.
35. In the event of an extraordinary election occurring through dissolution
of Parliament or other cause, and there not being sufficient time to act as
provided in Clause 34, the Divisional Council officers shall call a special meet-
ing of members to decide as to taking a plebiscite.
36. No selection shall hold good for more than 12 months. In the event of
any candidate breaking any of the rules of the League or the Platform, the
Branch may annul his selection and authorise a fresh selection.
37. The Labor Party shall neither enter into any alliance, nor grant, nor
promise to any person immunity from opposition at any time. In the event
of the Party in the State Parliament having a sufficient majority to form a
Government, the portfolios shall be allotted by exhaustive ballot after each
general election at a properly convened caucus of the Party.
38. The Executive shall appoint one General Returning Officer, who, when
instructed by the Executive, shall call for candidates for those Federal elec


torates not embraced within Divisional Councils, or where a Divisional Coun-
cil does not take action.
39. Divisional Councils may be formed in each of the electorates of Bass,
Darwin, Denison, Franklin, and Wilmot, for the purpose of organising and
conducting elections under their control in such Divisions. Every Branch of
the League, and affiliated union, within each Division, shall be entitled to rep-
resentation on the Council of its Division. Elach Branch or Union shall have,
an equal number of delegates, to be decided by each Council, within a limit
of three from each Branch or Union. Each Divisional Council shall have con-
trol of organising and elections to the State Parliament and House of Rep-
resentatives, within its Division; and may, at the request of the Branch or
Branches chiefly concerned, conduct elections to Municipal Councils, Marine
Hospital Boards, and other public institutions. Divisional Councils
shall have power to frame regulations for their own government, and for the
proper conduct of ballots for the selection of candidates; Such regulations
must receive the endorsement of the Central Executive before coming into
force. They shall each appoint a returning officer, whose duty it will be to
distribute ballot papers to those entitled to vote, through the Branches, have
the same collected, and declare the result of the election. Every member of
a Branch or affiliated Union who is not more than three months in arrears
with his subscription, and has been a member for three months, shall be en-
titled to vote in the selection of a candidate in the Division in which he is
registered. Upon the formation of a Divisional Council, the General Secre-
tary must be notified immediately, with a list of Branches and Uhions in-
cluded in the Council, officers’ names, and secretary’s address. Under no con-
sideration will a Divisional Council be permitted to exclude any Branch of the
League or affiliated Union, or include any party or organisation unattached to
the Tasmanian Workers’ Political League. Any two or more Branches may
proceed to the formation of a Divisional Council in the Division in which
they are situated; but before the Council is legally established, every Branch
and affiliated Union within the Division must have received at least fourteen
days’ notice of the meeting called for the purpose of forming the Council.
40. Should any Branch or Divisional Council cease to work, or become
defunct, from whatever cause, all funds and property belonging to such
Branch or Council shall be handed to the Central Executive for distribution
to the remaining Branches in the Division.
41. The Executive may refuse its recognition to any candidate whose past
record proves him unworthy of confidence; provided .that such candidate shall
first have an opportunity o i defending himself.
42. No member of the State Parliament shall contest a Federal seat, or
resign his seat in order to contest a Federal seat, without the consent of the
Executive.
43. All Bills shall be brought before a caucus meeting of the Parliamen-
tary party prior to their being considered in the House, the caucus to decide
whether such Bills shall or shall not be considered to affect the platform.
44. If any League desires to alter or add to the Federal Platform they may
place such additions or alterations on the agenda paper for consideration at
the annual State Conference, and, if such additions or alterations are approved
of by a majority of delegates the Conference shall have power to instruct the
representatives of the State at the ensuing Federal Conference to support such
additions or alterations of the Federal platform.
ALTERATION OF RULES.
45. All proposals to add to or take from the Platform, or Pledge, or Con-
stitution, shall be in the'hands of the Executive at least two months prior to
the Annual Conference, and shall at once be forwarded to Branches. Pro-
posals affecting the Platform or Pledge, carried by a two-thirds majority of
the whole Conference, shall at once come into force; but in the event of any
such proposal being carried by less than a two-thirds majority, it shall be
placed on the business paper for the next Conference. Proposals affecting the
Constitution shall be declared negatived unless carried by the votes of two-
thirds of the delegates present when the vote is taken.


Australian Labor Party.
OBJECTIVE.
1. Cultivation of an Australian sentiment based upon the maintenance of
racial purity, and the development in Australia of an enlightened and self-re-
liant community.
2. The securing of the full results of their .industry to all producers by
the collective ownership of monopolies, and the extension of the industrial
and economic functions of the State and municipality.
CAMPAIGN PLATFORM.
(As amended at Commonwealth Labor Conference,, Brisbane, July, 1908.)
1. Maintenance of a White Aupstralia.
2. New Protection.
3. Nationalisation of Monopolies.
4. Graduated Tax on Unimproved Land Values.
5. A Citizen Defence Force.
6. A Commonwealth Bank.
7. Restriction of Public Borrowing.
8. Navigation Laws.
9. Arbitration Act amendment. '
GENERAL PLATFORM.
1. The maintenance of a White Australia.
2. New Protection; amendment of the Constitution to ensure effective
Federal legisation for New Protection ar. d Arbitration.
3. Nationalisation of Monopolies; if necessary, an amendment of the Con-
stitution to provide for same.
4. Graduated Land Tax; graduated tax on all estates over £5OOO in value
on the unimproved basis.
5. Citizens’ Defence Force, with compulsory military training, and an
Australian-owned and controlled navy.
6. Commonwealth Bank of Issue, deposit, exchange, and reserve, with
non-political management.
7. Restriction of Public Borrowing.
8. Navigation Laws to provide—
(a) For the protection of Australian shipping against unfair competi-
tion.
(b) Registration of all vessels engaged in the coastal trade.
(c) Efficient manning of vessels.
(d) Proper supply of life-saving and other equipment.
(e) Regulation of hours and conditions of Avork.
(f) Proper accommodation for passengers and seamen.
(g) Proper loading gear and inspection thereof.
(h) Compulsory insurance of crews by shipowners against accident
or death.
9. Arbitration Act Amendment, to provide for preference to unionists and
the exclusion of the legal profession from Arbitration Courts, and for the in-
clusion of State Government employes.
10. Old Age and Invalid Pensions.
11. A General Insurance Department, with non-political management.
12. Civil equality of men and women.
13. Naval and Military Expenditure to be allotted from the proceeds of
direct taxation.
14. Initiative and Referendum.


FEDERAL PLEDGE.
Candidates for selection must sign, prior to nomination, the following
Pledge:—l hereby pledge myself not to oppose the candidate selected by the
recognised political organisation, and if elected to do my utmost to carry out
the principles embodied in the Federal Labor Platform, and on all questions
affecting the Platform to vote as a majority of the Parliamentary Party may
decide at a duly constituted caucus meeting.
Achieved Plank —“Old Age Pensions.”
State Platform.
(As amended by Conference, New Norfolk, April 14, 15, and 17, 1911).
ELECTORAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL.
One Adult One Vote.
Payment of members at the rate of £2OO per annum, with penalties for
non-attendance.
Abolition of Upper House; provision for initiative and referendum.
Abolition of State Governorship as at present constituted.
Extensin of hours of polling; a compulsory two hours leave to all em-
ployes during polling hours.
Abolition of office of Agent-General.
Restriction of State Borrowing; loan monies to be used solely for the re-
demption of loans and reproductive works, for which a sinking fund of 1 per
cent, must be provided, until Such time as a National Postal Banking System
is established.
LAND.
Progressive Tax on Land Values, town and country, exclusive of improve-
ments.
Tax on future increment of Land Values; payable when property changes
hands.
Self Assessment, where practicable; right of resumption by the State on
the basis of such assessment.
Repurchase of Estates for Closer Settlement.
Government Advances to Settlers on Easy Terms.
No Further Alienation of Crown Lands.
EDUCATION.
Free Medical and Dental Treatment of School Children.
Free primary, secondary, technical, and University Education, with all
requisites supplied by the State. Attendance at Primary schools to be com-
pulsory.
Establishment of a complete State Agriculture Department, including ex-
perimental farms and Agriculture College.
INDUSTRIAL.
Exemption from direct taxation of not less than £lOO of income; with
a further exemption of £25 for wife, and for each child, or dependent.
Establishment of a Public Trust Office.
Provision for all Permanently Disabled Persons and Widows and Orphans.
Establishment of a Department of Labor.
Legalised Eight Hour Day, and 5%-day week of 44 hours, where prac-
ticable.
A Workmen and Contractors’ Lien Act.


Minimum Wage in all Government and Municipal Contracts.
Compulsory Arbitration.
Wages Boards.
Equal Pay for Equal Work for both Sexes.
Shops and Factories Act; compulsory early closing and weekly half-
holiday.
Workmen’s Compensation.
Abolition of the Truck System.
State Pulping Works.
The prohibition of the employment of children under the age of 15, in
workshops, mines, and factories.
LIQUOR.
State ownership and control of the liquor traffic, with provision for local
option.
GAMBLING.
Referendum as to whether Tattersall’s should continue at at present, be
abolished, or conducted by the State.
STATE PLEDGE.
Candidates for selection must sign, prior to nomination, the following
Pledge:—l hereby pledge myself not to oppose the selected candidate of this
or any other Branch of the Tasmanian Workers’ Political League. I also
pledge myself, if returned to Parliament, on all occasion to do my utmost to
ensure the carrying out of the principles embodied in the Labor Platform, and
on all such questions, and on questions affecting the fate of a Government, to
vote as a majority of the Labor Party may decide at a duly constituted caucus
meeting.




How to Organise a Branch.
1. Talk the matter over with those most likely to co-operate*
2. Communicate with the General Secretary or the nearest
Branch Secretary.
3. If, say, ten or a dozen individuals signify their willingness
to join, fix a date for a meeting and send word to the General Secre-
tary a week or two before the date fixed, so that, if needed, he may
secure you assistance.
4. Advertise the meeting by poster, or through the press, if
possible, and otherwise make the meeting well known.
5. Send to the General Secretary for a supply of Members’
Tickets to meet your requirements, also Rules.
6. Arrange for mover and seconder of some such resolution as
this : “ That this meeting accepts the Platform and Constitution of
the Tasmanian Workers’ Political League, and resolves to establish
a branch of the organisation at ”
7. Elect officers, such as President and Secretary ; other officers
and Committee of Management can be elected later.
8. Send to the General Secretary a copy of the resolution-
passed, signed by the President and Secretary, and otherwise comply
with Rules 3 (a) and 7.
9. Rend report of meeting to “The Daily Post,” and any other
paper that may insert it.
•%
10. The branch, being formed, should immediately set to work
enrolling members, of both sexes, and enter into correspondence
with the Secretary of the Divisional Council for the electorate.


