

Rst?




GENERAL
THE 00\BR*Sl£*TjOV~W ~ , /\2m
f
is K W S 0 U T H W A L K
ANCIENT ORDER
r.
II
FORESTERS’
FRIENDLY SOCIETY.
Registered under the Friendly Societies' Jet, 17 Vic., No. 2t>.
- Bk Firm ! nor let corruption sly
Twine round your hearts indissoluble chains,
i'he steel of Brutus burst the grosser bands v, ‘
By Csesar cast o'er Rome; but still
The soft enchanting fetters of the mind.
And other Ctesars rose. Determined, hold
Your independence; for that once destroy'd.
Unfounded freedom is a morning dream
That flits serial from the spreading rye.
TiroMSOsr
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED AND SOLD BY THE COMMITTEE OP MANAGEMENT


Sins is t 0 (fnufn that Brother
was duly Initiated a Member of the Ancient
dt)rter of Joresttrs •» Court
No.
on the
day of
in the Year of our Lord One Thousand
Eight Hundred and
As witness ovr hands ,
S. C. R.
Sec.


A1335S Fl22l<=)
i.Lt-i-n
preface.
Man, when alone, and unassociated with communities, is erer suojec: to
the casualties and privations of his nature, without the power of alleviating
them. Although in new and thinly-populated countries, the uncontrolled
child of nature may wander unfettered through the woods and prairie*,
owning no law but his own will, and slave to no want save the common one
of hunger, still he is the creature of the cloud, liable to a variety of vicissi-
tudes, from which other animals are exempt. Gifted with no weapon, offen-
sive or defensive, by nature, weak; ah easy prey to the beasts of the forest,
and powerless by his own unaided eiforts; it is evident that He who gifted
man with faculties of mind, inferior only to the angels, destined him for
association with his fellows. To this end the power of language was imparted,
reflection, judgment, mind to design, and bands to execute. These are in-
contestable and splendid evidences of the benevolence and goodness of that
Divine Architect who created this world, and all those countless myriads of
shining orbs that wheel with the most unerring harmony through the bound-
less tracts of infinite space.
Seeing, then, that the association of our species was originally designed by
the Great Creator of all things, it is reasonable to infer that the constant pro-
gression of man is the aim of the Deity ; and the nearer we approach to
social perfection, the nearer shall we be to the ultimate design of Provi-
dence.
The fulness of time will bring the promised consummation, when tL»
“sword shall be turned into the pruning hook,” Ac.; in the mean time our
association is one step towards this great end ; and as we advance in years,
numbers, and intelligence, great and numerous will be the advantages which
those who come after us may acquire through our earlier exertions.
Our institution was founded for the purpose of assisting each other at
times when, but for the helping hand of our brethren, woe might sojourn for
a longer period in our dwellings. Fortius anchother ends we associate toge-
ther, and are bound by a solemn tie to act to each other as brethren, and
alleviate the sufferings of each other whenever they may overtake us.
Happily, here, then, we have the power of proving that*the pangs of ex-
treme poverty may be relieved, the despondency of the sick chamber
alleviated, and the hours of mortal dissolution rendered less awful, by the
voluntary association of brethren, uniting for common support aud mutual
guard, as far as human powers may be permitted, against tho-e unforseen
casualties to which all men are more or less liable.
To cheer and protect the unfortunate, to sympathize with and aid those
whom accident or disease may overtake, and to dry the cheek of the
mourner, are among the leading objects of Foresters.
To provide against the calamities just adverted to is, though great, not all
the advantages which result from our associated Brotherhood.
Associated for purposes alike benevolent and the frivolity oi
the profane is not permitted ; and whilst enjoying the “ feast of reason and
the flow of soul,” the charms of music are not suffered to be prostituted to
the evil purposes of throwing a grace over vicious sentiment. Joy,anJ
friendship rove through the rlowery fields «*f pleasure, undar the. tdfla <*«-
straint of Mora'itv, whilst her «ister. Reason, leads her bv the haul
M
Xt\’)
v .m
mm


Wv 1
, n'
Our iaws are just and liberal, fashioned after the purest models of go-
vernment. The greatest amount of individual liberty, consistent with the
general welfare of the whole, is secured to every member. To produce the
greatest possible amount of good to the greatest number, is the object of
•hem. Assumption of power and arrogance of demeanour may be imme-
diately checked by the despotism of the presumptuous : the rights of every
individual member are scrupulously respected and guarded; each individual
has equal rights and privileges; merit alone is the medium thrsugh which
posts of honour may be arrived at, and no artificial barriers are permitted to
prevent virtue and talent from occupying their fitting station.
“ Evbby Max fob bvert Man, himself included,” is our ruling
principle; benevolence and friendship are our objects, and justice and
morality are our characteristics. Who (hen. is so exalted in rank, whether
by birth or merit, that might not be proud of becoming a member of Thb
AxctFxr Oirnmi or TVireptrus,


GENERAL LAWS
NAME.
1, That this Society be called the New South Wales
Ancient Order of Foresters’ Friendly Society (hitherto
known as the Australian District) in connection with the
High Court in England.
OBJECTS.
2. That the objects of this Society are the following,
viz.—To raise a fund by entrance fees, subscriptions of
the members, fines, donations, and by interest on capital,
for insuring a sum of money not to exceed £5O for each
member to be paid to the Widow, or Children, or Execu-
tors, Administrators, or Assigns, of such member ; or for
defraying the expenses of the burial of a member. And of a
sum of money to be paid to a member on the death of his
wife. To raise funds for defraying the necessary expenses
of the District. To entertain and determine all appeals
from the various Courts and Members connected there-
with. To render assistance to Courts whose funds may
become exhausted. To provide a fund for the support
and protection of those Members who vote in the minority
of any Court that may break up or secede from the Order.
To relieve distressed Members, and to inflict fines and
penalties for the infraction of its Laws.
MANAGEMENT.
3. That this Society shall be managed by a D.C.R-
or District Chief Ranger, District Secretary, and aTrea-
surer, assisted by delegates from the various branches called
Courts. The above-mentioned District Officers shall be
elected annually by ballot; they shall attend all District
Courts or Meetings, and give such security for the pro-
perties they may hold in their possession, as & majority of


Die Delegate* may decide on, (pursuant to clause 9, 17th
Viet., No. 26.) Aud it is earnestly recommended that
they do all in their power to see the admirable principles
of the Order carried out in a liberal spirit.
DUTY OF THE D.C.R.
4. He shall preside over all District Courts or Meet-
ings, act impartially on all occasions, see that justice is
done to each Court and Member, and attend the opening
of all New Courts, if within three miles of the General
Post Office.
DUTIES OF SECRETARY.
5. He shall duly register the names, ages, and occu-
pations of all Members in the district; likewise the
names of the Members’ Wives when returned to him;
shall attend all District Courts or Meetings and the
opening of new ones ; in his possession shall remain the
various saleable and other properties of the District: he
shall send to each Court under his charge a quarterly
report of proceedings and financial matters within 14
days after the holding of the same, under a penalty of
is. 6d. for each neglect; he shall prepare the annaal
returns as required by the Friendly Society Act, (17th
Yict., No. 26,) and in communication with Courts, all
expenses of postage, Post Office orders, costs of carriage
for goods and parcels, &c., shall be defrayed by the
District; and shall keep copies of all correspondence .for
reference.
TREASURER.
6. He shall receive all moneys paid on account of the
District; attend all District Courts or Meetings ; pay all
demands when properly authorised so to do; he shall
attend each audit meeting, or send an account to each,
of all moneys received and paid by him, stating the
balance (if any) he may then have in hand; he shall
become bound, together with two sureties in such sum as
a District Meeting may direct (pursuant to 17th Vic., No.
26,) for the faithful fulfilment of his trust. He shall re-
ceive £4 per annum, to be paid quarterly.


TRUSTEES.
7. That four Trustees shall be appointed on behaif of
this Society by the Delegates assembled at a Quarterly
Meeting, in whose names the surplus capital of the Dis-
trict shall be invested, in conformity with the Friendly
Society's Act, (17th Vic., No. 26, c. 10.) Such
Trustees to remain in office during the pleasure of the
Delegates, and in case of one or more vacancies occurring,
others shall be elected at the next quarterly meeting.
Should any Trustee, upon being called upon to do so,
refuse to assign, transfer, or otherwise surrender any pro-
perty of this Society (or any Branch of this Society) as
the Committee of Management of the said Society (or
Branch) may direct, such Trustee shall (if a Member)
be expelled the Society, and cease to have any claim
thereon on account of any contributions paid by him.
CONSTITUTION OF DISTRICT COURTS.
8. That this District Court shall be composed of two
legally appointed Delegates from each subordinate Court,
united under these Laws, who shall be Financial Mem-
bers of the Court they represent. A Quarterly Meeting
shall be held at half-past seven o’clock precisely, on the
evenings of the first Thursday in the mouths of January,
April, July, and October, at the “Bull and Mouth,"
corner of Market and Pitt-street, or such other time or
place (of which due notice shall be given).
9. That each subordinate Court within three miles of
the General Post Office, shall appoint two Delegates to
represent the same at all Quarterly or Special Meetings
of the District; and shall also provide them with a
certificate of their appointment, signed by the presiding
Officers with Court Seal attached, under a fine of ss.
And any Brother being delegated, and failing to attend
at the time of opening shall be fined 2s. 6d., unless an
apology be accepted. Nevertheless should any unforseen
circumstances arise between the appointment of such
Delegates and the District Meeting which prevents either
of their attendance, the same must be made known to the
C.R. of the Court, who shall have the power should there


be no Court Meeting intervening, of appointing a Member
to fill up such vacancy.
10. That the following be the rules for opening and
conducting District Court Meetings, whether quarterly,
adjourned, or special. The Beadle having received the
Password from every Brother present, shall hand to the
D.C.B. the certificate he has received from Delegates
present, and the D.C.R. having examined them, shall
proceed to open the Meeting by reading the address same
as at High Court Meetings, and immediately proceed to
business. No Brother not a District Officer or Delegate
shall be allowed to speak unless called upon by , the
D.C.R.; should any one so interfere or make any
demonstration of approval or disapproval, he shall be
immediately ordered to retire; should he refuse, he shall
be fined 2s. 6d.; the same to be recovered as per Law
28. No Brother allowed to enter the room without the
Password or consent of the D.C.R. No Delegate to be al-
lowed to speak more than twice upon any one subject with-
out leave of the D.C.R. or in answer to a question.
Should he wander from the subject under discussion, or
become personal in his remarks, he shall be called to order
by the D.C.R ; should he disobey the call to order, he shall
be fined 2s. 6d. as per Law 28. No smoking or drinking
allowed at District Meetings. The same form to be
observed at closing as at opening the Meeting.
11. That the District Delegates for the time being
shall have the power to make a levy each quarter to
defray the necessary expenses of the District.
12. That the D.C.R. be allowed the sum of ss. for his
attendance at Quarterly Meetings. The District Officers
shall also receive 2s. 6d. each for their attendance at
Adjourned Monthly or Special Meetings. Any Officer of
this District not being present within ten minutes of the
opening of any Meeting, having received notice thereof,
shall be fined 2s. 6d.; and if absent during the whole of
the Meeting, ss.
13. That the Court at which a District Meeting is to
be held, shall appoint a Beadle for the occasion, or failing
to appoint such officer to be fined ss. for neglect; and


Hie Brother attending shail receive 2s. 6d. from the
Incidental l and.
14. That each subordinate Court shall send to the Dis-
trict Secretary twenty-eight days previous to the Quarterly
District Meetings, a correct return of all its members,
showing those financial, also those (if any) suspended,
with date of such suspension or reinstation, also the name,
age, &c., together with a medical certificate of the
health (form A.) of all those initiated since the last
return. Any Court violating this law to be fined 2s. 6d.
The District Secretary having received such returns, shall
forward to each Court a statement of all dues and
demands due by such to the District, within fourteen
days previous to the next District Meeting, under a
penalty of 2s. Gd. for eacli neglect; and any Court neg-
lecting to pay to the Treasurer such dues and demands
seven days previous to such Meeting (having received
due notice) shall be fined five shillings. Should the
returns not be forwarded, or all Moneys due to the Dis-
trict be unpaid at the Quarterly Meeting, the Court shall
be fined the full amount of 7s. 6d. and suspended till the
same he paid ; should they continue to neglect or refuse
to pay after eighteen months, the Court shall be expelled.
15. That this District shall not grant a dispensation
to open a new' Court unless there are at least eight Can-
didates to he initiated. The proposition money, 10s. Gd.
for each Canditate, together with their names, ages, and
occupations, to he deposited in the hands of the District
Officers previous to such application being granted.
16. That each Court shall pay to the District Funeral
Fund the sum of Is. Gd. per quarter for every Financial
Member, and 2s. 6d. for every newly-admitted one up to
twenty-eight years of age—over that age, (twenty-eight)
shall also pay one half of the fees as per Buie 27. Any
member registering his Wife shall produce a certificate,
of some proof of marriage satisfactory to a majority of his
Court; after which, provided she is in good health, her
Christian name shall be registered on the Books of the
C ourt, and forwarded to the District Secretary .


IT. That when a Candidate has been rejected by any
Court of this District, the Secretary shall immediately
inform each Court in compliance, and also the District
Secretary; and he shall not be admitted into any Court
without the sanction of a District one. Any person so
rejected obtaining admission without such consent, shall,
on proof thereof, be expelled the order, or suffer such other
punishment as a Committee of the District may deter-
mine. Any Court knowingly admitting such person shall
be fined 21s.
18. That at the Quarterly Meeting in July of each
year the Delegates then present shall nominate properly
qualified persons for each and every office in the District.
The election for the same to take place at the Annual
Meeting in October following. No absent Member can
be elected (sickness excepted), and then only by a written
statement of Iris willingless to fulfil the duties of such
office should he be elected ; and in cases of emergency,
by resignation or otherwise, the Delegate Meeting shall
proceed to elect proper qualified persons to fill any
vacancy that may occur.
19. That the salary of the District Secretary be £l6
per annum, to be paid quarterly, the said amount to be
paid from the Incidental Expense Fund.
20. That the District Secretary shall draw upon the
Incidental fund cheques upon the Treasurer for all monies
he may require for the use of the District, such cheques
to be countersigned by the D.C.11. for the time being.
21. That at each quarterly meeting three Auditors
shall be appointed from the Delegates present, to audit
the books and accounts of the ensuing quarter, and that
the same may be properly proved and examined they
shall meet previous to the District Meeting, so that the
accounts may’ be presented at the meeting as soon as the
business is opened. The audit to take place at the Dis-
trict Secretary’s and the auditors to receive 6s. for their
quarter’s salaries. Any 7 Auditor neglecting to attend at
the time appointed shall be fined 2s 6d.
22. That if any dispute arise between a member, or
the person claiming under or on account of a member.


and ibe officers of this District, or any Court of the
same, or should any member be dissatisfied with any
resolution passed by his Court, the person or persons
aggrieved may prefer a charge against such officer or
officers, or other member, or appeal against such resolu-
tion to the District Quarterly Meeting, when the Dele-
gates assembled shall have power to examine all witnesses
duly noticed by the District Secretary, shall determine
and decide upon cases of dispute, appeals, or otherwise,
that may come before them, (proof of the usual notices
and deposits required by law having been given) they
shall award all fines and costs and give judgment by
default if the appellant or respondent do not appear, and
the decision of such Delegates at such meeting, or a ma-
jority of the same shall be binding on all parties without
any other appeal whatsoever; provided always that no
Delegates from any Court of which either of the dispu-
tants may be a member of, shall be allowed to take any
part in the procedings during the hearing of the said case,
A deposit of £1 Is ,or the written guarantee of two
or more Brothers for the payment of such amount towards
the payment of any costs that may be awarded against
them, all appeals or charges to be made within three
months of the date of occurrence or not to be entertained.
The decision of the District to be final.
23. Should any Court refuse to comply with any
decision of the District, or refuse to pay any fines levied
by the District after having received due notice of such
decisions or fines, they shall be suspended until such de-
cisions be complied with, or such fines be paid. Should
the District Secretary allow a regular Court Meeting to
pass over in any Court decided against fined or suspended
by a decision of the District without giving the Court due
notice, he shall be fined ss. in each case; and if he
neglects two court nights he shall be fined £1 Is.
24. That all notices of business (not being for altera-
tion of law's), intended for the consideration of a District
Meeting shall he transmitted to the district Secretary,
through the medium of a subordinate court, at least seven
days previous to such meeting being held. Such notices,


if from a Court, to be signed by the presiding Officers
with Court seal, and all communications must be carefully
dated.
25. That all propositions for new District Laws, or for
altering or repealing those in force, must be passed in
open Court, and be signed by the three principal officers
of the same, and forwarded to the District Secretary
previous to the July Quarterly Meeting in each year, the
same to be inserted in such report, and be discussed at the
Annual or Quarterly Meeting in October.
26. That all resolutions passed at any District Meeting
shall be read by the Secretary previous to the closing of
the same, and come into operation, and have full force
and effect fourteen days after passing the same, excepting
the alterations of District Laws, which shall not be acted
upon until duly certified should the District be registered.
27. That no person shall be admitted a Member into
any Court ot this District who is under the age of eighteen
year’s ; he shall also obtain a medical certificate of sound
health in accordance to form A. Nor shall any person be
admitted to Sick or Funeral benefits if above the age ol
twenty-eight years unless he has paid into the Court
accepting him, exclusive of the regular admission lees,
the amount for over-age as specified in the following
table. Every person proposed for admission into any
Court shall produce a register, or some other document,
to prove he is not above the age he may represent him-
sent himself to be, or obtain the decision of a District
Meeting in his favor. The District Officers at a Monthly,
or the Delegates at a Quarterly, Meeting, shall have
power to fix the age at which a Candidate shall be
admitted; and the Court bringing the Candidate forward
shall first have the Candidate examined by the Court
Surgeon, and he (the Surgeon) shall state the probable
age ° of the party. Any Court oven five miles from
Sydney shall not be compelled to have their Candidates
examined by the District; but they shall be examined
by three Members of the Court in which they are pro-
posed, subject to the same conditions as regards fees and
medical examinations. Any Court acting contrary to
this rule to he fined Al Is. to‘the District Fund^


Table of over-age fees to be paid previous to admission
into any Court in this District.
If 28 years and not 29 ... £'o 4 0
„29 „ „ 30 ... 0 8 0
„30 „ „ 31 ... 012 0
„31 „ „ 32 ... 016 0
~ 32 ~ ~ 33 ... 1 0 0
» 33 „ ~ 34 ... 14 0
„34 „ „ 35 ... 110 0
~ 35 „ „ 36 ... 2 0 0
„36 „ „ 37 ... 210 0
„37 „ „ 38 ... 3 5 0
~ 38 „ „ 39 ... 4 0 0
„39 „ „ 40 ... 5 0 0
And if above the age of 40 years the same rate of con-
tribution as paid by Members of the Court receiving
him for every year or part of a year he so exceeds.
28. That should any Member allow his contributions
to exceed fourteen weeks, or being fined, and having-
received notice within one month after being fined, and
not paying such fine within fourteen weeks, he shall not
be entitled to benefits from this District until fourteen
weeks have expired from the time of his complying with
the above conditions.
29. That no person shall be permitted to act as
Medical Attendant to any Court in this District .who
cannot produce a qualification from the New South Wales
Medical Board. Any Court violating this rule to be fined
one guinea.
80. That a Special Delegate Meeting may be called
by the District Officers at any time, should they consider
the circumstances of such a nature as not to be deferred
to a regular Quarterly Meeting. The Monthly Meetings
of the District Officers to examine Candidates, and other
urgent business shall take place the first Thursday in
each month intervening between the Quarterly Meetings;
provided there not an Adjourned or Special Meeting
for that day, which Meeting shall act in place of the
Monthly Meeting.


31. That a District Messenger be appointed to deliver
all notices and communications required or issued by
the District to or from the various Courts, and that he be
paid 15s. a quarter for the same.
LAWS RELATIVE TO THE FUNERAL FUND.
32. That on the deatli of a Member who has been
initiated twelve months, his wife, child, executor, ad-
ministrator, or assigns, shall receive the smn of £ls
and if a Member’s wife die he shall receive the sum of
£lO provided that he is in conformity and compliance
with Rule 16 and 28. The certificate of marriage or
other satisfactory proof of such shall also be produced if
required, before payment is made. On the death of a
Member, or Member’s wife, the Secretary of the Court
shall communicate the same to the District Secretary,
forwarding also a certificate of the cause of his or her
decease, signed by the medical attendant, together with
an application, signed by the three presiding officers of
the Court, in accordance with forms B and C. The
District Secretary shall, on the above requirements being
complied with, draw an order on the Treasurer for the
amount of the Funeral Gift. Should a Brother remain
a Member of this District for five successive years after
the adoption of these Rules, his heirs shall become
entitled to a further sum of £5, making in all £2O.
33. That provided a Brother marries a second wife,
having received the Funeral donation for the first, he
shall pay to the Funeral Fund within three months after
such marriage, a registration fee of £1 Is., or he will
not be entitled to, or have any claim to any donation on
her account, unless he marries the Widow of a deceased
Member who is financial at the time. Nor shall any Mem-
ber be entitled to a second donation, having received the
first, unless his wife has been registered to the Funeral
Fund twelve months previous to her decease, nor in any
case shall a member be entitled to the benefits accruing from
the Fund on account of his wife, should it%e proved that
she was of unsound health, or above the age of 45 years
at the time of her being registered to the same, and that


no Member be allowed to register his wife to the said
Fund if above that age.
34. That no Member, Member’s Wife, or Widow,
who may have caused their death by any wilful or
immoral conduct shall be entitled to the benefits of this
fund, without the circumstances being first considered by
a Delegate Meeting.
35. That should any Member’s Wife desert him, or
act in any way as to bring disgrace on him or the Order
generally her name shall be erased from the books, and
she shall not be entitled to any benefits from the Funeral
Fund, unless she should subsequently return, and prove
by her conduct that she has reformed.
36. That should the Widow of any deceased Brother,
who was financial at the time of his death, pay into the
Court of which her husband was a Member, one shilling
per quarter on account of the Funeral Fund, she shall be
entitled to the sum of £lO in case of her decease ; the
same to be paid to her child, executor, or assigns, on the
production of the certificates in accordance with forms B
and C. But in order to entitle her to this benefit she
must join the fund within three months after her
decease. The Secretary of the Court shall inform her of
such privilege within that period, under a penalty of ss.
for neglect. But should she marry again, she shall
forfeit all claim on the fund, unless she marry a Member
of this Order.
CONSTITUTION OF SUBORDINATE COURTS.
37. That each Subordinate Court in this District shall
have the power of electing its own Officers, whose titles
shall be C.R., or Chief Ranger, Sub-Chief Ranger, Sec-
retary, Treasurer, Senior and Junior Woodwards, and
Senior and Junior Beadles. The office of C.R. being
cne of honour, the remainder subordinate offices only.
38. That every Financial Member shall be eligible to
vote in his own Court on the election of Delegates to
represent the same at any District Meeting, as also on the
appointment of its own Officers, and upon all questions
that may come before the Court. Any Member above


the age of 21 years, who has served a subordinate office
for six months, and is financial, shall be eligible to fill
any office in his Court or the District, excepting that of
the D.C.R.; to qualify him for which he must have pre-
sided in his own Court as C.R. for the period of six
months, or be a Past District Officer. No Brother to be
elected for the office of D.C.R. or C.R. whose arrears of
any kind are over five shillings.
39. That in order to prevent any undue influence in
the election of officers in Subordinate Courts, the voter
shall be shielded by the ballot, and also upon any other
question if demanded by a Brother. Open votes only to
be taken at District Meetings and Court Committees.
40. That in order to make every officer responsible to
his constituents for the faithful discharge of his duty, and
to prevent any abuse of power, and to remedy any other
defect arising from an erroneous choice, where the con-
tinuance of such officer in office would be adverse to the
well-being of his constituents, it is enacted that this
District, or any Subordinate Court, shall have the power
to call upon him or them to resign ; should he refuse, he
may be deposed by a vote of the District or Court.
41. That any brother attending, visiting, or holding
office in any Court of which he is not a Subscribing
Member, shall conform to all the rules and regulations of
the same; and should he knowingly violate any, or either
of them, he shall be amenable to, and suffer the same
penalty as would be inflicted on any Member of the
Court guilty of the like offence. Such penalty to be
paid into the Court in which he offends, subject to the
notice and penalties named in Rule 28.
42. That should any Brother make known to any
person not duly and legally initiated a Member of this
order, any of its secrets, especially the grip, pass-word,
sign, or counter-sign, he shall be for ever expelled; or
should any Brother make known any objections made in
a Court to the admission of a Candidate, or the name of
any Brother making such objection, he shall pay a fine of
1 Os. or be expelled ; or should any Brother, except the
C.R. or Secretary, give the pass-word or counter-sign


to another Brother, either in or out of Court, he shall be
lined for every such offence according to the discretion of
his Court, Or should any Brother make known any
resolution, or a discussion, used at any Meeting of this
order, to a person not belonging to it, he shall be lined,
or suffer such punishment as the Court may deem lit.
43. That should a Brother be convicted of felony he shall
be expelled the Order, and his name erased from the
District and Court Books. Any Brother who has been
expelled from this Order, shall not be re-admitted without
sufficient cause be shown of penitence for the past, and
security for the future. Nor unless his re-admission shall
have been sanctioned by the District. If any member be
guilty of Fraud or any other disgraceful conduct, or follow
any evil or wicked practice contrary to law, or use any
unlawful means of obtaining a livelihood, he shall be ex-
pelled. Any Brother defrauding another of his just dues
shall be suspended till full restitution be made, and by
liis actions evince that he is brought to a sense of shame
and sorrow for his fault.
44. That no person shall be admitted a Member of
the Ancient Order of Foresters who is a Sheriff’s Officer
or follower, who is in her Majesty’s army, navy, or in the
police force, or who is unhealthy, or of bad character, lives
an idle or dissolute life, frequents bad company, guilty of
excess of drinking, or is of a quarrelsome behaviour.
45. That no Sick Club, Benefit Society, or any other
united body of men, shall be admitted as such into this
Order, except in strict conformity with the laws regu-
lating the admission of new meters.
46. Should any Court belonging to this District be
desirous of leaving it, they shall give three months notice
of the same at a Quarterly Delegate Meeting, and at the
ensuing Quarterly Meeting having paid up all the lawful
demands of the District, and produced the Minute of the
Court regarding such withdrawal, signed by a majority
of the Financial Members of the Court, the whole of the
Members having been summoned for that purpose; they
shall be allowed to do so. Should any Court of this
Order that has never belonged to this District, or has


withdrawn or been expelled, and being desirous of joining
this District, they may be admitted by complying with
Laws 16 and 27 provided a majority of the Delegates,
assembled at a District Meeting, shall think fit so to
accept them.
47. That any respectable person above the age of 21
years may become an Honorary Member of this Society
on payment of £2 2s. to the incidental expenses of the
Court admitting him, but shall not have any claim on the
funds of such Court, or the Order; nor either shall he
hold any office in the same ; nevertheless, he shall have
power of expressing his opinion, and recording his vote
on all subjects and matters not financial.
48. That no person shall be initiated into this Order
whose proposition has not been before the Court he may
be desirous to enter from one regular meeting night to
another. Honorary Members excepted who may be
proposed and admitted upon the same Meeting night.
The proposer and seconder of each candidate shall be
responsible to the Court for the previous character of the
person proposed. Should they knowingly introduce a
person who is unhealthy or inadmissable, according to
the terms of rule 44, they shall be fined one guinea.
Nor shall any person be initiated whose proposition ex-
ceeds six months, nor unless he produces a medical certi-
ficate of his having been examined within twenty-eight
days of his admission.
49. That when any person is proposed as a candidate
for admission into any Court of this Order, his proposer
shall pay on his behalf the sum of not less than 10s. 6d.,
and at the time of his initiation the further sum of not
less than 4s. 6d., if under2l ; over that age, not less than
10s. 6d. (exclusive of over-age if any) shall also produce
a medical certificate of good health, in accordance with
form A. But should such candidate be refused admission
all moneys paid on his behalf shall be returned. Immedi-
ately after the admission of a Candidate as a Member, he
shall be provided gratuitously by the Court with copies of
all the laws by which he is to be governed, and a certificate
of Membership.


50. That in order to prevent, as much as possible,
any mistake by Brethren visiting any Court in this
District the outside Beadle shall invariably wear the
insignia of the order, a sash and horn, during the time
such Court is open, under a fine of 2s. 6d. for each
neglect; but it shall be optional with Courts whether they
compel the Beadle to remain outside the door or not.
When there is no outside notice shall be posted of the
Meeting within.
51. That it shall be legal for any Committee in this
District to proceed to the business for which they were
called together, and to act and decide thereon, if two-
thirds of the number specified by law be present, but not
otherwise.
52. That no D.C.R., C.R., or other Presiding Officer
shall put, or suffer to be put to the vote, any motion that
can be decided by law, under a penalty of 2s. 6d. to the
District Fund for each and every offence.
58. That should the Presiding Officer of this District
or any Court thereof vacate his chair without permission
of the assembled brethren, or first providing some com-
petent person to succeed him, or refuse to put to the vote
any proposition properly made, dissolve, or adjourn the
Meeting before the business is finished, or the time for
closing the Court has arrived without the consent of the
majority of the Brethren then present, he shall (if the
offenee is not so flagrant as to cause a motion for his de-
position) be fined, for the first offence, 55.; for the second,
10s.; for any future offence shall be punished as a Com-
mittee trying the case may award.
54. That should any Court permit the lecture books
to be taken from the Court-room, except to funerals or
the opening of new Courts, such Court shall be fined <£ I
Is. to the District Fund; the C.R. of each Court shall be
responsible for the safe keeping of the same. Or should
any Member unauthorised by the District write or copy
any part thereof, or other secrets of the Order, he shall
be fined not less than one guinea, to the District Fund,
and be suspended until the same be paid.
55. That each Court in this district be closed on or


before eleven o’clock at night, or the C.R. to he lined
2s. 6d. to the District Fund, and all business transacted
after that time will be illegal, and of no effect.
56. That any Brother preferring a charge against
another Brother of his own Court, in respect of some
matter or thing connected with the Order, shall deliver
the same in writing to the C.R. of his-Court, in which
shall be stated the cause of the complaint and the date
of occurrence, so that the C.R. may be enabled to give
the offending parties fourteen days clear notice of the
same.
57. Should the charge or complaint not be preferred
within three months of the date of occurrence, it cannot
be entertained. The C.R. upon receiving such charge,
accompanied by the deposit demanded by the Court, shall
summon the parties before a Committee of the Court,
stating the nature of the complaint therein ; such Com-
mittee to consist of twelve members, and the C.R. to be
appointed at each regular election of officers, providing
the Court shall consist of that number, otherwise it shall
be lawful for the District Meeting to hear and determine
such charge or complaint, &c., whose acts shall be
binding on all parties, the same as if determined by the
Court Committee. Should the accused, after a fair and
impartial hearing, be deemed guilty of the offence, he
shall be fined such penalty as a majority of the Committee
may think fit, (not exceeding .£1 Is.) But should such
Committee consider the offence of such a nature as to
warrant expulsion, it shall be referred to a Committee of
the whole Court; and should the defendant purposely
avoid appearing before such Committee (having been duly
noticed) he shall be deemed guilty, and dealt with ac-
cordingly. And should such charge be found frivolous,
or of a vexatious nature, the accuser shall be fined 10s.,
and be suspended until the same be paid. But all
grievances occurring between Brethren of different Courts
shall be referred to the District Meeting, subject to the
same condition, relative to notice as herein before
mentioned.


58. That each Court shall have the power of fixing
the amount to be paid by Members as contributions, and
also the amount to be allowed as sick benefits, and of
making other financial arrangements, for the government
of the same, provided such are in accordance with the
District Laws ; and no Court shall be allowed to break
up except in conformity with the Friendly Society’s Act.
59. That should any Court wish to amalgamate with
another they shall be allowed to do so, provided they
transfer the whole of their funds and other property to
the Court agreeing to receive them.
60. '1 hat no Court within one mile of another shall
be allowed to remove without the consent of the two
Courts nearest to the place they intend removing to, or
that of a Delegate Meeting, under the penalty of <£l Is.,
unless good and sufficient reason be shown for such removal.
A Court may be opened in, or removed to a Temperance
Hall or any other Building, providing the same be respect-
able.
61. That each Subordinate Court have its own seal,
with the number and name of the same engraven thereon,
and that no communication from any Court be acknow-
ledged unless the impression of such be thereon. No
Court or Member to be allowed to use any regalia but
that recognised by, and provided for, in the lecture books
of the Order, banners or flags excepted.
62. That for the general information of Members it
shall be imperative for the C.R. to have the quarterly
reports and all other documents issued from the District
read in open Court, at least on one regular Meeting
night, after receiving the same, or be fined 2s. 6d. to the
District Fund for such neglect.
63. That no Court in this District shall be allowed to
hold any Meeting, or transact any business whatever
connected with the Order on a Sabbath day ; any Court
violating this rule shall be fined one guinea to the District
Fund.


64. That any Court, Officer, or Brother, violating
any of those rules where there is no penalty attached,
shall be fined not less than 2s. 6d., nor more than one
guinea. In all cases where the C.R. of a Court offends
in any manner, the S.C.B. shall inflict the necessary
fines and penalties.
GRANTING DISPENSATION.
65. That upon application being made for a Dispensa-
tion to any Court by persons wishing to found a new one,
perfect information shall be given relative to the costs
to which they will be liable, nor shall any person or per-
sons become chargeable to a young Court by Clearance
or otherwise until the Court has been established twelve
months on pain of a fine of one guinea to the District
Fund, the eight candidates to be made in the opening
Court, and no new Court to be opened without the con-
sent of the two nearest Courts, or the consent of a Quar-
terly Delegate Meeting, and that a District Officer, with
the three principal officers of the opening Court, shall be
sufficient to open any new one, the District Officers
to be allowed the sum of 7s. 6d. each as opening
fee should they attend, and the distance does not
exceed three miles from the General Post Office. And
that the three opening officers, if presiding in the new,
be allowed 3s. each, or 395. in the whole, inclu-
ding their attendance for the first six months, and pro-
vided they have fulfilled their duties in a satisfactory
manner, the same to be paid by the new Court at
the expiration of that time. But should the distance
exceed that stated (three miles,) they shall be allowed
so much per mile extra from the funds of the Court
as travelling expenses, as the Members thereof deem
sufficient; but in no case shall the aggregate amoimt
exceed six guineas if within the above named distance.
Any new Court requiring the attendance of the District,
or other officers, after the expiration of the first six
months of its being opened, shall pay their expenses in
accordance to the above scale. Should any Brother or
person be desirous of opening a new Court at a distance
exceeding five miles from any other Court of this Order,


it shall not be imperative to have the Candidates made in
the Court through which the Dispensation was applied
for, bat they shall endeavour to get as clear proof of age
as possible so as to secure the acceptance of the Candi-
dates by the Opening Officer or Officers of the District
or Courts, together with the medical certificates, form A,
which certificates shall be forwarded to the District Sec-
retary at least seven days previous to the opening of the
new Court.
CLEARANCES AND TRAVELLING LICENSES.
66. That any Member of this District who has been
initiated twelve months, and is clear on the books of his
Court, may have his clearance by proving his necessity
for the same; but that no Member withdrawing from one
Court be allowed to enter as a Member of another, unless
he produce such clearance signed by the C.R., S.C.R.,
and Secretary of the Court issuing the same, stating that
he has paid up all arrears; but should a Member be
fifty-two weeks in arrears of contribution he will not be
allowed to enter his own or any other Court than as a
new Member, and in strict conformity with Rule 27.
67. That any Member arriving in this colony from au£
District beyond the Australian colonies, with clearance
or travelling license, and wishing to place the same into
a Court of this District, shall do so within three months
after his arrival, or arrival of his clearance, under a
penalty of 55., and a further sum of ss. for every month
so detained; he shall produce the required medical certi-
ficate that he and his wife (if married) are in sound
health, and shall pay to the Funeral Fund if his age does
not exceed thirty-eight years a fee of 10s., and ss. for
every year or part of a year he so exceeds, exclusive of
the fees required by the Court accepting him. But,
should the Clearance of any such Member be refused on
account of ill health or otherwise, he may be at liberty to
pay his contributions into any Court of this District, and
shall receive in case of sickness or death, the same
amount of sick pay or funeral donation as allowed by the
Court or District granting the Clearance, the same to be
refunded by them.


68. That any Member presenting a Clearance or
Travelling Card from any Court or District within the
Australasian Colonies shall be received upon the same
conditions as provided for the accepting of Clearance by
the laws of the Court or District granting the same, but
in all cases subject to the same restrictions relative to
health and arrears as in the previous law.
69. That any Member whose License or Clearance has
been accepted in any Court of this District, and has paid
all dues and demands as provided for in the above rules,
shall be entitled to all benefits of the District and Court
so accepting him. But should any Court refuse to receive
a Clearance, or a Brother fail to use a Clearance issued by
any Court in’this District to him, such Member shall be
allowed the space of three months to return the same to
the Court issuing it, and such Court shall be bound to
receive it.
TO. That should the funds of any Court in this Dis-
trict —such Court having been in existence twelve months
—become exhausted, application shall be made to the
District Officers, who shall examine the books of such
Court, and lay such application with their report before
the next District Meeting, which shall have the power of
relieving such Court with a grant of money from the
Incidental Expense Fund should they find that such funds
have not been used for any extravagant or unnecessary
purpose; and that Courts be recommended to form a
seperate fund for their incidental expenses.
71. That any Member or Members voting in the
minority of any Court that may break up, or secede from
this District from any cause whatever, or be suspended or
expelled for non-compliance with a decision of a District
or Appeals Committee, such Member or Members shall
be considered as still belonging to the Order, and in
event of their not being able to obtain admission into an-
other Court by clearance, in consequence of ill-health or
over they shall pay their contributions to the district,
and incase of sickness, they shall be paid sick pay as
hereafter mentioned, from the District Incidental Expense
Fund, such member or members shall pay to the Dis-


fcrict Secretary Is. per week contributions, and shall be
entitled in sickness to 15s. per week for the first 26
weeks, 7s. 6d. for the next 26 weeks, and ss. per week
from that time so long as his illness may last, and that
the Surgeon of the nearest Court do attend him and find
him with proper medicines if residing within three
miles of the same. But any member having received
26 weeks full pay, must be 6 months off the
funds before he will be again entitled to that
amount, but if he fall ill during that time he shall
be placed in the same position as regards benefits,
as when he declared off the funds of the District, any
Member or Members voting in such minority of Courts
seceding or otherwise, and wishing to avail themselves of
the above provisions, shall signify the same to the District
Secretary within one calendar month, providing such
member resides within 6 miles of his Court at the time ;
but if above that distance he shall be allowed three
calendar months to do the same, and in no case shall any
Member whose Court has broken up, and divided its
funds, be re-admit ted except upon the payment of all
moneys that he may have received from such division
into the funds of the District or Court he may unite with,
72. That should a Financial Member legally declare
on the Sick Fund of this District or a Subordinate Court,
and be in the receipt of the sick pay, the Officers of the
District or Court to which the Brother belongs shall
deduct from the sick pay such amount as may be
required from time to time to keep the Brother in com-
pliance until such time as he may be legally declared off
the Sick Fund of the District or Court.
73. That should any Court, Officer, or Brother, print,
publish, or circulate any article, or by any means what-
ever, act so as to bring the District, Court, Officers, or
Brethren into contempt shall, upon proof thereof, before
the proper- tribunal, be expelled the order, or suffer 'iich
other punishment as a majority of the same may deem
proper to inflict.
74. That no act of any person in possession of any
office in the District or any Court thereof, and acting as


such, shall be invalid, in consequence of any defect of
qualification or informality of appointment.
We, the undersigned, being Members of the above-
named Society, hereby Certify the foregoing to be the
new and amended Rules adopted by the New South Wales
District of the Ancient Order of Foresters' Friendly
Society, November 18th, 1858.
JOHN HOLMAN.
JAMES SIMPSON,
WILLIAM SOUTH
Countersigned by me
WM. O. FOX, D. Sec
I hereby Certify that these Rules are in conformity
to Law, and the Provisions of the Act in force relating
to Registered Friendly Societies.
Dated at Sydney, this 17th day of November, 1858.
ALFRED P LUTWYCHE, Attorney General
We, the undersigned, do hereby acknowledge ourselves
to be, and are the Trustees appointed by the New South
Wales Branch of the Ancient order of Foresters’ Benefit
Society, and that all Moneys, Securities, &c., now or
hereafter vested in our names, are for the sole use and
benefit of the said Society, as Witness our hands, this
18th day of November, 1858.
George Williams. Publican, Glebe.
Henry Potter, Butcher, Botany Road
George Telford, Pattern Maker, George Street.
Edward Swinson, Ironmonger, 41, Bathurst Street.


A.
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE OF HEALTH,
AND declaration to be signed previous to any person being
ADMITTED A MEMBER OP ANT COURT IN THIS DISTRICT,
Name? Age? Residence? Occupation? Married or Single ?
What is your Wife’s age ? What has been the state of your Wife’s health?
What has been the state of your health the last two years !
What was the nature of your last illness?
Hare you, or any of your Family been subject to fits?
Are you subject to Piles, Fistula, Strictures, Pleurisy, Gravel, or Stone i
Hare you ever had or are you subject to ruptures, spitting of blood, Asthma,
Gout or Rheumatism ?
Do you know of any hereditary or constitutional disease to which you may-
be liable?
Are you aware of any circumstance which, in justness and fairness you ought
to communicate to the Society, either in regard to your own or Wile's
(if any) state of health, which on reference to the rules of such might
raise a question as regards your eligibility? name it.
Are you aware that if at any time hereafter it should be proved that the an-
swers above given are not correct you will expose yourself to the lia
bility of being expelled the Society ?
And I do hereby agree that this declaration shall be the ground of Contract
between this order and myself, and if any of the averments herein contained
are not true, or used any kind of deception, or withheld any thing the know-
ledge of which would prevent my admission into the said order, I shall have
deservedly forfeited all moneys paid by me to the same, and they will be
justifiable in expelling me from the Institution. Signed.)
MEDICAL CERTIFICATE.
This is to certify that I have carefully examined Mr. and
am of opinion be is in good health, and I consider him a fit and proper person
to become a Member of Court
MEDICAL OFFICER.
B.
FORM OP MEDICAL CERTIFICATE.
I hereby cerrify that
late of died the
day of , and I have no reason to attribute his death to
poison, violence, or criminal neglect.
Dated at this day of a.d.
(Signed) A. 8., Profession.
Residence.
CERTIFICATE FOR OBTAINING FUNERAL DONATION.
Court No. Sydney, 18 .
This is to certify that Brother departed
this life, on the day of 18 . That he is not at
this time, nor has he been at any period during the last fourteen weeks in
arrears of Contributions exceeding that amount, or from any cause whatso-
ever suspended; he is consequently entitled to the Funeral Donation.
As Witness our hands
To the District Secretary. C, R.
Seal. S. C. R.
Secretary.
FORM OF CORONER’S CERTIFICATE.
I hereby certify that I have held an Inquest on the body of
, late of , who
w as found dead, and the Jury have returned the following verdict;
And it does not appear to me, that he has been deprived of life by means of
any person beneficially interested in obtaining burial money from any Society
A 8., Coroner.
Dated at this day of a d.


INDEX. No. of Law
Name and objects of the Society J,
By whom to be managed .. .. .. . - 5
Duty of District Officers 4,5, 6
—j .. •• •• -- >'>_
Trustees how to be appointed
Courts to appoint Delegates .. ..
District Courts, how composed, when held and how conducted .. 9, 1®
Lety for Incidental Expense and District Funeral Funds .. .. l!, 16
Allowance to District Officers .. .. .. .. .. . • 12
Headie to be appointed .. .. .. .. I®
Returns when to be forwarded to District Secretary .. .. K
Opening New CourU and granting Dispensations, &c. .. .. 15, 1)5
Notice of Candidates being rejected to be given .. .. .• I 7
Nomination and Election of D.O. .. 1®
Secretary’s salary how paid .. 1®
Cheques on Treasurer how drawn 20
Auditors to be appointed 21
Disputes and Appeals how to be settled .. .. . • •• 22
Courts refusing to comply with decision of District 23
Notices of business and for alteration of laws, how given .. .. 24,25
Resolutions to be read, &c , 26
Pronosuion and admission of Candidates, with over age fees ..27, 48, 49
TJnfmancial Members not entitled 28
Qualification of Medical Officers .. .. 29
Special and Monthly Meetings .. .. .. .. •• 56
Duty of District Messenger .. .. .. .. • • • • 31
Amount payable on decease of a member or his wife .. . - *2
Members Registering a Second Wife .. .. .. ■ ■ • • 55
Death occurring from Immoral Conduct
Misconduct of Members Wives .. .. .. .. •• •• 55
Members'Widows may continue .. .. .. .. •• •• 56
Subordinate Courts to elect their Officers .. 57
Financial Member’s Qualification for Officers .. •• •• 58
Vote by Ballot, if demanded 59
Misconduct. See , of Elective or Presiding Officers 40,53, 74
Members Visiting other Courts .. .. .. .. .. •• 41
Making known any Secrets or Discussion 42
Members Expelled, how, Re-admitted .. •• •• •• •• 43
Persons not to be admitted .. .. 44
Other Societies not to be admitted 45
Notice of Courts wishing to leave the District, how given .. .. 46
Honorary Members, how admitted .. .. •• •• •• 47
Outside Beadle to wear Insignia of the Order .. .. % • • 50
Legality of District or other Committees •• •• 51
Presiding Officers putting motions - • • •
Lecture Books, how kept *€ •• •• 54
Time ©f Closing Courts .. .. 55
Charges, how to be preferred .. .. 56, 57
Courts empowered to make By-Laws in conformity .. .. .. 58
Cour s wishing to amalmagate .. .. .. •• •• •• 59
Courts wishing to remove .. .. .. 60
Court Seal and Regalia to be used • • 61
District reports and documents to be read in Courts .. •• 62
No business to be transacted on the Sabbath ..
Breaking Laws, no Fine attached • • 64
Clearances and Travelling Licenses .. .. •• •• 66, 67,68,69
Court Funds when exhausted .. 7 6
Breaking up of Courts, &c.
Members on Rick Fund to be kept in compliance .. . • ••
Briefing the Order or Brethren into Contempt


REGULATIONS TO BE OBSERVED AT ALL
FUNERALS OF THIS DISTRICT.
Every Funeral shall be conducted by a master of
ceremonies, who shall be elected at a quarterly meeting
of this district, and he shall remain in office during the
pleasure of the district; he shall be provided with a black
baton, with gilt ends, as an insignia of his office : and to
him shall be entrusted the carrying out of all Funerals of
members, as follows; —
Upon the death of any member of this district, the
Secretary of the Court to which he did belong, having
received 24 hours’ notice of his Funeral taking place,
shall communicate the same to the master of ceremonies,
and also advertise it with the correct time and place of
meeting in the morning papers, so that all the members
may be made acquainted; when it is expected that all
who can possibly attend, will do so—and that 25 black
silk sashes be provided by the district, 6 of which shall
be for the Pall Bearers, and the remainder for the Dis-
trict Officers and for the Officers and Brothers of the
Court of which the deceased Brother was a member,
should they have no regalia of their own ; and any mem-
ber considered by the M. C. to be misconducting himself,
shall be immediately ordered to leave the procession ; and
upon the C. reporting such brother’s conduct to the
lodge to which he belongs, he shall be fined the sum of 5
shillings.
Every member will be expected to attend all Funerals
respectably attired, the regalia, if any, of the deceased
member may be attached to the Pall, to show what rank
the brother held in the order. The Pall bearers of a
brother shall be “ brothers” of officers of a Court, the
past and present officers of that Court, and for A.D.O.
they shall be the past and present officers of the district,
at all Funerals the D. 0. shall bring up the rear, and the
Court of which the brother was a member shall take the
precedence, and the other Courts according to seniority of


establishment, |*id when the hearse has armed at the
church yard, the brethen shall open line to form a lane
for the passage up of the D. O’s, who shall take up
their position immediately after the coffin, the brethren
shall then close line, and the procession shall then move
on to the grave, round which they shall stand in a circle
to hear the final address delivered by the D. C, R., who
shall also read the address at the house.
All Funeral regalia shall be kept in a box at the house
of the M. C., who shall receive for his services on attend-
ing the Funeral, the sum of fifteen shillings, and he shall
he responsible to the district officers for all sashes or
other regalia committed to his charge : and he alone shall
have the entire control of the Funeral procession, and
convey it out strictly in accordance with the foregoing
rule ; should he be absent or neglect his duty, or miscon-
duct himself in any way so as to bring disgrace upon the
order during any Funeral procession he may have to
attend, he shall be fined in the sum of 10 shillings; such
fines, as well as any others inflicted under these rules, to
go to the Incidental Expense Fund of the district
James Frye?, Printer, 352, Geo»ge Street, Sydeey.


v *\ \s
\ ' > ' ' i
O\ ' ' \
■\ • ' \






