

GENERAL RULES
AND
BY-LAWS
OF THE
Amalgamated Shearers' Union
OF AUST RALA S IA,
AS REVISED AND ADOPTED BY THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE
OF THE ASU.,
HELD AT ADELAIDE, S.A., FEBRUARY, 1891.
NEWPORT:
PRINTED AT "THE SHEANERS" AND GENERAL LABORERS
RECORD" OFFICE.
1891.


PREFACE
Experience has proved that all the privileges the
working classes now enjoy have been gained through 1 and
by their Trade Unions. As disunited individuals they
are at the mercy of their employers, but united they van
obtain all that is just and right. As almost every class-
in the community are sow organised for the furtherance
of the interests of their own particular callings, those
who are not members of some society whose duty it is to
look after its members 5 welfare, must of necessity suffer
injustice and wrong ; because, without union with their
fellow workmen of the same occupation, they are unable
"n resist those encroachments on their rights and privileges
which are certain to be made by those whose self-interest
-eads them, to trespass- on the rights of their fellow
men.
No society can expect permanency without Aides and
regulations. The are, however, of no use, if not read
and observed, but remain only a form without force. On
the contrary, when due attention and obedience is paid to
their wholesome and salutary orders, peace and conconi
arise, which animate the members to union and friend-
ship, Let, then, each, of you read and fully digest the
followingrules, and it will be discovered that, by strictly
adhering tu the same, the evils attendant upon our
'"espectlve occupations will be avoided, while the advance-
ment of the rights and privileges of labor, the cultivation
of brotherly affection, and mutual regard for each others
welfare, cannot fail to be the result ; and every go>->d
member of society will, admire and respect the noble
triumph you will have obtained by your united exertions
and perseverance.


RULES
OF THE
AMALG A MATED
Sherers' Union of Australasia.
NAME.
1. This Society shall be called the Amalgamated
Shearers’ Union of Australasia, and shall consist of
as many local branches as may conform to the following
rules.
2. (I) To protect the rights and privileges of
shearers throughout Australasia. (in) To secure and
maintain a fair rate of remuneration, by the adoption of
prices and rates of wages suitable to circumstances of the
■.several colonies and districts, (hi.) The adoption and
enforcement of just and equitable agreements between
employer and employe, (iv.) To make such arrangements
as will prevent undue loss of time, in travelling to sheds,
and to ensure the carrying out of agreements made by
shearers and shearers’ cooks with sbeepowoers. (v,V To
protect members against exorbitant charges for rations or
horse accommodation, (vi.) To provide relief for members
in case of accident whilst engaged in the occupation of
shearing, (vii,) To assist kindred organisation in
upholding their rights and privileges ami to generally
•assist in the emancipation of Labor.
GOVERNMENT.
3. The government of the A.S.IJ, shall be composed
of a President, two Vice-Presidents, Treasurer, and
Secretary, who shall act in concert with one representative


from each financial local branch, and shall form an Emo-
tive Council, any five of whom shall form a quorum,,
■which shall meet to' transact the business of. the Union
when required. Each, officer shall remain in office
until the ensuing Annual Conference Meeting, unless he
misconduct himself, or become unfinancial. If either of the-
above take place be shall no longer be an officer of the
'Union, such vacant office-to be filled by the officer next,
in rank : the lowest vacancy-thus caused shall be tilled at
the ensuing Executive Council meeting, but no officer
shall be compelled to fill any vacancy thus caused,.
4, Each recognised local branch shall appoint and pay
its own Council representative, nut under no circumstances-
shall a local branch be allowed to send more than one
representative to the Council meeting. The officers of the
A.SXh shall have power to call the Executive Council
together when deemed necessary,
5/ A committee of two members Is to, be elected from
the Council, who shall act with the President, Vice-
Presidents, Secretary and Treasurer, in all cases of
emergency ; but before so acting, the committee shall
make known to all members of the Executive Council,,
either by circular from the President, or if necessary by
Council meeting, the particulars of such emergent cases-
as may arise between the regular meeting of the Council
and the Annual Conference, The said Committee, if
called upon , to be paid out of the General Fund of the
A.S.U, ' '
CONFERENCE AND COMMITTEE.
6. A Conference meeting shall be held annually in the
month of February, at which the President, two Vice-
Presidents, Treasurer, Secretary, two Auditors and three
Trustees shall be elected or re-elected ; such election to-
be by ballot and to be by an absolute majority of those.-
voting.


7* Each branch shall appoint its own delegate to
Executive Council as soon as convenient ■ after each
Annua! Conference.
8, The Conned and Committee meetings shall be
held in the most central places, which shall he determined
by the Officers, but the Conference shall be subject to
removal to such places.as the majority of representatives
assembled at such conference may deetn suitable.
9, The Conference shall be constituted of mem-
bers from the various local branches belonging to the A.S.IL
who shall be duly appointed and paid by the respective
branches. The names and addresses of the representatives
to be forwarded to the Secretary of the A.SJJ. at least
fourteen days previous to the Conference taking place.
Each local branch shall be allowed to send representatives
on the following scales h
Ito too —One Representative.
500 to .1000 —Two do.
Over 1000 —Three do.
No branch to be allowed to send more than three repre-
sentatives.
DELEGATES’ CREDENTIALS.
10, Each Representative to the Conference and
Council Meeting shall be provided with proper creden-
tials, duly certified by the Chairman or Secretary of the
local branch he may represent.
EXPENSES OF COUNCIL AND CONFERENCE
MEETINGS.
ii > Expenses of Conference and Council Meetings and
also of Committees, such as stationery, porterage, and rent
of rooms, &c., shall be paid from the genera! funds
of the A.S.U.
DOTIES OF OFFICERS,
12. The duty of the President shall be to preside at all
meetings, inspect and thoroughly examine and sign all


money claims against the Union previous to their pay-
ment ; he shall be empowered, (subject to rule 4) to call
Committee Meetings in all cases of emergency, ami
generally to ensure the well-being and objects of the
Union ; and in case the votes at any time be equal, the
Chairman to have a casting vote.
13. The duty of the Vice-Presidents shall be to assist
the President stall meetings of the Onion, and in the
absence of the President, one of them shall occupy- the
chair, and conduct business. He shall perform all.
functions indicated for the President to the best ot his
ability and judgment, pro. fern- , if the President through
sickness or absence is unable to do so..
; <■ ■'
1:4. The Treasurer shah keep an account of all moneys
received as a check, against the Secretary, and, shall under
so circumstances pay, lend, or otherwise appropriate any
of the funds belonging to the Union to any local branch,
member, cause, or purpose whatever, except in accordance
with the rules, resolutions, and minutes of the Council
and Conference meeting ; he shall, at all times, give
ample security for the money entrusted to his care, such,
security to be approved of by the Executive Council.
He shall not retain in his possession any sum far a
longer period than. forty-eight hours; he shah not: be
responsible for results following legal action only for what
he received.
35. The duty of Secretary shall be to keep a correct
account of all moneys received and expended, attend all
meetings, and take minutes of the same ; he shall zealously
attend to'all correspondence, and. answer such questions
as may be asked in accordance with rules and regulations
of the Union. ; he shall write returns according to
instructions from the Council or Conference, have them,
printed and posted to all the local branches, and insert no
matter in them except in connection with business of the


Union ; he shall correspond at least monthly with the
brandies : he shall keep a memorandum book, and insert
the elate of postage of all correspondence and letters
the yearly accounts of the Union, and shall insert his
name and address in. all letters and returns, enter in his
account book a detailed account of all moneys received
from all branches, or from any other source, with date ot
receipt, also a detailed account of expenses for carriage or
purchase of goods, and all legal expenditure ; he shall also
keep an account of all moneys, goods, &c,, sent to any
branch, with the name of the branch and date of sending
same ; he shall also write any correspondence the
Committee may instruct him, and do all other things for
the advancement of the Union that the President may
direct ; send a digest of all business to come before the
Council Meeting as early as possible, and for Conference
Meetings at least one month before such meeting, to all
and each of the branches : he shall hold office for twelve
months, but the OVumr shall have power to depose the
Secretary for neglect of doty, or for the misappropriation
of money or goods of the Union ; he shall in all meetings
be allowed the right of speech or vote ; he shall not retain
more than / as in hand for more than forty-eight hours,
.and shall forward to Treasurer duplicate bank-slip for all
moneys banked,
AUDITORS,
16. The .Executive Council shall appoint annually two
professional Auditors, who at. least, once a year, and at other
times when requested, shall take the Treasurers and
Secretary's books and. balance-sheets, with all receipts,
compare them with bank pass-book and vouchers, and
report on same to Conference, Auditors finding any
deficiency to state the particulars in their report, and lay
same before the following Executive Council and Annual
Conference.
REPRESENTATION OF BRANCHES,
17. The President, Vice-Presidents, Secretary, and
Treasurer, or anv of them, shall not be allowed to


represent any local branch as representatives so long as
they hold office, but at ail Conferences, Council and.
Committee Meetings shall be allowed a vote.
.DEPUTATION EXPENSES.
iS, The President, Vice-Presidents, Secretary, and
Treasurer, when deputed to do business on, behalf of the
Union shall, for every day so employed, receive such sum
as the Conference may from time to time determine, and
second-class railway fare to and from such place of
business,
.19, All deputations appointed to carry out the
principles and objects of the Onion shall receive such sum
per day as may be determined upon by Conference, and
second-class railway fare. No deputation to be considered
legally apoointed unless they are appointed by Council or
Conference, except in cases of emergency.
CONDUCT OF MEETINGS,
20, For the purpose of obtaining good order and
facilitating business at all Council or Conference Meetings
connected with the Union, the following, regulations shall
be observed ;
(a) The examination of all representatives 1 creden-
tials.
(b) The names of all representatives to be called
over.
(c) Appoint Standing Orders Committee,
(i>) Proceed with business according to programme.
(e) The privilege of speaking on any subject shall
belong to him who first rises to address the
meeting,
(fV No representative allowed to speak mote than
once upon any one subject without the
express consent of the President. The mover
of any resolution, to have the privilege to
reply."


(g) All questions to be decided by, a majority of
votes,
(h) All votes to be counted and- declared by the
President or the scrutineers, but any two
members may demand a division,
(i) No representative shall be absent from the
meeting without permission from the Presi-
dent,
(j) No intoxicating drinks allowed in the meeting,
(k) Representatives not'answering to their names
when the roll is called shall be lined sixpence,
(l) Any representative disobeying the : President, by-
refusing to comply with the foregoing regula-
tions, shall be fined one shilling.
(m) All fines to be appropriated to the funds of the
Union,
OEDER OF DEBATE, "
21. Any member desiring to propose a motion or
amendment, or of discussing any matter under considera-
tion, must rise and address the Chairman; and no
member when, speaking shall be interrupted unless cal ed
to order when he shall sit down, and the,, member Iso
calling to order shall be heard in preference to any other
speaker, and the President shall then decide without
discussion on the point of order before the subject is
resumed, or any other subject entered upon,
23, No member shall speak to any motion after the
same has been put by the President, and the voting has
been given either in the affirmative or negative.
23, When two or more members rise to speak, the
President shall call upon the member who, in his opinion,
rose first in his place,
24, A member may speak once to any motion before
the meeting, and to any amendment proposed thereto*
and upon a motion or amendment proposed by himself


2s, That any member proposing or seconding a
•resolution shall be held to have spoken, and the mover
only shall have the right of reply.
■26. Whenever the President rises during a debate,
any member then speaking, or offering to speak, shall sit
down, so that the President may be heard without
interruption.
AMENDMENTS.
27. A question having been proposed, may be
amended by leaving out. substituting, or adding words ;
and such amendment shall be resolved by a majority of
votes.
28. Art amendment proposed and not seconded will
be entertained or entered on, the minutes,
29. Amendments may be proposed to any amend-
ment , as if such amendment was an original motion.
30. When amendments have been lost, the original
shall be put,
STANDING RULES AND ORDERS.
31. Every member on giving notice of motion, shall
read it aloud, and give to the secretary a copy of such
■notice, together, with his name, and the day proposed for
bringing on, such motion.
32. No notice entered on notice papers shall be
'proceeded with unless the member who has given such
notice, or someone authorised by burn, be present when
the business is called to order. Notices not so proceeded
with shall be struck out.
33. Any motion ' not seconded shall no be further
■debated, but shall lapse. ■„
34. So soon as a, debate upon a question shall b e
concluded, the President shall put the question to th e
meeting in a distinct and audible manner.


3s. The question being put, shall be resolved in the
affirmative or the negative by a show of hands, unless the
ballot be demanded.
Noth, -“Notices of motion will only be required for the
purpose of rescinding or altering rules, or some previous,
resolution involving any departure from the usual routine:
of business,
SUSPENSION.OF STANDING ORDERS.
36. It shall be competent, by a vote of two-thirds 0
the members present. for the meeting to suspend any
standing order herein contained, providing the object of
such suspension shall not be the rescinding of any'
resolution previously adopted by the Union.
SPECIAL,
37. If any member attend a meeting intoxicated, and.
interrupt the business, be shall be requested to withdraw
forthwith ; in the event of not complying, he shall be
■fined ss. Members leaving the meeting without the
consent.of the President to be fined 2s. , 6d. At all
meetings a guardian shall be appointed,, .who shall .take-
charge of the door.
38. That the'whole of these rules shall, as far as prac-
ticable, regulate the .proceedings of all meetings in
connection with the Union,
NOMINATION OF OFFICERS, ,
Vb No person ■' shall he elected an officer of the
A.S.U. unless duly nominated by some branch, of the
Union.; such nomination to.be forwarded to the Secretary
of the A.SJJ. at least one month before the date of the.
Annual Conference Meeting-: No. nomination shall be
ratified until the. consent of. the.. nominee has.: been
obtained.


INSTRUCTIONS TO LOCAL SECRETARIES,
40, The Secretary of each local branch shall make a
correct return every twelve months to the Secretary of
the A.S.U., stating the number of members the local
"branch contains, and the full amount of funds in hand,
together with the- state of affairs 'in such branch. Also
list of all members In such branch. Printed forms shall
"be supplied by the Secretary of the A,S.U,
OFFICERS’ SALARIES,
41, Salaries and allowances for officers shall be fixed
for ensuing year by Annual Conference,
WHERE BRANCHES MAY BE FORMED,
42, Branches may be formed in such districts or
■colonies as the Conference or Executive Council may
decide upon and shall be governed and guided by the
rules and bye-laws herein provided,
/ Disqualification for office.
43, No persons other than -praeikul shearers shall be
■eligible for election or appointment to any stipendiary
office in the A-S.U. This rule shall not apply to any
person in office at time said rule was passed,
N,B.~”~The above rale was adopted at the Annual Con-
ference held at Wagga, N.S.W,, la February, 1889,
44, No person shall be permitted to hold any office or
attend any Council or Conference as a represenrative. who
is not a financial member of the A.S,U.
45, Any member who shears or cooks at non-union
sheds after Ist August 189-1, shall not be eligible for office.
46, Any person, whether member or not, who has
canvassed or doth canvas for Non-Union men, or who
have otherwise taken, or doth otherwise take a prominent
part against the Union shall be debarred from holding
office.


SECRETARY AND AGENTS TO FIND SECURITY.
47. The Secretary and all Travelling Agents of the
A.S.IL shall find security for £\oo before entering upon
their duties as Secretary or Agents.
POWER TO MAKE BYE-LAWS.
48. The Executive Council of the A.SJJ. shall have
power £0 frame such bye-laws as may be necessary £0
carry into effect the objects of the Union>
POWER TO MAKE LEVIES,
49. In case the funds in hand are insufficient to meet
the requirements of the Union, the Conference or Council
shall be empowered to lay a levy upon the members,
the amount of which shall be in accordance with the
number of financial members the Union contains, and
sufficient per member to meet the requirements of
the A.S,XT.
STRIKES.
50. No general strike of members of the A,SXh shall
be entered upon until the whole question in dispute has
been fully and clearly placed before members, and a
majority have decided (by ballot} in favor of such striae—-
except in cases-of extreme emergency. In such cases the
Executive Council shall have power to deal with the
matter; but no serious step shall he taken, unless two-
thirds, at least, of the Council approve of same.
FUNDS AND BANKING,
51. Each branch shall, after each annual audit of
accounts, transfer all funds over and above amount.
required for working expenses to the secretary at the
central or head office of the Amalgamated Shearers*
Union of Australasia to be placed to the credit of said
Union,


52. Should any branch require assistance it shall be
in the power of the Executive Officers and Committee to
vote such sum. as may be required from the General
Fund,
53. All funds of this Union shall be placed in the City
of Melbourne Bank, or suck other bank as the Union
may at any future time think proper ; and three members
shall be elected by the Union, as Trustees, who shall
insert their names in the manager ! s or bank books for the
prevention of fraud and the security of funds,
54. The whole of the funds and property of the A.S.XJ,
shall be vested in the three Trustees elected at the Annua!
Conference to be held In trust for and subject tco the
control and direction of the Conference or Executive-
Council, Said Trustees shall have full power and authority'
to invest, use. or otherwise dispose of the said funds and.
property In such manner as they maybe from time to
time directed in accordance with these General Rules and
provisions of the Trades Union Act. 1884, and act amending
the same,
55. No funds shall be withdrawn, except by cheque,
signed by one of the Trustees. the Secretary, and the
Treasurer, ami countersigned by the President ; and no
Trustee shall sign his name to any cheque without
receiving a sealed note from the Secretary of the A.S.U.,
such note to be also signed by the'President. All Trustees
shall enter their names and addresses in the books of the
Secretary of the A.S.U,, and renew the same it they change
their residence. - - ■
ALTERATION OF RULES.
56. No new rule shall be made, nor any of the rules
herein, contained,, or hereaher to be made shall be
amended, altered, of rescinded,, unless with the consent of
a majority of the representatives present at the Annual


Conference Meeting, provided that copies of the same
shall first be submitted by the Secretary of the A.S.U. to
the various branches at least two months prior to the date
of holding such meetings Any branch wishing to alter
or amend any law must send such alterations or amend-
ments to the Secretary of the A.SXh at least three months
before the Annual Conference Meeting.
57. Whenever the Certificate of Registration is with-
drawn or cancelled by the Registrar,' the real and personal
property to which the Union is beneficially entitled shall
be applied —first, to payment of all just debts and liabilities
of the Union due and owing to persons other than persons
being members thereof ; secondly, to the payment of all
just claims of members- and persons claiming any relief
or other benefit from the Union; and thereafter shall
be divided among the members equally.
58. The Secretary shall draw up) and transmit to the
(government Statist, before the first day of February, in
every year, a"General Statement in the form and compris-
ing the particulars prescribed by or under the provision
of the 22nd section of The Trades Union Act 1:884, and
shall deliver to every member of or depositor in the
Union, on application, a copy of such statement.
59. The Secretary shall transmit to the Registrar,
before the first day of February in every year, a statement
of officers and a copy of all alterations of rules and new
rules made by the Union during the year ending the 31st
day of December then last past, and a copy of the rules
of the Union as they exist at that date,
60. Every person having au interest in the funds of
the Union may inspect the becks and the names of the
members, at.all reasonable hours, at the office of the Union
or other place where they are kept.


DISSOLUTION
61, The Union may at any time be dissolved, providing
that a vote of the members be taken, and two-thirds of the
whole number of the members good on the books vote in
favor of dissolving and winding np of the Union, Such
vote shall be taken by ballot,
62, In theeveut of any branch being dissolved, from
any cause whatever, all funds or property of any kind in
possession of the said branch shall become the property
of the A.S.U.
OFFICE.
63, The Central or Head Office of the Union, and the
place where ail communications may be addressed, is
Albert-street, Creswick, in the colony of Victoria.
W. G. SPENCE. President, Creswick, Vic,
C. FOYNTON, Vice-President, Cape Clear, Vic
11. LANGWELL, Vice-President, Bourke, N.S.W.
A. FOYNTON, Treasurer, Port Augusta. S,A.
I). TEMPLE, Gen. Secretary, Cieswick, Victoria.


BY-LAWS
OF THE
AMALGAMATED
Shearers' Union of Australasia.
FOR THE
GOVERNMENT OF BRANCHES.
MEMBERS.
I. Branches shall consist of persons who follow the
occupation of shearers and shearers' cooks. Others may
be admitted as honorary members,
OBJECTS,
.2, (i.) To protect the rights and privileges of
shearers throughout Australasia, (ii.) To secure and
maintain a fair rate of remuneration, by the adoption of
prices and rates of wages suitable to circumstances of the
several colonies and districts, (hi,) The adoption and
enforcement of just and equitable agreements between
■employer and employs, (iv.) To make such arrangements
as will prevent undue loss of time in travelling to sheds,
and to ensure the carrying out of agreements made by
shearers and shearers' cooks with sheepowners. (v.) To
protect members against exorbitant charges for rations or
horse accommodation, (vi.) To provide relief for members
in case of accident whilst engaged in the occupation of
shearing, (vii) To assist kindred organisation in.
upholding their rights and privileges and to generally
.assist in the emancipation of Labor,


MEANS.
3. For the purpose of carrying out the objects of the-
Union each member shall contribute the sum of ten
shillings per annum. Means shall also be raised by pay-
ment of levies, fines, donations, interest upon capital, &c.
GOVERNMENT,,
4, Each Branch shall be governed by a Chairman,
two Vice-Chairmen, Treasurer. Secretary, and a Com-
mittee of twelve, all of whom shall hold office for a
period of twelve months.
.5, Three Trustees shall be elected, who shall remain
in office during the pleasure of the Branch Union, and
may be removed at. a meeting specially called for the
purpose, A Special Meeting shall be called to till any
vacancy or vacancies that may occur.
OE.FIOE.En’ DUTIES.
6, The Chairman shall be the recognised head of the
Branch. He shall preside at all meetings in connection
with the Branch and Committee, and see that the
business is conducted in a proper manner. He shall sign
all cheques passed for payment, and other documents
requiring his signature as head of the Branch. He shall
be empowered to call Committee Meetings in all cases of
emergency, and generally to ensure the well being and
objects of the Union ; and in case the votes at any time
be equal, the Chairman to have a casting vote.
7. The duty of the Vice-chairmen shall be to assist
the Chairman at all meetings of the Branch ; and in the
absence of the Chairman, cue of the Vice-chairmen shall
occupy the chair, and conduct the business. He shall
perform all functions indicated tor the Cb.air.mau to the
best of his ability and judgment, pro .ton., if the Chair-
man, through sickness or absence, is unable to do so..


T The duty of the Secretary shall be to keep a
■correct account of ail moneys received and expended ;
attend all meetings, and take minutes of same. He shad
..zealously attend to all correspondence, and answer such
questions as may be asked in accordance with, the .Rules
and Regulations of the Union. He shall write returns
according to instructions from the Committee, and
forward where required. He shall keep a memorandum
book, and insert, the date of postage of all correspondence
and letters received, and keep copies of same. He shall
sit with the Auditors when auditing the accounts of the
Branch, and shall insert his name and address in all
letters and returns j enter in his account book a detailed
account of all moneys received from all sources, with date
of receipt ; also a detailed account of all' expenditure ;
shall write ana/ correspondence the Committee may
instruct, him, gnd do all other things for the advancement
oi the Union that the Chairman may direct. He shall
regularly pay over to the Treasurer all moneys, and shall
in no case hold in his possession a larger sum than £~ }
stem log.for a longer period than, forty-eight hours. He
shall hold office for twelve months, but the Branch shall
have power to depose him for neglect of duty, or for
the misappropriation of money or goods belonging to
the Union, and he shall in. all. meetings be allowed the
right to speak and vote,
9. The Treasurer shall receive and pay ail moneys
belonging' to the Union, into the Bank, in the names of
three Trustees, and shall under no consideration pay,
.lend, or otherwise appropriate any of the funds belonging
to the Union, to any member, cause, or purpose whatever
except in accordance with the Rules, .Resolutions, and
Committee of General Meeting. He shall sign all cheques,
and duly take receipts for ah payments made by him, and
shall not retain in his possession any sum of money
exceeding /y sterling for a longer period than forty-eight


hours. He shall, at all reasonable times, produce the
Bank Pass-book for inspection by the President or
Trustees, whenever demanded.
AUDITORS’ DUTIES,
to. Two Professional Auditors shall be elected at the
Annual meeting, who at least once a year, and at other
times when Instructed, shall take the Treasurer’s and
and Secretary’s books and balance-sheets, with all
receipts, compare them, and draw up a correct report on
same. They shall attach to each audit and report, an
inventory of .goods, Auditors finding any deficiency in
money or goods, to state the particulars in their report,
and lay the same before the following meeting.,
MEETINGS.
ii. Branches shall meet at least once each year
as a General Meeting of Members, at such time and place
as the Chairman and Committee may from time to time
determine, and at the appointed time the Chairman and
members present shall rise and uncover, and the Chairman
shall declare the meeting opened in the following
manner, via.;—l declare this meeting duly opened for
the transaction of all business that may be laid before
it in connection with the Amalgamated Shearers’ Union
of Australasia,
is. The Annual Meeting of all branches shall be held
in the mouth; of January in each year, at which reports
and balance-sheets shall be received, and officers elected
as per by-law 39.
13. Any officer, the Treasurer excepted, not taking
his seat when a meeting has been duly opened, will be
considered to have committed a neglect of duty, except a
written apology be sent to the chairman ; and no officer
shall leave his seat while the meeting is on without


appointing another to it ; and any officer,. Treasurer
excepted, absenting himself from three consecutive meet-
ings shall forfeit his seat,
ORDER OF DEBATE,
14, Any member desiring to propose a motion or
amendment, or of discussing any matter under considera-
tion, must rise and address the Chairman ; ami no
member when speaking shall be interrupted unless cal ed
to order when he shall sit down, and the member Iso
calling to order shall be heard in preference to any other
speaker, and the President shall then decide without
discussion on the point of order before the subject is
resumed, or any other subject entered upon.
15, No member shall speak to any motion after the
same has been put by the-President, and the voting has
been given either in the affirmative or negative,
16, When two or more members rise to speak, the
President shall call upon the member who, in Ms opinion,,
rose first in his place,
17, A member may speak once to any motion before
the meeting, and to any amendment proposed thereto,
and upon a motion or amendment, proposed by himself.
18, That any member proposing or seconding a
resolution shall be held to have spoken, and the mover
only shall have the right of reply,
19- Whenever the President rises during a debate,
any member then speaking, or offering to speak, shall sit
down, so that the President may be heard without
interruption.
QUALIFICATION TO VOTE.
co. Any financial member of any Branch (except
honorary members), shall be allowed to vote at all general
or special meetings of the branch only that he may, at the


time, be located in, irrespective of whether he belongs to
such branch or not.
2i, No member shall be allowed to vote at any
meeting of the Union without he first produces certificate
of membership or except other satisfactory proof is given
that he is financial and entitled to vote.
POWER TO POSTPONE- MEETINGS-
. 22, The officers of any branch are empowered to
postpone general or committee meetings when deemed
necessary.
QUORUMS.
23, At all general or special meetings of branches not
less than 25 members shall constitute a quorum,
N.B,—This rule shall not necessarily apply to branches
where District Committees are in existence,
24. At all meetings of branch committees five members
of the committee shall constitute a quorum, and may
transact airy business, of which due notice shall have been
given to the whole (or as many as possible), of the officers
and committee of the branch.
POWERS OF COMMITTEE.
25, Any member of committee, except the Treasurer
absenting himself from three consecutive meetings of the
committee, the latter shall have the power to strike him
off the' list, and another shall be elected in his stead,
26. Should any of the officers or committee of the
Branch do anything: contrary to the rules of the Union,
the committee shall have ; power to suspend them until
such suspension has been laid before a General Meeting
of the members for their approval or otherwise.


27. The Committee shall have power to expel any
member wilfully and persistently acting in. direct
contravention to any of the rules of the Union. or acting
in such a manner as to seriously prejudice the interests ot
the A.S.U., in any other way not provided for m the
Union Rules, Any member expelled under this rule
shall have the right to appeal, to the Executive Council or
Animal Conference, who shall consider the case, and have
power to readmit such member should they deem it
advisable. Any member expelled by the Committee of a
branch as herein provided shall cease to be a member of
the A.S.U., and the Secretary of the Branch expelling
him shall immediately notify all other Branches of the
expulsion, and the cause of same. Any member expelled
shall not be readmitted by any Branch without the
sanction of the Executive Council or Annual Conference,
NOMINATIONS.
28. Names of members willing to stand for election
to the offices of Chairman, Vice-Chairmen, Secretary,
Treasurer, Trustee, Executive Councillor. Delegate to
Trades and Labor Councils ; A.S.U. Annual Conference,
or Auditors, must be sent into the Secretary twenty-eight
days before the date of the Annual Meeting in January,
with signature of proposer and seconder attached. • Said
nomination shall be published not less than twenty-one
■days previous to the Annual Meeting.
ELECTION OF OFFICERS,
29. In the event of there being more candidates
nominated than are required for any office, an election
.shall take place, and shall be conducted by ballot in the
manner following, viz.;—-The Secretary of Brandi to
•supply the Secretary of each District Committee within
his district wills ballot papers, to be distributed to members
at meeting of District Committee and after same have
voted, to be returned, sealed, seven days previous to


general meeting, to Branch Secretary,, who shall hand
over same to returning officer and scrutineers, who shall
have been previously appointed. Said ballot to be
duly checked, and. returns announced at the general
meeting by reluming officer. Members who have not
previously voted to be allowed to vote at said meeting.
ELECTION OF COMMITTEE.
3©> Branches shall arrange whereby their committees
shall, as far as practicable, consist of representatives from,
and elected by the District Committees in their respective
districts. The arrangements to be made so as to secure
the election of as fairly and widely representative com-
mittee as circumstances will permit. The number of
committees not to exceed that provided for in By-law 7 4.
EXPENSES OF COMMITTEE.
3 1. Each member of Committee of a Branch repre-
sentating one or more District Committees shall be paid
for his travelling expenses, and si.ch sum as the Branch
may determine for his lost time when attending Branch
committee meeting. He shall furnish a written report of
business] done at such meeting, to the first meeting of the
District Committee- or committees he represents, and in
the event of him failing to do so he shah forfeit all claim
to remuneration. The officers of the Branch shall, also
be paid travelling expenses, and remunerated for lost time.
In accordance with the above, when attending committee
meetings, except the Secretary, who shall only be allowed
the travelling expenses,
DISQUALIFICATION AND QUALIFICATION FOR OFFICE,
32, No person other than a practical shearer shall be
eligible for election or appointment to any stipendiary
office In any Branch.
The above rule, which was passed at the Annual
Conference of the A.S.U, held at Wagga in ISB9 shall not
apply to any person then in office.


33< No person shall be eligible to hold a seat, on the
committee of any Branch, who is not a praetiml shearer ;
and no person shall hold any office in any Branch,
who is not a financial member of the Union,
34, Any member who shears or cooks at non-union
sheds after ist August, 1.891. shall not be eligible for office,
35, Any person, whether a member or not, who ha s
canvassed, or doth canvas for non-union men, and who
has otherwise taken, or doth otherwise take a prominent
part in working against the Union; shall be debarred from
holding office.
36, Subject to By-laws 33, 33, 34 and 35, any financial
member of the A.S.U. of. A, shall be eligible for election
or appointment to office in any Branch.
DEFINITION CLAUSES,
37, Wherever the word member occurs In general
rules or by-laws for government of Branches, it shall
mean a member of the A.S.U. of A.
3S. Honorary member shall mean other than those
who are parctical shearers or shearers' cooks.
POWER OF BRANCHES TO MAKE BY-LAW OR AMEND
SAME,
39, Branches shall be allowed to adopt By-laws to
meet any special requirements of their respective districts,
subject to approval of the Executive Council or Annual
Conference- Branches shall also have power to amend
By-laws (except those relating to government), and
working rules, to meet special local requirements, subject
to approval of Executive Council or Conference.
BRANCHES TO HATE CONTROL OF AFFAIRS IN THEIR
OWN DISTRICT,
40. Each Branch shall have centred of affairs in its
own district, and other Branches shall not interfere In any
wav.


FINANCE AND BANKING,
41. Each Branch shall after each annual audit of
accounts transfer all funds over and above amount required
for current working expenses to the Secretary at the
central or head office of the Amalgamated Shearers 5
Union of Australasia to be placed to the credit of the
General. Fund of said Union,
42. Should any Branch require assistance, it shall be
in the power of the Executive Officers and Council to
vote such sum as may be required from the General
Fund,
43. All funds of the Union shall be placed in such
■bank as may be decided upon at the Annual Conference
in the names of the Trustees, who shall insert their names
in the bank books.
44. No funds shall be drawn from the ban k except by
cheque signed by one of the Trustees, the Secretary, and
Treasurer, and. countersigned by the Chairman or Vice-
Chairman ; no Trustee shall sign any cheque without
authority in the form of a sealed note, signed by the
Chairman and Aecreiary.
ENTRANCE FEES.
45. The entrance fee for Shearers, Shearers’ Cooks and
Learners shall be five shillings.
CONTRIBUTIONS AND FINES ON UN FI NANCI AL
MEMBERS.
46. The contributions hi all cases (except Honorary
Members), shall be 10s. per annum, payable in advance, for
each year. In all cases subscription must be paid in first
*hed the member shears in for the season. In any case
whether member has been shearing or not, contributions
must be paid before Ist January, in advance, each season,
otherwise the member shall be in arrears, and not entitled
to the protection of the Union, until he has paid a fine
•of five shillings in addition to his annual subscriptions.


The payment of such hue, with the subscription, will'
re-en title the member to the full benefits and privileges of
the Union, including that of voting and holding office.-
All. subscriptions and fines due from members must be
paid, or otherwise satisfactory arrangements for payment
of saum must be made before any such member can start
work in arc/ Union shed.
H ONOR A R Y MEMBERS' S U BSCR IPTI ON.
47. Any person may be admitted a honorary member
of the Union on payment of an annual fee of ten shillings
(without entrance fee).
CERTIFICATES OF MEMBERSHIP.
48. On payment of entrance fee and contribution, a.
not transferable certificate of membership will be issued to
the person making such payment, provided that such
person is deemed a lit and proper person to become a
member of the Union. Members must produce certificate
of membership to Shed Representative before starting
work.
MEMBERS HOLDING FINANCIAL CERTIFICATES TO
HAVE PREFERENCE.
.49. In all cases those holding financial certificates shall
have preference to those without such certificates.
UNIFORM CERTIFICATES OF MEMBERSHIP THROUGH-
OUT ALL BRANCHES,
50. One uniform, form of certificate snail be used by
all Branches of the Union ; the color of certificate to be
changed each year, and the financial year printed thereon.
DUPLICATE CERTIFICATES,
51. Any member losing his certificate of membership
will be granted a duplicate of same, on producing a
statutory declaration that his certificate has beer, lost or
destroyed, whichever the case may be. Declaration forms


for this purpose will be available on application to
Resident Agents, Travelling Agents, Secretaries of District
Committees, and from all offices of the' Union.
ALL CERTIFICATES AND RULES TO BE PRINTED AND
SUPPLIED THROUGH HEAD OFFICE.
52, AH Certificates ani Rules for use of A.S.U. shall
be printed through Head Office, and supplied to each
Branch.
FINANCIAL YEAR.
53, The financial year of the Union begins on Ist of
January, and ends on the 31st December in each year,
PRIVILEGES TO MEMBERS OF OTHER UNIONS.
54, Any financial member of any Trade or Labor
Union shad be admitted to membership in the A.S.U.
without payment of entrance fee,
ABORIGINAL MEMBERS.
55< Aborigines (natives of the colonies) shall be
admitted to full benefit by payment of annual contribution
only—without entrance fee.
NON-ELIGI.BLE MEMBERS.
56. No Chinese, South Sea Islander, Kanaka or Asiatic
shall be enrolled a member of the A.STJ. of A.
RESTRICTIONS rs NON-UNION SHEARERS.
57. No non-union Shearer shall be allowed to shear
with members of the Union, unless such Shearer first
purchase certificate of membership, or otherwise agrees
to pay necessary fee and contribution to Shed Representa-
tive out of the first money earned.
58. Any member shall be allowed to shear with the
sheepowner or his sous (in their own shed) without the
latter being compelled to join the Union, providing such
sheepowner or his sons have not shorn, in any other
shed for payment since the establishment of the A.S.U.


MEMBERS .HOT TO ACCEPT ENGAGEMENTS THROUGH
MIDDLEMEN.
59, No member of the A,S,U. shall accept, engagement
in a shed through, any person other than sheepow tiers,
their managers, or secretaries, or authorised agents of the
A.S.U., under penalty of a line of five pounds yfs), for
each offence. No fee shall be charged to either sheep-
owners or members in contracting engagements through
the Union, .
REPORTS AND BALANCE SHEETS,
60, The Secretary of each Branch shall issue an
annual report and balance-sheet of the Branch, together
with separate balance-sheets, showing receipts and
expenditure of each agent (whether travelling or resident);
also balance-sheet showing monies personally received
and expended by secretary.
61, Any Secretary of a Branch failing to supply the
Secretary of the A.S.U. with copy of Branch balance-sheet
within, fourteen days after completion of annual audit,
shall be fined in the sum of five pounds (£s},
SECRETARIES AND TRAVELLING AGENTS TO FIND
SECURITY.
62, All Secretaries and Travelling Agents of branches
must find security for ■ £xoo before entering upon, their
duties ; said security to be approved of by the Committee
of the branch,
FINE FOR BLACKLEGGING,
63, At the Annual Conference of the A,S.U, ; held at
Adelaide, .February 1891, it was decoded that the rule re
fines for blacklegging (as given below) be suspended till
August ist, 1891, and that in the mean time all members
who have blacklegged m the past, and have not been
fined, shall be re-admitted to protection, of the Union
without payment of any fine, and that after August ist,
1891, the Executive Council shall fix amount of such
fines.


[Cofv o.f Emus Ifermnum vo]; —
FINES FOR SHEARING NON-UNION.
Any member violating the Union rules by shearing
in non-union sheds shall be fined AN for one shed, £6
for two sheds, '£y for three sheds* said firms to be
paid or otherwise satisfactory arrangements for payment
of same to be made before the member will, be . permitted
to work in., any Union shed. Should the member feel
aggrieved thereat he shall have the right of appeal to the
committee of the branch having control of the district,
who shall have power to remit any portion of the fine or
.fines, or increase same should they consider the circum-
stances justify such course. All appeals to be dealt with
by the first committee meeting after cases have been
reported. The Shed .Representative shall forward all
particulars re fine cases to the secretary of the branch
having control of the district wherein shed is situated,
•Members shearing in more than three non-union sheds to
be expelled from the Union,
MEMBERS TO BE GUIDED BY THE MAJORITY.
64. Any member refusing to be guided by the decision
of the majority of members at sheds and strikes shall be
fined 10s, for each offence. The committee of the branch
to have power to refund such fine (on appeal), should they
deem that circumstances justify such being done,
CHARGES AGAINST MEMBERS,
65, Any member bringing a charge against another
member, which, on inquiry, shall prove frivolous, shall be
liable to a fine of two pounds-
: 66. Any officer or member using undue influence with
any sheepowner in the choice of his Shearers will, be fined
Si for each offence.


RESTRICTIONS RE COLLECTING MONIES.
67, Any Secretary, Agent, or Shed Representatives
interfering with the collecting of Union arches in another
Branch without the consent of the .Secretary of such
Branch shah be fined Five Pounds for each offence.
68. Any Shed Representative, who may be entrusted,
with book for collecting monies, shall forward cash to
Office promptly ; and shall also return book immediately
he has completed collecting at the shed at. which he
received it, under a penalty of One Found for neglect.
Members are requested to see that this rule is religiously
adhered to.
INIE RIM RECEI FT S.
69. Under no consideration shall Secretaries or Agents
issue interim receipts or books of interim receipts to any
member. Any Secretary or Agent, doing so will be fined
.£5 for each offence
CLEARANCE RECEIPTS.
70, In all cases where members produce official
■Clearance receipts for past blacklegging or defaulting,
members at sheds or elsewhere shall have no power to
inflict any farther fines, or object to such member
shearing in any Union shed.
DISPOSAL OF FINES*
7.1, Ail lines imposed under these Bye-laws shall be
paid into the A.S.U, Accident Fund-
LABOR BUREAUS,
12. Where practicable, a labor bureau, or general,
registry office shall be worked in connection with each
'Branch. The profits from such offices to go to the funds
of the Union.


RATES OF SHEARING.
73. No member shall, shear under a minimum price he
each colony as follows :
Queensland, New South Wales and South Australia
(excepting the South-eastern district of latter colony)—
£1 per too, without rations.
The South-eastern districts of South Australia and
colony of Victoria (excluding those stations in latter
colony, as hereunder referred to)-™ 17s. 6d. per 100, with-
out, or 15s. per too, with rations.
The minimum price to be paid at all stations in Vic-
toria, from Swan Hill to Adelaide Border, that have a
frontage to the River Murray, shall be £1 per 100,
without rations, same as in colonies mentioned in first
part of this rule.
In all cases rams (over six months’ old) to be paid for
at not less than double the above rates.
Note,— AH'parties interested will understand that the
above rule does not debar members from accepting, and
sheepowners from paying higher rates than the above.
The Union only fixes the minimum rates —not less than
the above prices must be accepted.
COOKS,
■74. At all sheds where they provide their rations,.
Shearers shall find their own Cooks, except where
Cooks work conjointly for the Shearers and the
Sheepowners, In such cases cooks shall be elected by
ballot of Shearers and Laborers, In all cases cooks
must be members of the Union, and shall, produce
certificate of competency signed by the Shed' Representa-
tive, who must have been duly authorised to sign
same by resolution of members in his shed. Cooks
shall be paid not less than £2 per week where not
more than, 23 men are employed —over that number
3s, per man per week. No Chinese, South Sea
Islander, or Kanaka shall be engaged in the capacity
of Cook.


SPECIAL RLT|„S REGARDING MACHINE SHEDS,
75, In all sheds where shearing machines are used,
shipowners shall, provide machinery and requisites,,
knives and. combs included, (and experts) tree of cost.
Sheepowner shall also (at their own expense) keep the
said machinery, &c, ? in proper working order, and the
knives In good cutting trim. In cases of stoppages,
through breakages, shearers shall be recompensed for lost
time, or allowed to go on shearing with the hand shears—
sheepowner to provide such shears at his own expense.
Drivers of shearing machines must produce certificates
proving them to be duly qualified Engine-drivers,
TERMS UNDER WHICH MEMBERS SHALL ENGAGE,
76, No member shall accept engagement under any
rules or agreements other than those approved of and
adopted by the Union, Branches may adopt ..verbal agree-
ments. It shall also be optional to Branches as to
whether they enforce posting of the rules in sheds or not.
SUBSCRIPTION TO HOSPITALS,
77, All subscriptions to the funds of hospitals shall be
collected by a member of the Union, and forwarded by
him to the hospitals in the district hi which be is working,
providing such hospital shall admit a member of this
Union on presentation of his certificate for current year,
AGENTS' COMMISSION,
78, la all settled Branches the amount of commission
to be allowed local' Agents and Secretaries of District
Committees shall be ten (10) per cent. In any new
country taken up it shall be in the power of the Executive
of the A.S.U. to allow and sand ion a higher rate of
commission than the above should same be considered
advisable,
RULES,
79, Each member shall receive copy of rules free of
charge, on application to Union offices.


METHOD OF CHECKING CERTIFICATE BOOKS AND
BLOCKS,
80, Previous to the audit of each Branch, of the A.S.U.
circulars shall be supplied to each auditor, containing a
list of all certificate and receipt books used by the Branch,
to be signed in the handwriting of the President and
General Secretary of the A.S.U,, and also by the printer
and publisher ; and in ad cases the Branch Secretary shall
produce all certificate blocks and books of certificates for
the inspection of the Auditors : and after each annual
audit all blocks and certificate books that have been partly
used shall be transmitted to the Head Office.
MEMBERS’ ROLL.
81, Each branch secretary of the A.S.U. shall keep a
correct list of names, addresses, and numbers of each
member’s certificate of the Branch in which the Secretary
bolds office. Names of all members of each Branch shah
be alphabetically arranged, in the same form as the
Electoral Roll, and copies of such lists of names,
numbers, &c. shall be supplied members on application.
STRIKES,
Bm' No general strike of members of the A.S.U. shall
be entered upon nnti 1 the whole question in dispute has
been fully and clearly placed before members, and they
have decided by ballot in favor of such strike —except in
case of extreme emergency. In such case the Executive
Council of the Union shall have power to deal with the
matter ; but no serious action shall be taken unless two-
thirds at least of the Council approve of same. In the
event of a call-out taking place, any member who
refuses to obey same shall be dealt, with as the Branch
may deem lit,
SALARIES.
83. The Secretary’s salary —Delegates’, Treasurer’s,
and Auditors’ fees shall be fixed at Branch ..{Annual
Meeting, Xu no case shall Branch Secretary’s salary


exceed Two Hundred Pounds {£ 2oo) per annum.
Travelling Agents wages shall be fixed by Branch
Committee,
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE A.S.XJ, AND G.LIJ.
WORK IN SHEDS.
84. It is mutually agreed between the Amalgamated
Shearers’ Union of Australasia and the General Laborers 5
Union of Australasia that each Union shall assist the
other, so far as practicable, in the extension of the
principles of Unionism, and the enforcement of all just
demands,
85. In connection with the work on stations during
the shearing season, members of each Union shall manage
their own affairs ; but before members of either Union
take action, likely to affect members of the other, they
shall, make themselves acquainted with the whole of the
circumstances or the case, take a vote ol the members,
and act upon the decision of the majority,
86. dem.be.rs of the A.S.U., in cases where the
majority of shed hands are members ot the G-.JL.U,., shad
refuse to accept engagement until, the G.L.U, members
have made satisfactory arrangements regarding the non-
members ; the members ot the G.L.U. to act in the same
manner towards the A.S.U. under similar circumstances.


RULES
RELATING TO OFFICE SYSTEM OF
ENGAGEMENT.
1. Sheepowners may engage all shearers and cooks
required through the Union office in the district in which-
their shed?, are situated, and may send a list of names of
members they wish to engage. In the event of it being
impracticable to supply shipowners with any or with but
a portion of the men named the Union will, take steps to
provide the sheepowner with a full complement of good
competent workmen, provided that the said sheepowner
is agreeable to such arrangement.
2. Members, when applying to the Union for engage-
ment, may name five or six sheds in which they wish to
be engaged. Should these be supplied, the Secretary
shah inform the member, and give a list ot sheets df any)
which are not yet supplied. Any member wishing
engagement in any particular shed to give his tor
same. In the event of there being more applicants than
are required for any shed, the members shall be reduced,
by ballot to the lot required. Sued, ballot to be
conducted in accordance -with the instruction, or Branch
Committee,
3. Members, when applying for engagement in any
shed, must apply to the branch having control of the
district in which the shed is situated. Members, when


applying, must send correct name and address, and
number of certificate, and state name of branch to which
they belong. No applications for engagement shall be
entertained unless the applicant is a financial member of
the Union.
4. Members may, while at work in a shed, apply to
the office for next shed, and so on throughout the season,
and will apply as early as circumstances will permit.
Should any member be unable to fulfil his engagement,
he must immediately send notice to the branch having
control of the district in which the shed is situated.
5. Representatives in each shed shall forward notice
to the Secretary when they expect the shed in which they
are engaged to be finished. If possible such notice shall
be forwarded fourteen days before the completion ol
shearing in that shed. Sheepowners will be required to
furnish Representatives with information.
6. A copy of the agreement under which Shearers are
engaged, shall be sent to each shed, and be placed in the
hands of the Representative of the Union at shed,
N.8,-—Members will understand that it is not com-
pulsory to engage through the office. The above rules
■only apply in cases where sheepowners prefer to engage
their men through office.


IMPORTANT RESOLUTIONS
ADOPTED AT THE
ADELAIDE CONFERERCE
FEBRUARY, 1891,
PLAN OF CAMPAIGN, SEASON 1891.
(a.) That the details of the Plan of Campaign be left to the
Branches and Executive, on the understanding that
members be not requested to stay at borne, bat that they be
allowed to engage in the usual way j and that should it be
found that sheepowwere intend to fight the Union in the
coming season, that a manifesto be issued laying the whole
position before members, and urging them to make extra
efforts to res.st any attempt to injure or break the Union j
that a competent agent be at once stationed at Sydney and
Melbourne respectively to watch, over the interests of the
Union at- those points ; the Branches to station agents at
other important centres if considered 'advisable
(b.) That a plebiscite of members be taken at ones on the
following question. : —Whether or not members are In favor
of Brandies using the funds of ihe Union for the purpose of
securing employment- for members by taking contracts of
any kind—municipal, governmental, or private.
(o.) That the various Branches in each colony be empowered to
form a Defence Committee to coxssist of one member from
each Branch. This committee to have advisory powers only j
and not to have the disposal of any funds, or the power to
incur liabilities, except to such extent as may be granted to
such committee as one or all of the. Branches affected. The
work of the committee to consist of directing the operations
of agents, organisers, or lecturers in order to prevent loss of
time and concentrate attention of officials upon the points
most likely to require attention. The committee to sit when
an.d where required.


(IX) That this coxiferenee deprecates any act of violence or any
act stibversive to law and order.
(£.) That hi the event of the A.-SXL requiring fowls during the
ensuing season the Council shall hare power to borrow
money from the members. Up to Id per cent, to be allowed
for same ; not lees than £2O to he takes from any member.
Farther, that Branches make arrangements with the local
Banks for an overdraft if necessary.
CO-OPERATION,
That the scheme of co-operation as submitted to this Conference-
by Mr. Arthur Tremayne be fully placed before the members by
Branches for full consideration.
THANKS.
That this conference of Representative delegates has much
pleasure in conveying to Messrs. Slattery and Keydon the thanks
of the members of the Amalgamated Shearers’ Union for the disin-
terested professional efforts of those gentlemen on our behalf during
the late strike, and that a further recognition be made by the--
Executive.
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE A.B.U. AND QUEENSLAND
SHEARERS’ UNION-
(a.) That Financial Members of the A..S.U. or Q.S.U. crossing
into the jurisdiction of the other Union shall become full
members of the Union into whatever jurisdiction they enter,
and may at the option of such Union be required to take out,
free of charge, a ticket showing them to have become full
members.
(n.) That both Unions reserve to themselves the right to make
any claim for loss arising through payments incurred through,
members of either Union while on strike, and each agrees to-
discuss said claim in a friendly spirit and on its merits.
(c ) It Is distinctly understood, however, ■ that upon members of
the Union paying contributions into the Union under whose
jurisdiction he is working, the Union receiving such contribu-
tions shall take all responsibility, and agrees to make no claim,
on account of such member.


'o.) That the A.S.U. arid Q.8.1J. will jointly recognise and
maintain the Queensland border as dividing the jurisdiction
of the two Unions,
dB.) That the A.S.U. and Q.3.U. •will mutually uphold and
enforce the authority oil either Union within its jurisdiction
over their respective members,
■I?,) Thai- the first drafting of a scheme of federation between
the A. 3. U.&nd Q.S, U. for submission to their several members
shall be left to tire respective executives of the said Unions
and of the A.L.'F.
■ («.) That both Unions agree, pending the conclusion of the
negoeiations for federation between the two Unions, that the
executives of the two Unions, may jointly arrange to hold a
council meeting of an equal number of delegates from each
Union to consider matters in the common interest to the
parties affected.
CONFISCATED EARNINGS.
That the full amount of earnings forfeited by members in
connection with the call -out be paid out of the funds of the Union;
also that any lines paid into courts by members be refunded to them,
WuOLPRESSERS.
Thai; woolpressers be recommended to join the General
Laborers’ Uaion.
THE MARITIME STRIKE,
That the payment of the levy struck in support of the Maritime
Strike be optional for all meiuEers who did not 'shear season 1890,
•ami also to those who Joined the Union subsequent to the striking
•of such levy,
POLITICAL REFORM.
That in view of the urgent need of reform in many of the laws
•of the colonies, and In the composition of the several .Parliaments
thereof, as demonstrated so glaringly and forcibly during the recent
great strike, the various branches of the A.S.U. in each colony
co-operate in adopting a political platform, and that all branches
Take active steps in conjunction with kindred, organisations
to organise the “Labor Vote’' (Union and Non-union) in their
respective districts with a view of returning men to Parliament at
the next general election who will support the platform aforesaid,
-and otherwise apeak for and uphold the rights and claims of labor.


NOMLIGIBLE MEMBERS.
At the Annual Conference held at Bourke In .February, 5.890,
the following resolution was adopted :—“ That all Chinese or south
Sea islanders wte joined the Colon prior to passing of Bye-law 50,
shai \ be entitled to the full benefits of the I.Tnlon, and shall not be
debarred from engagement as shearers or shearers’ cooks so long as
su '.ii persons reuiain financial on the books of the Union. notwith-
standing Bye-law 50, which is hereby understood to apply only to
those Chinese or South Sea Islanders who have never been xnetnhers
of the A.S.U.
H.B. —At the conference evidence was given, showing that only l '
eight persona can claim protection under the above resolution, that
being the number of Chinese and South Sea Islanders who
received certificates previous to passing of Bye-law 62, in 1887.


FORM OF AGREEMENT.
To be used in New Sooth Wat..xs, Season 1891, and at- all Stations
isi VtCTOKiA, from Swan HOI to South Australia, that Have a
frontage to the River Murray. As adopted at the Annual!
Conference of the A.S.U.. held at .Adelaide, S.A., February, 1891.
An AGKKKMHsr made and entered into this day of
189 Bstvvxkiv of
(hereinafter called the shcepowrrer) of the one part, and the severao
persons whose signatures are subscribed in the schedule hereuh
(hereinafter called the shearers) of the other part, Whfjaubx eacd
of the shearers engages to shear sheep for the said sheepowuer, an a
the sheepowuer employs each of the shearers on the follow ;eg terra
and conditions :
1. The price of shearing wethers, ewes and iambs (including
ram lambs under six months), shall he at the rate of 20s. per
hundred for all such sheep shorn; rants, ever six months, at the rate
of 40s, per hundred for all rams shorn; money to be paid by cheque
on local banks or exchange allowed on net amount earned,
2, Each of the shearers will he at the station or
run ready to commence shearing on. the day of 189 ,
and the sheepowuer will bo ready to start the shearing on that date,
and to keep the shearers fully supplied with sheep, weather
permitting, except in case of unavoidable accident.
8. Before commencing work the shearers 'shall draw lots fed
their pens, and shall abide the result of such, drawing, the manage 1
having the right to make any alteration deemed advisable.
4. All sheep shall be taken carefully from the pen to the
shearing board and shorn thoroughly well, in a proper and workman-
like, manner, the belly wool to be taken off separately and placed
aside.. In opening the fleece at the neck both, blades of the shears to-
be kept under the wool and close to the skin, so as to avoid twice
cutting, and ho shearer shall be allowed to run the shears through
the fleece so as to break If; down the centre or the back,
5. In case any shearer turns out a sheep badly cut soul
insufficiently tarred, he shall at once sew and tar such cut in bis pels
If required to do so by the person in charge of the shed. .Ho shearer
shall tar hie sheep except on a severe out or stab, in which case he
shall dress such out or stab.
6. No shearer shall be allowed to kick or otherwise Injure or
iliuse any sheep, and in case he seriously injure or LlSase any sheep,
or cut- the teat off any ewe or pisrie off any wether or ram he shall
forfeit and pay to the sbeepowner the mess rate- for such sheep so
Injured, and if such sheep be fit for food to go to the shearers mess
account, the sheepowaer to have the right to refuse the fine and
keep the sheep.


7. No shearer shall be allowed. to catch any sheep from his pea
for the purpose of befog shorn while It is being tilled, but may
daring snob, filling shear from the most convenient pern No sheep
to be caught after the bell rings to cease work.
8. The sheepowner will during the whole of the time the
shearers shall be engaged as shearers supply them with proper
sleeping aeeonnnodation, sufficient cooking and table utensils,
'firewood, and good water, free of charge,
9. The sheepowners will on demand thereof pay to any of the
shearers any sum not exceeding 75 per coot am of the amount dim at
the time of such demand.
10. No shearer shall wilfully absent himself from his work
during the continuance of this agreement (except in case, of sickness)
without the permission of the manager, or bring any intoxicating
liquor on, to the station, or use any obscene language while engaged
in shearing.
11. Any party hereto may upon breach, of this agreement by
any other party hereby contracting with him give notice to such
other party determining this agreement, and this agreement shall
thereupon as between the parties giving and receiving such notice
be determined forthwith.
*1.2 As between the parties giving and receiving notice as
hereinafter mentioned this agreement may be determined in any
ease by the sheepowner or iris agent- giving to any of the shearers or
by any of the shearers giving the sheepowner or his agent or
manager or to the persen superintending or ixi charge of the shearing
shed notice of his intention to determine the same, or
in case of the shearers by the payment of or authorisation of the
deduction by the sheepowner from any money payable to any
shearer by the sheepowner of the sum of £2 by way of line in lieu of
such notice, in which latter case no notice by the shearer paying or
authorising the deduet-ion of snob, fine shall be necessary.
.13, Each shearer shall on the termination of his employment
under his agreement be thereupon entitled to be paid iu full at the
rate hereinbefore mentioned lets a deduction at the rate of 17s< fid.
per week for his board and lodging, including cook's remuneration
the sum so deducted to be placed to credit of "shearers' mess account.
14. The parties hereto agree to conform with, the working rules
of the A.S.TJ. of A., registered under the Trades Union Act, printed
" Amount; ot notice to be given wdi be decided by the Executive Council
shortly (if no settlement is come to with PastonPlsta Union), and will be oomamni-
o&ted to as embers through the Secretary ox District Committees, 1 gents, “Shearers,
and Laborers' Record/ 1 and other mediums.


on the' back hereof, which said rules it- is hereby agreed shad he
taken and read as forming part of this agreement, and construed
therewith.
As WrrKiiss the hands of the said parties the day and year first
before written.
Signed by the said sheepowuer 1
in the presence of I
The Sckex>ttpe HsinjiunnroBS BmvsuBiJO to,
.KAwnes of shbabkss. names of shhasfbs,
Withesa to the above Signatures .....
WORKING IbULES
Embodied as Pabt of Ao k e e m a ft t.
L No member shall accept engagement under any agreement-
or rules not approved of aad adopted by the Unioxn
2, No person other than shearers engaged to shear at a shed
shall shear any sheep in such shed. Union experts excepted,
d. In case a majority of the shearers decide that-sheen are wet,
no shearer shall be allowed to shear such sheep. If a majority decide
in ease of dispute that the sheep are dry, and any shearer refuse on
the ground ox ill-health to shear sheep which In his opinion are wet,
such refusal shall not be deemed a breach of this agreement,
4, Members may shear any number of sheep per day, but such,
sheep must be shorn in a fair and workroanlike manner.
5. No member shall be compelled to shear eanoered sheep.
6, The prices to be charged for rations and shearers 5 requisites?
by the sheepowuer shall not exceed cost prices with five per cent,
and cost of carriage added ; price lists to be produced previous to
commencement of shearing. In the event of dispute re price of
rations, the sheepowner to produce invoices.
7. Free agistment for two horses shall be allowed to every
shearer in all cases where the sheepowner has not less than 5000
sheep.; under that number, one horse. In the event of any shearer
having more than the number of horses specified, lie shall pay tire
smn of one shilling per week for each additional horse. The
sheepowner or his manager to arrange for shearers' horses to be-
brought into the yard on termination of employment, or at-
completion of shearing.


8, The sheepown&r shall provide at least one proper gnadst-one
for every feexs shearers or less number employed,
9, The eight hours' system will be strictly observed by all
members a! the Union; at-d each arrangement:} shall fee roads in
eaon shad tnafe not more than forty-eight hoars' work shall be done
in any one week ; 10 all oases work to cease at 12 ixooxt on Saturday,
Tfec hoars of connnencmg and ceasing -work each day. with the
intervals lor rneais, &o M to he arranged between the sheepowner and
tne shearers before commencing shearing, subject to foregoing
conditions. This rule shall not apply to cooks, ° °
10, In ail sheds where they provide their rations, shearers;
shall'find thdr own cooks, except where cooks work conjointly for
the shearers and the sheepowner. In such eases cooks shall be
elected by vote ol shearers and laborers. In all cases cooks most be
xaetnoers of the Union, and shall, produce certificate of competency,
signed by the shed representative, who must have been dulv authorised
to _ sign same by resolution of members in his shed. Cooks shall be
paid noi less than £2 per week where not more than x 3 men are
employed : over that number, 3s. per man per week,
u. In all sheds where shearing machines are used, the sheepowner
shall provide ail necessary machines and requisites (knives and combs
include..,), and experts, free of vOss,, ibe sheepowner shall also (at
lufe own c,y m) keep the .mm maenmexy, &c,, in proper working
oxoer. ‘..u« ......es 10. goon unutf condition. In cases of stoppage's-
throng u < v< cs, sheare lid >e 'recompensed for lost time, or
«.dowec .0 on shearing vm, tue hand shears; the sheepowner to
piovlde 5,. <...1 -hears at his own expense. Drivers of shearing machines
mien pi mm,,... ~„rtificates snowing them to be duly qualified drivers.
g"’ member shall be compelled to dag sheep; when necessary
ail sheep to oe (lagged at the sheeoowner’s expense,
x 3. Shearers’ tallies shall be posted daily in the shed,
. Hach shearer must have a. separate pen to shear into—no
double-banking allowed.


SHEARING AGREEMENT
'To be used .in the Northern District;; of South Australia (where
shearers provide rations). Drafted at a Conference of Representatives
of the South .Australian Pastorallsts' Union and Representatives of
the A.S.U. of A., on the i-Sth of February 1891.
An Aoukement made this day of xSg
BETWEEN hereinafter called the employer
■on the one part, and the undersigned sheerer or shearers of tire other
part. The terms of this Agreement are that the undersigned shearer
or shearers hereby agree to shear, with all reasonable despatch, the
sheep oi; the employer s station named In clause 2, in a fair and work -
manlike manner, and to the satisfaction of the employer or his agent,
•in accordance with and subject to the conditions of this Agreement,
the total number of sheep required lobe shorn by the whole of the
shearers employed during the shearing to he not less than
thousand or more than' thousand,
i. The price of shearing wethers, ewes, and lambs (including
■ram lambs under six; months old) to be at the rate of twenty shillings
per hundred for all such sheep shore ; rates at the rate of forty
•■shillings per hundred for all rams shorn ; money to be paid by
cheque on a local jeank, or exchange to be added,
3, The shearer shall be at the Station or
•run ready to commence shearing on the day
of 189 , and the employer agrees to be ready
to commence shearing on, that date, and to keep the shearer fully-
supplied with sheep, unless prevented by weather or some unavoidable
cause,
3. The employer shall during the whole of the time the. shearer
is engaged shearing provide him with healthy hut accommodation,
sufficient cooking and table utensils, wood, and the best available
water free of charge,
4, The shearer shall not wilfully absent himself from work, but
in rase he leave before the completion of shearing, owing to sickness,
accident, or other such unavoidable cause, or by the permission of the
employer or his agent, he shall be paid for the number of sheep shorn
by him at the price aforesaid, hut shall he charged X 2«. 6d. per week
for his board and lodging, cook’s remuneration included, such sum to
be deducted from the amount due to him and placed to the credit of
dhe shearers - ' mess ac. ouuh
$. If the shearer be discharged, as he may be, lor breach of tills
Agreement or of the Rules, as printed on the back hereof, he shall be paid
in full for all sheep shorn by him up to the time of such, discharge, but
he shall be charged 15s, ner week for his board and lodging, cook’s
remuneration included, which amount shall be placed to the credit of
.the shearers’ mess aeoount.


6. Once a week, on a day to be named at commencement of
shearing, on demand, the employer shall pay to the shearer any sum
not. exceeding so per centum of the amount, due over and above one
week’s earnings at the time of such demand.
7. The employer shall pay reasonable travelling expenses
incurred from the place of engagement on the conditions that the said
shearer or shearers remain until the completion of shearing, in ho
case shall a shearer be entitled to travelling expenses it in the employ
of the said employer one month before shearing,
8. The employer and the shearer shall conform to the Rules, as
printed on the back hereof, which rules it is hereby agreed shall be
taken and deemed to be and form part of this Agreement.
As Witness the hands of the parties the day and year first before
written.
Signed by the Employer j
in the presence of J
Names, of Shearehs, Names of S£earbes.
Witness to above Signatures ..
N.B.—Where Shipowners provide rations “ twenty shillings”
and <l forty'shillings’* in danse 1 are replaced by 17s. 6d. and 355. !
respectively. Glauses 3,4, and 5 ar e also struck out, and the
following inserted in lieu thereof,
3. That the food supplied the said shearers during the time
they are engaged as shearers by the said sheepowner shall be clean,
wholesome, and properly cooked, and the accommodation dean and
healthy.
4. The shearer shall not wilfully absent himself from work, but
in case he leave before the completion of shearing, owing’ to sickness,
accident, or other such, unavoidable cause, or by the permission of the
employer or his agent, he shall be paid for the number of sheep shorn
by hina at the price aforesaid.
5 If the shearer be discharged, as he may be for breach of this
Agreement, or of the Rules, as printed on the back hereof, he shall
be paid in full for all sheep, shorn by him up to the time of such
discharge.


RULES
.Embodied as Fast of Acxksmsnt.
1. The shearing shall be carried oa under the direction aad
supervision of the employer or the person placed by him in charge of
the shed, in accordance with the conditions of tills Agreement.
2. Before commencing work the shearer shall draw lots for hh
pea, and shall abide by the result of such drawing, the person in
charge of the shed having the right to make any alteration deemed
advisable.
3. All sheep must be taken carefully from the pen to the
shearing board and be shorn in a fair and workmanlike manner, and to
the satisfaction of employer or his agent. Where practicable the belly
wool to be taken off first and laid aside.
4. In opening the fleece at the neck both blades of the shears or
the machine to be kept under the wool and close to the skin, so as
to avoid twice cutting, and the shearer shall not be allowed to run.
the shears or the machine through the fleece so as to break It down
the centre or the back, and shall not stand mi the fleece.
5. No shearer shall tar his sheep except on a severe cnt or
stab, to the satisfaction of the employer or his agent.
8. Ho shearer shall be allowed to kick or otherwise injure or
iilnse any sheep, and in ease he seriously injure or iliuse any sheep,
or cut the teat off any ewe or pksde off any wether or ram he shall
immediately report the same to the person in charge of the shed;
and he shall pay to the employer the mess rate for the sheep so
Injured, and if the sheep be fit for food It shall go to the shearers’
mess, the employer to have the right to refuse such payment, and
keep the sheep.
7, The shearer shall not be allowed to catch any sheep from his
pea while it is being filled, but may during such filling shear from,
the most convenient pen. Ho sheep to he caught after the signal
has been given to cease work by the person in charge of the, shed,
8, The prices to be charged fey the employer for rations and
shearers'requisites shall, not exceed cost prices with five per cent,
added. la the event of a dispute employer to produce- Invoices.
9, Each shearer shall have free agistment for two horses oa
leasehold runs. On freehold runs the question re agistment for
horses shall be .mutually arranged between employer and employ*!.
The employer to have no responsibility.
10, No shearer shall bring any intoxicating, liquor on to the
station. Ho profane or obscene language shall be allowed in the shed.


1L The employer shall provide at least one proper grindstone
for every ten shearers or part thereof employed,
.1 % Ho shearer shall be allowed to shear sheep which the person
in charge of the shed declares to be wet; but in ease of any shearer
refusing on the ground of his health to shear sheep which he con-
siders wet, such refusal shall not be deemed a breach, of this
agreement.
13. No shearer shall be compelled to work more than 48 hours
per week ; shearing in all eases to cease not-later than 1 p.xn, on
Saturday.
14. No member shall be compelled to shear caneered sheep.
15. In all sheds where shearers provide their rations, shearers
shall find their own cooks, except where cooks work conjointly for
shearers and gheepowaters. In such, eases cooks shall be elected by-
vote of shearers and laborers. In all cases cooks must be members
of the A.S.U. or iI.L.U,. and shall produce certificate of compe-
tency, sijmed by shed representative, who must have been duly
authorise! to sign same by resolution of members in his shed. Cooks
will be paid not les.s than £2 per week where not more than i 3 men are
employed ; over that number, 3s. per man per week.
N.B.—~Where sheepowners provide rations, all words after “shed," in
fourth line, rule 6, are struck out.


FORM OF AGREEMENT
To be used in the South-eastern Districts of South Australia and
Colony of Victoria (excluding all Stations in the latter Colony, from
Swan I Jill to South Australian Border, having a frontage to the River
Murray.
Where Shearers Provide Rations.—Season 1891,
As adopted at the Annual Conference of the A.S, U,, held at Adelaide,
S.A., in February, 1891.
An Agreement made and entered into this day of
189 , Between of (hereinafter called
the sheepowner) of the one part, and the several persons whose
signatures are subscribed in the schedule hereto (hereinafter called the
shearers) of the other part. Whereby each of the shearers engages
to shear sheep for the said sheepowner, and. the sheepowner employs
each of the shearers on the following terms and conditions :
1, That the price of shearing wethers, ewes and lambs (including
ram lambs under sis months old), be at the rate of i'/s. 6d, per hundred
for ail such sheep shorn ; rams over six months old at the rate of 3ss.
per hundred for all rams shorn ; money to be paid by cheque on local
banks or exchange allowed on net amount earned.
2, That the said shearer shall be at the station or run
ready to commence shearing on-the day of xSg ,
and the said hereby agrees and undertakes to be ready
to commence shearing on the day of 189 , and the
said hereby agrees ami undertakes to be ready to
commence shearing on that date; and to keep them fully supplied with
sheep, weather permitting, except in case of unavoidable accident,
3, Before commencing work the said shearers shall draw lots for
their pens, and shall abide by the result of such drawing, the manager
having the right to make any alteration deemed advisable.
4, All sheep shall be taken carefully from the per; to the shearing
board and shorn thoroughly well in a proper and workmanlike manner,
the belly wool to be taken off separately and placed aside, la opening
the fleece at the neck both blades of the shears to be kept under the
wool and close to the skin so as to a v oid twice cutting, and shearers
shall not be allowed to run the shears through the fleece so as to break
it down the centre or the back, and shall not stand on the fleece,
5, In case any shearer turns out a sheep badly cut or insufficiently
tarred he shall at once sew and tar such cm. or wound in his pen if
required Ito do so by the person in charge of the shed.


6. No shearer shall be allowed >to kick or otherwise injure or ill
use any sheep, and in case he seriously injure or illuse any sheep, or
cut the test off any ewe or pride off any wether or ram, ire shall
immediately report same to person In charge of the shed under a penalty
of a hue of ios,
7, No shearer shall be allowed to catch, any sheep from his pen
for the purpose of being shorn while it is being filled, but shall during
such falling - shear from the most convenient pen. No sheep to be
caught after the bell rings to cease work.
So The sheepowner will during the whole of the time the shearers
shall be engaged as shearers supply them with proper sleeping accom-
modation, sufficient cooking and table utensils, firewood and good
water, free of charge.
9. The sheepowner will on demand thereof pay to any of the
shearers any sum not exceeding 75 per centum of the amount due at the
time of such demand,
xos No shearer shall wilfully absent himself from his work during
the continuance of this agreement (except in case of sickness) without
the permission of the manager, or bring; any intoxicating liquor on to
the station, or use any obscene language while engaged in shearing,
11. Any party hereto may upon breach of this agreement by any
other party contracting with him give notice to such other party
determining this agreement, and this agreement shall thereupon as
between the parties giving and receiving such notice to be determined
forthwith.
*l2, As between, the parties giving and receiving notice as
hereinafter mentioned this agreement may be determined fa any case
by the sheepowner or his agent giving to any of the shearers or by any
of the shearers giving tire.sheepowner or his agent or manager or to the
. person superintending or in charge of the shearing shed
notice of his intention to determine the same, or in case of the shearers
by the payment of or authorisation of the deduction by the sheepowner
from any money payable to any shearer by the sheepowner of the sum
of by way of line in lieu of such notice, in which latter case no
notice by the shearer paying or authorising the deduction of such fine
shall be necessary.
i 3, _ Each shearer shall on the termination of his employment
under this .agreement be thereupon entitled to foe paid in full at the rate
hereinbefore mentioned, less any lines imposed under danse 6, or
monies drawn, under clause 9, and also to a deduction at the rate of
12s. 64 per week for Ins board and lodging, including ' cook’s
remuneration, the said I3s. 6d, per week so deducted to he "placed to
credit of shearers’ mess account.
*See toot note 2?,-S.W. agmeta«nt m notice.


3:4- The parties hereto agree to conform with the working rules of
the shed, printed on she back hereof, which said rales it is hereby
agreed shall fcs takes and read res forming part of this agreement, and
construed therewith.
As Witness the hands of the said parties the day and year firs!
before, written.
Signed by the said sheepowner |
in the presence of s
The Schedule Hereinbefore Referred to,
NAMES OF SHEARERS. NAMES OF SHEARERS,
Witness to the above signatures
N.B, —When sheepowners provide rations 17s. 6d. and Sgs. in
danse 1 are replaced by 15s, and 3os. respectively, all the words after
“9" in clause x3 are also struck out, and clause 8 is replaced by the
following : —“The food supplied the said shearers during the lime they
are engaged as shearers by the said sheepowner shall be clean, whole-
some, and properly cooked, and the accommodation clean and healthy,’
WORKING RULES,
Embodied as Fart of Agreement,
1. No member shall accept engagement under any agreement or
rules other than those approved of and adopted by the Union.
2. No persons other than shearers engaged to shear in any shed
shall’ shear any sheep in such shed without the permission of the
manager.,
3. Members may shear any number of sheep per day, bxst said
sheep roust be shorn in a fair and workmanlike manner.
4. Any shearer forced to leave his work through some cause over
which he has no control, such as sickness in family, self, or accident, or
summoned to appear at court, or other reasonable cause, shall be paid
in full for all sheep-shorn up to date of leaving. Incase of accident,
death, or sickness, a doctor's certificate to be sufficient proof.
5. In case a majority of the shearers decide that the sheep are wet
no shearer shall be allowed to shear such sheep. If a majority decide,
in case of dispute, that the sheep are dry, and any shearer refuse on the
ground of ill-health to shear sheep, which in his opinion are wet, such
refusal shall not be deemed a breach of this agreement, and no, member
shall be compelled to shear canceled sheep,.


6. The prices to foe charged for rations and shearers' requisites by
sheepowners shall not exceed cost prices with five per cent, and cost of
carriage added. Price lists to be produced previous to commencing
shearing, In the event of dispute re price of radons sheepowners to
produce io voic.es,
7. 'Free agistment for cue horse shall be allowed to every shearer.
In the event of any shearer having more than one, he shall pay such
sum for each horse over one as may be agreed upon,
8. Sheepowners shall provide at least one proper grindstone for
every tea shearers or part thereof employed,
9. Such arrangements shall be made in each shed that not more
than forty-eight hours’ work shall be done in any one week. In all
cases work to cease at four p,ra. on Saturday, The hours of commencing
and ceasing work each day, with the intervals for meals, &c. { to be
arranged between sheepowners .and shearers before commencing
shearing, subject to foregoing conditions. This rule shall not apply
to cooks,
to, in.all sheds where they provide their rations, shearers shall
find their own cooks, except 'where cooks work conjointly for shearers
and sheepowners. In such cases cooks may be engaged by sheepowners,
Iu ail cases cooks must be members of the Union, and shall produce
certificate of competency, signed by shed representative, who must have
been duly authorised to sign same by resolution of members in his shed.
Cooks shall be paid not less than £t per week where not more than 13
shearers are employed ; over that number, 3s, per man per week,
xx. In all sheds where shearing machines are used, the sheep-
owner shall provide all necessary machines and requisites (knives and
combs included), and experts, free of cost. The sheepowner shall also
(at their own expense) keep the said machinery, &c. ; in proper working
order, and knives in good cutting condition. In case of stoppages
through breakages, shearers shall be recompensed for lost time, or
allowed to go on shearing with the hand shears ; the sheepowner
to provide such shears at his own expense. Drivers of shearing
machines must produce certificates showing them to be duly qualified
drivers,
12. No member shall be compelled to dag sheep ; when necessary
all sheep to be dagger! at the shipowner's expense,
1 3. Shearers’ tallies shall be. posted daily in the shed,
14. Each shearer must have a separate pen to shear in—no
double-banking shall be allowed,
N.B,—No alteration in above rules—where sheepowners provide
rations,
