

GENERAL INFORMATION
ON THE
PRESERVATION
OF
SOOKS, DEEDS, RECORDS, AND
DOCUMENTS
FROM FIRE;
THE PREVENTION OF EXPLOSIONS OF GUNPOWDER;
RESULTS OF EXTENSIVE FIRES;
RTIFICATES OF SCIENTIFIC AND PRACTICAL MEN OF TRIALS IN RED HEAT OF THE
SEVERAL FIRE-PROOF AND FIRE-RESISTING INVENTIONS, INCLUDING MILNERS',
Collected by W. MILNER,
President of the Liverpool Polytechnic Society for 1849.
WITH FULL PARTICULARS OF
ILNERS’ PATENT FIRE-RESISTING PRINCIPLE,
(BY THE MUTUAL RE-ACTION OF NON-CONDUCTION AND EVAPORATION,)
AND ITS APPLICATION TO THEIR VARIOUS MANUFACTURES,
CLUDING THE STRONGEST FIRE, FRAUD, AND VIOLENCE-RESISTING
SAFES AND CLOSETS EXTANT.
WORKS, 47 to 57, CABLE-STREET,
SHOW ROOMS, 50a & 54, LORD-STREET, LIVERPOOL.
LONDON CITY DEPOT, 47 a, MOORGATE-STREET.
I LONDON WEST END DEPOT, 517, NEW OXFORD-ST.
MANCHESTER DEPOT, 61, SPRING-GARDENS.
LEEDS DEPOT, 39, BRIGGATE.
HULL DEPOT, 47, WHITEFRIARGATE.
LIVERPOOL:
PRINTED BY D. MARPLES, LORD-STREET.
1849.


THOMAS MILNER & SON,
PATENTEES AND SOLE MANUFACTURERS OF
MILNERS' PATENT FIRE-RESISTING SAFES AND BOXE
By Royal Betters Patent for Eng-
By Royal Betters Patent for
By Royal Betters Patent for
landfe Wales, Sealed Feb. 26,
Scotland, Sealed Sept. R , 18‘
t Ireland, Sealed Nov. 7, IS4<
CATJTION. None are Genuine but such as bear Milners Patent Plates, Stamped
« Sealed 1840,” to imitate which is Felony.
For the Protection of Ledgers, Books, Deeds, Writings, Gunpowder, Cash, Plate, Je
lerv Silks, and other valuable Materials from Fire, by the mutual reaction of h
conduction and Evaporation; Warranted to bear more Heat, without injury to t
contents, than any other arrangement within equal dimensions, and recommended o
less than One Cubic Foot of inside measurement.
Fire-resisting Safe and Box Works, 50 a and 54, LORD STREET, and 47 to
CABLE STREET, LIVERPOOL.
LONDON CITY DEPOT, 47 a, MOORGATE STREET.
LONDON WEST END DEPOT, 517, NEW OXFORD STREET.
MILNERS’ HOLDFAST and FIRE-RESISTING GOVERNMENT SAFES
CLOSETS, for Books, Title Deeds, Cash, Plate, &c., the strongest safeguards against
and robbery in the world; outer plates of bodies, quarter to half inch, and of doors half
thick lron, strongly dovetailed together; with impregnable Locks, Bolts,
back Fastenings, and lined throughout with Milners’ Treble Fire-resisting Chambers. (See
No. 3, in Pamphlet.)
MILNERS’ DOUBLE FIRE-RESISTING CHAMBERED SAFES, CLOSETS,
CHESTS, lighter, and one-third cheaper, than the Thief-proof Holdfasts, but equally
gainst fire. (See List No. 2, in Pamphlet.) Safes and Chests from List No 2 and 3
recommended for large Buildings, Mansions, Mills, Suits of Offices, Warehouses, &c.
MILNERS’ ONE-CHAMBERED FIRE-RESISTING BOXES, for detached Built
of moderate size and risk. (See List No. 1, in Pamphlet.) I
TT-mvro i NETT PRICES AND DIMENSIONS OF MILNER’S PATENT FIRE-RESIS
ONE-CHAMBERED STRONG PLATE IRON BOXES, AS ABOVE, 2 INCH THICK.
The Size Letter of each Box is stamped on the right hand corner of the Patent Plate.
over the Lock.
Outside Measure.
INCH. INCH. INCH. PRICE.
t? 20 long, 14 wide, 14 deep £4 0 0
p'” 22 „ 16 „ 16 „ 5 0 0
G- ..... 24 „ 18 ~ 18 „ 6 5 0
h'"". 26 20 „ 20 „ 710 0
T 28 „ 22 „ 22 „ 9 0 0
j ’ ’ 30 „ 24 „ 24 „ 10 10 0
5 inches less each way inside.
All fitted with excellent and secure Patent Tumbler Locks, with each two Keys.
Delivered Carriage Free, Packages returnable, in any principal Town in England, or an
in the United Kingdom.


IMPROVED for the CUSTODY of the GOVERNMENT
REGISTRY, DOCUMENTS, and BOOKS, 1849.
LIST NO. 2.—NETT PRICES AND DIMENSIONS
OF MILNERS’ PATENT FIRE-RESISTING DOUBLE CHAMBERED STRONG
PLATE IRON CHESTS.
The Size Letter of each Chest is stamped on the right hand corner of the Patent Plate over
the Lock.
Outside Measure.
INCH. INCH. INCH.
CC.. £3 13 0..16 long, 12 wide, 12 deep.
DD.. 4 8 0..18 „ 13 „ 13 „
EE.. 5 5 0. .20 „ 14 " 14 „
FF.. 6 13 0. .22 „ 16 „ 16 „
Outside Measure.
INCH. INCH. INCH.
GG..£B 5 0..24 long, 18 wide, 18 deep.
HH..10 0 0.,26 „ 20 „ 20 „
II 12 0 0. .28 „ 22 „ 22 „
JJ...14 0 0. .30 „ 24 „ 24 „
5 inches less each way inside.
All fitted with excellent and secure Patent Tumbler Locks, with each tw o Keys.
MILNERS’ PATENT FIRE-RESISTING DOUBLE CHAMBERED STRONG
PLATE IRON BOOK OR DEED SAFES, WITH DOOR AND LOCK IN FRONT.
The Size Number of each Safe is stamped as above.
Outside Measure.
INCH. INCH. INCH.
No. 1 £8 5 0 24 high, 18 wide, 18 deep.
>, 2 10 0 0 26 „ 20 „ 20 „
n 3 12 0 0 28 „ 22 „ 22 „
„ 4 14 0 0 30 „ 24 „ 24 „
Each Size 40s. extra, with two Drawers, 4f in. high.
„ 5 with 2 Doors 21 15 0 2 Drawers in. high 30 „ 30 „ 24 „
„ 6 „ 2 „ 26 0 0 2 „ 5| „ 33 „ 33 „ 27 „
n 1 u 2 „ 30 0 0 2 „ 6J , 36 „ 36 „ 30 „
Nos. Ito 4,20 s. extra for Shelf. Nos. sto 7,30 s. Do. Do.
5 inches less high and wide, and 6 inches less deep, backwards, inside.
The Double-chambered Boxes and Safes ai'e also very suitable for small Stock of Gunpowder—say under
501 b., Flasks, Caps, &c., of Sportsmen, Dealers, Ships’ Use, Blasting, &c. A piece of board, two inches thick
covered over with coarse green baize, and fitted nicely within the top of the Box for the lid to close down upon
will prevent the escape of stray grains, two finger holes to lift it out by being gouged out in the board.
The Cylindrical Magazines for larger Stocks of Powder.
MILNERS’ Patent Fire-resisting Safes or Boxes made to fit Iron. Book Cases,
Closets, Strong Rooms, Recesses, to any particular dimensions, at 10s. per superficial foot,
and 5 cent, extra. If Safes, wider than two feet, made with two doors, opening in the
middle, at an extra charge of £1 per foot in height.
MILNERS’ Double Bankers’ Safe consists of two Safes, 2 to 2§ inches chambered,
placed one within the other, leaving steam space between, secured at the corners with wood
blocks; thickness from inside to outside, including all, 6 inches. Warranted to bear 24
hours exposure to red heat 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit, without injury to Books or Papers
inside. Inner Safe and Outer Safe each 10s. per superficial foot, and 5 per cent, extra.
If with two doors, dividing in the middle, each Safe extra £1 per foot in height.
All sizes of Boxes or Safes made with additional Inner Chamber, doubling the thick-
ness and trebling the resisting power, or as the Banker’s Double Safe.
LIST NO. 3.—NETT PRICES AND SIZES OF
Milners’ ‘Holdfast’ Fire, Violence, Robbery, and Fraud-resisting Safes and
Closets, for Cash and Valuables.
The strongest wrought-iron Safeguards in the world. No outer plate of ‘ Holdfast’ Safe
Bodies less than quarter inch thick wrought-iron, nor of ‘ Holdfast’ Doors less than half inch
thick wrought-iron, with Impregnable Locks, Bolts, and Back-fastenings, and lined throughout
with Milners’ unequalled double Fire-resisting Chambers. Safe against Fire and Robbery any
where. Of the outside dimensions quoted in List No. 2 above.
No. 1, price ... .£l2 7s. 6d. —No. 2, ... .£ls—Mo. 3, £lB.
No. 4, ... .£2l. —No. 4§, (32 by 26 by 26) ... .£24.
All the above £3 extra with two Drawers.
No. 5, ... .£32 12s. 6d. - No. 6 £39.'— No. 7, ... .£45.
Nos. 5,6, and 7 have two Doors aMd 2 Drawer’s.
All the above sizes 7 inches less in height and width, and 8 inches less in depth backward
inside, than the above extreme outside dimensions; or may be made to any'particular height,
width, or depth, at to the above, with five per cent, extra.


MILNERS’ Double Rankers Sale
capable of resisting twenty-four hours
Eire
MILNERS’ PATENT
FIRE-RE SISTI}
MANUFACTURES.
□
MILNERS’
‘HOLDFAST’ FIRE, VIOLENCE, ROBBERY,
AND
FRAUD-RESISTING SAFES & CLOSETS,
FOR CASH AND VALUABLES.
The strongest wrought-iron Safeguards in
the world.
For Prices, see List No. 3, page 3.
o
•° !?'o 3 j\
I
H O g y'cS
u •;«p<a %
c 6 -S«*3
E S o '
cr <u -p >
49 -g « .2 o
,d .2 rH § d
nir*
lit!
H I or J
iso
as 2 §
2-sts
3 ®
i


LIVERPOOL
WORKS,
47 to 57, CABLE-ST.,
SHOWROOMS,
50a & 54, LORD-ST.
LONDON
CITY DEPOT,
n
4=7a, MOOKGKATE-STREET.
WEST END DEPOT,
517, NEWiOXEORD-ST.
f Ji.:. .<>; ij
ij
CUNPOWDER
mACAZINE
f
Fire-resisting
Double-doored
Safe,
No. 5, £2! 15s.
30X30X24
Do. No. 6, £ &6, ,
33X33X2 f
Do. No. 7, £3O, iP
L36X36X30 «=
Slielf extra, 30s
Or made to any
bespoken
dimensions.
see Scale of
Prices.
If: -3
H
r
Box Q,H, T, or J.
placed on its er-d for BonV^
Fire-resisting Safe, No. 1 2,3, or 4


The momentous importance to all classes, of securing books and documents from fire,
is so forcibly advocated in the admirable paper from the Liverpool Polytechnic Society’s
Transactions, given hereafter in page 19, that we only venture further to allude to the addi-
tional weight which painful experience has since given to the argument. In all parts of
the civilised world, destructive conflagrations have swept off in masses these uninsurable
representatives of property,* spreading confusion, distress, and ruin around, whilst in other
cases the invaluable records of antiquity, as in King William’s College, Isle of Man, and
the researches of science, as in the Aberdeen College, have perished in the flames. At
this moment a Liverpool paper states that five gentlemen, from different parts of the world,
met on “ change’' this week, each brought to England in search of accounts destroyed by
fire at home; whilst the majority of their friends, in the metropolis and the large com-
mercial towns of this country, on hearing of these losses, and asking how these books and
accounts were kept, will learn, “just like their own, in Iron Safes or Strong Closets f (consist-
ing of dry non-evaporating materials ,”) —on opening which, afterthe fire, the books were found
consumed to ashes. One hour’s strong fire will burn the contents of the best of these that
can be made, whether cast-iron, wrought-iron, wrought iron fireproofed, as it is termed,
i. e., having a plate of iron placed some little distance within, or stone or brick closet with
iron doors, which, when once heated, continue their work of internal destruction for hours
after the fire is out around them. In the burning of ten warehouses in George-street,
Manchester, nine out of the ten occupants had their books destroyed in Iron Safes, cast,
wrought, and fireproof, of various kinds. The only one saved was saved by being thrown
out of the window. We may here give the subjoined, from the Liverpool Times : —
“ The following observations are from the pen of Mr. Dwight, of the New York Daily
Advertiser, a great authority, since he had the greater part of his property, deposited in safes,
destroyed during the late fire. They are well worthy of consideration in this country: —‘We
thought we would wait a day or two before we mentioned our own case. As things are become
more settled, and people are thinking about re-building, we would state, that we had appa-
rently one of the finest safes in the world, built full two feet thick of stone, with an outer and
inner iron door; in this safe we deposited a large quantity of papers and books. We felt
confident of their security; but after the fire was subdued, although the safe stood entire, the
books were so completely consumed that hardly a handful of dust remained. In the Merchants’
Exchange there were some twenty safes similar to ours. As for iron chests, we have the
same accounts from all parts of the city.’ ”
The fire at Messrs. Walkers’, of Birkenhead, and the contrast which the two Safes therein
offered after the fire one a strong Iron Safe and Drawers, entirely consumed; the other,
one of Milners’, which, although it had obviously had more fire, was as entirely preserved,
and would have stood hours longer—proves that sufficient means exist to guard against
these calamities. Similar results have attended several other fires in which Milners’ Safes
or Boxes have preserved their contents, under circumstances in which they would have
perished in any other custody; (see certificates hereinafter given;) and in proof of the
faithfulness with which all their depositories are made, the proprietors have great satis-
faction in stating that every one of these were sold by their agents. Before detailing parti-
culars of numerous experimental trials made in the principal towns of the United Kingdom
and certified by the municipal authorities and those of the highest scientific and practical
character in the various localities, we proceed to describe Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting
Book Safes, Deed, Record, Scrip, Plate, Cash, Jewellery, Silks, &c. Boxes, and Gunpowder
Magazines for protection from fire ; warranted to bear more fire, without injury to their
contents, than any others of equal dimensions and thickness; and recommended of not
less than one cubic foot of inside measurement. Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Depositories,
consisting of Milners’ “Holdfast” Safes, Closets, and Doors, the strongest wrought
Iron Safeguards against robbery, violence, and fraud (as well as fire) in the world; Milners’
strong hammered plate Iron Fire-resisting Safes and Boxes, single, double, treble, or quad-
ruple chambered, are rendered impervious to the action or duration of fire in the conflagra-
tion of all classes of buildings, for which their various thicknesses and fire-resisting power
is adapted, by the interposition within the chambers of a combined and most effective prin-
ciple of resistance to the transmission and effects of heat —viz., the mutual reaction of non-
conduction and vaporization, and the protracted diffusion and condensation of steam within
the contents, keeping the whole mass below the boiling point (212°), in which temperature
books or papers will not burn; for which invention and application the Royal Letters Patent
have been granted for the United Kingdom. They have been brought to their present state of
perfect and satisfactory efficiency by the successive improvements effected during upwards
* The public journals daily record occurrences like the following. Supposing a similar calamity to visit our
national archives Oxford, Cambridge, indeed hundreds of public and private libraries in this country, how
irreparable the consequencesi “The Jewish synagogue at Avignon was destroyed by fire on the night of the
25th November. The loss was estimated at 55,000 francs; namely, 34,000 francs for the building and wainscoting,
and 21,000 francs for the curtain and the ark (made of silk, gold, and silver), the ark itself, the chandeliers or
lustres, and the sacred bodks. some of which were very old. This last loss was more seriously felt by tbe Israelite
community than all the rest. The collection of the Sepherem, or books of the law, was composed of forty-two
parchment rolls, and considered one of the richest in the world.


of thirty years’ experience of the inventors as Safety Box Manufacturers. Milners’ Fire-
resisting Safes and Boxes, of every useful variety of size, are equally well adapted for
the books and documents of bankers, merchants, and tradesmen, or for the classification
of deeds and papers in professional and public offices; also for insurance, railway, and
other public companies, stockbrokers, shareholders, &c.; and for the preservation and safe
keeping of the title deeds, records, MSS, and writings of the government, the nobility, the
universities, clergy, gentry, and others. They are especially suited for depositories for
parish registers, and the books and papers of register offices, — the act requiring that the
same shall be kept in wrought, not cast, Iron Boxes; and the patentees have the satis-
faction to state that the Registrar-General has ordered the various offices to adopt
them. Milners’ Safes are made of all sizes, from the regular size of Book Safes to Closets
of the largest dimensions; the Boxes of numerous graduating sizes, the smaller sizes
nesting into the larger, for carriage and export.
Where the Iron Safe, strong brick, or stone room, or closet, with iron doors, are in use,
although experience has shewn them to he not only devoid of security from fire in them-
selves, but absolutely destructive to their contents when heated, they may be'made perfectly
secure by placing these Fire-resisting (evaporating) Safes and Boxes inside of them. The
vast importance of this principle, in its perfect and sure preservation of gunpowder from
explosion, needs no other enforcement than the terrific effects of such accidents in dealers’
stores, vessels, or private dwellings; the steam passing into the powder, reduces it to a
moist clayey mass, destroying its explosive qualities,—after which, even if ignited, it will
only fuse quietly away; and the patentees have sincere gratification in stating that they
have been requested to submit their plans to the Admiralty; and the same having been
approved, they are further requested to furnish estimates for Her Majesty’s ships of w ar.
For shipments of silks, and valuable goods, jewellery, cutlery, or other fine wares, they are
an excellent package; whilst their adaptation to the various uses of mercantile establish-
ments abroad, ensures them ready and profitable sale at their destination. Milners’ Fire-
resisting principle has been publicly tested as follows:
“ Liverpool , May 24, 1841. We, the undersigned, having this day witnessed the testing
of one of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, by its having been placed in ajjarge fire, con-
sisting of wood and upwards of six hundred weight of coals, for the space of two hours and
twenty minutes, do hereby express our conviction, that the Fire-resisting Boxes manufactured
by them are a perfect security in all cases of ordinary fire. The Box was filled with commer-
cial and other books, papers, parchments, and deeds, (one of which, of the 16th Henry Bth,
had five large thick seals appended to it,) and, within an inch of the cover, several Bank of
England notes; and, previously to being closed, was submitted to the examination of
J. S. Eeigh, Esq., R. Frodsham, Esq., L. Graham, Esq., and others present. The whole
contents, on the Box being taken out of the fire and opened in our presencq, were found to
be in a perfect state of preservation, the seals attached to the deed above-mentioned not
being in the slightest degree injured. This certificate is written on the deed of 16th Henry
Bth above-mentioned, which was submitted to the test.
“ Thomas Bolton, Mayor, R. Frodsham, Thomas Brancker, (Sir) William Scott,
J. S. Leigh, L. Graham, Bar. Prescott, S. Woods, Jun.”
The highly satisfactory results of similar experimental trials are attested by the authori-
ties and principal gentlemen in Manchester, January 20, 1842, (see page 2;)1;) Leeds, March
30, 1842, (see page 10;) Hull, July 9, 1841, (see page 10;) Nottingham, September 8, 1841,
(see page 10:) Leicester, October 15, 1841, (see page 10;) Edinburgh, April 20, 1842, (see
page 10,) when a “Fireproof Box,” made in Edinburgh, was purchased by,Sir Edward
Lees, and submitted to the same fire half the time, and its contents reduced to ashes; in
Glasgow,Mays, 1842, (seepage 11;) in Hamburg, August 29,1842, (see page 11;) in Liver-
pool, a trial of a gunpowder magazine for five hours and a half, in a strofig fire, for Dr.
Kane and Charles Wye Williams, Esq., (see page 12;) in Dublin, October 7th, 1842, (see
page 13,) for the Royal Dublin Society, after which the following testimonial was given on
behalf of the Royal Dublin Society by Sir Edward Stanley, Chairman :
“Committee of Manufacturers, Royai Dublin Society.— Resolved: That having
carefully examined the Fire-resisting Safes produced by Messrs. Milner and Son, and wit-
nessed their application to powerful and continued fire, we recommend them as articles of
approved utility.
“ I2lh October, 1842. Edward Stanley, Chairman .”
In Liverpool an elaborate investigation into the whole subject of Protection from Fire
took place in January, 1843. See “ Transactions of the Liverpool Polytechnic Society for
1843,” published by Lace and Addison, Liverpool. Extracted at page 19.
PRESERVATION OF DOCUMENTS FROM FIRE.—
LIVERPOOL POLYTECHNIC SOCIETY.
The first meeting of this body was held on Tuesday evening last (January 10th.) About
a quarter to nine o’clock, the Chairman, John Grantham, Esq., called upon Samuel


Woods, Jun., Esq., to read his paper “ On the Means of Preserving Documents from Fire.”
After some introductory remarks on the great importance of the subject, Mr. Woods pro-
ceeded to noticedhe inventions of Mr. Marr, Mr. Chubb, and Messrs. Milner, and gave the
details of the experiments made for the purpose of testing their relative merits, during the
past and present .week, in a field near Prescot-street. Mr. Woods stated that he had
ordered the heat .Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, of equal dimensions, without regard to price,
from each of the parties, and had afterwards requested their attendance, or some person for
them, at the experiments The result of these experiments had been to prove that exactly
in the inverse ratio as to cost was the power of resistance of the Boxes. Messrs. Milners ,
which was the, cheapest, (£3 105.,) stood three tests, without the documents in the Box
being injured. Tj?e papers in Mr. Marr’s Box (price £7 10s.) were much injured, and to a
considerable except destroyed, at the end of the third trial; but those in Mr. Chubb s Box
(price £ll 1 Is.) vfere in a worse state at the second examination. Marr’s Box was found
to be filled wj£h j*yet clay, instead of asbestos, agreeably with his specification, which
accounted for ijs longer resisting the fire than Chubb’s. The Boxes and their contents, as
they came from the fire, were exhibited at the meeting, and may now be seen at the London
and Birmingham Railway Office, 3, India-buildings, Water-street, Liverpool.
Mr. Woods concluded by mentioning other experiments, which proved the great supe-
riority of Messrs. Milners’ principle. In one of these trials, a round safe of six inches
thickness had been kept in a fire for twelve hours, without the heat penetrating through the
outer chamber of three inches, or the contents (books and papers, and for the first six hours
half a pound of gunpowder,) being more than slightly warmed, whilst those in a brick
closet nine inqjies thick, with a th, ee-quarter inch thick iron door, (the papers being
placed one foot from the door,) on being examined at the end of six hours, were found to
be destroyed, .although the fire had burnt slowly around it. Circulars had been sent,
inviting all the members of the society to attend, as also to numbers of scientific gentlemen,
including iron merchants and founders, chemists, and others most familiar with fire and its
effects, who had signed the certificates confirmatory of the facts stated. 'I he boxes were
afterwards taken in pieces, and their construction and materials examined by a committee
of five gentleifft'h, from whose report it was obvious that the result of the experiments
might have bq£n anticipated by a previous knowledge of, and exactly agreed with, the
difference of adaptation for the object of the three boxes.
In adverting to the trial of the Brick Closet alluded to above, the object of which was to
try the efficiency of similar safes commonly in use, Mr. Woods gave some information he
had obtained front London, New York, and Hamburg, which all went to prove the utter
incompetency of structures, however massive, consisting of materials— brick, stone, or iron
all in a greater or less degree good conductors of heat, to keep out such a temperature
(in case of their being surrounded with fire) as would be destructive to their contents.
Whereas, by the judicious arrangement and combination of bad-conducting and neutra-
lizing media, as applied in Milners’ principle, it was evident that the terrible agency of fire
might be most Successfully coped with. From, the Liverpool Papers of the day.
“ Liverpool, May 3, 1843.
“My Dear Sir, I feel much pleasure in giving my opinion of Messrs. Milners’ Fire-
resisting Boxes, although I am indebted to your experiments for my knowledge of them in the
first instance. Subsequently, however, I have been induced to examine their structure still
more minutely tttaii I had an opportunity of doing when you brought your paper before the
society. I may sdy, in relation to your experiments, I have seldom known a series on a large
scale so ably coiilucted throughout, and with so much fairness to all parties concerned.
Respecting thje'nrerits of the safety boxes of the rival makers, I unhesitatingly give the pre-
ference to patent; indeed, it would be difficult to do otherwise, after the results of
the several experiments. Not only do their boxes exceed the others in real safety from fife,
but there are §6 many truly philosophical principles brought to bear on their construction
and all tending Iff the one object as to inspire a confidence of their safety under almost any
circumstances, aHsing from fire, in which they might be placed. The other makers seem to
have sought their principle of safety through mere strength of material, while Messrs. Milner
have clearly seen that such in reality is the groat source of failure, as thicker iron soon
acquires a red Heat, and when so heated, will inevitably either retain or conduct it to a much
greater extentrtban the lighter plates that form the outside casing of Milners’ boxes; while
the chemical principles that are called into operation in the surrounding chamber the steam
that is made tq absorb an immense amount of active heat in the interior —keeping the con-
tents comparatively cool all demand the highest praise, and reflect much credit on the
inventors. I am, Sir, yours very truly, THOMAS SPENCER,
“ S. Wood's, Esq.” (The Inventor of the Electrotype.)
Further Tests. —ln Boston, April 21, 1843, (see page 14); Grantham, July 12, 1843,
(see page 14); in Sheffield, July 13, 1843; in Peterborough, September, 1843 ; Bury St. Ed-
mund’s,


and Birmingham Railway Station; trials of cases of various thicknesses up to six inches,
from two to twelve hours, and attested as below:—
(Copy) “ London and Birmingham Railway Office, Euston Station,
“ Bth April, 1844.
“Sirs,— lam instructed to send the enclosed report of the results of the public experiments
on your Fireproof Boxes and Safes at the Camden Station of this Company, which was autho-
rised by the Directors to be made under the immediate superintendence of their own officers,
and to congratulate you on the complete success of the very severe trials by which you have
allowed your admirable invention to be tested.
“ 1 am, Sir, your obedient servant,
“To Messrs. Thos. Milner & Son. “ R. CREED, Secretary.”
Since which period further laborious and satisfactory investigations of the principle
have taken place at Manchester (see page 24), Bristol (see page 27), Exeter, (see page 28),
&c., &c., for particulars of which see accounts. In most of the above trials the contents
of Iron Safes and Boxes were destroyed, standing beside Milners’in the fire; and the
Patentees have the great satisfaction of laying the following certificates, of their manufac-
tures having done their duty in actual extensive fires, before the public:—
“ Saddlery Warehouse, 32, London Road, Liverpool, Feb. 27, 1843.
“ Messrs. Thomas Milner & Son.
“Gentlemen, — I feel pleasure in informing you that my books and papers, which I kept
in one of your Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, which was in the fire on my premises, on Friday
evening last, were wholly preserved, in as good condition as when put in. The rest of my
books, invoices, &c., which were not in the box, were, I am sorry to say, destroyed.
“ I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,
“ MAURICE JONES.”
“ Liverpool, January 24, 1844. Gentlemen, Having had my principal books preserved
from fire by being in one of your Patent Fire-resisting Boxes (bought from one of your
agents) that was in the fire at my warehouse in Sparling-street, 17th January, 1844, I have
much pleasure in communicating the circumstance to you. Some other books, &c., which
were not in your box, were entirely destroyed. I wish to have a box of larger size; please
send me one or two to select from.
“ I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,
“J. B. BLACK ABLER,
“ Ship Chandler and Sail-maker, 10, Lower Sparling-street.
“ Messrs. Thomas Milner & Son.”
“ Manchester, August 31, 1844. Having had my books preserved in one of your Boxes,
in the late destructive fire in Irwell-buildings, Blackfriars, I have pleasure in requesting you
to send me one of your No. 2 Safes, with Drawers.
“Thomas Milner & Son. “ HENRY FISCHER.”
“ Birkenhead, June 2, 1845. —Dear Sir, —We have much pleasure in bearing unqualified
testimony to the efficiency and important advantages of Milners’ Fire-resisting Safes and
Boxes in cases of accident from fire. After the destructive fire at our offices this morning, the
books and papers deposited in the Milners’ Safe, purchased from you, were found to be
entirely uninjured by fire, whilst those contained in an Iron Safe and Drawers, standing
beside it, were completely destroyed. We will accordingly thank you to supply us with
another Safe, of the same size (No. 4) and description, immediately.
“ Sir, your obedient servants,
“ Mr. James Law, Stationer, Birkenhead. “J. & W. WALKER.”
At a meeting of the Liverpool Polytechnic Society, September Ist, 1845, Mr. Chilton
rose and stated that he had returned by the last packet from New York, and that precisely
the same circumstances related of the fire at Messrs. Walkers’ had occurred at that city
during the late destructive fire the books of a mercantile house, in one of Messrs.
Milners’ Safes, being preserved, whilst those in other Safes in the same office were com-
pletely destroyed.
“To the Editor of the Liverpool Standard, fyc.
“ Queen’s Dock Master’s House, 12 th November, 1845.
“ Sir,— In the complete burning of the whole of our premises on Monday last, the only
things saved out of the stock and property were our Books, which we feel that we owe entirely
to, Milners’ Fire-resisting Safe, in which we kept them. This Safe bears evidence of the
intense fire it had resisted ; and it was with as much surprise as gratitude that, on breaking it
open after the fire, we found, instead of ashes, as we expected, our Books perfect as we left
them. We think it due to this invaluable invention, and to the public, to make this declara-
tion through your columns. — Remaining, Sir, your obedient Servants,
“ GARNISS & CO.,
“ Late of 97, Park-lane, General Outfitters.
P. S. £SO in notes, left in the desk, were destroyed.”


“ Messrs. Milner & Sou. “ Central Di ck Station, 13 th November, 1845.
“Gentlemen, I was present during the whole time of the fire at Messrs. Garniss’s, on
Monday night, and consider it was one of the hottest fires of the kind I ever witnessed, espe-
cially in the shop, where your Safe was. Gentlemen, your obedient Servant,
“ WM. LEVERATT, Superintendent of Police.”
Thomas Milner and Son have great satisfaction in communicating to the Public the
following letter, reporting the second instance this month of the faithful performance of its
duty by one of their one-chambered Fire-resisting Boxes, — their weakest chamber, pos-
sessing only one fourth of the resisting power of their Double-chambered Boxes and Safes,
and less than one-twelfth of that of their Double Banker’s Safe. The above is the eighth
recent instance in this district, in three of which cases the entire stock and property were
consumed, leaving only the Books unburnt which were preserved in Milners’ Box. All
other property may be insured, but Books and Documents, often exceeding all other in
value, cannot, excepting as above.
“ To the Editor of the Manchester Guardian.
“Pent Warehouse, No. 18, Portland-street, Manchester,
“ 22nd November, 1845.
“ Sir, — About ten o’clock last night a fire broke out on my premises, which consumed the
entire of my stock on the ground floor, in which it commenced.
“ It is with unfeigned satisfaction that I have to announce to you, that the whole of the
Books and Papers that were deposited in one of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, were
found to be in as complete state of preservation as when placed therein. All other Books
and Documents not so secured were totally destroyed.
“ In justice to the invention, I am most anxious to make this occurrence known through
your columns, in the hope of calling the attention of my Brother Tradesmen to the importance
of availing themselves of the means of security offered by these Safes.
“ Such of my family as were on the premises at the outbreak were with difficulty saved, by
being lowered by a rope, which happened fortunately to be at hand, from the top story.
“ I am, Sir, yours very respectfully,
“JOHN OAKDEN.”
With reference to the superiority of this method of maintaining low temperature
in the heart of a strong fire by vaporization prolonged in chemical non-conductors
(in other words, by substituting boiling for burning,) it may be observed, that
from every pint of fluid discharged from the materials of the Safe, or Box, by
heat into the interior, nearly two thousand pints of steam are evolved and condensed
in the contents, rendering the whole mass damp and humid as a newspaper from the
press. By this means 1000 degrees of heat is neutralised, and rendered latent and
harmless—one-half of which temperature would destroy the contents of the best Safe or
Box that can be put together of dry materials; whilst the papers are made difficult of
ignition, the whole process being conducive throughout to their preservation. For a
much longer period than that during which a Box or Safe would be in contact with fire,
in the successive conflagration of the parts of a building, no greater heat than 212° will
pass through this medium into the interior^-a temperature perfectly harmless to books,
papers, parchments, or even bank notes; the cause of the exhaustion of the moisture being
so protracted, is its being sheathed and protected from rapid vaporization in the absorbent
non-conductor. In long-continued heat, the non-conductor discharges its pyroligneous
acid, which, combining with the alkali, forms a carbonaceous crust or pyrolignate of
potass —the worst conductor of heat known; and from within this shelter the papers or
books slowly give out again the large volume of steam that has been passed into and con-
densed in them, reacting most favourably, in keeping down to their own temperature that of
the Box or Safe, and the surrounding fire. The Tea-kettle, boiling at 212 degrees, in
immediate contact with red-hot fire, into which a handful of bank notes or gunpowder may
be placed with safety, simply and aptly illustrates this principle. Another beautiful and
forcible illustration of its extraordinary preserving capabilities may be shown in a very
simple manner, by folding a piece of common writing paper into the form of a tea-cup,
having a wire circle inside, and another outside round the top, tied together with small
binding wire, and two half circles of iVire crossing each other under the bottom, merely to
keep the form. If this paper boiler be filled with water, and put over a red-hot place on the
fire, where there is no smoke, it will boil away, without even discolouring the paper. With
great care, the boiler may be a banle note; and, with perfect safety, notes may be doubled up,
and boiled in the water, with only paper betwixt them and red heat, and afterwards dried.
Or, as the inside of a loaf in an oven is preserved for hours from being more than boiled,
under circumstances wherein it would be reduced to a blackened, charred mass, were it not
for its own self-contained moisture, materials the most combustible are kept from injury in
a similar but move perfect manner, within these boxes, when surrounded with burning coal.


The same heat that would serve to make an Iron Safe red hot in twenty minutes vrill not
bring the interior of Milners’ Box, of one foot inside measurement, (which dimensions are
necessary for the full advantage of the resistance and re-action of this principle,) to the
boiling point, 212°, which cools down rapidly the moment the fire subsides around.
Whereas the red-hot Iron Safe remains an immovable burning ‘prison for its dry contents,
consuming them for hours after the fire has left them. In short, the Milners’ Safe and the
Iron Safe, standing near each other in Messrs. Walkers’ fire, may be aptly compared to an
oven and boiler in vigorous operation; in which of the two would you deposit a bundle of
deeds, bank notes, or gunpowder, with a view’ of preserving them from being burnt?
Within each of these depositories a centinel engine may be supposed always attendant and
self-acting, ready not only to extinguish, but prevent fire, with its pipes charged and laid
into the most valuable property w’hich a public, professional, or mercantile office, or private
dwelling contains—property uninsurable, and yet often exceeding in value all that it
is deemed needful to insure the fire itself, in its first approaches, letting loose and
arousing, in concentrated operation within the box, its only efficient antagonist. T. M. &S.
have now’ briefly to allude to the insecure state of the monetary and documentary property
of the country, from the Custom house, Excise, and public offices, with their fireproof (?)
Iron Safes, strong rooms, with iron doors ! surrounded by piles of desks, cupboards, office
furniture, and floors, sufficient to make the Safes and doors red-hot ten times over—burning
them out with red hot safety ! the banks and extensive professional offices, consisting of
rooms, stories upon stories, whole piles of massive buildings, full of wooden chests,
drawers, secretaires, deed-boxes, and iron safes and closets, little better, — the whole
property in which an hour’s strong fire would sweep into destruction; and, lastly,to the
immense amount and value in commercial books and documents,without anymore efficient
protection than the worthless depositories which are still sold as “ fireproof,” without any
rational claim to the quality of resisting fire. It is as absurd so to denominate these gewgaw-
looking things, like gilt bird cages, —as if fire had any respect for these things,—as it
would be to nail the old horse shoe over the door, to keep out the fire witch; instead of
keeping her effectually out, by giving the water witch, the only fire-tamer!! scientific and
permanent possession.
Earnestly soliciting consideration of these remarks, T. M. & Son proceed to give the
following Testimonials:—
“ Liverpool, May 24tli, 1811. We, the undersigned, having this day witnessed the testing
of one of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, by its having been placed in a largetfire, con-
sisting of wood and upwards of six hundred weight of coals, for the space of two hours and
twenty minutes, do hereby express our conviction, that the Fire-resisting Boxes manufactured
by them are a perfect security in all cases of ordinary fire. The Box was filled with commer-
cial and other books, papers, parchments, and deeds, (one of which, of the 16th Henry Bth,
had five large thick seals appended to it,) and, within an inch of the cover, several Bank of
England notes ; and, previously to being closed, was submitted to the examination of J. S.
Leigh, Esq., R. Frodsham, Esq., L. Graham, Esq., and others present. The whole contents,
on the Box being taken out of the fire, and opened in our presence, were found to be in a
perfect state of preservation, the seals attached to the deed above-mentioned not being in the
slightest degree injured. This certificate is written on the deed of 16th Henry Bth above-
mentioned, which was submitted to the test.
“ Thomas Bolton, Mayor, L. Graham, William Scott,
J. 8. Leigh, Thomas Brancker, (Sir) S. Woods, Jun.”
R. Frodsham, Bar. Prescott.
“ Manchester, January 20th, 1842—We, the undersigned, have witnessed the testing of
one of Milners’ New Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, by its being exposed to the action of an
open fire of w’ood and seven hundred weight of coals, for the space of one hour and a half, do
hereby express our conviction, that their New Patent Boxes afford a perfect security in all
cases of ordinary fires. Ihe Box was filled with miscellaneous papers, an old ledger, and the
deed on which this certificate u'as written, with the seal attached. On opening the same, after
it had been taken out of the fire, its contents were found to be preserved, and even the seal
attached to the above deed was not in the slightest degree injured.
“ Holland Hoole, Borouglireeve of Salford, William Mawson, Solicitor, Princess-street,
Jeremiah Garnett, Guardian Office, John Bagshaw, Solicitor, Brown-street,
Thomas Ogden Lingard, Old Quay Office, William Slater, Solicitor, Princess-street.
J. W. Weston, Solicitor, Cross-street, Thomas Taylor, Solicitor, 38, Princess street.”
In the fire beside this Box, the contents of a Fire-proof Box of another make were
consumed.
“ Durham, 25th January, 1841. We, the undersigned, having this day witnessed the testing
of one of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, by its having been exposed to the action
of an open fire of wood and coals for the space of an hour, do hereby express our conviction


that the fire-resisting boxes, manufactured by them, are a perfect security in all cases of
ordinary fire. The parchment upon which this certificate is written, formed part of an inden-
ture, which was in the box during the whole time of its being exposed to the fire.
“ Thos. Chris. Maynard, Abraham Story, G. D. Shafto,
Henry Donkin, Henry Thomas Dunn, J. H. Forster,
John Burrell, Henry Taylor, John Henderson,
Robert Burrell, Ralph Dixon, James Brooksbank.”
George Wilkinson, John Shields,
“ Darlington, Feb. 22nd, 1841.—We, the undersigned, having this day witnessed the
testing of one of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, by its being exposed to the
action of an open fire of wood and coals for the space of one hour, do hereby express our
conviction that the Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, manufactured by them, afford very great
security in all cases of ordinary fire. The paper on which this certificate is written, was in
the box during the whole time of its being exposed to the fire.
“J. C. Backhouse, W. Myers, Solicitor, R. Pickersgill,
R. Wilson, Jun., Solicitor, Francis Furby, G. D. Lightfoot.”
“ Hull, July 9th, 1841. We, the undersigned, having witnessed the testing of one of
Milners’ Fire-resisting Boxes, the same being submitted to a great Heat from a Fire in the
Railway Bonding Yard, consisting of Wood, Coals, and Coke, for One Hour and Fifteen
Minutes, do hereby express our conviction, that they are a Security, in all cases of ordinary
Fife. The Box was filled with Books and Parchments, part of which was the piece on which
this Certificate is written.
“Geo. Locking, H. Hubbertsey, W. Tudor, Heddon Trigg, E. E. Thompson,
W. Field, W. Sharpe, J. G. Gainon, John Etherington, R. B. Calton.”
“ Nottingham, Sep. B th, 1841. We, the undersigned, havingthis day witnessed the testing
of one of Milners’ Patent Safety Fire-resisting Boxes, the same being submitted to a great heat
from a large fire of wood and coals, allowed by kind permission of Messrs. Bell and Cowen,
at their iron foundry, Beck Works, for one hour and twenty minutes, do hereby express our
conviction, that they are a perfect security in all cases of ordinary fire. The parchment on
which this certificate is written, with seal attached, was presented by John Buttery, Esq.,
Solicitor, and was in the box, with other papers and books, during the whole time of the
above test.”
“J- M. B. Pigot, Mayor, John Wells, Magistrate, Jno. Buttery, Solicitor,
Bev. S. Oliver, Stationer, Bell and Cowen, Beck Works, John Wild.”
“Leicester, October loth, 1841. We, the undersigned, having this day wituessed the
testing of two of Milners’ New Patented Safety Boxes, in the Cricket Ground of this place, do
hereby express our conviction, that they are a great security in all cases of ordinary fires.
The Boxes w-ere filled with Papers, Books, Parchments, Deeds, &c., and subjected to an
intense heat, from a strong fire of wood and five cwt. of coal, for one hour and fifteen minutes,
The parchment on which this is written, containing the seal, was in the box the whole time of
the test.
“Samuel Stephen Bankart, Newark, William Dunmore, Boster Branston Gate,
Joseph Goddard, John R. Evans, John Sarson, New Walk,
John Billings, Joseph Hames, William Barker.”
“ Leeds, March 30 th, 1842. We, the undersigned, having this day witnessed thetesting of
one of Milners’ newly Patented Fire-resisting Boxes, by its having been exposed to the action
of an open fire of wood and coals, of intense heat, for upwards of an hour, do hereby express
our conviction, that the fire-resisting boxes made by them are a perfect security in all cases of
ordinary fire.
“ W. Pawson, Mayor, Edw. Baines, John Beckwith,
A. & D. Webster, James Green, Robert Barr.”
“ Edinburgh, 20 th April, 1842. We, the undersigned, having this day witnessed the testing
of one of Milner and Sou’s Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, by its having been exposed to the
action of an open fire of wood and coals for upwards of an hour, do hereby express our con-
viction that the Fire-resisting Boxes manufactured by them are a perfect security in all cases
of ordinary fire. A considerable part of the Patent Box previous to being taken out was red
hot. A Box manufactured in Edinburgh, in imitation of Messrs. Milners’, was tested at the
same time, but not having arrived on the ground till the Patent Box had been nearly half an
hour in the fire, it consequently did not undergo so severe a test. Both Boxes were filled with
account-books, parchments, and miscellaneous papers; and, being taken out and opened in
our presence, the papers in Milners’ Patent Box were found to be in a complete state of pre-


servation, while those in the spurious imitation Box were nearly burnt to ashes. The parch-
ment upon which this testimonial is written formed part of the contents of the Box made by
Messrs. Milner and Son.
“ Edw. S. Lees, (Sir) Post-master General, B. F. Primrose, (The Hon.)
Robert Stevenson, Engineer, Gilbert L. Finlay, William Paul,
Arch. W. Goldie, Rd. Hunter, John Young.”
“ Glasgow, sth May, 1842. We, the undersigned, having this day witnessed the testing of
one of Messrs. Milner and Son’s Newly-Patented Fire-resisting Portable Safes, in the Yard of
Messrs. John M. Rowan and Co., Atlas-Foundry, do hereby express our satisfaction and appro-
bation of these Safes, as calculated to preserve Books, Papers, and other property, in all cases
of ordinary fire. The Box was filled with Books, Papers, Parchment, See., and though it was
exposed to the action of a coal and wood fire for an hour (thereby becoming red hot,) the
contents were taken out in a perfect state of preservation. The Parchment, on which this
Testimonial is written, formed part of the coutents of the Safe.
“ Jas. Campbell, (Sir) Lord Provost, Jno. M. Rowan, Thomas Edington,
James Laing, Geo. D. Clarke, John Watson.”
“ Gentlemen,-r A quantity of Deeds we had deposited in a common Tin Box at the Albion
Bank, about a month since w'ere entirely spoiled, by water having gained access to the strong
room ; whilst, at the same time, and in the same situation, there were two or three of your Fire-
resisting Boxes also in the water —the papersdn which were quite safe and dry.
“I am, Gentlemen, yours respectfully,
“James Wensley, Agent to Henshall & Co.,
“ Messrs Milner and Son.” “ Carriers, Liverpool.
Milner's Feuerfesle, Tragbare Sicherheitskisten.
“Hamburg den 29 th August, 1842. Die neuen feuerfesten Patent-Sicherheitskisten, von
den Thomas Milner and Son in Liverpool verfertight, wurden heute Nachmittag un 3 Uhr, am
Grasbrook hieselbst bffentlich einer Feuerprobe unterworfen. Wir, die Unterschriebenen,
wahrend der ganzen Zeit zugegen, driicken hierdurch unsre Genugthuung dariiber und unsere
Ueberzeugung a.us, dass die Kisten gegen zufallige und gewohnliche Feuersbriinste die
vollkommenste Sicherheit gewahren. ; — Es wurde ein von den Kisten mit Papier, Circulairen,
neuen gedruckten, sowie mit alten geschriebenen Biichern angefiillt, der Reprasentant der
obigen Firma, Herr D. Wenden, um dem Beweise noce mehr Kraft zu geben, legte auch seine
Uhr hinein, und wurde das Ganze, nachbem es von uns untersucht, von dem Herrs C.
Bleeker, Admiralitatstrasse Nr. 68, verschlossen. Das Feuer, welches aus iiber 7001 b
Steinkohlen und einer bedeutenden Menge Eichen, und anderm Holze bestand, wurde unter
Leitung des Herru Thompson, Oberaufsher der grossen Maschinen-Fabrik (Globe Iron Works)
au, dem Grasbrook angeschiirt und unterhalten; die Kiste wurde darein gestellt und blieb
anderthalb Stunden darin, und wahrend zum wenigsten der Halfte dieser Zeit war dieselbe in
einem weissgluhenden Zustande. Hinsichtlich der Uhr war das Interesse sehr rege; sie
wurde bei Wiedereroffnung der Kiste, nicht allein ganz unbesehadigt, sondern auch noch
gehend gefunden und zwar eben so rich tig, als ware sie in der Tache geblieben ; auch war der
ganze iibrige Inhalt der Kiste unversehrl, und hatte nur etwas von dem Dampfe gelitten
welcher dadurch erzeugt wurde, dass man als feruere Probe die Kiste weissglubend aus dem
Feuer herausgenommen und in’s Wasser geworfen hatte. Das Original dieses Attestes ist auf
einen 1 heil des der Probe unterworfen gewesenen Papiers geschrieben worden.
Gez. Robt. Willerton and Co. John Thompson, Engineer, Edwd. Marshall
Theodore Schulze, Richd. Oakley Couch, J. Peterson.”
G. Meeden, Thomas Sowerby, Engineer,
A Public Test of Milner § Son’s (of Liverpool) Patent Fire-resisting Safety Boxes, took
place on the Grassbroke, near the Elbe, this Afternoon :
“We, the undersigned, having heen present during the whole time of the above, feel
pleasure in expressing our conviction of their perfect security in all cases of casual and ordi-
nary fires. The Box was filled with papers, circulars, books, and old ledgers ; in addition to
which Mr. Wenden, the representative of the patentees, placed his watch inside; the whole
were examined by the gentlemen present, and were locked down by ‘Hernn H. C. Bleeker,
68, Admiralitatistrasse.’ The fire was composed of upwards of seven cwt. of coal, and a
considerable quantity of wood, oaken slabs, and other combustibles, solely under the superin-
tendence of Mr. Thompson, Manager of the Globe Foundry Iron Works. The Box was placed
in the fire, and there allowed to remain for one hour and a half, during the chief of which time
it was of a white heat. Much curiosity was excited respecting the watch; but on opening the
Box, it was perfectly safe, and going as true as when deposited—the whole contents were also
preserved ; including the document on which this certificate is written.”


Trial of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Principle, as a Protection of
Gunpowder from Fire.
Liverpool, 31s/ August, 1842. —We have this day witnessed the trial of one of Milners’
Patent Fire-resisting, Double-celled Gunpowder Magazines, of 15 inches external and 9 inches
internal diameter and height, filled with highly combustible materials, papers, and a packet of
gunpowder.
The magazine was placed on the ends of four upright bricks, in the centre of a hive-shaped
fire of wood and coal, of 6 feet base and 5 feet high, the fire being piled upon bricks, in which
four channels were left for admission of air to the centre,and care was taken to maintain a free
supply of oxygen throughout the experiment. The fire was lighted at the openings at four
o’clock, and burnt up fiercely iu 30 to 40 minutes, making a complete furnace around the
magazine, in which it remained until seven o’clock, when it was taken out and opened, and
the inner cell and its contents found to be unaffected by the severe ordeal, which had all been
borne by the outer oue of If inch thick.
The magazine was again placed in the fire of glowing coke, and allowed to remain two
hours and a half longer (in all hours,) when it was finally removed, and, notwithstanding
the outer case of the outer cell was red hot, the inner cell was still as fresh as when put in, and
its contents showed no further signs of the heat that had enveloped them than their being
pervaded with steam from the alkaline evaporating principle imbedded in the non-con-
ductor occupying the chamber of each cell, the distinguishing feature of this patent, viz.,
the employment of bad conducting media in combination with steam, which retard,
and absorb, and carry off insensibly the heat which would otherwise be destructive.
We beg to declare our confidence in the efficiency of Milners’ Fire-resisting principle as
applicable to the preservation of Books, Deeds, Gunpowder, and other Combustibles from Fire.
John Wilson Carter, Thomas Arstall, David Williams, M. D.
Thos. Edmund Weller, Joseph Scott, E. Tiernan, Chemist,
Chas. W. Williams, Richard Sandars, Robert Kane, M. D.
Patentee of economising smoke- ) n ((Professor oflNatural Philosophy and
preventing furnaces,) } Thomas A. G. Dolling. Chemistry, Dublin.)
“ City of Dublin Steam Packet Company’s Office, 24, Water-street,
Liverpool, September 1, 1842.
“C. W. Williams, Esq. Dear Sir, — I beg to report to you the particulars and result of
an experiment, performed yesterday, for testing one of Milners’ Fire-resisting Boxes, con-
taining gunpowder, which you deputed me to witness.
“ A circular foundation of bricks was laid down to make the fire upon, having four
channels for air draft, meeting in the centre, over which four bricks were placed on end, to
support the box, in order that the heat should have full play against its bottom, as well as
round its sides and top. Next, a variety of documents, and a paper containing an ounce of
gunpowder, were put into one of the boxes, which was fastened down in the usual manner,
and placed on the four bricks above mentioned. About half a ton of coals, wood, and
shavings were then piled up round about the box, so as to completely envelope it, and the
match was applied at the four openings. The fire, being aided by a fresh breeze, became, in
the course of half an hour, exceedingly fierce, and continued to increase in intensity until, at
about six o’clock, it exhibited one mass of glowing flame the great heat being perceivable
inside a neighbouring building. At seven o’clock the upper part of the fiery cone was
pushed off, and the box taken out, having been in the centre of the fire three hours. As soon
as possible it was opened, and the contents examined, when they were found to be precisely
in the same state as when put in— neither discoloured nor parched —and the gunpowder was
proved to be unchanged by igniting a small portion of it. The contents of the box were then
put back again, and it was replaced in the centre of the fire, and covered up as before, where
it remained until half-past nine, when the coal, having become converted into a mass of coke
and clinker, the crust was broken into, and the box taken out and examined again. The
outer case was perfectly red-hot; but, on opening it, the inner case presented, to the asto-
nished gaze of numerous spectators, as bright and, fresh an appearance as when first turned out
of the workman’s hands, and its contents were equally free from injury or change, (except so
far as being slightly damp,) while the temperature of the interior chamber was scarcely more
than 180 degrees!
“ The foregoing are the simple facts of this extraordinary experiment, as witnessed by me
throughout; and I cannot close this statement without observing, that so satisfied am I, from
what I saw, of the perfect safety of these boxes, that I should assist in extinguishing a powder
magazine on fire, in which they were exclusively used as depositories for the powder, with as
much freedom from fear as if it were an ordinary dwelling-house.
“ I remain, Sir, respectfully yours,
“T. E WELLER.
" Mr. Weller’s report to C. W. Williams, Esq., of the
trial in Liverpool of August 31, 1842.”


“ City of Dublin Steam Packet Company’s Office, 24, Water-street,
Liverpool, September 21, 1842.
“My Dear Sir, The bearer, Mr. Milner, is the Inventor and Patentee of the Fire-
resisting Boxes, and is about to visit Dublin iu the course of his business; and as introduction
to the influential portion of its inhabitants, he proposes to give a demonstration of the fire-
resisting qualities of his Boxes and Safes. I witnessed such a demonstration here, by his
placing one of his boxes in the centre of an immense mass of fire, and which box contained
not only Papers but even Gunpowder; after several hours in the heat of this great furnace the
box was taken out, and the Papers found to be all safe, and even the Gunpowder dry and as
perfect as ever. Should Mr. Milner give his proposed demonstration, the subject is well
worthy the patronage of the Dublin Society, and which they might extend to him by allowing
the demonstration to be carried on in their premises for a few hours, under the eye of such
gentlemen as would take an interest in watching so interesting an experiment. Mr. Milner
will explain the non-conducting power of the material which protects the interior of the box
from the intensity of the action of the fire. I have given Mr. Milner this note, under the cou-
viction of the subject being one of considerable importance.-—-I am, very faithfully yours,
“ Isaac Weld, Esq., Honorary Secretary to the “CHARLES W. WILLIAMS.
Royal Dublin Society, Leicester-street.”
“ City of Dublin Steam Packet Company’s Office, 24, Water street,
Liverpool, September 21, 1842.
“ My dear Doctor Kane, —The bearer, you will recollect, is the Patentee of the incombustible
boxes which we went to see iu the midst of the “ burning fiery furnace.” I think the Dublin
Society’s premises would present the most reputable anil worthy arena for him to exhibit his
Salamander.
“ Perhaps you would speak to the proper quarter on the subject, and give Mr. Milner a
letter to Mr. Weld as the proper introduction ; and your word to him, in confirmation of the
subject being worthy their patronage, might serve Mr. Milner, who is a stranger in Dublin.
“Yours truly, “CHARLES W. WILLIAMS.”
Letter from Sir Edward S. Lees, Postmaster-General for Scotland.
“ Edinburgh, V2th May, 1842. —My Dear Sir, I cannot place Mr. Milner, the talented
inventor of the Fire-resisting Safety Boxes, in better hands than yours. It is a wonderful
invention. Pray introduce him to the Bank Directors. “ Ever truly yours,
“William Farran, Esq. “EDWARD S. LEES.”
“ A trial of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Safes and Boxes having been announced by
cards, issued to 500 of the scientific and principal gentlemen of Dublin, which was adjourned
from the Royal Dublin Society’s premises on account of alterations in progress thereon, took
place at the Rotunda Gardens, October 7th, 1842. The fire, consisting of half a ton of coal
and fifty to sixty feet of wood and kindling, was lighted at one o’clock, with a Box and Powder
Safe, filled with papers, &c., in the centre. The whole were examined by the gentlemen
present, whose signatures on the certificate were placed inside.
“Sir John Kingston James kindly conducted the proceedings, and locked the Box. At
two o’clock, at Dr. Meyler’s suggestion, a large sugar hogshead, w'ith both ends knocked out,
was placed over the top of the fire, which quickly igniting, caused a very fierce draught, and
produced intense heat on the tops of the boxes, which were seen through the opening crevices
of the burning cask most severely exposed. A little before three o’clock, Dr. Meyler, with
whom the keys had been left by Sir John Kingston James, opened the box ; and its contents,
including several parchments with seals attached, were found to be perfectly safe. At half-
past four o’clock the Powder Safe was taken out and opened, and the inner cell, with its con-
tents, were still unaffected by the heat. It was again replaced in the fire of red coke, and
kept in until six p. m. ; when taken out, after five hours’trial, although the outer cell was red-
hot, the inner cell and contents, on being opened in the presence of Joshua Abel, Esq., If
Richardson, Esq. M.D., Messrs. Thomas and Gardiner Trouton, &c., were still as fresh and
perfect as when placed in the fire. We declare our satisfaction with the result of these
experiments, and our confidence in the perfect efficiency of this principle for the preservation
of all combustible materials in ordinary fires.
(Sir) John Kingston James, (Bart.) Caven- Isaac M. D’OHer, Governor of the Bank of
dish-row, Ireland,
William Farran, Abbey-street, P. Wilson, Registrar, Royal Dublin Society,
(Sir) Thomas M‘Kenny, Fitzwilliam-street, (Sir) Toler Osborne,
James Sheridan, Church-street, Richard Purdy,
Joshua Abel, 27, Eustace-street, C. H. Minchin, A.M.,
Robert Kane, M.D., Professor, Royal Dublin John D oyle,
Society, Robert Leech, M.D.,
Robert Hunt, Crampton Quay, John Louch, Architect,
Anthony Meyler, M.D., " Wm. M. Benson,
(Sir) Edward Stanley, George Davies.”
Thomas Grier,


“ Messrs. Thomas Milner & Son. “ Office, Commercial Buildings, October 24, 1842.
“At the late fire which consumed my warehouses, 1 regret to inform yon that my deeds,
papers, and account books, which were deposited in two Iron Safes, made by , of
Dublin, were completely reduced to ashes. The inconvenience aud loss occasioned tome is
very great. As I have now no faith whatever in Iron Fireproof Safes, (at least so styled,) I
am induced to purchase your Fire-resisting Boxes, which have been so strongly tested.
“ I am, gentlemen, your humble servant,
“RICHARD G. HICKS.
“ P. S. Please send me a Safe with Drawer and Box.”
“ Abbey-street., Dublin, IMh November, 1842.
“My dear Lord Mayor,— I wish to introduce my friend, Mr. Milner, to your Lordship’s
patronage. I was one of the many gentlemen, chiefly the most scientific in Dublin, who
witnessed the trial of his Fire-resisting Boxes, in a fire made with half a ton of coal and a cart-
load of chips, when they stood the test to the satisfaction and gratification of all I would not
be afraid to have one of his powder magazines, full of gunpowder, in my fire beside me all
day, so convinced am lof its perfect security. The government should oblige the vendors of
that dangerous article to have their retail stock kept in them. The papers give you an
accouut of a great escape from explosion in a house where it was kept; and last year twenty-
eight persons lost their lives in Limerick. Wishing you health to support your arduous
duties, believe me, my dear Lord Mayor,
“ Yours very sincerely, “WM. FARRAN,
“ Pelican Insurance, 76, Abbey-street, Dublin.
“The Right Hon. the Lord Mayor, (George Roe, Esq.,)”
“ Boston, April 21, 1843.
“Patent Fire-resisting Depositories. — A trial of Milners’ Fire-resisting Safes and Boxes
having been announced by circular to most of the scientific and principal gentlemen of
Boston, the same took place this day in the Buoy-yard, by permission of W. H. Adams, Esq.,
Mayor.
“The fire, consisting of a considerable quantity of coals, wood, shavings, sugar hogsheads,
and barrels, was lighted at twelve o’clock, with a box and circular safe placed in the centre.
The same having been examined by the gentlemen present, were locked down by Mr. T. Wise
Juu., banker, and at half-past one p. m. were taken out of the fire, when, on opening them,
the contents were found as perfect as when deposited. A packet of bills, with two seals
attached, placed in by Mr. Wise, were also uninjured. A common box, from the office of
Fred. Cooke, Esq., Solicitor, was tested with the above; and although favourably situated,
(not being placed like the others in the body of the flames,) burst soon after it had been
exposed to the heat>, leaving only the fragments in the ashes. The circular safe was replaced
in the fire, which was further tested by a considerably increased heat, under the superinten-
dence of an engineer, expressly engaged for that purpose, and was removed at three o’clock in
the afternoon, when its contents were again found uninjured, the same consisting of two
packets of gunpowder, a parchment deed, (kindly presented by Thomas Hopkins, Esq.,
Solicitor,) with a quantity of books and papers. The result of these experiments having
given the greatest satisfaction, we testify our confidence and conviction in the efficiency of
this principle, for the preservation of all combustible materials in ordinary fires. The docu-
ment which this is written on was in the box during the above test.
“ W. FI. Adams, Mayor, T. N. Morton, J. S. Tuxford, for Tuxford
F. Cooke, .Joseph Clarke, and Sons, Engineers,
S. IF. Jebb, Farndon Groom, H. R. Gibson,
Thomas Hopkins, B. Kenrick, Town Clerk, William Veall,
Cab. Pocklington, J. J. Maclean, M.D., J. Sturdy, Jun.,
John S. Bailey, Jun., Thomas Wise, Juu., John R. Bull.”
“ Sheffield, July 13//t, 1843.
“ At a large assembly of influential gentlemen, held here this day, to witness the trial of
Milners’ Fire-resisting principle,
“It was resolved unanimously, That this meeting, having witnessed the experiments
made by Mr. Milner of his Patent Safety Boxes and Gunpowder Magazine, have great plea-
sure in expressing their high approbation of the results, and their full confidence in the safety
of the same from fire.
“Moved by Thomas W. Rodgers, Esq., Solicitor, seconded by Dr. Harwood, and carried
unanimously. “WILLIAM BROADHURST, Master Cutler.’’
“ Grantham, 12 tli July, 1843.
“Mr. D. Wenden, representative of Messrs. Thomas Milner and Son, new Patent Fire-
resisting Box and Sate Manufacturers, of Liverpool, having announced by circular his inten-
tion of submitting some of these boxes to a public trial, we, the undersigned, beg to testify our
approval of the principle, and satisfaction of their security in all cases of ordinary fires.


“ At ten o’clock a. in. a fire was made in Mr. Green’s yard, adjoining the Duke of
Rutland’s premises, consisting of seven cwt. of coals, sugar hogsheads, a quantity of wood and
shavings, and a barrel without its ends, placed over the same, forming a chimney, and causing
a very strong draft. At this period a round safe, in which was placed papers, parchments, and
a small packet of gunpowder; also a deed box, nearly filled with books, papers, three
parchment deeds, a watch, and pamphlets, (upon which several gentlemen previously wrote
their names,) was placed in the fire, after being examined by the gentlemen present, and
locked down by R. H. Johnstone, Esq., Mayor. At ha]f-past twelve o’clock they were drawn
from their bed of heat and opened, when the contents of the circular safe were as perfect as
when put therein, the powder being quite cool and dry. The papers, &c. in the box were also
preserved, and the watch marking off the time as though it had not been deposited. The
circular on which this certificate is written formed part of the contents in the box during the
whole time of the above test.
“ £. L. Hough, (Ex-Mavor,) R. A. White, Solicitor, W. Walkington, Banker,
Thomas Winter, Solicitor, L. Wyse, Merchant, &c., Wm. Turner, M.D.,
Wm. G. Wagstaff, Solicitor, Joseph Kirke, Jos. J. W. Brown, M.D.,
Richard Eminson, Solicitor, Thomas Ekin, Druggist, Richd. Gamble, Druggist,
Jno. P. King, Solicitor, Thomas Wilkinson, (Manager Samuel Ridge,
John A. King, of Kewney & King’s Bank,) Hardy and Co., Bankers,
Jno. Manners, Solicitor, James Hall, (Cashier of Kew- John Fowler Burbridge, Wine
Frederick Malin, Solicitor, ney and King’s Bank,) Merchant.”
“Milners’ Fire-resisting Boxes. Avery interesting demonstration of the capabilities of
these boxes to resist heat took place in the city of Peterborough, at one o’clock on Tuesday
last, in a spacious yard belonging to Mr. William Crisp, of Cumber gate. Perhaps nothing at
the present time has so great a claim to public attention as this invention, warranting, as it
does, in the common occurrence of casual fires, to preserve their contents uninjured. Certain,
also, it is, that many opinions arising from the supposed impossibility of the thing will start in
opposition. In order, therefore, to remove such, and establish a confidence in the excellence
of this patent, Mr. Thomas Milner, one of the patentees, and Mr. D. Wenden, representative
of the firm, on their journey to Huntingdon, &c., waited for the purpose of publicly testing
one, from the stock of Mr. J. Sawyer, their agent at Peterborough. To witness the testing, a
very large body of gentry and respectable tradesmen assembled, amongst whom were F.
Skrimshire, Esq. M.D., John Broughton, Esq., F. J. Jenkins, Esq., J. G. Atkinson, Esq., E. H.
J. Compton, Esq., J. D. Simpson, Esq., W. D. Gaches, Esq., Mr. James Cattel, Mr. Aubrey
Franks, Oculist, &c., Mr. Thomas Ewart, &c., &c. A box was filled with papers and
books; a parchment deed, dated 1G57, with two very thick seals attached, belonging
to John Broughton, Esq., Solicitor; and a £5 Bank of England note, placed in by the
patentee, and a very curious gold watch by Mr. Wenden, all of which were closely examined
by the gentlemen above-named, and locked down by F. J. Jenkins, Flsq., Solicitor, who kept
possession of the keys during the whole period. At half-past one it was placed in a fire made
for the occasion, consisting of a large quantity of coals, wood, shavings, barrels, crates, &c.,
superintended by Mr. Battersby, the foreman of the gas works. At twenty minutes to three it
was removed and opened, when everything deposited was as perfect as when put in. The
watch was set by Mr. Jenkins prior to being locked up, and when taken out was still going,
not having varied scarcely a minute. Every person present was now satisfied that sufficient
had been shown fully to establish the principle; but on a request being made for a second
trial, to ascertain how much more heat it would stand, the box and contents W'ere given up to
the parties, who placed it on the top of the fire, which was then at as strong a heat as could
be made, every peison exerting himself to put the fire on the box. It was allowed thus to
continue, until a general opinion that all was destroyed began to circulate, when it was again
removed, and, to the surprise, astonishment, and gratification of all, everything remained still
uninjured, not even a discolouration, or the slightest scorch, being perceptible. The
gentlemen then signed the following testimonial: —
“We testify our conviction that Milners’ New Patent Fire-resisting Boxes are a perfect
security in all cases of ordinary fires, and that the principle upon which they are manufac-
tured is the best and most scientific ever brought before the public.
“ John Broughton, Solicitor, F. Skrimshire, M.D., F. J. Jenkins, Solicitor,
J. G. Atkinson, Solicitor, James Cattel, Solicitor, J. D. Simpson, M. H. Brewery,
E. H. J. Compton, W. Crisp, Junior, J. Wigginton, Grocer,
J. S. Clarke, Printer, W. Richardson, Yet. Surgeon, Aubrey Franks, Oculist,
J. F. Wilson, Watchmaker, W. D. Gaches, Solicitor, Thomas Ewart, Grocer,
P. H. Ellis, Grocer, R. Willmott, Draper, Thomas Cliadwell, Printer.”
John Hill, John Ellis, Builder,
“ They complimented both Mr. Milner and Mr. Wenden for bringing forward such a
useful invention, and for their gentlemanly and straightforward conduct during the whole
process of testing. Enough has now been said to show the value of these articles, which are


decidedly the best manufactured and the cheapest ever yet produced ; and the daily occur-
rence of the most calamitous fires, we doubt not, will determine every person who has books,
papers, deeds, or other valuables to protect, to their immediate adoption.” —The Boston,
Lincoln, Louth, and, Spalding Herald.
Liverpool, July Ist, 1844.
Thomas Milner & Son, having now had upwards of four years’ experience of working
their New Patent, have equal satisfaction and confidence in laying their views before the
public, in reference to the important subject of the preservation of documents from fire.
After having submitted their manufactures to the most searching private and public inves-
tigation, in which they have had the kind assistance bf scientific and practical men, in the
principal towns of the three kingdoms, they feel convinced that, within the various thick-
nesses of chambers, tested at the London and Birmingham Station in April last, (say from
one ana a quarter to six inches in thickness,) their depositories are equal to any degree of
risk, and offer perfect security to valuable but uninsurable property, in all classes of buildings.
The Proprietors recommend their Portable Deed Boxes, of not lesst nan one foot inside
measurement, such as tested from one to two hours in the various towns, for ordinary office
buildings, dwelling-houses, &e.; their Double-chambered Safes and Boxes for ware
houses (and large buildings) of ordinary risk; the same, with an additional inner chamber,
where the quantity of material or stock to burn is great, and the duration of fire likely to he
increased; whilst, to the nobility and gentry, for their mansions; to bankers, merchants,
and solicitors, where the risk may be still greater; they would recommend their Double
Bankers’ Safe, as far exceeding, in capability of resistance, any danger of degree or duration
of heat that might surround it in the conflagration of an extensive building. With one
thousand degrees (Fahrenheit) of heat enveloping this Safe for twenty-four hours, its
contents would not reach the temperature of boiling water.
The advantage of this principle over any other is, the superiority of the non-conductor
used, and the advantage that water or its vapour has, so shut up within the Box or Safe,
for use whenever wanted, over anything else in quenching or preventing fire. Iron, brick,
or stone Safes, however strong, will soon sympathise with the temperature of the surround-
ing fire; the barrier here used is that of nature herself, Water, or the vapour, under the
control of chemical non-conductors, wdiich cannot be made, excepting under artificial
pressure, hotter than boiling water; and in this medium papers will not burn.
Thirty years ago, the attention of the Proprietors of this Patent was drawn to the manu-
facture of Deed Boxes, which gradually became their sole business. At that time Tin
Boxes, with soldered seams, (falling in pieces when heated,) were generally used. The
Proprietors had furnished to the Sheffield Cotton Mill a number of Boxes of superior make,
so constructed that heat would not disunite them, and excluding the air. When that
building was burned, the contents of these Boxes were saved in bulk, whilst the common
boxes were destroyed with their contents. Subsequently an improvement was added to
this of an inner hollow chamber; and each of them were the best Boxes of their day.
But up to this period dry unevaporating materials were the only weapons of defence against
the destroyer, in the use of w'hieh a conquest of a few minutes of time was a triumph.
T. M. and Son claim the first and only use of the generation of steam within the depository,
which, developed slowly in successive enclosures, gave certainty of delay to the transit of
heat, which converted the minutes into hours and days; so that the period of resistance may
be now assured, to exceed that of the danger.
The present step is far in advance of anything extant; and, in return for the kindness of
their former patrons, the Patentees propose to add their new' principle to any of their old
Boxes, by putting in a new chamber, and their present new Patent Fire-resisting Principle;
charging the Boxes, w'hen completed, after their present scale, and allowing the full original
cost of the old Boxes therefrom. To others of their kind friends, Thomas Milner and Son
w’ould beg to suggest the appropriation of these Boxes for their less important papers.
The Patentees have pleasure in inviting attention to the following testimonials, since
their last publication:—
Extract from Bury Saint Edmunds’ Testimonial, November 16, 1843.
“ As a duty which is due to Messrs. T. Milner and Son, for their ingeniously constructed
Boxes and Safes, and from a desire to encourage the general adoption of a discovery of such
national importance,
“We, the undersigned, feel pleasure in subscribing our testimony to the fact of having
witnessed the miscellaneous contents of one of their Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, (consisting
of books, papers, deeds, a gold watch, &,c.,) after having been submitted to the fierce opera-
tion of a large fire (under the management of our townsman, Mr. Cornish, from the foundry),


for one hour and twenty minutes, perfectly safe; and also of expressing our satisfaction that
these Boxes are a perfect security in every circumstance of casual fires.
“ P. Macintyre, Mayor, R. Durrant, Jas. Bird,
Thos. M. Gibson, M.P. Thomas Whitaker, William Gross,
for Manchester, Geo. Thompson, Henry Everrad,
Francis G. Probart, M.D., Win. Dakin, Wm. Major,
J.P. Chas. Dalton, Samuel Bedels,
Johnson Gedge, Samuel Tymms, John Cornish,
John Green, Thos. Haslop, Charles Beard.”
Fi RE . _ Between three and four o’clock on Wednesday morning a fire broke out in a
warehouse in Lower Sparling-street, near the King’s Dock, occupied by Mr. Blackaller, a
ship-chandler. The buildingis one of considerable extent, and adjoins a number of other
large warehouses, which are filled with cotton. Mr. Hewitt proceeded at once to the spot,
with fourteen engines, seven water-carts, and a couple of tanks, and found, on his arrival,
that the three lower stories, which were filled with canvas, ropes, sails, oil, tar, and a
variety of other combustible materials, were completely on fire. The flames were bursting
forth in all directions at the time, and it was apprehended that the entire building would
fall a prey to the fury of the devouring element. We understand that Mr. Hewitt's exer-
tions on this occasion were above all praise. He manfully rushed into the thickest volumes
of the smoke in the rear of the premises; and it is in a great measure owing to the intre-
pidity of his conduct, as w r ell as the soundness of his judgment, that the flames were pre-
vented from extending to the adjoining warehouses. Mr. Whitty, Mr. Maxwell, and several
of the constabulary, were upon the ground at an early hour, and, as usual, rendered efficient
service—so also did the fire brigade. Curtailed from the Liverpool Mail of Jan. 20, 1844.
“ Messrs. Thomas Milner & Son. “ Liverpool , January 24,1844.
“ Gentlemen, — Having bad my principal books preserved from fire by being in one of your
Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, (bought from one of your agents,) that was in the fire in
my warehouse in Sparling-street, 17th January, 1844, 1 have much pleasure in communicating
the circumstance to you. Some other books, &c., which were not in your box, were entirely
destroyed. I wish to have a box of larger size; please send me one or two to select from.
“ I am, gentlemen, your obedient servant,
“ J. B. BLACKAT.LER,
“ Ship Chandler and Sail Maker,
“ 10, Lower Sparling-street.”
“ Essex Demonstration.— Chelmsford, February 28, 1844.
“ We, the undersigned, having witnessed a public demonstration of Messrs. T. Milner and
Son’s Fire-resisting Principle, by a box being placed in a fierce fire for a considerable time,
feel pleasure in expressing our conviction that these Safes and Boxes are an excellent security
in all cases of casual fires.
“J. C. Badely, M.D., Cantab. Thos. G. Bilton, Grocer, Thos. Spencer, Silversmith,
Thos. Chalk, Esq. H. Rayner, Woollen Draper, Geo. Sarel, Innkeeper,
W. M. Tuffnell, Banker, Rich. Buttle, Grocer, Jas. Gladwin,
Wm. Baker, Chemist, Henry Gladwin, John K. Leake, Esq.
J. T. Gilston, Surgeon, Jarvis Pettit, Geo. Phillips, Corn Factor,
S. Baker,Veterinary Surgeon, C. Robins, Civil Engineer, Jas. Heald,
Thos. H. Burrell, Banker, Thos.Phillips,Confectioner, J. P. Sarel,
W. H. Phillips, Innkeeper, W. Colls, Esq. Robt. Bull, Cabinet Maker,
G. A. Gepp, Surgeon, Geo. Wakeling, Auctioneer, Aug. Stokes, Innkeeper,
G. Meggy, Chronicle Office, Jas. Blythe, Grocer, Charles Stimson, Draper,
G. Haycock,Wine Merchant, Jas. Wade, Edwd. King.”
Wm. Straight, Grocer, John Wenden, Butcher,
47a, Moorgate-street, London, April 8, 1844.
Thomas Milner & Son, in respectfully claiming the attention of the metropolitan com-
munity to their Patent Fire-resisting Principle, would beg to observe, that having had
letters of introduction from influential parties in Liverpool, acquainted with the value of
their invention, to the Right Hon. Lord Viscount Sandon and Lieutenant-General Sir
Howard Douglas, members for Liverpool, to leading bankers, and heads of commercial
establishments, and from gentlemen at the head of scientific bodies in Liverpool to others
connected with similar institutions in London, amongst others to Directors and the Secre-
tary of the London and Birmingham Railway,— a public trial of their manufactures has
been made at the Camden Station of the company, of which the Patentees have been
favoured with the following detailed report and testimonial.
The peculiar feature of this principle is the combined use of the least conduction of
heat, with evaporation at 212 degrees, in keeping down the temperature and preventing
ignition; and it may be regulated from their ordinary Deed Box of inch thickness


(considered equal to the fire of any common dwelling house or office) by increasing the
chambers and thickness, so as to meet any contingency that could arise, even to keeping the
Crown Jewels safe in the hottest part of the Tower during the late conflagration.
(Copy) “ London and Birmingham Railway Office, Euston Station,
“ B th April, 1844.
“ Sirs, — lam instructed to send the enclosed report of the results of the public experi-
ment on your Fireproof Boxes and Safes at the Camden Station of this company, which was
authorised by the directors to be made, under the immediate superintendence of their own
officers, and to congratulate you on the complete success of the very severe trials by which
you have allowed your admirable invention to be tested.
“ I am, Sirs, your obedient servant,
“ To Messrs- Thomas Milner & Son. “ R. CREED, Secretary.”
(Copy) “ London and Birmingham Railway, Camden Station,
April 8, 1844.
“ Mr. Bruyeres having requested me to superintend in person the trial of Messrs. Milners’
Boxes and Safes at this station, on Thursday last, I beg to report as follows:
“ Early in the morning, about one ton of coals, and the same quantity of wood, were piled
upon a foundation of brick. Within the fire was placed a Safe of Double 2j inch chambers,
containing books and papers. Ihe pile was lighted at half-past eight, and quickly burnt up ;
at the same time a placard, describing the case as representing Milners’ Double-chambered
Banker’s Safe, was fixed in the ground.
“At nine o’clock a similar Safe was placed in a similar fire, several gentlemen having
previously placed inside books, on which they had written their names, and Mr. Milner a £lO
note. A placard was again hoisted, Milners’ Double-chambered Safe, each chamber inch.
This fire also speedily burnt up to a great heat.
“ A Deed Box was placed in another fire at eleven a. m., which had also been filled in
presence of a number of gentlemen. A brisk wind having blown steadily all day, the fires
had from the commencement soon burned into an active heat, and this was especially intensely
hot. A placard was again fixed near the fire, Milners’ Portable Deed Box, inch thick.
“By this time the number of persons assembled having considerably increased, the cases
were shortly after one o’clock removed and examined.
“ First, the Banker’s Safe, although taken out of a bed of red heat, the inner chamber and
contents were, after five hours’ trial, quite cool and perfect as when put in. Next, the Double
If.inch Chambered Safe was taken out and opened ; its contents were found perfect, like
those of the first. The papers, including the £lO note, were only slightly warmed.
“ The Portable Deed Box was then examined ; when taken from the fire, parts of it were
at a white heat on the outside, but the books and papers were all thoroughly steamed and
preserved j some were slightly discoloured at the edges, near the cover, by the non-conductor,
but all in a very good and sound state.
“ The Banker’s Safe was again placed in a strong fire, and, with two short intervals of a few
minutes for examination, kept there till eight p. m., when it was finally removed, quite red-hot
outside, but the inner chamber and contents perfectly fresh and unaltered. The severity of
the test here stated may be considered as far exceeding that of any ordinary fire; and the
perfect state in which the papers were found, after a trial of so many hours, should satisfy the
most sceptical of the protective properties of the invention under the most trying circum-
stances. (Signed) “H. WYATT.
“ R. Creed.”
(Copy) “ London and Birmingham Railway Station,
“ Camden Town, April 4, 1844.
“ Being present this day at a public trial of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Principle, tested
in various thicknesses, from to 5 inches, under the notice and inspection of Mr. Wyatt and
other gentlemen connected with the railway, we beg to signify our approval of the principle
and to recommend the invention to the confidence of the public.
“ Howard Douglas, Lieut. Gen.(Sir,) M. P.
Henry Wyatt, Camden Station.
Henry Dircks, Agent to Charles Wye
Williams, Esq., 77, King William-
street, City.
Thomas Long, Euston Station.
W. L. Birkbeck, Stone Buildings, Lin-
coln’s Inn.
Henry P. Bruyeres, Superintendent of
the London & Birmingham Railway.
Thomas Cunningham, Colonel Royal
Engineers.
Robert Savill, Euston Station.
Wm. Thomas, 5, Acton Place, Camden
Town.
Evan Jones, Camden Station, Agent
to Chaplin and Horne.
John Harden, Camden Station.
Sidney Braithwaite, Bath Place.
W. Crutchley, Oval Road.
John Jones, Do.
Henry Kelly, Davies-st., Berkeley Sqr.
John Faithful], Hampstead Road.
John Faithfull, Bpuverie Street.
George Savory, Grove Terrace, I.isson
Grove.


Thomas Robert Rackstrow, B,Hamilton-
place, New-road.
S. W. Brooks, Euston Station.
Ebenezer Fernie, Resident Director of
the British Commercial Life Insu-
rance Company, Cornhill, J. P.
Jas. S. Faitbfull, Claycross Coal Wharf,
Camden Town.
C. West, Camden Station.
D. N. Bailey, Do., Agent for Pickford
and Co.
H. J. Gardner, Do., Do.”
(Copy) “ London and Birmingham Railway, Camden Station, April 4, 1844.
“ This document was placed within one of Messrs. Thomas Milner and Son’s New Patent
Fire-resisting Deed Boxes, with our signatures written thereon, prior to being tested as
described in the above report
“ Howard Douglas, (Lieut.-Genl. Sir,) M.P.
J. L. Prevott, 24 a, Cateaton-street.
Thos. Robert Rackstrow, 8, Hamilton-
place, New-road.
J. B. Boothby.
John Bellamy, 7, Woburn-square.
Henry Wyatt, Manager of Goods’ Traf-
fic, Camden Station.
Henry Dircks, Agent to Charles Wye
Williams, Esq., 77, King William-
street, City.
William Crutchley, Oval-road. ”
“London and Birmingham Railway, Camden Station, April 8, 1844.
“ I hereby certify that the above document was taken out of Milners’ Fire-resisting Port-
able Deed Box by me, quite perfect, after having been subjected to the test as stated in my
report. “ HENRY WYATT,
“ Manager of Goods’ Traffic, Camden Station.”
(Copy) “Sup. Registrar's Office, Liverpool, June 17, 1844.
“Sir, — Messrs. Milner & Son have requested me, in consequence of an application from
you to them for a tender for their Fire-proof Boxes, to say that I have now in use twenty of
their Boxes, and one Safe, capable of holding the marriage notice book, and that I strongly
recommend such Boxes and Safes for the keeping of the register books of births, deaths, and
marriages. “ I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
(Signed) “JAMES ECKERSLEY.
“ To James Falconer, Esq., Solicitor, Clerk of the Doncaster Union.”
Thomas Milner & Son have the pleasure to find, from numerous applications received
from the various Unions, that the Registrar-General has done them the honour to recom-
mend the adoption of their Boxes and Safes for the registers, books, &c., &c.
From the “ Transactions of the Liverpool Polytechnic Society for 1843”—published by Lace
and Addison, Standard Office. Tuesday, January 10th, 1843. Mr. S. Woods, Jun.,
read a paper, “ On the Means of Preserving Documents from Fire'’ *
I have undertaken to bring before your notice a subject of the deepest interest to every com-
munity of people, for I believe that in almost every part of the civilized world, the records of a
nation, the laws by which it is governed, and the titles to property held by its corporate or indi-
vidual members, have been handed down, nearly from time immemorial, by documentary evi-
dence. But confining ourselves to the vast amount of property represented upon parchment, and
upon paper, in this small island alone; when we look upon the Title Deeds and Mortgage
Bonds, which secure to their owners and their mortgagees, or their successors, the landed estates
of the realm; upon the flimsy representatives of the whole of our National Debt, and of the
stock and property of our National and Commercial Institutions, and of the loans granted to
Foreign States, and of our monetary obligations as a trading community; we do but glance,
after all, at the importance of securing means for the preservation of our documents from
fire. And when we call to mind that the record of our monetary transactions is often wholly
committed to so fragile and perishable a material, that the destruction of a single paper might
involve the loss of thousands of pounds; and, also, that the accounts of our daily business are
committed to books, the destruction of which would involve our affairs in irretrievable confusion,
we are more than ever convinced of the absolute necessity of providing some safe depository, in
which we may treasure up such invaluable registers.
After several remarks on the means adopted to avoid such evils, the improvements being
not at all commensurate with the importance of the subject, and stating various instances shewing
the great and irreparable loss sustained from fire, it was added that the ravages of fire have
proved the absence of security in the brick and iron safes generally used, and “ the result of an
experiment hereafter given‘will strengthen the conviction.” Moreover, from information
obtained from the localities of great fires' it appeared the most elaborately and expensively con-
structed safes and strong rooms have failed. “ Enough has now been said to shew that we must
look beyond Masonry Chambers and Iron Safes for means of procuring a secure depository.”
After making general inquiry, and applying to all the makers he could hear of for particulars of
their manufactures, Mr. Woods proceeded to notice, according to their dates, the only three
* This paper was of very considerable length, and involved a number of certificates signed by individuals
who witnessed the experiments; it was published in a separate form, with these certificates at length, and the
following account of it will consist of several extracts from the publication, with a brief connecting narrative, or
abstract of observations.


inventions possessing any claim to merit, as non-conducting depositories, and commenced with
“ Marr’s Patent Fire-proof Boxes.” In his specification the Patentee says, “he had adopted the
idea of filling the space between the outer and inner cases with Asbestos, which constitutes the
whole of the invention, and has been found to answer the purpose,” two instances being giveu in
which the Boxes had been exposed to fire in London without their contents having been
destroyed. The next invention is that of Mr. Chubb, in 1825, which is said to consist in
“ lining the box: with several thicknesses of case-hardened iron or steel plate, and filling up the
spaces between with a bad conductor of heat.” Respecting this, Mr. Woods observed, “ that he
had not been able to meet with any account of Mr. Chubb’s Boxes having been put to any very
severe ordeal.” And the next invention which has obtained notoriety is that of Messrs. Thomas
Milner and Son, of this town, who, after various improvements, secured themselves by a patent,
in 1840.
In their prospectus they thus describe the merits and nature of their plan— Milners’ Patent
Fire-resisting Principle is applied, in their Boxes and Safes, between plate-iron cases, calculated
to conduct or retain as litle heat as possible..
These chambers are filled with an alkalised vegetable non-conductor, possessing extraor-
dinary powers of resistance to the transmission of heat, combined with an arrangement for the
vaporization of steam into the interior, so soon as the Box or Safe attains the temperature of 212°
(boiling heat.)
From each inch of fluid is slowly evolved near two thousand times its own volume of steam
and vapour, which passes into and is successively condensed in the contents of the box, rendering
them damp and humid, as a newspaper from the press. By this means 1040 degrees of heat is
neutralised, and rendered latent and harmless, (one-half of which temperature would char the
contents of the best Safe or Box that could be put together of dry anhydrous materials,) whilst the
papers are made difficult of ignition the whole process and principle being throughout conducive,
in the most extraordinary manner, to their preservation. For a much longer period than that
during which a box would be in direct contact with fire, in the successive conflagration of the
parts of an ordinary building, no greater heat than 212 degrees will pass through this medium
into the box, a temperature perfectly harmless to books, papers, parchments, or even bank notes.
The cause of the exhaustion of the moisture being so protracted is, its being sheathed and pro-
tected from rapid vaporisation in the absorbent non-conductor.
In long-continued heat the non-conductor discharges its pyroligneous acid, which, combining
with the alkali, forms a carbonaceous crust or pyrolignate of potass the worst conductor of
heat known; and from within this shelter the papers or books slowly give out again the large
volume of steam that has been passed into and condensed in them, re-acting most favourably, in
keeping down their own temperature, that of the box, and the surrounding fire.
To the best arrangement of non-conductors, which thirty years’ practical experiments have
suggested to the Patentees, they have superadded the mitigating power of evaporation *—the
principle of the tea-kettle on the fire red-heat outside, boiling water at 212 degrees inside, one-
fourth of the outer temperature; the principle whereby the loaf, by its self-contained moisture, is
kept soaking but uncharred in the oven. The same principle was exhibited by Mr. C. W. Wil-
liams to the Polytechnic Society, although with a different object when he boiled water over
an argand gas burner, in a pan with a pasteboard bottom!
The experimental trials detailed in the prospectus of this firm are so numerous, that it would
be tedious to go through them all. The boxes and safes were placed in open coal fires, and kept
there, without injury to the contents, for periods varying from one to five hours, with the outer
case red-hot.
Certificates of public tests of Milners’ Boxes are given from the authorities of Liverpool,
Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dublin, and the principal towns in England,
Ireland, and Scotland, the Royal Dublin Society, &c., &c.+
Attempts have from time to time been made to render the property of alkaline fluids to resist
heat, available for the protection of the person or property from fire.
In 1838, M. de Breza, a Frenchman, took out a patent for a chemical combination, to render
cloth, wood, paper, &c., indestructible bv fire. And in 1841, from Professor Renwick’s “ Trans-
lation of M. Dumas’ Treatise upon Chemistry as applied to the Arts,” we have described a
soluble, glass, (as he calls it,) which is a simple silicate of potassa or soda, that unites perfect
solubility in boiling water to some of the general properties of common glass. In the liquid
state it may be applied to cloth or wood, for the purpose of rendering them incombustible.
Although of itself a good preservative from fire, it fulfils the object better when it is mixed with
another combustible body in powder; they coagulate, and form, by the action of the fire, a
strongly adhesive crust. And this, you will see, is the principle which the Messrs. Milner have
introduced into their plan.
It is obvious that the most effective scheme is that which, while it provides sufficient external
strength to resist the ordinary falls and blows involved in the falling ruins of a building, affords
at the same time the best non-conductor of heat; for the less metal that there is, the more free
will the non-conducting interstratum be to resist the heat applied. On the other hand, the
casualties of a fire are such, that a chest may receive a heavy fall, or blow, from some falling
* The Patentees claim in their specification, “the exclusive use of any matter,or thing,evolving moisture
on the application of heat. ”—See page 23.
+ The Patentees since refer to— Mr. Jones’s fire in Lonfion-roarl, Liverpool,and Mr. Blackaller’s, Sparling
street, Liverpool, Mr. Fisher's, Black friars, Manchester, Messrs. Walker’s, Birkenhead, Messrs. Garniss’s, Park-
lane, Liverpool, Mr. Oakden’s, Portland-street, Manchester, Messrs. Plimsaul’s, Plymouth, Messrs. Brown's,
Glasgow, &c., See., in which theii boxes saved the books.


beam or masonry, so as to render it expedient to give some extra strength to the outer case at the
expense of the fire-preserving quality.
We next turn to those substances which are the worst conductors of heat. Spongy organic
substances, such as silk, wool, cotton, fur, hair, &c., rank among the lowest. Charcoal and saw-
dust rank also very low, and the harder woods lower than those of a softer kind. Asbestos is
known to be very indestructible by fire; and glass, as well as mineral and earthy substances, are
strong resistants. But to an immense extent beyond all these, or any solid bodies, water, or the
vapour of water, which cannot be heated under the pressure of the atmosphere above 212 degrees,
has the power of maintaining in itself, and whatever it pervades or surrounds, a low, harmless
temperature, even in contact with red heat.
The best combination of these qualifications, which is free from the danger of any destructive
chemical action upon the ink or paper, will doubtless give us the most complete protection I
may add that two other most important objects to attain are lightness, for ease of removal; and
cost , so as to bring them within the range of adoption.
I applied, more than once, both to Messrs. Chubb and to Mr. Marr, for any explanations as
to their plans, or the results of their experience, which they might think proper to give me, but
was not favoured by any reply to these communications; while a similar application to Mr.
Milner secured me every explanation and assistance 1 desired. Upon inquiry, in other channels,
into the respective merits and construction of these plans, I received so many conflicting state-
ments, that I felt convinced a comparative trial, fairly conducted, would be the only means of
arriving at any satisfactory results. I therefore requested a friend of mine in London to procure
for me one of Chubb’s best Fire-proof Boxes, to be made of exactly one foot square inside, (a
cubic foot of contents,) and not to exceed one foot five inches outside measure. And also one of
Marr’s, Bread-street, of precisely the same dimensions, such as they consider the best within
these dimensions. And I ordered one from Mr. Milner in the same terms, communicating to
none of them my intention as to their disposal. But it is only fair to add, that Mr. Milner
became acquainted with my design, and that any advantage which may attach to that circum-
stance in the comparative results of the trial, must be deducted from his success, in favour of the
manufactures of Messrs. Chubb and Marr. At the same time, Mr. Milner has assured me that
he is willing at any time to put his manufactures to any further fair comparative test which his
competitors may agree to.
You will observe that I gave each precisely the same dimensions, which confined them to a
surrounding thickness of inches, including that of the iron casings. The weight and cost
were as follows:
Chubb. Marb. Milner.
Cwt. qrs. lbs. Cwt. qrs. lbs. Cwt. qrs. lbs.
2 1 1 1 1 24 0 3 26
C05t....£11 11s. C05t....£7 10s. Cost.. ..£3 10s.
I sent a special invitation to each of the manufacturers named to attend the trial, or appoint
some party to do so on their behalf, to Messrs. Chubb and Marr, verbally to Mr. Milner; and to
which I received an acknowledgment from Mr. Chubb, Jun., Mr. Marr, and Mr. Milner.
Mr. Milner applied to me to allow a trial to be made at the same time of two of his Cylin-
drical Safes, the one being a Treble-chambered one, the innermost case
in. diam. in. deep.
12 by 12 inside, with a chamber of 1 inch,
the second 14 by 14§ „ „ 2 inches,
the outer 18 by 19 „ „ 3 inches.
The other a Double-chambered Gunpowder Magazine, of the same construction, but smaller,
viz., — the inner case, inside .... 9 in. by 9in chamber 1| in.
the outer case, inside 12 in. by 12 in chamber 1§ in.
The chambers of each being filled with the fire-resisting materials.
I had also constructed a nine-inch thick brick chamber, the inside being two feet long by one
foot broad, and one foot deep, supported by brick bearers one foot high, the mouth covered by a
closely fitting cast iron plate three quarters of an inch thick. The object of this experiment was
to determine the degree of security of the brick closets with iron doors, so generally used. When
opened, the contents were all on fire, although the trial had not been at all severe. .
(Referring to Drawing.)
Mr. Woods then described the trial of the boxes, in a large fire made for the purpose, to which
he had invited, by circular, from 500 to 600 of the principal scientific and practical men of Liver-
pool, including chemists, ironfounders, and others, practically acquainted with the subject, who
attended in large numbers, many remaining, and assisting in, the proceedings, and by whom the
certificates at the different stages were signed. The Mayor also very obligingly honoured the
experiments with his presence.
Marr’s box, Chubbs’ box, and Milners’ Powder Safes, were examined. On the first trial, the
fire had not made so much progress as to affect the contents of any of them materially. After
the second trial, the papers in Marr’s box were partially singed, but it was considered not to have
been so severely tried as the other boxes. In Chubbs’ box, when opened, the mass of papers
was reduced in bulk considerably, and they were in a state of ignition, and portions of them
completely destroyed.
The paper (certificate) placed in the centre of Chubbs’ box could not be found.
Milners’ box, “ when taken out of the fire, the outer case was red-hot; yet, when opened, the
papers were all perfect, and not in the least damaged by fire.” Milners’ Powder Safe was found
in the same condition.


Regarding the two latter, it was remarked during these stages, “ It was now, I believe, the
conviction of all present, that Milners’ two boxes were in the hottest part of the fire, and that the
test upon them was much more severe than upon Marr’s or Chubbs’.”
It was unanimously agreed that it would be useless to put Chubbs’ box to any further trial;
therefore, at half-past nine, the three others, Marr’s box, Milners’ box, and Milners’ small
Powder Safe, were for a third, time put into the fire, which continued to he one mass of red-hot
coal. At his own desire, Milners’ box was again put into the place it last occupied, viz., to
windward; and all were now subjected to a red heat, and were considered to be put to the most
severe test of the day. Marr’s had been thrown into the position it first held, and again escaped
the greater heat; but it was taken out red-hot all round the bottom. Milners’boxes, but espe-
cially the Powder Safe, had borne a red-hot heat nearly the whole of this hour and a half. Tes-
timonials of the results were again signed, the boxes having bean withdrawn at eleven o'clock,
and allowed some time to cool, the result of the trial being, that the papers in Milners’ boxes
were uninjured, or only discoloured, while in Marr’s box there were many considerably damaged,
and some entirely destroyed.
Marr’s box, Milners’ box, and Milners’ Powder Safe, were submitted to a third trial, and the
following are the final certificates regarding them: —
“ Milners' Double Celled Round Safe. This box was withdrawn at eleven o’clock p. m. from
the fire, which had consisted of one mass of red heat for the hour and a half during which it
again remained therein. On opening it, this paper, and all the Others contained in it, were
entirely uninjured, not displaying the slightest appearance of being charred or destroyed in any
part.— Liverpool, sth January, 1843.
“ J King. Jun. James Collins, M.D., Thos. Arstall.”
H. Mackay, Geo. Hill,
“ Liverpool, sth January, 1843.
“ This paper was taken out of Milners’ Fire-resisting Box at eleven p. m., having been put
again into the hottest part of the fire. The papers near the top (which were undermost in the
fire,) being slightly charred,* but not at all ignited. In opening this box, after the first trial, two
holes had been cut with a chisel into the chamber; and it is the opinion of the undersigned that,
had there not been this flaw, the papers would have remained quite sound. A great deal of
moisture was apparent throughout the papers, which were hot and steaming when taken out.
No part of any of the papers appeared to be illegible.
“James Collins, M.D., Thos. Arstall, H Mackay, J King, Jun., George Hill.”
I have omitted to say that flames from the non-conductor burst with some violence through
the chisel links, on taking this box from the fire, and that scarcely any hopes were entertained by
the parties present that the contents were saved.
“ Liverpool, sth January, 1843.
“ This paper was taken from Marr’s box, withdrawn from the fire at eleven p. m., in a red-
hot state at two corners of the bottom of the box. The papers throughout were in a heated and
very dry state, and many of them considerably charred, but none ignited. Those near the
bottom were the most damaged, the edges of many of the papers being reduced to tinder, whilst
some of the papers were partially and some entirely destroyed.
“ James Collins, M.D., Thos. Arstall, H. Mackay, J. King, Jun., George Hill.”
It is very difficult to compare the probable results of a fire with any system of trial such as
we have witnessed; but I think we may safely consider the severity of the test now given will
far exceed that of a casual fire, though there may be instances forming exceptions to this
opinion. It has proved, I think, all these inventions to possess some merit, and that they may,
to a certain extent, be protectively adopted —to a considerable extent as regards Marr’s and
Milners’— : but especially the latter and that the merits are in the inverse ratio to the cost. If
a well-bricked chamber be lined with a non-conducting stratum, on Milners’ principle, and we
place our documents within his portable boxes, and deposit these boxes in such a safe, I am
satisfied that we should obtain a perfect security against their destruction by fire. The risk of
the falling of the building would be the greatest in this case; but the boxes would fall with it,
and probably be buried among the ruins, when the heat would not exceed the capability of the
non-conducting principle to resist it. On the same assumption we may expect that, even if kept
in ordinary rooms, these boxes may afford, in the majority of cases, a safe in its literal meaning.
Further trials were made on Milners’boxes at his own request, with the most satisfactory
results. A treble-chambered box was exposed altogether for more than twelve hours, having
been inspected twice during that time, but even at the conclusion its contents were found
uninjured. Further trials were made on Milners’ boxes at the Gas Works, of the effect of a
strong heat suddenly applied for a short space of time, with results equally satisfactory.
_ Although not strictly within the subject of the present inquiry, a comment may be here per-
mitted on the very great advantage which such a magazine or safe presents as a receptacle for
gunpowder. The operation of the principle adopted destroys its explosive power, and is sure and
simple. The steam preceding the inroads of the fire, saturates the powder so completely as to
render it into a moist mass, which, on the fire reaching it, will quietly fuse away. And thus, if
used either in gunpowder stores, in ships, or by retailers, many of those awful catastrophes would
be avoided, in which the loss of life or property is but too frequently recorded. The inventors
inform me it is their intention to bring this subject under the notice of the Government, and to
institute a course of experiments, to elucidate the merits of their invention for such a purpose,
preparatory to taking that step.
* Upon a more minute examination, it was found that the papers here alluded to were not at all damaged
in the fabric by charring, but were so much stained or discoloured as to have given that impression.


The competition boxes were examined by four gentlemen, members of the Society, viz., —
Mr. A. King, Mr. Cunningham. Mr. C. J. Smith, and Mr. Edward Woods, and reports made
upon them. The following are Mr. Woods’ remarks upon these reports :
On Milne its’. There is a simplicity and ingenuity of arrangement, and of its self-acting
principle, in this plan, which bespeaks its own efficiency. The light weight of metal, the use of
vegetable powder, a good non-conductor of itself—the delay of its being converted into charcoal
by its absorption of the fluid the evaporating principle, ready, for any length of time, to act
when the occasion is required charcoal, a good non-conductor also of itself—the generation of
steam, absorbing, as it were, upwards of 1000 degrees of heat; and the damping of the papers,
thereby keeping them at a low temperature, and lessening the danger of ignition the neutra-
lizing of the pyroligneous acid from the vegetable material by the alkali— all combine together
in its favour, It was generally remarked by practical persons, that this box would resist consi-
derable violence, especially blows of percussion, without injury, from the chambers being closely
filled with a dense but yielding and elastic substance.*
On Chubbs’ —Here you will notice a great mass of metal, and a want of combination in the
non-conducting medium, which cannot fail to carry the external heat into the cavity containing
the articles to be preserved. The workmanship of this box, and its putting together, are of a
very superior kind, and its strength is such as to be likely to bear any blow it could receive. The
non-conducting substance is questionable; it does not fqse upon the application of the blowpipe.
On Marr’s. This is also a well-made box. The weight of metal is not so great as Chubbs’,
and the continuity of the non-conducting substance is well kept up around the inner box. I
apprehend that the clay has been put in wet,+ which, indeed, can only account for the damping
of the papers, and that the granular appearance has been caused by the action of the steam in
the confined chamber, generated from the moisture. An objection to this plan is, that, in course
of time, the clay would dry up, shrink, and so lose one of its elements of preservation, and offer
no more resistance than an imperfect brick coating of the same thickness. A trace of asbestos
was afterwards discovered in the clay, which probably was the substance mistaken for lime
or chalk.
A series of experiments made with a registering thermometer, to mark the internal heat of
the box, and a pyrometer, to ascertain precisely the external he atapplied, would form ah inte-
resting appendix to my paper.
After the reading of the paper a discussion ensued, in the course of which the chairman and
many of the members bore testimony to the fairness with which the experiments had been con-
ducted; and a vote of thanks was unanimously passed to Mr. Woods for his paper, and the
trouble he had incurred.
Mr. Woods exhibited to the meeting sectional drawings of the interior of each of the boxes,
of the brick closet, and of a fire proof brick tower in Hamburg, which had failed, although
several feet thick. The various boxes and their contents were also shown, as they came from the
trial, and Mr. Woods was highly complimented by numbers of the members for the zeal and
perseverance with which he had carried through the investigation, day and night, during the
inclement weather. When the contents of the boxes were shown, and Milners’ were found so
fresh and perfect, after the severe ordeal they had gone through, a general expression of satis-
faction ensued, and many of the members declared themselves warmly in approval of the prin-
ciple so ably opened out'by Mr. Woods, which was new to them, and met with their sanguine
concurrence.
“ Surveyors Office, Town Hull, Liverpool.
“ Having sent one of my assistants to attend the experiments to prove the various methods
and inventions in use for preserving documents from fire, made for the Liverpool Polytechnic
Society in January last, —from his report, and my own examination of the boxes and their
contents after trial, I beg to signify my approval of Messrs. Milner and Son’s principle, and to
recommend the same to the confidence of the public.
“JOSEPH FRANKLIN, Surveyor to the Corporation.”
“ Town Clerk’s Office, Town Hall, Liverpool.
“ Being assured of the excellence of Miiners’ Fire-resisting Boxes, they are used in the
Town Hall for deeds and papers. “ RD. RADCLIFFE, Town Clerk.”
Manchester, August, 1844.
Thomas Milner and Son, having been requested by influential parties to submit to the
Public a test of their Patent Fire resisting Principle, combining non-conduction and evapo-
ration, applied to the Authorities, who kindly appointed the Fire Police Station for the
Trial, and requested Mr. Rose to superintend the proceedings. The Trial was extensively
advertised, and 1,000 circulars were issued to the professional and commercial classes and
See further, page 20.
* The above unequalled Fire-resisting arrangement Thomas Milner & Son have now enclosed in the
strongest Wrought Iron Safes extant, with Fastenings to correspond; the Locks they cannot pick: in which
superior Fire and Thief-resisting Safes they are enabled to offer the best security to Cash and Valuables,
against Fire and violence which exists.—lBls.
+ Similar delusions have been practised in Manchester and elsewhere since, by testing presumed bad con-
ductors of heat in a wet state, or into which means of producing moisture, when heated, had been surreptitiously
introduced—either plan being a direct infringement of these patents—and claiming for the dry material virtues
for which it was solely indebted to the evaporation of which it was made the vehicle. Fire-proof! wet clay—
Fire-proof! wet cement—Fire-proof! wet plaster Fire-proof! wet hasty-pudding.'—Fire-proof! anything,
so long as higher temperature than 212° is kept from it by steam. No matter what the Steam Jacket consists
of—keep it boiling, and nothing will bum within it.


the Press, inviting their attendance. Thomas Milner and Son now beg to return their
sincere thanks to the Mayor, who kindly attended, and locked down one of the Boxes, and
opened it after Trial; to the Authorities generally; and to Mr. Rose, Sen., and Mr. Rose,
Jun.; for their attendance throughout the day, and the integrity and impartiality ol
their proceedings, in the face of the most dishonest attempts of interested and vindictive
parties to mislead them, and impose upon the public.
T. Milner and Son have further to express their best acknowdedgments to the
numerous crowds of gentlemen who attended the Trial during the day, and saw for them-
selves, and to solicit their candid consideration, and that of the public at large, to the
following Testimonials:—
(Copy.) “ Town-Hall, Manchester, Auyust hth, 1844.
“ Gentlemen, —Mr. Rose, the Superintendent of the Manchester Fire Brigade, has handed
me a report of the proceedings witnessed by him, in testing your Patent Fire-resisting Safes,
which I beg to enclose you.
“ Having myself noticed the result of the test applied to the Deed Box E,* (No. 4,) I am
so far satisfied with its capability of resisting a considerable degree of heat, that I will thank
you to send me a similar Box for my own use, as it appears to me sufficient to protect papers
from destruction by fire occurring in a dwelling-house.
“ I am, your obedient Servant,
“ Messrs. Thos. Milner and Son. (Signed) ALEX. KAY, Mayor.”
PUBLIC TRIAL OF MILNERS’ PATENT FIRE-RESISTING SAFES.—
MR ROSE’S REPORT TO THE MAYOR AND AUTHORITIES.
“ Clarence-street Police Yard, Manchester, July 31, 1844.
“ I.—Milner’s Double 2| Inch Chamber or Banker’s Safe, was in a strong fire made
of wood and coal ten hours. During the progress it was taken out of the fire twice, the
papers were examined, which were found to be uninjured, and appeared to be damp with
steam.
“II. —Double 1§ inch Chamber Safe, was in a similar fire seven hours, and when exa-
mined, the papers appeared as above.
“ 'f-111. Two-inch Chamber Safe No. 1, was placed in a similar fire for two and a half
hours, and after taking it out, the papers were examined and found to be uninjured.
“ t IV.—E. Deed Box, inch Chamber, was placed in a similar fire one hour, and after
it was taken out, the papers were examined and found as above, except a few at the top
being discoloured.
“ I certify that I witnessed the whole proceedings of testing the above Messrs. Milner
and Son’s Patent Fire-resisting Safes this day, and it is my opinion, they are superior
in resisting fire to any other invention for Deed and Book Safes that 1 have yet seen tested.
(Signed) “WILLIAM ROSE, Superintendent Fire Brigade.”
(Copy.) “ Manchester, 3 Is# July, 1844.
“ Having this day been present at the Trial of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Principle,
at the Police-yard, Clarence-street, made under the inspection of Mr. Rose, by permission
of the authorities, and having since then received Mr. Rose’s satisfactory report of the same,
we beg to recommend the adoption of the Boxes and Safes, in the manner Messrs. Milners’
circulars suggest.
“ Ist. The ordinary Deed Boxes, of chamber, for office buildings and dwelling-
houses.
“2nd.—The 2-inch chambered Safes, for warehouses of common risk.
“3rd. The Double or 2-inch chambers, for warehouses of extra risk.
* This Box, “ E,” 14 inch thick, our weakest chamber, is referred to in Mr. Rose's certificate No. 4, and the
general recommendation No. 1.
+ lll.—Beside the No. 1 Safe, in the same fire, and on the side least likely to become hot, was placed an
Iron Book-case, of 4to J inch thick. As the fire became red-hot, the iron dry Book-case and contents became
red-hot, whilst the chamber of our Safe, pervaded with fluid and steam at or under the bolting point, rejected the
fire, as the other absorbed it. One, when opened, was lull ot cindeis; the other, ot steam'd paper, uninjured.
t IV.—Some interested and prejudiced parties having suggested that the Boxes made to test, and those to
sell, might not be the same, they went and purchased one from Messrs. Love and Barton, in Market-street, of
lj-inch chamber, which was tested for the same time, and more severely, than the one described in the lourlh
trial—and was equally perfect when opened. The same parties had previously obtained a small portable Deed
Box, of the weakest chamber, and, as they stated, managed to destroy its properties at the bottom, over a smith's
hearth, so as to have charred some of the papers next the bottom, in w hich, it was said, several parties had
been engaged whose motives were obviously interested and vindictive. They then insinuated on the ground,
“ This is the Box Mr. Milner warrants for twelve hours,” well knowing the talsehood of the statement well
knowing the relative strength of chambers of one inch and six inches—that the practical result of the Safes was
the reverse of the theory of their own heads, viz., the thicker the chamber, the greater the capacity—which in
this case was as one is to six in thickness, and as one is to twelve in resisting power.
THOMAS MILNER AND SON.


“ 4th. The Double chambered Bankers’ Safes, for large warehouses, mansions.
&c., where the risk is still greater.
“ Nelson, Knowles and Co., High-street, Alfred Birchall, Rook-street,
Benjamin Bagnall, Mosley-buildings, Isaiah Hately, Mosley-street,
Edward Evans, Marsden-street, Charles Meredith, King-street.”
Samuel Eveleigh, Greengate, Salford,
Since the above Trial, the Patentees beg to copy from the Manchester Guardianoi Aug. 7:—
“We regret we have to record the almost total destruction by fire, on Monday night, of
the fine pile of buildings called the “ Irwell Buildings,” erected only five or six years ago by
Messrs. Robert Charlton and Sons, Callenderers, &c., Blackfriars. The buildings were of
great extent, and occupied by a number of parties as warehouses and offices.”
The report of the Guardian further states :
“We understand that one of Milner & Son’s Patent Safes was somewhere on the premises;
if so, from the great heat of the flames, there can be no doubt it was sufficiently tested.”
In the same Paper, of August 10th, it is stated :
“ We were misinformed when we stated on Wednesday, in the account of the fire, that
one of Milner and Son’s Patent Safes was somewhere on the premises. We have since learned
that it was a Portable Deed Box, of one inch single chamber, tested to resist fire from one to
two hours, and sold for use in ordinary office buildings, dwelling-houses, &c. This box, it
appears, was in the counting-house of Mr. Fischer, in, we believe, the second story of the
building, and contained that gentleman’s books, &c. Yesterday, (Friday,) it was found in the
ruins, amidst the rubbish at the bottom of the building, and crushed down from five to six
inches; yet, when opened by Mr. Fischer, to his gratification he found his books so as to be
(to use his own words) ‘perfectly legible every item.’ When it was first stated, in Mr. Rose’s
hearing, that such a box was in the building, he said, ‘ Then, in that case, if it stood such a
test, there could be no doubt of its being sufficient for all ordinary purposes;’ for the body of
flame was great, and the heat, as we have already stated, exceedingly intense, the lead spout-
ing falling in drops like rain.”
On calling upon the owner of the box, he very handsomely expressed himself to Thomas
Milner and Son, stating that he had written to all his correspondents to send him their
accounts, as his books were in the fire and burned; and his delight and surprise were
corresponding when he recovered them, in a copyable state, as he expressed himself to
T. Milner and Son, “ saved in your box.” At the same time giving T. Milner and Son a
letter to this effect, with permission to shew it to any enquirers.—The Box in question, a
No. 8, of one inch thick, is our weakest chamber, and possesses only one third the resisting
power of our two-inch chamber Safes, one sixth of that of our double If or 2-inch chamber,
and only a twelfth of that of our double 2f inch chamber, or Banker’s Double Safe of six
inches thick.
T. M. and Son have since been favoured with the following, and also have had orders
for Safes from all the principal occupiers of the Buildings
“ Manchester, Aug. 31, 1844.
“ Gentlemen, —Having had my books preserved in one of your Boxes, in the late destructive
fire in Irwell-buildings, Blackfriars, I have pleasure in requesting you to send me one of your
No. 2 Safes, with drawers.
“ Thos. Milner and Son. “ HENRY FISCHER.”
The Proprietors have great pleasure in communicating to the Public the following
additional letter from Mr. Rose: —Premising that the object of the second trial was to
ascertain the capability of the Bankers’ Safe of resisting the great heat of the hottest parts
of a large fire, in the most extensive and dangerous class of buildings, beyond the period of
its probable duration. The intense heat of the fire may be gathered from the fact, that an
iron pipe, of half inch thick, and five to seven inches diameter, bent by its own weight very
shortly after it was put into the fire beside the Safe; and another description of Fire-proof
Safe, sent for the purpose of being similarly tested in 1842, was destroyed in twenty minutes
in the same fire, about one tenth of the time that Milners’ Bankers’ Safe was exposed to it.
Fire Police Yard, Clarence-street, Manchester,
Messrs. Milner and Son, 4th September, 1844.
Gentlemen —I beg to express my entire satisfaction with the fair and candid
manner in which you have exhibited, and tested, [your Patent Fire-resisting Manufactures, as
superintended by me, at the request of the Mayor and Couucil, on the 31st July, and also with
the further trial made this day.
The results have fully established the value and efficiency of your principle in my mind,
and I beg strongly to recommend your double chambered Safes, in the manner your circular
suggests, (suited for the various classes of buildings), and to express my perfect confidence in
their security.
The trial on the 31st July, convinced me of their superiority and great capabilities of
resisting fire; but I was desirous of seeing one of your Banker’s Safes, such as recommended for
large warehouses of extra risk, &c., submitted to an intense heat, fora period exceeding that to
which I consider they might be so exposed in any extensive Fire.*
* The Safe was kept nearly four hours in this regular Blast Furnace,—T. M.& S.


Your compliance with my wish to-day, by testing one of these Safes, two feet square out-
side, and one foot square inside, in a fiercely sustained I imber and Coal Fire, of enormous
heat, in our circular wheel-tiring Fire, (which is in my opinion, equal to the hottest part of
any large Fires that have come under my notice), has given me the greatest confidence in
recommending the adoption of your principle as above. Notwithstanding that the outside was
almost in a melting state throughout the test, the whole of this trial was evidently borne by
the outer Safe of 2§ inches, the inner Safe being little affected by it, and the books within
scarcely warmed.
I agree with you in opinion, that the Safe was capable of at least as much more resistance
at the conclusion. I am, Gentlemen, yours most respectfully,
WILLIAM ROSE, Superintendent of the Manchester Fire Brigade.
A Public Trial of Milners’ Patent Fire resisting Manufactures was made in Portsmouth,
December 30th, under the sanction and inspection of the Authorities, and a number of
gentlemen connected with the Government departments, the highly satisfactorily results of
which are given below.
Portsmouth, January, 1845.
I have pleasure in expressing my strong approval of Milners’ Fire-resisting Invention,
combining the mutual reaction of nonconductiou and evaporation, in keeping down the tem-
peratnr . I have witnessed its practicai advantages here on Monday last, by the severe
testing of one of their Bankers’ Safes in a strong fire for twelve hours, in which were deposited
by myself and others nresent, Books, Papers, Gunpowder, Watches, Cash, Silks, &c. Al-
Niough surrounded with red heat so many hours, the interior and contents, when finally
examined, were scarcely warmed, — not exceeding 100° Fahrenheit.
THOS. J. MAIN, M.A.
Portsmouth, January 4th, 1845. Mathematical Professor Royal N. College.
Southampton, December 30th, 1844.
I have great pleasure in adding my testimony to the safety of Messrs. Milners’ Fire-proof
Boxes. On the above day a gold Geneva Watch, Chain, &c. were deposited, io my presence,
by Mr. D. Wenden, in the Patent Double-chambered Bankers’ Safe, and embedded in a fire
of intense heat for three hours, from half-past one till half-past four o’clock, f.m., and not-
withstanding the extraordinary heat at which the Safe was tested, when taken out they were
quite cool, and the Watch has not since deviated in time. J. COUPLAND,
Proprietor of the Hants Advertizer.
I have pleasure in stating my opinion that the heat produced from the fire in which Messrs,
Milners’ Safe was tested on Monday, the 30th December, 1844, was far exceeding any that
could be conveyed from a dwelling-house or building on fire. Given by me,
January Ist, 1845. THOS. BROWN, Engineer, R.N.
Victoria Cottage, Kingston, Portsea, Portsmouth, Dec. 30th, 1844.
I certify that a small packet of Gunpowder was inside Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting
Safe; when taken out of the fire to be inspected, at One, p.m., I minutely examined it, and
replaced it, with my Card, until half-past Four, p.m. ; the outward chamber was red-hot, but
the inward one quite cool, and the Powder as perfect and ignitable as when placed therein, of
which I satisfied myself by throwing a small portion of it on the Fire, AFTER it had been so
enclosed. W. WHYLOCK, Major, R. N.
Being present with Major Whylock during the above, and having placed our Signatures
with his Card, we add with pleasure our testimony to this extraordinary fact.
Hugh Goold, Commander, R. N.
G. V. Oughton, Pay-Master, R. N.
Richard Ward, Lieutenant, R. N.
Portsmouth, December 3 Oth, 1844.
From the severe testing of Messrs. T. Milner & Son’s Patent Fire-resisting Manufactures
(this day), we feel pleasure in expressing our approval of the same and conviction that they
are a perfect security under the circumstance of ordinary fires.
W. Whylock, Major, Royal Marines.
Thos. J. Main, Mathematical Professor,
R. N. College.
William Minchin, Solicitor, St. George’s
Square, Portsea,
J. Coupland, Proprietor of the Hampshire
Advertiser, Southampton.
Edwd. Hull, Collector, Customs, Portsmouth.
Francis Waring, Clerk iu the Custom-House.
Jno. Drummond, Surgeon, R. N.
G. W. Lauder, Southampton.
Jno. Harvey Stevens, Cap. Royal Marine
Artillery
Geo. Stebbing, Sen.,Optician,66,High-street.
J. Snowden, Stationer, Southampton.
William Lemmon, Ironmonger, Portsea.
H. Hutchinson, Captain R. N.
G. V. Oughton, Paymaster, R. N.
James Sowley Tibbetts, Hants Advertiser.
Thomas Brown, Engineer, H.M.S. Bee, R. N.
Hugh Goold, Commander, R. N.
Richard Ward, Lieutenant, R. N.
William W. Deacon, M.A. Clerk.
James Hollingsworth, King’s Rooms.
Henry Hollingsworth, King’s Rooms.
G. H. Mottley, Ed. Hampshire Telegraph.


“Great Western” Demonstration of the complete efficacy of Milners’ Patent
Fire-resisting Principle, and the insecurity of the Iron Safes and Boxes
generally used.
In introducing* their invention —combining with the most perfect non-conduction the
powerful aid of evaporation within the chambers, neutralizing therein 1000 degrees of
heat —to the Western districts of England, the Patentees obtained the kind attendance of
the leading scientific and commercial gentlemen of Bristol, to whom they had letters of
introduction from similar parties in Lancashire, acquainted with the value of their manu-
factures, at their Public Trial, which took place under the sanction of the Worshipful the
Mayor of Bristol, in the new Cattle Market of that city, May sth, 1845.
Thos. Milner and Son have pleasure in subjoining the Testimonial received from
gentlemen present, and also notices of the experiments, from the Bristol press; whilst they
gladly avail themselves of this opportunity of returning their sincere thanks for the uniformly
kind attention awarded to their claims by a generous public
“ New Cattle Market, Bristol, May 6th, 1845.
“ Having been present this day at the testing of Milners’ New Patent Fire-resisting Manu-
factures, suitable for various classes of buildings, in the above spacious enclosure, contiguous
to the Great Western Railway, before a numerous assemblage of Gentlemen, Merchants,
Solicitors, and by permission of R. P. King, Esq. (the Worshipful the Mayor), we certify with
pleasure our entire approval of this invention, our perfect satisfaction with the results of the
experiments, and our strong recommendation of Milners’ Safes and Boxes to the adoption of
the public.”
Wm. Herapath (Magistrate).
Samuel Tanner (Tanner Brothers).
Thomas Lucas, Director Bristol and Exeter
Railway.
S. Lucas,Director Bristol and Exeterßaihvay.
James Martin (Felix Farley’s Journal).
Henry Wyld (Alderman).
James Webb.
Geo. Wright (Banker).
Lieut. W. Malbon.
R. Bell.
Wm. Hick, Bath.
Bartlett Little, Notary, Public Bath.
Smith and Cos., St. Augustine’s-parade.
J. H. Wylde, Redcliffe-street.
John MacArthur(Morgan,MacArthur,& Cos.)
Joseph Smith, Ironmonger.
Wm. Burge, Leather Merchant, &c.
Robt. Parker, Bristol.
Jas. A. Hick, Bristol.
John Davies, Bristol.
John Yining (Alderman).
Henry Fisher (Superintendent of Police).
Wm. Bosworth (Inspector of Police).
E. Wait (Chief Clerk to the Bristol Gas Cos.)
John Breillet (Engineer)
Henry Merrick, j ßristol Gas ofßce _
John G. South, S
John G. Powell, Reporter to London Times.
Wm. Martin, Surgeon, Clifton.
Thos. Foster, Architect, Park-street.
F. Jarmin, Solicitor, &c. &c.
Until the invention of Milners’ Fire-resisting Safety Boxes, the mercantile community,
professional persons, &c., had no means of perfect safety for their books and papers fiom
the casualty of fire. The invention was tested in the Cattle-Market, in this city, on Monday,
last, by permission of the Mayor, in the presence of H. Ricketts, Esq., G.E. Sanders, Esq.,
J. N. Sanders, Esq., W. Herapath, Esq., Magistrates ; Aldermen Yining & Wyld ;J. K. Haber-
field, J. McArthur, R. T. H. Bartley, Alfred Elton, R. C. Dudley, H. M. Parker, G. Wright,
S. Lucas, T. Lucas, R. J. Hanson, James Webb, E. Naish, Esqrs., J. Breillett, Esq., Engineer
to the Bristol Gas Cos.; Lieut. Fisher, and a considerable number of scientific and other
influential gentlemen. The fires were made from 40 cwt. of coals and wood, with several loads
of shavings and faggots. At a quarter past 11, they were lighted, and in the midst were placed
two safes, first, Milners’ No. 1, new patent, and with ii a common iron safe of equal dimen-
sions, purchased for the express purpose of showing their comparative qualities. Both were
filled with papers, books, &c., and locked down by Geo. Wright, Esq. After being buried in
the burning mass for hours, they were taken out and opened the Patent Safe presenting all
within uusinged ; the Iron Safe a mass of blackened tinder ; thus evidently proving that the
common “safe” presents no security in cases of fire. In the second fire, at the same time,
was placed a round magazine, with If in. double chamber, in which were inclosed a gold watch
belonging to Mr. Wendea (> he active and intelligent representative of the patentees), a
casket of jewels, a flask oj yunpowder, several trinkets, cards, &c., with four silk handkerchiefs,
the property of gentlemen present. After 6 hours’ severe burning in the most intense fire, it
was opened, and to the utter astonishment of all, the inside was scarce,ly warmed , the watch
had not varied a moment, and every deposit was as-safe and perfect as though it had been in a
drawing-room cabinet. At 4p. m., two smaller boxes, one Milners patent (size letter E.)
with one purchased for the purpose, also sold as fire-proof, and such as we now see too
general in the offices of professional gentlemen, were subjected to a similar trial as the above
for 1 hour and 12 minutes ; the result was that Milners’ box triumphantly presented all within
it in perfect safety, while the other had yielded to the power of its contending enemy, not an
atom of its contents being uncousumed; the result in,each case was most gratifying and satis-
factory. A testimonial of the above facts has already been signed; and we doubt not but this
excellent invention will soon be so. firmly established in the public opinion, as to lead to its


general adoption, and prove of incalculable advantage to the community. Mr. Weuden will
afford all the information in his power as to the merits of the invention, on application
to him, at his offices, No. 39, Queen-square.— Felix Farley's Bristol Journal.
Liverpool, June 3, 1844.
Thomas Milner & Son feel gratified in having to communicate the following testi-
monial, given to their agent, Mr. Law, of Birkenhead, the more so from this being the fifth
instance, within a short period, of parties being indebted to their manufactures for their
Books being saved from destruction. The fire at Messrs. Walkers’ (the extensive Builders)
was of most intense character, the offices being completely gutted; and it is obvious that
Milners’ Safe had had the Worst of it, from the circumstance of the brass nob of the door
being melted, w hilst those of the Iron Safe were not, although every thing in the Iron Safe
and Drawers was reduced to black tinder.
T. M. & S. would earnestly suggest to every one who has a Set of Books or Documents
of value, to see this place, enquire into the circumstances, and think and act accordingly.
“ Birkenhead, June 2,1844.
“ Dear Sir, —We have much pleasure in hearing unqualified testimony to the efficiency and
important advantages of Milners’ Fire-resisting Safes and Boxes, in cases of accident from Fire.
“ After the destructive fire at our offices this morning, the Books and Papers deposited in the
Milners’ Safe, purchased from you, were found to he entirely uninjured by Fire, whilst those
contained in a strong Iron Safe and Drawers, standing beside it, were completely destroyed.
“We will accordingly thank you to supply us with another Safe, of the same size (No. 4)
and description, immediately. “Sir, your obedient servants,
“ Mr. James Law, Stationer, Birkenhead.” “J.& W. WALKER.
The Liverpool Papers, in reporting the Fire, state, “The building in which the Fire
commenced was completely gutted, and the whole of the contents destroyed, with the
exception of the Books, those being preserved in one of Milners’ Patent Safes. Messrs.
Walker have sustained a very serious loss, by the destruction of a number of plans and
specifications of buildings, some erected, and others in course of erection, which it is almost
impossible to estimate. These were consumed in a strong Iron Safe, standing beside
Milners’ Safe.”
PROTECTION FROM ACCIDENTAL AND INCENDIARY FIRES.
Thomas Milner and Son beg to solicit public attention to the following Certificates
and Testimonials relating to the extraordinary protection afforded by their Fire-resisting
Principle, as proved by a public demonstration at Exeter, on Tuesday, 19th August, 1845.
“ Exeter, 19th August, 1845.
“ We, the undersigned, having been this day present at the demonstration shown in the Cattle
Market, with permission of the authorities, by Mr. D. Wenden, the Representative of Messrs.
Milner and Son, of the fire-resisting qualities of their Patent Manufactures, have much
pleasure in testifying our perfect approval of the severity of the test applied, and our complete
satisfaction with the successful result of a trial, extending over a period of three hours, in which
the perfect security and excellence of their manufactures were shown, in contrast with the non-
security of iron safes and boxes, such as have been in general use.
“We beg to add our strong recommendation to the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants, and Traders,
of the perfect security to property in Jewels, Plate, Deeds, Books, and Papers, against fire, which
the Safes and Boxes of Messrs. Milner and Son with certainty afford.
Edward Woolmer, Mayor
John Harris, Magistrate of Exeter
Richard Lewin Pennell, M. D.,
Magistrate of Exeter
T. Shapter, M. D.
William Cann, for Charles Lewis,
Actuary of the West of England
Insurance Company
John Eyre Kingdon
Frederick Granger, M.B.
Benjamin Salter
Thos. Locke Lewis, F.R.S., Capt.
Royal Engineers
Joseph Shepherd, St. David’s Hill
George Pye, Merchant
John L. Hulme, Captain Royal
Engineers
Thomas Knott, St. David’s Hill
Huxham & Blown,droufounders
Stephen Knowles, *City Brewery
W. C. & C. Bodley, Ironfounders,
West of England Foundry
Jas. Strong, Powhay Mills
Thos. Sercombe, Wine Merchant
Henry Vatcher, Castle Street
John Geare, jun., Solicitor
William Scott, Ironmonger
Thomas Toby, Merchant
Edward James, Oil and Colour
Warehouse
Henry Beaumont and Cos.
James Nichols
William Strong, Solicitor.
To the Editor of the Liverpool Standard, fyc.
“ Queen’s Dock Master’s House, 12 th November, 1845.
“ Sir, —In the complete burning of the whole of our premises on Monday last, the only
things saved out of the stock and property were our Books, which we feel that we owe entirely
to Milners’ Fire-resisting Safe, in which we kept them. This Safe bears evidence of the
intense fire it had resisted; and it was with as much surprise as gratitude that, on breaking it
open, after the fire, we found, instead of ashes, as we expected, our Books perfect as we left
them. We think it due to this invaluable invention, and to the public, to make this declara-
tion through your columns. Remaining, Sir, your obedient Servants,
“ GARNISS & CO.,
“ Late of 97, Park-lane, General Outfitters.”
“P. S. £SO in notes, left in the desk, were destroyed.”
“ Messrs. Milner and Son. “ Central Dock Station, 13 th November, 1845.
“Gentlemen,—! was present during the whole time of the fire at Messrs. Garniss’s, on


Monday night, and consider it was one of the hottest fires of the kind I ever witnessed, espe-
cially in the shop, where your Safe was. Gentlemen, your obedient Servant,
“ WM. LEVERATT, Superintendent of Police.”
Thomas Milner and Son have great satisfaction in communicating to the Public the
following letter, reporting the second instance this month of the faithful performance of its
duty by one of their one-chambered Fire-resisting Boxes, their weakest chamber, pos-
sessing only one-fourth of the resisting power of their Double-chambered Boxes and Safes,
and less than one-twelfth of that of their Double Banker’s Safe. The above is the eighth
recent instance in this district, in three of which cases the entire stock and property were
consumed, leaving only the Books unburnt, which were preserved in Milners’ Boxes. All
other property may be insured; but Books and Documents, often exceeding all other in
value, cannot, excepting as above.
To the Editor of the Manchester Guardian.
“ Fen t Warehouse, No. 18, Portland-street, Manchester ,
“ 22nd November, 1845.
“ Sir, About ten o’clock last night a fire broke out on my premises, which consumed the
entire of my stock on the ground floor, in which it commenced.
“It is with unfeigned satisfaction that I have to announce to you, that the whole of the
Books and Papers that were deposited in one of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Boxes, were
found to be in as complete state of preservation as when placed therein. All other Books and
Documents not so secured were totally destroyed.
“ In justice to the invention, lam anxious to make this occurrence known through your
columns, in the hope of calling the attention of my Brother Tradesmen to the importance of
availing themselves of the means of security offered by these Safes.
“ Such of my family as were on the premises at the outbreak were with difficulty saved, by
being lowered by a rope, which happened fortunately to be at hand, from the top story.
“I am, Sir, yours very respectfully, “ JOHN OAKDEN.’’
PUBLIC DEMONSTRATION OF MILNER’S PATENT FIRE-RESISTING SAFES.
A public test of Milners’ Patent Fire Safes, took place on Tuesday last, at the Plymouth
Union Docks. A number of gentlemen in pursuance of invitation attended to witness the
experiments. Amongst the persons present were, Robert Morris, Esq., Manager of the
Branch Bank of England in this town ; David Derry, Esq., of the Devon and Cornwall Bank ;
William Stuart, Esq , Superintendent of the Breakwater; Rev. Mr. Wightwick; W. H. Daw,
Esq., Naval Bank; J. Robertson, Esq , National Provincial Bank; T. Bewes and W. Prance,
Esqrs., Magistrates; Alfred Hingston, Plsq., Devon and Cornwall Bank; —Clark, Esq.,
Devon and Cornwall Bank, Devouport; R. E. Elworthy, H. M. Gibson, A. Rooker, J. Lux-
more, W, A. Hunt, H. A. G. Mends, J. A. Gifford, J. Jackson, J. C. Hancock, W. Prance, jun.,
Esqrs., Solicitors; A. Peard, Esq., Barrister; G. Wightwick, AC. Arthur, and C. Chapel,
Esqrs., Architects ; A. H. Bampton and G. C. Dobson, Esq., Civil Engineers; Capt. M‘Adam,
r.m. ; Capt. Mutidy, r.m. ; Capt. Perling, r.n ; Lieut. J. Bothway, R.N.; J. C. Rees, Esq.,
r.n.; Lieut. Holman, r.n.; C. Tanner, Esq. ;W. Bryant, Esq.; Mr. J. Hearder; Mr. R. Ox-
land and Mr. F. Vaux, Practical Chemists; E. Edey, Esq., h.m. Dockyard ;J. C. Cook-
worthy, Esq., m.d. ; J. Cox, Esq., m.d. ;R. Fillis, Esq. ;I. Nichols, Esq.; Messrs. Fosterand
Beal; Dabb, Rundle, and Brown; Holman and Adams ; Mr. Skardon, Mr. H. Leamon, Mr.
A. Millroy, Mr. P. Fisher, Mr. P. G. Govett, Mr. J. Luscombe, and numerous other gentlemen,
to whom the perfect security of deeds, plans, papers, &c., is a matter of interest.
The fires were made from about 20 cwt. of coal, several loads of wood, five large sugar
hogsheads, various faggots, &c. One of Miluer’s No. 1 safes was filled with books, papers,
and certificates, containing the names of fifty of the gentlemen present, and a parchment deed,
quite new, with its seals attached, furnished by Mr. Millroy, draper, for,the occasion, being the
Deed of his property. The 2nd, which was a round Patent Safe, contained a gold watch, the
property of Mr. Bothway, r. n., an eye-glass, the property of Mr. Kerr, various cases of
jewellery, silk handkerchiefs, and a£s Bank of England note, filled with gunpowder, by Mr.
Wendeu, the respected representative of the patentees. An iron safe of the same size as the
oatent safe, No. 1., but of the common construction, was also placed in the fire. In this too,
number of papers and books were deposited. The three safes above mentioned, having been
fastened dowu, and the keys of the two locks entrusted to a gentleman present, at about 12
o’clock they were surrounded with a fire of the most intense heat, which lasted for three hours.
The wind was very high at the time, and the quantity of the material used for the occasion
was very great, so that the fire was more like that of a furnace than any ordinary fire. The
fire-place itself was a circular one, about the size of an ordinary waggon wheel, having four
flues, and the bricks composing them were so placed as to admit of the wind passing through
at each opening, and the high wind operating upon the whole, soon blew it into a charcoal
fire. In about seventeen minutes after the fire had drawn up, the common safe became red
hot, and it was at once evident, that its contents were then burning, as smoke was escaping
through the lid. At 3 o’clock it was opened, when the correctness of this conclusion was
manifest, —its contents being found calcined—in fact they were but one mass of black ashes


The dangerous results of entrusting to these common iron safes, was more fully and very ably
described by Mr. Wenden, who, after cooling down the one in question, and presenting its
contents, one mass of black ashes (as before observed), placed some fresh papers within, and
closed the lid during the two hours the circular safe was additionally tested. The object
here was to show, that an iron safe,, when once heated, though the outside may be compara-
tively cool, still retains and conveys sufficient heat within, so as to destroy whatever it may
contain: this was clearly demonstrated, for on Mr. Wenden’s opening this safe, after being
closed as above, the fresh papers had all become dry and charred, and on the smallest current
of air reaching them, burst immediately into a flame. The brass knob of the patent safe
having melted, and some of the solder having got into the lock through the intenseness of the
fire, it was found necessary to cut it open. This, however, afforded to the numerous specta-
tors an unexpected opportunity of seeing the beauty of the Invention in a manner which they
had not previously calculated upon, as thereby the fire-resisting arrangement and non-con-
ductors were all exposed, and the principle of the Invention was thus more fully explained by
the operator. On examining its contents, they were, as we anticipated, all found as perfect
as when first deposited, not excepting the parchment deed. It is true, that a slight discoloura-
tion of a few papers, which were lying at the top of the safe, had taken place; but this was
caused by the escape of the essential oil of the conductor, but it even did not cause any injury
to the papers. These papers were the certificates of the gerrtlement present, deposited prior
to the ignition of the fire, and are now to be seen at Messrs. Plimsaul’s,in as perfect a state as
when first deposited. The round safe, which had been placed in the fire the same time as the
other containing the jewellery, &c., was now about to be opened, and from the amount of the
value of the property deposited in it, which was upwards of £l5O, considerable interest was
manifested at this period of the demonstration. This safe having been opened, its entire con-
tents were, as in the other case,found in the most perfect condition ;it was then refilled with a
quantity of gunpowder, and at about 5 o’clock was opened in the presence of a number of
spectators —the contents were found uninjured, which was attested by many of the gentlemen
present. Mr. Wenden then offered to place the same safe in the fire for four hours longer; but all
present considered that the experiments already made had sufficiently attested the efficiency
of the Patent Fire-resisting Principle. In concluding our notice of the interesting proceed-
ings connected with the demonstration, we cannot refrain from expressing our decided con-
viction of the great superiority of Milners’ Safes and Boxes over all others which have come
within the range of our observation, and we doubt not but that in a short time they will be in
general use here, as they already are in the principal parts of the United Kingdom.
From the Plymouth Times, Dec. 27, 1845.
(Copy.) Union Docks, Union-street, Plymouth, December 2 3rd, 1845.
A public testing of Messrs. Milners’ Fire-resisting Manufactures having been announced
by advertisement and circulars, we, whose names are here subscribed, being present at the
commencement, certify to the fact that this document, with our signatures fresh written
thereon, was placed inside their No. 1 Safe, with several other books, papers, &c., before the
same was subjected to the heat.
David Derry, Banker, Plymouth.
Geo. Wightwick, Architect,
H. M. Gibson, Solicitor,
J. Shirley Leakey, Gentleman,
George W. Derry, Solicitor,
A. H. Bampton, Civil Engineer,
Robert Morris, Agent Bank of
England, (Branch,)
Richard Stuart, Superintendent
Plymouth Breakwater,
George Jackson, Solicitor,
H. A. G. Mends, Solicitor,
J. Pulling, Captain, R.N.,
A. Peard, Barrister,
H. Fillis,
P. Fisher,
T. Holman,
R. F. Rattenbury,
Thomas Collins Hind, Reverend,
P. 11. Govctt, High-street,
Henry Seaman,
George Tyerman,
Reverend A. Wightwick, Plymouth.
W. Carrill,
William Yosper, Devonport,
J. S. Brabant,
Alfred Rooker, Solicitor,
John Monday, Captain,
J. Latimer, George-street,
Oswald Arthur, Gascoyne-place,
William Kerr,
George C. Dobson, 29, Park street,
John Cocks, M.D., 5 ( Union-terrace,
Captain M‘Adam, R.M.,
John Fletcher Rees, 12, Gibbon-street,
J. Bothway, R.N., Union-street,
Alexander Milroy, Sussex-place,
Thomas Luscombe, Saltan’s-place,
William Erskine, Lieutenant, R.M.,
T. S. Marshall, Ironmonger, Devonport.
Charles Chappie, Architect, Stonehaven,
William Raby Chape, Ironmonger, Devon-
port.
We certify that the above document was quite perfect, after three hours’ test by a fire of
intense heat, in Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Safe, as detailed above.
JOHN C. HANCOCK, Solicitor, Devonport.
WILLIAM VOSPER, Gentleman, Stoke.
R. HOLMAN, Lieutenant, R.N., Superintendent of Police.


(Copy.) Union Docks, Union Road, Plymouth, Dec. 23rd, 1845, 5 p. m.
We, the undersigned, hereby certify that every thing contained in- the Milners’ Fire-
resisting Safe was perfect when opened after the last test, this being written on the leaf of a
book therein.
Alfred Kingston, Banker Plymouth.
Robert Oxland, Practical Chemist,
Edward Collier,
R. Holman, Lieut., R.N.,Sup. of Police,
H. J. G. Mends, Solicitor,
A. H. Bampton, Civil Engineer, Plymouth.
George Jackson, Solicitor,
F. Vaun, Chemist,
P. Fisher, Tallow Chandler.
(Copy.) Union Docks, Union Road, Plymouth, Dec. 23rd, 1845.
A public test of Messrs. T. Milner and Son’s Fire-resisting Safes took place, by kind per-
mission of D. Derry, Esq., in the above. As announced by circular, two large fires were made
from several cwt. of wood, coals, barrels, faggots, &c., in which were placed two of their New
Patent Safes, containing watches, jewellery, parchments, books, a£s Bank of England note,
with a packet of gunpowder, silk handkerchiefs, &c.
From the very perfect state of these deposits,— after a severe trial for several hours, — we,
whose signatures are here attached, having witnessed the same, feel pleasure in expressing our
conviction of the certain security, in cases of fire, these Boxes afford, — and beg strongly to
recommend them to the nobility, gentry, clergy, bankers, merchants, solicitors, and trades-
men, for their immediate adoption.
Robert Morris, Bank of England
(Branch,) Plymouth.
George Wightwick, Architect,
A. H. Bampton, Civil Engineer,
David Derry, Devon and Cornwall
Bank,
J. A. Gifford, Solicitor,
H. H. Cross, Solicitor,
Alfred Hingston, Devon and
Cornwall Bank,
Herbert Mends Gibson, Solicitor,
Warwick A. Hunt, Solicitor,
Henry Brown, Draper,
W. Pridham,
J. T. Breband,
J. C. Cookworthy, M.D.,
John Cocks, M.D.,
Dobbjßuudle, and Brown, Drapers,
Thomas Nicholson, -
Henry Smith, Surgeon,
Foster and Beale,
William Prance, Magistrate,
J. Bothway, R.N.,
J. N. Hearder,
Thomas Parrott,
Harris, Mudge & Cos., Naval Bank,
Richard Fellis and Son, Merchants,
J. G. Elworthy, Solicitor,
H. A. G. Mends, Solicitor,
Alfred Rooker, Solicitor,
Henry Seaman,
P. C. Parkhouse, Draper,
Edward Fry,
Edward Cook, (Messrs. Milroy&Co.)
Peter Vosper, Wine Merchant,
David M‘Adam, Captain, R.M.,
Charles Bate, S.D., Plymouth.
William Stuart, Sup. Breakwater,
George Jackson, Solicitor,
R. Holman, Lieutenant, R.N., Superinten
dent of Police Plymouth.
John Fletcher Rees,
John Foster, Surveyor,
Thomas Luscombe, Saltan’s-place,
Rev. Frederick Southall,
P. F. Govett,
George C. Dobson, C.E.,
Charles Tanner,
J. Luxmore, Solicitor,
Oswald Arthur, Architect,
William Rendle,
P. Fisher,
John Franklin, Master Attendant
Royal William Victualling Yard,
Robert Oxland, Practical Chemist,
T. Holman (Firm Holman & Adams,)
G. T. Fortescue,
Robert Parsons, Fire Engine
Director, County Fire Office,
Wm. Henry Prance, Jun., Solicitor,
Nat. Staniford, Milbay Glass Works,
Joseph Greaves,
Felix Nicholson,
Rev. T. C. Hind,
Captain John Monday,
William Vosper, Stoke, Devonport,
P. C. Clarke, Devon and Cornwall
Bank, Devonport,
Wm. Ruby Chape, Ironmonger, Devonport.
Charles Chappie, Architect, Stonehouse,
John C. Hancock, Solicitor, Devonport,
Joseph Elmes, Supt. Registrar, Devonport.
Union Docks, Union Road, December 23rd, 1845.
We, the undersigned, being present at the testing of Messrs. Milner and Son’s Fireproof
Safes, in the Union Docks, Union Road, Plymouth, state, that from the peculiarly boisterous
day on which it took place, and the quantity and description of materials of which the fires were
composed, that the test was much more severe, and the heat to which they were exposed more
intense, than any fire in this town for many years past; and have pleasure in adding
our testimony to the entire efficacy of the principle and the success of the trial.
R. Holman, Lieut. R.N., Superintendent
Police,
Nathaniel Staniford, Milbay Glass Works,
Robert Parsons, Engine Director, Tin-
street, Plymouth.


(Copy.) 5, Union-street, Plymouth, December 23 rd, 1845.
Sirs,—Having intrusted my gold watch with Mr. D. Wenden, to place inside Messrs.
Milners’ Fire-resisting Safe, which was submitted to a test of the greatest severity, by being in
the body of a fire conveying furnace heat for several hours, (in which were also various
jewellery and a packet of gunpowder, enclosed in a Bank of England note,) I do, with much
confidence, certify to their perfect security,—the watch not having varied a second since such
circumstance ; and cannot doubt that all who are interested will become at once possessors of
this excellent invention, — while to the army, navy, and all who traffic in gunpowder, they are
invaluable. I am, Sir, very respectfully yours,
J. BOTHWAY, R.N.,
Inventor of the Magnum Bonum Invalid Bed, &c., &c.
To Messrs. Plimsaul Brothers, Plymouth.
(Copy.) Union-street, Plymouth, December 26/A, 1845.
Gentlemen, — Having deposited the deed of my property, with seals attached, and other
papers thereunto belonging, inside Messrs. T. Milner and Son’s Fire-resisting Safe, which was
tested by Mr. D. Wenden at the Union Docks, on Tuesday last, for several hours, I have much
pleasure in stating that the same was returned to me perfect, as before the trial, —whilst the
contents of an Iron Safe, tested with Messrs. Milners’ at the same time, were entirely con-
sumed. From the practical proof of the certain protection this excellent invention affords, I
would strongly recommend all who have deeds, and other valuables, immediately to avail
themselves of these very safe and cheap depositories.
I am, Gentlemen, very truly yours,
To Messrs. Plimsauls, Ironmongers, Plymouth. ALEX. MILROY..
On the 30th of June, 1842, a Public Test was given of the capabilities of Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting
Principle, by means of evaporation in chemical non-conduction, as applied in their One-chambered Portable
Bcses, in the Cloth-hall Yard, Leeds; when a highly satisfactory Testimonial in its favour was given by the
gentlemen present, bearing the following signatures, amongst others: W. Pawson, Mayor, Edward Baines, A. and
D. Webster, James Green, John Beckwith, Robert Barr, &c. And at the request of numerous influential parties,
the Patentees have given a further trial of their improved Double Chambers, of increased power of resistance to
Fire, for large Safes and Buildings, at the same place, of which they feel much gratification in giving the follow-
ing particulars:
MILNERS’ EXTENDED WEST-RIDING (LEEDS) DEMONSTRATION.
Safety from Fire to Books and Documents, combined with the strongest security
against Robbery and Violence.
At the Public Demonstration of the perfect security against Fire, afforded by Milners' Patent Fire-resist-
ing Safes, and of the insecurity of other Depositories, at the Coloured Cloth-hall Yard, Leeds, September lfith,
1846, we certify that Milners’ Safes brought their contents, consisting of Books and Papers, including a£6 Bank
of England Note, out of the Fire quite perfect; whilst the contents of an Iron Safe, tested with Milners', to shew
the contrast and the heat of the Fire, were reduced to ashes.—ln recommending Milners’ Safes, as a perfect seeu-
rity against Fire, to all Public Offices, Bankers, and Mercantile Establishments, we aiso beg to congratulate the
Patentees, after these severe trials, on the very successful result of each experiment.
J. D. Luccock, Mayor.
Hamer Stansfield, Ex-Mayor.
George Hyde, Manager of the
Branch Bank of England.
A. and D. Webster.
Henry Birchall, for Edward
Birchall and Sons
Thomas Dawson, (Lapage and
Dawson.)
J. Y. Knight, 39, Briggate.
G. Korber, Wool Dyer.
Jennins and Hargrave.
W. P. Whitfield.
Frederick Heycock.
Francis Carbutt, Alderman, &c.,&c.
The Tested Safes and contents, as they came from the Tire, on yiew, and Stock kept suit-
able for ALL classes of Buildings, at MILNERS’ LEEDS DEPOT, 39, Briggate, Leeds.
MILNERS’ EXTENDED EAST-RIDING (HULL) DEMONSTRATION.
The security against Tire afforded by Milners’ Patent Fire-resisting Principle, (evaporation in chemical non-
conduction,) as applied in their one-chambered Portable Boxes, was publicly tested in the Railway Bonding Yard,
Hull, on the 9th July, 1841, when a certificate of approval was given by the following gentlemen, who had witnessed
he trial:
Geo. Locking.
W. Field.
H. Hubbertsey.
W. Sharpe.
W, Tudor.
Heddou Trigg.
John Etheringtou.
E. E. Thompson.
R. B. Calton.
MILNERS’ EXTENDED EAST-RIDING DEMONSTRATION, of the perfect security from the Fire of
the larger class of buildings afforded by their double and quadruple chambers, combined with protection against
violence and fraud in “ Milners' Holdfast Fire-resisting Safe,’’ —the strongest Safe extant, — took place at the
Railway Dock. Hull, October 19, 1846. Milners’ No. 1 Safe and an Iron Safe, such as generally used, were
placed in the same strong fire for three hours. Milners' brought its contents out perfect; those of the Iron Safe
were reduced to tinder. Milners’ Double Bankers’ Safe was exposed for six hours in intense fire, and the watch
taken out ol it when it came from the fire was cooler than the Mayor’s from his pocket. Full part culars will be
found in the Eastern Counties' Herald, the Hudl Advertiser, and Hull Packet, of the 22d and 23d October; and
the following certificates were obligingly given by the gentlemen present at the trials: —“ On the oci asion of pub-
licly testing Milners’ Fire-resisting Manufactures, at the Railway Dock, Hull, October 19th, 1846, this sheet of
paper, with the signatures thereon fresh written, was placed by John Gresham, Esq., the Mayor of Hull, in one of


tneir safes, which was tested in a fire of intense heat for six hours, and taken from the same with its entire oontents
quite perfect, as certified below."
Jno. Gresham, Mayor.
Thomas Thompson, Alderman
E. English, Manager of the York-
shire Banking Company.
Lightfoot,Earnshaw,&Frankish,
Solicitors.
Joseph It. Pease, Banker.
Edwin Smith, Banker.
Jno. Lee Smith. _
E. Coleman, Superintendent of
the Dock Company.
Sidney and Hall.
Kirk, Bolton, and Brown.
Henry Gibson.
Joseph Jones, Ex-M'ayor.
Robert Wells, Solicitor.
Holden and Son, Solicitors.
Gee and Cos.
James Henwood, Banker,
James Lofthouse.
Thomas White, Colonial Agent.
George Locking, Secretary to the
Hull and Selby Railway Corn-
pany.
William Brown.
William Beadle, Merchant.
Ashton Cox, Tobacco Manufacturer.
Having placed this document in Milners’ Fire-resisting Safe, I have much pleasure in certifying the above, and
adding my opinion, that from the very extraordinary heat to which these Safes have this day been subjected, they
afford a perfect security against the strongest conflagration. JNO. GRESHAM, Mayor.
Hull, 19th October, 1846.
Hull Railway Dock, October 19th, 1846.
“ Having attended the public testing of Milners’ Fire-resisting Safes, and witnessed the contents of each, con-
sisting of books and papers, £2O in Bank of England Notes, a gold watch and chain, together with a packet of
gunpowder, quite perfect, alter the most severe trials by fires conveying furnace heat for several hours (in which
the contents of a common Iron Safe, tried with the same to show the contrast, were completely destroyed,) we
have pleasure in declaring our conviction of their perfect security, and stt ;ngly recommending their universal
adoption.
“John Gresham, Mayor.
O. T. Dobbin, LL.D., Hull College.
W. Yevers, Wesleyan Minister.
William Mawson, Leeds.
George Ross, Surgeon.
A. MacManus, Chief Constable.
Wm. Field, Grocer.
C. Reid, Gent.
Eichd. Westerby.
T. Mason.
T. White, Colonial Agent.
R. Garbett, Merchant.
Wm. Beadle, Merchant.
Ashton, Cox, and Cos.
Wm. Moms, Gentleman.
Josh. Jones & Cos.
Hy. Gibson, Surgeon.
Kirk, Bolton, and Brown.
Wm. Irving, Jun.
John Gibson.
The Tested Saff.s and C ntents as they came from the Fires, and Stock of all strengths
and sizes, at 47, WHITEFRIARGATE, HULL.
J. T. MILXES, Agent.
NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE.
THOS. MILNER & SON earnestly invite the serious attention of all owners of Books and Documentary
Property, in the wealthy and important district of which Newcastle-upon-Tyne is the centre, to the following
certificates of results of their recent trial there:—
“ We, the undersigned, being present at the demonstration of the security afforded by Milners’ Fire-resisting
Manufactures, have attached our signatures to this document prior to its being placed within their Safe for testing
in the Riding School, at the Forth, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, November the 30th, 1846.
“ James Archbold, Mayor.
John Brandling.
James Finlay.
John L. Angas.
James Potts,
James Garnett.
Simeon Joel.
P. Bell.
James Jones.
James Clapham.
Jos. Armstrong.
James Wilson.
Jno. Ormeston.
J. Lambton Loraine.
John Fenton.
Wm. Beaumont.
George Lockey.
James Gilpin.
Robt. Wilson, Engineer.
J. D. Weatherley.
John Blackwell.
M. J. Burn, Engineer."
“ I certify, that this certificate was taken from Messrs Milners’ Fire-resisting Safe, after being subjected to the
most severe trial by Fire of intense heat, for Six Hours.
(Signed) “JAMES ARCHBOLD, Mayor.
“Riding School, Newcastle, November 30, 1846.
“Messrs. THOS. MILNER & SON, of Liverpool, having this day submitted two of their Fire-resisting Safes
to a public test, in Fires of the greatest severity, from three to six hours, we certify that the contents of each, con-
sisting of Miscellaneous Papers and Books, a Packet of Gunpowder, with a Gold Watch, were taken therefrom
quite perfect, whilst the Papers and Books within a large Iron Safe,tested with the same, were completely destroyed.
“We have therefore great pleasure in recommending these Fire-resisting manufactures for general use; and
while we congratulate the Patentees upon their very successful experiments, confidently declare our conviction
that their Sales afford a perfect security in cases of ordinary Fires.
“ James Archbold, Mayor.
John Brandling.
J. D. Weatherley.
Wm. Beaumont. ■
John Fenton.
James Potts.
Robt. Marshall.
James Finlay.
James Wilson.
Charles Humble.
R. W. Bolarn.
Geo. Chapman.
James Clapham.
J. L. Loraine.
Danl. Greene.
Philip Pearson.
Joseph Armstrong.
Jno. Capper Hall.
John Blackwell.
Henry Clapham."
The Tested Safes, and Stock of all strengths and sizes, at Mr. JOHN MATHER’S Stove and
Grate Manufactory, 13 and 14, Dean-street, NEWCASTLE.
On the day of the above Experiments the Patentees had their attention drawn to the Plymouth Papers of the
Saturday before, November 28th, reporting the fact of one of their Safes having “ done its duty,” in a very severe
trial on the occasion of the Premises of Messrs. Plimsaul Brothers, being destroyed by Fire, together with several
surrounding Buildings. The Fire commenced on Monday night, and was not completely got under until Wed-
nesday, involving a loss of £7,000 to £B,OOO, and entirely consuming the Stock, containing a quantity of Cam-
phine, Oils, Gunpowder, &c., &c. After giving full particulars of the Fire, they state
has furnished a practical test of the value of Milners’ Patent Safety Chest. About one o’clock it was discovered
that the books of account, and other important documents of the house, which were kept in one of these Chests,
were preserved uninjured by fire or water; while a large iron safe, of the old construction, which had been sur-
rounded with a brick wall, had had its door forced by the heat. Had the books been in it, they would have been
consumed.”
Since which, THOMAS MILNER SON have received the following from Messrs. Plimsaul Brothers, of
Plymouth; adding another triumphant instance to the number that have occurred, of the sterling value of their
principle,—bringing a set of Books uninjured out of a perfect crucible, on a large scale, as these gutted buildings
were:
41, Bedfobd-street, Plymouth, November 30th, 1846.
Gentlemen, —ln the late extensive and destructive fire that occurred on our premises in Buckwell-street, on
the night of Monday, the 23rd, which destroyed the Premises and our entire Stock of Ironmongery, Oils, Turpen


lane, Candles, &c., &c., and considerably damaged several adjoining houses, — the destructiin of property bainr
estimated at several thousands, — we have to inform you, that we owe the preservation of our Books and' Papers
entirely to the use of your invaluable Patent Fire-resisting Safe, the loss of which would have been inevitable, had
we kept them, as we formerly did, in an Iron Safe, surrounded by brickwork, and protected by inner and outer
doors, this Safe having become red hot throughout by the intensity of the fire.
We are, your obedient servants,
Messrs. Milner and Son.
PLIMSAUL BROTHERS.
Great Fire in Queen-street, Glasgow, January 17th, 1847.
In the opening month of the New-year, (1847), “Milners’ Fire-tamer,— 212° the boiling barrier against
combustion — steam slowly generated and prolonged in non-conduction — wins another Silver Trophy from the
Fire-king’s brow. A large fire occurred on the 17th of January, 1847, entirely destroying the handsome range
of stone buildings from 74 to 84 inclusive, in Queen-street, Glasgow, occupied by Messrs. Reid, Robertson, and
Co., Messrs. Samuel R and Thomas Brown, and several other establishments. The whole range of buildings
was completely gutted, and two of the sufferers have addressed the following letters to Thomas Milner and
Son:—
Glasgow, 12th Febroart, 1847.
Sirs, — I beg to inform you that my Books and Documents contained in a common Iron Safe, were completely
destroyed by the extensive fire which took place on the 17th ult., in Queen-street, wherein property to the extent
of £100,000 was consumed
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
D. RITCHIE.
To Messrs. Thomas Milner and Son, Fire-resisting Safe Makers, Liverpool.
Memorandum —There is nothing peculiar in the mere contrast of the above, with Messrs. Brown's letter
following. Out of ten warehouses burnt down in George-street, Manchester, nine houses had their Boots
burnt in their Iron Safes and Closets, and the same thing is weekly proving their insecurity; but what is really
peculiar in this case is, that Mr. Ritchie had sold numbers of Milners’ Fire-resisting Safes to his
neighbours, Messrs. Brown amongst t’.erest, but like the shoemaker’s wife, had taken no care for himself.'! a
warning which Thomas Milner and Son hope all their Agents especially will take, and not defer one day
getting their Books into Double-chambered Safes or Boxes.
Glasgow, February 12th, 1847.
Sirs, — The Books and Papers which were within your Fire-resisting Safe during the destructive fire on
our premises in Queen-street, on Sunday, the 17th January, ult., were all preserved, whilst all our other Books
and Papers not so deposited were totally consumed.
We have much pleasure in making this communication from a conviction of the certain protection afforded by
Milners’ Safes against the ravages of fire, and strongly recommend them to the general adoption ot the public.
We are, Sirs, your most obedient servants,
SAMUEL R. AND THOMAS BROWN.
Messrs. Milner and Son, Liverpool.
Milners’ extended Glasgow Demonstration.
In addition to the trial of their One-Chambered Box in Glasgow in 1842, and to the practical contrast afforde*
by the preserved contents of their Safe, at the Great Fire in Queen-street, Glasgow, in January, 1847), compared
with the universal destruction of books in the Iron Safes around, the Patentees have pleasure in publishing the
following Testimonial:—
New Square Bazaar, Glasgow, 22nd March, 1847.
Thomas Milner and Son, of Liverpool, having this day submitted two of their Fire-resisting Safes to a severe
trial, by fire of intense heat, respectively for three hours (during which the contents of an Iron Safe were com-
pletely destroyed), and for six hours without injury to the books, papers, bank-note, &c., within:—we feel much
pleasure in expressing our conviction of the perfect security against Fire afforded by Milners’ Safes, and do
hereby, with confidence, recommend their adoption by the public.
Alexr. Hastie, Lord Provost.
J. W. Sebright, Postmaster.
John M‘Callum, Deacon-Convener.
James Lumsden, Late Provost
Wm. Black (W. Black & Cos.)
Malcolm Black.
Robert Miller (Addie, Miller, and
Rankin).
John Forrester.
Alexander Malcolm (J. Gibson and
Cos.)
Thos. N. Slater.
Carmichael & Hutton.
D. Dreghorn.
W. Robertson, Supt. Fire Engines.
David Hall.
Patrick Dougall.
John Smith, M. A.
William Fulton.
John Hedderwick.
J ohn Wilcox,
George Bridges.
Geoe. Dowie.
David Smith.
John Miller.
Mungo Thompson.
Win. Thompson.
David Gilmour, Engr
Wm, Lewis, W. M.
John Sawers, Market Keeper.
William Wallace Fyfe, F. R . S. A.
Thos. Nielson (late convener of
Trades).
Jas. Drummond (Clarke & D.)
W. C. Paterson.
Arthur Scott, M.D., &c., &c.
When Milners’ Safe and the Iron Safe were removed from the fire, the Authorities present wished to see the
effect of a stream of water thrown upon them in their heated state ; and the Superintendent of Fire Police being in
attendance, with two engines to prevent accident (at the request of the Lord Provost, from the alarming extent of
the fires), he at once played upon them, when the Iron Safe doors cracked and flew to pieces—Milners' being
unaffected by the sudden cooling, and proving its superiority in this respect. At the close of the six hours' trial,
several scientific gentlemen wished to ascertain the temperature to which the contents of the Safe (so long sur-
rounded with red heat) had attained, which they found, by Thermometer, had barely reached the boiling point.
This certificate is signed—W. C. Patterson, Publisher of Mechanics’ Magazine, Glasgow; Robertson & Cos.;
Wm. Steward; Geoe. Dowie; John Buchanan; Arthur Scott, M.D.; Wm. Robertson, Supt. Fire Police, John
Sawers, M.K.,&c.,&c.
Great Fire in Manchester,
IN MARKET STREET, NEW BROWN STREET, POOL STREET, and POOL LANE,
Destroying the entire Square (or Block) of Warehouses, Offices, and Shops, (See Manchester Guardian
August 14th, 1817,) in which every Iron Safe is burnt out, the whole of the buildings being entirely
gutted. The only Safe which brought its contents uninjured out of the burning mass being the one alluded
to below.


p _ Manch ester, August 13th 1847.
which* my "warehouse formecf T ? nti - re I y gutted 'he entire block of buildings of
a quantity of valuable papers, watches, &c., were preserved 'uniniul^d°in one If 8 ' ™ y ks ’ tog . elher wilh
"Inch I strongly recommend to the public. 1 Jed 111 0116 our Fire-resisting Safes.
I am your obedient servant,
THOMAS HAIGH,
Messrs. Milner and Son, Woollen Merchant, New Brown-street, and Market-street.
i u stead tfburned) b t ;ihe S^p^ti^";:^ipTe e '^,l ) e t tfe COm Ne:r stea >“ ad (boiled
chambered Sale, full of valuable Books and Documente before toe Fire V.**? Ir ?“ Woof(?)
tinder and ashes after it. 1 S betore *h e rue, was found to contain nothing but
Important Demonstration of the Security against Fire of Milners’ Safes,
at Oxford.
very intei esting experiments have been made on Milners’ Safes at Oxfhrd’ fron J Papers that some
"”nTSlS„rbSr c i;EtS rh »S’ &*«»*«»&“ SS&B St' •—* • ■
Senile men, return cur best thanks to you and the CoundWc7e ’ V °“ , , d "i tb ® p,ace ' Mr - President and
Oxford, which at once secured to J *° Ashra ° lea “ Society at
bmversit.es, under whose sanction and superintendent scle , ntlfic bod y, and of the
raw that the Fires were hot enough to Drove that if »», our public Test was arranged and conducted. They
- so, hid
lay the following Testimonial, with which they hove been honoured, £? Cflre thaDkS ’ and be ? t ’°
“ Having this day attended the testing of Milners’ Fire tw ,• „ a- “Oxford, March 16, 184S.
and superintendence of the Authorities of the University ancfrCi Whf ?j a '? ttfactulvs ’ conducted under the sanction
Milners Bankers’ Safe, filled with Books, e 0B ”SSl a Clag
hire for Five Hours — Milners’ No 1 Safe oimilnritr , note, a Watch, &c\, &c., being surrounded with
an Iron Safe, not of their make , for One Hour and a half On sh Pt Heat foi l Two Hours and a half, and
tinder, and those of Milners’ Safes unsinged — We hat mttt T the c ° ntrast >i H» contents being reduced to
of the principle of these Safes-combined Zn-Conduction ai d £ 'vZZtiZ' ou !' Voided approval
experiments-the Fires being made to convey the mostintense 7 our ,f eat satisfaction with these
contents of each of Milners’ Safes, our unhesitating mini fa from the ver y Perfect state of the
Records. Manuscripts, &c. &c., against the wag , of 10re in all ordina' ® c f t n secul ' u y. the y afford to Books, Deeds,
recommend them to the public for general use ordinal y cases, and we do with great confidence
H. G. Strickland, M.A.,F.G.5., President of the
Asbmolean Society.
Uobert Walker,M.A ,F.R,S, Reader in Experimental
Society Phy ’ &nd S,ecretar y of tbe Ashmolean
Chas. Daubeny, M.D., Professor of Chemistry
ConeS' eSWe ’ B D ’ F ' R S ” Tutol ' Worcester
H. Wellesley D.D., Principal of New Inn Hall.
“an nay, Fe ow of Worcester and Senior Proctor
H. Binney Fellow and Tutor of Worcester.
R. Barnes, M.A., Ch. Ch.
H. S. Slight, Bursar of Corpus Christi College.
R. Muck eston, Fellow and Tutor of Worcester
w m. Andrew, Tutor of Worcester.
Chas. Rew, Fellow of St. John’s.
W. W.Stoddard, Fellow and Tutor of St. John’s.
w. Jacobs, M.A., New College
Fred. J. Morrell, Solicitor.
B. Badcock, Land Agent.
C. R. Hickman, Sheriff.
. Biddle, Solicitor.
T. Taylor, J.P,
Jas. Pike, Merchant.
i . Symonds, Surgeon.
John Taunton, Solicitor.
J. Bradstreet, (London and County Bank \
Win. Kirtland, Ashmolean Museum '
(x. A. Rowell, Ali'red-street,
,p ?• Hookham, (Hookham and Minty )
i . L. Robins, Commander R.N.
1. G. Cousins, Beaumont-street, &c. & t .
This certificate is most numerously signed
importfun developments and for owk ° n ® of the most useful and
and those gentlemen who acted with him. You will remember the fh-ttl™ ar ® gl 't atly ,ndebted to Mr. S. Woods
investigation of the means of preserving doeomen 2 ru 7„ first experiments upon them, when the general
TAW and r d ’ T 1 ®° nfess ’ against this invatable lZnUol throu f^ ut those &
ii--^£s!^ja^&?assalSsrS&UL!!sa¥V^ ,, * r * ,lS * !:s * !;s »«*Sas ? !«3£
borne the far greater heat; and Mr. Milner at mv tln , d ® r - *“ , the same Fires of which Milners’ had
was before their opponent. y ’ 1 Decame > and still am, as strongly their advocate as I
you deeply, more carTexnress ? for' ™‘ 1 ar tPStimony. Mr. Milner again said, Mr. President I ths t
and I rejoice in this opportunity of Snaking ° andld avowtd > inva luable as coming ftolvor
investigation of the subiect and <•„- *, aK “ B ,, my Jieait ' elt acknowledgments to this Societv for tv,.,;™ ?. ou ’
Every large Fire just,S' approval ofl/E? T **7® receiyed since pW„sdeSStoftT
improving and better title to the honour we
Ashmolean Society, and that enlightened srientifi7®o th ,? r ! c , tlo i l of the Liverpool Polytechnic Societv th
- Si?H c ls; ch ' H"w. »mrt
(List, No. 3, m Pamphlet,) affords perfect security again/fire! Fraud! ° Wfa and Fire - resisti ng Safe


Many hundreds of Milners’ Safes have been supplied to the various Register Offices and Board of Guardian*
throughout the Kingdom. To the Liverpool Office upwards of forty; Leeds, eight large Safes, &c., &c., ordered
at the request and recommendation of the Registrar General, who has honoured the Patentees with the following
letter, acknowledging the late Oxford Testimonial, and others.
“General Register Office, Somerset House, 28th April, 1848.
« Gentlemen,—l have to thank you for your letter of the 25th instant, and the acompanying
papers.
“ Whenever I have an opportunity, I am always glad to recommend your Fireproof Safes.
I have the honour to he, Gentlemen, your faithful servant,
“GEORGE GRAHAM, Registrar General.
“ Messrs. Milner and Son, Liverpool.”
Public Tost at Norwich, under the auspices of the Lord Bishop and the
Authorities.
Athenaeum, Norwich, August 22nd, 1848.
Milners' Banker’s Safe and No. 1 Safe were most severely tested at Norwich on Tuesday, August22nd.
(See Norfolk News, August 26th.) The former for five hours, and the latter for two hours and a half, the heat
of the fires being proved by an Iron Safe being placed in the fire alongside and taken out with Milners’No. 1
Safe, both being externally red hot. On opening the two Safes, the Books, &c. in the Iron Saf e were found to be
reduced to ashes —those in both of Milners' Safes, including a Bank Note, a Watch, Handkendneis, Jewel-
lery, &c., &c. being uninjured. In proof that the evaporating-steaming-principle of Milners Safes has no
more injurious effect upon documents or writing than the damping of a newspaper from the press, a certificate
was numerously signed (by the Lord Bishop and many Gentlemen), and placed in Milners Sale during the trial.
Various Testimonials to the above facts, and in approval and recommendation of Milners Safes, bear the
following signatures:— Edwd. Norwich, President of the Athenseum (The Lord Bishop), E. Bath 1 ower, V ice-
President of the Athenseum, John Alexander, George B. Everett, Samuel Jarrold, Charles Mushett, George Arnold,
John Barwell, Jun., E. S. Culyer, Alexander L>. Bayne, Robert Grants, Edward Thirkettle, James Freeman, Jun.,
F. G. Rainger, C. Baker, W. W, Warnek, A. Borrett, W. Collins, W. Howlett, Wm. Kmght, W. Gordmg, Grim-
mer Phi. Edward Curtis, W. Walter Bowthorpe, E. C. Hewett, Thomas Eade, W. Nash, W. H. Cox, William
Mayhew, Thos. Galloway, George C. Kerry, Joshua Bryan, Jas. Bennett, G. S.Whiiicop, Edw. Saltwell, K. Cook,
Sami. Truefair, Sami. Newman, G. E. Minns, John Todd,Wm. Parke Allen, Chas. Hornor, H. Saul, Jno. Edward
Short, Chas. Juln. Dyson, F. Benn, T. Grimwood, S. R. Scott, T. H. Gunton, A. R. Arnold, H. Baker, Robert
Denny, Thos. C. Fox, Alexander O. Withers, Edward Browne, Walter Kitton, R. J. Barlow, H. J. Clarke,
Etheridge Curtis, John Sharman, Thornton Moore, G. Sothern, James Green, M. S. Davies, Thos. W. Fmnigan,
Jas. Holmes. The foregoing connected with the Athenaeum -From the Chamber of Commerce : —J. H. Gurney,
Chairman; Henry S. Patteson, Vice-Chairman; Directors— Thos. Banks, J. Godwin Johnson, Jereli Coleman
(ex Mayor), Robert Chamberlin, Edward Willett, John Norgate, Frederick Browne, John Copeman, Jun., Josh.
Stannard, Jun., John Barwell, George Jay.—Members — Robert Seaman, Josh. Geldart, John Sultzer, Thomas
Lounds, W. Thorold, James Colman, Abel Fowler, Joseph Torris, Peter Finch, J. E. N. Bacon, Robert Colman.
James Dawbarn, Wm. Shalders, Jun., Edw. Blakely, Josiah Fletcher, Charles Winter, Horatio Bolmbroke,
William Stark, J. W. Gidney, Ironfounder, Dereham, Robert Thompson, Thos. Potter, Henry Trevor, W. L.
Mendam, W. S. Saul, Walter M. Miller, A. D. Withers, J. Bateman, Jun., Josh. Colman, Joseph Cooper, Iron
Merchant, Lynn, Wm. Martin, Thomas Banks, Robert Howlett, Ironmonger, R. Colman, E. N. Bacon, George
Watson, Henry Baker, E. C. Hewitt, S. R. Barnes, Henry Bidwell, Samuel Trew, Jun., W. P. Marshall, Robert
Thompson, Jun., Iron Merchant, &c., &c., &c.
Extended Midland Counties Demonstration of the Fire-resisting capabilities of
Milners’ Safes, superintended by Scientific Gentlemen, residents of Derby.
Derby, May 4, 1849.
Having attended a public test of Milners' Fire-Resisting Safes, in Derby, on the 3rd instant, when materials
destructible by fire were effectually preserved in them, as described below, we beg to testify our approbation of the
invention, as affording full and complete security under the circumstances proposed in each case (see Pamphlet,
page 11, and to add that the experiments were so conducted by Mr. Wenden, the Inventors' Agent, as to be
satisfactory to all present. The contents of a Safe, placed in a strong fire for two hours and a half, were preserved
in perfect condition, as documents, consisting of books, papers, parchments, a £lOO Bank of England Note, &c.,
while those of a common Iron Safe, similarly placed, were almost totally destroyed in the Safe, and burst into
flames when exposed to the air. Similar articles, together with gunpowder, gold watches, and bank notes, placed
within Milners’ double 2J inch chambers, and exposed to fire for six hours, with an interval of an hour aftei
the first three, were all perfectly preserved,— Robt. Forman, Mayor; Jedh. Strutt, Belper, High Sheiin.
John Barber, Solicitor, James Heygate, M.D., F.R.S., Derby; S. F. Every, Quarndon ; Alfred Smith, Banker,
Wm. Pike (Proprietor of the Reporter Paper), John Davis, Optician, John Johnson 1 , Surgeon, H. Evans, Darley
Hall, S. W. Fearn, F.G.S., Edward Calvert, Smith & Co.’s Bank, W. J. Shaw, Solicitor, John Corden, Distributor
of Stamps, Chas. Pratt, Chamberlain, John Johnson, Joseph Bloor, Druggist, J. Thompson, Superintendent of
Police, Charles Stevenson, Jas. Peet, Jun., Silk Manufacturer, Jas. Brentnall, Confectioner, Geo. Wild, Grocer,
T. P. Bainbridge, Postmaster, Wm. Goodwin, W. Spencer, Agent, Rev.W. Fisher, 8.A., George Stevenson,
Draper, Fras. Huggins, Royal Hotel, W. S. Smith, Surveyor, W. H. Dobie, Commander, R. N., I. J. Jessopp,
Solicitor, Jno. Dunnicliff, Fras. Dixon, Captain, Derby Militia, Thos. Cooper, Gent., H. E . Gisborne, Surgeon,
Wm. Gregory, Mercer, Jos. Hollingworth, Druggist, Jos. Peet, Silk Manufacturer, A. J. Bernays, Scientific
Chemist, F.C.K., Douglas Fox, Vice-President Mechanics’ Institution, Thos. Bent, M.D., President Of the
Philosophical Society, W. G. Spencer, Secretary to the Philosophical Institution, W. R. Stevenson, B. A., John
Hill, Surgeon, Joseph Whittaker, Secretary to the Derby Building Society, John James Simpson, Solicitor, John
Steer, Optician. Wm. Morley, Iron Merchant,Thos. Gadsby, Gent., Jno. Wright, F.R.C.S., Pegg, Harpur, o£ to.
Derby.


On Wednesday, February 25th, 1846, a number of scientific and commercial gentlemen were
present at the testing of several of Milners’Fire-resisting Cases, at their works, in Lord-street
and Cable-street. Two cylindrical cases, for the prevention of the ignition of gunpowder, of
equal thickness—-the one double chambered, and the other treble chambered—were tested, for
the admiralty, with the view of determining the relative capabilities of the two arrangements.
At the same time, one of Milners’ No. 1 Safes was, at the request of Mr. Whitty, and under
his inspection, placed in the fire alongside a strong iron book-case, in which Messrs. Whitty and
Ellis had kept their books before adopting Milners’ Safe, with the object of showing the effect of
the fire upon the contents of the one safe compared with the other. During the trial, the works
were visited by crowds of the leading gentlemen of the town, including the Mayor, and several of
the Council, &c., &c. ; and the fire, which was of the fiercest character that could be obtained
from wood and coal in the most active state of combustion, continued to increase in intensity to
the end of the experiment. After about three hours and twenty minutes, the outer bricks
surrounding the fire were pulled away, exposing the mass of combustion to be of one devouring
heat under and all around the cases, and themselves at a white heat —the bricks beneath them
being afterwards, found to be completely vitrified. Mr. Milner, jun., then took the opportunity
of calling attention to a large diagram, showing the supposed graduated temperatures of an
extensive building in rapid and strong combustion. This diagram, drawn on an upright board,
was divided into 30 portions by lines or indices, each representing 100 degrees of Fahrenheit-
first showmg the heat of boiling water and steam, or 212 degrees at the bottom of the scale; next
400 degrees, the heat at which papers and books begin to be charred; then ascending to 800
degrees, the point at which iron becomes visible in a dark room; and so on, up to and from 1000
degrees, a moderate red heat, to 2000 and 3000 degrees, a little higher than the point at which
cast iron meits. The object of this exposition was to show that, while all other bodies would
gradually sympathise and ascend with the rising beat of the surrounding fire, water and steam
would not exceed the boiling point, 212 degrees, in which papers could not burn, — water and its
vapour, under the control of bad transmitters of heat, being the agents of the fire-resisting prin-
ciple upon which the patent under review, submitted to these tests,is founded. Another diagram
was shown, exhibiting the inner cell of a powder magazine, which had been tested for twelve
hours by the 1 olytechmc Society some time back. From the centre of this cylindrical cell were
described successive concentric rings, representing successive chambers, each of which quadruples
the i esistmg power of the one within it—showing that the principle could be extended to any
I hß l h e -m- SeCUn i u eqUire< l from - 1 lt ‘ , thus increasing the resisting power beyond the risk of
Sonertv d o n f g ’thl h S T 7 t < T > i defi “ ed , aud adjusted, the valuable books and documentary
propeity of the Bank of England, and other extensive, public, or commercial offices, maybe
made perfectly secure from fire, m whatever part of the buildings the Safes may be found most
p’l ! 1 ' 611 '.,, He . lle V called attention to their one-chambered Box from Mr. Garniss’s fire, in
Paik-lane, the contents of which were the only things saved in the building; and to the Safe of
T^nn Sr |' f V< i l k vV °-t Ellkenhe f (1 > the b ? oks of wll ich were saved in their office, while an ordinary
Iron Safe beside it was burnt out. The speaker next invited the notice of the auditors to their
ew violence and fraud-resisting Safes”—the strongest description of Wrought-iron Safe yet
made, and which they intended to secure from fire by fitting them with their interior fire
resisting chambers, rendering them capable of resisting twelve hours’ fire, or upwards, which
wp m ° st , safeguards extant for cash, or other valuable property in
books, deeds, &c. These Safes were exhibited on the ground in the plain, strong wrought-iron
(half an inch thick,) unpainted, and ‘unchambered, with the view of showing their strength • and’
f "s^tr m ar e ” essof the finis,, ’ ,he ««*•* *»--A*, loctff’ii.
we ” rc “ ive<i ’“***“ he •“*>**.«• wr.
leftTrithfnn 16 Mn tentS - XT th . e „ lr , on 1 Safe were consumed to tinder, not a vestige of paper being
left within it. Milners No. 1 Safe brought out its contents, including the £IOO note unscathed
i ners round Safes, although half melted and burnt through the outside cases in many parts'
preserved their contents uninjured, the treble chamber proving, as was expected the
arrangement. The gentlemen present expressed themselves most highly l satisfied with the
'pemnents, as affording another proof of the extraordinary efficiency of’the principle under
circumstances far exceeding in severity any trial to which the Safes coukl, in any probability
Wh'tt I ’f rdlnary — 6S ' 7 ° the . foregoing, taken from the papers of the day, may be added
Mr. Whitty s own opinion, from his ow n paper, the Liverpool Journal,-whose estimate afmr
having for so many years superintended the Liverpool Police and Fire Establishment nnt’jJlZZ
more weight perhaps than any otherln another column we have insSed of th«
thl e experiments in the yard of Messrs. Milner and Son. Having taken some interest in


DEBTRUCTIVE FIRES IN GLASGOW, MANCHESTER, LINCOLN'S-INN,
MILNEKS’ “HOLDFAST” and FIRE RESISTING SAFES are the strongest, best, and cheapest j
guards in the world against fire, robbery, and fraud; 20,000 of them keep the books, deeds, and cash ol
practical men of Liverpool, Manchester, Glasgow, Sea., who know their superiority to any others. Five of ?;
have brought their contents unscathed out of the ruins of large fires in Glasgow alone this year, wherein sc
of other safes have been burnt out. Twenty-five offices were burnt out in Lincoln’s inn in January, in one *v
of which the title-deeds of thirty large landed estates were burnt, which would all have been preser-te
Milners’ Safes. From some hundreds of certificates, the following is selected, as one out of many instar ■<
which every thing was consumed in the buildings excepting what Milners’ Safe contained : —
“ Glasgow, 7th May, IS
“ Gentlemen, — We beg to inform you of the occurrence of one of the largest Fires that has taken place
for many years. We send you, however, the Glasgow Herald of this date, which will give particulars, from w
you will perceive there have been a great many buildings burned down; a sugar refinery, a church, and sei
manufactories, including the extensive premises of Messrs. Charles Boyd and Son, soap and candle mam)
turers. They had one of your No. 3 Safes, with drawers, got from us about five years ago; and the writer
calling upon them this morning, was perfectly astonished at the sight it presented. First of all, the b
knob as well as the brass-work round the lock, was completely melted off, and the sides ot the hate
blistered out nearly a couple of inches. The heat to which this safe has been exposed must have been
mendous: after enduring the fire above, it fell from the counting-house to the cellar beneath, a.nd therel
exposed for hours to the most intense heat, from the flaming oil and tallow. All the books and papersl
which it was filled, and also notes to a considerable amount, were perfectly saved. The large ledger, which
have been touching the door, was slightly discoloured at the back — only the binding — and no other !
was in the slightest degree damaged. On account of the absence of the Principal this 'orning, the certil
of this splendid test of the complete and perfect resistance which your invaluable Safes present agamsj
ravages of fire, will be obtained this evening.” — Thomas Milner and Son, with the deepest feehrt
‘ ratification lay before their friends, the public, the above extract from their Agent's letter, reporting!
strongest testimony they have received to the usefulness of their Safes, and have equal pleasure m ad|
*he promised certificate of the owners.
" o Clyde street, Anderston, Glasgow, May 7,1849
« Gentlemen —At the calamitous fire yesterday morning, by which our premises, and stock of oil, tallow,
were totally destroyed, our books were preserved in the Milners' Fire-proof Safe, purchased from you. We ;
great pleasure in thus bearing testimony to the great efficiency of these Safes. CHARLES BOYD & td
8 ‘‘This Safe was most severely tested ; the brass knob and brass work about the lock were melted off.’
TRIUMPHANT RESISTANCE TO ROBBERS.
Referring to their “ Holdfast Safes” (See List No. 3, page 3), Thomas Milner & Son 1
pleasure in publishing the following report, addressed to their Agents, of a night’s unsuccei
labour of robbers to obtain the valuable contents of one of their Safes, in the use of a 1
sugar-house in Glasgow: —
Messrs. David Boyd & Co. ,
Gentlemen—Our Milners’ Safe was attempted to be broken open last night; but, noti
standing the great and persevering violence with which the robbers have worked at the door]
back of the Safe (both of which are beaten in and cut through the outer plates in numerous pla
lock and bolts remained true, and saved the contents. You may send us another Mill
Holdfast Safe, No. 6. JAS. RICHAJtDSON & C
Glasgow, 23th December, 1848.
THE GREAT EIRE AT LINCOLN'S INN.
The Daily News of January 17th, says, “ A rumour is current, and we have reason to be
it well founded, that the title deeds of about thirty large landed estates, chiefly belong;,
families of distinction, perished in the Chambers of a firm of Solicitors, in Lincoln’s Inn.’!
this mass of valuable property had been deposited in Milners’ Safes, the same results would
followed as in the case of Mi\ Haigh, of Manchester, Messrs. Walkers, of Birkenhead, Hivei
Mr Blackaller, Messrs. Garniss &. Co., Messrs. Brown, Ker, Doering & Co., &c., &c., See.,
these irreparable losses would have been prevented. Besides the one office alluded to a 1
twenty-five others were destroyed. .
Large Fire in Gordon-street, Glasgow.— Here all the books in the safe-
were burnt to ashes, excepting those in the only three of Milners’ in the buildings. The v
contents of the brick, stone, and fireproof (1) cement closets, with iron doors, that stood e
were charred to tinder within them. Many of the iron doors of the closets fell out froij
stone and cement, in which they were fixed, shivering away from them from heat and \
thrown upon them, the books falling out after them into the fire.
Glasgow, I6f/i February, 1849
Gentlemen —The books and papers which we had in your Fire-resisting Safe, which
subjected to a most intense heat for several hours at the late fire in Gordon-street, on Thu]
last were wholly preserved —the property saved being of extreme importance to us. V/>
therefore great pleasure in communicating this fact, deeming your Safes invaluable as ., 4 .
tion against fire, and an invention with which the public cannot be too well acquainted.
° We arej gentlemen, your obedient servants,
Messrs Thos. Milner and Son, Liverpool. KER, DOERING, & <
The above Safe was most severely tested, the outside being completely burnt through.
Glasgow, \lth February, 1841
Sirs —I have great pleasure in stating that I kept all my books and papers of conseq
within one of your one-chambered boxes in my closet, and that every thing is now as ,,
within it as before the fire. I make this declaration in justice to yourselves, as the con, ,
several stone rooms with iron doors and common iron safes in the same fire were totally des'J
I am, sirs, respectfully yours,
Messrs Ytios. Milner and Son, Liverpool. JAMES TO WE]
In the third case, a closet full of books and documents was entirely burnt to tinder, the 1
closet and contents being one mass of red heat within, and surrounded by which one of M
Boxes kept its contents without a singe upon them; a case of most severe trial, from its prol
character.


MILNERS’ PATENT
FIRE-RESISTING, MANUFACTURES,
PATENT
FIRE-RESISTING,
r J^Z UA . L RE " ACTION 0E internal Non conduction and Evaporation (at
~ ' ' NER tnni? WITHIN THE SafE WHEN EXPOSED TO FIRE, NEUTRALISING
lOUU DEGREES OF HeAT, AND PREVENTING IGNITION.
WOEKSp ILITJEMIPOOILo
LONDON CITY DEPOT—47a, MOORGATE STREET.
LONDON WEST END DEPOT—SI7, NEW OXFORD STREET.
fonndl»m3 ?h rt,A V T^. el S i ?-? ° on £ a B' al j Ol w at Hamburg, New York, Quebec, New-
desteS’ !be JnT» a H f P 1 ?- 6rby wbere T ! n the ancient records of the town were
f fParb r ent| the Paper Buildin gs, Temple (where thirty-six
t the chambers of professional men were sacrificed, together with the valuable docu-
i 1 irr t ?P arabl e loss of the Records of antiquity in King
S™ L O .? 1 / g ’■ 1 1 \? f Mau ’ the .Registers of Science in Aberdeen College, the
and Mansions of the nobility and gentry throughout Great Britain
withthe f on^ ulnd redwithm a comparatively recent period—together
the destiuctive Town hires in this Country (as in George-street Mancliester
111 which nine Commercial Houses out of ten, burnt out, lost their Books and Docu-
ments mlron_ Safes and Closets miscalled Fire Proof,) whilst in London two Fires
occur daily on an average, involving the loss of Deeds/Writings Ancient Records
Manuscripts, Registered Documents, Commercial Books, Accounts, &c., and all
serving to corroborate the results of the investigations of practical science and to
prove the utter inefficiency of the presumed safeguards to which twTspedes of most
valuable but umnsurable property has hitherto heen intrusted.
Destructive Fire at Lincoln’s Inn, January, 1849.
At this moment we quote from the “Daily News” the
following startling announcement: —“A rumour is current, and
we have reason to believe it well founded, that the Title Deeds
°£ thirty large landed estates, chiefly belonging to families
of distinction, perished in the Chambers of a firm of Solicitors, in
-Lincolns Inn. ’ Daily News, January 17, 1849.
And this only IN ONE OFFICE, out of the numbers that
have been destroyed in the late Fire.
. The alarming frequency of these occurences having awakened public
ST U ’ th . e . universal importance of this desideratum to all classes— a\ecure
depository fot the preservation oj Books and Documents from Fire, we solicit your
sonsideration of the peculiar and effective principle of our Patent Fire-
resisting Manufactures, fully described in the accompanying pamphlet.
i Tll , e distinguished approval and powerful recommendation our Invention
has received from gentlemen interested in Mechanical and Chemical Science after
havrng witnessed the highly satisfactory results obtained by some hundreds of public
trials of this combined principle of protection in red heat under their auspices—and
the. numerous actual occurrences of Fires, in which our manufactures have preserved
their contents uninjured, while others have failed beside them—encourage us to press
their claims upon your attention. 5 1
We earnestly and respectfully solicit your perusal of the enclosed, and the
honor of your patronage for our Fire-Resisting Safes and Boxes, adapted in various
thicknesses to every class of Buildings, from the Cottage to the Palace, and
w “ I th6 De i , f e<l offlce t 0 the Universities, the Inns of Court, the Manchester
Warehouse, Mill, or Factory, and including the strongest and best Wrought Iron
Treasure Safes and Closets, Fire-Resisting Chambered, in the World, as well for
b D C vr to /L of P™ va te Documents and Valuables, as for those belonging
to Public Offices and Establishments, for the safety of which you may feel interested.
We are,
Your most obedient servants,
THOMAS MILNER & SON.


PATENT
HOLDFAST AND FIRE-RESISTING
BOOK SAFE, DEED BOX, AND GUNPOWDER MAGAZINE WORKS,
47 to 57, CABLE STREET, AND 50A AND 54, LORD ST.,
LIVERPOOL.
LONDON CITY DEPÔT— 47A, MOORGATE STREET.
LONDON WEST END DEPÔT, 517, NEW OXFORD STREET.
MILNERS’ HOLDFAST and FIRE-RESISTING GOVERNMENT SAFES and
CLOSETS, for Books, Title Deeds, Cash, Plate, &c., the strongest safeguards against
fire and robbery in the world; outer plates of bodies, quarter to half inch, and of doors
half inch thick, solid wrought Iron, strongly dovetailed together; with impregnable
Locks, Bolts, and back Fastenings, and lined throughout with Milners’ Treble Fire-
resisting Chambers. (See List No. 3, in Pamphlet.)
MILNERS’DOUBLE FIRE-RESISTING CHAMBERED SAFES, CLOSETS,
and CHESTS, lighter, and one-third cheaper, than the Thief-proof “ Holdfasts,”
but equally safe against fire. (See List No. 2, in Pamphlet.) Safes and Chests from
List No. 2 and 3, are recommended for large Buildings, Mansions, Mills, Suits of
Offices, Warehouses, &c.
MILNERS’ ONE-CHAMBERED FIRE-RESISTING BOXES, for detached
Buildings of moderate size and risk. (See List No. 1, in Pamphlet.)
TRIUMPHANT RESISTANCE TO ROBBERS.
Referring to their “Holdfast Safes” (See List No. 3, page 3, in Pamphlet),
Thomas Milner & Son have pleasure in publishing the following report, addressed
to their Agents, of a night’s unsuccessful labour of robbers to obtain the valuable
contents of their Safe, in the use of a large sugar-house in Glasgow:
Messrs. David Boyd & Co.
Gentlemen,—Our Milners’ Safe was attempted to be broken open last night; but.
notwithstanding the great and persevering violence with which the robbers have
worked at the door and back of the Safe (both of which are beaten in and cut through
the outer plates in numerous places), the lock and bolts remained true, and saved the
contents. You may send us another Milners’ Holdfast Safe, No. 6.
Glasgow, 28th December, 1848. JAS. RICHARDSON & CO
Robbery of £l5O from an Iron Safe (?) in Oil Street.
(See the Liverpool Papers of last week.)
A very striking and instructive contrast to the above circumstance very recently
occured : important to all Holders of Cash and Valuables. Mr. Leicester, of the
Steam-mills, Woodstock-street, lately fixed one of MILNERS’ HOLDFAST and
FIRE-RESISTING SAFES, the strongest Safeguards in the world against Fire and
Robbery, and called upon the Makers the next day, saying, “ I placed upwards of
<£7oo in your Safe last night, and we suppose the thieves had seen us getting it into
the office, and broke in after we left. They had tried to pick or force the Lock and to
cut into the Safe, in vain (half-inch Boiler-plate outside), neither could they remove
it (weight, nearly 8 cwt.) so I have saved .£7OO by my outlay of £21.”
Thomas Milner & Son have pleasure in laying the above facts before the Public.
JAPANNED CASH-BOXES (not fire-resisting), with Milners’ impregnable.
Detector Locks. , ~ . _
MILNERS’ IMPREGNABLE LOCKS, for all uses, and combination Door
Latches. ...
Pamphlets may be had at the Works, and of the Agents; giving sizes, prices,
description, experimental tests, in red heat, from one to twenty-four hours, by scien-
tific and practical parties the Liverpool Polytechnic Society, the Royal Dublin
Society, Professor Main, Dr. Sir R. Kane, Mr. Creed, Mr. Woods, Mr. Stevenson, Mr.
C. W. Williams, Mr. Herapath, &c. &c., and cases of actual fires, in which Milners
Safes—out of the 20,000 now in use—have preserved their contents, everything else
being destroyed in the buildings, including the contents of strong iron sages and
drawers, standing beside Milners'. _ n t , .
The Patentees caution the public, that none are genuine but such as bear their
patent plates; also against delusive tests of non-conductors in a moist state, or into
which means of producing moisture, when heated, have been surreptitiously intro-
duced. Without the powerful aid of steam, neutralising 1000 degrees oj heat, no pre-
sumed bad conductor of heat, in a thoroughly dry state (which it will soon become in
a dry office), will preserve the contents of a safe unburnt in a strong fire.
CAUTION TO MAKERS AND SELLERS OF SAFES.
Any means of producing moisture or evaporation within or round a safe, as securing
from fire, infringes these patents, and will be prosecuted.
Milners’ Works, 50a and 54, Lord-street, and 47 to 57, Cable-street, Liverpool;
London City Depot, 47a, Moorgate-street.
London West End Depot, 517, New Oxford-street.


DESTRUCTIVE LARGE FIRE
IN GORDON STREET, ARGYLE STREET,
GLASGOW.
Here all the books in the safes and closets, in nearly twenty offices, were burnt to ashes, excepting those
in the only three of Milne ns’ in the buildings. The whole contents of the brick, stone, and fireproof (!)
cement closets, with iron doors, that stood entire, were charred to tinder within them. Many of the Iron
doors of the closets fell out from the stone and cement, in which they were fixed, shivering away from them
from heat and water thrown upon them, the books falling out after them into the fire.
Glasgow, 1 6th February, 1849.
Gentlemen,—The books and papers which we had in your Fire-resisting Safe, which was subjected to a
most intense heat for several hours at the late fire in Gordon-street, on 1 hursday last, were wholly pieseived
the property saved being of extreme importance to us. We have, therefore, great pleasure in communicating
this fact, deeming your Safes invaluable as a protection against fire, and an invention with which the public-
cannot be too well acquainted. We are, gentlemen, your obedient servants,
Messrs. Thos. Milner and Son, Liverpool. KER, DOERING, & GO.
The above Safe was most severely tested, the outside being completely burnt through.
Glasgow, llth February, 1849. ,
Sirs, —I have great pleasure in stating that I kept all my books and papers of consequence within one
of your one-chambered boxes in my closet, and that every thing is now as perfect within it as before the
fire. I make this declaration in justice to yourselves, as the contents of several stone rooms with iron doors
and common iron safes in the same fire were totally destroyed.—l am, sirs, respectfully yours,
Messrs. Thos. Milner and Son, Liverpool. JAMES IOWEES.
In the third case, a closet full of books and documents was entirely burnt to tinder, the whole closet
and contents being one mass of red heat within, and surrounded by which one of Milners’ Boxes kept its
contents without a singe upon them; a case of most severe trial, from its prolonged character.
GREAT FIRE IN MARKET STREET, MANCHESTER,
ENTIRELY CONSUMING A LARGE SQUARE OF WAREHOUSES, OFFICES, AND SHOPS.
In the last great Fire in George-street, Manchester, nine large Houses had their Books burned in Iron
Safes Closets with Iron Doors, Wrought Iron Fire-proof (?) Safes, &c., &c., &c.; and again, on the above
recent occasion, upwards of thirty parties have suffered the same calamity. The only Safe which brought
its contents uninjured out of the burning mass being the one alluded to below. The outside of this Safe
was partially melted; the contents inside unsinged being steamed (boiled instead of burned) by the evapora-
ting principle of the Safe. —Near to it a large Wrought-Iron Fire-proof (?) chambered Safe, full of valuable
books and documents before the Fire, was found to contain nothing but tinder and ashes after it!
Manchester, Avgust 13th, 1847.
Gentlemen, —In the late Fire in Market-street, which entirely gutted the whole block of buildings
of which my Warehouse formed part, I have sincere pleasure in informing you that my books, together with
a quantity of valuable papers, watches, &c., were preserved uninjured in one of your Fire-resisting Safe to
whichl strongly recommend to the public. I am, your obedient servant,
THOMAS HAIGH,
Messrs. Milneb & Son. Woollen Merchant, New Brown-street, and Market-street.
In the numerous accidental Fires and experimental tests which Milners’ Safes have been exposed to
every description of Safe in use Fire-proof (so called) or otherwise, have been burnt out beside them,
confirming the recommendation of the scientific and practical authorities who have tested them; and the
Patentees, oduring 0 during seven years’ active working of their patent, on a rapidly extending scale, have spared no
pains nor cost in effecting improvements, by which they are enabled to pledge themselves at all times to
supply the most complete and secure depositories for Books, Documents, and Valuables; including the
strongest Wrought Iron Safes, Closets, and Doors in the World, lined with their unequalled Fire-resisting
Chambers. Out of upwards of 20,000 of their Safes in use amongst the Manufacturing and Commercial
Houses in Great Britain —the class best able to appreciate their value—numerous eases of severe trial in
accidental Fires have occurred, from which Thomas Milner and Son select the following as instances, in
which they are of opinion that no other Safe than their own would have preserved its contents unburnt.
Fire at Mr. J. B. Blackaller’s Ship Chandlery Store, Sparling-street,Liverpool; a strong and fierce Fire;
Safe most severely burnt outside; contents unsinged.
Fire at Messrs. J. & W. Walkers’, the extensive builders, Birkenhead: buildings entirely gutted, every-
thing burnt in them, including the contents of large Iron Safe and Drawers, standing beside Milners’: the
contents of Milners’ uninjured, and in use now.
Fire at Messrs. Garniss & Co.’s, Park-lane; a very strong Fire; again the contents of Milners’ Safe the
only things saved on the premises.
Fire at Plimsaul Brothers, of Plymouth; a very extensive and destructive Fire; a large Iron Safe,
covered with brick-work, with double Iron doors, burnt out; Milners’ entirely preserving its contents.
Fire in Queen-street, Glasgow; a great number of Safes and Closets burnt out: no books saved
throughout the buildings excepting Messrs. S. R. & Thomas Brown’s, in Milners’ Safe.
Milners, Fire-resisting Safes, Chests, and Boxes, suitable for all classes of Buildings, Impregnable
Locks and Cash Boxes, at the Works, 50a and 54, Lord-street, Liverpool, and London City Depot, 47a, Moor
gate-street. London West End Depot, 517, New Oxford-street.


DESTRUCTIVE FIRES IN GLASGOW, MANCHESTER, LINCOLN’S-INN, &c.
MILNERS’ “HOLDFAST” and FIRE-RESISTING SAFES are the strongest, best, and cheapest safeguard-
the world against fire, robbery, and fraud: 20,000 of them keep the books, deeds, and cash of the practical men of Li\
pool, Manchester, Glasgow, &c., who know their superiority to any others. Five of them have brought their conte-
unscathed out of the ruins of large fires in Glasgow alone this year, wherein scores of other safes have been burnt o '
Twenty-five offices were burnt out in Lincoln’s-inn in January, in one alone of which the title-deeds of thirty large landeu
estates were burnt, which would all have been preserved in Milners’ Safes. From some hundreds of certificates, th
following is selected, as one of many instances, in which every thing was consumed in the buildings excepting what Milner-
Safe contained:
Glasgow, 7th May, 1849.
Gentlemen, —We beg to inform you of the occurrence of one of the largest Fires that has taken place here for ni:
years. We send you,’however, the Glasgow Herald of this date, which will give particulars, from which you will per- > '
there have been a great many buildings burned down; a sugar refinery, a church, and several manufactories, includina
extensive premises of Messrs. Charles Boyd and Son, soap and candle manufacturers. They had one of your No. 8
with drawers, got from us about five years ago; and the writer, on calling upon them this morning, was perfectly astom.
at the sight it presented. First of all, the brass knob, as well as the brass-work round the lock, was completely melted u.'. 1
and the sides of the Safe had blistered out nearly a couple of inches. The heat to which this Safe has been exposed must,
have been tremendous: after enduring the fire above, it fell from the counting-house to the cellar beneath, and there was
exposed for hours to the most intense heat, from the flaming oil and tallow. All the books and papers with which it was
rilled, and also notes to a considerable amount, were perfectly saved. The large ledger, which must have been touching
the door, was slightly discoloured at the back —only the binding—and no other book was in the slightest degree damaged.
On account of the absence of the Principal this morning, the certificate of this splendid test of the complete and perfect
-■fesistance which your invaluable Safes present against the ravages of fire, will be obtained this evening.”— Thos. Milneb
and Son, with the deepest feeling of gratification, lay before their friends, the public, the above extract from their Agent’s
letter, reporting the strongest testimony they have received to the usefulness of their Safes, and have equal pleasure in •
adding the promised certificate of the owners.
“ Clyde-street, Anderston, Glasgow, May 7, 1849.
r “ Gentlemen, —At the calamitous fire yesterday morning, by which our premises and stock of oil, tallow, &c., were
totally destroyed, our books were preserved in the Milners’ Fire-proof Safe, purchased from you. We have great pleasure
in thus bearing testimony to the great efficiency of these Safes. CHARLES BOYD & CO.
“ This Safe was most severely tested; the brass knob and brass-work about the lock were melted off.”


The deep importance and peculiar interest of the question of security to valuable Documents
from Fire, in connexion with the time-honoured seats of learning at Oxford, requires no enforcement. Here,
during the lapse of ages, have been collecting, the Records of their wisdom and experience—of infinitely 1
greater worth in the eyes of the learned, and of greater moment to the interests of mankind, than the rich
accumulations of those favoured points in the universe—Nature's great laboratory where gold and gem,
“ the diamond in its native bed,” have been slowly forming, simultaneously with these richer stores. Here,
the mine of mind has been filling —the cycles of time and of religion have been fulfilling and here aie
treasured up, within these sacred towers, their inestimably valuable results. -A.II <iccid.6llt<il con-
flagration may, in a few hours, reduce these oracles of the past to unintelligible
ashes. The enquiry naturally arises, How can a disaster of such magnitude, and yet of such probable
occurrence, be effectively and certainly guarded against? Enclosing them in massive structures of iron,
stone, brick, or other dry non-evaporating materials, has been proved of no avail. These soon become
red hot throughout, when surrounded with Fire; and the merely calling a thing a Safe, will not make
it any longer what the name implies, for combustible property within the burning prison, when so heated.
Aware of the utter inefficiency of all existing arrangements, and feeling perfect confidence in tlieii Fire-
resisting Principle, as the only provision extant that can be made equal to any, wdiatever emeigency,
Thos. Milner and Son, in bringing their Patent Fire-resisting Manufactures under the notice of the
Universities, and being desirous of obtaining the awakened and impartial consideration of the Authorities
to the whole subject, they procured letters of recommendation to the Lord Bishop of Oxford, and to a
number of scientific Gentlemen; amongst them the following from the Liverpool Polytechnic Society to
the Ashmolean Society at Oxford:—
(copt.)
“Liverpool Polytechnic Society, Royal Institution, March 11, 1848.
“ To the Secretary of the Ashmolean Society,
“ Sir, I have the honour to communicate to the Ashmolean Society, through you, that, at a Meeting of the
Council of the Polytechnic Society, held on the 9th instant, Mr. W. Milner (one of the Members of the Council) having requested
an official introduction to the Ashmolean Society, at Oxford, recommending to their favourable attention the efficient Fire
resisting principle, for the protection against Fire of valuable Eecords, Books, anti Documents, of which his Firm ( r l hos
Milner and Son, of Liverpool and London,) are the Inventors and Patentees, it was unanimously Resolved: ‘That the Counci
of the Liverpool Polytechnic Society have great satisfaction in complying with Mr. Milner’s request, from the very important
considerations involved in the subject of security to Documents from Fire, and from their knowledge of the great original merit,
superiority, and efficiency of the invention; and that the Secretary he requested to address a letter to the Ashmolean Society,
containing their unanimous resolution, and embodying references to the investigation of their Society into the general question of
protection to documents from Fire, as reported in their public transactions, with the information and results obtained after careful
and severe experiments, proving the inadequacy of all other various plans in use, and the practical and successful mastery of the
difficulty in Milner’s Non-conducting and Evaporating Chambered Safes and Boxes.’ la pursuance of my instructions, I would
particularly call attention to the extraordinary capabilities of the arrangements for increasing the duration of security, by increasing
the Chambers, so that by estimating the time occupied in the burning down of all the various classes of buildings, a Safe is
provided which will keep its contents unsinged, although surrounded with Fire, and externally red hot itself, beyond that period.
I beg to invite your perusal of Mr. Samuel Woods’ paper, in the pamphlet of our transactions herewith; and have also pleasure
in referring you to the numerous corroborative experimental trials in Messrs. Milner’s punphlet, also accompanying; and to the
further and still more important and convincing testimony afforded by the many and severe cases of actual Fires, authenticated by
the certificates of the parties benefited by the invention, in which Milners’ Safes have proved their competency to grapple with
and repel the danger so deeply interesting to, and vitally affecting, property the most valuable and important to the man of science
and letters, as well as to the conservators of national and public records and documents, appertaining to property, wealth,
commerce, &c. “ Sir,
“Your’s respectfully,
(Signed) “C. F. SALT,
“ Sectary Liverpool Polytechnic Society .”


