

-13 mu re
L
**? NOW all Men by these Presents, that
have made, constituted, and appointed, and by these Presents do make, constitute and
appoint
true and lawful ATTORNEY, for and in Name, Plaee, and Stead, and to and
8e ? to ask ? demand ? ,ake - Slle for . recover, levy, and receive ail Sum and
Sums of Money, Debts, Rents, Goods, Wares, Dues, Accounts, and demands whatever,
which are or shall be due, owing, or belonging to j n
? . or detained from in any Manner of Ways
or Means whatsoever; and to appear for in any Court of Law or Equity, and to
sue, prosecute, or defend any Cause or Suit on Behalf; and to compound? agree
submit to an Arbitration, or any other Settlement, either by a private Agreement, or under
the Direction of the Court to do and consent unto every Matter as fully and effectually as
might or could do if present, in every Cause or Matter
CIV INC and GRAN I INC unto said Attorney, by these Presents, full
Power and Authority m and about the Premises, and to have, use, and take all lawful
M ays and Means, in Name or otherwise for the Recovery thereof; and upon the
Receipt of any such Debts, Dues, or Demands, Sum or Sums of Money as aforesaid, one or
more Receipt or Acquittance, or other Release or Discharges, for and in Name and
as Ac t and Deed, to make, sign, seal, and deliver, and generally to do and transact
any other Act or Acts, Thing or Things, Devise or Devises in the Law whatsoever, need-
ful and necessary to be done in and about the Premises ; and in Name to do ex-
ecute, and perform all things as fully, to all Intents and Purposes, as might or
could do if personally present, or if the Matter required a more special Authority than is
hereby given ; and Attornies one or more under for the Purposes aforesaid to make,
and at Pleasure to revoke, ratifying, allowing, and confirming, and holding effec-
tual all and whatsoever sa id Attorney shall lawfully do in the Premises by Virtue
hereof. J
In Ft itness whereof have hereunto set Hand and Seal
at Van Diemen's Land, the
7 tn Year of our Lord One thousand
eight hundred and thirty-
Signed, Sealed, and Delivered, 1
(no Stamps being used in the >
Colony, in the Presence of S
PRINTED AND SOLD BY A. BENT, HOBART TOWN, VAN DIEMEN'S LAND.


1 508
28007
, 2602
