

GENERAL CODE
%\\Us ami fatm of |We(lmc
DESIGNED FOE THE USE OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCHES OF AUSTRALIA
AND TASMANIA.
/^o77>
Melbourne: AN/ '^r\
Fergusson & Moore, Printers, 48 FLi>l[^;sj^A]|roEi%lr.
1885. Y^°
*- o'-••'-'■ .■




GENERAL CODE
and af |Wttdnw
DESIGNED FOB THE USE OF THE
PEESBYTEEIAN CHUECHES OF AUSTEALIA
AND TASMANIA.
fllelbotirne:
Fergusson & Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East.
1885.




INDEX
Part ll.—Functions of Courts, &c,
Part lll.—Modes of Procedure :
Chap. I.- -Moderation in Calls
Part I. —Standing Orders 5
Chap. I. —Sessions ... 16
Chap. IT. —Presbyteries 18
Chap. lll.—General Assemblies 21
Chap. IV. —Federal Assembly 26
Chap. V. —Congregations 28
Chap. ll.—Ordination and Induction of Ministers 34
Chap. lll.—Licensing of Preachers 38
Chap. IV. —Election and Ordination of Elders ... 42
Chap. V.—Petitions and Overtures 44
Chap, Vl.—Discipline 46
Part IV. —Forms, &c 54


PREFATORY NOTE.
No Eules have been introduced into this Code relative to Com-
mittees of Management or Deacons’ Courts. The practice of the
different Churches in regard to such Courts and Committees varies
for the present; and it is left with each Supreme Court to frame its
own rules thereanent, and place them in its Supplementary Code.
The same liberty is conceded relative to the Formula, which is to
be signed by Students applying for License, Preachers, Elders,
Ministers and Missionaries, and the Questions which are to be put
to them respectively; and likewise in regard to the Declaratory
Act and the Explanatory Statement.
Eules for the guidance of the Special and Standing Committees
of the General Assemblies are, in like manner, left with each
Assembly to frame for itself, and to insert in its Supplementary
Code.


PART I. —STANDING ORDERS FOR THE
CONDUCTING OF BUSINESS IN CHURCH
COURTS.
1. All meetings of Church Courts, Committees and Meetings, how
Congregations are opened and closed with prayer, and constituted, &c.
the fact of their having been so opened and closed is
recorded in their minutes. In Presbyteries, General
Assemblies, and the Federal Assembly, it is usual to
combine praise and the reading of the Word with
prayer in the opening exercises.
2. Every Court has its Clerk, whose duty it is to Clerk,
draw up and keep an accurate record of its proceed-
ings, and to supply extracts of the proceedings when
duly called for.
3. No extracts from the minutes of any Court can Extracts,
be given by the Clerk without its leave or instruction;
and the Fees to be charged for such extracts are fixed
by the Court itself.
4. Every Congregational Meeting or Church Court Chairman or
is presided over by a Chairman or Moderator, who has Moderator *
a casting vote but no deliberative vote; and the
Chairman or Moderator, if he wishes to express his
opinions on any matter before the Meeting or Court,
leaves the Chair, except when called to rule on a point
of order. When the Chair has been so vacated, it is
occupied by another Chairman or Moderator, who is
appointed to act pro tem.
5. In Presbyteries, General Assemblies, and the
Federal Assembly the Moderator for the current term
presides, or, in his absence, the Chair is taken by the
ex-Moderator. If he also should be absent, the Court
elects a Moderator pro tempore from among the members
who have already held the office of Moderator.
6/ Notices of motions are given at some Sederunt Notices of
or Meeting previous to that in which they have to be motions *
discussed, and are received without any discussion.
Members in giving such notices read them aloud, and
hand a written copy of them to the Clerk after they
have been so read.


Order of speak-
ing.
7. A member may give notice of motion for
another member who is not present, provided the
written notice is signed by the absent member; and
all changes on notices of motions are announced not
later than the Sederunt previous to that in which
it is proposed to have them considered, or previous to
the issuing of the circular by which the meeting for
the discussion of such motions has been convened.
8. Every motion or amendment before being dis-
cussed is committed to writing and placed in the
hands of the Clerk, and no change can thereafter be
made on the terms of it, without the leave of the Court.
9. When a motion has been submitted, it falls to
the ground unless it be seconded, and it must be either
seconded or formally dismissed before another motion
or amendment can be proposed, or any speech heard
in reference to it. The same law applies to all subse-
quent amendments; and no notice is taken in the
minutes of motions or amendments which have not
been seconded.
10. A motion or amendment which has been made
and seconded cannot be withdrawn except with the
leave of the Court, and at the request of the mover or
seconder. Motions which have been withdrawn are
not entered in the permanent record.
11. No member who simply_ moves or seconds
a motion or amendment can thereby reserve to
himself a claim or right to speak at a later part of the
discussion; but members who have spoken to a motion
or first amendment may claim a right to be heard on a
second or any subsequent amendment, provided it can
be shown that new matter has been introduced into
the debate by such amendment. The claim so made
has to be stated with all possible brevity, and the dis-
posal of it is settled forthwith by the ruling of the
Chair or by a vote of the Court, without any dis-
cussion.
12. When a member rises who has taken no pre-
vious part in a debate, and whom the Court may be
desirous to hear at that stage, it is competent for any
member to move that he be now heard, and the vote is
taken on every such proposal without discussion.


13. When two members rise to speak simultaneously,
the preference is given by the Moderator to the
member who declares his intention to oppose the view
supported by the previous speaker (subject to the
proviso of Standing Order 9.) If both members propose
to speak on the same side of the question, the preference
is given to the member who has first caught the eye of
the Moderator.
14. No member of a Court is allowed to speak more Explanations,
than once in the course of a discussion, unless in
explanation, or as provided in Standing Order 11; and
when a member claims the right to explain, his
explanation must have reference exclusively to some
statement or statements of his own, which, in his
opinion, have been misapprehended. Any attempt to
introduce new matter into an explanation is summarily
checked by or through the Chair; and any member
has a right to call the attention of the Chair to such
attempts. The point so raised is settled without
discussion, as provided in Standing Order 11.
15. Any member of the Court has the right to call a Calls to order *
speaker to order, and the speaker thereupon stops
and takes his seat, until the point of order has been
decided. The ruling of the Moderator or Chairman on
such points, if challenged, is disposed of in accordance
with Standing Order 11. Members calling to order
unnecessarily, or who appeal against the ruling of the
Moderator and have not their appeals sustained, are
prohibited from raising other points of order during
the same debate.
16. Members in speaking to a motion or amend- Personal reflec-
ment address themselves to the Chair, and speakers tlons-
who make personal reflections are at once called upon
by the Moderator or Chairman to withdraw such
reflections. The withdrawal so called for to be
made at once, and in a form satisfactory to the Court.
17. When any member objects to words used in Objectionable
debate, and desires to have them taken down, the
Moderator, with the approval of the Court, directs that
they be taken down by the Clerk accordingly. All
such objections have to be raised at the time when the
words objected to are used, and not at any subsequent
part of the discussion.


18. Members having been declared to have used
words which are considered objectionable, and failing
to retract them or to offer such an apology for the use
of them as may be satisfactory to the Court, are
censured, or may be otherwise dealt with as the Court
shall think fit, consistently with the fixed rules and
usages of the Church.
19. No member is allowed to reflect on any law or
decision of the Court except for the purpose of moving
in a legitimate form that it be moved or rescinded.
20. When the Moderator rises to speak during a
debate, any member then speaking or rising to speak
sits down, and the Court remains silent, so that the
Moderator may be heard without interruption.
21. When the ruling of the Chair on any point is
challenged, the member who questions the ruling is heard
for not more than five minutes, and the Chairman or
Moderator, having been heard in reply, the vote is taken
without fuither discussion, it being a fundamental
principle of our polity that the ruling of the Chair is
always subject to the direction of the Court.
22. Before a vote is taken on any question or motion,
the mover of the original motion has the right of reply.
The matter to be submitted to the Court is then formally
[stated by the Moderator, or, at his request, by the
Clerk; and any Member who fails to hear distinctly the
question as so stated, may claim to have it stated again.
But no further discussion can be allowed on a question
or motion after it has been so stated, and a vote has
been called for, in regard to it.
23. When the vote has to be taken on a motion and
amendment duly proposed and seconded, the vote on
the amendment is taken first, and thereafter another
vote is taken for and against the proposal which
has previously obtained the majority.
24, When several amendments have been proposed
and seconded, the last amendment is put against the
amendment immediately preceding, and the amendment
which is carried against that which has preceded
both, and so on until all the amendments have been
disposed of. Thereafter the amendment last carried is
put against the original motion, and then a final vote is
taken “for and against” the proposal which has obtained
the precedence.


25. Motions, which are ruled by the Chair to be
substantively separate motions, and not amendments,
are voted “ for or against,” without any further dis-
cussion, unless when members may propose to move
and second an amendment or amendments on such
substantive motions, in which case the discussion of
the substantive motion and the amendments thereon
is allowed to precede the disposing of the original
motion and its amendments.
26. When it has been ruled by the Moderator or the Motions with
Court that a motion is made up of several parts, any several parts,
member has a right to claim that a distinct vote be
taken on the separate sections of the motion. Separate
amendments, relative to the different sections, may also
be submitted.
27. When motions are made relative to sums to Motions reia-
be expended for any purpose, or to dates at which any o/dates! 1 ” 18
proposed action is to be taken, or until which such pro-
posed action is to be deferred, the vote is first taken on
the highest proposed number or the remotest date, and
thereafter, if necessary, on the other numbers and
dates in their descending order.
28. The vote is usually taken by a show of hands. Mode
But when the mover and seconder of a motion or 60 es '
amendment are dissatisfied with the declared result of
the show of hands, or when it is considered desirable
to have the numbers voting formally recorded, the roll
is called.
29. When the vote is taken by the calling of the
roll the doors are closed, and no member or stranger
is allowed to leave or enter the Court—until the result
of the vote has been declared.
30. The carrying of the “previous question” is held Previous
to mean that the Court does not consider it expedient to motions for d
give a deliverance on the subject under discussion, adjournment
and the previous question has been moved, a
vote “ for or against ” is taken in regard to it without
discussion. Motions for adjournment are dealt with in
like manner.
31. Presbyteries, General Assemblies, or the Federal c^™“4hoie° f
Assembly, for the sake of greater freedom of discussion house,
may resolve themselves into a committee of the whole


House, in which case the Moderator leaves the chair, and
a Chairman is appointed to act in his room. A separate
minute is taken of the proceedings of the Committee,
and when the Court resumes, the chair is again taken
by the Moderator, and the Minutes of the Committee
are read. The resolutions of the Committee are then,
without further discussion, adopted, negatived, or
referred back to Committee to be further dealt with at
a future sederunt, as the Court may determine, and any
member dissatisfied with the decision so arrived at may
at this stage exercise his full privilege of dissent.
32. Members of any Court may not only dissent
from its decisions on a case, but may petition to have
the case reopened if they can produce new evidence
materially bearing on the case, or if they can show to
the satisfaction of the Court that the Rules of Procedure
have been so violated or departed from as to involve
substantial injustice. Due notice has to be given to the
Court of such petition, and of the grounds on which it
is based. Attempts to reopen a case without sufficient
grounds are liable to be dismissed as frivolous and
vexatious.
33. Matters on which the members of an Inferior
Court desire to obtain the opinion of a higher
Court may be referred to the Superior Court sim-
pliciter, and in all such cases the members of the
Lower Court retain their right both to deliberate and
vote.
34. Formal notice of References has to be given
to all persons having a direct interest in the matter to
which they relate, and who may not have been present
when the reference was agreed to. The reference
when taken up is stated by one or at most two mem-
bers of the Court from which it has come, and who
have been appointed for the purpose. No questions
on points of form or order can be raised, except by the
Moderator, until the reference shall have been so
stated ; but the Court may thereafter decline to enter-
tain the Reference, on the ground that it is irregular or
frivolous.
35. Any member of an Inferior Court, or any party
in a cause, not being a member, who may be dissatisfied
with the decision of the Court in regard to it, has


the right of appealing from such decision to the next
higher Court and in such cases no members of the
Court whose decision has been appealed against have
the right to vote in the Court of Review.
36, When an appeal is taken against the decision of Appellants and
an Inferior Court, two members of the Court are espon ens '
appointed to act as respondents and defend its judg-
ment. The appellant or appellants and the respondents
have alone a right to speak on the case in the Superior
Court, all the other members of the Inferior Court
being placed or held to be, at the bar.
37. When there is only one appellant, he is heard
first in support of his appeal, and the Court is there-
after addressed by the respondents, the appellant
having the right of reply.
38. When there are two or more appellants—both
appellants if there be two—or two of the appellants
appointed to speak for the others if there be more
tham two—are heard in support of the appeal, and they
may claim to be heard alternately with the respondents,
one of the appellants having the right of reply.
39. After the appellant or appellants and respondents
have been heard, any questions bearing on the case
which members of the Superior Court desire to ask,
may be put to members at the bar. And when all such
questions have been put and answered, the record is
held to be closed, and the members are removed from
the bar, and held to be excluded from the Court, until
the appeal has been disposed of.
40. When the decision has been arrived at, the mem - Decision stated
bers of the Inferior Court are recalled to the bar, and
have the decision announced to them, whereupon they
are required either to declare their acquiescence in
the decision or their dissent from it, and take action
accordingly.
41. In cases of appeal—though no members of the Explanations,
Inferior Court have a right to speak while the
appeal is under consideration, except the appellants
and respondents—any of them may be heard in
explanation of what he regards as a misrepresenta-
tion of the proceedings of the lower Court, but the
explanation must be limited strictly to the alleged mis-
representation.


No dissent with-
out a vote.
42. Any member of a Court has a right to dissent
from any of its decisions, in regard to which he
has voted , and of which he disapproves, and to
have his dissent recorded. He may also assign
reasons of dissent, which, together with the answers
thereto approved by the Court, are recorded in a book
of dissents. It is optional with the Court to answer
reasons, given in by dissentients. Reasons of dissent
from the decisions of an Inferior Court have to be given
in at its next ordinary meeting, and in the case of a
Superior Court they are submitted when the minute
recording the decision is produced for confirmation.
43. Members who dissent and appeal crave extracts,
which are granted on terms fixed by the Court, and
such reasons of dissent and appeal have to be lodged
with the Clerk of the Court within ten days, else the
appeal is held to be fallen from.
44. No member of any Court can dissent or appeal,
unless he has voted relative to the decision dissented
from.
45. Appeals are either sustained or dismissed—the
motion to sustain always taking precedence of the
motion to dismiss; but in either case the judgment
of the Inferior Court may be modified or as the
Superior Court may think fit.
46. Appeals may he sustained —lst. Because the
decision of the Inferior Court is disapproved ; or, 2nd.
Because of irregularities or informalities in the pro-
cedure of the Inferior Court. The sustaining of an
appeal on the ground of irregularities or informalities
does not necessitate the reversal of the decision appealed
against, unless it is considered that substantial injustice
has been done to the appellant through such irregular-
ities; yet, in consequence of irregularities, the Superior
Court, without entering on the merits of the decision
appealed against or pronouncing any judgment in
regard to it, may send back the case to the Inferior
Court with instructions to have it taken up de novo
and disposed of in accordance with the rules of the
Church.
47. The dismissing of an appeal implies approval
of the procedure and the confirmation of the decision


of the Inferior Court; yet the Inferior Court may be
directed to amend or alter the phraseology of its decision,
in whatever manner the Superior Court may determine.
48. Appeals against the decision of an Inferior Effect of
Court, do not bar such farther procedure in the case, A PP eal3 -
as may be considered necessary to mature it for the
consideration of the Superior Court; but they stay the
execution of judgment, and subject the regularity of
such further procedure in the Inferior Court, to the
review of the Superior Court, if the Appellant
considers that he has been aggrieved by it, and pro-
vided he has duly notified the Inferior Court of the
points in its procedure to which he takes exception.
This notice has to be given at the time when the action
excepted to is taken —if the Appellant is present—
or as soon as he shall receive official intimation con-
cerning it; and intimation of all action bearing on the
interests of an Appellant has to be forwarded to him by
the Clerk of the Court with the least possible delay.
49. No question which has been decided at one No re-opening
Sederunt of a Court, can be re-considered at a subse- during a the
quent Sederunt during the same Session; nor can any same session,
question disposed of at the commencement of a &c ‘
meeting, be re-opened for consideration at its close.
50. No Inferior Court has a right to review the Relations of
proceedings of a Co-ordinate Court; but on giving due courts mate
notice, members of an Inferior Court, with the sanction
of that Court, may ask, through a higher Court, for
information relative to the reported action of a
Co-ordinate Judicatory, and by this means may have
such action brought under the review of the higher
Court.
, Th ls means that Sessions may ask, through the Presbytery, for
imormation relative to the action of another Session , and Presbyteries
may inquire, through the General Assembly, relative to the action
of another Presbytery, and so on.
5U If any charge founded on such information is charges must
brought against an Inferior Court, it has to be definitely be formulated
formulated and committed to writing, and the Inferior
Court requires to have an opportunity of meeting and
appointing Respondents to defend its action, before the
complaint is taken up by the higher Court.


Private Meet-
ings.
Reports to
General
Assembly
or Federal
Assembly.
Amendments'
on proposed
deliverances.
Business of
Inferior
Courts.
52. The charge as thus formulated is dealt with in
the same manner as an appeal, the Complainant and
the members of the Inferior Court having no right to
vote, or to take part in the deliberations, except as
Complainant and Respondents.
53. All Courts have a right to sit with closed
doors on matters which, in their judgment, require
privacy. But no matter which has been dealt with
publicly in an Inferior Court can afterwards be dis-
posed of privately in a Superior Court, unless with
the consent of all parties concerned, or unless the
Superior Court may determine by a definite vote that
it is expedient to have it disposed of in private.
54. Reports submitted to the General Assemblies or
the Federal Assembly have a formal Deliverance
appended to them on the various suggestions or recom-
mendations contained in each Report, and in every
case both the Report and the Deliverance are printed
and circulated among the members of the Court, at
latest, on the day previous to their being taken into
consideration.
55, Notice of any Amendment which members may
propose to move on such Deliverances, have to be given
at latest at the Sederunt previous to their discussion,
and all such amendments when announced are forth-
with printed and circulated. Amendments cannot be
entertained unless thus notified and printed.
56. In all meetings of Inferior Courts the items of
business to be taken up are fixed at the commencement
of the meeting ; but on the application of three mem-
bers of the Court, the consideration of any item may be
deferred until next ordinary meeting, or until a meet-
ing specially called for its consideration, unless it be a
matter which arises necessarily out of the business of a
previous meeting; and no item, to which exception is
taken by three members of the Court, can be discussed
until next ordinary meeting, or until a meeting called
for the purpose of considering the matter so excepted
to, unless the intention to have it brought forward
has been previously intimated to all the members of
the Court, or unless it arises necessarily out of the
business of a previous meeting.


57. No motion to suspend a Standing Order in con- Suspension of
nection with any matter which is under consideration can ordered
be entertained, unless notice of the intention to move it introduction
shall have been given at a previous meeting or Sederunt business,
of the Court. Nor can any motion to introduce new
business be entertained, unless notice of the intention
to have it brought forward shall in like manner have
been given at a previous meeting or Sederunt.
58. The following is the order of business in all Order of
Inferior Courts Business.
(1.) Confirmation of the Minutes of the previous
meeting.
(2.) Eeasons of dissent from any of the decisions
recorded in the Minutes, and the necessary procedure
connected therewith.
(3.) In Presbyteries, the reception of Commissions, and
the admission of Associated Members.
(4.) Eeception of Deputations.
(5.) Matters recorded in the previous Minutes, but not
disposed of.
(6.) Matters of ordinary business which have emerged
between the meetings,
(7.) Matters of which notice had been given at the
previous meeting.
(8.) Notices of Motions relative to matters to be
brought forward at a future meeting.
59. In the General Assemblies and the Federal
Assembly the order of business at Forenoon Sederunts
after the first is:—
(1.) Confirmation of the Minutes of the proceedings
of the previous day,
( 2 -) Reasons of Dissent from any of the decisions
recorded in the Minutes so confirmed, and the necessary
procedure connected therewith.
, (3.) Notices of Motions relative to matters to be
brought forward at some future Sederunt.
(4.) Eeport of the Business for the day.
„ ( 5 -) ?h. e various items of business in the order speci-
fied in this Eeport, as approved by the Court.
Applications from Presbyteries for authority to
meet , and the announcement of Meetings of Com-
mittees.
* a PP lies only to General Assemblies. No meetings of any
presbytery can be held during the sittings of the Federal Assembly.


Chapter I.—Sessions.
How Convened.
At Evening Sederunts :
(1.) Notices of Motions.
(2.) Business as arranged by the Business Committee*
and approved by the Court.
(3.) Announcements relative to Presbyteries* and
Meetings of Committees.
PART lI.—FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF
CHURCH COURTS, &c.
1. The Session consists of the Minister or Ministers,
and Ruling Elders of each charge or congregation.
2. It belongs to the Session to superintend and pro-
mote the spiritual interests of the Congregation in
regard alike to worship and discipline, including the
supervision of Sabbath Schools; to fix the times
for dispensing ordinances ; to admit to membership ;
to exercise discipline on erring members, and restore to
membership after discipline has been exercised; to
receive and grant certificates of membership ; to call
meetings of the Congregation ; to examine and judge
of the qualifications of persons elected to the Eldership;
to ordain and induct Elders ; to receive and judge on
petitions from members and adherents of the Congre-
gation ; and to transmit all papers which have to be
forwarded to the Presbytery.
3. The Minister of the charge is ex-officio Moderator
of the Session. In collegiate charges the Ministers
preside as may be arranged between them. Where
the one presides, the other sits as an ordinary member.
The usual practice with colleagues is to preside alter-
nately.
4. The Moderator and two Elders are necessary to
form a quorum.
5. No meeting of Session can be held without the
Moderator, or without a Minister authorised by him or
by the Presbytery, to take his place.
6. Meetings of Session are convened by the Moder-
ator, or on his authority, and may be convened either
by intimation from the pulpit, or by notices duly given
to each member of Session.


7. Moderators of Sessions are bound to convene
meetings when requested to do so by two of the Elders,
or when instructed by the Presbytery, and all such
meetings have to be convened in the usual manner.
8. In vacant charges the Presbytery appoints one of interim Mode-
its members to act as Interim Moderator of the rator ‘
Session.
9. When two or more congregations, each having Sessions in
separate Sessions, are under the pastoral care of one charges^ 6
Minister, they can only have one representative in the
Presbytery, and should meet conjointly for his election
and to consider matters affecting the general interests
of the charge. But difficulties which affect only one
of the Congregations in such a charge, and which can-
not be disposed of by its own Session, instead of being
dealt with by the Joint Sessions, must be referred
simpliciter to the Presbytery.
10. When there is no Session in a charge or congre- Congregations
gation, the Presbytery appoints a Session, which may sessions,
consist either of members of Presbytery, or of a
Minister who is a member of the Presbytery and of
acting Elders within its bounds. And even where
there is a Session, the Presbytery, at the request of the
Session, or in cases of special emergency, may appoint
Assessors to sit and advise with the Session, as circum-
stances seem to require.
11. No Minister can form a Session without the sessions,how
authority of the Presbytery, nor can he make arrange- formed,
ments for the election and ordination of additional
Elders without the authority of his Session.
complaint can be entered against Complaints
the Moderator of a Session in the Session over which *$ a j. nstthe
he presides. Any such complaint must be brought '
before the Presbytery, previous notice of the intention
to complain having been given to the Session.
of tlm ap P £ or Emission to the fellowship Members, how
i ne tinmen confer with the Munster, who reports to admitted,
the Session; and the Session admit the applicants on
being satisfied as to their religious knowledge.
14, Members of other congregations, and of other
evangelical Churches, may be admitted to occasional
communion, as the Session may determine.


Chapter ll.— Presbyteries.
Presbyteries.
15. Sessions have a right to elect any Acting Elders
of the Church to act as their representatives in the
Presbytery and the General Assembly. The election
is for six or twelve months, as the Session may
determine. (Note also Standing Order 2 and Rule 3,
Chapter 11., and Rules 18-23, Chapter V.)
1. The Presbytery consists of all the Ministers of the
congregations within its bounds, Professors of Theology
also resident within its bounds, a representative Elder
from each of the sessions subject to its jurisdiction,
and Ministers to whom seats in the Presbytery may
be assigned by the General Assembly.
2. The Presbytery has the superintendence of all
matters relating to doctrine, discipline and order in
the several Congregations and Sabbath Schools within
its bounds; arranges for the supply of ordinances in
vacant congregations, and the formation of mission
stations and new charges, takes supervision of the
Theological Students within its bounds, and certifies
them in order to their admission to the Hall from year
to year; tries candidates for license to preach the
Gospel, and licenses those who are found qualified;
receives and deals with all applications relative to
moderation in calls and the ordination, induction,
translation, demission, or removal of Ministers in con-
nection with its various congregations; deals with all
matters affecting the teaching and character of the
Ministers, Preachers, or other office-bearers residing
within its bounds, and with all questions referred to it by
the Sessions and congregations subject to its jurisdiction.
3. The Session Records, and also the Records of the
Deacons’ Courts or Committees of Management of the
various congregations, are submitted to the Presbytery
annually for examination and attestation ; and it is
expedient that each Presbytery should appoint a
definite meeting, to be known as its Annual Meeting, at
which these Records are presented and examined. All
such records have to be produced whensoever they
may be called for by the Presbytery.


4. All references for advice, and all complaints and Order to be pur-
, , x»ci sued in Keier-*
appeals against the proceedings and decisions ot fees- ences and
sions. Deacons’ Courts, or Committees of Management, Appeals-
have to be submitted to the Presbytery as the first Court
of Review, and until they have been so submitted and
dealt with, they cannot be forwarded to a higher
Court.
5. The records of each Presbytery are sent up Records of
annually to the General Assembly for examination and be attested. to>
attestation.
6. At the close of each ordinary meeting the Preshy- Meetings of
tery fixes the time of its next ordinary meeting, and of Presbytery-
any meetings, in kune effectum , which it may arrange
to hold in the interim, and the times fixed for these
meetings are duly minuted.
7. No business can be transacted at meetings, in inhunc
kune effectum , except the business definitely specified e ec um ‘
in connection with the appointment of the meeting.
8. Meetings, pro re nata, may be convened by the Pro re nata.
Moderator or by the Clerk with the approval of the
Moderator, and Moderators are bound to convene such
meetings when requested by five members of the Court;
or, in the case of smaller Presbyteries, when requested
by at least one-third of the members on the roll. Such
meetings are convened by a circular issued at least
seven days before the time fixed for the meeting.
Before proceeding to business, the Presbytery approve
and confirm the action of the Moderator in con-
vening the meeting, or of the requisitionists, at
whose instance it has been convened. In the event of
the Presbytery disapproving and declining to proceed
with the business, the Moderator, or any of the requisi-
tionists, have the right of complaining to the next ordi-
nary meeting of the Court. No business, except that
specified in the circular, can be taken up at such
meetings ; and the circular is entered in the Minutes to
show that this provisionhas been strictly complied with.
9. Presbyteries at meetings pro re nata and in kune
effectum may adjourn and hold another meeting pre-
vious to the next ordinary meeting of the Court, for the


- 1 purpose of completing the business for which they have
been convened, and for that purpose alone.
Irregular Meet- 10, When a Presbytery at the close of its ordinary
ing> meeting neglects to fix the date of its next ordinary
meeting, or if there should not be a quorum present on
the day, and at the time appointed, it is competent for
the Moderator or the Clerk, with the concurrence of
the Moderator, to convene another meeting by circular,
addressed to all the members of the Court. These
circulars have to be issued at least seven days before the
day of meeting, and in the record of the meeting,
the circumstances in which it has been convened are
definitely mentioned, and also reported by the Clerk
to the next meeting of the General Assembly.
Associated 11. When a member of one Presbytery is present at
the meeting of another Presbytery, he is invited to take
part in its deliberations, but he cannot vote.
Leave of 12. Ministers are in no case to absent themselves
Absence. fV/vm fVipir rmlnife nr from flip naatnrnl nnrp nf tVioir-
from their pulpits or from the pastoral care of their
congregations for more than two months without obtain-
ing the leave of their Presbytery.
Resignations. 13. Ministers, in resigning their pastoral charge,
send their resignation in writing to the Presbytery
of the bounds, and the Presbytery, before proceeding
. to deal with it, cite the Congregation to appear for
their interests at the next or such subsequent meeting
of the Court as may be thought most expedient. No
jntiraations of this nature are to be made to Congrega-
tions by their Ministers except through the Presbytery.
P in res^yter^es hold ordinary meetings at least once
reference* to every quarter, but they may meet as often as they find
Ossein ° f necessar y or expedient, and they are bound to take
biies. & order that the injunctions of the Federal Assembly or
General Assembly, on all points, are faithfully
observed by the Ministers, Sessions, Deacons’ Courts,
or Boards of Management within their bounds.
And to visit 15. It is the duty of Presbyteries to visit the Con*
Uonf^ ega ' gregations under their care as often as circumstances
permit or require 1 ; to call the members of Sessions and
other office-bearers before them ; to enquire into the
affairs of the Congregations, and deal with them as may
be deemed for edification.


16. New Presbyteries are formed by the General N p£ esbyteries
Assemblies, to which they are subject, and in the Deed how formed.’
or Act of the Assembly constituting a new Presbytery,
the time and place of the first meeting of Presbytery
are specified, and one of its Ministers is appointed to
act as Moderator of said meeting.
17. Any proposed alterations in the bounds of Presby- Alteration of
teries have first to be referred to the General Assembly. oum s '
Nor can the Assembly take action relative to such
references until all the Presbyteries which are to be
affected by the changes have been consulted and
allowed an opportunity of setting forth their views
in regard to them. The decisions of the General
Assembly in reference to such proposals are final.
18. Three members of Presbytery, two of whom Quorum;
have to be Ministers of separate charges, constitute a
quorum.
Chapter lll. —General Assemblies.
1. General Assemblies consist of all the Ministers Member^ of
and Elders on the rolls of the Presbyteries within their Assemblies,
bounds.
2. General Assemblies take oversight of the Presby- Powers of
teries subject to their jurisdiction; examine their records; Assemblies,
dispose of all references, appeals and complaints sent
up to them by the Presbyteries; receive and dispose
of the reports of their various Committees relative to the
general schemes of the Church; receive and approve of
reports thereon to be submitted to the Federal Assembly;
and attend to all matters referred or assigned to them
by the Federal Assembly.
3. All General Assemblies hold an ordinary meeting ordinary Meet-
at least once a year, not more than three months, nor ings *
less than one month, previous to the annual meeting
of tne Federal Assembly.
4. Ordinary meetings of a General Assembly may
be held twice a year, provided the time for the second
meeting is 'definitely fixed and formally recorded at the
previous ordinary meeting.


5. Members of General Assemblies, not exceeding
in each case three in number, are appointed to act
respectively as corresponding members of the adjoining
Assemblies, and such corresponding members, on
being received by the Assemblies with which they
have been appointed to correspond, are admitted for
the time to the privileges of ordinary members.
6. In the larger Assemblies* sixteen members,
representing at least four Presbyteries, one-half of
whom have to be Ministers, are required to consti-
tute a quorum, and in the smaller Assemblies the
quorum required amounts to at least one-third of
the members on the roll, and includes representa-
tives of two Presbyteries, one-half of the quorum
being Ministers.
7. If a quorum is not present on the day and
at the time fixed for the meeting of the Assembly,
or within two hours thereafter, it is competent
for the Moderator on his own responsibility, or at
the request of three members of the Assembly, to
convene another meeting. This meeting has to be con-
vened by circular addressed to all the members, and
issued at least seven days before the meeting, and
meetings so convened require to be held not less than
fourteen days before the meeting of the Federal
Assembly. If any emergency arise, which in the
opinion of a quorum of the Assembly while in Session
requires it, the Moderator on being requested by
said quorum convenes an emergent meeting in like
manner, i.e., by circular, addressed to all the members,
at least seven days before the meeting, which requires
likewise to be held not less than fourteen days before
the meeting of the Federal Assembly.
8. Pro re nata meetings of the General Assemblies
are likewise convened by the Moderator, on a requi-
sition from not fewer than seven members repre-
senting at least two Presbyteries, and on not less than
seven days’ notice, but no action can be taken at
such meetings except in reference to the matters
specified in the circular. Nor can the business be
proceeded with, unless there be a quorum present, and
*For the present the General Assemblies of _ New Smith Wales and
Victoria are the two larger Assemblies, to which the first Section of
this Rule applies.


farther, unless the action of the requisitionists and
the Moderator in convening the meeting is approved
by a majority of the members present. The time for
holding such meetings is limited, as in Rules 7 and 8.
9. The Moderators of the General Assemblies are Moderators,
elected for twelve months. They deliver an opening
address on being elected to the chair, and conduct
Divine Service in presence of the Assembly when
retiring from the chair.*
10. Committees are appointed by each General Committees.
Assembly to take the management of its various
funds and carry out the operations connected
with its different schemes j and these Committees,
besides preparing reports to be submitted to the
General Assembly for its approval and confirmation,
have also to forward to the Federal Assembly for its
information such abstracts or summaries of these
Reports as may be required. The records of all
such Committees are submitted annually to the
General Assembly for examination and attestation.
11. Each General Assembly has a fund known as the Assembly
Assembly Expenses Fund, out of which the salaries of xpensea un
its Clerk and Treasurer, the expenses of the Conveners
of its Committees, and of Corresponding Members
appointed to attend the meetings of other General
Assemblies, and all other necessary expenditure con-
nected with the proper management of the Assembly’s
business are defrayed.
12. A Committee is appointed by each General Business
Assembly to arrange the order of its business. All Commi tee *
papers proposed to be submitted to the Assembly are
first laid before this Committee, and must be forwarded
to the Convener at least seven days before the meeting
of Assembly. Parties having cases to submit to the
Assembly may attend the meetings of this Committee,
appointed for the consideration of their papers, and of
which meetings they will receive due notice from the
Convener. All appeals, complaints, or references, not
presented by Appellants or Complainants within the
specified time, are held to be fallen from ; but they may
be presented afterwards, provided sufficient cause can
be shown why they were not lodged in due time.
Moderator* 61161 Assem ' frames its own rules for the election of its


Papers rejected.
13. It belongs to the Business Committee to decide
whether the papers sent to them are duly attested,,
drawn up in proper form, and competent. The papers,
on being examined, are transmitted simpliciter or cum
nota as the Committee may determine. The Committee
do not transmit papers which contain proposals that
seem to them incompetent, or which are couched in
language which they consider disrespectful.
14. In the event of the Committee resolving not to
transmit the papers of parties who are not in attend-
ance when the resolution is adopted, due intimation of
it is given to the persons concerned, with certification
that unless they attend an adjourned meeting of Com-
mittee, to he held at latest within five days after such
notice has been sent, they will be held as concurring
in the resolution. Intimation of non-concurrence has
to be accompanied by a written statement of reasons.
15. The Business Committee submit to the Assembly
a Report of the papers which have been brought under
their review, and of the manner in which these papers
have been disposed of by them, and they also indicate the
order in which they propose to have the various items
of business taken up. The consideration of this Report
is the first matter entered upon and determined by the
Assembly after the roll has been adjusted and called.
16. The Business Committee meet from day to day
during the sittings of the Assembly, and report at each
Evening Sederunt the items of business which they
propose to have taken up on the following day. Tim
Report is approved or modified as the Assembly may
determine, and no deviation from the order thus agreed
upon can afterwards be allowed for that day.
17. Committees are appointed by the General
Assembly for the transaction of special business, and
the functions of such Committees terminate with the
fulfilment of the business allotted to them.
18. Committees are likewise appointed from year to
year for the transaction of general business, which, in
common with the Business Committee, are designated
Standing Committees. The members of these Com-
mittees are nominated by their respective Presbyteries


according to Special Regulations framed thereanent,
and approved by the General Assembly.
19. The Ordinary Meetings of these Committees are Quarterly
held quarterly, on days fixed from year to year by Meetin € 8 *
the General Assembly. One-half of the travelling
expenses of members in attending these meetings is
paid from the Assembly Expenses Fund, and the other
half by the Presbyteries which they respectively
represent.
20, Each Standing Committee appoints an Executive Executive
Committee, consisting of not fewer than five of Committee# -
their number, who meet from month to month,
or as often as circumstances may require, to
carry out the instructions of the General Committee,
to mature matters affecting the interests placed under
their care, for the consideration of the Quarterly
Meetings, and to take such action relative to emergent
business as they may consider necessary or expedient,
subject to the review of the General Committee. No
action taken by an Executive Committee except on
matters expressly referred to them with that view, is to
be considered final until it shall have received the
confirmation of the General Committee.
21. All Committees, whether General or Special, Annual Meet-
hold Annual Meetings during the week preceding the mfttees. ° m '
meeting of the General Assembly (at such times as
may be arranged by the Business Committee,) for the
purpose of approving of their Reports, and selecting
mem >eis to move and second the adoption of these
Reports in the Assembly.
Standing Committees also prepare and for- Abstracts of
wait! to the Federal Assembly such Abstracts or Sum- .Reports.
req ll^ 8 wor k ft* l ' th® preceding year as may be
23. No Member of any such Committees is allowed Members not to
to vote m the Committee, on matters in which he is whth
pers nally interested, or which directly affect the they have a
congregation which he represents. f n ~t.
records of all Standing Committees are sub- Records to be
mitted to the Assembly for examination in the same examined ’
manner as Presbytery Records.


Chapter IV. — Federal Assembly.
Members of the 1. The Federal Assembly consists of representa-
semWyl when lives from all the Presbyteries within its bounds,
and how ap- The Representatives, composed of an equal number of
Ministers and Elders, are elected by their respective
Presbyteries, and form one-sixth of the members of
each Presbytery. Presbyteries having less than nine
charges are represented by one Minister and one Elder,
and Presbyteries having nine charges, but less than
fifteen, are represented by two Ministers and two
Elders, and so on— i.e., an additional Minister and an
additional Elder are allowed for each six charges after
the first nine. The results of the elections by Presby-
teries are reported to their respective General Assem-
blies to be forwarded by them to the Federal Assembly.
Presbyteries further elect an alternate representative
Elder to take the place of the representative first
elected, in the case of his necessary absence.
2. Presbyteries not having on their Rolls a due
proportion of Elders who are in circumstances to
attend the sittings of the Federal Assembly, may elect
lona fide acting Elders within the bounds of their
respective General Assemblies to act as their represent-
atives under such circumstances, and in the event of
Presbyteries failing to appoint such representatives,
they may be appointed by the General Assembly.
Home Mission 3. The Federal Assembly appoints a Home Mission
Committee. an( j Extension Committee, whose duty it is
to receive and submit reports from the Home Mission
Committees of the various General Assemblies; and
to offer such suggestions thereanent as may conduce to
the harmonious and effective carrying out of the Home
Mission operations of all the Federated Churches.
Heathen Mis- 4. The Federal Assembly appoints a Committee on
sions Commit- Missions to the Heathen, whose duty it is to receive
reports of the Heathen Mission Committees of the
various General Assemblies, and to prepare a Report
thereon, to be submitted to the Federal Assembly.
Central Fund. 5. The contributions of all the Federated Churches
towards Foreign Mission work are remitted to a
Common Fund, which is under the immediate super-
vision and control of the Federal Assembly’s Committee.


6. General Assemblies may also send in to the
Central Fund the whole or any part of the contributions
which they raise for their internal Heathen Mission
work.
7, The Federal Assembly appoints a Board of Exam-
ination, by whom the questions to be put to Students
applying for admission into the Theological Hall, and
also to Students intending to apply for license, are
prepared, and to whom all the answers returned to
these questions must be forwarded by the Examining
Boards of the respective General Assemblies, who are
to conduct the examination, and who form Sub-
committees of the General Board ; and no Student
can be received into a Hall or Seminary as a regular
Student, nor be taken by any Presbytery on trials for
license, until he has received the imprimatur of the
General Board.
8. The Examination Board reports annually to the Reports of the
Federal Assembly on the manner in which the Exami- Board-
nations have been conducted, and on their results, and
submits the Scheme of Examination for the following
year for approval and confirmation by the Assembly.
9. The Federal Assembly appoints a Theological Theological
Halls Committtee, whose duty it is to receive reports Halls ‘
from the Theological Hall Committees of the various
General Assemblies, and to present them in a condensed
form with a view of harmonising the system of instruc-
tion adopted in the different institutions—the Subjects
of Study, the Text Books, and the exercises prescribed
to the Students,
10. No law or rule approved by the Federal Laws or Rules.
Assembly can become a permanent rule or law of the
Federated Churches until it shall have been remitted
to all the Presbyteries of the different Churches, and
approved by a majority of them.
V ’ P res byteries, in dealing with remits from the Remits.
F Assembly, are required either to approve them
or reject them, and in rejecting them they are free to
state the grounds on which their rejection has been
based. They may also approve in part or disapprove
in like manner; but in either case they are required
to specify the parts of the remit which are so approved


Meetings of the
Assembly.
Election of the
Moderator,
Duties of the
interests.
or disapproved respectively. Presbyteries failing to
send in a return are held as approving of the remit.
12. The meetings of the Federal Assembly are held
annually in such leading centres of population as may
be agreed upon at the close of each meeting, and at such
times as may be then fixed on and definitely recorded.
13. A Committee, proportionately representative of
all the Presbyteries of the Federated Churches, is
appointed annually by the Federal Assembly to select
the Moderator for the following year. This Committee-
holds its meetings at the seat of the Assembly for the
eusing year, and members who cannot attend these
meetings communicate their views personally to
the Convener. Two meetings of Committee are held
during the year —one for the nomination of members
considered eligible for the Chair, and the other to
select one of the members so nominated. The names
of the three members highest on the list of Nominees
are communicated to all the members after the first
meeting, and at the second meeting, the Nominee who
receives the highest number of votes is declared to be
selected, and his selection is then publicly announced.
The votes sent in writing to the Convener have the
same force as the votes of members who are present at
the meeting.
14. The position and duties of Moderators of the
Federal Assembly are the same with those of
Moderators of the General Assemblies.
Chapter Y.—Rights and Duties op
Congregations.
1. Preaching Stations or new Congregations may be
formed by the Presbytery of the bounds on its own-
motion, or on application from any number of persons
who declare adherence to the principles of the Church,
2. Before taking action the Presbytery gives inti-
mation to the Sessions of the Congregations (if any,)
which are likely to be affected by the formation of the
new charge, in order that they may be heard for their


3. The Presbytery also appoints one or more of its
members to visit the district in which the new congre-
gation or charge is to be formed, and report definitely
on its wants and resources.
4. After due inquiry and hearing the parties inter- Moderator and
l v o i Intprim SpcjQinn
ested, the Presbytery, if it sees proper cause, grants a
supply of ordinances, and places the station or congrega-
tion under the superintendence of a member of
Presbytery, who acts as Moderator, pro tem. ; and,
whensoever it may be required, an Interim Session
is appointed by the Presbytery.
5. Persons, male and female above sixteen years of Adherent*,
age, who unite statedly in the worship of a congregation
who contribute to its support, and who avow their
agreement with the principles and order of the Church
by applying to be enrolled as adherents, are entitled
to make such application to the Session, and, when so
enrolled, they acquire the full rights of adherents.
6. The members of a congregation are the persons Member*,
male and female who have been admitted by the Session
into full communion, and who still retain their place
on the roll. (See also Rule 1, Part III.)
7. Members in full communion, on applying to the Certificates of
Session for a certificate of disjunction, are entitled to
receive it; and on presenting their certificate to another
Session they are forthwith admitted into membership
by that Session, and entitled to the privileges there-
with connected.
8. The Session has power, on just cause shown, to Rolls revised by
remove the names of persons from the rolls of adherents tlie Session-
and members; but before taking such action it is
expedient to give intimation of the intention to
exercise this power to the persons who are to be so
dealt with, in order that they may be heard in their
own defence. The decisions of the Session relative to
such removals are authoritative, unless they are
appealed against to the Presbytery, and until they •
may be reversed by the Presbytery.
9 -. Congregational Meetings are convened from the Congregational
pulpit, and at least three clear days’ notice of all such Meetin Ss-
meetings, and of the purposes for which they are
called, is to be given.


M Chairman° r The Minister or Interim Moderator of the Session
has the right to preside at all Congregational Meetings;
but in his absence and with his approval, or at his
request, another Chairman may be appointed for the time.
Financial 11. Congregations hold an Annual Meeting, at which
statement. a (3 e t a il e (J and duly audited statement of their financial
affairs is submitted and considered.
Appeals against 12. Members and Adherents dissatisfied with the
Congrega ° f ac ti° n taken at a Congregational Meeting have a
tional Meet- right to bring their ground of complaint before the
mgs. Presbytery by Appeal or Petition, and are furnished
by the Clerk of the meeting with extracts relative to the
action complained of. The meeting appoints not more
than two Commissioners to attend the Presbytery and
answer the complaint. The complaint, accompanied
by reasons, has to be committed to writing and sent
to the Commissioners. Another copy of the complaint,
and reasons, has also to be forwarded through the
Session to the Presbytery Clerk, at least seven days
before the meeting of Presbytery, else the complaint
is held as fallen from. The Session on forwarding
such complaints require to see that they are in
conformity with the provisions of Rule 3, Chap, v..
Part 111.
Returns from 13. Congregations are required to give full ( information
congregation#, and make accurate returns respecting their affairs
whenever they may be called upon to do so by the
Presbytery or the General Assembly.
Congregations 14. When congregations find themselves unable to
failing into ra ise the stipend which they have arranged with the
Presbytery to give to their minister, no reduction is to
be made on the amount so promised without report-
ing their altered circumstances to the Presbytery.
Ministers neglecting to have such circumstances
reported to the Presbytery forego their right to claim
an amount of arrears exceeding a quarter’s stipend.
Action to be 15. The Presbytery on receiving a report of the
p k6 b t y the altered circumstances of a congregation takes the steps
which are considered by it most expedient either to
stimulate the congregation to greater liberality, or to
have the amount of the stipend reduced, or to recom-
mend and assist in the removal of the Minister to


another sphere of labour; or it reports the case to the
General Assembly which has the power, on proper
cause shown, to dissolve the pastoral tie.
16. Congregations, before proceeding to erect places sites and Plans
of worship, are expected to apply for and obtain the of Buildings.
Presbytery’s approval of the site and the plans of the
building.
17. The Precentor or Leader of the Service of Praise Conductor of
requires to be a person with whose character the Praise -
Session are satisfied; but it is expedient to have him
elected by the congregation, or by a committee of their
number appointed for the purpose.
18. It rests likewise with the Session to deal finally
with the resignation or removal of the Leader—to take
a general superintendence of the Service of Praise
and to receive and dispose of all complaints in regard
to it.
All Sabbath Schools, whether Congregational or Sabbath Schools„
Mission Schools, are under the direct control and super- subject to the
vision of the Session. Session>
20. Teachers formed into an association have the Nomination of
privilege of nominating new teachers and of choosing Teachers > *c-
office-bearers for the association, but it rests with the
Session to confirm all appointments.
"M* AH questions of discipline in connection with Questions of
e Teachers have to be at once referred to the Dlsciphne-
icssion.
c tu * Q uestions finance in connection with the Questions of
a ath School, likely to affect the general revenue of Finance ’
e congregation, have to be submitted to the Con-
grega mnal Board of Management for approval.
heathen Mission Schemes of the Church Foreign Mis-
Scb ° aim on the Mig sion Funds of the Sabbath sions -
I .l ll *' 0t i ler schemes or objects may be recom-
Sessidn ° c MM ren with the approval of the
Sabbath o^i C^° l °^ re P 0 nnnually to the Presbytery’s Annual Reports
practionKl 0 01 Committee 5 and, as far as may be
and hi e ’ 1 ad ° pt the As sembly’s Scheme of Lessons
woi c prescribed for the Annual Examinations.


PART 111. —MODES OF PROCEDURE IN
REFERENCE TO SPECIAL MATTERS.
Chapter I. — Procedure tn Regard to Modera-
tion in Calls
M oderation m a 1. Congregations in resolving to apply for modera-
plled for! ap on i n a ca ll hold a meeting which is duly convened
from the pulpit, and presided over by the Moderator of
the Session. At this meeting they determine the
amount of stipend which they undertake to contribute
to the support of their Minister, and appoint Com-
missioners to attend the Presbytery and report on their
position and prospects.* 1 At this meeting also the rolls
of the Adherents and the Communicants have to be
revised and forwarded to the Presbytery for attestation
(See Rule 7.)
When granted. 2. Moderations are not granted where congregations
do not promise what the Presbytery regard as an
adequate stipend, nor when arrears are owing to the
former Minister, or to Preachers who have been
supplying during the vacancy, until at least satisfactory
arrangements have been entered into for the payment
of these arrears; nor unless there is likely to be
harmony in connection with the call.
Procedure in 3. Presbyteries, in approving of applications for
IheCaUand Moderation, appoint one or more of their number to
election of the meet with the congregation on a day fixed for the
minister. purpose, of which arrangement due intimation is given
the pulpit at least eight days previous to the
meeting, or where there is more than one congregation
in a charge, such intimation is made from each pulpit at
least on one Sabbath before the Moderation takes place.
[Where Congregations are far remote from the seat of Presbytery
or are otherwise inconveniently circumstanced for meeting together
the Presbytery may agree to accept the application for moderation as
equivalent to a call; but in all such cases a form of call has to be
submitted to the meeting by the Moderator, and signed in his
presence, and no arrears must be owing either to their former minister
or to preachers, and the stipend promised must be adequate.]
filing up of 4. On the day fixed for the Moderation, after Divine
Service, conducted according to the arrangement of the
Presbytery, the special object of the meeting is
• Bee Appendix No. tV.


announced, and a blank form of call read* which the
congregation is instructed to fill up with the name of
a duly accredited Minister or Preacher of the Church,
or of any Presbyterian Church in fellowship with it.
5. If there he only one nomination, the concurrence Vote on the
of the congregation therein is signified by a show of CaU ‘
hands. If there be two Ministers or Preachers nomin-
ated, the vote is taken by the calling of the rolls.
(See Rule 7.) When more than two are nominated,
the vote is first taken on the two last nominated,
and so on, as in the case of separate amendments.
(See Standing Orders 23-4.)
6. Commissioners, not exceeding three in number, Commissioners
and one of whom at least should be a member of Session, the > CaU CUt *
are appointed by the Congregation to take charge of
the Call and present it to the Presbytery, and through
these Commissioners opportunity is given, in the
interim, to members and adherents not present at the
Moderation to adhibit their signatures. The signatures
so appended have to be attested by one or more of
the Commissioners, as having been written in their
presence.
7. At the next meeting of Presbytery the Call is Call sustained,
presented by the Minister who presided at the Modera-
tion, and who gives to the Presbytery an account, of
the proceedings connected therewith; the Commis-
sioners, if present, are also heard in support of it; and
when it has been found that the Call has been regularly
conducted, and has been signed by a proper represen-
tation of the Congregation, it is sustained. The signa-
tures of Members and Adherents are recorded separately,
and no Call can be sustained unless it is signed, or can be
satisfactorily shown to be acquiesced in, by three-fifths
of the Communicants whose names are on the Com-
munion Roll as attested by the Presbytery.
8. Members and adherents who are dissatisfied with Appeals relative
the election, or with the coarse of procedure in to the CaU ’
reference to it, have the right of complaint, and must
attend the Presbytery at which the Call is presented
to defend their complaint—one copy of the complaint
having been forwarded to the Session within three
after the Moderation, for immediate transmission
* See Appendix No. 11.


Appeals to be
stayed, &c.
Canvassing pro-
hibited.
Notification of
the Cali, <fec.
Trials for Ordi-
nation.
*See Standing Orders 35, &c.
to the Clerk of Presbytery, and another to the Com-
missioners appointed to support the Call. When the
complaint is submitted to the Presbytery the Com-
plainants state their case,* and the Commissioners are
heard in reply. Parties having been heard, the Pres-
bytery adjudicates on the complaint, and any person
interested, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the
Presbytery has the right of appeal to the General
Assembly, and should take action accordingly.
9. In all cases of this nature Presbyteries are
instructed to take such constitutional action, if pos-
sible, as may suffice either to stay, or to obviate the
necessity of such appeals.
10. It is unlawful for Ministers or Preachers, whether
by themselves or through others, to canvass for election,
or to enter into negotiations with any member or
members of a Congregation for the procuring of a
Call. Should it be made evident to the Presbytery
that such action has been taken or knowingly connived
at, by a Minister or Preacher, the call is declared
null.
Chapter 11. Procedure Relative to the
Ordination oe Preachers and the Induction
oe Ministers.
1. When a Call has been sustained, official notice
of it is given forthwith by the Clerk of Presbytery to
the person called, who is required, if he be a Preacher
or a Minister without a charge, to intimate, in reply to
this notice, his acceptance or non-acceptance of the Call
within thirty days, and the Presbytery arrange to hold
a Meeting as soon as convenient after the termination
of the thirty days, to receive and deal with the intima-
tion so given.
2. If the person who accepts the Call is a Licentiate
of the Church, a Certificate from a Presbytery Clerk of
his present standing is required to accompany his letter
of acceptance; and, on the Certificate being found
satisfactory, the following trials are prescribed:—-


j(l.) An Essay on some important topic of
(2.) A Greek Critical Exercise on some passage of
the New Testament. (3.) A Lecture. (4.) A Sermon.
He may als.o be examined on his knowledge of Biblical
Hebrew and Greek, and on Theology and Church
History.
3. No Licentiate is required to pass his trials within T^‘ 1 r 1 t o^v ( e 1 * yB
less than thirty days after his acceptance of the Call.
4, Members of Presbytery are appointed to examine Members to
"the Candidate on each of the subjects piescubed. amination.
Other members of Presbytery have full right to take
part in the Examinations, after the Examinators
appointed by the Presbytery shall have completed their
part of the work.
5. The trials being approved, a day is appointed for Edict of Ordlna
the Ordination, and an Edict is ordered to be issued in lon-
due form, which has to be publicly announced to the
Congregation or Congregations in the charge at least
eight clear days previous to the time fixed for the
Ordination.*
6. When the Presbytery meet for the Ordination at Edict called for.
the fixed time and place, and have been duly con-
stituted, the Edict of Ordination is called for and
returned, with certification that it has been properly
announced. Objections, in terms of the Edict, are then
asked for by the Presbytery, and if no objections are
offered, or, unless they are substantiated forthwith, or if
they are judged frivolous, the service is proceeded with.
7. At the close of the service a brief narration of the Ordlna-
various steps taken in connection with the Call is
given by a member of the Presbytery appointed for the
purpose. The questions appointed to be put to Congre-
gations and Ministers, in connection with such services,
are asked, and having been satisfactorily answered, the
Candidate for ordination kneels in the midst of the
members of Presbytery, and the presiding Minister
engages in prayer, during which, by the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery, the Candidate is solemnly
set apart to the office of the Holy Ministry, there-
after the presiding Minister gives him the right hand
* See Appendix No. 111.


of fellowship, saying, “ In the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, the only King and Head of the Church, and by
authority of this Presbytery, I hereby declare you duly-
inducted into the pastoral charge of this Congregation*
and entitled to all the rights and privileges thereto
appertaining.” The other members of Presbytery also
give him the right hand of fellowship.
Exhortations 8. The Minister and people are then exhorted as to
and welcome, their respective duties (as arranged by the Presbytery,)
and on retiring the Congregation give their Pastor the
right hand of welcome.
Call to a Minis- 9. If the Minister called is a member of the same
Presbytery. 111 * Presbytery, so soon as the Call is sustained he is cited
forthwith, or if absent, he is cited through the Clerk
by letter, to appear at the next meeting of Presbytery
and declare his mind regarding it. A member of Presby-
tery is also appointed to preach to his Congregation,* and
summon them to appear for their interests at this meeting,
with certification that, by failing to appear, they will be
held as consenting to the translation of their Minister.
»u to a Minis- 10. If the Minister called is a member of another
Presbytery? 61 Presbytery, the Call is forwarded to that Presbytery
in order that the Congregation of the Minister so called
may be duly cited to appear for their interests in the
matter, at a meeting of Presbytery to be held on as
early a day as is found convenient. One or more
members of the Presbytery which has charge of the
vacant Congregation, together with the Commissioners
chosen by the Congregation to prosecute the Call, are
appointed to attend the meeting of the Presbytery at
which the Minister called and the representatives of
his Congregation have been cited to appear, and when
the Call is taken up, parties are heard in the following
order:—First—One of the Commissioners of the Con-
gregation and a member of the Presbytery appointed
to prosecute the Call. Secondly—Two Commissioners
from the Congregation whose Minister has been called.
Thirdly—One of the parties prosecuting the Call is
heard in reply.
* Where there are several Congregations in a charge, intimation is
made by the Session to those Congregations which the member of Pres-
bytery may be unable to overtake.


11. The Minister called is then requested to state Action based on
. . , . , * . the decision of
ins views in regard to the call by either accepting it or the Minister
declining it, or by leaving the decision in the hands of called>
the Presbytery. The Presbytery then gives its decision ;
and from this decision, except when it is in opposition
to the declared will of the Minister, there can be no
appeal. When the decision is appealed against the
appeal is prosecuted in the usual manner.
12. When a translation .is agreed to, the relation Translation,
between the Minister and his Congregation is thereby
dissolved, and a member of Presbytery is appointed to
declare the vacancy so occasioned. The Minister thus
loosed from his charge is plaed under the jurisdiction
of the Presbytery having oversight of the congregation
by whom he has been called, and arrangements are
made for his Induction with all convenient speed.
13. In cases of Induction no trials are prescribed, Induction,
nor is the act of Ordination repeated ; but in all other
respects the ordinary procedure is the same as in the
case of Ordination.
14. If the Minister called is a member of a Pres- Call to a Minis-
bytery subject to the jurisdiction of another General General* ° tlier
Assembly of the Federated Churches, the same order Assembly,
of procedure is adopted as in translations from a Pres-
bytery of the same Assembly ; but in the event of its
being inconvenient for members of the Presbytery
having charge of the Call, or for the Commissioners
from the Congregation appointed to prosecute it, to
attend the Meeting of Presbytery at which the Call is
to be dealt with, members of the Presbytery of which
s the Minister called is a member, or any other Minister
of the same Church, may be appointed to act in their
stead.
15. A Congregation desirous to obtain a Minister Call to a Minis-
O O • r pi* 51T101 ilpt*
from a Presbyterian Church in another country, in coun t ry<
resolying to appoint Commissioners for this purpose,
has to report their resolution to the Presbytery of the
bounds, with whom it is competent either to add to or
otherwise alter the membership and powers of the
Commission as may seem to them most expedient. If
the Minister who has received such an invitation resigns
■his charge and comes to the colony his settlement is


Resignation of a
Charge.
for the Ministry.
tudents, when
examined.
f See Rule 13, Chap. 11, Part 11.
proceeded with as if he were already a Minister of the
Church without a charge.
16. If a Congregation resolve to Call the Minister of
a Presbyterian Church in another country, who still
retains his charge there, the Call, on being sustained,
together with all necessary documents, is forwarded to
the Clerk of the Presbytery of which he is a member,,
and any Ministers or acting Elders who are known or
believed to be able to attend the Meeting of Presbytery
at which the Call is disposed of, may be appointed to
act as representatives of the Presbytery and of the
Congregation from which the Call proceeds. If the
Minister accepts the Call, his settlement is proceeded
with as under Rule 15.
17. Ministers or Preachers are required to sign the
formula at their Ordination or Induction, and engage to
conform to any other rules which may be prescribed
by their respective General Assemblies.
18. Ministers, after their Induction, can resign their
charges only to the Presbytery,* and no resignation is
accepted until after careful inquiry into the causes ’
which have led to it, nor until the Congregation shall,
have been cited to declare their mind in regard to it.
Chapter lll.— Procedure in regard to the
Training and Licensing of Candidates:
1. A Board of Examination is appointed by the
Federal Assembly, and consists of not fewer than
twelve members, who elect from among themselves a
Chairman and Secretary, each General Assembly
being represented in the Board.
2. Students of Theology are examined by this Board
previous to their entering a Theological Hall or
Seminary as regular Students, and at the close of their
Theological course. They are also examined from year
to year as their respective General Assemblies may
determine.


3. This Board prescribes the subjects for both exam- Su^ C m 9 in*M,
inations and the special books connected with these &c,
subjects; fixes the dates and the places at which such
examinations are to be held; appoints a requisite
number of Examiners, and makes all other necessary
arrangements relative thereto.
4. In connection with the Exit Examination two Two Ex;an
or more Examiners are appointed by the Board branch,
on each of the following branches of study :
(1) Ethics, Apologetics, and Systematic Theology.
(2) Exegesis of the Old Testament.
(3) Exegesis of the New Testament.
(4) Church History and Pastoral Theology.
Two or more Examiners are also appointed to take
similar charge of the Entrance Examinations.
5. The Examiners on each subiect draw up the Conditions of
„ ~ , , ii'ji* • Bxamlnatloi
questions, fix the time to be allowed for answering
each paper, and assign the value of the answers ; and
no Student can be allowed to pass who has not obtained
the minimum of marks on all papers or subjects taken
collectively, which has been fixed by the Board.
6. The days and places fixed for these Examinations Ti^|® 0 < £ Exwill
are also fixed upon by the respective General Assem-
blies as the days for the Annual Examinations of
which they have charge (as set forth in Rule 2.)
7. The examinations of the Federal Board are con- Printed papers
ducted by printed papers, and the Examiners appointed
for each* subject are responsible for the printing and
forwarding of the examination papers to the Supervisors
whom the Board may select to take charge of the
examinations in the different places, said Supervisors
being members of the Board. No paper can be opened
until the day and hour fixed for the examination, when
they are opened by the Supervisors in presence of the
Students and distributed among them.
8. Within a given time fixed by the Board—the
Examiners forward to the Secretary the number of
marks obtained by each Student; and the names of the
Students who have passed in accordance with the
marks so reported are thereupon published by the
Secretary. Additional papers may be prescribed for
Honours.


M Board S ° f the -^ nnua l Meetings of the Board, for the pur-
pose of fixing the subjects and appointing Examiners
and Supervisors for the next examination are held in
connection with the Annual Meetings of the Federal
Assembly.
A made thro h applications from Students for admission to
Presbyteries, the Entrance Examination are made through the
Presbyteries within whose bounds they reside, and all
such applications have to be accompanied by a satis-
factory certificate of the moral and religious character
of the applicant. The Presbytery, in recommending
the application, certify that in their judgment the
candidate has the necessary aptitude for the functions
of the Christian Ministry.
ll* Every such applicant presents to the Board a
examination Degree in Arts or has to pass through an*examination
required. which is considered by the Board to be under the
circumstances a fair equivalent thereto, and he has
also to answer satisfactorily questions prescribed to
him in Elementary Hebrew, Scriptural Knowledge,
and the Shorter Catechism. The cases of all Students
who do not present Degrees have to be specially
reported by the Board for the final consideration of
the Federal Assembly; but if approved by the Board
they may meantime be admitted into the Hall.
C °traiDi of 12. The course in Theology extends over three
years, and includes at least eighteen months of Theo-
logical training. It embraces the following subjects
of study :—Ethics, Apologetics, Sacred Languages,
Biblical Criticism, Church History, Homiletics, and
Pastoral Theology,
13. The order in which the various subjects are to
be taken up, and the time to be devoted to each, are
left to be determined by the Theological Faculty of the
respective General Assemblies.
faculty* 1 I - There should he at least three Tutors or Pro-
fessors in each Theological Faculty, and Students are
required to deliver at least two discourses in each
year of their Theological Course. Essays on Theolo-
gical Topics, as well as Sermons, are also from time to
time prescribed.


15. Presbyteries take supervision of the Students
during the intervals between the different Sessions of L!,lyei
the Hall, and are directed, in conjunction with the
Home Mission Committee, to provide them with such
employment in Evangelistic or Mission work as, while
not unduly overtasking their strength, may train them
for their future labours. Previous to the commence-
ment of the second and third Sessions of their course
Students are examined by the Board of their General
Assembly in accordance with Rule 2.
16. Application is made to each General Assembly leave to take
by their respective Presbyteries, for leave to take on License* f ° r
trials for License those Students who, at the close of
their Theological Course, have received the exit
Examination Certificate of the Federal Board.
17. The subjects of trial by Presbyteries are : Subjects of trial
(1.) An Examination on Theology and some
definite period of Church History.
(2.) An Essay on some topic of Theology.
(3.) A Critical Exercise.
(4.) A Lecture on some passage of Scripture.
(5.) A Sermon.
18. The Examination on Theology and Church
History takes place not sooner than a month after the conducted,
trials have been prescribed and members of Presbytery
are appointed to conduct the examination orally and in
writing. Other members of Presbytery are free to take
part in the examination after the Examiners who have
been appointed for the purpose have completed their
work.
19. The discourses are heard at a subsequent Discourses,
meeting, held at such time as the Presbytery may
determine ; but at least seven days before this meeting
is to be held, the discourses are placed in the hands
of members of Presbytery, who are instructed to submit a
written report in regard to the discourses, and to select
the portions of them to be read in presence of the Court.
20. Presbyteries on taking a conjunct view of the The Act of
trials, and being satisfied therewith, proceed to license Lice nsmg.
in the following manner—


(2.) He next subscribes the Formula.
of Elders.
Bldera elected
by Communi-
cants.
Number fixed
by the Session.
Votes in writ-
ing.
Time for open-
ing lists.
Elders-Elect
how dealt
with.
* See Rule 11, Chapter I.
(1.) The questions of the Formula are put to the
Student, to all of which he is required to give his
assent.
(3.) He is addressed in suitable terms by the
Moderator, and after prayer, he is licensed, in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the authority of
the Presbytery, to preach the Gospel, and thereupon
he receives the right hand of fellowship from the
members present.
Chapter IV.—Procedure in regard to the
Election and Ordination, or Induction
1. The right of electing Elders belongs to the
Communicants of a Congregation, male and female
and, previous to an election of Elders, the Minister
should preach on the duties and qualifications of the
Eldership.
2. The number of Elders to be chosen is fixed by the
Session, * who take the oversight of the election.
It is often expedient to hold a meeting for the nomination of
brethren considered suitable for the office, and further, in the election of
Office-bearers, voters may be asked to nominate a number not exceeding,
one half more than the number to be chosen, e.g. Suppose six Elders,
Deacons, or Managers are to be elected, voters may nominate nine instead
of six, in which case the seventh, eighth, or ninth on the poll may be
appointed, in their order of precedence, to take the places of those among
the six who may decline to accept office. But no nominee occupying
a lower place can be so appointed, except by a new election.]
3. The votes are taken in writing, and each list
requires to be subscribed by the name of the voter;
otherwise, it is rejected as informal.
4. Two Sabbaths are allowed to intervene between
the announcement of the election and the opening of
the lists by the Session, so that all the members of
the Congregation may have an opportunity of voting.
5. After the election, the Session confer with the
Elders-Elect relative to their accepting office ; and, on
their expressing a willingness to accept, a meeting is
appointed, at which the Session take steps to satisfy
themselves in regard to the religious character of the


Elders-Elect, their prudence, and their knowledge of
Divine truth, of the government and discipline of the
Church, and of the duties of the Eldership.
6. When the Session are satisfied, an Edict is EdicUf Ordina-
appointed to be read to the Congregation, on at least
one Sabbath. This Edict is issued in the terms specified
in the Appendix.*
7. The Session meet at the time and place specified
in the Edict, and, if no objections are offered in terms
of the Edict, the Session proceed to the ordination of
the Elders-Elect. If objections are offered, the Session
inquire into the grounds 'of them, and decide accord-
ingly. +
8. On the Sabbath appointed by the Session for the Ordination.
Ordination —after sermon and the prayer by which
the Session is constituted, the Moderator narrates
the previous proceedings, calls on the Elders-Elect
to stared, and puts to them the prescribed questions.
Satisfactory answers being returned, the Moderator-
proceeds by prayer to ordain them to the office
of the Eldership, and to commend them to the grace
of God for aid and direction in the exercise of their
office. The right hand of fellowship is then given by
the Minister and the other Elders present to the Elaers
thus ordained, in token of their having been authorised
to take part in the spiritual oversight of the charge.
Suitable exhortations are then addressed by the
Moderator to the newly-ordained Elders and the
people, and at the close of the service the Elders
sign the Formula, and have their names added to the
Session Roll.
9. Elders coming from other Congregations cannot be
admitted into the Session until they are elected by the ga tions.
Congregation, and when elected their Induction is
proceeded with as afore-provided.
10. Elders retain office for life, unless deposed ; Resgation of
but should they demit either their office or their seat
in the Session, the demission has to be formally dealt
with by the Session, and the judgment of the Session
Qpa A nnpTl fl 1V No V.
t Persons dissatisfied have the right of Appeal, as p in
Standing Order, 35 ; and the Ordination is deferred until the Appea
Shall have been disposed of.


in regard to it requires to be recorded, before they can
i)e released from the obligations of their office or from
their place in the Session.
11. Elders who cease to be connected with a Congre-
gation, or to attend the meetings of Session for twelve
months, are ipso facto disqualified for office in the
Congregation, and may have their names removed from
the roll of the Session accordingly. But the Session,
before proceeding to disqualify them, require to send
them a written notice of the action so contemplated,
and the grounds of this action. Elders so dealt with,
on giving a satisfactory explanation, or indicating a
proper change of mind, may be continued in office,
or the case may be referred simpliciter, to the Pres-
bytery.
Chapter V. —Procedure in regard to Petitions
and Overtures.
Sec. I. — Petitions.
1. Every member and adherent of the Church has
access to its Courts by petition or memorial. He has
direct access to the Session of the Congregation to
which he belongs; but a petition or memorial to a
Higher Court must be presented in the first place to
the Session (except as provided for in Rule 5,) with a
request for its transmission.
2. Sessions and Presbyteries are bound to assist
Members of the Church in preparing Petitions and
Overtures, so that they may not be rejected on the
ground of informality or other defect.
3. Petitions or Memorials are transmitted by the
Lower Courts with or without approval or concurrence
on their part as they may see fit; but, in agreeing to
transmit the Petitions or Memorials, the Lower Courts
are required to see that they have been put in proper
form and are expressed respectfully.
4. Petitioners or Memorialists have a right to appeal
against the refusal of a Lower Court to transmit their
Petitions or Memorials.


5. Petitions relative to matters strictly personal may
be forwarded direct to a Higher Court by the person
interested ; but in so acting he requires to intimate to
the Inferior Court the action which he has so taken,
and state definitely the grounds of his action.
Sec. II. — Overtures.
1. An Overture is a proposal either for the enactment of Overtures
a new Law or for the repeal or amendment of an existing
Law; for a declaration or interpretation of the Law on
some particular point; or more generally it is a proposal
to have anything done or declared which it is com-
petent for the Court so overtured to do or declare ; and
Members of Inferior Courts have a right to move
the Courts of which they are members to overture the
Higher Courts on any matter of general importance.
2. Overtures which have originated in a Lower
Court are transmitted through the next Higher Court,
unless it can be shown that there was no convenient
opportunity of transmitting them in this manner.
3. No Overture can be moved in any Court unless
notice of it has been given at a previous ordinary
meeting of the Court, or intimated by circular sent
through the Clerk to all members of the Court at least
ten days previous to the meeting at which the proposed
overture is to be brought forward.
4. An overture proposing to amend, repeal or enact
any rule or form of procedure requires to set forth
definitely the rule or form of procedure which is to be
affected by it, otherwise the overture is dismissed as
irrelevant.
5. Overtures submitted to an Inferior Court may he
transmitted to the Higher Court with or without any
expression of opinion on their merits; or they may be
rejected by the Inferior Court.
6. The Mover of an overture has the right of appeal
against the rejection of his overture by an Inferior
Court, or against the refusal to transmit it; and any
member of the Inferior Court who has voted in support
of the overture has the right to concur in such appeal.


7. All overtures must be submitted in writing, and if
transmittedsmjpZiatar by the Lower Court, they have to
be signed by the Mover and Seconder. Lower Courts in
agreeing to approve or transmit overtures are required
to see that they are in due form and properly expressed,
and that two members of the Court are appointed to
support them in the Higher Court.
Chapter VT.— Procedure in Regard to
Discipline.
Cases of scandal 1. It is the dutv of the Courts of the Church to
how taken up , „ . .
and brought exercise discipline over such or its members as are
forward. guilty of known sin. No scandal is to be inquired into
after five years have elapsed since the offence is said
to have been committed and become known, unless
some new scandal of a grave nature affecting the same
person, and requiring to be investigated, shall have
arisen.
2. Cases of scandal may be brought forward either
—(1) By an accuser or accusers who undertake to
furnish definite information regarding the scandal; or
(2) By some member or members of the Court which
ought to deal with the scandal, and who allege the
necessity for inquiry.*
Accusations 3- The process thus originated may go on, either
mustbeinves- through accuser engaging to maintain the charge,
tigated. or through a resolution of the Court to institute
inquiry. Parties by whom an accusation is made should
be prepared to maintain and prosecute it in a com-
petent manner; but their failing or refusing to do so
does not absolve the Court from its obligation.
Accusations not 4. No accusation is to be made against a preacher
to be made minister or elder, nor any formal intimation given of
except i ■» • • • i • i
under definite an injurious report regarding him, in his absence, or
condition. unless he has received timely intimation of the inten-
tion to bring forward such charges or rumours; and
when a preacher, minister, or elder so accused thinks
himself aggrieved by the questions raised relative to
* See also Rules 26-30, pp. 40-41.


his conduct, or objects to their being discussed or
investigated, except in strict form, he is entitled to
demand that they be put in due form and committed
to writing, and that he be allowed at least ten days to
prepare his defence.
5. Accusations against Preachers are received and Accusations
investigated by the Presbytery within whose bounds p g r S ers<
the offence charged against them has been com-
mitted. Members of other Presbyteries who may
have evidence to give, are cited through their respective
Presbyteries at the request of the Presbytery by which
the investigation is conducted, and during the course
of the investigation the preacher receives no appoint-
ments.
6. Accusations against Elders are investigated by Against Eiders,
the Sessions of which they are members, and during
the process of the investigation the Elders so accused
are suspended from office.
7. Accusations against a Minister K are investigated Against Minis-
by the Presbytery of which he is a member; and ers-
members of other Presbyteries who have evidence to
give are cited through their respective Presbyteries
unless they come forward of their own accord.
8. If the accused person admits the charge, and the procedure wher
Court is satisfied with his confession, it proceeds to a accusation ad
decision without further inquiry.
9. If the accused person denies the charge, the when accusa-
Court resolves to proceed with the investigation of it, tion denied-
and all proceedings connected with this stage of the
investigations are conducted privately, and the minutes
of them kept in a separate record. The person accused
i s not necessarily present at this preliminary inquiry.
10. Should the Court find that the charges are Frivolous or
frivolous or unsupported, further action is stayed and u^" p e p 3 orted
the decision of the Court is intimated to the person ca g
accused, in which case all minutes which have been
taken relative to the case are destroyed, and he is
restored simpliciter to the position which he held
before the accusation was received.
11. If the matter laid to a Minister’s charge be Charges of un-
unsoundness of doctrine, or be conduct tending to
destroy the order, unity, and peace of the Church, courses.


Accused person
when cited.
great caution should be used, and the knowledge and
understanding of those who bring the charge should be
carefully considered before entertaining it. ( a ) If the
errors do not seriously affect vital points of religion,
or be not evidently spread with a design to corrupt
the faith of the Church, in that case, conference should
be held with the individual erring, and held frequently,
if necessary, and instruction and admonition given, as
may be needed, with the view of rectifying the error.
(b) But if the error be gross, and pertinaciously
adhered to, or be pursued with a visible design to
corrupt the purity of the faith, or the order, unity, and
peace of the Church, in that case, the proceedings are
to be conducted judicially, as afterwards provided.
12. Ministers, Preachers, or other Office-bearers,when
accused of heresy, are bound, on being called upon by
the Presbytery to whose jurisdiction they are subject,
to submit any manuscripts which are or may be supposed
to be required in the case, and to give full and explicit
answers to questions bearing on any point or points
involved in the accusation ; or, if considered necessary,
they may be required to commit their views on such
points to writing.
13. When the Court finds that the charges brought
out in the preliminary inquiry are grave and apparently
well substantiated, the accused person is cited, and all
the information which has been taken down in con-
nection with the inquiry, is read in his hearing.
14. If the accused person now admits the charge or
charges as so affirmed, the Court proceeds to deal
with them according to the evidence supplied, and
unless appealed against either by the accused or by
members of the Court, the decision thus arrived at is
final.
15. If the accused person continues to deny the
charge, action has then to be taken by judicial process ;
and the first step of this process is to furnish the
accused with the names of the witnesses who are to
give evidence against him, together with the statement
of their evidence previously read in his hearing.
16. The Minister, Preacher or Elder against whom
it is so resolved to proceed by Judicial process, is forth-


with suspended from office; and one or at most two
members of the Court are appointed to act as prose-
cutors. The members so appointed are precluded
by their appointment as prosecutors from deliberating
or voting on the evidence.
17. In connection with the process thus entered
upon, the Court cites witnesses at the instance of the Libel?
person accused, as well as the witnesses who are to
give evidence against him. There are two forms of
citation. (1) Citation issued while the Court is sitting, cit^*i^' d how
and in the presence of the person cited; and (2)
Citation by written summons, which may either be sent
through the post to the usual residence of the person
cited, by registered letter, or delivered at his residence
by the hands of a messenger appointed for the purpose.
(3) In case a witness either for the prosecution or
defence is, by reason of distance or other sufficient
cause, unable personally to attend, his or her written
statement, signed in the presence of and attested by
some respectable person or recognised authority, may
be received in evidence. The Court conducting the
investigation decides what distance or other cause is
sufficient to render evidence of this nature expedient.
18. Persons accused and witnesses in reference to Contumacy,
the accusation, being members or adherents of the
Church, are held and dealt with as guilty of contumacy
in neglecting such citations; but no censure is inflicted
until after the persons cited have been served with a
second citation, and have disregarded it. When an
accused person neglects or refuses to comply with a
second citation, the investigation is proceeded with as
if he were present, and all right to complain of the
manner in which it has been conducted, is forfeited
through his contumacy.
19. Before proceeding to the judicial investigation Objections to
the Court is bound to see and enter upon its record
that all persons who ought to be in attendance have Ac.
been duly cited, and that they have either responded to
the citation or have incurred the charge of neglecting
a second citation. A.t this stage of the case the person
accused is entitled to object to the relevancy of the
charge, and to challenge the competency of the wit-
nesses, or the admissibility of their evidence.


Examination of 20, Witnesses, before being examined, are required
Witn6SS63 ' • _ #
to make a solemn declaration that they bear no malice
against the person accused, and that they regard the
evidence given by them as if given upon oath. The depo-
sitions are taken down in writing, and are subscribed by
the witnesses when completed. If the witnesses cannot
write, their inability to sign their names is notified in
the record, and their depositions, after having been
read over to them, are subscribed on their behalf by
the Moderator.
Separate record 21. The evidence so taken is kept in a separate
record ; a general statement of the terms or nature of
the accusation, and of the judgment arrived at in
regard to it, being all that is inserted in the permanent
records of the Court. When the accused person is
found innocent, the record of this evidence is des-
troyed ; otherwise it is kept in retentis.
Closing of 22. Witnesses are not examined in each others’
of presence, and the accused person has the right of cross-
sentence examination. After all the evidence has been taken,
process* 118 the accused person is allowed to speak in his own
defence. The record is then held to be closed, and the
Court, in proceeding to deliberate upon the evidence,
may resolve to sit alone. A decision having been
arrived at, parties are recalled and the judgment of
the Court is formally announced by the Moderator.
The judgment so announced becomes final unless
appealed against.
(6) Judicial Pro- 23. All charges of a specially grave nature, are
cess by Libel. ma( j e the ground of a libel, and the libel has to be
prepared within twenty-one days after the resolution
to serve it has been adopted.
Relevancy Of 24. Tlie libel is P re P are(l the members of the
Libel. 7 Court who appointed to prosecute it, or at their instance
by the Law Agent of the Church ; and when submitted
to the Court, the first question to be considered is its
relevancy, i.e., whether the offence specified in the libel
be such that, if found true, it would become a subject for
the higher censures of the Church, and whether the
allegations contained in the libel, if proved, would


sustain the accusation.* The accused person having
been cited to attend this meeting has a right to object
to the relevancy of the libel, and to appeal against the
decision of the Court affirming its relevancy; but the
procedure, provided for in Rules 26-28, is not stayed
by such an appeal. The objections taken to the
relevancy of the libel have to be put in a definite form,
and committed to writing; and when such objections
are considered by the Inferior Court to be invalid,
answers to them are prepared and forwarded to the
Superior Court.
25. A libel admitted or found to be irrelevant is dis- irrelevant libel
missed; but if the case seem to require or admit it, the dlsmlssed -
Court may direct the preparation of a new libel, to
the relevancy of which the accused person shall have
the same right of objecting as in the case of the libel
which has been dismissed.
26. Conjointly with the decision of the Court, affirm- Procedure
ing the relevancy of the libel, the accused is furnished Stained™ 01
with a list of the names of the witnesses who are to be
examined in support of the charges specified in it, and
no evidence is adducible except such as relates to these
charges. At least twenty-one clear days are allowed to
the accused for the preparation of his defence ; but, in
the event of his wishing to have witnesses citedto appear
in his behalf, he requires, within seven days from the
time when the relevancy of the libel has been affirmed,
to furnish the Clerk of the Court with the names and
addresses of such witnesses, so that, if necessary, a
preliminary inquiry into the nature of the evidence
of such witnesses may be made by the prosecutors,
previous to the day fixed for the investigation of the
charges contained in the libel.
27. If an accused person, on whom a libel has been Contumacy,
duly served, fails to appear after a second citation, his
absence, besides being pronounced contumacious, is
held as a conclusive admission of his guilt.
28. The process of investigation in connection with Process of in-
the libel is as follows : —(1.) A statement of the
.charges contained in the libel and of the general nature
of the evidence by which these charges are to be sup-
ported is made by one of the prosecutors. (2.) The
• For forms of libel, see Appendix.


and passing
of sentence
Appeals
against such
sentence.
suspension
judicially
pronounced
■witnesses for the prosecution are examined, cross-
examined, and if necessary are re-examined ; and their
depositions are recorded as provided for in Rules 19 and,
20. (3.) The witnesses for the defence are in like
manner examined, cross-examined, and if necessary re-
examined, and their depositions recorded. (4.) The
evidence, as taken down and subscribed, is read by the
Clerk of the Court, and the prosecutors, the person
accused, or any member of the Court who may desire
fuller information on any point, is entitled to ask for it at
this stage, so that the record may be closed. (5.) The
person accused is heard in his defence, and one of the
prosecutors has the right of reply, but no statements-
are admissible in the pleadings either for or against
the accused, except such as are contained in the
written evidence. (6.) Parties, including under this-
term the prosecutors, the person accused, the witnesses
for the accusation, and the witnesses for the defence,,
are removed, and the Court proceeds to deliberate and
frame its judgment. Parties are then recalled, and;
the judgment of the Court having been formally inti-
mated by the Moderator, becomes final unless appealed
against.
29. Appeals by the accused, or on his behalf,
against the relevancy of the libel, the competency of
the witnesses, the conclusiveness of the evidence, or
the equity of the sentence stay the execution of
judgment, but the sentence of suspension from office
in reference to the accused remains in force until all
such appeals shall have been disposed of by the
Superior Court.
30, If the Inferior Court decides that the charges in
the libel have not been proven, and that the sentence
of suspension ought to be removed; the prosecutors,,
by appealing against this decision, may necessitate ita
being reviewed by the Superior Court, but their appeal
shall have no other ad interim effect.
31. Suspension from office judicially pronounced
upon a Minister, after investigation, for any period
exceeding three months, involves in it a dissolution of
the pastoral tie.


32. Ministers judicially suspended by one Pres- Ministers under
bytery, and who, during the term of their suspension,
may have removed to the bounds of another Presbytery
are taken under the supervision of the Presbytery into
whose bounds they have so removed, but the responsi-
bility of their restoration to office still rests with the
Presbytery by whom the sentence of suspension was
pronounced; and it is competent for any members of
the Presbytery under whose supervision the suspended
brother may have been temporarily placed, to complain
to the Assembly against his restoration by the other
Presbytery, if they see cause, due intimation of the
intention to complain having been made to that Pres-
bytery before the complaint can be received by the
Assembly.
33. Preachers who have been suspended cannot Preachers under
have their suspension removed except by the authority 61lsPen8ion-
of a General Assembly; nor can the removal of their
suspension entitle them to be employed within the
bounds of another Assembly until it has been duly
.reported to the Federal Assembly and approved.
34. The following are the sentences pronounced for Sentences
. it j adicially
various ottences: — pronounced.
(a.) Admonition. —This is an exhortation to cir-
cumspection, and no record need be made of it in the
minutes of the Court by which the admonition is
given. This is usually the mode of dealing with
offences which have arisen from an error of judgment.
( b .) Rebuke. —This is a severer sentence, and implies
that the erring party has been guilty of sin. Rebuke
is administered after prayer, and the offending brother
stands up in his place while the Moderator addresses
him. The rebuke so administered is entered in the
vecords of the Court by which the rebuke has been
administered.
(c.) Suspension Jrom 'privileges. —This sentence is
pronounced on a member who has brought scandal
on the Church. It may be inflicted for a limited
time, or sine die.


(d.) Suspension from office. —This is the sentence
pronounced on an office-bearer, when it is found after
due investigation that the continued exercise of office
by him will be injurious to religion.
( e .) Deposition. —This sentence is inflicted on
account of immorality or heresy, and can be inflicted
only by a General Assembly. It is pronounced
by the Moderator after prayer, in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and divests the offender of all
office in the Church, and of every right enjoyed by
him as an Office-bearer.*
86, No Professional Counsel is permitted to appear
and plead in any cases of Judicial process. But an
accused person who does not wish to represent and
plead his own case is free to request any Minister or
Elder of the same Church to act as his Representative,
it being understood that the Minister or Elder so
engaged is precluded by such appointment from
judging or voting in the case.
PART IV.—FORMS, &o.
I. Formulated Basis of Federation.
1. The final Court of Advice or Arbitration among the
Federated Churches, in respect to all matters legitimately
brought before it, and in respect to these matters alone, is
called “ The Federal Assembly of the Presbyterian Churches
of Australia and Tasmania.”
2. The names of the present Supreme Courts of the
Federated Churches remain unaltered.
3. Each such Supreme Court retains full control of its
properties and funds, and has power in all matters connected
therewith.
4, Each such Supreme Court has unfettered power in all
other matters now under its jurisdiction, except as here-
after provided.
5. The decisions of such Supreme Courts are final in all
cases, except where any such Supreme Court decides, with
the consent of parties, to refer a matter to the Federal
Assembly for advice or arbitration.
* Appendix, No. XI.


6. The Supreme Court, with which the case so referred
had originated, adopts simpliciter the decision of the Federal
Assembly in regard to it, and proceeds, thereafter, on its
own authority to give the required effect to the decision.
7. Members of the Supreme Court, who disapprove of the
decision thus adopted, retain the right of dissent, but the
privilege of dissent thus exercised and recorded has no other
result, except to relieve the dissentients personally from
taking any part in giving formal effect to the decision.
8. The Theological Halls and Seminaries of the Federated
Churches are under the general supervision of the Federal
Assembly; and all students of Theology, wherever they may
have been trained, are required to undergo the examinations
prescribed by the Federal Assembly through its Board.
9. The appointment of Professors and Teachers in the
Theological Halls and Seminaries remains as at present, in
the hands of the Supreme Courts, with which they are
respectively connected.
10. The Heathen Mission operations of the Federated
Churches are likewise placed under the supervision and
direction of the Federal Assembly.
11. The various Supreme Courts, while required to report
their Home Mission operations to the Federal Assembly,
and the arrangements made by them for the support of the
ministry within their bounds, are not otherwise limited
thereanent by any action of the Federal Assembly.
12. All regulations which bear on matters affecting the
general interest of the Federated Church are framed by the
Federal Assembly.
13. The foregoing regulations may be enlarged or amended
from time to time, provided always that no change be
made on the articles of this basis, unless after having been
adopted by the Federal Assembly it be remitted to all the
Presbyteries of the Federated Churches, and be approved
by a majority of them.
11. Form of Call to a Preacher or Minister.
We, the undersigned. Members and Adherents of the Form of Call.
Congregation, at in connection with the
Presbyterian Church of desirous of promoting
the glory of God and the good of the Church, being also
destitute of a Pastor, and well assured of the ministerial
abilities, piety, literature, and prudence, as likewise of the
suitableness to our circumstances of you
have agreed to invite, call and entreat, as we do hereby
heartily invite, call, and entreat you to undertake the office
of Pastor among us, and the promotion of our spiritual
welfare, and on your acceptance of this Call we promise yon
all due respect, encouragement and obedience in the Lord,


Edict of Ordina-
tion or Induc-
tion of a Min-
ister.
Witnesses to
Attested by
To the Kev.
tive to moder-
ation.
The Presbytery
and engage to contribute to your fitting maintenance as
God may prosper us.
In witness whereof we have subscribed this Call, as duly
attested by
! Witness to
signatures appended
at the Moderation.
signatures appended
thereafter.
111. Edict of Ordination or Induction.
The Presbytery of in connection with
the Presbyterian Church of having com-
Sleted the necessary steps for the as
[inister of the Cony regation at directed
an Edict to be issued in common form, and they accordingly
do hereby issue this Edict giving notice to all persons con-
cerned that if any of them have anything to’object to the
life or doctrine of the said they may
repair to the Presbytery which is to meet in
on the at o’clock, and
state their objections, with certification that if no relevant
objection is made, or unless the objectors give satisfactory
evidence of their preparedness to substantiate such objec-
tions forthwith, the Presbytery shall proceed to the
services as arranged.
directed
Presbytery Clerk.
Attestation of the Service of the Edict.
This Edict was duly announced to the congregation at
| Witnesses.
IV. Petition relative to Moderation in a Call.*
Your Petitioners, the Congregation of
respectfully request your Reverend Court to take steps to
* A meeting of the Congregation should be held to adopt this
Petition and appoint Commissioners to present t to the Presbytery;
See Chapter VI., Rule 1.


moderate in a Call, on the understanding that the stipend
to be paid to our Minister will be not less than £ per
annum and a Manse, or an allowance of £ for a resi-
dence.
Signed, on behalf of the Congregation, by
Chairman of the Meeting.
Secretary.
V. Edict for the Ordination or Induction of Elders #
Mr. or Messrs
Having been duly elected to the office of the Elder-
ship in this Congregation, intimation is hereby given that
if any member or adherent has any objections to offer to the
admission of the said , or to either
of them, into this office, they are requested to lodge such
objections in writing with , Session-Clerk,
on or before the , with certification that i£
no relevant objections are lodged and proved, the ordination
and admission of the said to the
Eldership in this Congregation, will be proceeded with
on according to the laws of the Church.
VI. Commission of Ruling Elder.
(Place and Date.)
The Session met and was constituted. Sederunt, &c.
Inter alia. The Session elected Mr. A. 8., one of their
number (or a bona fide Acting Elder of the Church,) to
represent them in the Presbytery of C. and the General
Assembly of D. during the current (specifying the term.)
•Closed with prayer.
Extracted from the Minutes of the Session of E., by P. G.,
Session Clerk.
VII. Form of Lihel No. I.
Kev. A. 8., Minister of the Congregation at C., in the
Presbytery of D., in connection with the Presbyterian Church
of —— , You are indicted and accused, at the instance
of the said Presbytery and of A., Moderator, and E. F. Gr.,
members of the same (or at the instance of H., and 1., mem-
bers of the congregation at C., in the Presbytery of D., in
connection, &c.,) that albeit, by the Word of God and the
laws and discipline of the Presbyterian Church of
(here describe the offence,) is an offence of a heinous nature,
Elder.


unbecoming the character and sacred profession of a
Minister of the Gospel, and severely punishable by the
laws and rules of the Church: yet true it is and of verity
that you, the said A. 8,, are guilty of the said offence, actor
or art and part, in so far as, on the day of , eighteen
hundred , or on one or other of the days of that month,
or of the month immediately preceding, or of the month
immediately following, you, the said A. 8., did within the
house, in the said , then and now or lately occupied by
(here describe the nature of the offence;) all which, or
part thereof, being found proven against you, the said A. 8.,
by the said Eeverend Presbytery of D., before which you are
to be tried in terms of your own public confession, or after
competent proof, you, the said A, 8., ought to be punished
according to the rules and discipline of the Church, and the
usage observed in such cases, for the glory of God, the edifi-
cation of the Church, and to the terror of others holding the
same sacred office, not to commit the like offences.
0
Signed at in name, presence, and by appointment of
the Presbytery of D., this day of , 18 — years, by
L. M., Moderator.
N. 0., Clerk.
Form oj Libel No. 11,
ALTERNATIVE CHARGE.
Eev. A. 8,, Ac.—That albeit, by the Word of God and the
laws and discipline of the Presbyterian Church of ,
drunkenness, as also disorderly and riotous conduct, are
offences of a heinous nature, unbecoming the character and
the sacred profession of a Minister of the gospel, and severely
punishable by the laws and rules of the Church; yet true it
is and of verity that you, the said A. 8., are guilty of one
or other of the said crimes, actor or art and part, in so far as,
on the day of , eighteen hundred , or on one
or other of the days of that month, or on one of the days
of the three months immediately preceding, or of the three
months immediately following, you, the said A. 8., did in
the house of M., in N. street, of (here describe the
circumstances applicable to the charge of drunkenness;) or
otherwise, time and place aforesaid, you, the said A, 8., did
behave in a riotous and disorderly manner, to the great
scandal of religion and the disgrace of your sacred profession
(here narrate circumstances applicable to the second charge,}
all which, or part thereof, &c.


Form of Libel No. 111,
CUMULATIVE CHARGE.
Eer. A. B , &c.—That albeit, by the Word of God and the
laws and discipline of the Presbyterian Church of ——,
simony, as also bribery and corruption, are crimes of a hein-
ous nature, unbecoming the character and the sacred pro-
fession of a Minister of the Gospel, and severely punishable
by the laws and rules of the Church: yet true it is and of
verity that you, the said A. 8., are guilty of both, or one or
other of the said crimes, actor or art and part; in so far as,
on the day of , 18 —, or of one or other, &c., you, the
said A. 8., did, within the manse of C., or elsewhere to the
prosecutor unknown (narrate circumstances of simony or
bribery.) All which, or part thereof, &c.
Form of Libel No. IV.
•HARGB OF A COUHSB OR HABIT OV CONDUCT. —AGGRAVATION.
Eov. A. 8., &c. —That albeit, by the Word of God and the
laws and discipline of the Presbyterian Church of ,
drunkenness, especially when committed habitually, is a
crime of a heinous nature, unbecoming the sacred profession
of a Minister of the Gospel, and severely punishable by the
laws and rules of the Church: yet true it is and of verity
that you, the said A. 8., are guilty of the said oflence, aggra-
vated as aforesaid, in so far as, on the day of ,
eighteen hundred , or on one or other, &c., you, the said
A. 8,, within the manse at C., or elsewhere, to the prose-
cutor unknown, did drink to excess, and were intoxicated, to
the great scandal of religion and disgrace of your profession;
and farther, you, the said A. 8., are an habitual drunkard,
and during the period between the day of , 18 —,
and the day of , 18 —, you, the said A. 8., indulged
in the habit of intoxication, and were guilty on various
occasions within that period of the offence of drunkenness.
In particular (here detail special instances.) All which, or
part thereof, &o.
Form of Libel No. V.
HEREBY.
Eev. A. B. You are accused at the instance of C. D. for
that you are guilty of teaching erroneous and heretical
doctrine, contrary to the Standards of this Church, in so far
as in a writing published by you (give the title of the writing
and the page in which it is to be found,) —you have taught
as follows (quote in full,) or in so far as in a discourse
delivered by you in on the day of 18 —
or about that time you used the following language or
language of the same force and effect. All which or part
thereof, &c.


XII. List of Witnesses and Documents Produced.
List of witnesses to be adduced against you, the said A
B, for proving the foregoing libel;—
(1. Name, designation, and address of witness.)
(2. Do. do. do. do.)
There will also be produced a further proof of the fore-
going libel.
(Title and Nature of the documents.)
A. 8., Moderator.
N. 0., Presbytery Cleric.
VIII. Warrant of Citation.
At D., the day of ,18 — years, which day the
Presbytery of D. being met and constituted, inter alia,
the said Presbytery having heard, read, and considered the
foregoing libel, at the instance of the said Presbytery,
against Eev. A. 8., Minister of C., for the crime of ——,
they did, and hereby do, grant warrant to and authorise P,
S., Presbytery Officer, to serve copies thereof, and of the
list of witnesses thereto subjoined, and of this deliverance
on the said A. 8,, and to cite him to appear personally
before the said Presbytery at their next meeting, which is
appointed to take place at , the day of next,
to answer thereto; and to give the said citation in writing,
either personally or at his dwelling-place, or by a registered
letter addressed to him through the post-office, bearing a
■competent time for his giving in his answers and objections
to the said libel, and list of witnesses, if he be so advised,
at least ten days before the day of compearance.
A. 8., Moderator.
N. 0., Presbytery Cleric.
IX. Citation thereon.
I, P. S., Presbytery Officer, by virtue of a libel, at the
instance of theEeverend Presbytery of D,, against you Eev.
A. 8,, Minister of C., for the crime of , and of the war-
rant and authority thereon by the said Eeverend Presbytery
(of which libel, with the list ®f witnesses thereto subjoined,
and warrant and authority thereon by the said Eeverend
Presbytery, what is contained on this and the preceding
pages is a j ust and exact copy,) do hereby lawfully cite you,
the said A. 8., to compear personally before the said Presby-
tery at their next meeting, which is appointed to take place at
, the day of next, in the hour of cause, at
o’clock noon, to answer to the said libel; and I further
charge and ordain you, the said A. 8., to give *in answers


and objections to the said libel and list of witnesses, if you
be so advised, at least ten free days before the said day of
compearance. This I do upon the day of ,in
presence of these witnesses, L. and M.
P. S., Presbytery Officer.
L., Witness.
M., Witness.
X. Certificate of Execution,
I, P. S., officer to the Eeverend Presbytery of D., hereby
certify that upon the day of 18— years, I did, in
virtue of a libel at the instance of the Eeverend Presbytery
of D., against Eev. A. 8., Minister of C., for the crime of
" , and of the warrant and authority thereon granted by
the said Presbytery, lawfully cite the said A. B. to appear
personally before the said Presbytery, at their meeting
which is appointed to take place at , on , the ——
day of next, in the hour of cause, at o’clock
noon, to answer to the said libel; and I further charged
and ordained him to give in answers and objections to the
said libel, and list of witnesses thereto subjoined, if he be
so advised, within days before the said day of appearance,
a just and exact copy of which libel, and of the listof witnesses
thereto subjoined, and-of the warrant and authority granted
thereon by the said Presbytery, consisting in the whole of
pages, subscribed by me on each page, and having a
citation attached thereto to the above effect, subscribed by
me and the following witnesses, I delivered to the said
A.B. personally apprehended [if not personally, by delivering
the same at his dwelling-house, or by a registered letter
addressed to him through the post-office, as witnessed by
,] before and in the presence of L. and M., witnesses
to the premises, and hereto with me subscribing.
P. S., Presbytery Qffioer.
L., Witness.
M., Witness.
XI. Sentence oj Deposition.
In the name of the Lord Jesua Christ, the sole King and
Head of this Church, and by virtue of the power and authority
committed by Him to it, I do now solemnly depose you,
P. G., Minister of the Congregation of H., from the office of
the Holy Ministry, prohibiting and discharging you from
exercising the same or any part thereof, in all time coming;
and I do declare the Church of H. vacant from and after
the day and date of this sentence.


Melbourne :
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East.






' njfcr ' - y -s ' j
■ , ■ V
‘
■ , - vor,
’
■': , ■
" ■
■ ,
•' ■ ‘
■ - ’ - - _ ' v l,
, f (
.
-
' ■ n
..•V - . -C
■ V' i ■ ' X .. ,J
V>,/ Z -sT v ;''
;■• • *- P: ,V: . v ; : v
* '-'T ’ . •>’ '■ ■-
V ( rj V' V s * J>* ■ -i
-
■ . V- '-V . - / • -■ r-
■
•
; t, • ;■ --
' • T '■ -
.
f-A :<i. '"Vs;"
■■ ' ' S~ :- , ■ '. '- !- '. "• -- - ■
" ‘ ' V *J * s' -s* ‘ r -
- v-V . ‘?V - . v„. i-y ■ -IX - .. . , V-- •
' ' - k ■ v ■• ► • ’ - • ' ' • ' •
■ '
-
• ■ ■ ' ■ .- , . ' .• .
.... ' • .
. r- • ■ a- - ■ ' -- ~ v w 1 - ~ { «w' B . - --- v . • V --
- -- - . ' - •' •. ‘ •'
■ ; . ■ • ■ ' . -- . _ . ' s >. - ' * . • ■ r £
, ■. ' . ... >■ ' : ... - ■ ■ - : ">: s
.
•' -~y -•>. ; - »..• V' yf- * - ■' • *, • .‘V > . y*-'' * • ‘
= Ml - ■ -
C .V,
- - v
~5--
- - • jf*
, - . ,,
- ■Stis
. i ■ -
.... , . •
■ - ■ ' : :.'v '■ ■ •' - ■ ■ t ■■ s ■
■ ,-f -?c. -V- ' ’■ ■
■/ - . ' - - < ■ , -
■ ■ ' J' - - ' "■•■
'
:tvfc‘s ... , :* .;.s * ■<- i- -
- 0 ' - - _ •
. - l
■. ; t • •*. \ ' j;<2 . ■' i . J -.
; ■ - , /-'?
:s' < v - '•:>■;■ -
: y ■ ■ ■
*
* . ■■ v «■ :5
,-i T« »
' •••.'. 1 ■' i -S' ’.rC-y *-W ••
■ • » - /*>"
*
• • ■ .* ' y
'
?
•>. ' ' s- ■■■.. -
.
- - - - - . r :•
tr v s
- ' .2 ' ' <■ - ■ ... -V ./ —’ • ' 1 S >-
'
. v
•
, • ' ■■ ■
. -ft *- , , • . V-, , **.- y ■ tf
- O
- ’-V - . ... > -v:s-
■ ■■ i
- <L..' ; : i
SJi ,-A ■
: V-
.
■
:
.


