

/( /I Head Quarters, Ballarat,
6th December, 1654.
GENERAL ORDER
Major General Sir Robert Nickle, K.H., Commanding the Forces in
the Australian Colonies, announces to Her Majesty’s subjects, Civil and
Military, that, acting under the authority of His Excellency, the
Lieutenant Governor of Victoria, He has assumed command of the
Force at Ballarat, to restore confidence and to preserve the lives and
property of all peaceful persons.
The Inhabitants are recommended to pursue their ordinary lawful
avocations as heretofore.
Military Law having been this day proclaimed, the Major General
directs as follows;
1. Stores of every kind may be brought into the District, except
Arms and »Ammunition ; and any Conveyance containing Jlrms or
Military Stores will be confiscated, and the persons in charge will be
tried by a General Court Martial.
2. All persons in whose possession or on whose premises Arms or
Ammunition may be found after S welve o’clock on the day of Saturday,
the Ninth of December, will be tried by General Court Martial.
3. AH persons having Arms or Ammunition in their possession, are
hereby required to deliver them, by that time, to a Storekeeper at the
Camp, appointed to receive, and register, and to give a receipt for the
same.
4. Should any insult or violence be offered to any Soldier, or Police-
man, or any recognised authority, the offending persons will be tried by
General Court Martial.
5. Should a shot be fired on the Camp, or on any of the above-named
authorities, from the neighbourhood of any Tent, it will be immediately
burned down, unless the occupants give such information as shall lead
to the conviction of the perpetrators of such outrage, who will, in every
case, be tried by General Court Martial. t
i fi. Any person found lighting a fire, having the appearance of a signal
tire, will be tried by General Court Martial. •
7. Officers commanding the Force, whether Civil or Military, now
serving within this District, w ill receive orders through the medium of
the Deputy Adjutant General, and will in like manner their reports
for Sir llobert Nickle’s consideration.
8. ru de* Meetings are prohibited, except with the permission of the
Major General.
(By Command J
E3> WA ED MA C ARTHUR,
COLONEL,
Deputy •Adjutant General .
IVu.tn) at tlic “Times" Office, Bakery-Hilt.
