

GENTLEMEN O’
FORTUNE
GURNEY SLADE






fea V5n I ,
' ,v< *’> w JK jp«|l SV ’***-*
He had pulled the trigger and wounded the foremost buccaneer
(page 266).


GENTLEMEN O’
FORTUNE
By
GURNEY SLADE
Illustrated by
VICTOR COOLEY
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, Ltd.
London, Edinburgh, New York, Toronto, and Paris


THOMAS NELSON AND SONS LTD
Parkside Works Edinburgh 9
3 Henrietta Street London WC2
312 Flinders Street Melbourne Cl
91-93 Wellington Street West Toronto I
Thomas Nelson and Sons
385 Madison Avenue New York 17
Fran9aise d’Editions Nelson
25 rue Henri Barbusse Paris V«


A oi ui
CONTENTS
I. Midnight Disturbance .... 5
11. Tale of Treasure 13
111. A Sea Fight 38
IV. On Board "La Mouette ” . .58
V. Recruits for Morgan . . . . 71
VI. In Maracaibo 88
VII. A Letter from Charles .... 107
VIII. In the Vault 119
IX. Out to the Mountains .... 132
X. The Barred Lagoon .... 147
XL The Fireship 158
XII. Out to Sea 175
XIII. A Spell at Port Royal .... 181
XIV. North for Bat Island .... 193
XV. The Treasure Hunt .... 202
XVI. Rodriguez comes ashore . , . 211
XVII. Favours returned 235
XVIII. The Gateway to Panama . . . 249
XIX. After the Battle 263
XX. On Harldene Terrace .... 273


\


CHAPTER I
MIDNIGHT DISTURBANCE
S a rule Gervaise Cartelot slept eight or
1\ nine hours without a break; but to-night,
as the clock in the hall struck two, his eyes
snapped open, and he lay wide awake, listening.
Through the open window the soft sea breeze
came floating in by way of the gap in the Downs
near Arundel, bearing with it the rustling of the
elms, the hooting of owls, and the murmur of
the river in the flats below : familiar sounds
enough, and contributing to the peace and calm


6 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
of the Sussex countryside in the reign of the
second Charles. But Gervaise was not satisfied.
Some instinct, bequeathed to him, perhaps, by
a long line of fighting ancestors, warned him
that all was not well. Slipping out of bed, he
went quietly to the window.
The moon had gone down and the stars were
twinkling brightly in the clear sky of the early
October morning. From the direction of Wild
Brooks came the thin crowing of a restless cock.
Everything seemed normal, and, after waiting
for a few moments, Gervaise was about to turn
away, when a glint of light caught his eye,
coming from the ruined chapter-house attached
to the south-east corner of the Rectory buildings.
Harldene Rectory had been built upon the
site of an old Austin priory. One hundred and
fifty years before, the little nest of Black Canons
had been rooted from their monastery by the
banks of the Arun, and, since then, much of the
stone of their buildings had been incorporated
into the dwellings of the gentry and peasantry
around. But the ruined chapter-house remained
as a witness to their long sojourn in the Rape of
Arundel. Roofless and overgrown with ivy, the
beauty of its original design evinced itself still


MIDNIGHT DISTURBANCE 7
in Gothic arch and delicate window. It was
from the white stone of an archway that the
light came reflected now to Gervaise.
Gervaise stared at it in puzzled fashion. Who
on earth, he wondered, could be in the chapter-
house at this time of night ? Not his uncle,
surely. The Rector of Harldene had been
known to descend to his library at unorthodox
hours ; but the chapter-house was an empty
ruin, and as familiar to him as his own bed-
room. ... A servant, then ? Gervaise dis-
missed that idea, too, as extremely improbable.
Why should any inmate of the Rectory desire
to visit the chapter-house in the early hours
of the morning, when all day and every day it
lay open for inspection ?
He decided to investigate. Slipping on his
breeches and boots, he went quietly downstairs
into the hall. Groping in the darkness, he dis-
covered that both the doors of the hall were
bolted and barred. This at once increased his
suspicions. Very quietly and cautiously he
opened the north door and made his way over
the lawn to the chapter-house. Reaching the
entrance, he stopped and peered in.
At the other end of the building a man in a


large hat and a cloak was crouched over a sheet
of paper. On the ground close by stood a
lantern, and its light showed Gervaise the man’s
face—dark, and foreign looking, tanned by
fiercer suns than ever shone in England. At
the slight noise Gervaise made, he leapt to
his feet, and his hand went quickly to his
belt.
“ Who are you ? ” asked Gervaise abruptly.
The stranger took up the lantern and shone it
full upon the lad’s face. Apparently he did not
like what he saw, for he warned gratingly :
“ Keep away, boy.”
Gervaise took no heed of the warning. Step-
ping through the doorway, he advanced upon
the man. But suddenly the light was doused.
There was a flash, a sharp report, and a bullet
whizzed past his ear. And at that something
seemed to leap in the boy’s blood. It was his
first taste of real battle, something very different
from the mock frays with buttoned foils in
which he had engaged with his schoolfellows at
Shrewsbury. His foot touched a large loose
stone. Stooping, he raised it with both hands
and hurled it with all his force in the direction
of his invisible enemy. An envenomed curse in


“ Who are you ? ”
Spanish told him that he had found his mark,
and he rushed forward to grapple. But he came
up against nothing more tangible than the thick
cluster of ivy covering the eastern wall, and a
few seconds’ search convinced him that his
assailant must have escaped through one of the
windows. Gervaise immediately scrambled
through the nearest and began to search the
encircling shrubberies. While he was thus en-
gaged, lights appeared in the Rectory windows,
and presently the south door opened and a
little procession came out upon the terrace. It
9


10 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
consisted of the Rector, two serving-men, and a
spaniel.
“ What is it, Gervaise ? ” asked the Rector,
a mila-faced, studious-looking man, as the lad
came to meet them.
“ There was a man in the chapter-house,
uncle. A nasty-looking fellow. I saw his light
from my bedroom, and came down to see what
he was up to. He fired a shot at me.”
“ My dear boy ! ”
“ I caught him with a stone, though, I think.
He let out a yelp. We may get him yet if we
search the garden. Will you come with me,
Asche ? ”
The younger of the two serving-men, a stoutly-
built fellow of the yeoman type, answered
readily enough :
“ Aye, I’ll come, Master Gervaise ; but I’m
thinking we’d better take sticks or guns with
us.”
“ I don’t think I quite like ...” began the
Rector. But Gervaise did not wait to hear the
end of the sentence. Darting into the house,
he returned with a couple of pistols, which he
proceeded to load.
“ Here you are, Asche,” he said, handing one


MIDNIGHT DISTURBANCE n
to the man. “You take the west side of the
garden and I’ll take the east. Carter can stay
with the master on the terrace and the
house.” Leaving the Rector still mildly pro-
testing, they began their search. For half an
hour they scoured the garden thoroughly, and
then pushed out farther to the boggy flats by
the river. Nearly an hour had elapsed before
they returned, crestfallen, to the terrace.
The Rector was visibly relieved at their
appearance.
“ I oughtn’t really to have let you go, Ger-
vaise. He seems to have been a dangerous
kind of man. I wonder what he was doing in
the chapter-house ? ”
“ Lurking about preparatory to breaking into
the house, I expect, uncle.”
“ Perhaps so. Well, I think we may as
well go to bed again now.” He turned and
led the way indoors. “ You can bolt up,
Asche.”
“ But that’s not the way to bed, uncle,” said
Gervaise, as the Rector moved towards the
library.
“ Hem ! No, of course not. Thank you,
Gervaise. I was forgetting.” The Rector took


i 2 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
up his candle and went slowly up the broad
oak stairs to his room. Gervaise, smiling dis-
creetly at the thought that he had saved his
relative at least two hours’ night study, followed
at his heels.


CHAPTER II
TALE OF TREASURE
THE next morning, when Gervaise was
sitting beneath the cedar tree in the north
garden, surrounded by pistols and guns and
swords, there came walking delicately to him
over the turf his cousin, Charles Sinden. And
a very debonair young gallant he looked, with
his flowing French periwig, broad hat with
gracefully drooping feathers, expansive breeches,
and smart shoes adorned with silken bows.
There was lace at his wrists and knees, and his
richly embroidered baldrick held suspended a
rapier of foreign pattern. Behind him, in the
drive, stood the coach in which he had driven
from the coast, and its driver was engaged in
emptying it of its numerous packages and
parcels.
“ It’s cousin Gervaise,” said the cavalier.
“ Cousin Gervaise, grown to a mastiff, but


i 4 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
playing with matchlocks as he did when he was
a sprawling pup.”
“ Why, Charles,” said Gervaise, “ this is
unexpected indeed. But it’s nice to see you
again.” He held out his hand.
Charles surveyed it, covered as it was with
grease and oil. He gave a slight shudder.
“ Must you really turn yourself into an
armourer’s mate, Gervaise ? Eh hien ! ” He
sighed, and extended his own small, beautifully
kept hand. Then, as Gervaise gripped it, he
gave a faint shriek. “ Laissez-le I Ma foi ! any
one would think you were trying to strangle a
pig.” He withdrew his hand and surveyed it
ruefully. I should have known,” he mur-
mured. “ The island youth in his own do-
main—untrained, uncouth, eager as ever to
trample on lilies.”
“ What’s that, Charles ? Are you calling your
hand a lily ? ”
“ It has held lilies,” said Charles reverently.
“ And something of their grace and fragrance it
had retained until I confided it to that great
oily paw of yours. When I say that it has
held lilies, I mean, cub of an islander, that
it has held the fingers of French ladies, fingers


“ It’s cousin Gervaise,” said the cavalier.
light as thistledown and transparent as rose
leaves.”
At that conceit Gervaise broke into a great
laugh. Charles listened to him critically.
“ There is a ring in your howling that is not
unmusical, cousin, but I would warn you to
suppress it. Loud masculine laughter is of the
bourgeoisie. . . . But tell me, why aren’t you
at Shrewsbury ? ”
“ There’s an epidemic there. All the boys
have been sent home. I was going to leave at
Christmas, anyway. I’m eighteen now, you
know. . . . And why aren’t you in France ? ”


“ Lord Bourne, my patron, has died of
wounds caught in a duel. He left me his ward-
robe and fifty guineas. The wardrobe I have
still, but methinks the coachman here will have
the last of the guineas. See that he has some
cakes and ale before he departs. Father is in
the library, I suppose ? ”
“ Yes, you’ll find him there.”
Gervaise smiled as his cousin went into the
house. He wondered what lay beneath Charles’s
airs and graces. At Shrewsbury several of the
boys aped, at times, the polished manners of
travelled relatives; but the most notorious
dandy of them all could not hold a candle to
Charles Sinden.
Half an hour later Charles came out again.
Sauntering up to the cedar tree, he stood look-
ing down at his cousin.
“ Our great floundering schoolboy is
amused,” he remarked. “ Perhaps he is think-
ing of the bird’s egg purloined from the desk
of a school chum ? ”
“ Nothing like that, Charles,” replied Ger-
vaise good temperedly.
“ Of a rabbit which he has caught in a snare,
then ? ”
(4,034)


“ No, I was thinking of you.”
“ A thousand thanks,” said Charles languidly.
He sank down on the carved stone bench be-
neath the tree, and glanced at his surroundings
with profound distaste. “ Death in life,” he
announced at last.
“ What is ?
“ This.” Charles waved his hand compre-
hensively. “ This, garfon, is the very heart of
the islanders’ stronghold. Here they practise
their rough crafts, laugh their great laughs, and
smother their hands with oil and grease.”
“ Wouldn’t uncle give you any money ? ”
asked Gervaise, holding up a gun and peering
into the barrel.
“ Money ! No. The curse of Charles Sin-
den is that he is the second son, and that his
brother is at Court. There is nothing like
having a brother at Court for keeping lean the
parental purse.”
“Yes, I know Hugh is always writing for
money.”
“ So am I, for that matter,” confessed
Charles. “ The trouble is that Hugh gets it,
and I don’t. So back lam come to the heart
of the English bog, where it seems I must per-
(4,034) 2


i 8 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
force spend my time listening to the prattle of
a schoolboy. Tims ! and to think I have come
to this direct from Fontainebleau—Fontaine-
bleau / ” he repeated, as Gervaise did not seem
at all impressed.
“ Yes, I heard you. Fontainebleau. Well ? ”
“ He says ‘ Well ? ’ ” sighed Charles, “ just
as if I had said ‘ pork ’ or ‘ beef ’ or ‘ beer.’
Fontainebleau, untutored one, is an earthly
paradise, where one meets the fairest ladies of
France, surrounded by choice flowers only less
fair than themselves.”
“ I suppose you’ve fallen in love with one
of them ? ”
“ Love ! For heaven’s sake don’t use that
word, cousin—it’s too English. In France one
whispers to oneself the word amour. One
meets a lady, comes upon her perhaps in a
bosquet ; one touches the tips of her fingers in
the minuet, and the whole world becomes
transformed to music and poetry.”
“ I suppose they’re very rich, these French
ladies ? ”
“ When they leave Court, they go to their
fathers’ castles in the country, the fair French
country. The peasantry decorate their animals


in their honour. Tout est en fete. Cannon
boom from the turrets, and bonfires announce
the joyful news of their return. As for me,
when I leave the palace, I come back in another
man’s suit to the English island, to a residence
which is almost bourgeois, and a great ox of a
schoolboy cleaning guns which look as if they
had been left over from the Armada. . . . And
tell me, what does this schoolboy propose to do
with his valuable young life ? ”
“ I don’t know yet. Uncle and the Earl are
going to talk it over soon, I believe. Uncle
wants me to go to Oxford, but I think the Earl
would like me to go into the army.”
“ Both terribly English,” condemned Charles.
“ And that reminds me—l suppose there’ll be
beef for dinner to-day ? ”
“ Sure to be.-”
“ One cannot hope to escape it,” Charles
groaned. “ Ah, there is the bell. Come in
and gorge yourself, and heaven send I can stand
the spectacle.”
The meal was served in the pleasant oak-
panelled dining-room looking out upon the
Downs, and Gervaise was amused to observe
that his cousin was exceedingly quick in over-


20 GENTLEMEN 0’ FORTUNE
coming his repugnance to English beef, and
made heroic inroads upon the sirloin.
“ The fact is, sir,” said Charles, with half a
sigh, when the talk turned again to his brother’s
expenses at Court, “ there is insufficient money
in the world for the world’s needs.”
“ You mean there is insufficient money in
the world for Charles Sinden’s needs,” cor-
rected Gervaise, and the ghost of a smile flitted
over the Rector’s pale features at the remark.
“ In essence it comes to that,” Charles
admitted. “My needs are peculiar and urgent.
England, by her beef eating and beer drinking,
has earned a reputation for savagery on the
Continent which men like myself are doing our
best to counteract.” He took a long draught of
ale from his tankard. “ But one cannot do
work of that kind without money. One must,
for instance, be apparelled.”
“You seem to be very well dressed at the
moment,” observed his father indulgently.
“ passe” said Charles carelessly, “in
England.”
The meal over, the Rector repaired to the
library, and the cousins sauntered together
upstairs. On the landing Charles halted, and


looked out of the window at the familiar sur-
roundings of his youth.
“ The Downs, the river, the boglands, the
cattle, the smoke rising from the farmhouses
and cottages where the islanders are eating their
beef and drinking their beer. Nothing changes
in this England of yours, Gervaise. And there’s
the old chapter-house. Ma foi! I believe it
was the black monks of Harldene who set the
fashion for gluttony in these parts.”
“We had a visitor there last night,” said
Gervaise, and he recounted the incident. Rather
to his surprise he found that Charles was keenly
interested in the story.
“ del! ” he said thoughtfully, “ that’s
strange.”
“ Yes, isn’t it ? I can’t think what he was
after.”
“ Cease your prattle, boy. I’m thinking.”
“ Well, I’m thinking too.”
“ Long, long thoughts about birds’ eggs and
pet mice, no doubt. But keep them unuttered,
my gawky scholar. I desire quiet for a few
moments.”
“ And you shall have it,” promised Gervaise,
flinging the window wide open with the toe of


22 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
his boot. With a quick movement he seized the
surprised Charles by collar and belt and jerked
him through the window, where he held him
suspended over the flagstones twenty feet
below. “ Think away, Charles,” he invited.
1 I’ll keep perfectly quiet.”
“ A trifle lower, cousin, I beg you,” said
Charles coolly. “ There is a nest a little out of
my reach. Doubtless you would like to have it
to add to your schoolboy collection.”
Gervaise laughed and lifted him back on to
the landing.
“ That’s all right, then, Charles. I just
wanted to see how you’d take it. You can go
on calling me schoolboy and islander now, I
shan’t mind.”
Charles rearranged his crumpled garments
and looked at him with a new respect.
“ Tims ! Gervaise, we shall get on, you and
I. I liked your geste. It was unexpected.
Now come into the chapter-house with me and
I’ll tell you something that I had intended to
keep to myself.”
Gervaise followed him wonderingly down-
stairs, through the garden, and into the old
ruin. There Charles made him designate the


He held him suspended over the flagstones below.
exact spot where the midnight visitant had
crouched with his lantern.
“ Just here, it was,” said Gervaise, pointing.
“ And he had a sheet of paper, you say ? ”
“ Yes, I saw it distinctly.”
“ Bien ! Now let me see if I can describe
this man. We’ll say that he was very dark,
tallish, deep-set eyes, and a black moustache.
Altogether a Spanish kind of hravo that would
make you loosen your sword when meeting
him at a dark street corner.”
“ Yes, that fits him very well.”


“ He had also the broad weal of a scar across
his chest.”
“ I didn’t see that. He was muffled up in
a cloak.”
“ But the scar was there, all the same.”
“You know the man ? Who is he ? And
why did he come here ? ”
“ He is Alonso Rodriguez, an Andalusian—
part brigand, part pirate, and wholly scoundrel.
He was till recently acting as valet and bully to
the Senor Pedro Suarez de Fontiveros, a high-
born Spaniard living in Paris. The Senor
Pedro had a great heart but a feeble body. He
embroiled himself rather in Paris, and so he
used Alonso. The fellow talks French well;
he knows the world, and he sticks at nothing if
he is well paid.”
“ But what was he doing in our chapter-
house ? ”
“He came for this.” Charles stepped to the
east wall of the ruin and pulled aside a bough
of ivy. Beneath, cut with a chisel on the flat
stone, was a design of about six inches by
three, bearing a rough resemblance to a bat.
“ That’s what he came for, Gervaise, and
that’s what he was copying by the light of


his lantern. See here, how the ivy’s been torn
away.”
“ Well, it’s all a mystery to me, Charles. I
didn’t know this drawing existed; and why your
Alonso Rodriguez should take the trouble to
come and copy it beats me altogether.”
“ I will tell you. But come out of this musty
old den. The wind is from France to-day, and
it seems a pity to waste it.”
They went out and seated themselves on an
oak bench on the south terrace. In front of
them stretched the long line of the Downs,
with little white clouds freshly arrived from the
Channel sailing high over their swelling con-
tours. In the lee of the hills Amberly could be
discerned, with the shell of its castle, gutted
half a century before by Cromwell’s rough-
handed soldiery, still standing. In the fore-
ground lay the broad expanse of the Arun flats,
dotted with grazing cattle and streaked with the
winding silver of the river. Mighty London
could change her face with each century; kings
could be deposed, beheaded, and recalled ; the
Ironsides could make and unmake parliaments ;
but Sussex remained eternally the same.
Charles viewed the scene with the patronizing


26 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
air of a young man fresh returned from the
courts of Europe, and resumed his story.
“ Many years ago, Gervaise, before you and
I were born, there came to this house the grand-
father of the Senor Suarez de Fontiveros. He
had been captured in the wars by an ancestor
of ours, and while awaiting his ransom he was
housed yonder.” Charles pointed to the large
clump of woodland darkening the foot of the
Downs to the south-east, where lay Varney
House, the Sussex residence of their kinsman,
the Earl of Varney and Sare. “ Baltasar de
Fontiveros was the name of this prisoner, and
he seems to have been a man of some humour.
As a Catholic he was interested in the monastic
remains hereabouts, and so he was brought here
one day by his host to view the old home of the
Black Canons. When asked if he would like
to leave a memento of his visit, he requested
the loan of a hammer and chisel, and with those
he inscribed that map on the chapter-house
wall.”
“ Map ! ” ejaculated Gervaise.
“ Yes, map. That’s what it is ; the map of
an island. That’s where his humour came in.
He was well aware of the English passion for


gold, and so he presented his hosts with a
treasure clue, merely suppressing the informa-
tion that it was an island, and that there was
treasure on it. I think I should have liked that
Baltasar. He had the right idea of a jest.
Doubtless his hosts were polite enough to
congratulate him on his spirited representation
of a bat, and as a Spaniard he would know how
to sweep his hat and bow and thank them for
their kind words.”
“ This is very interesting, Charles.”
“Yes, I thought you would find it so. The
Senor Pedro told me the story in Paris. The
fact that I was related to the house of Varney
formed a bond between us. I had the honour
to act as his second in his duel with a certain
Hernando Lopez, a Portuguese gentleman who
had affronted him by saying that the only living
creatures who feared Spain nowadays in the
Americas were mules and tortoises. They
fought well, those two, and in the end both
received their death wounds. Before he died
the Senor Pedro told me the whole thing. This
grandfather of his, Suarez de Fontiveros, had
been commandant on the Santa Christina , a
stout galleon built at Pasajes for the American


28 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
trade. Coming home one year from New Spain
with the Plate Fleet, she was blown north out
of her course in a terrific storm, and was finally
wrecked on this Bat Island. Pedro gave me the
details as he had them from his grandfather. It
seems that the Santa Christina crashed into the
creek there like a great pig into a clover field.
The masts went by the board, boats were carried
away a mile inland, and the guns hurtled about
like loose chickens. Only a handful of her
crew survived, but the commandant was one of
them. Now, on the galleon was a box of
jewels, valued at a hundred thousand pounds,
consigned to the Episcopal treasury. This
box the commandant managed to salve. He
and his men were on the island a month, during
which time they repaired one of the ship’s boats.
Before they left, however, the commandant
thought it prudent to bury the jewels, for he
realized that if he took them with him to sea
in an open boat he stood a good chance of
getting his throat cut. So he buried them at
the foot of a large tree due north of the galleon’s
bow. Well, to cut the story short, after many
adventures their boat was picked up by a
Spanish vessel, and the residue of the galleon’s


crew arrived home. For some reason best
known to himself and his family, the com-
mandant reported the treasure lost as well as
the galleon, and his story was accepted. When
Baltasar died, he passed the secret on to his son,
who in turn gave it to Pedro. So there you
have it.”
“ And is the treasure still there ? ” asked
Gervaise.
“ Pedro thought so. His family had done
well in other ways, and there was no need for
any of them to go treasure-hunting. He had,
however, made discreet inquiries among nau-
tical friends, and he had heard that twenty years
ago an Indian had mentioned seeing the wreck
of an old Spanish ship on a tiny island north
of the Bahamas, and that on the stern was
painted in blue the figure of a Spanish lady.
Pedro was convinced that that ship was the
Santa Christina .”
“ It sounds all right,” said Gervaise thought-
fully. “Was this Pedro a reliable kind of
man ? ”
“To his friends he was. Also he was on
his deathbed when he told me, and he swore
on oath that it was true.”


“ And where does this Alonso Rodriguez
come in ? ”
“ That’s what I’ve been thinking over my-
self, but I think I’ve got it now. The fellow
has evidently overheard something. Now I
come to think of it, I ran into him outside
Pedro’s door one day. Must have been listen-
ing at the keyhole. I expect he overheard
enough to convince him that there is treasure
buried on a certain island in the Indies. He
heard also that a map of that island had been
drawn at Harldene in Sussex. Bien ! He comes
to Sussex and makes a copy of that map.”
“ But he hasn’t got the bearings of the
island.”
“ Near enough. Anyway, he’s been a sea-
farer, and he’d know where to get a peek at the
buccaneer charts of the Indies. He’s probably
on his way to Bristol now for that very purpose.
He’ll look the charts over very carefully, and
suddenly he’ll come on an island shaped like a
bat, with the latitude and longitude plainly
marked. That’s all he’ll want. With that
information he can take ship for the Indies
and fill in time perhaps doing a little buccaneer-
ing while laying his plans for getting the jewels.”


“ I say, Charles,” began Gervaise forcibly,
“ why ”
“ Yes ? ”
“ Why shouldn’t we have a try for those
jewels ? ”
“ It takes money to get to the Indies, mon
cher. I have none. Father won’t give me
any. And yours, I believe, has been more or
less locked up by wise parents in order to grease
the wheels of your future.”
“ That’s true,” assented Gervaise. “ But
why not try the Earl ? He likes you —he’s told
me so more than once.”
“ Then he’s a sensible nobleman. Bien ! It’s
an idea. If he agreed to finance us we could
offer him half shares in the profits, and ”
“ What ? ”
“ Pray to heaven that he wouldn’t take them.
Allans ! But, mon gargon , put on some clothes.
That brown suit of yours may be all right for
trapping rabbits, but an earl has a right to
expect his kinsmen to be garbed comme il faut.
Besides, we’re going to borrow money. On the
Continent there is a saying that if a man wishes
to borrow money he should look as if he wishes
to lend it.”


“ All right. I’ll go and change. I shan’t be
long.”
Gervaise hurried into the house, and when
he emerged ten minutes later in his Sunday
best, jack-booted and spurred, and with a hat
only a little less rakish than Charles’s own, his
cousin eyed him approvingly.
“ Yes, that will do,” he said. “ You won’t be
mistaken now for the miller’s man. You have
an air, mon cher , which only needs a few years’
developing on the Continent to command
respect. What are the horses like ? ”
“ Not bad. The grey is the better of the
two. You can ride him.”
“I’m not sure that grey won’t clash with this
suit of mine,” said Charles, as they moved to
the stables.
“ I don’t suppose the horse will mind,” Ger-
vaise commented with a smile.
“No wonder you English get killed when you
go abroad,” said Charles evenly. “ Your at-
tempts at humour are like the junketings of a
wild ass.”
The Earl of Varney and Sare was at home
that afternoon, sitting solitary in front of a log-


fire in his library, smoking a pipe of fragrant
Virginia leaf, and with an open book on his
knee. Tall, white haired, and dignified, he had
been a force in the politics of his day. Through-
out the stormy times of the Stuart era he had
preached unceasingly the need for colonial
expansion, and particularly in the direction of
America. Europe, according to the Earl, was
over-populated ; it had been debated and fought
over for numerous centuries ; it was time that
superabundant English enterprise turned else-
where ; and over there, beyond the western sea,
lay the virgin continent which was the natural
field for its energy. He, had made two voyages
to Virginia, and had been instrumental in
obtaining further government assistance for the
colony there.
As he welcomed the pair with the quiet
courtesy characteristic of him, he noted their
points with the eye of a connoisseur. In every
age there is a certain section who proclaim the
decadence of the nation’s youth, and in the
seventeenth century there were not lacking those
who deplored the loss of the Elizabethan spirit.
But these two young men, Cartelot and Sinden,
were living refutations of the plaint, thought
(4,084)


34 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
the Earl. Gervaise’s character lay plain for all
to see. Six feet in height, firm of chin, and
steady of eye, he looked exactly what he was
—a virile young thoroughbred, needing only a
little experience of the world to develop into
first-class English manhood. As for Charles,
his elegant exterior could not deceive the Earl.
Beneath that lay the deadly fighter and equally
potent swayer of councils yet unconvened. The
Earl, with his vast experience of men, could
read the embryonic signs.
Ordering a tray of refreshments to be brought
in, the Earl made the cousins sit down with
him by the fire, and began to question Charles
about his travels. Charles, in his replies, made
no mention of English savagery on the Conti-
nent, an omission which caused Gervaise secret
amusement. The Earl divined presently, by the
preoccupation of the pair, that something lay
behind their visit, and at once requested
information.
“ Come, lads,” he said, “ what’s on your
minds ? Better out with it. That last anecdote
of yours was too rambling by far, Charles. I
couldn’t make out whether it happened in Paris
or Vienna. That’s unlike you, my boy. And


as for Gervaise, he’s sitting there with his
teeth clenched, looking as if he were fighting
Spaniards.”
“ Well, the fact is, sir,” began Charles,
“ we’ve stumbled on a treasure clue.”
“ Ah! a treasure clue ! ” A glimmer of
amused scepticism showed in the old nobleman’s
keen grey eyes.
“ And Gervaise and I thought of following
it up —if you thought it worth while.”
“ And if I don’t think it worth while, you
will, of course, put the idea out of your heads
right away ? ”
“We may endeavour to do so,” conceded
Charles ; “ but, to be quite frank with you,
sir, I doubt whether we shall succeed.”
The Earl laughed. “ Now I have you, my
boy. Go ahead.”
Charles was a natural raconteur, and had
developed his gift abroad. He unfolded the
tale very skilfully, and, long before it was ended,
the Earl sat rapt, his pipe gone out and un-
heeded.
“So! ”he said at the end. “An island and
a galleon and buried jewels. Strange ! very
strange ! That Baltasar—l remember him. I


36 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
was a boy at the time, and I was there when he
chiselled out that map. A very bad drawing of
a bat, I thought it, and laughed at him behind
his back. But, by heaven, the laugh was his 1
H’m ! h’m ! very strange ; but it all fits in.
This Alonso has evidently got what he wanted,
and he’s after the jewels. And I suppose ”
he looked keenly at the pair—“ you two young
swashbucklers want to give him a run for the
treasure. Is that it, eh ? ”
They nodded. “ But there are difficulties,
sir,” said Charles.
“ Such as an unsympathetic father and lack
of money,” suggested the Earl shrewdly.
“ Exactly, sir ; but those difficulties might be
overcome.”
“ By what, young man ? ”
“ By a sympathetic Earl of Varney and Sare,”
replied Charles boldly.
The Earl smiled appreciatively. He took up
his pipe and relit it. I’ll do it,” he said after a
few moments’ thought. “ Whether you get the
jewels or not, it will do you both a lot of good
to have a turn in the Americas. I will give
you introductions to some friends of mine in
Jamestown, and sufficient money to enable you


to live decently for a year. If you find the
trove, you can pay me back. If not . . he
shrugged his shoulders.
“We thought, sir, that if you agreed to help
us, you would take a half-share of the profits,”
said Gervaise.
“ No, lad, I don’t want it. I have more than
sufficient for my needs.” He puffed thought-
fully for a while. “ Tell the Rector I’ll come
and see him to-morrow,” he added. “ I think
he’ll listen to me. Put another log on the
fire, Charles. There’s a hint of autumn in the
wind this afternoon.”


CHAPTER 111
A SEA FIGHT
A FEW months after their interview with
the Earl, the cousins found themselves in
Bristol, with their passages booked on the
Zaandam , a Dutch ship bound for the Indies.
The Earl had been as good as his word. Two
long talks with the Rector had sufficed to over-
come all the latter’s objections, and once the
parental and loco-parental consent had been
given, the Earl had put the affair in train with
his usual speed and thoroughness. The choice
of a ship, however, he had left to the cousins.
“ Go to Bristol,” he had said, “ and bargain
yourselves for berths on any vessel you fancy.
That will be a useful experience for you.”
“ And if it should go down, you will be
relieved of a certain amount of responsibility,”
Charles had jested. Which thrust the Earl had
relished considerably.


The Zaandam was a stoutly-built vessel,
well armed and well manned. As they strolled
now along the quays, they saw her high carved
poop standing out like a promontory among the
litter of smaller craft surrounding her. Gervaise
stopped and surveyed her with a quickening
pulse. They were to sail on the morrow, and
the excitement of his first voyage was in his
blood.
“ Come,” said Charles, “ what are you staring
at ? The old Zaandam. Pourquoi ? You’ll be
sick enough of the old tub before you’ve finished.
Let’s go back to the hotel and suggest some
dishes for dinner to good mine host.”
“Not I,” said Gervaise. “ There’s lots to
see in this town yet.”
“ Barrels and tar,” scoffed Charles. “ The
very streets seem peopled with masts, and these
English mariners of yours, they roll like crabs.
Retournons ! ”
Gervaise shook his head. He was enjoying
himself hugely. Taking his expostulating com-
panion by the arm, he urged him along, stop-
ping every now and again to sniff the salt sea
air and stare at the fascinating tangle of masts
and spars. He loved every inch of this famous


4 o GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
seaport from which so many argosies had set
forth to lay the seeds of a greater England.
Charles, at last, half drew his rapier and
threatened to run him through there and then
if he did not instantly release his hold and go
back to see what was for dinner. Whereupon
Gervaise capitulated with a sigh.
They were on board early the next morning,
and took up their quarters with the captain in
the great cabin aft. The Zaandam's departure
was a quiet one. The sight of a vessel being
warped out and hoisting her sails for the Indies
was such a common one to Bristol eyes that few
troubled to suspend their occupations to watch
it. Moreover, this was a Dutch ship, and the
captain and crew had few ties in Bristol. No
women and children gathered at the quay to
wave their kerchiefs in farewell, and the stolid
Hollanders went about their work with scarce
a glance at the English land they were leaving
behind. By nightfall the Zaandam was off
Lundy, dipping and plunging to a strong
southerly breeze, and the island light was the
last her passengers were to see of their native
land for many a long day.
Three days of shipboard life was sufficient to


drive Charles almost permanently to the sanctu-
ary of the great cabin. He complained that the
smell of the cookhouse forward was most
trying to nostrils accustomed to the delicate
perfumes of Fontainebleau. He whiled away
the time reading French poems and tinkling on
the Spanish guitar, on which instrument he had
attained a singular proficiency. He had a sweet
voice, and often the gruff burly sailors would
pause near the cabin door to listen to his ditties.
Gervaise, however, chose another way to
counteract the monotony of the voyage, and
became genuinely interested in the working
and management of the ship. Before they were
a week out he had gained the confidence of
all hands fore-and-aft, and was using nautical
terms with all the aplomb of a master’s mate.
He roamed happily about from stem to stern,
and more than once tried his hand at furling a
sail in a stiff breeze. The Captain, a bluff
Hollander, not unlike his ship in shape and
gait, saw that the young Englishman’s interest
was real, and gave him many valuable hints.
Many an hour the two spent together in
the steerage-room, where, encompassed by
numerous charts, the lad was initiated into the


42 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
mysteries of dead reckoning and marking by
traverse. He devoted himself also to the study
of Spanish. Charles spoke that language very
well, and would condescend sometimes to give
him an hour or so’s unorthodox lesson.
“ After all,” said that young gallant one day,
when the Zaandam was several weeks out, and
the increasing heat warned them that they were
nearing the region of the tropics, “ Spanish is
likely to be of more use to you than knowing
how to say ‘ luff ’ and ‘ rumbelow.’ You’ll
spoil the shape of your hands with all this
heeling and hauling. You are a Cartelot,
remember, and your ancestors weren’t in the
habit of plunging their arms into tar-barrels.
Your Spanish progresses a little. Bien! you
should now endeavour to correct your French
accent, which is vile, mon cher —vile. Listen
now to this.” He took up one of his French
poems and began to read aloud.
Gervaise listened for a while out of politeness,
and then, with a hasty word of thanks, slipped
out on deck. There he found a state of excite-
ment prevailing owing to the presence of a
vessel bearing down on them from the north.
The wind was light, and the Zaandam had every


sail set; but the other, though a smaller craft,
had a greater spread of canvas, and was evi-
dently faster.
“ Most likely a pirate,” said the Captain,
passing his glass to Gervaise. Levelling it, the
lad was able to descry two serried lines of gun-
ports showing beneath the bellying canvas, and
her decks swarming with men ; far too many
for an innocent merchantman.
“ But she’s flying French colours,” he re-
marked, handing back the glass.
“ Colours mean as little in these seas as they
do in your own Channel,” replied the Captain.
“ Every buccaneer has a stock of them. She
may be French and she may not. She means
us to stop, anyway. There,” he broke off, as a
puff of smoke broke from the other’s bows,
“ that’s a signal. She may, of course, merely
want provisions, and be willing to pay for them.
But to me she looks the kind that take what
they want, and sink what’s left, including the
crew. I’m going to run for it, and fight if
necessary.” He cried an order, and the Zaan-
darris head was turned to the south. The yards
were braced square, and she plunged on at an
increased pace before the wind.


Another gun boomed from the pursuer at
this manoeuvre, and the Captain smiled grimly.
“ A stern chase is a long chase,” he remarked.
“ If we can lead her till nightfall, we may be
able to shake her off.”
Gervaise went back to the cabin to break the
news to Charles. He found his cousin with his
elegant legs stretched out on the cabin table,
singing exquisitely to the accompaniment of his
guitar.
“ I should put that away and get a cutlass
instead, Charles. We’re being chased. Didn’t
you hear the cannon ? ”
“ Cannon ? No, this groaning old gallipot of
a Zaandam makes such a noise that I can hardly
hear myself sing.”
“ Look there.” Gervaise pointed through
the cabin window at the ship foaming along in
their wake. “ The Captain thinks she’s a pirate,
though she’s flying French colours.”
“ French ! ” exclaimed Charles. “ But the
fellow has taste, anyway.” He put down his
guitar and bowed to the vessel. “ And he’s
been firing at us, you say ? ”
“ Yes, signalling us to stop. He’ll fire in
real earnest when he gets closer, I expect, so


“ Put that away and get a cutlass instead.”
you’d better put your guitar away if you don’t
want it smashed.”
“ That would be a calamity,” Charles agreed.
“ Our big bluff Dutchman’s going to fight ? ”
“ Oh, he’ll fight all right.”
“ Good ; then let’s go and tell him that he
can reckon on us for ten pirates each.”
The Captain smiled approvingly when this
news was broken to him. He had seen a good
deal of the English, he told them, in war and
peace, and he much preferred fighting with
them than against them. He handed them


46 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
the key of the magazine and asked them to
serve out small arms and ammunition to the
crew.
The ship was now being cleared for action.
Powder was brought up from the hold, and shot
was wrapped round with rope yarn in order to
ensure a smooth passage through the far from
flawless bores of the guns. The cousins lent
a hand with this work, and the sturdy Dutch
sailors grinned their appreciation. Gervaise
they knew and respected ; but Charles up to
now had been rather an unknown quantity to
them, a kind of super-passenger, elegant and
aloof, occupying himself with refined amuse-
ments in the cabin. Now, however, as he
moved amongst them, careless of his fine suit,
handling cannon-balls and pulling his weight on
gun lashings and tackles, the while he hummed
tuneful little French songs, they told them-
selves with relief that he was real English
after all.
As the afternoon wore on, the distance be-
tween the two vessels steadily decreased, and
soon it became evident that, unless the wind
dropped, a fight would be inevitable. An hour
before sundown the enemy had crept up


sufficiently close to try a ranging shot from
her bow gun. The ball dropped a hundred
yards astern of the Zaandam.
The Dutch captain had his plans ready. The
gun crews on the starboard side stood to their
stations. The powder and shot had been
rammed well home, and the gunners were ready
with their priming irons.
Ten minutes later another puff of smoke
came from the enemy’s bows, and with the
report a ball crashed into the Zaandam*s stern,
sending a shower of splintered wood and glass
into the white foam of her wake.
The time had come. The Dutch captain
barked sharp orders. The Zaandam*s helm was
put down, the sheet of the foresail was let fly,
the fore-bowline let go, and the foresail’s
weather brace was hauled hard. Topsails and
t’gallant sails were similarly treated, and then
the sheets, braces, and bowlines of the mainmast
sails were trimmed for the opposite tack. As
the Zaandam came round, she fired the whole
of her broadside, and an exultant cheer burst
from the Dutchman as the pirate’s foremast
tottered and fell.
“ Do the whole of the merry-go-round, Cap-


48 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
1 /
tain,” begged Charles, “ and give him the other
broadside.”
But such was not the Captain’s intention.
Defence, not offence, was his motto. The
enemy was crippled, but not totally disabled.
Two of her guns were spitting spitefully, and
the Zaandam's splinters were beginning to fly.
The Captain decided to get away while the
going was good. Accordingly the Zaandam
was brought round again to her original course,
and very soon she was out of gunshot.
“ And now to show him a clean pair of heels,
if we can,” said the Captain to Gervaise. He
looked dubiously at the sails, which were not
drawing to his liking. “ The wind is dropping,
I’m afraid. If we should be becalmed now
that fellow will have more to say to us.”
The way of the ship had indeed appreciably
lessened, and in another half-hour the canvas
began to clap fitfully against the masts. By
sundown it became evident that the Captain’s
fears were to be realized, for the breeze died
away altogether, and the Zaandam drifted as
helplessly as the enemy ship, lying now five
miles astern.
As darkness fell the Captain had the sails


furled, and gave the order that no lights were
to be shown. He cautioned the crew, too,
against making unnecessary noise.
“You think they’ll try boarding us ? ” asked
Gervaise, as they sat down to a hasty meal in
the cabin.
“ It’s probable,” replied the Captain. “If
the wind had held for another hour we could
have changed our course in the dark, and it
wouldn’t have been worth their while scouring
round for us. As it is, every mother’s son of
them has our bearings well fixed by now. We
shall have to keep a sharp look-out to-night.”
On deck quantities of case-shot were being
brought up for the gunners’ use, and the light
ordnance known as “murderers,” at the break
of the fo’c’sle and half-deck, were got ready to
repel boarders. An extra noggin of rum was
served out to the crew with their evening meal,
and the Captain was at pains to explain to them
that in the event of the ship being captured,
they could expect little mercy from the pirates,
considering the hammering they had given them
that afternoon.
When all was in readiness, the larboard watch
lay down on deck to snatch what sleep they
(4.034)


50 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
could. The cousins were stationed on the poop,
and it fell to Charles to take the first watch.
The general tenseness prevented Gervaise from
sleeping, and he felt relieved when Charles
touched him on the shoulder.
“ Wake up, large one, and pace the poop,”
whispered Charles. “ All is well, except for a
fat Dutchman down there who’s snoring like
one of his own windmills. What’s the use of
having the lights extinguished when a man is
allowed to bellow through his nose like that!
The whole of the Spanish Main must have
heard him, let alone the pirates yonder. Bon
soir, cousin.” He lay down on the bare boards,
wrapping his cloak round him.
Gervaise took up his position by the great
stern lantern. In the darkness forward a
stealthy shuffling was taking place as the new
watch took over. This died away presently,
and a profound silence reigned over ship and
sea. The Captain came up the ladder, stood by
the lad’s side for a moment or two, and then
stole quietly away again on his ceaseless round.
The Zaandam had drifted a little since the
wind had dropped, but Gervaise was able to
judge by the stars that the pirate ship would now


be lying on the starboard quarter, and in that
direction he strained his eyes and ears. An
hour passed, and then he heard the faintest
possible sound far out across the water. At
that moment the Captain came up the ladder
again and approached him.
“ I heard something over there,” said Ger-
vaise, pointing. “ A long way out.”
“ Are you sure ? ”
“ Positive.”
“ I’ll wake the watch, then.”
In less than two minutes the whole of the
crew was standing to arms. Charles came to
his cousin’s side, and leant over the taffrail.
“ You’ve wakened the ship,” he said. “ Now
produce your pirates.”
“ I didn’t say I heard pirates. I heard some-
thing. I’ve no idea what it was.”
“ Probably a fish out for a midnight swim. . . .
Hallo ! ” he broke off. “ I did hear a splash
then.”
“ The fish coming nearer,” said Gervaise
dryly. “ Listen.”
“ Rowlocks,” whispered Charles, “ badly muf-
fled.” And a stir on the Zaandam's decks told
them that the sound had been heard by all.


The next moment the blackness astern was
lit by a series of flashes, and a volley of musket-
balls whizzed through the ship’s rigging. With
the reports came the howls of the attackers.
“ French, I imagine,” announced Charles,
listening, with his head on one side, in cool
criticism; “ but canaille .”
In sharp succession came two more bursts of
firing from different points astern, and from
that the Zaandarris defenders knew that at
least three boats had been launched against
them.
Two guns were slewed in that direction, and
crashed together in reply, and from the yells
and shrieks that ensued, it seemed that at least
one of them had found a target.
The pirates’ longboat, packed with yelling
humanity, now came into view on the starboard
quarter, and a few vigorous strokes brought her
alongside. At once a shower of fireballs were
hurled on board, rope ladders and grappling
irons were flung, and a cloud of pirates began
to clamber up the side.
The Zaandam's crew, hardened most of them
in the recent war with England, rose nobly to
the occasion. Knowing the fate that awaited


It was lifted bodily on to the bulwarks.
them if the ship was captured, they fought des-
perately. The ladders were cast back as soon
as they were flung, and, despite their most
ferocious efforts, the attackers were unable to
obtain a footing on deck. In the midst of the
fray another boat came alongside, and its crew
joined at once in the assault. This attack was
met in an unusual way by the Dutchmen, for,
one of the deck guns having broken loose from
its tackles, it was lifted bodily on to the bul-
warks by a dozen pairs of arms, and toppled into
the boat below, which sank at once, taking with


54 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
it several of its mangled crew. The survivors
swam, cursing, to the longboat.
During this time Charles and Gervaise were
on the poop, armed with all the muskets they
could lay hands on, keeping up a brisk fire at
the boat. But now the Captain came hurrying
to them.
“ Look to the other side, lads,” he shouted.
“ I’m afraid the other boat will creep round
there, and the crew aren’t sticking to their posts.
Most of them have come over, and are fighting
the longboat, and they can’t hear what I say in
this din.”
Realizing the urgency of the situation, the
cousins leapt down the ladder. As the Captain
had said, they found the larboard side almost
deserted. Only three of the men remained at
their posts, and a determined attack on that
side would have resulted in the capture of the
ship.
“ Let’s man that gun,” cried Charles, point-
ing to one of the small brass “ murderers,”
whose crew had left it in order to join in the
fight. Gervaise nodded, and they raced to-
gether to the half-deck. Even as they reached
it there came a warning cry, and the pirates’


third boat heralded its approach to the lar-
board side by a shower of fireballs and a volley
of musketry. Charles slewed the gun to the
threatened quarter, and Gervaise stood by with
the match.
“ Now,” said Charles, as a dozen wild
figures swarmed over the bulwarks.
Gervaise applied the match, and the charge
of stones, bullets, and pieces of broken iron
met the pirates full, stretching half their
number dead and wounded on the deck. The
residue staggered back, and the three Dutch
sailors at once charged them. The cousins
rushed to assist, and their added impact carried
the day. The pirates were either hurled or
leapt of their own accord into the boat. But
Gervaise, as he sprang upon the bulwarks to
deliver a last blow, was seized by the ankle by
a man standing in the boat’s stern, and, before
he could recover his balance, was pulled off his
perch on to the jumble of pirates below. Half
stunned by his fall, he lay inert, scarcely con-
scious of the jabber of excited men around
him.
The boat pushed off, and as it did so Charles
dived gracefully from the bulwarks and rose


T., *> N 'r3$36y! jr* l/KB > ,
Gervaise was seized by the ankle.
to the surface close to its stern. One of the
pirates raised an oar to brain him.
“ Tenez ! ” cried Charles commandingly.
“Je suis Frangais ! Aidez-moi ! ” And while
the man hesitated, he grasped the side and
scrambled on board. “ Bien !” he said patron-
izingly, patting the pirate on the back. “ Ratnez ,
mon ami! ”
The purity of his accent, combined with his
supreme self-confidence, convinced the pirate
that this young stranger had a right to demand
a passage. He dipped his oar with the rest,
and the Zaandam receded into the darkness.


The tumult had now died away, for the long-
boat’s crew had also given up the attack.
With half her complement left behind, she,
too, was now limping back to her parent
ship.


CHAPTER IV
ON BOARD “ LA MOUETTE ”
BY the time that the boat had covered two
miles of her return journey, Gervaise
had recovered sufficiently to sit up and take
stock of his surroundings. About a dozen men
were rowing, and as many more were lying
wounded in the bottom of the boat. Their
groans and curses mingled with the beat of the
oars. Above the heads of the rowers, Gervaise
could see Charles sitting jauntily in the stern,
humming serenely one of his French songs.
The sight of him was a great relief to Gervaise,
though he wondered how he came to be there.
The pirates rowed sullenly in the wake of the
longboat, whose outline could be just dis-
cerned ahead. Presently a flare showed on the
deck of the pirate ship, and the boat’s course
was turned in that direction. Half an hour
later both boats drew within hail of the ship,


ON BOARD “LA MOUETTE ” 59
and as they came alongside Gervaise read her
name, La Mouette. The wounded were taken
on board, and then Charles and Gervaise
ascended the ladder in their turn, and a couple
of the crew took them aft to interview the
commander.
Captain Ragot, the chief of the French
pirates, was sitting at the cabin table. The
light from the swinging lamp shone upon his
semi-naval finery and the flagon and glasses
before him. He was a thin-faced, sinister-
looking man with a short clipped beard. His
right hand was wrapped in a blood-stained silk
handkerchief. Gervaise remembered seeing
him in the stern of the longboat, shouting and
cursing with even more volubility than his
followers. He scowled at the quartet as they
entered.
“ Who are these ? ” he asked curtly.
One of the escort made a shrugging Latin
gesture.
“We don’t know, Captain. Pierre le Grand
pulled the big one into the boat, thinking that
he’d do to help work the ship since we’re so
short of hands. The other dived in after him.
Says he’s French ; but he doesn’t look it. We


6o GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
thought we’d better bring them along to you at
once.”
“ Very well, leave them here. You two may
wait outside.”
The men departed, and the Captain stared
from under his brows for some seconds at the
prisoners.
“ Who and what are you ? ” he demanded.
“ We are Englishmen,” replied Charles in
French. “ Passengers in that Dutch ship.”
“ You speak good French.”
“ I have had the inestimable privilege of
living in Paris.”
“ Does your friend speak French ? ”
“ He tries to at times, but the effect is heart-
rending.”
“You fought against us just now ? ”
“ Alas, mon capitaine , yes. It cut us to the
soul to do it. My cousin here shares my affec-
tion for France. When we heard the loved
accents of your countrymen, we felt tempted to
throw down our cutlasses and cry ‘ Mes amis ! ’ ”
“ H’m ! ” was Captain Ragot’s only comment
to that surprising statement. Leaning his arms
on the table, he stared at them as if he would
read their souls.


“ What are you doing in these seas ? ” he asked.
“ We are on a mission to Captain Morgan,”
replied Charles promptly.
“ Captain Morgan ! ” The Frenchman was
evidently startled.
“ None other,” Charles assured him sweetly.
“ And what is your business with him ? ”
“ That I am not at liberty to divulge. It
cuts me to the quick to have to refuse informa-
tion to a gallant French captain, possessed, no
doubt, of letters of marque, and leagued, very
likely, with Captain Morgan to lift the Spanish
yoke from the Indies. But what would you ?
One has one’s orders from the great ones in
Europe, and, ma foi! one obeys them. You,
mon capitaine , in like circumstances, would act
similarly, del! I know a gallant man when I
see one.”
Captain Ragot had perforce to bow his head
to the compliment. He was Frenchman first
and buccaneer afterwards, as the astute Charles
had already divined.
“ Captain Morgan expects you ? ”
“ Expects us ! ” cried Charles. “At this
moment he is pacing his cabin floor, grinding
his teeth at the delay. The man who brings


us to Morgan makes a friend of that valiant
gentleman for ever.”
He had touched the right spot. Morgan’s
star was in the ascendant. The fame of his
buccaneering exploits in the Indies had reached
Europe. He bade fair to become a factor to
be reckoned with in international diplomacy.
Whatever the nationality of a man free-lancing
in the Caribbean, it was good policy for him to
befriend Morgan.
“ Sit down,” invited Captain Ragot, and he
poured them out wine. His manner now was
much more amiable. Morgan, he told them,
should by now be leaving Jamaica for a raid on
the Spanish settlements. He might be met
with at Curagoa, or thereabouts. La Mouette ,
as they knew, had suffered during the recent
fight, and a fresh crew would have to be en-
listed. He suggested sailing south to meet
Morgan’s fleet, and hoped that Charles would
use his influence to procure him necessary
supplies and men. There would be left over,
very likely, he said, a number of rejected
volunteers at Morgan’s last port of call before
his raid, and some of these he, Captain Ragot,
would be glad to have.


Charles gave the promise readily.
“ I shall have the pleasure of telling Captain
Morgan that I have been treated with chivalrous
courtesy on La Mouette , and will beg him to do
his utmost to repair all damages to ship and
personnel.” He raised his glass. “ A votre
sante, mon capitaine ! ”
“ A la votre , monsieur ! ” returned Captain
Ragot. “You will do me the pleasure of
berthing aft with me. There are some dry
clothes in there.” He pointed to a chest.
“ Please help yourselves to a change of gar-
ments. And now, if you will excuse me, I
must do the rounds.”
Charles wasted no time in availing himself
of this invitation. The moment the Captain
had gone he went to the chest and threw back
the lid. It was full to the brim with well-cut
clothes for almost every occasion. Divesting
himself of his dripping habiliments, Charles
arrayed himself in the pick of the Captain’s
wardrobe.
“ Don’t you want any, Gervaise ? ” he
asked.
“ No, I’m not wet. And they wouldn’t fit
me, anyway. Charles, I want to thank you for


64 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
jumping overboard after me. I realize now
that that is what you must have done.”
“ Chut! That’s nothing, my boy. Parhleu !
What sort of time should I have had by myself
on the old Zaandam ? It doesn’t bear thinking
about.”
“ Well, I should have been in a nasty hole
if you hadn’t come, and that’s a fact. Not being
able to speak French very well, and . . .”
“ Mon cher , do you know what would have
happened if you’d tried your French on the
crew of La Mouette ? Non ? Well, they’d have
keelhauled you, and then they’d have made
you run the gauntlet, and after that they’d
have hanged you at the yardarm. And small
blame to them. They could forgive you for
killing half a boatload of their comrades with
case shot out of a brass cannon ; but your
French, cousin, is quite a different matter,
infinitely more murderous.”
Gervaise laughed. ‘‘ Perhaps so, Charles. But
I picked up a little of what you were saying to the
Captain just now. I heard you tell him we were
English. But what was all that about Morgan ? ”
Charles explained, and Gervaise gave a low
whistle.


“ But we don’t know Morgan.”
“ We’re going to know him, mon cher ,” said
Charles serenely. “It was the mention of him
that saved our lives just now, I verily believe.
The capitaine's wounded hand was paining him,
and I think he was debating whether to hang
us or throw us overboard when I played him
Morgan. That brought him up all standing,
to use one of your nautical terms. Then,
before he could get back his breath, I paid him
a compliment. Pay a Frenchman a compli-
ment and he thinks you a shrewd fellow.
Pay him two, and he’ll pat you on the back and
try to borrow money off you. I’m talking, of
course, of the bourgeoisie. . . . But tell me, are
these bows too large, think you ? ” He touched
the ribbons at the extremities of his borrowed
breeches.
“ Oh, they’re all right.” Gervaise was not
at all interested in these sartorial details. “ But
talking of the capitaine trying to borrow money
reminds me : most of mine’s on the Zaandam ,
and I suppose yours is too ? ”
Charles nodded carelessly. “It will be re-
turned to us in due course, if the Zaandam!s
captain is spared to sail the seas. An honest
(4,034)


66 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
fellow, if ever there was one. But no ear for
music. He’s quite capable of clapping a hogs-
head on that guitar of mine. Don’t worry,
we’ll borrow some money off the capitaine.
I’ll tell him that Morgan has a picture of me in
his cabin, and on the strength of that we’ll
borrow a hundred guineas. But give me your
attention a moment. This coat. Is the lace
a little wide, think you ? Could a man walk
down one of your English streets in it without
fear of being jeered at ? ”
“ I expect so. But what it matters I can’t
for the life of me see.”
“You are like the rest of your countrymen,”
Charles reproved him. “ The white cliffs of
Dover guard the English beef and beer. The
elegancies of life beat in vain against that
stronghold.”
Gervaise yawned. “ I wish the capitaine
would come back and show us our berths. I
feel downright tired. Will it be safe to go to
sleep on this ship, do you think ? ”
“ We shall know in the morning,” replied
Charles sapiently, “ for both you and I are
going to risk it. Ah, I hear our friend’s step.
Yawn again, mon cher , and let him catch you in


“ Tell me, are these bows too large ? ”
the middle of it; then he’ll lead you to your
berth.”
And that precisely was what did happen
The next morning showed the disgusted
buccaneers a clear sea. A breeze had sprung
up during the night, and the Zaandam had
profited by it to spread her wings and dis-
appear.
On La Mouette now began the work of rigging
a jury-mast in place of the one shot away in
the recent fight. Seeing the crew so short-


68 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
handed, Gervaise took off his coat and worked
with them; Charles, however, preferred to pace
the deck in his carefully chosen garments. The
crew gave him covert glances, but there was no
hostility. The whisper had gone round that
this young elegant was an envoy from the
English government, sent out to bolster the
buccaneers in their struggle against Spain. In
that struggle French and English often fought
side by side, and Charles now reaped the benefit
of the entente .
By nightfall the jury-mast was rigged, sail
was set, and La Mouette moved off to the south
in search of Morgan’s fleet.
The next four days passed not at all un-
pleasantly for La Mouette’s two passengers.
Captain Ragot became intrigued with Charles’s
whimsicalities and highly spiced anecdotes of
French Court life. Gervaise noticed that the
meals in the cabin tended to lengthen themselves
each day. The Captain was rather a heavy
drinker, and at first endeavoured to induce his
guests to indulge with him. But Charles shook
his head.
“ My cousin is practically an abstainer. As
for me, mon capitaine , I am French in all but


my capacity to drink your excellent wine. I
remember once at the chateau of the Due de
Lanneville ...” and he steered skilfully into a
bright little story that captured Ragot’s attention
at once. There was something of the snob in
this bloodstained pirate captain who had started
life as a fisher boy in Brest. The mention of
a titled name would cause him to prick up his
ears at once, and he took an ill-concealed delight
in Charles’s intimacy with the great and powerful
in France.
“ The capitaine ,” Charles remarked to Ger-
vaise one day, “ is a mixture of lackey and pork
butcher, and for your sake as well as my own,
I’m developing the lackey side of him. When
he looks hungry I throw him a duke or a viscount,
and he fawns at my feet.”
“ I hope you’ve got a good supply of
viscounts.”
“ What I haven’t got, mon cher , I can invent.
The stock is inexhaustible.”
The truth of this assertion he proved on
several future occasions, and when, two days
after La Mouette had passed through the Lee-
ward Islands, the look-out reported land and
masts ahead, Captain Ragot expressed his regret


70 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
that he was so soon to be deprived of his guests’
company.
“ If you return to France, Monsieur Sinden,
you will perhaps mention to your influential
friends there that Captain Ragot is doing his
best to uphold the honour of his country,” he
suggested.
“ Mention it! Mon capitaine , the Court shall
ring with it. The eyes of the fairest ladies in
France shall brighten at your name. Parbleu !
what induced you to attack the Zaandam ?
Nothing but the honour of France, riest-ce pas ?
Endeavour to trust me, capitaine. A word here
and a word there, in the right place, and, presto !
you come into your own.”


CHAPTER V
RECRUITS FOR MORGAN
BENEATH a wide awning, set on the blaz-
ing spit of a small island to the west of
Cura9oa, lolled Captain Harry Morgan, inter-
viewing recruits for his raid on the Spanish
settlements on the shores of Lake Maracaibo.
Richly dressed in high English fashion, fine lace
at his throat and wrists, his face burned almost
black by the tropic suns, his well-tended hair
falling in waves to his shoulders, his was indeed
an arresting personality. A sea-warrior of the
period—stern, reckless, born to command; but
with his finer points marred by licence and un-
bridled dissipation—a man who could realize
an ideal, but would hesitate before sacrificing
himself to attain it. His elegant buckled shoes
were kicked off and lay on the costly Persian
rug in front of his hammock. By his side,
within easy reach, lay a water carafe, a decanter
of wine, and a guitar.


Captain Harry Morgan .
As Charles and Gervaise came trudging
towards him over the hot sand, his eyes gleamed
with interest, and he suspended his questions
to the line of recruits ranged in front of him
in order to observe these new-comers more
closely.
“ Who are you ? ” he asked, as they came
up.
“ If you will pardon me, Captain Morgan,”
replied Charles, with a courtly bow, “ we have
important news for your ears alone.”
“ Stand back a minute,” said Morgan to the


RECRUITS FOR MORGAN 73
recruits, and the bunch rolled away out of
earshot.
“ Thank you,” said Charles. “ But I must
now confess, Captain, that our news is more
important to us than to you. We have just
come in on that French ship.” He pointed to
La Mouette y anchored discreetly beyond the
fringe of Morgan’s vessels. “We were recently
passengers on a Dutch ship bound for James-
town. A few days ago that ship was attacked
by La Mouette , and my cousin and I were
captured. To save our lives I told Captain
Ragot that we were bound to you, and that you
were anxiously awaiting us. In consequence
of that we were treated decently.”
“ H’m, I see.” Morgan’s bold, keen eyes took
in every detail of the pair, and it was evident
that he was favourably impressed. “ Well,
what do you want me to do ? ”
“ Captain Ragot is probably watching this
interview through his spyglass. If you could
manage to convey by your expression that we are
your favourite nephews come to tell you that
you have just been left a fortune . . .”
Morgan leaned back in his hammock and
laughed heartily.


“ That will do nicely,” commended Charles.
“ Captain Ragot must now be convinced; but
there is one other thing, Captain ...”
Morgan sat up again.
“ Only one ? ” he queried. “ Come, you
are more modest than I thought.”
“It is ingrained in me, Captain. I fear I
shall never succeed in overcoming it. But the
fact is, I promised to use my influence with you
to obtain assistance in the way of gear and men
for La Mouette .”
A grim smile of appreciation lit the buc-
caneer’s dark face. He looked at the lame duck
of a French ship rocking gently in the swell.
The finesse of the situation, and Charles’s way
of handling it, appealed to him. So, in similar
circumstances, he might have acted him-
self.
“You can go and tell Captain Ragot that I
am charmed by his courtesy in helping my long-
expected emissaries to reach me, and that in
return I shall be pleased to do all in my power
to assist him in reconditioning his ship. That
will ease his mind—and yours. Don’t come
back till I send for you.” He turned to Ger-
vaise. “ You can remain here. Sit down and


RECRUITS FOR MORGAN 75
make yourself comfortable while I finish this
recruiting.” His eyes followed Charles as he
walked back to the landing-place. “ That
young man will never die through want of a
ready answer,” he remarked.
“ No, I think not,” Gervaise assented. “ And
he’d never let any of his friends die through
want of backing.”
“ I guessed that too,” said Morgan, and
signed to the recruits to come forward again.
The men came up in fours, halted in front of
Morgan, gave him a rough salute, and replied
to his curt questions. Sitting in the shade of a
rug flung over one of the supports of the awning,
Gervaise watched the proceedings with great
interest. These applicants were of all types,
but one and all reeked of the sea and the lawless
life they led upon it. Some stood to attention
in tattered shirts and trousers, others sported
smart coats and cloaks of captured Spanish
grandees; the majority had lengths of soiled
white cloth bound turban-wise round their
heads as a protection against the fierce rays of
the sun, but a few of them wore tricorn hats
and headgear of Eastern design. One and all
were armed to the teeth with musket, hanger,


76 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
pistols, and knives. Looking at them, Gervaise
realized that this was indeed the scum of the
Indies, but a warlike scum, actuated by a fierce
hatred of Spain and all that she represented,
and by an equally fierce love of her doubloons.
No wonder that the women and children of the
Spanish settlements crossed themselves at the
mere mention of their name, and prayed daily
for deliverance from their visitations.
These candidates for enlistment, in spite of
their sturdy independence, could hardly conceal
their anxiety to be included in the coming
expedition. The majority belonged to a crippled
pirate vessel which had put in at the island a
fortnight before. The coming of Morgan’s
fleet to purchase final stores of flesh and flour
they regarded as providential. Here was a man
whom fortune favoured, who knew how to take
risks and pieces-of-eight. His men, after the
capture of Porto Bello, had swaggered and
squandered to an unprecedented extent in the
wineshops of Jamaica and other shore haunts
of the buccaneers. One and all swore by Harry
Morgan, the result being that there was a rush
to participate in his next adventure.
Gervaise had to admit to himself that if he


RECRUITS FOR MORGAN 77
had wanted a few extra desperadoes for an
undertaking in which the chief requirements
would be courage, brute strength, and ferocity,
his choice would have been the same as Mor-
gan’s. His questions were few, but his instinct
was sure. A nod or a shake of his head denoted
acceptance or rejection, and then he passed on
to the next. There was no disputing his de-
cision. The favoured ones, their eyes gleaming
with fierce satisfaction, saluted, and went over
to the bonfires on the end of the spit, where
the men of the fleet were drinking and singing ;
the others trudged sullenly back to the ram-
shackle hut which had been built by the crew
of the crippled pirate vessel.
When the last of them had gone, Morgan
filled a glass with wine, drank it slowly, and then
proceeded to light his pipe.
“ Now we can talk, lad,” he said. “ Who
and what are you ? ”
“My name is Gervaise Cartelot. I come
from England.”
“ Well, I didn’t think you came from France
or Spain, did I ? What part of England ? ”
“ Shropshire originally. But my parents
died when I was a child. Since then my home


78 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
has been in Harldene in Sussex ; but I went to
school at Shrewsbury.”
“ What are you doing in the Indies ? ”
“My cousin and I are here on private
business.”
“ Any introductions ? ”
“ Yes, we have a few.”
“ Who from ? ”
“ The Earl of Varney and Sare.”
“ A kinsman of yours ? ”
“ Yes.”
Morgan puffed thoughtfully at his pipe.
Supposing you tell me what your business is
in these parts,” he suggested.
“ I don’t feel inclined to do that, Captain
Morgan.”
The buccaneer pulled a small silver whistle
from the folds of lace about his throat.
“ If I blow this, lad, do you know what will
happen ? No ? Well, a hundred men will
come running to do my bidding. They’d hang
or rack or draw and quarter you at a word from
me, and then go back singing to their rum and
bacon.”
“ I can quite believe that. But you won’t
blow it.”


Morgan let the whistle fall with an amused
smile.
“ Good ! you’re shrewd too. I like you, boy.
Tell me, do you hate Spaniards ? ”
“ My grandfather died in the Inquisition.”
“Ah ! And you’d like to pay that debt ? ”
“ We are at peace with Spain, I believe, Cap-
tain Morgan. And Spain, I understand, has
many gallant and honourable men in her armies.
I have no quarrel with her. But the Inquisition
is a thing apart. Against that I would fight and
show no mercy.”
“No mercy,” echoed the buccaneer softly,
as though well pleased. “You’d go out of
your way to hammer the Inquisition then, if
you had a chance ? ”
“I’d like to bring one shaven-headed mur-
derer to heel before returning to England.
Yes, I would.”
“ Then sail with me, lad, and I’ll give you
your chance. Come with me, and you can
have every inquisitor we find.”
“ But we are at peace with Spain. This
expedition of yours is nothing but piracy.”
Morgan smiled derisively. “ England is at
peace with Spain, you say ? Yes, over there in


Europe she is. A Spanish ship can sail up the
Thames without being fired on, and her crew
can flaunt it in London, if they have any money.
But here, lad, it is war —war between greater
England and greater Spain, and that war will
never cease till one or the other is beaten. They
know that in England, and they know it in
Spain. Out here the battle is being fought,
and England is backing her buccaneer navy to
win. lam sailing these seas with the authority
of the Governor of Jamaica. If it were not for
me and such as me Jamaica would now be in
the hands of Spain. We are keeping the Indies
free for English trade. They know that in
England; they know that well in England.
Piracy ! No, no, we don’t take English ships.
Spain is our enemy.”
“ Because she has the most money, I
suppose ? ”
Morgan flung back his head and laughed
with zest. Then suddenly he became serious
again.
“ Listen to me, lad. I want you to sail with
me ? ”
“ Why ? ” Gervaise asked bluntly.
“ Well, you might say I’ve taken a bit of a


fancy to you. You’re different from the rest
of ’em over there.” He waved a hand in the
direction of the fires. “ Most of those lads
would follow me into the jaws of hell. But
they’ve no refinement. Give ’em a million
doubloons apiece, and not one of ’em would
make himself fitter for God and man to look
upon. No, it would all go in rum and gewgaws
and trumperies, and in less than a year they’d
be out again in shirt and trousers, up to their
ears in debt at that. I know ’em.”
“ And what do you intend to do, Captain
Morgan, when you leave the sea ? ”
“Me ? Well, I reckon if I don’t run plump
into a Spanish cannon ball, I’ll end up as
Governor of Jamaica.” A prophetic utterance,
for in this manner, and knighted, too, by the
English king, was the buccaneer’s astonishing
career to end.
Morgan relit his pipe and studied the effect
of his words on Gervaise.
“ You don’t smile, lad. You think it
feasible ? ”
Gervaise nodded. This man, he thought,
was bold and forceful enough to carry out his
ambition.
(4,034) 6


“ Then sail with me,” urged Morgan. “ I
won’t ask you to take the oath. You can leave
when you like. I hold authority from the
English government to protect her possessions
in the Indies, and protection out here means
striking, not waiting to be struck. If we don’t
root out these nests of fire-lighting priests they’ll
go on clapping Englishmen in sanbenitos and
leading them to the fagot piles, just as they did
your grandfather.”
True enough words, as Gervaise had to
admit. Morgan esteemed himself to be, as
indeed he was, in the direct line of Drake, Gren-
ville, Hawkins, and the rest of the adventurous
sea-roving Elizabethans whose mission it was
to plant the seed of English colonial expansion
in the Americas the while they lined their own
pockets exceedingly well at the expense of Spain.
The sinister flower of true piracy had not yet
emerged. That was to come later when, the
Anglo-Spanish peace having solidified, there
was to be let loose on those bloodstained seas
a horde of pariahs—Blackboard, Davis, Roberts,
and a host of others, who murdered and plun-
dered irrespective of flag or religion, actuated
merely by lust of blood and gold.


The chance offered him of striking a blow at
the Inquisition appealed to Gervaise. But,
despite Morgan’s protestations of government
authority for his enterprise, the thought of
allying himself with that fierce lawless company
made him hesitate and ponder. He could
surmise a good deal of what would happen when
such a horde was let loose on the Spanish
settlements.
“ I should like to talk it over with my cousin,”
he said.
“ Then do. I’ll give you five minutes.
After that, send him to me alone.”
Captain Ragot and a boat’s crew from La
Mouette had come ashore, and Charles was
sitting with them on the beach when Gervaise
approached. At a signal from his cousin he
rose and drew apart. He whistled thoughtfully
when he heard Morgan’s suggestion.
“ And what’s the alternative ? ” he asked.
“He didn’t say. I suppose we should have
to stay with Captain Ragot.”
“ A cheerful prospect. Ma foi! I feel in-
clined to take Morgan’s offer. I feel, cousin,
that I have had sufficient of the good capitalize's
company. My arm aches with throwing him


84 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
viscounts. And, after all, whether we go or
not, this raid will take place.”
“ Exactly. And if we go, we might be able
to give some poor devil a hand who would other-
wise be burnt or tortured. As far as the In-
quisition is concerned, I’m as ready as any one
to strike and kill, and I’ve no objection to
fighting Spanish soldiers. But when it comes
to women and children . .
Charles nodded. “We feel alike there, Ger-
vaise. But our five minutes is up. I’ll go and
talk to him.”
“ And whatever you decide I’ll go by.”
“ Bien! Leave it to me.” And Charles
marched up once more to the reclining
buccaneer.
“ I hear, Captain Morgan, that you are wish-
ful of our company on this raid of yours ? ”
“ That’s so, lad. I can do with the pair of
you. Your cousin tells me that you are in the
Indies on private business. Well, I don’t ask
what it is ; but serve me well, and I may be
able to give you a hand with your affairs.”
“ Bien dit y Captain. And if we don’t come
with you ? What then ? ”
Morgan shrugged his shoulders carelessly.


“ Why, you don’t come, lad, that’s all there
is to it. You can stay here, and risk getting
shot by the islanders; or you can sail with your
Captain Ragot, if he’ll have you ; or, if you
prefer it, I’ll get one of my men to put a bullet
through your head.”
“ Thank you, Captain ; you are considerate.
You may take it, then, that we sail with you.
After all, one should see as much of the world
as possible, and there is an advantage in sailing
with a two-sided man.”
“ How do you mean, lad ? ”
“ Why, if you get knighted, I shall be able
to say that I was with the famous Sir Harry
Morgan at the taking of Maracaibo. But if
you get hanged, I shall give out that I was
captured by the notorious pirate Morgan, and
had the harrowing experience of sailing with
him on one of his expeditions. There will be
kudos either way.”
Morgan laughed approval of the jest.
“ You’re different from your cousin, boy.”
“Yes,” Charles agreed. “He has many
sterling qualities which I admire but do not
envy. lam more internationale. Politics, for
instance, absorb me at times. Also I am a


86 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
trifle clairvoyant. I can tell you what will be
said and done in London when the news of the
fall of Maracaibo reaches that city. Would
you like to know ? ”
“ Go on, lad,” the buccaneer invited, grim
amusement showing in his bold dark eyes.
“ People will begain by saying ‘ Whew! *
and ‘ This is rather startling.* From that they
will go on to ‘ Stout English sea-dog ’ and
‘ Good old Harry ! * The glasses of London
merchants with ventures in the Indies will
clink to the sound of your name. Apologies
will be made to an irate Spain. Then will
come the reprimand through the Governor of
Jamaica. In one of your ears he will bellow :
‘ What the devil do you mean by this, sir
buccaneer ? ’ and in the other he will whisper
that you are to be presented with a brand-new
ship, bristling with the newest type of guns,
and paid for by English tax-money. The cries
and shrieks of tortured men and women will
be loud in Maracaibo, no doubt, but they will
not be loud enough to reach London.”
“ I care not a button whether they hear them
or not,” said Morgan callously.
“You have that reputation,’* Charles con-


RECRUITS FOR MORGAN 87
ceded; “ but my cousin and I reserve the right
to confine our energies to the killing of soldiers
and inquisitors. Is that agreeable to you ? ”
He looked the buccaneer straight in the eye.
Morgan nodded. “We can get on without
your help in other directions, lad. You can
report now to Captain Rawlings of the Petrel.
You will sail with him. Your cousin will be
with me on the flagship. And now ask Captain
Ragot to step up here. I’ll do what I can for
him before we sail.”


CHAPTER VI
IN MARACAIBO
GERVAISE was surprised and disgusted
r when he learned that he was to be sepa-
rated from his cousin. His first impulse was
to remonstrate with Morgan; but Charles
advised acceptance of the decree.
“ Because, mon cher ,” he said, “ nothing we
can say will alter it; be sure of that. The
man has a way of setting his jaw when he has
made up his mind that is most convincing. It
would be a betise to argue with him.”
“ Oh well, if you’re satisfied . . .”
“Far from it, cousin. I merely accept the
inevitable, having first assured myself that it is
inevitable.”
So Gervaise went on board the flagship that
night, and took up his quarters aft with Morgan
and his officers. The next day he had an
opportunity of making the acquaintance of the
88


ship’s company, for the hours hung heavily for
the men lounging about the decks awaiting the
order to sail, and a group of them was glad to
gather round this tall, well-built young stranger,
and listen to his story of the fight between the
Zaandam and La Mouette. Gervaise found
them at once attractive and repellent. These
buccaneers of Morgan’s were some of the most
ferocious characters in history. They had
succeeded in terrorizing the Spaniard, who,
hitherto, had held the palm for cruelty in these
seas. They had murdered, and looted, and
tortured with unparalleled callousness, and
their lives of unbridled licence had left their
mark on one and all. But, on the other hand,
the sea invariably gives something to its votaries
which is denied to the landsmen, and these men
bore the marks, too, of those nobler battles
which they had waged against the wind and
waves. Gervaise was to get to know some of
them quite well in the following few weeks, and
always in his contact with them he experienced
that first feeling of repulsion for their vices and
admiration for their hardihood and courage.
Chief among them were Sing-Song, the Grunter,
Jack Scab, and the Tinman, a quartet which


90 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
always represented the crew in consultations
with Morgan.
Sing-Song had gained his pseudonym through
an unquenchable tendency to sing a mournful
little ditty called “ Tilly Down the Dale ” when-
ever the first shot of a battle was fired. He was
a tall, cadaverous-looking man of few words
but many blows.
The Grunter was short and thick-set, with
a mane of bristling hair. Gervaise learned that
he was in the habit of grunting when striking
down Spaniards. “ One blow, one grunt, just
as if he was chopping down trees,” said his
informant.
Scab was an abbreviation of scabbard, and
Jack, a powerfully built man, had earned un-
dying fame among the Brethren of the Coast,
as the buccaneers termed themselves, by his
prowess with this unusual weapon. In the fight
at Porto Bello his sword had been broken, but
he had carried on for some ten minutes with
the sheath, and, such was his prodigious strength,
had managed to kill three men by its thrust.
The fourth member of the quartet, the
Tinman, owed his sobriquet to his passion
for collecting arms, being in the habit of carry-


Carrying more weapons than he could possibly use.
ing upon his person more weapons than he
could possibly use. Only a man of his physique
would have dreamt of adopting such a hobby.
But the Tinman stood six feet two, and he was
broad in proportion. The clinking of steel and
iron about him was as music to his ears ; and,
because they knew that he was terrible in
battle, his shipmates indulged his whim, and
the choice of all captured weapons was allowed
to be the Tinman’s perquisite.
Circling round the quartet were numerous
satellites, chief among them a black-haired youth
with a broken nose who went by the name
of Creeper, who copied all their little idiosyn-


92 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
crasies as far as he dared, and was never so
happy as when in the company of the revered
four. He could sing “ Tilly Down the Dale ”
in a voice almost indistinguishable from Sing-
Song’s ; he had spent weeks in perfecting him-
self in grunting ; several times he had been
found practising cuts and thrusts with a scab-
bard, and he habitually carried more than the
normal quota of weapons. He had the records
of all the buccaneering celebrities of the coast
at his fingers’ ends, and was much given to
using the expression “ Gentlemen o’ Fortune,”
a term descriptive of themselves now becoming
current in the buccaneer haunts of Jamaica,
where the former hog-hunters of Tortuga found
themselves at intervals in the possession of
hitherto undreamed-of riches.
“ Though,” said Creeper, explaining the
origin of the term one day to Gervaise, “ that
ain’t to say that there ain’t a difference between
your sort of gentlemen and ours. Gentlemen
o’ fortune in England mostly has their gold
handed down to them, I reckon, and they cling
on to it. But gentlemen o’ fortune out here
spend it as soon as it comes, and then go out
after another lot.”


“ That would seem to be the way of it,”
Gervaise agreed.
The fleet sailed that evening, and arrived off
the entrance of the lake the next day. Here
they anchored, Morgan being anxious to avoid
being seen from the watch-tower on the high
hill of the island of Las Vigilas. At nightfall
the ships weighed anchor and moved towards
the land ; at daybreak they were against the bar
and within reach of the earthen fort on the spit
commanding the entrance to the great lagoon.
As the fleet was descried from the shore a
red flash broke from the fort, and a ball came
singing over the poop of the flagship. As it
did so, a high mournful voice struck up “ Tilly
Down the Dale,” and the crew sniggered and
nudged each other as they pointed to Sing-Song
standing by a nine-pounder, staring with hungry
eyes at the fort, and delivering himself of his
feelings with supreme unselfconsciousness.
Since its destruction by the French buccaneer
Frangois Lolonnois some years before, the fort
had been rebuilt and strengthened, and its
armament increased. Its numerous ten and
twenty-four pounders now opened fire on the
fleet. They were answered by the guns of the


94 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
ships, and for hours the cannonade was kept
up, while boatloads of buccaneers ensconced
themselves ashore and kept up a brisk musketry
fire against the loopholes.
At nightfall, the fort still holding out, Morgan
marshalled his forces for a grand assault in the
darkness. Nearly the whole of his men were
landed, and, at his order, rushed whooping at
the fort. To their surprise they met with no
resistance, and, swarming over the earthworks,
they found the place deserted, and a match laid
to the powder magazine, which was designed to
blow up within fifteen minutes. The match
was snatched away just in time to avert catas-
trophe, and then the invaders began to search
the fort. A goodly amount of powder, arms,
and provisions were found, and these were set
aside for distribution among the fleet. Morgan
then set parties to demolish the walls and spike
the cannon.
The next day all the ships crossed the bar,
and proceeded to Maracaibo, but, striking low
water, the expedition was carried on in boats
and canoes.
The inhabitants of Maracaibo, with the
memories of Lolonnois’ terrorisms still fresh in


their minds, did not wait for the buccaneers’
approach. Carrying with them the most valu-
able of their portable possessions, they fled to
the neighbouring woods. The buccaneers, ex-
ercising their usual rough military discipline,
established a corps-du-guard in the great church
of the town, posted sentinels, and then took up
their quarters in the best houses.
So far Gervaise had had no undue qualms
respecting his participation in the raid. On
the flagship he had voluntarily taken the place
of one of the men killed at his gun, and had
been one of the first to rush the earthworks in
the land attack. But up till now he had been
fighting Spanish soldiers, of the breed who, a
century before, had swarmed on the decks of
the Armada when, fan-shaped, it had sailed up
the Channel with the avowed intention of
subjugating England and bending her to the
yoke of their hated Inquisition. Against them
he could fight with an easy conscience, con-
vinced that he was engaged in good and righteous
work. But now a different phase was to set in.
In Maracaibo there was no armed soldiery to
subdue, but the country around teemed with
money-laden noncombatants. The bucca-


96. GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
neers went out in bands into the woods, and
returned with numbers of panic-stricken
wretches, who were stripped of their belongings
and then tortured to reveal the whereabouts of
rich friends and relatives. The scenes that
ensued in all parts of the town so sickened and
disgusted the lad that he had much ado to keep
a hold on his tongue and his sword.
Morgan, seated at the table in their pleasant
room overlooking the water-front, twitted him
one morning on his expression as a party came
in from the woods, driving some women and
old men before them with whips.
“ Treasure-hunting is not to your fancy, it
would seem,” the buccaneer remarked.
“ I hate it,” said Gervaise heatedly. “ I
wonder you allow it.”
“ The whole brood wants stamping out,”
said Morgan carelessly, “ and this is as good
a way as any. If they shed gold in the stamping,
so much the better.”
Gervaise saw that it was no use appealing to
this man’s better feelings, so he changed the
conversation.
“ How long do you expect to be here ? ” he
asked.


“ Two or three weeks, perhaps. Just so long
as it takes us to comb the woods thoroughly.”
“ Can’t you give me something to do on the
ships ? ”
“ You can help the supercargo, if you like.
He was complaining this morning that he’s
overworked. There’s a lot of extra stores
coming in, and he’d be glad of your help.”
“ I’ll be glad to do it. And can I have my
cousin with me ? ”
“ Is he squeamish too ? ” Morgan sneered.
“ He’d be willing to meet any buccaneer of
your company with sword or pistol, and give a
good account of him,” Gervaise flashed back.
“You know that. But, like me, he has no
stomach for wholesale butchery.”
Morgan smiled at the lad’s heat. “You can
take him, lad, if he wishes to go. But when we
leave here he reverts to the Petrel . I can’t
have two of your kidney on my ship. You’d
make lambs of my crew in no time. Report to
Oakley, the pair of you. I’ve no doubt he’ll
keep you busy.”
Feeling thankful that he had gained that
much, Gervaise put on his hat and went out
into the street. Charles, he knew, was lodged
(4,034) 7


98 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
in one of the four monasteries of the town.
They had met once or twice since the sailing of
the fleet from the island, once at the storming
of the fort, when they found themselves running
together, in the company of Sing-Song and the
Grunter and a number of other yelling, cursing
buccaneers, pell-mell at the earthworks; and,
later, during the attack on the Inquisition
buildings in Maracaibo—whose inmates had
taken care to decamp in good time. On both
those occasions there had been time for the
exchange of only a few breathless words, and
since then, Gervaise, hurrying hither and
thither about the town on his chief’s errands,
had had no opportunity for the long chat with
his cousin which he so much desired.
The priests of the long, low monastery had
fled inland with their flock, and the rooms were
now given over to the roystering ship’s com-
pany of the Petrel. In one of them Gervaise
was fortunate enough to find his cousin seated
on a stool, strumming a guitar to an appreciative
audience of red-shirted buccaneers just returned
from fugitive-hunting in the woods. These, num-
bering about half a dozen, were drinking from
choice goblets which had once been the treasured


possessions of prominent citizens of the town.
Loot of every kind was strewn about the floor, and
the atmosphere was thick with tobacco smoke.
By the buccaneers’ manner towards his
cousin, Gervaise divined at once that Charles
had succeeded as usual in establishing his
popularity among them. The minstrel in those
days was always sure of an easy tolerance, but
when, as with Charles, he combined his gift with
the prowess of the warrior, the wit of the jester,
and the polished insolence of the courtier, they
found him irresistible and unique. They de-
lighted even in his elegant garments, which were
a constant reproach to their own clothing, con-
sisting chiefly, as it did, of ragged breeches and
shirts dyed in the blood of bullocks. Knowing
that his hand was as ready to seek his sword-
hilt as to touch the strings of his guitar, they
accorded him their whole-hearted respect, yelled
with laughter at his sallies, and applauded his
songs.
He was singing a little French ditty as Gervaise
entered :
‘ Oh, Antoinette de Treves,
ficoutez k mes reves.
Je vous aime, je vous aime,
A jamais! ”


The words were Greek to his audience, but
the sweet sentimentality of the tune appealed
to their maudlin humour, and they clamoured
for more. But seeing Gervaise, the singer put
down his instrument, and rose with joyful
haste.
“ Ah, mon cousin, at last! Tall and straight
and true as ever. What news, mon cher ? ”
“ The news is, Charles, that you and I
are to report to Oakley for fleet victualling
work.”
There was a hubbub of comment from the
lounging buccaneers.
“ What! ” cried one. “ Are we going to lose
our Blondel ? ”
“ Bad luck, that! ” shouted another.
“ Well, anyway,” observed a third, “ we’ll
get an extra barrel of pork or so on the Petrel
now if Lord Charlie Sinden weighs out the
stores.”
“ Fairness is my motto, as you all know, mes
braves ,” said Charles; “but one looks after
one’s own. The Petrel shall be the last ship in
the fleet to starve, voyez-vous ! ”
“ Is Morgan thinking of moving ? ” one of
the men asked Gervaise.


“ He’s said nothing about it to me.”
“ There’s no hurry, anyway,” growled
another. “We haven’t squeezed Maracaibo
dry yet.”
“ Still,” objected one of his companions,
“ while we’re squeezing them here, the rich
ones are getting away from Gibraltar.”
“ Not them,” scoffed another voice. “ It’s a
big town is Gibraltar. Garrisoned, too. They’ll
fight, they will, and reckon they’ve a hope of
knocking us back.”
The discussion on this important point now
became general, and Charles took the oppor-
tunity to make his exit with Gervaise.
“I’m glad you’ve dug me out of that sink
of iniquity,” he said, as they walked together
along the water-front. “ When it comes to
strong forts and belching cannon, I ask no
better company than these brisk lads of Tor-
tuga. But when they lay down their hangers
and take up the thumbscrews—faugh ! I have
a hard job to keep my hands off their burly
necks. . . . But that’s not what I want to talk
to you about. Who do you think I saw yester-
day, driving in a batch of prisoners with the
point of his sword ? ”


“ Pretty well the whole of the ships’ com-
panies, I should imagine.”
“ True, the whips were cracking all day. But
some one in particular—an acquaintance of
yours. None other than Alonso Rodriguez.”
“ What! ” exclaimed Gervaise. “ Here ? ”
“In the flesh, mon gar f on. And it was that
same flesh that enabled me to recognize him.
Ma foi ! there wasn’t much of it showing, what
with his sombrero and bandana ; but his shirt
was gaping at the neck, and I caught a glimpse
of the scar on his chest. That’s what made me
look more closely at him. He pretended at
first he didn’t know me ; but he wasn’t clever
enough to keep that up, and before long we
were chatting bravely about the old days in
Paris. Amusant , n'est-ce pas ? He wanted
badly to stick a knife into me, and I would
have given my second best suit of clothes for
the pleasure of kicking him round the square.
But instead of that, we were quite civil to each
other, and parted with courtesies. I made
inquiries afterwards, and found out that he’s
on the Tiger. Brave enough, by all accounts,
but not popular —too mean with his money to
be bon camarade. But we must be careful not


“ We were quite civil to each other.”
to get in front of that lad if it comes to storming
Gibraltar, otherwise we might fall with bullets
in our back.”
“ Perhaps it would be as well to warn him
not to attempt any of those tricks. If we told
him that we have friends ready to avenge us,
it might make him think twice before trying
it.”
“ A good idea,” assented Charles. “ We’ll
tell him that Morgan is going to hang him if
we’re found with bullet holes between our
shoulder blades.” He pointed to one of the
larger residences facing the lake. “ Look, that’s


io 4 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
the house he’s quartered in, he and the other
brisk lads of the Tiger. And del! if that isn’t
the man himself. See ! just coming out of the
doorway.”
“ Let’s go and talk to him,” said Gervaise.
“ It’s a good opportunity.”
They crossed the street and came full face
upon Rodriguez, who had turned his steps in
the direction of the main square.
“ Ah, quel honheur , Alonso,” said Charles
cheerily, halting in front of him. “ I was just
telling my cousin that you were in Maracaibo,
and he tells me that he had the pleasure of
meeting you once in Sussex.”
Rodriguez had perforce to stop. His eyes
glinted evilly beneath the rim of his broad
sombrero.
“The sehor is mistaken,” he said, with
dangerous softness. “ I have never been in
Sussex.”
“ Yet,” said Gervaise, “ you bear a curious
resemblance to a thief who broke into one
of my uncle’s outhouses, and whose head,
I’m sorry to say, I missed breaking with a
stone.”
Rodriguez’s thin lips twitched beneath his


moustache as he replied, still with venomous
softness : “ The senor is mistaken.”
“ No, I’m afraid there’s no doubt about it.
You are that thief, Alonso.”
The buccaneer’s hand stole to his pistol-butt,
and hovered there. They could read his
thoughts. He was itching to fire point-blank
at Gervaise. But they were two to one, and
even if he were able to dispatch the pair of
them, Morgan’s stern laws against duelling
whilst on expedition would have resulted in his
own summary execution. Private quarrels
among the Brethren of the Coast had to be
postponed till after disbandment. Rodriguez’s
face turned pale with the effort of repression
as he hissed :
“We shall meet later, perhaps, senor, at
Port Royal ? ”
“ Nothing would give me greater pleasure,”
Gervaise assured him.
“ And he is so anxious for that pleasure,
Alonso mio” put in Charles, “ that he intends
to take means to ensure it. Of course, he is
willing to take all the usual risks from Spanish
steel and bullets, but if any buccaneer of his
acquaintance were to be so ill-advised as to


io6 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
mistake him for a Spaniard, his friends would
see to it that that buccaneer never made such
a mistake again. We intend to tell Morgan
that such mistakes may possibly happen.”
“You are good at threatening, Senor Sin-
den,” sneered Rodriguez.
“ I learnt it in Paris,” said Charles carelessly.
“ My old maztre d'armes there, Monsieur de
Seline, used to impress upon me : ‘ Threaten
once only, and spend the rest of your life, if
needs be, in carrying it out/ That seemed to
me good advice. We understand one another,
then, mon brave. But how pleasant it is to
have an understanding. Difficulties take wings
and fly away from an entente such as ours.
But you tap your foot. We are detaining you.
Doubtless you are on your way to borrow
thumbscrews or a rack. Allow us to wish you
good-day.”
Rodriguez snarled something vicious under
his breath, and went off to the square.
“We’ve spiked his guns for the time being,”
said Charles, as they continued their walk along
the water-front. “ And now for this super-
cargo man, and extra pork for the Petrel .”


CHAPTER VII
A LETTER FROM CHARLES
DURING the next fortnight the cousins
were kept busy checking and apportioning
the captured stores. Hitherto there had been
some grumbling among the ships’ companies,
each crew suspecting other ships of obtaining
more than their rightful share of provisions.
But Gervaise’s frankness and Charles’s tact now
did a great deal to smooth away these diffi-
culties, and the supercargo was loud in their
praises to Morgan.
Their work proved a godsend to Gervaise
and Charles, for it kept them out of the way
of the excesses and debaucheries of a hapless
city in the hands of a triumphant company of
freebooters. Their refusal to take a hand in
the torturing and treasure-hunting was regarded
by the buccaneers as another proof of their
gentle upbringing, and, strangely enough, when
107


one considers that ungodly company, gained
them additional respect.
After a stay of three weeks in Maracaibo the
fleet set sail again, and penetrated farther into
the great lagoon. Their destination now was
Gibraltar, a town of some fifteen hundred
inhabitants, situated on the side of the lake
about forty leagues from Maracaibo. The
progress was slow by reason of head winds, and
it was not till four days later that they arrived
before the town.
As they dropped anchor a shower of cannon
balls came singing over the quiet waters, sent
up the spray not more than fifty yards from the
side of the inmost vessel, and caused Sing-Song
to pipe up his inevitable ditty.
Gervaise, standing on the poop, looked at
the town nestling among its plantations of
sugar, cotton, tobacco, and cedar. The country
appeared cultivated almost to the foot of the
snow-clad mountains to the south, beyond
which he knew lay the great town of Merida,
to which Gibraltar was subsidiary. It seemed
a pity, he thought, that such a fair domain must
shortly be given over to the rapine which had
marked the capture of Maracaibo. But follow-


A LETTER FROM CHARLES 109
ing that thought came another—that here,
as in all the cities where Spain exerted her
influence, worked the deadly venom of the
Inquisition, poisoning and destroying with even
more deadly effect than the steel and lead of
the buccaneers. A man might die an agonizing
death at the hands of Morgan’s men, but there
it ended. But another, marked down by the
Inquisition, had no such consoling thought, for
after his death the tentacles of the Holy Office
seized upon his children, and his children’s
children, visiting upon them the so-called sins
of the father, stripping them of spiritual and
material rights, holding them up to the infamy
of believers, and making of their innocent lives
a continual curse and supplication.
“ Well, lad, what do you think of that for a
nut to crack ? ” Gervaise turned, and saw
Morgan standing beside him.
“ If they like to fight, they should keep us
at bay for a long time,” he replied. “ They
seem to have plenty of guns, and they could
sink every boat we tried to send in.”
“ But we shan’t send them in—not direct,
anyway. We’ll try them at daybreak, over
there.” Morgan pointed to the woods flanking


no GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
the town. “ We’ve a man on board who knows
the paths.” He stood erect, scanning the scene
of the coming operations with the keen eye of
the military strategist.
“ They’ve stopped firing,” said Gervaise
presently.
“ Yes, I thought they’d soon get tired of that.
Up till now it’s been all noise and no splinters.”
That afternoon and evening there was much
bawling of lewd choruses on the ships, and more
than once Gervaise caught the tinkle of a guitar
coming from the direction of the anchored
Petrel. He guessed that Charles had his usual
appreciative audience around him, and was
beguiling the time with “Antoinette de Treves,”
and similar ditties.
An hour before daybreak the next morning
a strong force of buccaneers took to the boats
and pulled ashore in the direction of the woods.
Forming into rough military formation on the
beach, they marched off through the woodland
paths with Morgan and the guide at the head.
The guide proved reliable. There was no
hitch in the proceedings, and at daybreak the
buccaneers were in the town. They found it
almost empty. The inhabitants, following the


A LETTER FROM CHARLES m
example of those at Maracaibo, had nailed the
guns and departed, bag and baggage, into the
interior.
Following their usual procedure, the buc-
caneers took up their quarters in the best
houses, razed the Inquisition agency building
to the ground, set a corps-du-guard , and pre-
pared to make excursions into the surrounding
country in search of fugitives.
This time, however, the scurrying inhabitants
had gone farther afield, and it soon became
evident that a series of organized expeditions
would have to be made if the bulk of the town’s
errant wealth was to be garnered. Accordingly
Morgan, leaving a handful of men in the town,
sent out large parties to install themselves in the
country houses of the richer Spaniards, knowing
that sooner or later these would be forced to
repair to them for provisions.
Gervaise, by his own wish, remained with the
tiny garrison, but Charles, by Morgan’s orders,
repaired with the crew of the Petrel to a large
hacienda some twenty miles away in the direc-
tion of Merida, where the buccaneer chief
imagined that his knowledge of Spanish might
come in useful.


Morgan himself being gone with the maraud-
ing parties, Gervaise spent most of his time on
the ships, making inventories of the stores
preparatory to revictualling when fresh supplies
arrived. One evening, having stepped ashore
from his dinghy, he was about to proceed to
his lodgings when a negro shuffled up to him
and addressed him by name. He was wearing
on his arm the red badge which the buc-
caneers were in the habit of affixing to im-
pressed messengers whom they wished to go
unmolested.
“ Senor Cartelot ? ” inquired the negro.
“Yes,” said Gervaise.
The negro pulled a letter from a receptacle
beneath his cotton shirt and handed it to him.
Opening it, Gervaise read the following :
“ Cousin mine, —
“ I have promised the bearer of this two
hundred strokes of the bastinado, a trifle of
rack, and a dozen lighted matches between his
fingers if he fails to deliver this letter; and a
couple of gold pieces if he is successful and
brings back an answering note. Ma foi! see
what it is to be a buccaneer. One gives orders,


A LETTER FROM CHARLES 113
and people leap to obey. But, allons , to the
purport!
“ Know, then, that I am at the hacienda of
Don Miguel de Casa, a Spaniard who believes
in surrounding himself with the good things of
life. A paradise it must have been here before
our brisk lads of Tortuga arrived, for one has
only to blow at the trees for all the fruits of the
tropics to fall into one’s lap. There will be
no scurvy on the Petrel for many a month, I’ll
be bound.
“ Mais ecoutez. To-day they captured Don
Miguel, and put him to the torture. Pah!
I was walking in the plantations at the time,
and returned to find him a quivering heap in a
corner of the barn. They had flung him there
in preparation for another ordeal to-morrow.
But mercifully he has since died. Poor gentle-
man ! I did my best to soothe his last moments,
and he seemed to realize that I was not Tortuga
bred. He told me that his daughter Miranda
is in hiding with a maidservant in a cave at the
foot of the mountains. He had been with them
for some days, and then, their food running
short, he had ventured out in search of sup-
plies. He was captured near his own hacienda,
(4,034) g


n 4 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
put to the torture, and refused to give anything
away to his persecutors. Even as he lay dying
all his thoughts were for the two women he had
left, and, finding me sympathetic, he begged
me to go out and succour them.
“ That, mon cher y was easier said than done,
for such is my popularity with the red-shirted
ones these days that I find it difficult to move
a step without half a dozen of them clinging to
my coat-tails. I suppose I must have looked
my perplexity, for Don Miguel grasped me by
the arm and implored me, if I could not go
myself to the mountains, to cause word to be
sent to Fray Gerundio, who was in hiding in a
vault beneath the great church of Gibraltar,
the entrance to which is in the garden house of
the citizen Sebastian Ramirez, a prominent
citizen of Gibraltar, whom you and Morgan
have honoured by using his residence as your
shore quarters. Don Miguel did not appear
to be greatly attache to this same Fray Gerundio.
In fact, he seemed to be making the best of a
very bad job. But this monk evidently knows
the position of the cave, and Don Miguel
seemed to think that he would bestir himself
to assist the Lady Miranda.


“ And so, mon hrave , I pass this information
on to you. Que pensez-vous ? Are you free to
ride to the mountains ? I should like to see
you in the role of succourer of distressed
damsels. Mighty and swift in battle you may
be, but the gentler arts should not be despised.
Until you learn them, you will never be Vhomme
parfait. Would to heaven that I could go
myself, but I fear, even if I were able to shake
myself free of my red-shirted entourage , I
should spend much valuable time in scouring
the foothills. Don Miguel was so feeble at
the last that he was unable to give me exact
particulars as to the cave’s position. And,
meanwhile, the two maidens languish, and their
protector returns not.
“ Send me word by the negro if you are free
and willing to make the attempt.
“ Voire cousin hien affectionne ,
“ Charles.’*
Gervaise was moved by the letter. He was
conscious of the strong undercurrent of serious-
ness beneath his cousin’s light-hearted raillery.
He looked at the distant snow-clad mountains.
Somewhere in their fastnesses the Lady Miranda


n6 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
and her maid lay hidden, short of food, and
waiting for the return of him who now lay dead
in a corner of his own barn. Pathetic enough
in all conscience. Yes, he would do what he
could, and at once.
“ Come with me,” he said to the negro, and
set off, walking swiftly, to his quarters in the
house of Sebastian Ramirez. Arriving there,
he had the negro into his room and bade him
sit down while he scribbled a hasty note to
Charles. Handing this, with a couple of gold
pieces, to the negro, he told him to make all
speed back to the hacienda, and deliver it
secretly to his cousin.
Well pleased with his guerdon, and hopeful
of more, the negro went off at a loping trot.
Gervaise then sat down by the window and
re-read Charles’s letter very carefully. When
he had its contents by heart, he burnt it and
scattered the ashes. Then, taking his sword
and pistol, he went out into the garden.
The little wooden summer-house was at the
end, half hidden by fruit trees and creepers.
Entering it, Gervaise found it furnished with a
rustic table and some stools. Having assured
himself that the entrance was not overlooked,


A heave brought up the- trap-door.
he removed the matting and made a minute
examination of the floor. This was of beaten
earth, and showed no signs of having been
recently touched. Drawing his sword, he be-
gan to probe it methodically, and very soon the
point came up against something hard in one
of the corners. This hardness, he discovered,
extended over an area of a little more than a
square yard. But a tool was necessary to
remove the earth, and, going into the garden,
he was lucky enough to find a rusty spade.
Setting to work with this, he cleared the earth


n8 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
from off a square block of wood, whose massive
hinges revealed it to be a trap-door. Using
the spade as a lever, he was enabled to get
his fingers in the crevice opposite the hinges,
and then a heave brought up the trap-door
quite easily, and the loose earth fell softly on
to a flight of stone steps leading down into
subterranean darkness.


CHAPTER VIII
IN THE VAULT
GERVAISE stood for a few moments looking
r into the cavity. It was evident that a
light would be necessary for further exploration.
He went back to the house and found a lantern,
and, having stuffed another pistol into his belt,
he retraced his steps once more to the summer-
house, took up the spade, and descended the
flight of stairs. At the bottom, a passage some
six feet high and five wide bore sharply away
to the left, and the rays of his lantern showed it
to be supported with baulks of timber, some
of which were beginning to show signs of age
and decomposition. The air was musty but
breathable.
Bending slightly, Gervaise set off down the
passage, walking as silently as possible, and
keeping a sharp look-out for pitfalls. At the
end of a hundred yards or so the passage took


i2o GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
a turn to the right, and at this bend was an
alcove, where a determined man, well armed,
could have held an army of intruders at bay.
But it was now unoccupied, and Gervaise went
on for another fifty yards, to be brought up
short, further progress barred by a strong
studded door of cedar wood.
Gervaise pushed against the door and found
it locked. All was silent. But he guessed that
this was the door of the church vault, and that
on the other side of it lurked Fray Gerundio.
Setting down his lamp, he tapped on the wood
with his knuckles.
“ Are you there, Fray Gerundio ? ” he
called.
There was no answer.
“ Fray Gerundio,” he called in a louder tone.
“ Open this door. lam a friend.”
Still silence. Gervaise became impatient.
The thought occurred to him that perhaps the
monk was already making his escape by another
exit. Taking a short grip of the spade, he
brought it with all his force against the lock.
Blow after blow he rained on the same spot,
their echoes coming back with monotonous
regularity from the end of the corridor, and at


Gervaise drew a pistol and stepped through.
last the mangled fastenings gave way, and the
door swung open inwards a couple of inches.
Gervaise pushed it full open with his foot, drew
a pistol, and stepped through.
He found himself in a large cedar-beamed
chamber, dimly lit by a couple of ecclesiastical
candles in sconces. The draught from the
doorway caused their flames to flicker and send
dancing shadows on the whitewashed walls.
In one corner lay a heap of golden sacramental
vessels, some of them richly studded with
jewels ; in another hung the costly vestments


i 22 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
of the clergy of Gibraltar, ablaze also with
precious stones. A water-beaker and a sack
of provisions occupied a third corner. But
Gervaise scarcely noticed any of these things.
His attention was riveted at once on the man
who stood with folded arms in the middle of
the chamber, a priest in the habit of the Do-
minican friars, tall and lank, his face pale and
emaciated from his long vigil underground.
There was something about him, apart from
his dress, that aroused the lad’s instant dislike.
Years of fanatical intolerance had set their mark
on the Dominican’s face. With his thin lips
and cold, deep-set eyes, he looked as if he might
have been the callous spectator of many an
auto-da-fe.
“ You are Fray Gerundio ? ” asked Gervaise
curtly.
I am.”
Gervaise at once hated the voice as much as
its owner. There was an attempt at chilling
dignity in it which roused his ire. This man
was already trying to impress and subdue him.
“ What are you doing here ? ”
“I am guarding the treasures of our Holy
Mother Church.”


Still that tone of cold condescension. The
monk had quickly divined that Gervaise was
no common pirate, and he was fighting for the
advantage.
“ Do you know Don Miguel de Casa ? ”
“ I have that pleasure.”
Gervaise now began to awake to the fact
that the monk was speaking good English.
“ How do you come to speak our language ? ”
“ I learnt it from an Irish friar in Seville.
Have you an objection ? ”
That question, tinged as it was with sarcasm,
was a mistake. Gervaise ignored it, and led
back with one which would have been better
for the monk if it had never been asked.
“You are, perhaps, connected with the
Inquisition in this city ? ”
The monk nodded; but there was more pride
than contrition in the mute avowal.
“ I imagined you might be. Then, Fray
Gerundio, Inquisitor of the Holy Office in the
city of Gibraltar, take that! ”
Struck with all the force of Gervaise’s
clenched fist on the point of the jaw, the monk
fell like a log.
Gervaise looked sternly down at him.


“ By rights I should have put a bullet into
you, Fray Gerundio, or, better still, handed you
over to Morgan’s men. But I’ve need of you.
Get up ! ”
The monk staggered to his feet and wiped
the blood from his face.
“ Listen,” said Gervaise. “ Don Miguel de
Casa is dead, and his daughter and her maid
are in hiding in a cave in the mountains. They
need food. You, I believe, know the position
of the cave ? ”
The monk shrugged his shoulders.
“You know it,” said Gervaise, “ and you are
coming with me to take provisions to these two
women.”
“ And what is the alternative, senor ? ”
“ Death.”
“You have a pistol, senor. Let it be
swift.”
“ You fool! ” cried Gervaise. “ A pretty
right you and your kind have to demand a swift
death. Are you so steeped in your priestly
villainy and deceit that you can’t recognize
honesty when you see it ? You think I want
to capture the Lady Miranda ? ”
“You are of Morgan’s band.”


“For reasons of my own ; but these reasons
include neither the harming of women nor the
looting of cities. Come, make up your mind.
If you refuse, I’ll drag you into the street and
give you up to Morgan’s men.”
The monk hesitated for a few seconds, and
then made a gesture of assent.
“ I accept your word, senor. What are your
wishes ? ”
“ You know this cave. Well, you must dis-
guise yourself and lead me to it. If you try
to play false, I’ll shoot you dead. If you carry
it through, I’ll let you go free, and heaven for-
give me for the lapse ; for, Fray Gerundio, if
it were not for the plight of these two women,
dead you would be by now.”
“ I have been expecting death ever since I
heard your footsteps in the corridor,” said the
monk indifferently.
“ Why did you not try to escape ? ” Ger-
vaise pointed to a small door. “ That looks
like an exit.”
“It leads to the church, senor. But two men
would be required to lift the stones that guard
the entrance. When the clergy left, they sealed
the stone, and gave me the key to that.” He


126 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
nodded to the door which Gervaise had mal-
treated.
“ I see. Well, let us go.
But the monk still hesitated, his eyes on the
heap of church treasures. It evidently went
against his grain to leave them unguarded.
“ Don’t worry about those,” said Gervaise
carelessly. “If you get back, you can sit on
them again, and much good may it do you.
I shall say nothing about them. Melted down,
they might give the men of the fleet a day’s
orgy in Jamaica. You can keep your golden
trumperies, if that’s any ease to your soul.
Come ! Take up that lantern, and lead the
way.”
The monk did as he was bid, and Gervaise
walked behind him down the corridor. When
they reached the flight of steps, Gervaise
ordered him to stop.
“ Wait here, and don’t move,” he said. “I’ll
go first.” Mounting into the summer-house,
he looked round the garden to see that all was
clear, and then told the monk to come up.
Then, letting fall the trap-door, he covered it
with earth again and replaced the matting.
Their entry into the house was accomplished


unobserved, and Gervaise led his captive into
a room with barred windows on the upper
floor.
“You can wait here till I come back,” he
said. “ I’m going out now to find you a dis-
guise. The quieter you are, the better it will
be for you.” And, locking the door, he went
down to the water-front, took his dinghy, and
rowed off to the flagship, where he soon found
the articles required. He returned to find
Gerundio sitting on a stool, fingering his beads,
and murmuring prayers. He shuddered a
little as he saw the garments Gervaise had
brought—a red shirt, dyed in bullock’s blood,
of the buccaneers, a pair of breeches gaping
widely at the knee, a flamboyant neckerchief,
immense sea-boots, and a sombrero that was a
disguise in itself.
“ The livery of the devil,” he murmured.
“ And therefore fit for you to wear,” Gervaise
retorted. “ The sanbenito is a good deal more
ghastly, but you’ve extracted a lot of pleasure
in dressing poor wretches up in that, I’ll be
bound.” And seeing that the monk was likely
to become mutinous, he pointed through the
window to where three half-drunken buccaneers


of the garrison came lurching down the street,
singing a maudlin chorus. “You see those
men, Fray Gerundio ? Well, their creed is not
a whit more blood-stained than yours, for all
your canting hypocrisy about there being no
shedding of blood when you deliver victims to
the secular arm to be burnt. These buc-
caneers are as ready to burn people as you
are ; but they do not cant when they are doing
it. If they knew you were here they would
come in and tear you limb from limb. Now,
if you do not put on this dress at once, I will
call to them. Dead or alive, you shall wear these
clothes.”
There was no mistaking the purposeful ring
in Gervaise’s voice. The monk, raising his
eyes, muttered a prayer for forgiveness, and in
silence donned the garments of the Coastal
Brethren.
Gervaise smiled grimly at the metamor-
phosis. He picked up the discarded robe and
sandals, and was about to fling them into a
cupboard, when the monk stretched out a
pleading hand.
“ Surely, senor, I may be permitted to carry
them with me ? ”


“ Just as you like.” Gervaise tossed him the
bundle carelessly. “ But after a day or two
in your buccaneer’s rig you may feel disposed
to keep on wearing it.”
“ Heaven forbid.”
“ Well, you’ve only to say the word, and I’ll
speak to Captain Morgan, and get him to let
you take the oath of allegiance.”
The monk shuddered, and began to pack
his own clothes into a neat parcel. Gervaise
watched him for a while in contemptuous
silence, then he said :
“ To-night, when it is dark, we shall ride out
of the city. I shall bring a couple of mules
here. Meanwhile you had better make a meal.”
He went below, and foraging in his own quarters,
found some bread, meat, and wine. Returning
with these, he set them before the monk, and
then, locking the door, he left him to his own
devices.
Gervaise, by virtue of his position as the
supercargo’s right-hand man, had the right to
commandeer anything he chose in the way of
captured property. He exerted this privilege
now by selecting a couple of the strongest mules
from the dozen or so which had been left in
(4,034) g


130 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
the town corral for the use of the garrison.
These he loaded with a good store of provisions,
and then, as darkness fell with its usual tropical
abruptness, he mounted one, and led the other
round to his quarters.
The monk, sitting in his swashbuckling dress,
telling his beads with unction, presented a figure
almost laughable in its incongruity. He re-
coiled a little as Gervaise handed him some
weapons.
“You forget, senor,” he remonstrated, “ that
the shedding of blood is forbidden to my order.”
“ Don’t worry about that, Fray Gerundio.
The pistols aren’t loaded, and there’s only four
inches of sword in that scabbard. You burners
of men and women have a way of squaring your
consciences by granting yourselves indulgences.
I believe, and I’d rather trust a snake than one
of your order. Put them in your belt. An
unarmed buccaneer would arouse suspicion.”
The monk obeyed without further demur, and
then, gathering up his bundle, followed Ger-
vaise downstairs and out to the tethered mules,
“ Now,” said Gervaise, when they had
mounted, “ we want to get to this cave as
quickly as possible. If we meet with buc-


cancers, be careful not to open your mouth.
On the other hand, if we fall in with fugitive
Spaniards, you must do all the necessary
talking. And be sure that it is good talking,
Fray Gerundio. You understand ? If it comes
to a fight, you’ll get my first bullet. Have you
got that quite clear ? Good ! Then off we
g°*


CHAPTER IX
OUT TO THE MOUNTAINS
THE meagre garrison left by Morgan was
not in evidence that night as the pair rode
through the streets of the city. Among the
captured stores was a good quantity of wine
and brandy, the effect of which kept the buc-
caneers in a semi-intoxicated condition in their
own quarters. Once clear of the town, Gervaise
told his companion to ride a little ahead and
lead the way.
It was a bright starlit night, and the monk
rode with the confidence of familiarity, never
once hesitating at the cross-paths, or the bridges
and fords spanning the streams which irrigated
the plantations. The mules, sturdy animals,
accustomed to the long trek to and from Merida,
seemed to realize that a long journey lay in front
of them, and settled down at once to a steady
even pace.


There was little conversation between the
riders. Gervaise’s dislike of the monk had not
abated. To him Fray Gerundio represented
the Inquisition, that intolerant, death-dealing
office which, not content with having eaten the
heart of Spain, strove even now to get the rest
of the world beneath its sway. He had struck
the fellow once, and he knew that, at the
slightest sign of officiousness, he would strike
him again.
After four hours’ riding he called a halt,
and having fed and watered the mules, they
refreshed themselves with a short meal. Re-
suming their journey, they found themselves
soon in the region of the outlying haciendas-
In some of them lights still flickered, and the
echoes of bawling choruses came to them across
the quiet fields. And once they heard the
agonized screaming of a man under torture,
which caused the monk to remark :
“ Your countrymen are amusing themselves,
senor.”
“ It should be a familiar sound enough to
your ears,” said Gervaise dryly.
“ The Holy Church castigates for the good
of the soul,” the monk ventured to remark.


134 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
“ But doubtless, senor, we are being punished
now for unknown offences. To some are sent
locusts, but we here in Venezuela are not so
fortunate, and the shadow of the pirate lies heavy
on our pleasant land.”
“ If the people hereabouts had to choose
between the buccaneers and your accursed
Inquisition, they would do well to choose the
buccaneers.”
“ Those without the Holy Mother Church
cannot be expected to understand its problems,
senor.”
“ Those problems are of your own sinful
making, I expect.”
The conversation waned after that, and for
two hours they rode on in silence. They had
passed through the outer ring of the buccaneer
encampments, and were traversing a dense
forest of cedars, when a voice called suddenly
from in front in Spanish :
“ Who goes ? Halt or we fire ! ”
Gervaise guessed at once that they had ridden
into a band of fugitives from the city, and his
left hand shot out and grasped his companion’s
rein.
“ Spaniards, are they not ? ” he whispered.


“ Yes, senor.” The monk’s eyes gleamed
beneath his sombrero. His voice, in the near
presence of his countrymen, took on a new ring.
“ Then say something that will cause them to
let us pass,” Gervaise hissed in his ear.
The monk looked undecided. He was evi-
dently weighing the position. But the next
moment Gervaise’s pistol was thrust against
his ribs.
“ Speak up, Fray Gerundio,” he urged,
“ and quickly.”
With his life hanging in the balance, the monk
hesitated no longer.
“ I am Fray Gerundio, riding to the moun-
tains on particular business,” he called out
authoritatively. “ Clear the path, and avert
your eyes.”
There was a short subdued whispering in
front, and then a voice called : “ Pardon, Fray
Gerundio. We do your bidding.” A rustling
ensued, and then silence. The pair rode on
without further challenge. The monk was
evidently a person of authority in Gibraltar.
As dawn broke, they found themselves in
the foothills, in the shadow of the mighty snow-
clad peaks towering into the greying sky to the


136 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
east. They had just emerged from a forest,
and now the monk led the way along the fringe
of trees, and then struck up a kind of winding
goat-track, which proved a severe test to the
scrambling powers of the mules. In another
half-hour they came within sight of the cave.
The monk pointed it out to Gervaise, otherwise
he might have passed it unnoticed, for its
entrance was almost obscured by a jagged over-
hanging outcrop of rock.
As they turned across to the cave a young
woman appeared at the entrance. She gave one
long look at them, uttered a piercing cry of
despair, and almost fell back into the interior
again. The cry brought out her mistress, the
Senorita Miranda de Casa, a beautiful olive-
skinned Spanish girl of twenty-one or twenty-
two. Dressed as if she were still the privileged
chatelaine of her father’s house, she made an
incongruous and pathetic picture in those bleak
and inhospitable surroundings. As her eyes
fell on the two riders, she crossed her hands
on her breast, and stood still in statuesque
resignation.
“Itis I, senorita ! ” cried the monk. “ Fray
Gerundio! ”


At the sound of that sombre voice the girl
started and looked searchingly at him. The
Inquisition masquerading as piracy! What
could this mean ? And who was this young
cavalier with English features riding so con-
fidently by the side of one of his hereditary
enemies ? A gentleman, evidently. But why
came he here ? She kept her eyes on him, her
heart full of misgivings, until, halting close to
her, he dismounted and swept his hat from his
head in courteous salutation. Then, at the
sight of his bright, open countenance, the
Senorita Miranda experienced hope once more.
Fierce this young man might be, and stem in
his dealings with men, but those massive, sun-
tanned hands of his had never been lifted against
a woman, and never would be ; she knew that
instinctively. She turned to the monk, who
had now dismounted, for explanation.
Fray Gerundio began to speak in quick
sentences. Gervaise could understand but very
little of what he was saying, but he disliked the
authoritative tone which was rapidly creeping
back into the monk’s voice. The maid, Anita,
had crept up now behind her mistress, and the
two listened with bent heads to the monk’s


peroration. Gervaise felt his gall rising as he
watched and listened. This kind of stuff that
the monk was pouring out might do very well to
impress a young woman of texture as common
as this Spanish serving-maid’s, but the Senorita
Miranda, evidently a lady bred and bom, had
her gentle eyes downcast, and was listening
with equal humility. Presently he could stand
it no longer, and cut in :
“ Here, Fray Gerundio,” he said peremp-
torily, “ I think you’ve talked long enough.
The Lady Miranda looks tired. Let her sit
down. You can give me a hand to unload
the mules.”
A touch of red flicked the monk’s sallow
cheeks. Good sense told him to obey ; but
the habits of a lifetime are not easily broken.
When addressing men in the presence of women-
folk, he had always adopted a certain tone
calculated to enhance his prestige with the
latter, and backed as he was by the dreaded
power of the Inquisition, the men could not but
submit. The habit was too strong for him
now.
“ I have much to say to the Sefiorita de Casa,”
he replied, in the tone which he might have


OUT TO THE MOUNTAINS 139
adopted towards a presumptuous peasant.
“ Permit me to continue.”
The combination of his manner, tone, and
words was too much for Gervaise. His smoul-
dering anger burst into flame. He took a quick
step forward and crashed his fist full into the
monk’s face. Fray Gerundio fell prone, and
lay stunned and motionless, for in his fall his
head had come into contact with a boulder.
A gasp of awe and astonishment broke from
the maid Anita.
“ He has struck a priest of the Holy Office,”
she murmured, and looked at Gervaise as if she
thought the heavens might open to punish him
for his temerity. But in her glance there was
something very like admiration also.
The Senorita Miranda said nothing. Her
wonder was as great as her maid’s, but her
training enabled her to subdue it.
Quite indifferent to the effect he had created,
Gervaise turned to the mules, and began to
unload the stores. Then, spreading some of
the choicest on a flat rock, he invited the girls
to eat and drink.
The maid’s eyes sparkled, for their provisions
had run out on the previous evening. At a


140 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
sign from her mistress she took a portion of the
food and wine and carried them a little apart.
The Senorita Miranda, after a hesitating glance
at the still prostrate monk, then sat down and
began to eat and drink.
Gervaise did his best to carry on a conversa-
tion during the meal. Eking out his bad
Spanish with a good deal of gesturing, he
managed to convey to the senorita something of
the general situation in and around Gibraltar.
He soon discovered that the monk had not
broken to her the news of her father’s death,
and decided to keep off the subject himself.
The poor girl’s situation was sufficiently tragic
as it was, and to tell her now would be useless
cruelty. Later on, when the buccaneers had
departed, she would be better able to bear the
blow. So he feigned misunderstanding when
she questioned him about her parent, and after
two or three attempts she gave it up. She
managed to understand, however, that Ger-
vaise had been apprised of her situation by a
friend, that his sympathy had been aroused, and
that he had impressed Fray Gerundio into the
position of guide to her hiding-place.
The colour came back into the girl’s cheeks


OUT TO THE MOUNTAINS 141
a little as the meal progressed. Her eyes
brightened, and once or twice she broke into
a musical little laugh at Gervaise’s sturdy man-
handling of her language. But always she
quelled the laugh almost as soon as it had come,
and looked round at the monk. Gervaise knew
what she was thinking. Laughter with a heretic
would not find favour with the Dominican. He
shrugged his shoulders, wishing that he could
explain to her his opinion of the Inquisition
and its ministers.
The meal finished, he went over to the monk
and looked at him critically. Decidedly he
would not be fit to travel for a day or two.
Kneeling down beside him, he took the pistols
from Fray Gerundio’s belt, loaded them care-
fully, and handed them to the Senorita Miranda.
“ In case of accidents,” he said.
The girl did not understand his words, but
she grasped their meaning. She was being
given the means of defence or a speedy death
for herself and her maid in the event of their
hiding-place being discovered by the buc-
caneers. She bowed her head in acknowledg-
ment, and gave them to Anita, who seized upon
them with greedy fingers.


Gervaise now made them understand that
he wished to sleep for a couple of hours before
making the journey back. The senorita at
once led him into the cave and pointed to some
rugs spread out in a corner. Smiling his thanks,
he lay down and was soon fast asleep. When
he awoke, the shadows of evening were touching
the peaks, and he realized with a start that he
had slept throughout the entire day.
The two girls, sitting just outside the entrance,
turned at his movement.
“You were tired, senor,” said the Senorita
Miranda. “It was well to sleep. And now
you must be hungry. Come.” And she pointed
to the flat rock, on which was spread another
meal.
As he came out, Gervaise glanced at the monk.
He was still in the same place, but his head was
now pillowed on a folded rug. He was feeling
better, the senorita said, and had eaten and
drunk a little, but he was still feeling the effects
of his fall, and seemed disinclined to move.
Gervaise lingered rather over that meal, for
he felt reluctant to leave two girls in such a
plight, with no one more serviceable than a sick
monk for a protector. Also he found the com-


“In case of accidents” he said.
pany of this well-bred young Spanish lady
exceedingly refreshing after his weeks of so-
journing with the coarse-mouthed buccaneers.
He knew that she trusted him, and this in spite
of the fact that he was of Morgan’s band, and
an invader of the realms of His Most Catholic
Majesty. But he knew very well that his
presence would give the monk an additional
handle against the house of Casa when the fleet
had departed and he was restored to his former
authority in Gibraltar. For she was Spanish
and Catholic, and he was English and of the


144 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
Reformed religion, and the sallow-faced priest
might make mischief if he stayed longer than
the exigencies of the situation required. So
far all had been in order, and even a flint-
hearted Dominican could find no flaws in the
way he had conducted the affair. But the meal
once over, it was time for him to depart.
Rising, he began to saddle the mule he had
ridden out. The other he proposed to leave
for the use of the trio. When all was ready,
he looped the reins over his arm and held out
his hand in his bluff English way to the
senorita. To his surprise she took it and raised
it to her lips, an example which was followed
by her maid.
“ And this,” he thought, “ is where I want
Cousin Charles with me. He would know
exactly what to do and say ! ” Nevertheless,
neither of the two young women found any-
thing gauche in his manner as he swept off his
hat and smiled his honest, pleasant smile.
Heretic he might be, but they knew that he had
risked his life to help them, and surely there
were not enough such heretics in the world.
Mounting, he rode off down the path, and
at the bend he turned and waved his hat to


OUT TO THE MOUNTAINS 145
them. They fluttered their handkerchiefs in
return. A pitiful little picture the pair of
them made, standing there with the sombre
mountain for a background ; bu f he consoled
himself with the thought that they had enough
provisions now to outlast the buccaneers’ reign
of terror, and when that shadow had departed
the Senorita Miranda would no doubt get
married to some spirited young Spaniard of
her own class, and time would heal the blow
of her father’s death.
The mule, knowing that he was homeward
bound, stepped out at a brisk pace. Gervaise
had taken keen account of the paths on the
outward journey, but he soon found that the
animal knew the way even better than himself,
and needed no bridle direction at cross-roads.
On reaching the forest where he and the monk
had been challenged, Gervaise rode with his
hand on his pistol. In the event of a repetition
of that incident, he meant to fire, draw his
sword, and trust to a charge to carry him
through. But he passed unmolested through
that domain, and another few hours’ riding
brought him to the cocoa plantations which
marked the outer ring of the buccaneer camps.
(1,034) jq


The rest of the journey passed without in-
cident, and at dawn he rode into the deserted
streets of Gibraltar, where he corralled his
mule, and f hen, proceeding to his quarters,
flung himself on his couch and slept till the
setting of the sun.


CHAPTER X
THE BARRED LAGOON
THE hunting and torturing of the fugitive
Gibraltans continued for another fort-
night. From time to time mule trains laden
with plate, merchandise, and stores, escorted
by flushed and shouting bands of buccaneers,
came into the town, and Gervaise supervised
their temporary warehousing. Then came news
that the Governor of Gibraltar was in hiding
in the neighbourhood of a mountain some
leagues away, and that with him were a con-
siderable number of the women.
Morgan at once gathered in his scattered
units from the countryside, and divided them
into two forces. One of these parties, con-
sisting of two hundred men, was sent to capture
a ship and four boats lying in one of the rivers
of the lake. The remaining two hundred and
fifty men Morgan led himself against the
147


148 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
governor. But this time the luck was with
the Spaniards. Coming within reach of his
objective, Morgan found that access to the
mountain-top held by the Spaniards could only
be had by way of a narrow path of a width
sufficient only for the passage of one man at a
time. The fighting temper of the buccaneers
might have carried them to the top in spite of
this obstacle, but now the elements took a
hand in the game. As the buccaneers were
crossing a river in that region a torrential rain
swept down upon them, with the result that
the stream overflowed, and several men were
drowned. More serious still, the powder was
soaked, and there remained not a dry charge
in the force. In these circumstances, Morgan
decided to give up the attempt, and, after
wading up to their armpits for several miles,
the party was successful in reaching dry land,
and returned to Gibraltar. Here, two days
later, they were joined by the river party, who
had brought with them considerable booty from
the captured vessels.
With them came Charles, whom Gervaise
had not seen since his departure for the hacienda
of Don Miguel de Casa. Their meeting now


was a joyful one, and very soon the Senorita
Miranda became the subject of their con-
versation.
“ She should be safe now,” said Gervaise.
“ All the scouring parties are in, and we are
sailing soon for Maracaibo.” He recounted
the story of his adventures with the monk, and
his cousin’s eyes opened wide as he listened.
“ Ma foi ! that was a master-stroke dressing
the Fray up as a brisk Tortugan. He must
have been in purgatory all the time he was
wearing it. And the senorita . . . was she
pretty ? ”
“ She seemed nice-looking.”
“ Seemed nice-looking ! ” Charles repeated
with scorn, “del ! describe her, man ! ”
“ Well,” said Gervaise thoughtfully, “ she
seemed a well-bred girl, and very neat.”
Charles made a gesture of despair.
“ I should have known better than to send
you, cousin. It was a waste of an opportunity.
Tiens ! there was I, hemmed about with red-
shirted rum-drinkers, unable to move hand or
foot without a brisk buccaneer clinging to my
coat-tails, and I gave you this magnificent
commission to hack and maltreat. Seemed


150 GENTLEMEN 0’ FORTUNE
neat , you say ! Oh, you islander ! Were all
the delicate details lost on you ? Did you
by any chance remark the colour of her eyes,
the turn of her neck, the shape of her hand,
the . . ”
“ No, I can’t say I did,” replied Gervaise
slowly, as Charles paused for breath. “You
see, she wouldn’t shake hands with me. I
offered to, but ...”
“ Nom d'un Men ! ” almost screamed Charles.
‘‘You offered to shake hands with her ! You
.. . you gallant! It never occurred to you, I
suppose, to raise her hand to your lips ? ”
“No, but she kissed mine.”
“ What’s that ? What are you telling me ?
del! Can this be true ? Crude Englishman !
Will you never learn ? ”
“ I didn’t ask her to kiss my hand,” defended
Gervaise.
At that Charles sank back into his chair,
bereft for the moment of speech.
“ Oh, you didn’t,” he murmured at last.
“ You didn’t. Come, that’s something. And
she kissed yours, you say ? Can it be that the
naive barbarity of you islanders has some charm
for the civilized races ? It is evident that


somehow or other you must have hewn and
butted your way into her favour. But your
methods, Gervaise —your methods ! You plant
one great fist into a monk’s face, and offer the
other to a lady to shake. Magnijique ! You
are the finest buccaneer of them all. Capture
a ship and hoist your flag, and the Brethren
will come scurrying to join you.”
“ Well, I’m sorry I didn’t manage better,
Charles ; but the business was none of my
choosing. Are you going to stay and eat with
me ? ”
Charles shook his head. “ Alas, no. I
must away. There is a tendency these days
for the lads of the Petrel to quarrel, and I find
that my sweet presence acts as an unguent on
heated passions. I must away and chant to
them the ballad of ‘ Antoinette,’ and tell
seaman Jarvey that he is as tough a man as
seaman Fry, and seaman Bates that he is as
tough a lad as seaman Rolfe, and vice versa.
Toughness, as you know, is one of their gods.
Come and see me as soon as possible.”
“ I certainly will,” Gervaise promised.
Preparations, however, for the fleet’s de-
parture kept Gervaise very busy the next day,


152 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
and it was not till five days later, when the ships
were off Maracaibo, that he saw Charles again.
They met then in the market-place, where
Morgan had convened a meeting of the ships’
companies. A rumour was steadily growing
that Spanish ships of war were in the Narrows,
and that the fort had been reconditioned during
the buccaneers’ absence at Gibraltar. All
realized that if this news proved true, their
position was likely to be serious. The fleet
was laden now with plunder, and carried slaves
and prisoners as well. When the time should
come for the division of spoils, there would be a
rich haul for every man. But with the lagoon
barred, they could make no use of their ill-
gotten riches ; and each day made their position
there more dangerous, for the Spaniards at the
entrance would soon be reinforced, and no
doubt would be burning to avenge their late
defeat. The market-place hummed with ex-
cited comment, but nothing could be done
until the enemy’s force was ascertained. Morgan
therefore proposed sending a small, swift boat
to reconnoitre the Narrows, and Gervaise, who
was standing by him, at once offered to make
one of her crew. After his recent experiences


the prospect of getting a breath of the sea was
very inviting, and even the whistle of a cannon-
ball or two would make a pleasant change from
the groans and lamentations of the hapless
Spanish cities.
Morgan nodded assent. “ I’ll put you in
charge of the boat,” he said. “ Don’t fight if
you can help it. We want news this time, not
Spaniards. Count the ships, and get an idea
of the number of guns they carry ; then come
back as fast as you can. Pick your own crew.
Five, including yourself, should be enough.’’
There were many volunteers for the little
adventure, but in the end Gervaise chose
Charles, Sing-Song, the Tinman, and the
youth Creeper.
With these four he set sail that afternoon.
Close-hauled to a westerly wind, the boat sped
swiftly across the rippling surface of the lake
on a course which would enable it to just clear
the outflung point on the eastern shore. As
soon as they had left the point behind, Gervaise
set watches, and, with her crew alternately
steering and sleeping, the boat rushed on
towards the Narrows. At an hour before dawn
lights showed faintly ahead, and, after con-


154 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
suiting with his crew, Gervaise had the sail
lowered, and the boat was allowed to drift.
All hands were now wide awake, and staring
impatiently to the north, wondering what the
daylight would show them. They were evi-
dently close to the lagoon entrance, for the
booming of the breakers on the outside reefs
was plainly audible.
At last a greying streak spread over the
eastern horizon, turning quickly to a rosy flush
which dimmed the ships’ lights in the Narrows,
and showed the watchers on the drifting boat
the massive shapes of three men-of-war barring
the mouth of the lagoon.
“ Caramho ! ” ejaculated the Tinman.
“ Is that all you can find to say ? ” asked
Charles.
“ No,” said the Tinman, and proceeded to
let out a jet of oaths in three languages. Like
most of his comrades, he was richer now than
he had ever been in his life before, and Jamaica,
that Mecca of all true buccaneers, beckoned
him to come and laze in voluptuous idleness, to
scatter his gold, and forget for a while the hard-
ships of the sea. He cursed and spat his venom
against the royal ships of Spain blocking now


the path to that Elysium, the while his great
hand gripped the butts of his numerous pistols.
The youth Creeper listened respectfully to his
diatribes, storing up the choicest for his own
future use.
“No doubt what you say is perfectly true,”
said Charles, when the Tinman had at last
exhausted his vocabulary. “If we are going
to squeeze through there into the open sea, we
shall have to disgorge a lot of things to do it,
including doubloons and prisoners.”
“ Let’s count the guns before they try
blowing us out of the water,” said Gervaise.
“ We’re a bit too close to be comfortable.”
They scanned the bristling sides of the ships.
“ Forty if there’s one on the big fellow,” said
Sing-Song.
“ And thirty on the next,” added Creeper.
“ I make twenty-four on the smallest,” said
Gervaise. “ Remember that, will you ? Morgan
will want to know.”
“ They rise early in the Spanish fleet,”
Charles remarked. “ Look at them swarming
on the deck of the big one. Ah,” as there
came a puff of smoke and a booming report
from the flagship, “ you’re right, Gervaise,


The cannonade now became brisk.
we’re a wee bit too close. What’s that, Sing-
Song ? ”
“ Tilly, Tilly, down the dale,” that buc-
caneer was singing as, with sword half drawn,
he stood clutching the mast, and glared with
fascinated eyes at the flagship.
“ Shut up,” growled the Tinman. “ We’re
not fighting this time, Sing-Song.”
“ No, indeed,” said Gervaise, “ and the
sooner we’re out of this the better. Up with
the sail ! ”
As the canvas rose flapping in the wind,
another ball, better aimed than the previous one,
sent up the spray within ten yards of the side.


The cannonade now became brisk, all the
ships taking a hand in it; but by steering a
zigzag course Gervaise managed to draw out
of the danger zone without suffering any
casualties.
“ We can honestly say that there are ships
of war in the Narrows,” said Charles, as the
boat settled down again on her southerly course,
“ and that they are prepared to dispute our
passage.”
“ They must be a bit jumpy on board,
though,” Gervaise remarked. “ How were they
to know we weren’t a peaceful fishing boat ? ”
“ The Tinman was talking rather loudly—l
should think they could have heard him in
Jamaica. And he wasn’t at all complimentary
to Spain; were you, Tinman ? ”
For answer, that large buccaneer, sitting
grumbling and growling in the bows, delivered
himself of a number of surprisingly untrue
statements about the King of Spain and the
Spanish nation in general ; to which remarks
the youth Creeper accorded many a reverential
“ Aye, aye I ”


CHAPTER XI
THE FIRESHIP
THE return of the boat to Maracaibo with
confirmation of the bad news caused grim
consternation among the buccaneers. Three
ships of war and a strong fort manned by dis-
ciplined soldiers constituted a strong barrier
indeed. The largest of Morgan’s vessels had
only fourteen small guns. With their superior
armament the Spaniards would be enabled to
do great damage before the buccaneer fleet
could get within range. The Spaniards were in
a position to dictate terms, and those terms
would certainly not permit the passage of
plunder from the lagoon towns to Jamaica.
Morgan, however, with his usual effrontery,
sent a messenger to the Spanish admiral, de-
manding a ransom for not having put Mara-
caibo to the flames. The answer to this came
in the form of a letter, which Morgan read to


the assembled ships’ companies in the market-
place.
“ The Letter of Don Alonso del Campo y
Espinosa, Admiral of the Spanish Fleet,
to Captain Morgan, Commander of the
Pirates.
“ Having understood by all our friends and
neighbours the unexpected news that you have
dared to attempt and commit hostilities in the
countries, cities, towns, and villages belonging
to the dominions of his Catholic Majesty, my
sovereign lord and master, I let you under-
stand by these lines, that I am come to this
place, according to my obligation, near that
castle which you took out of the hands of a
parcel of cowards ; where I have put things
into a verv good posture of defence, and
mounted ,ain the artillery which you had
nailed ar dismounted. My intent is, to dis-
pute with you your passage out of the lake, and
follow and pursue you everywhere, to the end
you may see the performance of my duty.
Notwithstanding, if you be contented to sur-
render with humility all that you have taken,
together with the slaves and all other prisoners,


I will let you freely pass, without trouble or
molestation, on condition that you retire home
presently to your own country. But if you
make any resistance or opposition to what I
offer you, I assure you I will command boats to
come from Caraccas, wherein I will put my
troops, and coming to Maracaibo, will put you
every man to the sword. This is my last and
absolute resolution. Be prudent therefore, and
do not abuse my bounty with ingratitude. I
have with me very good soldiers, who desire
nothing more ardently than to revenge on you,
and your people, all the cruelties and base
actions you have committed upon the Spanish
nation in America.
“ Dated on board the royal ship named the
Magdalen , lying at anchor at the entry of the
lake of Maracaibo, this 24th of April 1669.
“ Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa.”
When the hum of comment on this plain-
spoken epistle had died down, Morgan put the
situation tersely to his men. The Spanish
admiral was a man of honour, and their lives
were safe if they felt disposed to return to
Jamaica as poor as when they left it. On the


other hand, if they wished to retain the treasure
they had gained, they would have to fight,
and fight perhaps as they had never done be-
fore. Let them think it over, and he would
abide by their decision. Thus the astute
Morgan, who knew well what that decision
would be.
The buccaneers needed no time to weigh
the matter. The idea of surrendering the
treasure was altogether too much for their
stomachs. The risks were great, but if the whole
armada of Spain was massed there at the
Narrows, they would have voted for an attempt
to burst through. The square echoed now
with their ferocious shouts, and Morgan at once
began his preparations for the battle.
The suggestion that a fireship might be used
seemed to him a good one, and the least sea-
worthy ship of his fleet was selected for the
purpose. Her crew was distributed among the
other vessels, and their places taken by dummy
wooden figures dressed in sombreros and ban-
doliers, and armed with all the unserviceable
weapons that could be procured. From false
gun-ports cut in the vessel’s sides protruded
the drums used by the local negroes, the effect
(4,034) U


162 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
of these, even from a short distance, being that
of cannon. Pitch, tar, and brimstone were
poured into her; powder dumped in ad-
vantageous positions, and the bulwarks were
thinned in order to give the explosions extra
force.
While this work was proceeding, another
messenger was sent to the Spanish admiral. In
this Morgan offered to quit Maracaibo without
ransom, and release half the slaves and all the
prisoners in exchange for an unhindered passage
out of the lake.
The reply was sternly brief. The admiral
gave the buccaneers two days in which to accede
to his original demand. At the end of that
time the Spanish fleet would come and ex-
terminate them.
This was much what Morgan had expected,
and on the receipt of it he made his final ar-
rangements for the attack. There was still the
question of the fireship’s crew to be settled.
Three men at least would be required to move
among the dummies posted about her decks —
one to steer, and the others to cast the grappling
irons. It would be a dangerous service indeed,
for, with so much explosive on board, she might


very well be blown to pieces before ever she
reached the enemy. As usual when anything
extremely hazardous was in the wind, Morgan
called for volunteers, and such was the reckless
temper of his men that the whole of the ships’
companies stepped forward in answer to the
request.
“ You’ll have to cast lots for it, lads,” said
Morgan, and was about to do this when Ger-
vaise touched his sleeve.
“ It would save a lot of time, Captain, if you
let me go,” he suggested.
“ Do you want to be blown sky high ? ”
Morgan asked grimly.
“Not particularly ; but whether we sail on
the fireship or not, we all stand a good chance of
that.”
“ Well, that’s true enough.” Morgan eyed
him reflectively. This young Cartelot, he knew,
was as cool a hand as any in the fleet. He could
be trusted not to forsake the fireship until he
had done what he had set out to do. On the
other hand his appointment might cause jealousy
among the bolder spirits, for, though the risks
were great, the rewards of success would be in
proportion, and the names of the fireship’s crew


164 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
would be in the mouths of all Port Royal and
other haunts of the buccaneers.
While Morgan hesitated, Charles, guessing
the purport of their conversation, came pushing
through the throng.
“ Let me tell you, Captain,” he said loudly,
“ that this is a job for cousins. Mr. Cartelot
here and I have had a large experience of
combustibles, and I may mention that Guy
Fawkes consulted my grandfather about the
placing of the powder barrels under the Houses
of Parliament.”
There was a guffaw from the buccaneers
around at this sally. The moment was pro-
pitious for Morgan.
“ What say, lads ?” he cried. “ Shall we let
this pair of cockerels take the fireship in ? ”
There was a general shout of approval.
“ That’s settled, then,” said Morgan. “ And
now, lads, go and pick your third man. They’ve
all volunteered. Take your choice.”
“ Leave this to me,” Charles whispered to
Gervaise. “Allow me, Captain.” And step-
ping on to the box which served Morgan for a
rostrum, he surveyed the expectant company.
“ There stands a man, Captain,” he said,


pointing, “who will suit us very well. Mafoi!
it will be hard indeed to distinguish him from
the wooden lads of the Blowemup .”
“ Go and take him, then.”
Charles stepped down from the box, strode
jauntily through the crowd, and to Gervaise’s
astonishment stopped in front of Rodriguez.
“ How say you, Alonso ? Have you a mind
to sail with my cousin and me, and heave a
grappling iron on the Magdalen ? ”
The cool effrontery of the suggestion left
Rodriguez bereft of words for the moment. His
face went almost black beneath its tan, and his
eyes gleamed with suppressed choler. But the
eyes of the company were on him, and hesitation
might easily be misconstrued. He had no
choice but to accept.
“ Come with you ?” he growled. “ Aye, I’ll
come with you.” His lips curled with venomous
spite, showing his tobacco-stained teeth.
“ Bien ! ” cried Charles, waving his hand to
Morgan. “ Our good Rodriguez jumps at the
chance, Captain. Our trio is complete.”
This important business settled, and there
being nothing further to discuss at the moment,
the buccaneers dispersed to their ships.


“ And what think you of that for a master-
stroke, cousin ? ” Charles asked, as they walked
together down to the water-front.
“ I don’t know quite what to think of it.
You amazed me.”
“ But not so much as I amazed Rodriguez.”
Charles chuckled at the memory. “Et puis ,
mon cher , you brought it on yourself. It was
clear for all to see that you were inveigling
Morgan into letting you sail on the fireship.
So what could I do ? Consider my feelings
sailing comfortably along in the Petrel , waiting
for you to be blown over the masthead. Non ,
that would have been too triste. I had to come,
too. Then, when it came to the question of the
third man, there was only one whom I really
desired to see sitting on a lighted powder
barrel, and that was Rodriguez. So I made
straight for him. But his face, cousin ! Did
you remark it ? Pas du tout joli ! He nearly
blew up there and then.”
Gervaise laughed at the recollection. “It
was a bad moment for him,” he agreed. Then
he grew serious again. “We are like rats in a
trap here, Charles.”
“ That’s so, Gervaise, but more well-fed and


business-like rats I never wish to see. It re-
mains to be seen whether the trap is stronger
than the rats. Personally I shouldn’t be sur-
prised if Morgan manages to gnaw his way out.
One thing is very certain, the trap is going to
be badly damaged before the rats are killed.
Well, we’ve our work cut out with the good
ship Blowemup , and we shall soon have the
choice of burning or swimming. Let’s hope
there will be a boat near when the time comes,
otherwise I fear me that the Santa Christina’s
treasure will lie unclaimed for a few hundred
years more.”
“I’d almost forgotten about that treasure.”
“ That’s the effect of the Blowemup. Nothing
like the prospect of a voyage in a fireship for
driving all other thoughts out of one’s head.”
The fleet sailed the next day for the Narrows.
The fireship, manned at this preliminary stage
by a dozen buccaneers, headed the procession.
Following came the longboats laden with
women prisoners and the bulk of the captured
treasure, and then Morgan’s flagship, leading
the remainder of the fleet.
The three Spanish ships were sighted at
nightfall, stretched in line of battle across the


168 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
mouth of the lagoon. It was too dark for
action, so the order was given to drop anchor ;
and almost within gunshot of each other, the
two fleets waited for the dawn.
Just before daylight the additional crew of the
fireship departed in a boat for their own vessel,
leaving the cousins and Rodriguez to their
own devices. She was under full sail and
hove-to. They needed now only daylight and
the signal from the flagship to bear down on
the enemy. Gervaise was at the helm, and
Charles, his spirits quite undamped by the
ordeal in front of him, went the round of the
decks, setting the dummies’ sombreros at
rakish angles, and inquiring if they had passed
a pleasant night. Rodriguez, looking very
surly and grim, stood aloof in the bows, a
grappling iron in his hand, staring with evident
distaste in the direction of the Narrows. To
him presently came Charles, and pretending to
mistake him for one of the dummies, gave his
hat an additional cock. Rodriguez turned on
him with a venomous snarl.
“ A thousand pardons, Alonso mio ,” Charles
apologized with mock contriteness. “ A little
error on my part. There was something


dummy-like in your attitude —a soupfon of
woodenness, shall we say ? You will excuse
me.
“ Keep your jackanapes’ tricks to yourself,”
growled Rodriguez.
Before Charles could reply there was a shout
from Gervaise. The dawn had broken, and
the signal flag was creeping to the masthead of
Morgan’s ship. Charles and Rodriguez rushed
to the ropes, and the fireship’s head came
round.
“ That will do,” cried Gervaise. “ Take up
your positions.” And, followed by the entire
fleet, the fireship bore down on the ships of
Spain.
These, too, were under sail, and the largest
of them, the Magdalen , heeling a little to the
freshening breeze, came out to meet what she
considered to be the buccaneers’ flagship. Not
a shot was fired as the two ships neared each
other. The Spaniards seemed determined to
carry their enemy by the board. Gervaise,
knowing that his vessel was of lighter draught
than the Magdalen , kept her to the windward,
so that the flames would sweep over the other’s
decks when they locked. The Spanish com-


170 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
mander, confident in his greatly superior
strength, made no attempt to defeat this
manoeuvre. It was immaterial to him, unaware
as he was of the true nature of the enemy,
which side he boarded.
So the Magdalen foamed on, her one object
to get alongside and strike the first staggering
blow of the battle. As she drew near, Gervaise
could see the boarding parties standing by the
bulwarks, and sailors ready with the grappling
irons.
Crash ! They had joined. The irons were
flung, and with loud shouts the Spanish
soldiers leapt on to the fireship’s deck. But at
that moment a sudden gust of wind blew most
of the hats from off the dummies. The
Spaniards paused in their rush, and gaped in
amazement at the wooden figures. The mean-
ing of it burst upon one of their number.
“ A fireship ! ” he cried, recoiling hastily to
the side.
The word went like wildfire along the crowded
decks of the Magdalen. The order came sharply
from the commander to cast off the grappling
irons.
But it was too late. Three of the English


ship’s crew were now showing decided signs
of animation. Rodriguez, having cast his grap-
pling irons on to the Spaniard, now sought to
make his escape before the conflagration, and
dived overboard from the bows. Gervaise,
however, meant to see the thing through more
thoroughly, and he and Charles, each with a
lighted match, rushed from end to end of the
fireship, leaving in their wake a sheet of flame,
whose scorching heat drove back the Spaniards
in confusion, and set light to the overhanging
sails. The two ships were now inextricably
locked, and nothing could save the Magdalen.
Behind the sheet of smoke and flame Charles
grasped his cousin’s arm.
“ Dive, lad, and quickly ! ” he cried.
They rushed together to the rail, but before
they could reach it a baulk of timber, hurled
from a near-by explosion, caught Gervaise in
the back, and sent him sprawling.
“ My arm’s broken,” he gasped, as Charles
bent over him, “ and I don’t know what’s
happened to my shoulder. You’d better go,
Charles. I’m afraid I can’t move.”
“ Nonsense,” said Charles sharply. “ Take
five seconds to get your breath. Now, then,


172 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
put that good arm of yours round my neck.
So ! Now up with you ! All your beef into
it, lad ! ”
Gervaise obeyed, and with a mighty effort
staggered to his feet. Together they swayed
and tottered to the side.
“ Phew! ” cried Charles, as another ex-
plosion sent a shower of flying fragments
round their heads. “ The old Blowemup's
getting well to work, isn’t she ? ” He seized a
loose oar and flung it overboard. “ After that
oar, cousin. Over you go ! Head first or feet
first, it doesn’t matter.”
There was indeed no time to waste. Ger-
vaise was feeling very sick and faint, but drown-
ing was preferable to being burnt alive. He
toppled clumsily into the water, and at once
Charles, who had dived neatly, was by his
side.
“ Here’s the oar, Gervaise ! Grab it! That’s
right! Now kick a bit if you can.”
Gradually, by dint of their united efforts,
they moved clear of the locked ships, and
presently Charles trod water and waved
frantically.
“ What is it ? ” Gervaise sputtered feebly.


“ Head first or feet first, it doesn’t matter.”
“ One of the longboats. Ah, they’ve seen
us ! A nous , mes braves ! They’re coming !
Ma foi ! never again will I say aught against
the lads of Tortuga. Brisk they may be, but
they’re sweet and wholesome too. Any mother
might be proud of them.”
The exploits of the fireship’s crew had been
watched through numerous spyglasses, and a
chorus of rough congratulation broke from the
buccaneers in the longboat as they helped the
pair on board. Morgan’s young cockerels had
more than fulfilled expectations, and the sight
173


174 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
of the burning Magdalen had sent a thrill of
savage confidence through the fleet. Seats
were found for the young gallants in the stern,
and then the boat turned and headed for the
fleet.
For a few moments Gervaise sat in a half-
recumbent position, his head pillowed on his
cousin’s shoulder, listening to the jabber of
excited conversation and watching the burning
ships. Then suddenly the whole scene faded,
and he lost consciousness.


CHAPTER XII
OUT TO SEA
WHEN Gervaise came to, he found himself
lying in his berth in the flagship, with
Charles bending over him, holding a flask of
eau-de-vie.
“ That’s better, mon cher ,” said Charles.
“ It isn’t like you to be sleeping while there’s a
fight going on.”
The booming of the guns was shaking the
ship’s timbers, and the shouting of the buc-
caneers on deck was plainly audible in the
cabin.
“We seem to be in the thick of it,” Gervaise
remarked.
“ Yes, the Magdalen is sinking, and the other
two are running for the castle. We’re fighting
the hindmost now.”
“ I don’t remember coming on board.”
“ No, you fainted in the longboat. That
176


176 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
was rather a pity, for you missed Alonso
Rodriguez.”
“ Rodriguez ! Where was he ? ”
“ In the water, swimming like a porpoise,
and cursing in a way to make a Spaniard turn
green. Oh, but he wanted badly to be picked
up, did the Sehor Rodriguez. But I think he
had hopes to have seen the last of us. If we
had had horns and tails he couldn’t have looked
more disgusted when he clambered into the
longboat to find us sitting in the stern.”
“ Is he on board ? ”
“ No, he preferred to stay in the longboat.
He’ll get back to his own ship soon.”
“ How long have I been here ? ”
“ About twenty minutes. The surgeon has
just gone, after setting your arm. You’ll be all
right, he says, unless a cannon ball comes in
from the castle and complicates matters. Eh
hien , now that you’re conscious again, I think
I’ll go on deck and take a hand in the festivities.
I’ll leave the eau-de-vie with you, in case you
feel faint, and I’ll pop down now and again to
see how you are.”
Gervaise nodded feebly. He was still feeling
very sick and sore, and conversation was some-


thing of an effort. The fact that the flagship
was in action seemed to him curiously unim-
portant. He closed his eyes and tried to
sleep.
Charles, running on deck, soon found a
vacant post at one of the guns ; and while he
pulled on lashings and tackles, he took in the
general situation.
The Magdalen , still tethered to the fireship,
was now low at the bows, and was evidently
sinking fast. Her crew, having thrown them-
selves into the water, were being fired at from
the buccaneer craft clustered round. Of the
remaining two Spanish vessels, one had now
reached the castle, and was safe for the moment
beneath the shelter of its guns ; the other, her
escape cut off, was being pounded by the flag-
ship and her consorts. The morale of the
Spaniards had been badly shaken by the loss
of the Magdalen , and Charles’s work as a gunner
was of short duration, for two of the buccaneer
vessels soon closed in upon their victim, and
carried her by the board.
The whole fleet now steered through the
smoke clouds hanging low over the lagoon
towards Maracaibo Castle. The ship that
(4.034) J2


178 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
had taken shelter there was captured after a
gallant defence, but the castle resisted all
efforts to subdue it, and, having lost thirty
killed and many more wounded, Morgan gave
the signal to withdraw.
The Spanish fleet was now accounted for,
but the passage was not yet clear. The castle
at the mouth of the lagoon, strongly garrisoned
and bristling with guns, could still exact a
heavy toll from any ship attempting to pass.
In these circumstances, Morgan had recourse
to a ruse. His plan was to give the Spaniards
the impression that a land attack was con-
templated, and thus induce them to move their
guns from the seaward side of the ramparts.
Accordingly the boats, loaded with men, were
sent to a point out of gunshot of the castle, and
screened from its view by a clump of trees.
On arrival there, the buccaneers, instead of
disembarking, lay down in the bottoms of the
boats, and returned to their ships with only the
rowers visible to the watchers in the castle. On
reaching the ships, the men, taking care to
keep well out of view of the Spaniards, went
below and remained there. For several hours
4
this coming and going of the boats went on,


and at nightfall the castle garrison, convinced
that the bulk of the buccaneers were on land
and preparing for an assault in the darkness,
moved their guns to the land side to meet it.
The breeze was light as darkness fell, so
light that it hardly sufficed to stir the fronds
of the palms on the shores of the lagoon ; the
red-cross flags of the buccaneers and the great
standard of Leon and Castile on the castle
battlements drooped lazily round their poles.
But with the darkness came the ebb of the tide,
and very soon a moon appeared to further
favour the buccaneers’ plans.
The noise of the rattling chains as the ships
weighed anchor reached the castle, but the
defenders paid no great attention to it. Imagin-
ing only a nucleus of the crews to be on board,
they kept their attention to the land side, from
which the coming attack was expected.
Almost in silence the ships floated down on
the tide, and suddenly a shout and a musket
shot from a sentry awoke the garrison to the
true nature of the position. But it was too
late to shift the guns, and their musket balls
fell harmlessly into the intervening water.
The fleet was now well into the Narrows,


iBo GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
and sails were being hoisted to full-throated
chanties. As each ship passed, she fired a
broadside at the castle walls. Thus, laden with
loot, Morgan led his ships out once more into
the familiar Caribbean, leaving in his wake the
terror and desolation so indissolubly connected
with his name.


CHAPTER XIII
A SPELL AT PORT ROYAL
ON the arrival of the fleet at Port Royal,
Charles secured good lodgings for him-
self and Gervaise at an inn patronized by the
better class of planters. The surgeon on board
had delivered his opinion that four or five
weeks’ complete rest would be required to
restore Gervaise to health, and promised to
look in from time to time to see how his patient
was progressing.
Gervaise made the journey from the ship to
his lodgings in a litter, and the sight of the
clean, comfortable room, with its window over-
looking the harbour, cheered him considerably.
The voyage from Maracaibo had not been an
enjoyable one ; storms had been encountered,
and the ceaseless rocking and jolting had re-
tarded his recovery.
During his first week on shore he had to rely
181


chiefly on Charles for news of what was going
on in the town, for the accounts he had from
the Tinman, Sing-Song, Creeper, and other
rough shipmates of the flagship were so muddled
and confused that he could not attach much
credence to them. Charles, however, keeping
aloof from the wine shops, but overflowing as
ever with his own joie de vime , knew exactly
what was happening, and imparted it in his
usual entertaining manner.
Port Royal, he told Gervaise, was en fete.
There was keen competition among the buc-
caneers to be the first to get rid of their recently
acquired riches. “And, mafoi! the inhabitants
are helping them nobly. Every Jack Buccaneer
of the fleet has a string of harpies behind him as
long as the Luxemburg, and in a week or two
most of them will be looking for ships.” He
gave instances of the extreme prodigality of
their recent shipmates, and Gervaise listened,
marvelling.
“ Morgan seems very busy,” he remarked
presently. “He came in for two minutes
yesterday, and then he was called away.”
“Two minutes, did he ? That was an un-
precedented honour, mon cher. Morgan now-


adays is the lion rampant, king of the land,
hand-in-glove with the governor, and deferred
to by all. If you want to borrow money, all
you have to do now is to put your head out
of the window and cry : ‘ Harry Morgan came
to see me yesterday ! ’ and the good burghers
of Port Royal will come running to you with
clinking bags.”
Gervaise smiled. “ That might be worth
trying, eh, Charles ? ”
“ We’ll have to raise the wind somehow,”
his cousin agreed. “ We’ve been very high
and mighty only accepting seamen’s pay for
our services, but we can’t live for ever on that.
Morgan, of course, will lend us whatever we
want, but . . .”
Gervaise nodded and then
changed the subject.
“ Have you seen anything of Rodriguez ? ”
“Yes, I run across him now and again. In
a way I’ve saved his reputation. He was the
first to jump off the Blowemup , as you know;
and many a hard drinker has wanted my
version of that incident since. Was I satisfied,
and were you satisfied ? That’s what they
wanted to know. I said we were. I could say


184 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
no less. He flung his iron, and then left the
ship. That was all that was required of him.
If we liked to stay on for a bit of bravado, that
was our business. I had to do him that amount
of justice. But neanmoins he isn’t popular.
He seems to be saving his money, and his one
extravagance is in the way of clothes. I saw him
yesterday in a coat with brass buttons, a la
capitaine , and a hat to match. All he wants
now is a ship and a reputation to be a real
terror of the Main.”
“ I wonder he doesn’t buy a boat and sail for
Bat Island. He must have sufficient money
for that.”
“ There are difficulties. He has money,
true, but so has every one else in Port Royal
at the moment, except our two selves. He
can’t sail to Bat Island by himself, and if he
gets help, what excuse is he going to give for
bursting up that way ? He isn’t the kind to
offer half shares in a treasure-hunt. Non.
Yet the only kind of men he could get would be
the sort who would take half shares or more
when they got wind of what he was after.”
“ That’s true,” Gervaise assented. “ I won-
der what he’ll do ? ”


“ Stand by and whistle for a breeze. Just
what we are doing ourselves, mon cher .”
Two days later Charles came to the inn with
a light in his eye that betokened new T s.
“ The breeze has come at last, cousin,” he
said. “ I’m in the way of earning two hundred
guineas.”
“ That’s a large sum, Charles.”
“ An honest commission, nevertheless.
Ecoutez ! ” Charles flung his hat on the bed
and sat down by the bedside. “ There is talk
now of Morgan taking a grand fleet to Panama,
no less. The governor concurs, and the mer-
chants of Virginia are to be asked to back the
enterprise. lamtogo to Virginia and put the
position to them. It will be my task to point
out to them delicately what they know already :
that Morgan’s fleet is their surest safeguard
against the machinations of Spain, and that
without that safeguard a line of Spanish ships
would have sailed up the Chesapeake ere now.
According to the Council I am the one man in
Jamaica really fit for these negotiations, since
the gentlemen of Virginia understand my kind,
and would listen to me where they might show
a red-shirted Tortugan the door. For my


services I am to be paid two hundred guineas,
and free passage both ways. It will mean my
being away for a few weeks, but that can’t be
helped. By the time I return you should be
your robust self again. Done , with the two
hundred guineas we purchase a tight little
craft, and sail north for Bat Island and the
jewels. Que pensez-vous de cela ? ”
“It sounds feasible. When do you sail ? ”
“ To-morrow. And while I’m gone, keep
your eyes open for a likely boat. Also be-
ware of Rodriguez. Walk not in dark lanes
at night.”
“I’ll be careful,” Gervaise promised.
Charles sailed the next day, and Gervaise,
lying on his couch by the window, watched
the white sails of the ship disappear out of the
harbour. He missed his cousin very much
during the next fortnight; but at the end of
that time he was given permission by the
surgeon to take a little exercise out of doors,
and, after that, his strength began to return
rapidly. As he sat in the garden of the inn
one afternoon there came to him the Tinman,
bristling as usual with weapons, but wearing an
air of dejection. He asked Gervaise for the


A SPELL AT PORT ROYAL 187
loan of a shirt, his own, as he said, having been
torn to ribbons in a tavern brawl the evening
before. Gervaise found him the article re-
quired, and then his visitor sat down and began
to gossip. Like the great majority of his com-
rades of the Maracaibo adventure, his pockets
were now empty, and he was bitterly regretful
of his recent liberality.
“ What a man wants is a long head,” he told
Gervaise. “ The next lot o’ money I get, d’yer
think I’m going to chuck it away in this here
hole of a Port Royal ? Not me, shipmate. I’m
going to England, I am, and buy an inn and live
respectable. Do a bit o’ church-going maybe,
too, and say ‘ How-do ’ to the parson. This
gentleman-o’-fortuning, there ain’t nothing in
it.” There followed then the inevitable string
of oaths with which the buccaneers supple-
mented their more serious statements. Ger-
vaise listened with becoming gravity, knowing
full well that Port Royal would have the lion’s
share of the Tinman’s future prize money. But
his visitor’s next remark caused him to prick
his ears and take an additional interest in his
conversation.
“ The likes o’ me,” growled the Tinman,


188 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
“ sailing under a son of a sea-cook like
Rodriguez ! ”
“ Alonso Rodriguez ? ” asked Gervaise.
“ Aye, you know him. Sailed with you on
the fireship. First off, he was, too. But there,
I won’t say nothing about that, for they tell
me you and your cousin are satisfied. But
there’s a long-headed one for you. Stands
about, he does, and drinks what others offer him,
which ain’t much, him being what he is. Still,
there he is, buying nothing, drinking nothing,
but keeping his hand all the time on his pieces
of eight! And now what does he do, him
having money and the rest of us with none ?
Why, he buys hisself a ship, rigs hisself up in
a coat with brass buttons, and begins to take
on hands.”
“ Oh, he’s bought a ship, has he ? ”
“ The Corheau . She’s all right. I don’t say
nothing against her. Going cheap she was.
But Rodriguez ! Captain Rodriguez ! ” The
fountain of oaths broke out afresh. “ And
me sailing with him because I haven’t a penny
piece to buy myself rum ! ”
“ Bad luck,” Gervaise sympathized. “ And
where is he making for ? ”


“ Hanging about Porto Rico for a bit, he says,
to see what comes along. And hands are join-
ing. Can’t help themselves. Morgan ain’t
ready yet for Panama, and credit’s short in this
here town. Captain Rodriguez ! ” The mere
utterance of the name caused a fresh outrush
of oaths.
When his visitor had gone, Gervaise sat
wrapped in thought. He had a very shrewd
suspicion that the purchase of a ship by Rodri-
guez and his avowed programme of lying for a
while off Porto Rico was merely a cloak for his
true intention, which was to take the first chance
of sailing north to Bat Island and investigate
the wreck of the galleon. No doubt he had his
plans cut and dried, and it was equally sure that
the crew of the Corbeau would not be invited
to take a hand in the treasure hunt. But undue
hurry in this matter might arouse suspicion
among his crew, and if Charles should arrive
back soon from Virginia they might still have a
chance in the race.
The next morning he went down to the quay
and looked at the Corbeau from a respectful
distance. She was a trim little ship, French
built, and carrying ten guns. She was taking


in stores and powder; and on the poop, direct-
ing operations, stood a figure clad in the para-
phernalia of sea command, which Gervaise had
no difficulty in recognizing as that of Rodriguez.
Chanties were being bawled by his men as they
hauled on the ropes, but it struck Gervaise that
they lacked their customary vim. It seemed
that the grudging spirit of the Tinman perme-
ated the whole of the Corbeau's crew. Forced
by circumstances to sail under a man for whom
they had no particular respect, their misgivings
found voice in their choruses. He stood there
for some time in the shelter of a dismantled
figurehead, taking in every detail of the Cor-
beau's shape ,and rig, and when he left he was
sure he could pick her out again from a hundred
ships of similar tonnage.
Each day after that Gervaise put in a good
deal of time on the quay, watching Rodriguez’s
preparations for departure, and studying the
small craft of the port for something suitable
for the needs of Charles and himself. Before
very long he discovered one which seemed to
him just what they required. She was a
stoutly built, half-decked fishing boat of about
eight tons burthen, carrying a single lateen


Its owner would he willing to part with it.
sail, and his apparently casual inquiries gleaned
the information that its owner would be willing
to part with it at a reasonable figure.
The weeks passed slowly, and still the Cor-
beau remained in port. Gervaise learnt with
considerable satisfaction that Rodriguez was
having trouble with his crew, a batch of whom
had been able to borrow money for a fresh
debauch, and were disinclined to go to sea
while a single penny piece remained in their
pockets. But one morning, when taking his
customary walk along the water-front, he found


the Cor beau's berth empty, and the ship gone.
She had sailed on the early morning tide, and
an old longshoreman who had witnessed her
departure shook his head over her chances.
“ Crew’s all right, some of ’em,” he told
Gervaise; “ but this Rodriguez, he ain’t Morgan
—not by a hundred fathoms he ain’t Morgan.
You won’t see the Corbeau coming in here
trailing a string of Spaniards. And when
Morgan’s ready for Panama, Rodriguez ’ll be
looking for a new crew, and precious lucky if
he gets ’em.”
That was an eventful day for Gervaise, for
the next tide brought in a large ship from
Virginia, and hurrying down to meet her, he
discovered, to his great joy, that Charles was
on board.


CHAPTER XIV
NORTH FOR BAT ISLAND
“ Jl/fON cher ,” said Charles, stepping off the
IVI gangway and gripping his cousin’s
hand, “ there is no need to ask how you are.
You should take up duelling for your health’s
sake, for, ma foi! you appear to thrive on
wounds. And you have something to tell
me, riest-ce pas ? Your eyes brim with
news.”
“ The news is this : Rodriguez sailed to-day
in his own ship.”
“ Diahle ! Where ? ”
“ Report says to Porto Rico.”
“ Nom d’un chien ! Have you found a boat
for us ? ”
“ Yes, I can get it at any time.”
“ Then, mon brave , go and buy it.” Charles
thrust a well-filled purse into Gervaise’s hand.
“ I must away to Morgan and report.”
(4,034) 193


“Was your mission successful ? ”
“ I am bound to secrecy. But it was suc-
cessful in this way, that our chubby old ship,
the Zaandam , was anchored off Jamestown, and
the captain, good man, handed over our be-
longings without the slightest demur, even to
my guitar. But go and buy that bateau , and
provision her with the best. With luck, we
may be able to get away to-night. I’ll come
to the inn the moment I’m free.”
Gervaise hurried away, and was fortunate
enough to find the ear-ringed, mahogany-
coloured owner of the boat about to enter a
tavern on the water-front.
“ I’ll buy your boat, if you still wish to get
rid of her,” said Gervaise.
The man nodded. “ Want her right away ? ”
he inquired.
“ Yes; and can you victual her for me ? ”
“ How many of you, and for how long ? ”
“ Say two, for eight weeks.”
The man raised his brows a little at that,
but he made no comment. If a young gallant
like Gervaise wished to cruise for eight weeks
with a single companion in a half-decked boat,
it was no business of his. He named a sum


NORTH FOR BAT ISLAND 195
which was not unduly exorbitant, and Gervaise
clinched the bargain at once.
“ Put on another two guineas and have it all
on board by sundown,” he said. “ Can you do
that ? ”
The man brought his gnarled fist down on his
knee.
“I’ll do it,” he cried. “ I know a gentleman
when I see one. You don’t haggle. Well, nor
I won’t haggle. I’ll get the best that can be
got, and it’ll be on board by sundown. You
can come down then and look it over, and then,
if you’re satisfied, you can settle the account.
And I reckon you don’t want this deal blabbed
all over the town ? ” He looked shrewdly at
Gervaise.
“ It would serve no useful end,” the lad
admitted. ‘
“ No, I guessed not. Well, leave that to me.
No one ’ll get anything out of Dick Pyle. And
powder, now, shipmate ? what about powder ?
Just enough to sink a galleon, eh ? ”
“You can put a keg aboard for me, and charge
it up on the account.”
“ Aye, I thought so. Right, it’ll be there.
I’ll get off now and see about it.” And with a


196 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
wave of his horny hand Dick Pyle departed,
evidently well pleased with his bargain, and
intent on fulfilling his part of it.
Late that afternoon Gervaise pored with his
cousin over a large chart of the Indies spread
out on the table in their bedroom at the inn.
Charles was in high spirits. He had been
extremely well received at Jamestown; but
whether because of his own engaging person-
ality, or because of his capacity as Morgan’s
envoy, Gervaise was unable to determine. But
the free dignity of the colonists had evidently
impressed Charles greatly, and only the necessity
for concentrating on their own immediate ad-
venture kept him from pouring forth a flood of
sparkling anecdotes.
Dick Pyle was as good as his word, and at
sundown the boat was lying fully equipped and
ready for sea. An hour later, laden with their
belongings, the cousins stepped on board and
hoisted the sail. The wind was favourable,
and, once dear of the harbour, Gervaise set the
course almost due east, intending to hug the
coast until he could go about for the Windward
Passage.
The boat was a good sailer, and gave them so


NORTH FOR BAT ISLAND 197
little trouble that they were enabled to take
four-hour spells of sleep during the night; and
the breaking dawn showed that they had cleared
the island. The course was then altered to
north-east, and Charles, having made a hearty
breakfast, took up the guitar, which he had
insisted upon bringing with him, and beguiled
the time with tuneful little French chansons.
Both he and Gervaise were enjoying to the full
the sense of freedom at being at sea in a little
craft of their own, and the knowledge that the
CorbeaUy with its band of cut-throats, was sailing
not far away on the same errand as themselves,
gave an additional zest to their adventure. The
affair had devolved into a race, for a prize which
might very well be non-existent; but they
thrilled to the sense of contest.
Their good wind held for the next two days,
and then died away for twelve hours, during
which time the cousins slept in the shade of
the tarred sheet which served equally well as
an awning and a temporary hatch in rough
weather. With the revival of the breeze they
continued on their course, and the next morning
showed them the western point of the island of
Tortuga, faintly outlined in the haze to the


198 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
east. After a prolonged study of the chart the
course was now altered two points to the east,
and the following day they negotiated the
passage through the Bahamas for which they
had been making. During the next twenty-
four hours a freshening wind caused Gervaise
to make careful calculations of their speed, and
at nightfall he judged it expedient to douse sail
rather than run the risk of overshooting their
mark.
“ As far as I can make out,” he told Charles,
“ we are somewhere within fifty miles of Bat
Island.”
“ Well said, my mariner. Then we’ll sleep
through the entire night. That’s a pleasant
thought. As cousins go, you have no peer,
mon cher ; but I must confess that your habit
of pulling me out of my blanket and leading me
to the tiller in the cold dark hours of the morn-
ing irritates me at times. It is the one flaw
in the seafaring life.”
Nevertheless Charles was wideawake of his
own free will before dawn the next morning,
and peering impatiently into the darkness to
the north-east. Gervaise, by his side, stared
with him.


The minutes passed, and then the eastern
sky began to flush with the dawn. Suddenly,
as the yellow rim of the sun appeared over the
horizon, Charles gave a shout.
“ What’s that ? ” he cried, pointing. “ A
ship ? ”
“ Wait a minute,” said Gervaise tensely.
“ It’s either a ship under full sail or . . . No,
it’s an island. See, there are two hills.”
“Two hills,” echoed Charles. “ Then we
are here—at last! ”
“At last,” assented Gervaise. “ That must
be Bat Island.”
“ And about time,” said Charles, regaining at
once his usual airiness. “ And if the old Santa
isn’t there, I shall go to Spain and put all the
relatives of the late Senor Baltasar to the sword.”
He sniffed the air. “ I smell rubies, though,
cousin—rubies and pearls and diamonds.”
“ Then you’ve a better nose than mine. But
we’ll certainly go and see.” Gervaise gazed
at the island. “ About twenty-five miles off,
I should think.”
“ It may be a few inches short of that, or
even a foot or two more,” Charles jested, as he
moved to the ropes.


The sail was hoisted, and then, with Gervaise
at the tiller, the boat moved swiftly for a point
midway between the two hills. In less than
three hours they were close in, and their belief
that this was the island that they had come so
far to seek grew to a certainty as they noted the
long sharp spit in the shape of a bat’s wing
breaking the sea on the south-east side. Further
proof was soon afforded them as they coasted
along the southern shore and opened full on
a creek which, fringed with palms and willows,
stretched inland as far as they could see.
Guarding its entrance was a large black rock,
against which the breakers boomed and fretted,
filling the air with spray, and making a noise
like distant thunder.
Gervaise cleared the rock on the weather side,
and then, with Charles crouched in the bows
looking for hidden obstructions, he took the
boat over the bar and gained the placid inland
water. The western hill was now breaking the
wind, and at a greatly decreased pace they
sailed up the creek until they reached the first
bend. This led directly to the west, exactly
as it had been marked on the Spaniard’s rough
chart on the wall of the chapter-house. As


There lay the wreck of a galleon.
they went about Charles gave an exultant cry;
for there, on the north bank, not a hundred
yards from them, lay the wreck of a galleon.
Close by was a convenient landing-place,
and, running the boat’s nose into the bank,
Gervaise let the sail down with a run, and,
without stopping to stow it, leapt ashore after
his cousin and stood gazing at the wreck.


CHAPTER XV
THE TREASURE HUNT
“ C'PECTACLE solennel! ” murmured
Charles.
And indeed the old galleon presented a
pathetic sight. Some ancient displacement of
the bar had diverted the original course of the
tide, and for many years the water had not
touched the keel of the Santa Christina. High
and dry she lay against the background of the
lowland jungle, cut almost in half by a great
tree which had fallen across her waist. Her
ribs hardly showed through the mass of parasitic
vegetation, yet the old swan-like lines which had
once delighted the shipbuilders of Pasajes
could still be divined.
Here she had lain throughout the long years,
in this creek of a desolate isle, while to the
south and east and west two great nations
fought out their destiny at sea. The coast
202


towns of the Main had gone up in flames, the
sea-rovers had sailed in the wake of the gold-
laden galleons, and the seed of the great Ameri-
can nation had been sown in Virginia ; and
through it all the Santa Christina had rested
and decayed. The twisted skeleton of her
great poop lantern still jutted out from a mass
of foliage, but the smaller ones, like most of
the guns, had crashed through the weather-
eaten deck timbers into the obscurity beneath.
The pigments had cracked and peeled from the
portrait of her patroness on the wall-like stern,
but flecks of blue and red still showed through
the draped greenery, mute witness of the mari-
time art of nearly a century before.
“ And once,” said Charles, “ on those decks
walked Suarez de Fontiveros, a dignified gentle-
man of Spain. Eh hien !it would puzzle any-
body to walk with dignity on them now. Tout
passe , mon cher , even Spanish galleons. Let’s
have something to eat, and then, like Don
Suarez, well walk delicately inland, and halt
where he halted.”
Taking some stores from the boat, they made
a meal on the bank. They ate almost in silence,
both busy reconstructing that scene of long ago,


204 GENTLEMEN 0’ FORTUNE
when a handful of the Santa Christina's crew
had sat very likely where they were sitting now,
dreaming of their homes in distant Spain.
“ And now for the treasure,” said Charles,
when they had finished. “ A pick and a shovel,
and then out in the tracks of the Fontiveros.”
Gervaise looked at the jungle and frowned a
little. “ We’ve a big choice,” he remarked.
“ All we know is that he buried it at the foot
of a large tree north of the galleon’s bow.
There seems to be plenty of big trees to the
north there.”
“ Vous avez raison , my large young mariner.
But in a situation like this a little thinking will
save us a heap of digging. As for me, I’d
rather fight six duels than dig one big hole.
So let us think. Voyez, what happened when
this poor old Christina blundered over the bar,
there to pile up her bones in her last berth ?
She struck here, and here she remained, and
what was left of her crew scampered out of her
and camped on shore. Eh hien !so far so good.
But where did they camp ? ”
“ Close to the ship, I should think.”
“ Be sure they did, unless they were very
different from the seamen of to-day. That’s


agreed, then : they camped here, near where
we’re standing. Now the commandant wishes
to bury a valuable treasure north of the galleon’s
bow. Would he, do you think, choose a place
within earshot of the crew ? Ma foi , no ! On
the other hand, being something of a sailor
himself, he wouldn’t care to go too far inland.”
“ Quite true, Charles, he wouldn’t.”
“ Bien , then we know roughly where to look :
not too near and not too far. Allans ! ” And
taking the digging implements and the com-
pass from the boat, they took a bearing from
the bow of the wreck, and set off into the
jungle.
They found it very hard going, and after
traversing some fifty yards, they had to hack
their way through the dense undergrowth with
their swords. Once or twice they hesitated at
good-sized trees barring their line of march,
but, deciding each time that they were too
near the creek, they pushed on again. They
had covered some five hundred yards when they
came suddenly on the remains of an excep-
tionally large tree, which looked as if it had
succumbed to the force of a long past tornado.
Most of its branches had decayed and vanished


206 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
into the undergrowth, but its trunk and jagged
stump still remained, half covered with moss and
ferns, and forming the abodes of numerous
colonies of insects. Instinctively the cousins
came to a halt and regarded each other.
“ In the days when Don Suarez was a soldier
of renown,” said Charles, “ this tree must have
reared its head proudly above its fellows, the
unquestioned king of the jungle. The com-
mandant on seeing it might well say ‘ Caramba ! ’
and set down his box of diamonds. How’s the
bearing ? ”
Gervaise set the compass on the ground
and looked back along the line of hacked
vegetation.
“ Due north,” he announced, and, picking
up the shovel, he began to dig with a will at
the foot of the stump. Charles took up the
pick, but the ground was too soft to need that
implement, and he stood watching, dodging the
flying earth and bending from time to time to
peer into the cavity.
“ Ah ! ” he exclaimed with relief, as Gervaise
suddenly flung down the shovel and plunged
both hands into the hole. “ Quelque chose, mon
ami? ”


Pulled out an old brass-bound mahogany box.
For answer Gervaise pulled out an old brass-
bound mahogany box, and held it up trium-
phantly.
“ Praise be ! ” said Charles, putting a hand
beneath it and calculating the weight. “ It’s
full of something, and unless Don Suarez loved
a joke like his son Baltasar, you and I should
be gentlemen o’ fortune now with a vengeance.”
He took out his kerchief and wiped the dirt
from the box. The wood beneath had rotted
a little in parts, and Gervaise, ignoring the
lock, which still held, set to work with his knife


208 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
on the most decayed portion of the lid. When
the hole was sufficiently large, he up-ended the
box, and a cascade of gems spilled out on to the
dark earth.
“ What a sight for a brisk lad of Tortuga ! ”
breathed Charles. He sank down on his knees
beside Gervaise, and began to count the jewels.
There were two dozen large rubies, eighteen
diamonds, thirty-five emeralds, and fourteen
pearls. The latter, of great size and perfect
shape, were, however, rather discoloured from
their long interment.
“ But that may be remedied,” said Charles.
“ Pearls, I believe, may be restored to health
by taking off their skins : flaying them alive, as
it were, for the good of their souls, like the
Inquisition.”
They lingered for ten minutes, admiring the
shining beauty of the gems, and then Charles
suggested that they should fill in the hole at
the foot of the stump.
“ Why ? ” asked Gervaise.' “ What does it
matter ? WeVe got the jewels.”
“ And leaving the hole gaping like that will
tell Rodriguez that we’ve got them. Sooner or
later he’s coming here treasure hunting, and the


more time he spends on Bat Island looking for
it the better it will be for honest men sailing
the seas. And, ma foi , the thought of him
snorting and rooting from one tree to another
like a wild pig gives me a warm glow.”
Gervaise laughed, and assisted him in the
task; and when the ground had been coaxed
and patted back into its original aspect, they
retraced their steps to the creek, where, after
a meal, they divided the jewels, and sewed
them securely into their clothing.
They were now anxious to leave the island,
but the incoming tide was too strong at the
moment, and while they waited for the flood
Gervaise busied himself with some small repairs
to the boat’s sail, and Charles climbed to the
bare rocks topping the eastern hill to make
certain that the coast was clear.
Presently a long, faint halloo caused Gervaise
to look up. Charles was waving to him
energetically from the hilltop. Dropping his
needle, Gervaise hurried up the slope and
joined him.
“ What is it ?” he asked.
Charles pointed to the south. Some fifteen
miles away a ship under full sail was bearing
(4,034) J4


2io GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
up for the island. Gervaise looked at her long
and earnestly.
“ Anything like the Corheau ? ” Charles asked.
“ Very like her. Charles, we’re trapped.
We can’t get away.”


CHAPTER XVI
RODRIGUEZ COMES ASHORE
“ T TS 7E were trapped once in the lagoon at
V V Maracaibo,” said Charles, “ and we
got away. But this, I admit, cousin, looks like
being a harder job.” He gazed thoughtfully
at the distant vessel. “ The fact is, she’s come
at the wrong time of day. If she’d been a few
hours later, we might have slipped past her in
the dark. As it is, I suppose she’ll anchor just
off the bar, and send a boat up the creek.”
“ We’d better hide our boat,” said Gervaise
quickly. “If they see that, we shall be in a
pretty fix.”
“ A sound suggestion, mon cher. We’ll do
that at once. And keep to the lee of the rocks
going down. I expect the good Alonso is
straining his eyes this way at the present
moment, and if he sees us leaping about on the
hilltop he’ll be filled with unholy joy, and give
211


2i2 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
orders for the tarpaulin to be taken off the
bow gun.”
Hurrying down to the boat, they hoisted the
sail and took her another mile up the creek.
Then, finding further navigation impossible on
account of floating tree-trunks and masses of
sodden vegetation, they turned up a convenient
backwater, and, after a good deal of hard work,
managed to moor her to the bank some fifty
yards from the main stream.
“ That’s the best we can do,” said Charles.
“ Now for a musket apiece, and a few eatables,
and back to the hilltop.”
When they reached their coign again among
the rocks on the summit, they found the ship
was close in.
“ It’s the Corheau all right,” said Gervaise.
“ There’s not the slightest doubt about that.
I should know her cut anywhere.”
“ And the most uneasy man on the Corheau
must be friend Alonso,” murmured Charles
pensively. “He is in a delicate situation.
Now what is he going to do ? Pensez. He’s
the only man on board who knows anything
about the jewels, and trust him to keep that
knowledge to himself. How, then ? Does he


RODRIGUEZ COMES ASHORE 213
come ashore with a boatload, or does he come
alone ? ”
Gervaise could find no reply to that ques-
tion.
“ And if he comes alone,” went on Charles,
“ what about putting a bullet into his back, and
ridding the world of a consummate scoundrel ? ”
“You might level your musket at him,
Charles, but you wouldn’t pull the trigger.”
“ No, I suppose not,” Charles admitted
regretfully. “ That’s what comes of being
brought up in one of your Sussex rectories.
One is permitted, it seems, to hurl a brick at
his head, as you did in the chapter-house, but
one mustn’t drill him with lead.”
In spite of the seriousness of their situation,
Gervaise had to laugh at this droll deduction.
“ He fired at me first, if you remember.”
“Yes, that’s the way of it. The ruffians of
this world are always allowed to fire first.
Absurd, riest~ce pas ? But there it is : noblesse
oblige. All the same ” —Charles stared thought-
fully at the oncoming vessel—“ I’m afraid,
Alonso mio , you are about due for another brick-
bat.”
“ You have a plan ? ”


“ A vague one. It will want working out.
It depends upon whom he brings ashore with
him.”
Flying the red cross of the buccaneers, the
Corbeau sailed up to within half a mile of the
bar, and then her canvas came down with a
run, the chain rattled out, and she swung round
broadside to the hill. Awnings were rigged
fore and aft, and then her decks cleared as the
crew went below for a meal.
An hour passed, and then a dinghy was low-
ered, and two men took their seats in her.
The watchers on the hill easily recognized one
of them as Rodriguez ; the other was unknown
to them. Rodriguez took his seat in the stern,
and his companion taking the oars, the boat
moved for the mouth of the creek, and was soon
lost to view.
“ Two of them,” said Charles in a satisfied
tone. “ Bien , we should be able to deal with
two. But it seems to me that one of us should
go down and guard our boat. I’ll go, if you
like. And if you hear a shot from that quarter,
you’ll know that I’ve thrown a brick at Alonso’s
head.”
The suggestion seemed a good one to Ger-


RODRIGUEZ COMES ASHORE 215
vaise, and he acquiesced at once. Taking his
musket, Charles made a cautious descent of the
hill, and disappeared in the undergrowth lining
the creek.
Left to himself, Gervaise continued to keep
a sharp watch on the Corheau. Her crew were
now lying about in little groups under the awn-
ings, and the lad guessed that they were
gambling. After his experiences in Morgan’s
fleet, she seemed a strangely silent ship to him ;
but that might be due, he thought, to the
unpopularity of her captain.
The hours passed, and the sun plunged down
to the west, but the dinghy made no reappear-
ance, and there was no sign of Charles. Ger-
vaise wondered what was happening. The
stern of the galleon was just visible from his
hiding-place, and he had seen the dinghy pass
it; but whether Rodriguez had gone ashore
at that spot or continued farther up the creek
he could not determine.
Evening came at last, and with the dusk
lights showed on the Corheau. With the fresh-
ness of the night her crew began to evince
more signs of life. Buckets rattled on her
decks, and now and again Gervaise caught the


216 gentlemen o’ fortune
faint snatch of a song. Presently Charles
joined him silently. He had his guitar under
his arm, and as he looked down at the starlit
waters and the gently rocking Corheau , his
fingers plucked soundlessly at the strings.
“ The dinghy hasn’t returned yet,” Gervaise
told him.
“ No, I know. I’ve just been along there
by the galleon. They’ve pulled in just above
the bows, and they’re camping on shore.
Drinking hard the pair of them. They didn’t
come near our boat.”
“ Drinking hard,” echoed Gervaise. “ What’s
his idea, I wonder ? ”
“ Possibly he means to make the other man
drunk, and then go off by himself treasure
hunting. Ma foi! that sounds very feasible.
It’s quite likely he’s drinking a lot less than
his friend, and pretending he’s drinking a lot
more. What happens then in the dawn ?
Why, his friend is stretched out, practically
hors de combat , and Alonso goes quietly off
looking for big trees north of the galleon’s
bow.”
Gervaise thought that over. It seemed a
reasonable solution.


“ And how goes your plan ? ” he asked.
“ Have you shaped it yet ? ”
“I’ve been thinking so hard that I had to
bring my guitar for a sedative,” Charles replied.
“ But the plan is good. We take Alonso’s
dinghy ”
“ Eh! ”
“ I say we take Alonso’s dinghy. Why not ?
He isn’t using it.”
“ But he’ll object very much to our using it.”
“ We’ll wait till he’s asleep. Bien , having
got the dinghy, we’ll go up the creek and bring
our boat down to the mouth. I noticed a little
cove as we came in, on the western side. That
will do nicely. We’ll leave our boat there.
I’m afraid it would be too risky trying to sail
her out with the Corheau stuck there right in
the fairway.”
“ It certainly would,” Gervaise agreed.
“ So we step again into the dinghy, and row
out to the Corbeau ”
“ What I ” cried Gervaise. “ What are you
saying ? ”
“ I say we row out to the Corheau .”
“You mean to go on board ? ” asked Ger-
vaise, marvelling.


“ Most certainly. We’ll go on board and
tell the brisk Tortugan crew that they’ve got the
wrong captain. But perhaps you’d better leave
that part of it to me.”
Having every confidence in his cousin’s nerve
and resource, Gervaise assented readily to this
proposal. The barefaced effrontery of the plan
was beginning to make its appeal to him too.
Their situation was desperate, for it was certain
that Rodriguez would not leave the island until
he had satisfied himself that the treasure had
been removed, and during that time he could
hardly prevent his crew from coming ashore
or sailing up the creek ; and once the boat was
discovered all might well be lost. A desperate
situation indeed, and only a desperate stroke
could take them clear of it.
“ The advantage of surprise is with us, you
see,” said Charles. “ Alonso doesn’t know
we’re here. We’ve time to get our tale cut
and dried and ram it well home before he can
open his mouth. And when it comes to the
telling of tales, I’ll back myself against him
any day. del ! what a heavenly night! It’s
a pity I can’t regale you with a chanson.”
Laying down his guitar with a little sigh of


RODRIGUEZ COMES ASHORE 219
regret, he perched himself on the rock beside
Gervaise, and looked around him.
The sky was thick with stars, the planet
Venus dominating them all for brilliancy.
From the creek’s mouth came the familiar
sounds of shipboard life—the clinking of utensils,
a hoarse call or two from the seamen, the thin
tinkling of a stringed instrument, and the
banging of a loose block as the vessel rose and
fell in the swell. These noises ceased pres-
ently as the crew sought their berths, and then
the only sounds were the subdued twittering
of insects, and the eternal chant of the surf on
the beaches below.
They waited another hour, and then decided
that the time had come to reconnoitre. Creep-
ing down the hill, they reached the jungle at its
foot, and then Charles handed the guitar to
Gervaise.
“ Wait here a moment, shipmate,” he said.
“I’m less weighty than you, and lighter on
my feet. Besides, I’m practised in these
manoeuvres. One had to walk warily in the
French jar dins at times.” He disappeared
noiselessly into the undergrowth, and was gone
above five minutes. So cat-like were his


220 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
movements that Gervaise gave a little start at
finding him by his side again.
“ They’re both asleep,” he whispered. “ I
think we can get the dinghy without waking
them. Anyway, don’t fire if you can possibly
help it. A shot would bring a boatload of red-
shirts from the Corheau , and that would spoil
our surprise. Use this if necessary.” He
touched his pistol butt significantly.
Moving forward, they came out by the wreck
of the galleon, and there, on each side of the
dying embers of their camp-fire, lay Rodriguez
and his companion, plunged in stertorous
slumber. Their weapons —muskets, pistols,
and hangers—lay close at hand, and scattered
round were a number of empty bottles, flung
carelessly aside with the debris of their evening
meal.
Motioning Gervaise to stand by and watch
the sleepers, Charles unfastened the dinghy’s
painter, and began to draw her in ; and at that
moment Alonso opened his eyes, gave a startled
curse, and shot out his hand for a weapon.
Immediately Gervaise took a step forward and
brought down the guitar with all his force into
the buccaneer’s face. Alonso sank back with-


Brought down the guitar with all his force.
out a groan, and a dull red stain spread slowly
over his face and clothes.
At the sound of the blow Charles, with the
painter in his hand, leapt back, ready to assist.
They stood together for a few moments, gazing
at the prostrate men, ready to strike at the
slightest sign of animation. But Alonso had
been stunned by the blow, and apparently his
companion’s potations had been too deep to
allow him to be disturbed by anything less
221


222 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
than a thunder-clap. They lay inert and
motionless.
“ They’ll want watching, though,” whis-
pered Charles. “ You’re stronger with the oars
than I am. Could you manage to get up the
creek and get the boat down by yourself ? ”
“ I think so. I’ll try, anyway.” Gervaise
took the painter, pulled in the dinghy, and
stepped on board. Then, with a wave of his
hand, he put out the oars and began to row.
Keeping in as close as possible to avoid the
full strength of the ebb, he pulled steadily up-
stream, and came presently to the backwater.
Here the darkness and the jumble of aquatic
vegetation impeded his progress considerably,
but he reached the boat at last, and was greatly
relieved to find her still afloat. Towing her
out into the main stream was an arduous task,
demanding all his energy and patience, and he
was dripping with perspiration when at last it
was accomplished. After that, the rest of the
journey was an easy matter. A dip of the oars
occasionally was sufficient to keep the tow-
rope taut, and the tide did the rest. As he
neared the buccaneers’ camp he pulled sharply
inshore, and the larger boat, tugging at the


RODRIGUEZ COMES ASHORE 223
rope, swung round and came swiftly in close
to the galleon’s bow.
As the dinghy’s nose touched land, Charles
emerged from the shadows, and straddled one
of the thwarts.
“ Off we go,” he said, taking up a pair of
oars. “ You managed that nicely, cousin. As
far as seamanship goes, I’d be willing to go
round the world with you in this dinghy.”
A sharp jerk from Gervaise sent the dinghy
spinning out once more into the stream, and a
few strokes of the oars brought her consort clear
of the bank.
“ But,” added Charles, “ I don’t think you’ll
ever play the guitar, mon cher. You’re too
strong in the fingers.” He chuckled. ‘‘Not
that Alonso won’t remember your one and only
tune, though.”
“ I hope he does,” said Gervaise grimly.
“ Oh, he will. Soyez tranquille! It will
be running through his head for weeks.
P-r-r-mp ! All the strings together in the
grand chord. Magnifique! The only thing
against your style is that you’d need a new
instrument for every tune you played.”
Gervaise made no further comment to these


224 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
railleries. They had rounded the bend now,
and the task of taking the two boats across the
stream to the little cove on the western side
was engaging all his attention. At his sug-
gestion Charles shipped his oars, and perched
himself as look-out in the bow.
“We won’t go right into the cove,” said
Gervaise, “ or we might find the boat high and
dry when we want her. Give a hail when we’re
near it, and then I’ll anchor her.”
“ This looks sonething like it,” said Charles
presently. “ Stand by! Yes, it’s the cove sure
enough.”
Gervaise at once backed water, and as the
larger boat floated gently alongside, he sur-
rendered his oars to Charles, climbed on board
her, and let drop the anchor. Then, having
waited a few moments to assure himself that
she was really fast, he resumed his place in the
dinghy. Charles dipped his oars in unison,
and the little boat shot out into mid-stream
again, and headed directly for the mouth of the
creek.
So far all had gone well, but Gervaise could
not diguise from himself that the really ticklish
part of the adventure was yet to come. His


RODRIGUEZ COMES ASHORE 225
cousin’s powers of bluff were now about to be
put to a very stern test, and he would need all
his sang froid to carry the venture through.
It was almost a relief to Gervaise when, as they
came within the circle of light cast by the
Corbeau’s stern lantern, a rough voice cried :
“ Who goes ? ” It was like hearing the first
shot of a battle. The tension abated, and there
remained only the determination to carry on
bravely through whatever might befall.
“ Friends ! ” Charles called back.
The sentry, with one large gold earring
gleaming in the lantern light, leaned over the
rail, musket in hand, and stared down at
them.
“ Is that you, Captain ? ” he cried doubt-
fully.
“ No, it isn’t Captain Rodriguez,” replied
Charles coolly. “I’m Mr. Charles Sinden,
and with me is my cousin, Mr. Gervaise
Cartelot.”
The sentry, too astonished even to swear,
could merely gaze at them.
Gervaise brought the boat adroitly against
the ship’s side, and Charles, standing up,
continued to address the man on the poop.
(4,034)


“ We propose to come on board,” he said.
“ A ladder would help us considerably.”
“ Want to come on board, do you ? ” The
sentry came out of his stupor a little. “ Wait
a bit. There’s something queer about this.
That’s the CorheaiCs boat, ain’t it ? ”
“ To be sure it is, my friend.”
“ Then where’s the Captain ? ”
“ Ashore there. Sound asleep, I think I
might say.” Charles turned to Gervaise, who
corroborated the statement with becoming
gravity.
“ And where have you two sprung from ? ”
“ Straight off the island. But you’re a long
time letting us on board, my friend, del,
man ! what are you afraid of ? Two of us
can’t take and scuttle the ship. If you’re scared
to leave us, fire your musket, and bring up the
crew.”
“ Well now, that ain’t a bad idea, that ain’t,”
said the sentry. “ That’ll just about do it,
that will.” And raising the barrel of his musket,
he pulled the trigger. The echoes of the report
came rolling back from the island hills, and at
once the Corbeau began to stir. There was a
startled muttering of oaths, a shuffling on decks


“ Want to come on hoard, do you?"
and ladders, and very soon a batch of the
buccaneers came running aft, growling impreca-
tions and inquiries of the sentry. The residue
soon followed, and when the explanations had
been made, a row of curious faces appeared
over the poop railings and stared down at the
pair in the dinghy.
“ Why ! ” cried a mighty voice, “if it ain’t
young Gervaise Cartelot! ”
Gervaise looked up and recognized the
Tinman.
“ And his cousin ! ” “ Why, I know him ! ”
“And me. I was with him on the Petrel


“ Well, they’re all right! ” were some of the
cries, plentifully interlarded with oaths of sur-
prise, that followed.
“ So,” said Charles politely, “ it seems that
we are vouched for. That being so, gentlemen,
perhaps you will allow us on board.”
“ Well, I reckon,” said the Tinman. “ Sling
us your rope.” He caught the dinghy’s painter
deftly. “ Here, chuck down the ladder, one
of you.” The order was obeyed, and the pair
ascended to the deck of the Corbeau.
Charles seated himself on the taffrail, and
inquired who was in command during the
captain’s absence.
“ The Tinman,” answered a dozen voices.
“ And a very good choice, too,” flattered
Charles. “ I will then, gentlemen, address
myself to the Tinman ; but please remember
that I consider him the mouthpiece of you all.”
His ease and good-humour had their effect.
The crew gathered round, their curiosity roused
to the highest pitch. Here, sprung most sur-
prisingly out of the night, were the two young
gallants who had taken the fireship up to the
Narrows of the lagoon at Maracaibo. They
were known personally to several of the Corbeau's


RODRIGUEZ COMES ASHORE 229
crew, and those who met them now for the first
time had heard every detail of the exploit dis-
cussed with respectful encomiums in Port
Royal and elsewhere. It was a sympathetic
audience from the first, and Charles knew how
to make the most of that advantage.
“ I propose,” he said, “ before I explain our
presence here to-night, to put a few questions
to you, Tinman. Is that agreeable ? ”
“ Don’t see why you shouldn’t,” replied that
large buccaneer, looking round for support.
“ That’s fair enough, ain’t it, mates ? ”
There was a murmur of assent. Charles’s
reputation would stand him for more than
that.
“ May I ask, then, why the Corheau is
anchored away up here out of the trade routes ? ”
The chorus of growls that followed showed
that he had touched a sore point.
“ It’d be a cute man that could answer that,”
said the Tinman. “ That’s what we want to
know ourselves. Wouldn’t take seamen’s words,
not Captain Rodriguez wouldn’t. Not him.
He knew, he did. Said that he’d an idea that
this island would make a good place for careen-
ing. You, Walter Stewer, you’d been here


2 3 0 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
before. You told him that he’d never get the
Corheau over the bar, didn’t you ? ”
“ Aye,” said the gaunt, saturnine buccaneer
addressed. “ I told him. There’s a wreck
in there—old galleon of sorts ; but she must
have scrunched over on a spring tide when the
bar ain’t what it is now. I told him, but he
wouldn’t listen.”
“ And anyway,” went on the Tinman dis-
gustedly, “ what’s he thinking about careening
for now, when we’re only a few days out of
Port Royal ? There’s no barnacles on us yet.
Said it might come in useful later on, he did ;
but I reckon we’d be better looking for ships
in the trades than lying here broiling. Fool’s
idea, I call it. Wasting a lot of good time.”
“So he told you that? I see.” Charles
nodded thoughtfully. “ And why did he go
ashore with one man ? ”
“ Said he was going to have a look round.”
“Oh, to have a look round.” Charles’s tone,
more than his words, seemed to dismiss that
statement of Alonso’s as a flimsy pretext, and
the circle of rough, lawless faces drew nearer.
“You know something ? ” demanded the
Tinman.


“ A little ; but give me time. Did he sug-
gest any of you others going ashore with
him ? ”
“Not him. Said pretty plain he didn’t want
us. Not that we wouldn’t have gone though,
if we’d felt like it. But Walter here, he said
the ship was better than the island. He said
there wasn’t a blessed pig on it, nor a goat
even. That’s so, ain’t it, Walter ? ”
“ Aye,” growled Stewer ; “ that creek ain’t
worth rowing into. There’s nothing there.”
“ But yet,” said Charles meaningly, “ your
good captain and his friend choose to spend a
night on it.”
There was a silence. The ring of faces
craned yet nearer.
“ Tiens I ” said Charles ; “ but this captain
of yours gives me the tisane . What, mes
braves , is he going to pitch a yarn like that,
and get clear with it ? del! a crew has its
rights.”
“ He’s been hazing us ? ” cried the Tinman,
with an oath.
“ Up and down the decks, he has, my friends.
Careening ! ” Charles shrugged his shoulders.
“ Well, I know your opinion of that. Then


232 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
what has he come for ? I put it to you. What
would bring a man like Rodriguez up here ? He
has a good ship and a fine crew, and he leaves
the good spots and the chance of prizes to come
to an islet like this. What’s the only thing that
could induce him to do that ? ”
“ Gold ! ” hazarded a breathless voice.
“ You’re near it, mon brave. Treasure, shall
we say.” Charles rose and pointed dramati-
cally to the creek. “Up there, mes amis , lies
the wreck of an old galleon. Did she carry
treasure ? Ask your Captain.”
At that the crowd broke into a frantic surg-
ing rabble. Mingled with hoarse imprecations
against Rodriguez came the cry of “ Boats ! ”
The buccaneers jostled and swore at one another
in their eagerness to lower the two remaining
ones. In less than a minute the dinghy, filled
to overflowing, was being rowed swiftly towards
the bar. Following, in a very short space of
time, raced her two consorts. Except for
Charles and Gervaise, the Corbeau was left
deserted. In the general scramble no one had
paid the slightest attention to them. They were
free to go or stay as they pleased. All the
buccaneers’ energies were concentrated on get-


“ Boats ! "
ting ashore in the shortest possible time, to
exact reparation from Rodriguez for his du-
plicity, and obtain a share of the treasure. The
sentries had gone with the rest. The ship could
look after herself. No man had a mind to stay
on board while such an engaging adventure was
toward. “Ask your Captain,” Charles had
said, and each man had taken that injunction to
himself.
“ Un succes fou ! ” murmured Charles, lean-
ing over the taffrail, and watching the retreat-
ing boats. “It’s a pity they took the dinghy;
238


234 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
but it can’t be helped. Ah, you’re taking off
your boots, cousin—an excellent idea.” And
removing his own and slinging them round
his neck, he followed Gervaise down the rope
ladder, and slipped off into the water.


CHAPTER XVII
FAVOURS RETURNED
THAT swim was one which both the young
men were destined to remember for many
a long day, for it needed all their strength to
resist being swept out to sea by the receding
tide. As it was, when they did reach land, they
found themselves a good half-mile to the west
of their anchored boat. Panting from their
labour, they flung themselves down on the wet
sand for a few moments to recover their breath,
and then set off at a half trot to the cove. From
far up the creek they could hear the rhythmic
beat of the buccaneers’ oars ; but suddenly
this ceased, and then, after a pause, a clamorous
shouting broke out, followed by the sharp
reports of pistols.
“ They’ve found Rodriguez,” said Gervaise
as they ran.
“ And he won’t tell them anything about the
treasure,” Charles added dryly.


They pounded along the heavy sand, and
reaching the cove, plunged at once into the
water and freed the boat.
“ We’ll try the lee of the rock,” said Ger-
vaise, springing to the tiller after they hoisted
the sail. “It will be quicker, and I think
there’s enough water.”
“ Bien entendu y mon brave. This creek is
decidedly less peaceful now than when we
entered; and when three boatloads of buccaneers
are abroad looking for treasure and explanations,
mafoi , I prefer to be sailing sweetly out at sea.’
And going forward, Charles established himself
in the bows as a look-out.
“ Starboard a trifle,” he called out presently.
“ Starboard still. Steady. Right, keep her at
that.” And the rock loomed out on the port
bow, came abreast, and sank into the darkness
astern.
Their main object now was to get out of
sight of the island before dawn. Gervaise
accordingly put the boat before the wind, which
was from the north, and fairly strong.
“ If it drops during the night, you’ll have to
think out another little story to tell the Tinman
and his friends,” Gervaise remarked.


“I’ll have it all ready,” Charles promised,
“ and every man Jack of them will believe it.
See what it is to have a Continental training in
the raconteur’s art ! There is no finesse in the
story-telling in that barbarous English island
of yours. Consider the English tale and the
French conte. The Englishman says: ‘ I went
to the village inn, and drank four quarts of beer,
one after the other.’ His audience believes
him, and the tale is over. How different would
be the recital in France. ‘ ficoutez, mes braves ,’
the Frenchman would say, ‘ I have to-day an
anecdote to tickle your fancy, concerning the
consumption of hoissons on an incredible scale.’
At the end of the first quart he would have his
audience on tiptoe with expectation ; at the
end of the second they would be drinking beer
with him in imagination, and sharing all his
emotions ; with the third they would be fighting
and kissing each other, drunk, not with the
beer, but the story-telling ; and the story of
the fourth quart would be told with the racon-
teur marching at their head along the high-
road, seeking giants to kill and fair ladies to
rescue.
“ You’re certainly a master of the art,” Ger-


238 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
vaise conceded. “ But I think you might
come out of the bows now and have a sleep.
I’ll take first watch.”
“ C'est une idee” said Charles with alacrity,
and taking a blanket, he curled himself up in
the bottom of the boat and made himself snug.
“ Do you think, Gervaise,” he added, “ you
could manage a gentle little song as a pre-
liminary to waking me ? That great paw of
yours is rather too drastic.”
“My songs would be worse, I’m afraid,
Charles; but if you really want a change,
I’ll poke your ribs with the toe of my
boot.”
“ Englishman ! ” hissed Charles. “ Islander !
Cochon ! ” and closed his eyes.
The dawn spread with its usual loveliness of
colours, and when the saffron, mauve, green,
red, and purple had merged once more into
golden day, Bat Island showed as a mere
shadowy speck on the horizon.
Charles viewed it with great satisfaction.
“ We’ve a chance, cousin,” he remarked.
Gervaise nodded. “ But we’re not clear yet.
If the Cor beau puts out, she can sail a deal
faster than we can.”


“ True, sapient one, she can. We may make
the voyage to Jamaica on her yet.” And all
that day they kept looking back in their wake,
half expecting to see the buccaneers’ topsails
set square for the long, stern chase.
But it was not the Corheau's canvas, but that
of a great galleon flying the standard of Leon
and Castile which loomed out of the mists the
next morning close astern. And almost before
they had time to take in her import, a gun
boomed from her bows, and a ball whistled
over the boat’s mast as a signal for them to
heave-to.
“ Does the mouse say ‘no ’ to the well-fed
lion ? ” queried Charles resignedly. “Not if
he’s got any sense at all. Bring her round,
Gervaise. Politeness is our motto now. Look
at the ugly great brute. She’s swarming all
over with soldiers, like mites on a cheese.”
As Gervaise put the tiller down, the galleon
too came into the wind, and a number of men
descended her wall-like side and manned the
boat, which was dragged up from astern.
Charles, as he watched them, slipped two
pistols into his belt, and Gervaise followed his
example.


“ One each for us, and two for the Spaniards,
if it comes to it,” said Charles.
Gervaise read his thoughts. The shadow of
the Inquisition lay over them both, and better a
short sharp fight than meek surrender to such a
fate.
The boat, manned by half a dozen sailors
and as many more soldiers, quickly covered
the intervening space, and as she came along-
side, the elegantly dressed young Spanish
officer in the stern addressed them in his own
language.
“ I have orders to take you on board the
galleon,” he said, and studied them intently, as
if to read the effect of his words.
Charles, however, preserved his usual care-
less demeanour as he replied : “We have no
objection to paying our respects to the Com-
mandant of a ship of Spain, and doubtless he
wishes to make apologies for the gunner who
nearly took the top off our mast. A little
closer, I pray you, senor. Thank you.” And
followed by Gervaise, he stepped into the
boat, and took his seat in the stern.
The return journey was accomplished in
ominous silence, and reaching the galleon, they


“ I have orders to take you on hoard the galleon”
were taken at once to the poop, where the
Commandant, a tall, grey-haired, dignified-
looking man, stood surrounded by a little group
of officers.
“You speak Spanish ? ” he asked curtly, the
while his keen eyes took in every detail of their
appearance.
“It is one of my proud boasts, senor,”
Charles replied.
“You are English, of course ? ”
Charles inclined his head. “ That, senor, is
a source of even greater pride to me.”
It was fortunate, perhaps, that Gervaise could
(4,034) 241 16


242 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
not understand Spanish very well, otherwise he
might have been tempted to smile at that remark.
“ What are you doing in that boat so far
from land ? ”
“ Pursuing our private errands.”
“ And those are ? ”
“ Strictly private,” replied Charles with bold
courtesy.
A murmur broke from the group of officers,
and the Commandant’s lips twitched slightly.
“ Private business of young Englishmen in
these seas is usually connected with the pirate
Morgan,” he announced. “You will continue
your voyage with us to a Spanish port.”
“ How can I express my regret at being unable
to fall in with your wishes, sehor ?
“ Spare yourself the trouble of explanations,”
was the dry reply. The Commandant turned
and spoke a few words to one of his subordi-
nates, who hurried at once to the ship’s waist.
There was a pause then in the conversation on
the poop. The group there seemed to be wait-
ing for something. It came presently in the
shape of two loud reports, and the whistle of
cannon-balls. The boat, struck between wind
and water, heeled slowly and began to fill.


“ I think,” said the Commandant impassively,
** that you will sail with us to a Spanish port.”
“ I am inclined to think so myself now/’
Charles agreed. “ But may I point out to you,
sehor, that our two countries are at peace, and
that you have just been guilty of an act of
piracy ? ”
“It is well for an Englishman to complain
of piracy in these seas,” returned the Com-
mandant, with bitter humour. “ But I intend
to affront you further by asking you to sur-
render your arms.”
“ That, I regret to say, is impossible, sehor.”
“ I have two hundred soldiers on board this
ship.”
“ I congratulate you, sehor ; but may I point
out that you are in danger of losing at least two
of them ? ” Charles’s hand, like Gervaise’s, was
now resting on his pistol butt.
A kind of grudging admiration showed in the
Commandant’s face, and was reflected in those
of his staff. Soldiers themselves, they were
connoisseurs of bravery, and they were im-
pressed by the coolness and assurance of the pair
in the face of imminent death. But before the
Commandant could give the order for their


arrest, a soldier came hurriedly up the poop
ladder, saluted his chief punctiliously, and
requested permission to speak.
“ Well,” said the Commandant, “ what is
it? ”
“ Pardon, excellency, but this big young
man’s name is Cartelot, is it not ? ”
“ Possibly. Why do you ask ? ”
“ I know him, excellency. I was one of the
prisoners ransomed at Maracaibo, and I saw him
there.”
“Ah ! ” The faces of his listeners grew
sterner still.
“ But, excellency, he is not a pirate.”
“ How ? At Maracaibo, and not a pirate ! ”
“ No, excellency. I had the story from the
maid of the Sehorita Miranda de Casa of Gib-
raltar. This is the young Englishman who
saved the lives of the Senorita Miranda and her
maid by taking them stores from Gibraltar.”
The Commandant turned to Charles. “Is
this true ? ” he asked.
“ Perfectly, sehor. And allow me to add a
word of explanation. The ship in which we
were bound for the Indies was attacked by
French pirates, and my cousin and I were


captured. Circumstances then compelled us
to sail with Morgan on his raid, but we sailed
with him on condition that we were to take no
share in the plunder. I may add that there was
no difficulty raised about that condition. After
the capture of Gibraltar I happened to be at
the hacienda of Don Miguel de Casa, and learnt
from him just before he died that his daughter
and maid were in hiding, and hard pressed for
food, in a cave in the mountains. Unable to
succour them myself, I sent word to my cousin
here, and he set out from Gibraltar, and carried
the matter through ; with the result, I hope,
that the senorita may live to enjoy a long and
useful life.” And Charles bestowed his best
bow upon the Commandant and his suite.
“ It is the truth, excellency,” corroborated the
soldier. “So exactly did I have the story from
the maid Anita. A fine character did she give
the Senor Cartelot. As a gentleman he came,
she said, and as a gentleman he went, and no
hidalgo of Spain could have surpassed him.”
“ Thank you,” said the Commandant. “You
may go. I will speak with you anon.” Then
he turned to Charles, his manner quite changed.
It is a pity, senor, that your cousin does not


246 GENTLEMEN O* FORTUNE
speak Spanish, for we cannot express to him
our thanks for the service he has rendered to
our countrywoman. But perhaps you, senor,
will be good enough to convey them.”
Charles bowed, and translated rapidly to
Gervaise.
“ Take your hand off your pistol,” he added
hurriedly, “ and smile at the old boy. I expect
he’ll offer us the galleon now.”
Gervaise gave the Commandant a dignified
salute, which was returned by the recipient and
the whole group of officers.
“ We regret, seflors, very much the incon-
venience we have caused you,” said the
Commandant; “but you will, of course, be
recompensed for the loss of your boat. We are
proceeding now to San Lorenzo, at the mouth
of the Chagres River. lam afraid there is no
option but for you to accompany us. But
arrived there, you will state your wishes, and I
will do my best to further them. Meanwhile
the best that this ship affords is at your service,
and we shall do our utmost to make your passage
a pleasant one.” ;
Charles thanked him, and then, after a short
consultation between the Commandant and his


staff, they were taken in charge by one of the
younger officers and given a comfortable little
cabin.
“ The Commandant wishes me to say that
your meals will be served in here if you wish,”
said the young Spaniard, “ but he hopes with
us that you will honour us with your presence
at the big table.”
“ Nothing would give us greater pleasure,”
Charles replied.
“In a quarter of an hour, then, senor.” And
having assured himself that they had every-
thing they needed, their guide bowed and went
away.
“ A surprising world, mon cher ,” Charles
remarked when they were left to themselves.
“Five minutes ago I wouldn’t have given a
bent thimble for our lives. Blessings on that
soldier lover of Anita ! I could have hugged
the man. No hidalgo of Spain could have sur-
passed you, he said. How do you feel about
that, mon brave ? ”
“ Pooh ! But look here, Charles, what are
we going to do when we get to the Chagres
River ? It’s right in the middle of Spanish
territory, you know.”


“ What are we going to do ? ” cried Charles
airily. “ Why, we’re going to leave everything
to the hon Commandant. He means to treat
us like favourite nephews, I feel sure. And
personally, mon cher t when it comes to sailing
these seas, I prefer to be in a fat well-found
galleon than tossing about in that cockle-shell
that’s just gone to the bottom. I wonder if
there’s a guitar on board. I must ask our
friend the Commandant.”


CHAPTER XVIII
THE GATEWAY TO PANAMA
CHARLES quickly had the measure of the
Spanish officers on board the galleon,
and with the aid of a borrowed guitar he set
himself to the task of breaking down their
reserve and creating a new atmosphere in the
great cabin. This he accomplished in less than
two days, and after that his hosts found them-
selves more and more inclined to pass their
spare time in his company, listening to his
chansons and racy stories of the European
Courts.
The cousins were able to pick up occasionally
some scraps of information regarding the general
political situation ; but on the subject of the
galleon’s cruise the Spaniards’ lips were sealed,
and they never discovered from whence she
had come nor her ultimate destination. One
point, however, the Commandant made very
plain, and that was that he wished his guests
249


250 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
to leave the vessel at San Lorenzo. He would,
he said, give them a personal recommendation
to the commander of the Spanish forces there,
and no doubt their stay at the castle would be
made as enjoyable as the circumstances per-
mitted.
“ And so,” said Charles, in the privacy of
their cabin, after hearing this news, “we’ll have
to take the old boy at his word. When we
arrive at San Lorenzo I’ll sing sweetly to his
friend the Colonel, and when we do board a
ship for Europe, he’ll come down weeping to
the quay to see us off. Meanwhile, mon cher y
I think it would be a good idea if we made our-
selves body-belts to hold our jewels. To tell
you the truth, I’m afraid to take my coat off
these days, lest some slim-fingered soldier of
Sevilla should take hold of it and wonder over
the lumps in the seams.”
“ I’ve been feeling exactly the same,” Ger
vaise confessed. “ We’ll make the belts to-day.
I shall be much easier when that’s done.”
The voyage to the Chagres was accomplished
without particular incident. Once or twice
small vessels of rather rakish appearance in-
spected the galleon from a respectful distance,


THE GATEWAY TO PANAMA 251
but sheered off when her armament became
manifest. Gervaise noticed that Jamaica was
given a wide berth, and the galleon coasted along
the southern shores of Cuba almost as far as
Trinidad before she headed south for the
Isthmus. They had been on board nearly three
weeks before San Lorenzo was sighted. Stand-
ing together in the bows they gazed with great
interest at the strong castle perched on its hill.
“ The gateway to Panama,” murmured
Charles.
“ And a fine gateway, too,” said Gervaise.
“ It will have to be taken if Morgan means to
march across the Isthmus. He’ll lose more men
there than he did at Maracaibo. If the garrison
chooses to fight, they could hold it against an
army.”
This impression was strengthened as the
galleon entered the harbour, and the nature
of the defences became more apparent. The
Spaniards were well aware of the strategic
importance of San Lorenzo, and the castle
there was one of the strongest on the Main.
The natural advantages of the spot had been
exploited to the full. A great submerged rock
prevented ships from approaching the harbour


252 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
in front of the castle, while, on the land side, a
mangrove swamp, swarming with alligators,
and thickets of cane and liana, presented
obstacles calculated to make the most reckless
leader pause and think; and even if these
were successfully negotiated, an attacking force
would then have to contend with the man-made
defences, consisting of a deep ditch and palisad-
ing divided by gabions of earth. The whole
place bristled with cannon, and its garrison of
three hundred and seventeen men was under the
command of one of the most valiant soldiers of
Spain.
To the care of this soldier the cousins were
committed that evening by the Commandant of
the galleon. They found this blue-eyed, fair-
haired custodian of the Panama gate a pleasant
person enough. On hearing their story he at
once accorded to them the full hospitality of
the castle, placed one of the best apartments at
their disposal, and gave orders to his command
that they were to be treated with the respect
and consideration due to young Englishmen of
birth who had performed signal service for
Spain. At the moment, he said, there was no
ship in the harbour bound for Europe, nor


THE GATEWAY TO PANAMA 253
could he say, with the seas in such a troublous
state, when any such would arrive. But mean-
while they must look upon the castle as their
own, and inform him of their slightest wish.
“ It seems a pity,” Gervaise remarked, as
they sought their couches that night, “ that
with the world so big, the nations can’t divide
the newer parts of it amicably, and settle down
to live as neighbours in peace and good-will.
Some of these Spaniards are excellent fellows
when you get to know them. This Colonel, for
instance.”
“ A don and a hidalgo,” Charles agreed.
“ As a rule the Spaniard is a mixture in equal
parts of courtesy, gallantry, and cruelty. The
last, however, seems to have been left out of
the Colonel’s make-up. But as to Spain and
England settling down as good neighbours in
the New World, I’m afraid it will be a long time
before that comes to pass. For one thing,
England would want Spain to give up her
Inquisition, and Spain would want England to
give up her beer drinking and other barbaric
customs. Rightly, too, I think. You see ”
But Gervaise interrupted him with a loud
fictitious snore.


The galleon sailed the next day, and continued
her voyage to the south. The cousins settled
down to the life of the fortress, joining with the
officers of the garrison in their off-duty pas-
times, and reading such books as were to be
had in the quietness of their own room. But
the days passed into weeks, and the weeks into
months, and still no ship for Europe left the
harbour of San Lorenzo. The Colonel was
apologetic.
“ I could, of course, arrange for your passage
on a vessel bound for other ports on the Main,”
he said ; “ but I’m afraid that would not be
much help to you. I hear that your country-
man Morgan is at sea again, and that being so,
very few Spanish ships would care to attempt
the passage across the Caribbean alone. It
looks to me, sehors, as though you will have to
wait here until the treaty between our two
countries is ratified, and piracy put down in
these seas.”
“It would seem so,” said Charles. “ H’m,
so Morgan has left Jamaica.”
“ Preparatory, no doubt, to trying for Panama.”
The Colonel smiled confidently as he glanced
round the battlements.


“ In the event of his coming here, I should
like to know what our position will be.”
“ Why, senor, you will act as seems fit to
you. I require no bond from you or your
cousin. At Gibraltar you saved the lives of
two of my countrywomen at the risk of your
own. That being so, I do not think that the
safety of San Lorenzo will be jeopardized by
your presence here.” And he gave them a
graceful bow.
But it was not Morgan who came first to the
gateway of Panama. The task of taking San
Lorenzo was given to Captain Bradley, a veteran
Brother of the Coast. Dispatched from Santa
Catalina, where Morgan lay with his grand
fleet, he arrived off the Chagres with a few
ships, manned by four hundred buccaneers, at
sunset one evening, and caused the fortress to
hum like an angry hive.
“ They might have waited till we had left
the place,” said Charles, as he surveyed the
fleet with Gervaise from the castle battlements.
Our friend the Colonel has been very cour-
teous about it all, but the fact remains that
our position here is likely to prove embarrass-
ing. Pensez. We can’t fire a shot nor draw a


256 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
sword, but we stand an excellent chance of
being mown down by one of our own cannon-
balls ; or, who knows, one of these Spaniards
in the fervour of the fight may suddenly re-
member we’re English, and proceed to fill us
with lead for the greater glory of his patron
saint. If we had any sense, we’d dig a big hole
and sit in it till the affair is over. Heh ! are
you listening to what I’m saying, Englishman ?
I don’t believe you heard a word of it.”
“Yes, I did. You said something about
digging a hole. But look there, Charles —that
ship to leeward. You’ve seen her before.”
“ Possibly. She’s much like other ships,
though—yards and canvas, and men yo-hoing.
Parhleu , je ne suis pas matelot , moi ! What about
her?”
“ That’s the Corheau.'
“ Ah, ah, the Corheau. Now, mon ami y this
does become interesting. See what it is to have
a nautical eye. The Corheau. Now I wonder
if friend Alonso is on board.”
“I’m wondering, too. But there were shots
in the creek that night, if you remember. They
may have killed him.”
“ That’s so. But if he’s still alive, let’s hope


THE GATEWAY TO PANAMA 257
a Spanish ball will complete the good work you
began with my guitar.” And Charles chuckled
at the memory.
All that night the garrison stood to arms, for
the noise of oars was plainly audible from the
castle. The landing, however, was made at a
point below the harbour, and it was not till
two o’clock the next afternoon that the buc-
caneers, dripping with mire and perspiration
after their arduous passage through the man-
grove swamp, came into view on the top of the
neighbouring hill. There they were met by so
withering a fire from the loopholes that they
retired hastily to hold a council of war in the
shelter of the cane brake. A wave of jubilation
swept through the castle at their withdrawal,
and the cousins came in for a good deal of
badinage.
“ But wait, my friends,” said Charles,
“ that’s merely a preliminary. There’ll be
more than musket-balls coming over the pali-
sades before long.”
And so it transpired, for very soon the sea-
rovers poured out again for a fresh assault.
They were received by the same deadly fire ;
but this time there was no hesitation. With
(4,034)


258 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
hoarse yells, the buccaneers tore across the
gully, crossed the moat, and swarmed up to
the palisades. Over the gabions leapt the
Spanish soldiers, and the conflict now became
hand-to-hand. The advantage of position, how-
ever, lay with the defenders, for the buccaneers
found it difficult to obtain a footing in the loose
earth. While they scrambled and stumbled,
the musketry fire broke out afresh from the
walls, and at last, leaving seventy of their
number dead and wounded, the buccaneers
were forced to retire.
The general impression throughout the castle
was that the attack had been beaten off for
good, and even the Colonel was surprised when
his young English guests ventured to express a
contrary opinion.
“ What I ” he cried, “ you think they
will come for more of that! ” He pointed
to the jumble of dead bodies lying without
the palisades.
“ My cousin and I have had the experience
—I won’t say pleasure —of serving with the
buccaneers at Maracaibo,” returned Charles
courteously, “ and their character is so well
known to us that we shall be greatly surprised


THE GATEWAY TO PANAMA 259
if this proves to be their last attempt on San
Lorenzo.”
The Colonel shrugged his shoulders. “ They
must be gluttons, indeed, if they wish for more.”
And he hurried off on his rounds.
Once again Charles’s prophecy proved true.
Down in the cane brake the buccaneers were
recuperating themselves with a long sleep, and
their next attack came in the darkness. The
moonless night and a haze from the sea assisted
their plans, and the first intimation the garrison
had of this fresh assault was when a number
of hand-grenades burst against the outer pali-
sades and set them on fire in several places.
This was followed by a volley of musket-balls
directed against the line of loopholes. In the
excitement of the fighting a flaming arrow passed
unnoticed over the heads of the Spaniards, and
alighted on the palm-thatched roof of one of
the castle buildings, which at once caught fire.
The flames spread unchecked to some neigh-
bouring powder barrels, and the subsequent
explosion shook the hill. Encouraged by this
success, the buccaneers flung more grenades,
and soon the whole of the outer defences were
ablaze. The tide of the battle was now turning


260 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
against the defenders. Their resistance was as
determined as ever, but they realized now
that it was to be a fight to the death. Inspired
by the spirit of their commander, they fought
like Paladins, and managed at last to drive the
buccaneers back into the cane brake ; but well
they knew that this was only a respite, and that
the dawn would see the final phase of the
contest.
At first the cousins had retired to the keep
while the fighting was in progress, but very
soon, as the wounded began to come in, they
found work which they could perform with an
easy conscience. The overworked Spanish sur-
geon was only too glad to have their assistance,
and they were kept very busy. Unhampered
by arms, they sallied out among the bursting
grenades and flying fragments from the burning
buildings, picking up the wounded, and carry-
ing them into the keep. Many a grateful glance
and babbled word of thanks did they receive
from the stricken men, and when the fighting
lulled, the Colonel hurried up to bestow upon
them the acknowledgments of the garrison.
That garrison was now greatly depleted, and
the breaking dawn showed charred and smoking


Work which they could perform with an easy conscience.
palisades, ruined battlements, and a mere hand-
ful of Spaniards standing matchlock in hand at
the embrasures. And with the dawn came a
fresh attack. With their ferocity undimmed by
their losses, the buccaneers charged again and
again upon that gallant residue, and the end
came at last in a terrific hand-to-hand fight.
Dismayed by the death of their commander,
the forty remaining Spanish soldiers gave up
the struggle. Nine made good their escape by
leaping the castle wall on the sea side, where
they took to a boat, and carried the news up


262 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
the river to Panama; and the others were
overpowered and made prisoners.
Captain Bradley had been killed in the fight-
ing, and the command of the buccaneer forces
had been taken over by a man named Palabra.
Followed by a number of his men, this leader
now rushed, sword in hand, into the keep, where
he found two unarmed and very tired young
Englishmen sitting quietly by a row of wounded
Spaniards.


CHAPTER XIX
AFTER THE BATTLE
“ T TALLO ! ” cried Palabra with a suspicious
1 J. scowl. “ What’s this ? Who are you ? ”
Before either of them could reply, a swarthy
buccaneer stepped forward, his face beaming
in delighted recognition.
“ Why,” he shouted, “ it’s Charlie Sinden !
And that’s his cousin, young Gervaise Cartelot! ”
“ What, the two that ...”
“Yes, that’s right: them’s the two that took
the fireship out at Maracaibo. Howdy, lads ? ”
Palabra’s face cleared, and his manner be-
came quite cordial as he said :
“ Ah, I’ve heard of you boys. How came you
here ? ”
“ Captured by a Spanish galleon, and brought
here to await passage.”
Palabra raised his great black brows.
“ Lucky for you we came, wasn’t it ? Smells
of the Inquisition, don’t it ? ”


Charles shrugged his shoulders, and the
swarthy buccaneer became derisive.
“ Inquisition !” he snorted. “ The Inquisi-
tion couldn’t hold Charlie Sinden, not it. He’d
play his guitar and have the monks bringing
him rum in no time. Look at him now ! Not
a rope on him, and him a captive. He’s told
’em the tale, and he’s had ’em eating out of his
hand. Now ain’t you, Charlie ? ”
“ Our time here has not been unpleasant,”
Charles admitted.
“You didn’t fight against us, I suppose ? ”
said Palabra.
“ No, we’ve been unarmed through it all.
They treated us well; so when you shot off a
Spaniard’s leg, we carried him in and gave him
a drink of water. Mafoi !we could do no less.
Once or twice they made us restive when they
kept calling you English dogs, and shouting
that this was the way to Panama. But, del!
Captain, one must admit they had provocation.
Some of the remarks of you and your brisk lads
came very clear and concise through the
palisades.”
Palabra grinned. “ Any treasure here ?” he
inquired.


“ If there is, it must be pretty well scattered
by now. Tiens! Captain, you can’t set light
to a dozen powder barrels without spreading
things a bit. My cousin and I are full of
splinters.” Charles touched his bandaged left
arm, and pointed to Gervaise’s grazed and
blood-stained cheek. “ But I never heard a
whisper of treasure here. The place was
simply a strong fortress.”
“ Well, we didn’t expect to find much,” said
Palabra. “ Still, we’ll have a look round. And
then, lads, I reckon we’re due for a sleep.”
There was a chorus of assent from his fol-
lowers, all of whom were now feeling the
reaction after their long hours of excitement.
There was a general movement out of the keep,
and the cousins, after first designating the most
likely spots for those in quest of loot, wandered
away to a shady nook in the battlements, and
settled down for their first real sleep since the
arrival of the buccaneer fleet.
The next day they were greeted by several
old acquaintances, chief among them the Tin-
man. That large buccaneer, his head bound
by a blood-stained bandage, confessed to curi-
osity, but bore them no malice regarding their


disappearance from Bat Island. Whatever they
did, they would still be to him the spirited
young gallants who had steered the fireship
against the Spanish fleet at Maracaibo. Sitting
down by them in the shade of the charred
palisades, he told them the story of the happen-
ings at the island after the boats had left the
Corheau on their journey up the creek.
The three boats had reached the camping
place by the galleon almost simultaneously,
and yelling curses and recriminations, the men
had leapt ashore and advanced upon Rodriguez,
who had made the mistake of drawing his pistol.
Flurried by their demands as to the where-
abouts of the treasure, and in fear for his life,
he had pulled the trigger and wounded the
foremost buccaneer. At once a dozen shots
rang out, and Rodriguez fell back dead. His
companion, still dazed from his potations, then
came in for some rough handling; but his
protestations of ignorance concerning the treas-
ure were so convincing that the men were at
last forced to accept them.
“ It was a fool trick, though, killing Rod-
riguez,” said the Tinman in a tone of sorrowful
reminiscence. “ But there, we was that worked


up, we didn’t stop to think. There he lay,
dead as a log, and his secret with him. So we
had to start hunting without any clue.”
Their search had lasted a fortnight. The
galleon was pulled almost to pieces, and the
island dug up in a thousand places. “ But
nary a sign,” said the Tinman, shaking his
head. “ Nary a sign.”
In the end, despairing of success, the buc-
caneers had elected the Tinman as captain,
and set sail in the Corheau. There was a good
deal of wondering comment on the disappear-
ance of the young Englishmen, but at last it
was agreed that they must have been there on
Morgan’s business, and that they had sailed
back to Jamaica to rejoin him.
After a fairly successful cruise, the Corheau
had made for Santa Catalina, where Morgan
lay with his grand fleet; and there she had been
detached with other vessels for the attack on
San Lorenzo.
“ And a sweet job it’s been,” added the
Tinman ruefully. “ A hundred of us killed,
and as many more wounded. They hung on
here grim, they did. What stung ’em to fight
like that ? ”


“ I expect they wanted to keep their castle,”
Charles replied in his most innocent fashion.
And then, in answer to the Tinman’s inquiries
as to the reason of their presence on Bat Island,
he wove a vague but intriguing tale which left
the big buccaneer no wiser than before.
“ And so, Tinman, my friend,” he wound
up, “we’ll let bygones be bygones. There
was treasure on that island. But you and your
fellow Tortugans were too brisk. Rodriguez
could have told you a lot if you hadn’t killed
him.”
“ Aye, we oughter have put him to the
torture.” The Tinman sighed at the thought
of that wasted opportunity. “ Well, it’s too
late now. So, as you say, Charlie, we’ll let
bygones be bygones, an’ try an’ make it up at
Panama.”
The buccaneer force now settled down at
San Lorenzo to await the coming of Morgan’s
fleet, passing the time in a manner highly con-
genial to them by flying the Spanish flag from
the battlements, and by this means decoying
several Spanish ships into the harbour, which
were at once seized and looted.
This standard, however, was hauled down


when Morgan arrived, and when the crews of
the approaching vessels saw the red cross of
England waving over the fortress all the bonds
of discipline were broken, and more attention
was paid to the rum casks than the sounding-
leads. The result of this lapse was that four
of the ships ran on to the submerged rocks at
the harbour mouth, and, the wind rising, soon
became total wrecks.
In spite of this mishap, the general jubilation
continued for a couple of days ; and then,
order being restored, Morgan set to work on
the reconditioning of the castle, which he pro-
posed to garrison with five hundred men during
his absence on the Isthmus.
Morgan’s greeting of the cousins on the day
of his landing was a surprised but hearty one.
“ So,” he said, when he had listened to as
much of their tale as they chose to tell, “ that’s
not so bad. Maracaibo, Gibraltar, and San
Lorenzo. That’s three to you, not counting
a little private expedition of your own from
Jamaica.” A gleam of shrewd amusement
showed in his dark eyes. “ I ask nothing
about the last, though. You wanted two
hundred guineas, and I put you in the way of


270 GENTLEMEN 0’ FORTUNE
earning it. If you liked to slip out of Port
Royal one dark night, and sail north, south,
east, or west, that was your affair. And now,
what ? Are you coming with me to Panama ? ”
They shook their heads.
“ Panama ! ” repeated Morgan. “ Panama ! ”
And spoken like that, the word seemed to
convey all the magic, romance, and cruelty of
the Main.
“We’d like to go with you to Panama,” said
Charles meaningly.
“ But we’re afraid you’ll take it,” added
Gervaise.
“ Aye, lad, I’ll take it. Have no doubt
about that.” Morgan’s tone was that of a seer.
“ And do you mean to tell me that you two lads
of mettle can abide to stay here while we’re on
the march ? ”
“ del! no,” cried Charles. “ San Lorenzo
may be the gateway to Panama, and it may be
a very good gateway, but we’ve seen enough of
it to last us a lifetime. You’re sending a ship
back to Jamaica with the wounded, I believe,
Captain. Bien. Then, by your good leave,
we’ll sail in her.”
“As you will, lads. But it’s a pity.” Morgan


surveyed them thoughtfully for a few moments,
and then smiled. “ You’re going back to Eng-
land, I suppose ? You’ll give me a good name
there ? ”
“ It will be unnecessary,” Charles assured
him. “ Take Panama, Captain, and my board
and lodging is assured for life. When lam in
need of a meal, all I shall have to do will be to
gather a few fat London merchants round me
and say : ‘ I was talking to Sir Harry one day
on the battlements of San Lorenzo . . .’ Then
will the fat ones order me turtle and choice wine,
and inquire if they may have the pleasure of
lending me a hundred guineas.”
Morgan slapped his knee at the jest, and
roared with laughter.
“ You’ll never starve, lad, with that ready
tongue of yours, that’s certain. It’s a thousand
pities you’re not coming with us. But there,
have your own way. You can go back with the
wounded. Come and see me before you go.”
The ship sailed a few days later, and arriving
at Port Royal, the cousins disposed of one of
the Santa Christina diamonds to a merchant
there, and booked a passage to England with
the proceeds. After a favourable passage, they


arrived in England on the very day that Morgan
began his march across the Isthmus.
The story of that incredible journey has been
told a hundred times and in a hundred dif-
ferent ways, and it stands out as one of the
most remarkable feats in English overseas his-
tory. Morgan, as usual, emerged from that
series of blood-stained events, ending with the
capture and sack of Panama, with his fortune
enormously augmented and his name more
famous than ever. But the ratification of the
treaty between Spain and England put a stop
to his semi-official piracy. He was determined,
as he said, to remain an honest man. Idolized
by the people of England as the scourge of the
Inquisition, honours began to crowd fast upon
him. He was knighted, and twice acted as
Lieutenant-Governor of Jamaica. Dying in
1688, he was buried in St. Catherine’s Church,
Port Royal. But the Caribbean had not yet
seen the last of him, for four years later the
earthquake which destroyed the city swept
church and tomb into the sea which had been
the scene of so many of his world-famous
exploits.


CHAPTER XX
ON HARLDENE TERRACE
THE cousins had the news of the capture
of Panama as they sat, one sunny after-
noon, on the terrace at Harldene. The Earl
had sent the tidings by messenger. A post-
script told them that the sale of the Santa
Christina jewels had at length been completed,
and that the total proceeds amounted to
seventy thousand pounds.
“ That’s thirty-five thousand each,” said
Charles, “ for the Earl won’t take a penny of it.
We’re passing rich, mon cher .”
“ Gentlemen o’ Fortune,” assented Gervaise
with a smile. “ Shall we go and tell your
father ? ”
“No hurry, mon brave. He’ll just look up
and say : 4 That seems a lot of money, Charles.
What are you going to do with it ? ’ And then
down will go his august head again after a much
more important Greek text. No, the news will
(4,034) 273 l 8


274 GENTLEMEN O’ FORTUNE
keep for father for a bit. We’ll ride over and
see the Earl, though. He’s been very good
arranging the sale of the jewels for us with his
London friends.”
“Yes, he’s saved us a lot of trouble, and
money too, I expect. We’ll certainly go over
and see him.”
But neither of them made a movement.
Leaning back, they gazed out over the vista
of quiet Sussex countryside ; but the details
of it were lost on them, for their thoughts were
of that once fair city of the Isthmus, standing
now a mass of ruins under the blazing tropic
sun.
“ Panama,” murmured Charles, half to him-
self, and his tone was that of a requiem. “I’m
glad we didn’t go. But ”
“ Yes ? ”
“ But there’s something about the Americas.”
Gervaise hid a smile. Charles had been
growing restive of late, and he guessed what
was coming.
“ Virginia, for instance,” said Charles mus-
ingly. “ Now there’s a country fit for a
gentleman to live in—a cavalier country par
excellence .”


“ It sounds very nice from your description,
Charles. But I suppose, now that you’ve got
all this money, you’ll be off to the Continent
again.”
“Et pourquoi ? ”
Gervaise simulated surprise. “ Why, you
couldn’t live here, could you ? You told me
once, you may remember, that England by her
beef eating and beer drinking had earned a
reputation second to none for savagery, and
men like yourself were doing their best to
counteract that impression. Naturally you will
wish to continue that good work.”
“ One cannot labour for ever with advantage
in the same rut, cousin, though I admit the
need.”
“ In other words,” accused Gervaise, “ your
tastes have changed, and you prefer Virginia
now to Europe. But the society of Virginia is
composed of barbaric English islanders. I
don’t know about the beer out there, but I
believe the rum . . .”
“ Peace, enfant. Let me speak. Money has
brought me an added sense of responsibility.
Incredible though it may sound, I was born in
this English isle, and lived here for a number of


years. Unlike the majority, though, I have
succeeded in ridding myself of the worst
insular traits. Nevertheless, one cannot en-
tirely ignore the claims of patriotism. Eng-
land, when all’s said and done, can claim that
she gave Charles Sinden to the world, and it
seems only fair that England should reap a little
of what she has sown. Now in Virginia . . .”
“ There are a number of congenial spirits,
eight thousand horse, a number of negro ser-
vants, and plenty of good land for growing
tobacco.” Gervaise nodded. “ Yes, I know,
Charles ; you’ve told me lots of times.”
Charles gave a resigned sigh. “Tact and
finesse wilt before your blundering insularisms,
Gervaise Cartelot. You will always be the
same engaging mixture of rustic and sea-dog
who offered his hand for a Spanish lady to shake.
Enfin , I was going to suggest that after a month
or two more of this entourage you might care
to take ship with me and sail west, away again
for the Chesapeake.”
“ You’ve got it out at last,” laughed Gervaise.
“It’s taken you months to do it. Eh hien!
parbleu , del, I’ll come, mon cher ! Up off that
seat, mon brave , and allons to tell the Earl!


ON HARLDENE TERRACE 277
He’ll be very pleased to hear you’re going to
turn colonist.”
Charles shuddered as he rose.
“ Mon cousin he said solemnly, “ I would
rather take another fireship out to the Narrows
of Maracaibo than listen to your French.
Your accent is unspeakably vile. Cher chons
les chevaux”
“ Out, mon ami”
Charles shuddered again.
THE END
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT
THE PRESS OF THE PUBLISHERS


/




/
%




M
W
S> g*.
■


1508
02233164 4


