

Iv' Jl ,
mmm. ~ ■■


j
fffe ; I
I! ■ :fi)
|| : . /
:
• I
THE PHILIPPINE
Journal of Science
A. General Science
No. 5
SEPTEMBER, 1909
VOL. IV
GEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE OF THE ISLAND OF
LEYTE—WITH NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS ON
THE ADJACENT SMALLER ISLANDS AND
SOUTHWESTERN SAMAR.
Geokge I. Adams.
{From the Division of Mines, Buveciu of Science.)
Little has been published concerning the geology of the Islands dis-
cussed in this report. Jagor, who visited the northeastern part of Leyte
in 1860, noted the occurrence of a schist south of Tanauan, and described
Bito Lake near Abuyog and the solfataras south of Burauen. His-
petrographic specimens were examined by Roth. A single specimen of
igneous rock from the Island of Limasaua was described by Oebbeke who
studied Semper’s collections. Abella visited and described the Island of
Biliran in 1882, especially its sulphur deposits. Becker cites passages
from a manuscript report made by Ashburner in 1883 on the gold mines
of the Island of Panaon. All the publications above mentioned were made
use of by Becker in his report on the geology of the Philippines. In
treating of the tectonic features of the islands, he discusses the structural
relations of the Island of Leyte as surmised by others and adds some
observations from his study of the maps. In the Atlas de Pilipinas,
prepared at the Jesuit Observatory in Manila, the conventional sign for
an extinct volcano is shown on a general map of the islands near the
name “Mount Amandiuing.” This symbol, as will be explained later, may
have been intended to indicate the solfataras south of Burauen. There
is also a manuscript report by Maurice Goodman, formerly mining
engineer of this division of the Bureau, which describes the sulphur
deposits on Biliran Island and those near Burauen on Leyte visited by him
in 1906.
c I
'S'-Li
I
% I
90339 339


No previous attempt has been made to describe the physiographic and
geologic districts of Leyte and so the present report, although meager, may
serve as an introduction. The reconnaissance on which it is based was
made during April and the first half of May, 1909, while studying the
geologic conditions governing the drilling of deep and artesian wells for
the Bureau of Public Works. The island was circumnavigated and fifteen
coast towns and three interior towns in the northeastern part were
visited.
Maps.- —The best map of Leyte is by d’Almonte, published on a scale
of 1-200,000. It was evidently used in preparing the one published in
the Atlas de Pilipinas. On it the adjacent Islands of Biliran and Panaon-
are shown in some detail. The two most notable errors which it con-
tains are in the representations of Lake Bito and the Leyte River. Jagor,
who visited Lake Bito, has shown that it was drawn too large on Coello’s
map, which may have been d’Almonte’s source of information. The
description of the lake, translated from the Spanish edition of Jagor’s
travels, is as follows:
“The rain having passed, we arrived at the Bito River in an hour (from
Abuyog) by an agreeable road and in a banca ascended the river which follows
through heavy vegetation. The margins are low, level and sandy, and are
covered with tall bamboo and reeds. After having ascended ten minutes the
way w T as found obstructed by fallen tree trunks, which obliged us to make a
detour of half an hour on land in order to reach the river above the obstruction.
Rafts of bamboo were constructed, on which we journeyed, very much crowded
because of their small size, due to the little amount of material available. We
arrived at the lake in ten minutes. To the north and south of the lake there
are hills. Seen from the center, the lake is nearly circular and is surrounded
by a forest. Coello represents it too large (4 sea miles instead of the one
* '
which it has). It is about 1 league distant from Abuyog. * * * We found
the greatest breadth to be 585 brazas, equal to 977 meters (its greatest breadth
must be a little more than 1 kilometer) and its length is about 1,007 brazas,
equal to 1,080 meters, or less than a mile. Soundings showed the bottom to
incline gradually toward the center where the depth is 8 brazas, equal to
13.3 meters.”
Lake Bito will be correctly shown on a Coast and Geodetic Survey
chart now in preparation for publication.
There is a general impression among those who have an opinion in
regard to this lake, that it occupies a crater and that the hills which
surround it are the remnants of a crater rim, but there is no information
confirming this. The idea is suggested' by the position and appearance
of the hills in the plain, as seen from a steamer when leaving Abuyog
for Dulag. The depth of the lake indicates a depression greater than
would be expected from the grade of the stream. The locality is worthy
•of geologic investigation.
The Leyte River is much shorter than is indicated on published maps,
and does not have its source in Lake Danao, nor is Danao the source of
the Cancatoco River, as is shown on some maps. The Iwaasan River is


the outlet of the lake, and it flows to the east to Amandiuing Lake which,
in turn, is the source of the Binahaan. Lieut. Philip H. Rockstroh, of
the Philippines Constabulary, kindly furnished this' criticism, together
with other information concerning the hot and mineralized springs and
topographic features of the island, and his description of Lake Bito
corresponds with the one by Jagor given above. On a manuscript atlas
of the Philippines by d’Almonte, which is now the property of the Coast
and Geodetic Survey, these features of the drainage near Lake Danao
are shown as here described. The errors in the published map may be
due to the lithographer.
There are a number of sectional and route maps made by officers of
the United States Army and Philippines Constabulary, but it is not
possible at present to compile a satisfactory map. The Coast and Geo-
detic surveys how in progress, as well as surveys by the Bureau of Lands,
indicate that many details of the Spanish maps will be changed when the
present surveys are concluded and combined. Accordingly, in this report
only an outline map on a small scale is used, and the reader who may
have a special interest in the island is advised for the present to consult
d’Almonte’s map or the one in the Atlas de Pilipinas, which was taken
from d’Almonte’s, and also the Coast and Geodetic Survey charts.
Physiographic and geologic districts. —No previous attempt has been
made to describe the physiography of Leyte and the only suggestion as
to its topographic features is in the disposition of the streams and the
names of the mountains on the maps. The hachuring of d’Almonte’s is,
to say the least, misleading, and in the absence of elevations accompany-
ing the names of the mountains, an imperfect idea of the relief is
presented. The physiographic districts distinguished in this report cor-
respond closely with the geologic structure and are accordingly indicated
by the geologic districts on the accompanying outline map. The domi-
nant feature of Leyte is the Central Cordillera which runs from Cabalian
in a northwesterly direction through the island and is continued in
Biliran and Maripipi Islands. In addition may be distinguished the
southwestern semi-mountainous district, the northeastern semi-mountain-
ous district and the northeastern plains. There are also some littoral
lowlands of small extent which are not shown on the map.
CENTRAL CORDILLERA.
This district is for the most part rugged and is dominated by many
high peaks. Its lowest portion is to the west of Carigara, where it is also
narrowest. This is the most practicable place for a road to cross the
district, and a trail now exists which can be developed into a road.
The trail over the cordillera between Dolores to Jaro is very difficult,
because of the steepness of the western slope, and it is impracticable for
a wagon trail. There is an idea prevalent that a road should be estab-
lished between Abuyog and Baybay following the river valley in so far


as possible. This route has been surveyed by the division of roads, and
some money has been spent in clearing a trail, but the route is not an
easy one and the building and maintaining of a road in this section
would be very costly.
Similarly, from Abuyog to Sogod the foot trail is rugged and difficult,
and the coast between Abuyog and Himmangan affords no place for the
construction of a road. With the exception of the route from Carigara
westward, it is probable that the Cordillera forms a barrier to transporta-
tion which will prove effective for a very long time.
Mount Amandiuing . —The only peak of the Central Cordillera which
appears to be indicated in the Philippine Atlas as an extinct volcano is
Amandiuing. No explanation of the reason for this is given and it
may be that the symbol was intended to show the solfataras of Burauen,
However, several military officers who have ascended the flanks of Aman-
diuing have stated that it has the appearance of an extinct volcano, and
it may prove to be one since there is a hot sulphur mud spot on its flank,
and there are hot springs at the source of a stream which heads in this
peak and flows towards Jaro.
Solfataras near Burauen. —The solfatara of Casiboy south of Burauen
is indicated on d’Almonte’s map as situated in Mount Himalacagan. As
will be seen from the succeeding quotations there is a second solftara
near by.
The following description of these solfataras by Jagor is translated
from the Spanish edition of his travels in the Philippines:
“South of Burauen rises the mountain ridge Manacagan, 1 on the further slope
of which is a large solfatara from which sulphur is obtained for the powder
factory established in Manila. From the gateway there is seen to the south,
through the shade of the trees, a great white slope of Mount Danan.”
“At 9 o’clock we reached the crater of Casiboi where there is much vegeta-
tion and advancing to the south we saw some sheds in which sulphur is
sublimated. A few hundred paces more to the south a stream flows 12 feet
wide, the water of which is hot (30° Reaumur) and deposits siliceous sinter at
its borders.”
“Following from north to south along a ravine the walls of which have a
height of from 100 to 200 feet, the vegetation gradually diminishes and the
rock is so white as to affect the eyes. In places it is of a yellow color due
to the sublimated sulphur deposited on it. In many places there rises from
the ground a penetrating, dense vapor with a pronounced odor of sulphur.
Several hundred paces beyond, the valley turns to the left (east) and widens.
Here numerous siliceous springs break through the clayey earth which is
impregnated with sulphur. This solfatara must formerly have been more
active. The depression formed by the decomposition of the rock has a floor
covered with debris and measures about 1,000 feet wide and five times as long.”
“In the eastern part there are a number of small boiling mud spots. From
holes made in their borders with a stick, water and steam ascend. In some
1 Mount Himalacagan on Abella’s map.
i ’v
i^T.
M.
1


deep places to the west beds of gray, white, red, and yellow clay lie deposited
in layers and having the aspect of variegated marls.”
“Exactly to the south in front of the gate-way on the trail from Burauen
there is a cavern in white decomposed rock, having an opening 25 feet wide
from which much water which deposits siliceous incrustations flows. The roof
of the cave is hung with stalactites which are covered partially or completely
with sublimed sulphur.”
“In the high part of the slope of Mount Danan near the summit so much
sulphur is deposited from the vapors that it can be collected in coconut shells.
In some crevices protected from the action of the cold air it accumulates in
thick brown crusts.”
“The solfatara of Mount Danan is situated exactly south of the other at the
opposite . side of the ridge of the Casiboi. The clay, which remains after the
siliceous matter has been washed out, is carried by the rain to the valley
where it forms a plain, the greater part of which is occupied by the Lake
Malaksan. (Malaksan signifies sour.) It is limited by low ground, and its
extent, which is subject to frequent variations according to the weather, was
found to be 500 paces long and 100 wide. From the elevation at the solfatara
there is seen through an opening to the south a somewhat larger lake of
fresh water surrounded by wooded mountains. Its name is Jarnanan. * * *
Soundings gave the following results: Near the southern margin, which is
somewhat more steep than the north, 13 fathoms' (equals 21.7 meters) ; the
greatest length was found to be 800 varas (668 meters) and the width about
half of this.”
Mr. Goodman described the same locality as follows; he introduced
some names not contained in Jagor’s description, but the reader will be
able to reconcile the two descriptions without difficulty:
“The earliest indication of our proximity to solfataric activity was observed
when we came to the crossing of the Mainit River, about a third of a mile
south of da puerta.’ The source of the heat and sulphur carried by the Mainit
lies in the solfatara, which is only about a quarter of a mile east of where
we crossed the river and about 100 feet above it. The To-od Grande, as
this solfatara is called, is a large barren space about 800 feet long by 500
feet wide. Its surface consists of white kaolin resulting from the corrosion by
acid fumes of some volcanic rock, probably andesite. A portion of this super-
ficial layer has incrusted upon it a greenish yellow mixture of sulphur and
clay, deposited from the sulphurous gases which still emanate from numerous
fissures and crater-like openings in the surface of this barren area.”
“These openings are of two kinds —dry vents from which gases escape into
the atmosphere without the association of water, and wet holes which are like
large earthern caldrons containing either boiling mud or water. Extending
some distance around the orifice of the dry vents there is usually formed an
incrustation of beautiful yellow crystals of sulphur. The bulk of the sulphur,
however, lies in the impure clayey mixture distributed over the surface in
irregular patches. An average sample of the crust to a depth of about nine
inches yielded on analysis 66.1 per cent of free sulphur.”
“The To-od Pequeno is a continuation of the same solfatara, situated to the-
south of and at a lower level than the To-od Grande. It exhibits the same
phenomena as the upper solfatara, but is much smaller in area. In one portion
of the To-od Pequeno is a large cave from the bottom of which issue steam,
sulphurous, chlorine, and other gases, corroding the sides and roof of the


vault and giving to it a vari-colored appearance, due to the secondary minerals
formed.”
“About half a mile southeast of the To-od and separated from it by a high
ridge of andesite is another solfatara called the Pangujaan. 2 It is situated
on the southern slope of a slide, about 125 feet high and about 300 feet wide,
from the sides of which four or five larger and several smaller vents give off
steam and sulphurous gases in a continuous flow. As at the To-od, these vents
are usually fringed with a sublimate of sulphur, close approach to which,
however, is very difficult on account of the precipitousness of the slide, as
well as on account of the heat and noxious gases given off. Occasionally the
channel leading to one of these vents may become closed, and the flow of gases
deflected in another direction, in which event the rich sublimate which has
formed in the neck and about the mouth of the vent becomes covered over with
a subsequent layer of kaolin, forming a hidden deposit of almost pure sulphur.”
“South and southwest of the two solfataras are two small lakes which drain
that region. The smaller of these, called the Malaksan, has low and flat banks,
is quite shallow, and is about 100 feet long by about 500 feet wide. Its waters
are slightly acid, and apparently barren of all living matter. The larger and
deeper of the two lakes, called the Pangi, is situated about half a mile south of
lake Malaksan, has high, steep and wooded banks, and contains fresh water
with an abundance of large fish. The approximate altitudes of the two lakes
are respectively 1,230 and 1,160 feet above sea level. With the exception of
a few occasional fishermen who venture into this country, the entire neighbor-
hood of the solfataras is uninhabited and uncultivated for miles around.”
Mount Cabalian. —Another topographical feature worthy of description
is Mount Caballan, which is situated in the extreme southeastern point
of the island. Its lower slopes have the characteristics of a volcanic cone,
but its summit is broken up into irregular peaks inclosing a lake which
evidently occupies the crater. To the south and east the lower slopes of
the mountain descend gradually to the sea, and to the northeast they
descend with the same regularity to a lowland. To the north and west
there are hills which destroy the outline of the cone. To the west and
east of the mountain there are hot springs, and several of the streams
which flow down its lower slope are slightly mineralized, so that fish
do not live in them.
In Bulletin 111, Census of the Philippines, 1905, Rev. Saderra Maso,
S. J., records that it is stated that near Cabalian there lies an active
solfatara. This probably refers to Mount Cabalian which, however, does
not exhibit solfataric action. In 1907 it was the center of a local earth-
quake disturbance which continued from May 17 to 25 and caused
several large landslides from the peaks of the mountains. The barren
rock faces and the paths of the descending avalanches, as indicated by
the absence of trees, were clearly distinguishable at the time this recon-
naissance was made. In the Bulletin of the Weather Bureau for May,
1907, the reports of this earthquake from inhabitants of the locality
state that the disturbance caused some nipa houses to fall, and that on
2 Solfatara of Mount Dan&n of Jagor’s description.


May 20 the shocks were so frequent that the people had difficulty in
cooking their meals. In his report for May, 1907, Director Algue, of
the Weather Bureau, writes concerning the character of the disturbance;
“It is certain that these earthquakes, besides having a very reduced meizoseismic
area (about 10 kilometers in diameter) must have proceeded from a center at a
small depth, since of more than sixty disturbances felt in the epicentrum between
the 17th and 25th of May, only eight were perceptible in Maasin, 30 kilometers
distant, and four in the extreme northeast of Mindanao, which is 60 kilometers
distant.”
Solfataras on Biliran Island. —According to Abella the central cor-
dillera continues to the north in the islands of Biliran and Maripipi,
He describes the Cordillera of Biliran as extending from the northwest to
southeast and lying near the eastern sides of the island, and then curving
to the south where it terminates in abrupt slopes at the narrow strait
which separates the island from Leyte.
The active solfataras of Biliran are described by Abella as follows
(translation from the original in Spanish) :
“The most important of all, the one in the drainage of the Caraycaray River,
is situated in the place called Cajuco on the western slope of Mount Guinon on one
of the spurs which gives rise to the Cailjian ravine. One sees at that place an
elliptical space about 100 meters long entirely devoid of vegetation in which the
rocks are whitened or of variegated colors produced by the deposits and concretions
of various natures which are found there, and from some distance there is a
noticeable sulphurous odor from the fumaroles at various points”
The mine San Antonio was located on this deposit.
“The solfataras of the Caibiran River occur principally in three bare spots
analogous to the one at Cajucao situated parallel to the Mapula ravine on the
eastern side of Mount Guinon opposite those of Cajucao. * * * These three
spots or bare places present phenomena and products similar to the others just
described. * * * However, the disintegrating products of the rocks are here
more extensive, which seems to indicate that these sulphur deposits are somewhat
older than that of the other slope and are in their period of decline or extinction.”
The mine Santa Eosalia was located on this deposit.
“The solfatara situated in the drainage of the Anas River on the western
slope of Mount Guianasan is still more energetic and important than the one
in the Mapula ravine, but on the other hand possesses a much more ferruginous
character than the others.”
The extinct solfataras which Abella saw are situated at Guiso del
Monte Panamao near Almeria and at Catmon near -Naval. At the first
he found clays, oxide of iron, and pyrite, the soluble substances and
sulphur having disappeared. The second, which is near the sea and
away from any stream, has a circular crater-like depression 50 meters in
diameter and contains some clay deposits, but no sulphur.
' c.
Goodman, who visited the Island of Biliran to examine the sulphur
deposits, gives a description of them similar to that of Abella. He also


noted a conglomerate on the beach about a half mile north of Almena, the
boulders of which are encrusted with deposit of aluminous sulphate,
probably alunogen, hut of no commercial importance. In addition he
refers to a hot spring near Catmon with a temperature of 107 F. and
containing a small amount of gas, but no sulphur.
Springs: Besides the springs already mentioned as associated with the
solfataras on Biliran Island and near Burauen in Leyte and those related
to the extinct volcanoes, Mount Amandiuing and Mount Cabalian, there
is a small hot spring on the west side of the point of land which projects
from Leyte opposite Poro Island in the Biliran strait and a hot sulphur-
spring on Mount Ogris south of Mount Nipga between Abuyog and Bay-
bay. South of Abuyog in the barrio Buenavista there is a cold mineral
spring. To the west of Alangalang, on the west side of the Cabayong
River, there are some small and apparently nearly buried hills which are
probably outliers of the Cordillera and at the base of one of these there
is a cold mineral spring.
Igneous rocks! —The rocks from the Cordillera which were collected
by Jagor, were studied by Roth who states that there is an amphibolitic
andesite at the gateway of the mountain of Dagami. Evidently he refers
to the gateway in the mountain Himalicagan which Jagor passed on his
way to the solfataras south of Burauen, since on Coellos map the names
Dagami and Burauen are transposed. Roth, in his comments, states
that the rock is exacty like that of Isarog, a dormant volcano in Camarines
Sur, and that to the north of it there is a lapilli formation. This would
seem to be a proof that there was once an active volcano near by and
would support Jagor’s statement that the solfataras are in a crater. In
another portion of his article Roth writes that it is well known that
Mount Dagami (Himalicagan) is an extinct volcano. Goodman found
andesites at a locality near the solfatara.
According to Becker’s opinion Ahella’s descriptions of the rocks of
Biliran Island make it substantially certain that they are hornblende
andesites.
The rocks which the streams bring down to the vicinities of Alangalang,
Dagami, and Cabalian and which were collected during the reconnaissance
on which this report is based, were mostly hornblende andesites with ‘a
few basaltic boulders.
One of Roth’s conclusions is as follows:
“Among the numerous volcanic racks which I have from the south of Luzon,
Samar, and Leyte and in the related tuffs, there are represented with few
exceptions only two types, closely related, both being characterized by the presence
of triclinic feldspars and distinguished one by hornblende, and the other by
augite; hornblende andesites and augitic andesites or dolerites.”
3 ln this paper Kemp’s classification of igneous rocks is followed. The
petrographic determinations are by Dr. W. D. Smith.


Sedimentary rocks. —Thus far no sedimentary rocks have been reported
as occurring in the cordillera in Leyte, and Abella did not mention any
in his description of Biliran Island. However, according to a seemingly
reliable report, there is an occurrence of petroleum on the east coast of
Biliran, inland from the sitio Capalis, and it is quite probable that it is
in sedimentary rocks.
The eastern flank of the cordillera is buried for a long distance by
the alluvial deposits of the northwestern plains. The western flank from
Ormoc to Baybay descends to the coast. The places where the relations
of the sedimentaries may best be studied have not been visited, although
it is certain from a few observations made during this reconnaissance that
on the western flank of the Cordillera there is an extensive series of
stratified deposits in which limestones are conspicuous. They are more
fully discussed in describing the southwestern district. On the east side
of the island similar limestones were seen at only one locality. At
Patyucan point and extending inland to the road between Hinunangan
and Hinundayan, there is a mountain called Patyucan which consists of
massive and thinner bedded limestones which outcrop in conspicuous sea
cliffs. They dip towards the south as if they had been given their inclina-
tion through a subsidence peripheral to the volcanic center, Mount
Cabalian.
Origin of. the Cordillera. —The trend of the Cordillera, as shown on
the accompanying sketch map, is about N. 30° W. Abella has expressed
his opinion that Biliran Island is due to a volcanic action and that it is
a part of a volcanic belt which continues to the southward through Leyte
and Panaon and the Eastern Cordillera of Surigao (Mindanao) to point
San Agustin with some similar volcanic manifestations, and to the north-
ward in the island of Maripipi and others until it connects with the
active volcano Bulusan in Luzon, being thus situated on one of the vol-
canic fractures of the Archipelago. Becker cites this opinion of Abella
and also the rather untenable theory of volcanic belts by Koto in his
“Geological Structure of the Malay Archipelago” in which is included a
structural line from Masbate through Leyte and eastern Mindanao. Es-
pecially suggestive are the following remarks by Becker,
“To my thinking too much effort has been made to show unbroken continuity
of volcanic zones. Fissures occur far more often in parallel systems than singly
and, just as dikes jump from one fissure of such a system to another, so, I
think, do the greater volcanic phenomena.”
Much more study will be necessary, before the relations of the volcanic
zone of Leyte are determined definitely and in the meantime it will be
better not to try to extend it too far. In the accompanying map Panaon
Island is not included in the trend of the Cordillera, since it is not known
to contain any true volcanic phenomena and the rocks seen in the
northern end indicate that it is more closely related to the southwestern
semi-mountainous district.


SOUTHWESTERN SEMIMOUNTAINOUS DISTRICT.
If the limits of this district, as shown on the accompanying sketch map,
are studied, it will be noted that between Ormoc and Baybay the Central
Cordillera descends to the coast. Accordingly, the southwestern district
is discontinuous and may be spoken of as consisting of a northern and a
southern part.
The northern part contains a number of hills and low mountains which
are indicated on d’Almonte’s map, although no elevations are shown.
They are situated in the western part of the area. The landscape in gen-
eral presents a broken appearance, and near San Isidro and Yillaba is a
cogon hill country which formerly contained many haciendas devoted to
the cultivation of sugar. Communication is largely by sea. There is,
however, a trail leading north from Ormoc to Valencia and thence con-
tinuing northward to the head of the estuary into which the Leyte and
Palapay Elvers flow. This trail passes through relatively low country and
has a branch which turns to the eastward and crosses the Cordillera to
Capoocan and Caragara. There are also branches from this trail which
turn off at various points to Yillaba and Polompon. The only improved
road is one newly built from Ormoc to Dolores, which it will be im-
practicable to extend eastward over the cordillera to Jaro. The country
along the trail north from Ormoc will probably develop into an important
agricultural district, inasmuch as it contains a large amount of valley
land. At present it is very sparsely inhabited.
The southern part of the southwestern district is more mountainous
than the northern. To the south of Baybay there is a high ridge which
runs in a southeasterly direction to a point opposite Bato, where there is a
break in the mountains which is taken advantage of for a trail across
this peninsular part of Leyte, the remaining roads of this area being
along the coast. To the south of this route of travel there are mountain-
ous ridges, one of which lies to the north of Maasin and the other to the
west of Malitabog. Pananon Island, which is separated from Leyte by
a narrow strait, appears to be a continuation of the mountains which
parallel the coast south from Sogod. If we analyze the coast line of
Leyte and judge of the trend of the mountains as shown by the position
of the names on d’Almonte’s map, we might be led to the same conclusion
which was expressed by Becker, who, in his remarks concerning the
structural lines of the Philippine Islands writes:
“Near the center of our own Island of Leyte there is a fork in the mountain
system, and the westerly branch is seemingly continued southward through Mount
Apo and the southermost part of Mindanao by the way of Sanguir Island to
Celebes.”
It is probable that this remark was based upon a study of the map
of Leyte rather than its topographic features seen in the field. The coast


line of d’Almonte’s map is far from perfect. When the bay in the
southern part of the island, which may have suggested the forking in
the mountain systems, is properly mapped and the trend of the adjacent
mountains is shown, it will be seen that the structure of the southwestern
district is approximately parallel with that of the central cordillera.
Sedimentary formations. —At all of the places where the rocks of this
district were examined, and in all of the landscapes which were studied
while passing along the coast, conspicuous outcrops of coralline limestone
were seen exposed on the flanks of the hills and even resting on the tops
of some of the higher mountains. The relation of these outcrops to the
topography and the apparent dip of the formations, as well as their
attitudes when studied at close range, show that they have been elevated,
faulted, and tilted. In some places masses were caught in between erup-
tive igneous rocks. It is probable that they were deposited on a base-
ment of older igneous rocks and that with the gradual elevation and
emergence of the Island of Leyte igneous rocks were intruded along some
lines of fracture, giving rise to the dominant mountain trends. The
sedimentary formations include beds of shales and conglomerates, but
these are far less conspicuous than the limestones. In the northern part,
near Eidalia, which is now known as Port Calubian, outcrops of coal
are reported. Becker states that Leyte possesses coal but the locality is
unknown, although it is said to be in the southwestern part of the island.
It may be that the locality near Calubian is the one which furnished the
samples which, as noted by Becker, were analyzed by the Inspeccion de
Minas and shown to be of the same class as the Cebu coal, having a fuel
value of 5,800 calories. On d*Almonte’s map, the occurrence of petroleum
is indicated at a point about 7 kilometers north of Yillaba. It is reported
that some prospectors have studied this part of Leyte and have found
much to encourage them in the belief that petroleum exists there in
paying quantities, but they have been deterred from developing the field
because of the difficulty of enlisting capital.
Igneous rocks. —The igneous rocks of the southwestern district have
been very little studied. From the island of Limasaua a specimen of
hornblende andesite was determined by Oebbeke. During this recon-
naissance some specimens of igneous rocks were collected to the west of
Malitbog. They have been classified as diorites and peridotite porphyries.
The field relations of the igneous rocks to the west of Malitbog and on
the northern end of Panaon Island, near Liloan, show clearly that erup-
tive and intrusive rocks have broken through the sedimentaries and in-
cluded masses of the limestone. On the eastern side of Panaon, near
Pinutan Point, d’Almonte indicates'the occurrence of gold mines. Becker
states that the Avail rock at these mines was called by Ashburner “green-
stone porphyry ” and that this term, while it would not exclude prophylitic
neo-volcanics, in all probability points to diorite or diabase.


Gold Mines on Panaon Island. —These mines were examined by Ash-
burner in 1883. From a manuscript report in the possession of Ashbur-
ner’s clients, we have the following information given by Becker:
“Several veins of quartz outcrop on the coast and extend in a westerly direction
into the mountain. These veins are paralled. They strike east and dip south.
The wall rock is ‘green-stone porphyry.’ There is some wall rock in the vein
and the sulphurettes are generally pyrites and accompanied by galena and zinc
blende. One vein about six feet wide has been worked to a considerable extent,
some 871 tons having been treated up to 1883. The yield was $6 or $7 per ton.
Concessions for gold mining have been granted at Tigbuan, just south of Pinutan,
and, according to the Compendio de Geografia, there was a productive mine at
Inalinan.”
Becker further says that Ashburner found nothing which he could
recommend to his clients. However, a mine which at that time was not
attractive to capitalists, may prove worthy of exploitation when the condi-
tions of the country are favorable to mining.
NORTHEASTERN SEMIMOUNTAINOUS DISTRICT.
There is an elongate mountainous area to the west of the straits which
separate Leyte and Samar Islands, in which the highest elevations are
toward the northern end. There are some broken ridges on the east
and west of the mountains, and to the south are isolated hills forming
a continuation of the district. The rugged portion is heavily timbered
and but sparsely inhabited.
From Tacloban, the principal port of Leyte, the road to the interior
makes a detour of this district, first running to the south along the coast
to the town of Palo, where it branches to the northeastern plains. South
of Palo there are a few scattered hills situated near the coast and having
their flanks partly buried by the sediments which constitute the plain.
Geologic formation. —The only note concerning the rocks of this district
is by Jagor, who reported that he found a cliff of grayish green quartzose
chloritic schists on the sandy beach about a league from Tanauan. This
locality is evidently to the south of Tanauan about half way to Tolosa
where there is such an exposure. Inland, in a long hill which the road
touches in two places, this schist is more fully represented and is cut
by dikes and larger intrusions of an augite andesite porphyry which
probably produced the schist by metamorphosing the sedimentaries with
which it came in contact.
Further south on the seashore, just to the northeast of Tolosa, there
is a high subconical hill surmounted by an old tower built as an outlook
and defense against the Moros. An exposure of rock in a sea cliff of a
neighboring lower hill to the northeast shows an altered shale much
squeezed and slickensided. Between Tolosa and Dulag there is a hill
in which exposures near the road show a fine igneous rock which on
microscopic examination proved to be felsitic andesite.


About 1 kilometer to the west of Tanauan the United States Army
opened a quarry in an isolated hill, in order to obtain stone for repairing
the road from Tanauan to Dagmi. There is exposed in this quarry a
squeezed, slickensided and very much altered rock which under the
microscope showed only serpentine.
In the falls of the Milarong River to the west of Palo, and also in
the hill near by, there is exposed an augite andesite with gabbroic texture.
It is similar to the rock which is found cutting the schist south of Ta-
nauan. The road nearer Palo cuts into a hill of altered shales. At Palo,
at the north end of the bridge, a quarry has been opened for road material
in a high hill of hard and slickensided and somewhat altered shale. The
abutments of the bridge rest on exposures of this rock which produces a
small fall in the river. The main area of the northeastern district was
not visited, but such gravels as were seen from its streams indicate that
the rocks which constitute it are similar to those found in the hills which
form its southern continuation. The geologic history of the district, as
may be interpretated from the data now available, indicates that the
mountainous structure was due to the intrusion of igneous rocks into a
series of sediments producing an uplift along an axis trending ap-
proximately north 30° west.
A peninsular part of Samar and the very irregular shaped Daram
Island, as well as other lesser islands, lie to the northward, in strike with
the northeastern district of Leyte, a fact which indicates that the structure
continues to the northward. In traveling by steamer from Catbalogan,
Samar, to Carigara, Leyte, and returning from Tacloban through the
straits and interisland passages to Catbalogan, an opportunity was given
to see the islands at close range, but no landing was made. The islands
consist of sedimentary rocks with some igneous rocks which appear to form
the axis of the trend, and, if they are not a continuation of the igneous
rocks of northeastern Leyte, they at least follow parallel structural lines.
Without landing and making a close examination it can not be determined
whether they are intrusive or not, but the sedimentary beds do not appear
to be altered and probably represent a younger formation than those which
are cut and metamorphosed by the intrusives of the northeastern district
of Leyte. In fact, at Tacloban, in the point of the peninsula on which
the town is built, there are some low hills around which the Army post
is located and exposures made by cutting roads show that the formation
of which these hills are composed is a series of variable sandstones, shales
and conglomerates, dipping at a low angle to the eastward. In the con-
glomerates there are pebbles and small boulders of igneous rocks which
apparently had their origin in the northeastern district. Especially sig-
nificant are the pebbles of schist. The hills in Tacloban were once islands,
and they have been united to the mainland by a recent formation con-
sisting of marine deposits and coral reefs which form the neck of the


peninsula. A second peninsula of apparently similar origin but without
any hills, lies to the east of the town, forming the limits of Cancabato
cove. To the west of Tacloban the first low ridge consists of a series of
sedimentaries very little exposed, but giving evidence of containing sand-
stones and some limestones. The direction of this ridge is about north
30° west. Looking across the straits to the north of Tacloban on the
Island of Samar, there is a conspicuous hill showing a high escarpment,
well toward its upper portion. This escarpment is due to the weather-
ing of a thick bed of variable sandstone and conglomerate. In passing
through the straits between Samar and Leyte, in the portion which has
approximately a north south direction, one may observe outcrops of sedi-
mentary beds dipping at low angles to the eastward. These are imper-
fect sandstones and nodular and concretionary argillaceous beds. The
many changes in the direction of the channel in this part are due to
the development of the channel by erosion along the strike of the least
resistant beds which have an eastward dip and a strike of about north 30°
west. The topography of the shores and the islands in the straits shows
a series of hills or ridges and the channel occupies the lowest valleys be-
tween them, passing in a zigzag direction.
This series of sedimentary beds may best be studied on the Island of
Samar where it contains some heavy limestones. Besides a number of
sea cliffs which were seen in the small islands along its western shore,
exposures were studied at Catbalogan and' Calbayog. The formation is
probably very extensive in Samar where its history may some day be
worked out in detail. It is but slightly represented in the northeastern
part of Leyte’, and there is little certainty of correlating it with the
sedimentary formation in the southwestern districts of the island because
of the wide belts of the northeastern plains and the Central Cordillera
which intervene. Nevertheless, the idea suggests itself that the sedi-
mentaries of western Samar and southeastern Leyte belong to the same
series which at present are not classified closely as to age, but which are
now called late Tertiary.
NORTHEASTERN PLAINS.
This district is the part of Leyte best adapted to agriculture because
of the character of its soil and the general level surface of the land. It
lies between the northeastern semimountainous district and the Central
Cordillera, having considerable seacoast on Carigara Bay, and a longer
coast line on the Pacific Ocean between Palo and Abuyog. Eoads are
being built to connect Carigara and Tacloban by the way of Palo, and to
extend from Palo through Tariauan and Dagami to Burauen; and grad-
ually this system will extend along the coast as far south as Abuyog, and
have branches to all the important centers of population. Carigara is


a very shallow port and ships must anchor well out in the bay. At low
tide a broad beach is left bare, and the channel across it is too shallow
for transporting cargo by lighters. On the east coast the towns are un-
protected ports and open toward the Pacific. As a result, Tacloban,
which has deep water and is well protected, will always receive a large
amount of traffic from the plains district.
Geologic formation. —With the exception of a few exposures in low
river banks which reveal very soft sandstones and poorly cemented con-
glomerates, little idea of the underlying formation of the northeastern
plains can be obtained. Its surface deposits are largely alluvial and have
been brought down by the streams from the Cordillera. Accordingly,
near the foot of the Cordillera, coarser sediments are to be expected, and
along the sea coast where the plains are low, little else is seen besides
beach sand and silts deposited near river mouths. Reference has already
been made to the partially buried hills, which are the southern continua-
tion of the northeastern semi-mountainous district. The occurrence of
some low hills near Alangalang which are probably outliers of the Cor-
dillera district, has been noted in connection with the description of the
Cordillera. Also reference has been made to the hills which surround
Lake Bito. These are all inliers in the plain and give very little informa-
•tion as to the general formation. The only place thus far at which
a deep well has been drilled in this district is Carigara, where artesian
water was encountered at a depth of 56 meters. An examination of the
samples of drillings which came from the well showed sands, detrital
material from andesite rocks such as might have been brought in by rivers
from the Cordillera, and interbedded marine sands containing marine
shells. While it is not possible from the present data to prove the emer-
gence of this plains district, it appears very reasonable to suppose that it
was a strait at some period not very far removed, and that the elevation of
the island has converted it into an alluvial plain, the surface of which
has been aggraded by the streams. Marine sediments may be expected
under the alluvial surface deposits.
GEOLOGIC HISTORY
Our present knowledge of the geology of Leyte is very incomplete but
it points to an interesting history of the island which may be tentatively
outlined as follows:
The basal formations do not appear in any area thus far studied
unless the dioritic rocks represent the igneous portion of the older forma-
tions. Thus far diorites have been found only near Malitbog, and, pos-
sibly, as Becker has suggested, they are represented at the gold mines on
Panaon Island.
In the northeastern district there is a series of sedimentaries, perhaps


older Tertiary, which have been metamorphosed into schists and altered
shales by intrusive igneous rocks. Some stream gravels indicate that a
similar series of more or less metamorphosed sedimentaries and accom-
panying intrusives are present in the southwestern district. The erosion
of these formations has contributed sediments to the later Tertiary.
The most widely distributed formation is a series which contains besides
conspicuous beds of limestone, some shales, sandstones, and conglomerates.
It is the predominating formation in the southwestern district and is
reported to contain coal near Port Calubian (Eulalia) and petroleum
north of Yillaba. There is a small area of limestone of this series in
the hills at Patyacan point on the east side of the Cordillera in the
southeastern part of the island, and it is represented in the northeastern
part of the island near the strait of San Juanico, and extensively in
southwestern Samar. These sedimentaries are usually considered as later
Tertiary. They have been lifted, faulted, and intruded by igneous rocks
which appear to be closely related to the igneous rocks of the Cordillera.
The Central Cordillera of Leyte is a volcanic belt which extends in a
direction north 30° west, through the island and continues in Biliran and
Maripipi Islands. It contains the extinct volcano Cabalian, the solfataras
south of Burauen, Mount Amandiuing, which is probably an extinct
volcano, and the solftaras in Biliran Island. The rocks of this district
are largely hornblendic andesites.
The northeastern plains, which are largely alluvial, represent the latest
extensive formation. In addition there are some marginal littoral
deposits formed in part of coralline limestone.
The emergences and submergences of Leyte and the adjacent islands,
including especially Samar, form a complicated history. The coal in
Leyte (and it may be noted that coal is also reported in western Samar but
not yet known to be of economic importance) and the wide distribution
of coralline limestone, in what is called the later Tertiary series of sedi-
mentaries, indicates an extensive area of low-lying lands, coral reefs and
shallow seas in late Tertiary time. The emergence of this series, which
formed the Island of Leyte, seems to have been brought about by the
igneous intrusions and volcanic eruptions which took place in the zone
of the Cordillera. During the first stages of this process a strait probably
extended in what is now the northeastern plains district. By continued
elevation and the contribution of sediments from the Cordillera this
strait has been transformed into an aggraded alluvial area. The develop-
ment of the San Juanico Strait apparently occurred later and may be
attributed to a submergence along an axis parallel to the Cordillera of
Leyte, and perhaps resulting concomitantly with the growth in elevation
of the central portions of the Islands of Samar and Leyte.


SUMMARY OR MINERAL RESOURCES.
Gold. —The mines in Panaon Island have been abandoned for several
years. If the veins permit of favorable mining and a yield of from $6
or $7 per ton can be obtained, as reported by Ashburner, it may be worth
while to reopen the mines.
Coal. —The commercial value of the coal near Calubian probably
depends more upon the character of the beds and facilities for delivering
it at the sea coast, than upon the quality, since most Philippine coals
' are of about the same grade. Concerning the nature and location of the
coal there are at present only hearsay reports.
Sulphur. —Goodman, from an examination of the surface estimated
that there are about 3,000 tons of sulphur in sight at the To-od and
Pangujan solfataras south of Burauen. At the mining claim San An-
tonio on Biliran Island there hre 400 tons and at the Santa Rosalia
claim the amount is inappreciable. He suggests the deduction of 25 per
cent for loss in mining and treating. The cost of transportation from
the Burauen deposits he considered prohibitive and the Biliran deposits
too small to warrant the cost of installing machinery. However, trans-
portation from Burauen to Tacloban will soon be improved by the com-
pletion of a good road, and since the remaining distance is short it may
be that the sulphur can he exploited at a profit.
Petroleum—ls o wells have been drilled and no study of the geologic
structure near the oil showings has been made. There is some talk of
prospecting at the showings near Yillaba and on Biliran, but at present
there is lack of capital for such an enterprise because of the attendant
risk.
Stone. —Thus far two quarries have been opened for road material,
oue just west of Tanauan and the other at Palo. jSTo doubt others will
be developed in order to obtain stone of good quality for road building.
Up to the present time gravel has been extensively used, but with better
equipment crushed stone will be employed for road surfacing and a
diligent search will probably reveal that it can be made available at many
places.
Clay. —At present, ordinary pottery is manufactured at Tanauan and
probably at some other towns which were not visited.
Formerly brick kilns were operated for burning soft brick at Baybay,
but after supplying the local demand they were allowed to fall into disuse.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Jagor, F. Reisen in den Philippinen. Berlin, Wiedmannsche Buchhandlung
(1873) XYI-381; 1 map. This work contains the paper by Roth catalogued
separately. A Spanish edition, “Viajes por Pilipinas,” translated from the
German, was published in Madrid in 1875; and an English edition, “Travels
in the Philippines,” was published in London in 1875. The English transla-
tion is very poor and omits Roth’s paper.
90339 2
■


Roth, Justus. Ueber die geologische Beschaffenheit der Philippinen. Ibid,
331-354.
Oebbeke, Dr. K. Bertrage zur Petrographie der Philippinen nnd der Palau Insel.
Neues Jahrbuch fur Mineralogie, etc. (1881), Beilage-Band, 451-501.
Abella y Casabiego, Enrique. La Isla Biliran (Pilipinas) y sus actuales
emanaciones volchnicas. Boletin de la Comisidn del Mapa Geologico de
Espana (1884), V, 11. Later published separately in Madrid in 1885.
Koto, B. On the geologic structure of the Malayan Archipelago. Journ. Coll.
Soi., Tokyo (1899), V, 11.
Becker, George F. Report on the Geology of the Philippine Islands. Annual
Rep. U. 8. Geol. Survey (1899-1900), Part 111.


* I
r ■ . '" " |
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Plate I. Reconnaissance map of the geologic districts of Leyte.
357
' 1 ■


*
-
1
N.
\ '
r . ■ < .
'
%
■ , ‘ * N
t
' ■
"
*
-K
►
.
A
♦


125° ~
i.
<X 1 j/^V
A M A R ‘~m^
„ ' LEGEND o
i» ne ° u s an^
J~\ sedimentaries etc,
CAMOTE IS. Abuyog |
( ( /juabalian. ,,
k//' /T/A-Malitbog \/ f
--- "vr /7 \ , \ DIN AG AT IS
J
/rO "> 3 Cr%
\vyxi PANAON t. S.
V UMASAUA I. 1 ?) .-, A
bohol i. 7 y %r
< rv
' —s. SUPJGAO^^,
SCALE J Ss
O 10 20 30 40 50 KILOMETERS MINDANAO
/ 0 10 20 30 40 50 MILES \ S
- 'i— rn -.if - ,- ■ ,. .-— . —.7 irt ~=' TiW \ c.
j ~ 125° J. FALCON DEL.
Adams : Geological Reconnaissance of Leyte.]
[Phil. Jouen. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
RECONNAISSANCE MAP OF THE GEOLOGIC DISTRICTS OF LEYTE.
F> LAT EL I .


■'r
111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY.'
A. THE MEN.
By Robert Bennett Bean, assisted by Federico S. Planta.
(From the Anatomical Laboratory, Philippine Medical School, Manila, P. I.)
■rt,-
A study of the physical characteristics of the people of Taytay was
suggested by Doctor Freer in conjunction with the medical investiga-
t tions to be made there in 1909. This study throughout the season of
investigation was greatly facilitated by the kind cooperation of Doctors
Clements and Nichols.
A series of observations was conducted on about 500 individuals, forty
measurements of each individual being made by Doctor Bean, and
transcribed by Mr. Planta. The head measurements were performed
in accordance with the prescribed regulations of the International Con-
gress of Anthropologists assembled at Monaco in 1906(10,14), and the
body measurements in accordance with the personal instructions of
Prdfessor Monouvrier (3). Additional observations on the ear type, .color
of eyes, structure of hair, etc., were carried on, and sagittal outlines of
the head from inion to nasion were produced with the cephalograph (7).
The statistical part of the work was done by Mr. Planta, who alone is
responsible for the averages, although every calculation has been verified
until its accuracy is assured. Doctor Bean alone is responsible for the
interpretation of the results and the writing of the paper.
This study is divided into six parts: I, Physical Measurements; IT,
Descriptive Characters; 111, The Segregation of Types; IV, Ear Type
and Species; Y, Diseases and Species; and YI, Conclusions, The Separa-
tion of the Types into Systematic and Elementary Species.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
The town of Taytay probably contains a more mixed population than
the average Eilipino town at the same distance from the coast (20 kilo-
meters), for the following reasons: It is near enough to Manila (15
kilometers) to receive some of the overflow of the population from that
city, and perhaps for this reason and because of its pleasant location on
an elevated knoll at the base of the foothills of adjacent mountains, it is
1 These studies form a part of those carried on during the medical survey of the
town of Taytay, the remaining papers on which have already been published in
Sec. B. 4 (1909) of this Journal— Co-Editor.
p £ -
k


the country residence of some of the Government’s high Filipino officials.
The proximity to the town of the hills and mountains is sufficient to
attract- the hill people, and its situation on the borders of Bay Lake
(Laguna de Bay) attracts the fisher folk. It is only a few kilometers
from Pasig, the capital of Rizal Province, where a mixed population of
Filipinos, Americans, Spaniards and Chinamen reside. The pilgrims to
Antipolo, situated in the hills, pass through Taytay, and one of the most ,
important industries of the place is the transportation by cart and
hammock of many thousands of passengers on this pilgrimage during
the month of May each year. Finally, the town of Cainta, where a
garrison of British soldiers, natives of India, are reported to have been
left when the British evacuated Manila one hundred and fifty years
ago, is little more than a stone’s throw from Taytay, and there has
probably been an infiltration of the Indian element into the latter place.
r*" '
The individuals measured were those who came to the dispensary and
they should be considered in part as a hospital population, but the major-
ity showed no other affliction than infestation with intestinal parasites and
many were only friends of the sick who came with them as companions.
The resulting components of this randon sample represent more nearly
the normal average of the population than if a selected group such as
recruits, students or other homogenous bodies of people had been taken.
Therefore it may be assumed fairty that the individuals herein pre-
sented are typical of the littoral population of the Philippines, although
a larger percentage than usual belongs to the hospital population, and
the Indian element may exert a small influence.
I. PHYSICAL MEASUREMENTS.
STATURE.
Topinard(3l) classified the races of men by stature as follows:
Men. Women.
Small below 160 cm. below 140 cm.
Below medium 160-165 (inclusive) 140-153 (inclusive)
Above medium 165-169 (inclusive) 153-157 (inclusive)
Tall above 170 above 158 .
The Taytayans, according to this classification, are on the border line
between the small races and the races below medium height. The
average of 183 adult males is 159.47 centimeters. The minimum is
145.7 centimeters and the maximum is 171.0 centimeters. The stature
is 5.47 centimeters greater than that of 104 adult male Igorots(3),
but the distance between the extremes is not so great. The extremes
should be separated more in 183 individuals than in 104, if the compo-
sition is the same. However, this is not true of the two groups, Igorots
and Taytayans, from which the inference is that the stature of the
component elements forming the Igorots was more diverse than that
forming the Taytayans.


ft r r r v~
30 ;
V) 2 6
'-J 2S / N
25 : .
§ \?0
20 J- __ -i,
I \
' 6 J \
k IS ——= \ :
O / ' \/J ■
It \
5) !0 ; -/- : —
5 / • \ -
5) 6 / \ 12
* 5
3/ '-t.
t —-r
1—L— I _i L_
14-6 148 HO 152 /54 156 ISS 160 /62 /64 166 166 170 172
STATURE IN CENTIMETERS
111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 361
The Igorots are apparently derived from a tall stock (170 centimeters),
a small stock (148 centimeters), and a stock below medium height. The
Taytayans are probably derived from both the latter stocks, and, in
addition, their stature has been influenced by Spanish and Chinese
elements. The Spanish are slightly below medium stature and the
Chinese are slightly above , although the Northern Chinese (Manchus)
are ta11(8,10,14,17,22,35) ; the two original stocks were small. A com-
bination of these elements with a greater proportion of the original
stocks could easily produce an average stature of 159.47 centimeters.
The curve of stature illustrates how this might result. -There is a
Fig. 1. —Curve of Stature of 183 Adult Male Taytayans,
summit at 156 centimeters where the mode is found, there is another
summit at 162 centimeters, and a break of the curve at 168. The first
summit includes the greatest number of individuals with the same
stature, a small stature, that would represent the primary stocks; the
second summit has fewer individuals and a stature below medium, which
represents the Spanish; and the break above medium stature, with still
fewer individuals, represents the Chinese. The Spanish element is
apparently in excess of the Chinese but is not present in so great a number
as the primary stocks. The presentation of types in a subsequent part
of this paper corroborates the inferences stated here.
The stature of the Taytayans exceeds that of the inhabitants of the
inland part of the Malay Peninsula (18), that of the Yeddahs of Cey-
lon(24), the Dyaks of Borneo(18), the Dravidians of Bengal(18), the
Annamites in general(lo), the Igorots(3), the Ainos and the Japa-
nese(lB) ; it is practically the same as the Malays of South Perak(lB),
and the Menangkabau-Malayan of Hagen (12) ; and it is less than that of
the Chinese(l2,lB), Coreans(lB), Javanese(l2,l7,3o), Sumatrans(39),
North American Indian (13), the African and North American Negro
(31), and practically the whole body of European and American whites
(10,23,31,36).


«
BEAN.
764 r : :
NUMBERS INDICATE
HOW MAt)y IN 2 6
/63 GROUP 7 \ !
i» CV-f/l
>y /' \ \
\ / \ /
| ,6t —-—mf \ / 1 —~
8 A / \ / \
760 j--\- 4- Y f V
759 j X ggX i
k / \ / \
/w / 25\/ 4. i_
'R ,5 ° ioJ \
157 — - t
/« T- V
15-/7 /Q-2? 23-27 2832 3337 38 A3 43A7> AS-SO 57-60 6/-70 7/-80
AGE GROUPS
Fig. 2. —Stature and Age.
>_ STATURE AND AGE,
This array presents a bizarre effect, and no deductions may safely be
drawn from the correlation of stature and age. However, the facts
speak for themselves.
The age is only approximate as indicated by the manner of grouping.
For instance, there are 6 men at the age 20, but only 4at 19 and 1 at 21; there
are 7 at 25, but only 2 at 24 and 2 at 26; there are 15 at 30, but 4 at 29 and 2
at 31; there are 9 at 35, but 2 at 34 and 1 at 36; there are 13 at 40, but 3 at
39 and 2at 41; and there are 7 at 45, and but 1 at 44 and 1 at 46. Therefore,
it seems justifiable to group the ages in series of 5 except that the ages 15 to 17
form one grouj) and the age groups above 50 are in series of 10.
Accordingly, the-stature appears to increase from 15 to 20, to decrease
from 20 to 25, to increase from 25 to 40, to drop considerably at 45
and 50, to increase again at GO and 70, and finally to reach a stature
at 80 that is less than that below 20. There is a fastigium at 40, the
stature increasing up to that age and decreasing thereafter. The in-
dividual with the smallest stature is aged 38, and the one with the
tallest, aged 33. There are 58 individuals above the age of 20 who
have a stature less than the average of the group aged 15 to 17. For
this and other reasons the few individuals below the age of 20 are
included as adults in this study. The conclusion reached is that stature
in age groups is a matter of the chance types that were measured at
each age rather than altered stature due to age. If the stature increases


to the age of 40, this would indicate that the Filipino reaches maturity
in stature late in life, and if the stature at age 15 is equal to that in
adult life the Filipino reaches maturity at an early age. Both may be
true. There may be an early rapid maturity that is premature, and a
late ripening that is real maturity, or some types may mature early
and others late, or there may be waves of progression superceded by
regression, although the last is very improbable.
There is no such regularity in the increase of stature as found among
the Igorots, and the fastigium for the latter was between 20 and 30
instead of about 40. The fastigium for stature of the following peoples
from records of more than a million individuals (31) is given for
comparison with the people of Taytay:
North American} Years.
Irish / 31-34
English 29
Scotch “ 28
French 27
Scandinavian - 25
German 23
Igorot 20-30
Taytay 40
Liharzig gives the twenty-fifth year, Yillermi the twenty-third.
SITTING HEIGHT.
This linear dimension is the distance between the ischial tuberosity
and the vertex of the head when the person is sitting erect. It may be
divided into three parts, the total head height, from the chin to the
vertex; the neck length, from the chin to the suprasternal notch; and
the body length, from the suprasternal notch to the pubic spine; although
the three dimensions do not quite equal the sitting height because the
pubis is several centimeters higher than the ischial tuberosities.
The average sitting height of 181 adult males is 83.99 centimeters
with minimum and maximum of 74.3 and 91.7, respectively. It is
7.6 centimeters more than the distance from the trochanter to the vertex,
6.9 centimeters more than the distance from the pubic spine to the
vertex, and 0.9 centimeter more than the total leg length. It is 53.3
per cent of the stature which is 0.8 more than the European according
to Topinard, and 3.9 less than the length “Scheitel bis Damm” of 130
Europeans (Swiss?) measured by Hoffmann and given in YierordFs
tables(36). The sitting height of 60 Apache and 53 Pima Indians
of the southwestern United States measured by Hrdlicka(l3) is 53.2
and 52.9 per cent respectively, which is practically the same as my
figures for Taytay.
Soularue(29) approximates the relative body length by comparing the length
of the vertebral column of 174 skeletons to the calculated, stature, and concludes
that the white and yellow races have relatively long bodies and short legs compared


with the black and other races. The North American Indian is intermediate
between the yellow and the black races which are less than the white in body
length.
The length of the body is measured in so many ways by different
men that one is at a loss to know which method to select. The distance
from the suprasternal notch to the symphysis pubis is the easiest and
most direct method and lends itself to photometry as well as anthropo-
metry. Although it is variable on account of the movable points from
which it is measured, it is probably as exact as any other. The acromion
to the symphysis is probably more variable, and the suprasternal notch
to the trochanter is scarcely less so. The length of the vertebral column .
is the actual body length, and can be measured from the nasal spine to the
pubis, but these are also variable points.
The average body length of the Taytayans from the suprasternal notch
to the symphysis pubis is 47.1 centimeters, from the suprasternal notch
to the trochanter it is 45.8 centimeters, and from the acromion to the
symphysis pubis it is 47.8 centimeters.
The body length of the inhabitants of the inland part of the Malay Penin-
sula (18), (p.' 283), measured from the suprasternal notch to the trochanter (?),
averages from 43.5 centimeters in the Senoi I, to 47.2 centimeters in the Western
Senoi. The body length of the inhabitants of central Sumatra (39), measured
from the acromion to the symphysis pubis, averages 45.2 centimeters. The body
length of the Igorots(3) (p. 431) from the suprasternal notch to the pubis in
47.7 centimeters. Topinard(3l) (p. 1068) gives the body length “de la fourchette
du sternum au siege” in relatiou to the stature which may be compared with
that of the Taytayans in the following table:
Body length in relation to stature.
Relative ' Number of
Group. body Author. individ-
length. uals.
Europeans ' 33. 6 Topinard 280
Kabyles 1 32.5 do 163
Annamites 30.2 do : 27
Kalmucks 34.6 do 6
Taytayans 33.6' Bean , 170
This places the relative body length of the Taytayans in the same
class as the Europeans and it is different from the Annamites.
Differences of body length can not mean a great deal until the methods
Differences of body length can not mean a great deal until the methods
of measuring the body have been unified, and the basis for the body
length should be the distance from the suprasternal notch to the sym-
physis pubis. At least this measurement should be made and utilized
in a comparison of different people.


The total head height (chin to vertex) is 23.2 centimeters for Taytay,
which is 14.5 per cent of the stature or nearly that of the Chinese.
Topinard(3l) (p. 1071) assigns the greatest total head height to the Chinese,
the least to the European, and places the Negroes of Africa near the latter and
the Negroes of Oceania near the former.
The European has 7.5 heads of stature, the Negro, 7 heads of stature,
and the yellow people, 6.5 heads of stature. The Taytayans are therefore
like the Negro in total head height, because this is 1 / 7 of the stature.
The total head height of the Igorots(3) (p. 437) is 21.6 centimeters
and their stature is exactly the same as the Taytayans in relation to it.
The neck length of the Igorots is 0.3 centimeter less than the Tay-
tayans, which is 7.39 centimeters. This is the same as that of the Besisi
of the Malay Peninsula, (Martin) (18) and of the Japanese, but it is
greater than that of the Senoi.
It has been demonstrated that the Filipinos of Taytay resemble the
Negroes, the Europeans, the Chinese, the North American Indians, and
the East Indian peoples; therefore it can not be doubted that they
represent a much mixed population and that many diverse types are
to be found among them. This becomes more evident as we proceed,
and finally an attempt will be made to select some of the types and to
relate them to the people from whom they were derived.
LOWER EXTREMITY.
The total length of the lower extremity, as determined by the height
of the trochanter from the sole of the foot when the person stands
erect, is 83.08 centimeters for 170 adult males, with a minimum of
72.8 centimeters and a maximum of 93.5 centimeters. The height of
the trochanter is 1.3 centimeters greater than that of the pubic spine.
It is 3.92 centimeters higher than the Igorots which is 1.8 centimeters
greater than their pubic spine. The relatively greater trochanter height
of the Igorots is probably due to the heavy fascia and muscles that cover
the trochanter in these hardy mountain climbers, thus projecting upward
its palpable part. However, the trochanter height of the Igorots in
relation to stature is but 51.6, whereas that of the Taytayans is 52.1;
therefore the lower extremity of the latter is both absolutely and relatively
longer than the Igorots.
Hoffmann(36) gives, the trochanter height of 130 European males as 89.8
centimeters. Topinard(3l) (p. 1074) gives the relative trochanter height as
follows:
30 Belgians 52.0
12 Arabs 52.6
13 Berbers 53.6
27 Annamites 50.2
3 Esquimaux 50.7
10 Negroes 53.1


Group. Absolute. Relative.
78.1 48.5
81.2 50.0
: 83,8 50.0
1 83.9 51. 9
- 81.8 51.5
L. 52.0
91. 0 56. 0
.— 83.08 52.1
This places the Taytayans intermediate between the Annamites and
Negroes and almost the same as the Belgians and Arabs.
The relative public height by Topinard (31) (p. 1074) is somewhat different:
1,061 Whites 50.3
27 Annamites • 51.2
2,020 Negroes 51.8
That of the Taytayans is 51.3 which approximates the Annamites
and is between the white and the Negro, although nearer the latter
the former.
Martin’s (18) Malays (p. 260) present a variable average length of the inferior
extremity from 76.3 centimenters to 83.2, and the relative length varies from 51.2
to 53.3. This length is estimated by subtracting 4 centimeters from the height of
the anterior superior iliac spine, therefore it is comparable neither with the
trochanter nor with the pubic height. However, Martin gives a long list of
trochanter heights of other peoples from which we extract a few
Japanese students
Japanese workmen
North Chinese
South Chinese..
Ainos
Europeans
Kru Negroes _
Taytayans
The trochanter height makes the Taytayan resemble a European similar
to the Ainos and Southern Chinese.
■■
The lower extremity offers three parts for examination, the upper
leg from the trochanter to the knee, the lower leg from the knee to the
ankle, and the ankle height from the ankle to the sole, to which may
be added another, the leg minus foot equal to the length of the lower
leg plus that of the upper leg.
LEG MINUS FOOT.
This may be given best in three groups recently measured.
Group. Absolute. Relative. Number.
Martin’s Malays (p. 260) 70.9-76.8 47.2-49.7 100 ?
Igorots 74.0 48.1 104 ■
Taytayans— . 76.5 48.0 175
The relative length does not vary greatly in the three groups, but
the absolute length is greater for the Taytayans than for the Igorots
or for the majority of Martin’s Malays.


Group.
■« : ‘ ■ ~
Asiatic 1
American
Negro
European
Polynesian
A
,
111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 367
UPPER LEG.
The absolute upper leg length from the trochanter to the skin line
of the knee of 176 men of Taytay is 39.2 centimeters and the relative
length is 24.6. The Europeans of Hoffmann (36) (p. 15) have an
absolute length of 41.9 centimeters and a relative length of 20 (Top-
inard)(3l). Martin(lB), however, gives the relative length for Eu-
ropeans as 24 to 28. The Igorots have an absolute length of 38.0
centimeters and a relative length of 24.7, whereas the Malays of
Martin(lB) (p. 265) have an absolute length of 38.5 to 42.2 centimeters
and a relative length of 23.6 to 26.5, which is greater than that of the
Igorots and Taytayans absolutely and relatively.
The upper leg length (Topinard (31), p. 1041, Martin(l7), p. 265) increases
absolutely and relatively from the Asiatic through the African to the European.
Soularue (29) gives the following length of the femur in different groups of men :
Group.
Absolute.
Relative.'
American
Negro
Asiatic
Polynesian
European,-
29Ts -
The absolute length varies considerably but there is no great difference
in the relative length. We may conclude from the foregoing facts that
the length of the femur and of the upper leg is a matter of stature
rather than of race.
LOWER LEG.
The length of the lower* leg from the knee to the ankle for 175 men
of Taytay is 37.29 centimeters absolutely, and 23.37 relatively; that
of the Igorots is 36 and 23.4 respectively.
Martin’s Malays vary from 31.4 to 35.4 centimeters absolutely and from 20.8
to 22.7 relatively. For Hoffmann’s Europeans, Vierordt(36) gives 39.6 and 23
centimeters respectively, and Martin (18) gives 22 to 24 centimeters for the
relative length of the Europeans.
The lower leg length (Martin(lB), Topinard) (31) increases relatively and
absolutely through the Asiatic and European to the African. Soularue (29) gives
the following;
Absolute. Relative.
34.6 23.2
35.2 24.9
35.8 24.5
35.8 23. 9
36.8 24.4


Do.
Bean.
Hoffmann.
: *
'Wi.
in.
Author.
Broca.
Do. 4
7 Topinard.
>2 Do.
2 Verneau.
4 Do. , x
•*
4 Soularue.
L3 Do.
22 Do.
L9 Do.
21 Do.
6 Do.
The Taytayan resembles the Polynesian and is more like the European
than like any other group, although resembling more the Asiatic than the
Negro or American Indian.
THE TIBIO-FEMORAL INDEX OK CRURAL INDEX.
The length of the tibia multiplied by 100 and divided by the length
of the femur, or, on the living, the length of the lower leg multiplied
by 100 and divided by the length of the upper leg, gives the tibio-
femoral index, which represents the length of the lower leg in terms
of the upper leg equal to 100.
The tibio-femoral index of the Taytayan men is 95.1. For purposes
'***• of comparison, a table is given with the tibio-femoral indices of various
groups by different authors.
Tibio-femoral index on the living.
Number
Index. of indi-
Author.
Group.
yiduals,
Veddahs
Malays _.
Martin.
79.1-88. 4
Sumatrans
Alas
Kleiweg de Zwaan.
Hagen.
Neu Mechlenburger_
Igorots
Europeans..
To this may be added
a few records
on the
skeleton
Tibio-femoral index on the skeleton
Number
of indi-
viduals.
Index.
Group.
Europeans.
Negroes
Europeans
Negroes
Grimaldi
81.2-86
Cro-Magnon.
Japanese
Malayo-Polynesia ..
Chinese and Annamese _.
Europeans
Negroes
Negritos..


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 369
It is evident from the above that the tibio-femoral index differs in
the different groups of individuals, and there is a transition through
the Asiatic and European to the African. The Taytayans have a higher
index than the Asiatic or European, and I believe we can- safely say a
lower index than the Negro or Negrito.
THE ANKLE HEIGHT.
This is 6.5 centimeters for the Taytayans, 5.4 centimeters for the
Igorots and 7.8 for the Europeans according to Hoffmann. The Tay-
tayans are almost exactly intermediate between the Igorots and the
Europeans, which may be significant and can be taken to mean that
the Taytayans represent a cross of the early Malay and the later European
peoples.
THE UPPER EXTREMITY.
The total length of the upper extremity is the distance from the
acromion process to the tip of the middle finger with the arm hanging
straight by the side. This may be divided into three parts, the upper
arm from the acromion to the head of the radius, the forearm from the
head of the radius to its styloid process, the hand from this point to
the tip of the middle fingers, to which may be added a fourth part, the
arm minus hand by combining the length of the upper arm and forearm.
The absolute length of the upper extremity of 176 Taytayans is 72.97
centimeters and the relative length is 45.8, which is greater than that
of the Igorots(3) (absolute, 67.82 centimeters, relative, 44.0 centi-
meters), of the Malays(lB) (absolute, 64.5 to 71.8 centimeters, relative,
43.1 to 45.9 centimeters), of the Sumatrans(39) (absolute, 70.34 centi-
meters, relative, 44.62 centimeters), is the same as the Battaks(l2)
(absolute, 73.4 centimeters, relative, 45.8 centimeters) ; and it is less
than the Ainos(18) (relative, 46.0 centimeters) and the Yeddahs(lB)
(absolute, 73.9 centimeters, relative, 47.0 centimeters). It is about the
same as the European(lS) (relative(lB), 45.5; relative(3l), 45.0,
absolute(36), 74.2).
The upper extremity of the Negro is not longer relatively than that of the
European according to Topinard(3l) (Negro, 45.2, European, 43.2 to 45.5 cen-
timeters) although Keane (14) (p. 36) gives the long upper extremity of the
Negro as an important differential character. Soularue(29) (p. 375) finds little
difference between the two in the combined length of the humerus and radius
in relation to stature, which is 37.3 for the Negro and 36.8 for the Europeans.
Topinard(3l) (p. 1036) gives the relative length as 35.5 for the Negro and 35.0
for the European.
The upper extremity of the Negro may be a trifle longer relative to
stature • than is the European, but whatever the difference, it is slight
and the Taytayan is not so greatly unlike either one.


20.1
20.2
21.3
21.5
22.0
♦
THE ARM MINUS HAND'.
This linear dimension is 55.42 centimeters absolutely, and 34.7 in
relation to stature in 175 Taytayans. The same dimension of the
Igorots varies from 50,5 to 53.9 centimeters absolutely and from 33.3
to 33.6 relatively. Among the Malays(lB) (p. 247), it varies from
48.5 to 53.1 centimeters absolutely and from 31.6 to 34 relatively.
Referring to the length of the humerus pins the radius as given above,
it is clear that the Taytayan is more like the Negro and the European
than like the Igorot or the inhabitants of the Malay peninsula.
THE UPPER ARM.
The absolute upper arm length of 175 Taytayans is 32.37 centimeters
and the relative arm length is 20.3. That of the Igorots is from 28.6
to 30.6 centimeters absolutely and from 18.7 to 19.8 relatively, and that
of the Malays(lB) from 27.6 to 30.7 centimeters absolutely and from
17.9 to 19.8 relatively.
The 130 Europeans of Hoffmann have an absolute length of 31.2 centimeters
and a relative length of 18.5. Topinard(3l) gives the European’s relative length
19.5. The following figures are taken from Martin(lB) for comparison:
The upper arm lengths of various peoples.
Group. Absolute. : Relative.
' _ __ L_
Japanese students 26.2 16.9
Japanese (fine)— 29.7 * 18.3
Senoi 28.0 18.0
Malays 30.3 18.9
Jews 30.7 19.0
Germans 19. o
South Chinese i. 31.1 19.2
Ainos_: 30.3 19.3
Veddahs 31.0 19.4
Battaks - 31.1 19,4
Malays 31.7 19.6
Europeans 19, g
Sikhs 34. 2 20.1
Taytayans 32.37 20.3
Highland Igorots 29.8 19.8
ie relative length of the humerus as given by Soularue in several groups
VS •
follows
Malayo-Polynesian
Negroes
Europeans
Yellows
Arabs and Berbers


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 371
From the foregoing it may be inferred that the Taytayans resemble
in the upper arm length the Europeans, Sikhs, American Indians,
Chinese, Arabs and Berbers more than they do the Japanese, Senoi and
Negroes, and they are not greatly different from the Highland Igorots.
THE FOREARM.
The length of this part is 23.05 centimeters absolutely in 176 Tay-
tayans and 14.45 relatively. Among the Igorots(3) (p. 424) it varies
from 23.0 to 23.3 centimeters absolutely and from 14.4 to 14.8 relatively,
14.8 relatively,
and among the Malays(lB) (p. 250) from 20.1 to 23.6 absolutely and
from 13.3 to 15.2 relatively.
For Europeans, Hoffmann (36) (p. 15) gives 24.6 centimeters absolute and
Topinard (31) gives 14 relative. The following list is taken from (18) Martin
(p. 255) for comparison:
Group.
Absolute,
Relative.
Senoi.
Japanese
Veddahs
Europeans.
Malays
22.9
South Chinese.
Sikhs
Ainos.,
24.1
Battaks..
Germans
Jews
Negroes
16.5-17.1
Congo-Negroes
Topinard (31) (p. 1087) places the relative length of the forearm in the
Negro above that of any other people, although three Kaffir Negroes were less
than some Europeans .and Asiatics
The Taytayans are intermediate between the Negro and the Japanese
or Senoi, and almost exactly the same as the European.
The length of the radius as given by Soularue and Topinard may be compared
with the length of the forearm as already given
Group.
Relative.
Author.
Europeans 15.5 Soularue.
Asiatics _ 15.7 Do.
Arabs-Berbers 15.9 Do.
j Malayo-Polynesians «. 16.0
Americans: 16.2
Negroes in general 17.1 Do.
Europeans 14.3-14.9 Topinard
Asiatics 14.1-15.6 Do.
Negroes in general 15.2-15.7 Do.
90339 3


, r—
Group. Absolute. Relative.
South Chinese —> 16-3 I 10.1 ,
Javanese • 16.8 | 10.2 j
! Malay _ 16-9 j 10.5 j
i Battaks I 7 -9 I 19- 6
I Sikhs I'-8 : 19- 7
! Senoi 1 — 16- 8 10.9 **
Jews - 18-5 , 11.2
European : H-®
Japanese students T _; 18.7 11.5
Veddahs .... 18-4 11.5
Ainos v 18.4 11-7.
k.
• _ '
J
The length of the radius separates the European and Negro still
further than does the length of the forearm, which indicates that this
dimension is a good differential factor for large groups of individuals.
The length of this part in relation to the upper arm may also help to
differentiate the world’s groups of people.
THE RADIO INDEX OB BRACHIAL INDEX.
This is equal to the radius times 100 divided by the humerus, or, in
the living, it is the forearm times 100 divided by the upper arm. For
175 Taytayans it is 71.2, for 104 Igorots(3) (p. 425) it is 76.2, and for
the Mateys(lB) (p. 252) 73.2 (Senoi 76.0).
Topinard gives the European 82.2 to 86.8 and the Negroes 87.9 to 93.4.
Martin found the brachial index unsatisfactory as a -differential factor because
of the varied results of different authors, due no doubt to lack of a uniform
standard for taking the measurements. However, Hoffmann (36) makes the
European index 78.8 on the living, and Annandale (18) (p. 147) gives that of
the Semang as 98.7. The radio-humeral index (skeleton) given by Soularue(29)
follows:
19 Europeans 73
12 Chinese and Annamese 75.4
22 Americans 7 6.3
13 Malayo-Polynesians 76.8
21 Negroes of Africa 78.0
6 Negritos ’• 78.3
There is a gradual transition from the European to the African. Evi-
dently the Taytayans are more like the European than like the Negro
or Negrito.
THE HAND LENGTH.
The absolute hand length of 176 Taytayans is 17.55 centimeters and
the relative is 11.05, that of the Igorots(3) (p. 424) is 16.0 to 17.8 centi-
meters absolutely and 10.6 to 11.3 relatively, and of the Malays(lB) (p.
250) is 16.0 to 18.7 centimeters absolutely, and 10.5 to 12.5 relatively.
Martin gives the following for other peoples.


111. FILIPINO types: racial anatomy in taytay. 373
The Europeans (Hoffmann (36) and Topinard (31) ) have an absolute hand
length of 18.4 centimeters and a relative hand length of 11.5.
From these measurements the Taytayans would be placed in the midst
of the groups given above and in hand length they are not a great deal
less than the Europeans.
Krause (36) gives the distance from the knee to the middle finger with the
arm straight at the side as 14 centimeters in Europeans and only 5 to 8 centi-
meters in Negroes.
In the Taytayans the same distance is 13.83 centimeters, which is
practically equal to that in the Europeans.
THE INTERMEMBHAL INDEX.
This may be represented best by the four long parts of the extremities ;
upper arm, forearm, upper leg and lower leg, on the living, and by the
corresponding bones: humerus, radius, femur and tibia on the skeleton.
The index is the length of the upper extremity, or upper arm plus fore-
arm, in terms of the lower extremity, upper leg plus lower leg, when
the latter equals 100. For the Taytayans it is 72.4, for the Igorots(3)
(p. 457) it is 69.2 to 70.6, and for the Malays(lB) (p. 267) it is from
63.7 to 71.4.
Soularue(29) gives the following on the skeleton:
Europeans 69.1
Chinese and Annamese 68.5
Americans ■ 69.0
Negroes 68.3
Negritos 69.0
Australians 69.1
Apparently the lower extremity of the Negro is relatively long and
the upper is relatively short. The difference is slight and this factor is
not so good a differentiator as others.
The facts hereinbefore presented are given in the usual manner with a
system of averages which may be of assistance in establishing differences
and resemblances of various groups of men, but it is not of much as-
sistance in fathoming the complex consistency of the group under con-
sideration. This must be done in a different way, and the only way
that presents itself as feasible is to study the individuals(3B). This we'
will do presently by grouping them so that the individuals of each group
resemble one another. The object in view in giving the measurements
that have gone before was to convince anyone that very little could be
derived from such a study except what was known before.
We have already demonstrated that the stature of the Taytayan is
similar to the other eastern Asiatic and Pacific peoples; the sitting height
is the same as that of the North American Indian; the body length is
the same as the European’s; the total head height resembles that of the


Negro; the length of the lower extremity is the same as that of the
European; the tibio-femoral index is intermediate between that of the
Asiatic-European and the Negro-Negrito; and the total length of the
upper extremity is like both Negro and European. The upper arm length
resembles that of the European and the Sikh, and the forearm length is
exactly that of the European, but different from either the Japanese on
the one hand or the Negro on the other; and lastly, the Taytayan is more
like the European than the Negro or Negrito in the brachial index and the
hand length. At the beginning of this paper it was stated that the Tay-
tayans are probably derived from mixtures of Filipinos, Chinese, Spanish,
and East Indian elements. This has been established by body measure-
ments. There is also evidence of some relationship with the Negro
although there is considerable evidence that the greatest amount of
resemblance is for the European. When the types are established it-will
l)e seen that a majority of them are European, and that a majority of
the individuals pertain to the European types.
THE AVERAGE TAYTAYAN A TYPICAL FILIPINO?
The individual represented by serial number 99, clinical number 176,
is almost exactly equal in every dimension to the average of the first 100
measured, and to the total average; therefore he may be taken to represent
the type of the Tay tay population, if this constitutes a type. This man is
an Australoid with a cephalic index higher th.au usual, indicating some
Primitive influence or a slight dorsal flattening of the head. The head
outline is low in front but the front homhe is seen (fig. 3). The occiput
neither bulges nor is it much flattened, the vertex is high, the glabella
prominent. Australoid and Primitive are both represented, but Iberian
can not be excluded.
The radio-humeral index is 67.8, the tibio-femoral is 91.2 and the
intermembral is 71. Negroid characteristics are lacking, but European
characteristics are in evidence. One can safely say that a typical Filipino
(?) of to-day is European rather than Negroid but retains Primitive
characteristics.
THE TAYTAYAN, THE EUROPEAN AND THE NILOTIC NEGRO.
It may be of interest to compare the average linear dimensions of these
three groups of individuals to determine similarities and difference's.
The Nilotic Negroes were recently measured by the late Dr. Alexander
Mac Tier Pirrie, and reported by Dr. David Waterston (38) from the Anthrop-
ological Laboratory of Edinburgh University in 1908. The Nilotic Negroes
include the whole native population “extending from the western frontier of
Abyssinia■ across the Nile Talley, through the Barh-El-Ghazal region westwards
to the Central Niger, and from about 200 miles south of Khartoum, to the
northeastern shores of Lake Nyanza.”


in. FiLiriNO types: racial anatomy in taytay. 375
CD
r
O
<_
L_
£
a
<
o
M
3
o
<
H
>*
<
H
K
O
<
«
K
>
t
cu
' Q_
'u
o
O


The individuals measured are distributed among 12 different tribes, the
Dinkas (60 males) and the Buruns (43 males) making more than half the
number.
The Dinkas are the tallest and have relatively the shortest limb parts of
all the groups. The averages and indices of the measurements of 187 adult
males are given in a table at the end of Waterston’s paper from which we extract
the following:
187 Nilotic Negroes. i 183 Taytayans.
130 Europeans. a
Character.
Absolute.
u Pin five Abso- Rela-
Relative. lute . tive.
fute°; Relative '
Stature 168.25-180.16
100.00-100.00 159.47 100.00
26.80- 28.00 39.20 24.60
24.40- 24.80 37.29 23.37
18.60- 19.30 32.37 | 20.30
17.10- 17.70 23.05 | 14.45
167.80 | 100.00
41.90 25.00
39. 60 23.60
31.20 18.60
24. 60 14.70
Upper leg length 40.70- 47.00
Lower leg length 39.60- 44.42 I
Upper arm length 32. 00- 34.79
Forearm length 28.68- 31.08
95.1
Tibio-femoral index
Radio-humeral index
Intermembral index _
89. 5- 98.6
87. 6- 92.9
68. 4- 77.4
“Hoffmann in Vierordt’s tables (Swiss men?). The black faced type represents the
figures for the group of Dinkas (60 males)
The stature of the groups of Negroes ranges from above medium to
tall, the European is above medium, and the Taytayan is small.
The limb parts of the Negro are.longer individually and collectively,
absolutely and relatively, than those of the European or Taytayan, except
the relative upper arm length which is the same for the European as for
the group of Negroes that has the smallest relative length, and is greater
for the Taytayan than for either the Negro or the European.
The absolute upper arm length of the Taytayan is measured from the
upper edge instead of the lower edge of the acromion process to the elbow,
and this may make it about 1 centimeter longer than it should be, there-
fore it is probably the same as the European, and less than the Negro.
However, even a greater reduction than 1 centimeter would not reduce
the relative length as low as either of the other two peoples. The relative
length of the upper arm is therefore a distinctive feature of the Tay-
tayan, is different from the European, and even surpasses the Negro
(cf. Japanese (3)).
The absolute and relative forearm length of the Negro is so much
greater than that of the other two peoples that it may be s at once desig-
nated as the most characteristic limb quality of the Nilotic Negro.
The tibio-femoral index of the various groups of Negroes gives both
lower and higher figures than those of Taytay and of the Europeans,
and if all the groups of Negroes are averaged the index would not be
different from the other two. It may be significant, however, that some
groups of Negroes have a high index and others have a low one; the
■


» III. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 377
ARTISTIC CANON.
For the purpose of comparing the Taytayan with the European from
the standpoint of the artist, the canon of Fritsch(SO) (p. 197) is used
in the same way in which it was used for the Igorots(3) (p. 451). The
length of the vertebral column as represented by the distance from the
symphysis pubis to the nasal spine is taken as the base line, and all other
linear dimensions are given in relation to that. A glance at the chart (fig.
4) will show that the total head height, the length of the upper and the
length of the lower extremities are greater in the Taytayan than in the
European. Compared with the Normal Benguet Igorot, and the Igorot
from Bontoc(3) (p. 453), the Taytayan is similar to both, and the pro-
tomorphic characters are evident in the long arms and the long total
head height. According to Stratz (p. 304), the total head height varies
with the stature, and a stature of 160 centimeters corresponds to a total
head height of 33 centimeters. The stature of the Taytayans is 159.47
centimeters and the total head height is 33 centimeters.
HEAD FORM AND PHYSIOGNOMY.
V
The mean head length of 183 Taytayans is 18.30 centimeters and the
mean head breadth is 14.96 centimeters with the resulting cephalic index
of 81.79. This would be altered if the diameters of the head are reduced
by 1 centimeter each as an allowance for the thickness of the. extra-
cranial tissues. The cephalic index of the skull would thereby be 80.7,
a frankly brachycephalic skull, but very close to mesocephaly.
The cephalic index of the head is 4.19 points greater than that of
the Igorots, and about as great as the greatest of Martin’s Malays (18)
(p. 344), which vary from 76.4 to 83.4.
same condition is found among the Taytayans where a low index pertains
to some types and a high index to others. One Negro had an index of
more than 100, and one or more among the Taytayans have like indices.
The radio-hnmeral index is greater for the Negroes than for the
others, because of their great forearm length. The Taytayan, because
of the great upper arm length, is more distantly removed from the
Negro by this index than by any other factor of the limb measurements.
The intermembral index puts the Taytayan intermediate between the
extremes of the Negroes and separates them from the Europeans.
The Negroes, except one group, have longer arms in relation to their
leg length than the European.
* • After all is said, one must admit that in the limb parts the differences
that separate the three peoples are not great except in the long forearm
of the Negro and the long upper arm of the Taytayan.
We now arrive at a consideration of the artistic canon of the Taytayan
from the measurements that already have been discussed.


. • ; * .
378 I5KAN.
•s 7
\ ✓
7 B -/—■ — - s - ■ A 6
e — / \ t \ _ s-
A I I '
/ ! ■
I ' ’ — J
•3 1 i
I
I
i - 2
I
2 I
I
i
F
I
I
I /
I
I
I
I
I
" r
i
i .
Pig. 4. —The Solid Lines on the Left Represent the Average European Ac-
cording to the Canon of Pritsch. The Broken Lines on the Right Repre-
sent the Average Taytayan According to the Same Canon. The European
Stature is Equal to 8 Total Head Heights. The Taytayan Stature is Equal
to 7 Total Head Heights. A and B Point to the Chin.
The narrowest forehead breadth is ±5.3 millimeters less than the widest
part of the head. This difference is only 43.0 millimeters for the Igorots
and from 38 to 46 for the Malays (18) (p. 347).
The nose length, from the skin line at the greatest depression of the
nose bridge between the eyes, to the nasal point or spine, is 4.7 centi-
meters, and the nose width from tip to tip of the flaring nostrils is 4
centimeters, with the resulting nasal index of 85.3. The Igorots have
a nasal index of 93.7 measured in the same way. That of the Malays is
only 88, because Martin used the nasion instead of the skin line.


> - „
V
■
' ' 1 ‘ ' ‘ * '/ .
4 *
The morphologic face index is 82.1, that of the Igorots is 79.4, whereas
Martin’s Malays vary from 80.5 to 85.8 which is greater than it would
be were the methods of measuring the same.
-The following facial indices are taken from Martin (18) for comparison
Battaks 82.0
Javanese 82.1
Malays 83.0—83.8
South Chinese 85.3
Ainos 86.9
North Chinese 87.0
Sikhs 88.3
If the chin-nasion distance of the Taytayans were increased by 7 or 8
millimeters, which would be fair under the circumstances, the index
would then surpass even that of the Sikhs. Undoubtedly, the face of the
average Taytayan is long like that of the Sikh, the northern Chinese and
the European.
The lower face height (chin to nasal spine 6.6 centimeters) compared
with the upper face height (nasal spine to vertex, 16.4 centimeters) is
not so great as that of the Igorots (6.7 centimeters lower, 14.9 centimeters
upper) which again places the-Taytayan close to the European.


.
380 ■
BEAN.
Table I. —Men of Taytay—
<
■ Body.
Type of individual.
s
bp
*S
£
*s
&
0)
0)
M
&
s
g
B
# bc
’53
rS
2
o
f-i
o>
c
o
o
H
*03
’3
5
3
£
a>
55 -
u
OJ
be
C
3-
33
£
O
£
£
'tH
CD
Ul
1
6
_g
s
w
,3
o
s
33
£
c
33
Australoid
Alpine
18 | 162.4
47 ' 161.5
27 j 166.0
29 154.4
Cro-Magnon
Blend
Australoid
Blend
Blend _
Australoid
Blend
153.4 6.3 45.3 I 86.0 G2.0 j 80.3
137.5 ! 6.7 42.0 76.0 55.5 j 71.5
Primitive Australoid
Blend
141,0 153.5 j 7.6 44.5 ! 87.5 63.3 82.6
139.7 (?) 42.3
153.8 83.3
161.7 81.5
Blend ..
Blend-
148.2 6.1 46.7
139.6 6.2 40.4
140.0 6.5 45.0
405j 46 152.1 81.5
380 >7O 153.6 77.2
Blend
Blend
390 : 41
376 1 23
404 ] 80
315 42
CO. 5
54..0
53.0
Australoid
Blend
Alpine _
Blend ...
Australoid 1
Blend
134.6 146.3 7.0 40.0
138.0 147.0 7.5 45.2
158 41 159.4
373 70 160.8
142.4 | 153.0 6.0 44.5
127.0 135.0 6.3 37.0
B. B. B.
Primitive
237 62 165.0
303 26 147.1
421 17 160.7
5.7 44.8 87.4 j 67.7
Iberian
129.5 : 149.8
6.2 41.7 79.5 j 53.5
Blend
22 42 153.2
130.3 138.0
7.4 45.6 86.3 , 59.7
7.0 43.5 81.0 I 59.7
Australoid -
238 30 163.4
138.6 148.8
Modified Primitive
29 158.9
135.5 146.0
Australoid _
Blend
124.5
119.3
■125.6
129.8
135.0 141.6
6.0 41.0 80.4 | 58.3
126.0 137.8
132.4 141.4
5.8 40.4 77.0 53.4
6.7 41.4 80.0 53.0
Primitive _.
Blend
438 50
137.3 145.3
6.2 44.0 85.3 60.0
431 22
32
Iberian
Australoid
Iberian
Adriatic? ..
Australoid
Blend
Australoid
Blend
to
*s
a
03
*s
s
s
s
82.6
87.5
84.4
85.2
A
0) i
fej0
370
366
293
8
2
3


h
f
•
V
i
i
1
4
00
s
4-4
00
5
CO
00
to
o
77
05
s
GO
*7
CD
GO
GO
GO
GO
s
GO
GO
£
5
19
GO
00
OD
tj
CD
00
CD
GO
r,
00
GO
GO GO
£
Length.
to
Cn
GO
to
bn
t- 4
to
—7
b
05
b
CO
CO
b
GO
J- 4 •
CO
CD
b
CO
b
•7
*05
CO
*45-
‘bn
45*
bn
CO
b
to
b
bn
GO b
to
O
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
4-4
4-4
yU
l_a
yu
l_i
yu
_
4-4
yL
yu
yu
4_4
4-4 4-1
4^
Breadth.
4-
4*.
4—
4-
cn
45-
Cn
Cn
45-
45-
cn
-4*
4-
cn
cn
Cn
45-
Cn
cn.
cn
4-
cn
cn
Cn
cn
4-
cn
. cn
cn
B
bo
bo
7
4-
i- 4
GO
—7
bn
bn
CD
45-
b
to
•or
b
*4- 4
to
-7
bo
b
-7
GO
b
bo
7
4-
b
bn
Cn
bn
bo
M
GO
05
05
bn
b GO
b
C
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
l_a
yu
y*
yu
i_*
yu
wu
4^
4-1
Height.
B
to
to
to
to
to
IO
to
to
to
to
4-4
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
00
to
to
10
co
CO to
CO
CO
O
to
bn
b
4-
00
to
to
CO
CO
CO
—7
cn
bn
bo
bn
CO
b
CO
cn
05
45-
cn
to
cn
b
bn
00
b
to
to
00
7
b
►- 4
cn 7
4-
1—1
U,
yu
M
yu
yu
I_1
yu
yu
yu
yu
yU
y^
M
y^
yu.
yu
yu 1—1
4_i
Forehead width.
Co
o
o
CO
o
O
o
CD
O
o
o
o
4- 1
4-4
4-4
o
O
o
O
4-4
O
O
o
o
O
d
4
0
CD
O
0
0
0
4-4
CD
CD
0
CD
4
. CO
b
CO
b
M
CD
*7
b
to
cn
b
O
to
b
45-
bn
Cn
05
b
bn
b
05
45-
co
o
bo
bn
bi
7
4-
*45-
b
7
GO
7
GO
b bo
b
b
yu
yu
J__4
yu
I- 4 '
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
u_»
yu
y^
4-4
yu
yu
yi
4j
4-4 4-4
4-4
Bizygomatic.
g
CO
CO
CO
45-
CO
CO
CO
45-
CO
CO
CO
45-
CO
CO
CO
4-
45-
CO
4-
CO
4-
CO
to
4-
CO
4*
co
CO
50
M
4-4
bo
b
bn
7
bo
to
bo
cn
*05
to
bo
—-7
CO
b
b
CO
bn
bo
•7
b
*05
CO
00
7
to
4-4
b
*CD
*05
7
CO
CO
b
4- GO
1-1
M
yu
yU
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
!_u
yu
l_i
y^
yU
yu
yu
yU
4_.
4-4 4-
4-1
Bimastoid.
to
to
CO
CO
to
CO
CO
to
to
CO
to
to
to
CO
to
4-
CO
to
CO
to
CO
to
to
CO
CO
co
to
*4-
CO
Cn
b
b
CD
45-
Cn
00
“-7
bo
b
►- 1
45-
b
bo
4-
bo
to
bn
GO
bn
05
GO
05
to
*“*
to
bo
00
CO
cn
*05
4- 4-*
b
4-.
hH
o
o
O
o
£
4-5
O
O
o
£
o
CD
£
c
£
P
4-4
O
o
P
CO
o
NO
p
O
£
4-4
o
O
O
s
0
4-4
O
p
0
0
p
CD
s c
£
Bigoniac.
4H
GO
t—
4-
f- 4
b
►4-
-7
CO
b
b
Oo
f- 4
4-
b
to
to
bo
b
to
05
• b
b
P
b- 1
CO
•7
cn
45-
bo
4-4
*4-
GO
7
00
b
7
to b
b
<^l
S
* P
05
7
05
05
-7
05
05
—7
*7
7
05
-7
-7
05
-7
GO
05
r i
j7
CO
-1
r l
05
7
7
7
00
p
7
7
P°
7
7
p
p
7 1
p
Naso buccal.
4-
05
4-
CO
Cn
CO
bn
bo
—7
b
to
to
45-
b
to
b
bo
b
b
OO
bn
to
o«
b
b
to
to
1-1
4-
CO
CO
*4-
bn
to
*4-
*4-
CO
s*
05
pi
05
Cn
05
<7
05
<7
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
pi
05
05
05
05
p
p
p
7
p
p
7
p
p
P
p
p j
p
Naso alveolar.
b
00
to
b
b
b
to
b
b
bn
cn
b
to
to
b
to
to
b
7
b
bo
1-1
*45*
b
*45-
7
*4-,
b
7
bn
7
4*
CO
<?4
to
to
to
to
to
CO
to
CO
CO
to
to
CO
CO
CO
to
to
CO
to
to
to
CO
CO
CO
to
to
to
CO
to
CO
4-4
to
to
to
to
CO
4-4
to
to }
to
Npse base.
00
b
bo
CO
bn
i -4
bo
to
b
to
05
b
to
b
GO
bn
b
bo
05
*•7
b
io
b
-7
cn
4-4
b
I- 4
OO
b
b<
*45-
CO
O
bo
b
bo 1
b
P 3
O
7
GO
7
-7
7
GO
05
00
7
7
—7
—7
05
GO
05
05
GO
7
00
-7
•7
-i
00
7
CO
p
p
00
GO
9°
7
GO
p
7
|
7 00
p
Nasion hair line.
H
b
b
H-*
b
b
b
to
7
45-
O
b
bo
o
b
bo
CO
bn
b
b
CO
bo
b
bo
*4-
b
be
CC
bo
to
*0
4-
bo
CO
1
io to
yu
M
4_t
yu
yu
yU
yu
i_i
H
y^
y^.
H- 4
yu
•1 1
4-4 4-4
CD
Chin nasion.
o
o
o
to
to
4-4
o
to
o
O
0
CD
O
O
i—i i—i
4" 1
CO
05
b
b
o
to
to
45-
4-4
o
45-
4-4
05
o
b
b
b
05
*4-
4-4
CO
00
b
b
45-
cn
b
b
GO
b
*4-
b
*05
7
b
t
b bn
cn .
tel
. CO
CO
4-
4-
45-
4-
45-
05
CO
CO
CO
45-
45-
45-
45-
CO
45-
CO
4-
45-
45-
4-
CO
45*
4^
45-
co
45-
45-
4^
co
44
CO
45-
4-
4-
45-
4- CO
4-
Nose width.
m
7
GO
to
b
4- 1
b
CO
CD
b
CD
7
to
4-4
to
CO
*45-
b
bn
b
bn
to
b
b
bo
b- 4
45-
7
r- 4
to
bo
7
CO
GO
b
cn
b
cn bn
4-4
P
4-
4-
Cn
45-
4-
cn
45-
cn
45-
45-
4-
4*
44-
45-
cn
45-
45-
cn
4-
4-
4-
cn
cn
4-
a<
45-
cn'
cn
cn
4^
cn
4-
cn
cn
45*
45-
4-
4* cn
4*
Nose length.
Qj
w
4-
H
b
to
b
b
bn
bo
GO
—7
05
b
bo
b
b
b
to
4*
05
cn
*7
b
o
b
f- 4
05
b
b
,45-
CO
0
7
7
b
CD
bo
bo
bo to
b
to
J—
4-
4^
M
H- 4
4-5
to
4-
4- 1
4-4
to
44
to
to
4-4
to
4-4
4-4
to
4-4
to
to
p
to
to
4-*
p
J- 4
to
P
to
4-*
p 4
to
to to
to
Mouth width.
CD
to
b
b
7
b
-7
b
45-
to
00
CD
to
— 1
o
CO
7
>— 4
bo
b
b
4-
bj
to
b
bn
to
b
GO
bn
b
bo
7
bo
bn b
b
p
4*
4*
45-
4-
45-
45-
45-
p
45-
45-
*.
45-
45-
45-
4
4-
4-
4-
pi
45*
4-
4-
j-
45*
4*
45-
45-
p«
4-
4-
w
cn
4-
pi
p
p 4-
p
Mouth length.
•
b
CO
bo
Cn
to
b
bo
bo
bn
bo
b
05
b
b
4-
b
b
b
h-
1
CO
p
CO
3.4
3.9
3.3
3.4
3.7
8.6
3.7
3.9
3.5
3.5
3.7
bn
3.7
3.4
3.5
3.5
pc
3.4
OC
*05
3.8
pc
3.6
3.6
OO
b-7
OO
00
cn
3.6
3.9
4
p
b
M
p3
b.
3.9
3.7
oo
bn
3.5
3.0
3.5
p
to
Ear width.
!>
5.9
6.1
6.6
5.3
6.0
05
6.3
04
5.9
6.5
5.9
6.3
05
6.2
6.2
5.6
05
5.9
05
*-r
05
5.3
6.1
9 9
6.1
5.4
6.0
6.8
p<
bn
6.1
6.1
p
7
6.8
5.8
p
b
6.0
GO b
bo
Ear length.
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
OC
CO
CO
co
CO
00
O
*4-
b
O
to
b
CO
to
45-
b
45-
cn
bn
45-
*45-
to
►“*
CO
bo
-7
b
bn
bn
45-
b
b
b
b
bn
cn
bo
cn
to
b
CO
to bn
7
to
CO
to
CO
to
CO
CO
CO
to
to
CO
CO
to
CO
CO
OO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
to
CO
CO
to
co
co
co
to
to
to
CO
CO
to
CO
CO
to
CO CO
co
Eve length.
Hi
b
I_i
IO
o
Cn
b
1—1
b
b
*CD
bn
b
4-4
b
CD
CO
4-4
b
b f- 4
On
o
Cn
o
o
o
Cn
Cn
Cn
o»
o
cn
o
o
o«
cn
o
o
o
cn
cn
cn
cn
CO
bn
M
CO
CO
to
3.5
to
45-
1
to
to
bn
2.5
to
CO
CO
CO
cn
oo
cn
pc
bn
o»
CO
4-
cn
45-
CO
CO
3.5
CO
bn
w
45-
4-
45-
to
CO
bn
00
b
2.0
4- M
b b
to
b
Eye color.
IN
to
to
CO
CO
to
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
to
CO
to
CO
CO
CO
to
ND
CO
CO co
co '
Frontal.
CO
CO
o
CD
to
CD
o
CD
o
to
b
1—4
o
4-4
GO
CD
0
s
bo
to
bo
to
to
bo
45-
to
4“*
o
b
b
00
45-
bo
b
*4-
CO
bj
b
to
Oj
05
01
bn
bo
GO
cn
0
b
to
CO
4-
bn
7
7 CO
b
rn
CO
rn
rn
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
co
CO
CO
Co
CO
co
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO CO
CO
Parietal.
‘re
Hj
Cn
05
4-
CO
05
CO
o«
cn
45-
05
CO
Cn
OD
GO.
05
05
05
cn
45-
cn
7 05
cn
b
7
00
b
CO
o
05
b
CO
45-
05
7
b
45-
O
b
to
to
o
b
b
CO
cn
b
bo
CO
b
4-
be
CO
b
bo
co
45*
00
CO
io
4- 4-
to
3
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
ro
ro
to
to
to
10
to
to
ro to
to
Forehead.
(T>
GO
7
-7
-7
GO
o«
CD
05
05
CD
•7
•7
■GO
7
-7
00
(JO
GO
05
?°
?°
b
Cn
CO
-I
to
o
—7
bn
bn
-I
O
b
b
bn
Cn
—7
bo
to
CO
bn
GO
o
b
b
“7
05
0
cn
0
4-
CO
to
cn
4-
to
to
*4-
0 4^
b
to
to
tsl
to
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
to
to
to
to
co
ro
CO
CO
to
CO
CO
to
to
CO to
to
Occipital.
O
CO
CO
(JO
CO
GO
to
CD
o
00
7
CD
CD
CD
to
CD
o
o
CD
t -4
7
7
00
to
05
b
b
b
45-
b
4- 1
b
bo
to
bn
bo
b
*45-
b
to
05
o.
b
►- 1
b
05
to
•7
7
0
b
b
05
b
b
CO
O
0
b
bn
b b
b
00
00
►4
4-
Cn
41-
45-
cn
cn
cn
cn
45-
cn
45-
45*
cn
45-
45-
4-
cn
44-
4-
O'
45-
4-
45*
Cn
4^
45-
4-
cn
45-
45-
45-
cn
cn
45-
cn
4-
4- 4-
4-
Ear cartilage.
b
b
CO
bo
45-
o
to
to
b
bo
CO
00
or
b
CO
bo
GO
*•7
io
to
00
to
CD
7
bo
4^-
to
7
b
cn
cn
GO
io
b b\
05


382
BEAN.
y
Table I. — Men of Taytay —
Type of individual
Blend
Blend
Iberian
Australoid _
Modified Primitive
Blend
Iberian
Australoid
Blend
Iberian _
Blend
Blend ___.
Cro-Magnon
Cro-Magnon
Cro-Magnon
Blend
Blend .
Blend.
Blend.
Blend
Blend _
Blend
Alpine
Blend
Iberian
Iberian.
Blend...
Australoid
Blend .
Blend..
Blend _
Blend ..
Blend _
Cro-Magnon
Blend
Blend
Blend .
Modified Primitive __
Australoid
Iberian.
«• ! .
60 i f
•53 ' .£P
rj 1 &
oo ■=
t5
c 3
A
;s
o
c ! .2
*43 ! ,0
£ i s
CO j P-I
86.1 85.0
82.9 82.7
85.7 84.0
82.5 78.6
78.9 80.8
1003 i4O
81.7 75.2
85.9 76.6
484 ! 30
486 i 47
81.7 79.0
87.3 87.0
82.3 ; 81.5
465 : 30
83.7 81.6
85.6 81.0
88.8 | 92.0
84.7 86.3
87.3 89.4
86.7 82.7
157.8 | 85.3 80.3
165.7 ' 90.0 82.3
154.1 I 83.4 78.7
168.3 90.7 83.7
82.2
85.0
86.0
81.6
84.8
84.0
83.2
80.0
78.0
82.8
76.8
82.7
89.0
85.8
83.2
37 163.3
19 169.7
32 108.7
28 157.0
156.5 82.2
80.3
78.2
75.0
78.7
23 157.0 84.3
23 151.8 85.1
40 157.4 86.0
£
ju>
*53
s
3
a
p
96.4
97.0
100.7
88.7
93.0
90.0
89.3
92.5
103.0
95.5
94.3
94.5
106.0
101.0
105.0
96.7
98.0
98.2
91.3
101.0
100.7
101.7
100.0
95.8
97.0
96.5
95.2
94.2
90.3
96.0
90.2
100.0
105.5
100.7
96.3
94.0
90.0
88.0
93.2
A
d
C
o
CTJ
134.8
126.3
132.3
127.3
125.8
123.0
123.5
126.6
137.C
128.6
128.5
130.0
139.8
136.2
138.2
131.5
128.8
133.5
123.5
134.8
131.4
136.0
132.4
128.8
130.0
133.8
126.5
130.0
124.2
130.2
121.2
132.2
137.5
136.2
120.7
127.3
123.5
121.4
126.4
A
s
o
142.7
133.3
139.3
133.4
130.0
129.5
132.5
135.1
145.3
131.5
135.0
138.0
147.3
142.8
146.2
140.2
136.0
141.8
131.8
145.5
153.6
155.6
148.5
147.4
143.6
146.3
139.5
138.8
134.3 146.2
141.0 l 150.2
135.0 144.4
137.5 I 146.3
141.0
117.6
139.0
131.8
138.7
129.2
150.3
156.4
154.6
145.3
140.5
144.3
145.0
136.0
143.8
141.2
140.0
143.5
6.0
5.7
6.7
6.7
134.7
131.0
130.0
132.2
rC
Q)
3
c
<
6.6
7.0
6.8
7.5
151.5
143.8
151.2
141.5
141.0 6.8 43.5
139.8,6.0 39.0
141.3 6.2 40.6
142.1 6.4 40.8
154.2 6.8 47.5
143.4 6.3 44.0
143.0 5.8 41.5
147.5 7.3 44.2
48.2
47.0
47.8
44.5
7.2
6.9
6.5
6.7
158.5
153.0
154.8
148.8
42.2
44.7
42.0
47.2
6.0
7.3
6.0
6.2
145.2
152.2
140.2
153.5
46.1
46.2
43.3
44.5
7.1
6.6
6.5
6.3
5.8 42.8
6.6 45.7
7.1 42.6
7.0 43.2
6.6
6.2
5.8
40.6
44.0
42.7
44.3
44.6
46.4
■42.8
6.3
6.5
7.4
7.0
43.5
42.0
42.4
40.0
-C f-l
bi3 <D Cl
•i-i -*-> .jr l
CD a -2
OS Sh
0)
S V *0
S g .5
W H Pm
G “-J3
a3 s-i
■S S £
2 .5 f
5H
88.3 ! 61.2 79.3
82.0 1 54.4 I 73.0
85.3 57.0 I 75.2
44,5
43.4
45.5
44.0
79.8 1 53.4 72.6
81.2
77.0
77.0
79.4
86.3
84.0
82.2
83.0
61.2 81.5
95.3
87.0
90.4
61.0 80.5
58.7 76.7
61.5 78.8
56.8 74.8
81.7
84.8
79.0
87.0
60.0 78.8
51.2 69.3
58.0 77.0
59.8 80.0
86.0
88.2
85.7
84.2
61.2 78.6
58.4 77.0
57.2 75.0
83.5
85.7
82.8
80.8
79.5
85.4
78.7
84.5 59.5
91.2 57.2
87.7 64.8
83.6 59.5
83.2
79.0
75.7
80.8
53.6
57.6
55.4
3
•Sf
*53
o
£
W




384
BEAN.
4
Table I.
—Men of Taytay —
• 1
1
Body.
Type of individual.
Iberian
Blend
Blend
Iberian
Australoid
Australoid
Modified Primitive
Alpine
Australoid
Cro-Magnon
Blend,
Blend
Blend _.
Blende.
Australoid ~
Australoid ..
Blend,.
Australoid _
Australoid
Blend
Blend
Blend
Cro-Magnon
Blend
Blend
Blend _.
Blend,
Blend _.
Alpine ~
Primitive .
Blend
Blend _.
Australoid
Cro-Magnon
Blend .
Blend
Blend
Biend
Iberian
Blend,.
£
o5
*s
o
. 81 520 40
,j 82 537 45
. 83 225- 30
.1 84 703 50
180 ; 27
aj
OS
C C
564'55 156.8 84.5
560 40 170.7 88.2
551'23 ■ 150.8 | 80.2
556 I 30 | 152.2 ( 79.5
23 162.2
40 148.5
39 157.8
45 i 160.9
(?)| 157.5
25 | 156.8
37 162.5
22 164.3
37 167.0
35 I 155.3
21 j .166.8
20 157.1
15 146.9
xj
to
’3
r-t
o
5
’53
rC
5. a
-C
o3
c
a
03 *rS
43
<D _
■M 0)
U A
0) I
S’ I •§
S j
s
o
r~* O
M 0)
P3
C ; i4
95.5 128.6 135.7 I 116.8 j 7.5 45.2 j 82.5 60.8 77.4
99.0 138.5 131.0? 148.2 6.0 44.7 83.7 59.4 77.8
98.0 131.0 137.0 148.5 I 5.7 42.3 86.2 61.3 77.5
95.0 126.6 133.4 | 144.2 i 7.5 41.0 81.8 57.3 77.5
6.8 44.7
7.0 42.8
6.3 43.6
6.5 43.0
6.5 [ 45.8
6.7 44.8
6.1 | 46.7
6.2 41.0
6.8 43.8
6.1 45.2
5.4 42.6
6.6 45.5
139.3 148.8
99.4 130.8
91.2 119.5
126.5? 136.8
134.7 145.5
97.2 128.0
129.0 138.7
91.2 123.5
89.8 ; 126.0
104.0 ! 136.0
95.6 ; 126.8
89.8 ' 119.8
t bp
bo
.s
33 ;
5
‘S
o
—
43
£
O
a
o
O
72.0
71.8
74.0
63.8
54.0
78.4
57.2
61.8
83.3
83.2
44.5
44.8
83.0
83.3
43.8
7.0
(5.8
6.2
145.6
45.8
142.6
6.8
134,6
135.8
(?)
148.4
(?)
129.2
127.6
130,5
95.5
96.2
139.0
95.0
81.4
130.6
97.4
s
fee
d
o
o
?-(
o i
tUD
&
*53
A
S-H
cS
w
s
be
u
o
£
81.4
80.4
84.4
78.5
83.2
82.4
80.7
S
s
A
84.0
80.8
85.0
86.2
83.8
83.3
85.3
86.3
157.0
156.0
159.2
162.5
156.0
160.4
101.6
160.3
17
32
. 31
666
8S
87
86
85
o
•S
£


*
1
/■
*
i
\
l
■*
. 00
l-i
44
i-i
44
i_i
i-i
44
1-4
h4
i_i
44
1-4
44
f—
44
1—1
a
r*
•Dl
zc
00
GO
(JO
bo
00
-*•1
GO
CD
.--i
05
CD
GO GO
GO
00
Length.
CS
—7
GO
b
o
05
05
to
to
to
O'
05
05
GC
CO
4-
°
GO
*44
44
Si
b
b
—1
cn
b
O
to
b
CM
05
00
05 44
44
bo
P
Co
1— i
M
1-1
i_i
i_i
K-*
l-i
l-i
M
>_a
1_1
■
!_l
|_a
i_i
M
l_u M
Breadth.
O'
05
O'
44
O'
44
O'
05
O'
O'
O'
4-
4-
44
O'
4—
44
Cn
4-
O'
4- 4—
44
3
*44
GO
*44
1-1
b
GO
O'
b
to
b
05
b
b
GO
GO
bo
GO
b
b
b
rO
to
io
44
-j
b
O'
05
05
b
to
CO
44
b
to cn
Cn
C^i
l-i
l-i
l-l
t—i
i—i
1-i
l-i
i_.
1-1
l-i
—.
—4
l_i
1_
i_x
l_i
—1
>_1
1_1
i_i
i_i
l_i
)_J
Height.
3
to
to
05
05
44
44
to
05
to
05
to
to
to
4-*
to
to
05
to
H
to
44
8—
to
io
to
to
to
05
to to
to
to
CO
44
Cn
b
b
O'
-^1
b
b
b
bo
be
O
bo
to
to
b
05
b
b
to
CD
b
CO
05
*^T
b
b
44
cn
b
b
05
H*
io cn
to
b
ct)
©
i-i
H-*
1—1
l—i
i_i
1—1
i_i
i_i
i_i
l_i
4_i
i_i
j_i
l_i
1_1
l_i
(_i
i_l
j_i
M
4-* 1-*
M
Forehead width.
p
O
44
O
O
0
O
0
0
O
44
CD
0
O
4- 1
0
O
O
0
O
CD
O
0
0
1— 1
44 ‘
O O
O
0
o
b
to
O'
05
05
b
05
Cn
b
b
44
b
44
bo
44
b
to
*05
>-*
bo
to
bo
b
O
b
O'
GO
to
b
b
0
Q
b io
b
*44
§
44
P
p
P
p
p
IP
p
p
P
44
P
05
13.5
p
co
p
P
p
p
p
p
p
p
p p
p
P
Bizygomatic. ’
io
to
b
O-.
b
b
b
GO
GO
4*
GO
b
bo
b
b
GO
05
05
b
GO
Cn
bo
Cn
k>
4
4
b
b
b
b
b b
b
be
p
1-4
M
h- 1
l-l
1—1
1— 1
4-1
4-1
l_i
l_i
i_i
44
l_i
(_!
l_i
l_i
l__l
i_i
(_1
,_i
l_i
i— 1
*4+.
po
to
to
05
05
to
to
05
to
05
05
05
to
to
05
05
to
to
to
to
to
to
05
05
05
to
05
05
to to
Bimastoid.
44
b
05
b
O'
44
O'
b
b
05
O'
-41
to
b
b
CO
b
b
05
GO
b
b
05
05
b
0
io
to
bo b
bo
b
o
h- ‘
O
p
P
|p
g
P
P
p
P
to
P
rp
p
p
P
p
P
P
p
p
p
44 H4
!_a
7^
s
4*.
b
O'
to
to
to
to
b
4
05
b
b
4
44
4
b
05
b
05
«
b
’to
b
05
4
b
10
bo
to
b
44
£.
b b
cn
0
Bigoniac.
0
7.6 I
6.6
7.8
7.0
6.8
6.5
7.2
7.5
6.8
05
-*7
05
6.9
7.0
DJ
6.9
7.0
7.2
6.5
7.3
7.0
6.4
7.2
GO
1 6.7
6.7
7.3
7.4
90
Cn
s
to
Naso buccal.
s.
6.7 1
—7
6.3
7.5!
6.5
5.9
7/9
6.3
03
05
7.1
“-4
6.1
6.1
05
O'
6.4
6.4
05
6.6
6.1
05
5.7
6.6
05
05
5.8
05
5.8
5.7
6.1
bo
05 b
7.6
b
Naso alveolar.
Co
£
43
to
3.2 I
2.71
3.4
2.6
2.6 1
3.0
to
bo
to
b
to
bo
3.0
2.7
to
GO
3.0
2.7
2.8
2.8
2.7
2.8
3.2
3.1
2.6
2.2
to
3.0
3.0
2.8
2.6
w
05
2.9
3.2
2.3
3.0
cn
to
05
3.2
2.8
05
io
b
Nose base.
—:
h-4
GO
7.0
6.7
6.3
5.5
CO
b
j
7.1
Ci
-7
8.0
8.5
7.0
GO
7.4
05
6.3
00
6.6
OO'
7.4
6.0
GO
7.4
6.7
05
b
JO
to
*05 tO
Nasion hair line.
*
0
£
[p
P
|
P
P
.
|p
P
P
P
p
P
P
P
p
P
P
P
P
p
p
P
p
4-
j
l—.
1-1
“h* 1—1
~
*
3
B
b
b
p
05
05
1
bo
4
b
b
1
b
b
5l
b
05
*44
4
05
b
bo
b
b
w
b
b
05
b
b
1
b
O'
*05 i-i
to
C'
b
Chin nasion.
5'
43
s
05
05
05
44
05
05
44
44
05
44
44
05
44
05
05
44
05
44
05
44
05
44
4-
44
44
44
44
05
44
05
05
44
05
05
44
ir
44
!
p
fej
U2
CO
b
b
05
b
b
O'
io
*GC
b
io
0
GO
44
05
b
44
b
to
05
0
bo
b
01
05
b
bo
bo
44
O'
b be
b
b
Nose width.
a>
0
CL
cn
on
44
Cn
4-
44
44
44
44
44
44
O'
44
44
44
O'
44
44
44
4-
4*-
44
44
44
44
44
O'
44
44
44
ih
7
—
b
bo
b 05
*05
Nose length.
w
JO
to
to
to
to"
I- 1
to
to
to
to
1-4
to
to
to
I-*
44
to
to
to
4-*
to
to
to
to
to
j
to
to
H4
to
i_i
i_i
P
~ —
—
—
!>•
to
05
1
b
GO
bo
CD
O'
05 cn
Cn
cn
Mouth width.
0
cn
O'
p
pi
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
O'
44
44
4*-
O'
44
44
O'
44
44
j
O'
44
cn
44
44
•j
4^
44
cn
Mouth length.
to
b
b
to
to
b
to
b
44
O'
O'
b
to
to
GO
-J
05
b
-7
b
*44
b
1
b
b
05
44
bo
1
b
O'
b Cn
b
b
pi
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
OS
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
3.5
05
05
05
b
GO
*44
O
05
*44
b
to
05
4-
b
05
00
b
05
44
b
05
Cn
05
b
-I
Cn
05
to
00
GO
b
b
cn
cn
05 cn
44
b
Ear width.
05
O'
O'
05
O'
O'
O'
o«
03
CT.
05
O'
05
O'
O'
05
O'
05
05
05
t -vJ
O'
05
05
cn
05
05
Cn
Cn
Cn
05
05
05
05
_I~
~
Ear length.
:
£
be
cn
b
05
b
b
b
b
b
05
05
bo
b
OO
bo
b
to
05
b
0
05
to
05
44
b
*44
to
05
io
Cn
b
05
b b
C5
b
05
05
05
05
05
to
44
05
05
05
05
to
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
44
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
ro
rn
05
r,-
~ _
—; — ■—
CO
o
05
44
O'
CD
b
•“*
b
44
05
b
to
b
•05
0
bo
to
Cn"
b
Cn
b
-41
bo
H4
b
Cn
44
05
b
io
44 b
b
b
Interocular distance.
to
05
to
05
to
to
to
05
to
05
to
05
05
to
to
05
to
to
05
to
to
05
to
05
to
to
05
to
05
to
05
05
05
to
rn
to
rn
be
O'
b
o
bo
o
b
O'
GO
O'
bo
O'
0
io
O'
95
b
0
GO
O
io
0
O
GO
GO
O
O
GO
O
O'
O
-I
O'
b
0
O
O
b
0
b
b
O'
O
bo
O
-41
c
0.
O
b
b
b
cn
bo
0
; g g
O
-*■7
O
Eye length.
p
05
05
05
to
05
44
44
05
05
05
O'
05
05
05’
05
05
to
44
O'
05
44
to
to
44
05
05
05
O'
44
05
to
ro
05
to
~T"
—
cn
b
O'
O'
b
cn
Eye color.
05
to
05
05
to
to
05
05
05
05
to
to
05
05
05
05
to
to
to
05
b
30.6
30.0
to
44
bo
b
b
to
CD
bo
p
b
O
b
O
b
to
b
O
44
O
b
b
b
to
b
p
b
p
b
0
05
bo
44
p
b
p
O
O
9°
b
9°
44
p
b
p
bo
0
*44
28.6
Frontal.
0
05
05
"
05
05
05
b
05
O'
05
pi
05
O'
b
05
O'
p
S3
05
O'
05
05
00
05
05
O'
05
03
05
p
05
05
05
O'
05
g
05
05
05
O'
Cn
05
to
05
O'
05
O'
05
05
05
05
O'
05
-I
05 05
05
05
Parietal.
0
H{
b
O'
bo
bo
b
io
GO
*05
GO
44
O'
to
O'
b
05
05
44
io
44
05
*44
05
44
b
0
b
t- 4
»-*
Cn
b
b
to
b
b
b 44
b
to
B
43
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
N5
to
t~>
to
to
r 1
t .
to
to to
to
—
CD
>
O
*"•
(JO
05
CD
00
-■ 1
uo
-1
00
GO
O'
-j
--I
-1
05
§
Forehead.
to
*7
b
b
b
to
0
b
be
05
QC
b
05
0
bo
b
b
bo
b
OO
bn
O
O'
to
44
05
b
to
0
bo
b
05
O
05
to b
GO
Cn
O
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
j.
r .
to
to
t *1
11
-
GO
CD
(JO
CD
CD
(JO
00
--i
•^1
00
CD
05
00
|_U
Occipital.
b
O'
to
b
b
b
b
to
05
°
0
b
GO
b
bo
O'
O
b
b
b
GO
44
O'
O'
io
b
•-*
05
b
O'
O
b
05
b
io
b be
b
bo
CO
pn
4-
4*
O'
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
O'
44
44
44
44
44
O'
O'
O'
44
44
O'
O'
cn
44
~
pp
Ear cartilage.
O'
bo
b
b
05
b
O'
bo
b
b
GO
50 -
O'
GO
b
GO
1-1
44 O'
b
bo
b
b
io
b
b
.44
io
io
b
b
b
lo 4
cn
b
GO
cn


386 BEAN.
Boi
’
Tvpe of individual. +J . .Sf -g
■ j3 +-> a;
© ■£? m - -s S
d fc £ •$ * £ *> £
jz ,• ,q w , ( a>
•S -a d B s » s .s t
S s £ .g d S a> g y
CO O -< CO CO Pj (3 CO U W
Blend
Modified Primitive.
Blend
Australoid
Blend..
Blend
Australoid? _
Blend
Australoid ..
Cro-Magnon
Alpine
Blend
B!end_.
Blend
Australoid
Australoid
Blend
Iberian
Blend..
Australoid
Iberian
Australoid _.
Australoid ..
Blend -
Blend-
Blend-
Blend ..
Cro-Magnon
Alpine _
Iberian
Blend—,
Blend
Australoid _
Alpine
Blend ..
Blend
Blend _.
Blend—._
Alpine
Australoid
Body.
i +j i s
rj •tD
+s .. M -M- 1 . •$
• ' •'
- s .Sf ” 'S3 ■§, £ -g "S _£ d be
1 • ■« £ | -53 § 2 § ® ;§
>3 P o 5 £' G 2®o~J , ~
• 3 .S -R 33 S R ■ 13 3a3 O-60M
Q) -*- 1 +j rO —I ?-< .2 S_, )z Ole T 1
|be ! S S s a a a R 3 " S :-S £
<| ® 02 d- (3 CQ U W <4 H j >
34 164.7 83.2 87.3 100.6 j 134.5 142.8 153.0 7.0 47.4 89.7 j 54.3 73.6
29 161.2 89.9 80.3 96.4 130.4 138.0 148;3 6.0 43.5 80.0 53.5 ■ 72.6
62 163.5 84.3 84.2 100.0 ' 132.5 140.0 149.0 6.5 45.6 87.3 | 59.4 ; 77.0
42 156.0 86.1 77.8 92,2 125.4 132.3 142.6 6.7 42.5 80.0 | 57.0 ! 73.0
17 164.5 87.9 86.4 101.5 135.5 141.8 152.3 7.8 41.8 85.0 ’ 57.3 75.5
64 166.5 85.2 87.8 101.5 131.8 141.0 152.0 6.4 46.6 89.0 57.8 76.8
.30 153.5 80.5 80.4 95.8 123.5 132.0 140.0 6.1 44.0 79.0 | 57.7 72.5
70 158.7 84.2 82.3 96.7 130.0 137.5 145.5 7.1 45.0 84.0 55.3 72.6
35 155.7 82.3 80.3 93.8 126.0 131.5 143.0 6.1 42.0 82.0 56.0 71.8
28 167,7 88.9 85.4 100.0 135.3 145.0 154.6 6.4 46.8 86.8 64.5 82.5
25 157.9 84.6 80.2 93.3 129.0 137.2 147.2 6.0 43.8 80.6 56.4 73.6
16 166.5 81.7 79.0 93.0 125.5 133.5 143.0 6.1 43.3 82.8 1 53.4 71.0
16 160.0 80.7 86.5 98.0 130.5 ] 136.8 146.7 6.8 46.0 86,0 55.8 73.8
19 168.6 89.5- 88.0 102.5 137.8 144.4 153.8 7.7 48.6 89.8' 56.3 74.6
63 161.6 86.7 81.5 97.5 131.7 138.0 150.0 6.0 44.3 84.2 56.5 74.6
27- 149.5 78.5 77.5 90.5 119.0 126.7 134.2 5.8 41.4 77.2 50.2 65.0
38 145.7 78.1 76.2 86.3 418.5 124.0 132.6 7.3 40.7 77.0 52.8 71.0
20 158.3 80.8 83.4 98.3 130.0 138.6 148.7 6.5 45.2 84.0 56.0 , 74.0
.26 156.6 | 87.0 77.0 91.3 127.0 135.5 144.5 6.3 40.6 77.5 65.5 j 71.0
.19 161.0 84.6 85.0 96.5 128.5 137.3 146.8 j 6.6 47.0 j 85.7 54.2 72.4
. 45 166.2 86.7 86.5 100.0 135.3 143.5 1 153.0 6.7 45.5 86.0 62.0 79.4
70 164.0 86.7 83.0 94.0 131.4 139.0 149.8 j 6.6 46.5 86.2 59.5 79.0
30 159.8 84.0 83.0 96.6 131.0 137.0 | 147.8 6.2 46.5 85.6 58.7 76.2
32 160.9 84.8 83.0 96,5 129 0 138.3 147.8 6.4 44.8 I 86.0 54.2 71.7
; , :
I
33 171.0 91.7 I 86.3 102.0 139.0 147.0 j 157.6 i 6.8 46.0 j 88.0 63.0 85.0
35 156.4 82.2 | 81.0 94.8 128.0 134.0 I 143.0 j 6.6 43.4 82.8 60.5 77.5
40 161.6 83.3 I 83.6 96.8 129.0 136.7 ; 146.5 j 6.0 44,3 | 85.5 54.5 73.0
53 166.8 90.3 84.5 99.0 134.0 142.6 | 163.5 ! 6.5 44.0 | 88.0 58.0 76.5
32 158.0 81.6 79.6 96.2 128.0 136.5 146.0 6.8 43.0 : 83.0 60.0 76.7
.32 163.2 86.1 86.0 99.2 131.3 139.0 149.8 7.1 46.3 1 85.8 54.0 71.0
156.4 82.9 81.4 94.3 126.0 133.0 142.4 6.8 i 42.8 82.8 54.4 71.5
30 164.0 87.1 82.8 101.0 134.2 140.8 151.0 7.6 45.8 83.5 57.2 75.7
.20 159.9 85.7 82.0 93.5 128.5 136.2 146.3 6.8 ! 44.0 83.0 57.3 74.3
60 162.8 85,0 82.0 97.0 132.5 139.5 150.8 6.4 j 44.6 83.2 57.8 75.4
80 153.7 80.7 79.4 89.7 125.2 130.0 138.8 6.3 1 42.5 81.0 54.0 71.0
26 156.8 82.8 81.‘6 94.7 125.0 134.1 143.5 5.9 43.5 81.5 58.2 74.2
40 151.5 81.5 76.6 90.8 122.0 130.0 138.6 6.2 42.5 78.5 56.0 72.2
33 149.0 79.2 78.8 89.6 121.8 130.2 138.2 7.2 42.0 77.5 55.5 71.0
421 162.6 90.7 77.6 94.0 131.5 136.5 148.5 7.2 44.6 79.3 58.6 76.0
! 27 153.5 83.7 75.4 91.3 121.3 129.3 140.0 5.7 40.4 75.9 ! 52.0 69.6
£
_bp
'3
.a
(S
c
42
W
g
o
100.3 134.0
97.6 129.5
101.0 | 132.5
94.4 124.0
108.0 138.5
100.7 129.3
98.0 127.6
101.0 134.0
95.0 128.8
97.0 129.7
94.0 126.7
100.0 134.7
97.8 127.5
100.0 132.5
93.0 124.0
94.7 125.6
95.8 } 12412
95.5 122.0
100,0 129.0
90.6 I 123.3
Table I .—Men of Taytay —




388 ■
BEAN.
.
r~
si ~
o ,s •;
jo 5. .1-5
32 <U bL
■a | ■- s s *
■ g 5 S | i i
GO O I GO 03 &
~1 i ~
._ 161 935 30 167.2 83.8 80
162 934 30 148.2 80.7 I 73
__ 163 940 38 161.2 82.3 84
__ 164 129 30 159.5 85.9 82
.. 165 941 25 154.7 84.2 79
... 166 954 301 160.1 84,6 83
167 471 251 165.3 90.0 85
168 25 158.4 84.0 81
„ 169 543 42 163.4 85.2 87
170 18 157.1 84.2 79
171 40 162 4 86.9 82
.. 172 18 152.1 81.7 77
183 80 j 160.9 8-5.4 82.0 99.0 130.0 137.8 148.2 6.2 44.8 86.2 61.0 79.4 102.0 132.0
b Adult.
r
V
S*'
♦
■
J
Table I. —Men of Taytay—
Type of individual,
Blend ..
Blend..
Iberian
Iberian
Australoid
Alpine
Cro-Magnon
Australoid ..
Blend ....
Blend ....
Blend.
Blend _
Blend
Blend
Blend..
Alpine _
Blend,
Blend
Australoid
Blend
Cro-Magnon
Australoid _.
Body.
; Ms' 1 I
+J bO ,
& *5 rC . i +J*
6 bo r£ SO • Tt i pC
J25 ’S .Sf —< ‘S i h .5? 6c
S . . -S ■ S g a % S o
g3 O u. *71 H “' 1
I j s p .s | I ~ i 5 2 . «
5 a i s B ■§ 1 s | § p I c
o<!;ch co 04 >3 S o j w -< j M
- 935 30 167.2 83.8 I 80.6 92.0 128.0 I 134.7 I 144.0 j 5.0 43.(
! 934 30 148.2 80.7 I 73.6 86.5 120.8 126.2 135.3 i 5.6 39.2
! 940 38 161.2 82.3 84.2 97.6 129.0 j 135.0 145.8 6.0 ! 43.2
[ 129 30 159.5 85.9 j 82.0 96.2 130.0 136,5 | 145.6 7.5 | 43.4
) 941 25 154.7 84.2 79.6 91.0 126.0 134.4 144,0 7.0 1 43.2
> 954 301 160.1 84.6 83.3 96.0 131.0 138 0 I 147.8 6.5 45.3
’ 471 25 i 165.3 90.0 85.5 98,6 132.5 143.3 154.0 7.4 44.7
! 25 158.4 84.0 81.4 95.7 127.2 134.3 : 145.3 5.9 43.5
1 543 42 163.4 85.2 87.0 101.0 133.0 142.4 152.0 6.3 44.7
I 18 157.1 84.2 79.0 93.5 127.3 136.6 144.2 |_ 7.1 44.0
. 40 162 4 86.9 82.6 95.6 132.0 141.3 151.0 I 6.7 43.6
1 18 152.1 81.7 77.0 89.4 122.2 129.5 I 140.6 5.3 42.0
I 60 156.6 83.0 82.6 95.0 127.0 135.0 144.5 I 6.2 43.0
1069 64 163.1 86.4 84.3? 97.7 131.0 139.0 , 150.0 I 6.1 44.0
’ 1048 20 164.9 84.8 86.2 100.0 133.0 141.4 151.5 I 6.2 45.6
■ 30 154.8 82.8 80.0 94.0 125.3 133.0 : 141.2 : 7.0 42.5
1077 29 148.8 79.7 74.5 87.5 120.0 127.5 | 138.0 6.8 40.0
360 31 159.0 84.6 i !
348 39 164.3 88.5 _ ; :
1 I 28 166.2 , 90.0 I !
-|( b ) 159.9 j 83.8 1 81.8 99.0 129.0 135.5 145.4 7.0 44.2
1086 ! 28 167.2 89.4 86.6 101.0 1 135 0 145.0 154.6 8.2 j 45.5
80 160.9 81.4 82.0 99.0 130.0 137.8 148.2 ! 6.2 [ 44.8
b Adult.
I
I 'I
'he 2
• ‘53 « .Sf
S s ■« s ! I I
.» I § £ d, If f a
5 If , fl 'B 2- 23 2
s \t £ 2 5 & a
m a$ ! o he ® o I o
c I « I g .s . s £ ! £
-3 | W Eh I? W I <*
, | _
5.0 1 43.0 | 81.0 — 1
5.6 1 39.2 j 75.7 46.5 | 63.8 87.5 118.4
6.0 ' 43.2 | 84.7 54.4 | 71.2 94.3 128.8
7.5 43.4 83.6 64.7 I 72.5 95.9 130.0
I
7.0 | 43.2 | 79.4 54.6 71.0 94.5, 125.8
6.5 45.3 I 82.7 57.0 74.8 100.0 I 131.0
7.4 44.7 , 84.2 57.8 75.2 102.5 i 136.0
5.9 43.5 1 82.5 54.3 74.2 95.8 I 127.5
6.3 44.7 j 87.0 61.2 79.4 103.7 } 134.7
7.1 44.0 | 80.8 54.7 71.0 93.0 127.0
6.7 43.6 j 84.3 60.4 77.2 101.7 I 133.0
5.3 42.0 | 79.0 53.8 71.0 93.3 ' 122.7
6.2 43.0 I 83.2 55.0 73.0 99.0 j 128.0
6.1 ,44.0 84.3? 59.0 76.5 j 100.7 I 133.5
6.2 45.6 | 88.0 56.0 j 74.6 | 101.0 | 134 6
7.0 42.5 ! 81.7 55.2 71.9 j 94.4 ! 125.7
6.8 40.0 j 76.0 53:5 69.6 93.0 i 121.0
I
-
|
7.0 j 44.2 | 85;0 58.2 77.0 98.6 132.5
8.2 j 45.5 88.2 62.0 79.6 104.0 j 137.0
6.2 [ 44.8 86.2 I 61.0 79.4'102.0 ! 132.0
:
6.2 43.0 83.2 55.0 73.0 99.0
6.1 44.0 84.3? 59.0 76.5 100.7
6.2 45.6 88.0 56.0 74.6 101.0
7.0 42.5 81.7 55.2 71.9 94.4
6.8 40.0 76.0 53.5 69.6 93.0
7.0 44.2 85;0 58.2 77.0 98.6
8.2 45.5 88.2 62.0 79.6 104.0
6.2 ! 44.8 86.2 I 61.0 79.4 102.0
99.0 129.0 135.5
101.0 135 0 145.0
99.0 130.0 137.8
b Adult.
1077 29 148.8 I 79.7 | 74.5 87.5 120.0 127.5 I 138.0
360 31 159.0 84.6 |
348 39 164.3 88.5 :
128 166.2 90.0
*
-4T
44.7 87.0 61.2 79.4 103.7
44.0 80.8 54.7 71.0 93.0
43.6 84.3 60.4 77.2 101.7
42.0 79.0 53.8 71.0 93.3
43.2 79.4 ' 54.6 71.0 94.5_
45.3 82.7 ! 57.0 74.8 100.0
44.7 84.2 j 57.8 75.2 102.5
43.5 82.5 54.3 74.2 95.8
152.0 6.3
144.2 I 7.1
151.0 ; 6.7
140.5 I 5.3
543 42 163.4 85.2 87.0 101.0 133.0 142.4 | 152.0
18 157.1 84.2 79.0 93.5 127.3 136.6 j 144.2
40 162 4 86.9 82.6 95.6 132.0 141.3 151.0
18 152.1 81.7 77.0 89.4 122.2 129.5 ! 140.6
60 156.6 83.0 82.6 95.0 127.0 135.0 144.5
1069 64 163.1 86.4 84.3? 97.7 131.0 139.0 : 150.0
1048 20 164.9 84.8 86.2 100.0 133.0 141.4 151.5
30 154.8 82.8 80.0 94.0 125.3 133.0 | 141.2
134.3 145.3 5.9
143.3 ; 154.0 7.4
138 0 i 147.8 6.5
134.4 ; 144.0 7.0
5.0 1 43.0 81.0 ——
5.6 39.2 75.7 46.5 63.8 87.5
6.0 ' 43.2 84.7 54.4 I 71.2 94.3
7.5 I 43.4 83.6 54.7 72.5 95.9
I
2 ' S
.SP M) £ a "§) .SP
i! 2 c '■£ JS i:
<S ~ £ g 5 &
M d) o OJD 2 o
c e g a S £
-S M £h &H - I? h
I • Ij •
i I 43
bo -*J
43 +f ’53 43 .
bO 43 bo
’S .£P r-4 ‘S r hJ) I S
■s S $ A •“ ' SP
2 “ o 5 S a I
S3 .S -2 S S3 c ' 43
£> -G 42 -2 .5 fc.
b0 2 S 43 c3
GO ffi P 5? q w
30 157.2 83.8 j 80.6 92.0 128.0 I 134.7 j 144.0
30 148.2 80.7 I 73.6 86.5 120.8 126.2 j 135.3
38 161.2 82.3 j 84.2 97.6 129.0 j 135.0 145.8
30 159.5 85.9 j 82.0 96.2 130.0 | 136,5 146.6
25 j 154.7 84,2 • 79.6 91.0 126.0 134.4 ! 144.0
30 | 160.1 84,6 | 83.3 96.0 131.0 138 0 1 147.8
251 165.3 90.0 j 85.5 98,6 132.5 143.3 154.0
251 158.4 84.0 ; 81.4 95.7 127.2 134.3 145.3
Body


>
/
<
♦
1
3»
7
44
4-*
to
1-u
i—i
j_ 1
1—1
1-1
l_i
h_i
|_a
►_i
>_i
•'i
*^T
00
00
CD
00
'i
— -1
CD
CD
— T
X
Length.
CH
b
b
o
CO
CO
05
b
bo
— 1
44
00
be
44
— T
05
be
O
Qi
to
P
Co
1-4
H4
44
44
y-L
f_i
1-1
M
M
H
, .
X
bn
b
04
04
4-
44
4-
4-
44
•4-
44
Ox
CO
o«
o«
4-
44
Breadth.
3
05
hJ
be
bo
44
-41
b
to
b
bo
GO
44
b
44
CD
GO
S'
44
h4
h-»
44
H-t
H-i
i_i
H_i
,_a
,_a
M
B
3
to
to
to
CO
CO
to
CO
Height.
GO
CO
o
44
04
o
04
to
be
to
b
04
44
b
Ol
05
be
O
0
O
b
(S>
t— ‘
44
,-4
c-l
(-J
|-i
i—i
44
_4
b
4-*
CO
p
O
CD
0
O
•- 1
44
O
O
b
CD
0
Forehead width.
s
c*e
b
GO
GO
b
to
b
i-4
b
-I
b
b
b
X
4-
b
44
h-*
r— i
m
l_i
|_*
i-i
M
§
CO
to
b
bo
b
CO
to
CO
b
p
44
p
p
44
bo
44
be
to
b
p
b
44
44
p
os
Bizygomatic.
§
$
i—*
4-*
h-i
P- i
l—l
>_i
,—1
M
W_.
M
P
y-'
oe
oe
to
to
to
to
CO
CO
4-
44
CO
to
to
CO
Bimastoid.
— j
b
00
O
-I
be
b
bo
be
b
0
b
be
CD
44
(-»
r-i
44
1— i
p_i
(_i
i-x
t 1
s
p 5
t— 4
t -4
O
l — 1
o
p
k- 1
0
0
0
CO
O
44
44
0
CD
•—i
O
CD
0
Bigoniac.
0
!“*
04
So
GO
—1
b
be
4-*
| - 4
05
be
be
0
bo
be
CD
X
b
-J
-a
GO
05
-I
. ,
r-4
Naso buccal.
PI
b
CO
b
GO
b
b
b
05
b
b
b
44
44
b
bo
b
44
be
b
to
b
, g"-
05
05
•^3
05
-T
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
05
Naso alveolar.
to
bn
to
to
to
CO
b
bo
be
b
be
b
bo
*44
to
b
b
bo
-T
be
bl
p
to
CO
CO
to
to
CO
CO
to
CO
CO
to
co
CO
to
to
co
CO
CO
co
CO
to
to
Nose base.
b
04
GO
*-*
b
b
to
bo
b
b
b
bo
b
*-*
b
to
4-
44
00
6.2
7.5
b
b
7.2
05
bo
05
b
6.5
i.
04
bo
7.4
6.0
6.6
b
—1
5.6
p
b
00
b
u
7.3
7.1
Nasion hair line
0
P
P
to
p
P
p
4-*
to
1
p
p
p
to
p
I— 1
p
p
p
to
p
0
G
Chin nasion.
rt-
Is,
b
b
b
b
1
b
b
b
b
H-*
44
io
b
to
be
05
to
b
S’
4.2
to
4.4
4.3
44
co
44
b
3.7
4.1
4.1
4.2
3.8
3.7
b
4,0
OS
b
4.1
4.0
4.1
3.9
0
p
b
4.0
Nose width.
w
■ s
Sc
o\
cn
cn
44
04
44
44
4-
04
,44
44
44
44
44
44
44
cn
44
01
44
CO
44
Nose length.
Di
w
b
b
to
b
b
b
b
b
bo
CO
bo
04
44
b
05
b
be
CD
-41
b
cn
61
2.5
1.8
2.1
2.0
2.1
3.0
b
2.0
2.4
1.7
2.5
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.1
to
b
2.4
2.0
i
2.3
Mouth width.
0
5.0
5.0
5.5
6.0
5.5
4.8
4.6
4.6
4.7
4.3
3.8
4.8
44
04
4.7
pi
to
5.0
5.0
4.5
44
-1
44
be
i
44
b
Mouth length.
j
3.8
3.4
to
3.2
3.2
3.3
3.2
3.3
3.2
3.6
3.0
3.7
p
.to
3.1
3.3
3.4
3.3
3.3
p
b
be
3.0
p
Ear width.
*
05
04
05
05
44
04
04
05
05
04
05
a-
05
cn
05
05
CJi
05
05
05
On
Ear length.
V,
b
CO
b
to
to
bo
b
be
b
44
b
to
05
b
b
bo
to
b
b
b
>
CO
3.5
.44
b
44
b
3.3
3.3
CO
b
3.6
3.2
3.0
3.4
3.3
3.3
44
os
4 4
3.7
2.9
os
to
3.4
3.2
3.9
Interocular distance.
H
Q,
to
OC
to
b
b
to
b
Xt
to
Eye length.
k!
o»
cn
o
o«
0«
04
04
04
0
0
Oi
O
Cn
01
a«
0
O'
CO
CO
to
44
44
1.5
45-
CO
45-
44
44
44
M
44
44
b
to
1.5
CO
3.5
to
4^
CO
Eye color. -
IN
CO
CO
CO
CO
CO
co
CO
CO
to
to
CO
to
to
co
CO
CO
CO
to
to
y -1
(JO
0
44
0
44
CD
to
0
Frontal.
0
■—:
-41
CO
b
04
to
b
O
b
be
*44
b
44
05
b
-er
0,
to
H*
44
0
b
b
CO
CP
CO
05
CO
CO
OI
“
CO
04
CO
p
“
CO
04
CO
44
g
CO
44
CO
44
CO
p«
CO
CO
CO
05
co
OS
CO
05
CO
a«
CO
CO
Parietal.
O
h^j
b
b
bo
b
b
b
4-
b
b
be
b
b
b
b
CO
b
b
4^
b
to
B
•
to
to
00
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
04
04
p
p
p
p
GO
0
05
05
Forehead.
Hj
GO
b
b
•Of
b
*-I
00
b
b
to
b
0
b
44
b
be
*44
-41
to
00
to
CO
o
to
CD
to
to
-i
to
to
CD
to,
?9
to
00
to
to
00
to
CD
CD
to
00
00
to
to
X
to
00
Occipital.
§
bo
b
b
44
b
b
b
b
44
CO
b
to
b
b
b
b
-I
44
0
b
CO
Qi
QT
44
44
44
45-
45-
45-
04
04
44
04
04
44
Ca
Ear cartilage.
to
bi
CD
b
b
to
4
be
be
b
b
b
4
b
bo
b
X
CO


Table
Taytay
Species of individual.
The true species is in
parenthesis, except
where no parenthesis
is given.
U *-t
0) (P 0) O)
o c o5
SX) 2 bJD P bo
l§ ®l §1 ®g
gS? |«? SS? Is?
r Q'—' P'“ 1 G)h
< K <1 K
o
u •
Or£
'♦H 4-»
&C
C
Cl c
> r ~'
'c 03
§
a c
r—< 0)
O
T3
p
o3
pP^*
O b£
> P
43 a?
PCS
'o
Pi
<U
fH *
•°5
60
2 S
o S
<
p-i3
p bo
3 s
si
pD c 5
6
£
"3
o
p
5
Australoid
Alpine (Iberian).
Cro-Magnon
Blend Primitive
Australoid
Blend _
Blend Alpine
B. B. B.
Australoid
j Blend (B. B. B.)
Primitive Australoid
Blend (Iberian)
Blend (Primitive)
Blend (Iberian)...
Blend Primitive? .
Blend (Primitive)
Australoid?
Blend (Iberian) _
Alpine (Iberian).
Blend (Adriatic) .
Australoid
Blend.
B. B. B.? (Alpine)
Primitive
Iberian
Blend .
Australoid
Modified Primitive
Australoid
Blend_
Primitive (Alpine?)
Blend (Iberian)
Iberian
Australoid_
Iberian
Adriatic (Modified
Primitive).
Australoid
Blend (Iberian)
Australoid
Blend.
Blend (Iberian) ...
Blend (Iberian?)...
Iberian?
Australoid
Modified Primitive
Blend (Primitive) .
Iberian
23.19
23.45
21.81
25.11
22.48
25.07
21.81
22. 72
22.77
23.45
20.79
23.44
28.33
20.87
24.33
23.17
23.38
22. 97
22.47
23.00
22.57
23.72
23.98
23.67
24.12
24.74
24.25
23.89
23.03
23.41
23.62
23. 60
23.76
21.71
22.26
40.7
34.0
43.0
37.7
41.3
39.1
37.2
36.2
33.2
40.3
4],4
43.0
39.7
42.5
39.2
42.6
37.8
40.7
37.5
39.4
36.6
38.6
41.3
43.6
38.5
38.8
40.9
39.2
38.1
43.8
38.6
39.8
35.8
•37.7
38.0
36.4
24. 82
25.82
24. 95
24.40
26.62
24.82
24. 29
23.05
24.41
25.00
23.56
24.2
22.59
25.41
24, 51
25. 54
25.71
24. 21
18.3
16.0
19.3
16.3
17.8
16.1
15.9
22.18
21.74
26.61
24.59
26.97
24.68
25. 75
26.65
26.51
24.67
24.98
23.59
25.30
24.33
25.13
25,92
25. 75
24.04
17.1
18.0
18.0
17.6
18.1
18.6
18.2
19.2
16.8
18.0
16.3
10.88
10. 63
11.41
10.60
11.01
10.58
10.35
16.8
14.8
16.5
17.2
17.0
18.7
16.9
15.7
16.7
10.29
9.69
10.89
10. 21
10.66
11.62
10.24
10.67
10.39
17.0 11.10
17. 6 10. 77
18.0 11.32
16.4 10. 53
17. 0 13.03
17.2 .11.18
17.0 10.67
20. 6 15.71
18.2 11.86
10.94
11.36
11.45
11.27
11.00
11.96
11.11
12.36
10.88
11.11
10.55
24.9
23.3
27.9
22.0
21.4
20.3
23.1
25.7
21.1
20.8
25.8
25.0
24.9
23.8
21.3
22.4
21.7
22. 7
21.7
22.3
19.6
25.3
23.0
23.8
21.8
14.43
14.05
13.61
22.0 13.45
19.8 I 12.03
23. 8 15. 22
25.4 16.03
23.7 15.08
20.4 13.45
24.9 15.13
21.9 14.08
24.8 15.14
24.4 15.71
21. 7 14.05
22.2 14.60
24.4 15. 79
7
8
9


TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 391
FILIPINO
indices and relative factors —Continued.
fH
<D .
S3 iUD
gl
« S
a; o3
S
s
o §
v .
d X
C 0)
O
C fl
tUD-—•
.2 «
S a
X?**
Oh
&CX
O 0)
o
a, a;
m «
o<2
S
co' 2
S3 S3
O X
ss *-<
SS CD
X 5
a
D
■ bo
'Z'o
h.t®
0) 4)
ft-s
ft
p
.2*
j-§
&
s
o
Ear type.
.«
ft
O
. 80.2 102.5 Primitive, Iberian A
81.94 67.30 | Iberian A, Iberian D
81.90 104.65 j Mixed, Primitive
i 82.85 93.02 I Iberian A, Primitive
77.24 104. 65 B. B. 8., Iberian D ...
80.22 I 83.67 Iberian 8., mixed
71.1 82.7
78,2 80. 4
j 1 88.3 | 80.00 | Odd type, mixed
68.8 84.6
.j I 82,5 | 66.6 |B.B. B _
71.5 89.0
.j 75.90 j 91.5 i Alpine, Primitive..
71.6 81.9
48.57 23.7 13.1 84.23 ; 74.0 Iberian A, Iberian D
38.34 24.5 | 14.7 82.0 100.0 Odd type, Primitive
74.4 75.7
20.26
72. 3 74. 7
56.15 28.2 16.2 79.50 77.77 i Iberian D, B. B. B
41.94 25.8 | 14.9 86.20 I 82.00 j Odd type, Primitive
39.63 23.0 11.5 84.15 74.0 Iberian B and C ’
79.7 84. 5
73.8 85.8
70. 7 83. 3
38.82 24.1 1 13.7 j 86.74 95.65 j Alpine, B. B. 8., mixed.
80.3 72. 7
73.9 77.9
20.36 24.3 | 13.7 I 79.40 80.40 j Odd type, Iberian D, B. B. B„
mixed.
13.5 37. 5
19.0 33.0
11.1 29.9
12.8 32.8
36.00 22.7 11.1 76.1 87.7 Alpine, Primitive
57.58 25.4 I 13.6 : 79.5 72.0 1 Iberian A
71.4 82.8
25.4 13.6 79.5 72,0 ! Iberian A
69.8 j 86.1
37.12 24.8 | 12.5 84.40 71.42 j Iberian D
39.03 24.0 12.9 j 85.24 89.36 Iberian D, odd type
69.8 89. 7
76.4 77.6
73.3 84,4
11.0 81.5
31.88 24.8 13.4 80.43 100.0 I Mixed _
44.04 22.0 i 11.8 | 83.07 ) 86.95 I Odd typ
14.8 33.6
22.0 i 11.8 | 83.07 1 86.95 I Odd type, mixed -
76.4 74.1
37.12 22.6 |
36.98 20.1
45.57 21.2
10.6 83.06 | 68.63 i Iberian D, odd type.
9.1 83.33 | 95.25 Iberian C, Primitive
10.2 i 77.66 . 73.90 Mixed, Alpine, Primitive,
Iberian C.
79.03 | 86.00 i Primitive, B. B. B_
22,58 14.5 j 32.5 44.61 j 22.9 11.9
19.46 12.1 34.0 35.58 ! 24,8 13.2
78.75 | 91.30 j Mixed, B. B. B .j.
19.85 15.0 35.1 46.15 23.4 12.3
92.48 | 85.41 , Mixed ,
77.41 | 91.30 Mixed, Iberian A, Primitive.
80.11 : 80.43 Alpine, Primitive
19.66 16.5 ; 29.5 55.93 20.7 9.3
19.95 14.0 34.3 40.82 24.4 13.4
19.53 13.1 33.8 38.75 21.2 10.1
93.37 ; 82. 97 Mixed, Primitive _
20.71 11.1 33.8 33.33 22.0 12.0
87.57 81.25 j Iberian B
72.76 j 73.58 j Iberian, mixed A and C_
20.08 14.5 34.0 42.61 22.3 10.1
81.76 j 95.55 | Modified Iberian B, and C
21.11 13.2 33.0 40.00 22.9 11.7
odd type.
14.3 37.4
11.8 77. 43 80.00 Iberian A, Primitive ..
13.5 88.30 [102.50 \ Malay, Chinese
15.5 34.0
88.30 j 102. 50 I Malay, Chinese -
31.8 41.50
22.1 11.5
95.23 j Iberian B, mixed, Iberian C
77.9 i 76.8
30.6 35.94
20.4 9.8
84.00 Iberian D.
71.9 i 80.9
71.5 i 78.6
33.4 43.71
21.3 11.0
92.60 Alpine.
73.9 ! 79.8
32.6 49.38
38.4 29.68
22.1 11.0
21.8 10.6
84.09 Modified Primitive,
78.84 Iberian C and B
. 77.7 80.0
. 70.1 82.3
29. 3 48.80
22.2 11.0
78.84 Odd type, B. B. 8., Iberian D
81.25 Modified Iberian C
31.6 52.84
24.5 12.7
77.9 85.5
38. 6 26.16
21.9 11.5
-97.67 Iberian D, Iberian C
86.7 72.2
32.8 37.19
24.4 13.4
93.33 Odd type, Primitive..
71.2 82.0
33.0 44.84
22.5 11. 2
93.02 Primitive, Iberian C
75.1 . 84.9
82.3 [ 73.1
34.2 37.13
22.0 11.4
72.54 i Iberian A


BEAN.
Table II .—Men of Taytay —
O Q 0) o £ % g . £ . O .
■ |A g* &d | . | . o 5
o o*j, 5$ .P-& s m, g> g>
- |g £§ ®£ |g> £g> A £ A |A
C gaf IS lof S' 2 8 2 H S gS
Q -rH ' 1 A 0> ,0 p a> Ki pOC3
48 484 34.4 22.33 38.6 26.06 16.2 10.52 19.5 12.26 33.3
49 486 40.7 24.35 38.8 23.22 21.0 12.57 24.0 14.36 30.8
50 17 37.7 23.80 40.0 25.25 18.0 11.36 24.5 15.46 33.5
51 465 35.7 22.66 40,7 25.84 16.7 10.60 21.0 13.33 34.4
52 36.9 23.14 38.8 24.34 16.9 10.60 23.0 14.42 28.8
53 41.0 24.07 47.1 27.59 20.3 11.89 24.3 14.23 33.9
54 40.1 24.04 40.0 23.98 19.5 11.68 23.3 13.96 34.7
477 41.3 24.51 42.6 25.22 18.0 10.68 26.5 15.72 33.5'
56 481 37.8 23.42 41.1 25,46 17.3 10.72 22.5 13.94 32.5
57 471 36.2 22.94 39.5 .25.03 18.0 11.39 23,2 14.69 30.0
" 234 37.4 22.57 40.1 24.20 18.8 11.34 24.2 14.60 31.5
"89 36.0 23.98 37.0 24.10 18.1 11.74 21.9 14.21 32.6-
Blend (Primitive) 91 551 33.8 22.48 38.2 25.33 17.7 11.73 22.7 15.05 34,1
Blend (Iberian) 92 556 33.9 22.27 39.6 26.01 17.8 11.69 21.0 13.79 31.6
Blend 93 558 37.9 23.36 41.4 25.52 18.7 11.52 23.7 14.61 31.4
Species of individual.
The true species is in
parenthesis, except
where no parenthesis
is given.
Australoid
Blend (Adriatic)
Iberian?
Blend (Modified Primi-
tive).
Blend (Iberian)
Cro-Magnon
Cro-Magnon? ___
Cro-Magnon 55 477
Blend _
Blend (Iberian)
Blend (Iberian) j 58 234
Blend (Modified Primi- |69 489
five).
Blend (Iberian) 50 488 41.0
Blend (Iberian) i 61 486 39.0
482 39.6
Blend | 62
Alpine 63 i 492 36.8
Blend 64 466 ; 38.2
Iberian i j 65 514 37.0
Iberian 66 601 39.1
Blend (Iberian) 67 1 988 35,4
Australoid .
Blend
70 34.1
Blend .
Blend (Iberian) j 71 505 j 37.8
rn „ J n <) QA Q
Blend 72 526 36.9
73 I- ... 38.0
Blend (Iberian)
74 535 38.1
Cro-Magnon
75 521 39.0
Blend (Iberian)
76 528 35.8
Blend (Alpine)
Blend (Alpine) I 77 503
Modified Primitive ! 78 836 | 36.3
79 529 35.7
Australoid ..
80 522 33.3
Iberian ..
81 520 37.7
Iberian _
82 537 38.7
Blend (Alpine)
83 225 36.6
Blend
84 703 : 33.5
Iberian
85 j 39.0
Australoid
86 i 566 ! 37,6
Australoid
Modified Primitive
87 -i 38.0
Alpine - 88 . 180 37.5
564 37.3
Australoid (Typical?)—
560 42.2
Cro-Magnon?
14.61 ‘ 35.9
13.92 i 31.8
15.80 32.0
14.19
11.32
11.05
13.63 34. 6
14.65 32.4
10.70 23.6 14.69 I 32.8
11.52 22.6 13.78 33.6
10.88 21.2 13.49 34.6
10.62 21.9 13.93 31.4
32.4
33.1
33.2
32.3
34.1
33.3
30.0
31.1
Hi 54 | 21.4 | 13.42
8; 56 i 22.8 15.01
11.08 24.4 1 14.94
12.02 26.7 15.73
9.60 I 23.1 I 13.69
10.82 21.5 13.69
10.67 22.2 14.18
10.38 21.6 13.75
10.80 21.7 14.29
30.3
31.5
33.9
11.49 22.7 14.42
10.35 21.7 13.53
11.38 22.7 14.04
10.09 23.3 14. 52
31.4
31.6
34.0
32.9
33.1
12. 94 20.9 13.39
10.21 20.8 12.80
10.55 23.7 14.88
11.41 23.6 15.12
11.59 24.6 15.66
12.37 21.6 13.77
12. 59 .22. 5 13.18
30.6
36.5
34.1
31.6
31.4
23.71
22.39
23. 72
23,03
68 462 36.2 23.02
21.97
23.71
24. 30
23.27
22.45
23.11
22.80
23.96
23.51
21.15
23.45
22.81
21.47
23.99
23.61
24.35
23.81
24.72
22.48
22.27
23.36,
42.0
42.4
39.7
40.7
40.0
40.3
37.6
38.9
41.4
36.0
40.2
46.6
41.3
40.8
39.7
33.3
40.8
37.3
43.9
40.8
87.5
39.2
38.4
36.1
42.4
38.2
39.6
41.4
17.4
18.6
17.8
17.2
25.14
25.80
24. 65
25.34
18.9
17.1
16.7
24.39
25.65
23.9S
25.06 17.8 11.46 1 19.6 12.62
25.97 18.4
23.71 14.0
24.61 18.1
27.46 20. 4
24.48 16.8
25.98 17.0
25.36 16. 7
23. 56 16.3
21.93 16.4
25.92 18.1
23.26 16.6
24.13 18.4
27.36 16.2
26.15 | 20.2
23.07 ! 16.6
24.62 16.8
24.61 17.8
24.71 | 18.2
23.02 19.4
24. 83 21.5
23.6
23.6 :
26.4
22.4
23.0
24.6
12.22
11.29
20.2
19.0
24.15
23.64
39.9
39.8
24. 21
24. 36
485 39.0


20.12
14.2
33.0
43.03
22.2
10.4
80.42
84.00
Iberian B, Primitive _ .
20.48
12.2
33.0
36.96
26.3
15.0
76.21
78.72
Iberian C, Iberian D(Cro-Mag-
non, (B. B. B.)
20.48
12.5
37.3
33.51
23.0
. 11. 5
77.27
85.41
Iberian, mixed _
22. 02
12.0
31.3
38.33
22.1
12.2
85.54
86.95
Iberian 11 _
19.97
14.2
35.8
39.66
19.7
10.2
78.08
100. 00
Primitive
80. 32
86.54
20.87
12.3
33.9
36.28
23.4
11.8
79.70
82.00
Mixed. Primitive
20. 76
12.3
33.9
36.28
20.7
9.3
84.83
82.35
Iberian I)
21.86
13.4
31.0
43.22
22.6
86.14
86.04
Iberian C, Alpine, Primitive
19. 77
17.3
32.2
53.73
22.8
11.5
80.10
82.97
Mixed, Iberian B and C
20.09
16.5
32.0
51.56
25.4
12.9
76.16
89.13
Modified Iberian A, Alpine ___
19.73
14.9
35.5
41.97
23.7
11.7
85.10
86.00
Iberian A
19.10
13.1
30.4
43.09
21.0
9.8
81.96
72.34
Iberian C, Primitive .
19.87
13.7
33.3
41.14
21.8
11.1
81.71
76.00
Iberian A, Primitive, odd type.
20.92
13.0
33.1
39.27
23,5
11.0
76.14
93.75
Iberian'C, Primitive
20. 66
14.6
35.5
41.12
110.00
21.21
14.8
31.4
47.13
21.5
89.15
84.44
21.01
14.1
33.7
41.83
21.2
9.2
86.85
74.50
Primitive, Iberian C
indices and relative factors —Continued
•ri< O
j 1 I ® *
ffl . aS . 'O
-aS -S
ft h M o
si "3
w'*’ J3
f-i
0) •
a
’3 K
0 <D
2^5
Sc
CO O
o3
Ph
I « a
s | | c
~ %
J'O
ft
a
•S
3
£
Ear type.
’"S £
,2 £
O c 5
Ph
cc P <d
S 'a "
2 9
Ah P
P 0)
U «
i
S
13.5 34.1 39.58 18.9 9.6 79.77
21.62
18.43
21.16
18.9
21.8
26.9
9.6
10.7
14.9
93.02
89.13
79.59
Primitive, Iberian C_
76.1 70. 9
16. 0 34.6
Odd type, Iberian C, B. B. B ._.
Iberian C, B. B, 8., Iberian D
75.1 79.8
73.6 j 85.7
14.0 33.1
(Cro-Magon).
Primitive
38.03 i 21.4
84,46 Iberian C.
71.9 90.0
72.1 i 89.3
41.42 | 23.4
82.22 Iberian C.
100.00 Mixed, lb
41.81 i 24.0
Mixed, Iberian D, Primitive,
74.7 | 81.0
Iberian A and C.
j 19.88 ; 15.6
20.13 I 14.0
33.2 j 46.98 | 22.3 10.0
82.90
83.33
83.15
87.29
95,30 Odd type, Primitive, Iberian D
73.4 86.9
77.6 | 78.7
34.8 40. 46
21.2 10.8
21.8 9.8
93.00 Iberian A, odd type
19.01 12.7 35.8 35.49
82.23 Iberian B_.
71.8 92. 3
19.07 15.9 35.3 43.04 23.9 11.7
80.39 Iberian C.
. 67.8 j 89.0
21.15 12.6 I 32.2 39.13 22.3 11.4 88.70
100.00 Iberian D, mixed
, 74.4 81.3
21.33 j 17.3 33.8 51.18 22.8 11.4 81.53 90.00 Iberian D, Iberian B
19.24 | 18.5 30.7 | 60.26 ' 21.6 I 10.4 79.36 84.31 Iberian B and Cl
76.0 |
75.6
19.16 16.7 34.3 48.69 20.7 10.2 85.31 84.09 Modified Primitive, Alpine-
-21.06 j 14.0 32.4 i 46.29 24.8 | 13.5 85.14 66.66 Odd type, Iberian B and C
69. 2 80.9
85. 2 71.2
80.2 73. 0
72.2 83.9
. 70.3 87.1
67.0 89.0
21.71 11.8 33.5 35.22 26.0 15.0 89.14 95.00 Primitive-
19.96 13.0 33.4 38.92 21,8 9.8 76.47 85.41 Iberian B, Alpine, Primitive..
20.01 14.5 33.2 43.67 25.2 13.7 70.50 79.19 Iberian 1), mixed, Iberian A__
67.9
69.3
75.4
93.0
80.9
79.7
21.14 14.8 33.1 44.71 24.6 13.6 75.00 78.43 Iberian B, Primitive, Iberian D_
20.48 16.6 34.5 48.11 30.6 12.5 84.23 75.47 B. B. B
19.57 14.8 33.0 44.84 23.4 11.3 80.11 88.37 Iberian, mixed
20.25 16.5 31.6 52.21 22.6 10.3 77.59 81.63 Iberian D
73.1
65.7
84.2
90.4
91.9
76.9
71.0 ; 85.7
19.51 14.3 ! 30.2 47.35 22.2 11.6 73.68 102.22 Odd type
21.38 15.1 34.2 44.15 21.9 10.6 | 78.57 81.81 Iberian C
22.61 13.3 | 30.3 43.89 21.8 11.8 85.00 88.09 B. B. 8., Iberian A...
84.9 | 75.1
72.7 , 86.2
75.8' ! 75. 7
20. 76 12.5 31.1 40.19 j 22.7 11.7 85.29 83.33 Iberian A?
19.35 11.3 33.2 34.03 23.7 12.4 83.99 79.16 Iberian B, Primitive
69.5 81.4
79. 8 81.8


\
394 bean.
Table II. —Men of Taytay —
® 1 ® j ® | % ' 1 g . i . | •
Species of individual. : $ 14 I otS g*S a j Ji'p \ °tr 2*?„
The true species is in % ~ S> 1 SP ” Sf 3 £ 6 p p g p
parenthesis, except 1 ~ \S g £ g £ g £g |® to ® ty
where no parenthesis j « i 1 |~ |® ■%£ ||g S g 3 S
IS given. . fl M O) J" <D I DQ CJ J5 CD : OD ,2 : OQ rS
O \ Zi I a> r “ H ! £2 CD O>o3
• |Z; oj<!P3j<l PS, <!&!**)#■«!
| Blend i 94 ! 474 1 32.4 21.81 35.6 ! 23.97 i 16.4 11.01 20.4 13.73 29.4
Australoid 95 580 37.0 23.44 39.0 24.71 16.4 10.39 21.2 13.43 32.4
Australoid 96] 37.6 23.36 35.6; 22.12 17.8 11.06 21.9 13.61 31.7
Blend (Australoid) : 97, 581 37.9 23.52 39.8 I 24.31 ! 18.0 10.99 ,25.0 15.27 33.0
Australoid 1 98 L„:. 35.8 22.73 38.2 24 25 16.9 10.73 21.5 13.65 33.1
Australoid 1 99 176 j 37.3 28.78 39.6 25.26 18.7 11.92 1 23.0 14.66 33.9
Blend I 100 j 584 1 36.6 j 23.44 37.3 23.95 18.6 11.94 21.6 13.87 31.5
Blend (Modified Prim- 101 596 39.3 ■ 24.1 I 38.0 i 23.3 17.3 10.6 j 22.0 13.5 32.0
itive.) I
Blend 102 589 38.1 23.2 42.2 25.7 18.8 11.4 26.5 16.1 35.5
Cro-Magnon 103 616 40.6 I 24.3 i 40.6 | 24.3 | 19,5 11.6 1 24.5 14.7 32.6
Blend (Iberian) ! 104 63 34.8; 22.2 40.3 25.7 16.3 10.3 ! 20.7 13.2 34.0
Blend 105 ] 603 37.0 | 23.7 38.2 j 24.5 17.8 11.4 ] 22.2 14.2 33.0
Blend j 106 i 39.1 24.5 1 39.8 I 24.9 18.3 11.4 22.8 14.3 ! 33.2
Blend I 107 101 37.2 24.3 37.7 1 24.6 j 17.2 11.2 , 20.5 13.4 33.0
Blend-, I 108 | 38.9 24.4 j 39.5 i 24.7 18.2 11.4 22.6 14.1 30.5
Alpine (Iberian) 109 653 38.9 1 23.9 ; 38.9 | 23.9 17.8 10.9 , 22.7 13.9 34,8
Primitive? 110 36.5] 23.7 I 31.1 20.7 15.4 10.3 I 20.6 13.7! 31.3
Blend 111 638 39.4 I 24.7 38.3 j 24.0 17.0 10.7 I 23.9 15.0 I 30.1
Blend - 112 37.3 I 24.6 i 36.1 ! 23.8 | 17.3 11.4 ! 19.9 13.1 30.0
: Australoid ! 113 628 36.6 23.6 38.2 24.6 ! 18.3 11.8] 21.8 14.0 31.2
Cro-Magnon 114 656 41.3 24.8 42.5 25.4 1 20.2 12.1 23.5 14.0 35.6
Blend 115 639 34.5 1 21.9 36.6 23.2 16.4 10.4 j 22.6 14.3 30.7 k
Blend (Primitive) 116 631 35.1! 23.8:38.0 25.8 14.7 10.0 20.8 14.1 I (?)
Blend 117 S9.8 I 24.5 j 38.9 23.9 18.8 11.6 | 22.2 13.6 33.8
Blend 118 316 39.8 ] 24.4 I 40.2 24.6 16.7 10.2 ] 24.7 15.1 31.0
Iberian 119 39.1 25.0 37.8 24.1 17.8 11.3 ' 23.3 14.9 31.6
Blend (Iberian) 120 654 36.3 23.7 38.4 25.1 17.2 11.2 24.9 16.2 29.1
Blend 121 662 40.4 ! 24.5 42.3 25.7 19.3 11.7 26.7 16.2 ] 34.7
Modified Primitive | 122 657 37.5 23.3 j 36.5 22,6 19.1 11.8 25.0 15.5 32.9
Blend i 123 651 39.1 23.9 41.7 25.5 17.6 10.7 24.0 14.6 : 32.5
Australoid 124 650 35.8 22.9 37. 5 24.0 16.0 10.2 21.4 18.7 30.6
Blend (Iberian) .1 125 609 34.0 20.7 43.2 26.2 I 18.2 11.0 25.2 15.3 34.7
Blend (Iberian) 126 692 40.1 24.1] 42.5 25.5 19.0 11.4:25.7 15.4 33.5
Australoid 127 37.9 j 24.6 35.0 22.8 14.8 9.6 21.5 14.0 32.5
Blend . 128 708 37.9 j 23.8 39.0 24,6 , 17.3 10.9 | 23.4 14.7 j 32.5
Australoid 129 686 35.9 23.0 ,40.0 25.6 15.8 10.1 j 23.2 14.9] 32.0 „
Cro-Magnon i 130 710 40.4 24.1 40.0 23.8 j 18.0 10.7 23.5 14.0 33.0 »
Alphine (Iberian?) 131 730 37.8 ; 23.9 36.8 23.3 17.2 10.9 21.9 13,8 33.5
Blend (Modified Prim- 132 754 37.2 I 23.8 39.5 26.2 : 17.6 11.2 21.7 13.8 ] 34.3
itive). j ' ' I
Blend (Iberian) 133 726 39.2 1 24.5 I 40.0 25.0 18.0 11.2] 23.4 14.6 133.6
Blend (B. B. B.) 134 757 40.9 | 27.2 | 41.2 24.4 | 18.3 1 10.8 | 27.4 16.2 34.0 *
Australoid. 135 758 38.3 23.7 :39.9 24.6 18.1 , 11.2 ] 23.2 14.3 36.4
Australoid 136 760 35.6 j 23.8 35.8 23.9 14.8 9.9 : 22.6 15.1* 32.9
: Blend (Primitive) 137 761 33.4 22.9 36.3 24.9 18.2 12.5 18.6 12.7 29.4
Iberian 138 756 38.7 24.4 38.8 24.5 18.0 11.3 22.8 14.4 33.0
| Blend 139 34.3 ] 21.9 36.9 23.5 16.5 9.8 | 23.3 14.8 33.5
; Australoid i 140 40.4! 25.1] 38.7 24.0 18.2 11.3 21.6 13.4 35.0
Iberian 141 38.8 ! 23,3 ! 40.5 ! 24.3 17.4: 10.4 24.1 14.4 34.0


. ’
indices and relative factors —Continued.
ft . « I 2 ! a m o .
P , -S o3 « <d -d J
g ■ ® . os . '2 • m a®
£ &C £ . S r- .S O
®S o|g§sg » G Ear type. S-S
£d «- 3 8 ! ja''* ?S | |'S
a| s a® & ~ -i
■s* ■§ a ! a ® ■ & |
« p p o h P o £ c*
19. 79 13. G 32. 0 42.50 23.1 12.1 83.05 80.39 Iberian C, Primitive 69.5
20753 15.0 I 34.3 J 43.73 22.5 11.5 77.00 95.23 Iberian B, Iberian C 1— 71..4
19. 70 . 16. 8 34.3 48.97 i 24. 6 12.8 81. 72 97.61 Primitive, Alpine 67.6
20.15 15.8 30.7 j 51.46 23.2 11.3 81.28 91.48 Iberian C, Alpine ’ 75.6
* 21.01 17.4 32.2 j 54.31 23.7 12. 4 82.60 97.67 Primitive, odd type, mixed 76.5
21.61 13.2 33.6 | 39.28 19.8 8.7 81.50 95.30 Mixed 76.8
20.23 12.8 31.7 40. 37 22.7 11.3 79.67 81.25 Iberian A, Iberian D, mixed __ 70.2
* 19.6 14.1 34. g 40.5 22.3 11.0 85.10 89.79 Mixed 81-2
■* 21.6 15.0 33.0 45.4 22.8 11.8 83,88 77.08 Mixed, subnothern 77.9
19.5 13.5 33.8 39.9 25.4 13.7 75.77 97.61 Iberian 0 73.2
21.7 15.6 30.3 51.4 23.6 12.6 79.14 88.09 Iberian C 74.0
21.2 16.1 31.0 51.8 23.4 11.8 84.04 86.00 Primitive odd type: 70.4
20.8 14.2 32.8 43.2 20.9 83.14 73.91 Mixed, Iberian, B. B. B
21.5 13.7 33.3 41.1 21.4 10.7 84.09 88.37 Mixed, Iberian A 77.4
19.1 12.4 30.6 40.5 24.1 12.2 84.40 83.33 Iberian A, B. B. B P 67.6
ZU. O Id. O , dZ. Z
» 19.6 14.6 35.3
21.2 13.1 35.7
21.9 i 14.0 32.5
20.6 11.5,32.5
* 20.1 14.5 35.3
22.5 . 16.0 34.2
22.0 13.0 (?)
20.1 10.1 32.2
20.8 14.9 31.7
21.3 14.3 35.7
21.7 11.5 ! 32.0
20.4 13.5 i 35.3
t ■'
111.
23.4 12.1 75.12:100.00 Mixed, subnothern
22.8 | 12.5 81.76 : 80.43 Modified Iberian A, Primitive
20.9 9.8 87.05 80.00 Mixed, Primitive ___
23.4: 10.9 83.88 79.62 Odd type, mixed, Primitive..
21.2 10.2 i 86.51 | 81.81 | Iberian C, mixed.
22.4 10.3 77.96 72.00 Iberian A.
22.7 10.6 | 81.48 73.58 Iberian D, mixed.
21. 9 9.9 I 85.63 75. 47 Odd type Primitive
23.2 11.9 89.41 j 87.50 \ Mixed, odd type, subnothern.
23.5 j 11. 9 88.57 i 82.69 Mixed, Iberian A, (Iberian D,)
B. B. B.
43.3 23.7 I 12.0 j 79.89 ! 93.61 i Odd type, mixed, Primitive..
44.4 22.7 11.4 i 87.70 i 86.66 Iberian C.
45.0 25.5 13.3 81.86 70.37 Iberian C.
55.6 21.5 | 10.0 j 81.11 | 93.02 | Mixed, subnoth'ern.
43.2 21.2 9.7 86.40 94.00 : Mixed, odd type, Primitive ...
41.9 24.2 i 12.8 | 75.60 j 84.70 ! Iberian B and C, (Iberian D)
41.8 22.7 12. 0 77.60 ! 97.50 Iberian C, mixed.
36.7 20.7 9.7 1 89.28 78.72 Iberian A and C
43,1 23.0 13.0 I 88.37 90.24 ■ Mixed, Alphine
35.3 23.2 j 11.9 87.77 : 78.26 | Iberian A.
41.1 24.2 12.2 88.63 ; 83.33 j Mixed Primitive.
46.7 23.6 12.6 83.33 97.72 B. B. 8., mixed
22.8 11.5 77.89 86.04 j Iberian C, B, mixed.
31.3 21.7 10.9 86.04 80.00 Odd type, mixed ___
47.0 19.8 8.8 79.03 77.27 | Iberian C, odd type
40.0 21.1 9.1 79.27 84.09 | Iberian A, mixed, Primitive.
35.9 23.7 11.4 78.95 95,55 Iberian A, B, mixed
111. FILIPINO types: RAC
indices and relative factors— Continued
O A T3 © *
-S ® =3 © ©
ft-M £ • 03 •
-I 0 . -S
©Jj 5§ §5 g© _.£? »-.SP -S
*r-» izd !ri 2 frt _> a* 03 03 r2
■g a .jp hs-l p, 'S
■sS c s a ® » &
«dtip oh P o
19.79 13. G 32.0 42.50 23.1 12.1 83.05
20753 15.0 34.3 43.73 22.5 11.5 77.00 |
19. 70 , 16. 8 34.3 48.97 |- 24. 6 12.8 81. 72 I
20.15 15.8 30.7 51.46 23.2 11.3 : 81.28 j
21.01 17.4 32.2 54.31 23.7 12.4 ! 82.60
21.61 13.2 33.6 39.28 19.8 8.7 ! 81.50
20.23 12.8 31.7 40. 37 22.7 11.3 , 79.67
19.6 14.1 34.8 40.5 22.3 11.0 85.10
-
21.6 15.0 33.0 45.4 22.8 11.8 83.88
19.5 13.5 33.8 j 39.9 25.4 13.7 | 75.77
21.7 15.6 30.3 ! 51.4 23.6 12.6 | 79.14
21.2 16.1 31.0 51.8 23.4 11.8 j 84.04 |
20.8 14.2 i 32.8 43.2 20.9 j 83.14
21.5 13.7 33.3 | 41.1 21.4 10.7 84.09
19.1 12.4 30.6 | 40.5 24.1 12.2 | 84.40
21.4 14.2 31.4 45.2 22.0 10.9 91.28
20.9 16.0 28.3 56.5 23.3 12.6 88.95
18.9 15.0 30.8 48.7 24.6 12.8 j 82.41
19.7 13.0 32.3 ; 40.2 22.6 12.1 78.02
20.0 12.2 37.2 32.8 22.5 80.32
21.2 13.6 32.0 42.5 23.4 12.1 75.12 1
19.5 17.3 31.2 55.4 22.8 12.5 81.76
12.6 1 30.0 42.0 20.9 9.8 87.05
20.8 13.8 I 33.0 41.8 23.4 10.9 83.88
19.0 14.2 j 31.6 44.9 21.2 10.2 86.51
20.2 15.2 31.5 48.2 | 22.4 10.3 i 77.96
18.9 13.7 30.1 44.0 22.7 10.6 j 81.48
21.1 13.3 33.9 39.2 21.9 9.9 ! 85.63
20.4 16.1 , 34.0 47.3 23.2 11.9 : 89.41
19.8 15.8 : 32.5 48.6 23.5 11.9 i 88.57
19.6 : 14.4 33.2 43.3 23.7 12.0 ' 79.89
21.1 15.1 34.0 44.4 22.7 11.4 87.70
20.1 13.7 30.3 j 45.0 25.5 13.3 ! 81.86
21.1 15.4 27.7 ! 55.6 21.5 10.0 81.11
20.5 14.4 33.3 43.2 21.2 9.7 ; 86.40
20.5 13.5 32.2 j 41.9 24.2 12.8 | 75.60
19.6 14.6 | 35.3 ; 41.8 22.7 12. 0 77.60
21.2 | 13.1 35.7 36.7 20.7 9.7 i 89.28
21.9 14.0 32.5 43.1 23.0 13.0 88.37
20.6 11.5 j 32.5 35. 3 23.2 11.9 87.77
20.1 14.5 35.3 41.1 24.2 12.2 88.63
22.5 . 16.0 34.2 46.7 23.6 12.6 83,33
22.0 13.0 : (?) 22.8 11.5 77.89
20.1 10.1 32.2 31.3 21.7 10.9 86.04
20.8 14.9 31.7 47.0 19.8 8.8 79.03
21.3 14.3 35.7 40.0 21.1 | 9.1 79.27
21.7 11.5 32.0 35.9 23.7 i 11.4 78.95
20.4 : 13.5 i 35.3 38.2 22.7 ! 10.5 73.05
I RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 395
O . -rH .
"3 X g>X
P O’ 0 <D
Pp ° p
,p .a
.2 <K P- d>
wo a
» OS o 05
MH *+H
cw s
85.5
83.2
83.5
80.2 |
22.0 10. 9 94.28 I 60.37 i Iberian C_
23.3 12.6 88.96 | 89.13 Alpine, Primitive.
69. 9 83.7
75. 5 75. 7
78. 3 85. 3
71.8 92.5
79.0 -78.5
69.1 91. 6
69". 6 85.2
67.6 86.9
77.5 81.8
70.1 84.0
80. 4 83.5
78. 7 80.1
70:0 87.1
71.4 85.1
72.5 79.3
76.2 82.6
72.1 79.2
65.0 84.6
78. 7 72.9
38.2 22.7 I 10.5 73.05 80.76 I Mixed, odd type, Iberian A
24. 6 | 12.8 82.41 ! 86.95 j Iberian B, mixed, Alpine
22.6 12.1 78.02 86. 36 : Primitive, subnothern
22.5 j 80.32 95.45 Odd type, Primitive


396 BEAN,
I fH SH
1 o> o>
> • > •
Species of individual. 55 S5
The true species is in w> '-'so
parenthesis, except . g § . |
where no parenthesis § L2T bT
is given. . n 1 S a? ! * a?
O I ' ' a)— 1
£ o ■ -<j «
.
Australoid 142 784 39,9 j 24.3
Blend 156 222 27.6
Blend (Primitive) ... 157 915 36.3
Blend (Primitive) 158 1,085 34.8
Alpine. - 159 921 37.4 23.0 34.7
Australoid 160 931 34.7 22.6 35.5
Blend (Iberian) 161 935 38.0 24,1 38.0
Blend (Primitive) 162 934 33.6 22.6 36.5
Iberian? . 163 940 87.2 23.1 41.5
Iberian 164 129 35.9 22.5 40.2
Australoid 165 941 36.2 23.4 36.2
Alpine (Iberian?) 166 954 38.8 24.2 37.4
Cro-Magnon 167 471 37.3 22.5 39.5
Australoid 168 37.6 23.7 39.0
Blend (Australoid) 169 543 38.4 23.5 42.3
Blend., 170 36.9 23.4 36.8
Blend (Iberian) 171 36.9 22.7 40.7
Blend 172 36.7 24.1 37.0
Blend 173 36.8 23.5 40.2
Blend 174 1,069 37.9 23.2 20.3
Blend 175 1,048 39.4 23.9 42.4
Alpine 176 35.5 22.9 39.2 25.3
Blend (Iberian) 177 1,077 33.2 22.3 36.0 24.1
Blend 178 360 1
Australoid 179 348 '
Blend 180 j
181 ...J 37.2 23.2 40.8 25.5
Cro-Magnon 182 1,086 I 37.3 22.3 I 42.7 25.5
Australoid 183 j 38,6 23.9 41.4 25.7
-k.
i .
Australoid
Blend
Blend (Cro-Magnon)
Blend
Blend
Cro-Magnon
Alpine (Iberian),
Iberian
Blend.
Blend (Iberian)
Australoid
I Alpine (Iberian?)
Blend (Iberian?).
775 | 40.3
800 , 38.4
801 ! 39.2
816 : 36.8
825 I 38.3
833 j 37.5
875 ! 3(i. 2'
870 36.0
877 | 38.2
i 37.2
885 j 38.2
886 36.2
® I ® I I s a g . g .
o5 15 §£' ijs ■ S ■ ! ■£«
-■£. °S =>S -5 5f Sf
|| >| !|| >| i|c >c '|-2 £,§
Is 1 |i : Is? li ■§* 1® ; |g 1e
.0 ,-H a)’—' r o r “' cd ,0 jo ,005 o os
<1 )PS I<) PS <S |PS <S PS
24.2 I 16.0
23.7 I 16.2
23.8 15. 5
21.3 17.4
23.1 17.6
24.1 ' 17.0
24.6 I 17.3
16.4
17.8
17.4
19.9
18.2
16.3
23.4
23.3
23.9
24.6
25.8
23.4
10.3 24.5
11.3 22.3
11.5 26.0
17.5. 1 10.7 24.2
1J.2 26.4
18.6
16.7
16.1
10. 8 22.5
10.8 23.4
18.8
17.6
24.3
25.2
23.8
22.9
23.5
23.6
22.4
22.9
24.0
23.0
23.3
23.2
23.4
23.5
23.9
23.9
23.3
23.0
22.6
24.1
22.6
39.7
39.1
41.2
42.0
39.4
41.2
44.0
40.0
39.5
40.0
37.7
39.0
38.6
38.5
38.0
36.0
35.5
25.1
24,3
25.6
25.7
25.3
24.1
t-l
0) .
P-rj
P-+3
p bo
s|
Is
; £2 03
c
24.2 19.5 ! 11.8 25.5 15.5 32.0
10.9 I 23.8 14.9 33.2
10.8 23.1 14.3 36.2
24.4 J 17.5
25.6 17.5
24.5 I 22.0
12.8 23.0 , 13.4 30.5
25.1 ! 17.0
10.8 28.2 14.8 28.6
10.8 25.0 15.4 29.0
25.5 i 18.5
26.3 j 18.5
11.1 ! 24.5 : 14.6 33.0
25.3 , 1G.7
10.5 18.3 11.5 33.8
24.2 I 17.0
10.4 26.0 15.9 32.7
10.9 22.5 14.3 32.7
25.5 1 17.1
11.2 24.3 14.8 34.7
10.6 23.5 14.7 29.7
22.9 18. 5
24.3 | 17.0
23.7 I 17.6
25.0 ; 17.0
10.8 24.6 15.1 | 32.5
11.1 22.0 14.3 | 31.0
22.0 14.3 ! 31.0
10.2 20.5 ! 13.1 : 30.9
10.6 23.6 15.5 28.4
10.4 I '24.5 j 16.4 | 26. 5
10.7 j 24.0 : 14.7 j 29.0
11.4 j 21.0 13.6 1 32.7
10.8 24.0 j 15. 2 | 28.0
11.6 ; 23.7 i 15.9 30.9
23.5
25.2
27.3
21.6
24.3
22.0
10.6
11.1
10.5
12.5
11.1
10.3
15.1 31.3
15.7 | 31.0
16.5 I 33.5
13.6 31.7
14.8 | 31.0
14.0 | 34.0
31.3
29.4
29.0
32.8
15.1
14.6
16.6
14.8
33.6
31.3
28.0
16.0
14.5
15.7
21.6
24.4
22.6
Table
Men of
Taytay —
39.2
155
154
193
152
151
150
149
148
147
146
145
144
143


1 I
18.6 17.0 81.0 54.8 28.1 11.9 72.20 84.00 Iberian D 79.8 80.5
indices and relative factors —Continued
o
w|
o G
0>
X 5 tn
I a
i
t-i
0) .
g*g
C
p <D
li
O o3
PS
s
s
S3
S|
S |
£
o .
*5 x
« 03
O
tIC-r-H
•2 03
03 03
35
ft^
ft
*
03
'C
o5
£
03 •
o
33 .
n 60
<d'S
ft-®
p.
(3
O’®
ft 03
O
S
s *
22 CU
ft
s
o
Ear type.
76.21 90.57 j B
19.5
.20.7
22.4
17.8
18.3
18.3
19.8
21.4
20.0
11.0 ; 87.4
29.4
39.5
41.5
42.4
41.5
40.9
41.4
52.2
41.1
40.7
54.5
32.8
42.2
29.0
43.2
45. 5
33.5
43.7
53.0
31.7
37.6
25.0 12.5
>. B. 8., Alpine _
13.6 34.4
22. 8 12.0
77.29 j 89.36
Primitve, Iberian A
13.5 32. 6
22.6 10.8
79.89 : 81.96
Primitive, odd type, Iberian A
15.7 37.0
24.0 12.0
81.10 | 87. 70
Iberian, mixed _
13.8 33.2
22.4 10. 8
84.60 j 81.10
Primitive, mixed.
Iberian D, odd type _
13. 2 32.2
24.9 12. 6
24.2 13.4
79. 80 75.91
14.5 35,0
81.20 100.00
Iberian D
16.6 31,8
21.5 10.0
85.87 i 62.00
Iberian A.
13.2 32.1
24.2 12.0
76.16 | 83.33
Iberian A
12.9 31.7
23. 4 12.1
87.20 84.44
Primitive, mixed
18.2 33.2
23.2 10.4
78.46 85. 41
Primitive, mixed.
11.5 35. 0
23.7 12. 3
72.02 90.70
Mixed, Primitive, Iberian A.
15, 0 35. 5
23.3 11.9
91.95 81.13
Iberian 1).
10.3 35.5
13.1 30. 3
23. 7 12.9
84.15 86.00
78.91 88.88
Iberian D__.
20.1
19.7
18.7
17.7
17.8
21.3
17.8
20.8
22.7 11.7
Iberian A, Primitive ,
71.3
14.2 31.2
21.5 11.3
87.57 88.88
Alpine, Primitive _
83.1
10.8 j 32.2
18.8 S. 4
83.60 86.00
Mixed, Iberian A, Primitive,
16.4 37.5
15.9 30. 0
26.1 13.8
84.32 54.90
B. B. 8., Primitive ~
Odd type, Primitive,
24.2 12.2
77.54 98.48
22.5 10.5
81.87 I 86.95
Iberian B
11. 4 36.0
22.0 11.8
86.14 92.30
Iberian A, mixed, Primitive,
odd type.
12.9 34.3
Mixed, Iberian A, odd type,
Iberian D.
80.5
Iberian A, Iberian D, odd
type.
77.72
20.2
19.3
20.2
20.0
18.9
21.6
35.0
35.0
33.9
31.5
32.0
33.8
32.6
36.3
38.6
45.4
43.7
42.9
9.1
10.6
10.8
12.7
9.9
8.5
75. 70
89.77
75.40
76.29
81.40
79,60
89.13
78. 43
89.13
84.80
90.90
86.60
Mixed, Iberian A
Iberian D
22.1
22.0
24.1
21.0
20.5
Iberian C
14.3
14.0
14.5
Mixed, Iberian A _
Mixed, Iberian C,
Mixed, Primitive, Alpine,
Iberian A.
1 10. 1
77.08
88.37
87.50
19.2
19.3
18.5
13.0 36. 4
12.4 32.8
12.4 32.0
36.7
37.8
38.7
81.03
79.67
82.50
Iberian C, Iberian D _
Iberian A, mixed
Iberian B, C, mixed,
13.4 i 33.3
Iberian D, (Cro-Magnon)
odd type.
20.3 13. 8 | 33.0
on o i A n q i q
41.8
44.4
40.0
23.5
21.8
21.3
11.5
9.9
9.9
Iberian C, Primitive
20.2 14.0 | 31.3
18.8 13.0 32. 6
75.51
86.95
86.00
94.49
Mixed
Iberian B
81.96
78.00
80.00
Mixed
Alpine
Mixed
21.2 17.2
19.7 14.4
42.3 22.2
54.8 23.1
Mixed, Alpine, B. B. 8., Prim-
itive, Iberian A,


1
■
BEAN.
111. —Averages and extremes —physical characters
of adult males at
Table
Taytay, 1909 —Oody measurements
Num-
ber
of in-
divid-
uals.
Mean of
first 100
indi-
viduals.
Mini-
mum.
Maxi-
mum.
Character.
Mean.
38.40
Age (2)15.00
36.32
(3) 80.00
Stature 145.70
159.47
171.00
91.70
159. 60
Sitting height 74.80
83.99
Pubic height 71.00
Umbilical height 85.00
81.78
95.75
105. CO
Sternal height 118.00
128.88
139.80
124.60
Chin height 124.00
136.27
148.80
136.40
Ear height 134.60
14(>.10
158.50
144. 40
Ankle height 4.40.
Knee height 38,40 j
Trochanter height ; 72.80
Finger-tip height 46. 50
83.08
57.04
Wrist height 63.80
Elbow height - 87.50
97.69
110.50
129.69
139.80
Acromion height —-; 117.40
129.10
Head measurements of adult male Filipinos at
Taytay,
Rizal, Luzon,
Table IY.—.
P. 1., 1909 —averages and extremes.
Mean of
first 100
indi-
viduals.
Mini-
mum.
Maxi-
mum.
Character.
Mean,
of in-
divid-
uals.
Maximum length 16.60
Maximum breadth 13.40
U.!Mi
Maximum height 11.20
Minimal frontal breadth 9.20
10.44
Bizygomatic breadth 12.00
Bimastoid breadth 11.40
Bigoniac breadth 9,10
Naso-buccal distance,,- 5-90
10.69
14.30?
Naso-alveolar distance 5. 30
Nose height (base) 1- 80
Nose breadth | 2.80
Nose length 3.70
Chin-nasion distance.-i 1 9.30 [
Nasion hair-line distance 5. 50
11. *2O
11.20
1.88
Mouth breadth (lips) 0.30
4.60
Mouth length 3. 80
Ear breadth I 3.00
Ear length 4.80
Ear cartilage length-,- ; 4.20
Interocular distance I 2.60
Eye length (transverse) 2.50
Eye color (Martin) 1.00
Frontal circumference ' 27.40
30.50
35.69
Parietal circumference 31.80
Forehead circumference ; 24.70
27.50
28.48
Occipital circumference 1 25.30


•
V
III. F
Tae
LE V. —-i
Absolut
Low
Upp
Han
Fore
Upp
Pub
*
Uml
Tota
-
Upp
Relative
'
Lon
Upp
Han
Fore
Upp
Indices:
Omp
Cepl
Nass
Phy
Mor
93.30
Morphologic face.
81.80
CHARACTERS.
DESCRIPTIVE
Time and exact appliances forbade the measurement of certain char-
acteristics such as skin color and minor deformities, but notes were made
of such occurrences and they are utilized in the following pages for
purposes of description.
SKIN COLOR.
The Taytay an has a brown skin, the shade of which depends largely
upon whether the individual is an outdoor or indoor worker. As the
majority of men are fishermen or farmers, the skin is usually a darker
shade than the average Filipino of Manila where so many men work
indoors. The skin color is somewhat relative for this reason. However,
a feiv individuals were so dark in color as to appear almost black, and a
few more individuals were so light in color as to appear almost white. Of
these there were six of the former and eighteen of the latter. The light-
colored individuals invariably exhibited evidences of recent European
extraction, whereas the dark colored were similar to the Indians of
Cainta from whom they'were probably derived.
-Indices and relative factors of adult male Filipinos
averages and extremes.
Mean.
Factors.
31.00 37.29
31.10 39.22
14.00 17.55
18.30 23.05
26.60 32.37
6.80 13,96
27.70 I 33.14
18.80 ; 23.00
8.40 ; 11.80
23.37
27.20
24.(i0
11.05
20.30
42.25
Omphalic
Cephalic..
Nasal.....
81.7!)
110.00
85.20
Physiognomic .
Absolute length:
Lower leg
Upper leg
Hand
Forearm
Upper arm
Pubis to umbilicus
Umbilicus to sternum.
Total head height
Upper face height
Relative length:
Lower leg __
Upper leg ...
Hand
Forearm
Upper arm _
Taytay —
Number
of indi-
viduals.


■ ' ( * I :
BIend - A loid ra ' Iberian ' Mag- Alpine
Straight 36 12 8 34! 0
Slight Mongolian 24 8 0 4 4 3
Mongolian 5 2 2 1 0 1 0
_____ L_ __! a *
HAIR.
The color of the hair is almost uniformly black and straight, with an
occasional fine brown, but no notes were made in reference to this factor.
Only three individuals had wavy hair and these gave evidence of
modified Iberian characteristics. No association with the Negrito can be
established from the hair form, and there is no evidence of any recent
Negrito intermixture.
EYE COLOR.
The average eye color of 179 individuals determined with Martin’s(l7)
artificial eyes is that of the intermediate brown No. 3, which occurred
74 times, a greater number than any other color. Number 1 occurred
18 times: in 6 Australoids, 7 Blends, 2 Iberians, 2 Cro-Magnons and 1
Alpine; and No. 5 occurred 16 times: in 8 Blends, 2 Alpines, 2 Cro-
Magnons, 2 Australoids, 1 Iberian and 18.8. B. It may be significant
that a greater number of Australoids and Iberians have dark eyes than
light eyes, signifying an intensification of pigment due probably to the
Iberian. I have referred before (4) to an intensification of skin pigment
among Filipino Iberians, and this is hereby confirmed.
The condition of arcus senilis is prevalent and is not confined to old
men.
Four blind individuals were noted among 183 men.
THE MONGOLIAN EYELID.
Observations were made on 116 individuals to determine the condition
of the upper lid at the inner canthus, and only 10 were found with a well
marked fold at this point, whereas 63 were found without the fold, and
43 had only a slight indication of it.
If tins fold is a sign of Asiatic blood as distinguished from European
and others, then almost half the individuals examined give indications of
Asiatic extraction. However, this proportion is probably not true, but
those individuals who have only a slight fold have no doubt as much
other blood as Asiatic. Therefore the relative proportion of European
and others to Asiatic should be as the ratio of 63 to 10, or 63 plus 4 43 to
10 plus 4 43, which is a ratio of 84.5 to 31.5, or somewhere between the
two ratios.
When the types (species) are correlated with the three conditions of
eyelid, not one type can be excluded from the Mongolian, but each type
has some individuals with this condition as may be seen in the table below:


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 401
Some types, however, have a greater number of straight upper lids,
whereas others have the fold in greater number. Thus the Australoid and
the Iberian have a greater number of individuals with straight lids, .
whereas the Alpine, Modified Primitive, and Cro-Magnon have a greater
number with Mongolian lids, and the Blend has almost an equal number
of each. May it bednferred from this that the Australoid and Iberian are
other than true Asiatic types, whereas the Cro-Magnon, Alpine, and
Modified Primitive are true Asiatics, also that each type is represented
among the Chinese? None of the Primitive or B. B. B. were examined
for lid formation.
HEAD OUTLINES.
Composite outlines of the three groups, brachycephalic, 74 individuals,
mesocephalic, 69 individuals, and dolichocephalic, 22 individuals, are
made in the same manner that similar outlines were made for the Igorots,
negroes and white students described in former studies(3).
There are two dolichocephalic outlines because so few individuals did
not produce one composite, there being enough large outlines to make
an additional composite outside of the one where the greatest number
produced the small outline.
A glance at the outlines (figs. 5, 6 and 7) will show the dorsal flatten-
ing marked in the brachycephalic, which at once differentiates the Tay-
tayans from the Igorots, negroes or white students. .This flattening in
the brachycephalic (fig. 5) is accompanied by projection in the parietal
prominence in the region of the bregma and bulging in the
temporal region, which suggests artificial flattening by pressure from
behind. Many of the heads were flattened toward one side rather than
exactly in the middle, and when this condition existed the opposite side
bulged in the parieto-temporal region more than the side on which the
dorsal flattening was most marked. (See Plate XVIII.)
In several children this was more decided than in adults. One of
these is given in fig. 8 where the two outlines are shown as taken with
the cephalograph over the middle of the right and of the left eye
respectively and parallel to the median line. Another is shown in fig. 9,
with the median sagittal outline and one parallel to it 3 centimeters to the
left. The first of these is of a boy, aged 4, whose father brought the
child to me for consultation. The boy had slept invariably with his
head on a hard board covered with only a thin matting, the petdte, with
the head turned to the left at an angle of 45°, and I attributed the trouble
to this cause. The head of the second boy, aged 10, was not so distorted
but without doubt the condition was due to the same cause. These two
cases illustrate a condition that is found frequently among the children
and I believe it is nothing more nor less than the petdte habit that
produces it.
The petdte habit is what I named the Filipino custom of sleeping on


I
i
402 BEAN.
«5
C
/ °
/ S-
/ U_
Id
f +f
X \ Q_
O
\ O
O
L . __
02
◄
P
Q
>
3
£
o
M
P
<
w
p
H
u
W
o
a
ffl
p
o
02
H
g
3
H
P
o
H
H
M
02
O
P
s
o
O
LO
d
M
s


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 403
fO
c
o
d:
m
<
£
Q
3
3
z
o
3
<
w
Pw
«
o
o
02
W
§
05
CO
ft
o
Xfl
W
g
H
£
o
H
M
m
o
fc
s
o
o
CO
d
M
fa
cs
-M
EL
O
O
o
90339 5


404 BEAN.
s' %
/ s'
/ X c
X X o
XX i-
X X Ll_
/ / w
/ / hJ
/ / ◄
/ / H>
/ / M
/ / >
/ / „ >H
/ / Q
/ / 2
] j °
/ / 3
/ / <J
/ / w
/ /
/ / H
/ / o
/ / o
/ / W
/ / u
/ / M
/ /
/ / o
/ / p
/ / <N
/ / N
I
/ / o
' / 03
w
g
3
H
P
O
H
M
\ o
\ \
\ \
\ N. 15
\v Q_
N. O
o


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 405
hard floors (bamboo or other material) with only the petdte or a small
hard pillow between the head and the floor. This is the coolest way to
sleep in the tropics, the soft pillow being particularly hot and oppressive.
When the baby is placed upon a petdte, in acquiring the habit it normally
lies flat upon its back, and the head is either straight or turned slightly to
one side. After a few months a flat place is formed on that part of the
head resting on the petdte, and the child then lies on this flat place until
the head becomes misshapen and sometimes badly deformed.
When my daughter was about one or two months old we kept her in a
woven bed with only a sheet and a petdte beneath her until about the third
month when I noticed a small flat place in the occipital region of the head,
after which we used a small pillow and the head soon resumed its normal
dorsal rotundity.
This matter is a subject of great interest and may be one of vital im-
portance because such deformities may result in impaired mental ability
by undue pressure and distortion of the brain when it is developing most
rapidly. We would therefore suggest that a study of the school children
be made by the teachers in the public schools, using the cephalograph (7)
originated by Doctor Bean, one of which is owned by the Bureau of
Education. The teachers are probably the only ones who can control the
children sufficiently without the aid of the parents so that their head
outlines can be made. Records should be kept showing the physical and
mental condition of the child and from time to time the head outlines
should be made, the parents having been instructed previously about the
proper head rest for their children. The teachers may be able to induce
the youngest children also to have their head outlines made in order that
the study may begin in the cradle, or rather on the petdte, at which time
the most good can be accomplished.
If the deformed condition of infancy persists during the adult life of
the individual, then otherwise dolichocephalic or mesocephalic heads be-
come mesocephalic or brachycephalic, and a part at least of the brachy-
cephally and mesocephally of the Orient is not natural.
The vertical occiput and the front homhe may be only deformities and
not racial or true morphologic characteristics. For this reason, I believe
the cephalic index is not the best differential factor although it still may
be of some service and should not be discarded entirely, but relegated to
a subordinate position in racial anatomy.
Forty-two heads of Taytayans give evidence of dorsal flattening to
a noticeable degree, and among these greatly distorted heads are in-
cluded all those of the Primitives, 6 of the Australoid, 1 B. B. 8.,
1 Adriatic, 6 Iberian Blends (Alpine), 5 Primitive Blends (fig. 10),
3 Adriatic Blends, and the remainder are Blends of various sorts. In
connection with the ear type, it is of interest to note that 13 of the 42
flat heads had ears of the odd type, although 16 odd type ears were not


/ \
/ \ Occipital
\ Frontal /
U
Fig 8. Boy of Taytay Aged 4. The Small Outline is' From the Left Side of the Head Over the Middle of the Eye. The Large
Outline is From the Right Side of the Head a Little Nearer the Median Line.


III. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 407
. |
I S' Co I 3
/ S' I H
f / I H
' \ N. 0 f*
- \\ -e I g
xX S *
\\ O ( o
CD I o
"" fo
111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 407
2
M
P
H
P
o
£
c
1-3
H
W
£
p
S
H
s g
S 3
W
H- -i
H d
a s
Eh g
£
h <j
O M
s «
g m
iJ 3
B O
p 01
O g
B g
'§ S
a u
U2


(
Na 137 No. 158'
I
1
Occi
Dita
Frontal
Fig
10. —Head Outlines of 2 Primitive Blends With Flattened Occipital Region. Serial Nos. 137 and 158.
< * r *


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 409
associated with dorsal flattening of the head. The individuals previously
noticed with this, ear type were distinguished by the flat occipital region.
The questions immediately arise: Is the flat occiput a type of head or is
it a deformity? Is the odd type ear a true type or is it due to the
deformed head ? The two are evidently closely associated, but what do
they represent? The occurrence of the flat head with the Primitive and
related types may be urged in favor of the odd type entity represented by
the Primitive and its allied forms, and the absence of the flat heads among
Cro-Magnon and Iberian favors this view. On the contrary, the flatten-
ing of the head increases the cephalic index and thereby types are classified
as Primitive or related forms that would be otherwise different types
because the cephalic index is the basis of the classification. For the same
reason, neither the Iberian nor the Cro-Magnon have any flat heads, be-
cause if they did the cephalic index would be increased and they would
be no longer Cro-Magnon or Iberian. The cephalic index should be
replaced by some other factor in the differentiation of the types, or some
other factor should be utilized in conjunction with it as the basis of the
classification.
Therefore we have utilized the ear form in connection with the
cephalic index, nasal index, and stature in an additional classification
which is to be given when the ears are studied.
ADDITIONAL OBSERVATIONS.
Eleven left-handed individuals occurred among 175 observed, and
this in spite of the fact that it is considered unfortunate to be left-
handed and some stigma is attached to the condition. One square, box-
shaped head suggesting' previous rachitis was observed, and one platyc-
nemic tibia (saber shin) was seen. Two cases of wry face (unilateral
facial paralysis) were noted. One case of scaphocephaly (Plates I and
IV) and one hare lip w r ere seen.
The box-headed individual mentioned above, Serial ISTo. 149, clinical
Vo. 875, also had odd fingers. The lengths from the web to the tip of
the fingers is given here;
Right Left
hand. hand.
cm. cm.
Thumb 5.6 6.0
Forefinger 9.0 7.0
Middle finger 8.7 10.3
Ring finger 8.2 9. 0
Little finger 7.7 7.5
The right forefinger is long and the left is short; and the middle
finger and ring finger of the left hand are longer than the same fingers
of the right hand. Apparently no bones are absent, and no history of
of the right hand. Apparently no bones are absent, and no history of
similar deformities in the family could be obtained.


A peculiarity of the bones of the skull in the form of a ridge on the
bone about the size of the linger and extending from mastoid to mastoid
around the occipital region, was noted frequently; in two persons, both
of the Iberian type, it was well marked. This ridge apparently followed
the superior curved line and crossed the external occipital protuberance,
terminating on each side in the mastoid process. It occurred on 12
Iberians, 3 Blends, 2 Australoids, 2 Alpines, 1 Cro-Magnon and 1 B. B. 8.,
21 times in all. The accompanying head outline illustrates this pro-
' jection over the occipital protuberance, which itself was not large but
seemed continuous with the ridge (fig. 11). Future studies of skulls
may reveal the nature of this abnormality, because it was not superficial
but appeared to be bony in character.
111. THE SEGEEGATION OF TYPES.
In previous papers concerning the Filipino Types found among the
Manila Students(l) and in Malecon Morgue(s), the suggestion was
made that the types represent species, of which there are elementary or
new, and systematic or old, present in both groups of individuals as well
as among the Igorots and Japanese. The Primitive and Iberian are
called systematic species, the Alpine, B. B. 8., Modified Primitive, and
Adriatic, elementary species, and the Australoid and Cro-Magnon, system-
atic species also, but not so definite as the Primitive and Iberian. The
reasons for this classification and for the use of the word species have
already been given in relation to Schulls’(l) work on corn, and the
work of Price-and Drinkard on the tomato(4).
The species of men at Taytay may be selected by the same method
used to select those of the students and in the morgue. The species so
selected are then differentiated as follows:
The Primitive is brachycephalic, platyrrhine, and smali in stature.
The Iberian is dolichocephalic, leptorrhine, and below medium size.
The Australoid is dolichocephalic, platyrrhine, and small or below medium size.
The Cro-Magnon is dolichocephalic, platyrrhine, and above medium stature.
The Alpine is brachycephalic, leptorrhine, and below medium size.
The B. B. B. is brachycephalic, leptorrhine, and above medium size.
The Modified Primitive is brachycephalic, platyrrhine and below medium
stature.
The Adriatic is brachycepahlic, platyrrhine, and above medium stature.
The Blend is moderately brachycephalic, moderately platyrrhine and small in
stature, corresponding with the Primitive and Modified Primitive more nearly
than with any other type.
THE PRIMITIVE.
Only three individuals of this type were observed among the men at
Taytay, although a majority of the Blends conform to the Primitive.
The three men are characterized by a stature of 150.1 centimeters, a
cephalic index of 88.5 and a nasal index of 89.1, in addition to which
may be given the morphologic face index 78.5, the omphalic index 44.1,


• CD
/ t-J
/ C
X o
/ i-
/ Li ~
♦ /
< /
\ (U
\ _Q0
\ u
\ ~°
\ V
\ -C
\ -H
N \ v rD 0
- \ -P -P
\ ;§- i
N. °
*
111. FILIPINO TYPES I RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 411
H
p
P
3
o
o
H
w
H
H
P
o
«
Q
£
ffl
£
o
PQ
P
p
OQ
P
fc
P
£
c
o
£
%
o
W
H
g
H
p
c
p
K
ffi
rH
rH
2


150.1
147.1
38.6
30.7
86.3
31.1
*2*2.1
20.6
30.1
30.0
11.1
37.0
88.5
83.3
89.1
83.0
78.5
74.3
*
>
—
■I
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
the tibio-femoral index 92.6, the radio-humeral index 73.7, and the
intermembral index 75.5. Other characters need not be mentioned be-
cause they are neither distinctive nor differential in nature.
Type N of the Igorots has a stature of 150.8, a cephalic index of
84.3, and a nasal index of 89.4 which indicates a close relationship to
the Primitive of Taytay. They are practically identical with the Prim
itive of the Manila Students and of Malecon Morgue, although relatively
fewer individuals of this species are found at Taytay.
Mean Mini '
ivjeau. mum .
of in-
divid-
uals.
Character.
Stature .
Absolute lower leg length-.
Absolute upper leg length .
Absolute forearm length
Absolute upper arm length
Omphalic index
Cephalic index _
Nasal index
Morphologic face index-
Attempts were made to obtain photographs of one or more Primitive
men, but unfortunately the individuals could not be prevailed upon to
submit to the ordeal of sitting for their portraits, therefore descriptive
characterization and measurements must suffice. However, a few photo-
graphs of the Primitive type as found among the Moros, Igorots, and
other peoples of the Islands are taken from the Bureau of Science col-
lection for purposes of inspection and comparison. These may be seen
in Plates II to VI.
The head outline from glabella to inion of a Primitive man, Serial
Ho. 110, is given in fig. 12 with that of an Iberian for comparison. The
depression of the lambda and the elevation of the bregma are very notice-
able, and the front bomhe is exaggerated. The head is short and high.
Whether or not this is due to pressure on the occipital pole can not be
known. It is possible that pressure on the occipital bone after it is
thoroughly ossified would produce a depression of the lambda. There
is the counterbalancing elevation of the bregma and the frontal region,
although the three characteristics may be normal. It is a question
whether the Primitive is a species or type, or whether it is a condition
due probably to malformation of the head during infancy.
The individuals are small, with small round head (A 19), broad, flat,
short face and nose, lips full but small, chin small and somewhat reced-
ing, forehead narrow but bombe(ls), and directed almost vertically from
153.6


/ s' \ 05
// o c
// — O o
/ 4 2
// m
/ / M
/ / M
/ / s
/ / k
/ / ' - CO
/ / 00
/ / 6
/ / £
/ / s
/ / w
/ / w
I <
■ s
/ B
/ M
CO
H
2
3
H
P
O
\ W
\ \ S
\ \ w
\ \ w
\ \ s
\\ 2
\\ |
C\J
V. 6
2: _ 2
\
Ns \! §-
N. ' V O
o


the brows which are not prominent but somewhat flattened. In truth the
type is infantile (26).
It is easily associated with Hagen’s (12) “infantile Gesichts Bildung”:
“niederes Gesicht, stumpfe, breite, niedere Nose, breite, wenig erhebene Nasen-
wurzel dann Neigung zur sogenannten mongolenfaltenbildung der Augenlider,
vorwblhte Stirn, die sogenannte Front bombe.”—“so haben wir einen ziemlich
umfangreichen Komplex von Merkmalen, innerhalb dessen sich die Zusammen-
hdngen. und Gemeinschaftlichkeiten der aus den heutigen Menschenrassen heraus-
zuschalenden Urform bewegen miissten, wenn diese wirklich anf den Namen einer
‘primitiven ’ anspruch haben soil.” However, Hagen includes the Senoi, the Aeta,
the Indian of South America, the Papuan, the Veddahs of Ceylon, the Battaks
of Sumatra, the negro of Guinea and the Bushman of Africa under the term
“primitiven,” some of whom are dolichocephalic and others brachycephalic; there-
fore, it is evident that more than one somatologic type is included in his
“primitiven.”
The Primitive of Taytay conforms in bodily dimensions to a type of
Negrito found in the Philippines and to types found in other Asiatic
island groups, as well as on the mainland in the Malay Peninsula (4).
The Kuhns of Sumatra(37), the Taradjas of the Celebes(24), the
Semangs and Senoi of the Malay Peninsula(lB), the Orang Akett of
Sumatra(l9) and the Veddahs of Ceylon(18), have in their composi-
tion a form similar to the Primitive. This form has almost invariably
associated with it another which 1 call the Australoid, the chief differ-
ences being that the latter has a dolichocephalic head and a wider nose
than the Primitive (32).
THE AUSTRALOID.
There are two forms of the Australoid, one a primary, or remote, the
other a secondary, or recent; the first found among the Igorots, the
second among the students and morgue subjects. Physical measurements
do not differentiate them, except that the more recent is taller. Very
few of the primary appear among the men of Taytay, but among the
women more are found. However, a few men are noted with stature
about 150 centimeters and with very wide nose and narrow head. No
photographs could be obtained of these primary Australoids because of
their shyness, or aversion to having their picture taken; an indicator, as
in the Primitive, of elemental nature. Snap shots of other Australoids
were taken with the only camera at hand, a Brownie pocket kodak, but
the pictures are not reproduced on account of their poor quality.
The man represented by Serial No. 89, Clinical No. 564, resided
some distance from Taytay, but came to be treated at the dispensary;
he was probably suffering from sexual neurasthenia. His features are
large and heavy except the lower jaw, which is short, square and reced-
ing. The brow ridges protrude, the cheeks are large and prominent,
the nose is wide, straight, heavy and depressed at the nasion, and the
lips are full and thick. The brow ridges are noticeably prominent.
This is a form somewhat apart, although one other was noted like him,


Ghameter. JSS Mean - mum.
111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 415
and it is a not unusual Filipino type. It is nearly related to the
remains of the earliest paleolithic man (Homo Heidelbergensis—Homo
Mousteriensis) recently discovered in Europe, if indeed it is not exactly
the same form (15).
The upper lip is broad from its border to the nasal spine, a distance
of 2.7 centimeters, although broader lips are seen. The peculiarity is
in the rounded contour between the nasal spine and lip margin as seen
in profile. The facial angle 70°—glabella, nasal spine, external auditory
meatus —is not greater nor less than many others, although it is 7° to 8°
less than that of the Igorots measured in the same way. Nevertheless,
about 30 per cent of the Igorots have the same index and 4 per cent
an index less than 70°. The nasal index is 73.68, the cephalic index
is 102.2, and the stature is 156.8. The head height is 12.5 centimeters.
The ear is similar to the odd type previously described. The physical
characters of this man resemble those of the Taytayan Cro-Magnon, but
the stature is much less and other factors as well differentiate the two.
The sagittal head outline is of sufficient interest to be given (fig. 13). It
is low, long, and somewhat flat over the lambda. The forehead is not
high, and the glabella is prominent. The occipital region is full but not
projecting, although the occipital circumference is 2 centimeters greater
than that of the forehead. The outline might very well represent an
Iberian and Primitive combined.
Another man of similar form is represented by Serial No. 103, Clinical
No. 616, and although the stature of this man is 12 centimeters greater
than that of the other there is a similarity in many respects that associates
the two forms. Both of these men belong rather to the Cro-Magnon
than to the Australoid group because of greater stature, straight nose,
wide, long face and prominent occipital region, but they also partake
of the Australoid characters.
They are not secondary Australoids, however, which are represented
by two other men whose photographs were obtained without difficulty.
(Plates I, XVI, and XVII.) These two men show evidences of recent
Iberian mixture, but retain the Australoid characters to some extent.
of in-
divid-
uals.
Stature.
158.01
Absolute lower leg length.
Absolute upper leg length ,
Absolute forearm leneth ...
37.00
38.04
22.60
Absolute upper arm length
Omphalic index
41.40
Cephalic index.
Nasal index
03.30
Morphologic face index.
82.30
I '


/ Occipital
Frontal 1
Fig. 13.—Australoid Head Outline. Serial No. 89. Clinical No. 564.


The Iberian.
Num-
Maxi ' Mean Mini ' of in-
mum. mum.
uals.
169.3 160.7 154.5 17
40.6 37.6 33.3 15
43.6 39.9 36.4 15
26.0 23.3 20.9 15
36.6 32.9 28.8 15
42,9 33.5 15
76,2 70.5 15
78.5 72.0 15
84.8 73.1 15
111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 417
The mean stature of 37 Australoids of Taytaj is 158.0 centimeters,
the cephalic index is 78 and the nasal index 93.3. The morphologic
face index is 82.3, the omphalic index is 41.4, the radio-humeral index
is 70.4, the tibio-femoral index is 97.3 and the intermembral index is
72.9. Compared with the Primitive, the stature is greater, the head is
narrower, the nose is wider, the face is higher, the umbilicus is lower,
the forearm is shorter, the lower leg is longer, and the lower extremity
is shorter. The form is intermediate in general, between the Primitive
and the Iberian.
The stature of the Australoids of Taytay is 0.7 centimeters less than
that of the Morgue Australoids, 11.5 centimeters greater than that of
the Igorots, 2.9 centimeters less than that of the students, 5.75 centi-
meters less than the Japanese previously measured. The cephalic and
nasal indices of all groups are practically identical—dolichocephalic or
slightly mesocephalic, and platyrrhine—except that of the Igorots who
are frankly dolichocephalic, and markedly platyrrhine. The Igorots are
the primary Australoids, whereas the other groups contain Blends that
simulate them, and represent recent mixtures of the Filipino Iberian
and Primitive, both of which are somewhat blended.
The physiognomy of the primary Australoid resembles that of the
Senoi, the Aeta, the Battak, the Yeddah, and the Indian of Peru, as
given by Hagen, whereas the physiognomy of the secondary Australoid
represents distorted Primitive and Iberian. For purposes of comparison
the Iberian will be described next.
bermn.
Num-
Maxi- Mean Mini ' of in-
mum. mum.
uals.
169.3 160.7 154.5 17
40.6 37.6 33.3 15
43.6 39.9 36.4 15
26.0 23.3 20.9 15
36.6 32.9 28.8 15
52.8 42,9 33.5 15
79.0 76.2 70.5 15
85.4 78.5 72.0 15
91.6 84.8 73.1 15
.7 centimeters, the cephalic ind
he omphalic index is 43.9, the
io-hmneral index is 70.8, the 1
membral index is 73.5. Comp*
tive. it may be said that the I
Character.
Stature
Absolute lower leg length,.
Absolute upper leg length .
Absolute forearm length ...
Absolute upper arm length
Omphalic index
Cephalic index.
Nasal index
Morphologic face index.
The stature of 17 Iberians is 160.7 centimeters, the cephalic index is
76.2 and the nasal index is 78.5. The omphalic index is 42.9, the mor-
phologic face index is 84.8, the radio-humeral index is 70.8, the tibio-
femoral index is 94.2, and the intermembral index is 72.5. Comparing
this with the Australoid and Primitive, it may be said that the Prim-


itive and Iberian have blended to produce the Australoid in stature,
face height and width ; the broad nose of the Primitive has been retained
and is somewhat broader; and the cephalic index and limb and body
measurements of the Iberian have been retained to some extent. The
tibio-femoral index of the Australoid is greater than that of the Iberian
or Primitive.
The stature of the Iberian of Taytay is but little less than that of
the student Iberian, or the Iberian of Malecon Morgue, and is the same
as the Japanese Iberian. The cephalic index is practically the same in
all groups although the Japanese are slightly more dolichocephalic than
the others. The nasal index is also about the same in all the groups,
although the 5 Morgue males have an index of only 68.14, but the flare
of the nostrils may not be so great in death as in life, which may account
for this.
The fact is significant that the Iberian is present in all the groups of
Littoral Filipinos so far observed, and is also found among the Japanese
and Igorots. It can easily be accounted for among the Filipinos, through
recent European (Spanish) immigrants - , but an earlier migration from
-Europe must have occurred to have impregnated the Japanese and
Igorots. The alternative is that the Iberian is a fundament of primary
man and is found as an element in all the groups. Keane’s hypothesis
of the eastward migration of the early Europeans explains their presence
in the heart of Luzon and in Japan. A northern branch reached these
Islands, while the main body pushed on through the central Pacific to
Hawaii. This is substantiated by a study of the ears of the natives
throughout the Philippines, which has been undertaken and will be
rapidly prosecuted.
For the purpose of illustrating the different Iberians, examine Plates
I, and YII to XII. The different Iberian types will be discussed when
the ears are described.
The sagittal outlines of two Iberian’s heads are seen in fig. 14, and
the two are almost identical. One, however, is slightly flattened in the
occipital region. (See also fig. 12.) These outlines may be studied
best by comparison with the outlines of the heads of two Primitive Blends
in fig. 10. The forehead of the Iberian is almost vertical, that of the
Blend is bombe; the occipital region of the Iberian is full and rounded,
that of the Blend is vertical and fiat; the parietal region of the Iberian
is well rounded, whereas that of the Blend is prominent and bulging;
the bregmatic region of the Iberian is almost flat, whereas that of the
Blend bulges, especially in the superior frontal region. There is evident
distortion by flattening in the occipital region of the Blends, but the
Iberians appear to be normal in this particular, although one is slightly
flattened.


111. FI LI I* INO TYPES; RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 419
to
c
o
L.
Ll_
t-
Q
£
10
CM
m
o
£
a
<
s
a
CQ
m
55
M
H
P
O
Q
<
H
ffi
Jz;
<
5
H
«
LO
c\j
o
2
rH
6
M
fe
r\
si-
o
2
CD
+-*
Q_
o
o
O
90339 6


*
V
420 BEAN.
The Cro-Magnon.
Character Maxi ' Mean Mini ‘
I cnaracier. mum. mum.
Stature 170.7 167.7
of in-
divid-
uals.
Absolute lower leg length
42.2 3!). 7
Absolute upper leg length.
47.1 42,5
Absolute forearm length
27.3 24.(5
Absolute upper arm length.
36.5 33.9
Omphalic index _
51.6 42.9
Cephalic index.
82.9 ' 78.3
Nasal index 104.7 93.4
Morphologic face index 89.3 83.0
The stature of 13 men called Cro-Magnon is 167.7 centimeters, the
cephalic index is 78.3, and'the nasal index is 93.4. The omphalic index
is 43, the morphologic face index is 83.0, the tibio-femoral index is 93.4,
the radio-humeral index is 73.5, and the intermembral index is 71.3.
The stature is 8.3 centimeters greater than that of the average Tay-
tayan, the cephalic index is 73.5 less, the nasal index is 8.8 greater, the
omphalic index is practically the same, the morphologic face index is
1.7 greater, the radio-humeral index is 1.3 greater, the tibio-femoral
index is 1.7 less and the intermembral index is 1.3 less. The lower leg
is 3.4 centimeters longer, the upper leg is 3.3 centimeters longer, and the
forearm and upper arm are each 1.5 centimeters longer.
The Cro-Magnon of Taytay is therefore an individual above the
average in stature but not tall, with mesocephalic head and platyrrhine
nose, although the nose is not flat but straight, long and wide. The
face is large in both vertical and transverse directions. The limb parts
are long, especially the forearm and upper leg, and the lower extremity
is relatively longer than the upper. (Plate XV.) These factors in-
dicate a relationship with the prehistoric Cro-Magnon of Europe.
For the sake of comparison, the measurements of the skeleton of the
old man of the cavern of less Eyzies{9), from the sepulchre of the
troglodytes of Perigord in the valley of the Yezere, in the region of
Dordogne, France, described by Broca, and those of a skeleton of the
cavern of less Enfants (35), from the sepulchre of the troglodytes of
Grimaldi, on the Mediterranean, in Italy near Monaco, described by
Yerneau, will be presented, together with measurements of two indi-
viduals from Taytay. To make the comparison more interesting, with
these are given the measurements of two Nilotic Negroes, of two Negroid
skeletons of Grimaldi, of two blonde Americans now living in the Philip-
pines, and of another Cro-Magnon skeleton from the grottoes of Grimaldi.
Num-
ber
165.3
37.3


Living. Skeletons.
| 2 g 'ns S|s s i & i *
25 . ? o g > 3 '“ . g ja u
_ •' .—, O) S? >5,3 C > o> ti _ O
03“ 03*; J . pq O 2o C-M g> . g . £ .
•r 1 tq S >, o> m ■*> S 3 Jr 0) H, ® OQ ®
Body character. %S vZ s-g a-g gg-§ go |?g
CjJS O § of ..O So I So
c3 oS O S bf S 5 ® j§ J§ I $ J§
fe is f |i pi f? r r 11“
o3 3 > 2 ® n ® k *q >q 3
H H <! o" O U O O W
Stature 167.7 167.0 159.5 L_... 189.0 177.0 159.5 156.0
Upper leg length 46.6 40.6 39.2 L 1. 52.2 49.1 43.4 41.9
Lower leg length 38.1 40.6 37.3 45.0 40.2 36.4 35.1 .—
Upper arm length 34.1 32.6 32.4 [ 36.5 35.0 29.1 27.1
Forearm length 26.7 24.0 23.1 27.9 23.3 21.6 |
Head;
Maximum length. 19.3 19.4 18.3 20.2 19.8 20.6 19.1 19.2 j—.
Maximum breadth __ 14.7 14.7 15.0 14.9 15.1? 14.2? 13.1 13.3 j...
Total face length. 21.1 19.1 18.5 22.7? 24.5? 23.0? 16.0? 18.07-
Total face breadth 14.2! 14.0 13.8 14.4 15.5? 15.2 10.3?. 11.2? —
Cephalic index 76.2 75.8 81.8 73.8 76.3 71.4 68.6 69.3
Face index 67.3 73.3 74.6 63.4 63.2 66.5 63.6 61.5 __
Preauricular cir-
cumference 28.2 27.7 27.5 j 27.2 26.9 24.0 23.1
Post auricular cir-
cumference 29.6 29.0 28.5 i 29.6 ■ 29.1 — 28.2 29. 2 _
Nasal index 89.1 97.6 85.2 45.1 56.9 47.2 63.6 54.4 .
Tibio femoral index. 81.8 100.0 95.2 85.4 81.5 83.9 83,8
Radio humeral in-
dex.. 78.3 73.6 71.3 ! 76.4 80.1 79.4
Intermembral index. 70.6 69.7 72.5 | 66.1 65.7 63.1 69.
Living.
A blonde Amer- A Nilotic Negro A Nilotic Negro
Body character. ican No. 1. (A Burum). (A Nuer).
Abso- Rela- . Abso- Rela- Abso- Rela-
lute. tive. lute. five. lute. tive.
Stature 182.0 100.0 190.0 100.0 165.0 100.0
Upper leg length 47.0 25.8 51.0 26.8 46.0 27.8
Lower leg length 42.0 23.1 I 51.0 26.8 40.0 24.2
Upper arm length 35.5 19.5 34.0 17.9 32.0 19.3
Forearm length 27.5 15.1 I 33.0 17.4 29.5 17.9
Head: i
Maximum length ... 20.0 19.7 20.0
, Maximum breadth__ 15.0 15.0 14.0
Total face length 18.0 18. 9
Total face breadth __ 13.3 14.0
Cephalic index 75.0 ; 76.1 70.0
Face index 73.9 74.1
.t. Preauricular cir-
cumference 27.0 i
Post auricular cir- !
cumference j 32.0
Nasal index ! 66.0 95.0 95.0
Tibio femoral index., 89.4 100.0 87.0
Radio humeral in-
dex 77.5 j 97.1 92.2 ....
Intermembral index. 70.8 j 65.7 71.5 —
111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 421
Comparison of Cro-Magnons, Negroes,
Americans and Taytayans.
C 3
V .
O <V
m B
°
d “
o
E
85.4 81.5 83.9 , 83,8 79.7 81.3
80.1 79.4 73.9 79.4
A blonde Amer-
ican No. 2.
Abso- Rela-
lute. tive.
189.2 100.0
51.5 27.2
45.0? 23. 8
37.0 19. 5
26.7 14.1
19.3
14.3
17.7
13.5 ...
74.1
76. 3
56.1
87.3
72.2
66.0


It is to be noted that the stature of the Taytayan Cro-Magnons is
only 167.0 and 169.7 centimeters. The calculated stature of the Cro-
Magnon from Grimaldi is from 175 to 189 centimeters, of the Amer-
icans 183 and 189.3 centimeters, and of the Nilotic Negroes from 165
to 190, whereas the stature of the Grimaldi Negroes is only 156.0 to 159.5
centimeters. The last two measurements, however, are of an old woman
and a boy. ■
The absolute upper leg length of the two Taytayans is 40.6 and 46.6
centimeters, the length of femur of the Cro-Magnon of Grimaldi is
from 47 to 53.6 centimeters, the upper leg length of the Americans is
47 and 51.5 centimeters, the Nilotic Negroes are from 43 to 51 centi-
meters in upper leg length, and the Negroes of Grimaldi have a femur
length of 41.9 and 43.4.
The absolute lower leg length of the Taytayan Cro-Magnon is 38.1
and 40.6 centimeters, the tibia length of the Cro-Magnon of Grimaldi
is from 40.4 to 45.0 centimeters, the lower leg length of the Americans
is 43 and 45 centimeters, that of the Nilotic Negroes is from 39 to 51
centimeters, and of the Negroes of Grimaldi 35.1 and 36.4 centimeters
in length of tibia.
The absolute upper arm length of the Taytayans is 33.6 and 34.1
centimeters respectively, the length of the Cro-Magnon humerus is
34.3 to 37.9 centimeters, the upper arm of the American is 35.5 and
37.0 centimeters long, that of the Nilotic Negroes is 31 to 34 centi-
meters long, and the humerus of the Grimaldi Negroes is 37.1 and 39.1
centimeters in length.
The absolute forearm length of the Taytayans *is 84 and 36.7 centi-
meters, the radius length, of the Cro-Magnon is from 86.1 to 88.6 centi-
meters, the forearm of the Americans is 36.7 ,and 37.5 centimeters long,
that of the Nilotic Negroes is from 39.5 to 33.0 centimeters in length,
and the radius of the Grimaldi Negroes is 81.5 and 33.3 centimeters
long.
Certain contrasts and parallels may be deduced from the foregoing:
Whereas the stature of the Taytayan Cro-Magnon is less than that
of any except the Grimaldi Negroes, yet the limb parts of the Taytayan
are about as long as the Cro-Magnon of Europe or the Nilotic Negro,
except the forearm of the latter which exceeds that of any other.
The upper arm of the Taytayan is also relatively long, but in spite of
these differences the evidence is such that the Taytayans selected are
considered to be modified Cro-Magnons, and the Nilotic Negroes are
also modified Cro-Magnons; the first with decreased stature and in-
creased relative upper arm length due to the union with a type of
that nature pertaining to the East, the other with about the same stature
but with increased relative forearm length due to mixture with African
types.


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 423
Yerneau(34) has demonstrated the presence of Cro-Magnon types in
the living population of Europe, and the measurements of the two Amer-
icans are given to show their relationship to the early Cro-Magnon of
that country.
Head and face measurements corroborate the limb measurements and,
if anything, are more emphatic in associating the Cro-Magnon with the
Taytayan, and with the Nilotic Negro. The head length and breadth
are greater in the Cro-Magnon than in the others, and the cephalic index
is less, the face dimensions of the Cro-Magnon are also greater than in
the others, but the head is dolichocephalic and the face is large in all
alike. The nose of the Negro and of the Taytayan are more platyrrhine
than the Cro-Magnon but in all it is similar; large and straight. The
head, nose and face of the Americans are smaller than of the Cro-Magnon
and indicate affinities to the Mediterranean Race of Sergi, or Iberian,
as it is called in the present work.
Dr. Pirrie(3B) noted that the occiput of the Nilotic Negro is prom-
inent —projects boldly backwards —and this is characteristic of the Cro-
Magnon. The Taytayan is not so marked in this feature but the occiput
of one American exceeds all others in this respect. Figures 161 and 168,
pages 368 and 370, in the Third Report of the Wellcome Research Labora-
tories, represent modified Cro-Magnon heads.
Undoubtedly, the Cro-Magnon has become dissipated by fusion in
Europe and Africa, and I believe in Asia as well. Cro-Magnon char-
acteristics may be noted among the Chinese of Manila(6), and among
the Filipinos of many provinces. This may be accounted for through
Spanish intermixture, but earlier infiltrations from Europe can not be
excluded.
Cro-Magnon characteristics may be seen by examining Plates I, YIII,
IX, X, XI, XII, and XY, although obscured by other types. Plate XY
represents the nearest approach to the Cro-Magnon that could be photo-
graphed at Taytay, although partly Australoid and recent Iberian. The
dorsal flattening of the head in the latter is, I believe, a relic of infancy
when the head rested a great deal on the petdte with a hard flat surface
beneath.
The sagittal head outlines from glabella to inion of the two Taytayan
Cro-Magnons and of one American Cro-Magnon are given for comparison
and contrasts. (Eig. 15.) The height of the two Taytayans is greater
than the American, and, as a matter of fact, the auricular bregmatic height
of the American is 12.4 centimeters whereas that of the Taytayans is 13
and 13.6 centimeters. The two Taytayan outlines were made with the
cephalograph and are exact, but the outline of the American was made
with electric fuse wire and is therefore not so exact, but it does not vary
more than a few millimeters at any point and the general contour is a
true representation of the head shape.


/ y\ — ' t —
/ s x 1 S «> S A V V^^
// \ \
/ / \ 1
/ ''No. 74 i NX
American /\ N\
/ No. (Oa-'' \A\
Occipita
1
I Frontal
/
I
La
■
1
Fig. 15. —Three
Cro-Magnon Head Outlines. Blonde American No. 2. Taytayan Serial No. 74, Clinical No. 535 ; Serial No. 103, Clinical No.
616. American Outline Made with Lead Fuse Wire, the Others with the Cephalgraph.


111. FILIPINO TYPES : RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 425
The same difference between the American and Filipino outlines is seen
as that noted between the American students and Igorots(3). The Amer-
ican is long and low, the Filipino is of equal length but high. Notwith-
standing the differences, the three outlines resemble the outlines of the
Cro-Magnon skulls of prehistoric Europe. This is especially true of the
American outline which has the vertical forehead, the long straight
superior part of the fronto-parietal region, and especially the projecting
occiput, that makes it identical with the masculine cranium of the Grotto
des Enfants portrayed in Plate 111 of Yerneau’s “Grottes de Grimaldi
The heads of the Taytayans have probably been somewhat flattened dor-
sally and thereby projected upward and pressed forward by the petdte
haiit of infancy; otherwise the shape may be due to crossing with the
Primitive and other types.
Compare with these outlines the heads of two Nilotic Negroes(3B)
(figs. 161 and 168) and a striking similarity is seen, although the Negro
heads show the flat superior frontal region previously described by me
(Negro brain) which differentiates them from other peoples.
The Alpine.
Num-
ber
of indi
vid-
uals.
Maxi - Mean,
mum.
Character.
mum.
Stature 164.3 159.84
Absolute lower leg length 38.9 37.16
Absolute upper leg length 42.4 38.71
Absolute forearm length 25.2 ‘2*2.54
Absolute upper arm length 34.8 3*2.7*2
Omphalic index 52. 2 42.59
Cephalic index 94.3 87.74
Nasal index _
81.1 70.0 8 54.9
Morphologic face index 89. 7 8*2.21 75.5
The characteristics of the Alpine may be emphasized by contrast with
the Cro-Magnon. The difference is great. The Alpine is small, the Cro-
Magnon is almost tall; the Alpine is brachycephalic, the Cro-Magnon is
dolichocephalic; the Alpine is leptorrhine, the Cro-Magnon is platyrrhine;
the Alpine is short, squat and fat, the Cro-Magnon is long, lanky and
lean; the lower leg of the Alpine is relatively long, that of the Cro-Magnon
is not; the forearm of the Alpine is relatively shorter than that of the
Cro-Magnon; and the face of the Cro-Magnon is relatively longer than
that of the Alpine. The physiognomy and the ear are different as may
be seen by an examination of the plates representing the Cro-Magnon
characteristics, and of Plate XIII.


The Alpine is probably a mixture of Primitive and Iberian in which
the head form of the Primitive is retained with the physiognomy and
stature of the Iberian. The nose is even more leptorrhine than the
Iberian and the morphologic face index is between that of the Primitive
and Iberian but nearer the latter. Further observations on the ear are
convincing and will be discussed further on in the present work.
The Alpine is therefore the complement of the Australoid which is
supposed to represent the mixture of Primitive and Iberian in which the
head form is Iberian and the physiognomy Primitive. This confirms in
a measure the suggestion that human types conform to tomato hybrids
suggested in a previous paper on Manila Students.
The B. B. B.
Num- |
mum. Mean ' mum; I o ™-!
uals.
166.8 1 165.9 165.0 : 2
i 38.5 | 1
42.5 - 1
. 23.8 1
20,8 1
37.1 ]
82.2 81.7 81.2 2
68.6 67.6 66.6 2
89.0 87.4 I ’ 85.7 2
Character.
Stature
Absolute lower leg length .
Absolute upper leg length .
Absolute forearm length...
Absolute upper arm length
Omphalic index
Cephalic index.
Nasal index
Morphologic face index.
The evident characteristics of this species are stature slightly above the
average, relatively short lower legs and short upper arms, low omphalic
index, very narrow nose, and very long face with slightly brachy cephalic
head.
The species is fairly well illustrated in Plates XIY and XY, and in
Plate lin the full figure on the right. It conforms in actual dimensions
to the Students and Morgue subjects of the same species. The head
outline is given in fig. 16 in contrast with the head outline of an Alpine.
As previously noted, this species is a large edition of the Alpine, but the
two are different in many ways. It seems to be a combination of Alpine
and Iberian. If the Alpine is a result of Iberian and Primitive blending,
the two species, Alpine and B. B. 8., are derived from the Primitive and
Iberian by a process of crossing and re-crossing. Ee-crossing the Primi-
tive and Alpine should produce a species similar to the Alpine but more
like the Primitive, and such a species is the Blend—at least that part of
it that resembles the Primitive.


, :
.
/s' CO
/X C
/y o
//
* J
\\ CD
V\ CD
\ \ • CD
\\ “ C
\\ : _q_
;. re
; *9-
o
|?'iv * « ••
111. FILIPINO types: racial anatomy in taytay. 427
g
3
o
CO
6
£
A
<
3
w
M
M
ri
ri
m
£
A
<3
o
s
A
O
oo
00
£
5
3
S eo
m io
02 00
H O
I *
3
A
c
m
m
ffl
Q
£
H
g
3
<1
w
g
3
H
p
o
A
C
.K
ffi
3
H
H
3
<5
CO


*
The Blend.
Num-
ber
of indi
vid-
uals.
Maxi- Mean Mini "
mum. mum.
Character.
Stature 171.0 158.8 145.7
Absolute lower leg length 41.0 37.2 32.4
Absolute upper leg length 43.9 39.1 33.2
Absolute forearm length 27.9 2(1.5 18.6
Absolute upper arm length 34.9 33.2 26.5
Omphalic index 57.6 42.2 20.4
Cephalic index 88.7 83.3 78.0
Nasal index 100.0 83.8 70.4
Morphologic face index 92.5 82.0 5 66.1
The Primitive, Modified Primitive and Adriatic enter largely into the
Blend and one is tempted to constitute this as a definite species, embody-
ing the Primitive and Adriatic. Two important differential characters
that are Primitive in nature are noted; the high radio-humeral and tibio-
femoral indices, the latter 95.1 and the former 79.8. The close relation-
ship of the Taytayan Blend and the Primitive Morgue subject and
Primitive Student in these particulars is noteworthy. The intermembral
index is also high, being 78.3, as against 71.2 for the Cro-Magnon of
Taytay. These three characters are Negroid or Negritic, and the in-
ference is that the Negrito forms a large part of the composition of the
Blend.
A review of the Blends reveals 55 of the 94 that resemble the Primitive.
A similar review of the Igorots reveals 70 of the 104 that-resemble the
Australoid. The contrast needs no comment. Among the Blends there
are also 10 that resemble the Iberian, 7 the Australoid, 5 the Modified
Primitive, and 5 the Adriatic; the remainder are Alpine and B. B. 8.,
and among these some Cro-Magnon that resemble the Iberian.
It is true that the majority among the Igorot Blends resemble the
Primitive so that a similarity exists between the two peoples in this res-
pect, but the differences between the groups are otherwise considerable.
The differences are slight when compared with the Blends of the
Morgue subjects and the students. The stature of the student is greater,
and the intermembral index of the morgue subject is less, but otherwise
the Blends of all three form a somewhat stable composite that may be
called a species. This species would be characterized by small stature,
and would be brachycephalic, messorrhian, mesoprosopic, mesomphalic,
with Negritic limb parts. All the characteristics are more Primitive than
otherwise, the indications point to a dominating influence for the Primi-
tive, and the Blend truly represents a Modified Primitive. The Adriatic
and Modified Primitive will not be treated because of the small number
of each and the Blend may be taken in their place as having absorbed


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 429
them or modified them. However that may be, they are seldom seen
in Taytay.
The head form of the Alpine, B. B. 8., and Blend, as determined by
the sagittal outlines, may be seen in figs. 10 and 16. The Alpine and
B. B. B. are almost identical, except that the Alpine is shorter and higher
as if it had been flattened more in the occipital region. The Blends
appear to be exaggerated Alpine outlines exhibiting greater occipital flat-
tening.
IV. EAR TYPE AND SPECIES.
In a previous monograph on Filipino Ears(6), an attempt was made
to classify types of ears with concomitant morphologic types by general
observations in a casual manner. The present work is an extension of
the classification to a small number of individuals who are examined
closely, in which more time is given, an exact study is made, and a more
critical analysis of each individual’s ears is possible. The result is a
more exact classification of the ear types and the association of these with
more definite types of men.
THE PRIMITIVE EAR.
This ear was previously named Malay, but there is now sufficient
evidence of its association with the Primitive and allied forms to change
the term Malay, which is an indefinite one at best, to that of Primitive,
which represents not only the form of the individual but the charac-
teristics of the ear as well. Both are infantile throughout. The descrip-
tion of the ear is altered somewhat from that of the Malay as follows:
The Primitive ear is small, round and somewhat flaring, cup shaped,
and with depressed concha, in contrast with the everted concha of the
Iberian. It is intermediate in form between that of a four month foetus
as described by Schwalbe(37), and the adult European as exemplified by
the Iberian. It is well illustrated in Plates ItoY of the present work
and in Plate IY of the monograph on Filipino ears(6). It may also
be seen in Martin’s work on the inland stem of the Malay Peninsula (18),
as in the Senoi boy of fig. 31, page 317, the Senoi boy of fig. 47, page 359,
the Senoi maiden of fig. 48, page 360, the Senoi of fig. 54, page 391, and
probably in fig. 57, page 397, and fig. 96, page 708, (although there it
is not so clear), in fig. 98, page 712, figs. 100 and 101, pages 717 and 719,
and in Tables XII and XYI, in all of whom there are Primitive char-
acteristics of physiognomy with Australoid heads. Other' Senoi men and
women illustrated in the same work do not have the Primitive ear and
their physiognomy and other characters indicate other than Primitive
features. Martin’s Senoi and the Australoid herein described are of the
same nature. Some forms partake of the Primitive except in head shape,
whereas other forms are not Primitive, hut Iberian or Xegrito. The
former are the 'primary Australoids, the latter the secondary Australoids.


(See pp. 414 and 439.) The Primitive ear appears pure or mixed
at Taytay (see Table on p. 433) on 35 Blends, 15 Australoids, 3
Primitives, 3 Modified Primitives, 5 Cro-Magnons, 2 Alpines, 2 Iberians,
and 1 Adriatic. The types partake of the Primitive in ear form to the
extent represented by the number given with each. All the Primitive,
Modified Primitive and Adriatic have Primitive ear forms, and the form
occurs often in the Australoids and Blends. There is no Adriatic or
Modified Primitive ear, but these themselves are altered Primitives.
There is no Australoid form, but it may be of interest to note the forms
of ears that appear upon the Australoid. As already stated, there are
15 that resemble the Primitive, in addition to which 26 resemble the
Iberian, 7 the Alpine, 6 the odd type, 5 the B. B. 8., and 32 are mixtures
of either two or more of those already mentioned or of unknown type.
The Australoid ear is largely Iberian and Primitive, thus corroborating
the supposition of its origin as a result of the crossing of these two.
THE IBERIAN EAR.
The types of this ear have been increased to include the Cro-Magnon
and the Igorot, in addition to which another type has been added, making
five in all, to which may possibly be added the B. B. B. and Alpine,
leaving all the ear forms thus far segregated either Iberian and Modified
Iberian, or Primitive and Modified Primitive. The morphologic types
become narrowed down to the European and the Eastern. But this is
too simple, and the Alpine is more like the Primitive than like the
Iberian, and the B. B. B. is distinct from either. The Igorot ear has
resolved into the Iberian (C), a modified B. B. 8., and the Subnorthern
(Chinese), all three of which have similarities, but each of which is
different from the other. The Igorot ears will be presented in a sub-
sequent publication. Good photographs were secured of all the Iberian
types except C.
THE IBERIAN A EAR.
This ear is represented somewhat modified in Plate II and it may also
be seen in Plate VIII of the Filipino ears(6), and in the Plates I, Y, YI,
and YII of the Theory of Heredity(2) in an Iberian from Madrid,
Spain. It is a round or elliptical ear, usually flaring slightly and often
standing out from the head. The helix and lobule are symmetrical, and
the helix is inrolled until it almost touches the everted concha.
This ear, or modifications of it, occurs on 25 Blends, 9 Iberians, 6
Australoids, 3 Cro-Magnons and 2 Alpines. It is found more often among
the Blends than is any other except the Primitive, and it is in greater
proportion among the Iberians than is any other ear form.


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 431
THE IBERIAN B EAR.
The Iberian B is the most distinct of all the Iberian ears, and probably
represents the true type. When it appears on an individual it is clear
cut, as a rule, indicating a lack of blending, or it may be that the other
Iberian ears are blends, whereas this is the original type. The ear is
well illustrated in Plate VIII of the present work and in Plate IX of the
Filipino Ears(6). The description given in that paper can hardly be
more exact. The eversion of the concha, the direct attachment of the
lobule to the cheeks with the absence of the lobule, and the peculiar spiral
twist as seen from any point are unmistakable and emphasize the ear as a
most distinct type.
It is found pure or impure on 12 Blends, 7 Australoids, 2 Iberians
and 1 Alpine. Its numbers are relatively small compared with the other
Iberians. The 4 individuals in which the ear is comparatively pure are
all Blends with small stature; they are mesorrhinean and brachycephalic,
but three of them have the flat occiput that is probably due to distortion;
therefore the heads would probably have been dolichocephalic with the
absence of the dorsal flattening, the Blends thus becoming Iberians.
The ear is frequently associated with the Iberian C ear which is ap-
parently a modified form of the Iberian B.
THE IBERIAN C EAR (iGOROT).
This ear resembles the Igorot ear because it has a square inferior
margin without lobule, but it is smaller, more slender, and the lower
margin is narrow, whereas that of the Igorots is broad. Undoubtedly
this form of ear is present among the Igorots and could readily be
mistaken for the Igorot ear, but the above-mentioned qualities differen-
tiate it. The Iberian C also resembles a form of Chinese ear, except that
the latter stands almost at right angles to the head, whereas this form
does not. The Iberian C ear is small, slender and delicately molded, and
either stands close to the head or flares very little. The lobule is absent,
and in its place the lower part of the ear is square, joining the cheek at
right angles. It occurs more or less pure on 22 Blends, 7 Australoids,
6 Cro-Magnons, 5 Iberians, 4 Alpines and 1 Primitive: 45 times in all.
The relatively pure Iberian C ear appears on 5 Cro-Magnons, 4 Blends,
and 1 Alpine. Two of these individuals are small, 2 are below medium
height, 4 are above medium height, and 2 are tall. Three heads are
decidedly flat behind, which, were the flattening absent, would remove
the individuals from the group of Blends to the Iberian. The middle
figure in Plate 111 and in Plate VI of the monograph on the Igorots(3)
shows Iberian C ears.


THE IBERIAN D EAR (CRO-MAGNON)
This ear is so well illustrated in Plates IX and X that it needs no
description. It is the long ear previously portrayed and described as
the Cro-Magnon (6). Its leading characteristics are the large pendant
lobule, large open concha somewhat everted, and straight external margin
of the helix.
The ear appears pure or mixed on 20 Blends, 7 Iberians, 6 Australoids,
4 Alpine, 3 Cro-Magnons and 18.8. B. Xone of the individuals with
relatively pure type ears are tall, and only two are above medium height,
but 4 are below medium height and 7 are small. This is therefore not a
Cro-Magnon physique, but an Iberian. The individuals with Iberian C
ears resemble the Cro-Magnon in size more than those with Iberian I)
ears. The Cro-Magnon ear has become disseminated apparently among
the Iberian types to such an extent as to lose its identity; and for this
reason it can not be located and described. However, at rare intervals
an ear appears that is similar to that shown in figure 12 of the monograph
on Filipino Ears(6), and also to that in Xo. 3202 in Plate YII and Xo.
14964 in Plate X of the same paper, in which the ear is long and resembles
the Iberian D; but its position is almost at right angles to the head, the
lobule is not pendant, and the helix is much inrolled with everted concha.
This was named the Cro-Magnon, but, as may be recognized, the char-
acters are largely Iberian, and most frequently appear in association with
one or another Iberian type.
THE IBERIAN E EAR.
This type is rare, and a doubtful entity, although a similar ear form
has been seen on at least 3 men in Manila recently: one a German, one
an Englishman, and one a Filipino. The ear stands straight from the
rfpper part of the base, and the helix tends to roll over above, giving a
drooping appearance. Otherwise, the ear is similar to the Iberian Ain
form. The individuals have very long heads, small stature, and their
physiognomy is characteristic. The nose is aquiline, the lips are full,
the eyes are large and wide open. One hesitates to assign this ear to
the Iberian or to designate it as a specific form, and future investigations
may clear up its relationships. For the present it remains Iberian E,
and may be seen in modified form in Plate XII.
THE ALPINE EAR.
This ear, unfortunately, does not appear on a single individual of the
Alpine species, and occurs only twice in relative purity, the two in-
dividuals being Australoids. The ear is found on 9 Blends, 7 Australoids,
and 1 each Cro-Magnon, Iberian, Primitive, and Modified Primitive. The
ear in absolute purity was not seen once in Taytay, but was present only
in modified form resembling the Primitive, as may be seen in Plate XIII.
This confirms previous observations. However, as the study of this ear


III. FILIPINO TYPES:
RACIAL
ANATOMY
IN
TAYTAY.
433
continues, it looks more and more like a blend of Iberian and Primitive.
The front view can with difficulty be differentiated from the Primitive.
The lateral view shows the concha somewhat everted and the absence of
lobule, suggesting the Iberian B. The Alpine ear and the Alpine species
will be found purer and more often in conjunction wherever the Philip-
pine population is not so mixed as it is at Taytay.
THE
B.
B. B. EAR.
4$
♦
This ear, like the Alpine, was not found in purity at Taytay. Modified
forms may be seen, however, in Plates XIY and XV, where it resembles
the pure type, but it is by no means pure. Oblong shape and almost
flat surface characterize the ear when pure. These characters are present
in the two individuals portrayed, but only in a modified way.
The ear appears more or less pure on 11 Blends, 5 Australoids, 2
Iberians, 1 B. B. B., 1 Cro-Magnon, and 1 Alpine.
THE COMPARISON OF EAR TYPE
AND
MORPHOLOGIC
TYPE.
The table is presented showing the number of each kind of ears found
on the individuals of the different species.
Comparison of ear and morphologic types.
Ear types.
Morphologic types.
Primitive.
Iberian total.
<
ri
d
«
PQ
M
m
Alpine.
Odd type.
Pure ear forms.
Mixed ear
forms.
Total ear
forms.
Total number
of individuals.
Blend . ..
35
79
•25
12
22
20
n
9
17
20
74
161
94
Australoid
15
26
6
7
7
6
5
7
6
5
32
59
37
Iberian ... __
2
23
9
2
5
7
2
1
4
5
12
32
17
Cro-Magnon
5
12
3
0
6
3
1
1
1
5
7
20
12
Alpine ..
2
11
2
1
4
4
1
0
1
5
7
15
12
H. R. R
0
1
0
0
0
1
1
0
1
i
i
3
2
Primitive-
3
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
3
5
3
Modified Primitive
Adriatic- - . __
3
1
0
o-
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
3
1
6
' 2
4
1
Total
66
153
45
22
45
41
21
20
32
42
140
802
182
*
»
*
L
The last four columns of the table need some explanation. The pure
ear forms are those in which the ears resemble only one type, and the
mixed ear forms are those in which more than one type is combined. The
two columns (pure and mixed ear forms) equal the total number of
individuals. The total ear forms are obtained by adding the number
of Primitive, Iberian, B. B. B., Alpine and odd Type ears.
The Blend has more than twice as many Iberian as Primitive forms,
and a relatively large number of the odd type. The mixed ear forms
and the total ear forms are in relatively greater abundance than among
the pure types.


The Australoid has less than twice as many Iberian as Primitive ear
forms, and a relatively large number of Alpine ears. The number of
pure ear forms is small and the number of mixed ear forms is almost as
great as the total number of individuals. The Australoid and the Blend
are evidently impure types.
The Iberian species has only two ears that resemble the Primitive form
and 23 that are Iberian, whereas the Primitive species has only one
resembling the Iberian, and 3 that are Primitive in form. The Iberian
lias a relatively large number of pure ear forms, and few mixed ear forms.
The Primitive and Iberian species are evidently purer than the Australoid
and Blend in ear form. Each Cro-Magnon individual has some Iberian
ear form, although 5 resemble the Primitive. The pure ear forms are
relatively great and the mixed are relatively small.
The Alpine species also has a large number of Iberian ear forms and
only two that resemble the Primitive. The pure forms are also relatively
more frequent than the mixed.
The Modified Primitive has Primitive ears, and the Adriatic has the
same form.
The B. B. B. species has B. B. B. and Iberian ears.
There are seven ear forms that are called mixed because no resemblance
to any recognized form could be seen.
SUMMARY.
The ear form is established beyond doubt as a differential factor in
racial anatomy, and among the Filipinos of the littoral it should be placed
above the cephalic index in importance, because of the apparent distor-
tion of the head in many individuals. By the ear alone, the derivation
of the majority of people may be determined, and in conjunction with
the nasal index and stature, assisted by the cephalic index, more definite
species can be segregated than by using the last three without the ear
type. The table of ear types and morphologic species demonstrates that
the species segregated by means of the three morphologic factors are not
entirely homogeneous in ear form, and this lack of homogeneity is prob-
ably due to the distorted heads. The Iberian species as segregated is
relatively pure, although this is the Filipino-Iberian, a mixed species in
reality. The Cro-Magnon is partly Iberian and partly Primitive, but
the Cro-Magnon characters have been positively proved. The Australoid
is segregated as a mixed species in process of formation and the ear form
substantiates this. The three' species are dolichocephalic, and although
their heads might be longer if no dorsal flattening appeared in any in-
dividual, yet the flattening is a negligible factor. Not so, however, with
the remaining species, except the Primitive, Modified Primitive and
Adriatic, whose heads are so hyper-brachycephalic that if there were no
dorsal flattening the heads would probably still be brachycephalic. The
Blend, the Alpine and the B. B. B. are not so hyper-brachycephalic, and


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 435
if the heads that are flattened dorsally could be made natural, some of
the individuals of these types would be Iberians. This is indicated by the
relatively large number that have Iberian ears.
Therefore I would alter the terminology of the species of some indi-
viduals where the ear type is significant. This is done in the table of
indices in the first column (Table 11, pp. 390-397) by placing in
parenthesis the alteration. The species, as selected by the three factors,
cephalic index, nasal index, and stature, is placed first in this column,
after which in parenthesis, come the true species as determined by a con-
sideration of the ear form and other characteristics.
The number of individuals in each species becomes altered as shown in
the following table;
. „ 1 Modi-
Bi US ' Al- ~ r0 ‘ „„ t. Prim- fled
Blend, tra- pine Mag- 8.8.8. itive p rirn .
ioia. non. itive
94 ■37 12 | 12 2 j 3 4
41 39 11 13 4 j 14 9
m, the number of individuals consti
the species combined, which was ob’v
Original classification j 17
Altered classification | 50
constituting
In the original classification,
the Blend exceeds that of all
obviously
too great a number in so mixed a population. The altered classification
reduces the Blends more than one-half by placing a large number of them
with the Iberian, Primitive and Modified Primitive. The other species
remain practically unaltered except the B. B. 8., which is increased by
two individuals, thus doubling the former number. This is a more exact
classification and represents real conditions.
The Taytayans would therefore be placed in the scheme for heredity (2)
between 2 and 3 under Spurious Mendelism, and they would be nearer
2 than 3 because the number of species greatly exceeds the number of
Blends, and at least two species, the Iberian and the Primitive, are
relatively pure.
In concluding the discussion of the ear form, it may not be out of place
to criticize the types selected by Polkmar and presented in his Album
of Philippine Types (11). The majority of them are Blends with evident
Iberian characteristics, but many of them are sufficiently pure in type to
be classified as species exactly by their ear form.
Plate 56 of Polkmar, represents a typical Primitive with a typical
Primitive ear. This is a Yisayan with a stature of 148.5 centimeters, a
cephalic index of 92.17 and a nasal index of 91.49. The head has the
flat occipital region said to he characteristic of the Malay, and this
probably accounts for the high cephalic index. The ear presents the
double roll aspect so often seen in the Primitive, caused by the helix and
concha lying close together.
The Yegrito-Tagalog, in Plate 76 of Polkmar, has Modified Primitive
90339 7


ears but would be classed as Australoid b} r other characteristics. Like-
wise the Negrito of Plate 78 of Folkmar, has Modified Primitive ears
but is Australoid by the cephalic index of 78.45, nasal index of 102.38
and stature of 135.7 centimeters. Other Modified Primitive ears may
be seen in Plates 14, 34, 66, and 67 of Folkmar.
The Alpine ear may be seen in Plate 44 of Folkmar, where the individual
(a Tagalog of Laguna Province) is also of that species, with a stature of
163.5 centimeters and cephalic index and nasal index of 88.24 and 83.67
respectively. Other Alpine ears somewhat modified and resembling both
Primitive and Iberian, may be seen in Plates 1, 17, 20, 21, 25, 37, and 66
of Folkmar.
Plate 60 of Folkmar, a Yisayan of Masbate, represents a secondary or
recent Australoid, with typical Iberian A ears.
Plate 41. of Folkmar, a Tagalog of Bulacan Province, has Iberian C
ears, and the physiognomy is mixed Iberian, the individual being a Blend.
Other more or less pure Iberian ears may be seen in Plates 4, 5, 8, 12,
15, of Folkmar, many others throughout the Album have some Iberian
characteristics, and only a few have no Iberian characters in ear form.
Plate 59 and plates 50 and 75 of Folkmar represent modified B. B. B.
ears, and types with oblong face and head resembling the B. B. B, species.
A man simulating the Cro-Magnon and having Iberian (Cro-Magnon?)
ears is seen in Plate 32 of Folkmar.
Folkmar may have classified Filipinos to his own satisfaction, and
others may see the Tagalog, or Ilokano or Yisayan type, but I can not find
sufficient uniformity of characteristics to justify the classification into
such groups although there may be a slight superficial resemblance in
facial expression, attitude, manner of action, etc. Folkmar’s divisions
are therefore unjustified, whereas by the ear type and its associated
physical type, much may be obtained from the plates of his Album.
There can be no doubt of the two species, Primitive and Iberian, among
the Filipinos, and it is possible that the various manifestations of these'
and the union of their different characters in many combinations result
in the other species, although the B. B. B. when pure is unlike either
the Primitive or Iberian.
Y. DISEASE AND SPECIES
The association of tuberculosis and beriberi with the Iberian and
Primitive species respectively, was previously determined in a study of
the types found in Malecon Morgue(s). The present study corroborates
the association of the Iberian species with tuberculosis, but adds nothing
to substantiate the association of beriberi with the Primitive species,
because only one case of beriberi is noted and that in a Cro-Magnon,
although the ears of this individual showed Primitive markings.
The afflictions of the Iberian were 9 with intestinal parasites, 4 with
tuberculosis of the lungs and 1 with other lung or pleural affections, 1


111. FILIPINO TYPES : RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 437
with heart or arterial disease, 2 with fever and 1 with neurasthenia.
Such few observations would mean little, but they corroborate previous
findings in the morgue, therefore their meaning is significant.
The Primitive, 3 subjects, have 2 with animal parasites, 1 with lung
or pleural affections and 1 with some acute infection.
The Australoid is affected in 18 cases with animal parasites, 6 with
tuberculosis, 2 with other lung or pleural affections, 2 with heart or
arterial disease, 1 with neurasthenia, and 3 with the kidneys or genito-
urinary organs affected. The large number of cases of tuberculosis is
probably'due to Iberian influence.
Among the Blends are 60 cases of animal parasites, 12 cases of tuber-
culosis, 8 cases of lung or pleural affections other than tuberculosis, 18
alimentary affections other than animal parasites, 5 heart and arterial
diseases, 4 cases of fever, 5 of acute infections, 3 with skin diseases in-
cluding 1 case of leprosy, 3 with diseases of the kidneys and genito-
urinary organs, 1 case of rheumatism, and 1 of splenic affection.
The diseases group themselves in a similar manner when the ear type
alone is the differential factor, as in the following table:
Ali-
men- Others,
tary.
8 4
5 3
1 1
;t type and
maiority of
Intes-
tinal {Respir-
par- j atory.
asites.
Circu-
latory.
Fevers.
Urinary
Mixed ears 49 17
Iberian ears 26 13
Iberian-Primitive ears j 11 2
10 j 3
The mixed ears include those that are not of any distinct type and
whose affinites are obscure or of many kinds. Probably the majority of
these have Iberian characteristics.
The Iberian has a greater proportion of lung affections and fewer
urinary troubles than the mixed. The Iberian-Primitive has fewer lung
troubles and a greater number of intestinal parasites than either the
Iberian or mixed.
Other forms are not considered because there are too few for com
parative purposes.
The Iberian and the Primitive are next compared by taking every
individual in which either type of ear occurs, be it pure or not, there
being 59 in the Iberian group and 29 in the Primitive. The diseases are
then found to be as follows:
InteS- All
Num- tlnal Tnrlo . Tuber- " Circu- Mala- fm Ben- Tt ,
ber. par- Lung ’ culosis. latory. ria. umers - beri. 10taI '
asites. y-
Iberian 59 48 18 12 10 8 4 7 0 107
Primitive 29 19 3 1 2 1 0 '3 1 29


This again corroborates previous findings, and signifies that by the ear
alone the susceptibility to tuberculosis may be indicated. There are also
indications that malaria is more frequent among the Iberian Filipinos,
and that the heart and arteries are affected more often than in the Primi-
tive. Indeed, all diseases are associated more frequently with the Iberian
than the Primitive, except beriberi, and only one case of this disease is
reported among the men measured.
ISTo absolute conclusions would be justified from the facts exposed, but
the inference is strong that the Iberian is more susceptible to all diseases
but more especially to tuberculosis than the Primitive. This may be
indicative that the European and Filipino blend, or its resulting off-spring
of the Iberian type, is less resistant to disease in the tropics than is the
aboriginal type on its own soil and in its natural environment.
The records of disease may be found in the statistics of the Medical
Survey of the town of Taytay in the Biological Laboratory, Bureau of
Science, from which the data are drawn.
CONCLUSIONS. —THE SEPARATION OF THE TYPES INTO SYSTEMATIC AND
• ELEMENTARY SPECIES.
The time has come when the types of men found in the Philippine
Islands may be designated without doubt as elementary and systematic
species. It is entirely without the province of anthropology to define
these terms so that they will apply to all zoological forms, but the studies
of the past few years among the Negroes, the students, and the school
children in America, among the Igorots, the Manila students from all
parts of the Philippine Islands, the morgue subjects and the people of
Taytay, as well as a study of Filipino ears, justifies a classification of
the types of man into two definite groups. One contains the types that
are stable and have been stable for many hundreds if not thousands of
years, and that do not blend readily when crossed with other stable types;
these are called systematic species. The other group contains the types
that are unstable, that have not been in existence so great a time, and that
blend readily, especially with nearly related types; these are called elemen-
tary species.
Each species may have subspecies or varieties. The elementary species
are cross sections of variable species which have been formed by the union
of two diverse species, whereas subspecies or varieties are cross sections of
systematic species that are variable through inherent changes not due to
actual crossing but to the interplay of heredity and environment. Ele-
mentary species and subspecies or varieties may sometimes be the same,
and ultimately may prove to be synonymous terms. Varieties may become
systematic species when they shall be sufficiently differentiated, and shall
have become stable. Elementary species may become systematic species
when the blending elements have reached a stage of slight variability and
have become a pure blend. The difference between elementary species


111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 439
and variety is that the first is the beginning formation of a systematic
species by the blending of two others, whereas the second is the beginning
formation of a systematic species by the differentiation and disintegra-
tion of an old systematic species.
The proper use of the terms, systematic species, elementary species and
variety, may be illustrated by the Filipino types of this and previous
studies.
The Iberian type became isolated many hundreds of years ago and
became a systematic species of man, and, in the course of time, developed
varieties which Sergi(2B), under the title of the Mediterranean Race, has
differentiated and designated by their skull form. The varieties of this
type spread over the face of the earth, and as they came to the Orient
they encountered an entirely different type, another systematic species,
the Primitive with its varieties. The commingling of the varied forms
resulted in several new types which are elementary species or variable
blends of the varieties of the two original systematic species. This will
probably account for every people of the East except the Negrito, and
it may prove useful in unravelling their varied forms, because the
Negritos are not homogeneous, as will be evident from forthcoming
studies.
The present and previous studies reveal at least four types of Iberian
ears, which differentiate the Iberian varieties, and to this extent the divi-
sion of the Mediterranean Race by Sergi is corroborated. The Primitive
may also be subdivided into at least three types; the Primitive proper, the
Modified Primitive, and the Adriatic, and also the Blends, all of which
have ears of similar form that have not yet been differentiated, but the
three varieties of men are none the less evident.
The union of the Iberian and Primitive species as constituted by
their varieties, has produced in the Philippines the Australoid, Alpine,
and B. B. 8., if not the Cro-Magnon. Their union to form the Australoid
had resulted in the type Aof the Igorots,—the primary Australoid —at
the time the Spaniard’s came to the Islands, after which a new infusion. •
of modified Iberians caused an alteration of the primary Australoid and
the formation of the secondary Australoid. The primary Australoid is
an elementary species, and the secondary Australoid is also an elemen-
tary species but different from the primary.
The Alpine represents the union of the Iberian and Primitive as a
complementary form to the Australoid but without subdivision, although
the B. B. B. probably stands in the same relation to the Alpine as the
secondary Australoid to the primary.
The Cro-Magnon has Iberian qualities and also Primitive, but not so
definite as the Iberian. This form is probably the result of recent and
remote Cro-Magnon elements which came with the Iberian from Europe.
Its relation to the Australoid is similar to the relationship of the B. B. B.
to the Alpine.


440
BEAN
The question of race naturally suggests itself here and may be consid-
ered in relation to the varied forms that constitute the Filipino people.
The definitions of species, variety and race are given by Quatre-
fages (21) as clearly as one may hope to have them;
“Species is a collection of individuals more or less resembling each other,
which may be regarded as having descended from a single primitive pair by
an uninterrupted and natural succession of families.”
Variety is “An individual or a number of individuals belonging to the same
sexual generation, which is distinguished from the other representatives of the
same species by one or several exceptional characters.”
Race is “A number of individuals resembling each other, belonging to one
species, having received and trasmitting, by means of sexual generation, the char-
acters of a primitive variety.”
There is nothing in the above definitions that is incompatible with the
ideas formulated and expressed in the preceding pages as to systematic
species and varieties., but Quatrefages gives no definition of a type that
is formed by the union of two other types, therefore room is left for the
term elementary species as defined above.
The use of the word race may well apply as indicated by Quatrefages,
except that such an entity becomes again a species as soon as it is estab-
lished as a race. Derivatives of the primary races are termed secondary
races, and derivatives of these tertiary races by Quatrefages, but when
many of these become fused the term race is used no longer. Would it
not be better to continue the terms species and variety, or to give the
name type to the primary, secondary, tertiary, etc., races of Quatrefages,
and to dignify each nationality that has developed characteristics that-
differentiate it from other nationalities by the term race, as the German
race, the French race, the Filipino race? Otherwise, the word race
becomes lost or relegated to designate remnants of humanity such as the
Esquimo and the Negrito, which are only types or varieties.
The term race should apply to any composite body of individuals who
are becoming or may have become a distinct type by a natural or an
artificial process. A race may contain systematic species, varieties and
elementary species in profusion. A Filipino race at present exists under
this terminology but not under that of Quatrefages, nor would more
than a few of the world’s living peoples be races according to his
definition. Face would apply also to the Cro-Magnon of early Europe,
the Mediterranean of Sergi and to other forms that have become dis-
persed and diffused or remain as fragments such as the Basque, the
Esquimo and the Negrito. There would be a German race and an
English race, a Dutch’ race and a Spanish race, but not a white race or
a black race or a yellow race, because elements of each color are fusing
in different ways in various places, and the color markings do not con-
stitute a- definite factor of differentiation, although color may be useful
as an adjunct. Color markings have been of no value in the differen-


...
Iberian
Australoid (?) , ,
Primitive
J_
f Cro-Magnon (?)
IB. B. B. (?)
( Australoid.
(Alpine. •
111. FILIPINO TYPES: RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 441
tiation of Filipino types. Hair form has been of little avail in the
study of the Filipinos, because they all have straight black hair, with
an occasional wave. The cephalic index has been found unreliable
because of possible distortion of the head. In the place of this, how-
ever, the ear form has been found a better indicator, and by this alone
much can be known as to the individuals’ component elements. In con-
junction with the other physical factors, nasal index, facial index, stature,
brachial and crural indices, etc., the ear form is of great Service.
means of these factors the men of Taytay have been separated into
groups that are called species and varieties in the following classification
Varieties.
Systematic species.
Elementary species.
Iberian A_
Iberian B _
Iberian C (Igorot)
.Iberian D (Cro-Magnon)
f Primary Australoid 1
I Secondary Australoid (Negrito)?-)
Primitive
Modified Primitive
Blend (?)
.Adriatic
Two processes are supposed to have been active, a differentiation of
the Iberian and Primitive into diverse forms, producing varieties, and
a fusion of the varieties to make the elementary species. It can not be
absolutely determined that the Primitive and Iberian did not arise by
the fusion of other forms, but if so, they had so completely fused as to
be true systematic species, unless the varieties represent the forms that
previously fused. The Australoid furnishes an interesting example of
the fusion of two forms, and at the same time the production of two
different forms, although the secondary Australoid may represent Negrito
elements.
There seems to be in man a life cycle of the following nature: The
crossing of diverse types induces a condition of Mendelism more or less
pure, depending upon the amount of resemblance between the types,
following which comes spurious Mendelism when the types begin to
blend and later no Mendelism but a tendency to blend and a tendency to
remain true to type until a perfect blend is formed. This is the first
cycle, and the perfect blend becomes a systematic species when sufficiently
stable. After this, the systematic species becomes diversified through
inherent variation acted upon by the environment, until differentiation
results in the formation of varieties with any one of which or all together
the cycle may be repeated.


There is first a period of alternate inheritance, then a period of
blending followed by a period of stability, after which differentiation
begins. The four periods are not clear-cut but overlap, and more than
one may be going on at the same time.
Fusion of the mass of Filipinos throughout is evident in the formation
of a blend that will probably be largely Primitive, or between that and the
Adriatic, because in the course of time the Iberian elements will be
eliminated to a great extent by disease, especially tuberculosis.
The Filipinos of Taytay are therefore in the blending period, but at
the same time some of the types may exhibit alternate heredity, some
are in a condition of stability, and others are undergoing differentiation.
There is, no doubt, an exemplification of G-alton and Pearson’s ancestral
heredity and reversion to mediocrity, yet fusion of all the elements seems
to be the ultimate goal.
BIBLIOGRAPHY.
(1) Bean, Egbert Bennett. A Scheme for Type Heredity in Man. Science,
N. S. (1909), No. 754, 942.
(2) Idem. A Theory of Heredity to Explain the Types of the White Race.
This Journal, Sec. A, (1908), 3, No. 4, 215.
(3) Idem. The Benguet Igorots. A somatologic Study of the Live Folk of
Benguet and Lepanto-Bontoc. This Journal, Sec. A, (1908), 3, No. 6, 413.
(4) Idem. I. Filipino Types: Manila Students. An Attempt to Classify the
Littoral Population of Luzon and Adjacent Islands. This Journal, Sec. A, (1909),
4, No. 4, 263.
(5) Idem. 11. Filipino Types: Found in Malecon Morgue. This Journal, Sec.
A, (1909), 4, No. 4, 297.
(6) Idem. Filipino Ears. A Classification of Ear Types. This Journal, Sec.
A, (1909), 4, No. 1, 27.
(7) Idem. A Cephalograph. This Journal, Sec. A, (1909), 4, No. 5, 447.
(8) Birknee, F. Beitrage zur Rassenanatomie der Chinesen. Part I. Arch,
f. Anthrop. Braunschiceig (1906), 4, 1.
(9) Broca, M. Sur les cranes et ossements des Eyzies. Bull. Soc. d’ Anthrop.,
Paris (1868), Series 11, 3, 350-391.
(10) Deniker, J. The Races of Man. An Outline of Anthropology and
Ethnography. New York (1906).
(11) Folkmar, Daniel. Album of Philippine Types. Manila (1904).
(12) Hagen, B. Hofrat: Kopf-und Gesichtstypen ostasiatischer und melane-
sicher Volker. Herausgegeben mit Unterstlitzung der Kbniglich Bayerischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften. Stuttgart (1906).
(13) Hrdlicka, A. Physiological and Medical Observations among the In-
dians of the Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico. Washington
(1908).
(14) Keane, A. H. Man. Past and Present. Cambridge: At the University
Press. (1900).
(15) Klaatsch, Hermann. Die neuesten Ergebnisse der Palaontologie des
Menschen und ihre Bedeutung fur das Abstammungsproblem. Ztschr. f. Ethnol.
41 Jahrgang (1909) Heft 111 u. IV.
(16) Luschan, Yon V. Die Konferenz von Monaco. Korresp.-Blatt d. deuts-
chen Ges. f. Anthrop., Ethnol. u. Urgeschr. (1906), 38, 53-62.


111. FILIPINO TYPES : RACIAL ANATOMY IN TAYTAY. 443
(17) Martin, R. Augenfarbentafel, Versammlung der deutschen Anthropo-
logischen Gesellschaft in Worms. (1903), 34.
(18) Idem. Die Islandstiimme der Malayischen Halbinsel. Wissenschaftliche,
ergebnisse einer Reise durch Vereinigten Malayischen Staaten. Jena. (1905),
283.
(19) Moszkowski, Max, (Berlin) Die Urstamme Ostsumatras. Korresp.-
Blatt d. deutschen Ges. f. Anthrop., Ethnol. u. Urgesch. (1908) 39, Nos. 9 and 12.
(20) Papillault, G. Entente Internationale pour I’unification des mesures
cranometriques et cephalometriques. Anthrop. Paris (1907), February.
(21) Poll, Heinrich. Ueber Schadel und Skeleteder Bewohner der Chatam-
Inseln. Ztschr. f. Morphol. u. Anthrop. (1903), 5, 1—134.
(22) Quatrefages, A. de. The Human Species. New York (1879).
(23) Ripley, W. Z. The Races of Europe. New York (1899).
(24) Sarasin, Fritz. Versuch einer Anthropologic den Insel Celebes. Zweiter
Teil: Die Varietaten des Menschen auf Celebes. Materialen zur Naturgeschichte
der Insel Celebes: V Band., II Teil. Wiesbaden (1906) i¥an, London (1908), 8,
No. 8.
(25) Schlaginhaufen, Otto. Ein Beitrag zur Craniologie der Semang, nebst
Allgemeinen Beitragen zur Craniologie. Leipzig (1907).
(26) Schmidt, W. Ueber die entwickelungsgeschichtliche Stellung der Pyg-
maenstamme. Korresp.-Blatt d. deutschen Ges. f. Anthrop. Ethnol. u. Urgesch.
(1908), 39,
(27) Schwalbe, G. Das Darwinsche Spitzohr beim Menschlichen Embryo.
Anat. Anzeig. (1889), 4, No. 6, 176—189.
(28) Sergi, G. The Mediterranean Race. A Study of the Origin of European
Peoples. New York. (1901).
(29) Soularue, G. Martial. Recherches sur les dimensions des os et les
proportions squelettiques de I’homme dans les differentes races. Bull. Soc. d’
Anthrop. Pdris (1899) Ser. IV, 10, 328.
30) Stratz, C. H. Naturgeschichte des Menshen. Grundriss der Somatischen
Anthropologic. Stuttgart (1904).
(31) Topinabd, P. Elements d’Anthroplogie Generate. Paris. (1885).
(32) Turner, W. A Contribution to the Craniology of the natives of Borneo,
the Malays, the natives of Formosa and the Tibetans. Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh
(1907), 45, Part 111, No. 28, 781-813, 5 plates.
(33) Idem. Man, London (1908), 8, No. 3.
(34) Verneau, R. Contribution a I’etude des caracteres cephaliques des
Birmans. Anthrop. Paris (1904) 15, 1-23.
(35) Idem. Les Grottes de Grimaldi (Baousse—Roussd) Monaco. (1906). Part
111. Anthropology.
(36) V ierordt, H. Anatomische, Physiologische und Physikal. Daten und
Tabellen zum Gebrauche fiir Mediziner. Jena (1906).
(37) Volz, Prof. Dr. Wilhelm. Beitrage zur Anthropologie und Ethnographic
von Indonesien. 111. Zur Kenntnis der Kubus in Siidsumatra. Arch. f. Anthrop.
Braunschweig (1908), 7, 89-109.
(38) Waterston, David. Report upon the Physical Characters of some of
the Nilotic Negroid Tribes. Third Report Wellcome Research Laboratories. London
(1908).
(39) Zwaan, Kleiweg de. Die Anthropologischen Ergebnisse der Sumatra-
Reise des Herrn, A. Maas. Ztschr. f. Anthrop. Berlin (1909), 168-180.


■»;
.
.
.
.
&
3
V
*
.


ILLUSTRATIONS. 1
Plate I. The men of Taytay. The first figure from the left is an Iberian D with
Cro-Magnon affinities. The second figure from the left is an Australoid
of the secondary variety with Iberian affinities. The middle figure
is the only Iberian E seen at Taytay. The figure to the right of the
center is a Modified B. B. B. with Cro-Magnon affinities. The figure
on the right is the only B. B. B. seen at Taytay that approached nearly
the pure type.
11. A Bagobo woman from Davao, Mindanao. Primitive ears and Primitive
species.
111. An Ifugao woman from Quiangan, Nueva Aiscaya Province, Luzon.
Primitive ears and Primitive species.
IV. A Bontoc Igorot woman from the Mountain Province of Luzon. Primi-
tive ears and Modified Primitive species.
V. A Bukidnon man from Capiz, Iloilo. Primitive ears and Primitive
species.
VI. A Kalinga from Hagan, Isabela Province Luzon. Mixed Primitive ears
and mixed Primitive species.
VII. An East Indian type from Cainta. Modified Iberian A ears, and modified
Iberian A subspecies or variety.
VIII. An East Indian type from Cainta. Modified Iberian B ears, and modified
Iberian B subspecies or variety. Cro-Magnon affinities.
IX. An East Indian type from Cainta. Modified Iberian D ears, and
modified Iberian D subspecies or variety. Cro-Magnon affinities.
X. An old man from near Taytay. Modified Iberian D ears and modified
Iberian D subspecies or variety. Cro-Magnon affinities.
XI. An official of Taytay. Modified Iberian B and D ears and subspecies or
variety. Cro-Magnon affinities.
XII. A carpenter of Taytay. Modified Iberian E. Cro-Magnon affinities.
XIII. A hammock carrier of Taytay. Mixed Alpine and Primitive ears and
species.
XIV. A property owner of Taytay. Modified B. B. B. ears and species. The
subject is afflicted with yaws.
XV. A retired proprietor of Taytay. Modified B. B. B. ears and species.
Cro-Magnon affinities. Partial facial paralysis.
XVI. A laborer of Taytay. Secondary Australoid variety. Iberian affinities.
XVII. A fisherman of Taytay. Secondary Australoid variety. Iberian affinities.
XVIII. Two Philippine skulls that show right dorsal flattening and consequent
left ventral bulging. Well marked in the skull on the left.
1 All photographs used in this study were made by Mr. Martin of the Bureau
of Science or his assistants.


TEXT FIGURES. 2
Fig. 1
Curve of stature of 183 adult male Taytayans. The number of individuals
with a given stature is placed over each point on the line.
2.
3
4
Stature and age.
Average Taytayan head outline. Serial number 99, clinical number 176.
The solid lines on the left represent the average European according to
the canon of Fritsch. The broken lines on the right represent the
average Taytayan according to the same canon. The European stature
is equal to 8 total head heights. The Taytayan stature is equal to 7
total head heights. A and B point to the chin.
Composite head outlines of 74 brachycephalic individuals.
Composite head outlines of 69 mesocephalic individuals.
Composite head outlines of 22 dolichocephalic individuals.
Boy of Taytay aged 4. The small outline is from the left side of the
head over the middle of the eye. The large outline is from the right
side of the head a, little nearer the median line.
Boy of Taytay aged 10. The short outline is 3 centimeters to the left
of the midline. The long outline circumscribes the sagittal plane.
Head outlines of two Primitive Blends with flattened occipital region.
Serial numbers 137 and 158.
Head outline illustrating the bony band about the occiput.
Primitive and Iberian head outlines. Iberian serial number 33, Primitive
serial number 110.
Australoid head outline. Serial number 89, clinical number 564.
Iberian head outlines. Serial numbers 25 and 47.
Three Cro-Magnon head outlines. Blonde American number 2; Taytayan
serial number 74; clinical number 535; serial number 103, clinical
number 616.
Sagittal head outlines of iHpine and B. B. B. Alpine is serial number 88',
clinical number 180; B. B. B. is serial number 8, clinical number 353.
head outlines were made with the cephalograph (7) unless otherwise
and they are all reproduced natural size.
stated,


Bean
: III, Filipino Types : Racial Anatomy.]
[Phil. Jouen. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
-A
it IF
I^F
, ,|. C..M,
f
I \
r i 1 )
(r
/ 'j
j :. ,r 4 <■.
1
JW-V V-.
■
- —
frpM | I >
A
B
W ; v
1 1 /
■ rw
L f
■f-.j,,. w
I i J \
, ■ > ■ ■ i
\ ■ Ml ,/f V.l^j
<. L m -j
k — JT ' 4 1 M
l v»u\\ u fflr, JT
A 1 11 Jk
wk : ". |
jflpMfc
nT III
., L'
I ,
n Ijjj, ; 11 Bly
11
■4 . f
! ■P-fl
i
\
vw -ilM
■
V v Ml//
IB MnUw
'
\ A
1 h'
%JK]^
jflU'
■ c\ jr-
Iberian D. Australoid.
Iberian E.
Cro-Magnon B. B. B. Modified B. B. B.
THE MEN OF TAYTAY.
PLATE 1.


id r ' ~
d '
£ V-
>
j«|V/
\',|||*. (jf ' .
|‘ * • • *■ ' d
lu
f* >
/ J* I
A - - cc
Q-
Q
Z
<
cr
“ ‘ — <
uj J
uj "
P U
i 5
a. J
a
It jf.
_ /1 ypp
RB
' (jjKffr .,£F: o
JSB , V •• ”T
ni ** ifeL v
Y^R|‘-
ffl ; — —


Bean : III. Filipino Types : Racial Anatomy.]
[Phil. Jouen. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
jm '$ s.
> \Ui^DW^ «£ s V
fWp
IIKmmik^VP
.Qr
ifK
■F .
-,v. .'-
if ■ '■M&'i '
i:H Jipl v m
/j)| /flfe..
IFUGAO FROM QUIANGAN, NUEVA VIZCAYA, LUZON. PRIMITIVE EAR AND PRIMITIVE SPECIES.
PLATE Ml.


Bean : III. Filipino Types : Racial Anatomy.]
[Phil. Joubn. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
%
XKctBBKf'
._■ tsSSfbL.
I
■ v A.
. di|L
X
• 'iJrw> . *
v Mm ... <mi Wl
BONTOC IGOROT, MOUNTAIN PROVINCE OF LUZON. PRIMITIVE EAR AND MODIFIED PRIMITIVE SPECIES.
PLATE IV.


Bean : III
, Filipino Types : Racial Anatomy.]
[Phil. Jouen. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5
I . v' A
>.« &
: i ■. mv ■** m.
1
'§ ■
.
1 ' ® vii
- .
TBP
i jgy
w rl
H|— M •■ 1 - 1
r
& * f *>& ■. fW** a. .. I w
■ C 'J% •■■
i
'
f
>si •
JpB
» 2 2hMHH'',
. : j
* ■.
/(
•4. mmit&mrn
-/ / :
1
. ■-■,„■■■ TJII ,-
W. % < wp
• *■ • ■»& Ckf pp^MSR
* '
7
Wmm :
||Mf W"|
/JT ■ ■■— •■ -
m *dm
< |
'rjh&
_| L J
- i|
**
0* 0>0 1
,# =
dffr , ■-/ U.
if . -, ; |pm ■ i^2p
1
F* •’ ';* V
rn | Vrif 7 . i m m
* * ■ SK ffiMffii ■ ■
r
4 m
..if
* * "
W > 1, J 'JgHL JH
** *'*<o
W
v a
1* ' ''‘ujdmtfM V*
2BK9lHfi& '!• Sr
BUKIDNON FROM CAPIZ, ILOILO. PRIMITIVE EAR AND PRIMITIVE SPECIES.
PLATE V.


Bean : III. Filipino Types ; Racial Anatomy.]
[Phil. Journ. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
1 ,|
r ar
. iFT'aiWUfih .1 At
1 ?
WW iSP '®|
W W
* jtf
Jtji 1
-1 f
' > :•! 1
fck V - ; I
HP >1® - J
ak galfflBSWl
'
J 1 ;
Min...
mm \
KALINGA FROM ILAGAN, ISABELA PROVINCE, LUZON. MIXED PRIMITIVE MIXED PRIMITIVE SPECIES.
F> LAT E VI.


in
6
£
>
~/St ■
o
m
«
P
o
►“5
P
3
pH
m
K
P
EH
O
g
3
H


Bean : III. Filipino Types : Racial Anatomy.]
[Phil. Journ. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
*{■ V* ‘ f' f ■ ) i*-.
'f
'V ''
- , , , , ; ■ J. li < N
4 - i i
W't* 'fJ 1 i’ 1 '■■
t i '
.-Jt-jiSL life. f . * , •■•#», j-j. k
; ;i -.'''
( 1 1 »W'Jf: i 1 ■
v A
J| r
# -.-air I II Ml III i PTr r
im< niiBiC ,L ’_[ : v jr , AmF' |jij
1 w"£S£'^'l
4
/ '
jHM
"""
MIl
fc- T
SHn Ih9H
.cs^HBhhRk
\M&&k itek^
if4Kfe. ’
/j§, _J|HhA
liH If
OLD MAN OF CAINTA.
BERIAN B MODIFIED. EAST INDIAN TYPE.
p lat E VIII


| ■ ' '
E
* z
~ % t'JS&t'm. - ■ <
V„ **■*, •
o ' '■'•
g 4R
S ■;. ■ - ••,' M ■■
w
£
< ■ ;•
a
PQ . • - ---- - - - - " - '■ . —I


id
<
i
o
cc
o
i
E Hi
ID |-
2 <
J
I i
r % O
cc
u_
% * z
i ll
& 'WsMvHnimsiaBm
i
£
<J
W
PQ


Bean : III. Filipino Types :
Racial Anatomy.]
[Phil. Journ. Sci., Vol. IY, No. 5
•
( . .
f
'
i
/
■ i
N
. 1
aw*
f
<
AN OFFICIAL OF
TAYTAY.
IBERIAN B AND D
FOLATE XI.
. CRO-MAGNON AFFINITIES.


I
z:
<
a
m —
CO
UJ
h;
Z
LL
u_
<
I *
< 111
? h
O <
cc J
° a
UJ
z
<
cc
UJ
CO


Bean ; III, Filipino Types : Racial Anatomy.]
[Phil. Joukn. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
1
jjr
W m
I m ]tl f
c.
j .vf;’'• w v ' ’* v * J r< ’’
,
■k
Ns
HAMMOCK CARRIER OF TAYTAY. ALPINE TYF
!=> LAT E XIII.
3 E. ALPINE PRIMITIVE EAR.


Bean; III. Filipino Types: Racial Anatomy.]
jRr't-NxV x
-gf JL
■■ ■ j
1 %WwSt&l jw
* ’"
Mfe
'V * W
♦ * *- - - ' , l
"' > ’ 1 4' \
,'* v % - -••••» w 1 . ' \
•* ’ 9 • m m .. *. * ** . f i* ’,•
-. *, ;*••: ' i' ■;
jV..
■ > 'v' :> * i ------- a 7
i mww
....
f
LO ' _
6 '.-»•* •• •
£ \ 'i
- «• .
t k
>
u , *.* * ' “ “ *
ui ' ., • .
— ✓ - • ’ ,* .
0 ■ . ' mm>
* * * *, * t
, /
. V ;; • .. y
“ >
“ X
CQ
Q llJ
Hi h
- <
Q j
o J
5 a


cl /
" 1 « J t
: •*» -
« .: '* ■ ■ \\
P V
£ \ < '
z
<J - f u • (' • '■ •
ra ,y ‘
</)
UJ
h
z
U.
U-
<
z
0
1 >
< x
5
6 Hi
ec |_
° <
CD
. a
CO
CO
Q
UJ
LL
Q
O


LO
*
i P >
; i_
"' , .*. * ;•■ y ..,' * •' ~
tr *. •«■ * *V Jr ",
r«ynE
•
* s- * * S:
••* % v'vv "V- * V
7 * * :? ' ''* *’ ’
\ * * .*.*.' *' - : : : >w
H ••■* A , ■ , . « .’■■ ,Jf / ’
e - '-- JUa - 4
g «... -■■ ?. :/*, \ ]*
E - 7 v v ‘t _
>
H-
m >
? x
>
>■ m
c u
< K
a <
I i
in
CO
I
o
z
Q_
_J
Li.
Q
O
<
cr
h
co
D
<


Bean : III. Filipino Types
Racial Anatomy.]
[Phil. Joukn. Sci.,
Vol. IV, No. 5.
x- jt 3
m
\ A
1
/
V
S i
v
Y
■t.
, . , -
•V. ■
1
. > * i .
r i. 1
' if*# ■ 1
■ • ■ - ■; i I
wi
i
■I:# JF
•• ■
.
' ”1;
KLj |
,,
v«h|' ,•> >
' H -.af r' 1
■ ■ -4-|;
■
I 19 V.' &
,,
.
■ ■ 4 • ! -•*“?
AUSTRALOID FILIPINO—SECONDARY VARIETY.
IBERIAN
AFFINITIES.
F> LATE XVII


; „*: ' *' * r$&
- :
Hsi»iF w : ■t- -;
* ll
* V
■w • i v ' *‘ ,; -V ;; * , III i
'> • . < JHhHH «>
raiiw - 4 . r.‘/,v 7
- - i5a«a ''rn^iio^H
T‘.V '
wf v . •
jaBwjjBipalF - / vHH
' \ '**"' til - .!mBBwBI
■I -Bre-* . t'WW'tVv
~ . - lili^
wPKaMLmr’r* A ■> *. ■.■•»iWv ~ f,
bsMto.. * ■■■ , . f ' } .•: viuifla
; / . '
a ' ‘$mmS .Hw
‘A 9Hyi
* v* '.3|" §p *: r '\w ..^80
■Hp.
o
£
h
Z
o
z
o
—I
3
CO
_J
<
CE
H
Z
LU
0
H
Li.
UJ
_J
1
H
£
O
z
z
LlI
H
H
<
_j
Li.
-J
<
CO
cr
0
Q
h-
-1
O
a:


A CEPHALOGRAPH: THE DESCRIPTION OF AN INSTRUMENT
FOR REPRODUCING THE OUTLINES OF THE
HEAD AND FACE.
By Robert Bennett Bean.
(From the Anatomical Laboratory of the Philippine Medical School, Manila, P. I.)
The value of an instrument that would accurately and easily produce
the outlines of the head and face in any direction, through or over any
plane, has long been recognized by anthropologists, and the instrument
here described and pictured is presented with the hope that it will fulfill
the requirements. The idea of the construction of a cephalograph oc-
curred to me as early as 1905 when I used a machine for obtaining
the outlines of the brain which would reproduce only the silhouette of
the object but which could not be applied to the surface. At that time
I spoke to Dr. Ales Hrdlicka who encouraged me to attempt the con-
struction of such a machine, but the opportunity for its construction did
not arise until I reached the Philippines in June, 1907.
In 1906 I consulted Prof. L. Manouvrier who was at that time working
on a machine designed for the purpose of obtaining, outlines of the
head on the living, and I am grateful to him for any suggestions that
may have been utilized in the construction of the cephalograph. The
principles involved in the cranial instruments of Prof. Rudolph Martin 1
have been utilized, especially the pantograph to reproduce the exact
outlines, the use of which occurred to me after my acquaintance with
Professor Martin’s instruments. The castings were made of alumi-
num through the kindness of my brother, Mr. Wyndham Randolph Bean,
superintendent of the plants of the T. H. Symington Company at Roches-
ter, New York, for whose interest in and personal supervision of the
work I am greatly thankful. The measuring arm of the machine was
made by Filipino students at the Philippine School of Arts and Trades
in Manila, under the direction of Mr. Hewitt. To Mr. Hewitt I am
also indebted for cooperation in constructing another cephalograph for
the Bureau of Education of the Philippine Isalnds.
The cephalograph consists essentially of an aluminum frame supported
by two vertical steel bars 1 meter long and 2 centimeters in diameter,
fastened by brackets at each end to a board screwed to a frame or to
any wall or post. The aluminum frame supports, by two parallel rods
of the same diameter but only half as long, a horizontal aluminum bar,
1 Ueber einige neure Instrumenten unci Hilfsmittel fur den Anthropologisclien
Unterricht. Correspondenz-Blatt der Deutscher anthropologischen Gesellschaft.
(1903), No. 11, pp. 127-132.


1 meter long and 12.8 centimeters wide, on which a, sliding brass piece
supports the pantograph with the measuring arm. A smooth board on
which drawing paper is held by thumb tacks is clamped to the end of
the horizontal bar. The aluminum frame has a horizontal aluminum rod
inserted at its middle, through the end of which another rod passes
vertically to carry the head rest. At the upper end the vertical rod works
in a cylindrical Joint which allows rotation through 360 degrees, and at
the lower end is a ratchet attachment by which the head rest may main-
tain the head at any desired angle in the vertical plane. Four supports,
only two of which are shown in Plate I, serve to fix the head so that it
remains rigid while the outlines are being made.
A unique feature of the cephalograph is the measuring arm of the
pantograph (Plate II), which has a semicircular brass bar with a radius
of 25 centimeters interposed between its extremity and the adjacent Joint
in such a manner that the pajds of the arm contiguous to the semi-
circular bar may glide from one end to the other of the bar, or may be
fixed at any point, the end of the measuring arm remaining at the same
point regardless of the position of the other parts of the arm.
On the end of the measuring arm is attached a small frame holding
a wheel so that a rolling surface comes into contact at all times with
the part being measured. The weight of the measuring arm and the
rolling contact allow exactly the same pressure to be exerted continually
without any appreciable effort on the part of the operator of the
cephalo graph.
Coronal, sagittal and horizontal outlines of the head and face may be
made easily and rapidly, and outlines in almost any direction are possible
with a little manoeuvering. With the position shown in Plate I, only
vertical longitudinal outlines can be made, but by rotating the head rest
through an angle of 45° horizontally, coronal outlines are possible; then,
by depressing the head rest until the face is prone and the horizontal posi-
tion of the head assumes the vertical direction, horizontal outlines can
be made.
The weight of the machine packed in a portable case is about the
average load for a native carrier, about 30 kilos (75 pounds.)
It is to be hoped that the cephalograph will be used in schools and
universities, as well as among the wild tribes and native peoples of the
earth that are little known, and wherever the living may be measured.
The cephalograph can also be used for measuring any solid body to which
the attachment at the head of the measuring arm can be applied. For
this reason it may be of service in measuring skulls and other bones as
well as any objects of which the contour in any given plane is wanted,
although slight alterations may be necessary if a complete circuit of an
object is desired. Criticisms and suggestions will be gladly received, for
I realize the imperfections of the instrument, but I believe it represents
a distinct advance in the application of mechanics to the reproduction of
the outlines of the head and face.
■t


-
V
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Plate I. The cephalograph in operation at Taytay, Rizal Province, Luzon, in 1909.
11. The measuring arm of the pantograph.
<r
i
I
t


4
4
4
♦
A


Bean : A Cbphalogeaph.]
[Phil. Journ. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
VENTRO-LATERAL VIEW OF THE CEPHALO6RAPH AT WORK AT TAYTAY, PROVINCE OF RIZAL,
ISLAND OF LUZON, IN 1909.
PLATE I.


I (\ I
Bean : A Cephalograph.]
[Phil. Jouen. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
Fig. 1. THE MEASURING ARM OF THE PANTOGRAPH. THE SIDE FACING THE OPERATOR OF THE
CEPHALOGRAPH.
Fig. 2. THE REVERSE SIDE, SHOWING THE DISTAL END OF THE ARM IN A DIFFERENT POSITION.
PLATE 11.


& sl\.
THE ACTION OF ORGANIC PEROXIDES ON THE
PHOTOGRAPHIC PLATE.
Benjamin T. Brooks.
(From the Chemical Laboratory, Bureau of Science, Manila, P. I.)
With the recent development of our knowledge of radioactivity, the
action of many substances on the photographic plate has been studied
and in some cases this property has been taken as a test for radioactivity.
This property alone is not sufficient to characterize a body as being
radioactive, as is very generally recognized. Nevertheless papers still
continue to find their way into the chemical literature ascribing radio-
activity to certain substances which affect the photographic plate but
which have little or no semblance to the heavy metals.
'
|
That the “pseudo-radioactive” substances are not radioactive in the
same sense as the heavy metals has been shown by Russell, Saeland and
Ebler.
Russell 1 has described recently the action on the photographic plate of
colophony and a number of substances which contain resin. He has shown that
the shadows thrown by resin are not bounded by straight lines, but curve round a
screen; that the action is not capable of passing through glass, mica, or aluminium
foil, even of extreme thinness, and does not affect an electrical field. The action
can pass along a bent glass tube, and may be swept out of a tube by a slow current
of gas. No action takes place in an atmosphere of carbon dioxide. Heat destroys
the activity and previous exposure to sunlight accelerates it. Alkalies or sulphur
dioxide destroy the activity. When the activity of a specimen is destroyed by
any of the above means, exposure to oxygen and light restores it. Russell also
prepared crystalline abietic acid and found it to be active. Turpentine and
specimens of pure pinene and limonene after exposure to air showed the same
behavior. A similar behavior of linseed oil is described by him 2 in a previous
communication.
I ♦
Russell states that the effect appears to be produced by a vapor rather than
by any form of radioactivity. He had previously shown 8 that the vapors of
hydrogen peroxide affect a photographic plate, even in dilutions of one part in
a million. He suggests that this may be the active substance.
Saeland 4 has recently shown that the action on the photographic plate of the
alkali metals, magnesium, zinc and other metals which have a high solution
1 Proc. Roy. Soc. Bond. (1908), B, 80, 376.
2 Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. (1898), 63, 102.
3 Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. (1899), 64, 409.
4 Ann. d. Phys. (1908), 26, 899.


tension, is due to hydrogen peroxide formed by the oxidation of the metal in the
presence of moisture.
Ebler 5 has recently confirmed this view by exposing certain metallic peroxides
in moist air to photographic plates. The effect produced was the same as that
described by Russell and Saeland.
Russell made no attempt to explain the formation of hydrogen peroxide by the
organic substances studied by him or to call attention to the fact that they are
capable of forming organic peroxides by autoxidation. The conditions under
which the activity is destroyed or increased are strongly suggestive of an intimate
connection with organic peroxides.
That organic peroxides are slowly hydrolyzed by water with the formation of
hydrogen peroxide has been shown by Freer and Novy 6 and by Clover and
Richmond. 7 This fact offers a plausible explanation of the formation of hydrogen
peroxide and the consequent change in the photographic plate produced by the
substances studied by Russell.
In order further to test this theory benzoperacid, acetyl peroxide and
benzoylacetyl peroxide were tested and each substance was found to
affect a photographic plate.
The experiment was carried out by placing about 0.1 gram of the
substance on a moist piece of filter paper in a shallow crystallizing dish
and covering the dish with a photographic plate. In the case of acetyl
peroxide a distinct dark spot was obtained on developing the plate after
an exposure lasting twenty minutes. Benzoylacetyl peroxide gave a
distinct spot after about 45 minutes. If the plates were exposed too
long a reversal, or positive, was obtained.
In a study of Manila copal it was found that the substance rapidly
absorbed oxygen from the air and that the powdered resin affected a
photographic plate In the same way as colophony. Russell stated that
amber was very feebly active compared with colophony. In order to
ascertain if the older fossil resins could be differentiated in this way
from the more recent ones, several samples of Manila and other copal
resins, were exposed to photographic plates.
About 10 grams of each specimen of copal were pulverized and placed
in a shallow crystallizing dish. A photographic plate was then placed
with the film side down upon each dish. At the end of one week the
plates were developed in the usual manner and in all cases a round
dark spot sharply outlining the dish was obtained. Samples of recently
collected, semi fossil and partially distilled Manila copal gave very dark
spots. A specimen of kauri copal gave a much blacker spot than Manila
copal, which probably has some connection with the fact noted by
Worstall 8 that the oxidation of kauri is the faster of the two. Zanzibar
copal gave a fainter spot than kauri or Manila and a specimen of hard
brittle resin from Philippine coal showed the least activity of all.
5 Ztschr. f. angew. Chem. (1909), 22, 205.
e Am. Chem. Jour. (1902), 27, 161.
1 Am. Chem. Jour. (1903), 29, 179.
* Journ. Am. Chem. Soc. (1903), 25, 863.


In order to determine Avhether or not the resin acids in Manila copal
would, like abietic acid, affect the photographic plate in the absence of
terpenes, the following experiment was tried.
About 50 grams o*f powdered copal were dissolved in cold dilute alkali
and the solution extracted four times with ether. The solution was then
evaporated to one-half its volume on the steam bath to expel the ether.
The solution was diluted and the resin acids precipitated by dilute
hydrochloric acid. Ten grams of the dried acids were exposed to sunlight
for one half day. A photographic plate was then placed over the sub-
stance and on developing the plate four days later a distinct black spot
was obtained.
The above explanation of the action on the photographic plate of
certain organic substances was suggested by a study of the autoxidation
of Manila copal, but in view of the interest recently shown in this
peculiar phenomenon it is published at the present time while the work
on Manila copal will appear at a later date.


.
•*
J #
/
*
• I
s.
TS
*
*


i
*p
TESTS OF PHILIPPINE ROAD MATERIALS.
George I. Adams.
(From the Division of Mines, Bureau of Science.)
Sometime ago the engineer of the city of Manila requested that the
division of mines of the Bureau of Science find a quarry site which would
supply a superior quality of stone for macadamizing the streets. The im-
portance of this problem will be seen when it is realized that the city uses
each year in surfacing streets about 50,000 cubic meters of crushed
stone,, which costs delivered in Manila about 1*2.50 per cubic meter. The
quality is not satisfactory and any improvement in the quality of the
material used would be evident in the better character of the streets and
a saving in the cost of maintenance.
Abrasion machine. —lt is obvious that in recommending a change of
the quarry site one should not trust simply to his judgment, but should
be able to base his recommendations on reliable tests. When geologic
work was begun for the purpose of finding a better stone, there were no
appliances in the Islands for testing stone for use as road material, and
it seemed undesirable to resort to the only remaining method of making
a practical test by macadamizing certain streets with different materials
available, and waiting for the results of actual wear to show which mate-
rial is the most desirable. A properly equipped laboratory should be sup-
plied with apparatus for submitting stone to the abrasion test and
determining its cementing value, toughness, absorption, hardness, specific
gravity, and strength. Most of this apparatus is relatively expensive, and
some of it, being of special design, can not be constructed easily. For the
abrasion test, however, which is the one which most closely corresponds to
the conditions of actual wear, a machine that can he constructed readily is
required and accordingly one was designed. Castings were made in Ma-
nila, and the machine was completed and set up by the engineer of
this Bureau. The Devall type of machine first constructed in Prance
and accepted and used by the Road Material Laboratory of the United
States Department of Agriculture at Washington, was selected, in order
that tests might be carried on in conformity with accepted standards,


and comparisons made with the results obtained in the Washington
Laboratory, which has been in operation for a number of years.
The Devall abrasion machine consists essentially of two iron cylinders fastened
to a shaft so that each cylinder is at an angle of 30° with an axis of rotation.
Each cylinder is 20 centimeters in diameter and 34 centimeters in depth, closed
at one end and having a tightly fitting iron cover for the other. In testing stone
with this machine it is broken into pieces of as nearly uniform size as possible,
each of which will pass in all positions through a 6 centimeter ring. Five
kilograms approximating as closely as possible to 50 pieces of rock previously
cleaned by washing and subsequently dried in an oven and then cooled in a
desiccator, is used as a charge for each cylinder. The machine is rotated at the
rate of 2,000 revolutions per hour for live hours, the inclination of the cylinders
causing it to be thrown from one end to the other twice at each revolution. When
the abrasion of the material is completed, the contents of each cylinder is placed
on a sieve having openings of 0.16 centimeter, and the material which passes
through this is caught on a sieve having openings of 0.025 centimeter. Both
sieves with the rock held on them are placed under running water until all the
dust is washed off'. These fragments are then dried in a hot air bath and cooled
in a desiccator and weighed.
Percentage of wear. —The percentage of wear indicates the amount of
the original sample which was worn to fines less than 0.16 centimeter in
size during the test. Theoretically, this percentage of wear may vary
from 0 to 100, but materials which show 20 per cent or more of wear
are considered unfit for use. Some materials will show less than 2 per
cent of wear.
French coefficient. —The French coefficient, which is an arbitrary one, is
determined by dividing 2,000 by the weight of the fragments under 0.16
centimeter in size, which are worn off during the test. According to this
standard, the scale of excellence would vary from 0 to 20, with some
material passing 20.
United States coefficient. —In reports of the road material laboratory
alTWashington, the United States coefficient is also given, which is found
by dividing by 10 the weight of the material over 3 centimeters in size
which remains after the test.
Report of a series of tests. —Inasmuch as the French coefficient is an
arbitrary standard and the United States coefficient does not express so
directly the wear in actual use on the roads, it is not considered neces-
sary to record them, although they have been computed in all the tests
made in this Bureau. The following table is a summary of the abrasion
tests thus far made on road materials used in the Philippines. It is
presented for the information of those who are in charge of the con-
struction of roads with the hope that it may indicate the wide range
in the character of the stone used and show that in many cases a con-
siderable economy may he effected by carefully selecting the quarries.


Num-
ber of
sam-
ples.
cent-
age of
wear.
Rock varieties.
Localities,
Textures.
Tallm Island, Manila city quarry...
do
Basalt _
Vesicular and sco-
riaceous.
Road from Antipolo to Tay tay, Rizal
do
Dense
Vesicular..
Crystalline
Andesite-
Los Banos quarry, Laguna.
Do.
Do.
Do.
Do.
Sisiman quarry, Bataan .
Arayat quarry, Pangasinan.
do
Vesicular
Sea beach below Batangas, used in
road from Batangas to San Juan.
Crystalline, but
weathered.
Dense, finegrained
Gabbro
New Manila city quarry, Angono,
Rizal.
Old Spanish quarry, Angono, Rizal
Brecciated..
Diorite.
Gravel, crystalline..
do
Benguet road.
do
2.67
Diorite and andesite
Diorite
Crystalline
Sara-Ajuy road, Iloilo.
Limestone .
Do
Do
Do
Do
Do
Do
Dense.
do
Montalban, Rizal..
Sibul Springs, Bulacan
San Esteban, IlocosSur.
Porous
Dense
Danar, Ilocos Sur
Porous .
San Fernando, La Union.
Dense _
Benguet road.
do
Dense, argillaceous.
Stone used for the streets 0]
few streets of Manila were i
The streets which were well
with granite blocks imported
of Manila. —During the Spanish regime very
macadamized, and these only imperfectly
improved were, for the most part, paved
from Hongkong as ballast. In addition,
paving blocks were cut from an andesite near the present Sisiman quarry,
which is situated near Mariveles at the entrance to Manila Bay. Also
at several places near Angono, Binangonan and Talim Island, basaltic
and gabbroic paving blocks were made in a desultory way. Samples of
these classes of block pavements can be seen in Manila to-day, and the
mode of wear of the paving blocks is a fair index to the quality of the
stone for macadam. At the beginning of the improvement of the streets
by the American authorities, some crushed stone was obtained from the
Binangonan quarry. This quarry has a very limited face, the stone varies
in texture, and, accordingly, is unsuitable for large operations and was
soon abandoned. The next place where quarrying was carried on exten-
sively was on Malagi Island just southeast of Talim Island. The estab-
lishing of quarries there came about through using the island as a
prison and the effort to employ the convicts at manual labor. The stone
was not of superior quality and when the island was abandoned as a


prison colony, the quarries were discontinued. The present plant oper-
ated by the city is on the northwest part of Talim Island at Subay,
where a crushing plant operated by steam and supplied with convenient
tracks, bins, and facilities for dumping into scows, is still in operation, but
shows the results of heavy usage. The stone at this quarry is of about the
same character as at Binangonan and Malagi. The better qualities are a
dense basalt, which has a conchoidal and splintery fracture and shows
2.57 per cent of wear. With it there is a variable vesicular and sometimes
scoriaceous variety showing 8.66 per cent of wear, and the gradation into
this quality is so irregular that in quarrying it is very difficult to separate
the two. Moreover, the processes of weathering have attacked the poorer
and softer stone and the quarry at Talim contains considerable dirt, so
that it is impossible to obtain continuously a clean, uniform crushed stone.
A careful survey was made of the zone which embraces Talim Island
and Binangonan Peninsula. No better material was found occurring in
relations suitable for quarrying. The zone is characterized by flows of
basaltic lava, varying from dense to vesicular and scoriaceous varieties,
and a large part is covered with volcanic agglomerate and braccias, which
grade into tuffs.
When the United States Army built the road between Los Banos and
Calamba, they opened a quarry near Los Banos. The rock is a crystalline
andesite, usually quite dense in texture. There is a high face of rock
which rendered quarrying easy and a small crusher was installed which
gave a very satisfactory output. It shows 2.66 per cent of wear. Besides
using the stone on the road near Los Banos, a considerable quantity of it
was transported to Fort McKinley and used in macadamizing the streets
of that post. The city of Manila has been deterred from using this quarry
because it was thought not to furnish the best quality of rock which could
be obtained, and that the transportation which would include that by land
to the shore of the lake and a long towage across to the mouth of the
Pasig Eiver would make the cost too high.
The quarry at Sisiman, near Mariveles, was opened for the purpose of
supplying large stone for building the breakwater of Manila Harbor.
The city was induced to try crushed stone from this quarry for macadam,
and some streets were carefully prepared with it for the purpose of
making a practical test, but it was found unsatisfactory since it is too
soft and wears rapidly under the action of wheels, disintegrating into
rock flour. Although the quality of the stone was soon determined, some
additional attempts were made to use the screenings from it as a top
dressing over the Talim rock, with a hope that it would serve as a binder.
As it has a very low cementing value, this experiment was not successful,
and the fact that the dressing consisted of fines containing a large amount
of rock flour rendered the streets muddy and necessitated the removal of
the dressing after the first heavy rains.


As soon as the abrasion machine was constructed, the Sisiman rock
was tested and its percentage of water was found to be 4.08. This test
demonstrated much more economically the unsuitability of the rock than
did the practical test, and showed the value of using the abrasion machine.
In looking for a quarry site, the shores of the Bay Lake (Laguna de
Bay) and Manila Bay were carefully explored as well as all points from
which railway transportation appeared feasible. It was soon discovered
that it would be impossible to ship stone by rail at the present freight
rate, or even at such reduced rates as the company might be willing to
concede, since the railway rates are high and seemingly excessive. No
good quarry site was found on the immediate shore of the lake. The
occurrence of hard rock on the shores of Manila Bay are all near the
entrance, and most of them at places where the conditions for quarrying
and loading are not favorable. Transportation across the bay could not
be depended upon during rough weather, and this would be a serious
handicap to the city since continuous operations are necessary in order
to supply the amount of stone required, and if the launches and lighters
and employees were unable to carry on continually this work they
could not be employed readily in other duties.
✓
The railroad to Antipolo passes an extensive outcrop of basalt in the
vicinity of Antipolo Falls which is to the north of Binangonan Peninsula
in the same zone of basaltic rocks. Samples of this stone were collected
and tested for the sake of information. They showed 3.61 per cent of
wear, or practically the same amount as the best grade of Talim rock;
and although the fracture of this stone was somewhat better than that
at the Talim quarry, it appeared that little could be gained by using it,
and transportation, which would necessarily be by rail, would be too
expensive. Between Antipolo and Taytay, in making a cut, a very hard
stone was found and the railroad company called the attention of the
division of mines to its occurrence. It was examined in .the field and
the exposures were found unsuitable for establishing a quarry. The
rock was not tested, although a sample of it was obtained. Similarly,
the limestone at the waterworks dam near Montalban was examined,
since it was suggested that it might show better cementing values, and,
being an unusually hard limestone, might prove suitable for macadam.
The percentage of wear of this stone was found to be 3.97 per cent.
Although it is superior limestone, it is not good enough to recommend
for use on city streets; moreover, the color, which is nearly white, would
be a serious disadvantage because of the strong reflection of light from it.
Up to this point in the field work, investigations had been carried on
with the hope of satisfying the desire of the city officials to be informed
of a location which would necessitate only water transportation. It
was ascertained that a good quality of the rock could not be found
situated under these conditions. It was believed that the hard stone


found on the railway between Tartar and Antipolo was of superior
quality, and it was judged from the geological formation that it would
continue in a southerly direction to Angono, which is on the shore of
the lake. At Angono, however, there is a belt of allurial land lying
between the hills and the lake shore, across which it would be necessary
to use land transportation for a distance of approximately 2 kilometers.
It was reported informally to the city engineer that this location would
probably furnish the best rock arailable near Manila, and when it was
seen that land transportation could not be avoided if a good quality of
stone was to be secured, instructions were received to examine the vicinity
of Angono. A hill situated to the northeast of the town contains a
fine-grained, even-textured gabbroic rock, breaking with a good fracture.
Samples of it were secured and tested in the abrasion machine. It
showed 2.17 per cent of wear, and constituted at that time the best road
material which had been received at the laboratory. Although the per-
centage of wear is not very much lower than that of the Talim rock,
which is 2.57 per cent, the even quality of the stone and the possibility
of obtaining it without admixture of quarry dirt and objectionable in-
ferior material, such as is found in the quarry now operated, renders it
far superior to the Talim product. It was learned during the investiga-
tion of the Angono locality that under the Spanish regime a quarry had
been opened in the hills to the southeast of Angono, a tramway built to
the border of the lake and a stone pier constructed from which the
contents of cars could be dumped into scows. All of this installation
was abandoned and sold before the American occupation and the quarry
practically forgotten. Complete records, however, were discovered in the
city archives. Before the location of the quarry had been visited, stone
obtained from it was seen in the riprap on Pasig Eiver in front of the
municipal building at Pasig. This stone is suitable for many purposes
and was used at various places in Manila by the Spanish, but it is
brecciated, which uneven texture renders it much less desirable for road
material than the stone in the hill northeast of Angono. Samples of the
rock were selected and submitted to abrasion tests. It showed 2.31
per cent of wear on carefull}’ selected pieces and it is probable that the
run of the quarry would not be quite so good. It is unfortunate that
the Spanish quarry is not suitable for supplying stone for macadamizing,
since the utilization of what remains of the tram grade and the stone
pier would save a considerable expense. Steps have been taken by the
city to secure a title to the new quarry site northeast of Angono, and before
long Manila may have better streets. The additional cost of the land
transportation will probably be counterbalanced by the saving in main-
tenance.
Stone used on the roads of the provinces. —When the abrasion machine
was installed, and a few samples of stone had been tested, a report of the


TESTS OF PHILIPPINE ROAD MATERIALS.
results was made to the Director of Public Works, accompanied by an
offer to test a series of samples of crushed stone from the quarries operated
in the provinces. In accordance with this offer, a number of samples
have been received and tested, and their percentage of wear will be found
recorded in the table in the first part of this report. It has not been
possible as yet to do any field work to determine whether the quarries
which are operated are supplying the best rock which can be obtained, but
it will be noticed that there is a wide divergence in the character of the
stone used, and in some cases the percentage of wear is so excessive that
if any better stone could be obtained, even at some additional cost, the
roads might be improved and the expenses would perhaps be counter-
balanced by the saving in maintenance. It is the desire of the Bureau
of Science to aid as fully as possible in the economic problem of the use
of road materials' and it is hoped that further tests, and possibly some
field work, may be carried on each year in cooperation with the Bureau
of Public Works. It is planned to equip a laboratory with all the stand-
and machines so that complete tests may lie made. The necessary ap-
paratus for this has already been ordered.


c
*
/
*
d
•<*
%


SAND, GRAVEL AND CRUSHED STONE AVAILABLE FOR
CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION IN MANILA.
Geobge 1. Adams.
(From the Division of Mines, Bureau of Science.)
While making a geological reconnaissance of southwestern Luzon,
special attention was paid to the occurrence and availability of structural
materials. In this area which produces no metallic minerals, the value
of the stone, gravel, sand and clay products used during the last year
surpassed that produced by any mining district in the ■ Islands. Most
of this output was used in and near Manila.
It is a surprising fact that sand and gravel taken from the Pasig and
Mariquina Rivers have sold at the dredges for more per cubic meter
than the average value of the gold per meter in good gold-dredging
ground, and that the price of crushed stone at the quarries has in some
cases been so high as to make the quarrying compare favorably, consider-
ing the expenses of production, with the mining of low-grade ores.
The problem of the cost of structural materials in Manila should resolve
itself without any special investigation. It is the purpose of this report
to discuss the nature of the materials which are commonly used, to show
where other and better ones may be obtained, and to indicate their
relative efficiencies in concrete construction.
SAND.
Sources. —Most of the sand used in Manila is dredged from the Pasig
River or dipped up in baskets and loaded into bancas by native divers.
Some is also obtained from the Mariquina River which enters the Pasig
just below the town of Pasig. The Pasig is the outlet of Laguna de
Bay and does not bring coarse sediments from the lake. Accordingly,
such sands and gravels as are found in its bed are received almost entirely
from the Mariquina, which is its principal tributary, and the only large
stream from the Eastern Cordillera which brings erosional products to
the vicinity of Manila. (See fig. 1.)


O/M/W SAND / ] \
Oram“N \ yy \
f MANILA \ ) 1/ ]
T ,,. MIT » y-s^.
V MAN I
\ BAY m "flV C/Tr QUARRY
\ s/wo V/V* ,
I 1 1 \ jf* agAngono
J SANGL£ Y g \ |f
Magiveles ,/ | I >)
stsfMAN quarry fs j; ta city
; I 7
ys© / Banos
COS BANOS \pUARRY
North of Manila, the first large river which flows toward Manila Bay
and contains an important amount of sand, is the Quingua, which flows
from the Eastern Cordillera past Baliuag and Quingua and joins the
delta system of waterways which enters Manila Bay, Near the station of
Quingua, there is a switch of the Manila and Dagupan Railway which
enters the river bed and there a large amount of sand, with which is
mixed some gravel, has been taken out and used on the road as ballast.
This material which will be referred to in this article as Quingua sand,
can be transported to Manila by water, but the distance is great and
the river near Quingua is often too shallow for navigation by launches.
Transportation by rail at the present rates is prohibitive, and the cost
as compared with usual railway rates seems excessive.
Fig. 1. —Index Map of Localities Producing Sand, Gravel and Crushed Stone
South of Manila there are no streams entering the bay which contain
deposits of gravel and sand, but all contribute small amounts to the
beach. At Cavite, sand has been obtained in dredging the anchorage in
front of the coal pockets on Sangley Point and considerable of it has
been used in Manila; the beach also furnishes a similar material. This
sand is referred to in this article under the name of Sangley Point sand.
Near the entrance to Manila Bay there are several places where beach
sands composed largely of comminuted shells may be obtained. They


MATERIALS FOR CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION IN MANILA. 465
have been used in building the fortifications at the entrance to the bay,
but none have been brought to Manila, and it is probable that they
will not be used here since better sands can be obtained more economically.
The sands used in Manila have been of only fair quality and it was
the purpose of the investigation to find, if possible, one of superior
quality. Sand from the Tarlac River at Tarlae, a railroad station situated
halfway between Manila and Dagupan, was at one time recommended as a
standard sand for use in testing cements, inasmuch as it was the best
then known in the Philippines. An examination of the map showed
that the sources of the Tarlac River are in the Western or Zambales
Cordillera and it was accordingly concluded that rivers having their
sources in these mountains and emptying into Manila Bay might carry
the same kind of sand. It was decided that the Orani River was the
most promising to investigate and upon visiting it there was found
an abundance of sand similar to that of the Tarlac and of a slightly
better quality. The river can be entered by launches and at low tide
the sand can be loaded directly into barges. This sand is given the
name of Orani sand in this report.
Nature of the sands. —The Pasig and Mariquina sand is a pebble sand
which has resulted principally from the breaking down and wearing
of andesite and basaltic rocks and gravels. The grains are in an ad-
vanced stage of decomposition and crush easily. The original rocks
contain very little quartz and so there is not a noticeable amount of
quartz in the sand. The few grains which may be seen in a small sample
are probably mostly derived from quartz veins.
The Quingua sand is also a pebble sand, but it is derived from an area
containing a great variety of rocks and many of its grains are hard and
it contains a noticeable amount of quartz.
The Sangley Point sand is derived principally from basaltic rocks
which occur fragmentally in the tuff formation which borders Manila
Bay. The grains are in an advanced stage of decomposition and are
readily crushed. In addition to the basaltic material many minute shells
and fragments of larger ones are present.
The Orani sand is composed largely of clear sharp grains but little
rounded. It is clean and sharp and produces a decided squeak when
grasped in the hand. The clear grains are readily mistaken for quartz
but in reality are plagioclase feldspars which have a similar hardness and
specific gravity. The remaining minerals which it contains are pebbles
and fragments of various igneous rocks. There are a few soft gravels
of light specific gravity found with the sand but they are not more
numerous than similar objectionable elements in the other sands.
Granularmetric analysis. —For finding the percentage of the different
sized grains which constitute the sands, a series of sieves was obtained
and the sizes of their meshes carefully calibrated. The analyses made
by sieving the sands are illustrated graphically in the accompanying


90 i- ■> "
<o /
K kl 30 J.
V5
u: 1/5 *> ?
5 «0 4—
CQ H; / /
kj 50 1 —
V) t
x 5: /
Q w /
% / /
Jo § 30 f~ ' —
s i— -J7--
to — —? — ;
—
>0 O 03 > O r\4 JO
(\l P) > 10 tO °0
MILLIMETERS <
OOOOOO o O
MESHES TO INCH O qd o *o <* <*) <m
SIZE OF OPENINGS IN MILLIMETERS AND NUMBER OF MESHES TO THE INCH
— 1 ■ — 7
90
t> «° ;
$ •* "
70 >
* > / /
V $ 60
<0 0; ,/ /
Si io •
Vi S; i "
Q) uo
Vi / '
S> S 30 r-
S lo / '
S <0 //
Q. 20 4.7
>
10 — -^•—— > i
£ JO
MILLIMETERS
0)00000 o o
MESHES TO INCH O <o <o *o -» O
SIZE OF OPENINGS IN MILLIMETERS AND NUMBER OF MESHES TO THE INCH
diagrams in which the curved lines represent the gradation of the sands
and the broken line is an even grade line for the series of sieves used.
This grade line runs from zero to 100 per cent on the 10 mesh sieve,
which sieve corresponds approximately to the one having the smallest
openings in the series used for stone and gravel. In order to ascertain
the percentage held on any given sieve the amount indicated as passing
the sieve should be subtracted from 100.
Pig. 2. —Granulaemeteic Analysis of Pasig Sand Dipped Up in Baskets.
There is a large amount of fine-grained sand used in Manila on small
jobs. It is dipped up in baskets and loaded into bancas by native divers.
This sand is sometimes called hanca sand. An analysis of some of it is
shown in fig. 2. It will be seen that only 1 per cent is held on the
20-mesh sieve, but 5 per cent is held on the 30-mesh sieve, and the
percentage passing the 100-mesh sieve is 2.6.
Fig. 3. —Geanulaemeteic Analysis of Pasig Sand Obtained by Dredging.


I “'
so -
so—— ——
i§ Jy _— —
70 __ — —/
X 5 60 ~—
<*) k /
kl N SO
y> t / s'
/ s'
Q) ho /
kj <0 / .
k> g 30 /
<o /s'
f ~t "
“tA<l j||
MILLIMETERS
OOOOOQ) O O
MESHES TO INCH <N
SIZE OF OPENINGS IN MILLIMETERS AND NUMBER OF MESHES TO THE INCH
—
90
'n '
K £ so
vB
i r; ”
j, * „
ki [M so
t; Q 40 ■ Z —
kl W / '
Jo 30 -/ <£-
o' <o //
* w
io —-/- : 1 —
/
52SS5S a «
MILLIMETERS
C500QC>Q O
MESHES TO INCH Q tt) *0 * n
SIZE OF OPENINGS IN MILLIMETERS AND NUMBER OF MESHES TO THE INCH
MATERIALS FOR CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION IN MANILA. 467
The analysis of a good grade of Pasig sand is shown in fig. 3. This
sand contains 2.3 per cent of fine gravel; 36 per cent is held on a 20-mesh
sieve; 58 per cent is held on a 30-mesh and 2.6 per cent passes the
100-mesh.
Fig. 4.—Geanulaemetric Analysis of Pasig Sand Obtained by Dredging.
The analysis in fig. 4 shows a sand containing 12 per cent of fine
gravel. This sand runs a little coarser than the one shown in fig. 3.
Twenty-nine per cent was held on a 20-mesh sieve., 51 per cent was
held on a 30-mesh sieve and but 2 per cent passed the 100-mesh.
Fig. 5. —Granularmetric Analysis of Quingua River Sand.
The sample of sand taken from the Quingua Eiver shows 25 per cent
of fine gravel mixed with it; 41.5 per cent was held on a 20-mesh sieve,
55 per cent was held on a 30-mesh sieve, and but 1 per cent passed a
100-mesh. This sand is clean and the most evenly graded of any of the
samples examined.
90339 9


' p- —
s'
s
90 '
K SO ■ —
jt ki
S 70 1
* .
5 60
«3 Q; .— /
Vj £■ SO- —": —
<3 i,o —z -s~
5- /
'O 30 — :
0: co s'
t * ZO
l7>nt~i IN
MILLIMETERS
qooOOO O
MESHES TQ INCH 5 00
S/ZE OF OPENINGS IN MILLIMETERS AND NUMBER OF MESHES TO THE INCH
— ——
"
K. SO —
i Z 70 ~
$ so 7 —
*0 ft: 7/ /
Uj S' so T- — —
«) S X /
K j x'
K Q) VO j -pr* — —
$ / . '
g S - 1-
* - J0 :
to —
•o O <0 •*• 'c «M *2
** <\ **? ®*
MILLIMETER*
OOOOOO O O
MESHES TO INCH o co «o v, s* m rv,
SIZE OF OPENINGS IN MILLIMETERS AND NUMBER OF MESHES TO THE INCH
Fig. 6.- —Geaniilaemetbic Analysis of Sangley Point Sand.
There is a considerable percentage of coarse material in the Sangley
Point sand which consists of decomposed pebbles and shells and shell
fragments. In fig. 6 it, is seen that there is 16 per cent of this coarse
material, 41 per cent held on a 30-mesh sieve, 54 per cent on a 30-mesh,
and 7 per cent passing a 100-mesh sieve. Accordingly the sand contains
an objectionable amount of coarse material, consisting of broken shells
and also considerable dirt.
Pig. 7. —Geanxjlaembteic Analysis of Oeani Sand.
The analysis shown in fig. 7 indicates 13 per cent of fine gravel, 30.5
per cent held on a 30-mesh sieve, 56 per cent held on a 30-mesh and
3 per cent passing a 100-mesh. The Orani sand contains coarse sharp
.grains and very little fine material and practically no shell fragments.


90 :
k. so :
t l(J / s
£ D; 10 _A
* £ / /
$ *>- /
CQ Q; / /
£ 50 —7 Z — —
X S; / s
£ Q 40 — —/- -7- —
% , //
!£ A
u <: 30 —
2 0 —
,0 * :
/
A ' -
MILLIMETERS n 10
CJOOCJOQ) O 5
MESHES TO INCH O Q: <0 ‘o rg
SIZE OF OPENINGS IN MILLIMETERS AND NUMBER OF MESHES TO THE INCH
90 —
k \ 80 1 7"*
I
to 70 -/ 7—^
kj / •-'
i k- / -
v 60 •
>- ki / y
03 tt /s'
£ 50 “
£ $ X -
K Q 40 i -7“
5* 7~
(o 5 30 •■ fr* ■
ko s';
* 2,7 X/ ‘
, 0
x
V) O £ O 03 00
MILLIME TERS
OOQJOOO o
MESHES TO INCH cm
size: of openings in millimeters and number of meshes to the inch
MATERIALS FOR CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION IN MANILA. 469
Fig. 8. —Geanulaemeteic Analysis of Ohani Sand.
Another analysis of Orani sand is given in fig. 8 which shows 4.1 per
cent of fine gravel; 23.4 per cent held on a* 20-mesh sieve, 67.6 per cent
held on a 30-mesh sieve, and 0.5 per cent passing a 100-mesh sieve. It
will he noted that from the 60-mesh sieve to the 20-mesh the line indi-
cating the analysis is nearly straight.
Pig. 9.-—Granulahmetric Analysis of Tarlac Sand.
The analysis of a sample of Tarlac sand is introduced for the sake of
comparison, although the sand is not available for use in Manila. The
percentage of fine gravel is shown to he 1.5; 26 per cent is held on a
20-mesh sieve, 59 per cent is held on a 30-mesh and 1.5 per cent passes
a 100-mesh. This sample had been sieved to take out coarse pebbles.


470 ADAMS.
90 t -S—.
£ k! 80 —' ' ’ ~
$ W / . "
15 ™ —A
j* eo - —
Q3 / /
kj 5 so -/- —
s £ / .'
q 40 -/-- — ;
ki k) /
P J ° ~f
<o , / /
5 20 r ’
,Q. ■ f— *
£ O « « K jo OJ g
MILLIMETERS ■■■•■■
0 0.0000 o o
MESHES TO INCH O oo o *4- o <\
SIZE OF OPENINGS IN MILLIMETERS AND NUMBER OF MESHES TO THE INCH
55
66
91
97
107
100
Pig. 10. —Geanulaemetric Analysis of Beach Sand from Near Corebgidoe.
In fig - . 10 an analysis of a beach sand from near the entrance to
Manila Bay is given. It shows 13 per cent fine gravel size, 20 per cent
held on a 20-mesh sieve, 22 per cent
cent passing the 100-mesh. It is
fragments.
held on a 30-mesh sieve and 3.3 per
composed almost entirely of shell
All of the sands which have been
certain amount of variation. The
analyzed granularmetrically show a
analyses presented above, however,
may be regarded as fairly typical. Pasig sand, as it is used at present,
is not screened according to any uniform specifications.
Efficiency. —Samples of sands from various localities above mentioned
were sieved on a 20-mesh sieve and the portions passing were then sieved
on a 30-mesh. The sands retained on the 30-mesh were used for making
a series of tensile-strength briquettes in which a good quality of cement
was employed in the proportion of one part of cement and three parts
of sand. These briquettes were broken after seven days and their tensile
strengths compared with similar briquettes made with crushed quartz used
as a standard sand. The results of these tests, which, however, should be
regarded as incomplete, are shown in the following table:
Comparative test of sands in tensile-strength
briquettes
Sand screened through 20-mesh and
held on 30-mesh.
Sangley -
Pasig
Tarlae
Orani
Quingua.
Crushed quartz..
Percent of
efficiency
at 7 days.


MATERIALS FOR CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION IN MANILA. 471
The variation of the efficiency in the Sangley, Pasig and Quingua sands,
all of which are pebble sands, is probably largely due to the difference in
the character of the rock fragments which compose them. Andesitic and
basaltic materials are conspicuous in the Pasig sands and basaltic grains
constitute nearly all of the rock material in the Sangley sands, while the
Quingua contains harder materials which do not so readily decompose and
become spongy or porous, but under the action of water are gradually
worn down to smaller sizes by attrition and abrasion. The efficiency of
the Sangley sand, which is the lowest, may be further accounted for by the
presence of many minute shells which do not fill with cement.
The fact that the Quingua sand is more efficient than the Orani and
Tarlac, is probably due to the shape of the grains, which being rounded
decreases the voids. Moreover, the vitreous surfaces of the crystal frag-
ments in the Orani and Tarlac sands may also cause them to wet less
readily than the grains of the Quingua, which have minutely pitted
surfaces and capillary openings.
A comparison of the efficiency of the Pasig and Orani sands was also
made by crushing concrete blocks which were made in a uniform way,
using the same cement and Pasig gravel in each, but different sands.
In order to follow working conditions the sands were both screened
through a 4-mesh sieve. The blocks were stored twenty-five days in
moist air and afterwards exposed to the sun and rain. They were crushed
at the end of three months and gave the following results: Pasig sand,
1:2:5: mixture, average of three breaks; first crack, 912 pounds per
square inch; ultimate, 1,542 pounds per square inch. Orani sand, 1:2:5
mixture, average of three breaks; first crack, 1,568 pounds per square
inch; ultimate, 1,951 pounds per square inch.
Specific gravity, percentage of voids and weights■ per cubic meter. —
Samples of the various sands were screened through a 10-mesh sieve and
their specific gravities, percentage of voids and weights per cubic meter
determined as shown in the following table:
Weight per |
Specific Percentage cubic
gravity, of voids. meter- in |
kilograms. I
Pasig _ ! 2.67 37.5 1,6/1
Quingua | 2. 171 3 &- 2 1 1,757
Sangley \ 2.58 42.0 1,500
Orani 1 2.62 42.9 | 1,500
Corregidor - | 2.77 41.7 1,616
Photographs of these samples are shown in Plates I and 11.


co /
ao __4_. -yn
u ! ]/ /
$ w —-) ——-: / 7* • :
* / /
X 5 60 -/- 7
<Q £ / /
k, so |- -7 7— : *
/ /
Q *0 /-
%* / /
t% -—/-r
£ 3 /
5 20 —/—r :
i/ffrt \ --—]-
>0<OV'ONhO V*. V.
CENTIMETERS •*> K . K . 00 £
N N, (M f*l 'O
INCHES J0.15.20 .30 45 67 1.00 1.50 2.25
DIAMETER OF PARTICLES IN CENTIMETERS AND INCHES
GRAVELS.
Source of materials. —The only gravel readily available for use in
Manila is that which is dredged from the Mariquina River. The gravel
in the Pasig has already been largely dredged out in maintaining the
channel of the river, and although it is partially renewed during the
flood season when the Mariquina gravel is brought in, it does not furnish
a satisfactory dredging ground.
The Quingua gravel at Quingua is too fine. Further up the river
near Baliuag, the same river contains a good quality of gravel but it is not
accessible.
Nature of the gravel. —The Mariquina gravel is derived principally
from basaltic and andesitic rocks, as has already been explained in dis-
cussing the sands of the stream. Many of the pebbles are partially
decomposed and show altered spots and “pin holes” when broken. The
basaltic gravels frequently have a dense texture and are friable, being
in many respects similar to the Talim basalt which is used in macad-
amizing the streets of Manila, and which has proved rather unsatisfactory
on account of its friability.
Granularmetric analysis. —By sieving samples of the gravel on a series
of stone and gravel sieves with round openings, the percentage of the
different sizes in several samples has been determined. These analyses
are shown graphically by the plotted curves in the following figures and
they may be compared with the even grade line which is shown by the
broken line drawn from zero to 100 per cent on the sieve through which
the gravel should all pass according to the specifications.
Fig. 11. —Granularmetric Analysis of Mariquina Gravel to Pass a i.5-inch Opening


—rn 1 r 7
<0 / I / I
K 80 7—1 I X
' / L
$ <0 70 1
/ / '
5 00 ’
«a 0; / / i ■
j*j £ 50 7 —/ 1
k, ’ / i
5 Q w- / 7~ H
/. / !
O § 30 L — y- ° —
f S5 / /
CO / -
x 20 —7 — y- —— *
K 1 / \
CENTIMETERS £ " w
INCHES t0.ts.30 JO .45 .07 .75 1-00 I SO
DIAMETER 0E PARTICLES IN CENTIMETERS AND INCHES
k. 80 * '
$ §
5; 10 70 y/
K y'/
fc $ 60 77
113 f
k £* so : —
V3 5; '
C> io- y
k <o / '
G § jo -/-—a ■
<t to / /
<o //
CL 20
'°—yf
l— -4 —
k is » 4 5 ? 7 R
CENTIMETERS •» "> ‘o JJ £ ")
INCHES .10.15.20 -30 *S .67 1.00 '-50
DIAMETER OF PARTICLES IN CENTIMETERS AND INCHES
MATERIALS FOR CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION IN MANILA. 473
The analysis in fig. 11 shows 2.2 per cent of oversize and 8.7 which
passes the smallest sieve. The percentage of voids is 31.2, and with
material under 0.1 inch screened out, 33.5
Fig. 12.—Granularmetric Analysis of Mariqiiina Gravel to Pass a o.ys-inch opening.
The analysis shown by fig. 12 indicates 27 per cent of oversize gravel
and 6 per cent passing the smallest sieve. Voids 29.1, with material
under 0.1 inch screened out, 32.9 per cent.
Pig. 13. —Granularmbtric Analysis of Maeiquina Gravel to Pass a i.5-inch Opening.
The analysis in fig. 13 shows 12 per cent of oversize gravel and 2 per
cent passing the smallest sieve. Voids, 31.2 per cent.


30 — :
<0
k. £ so — / ; —
$ Sy / /
ki V> 70 X ; ‘ •
* X /
x < «o- ; X x
oa £ / x
k SO /-—
X / /
Qi /to -/ S ■ ■
5 y> //
JO k 30 — 7 i- ;
y
<o X
* ~2 —
'°lWii r i t
*0 oo " <0 * O * "■ «N
CENTIMETERS *o £
INCHES .10.15.20 .30 .45 .67 TOO 750 2.25
DIAMETER OF PARTICLES IN CENTIMETERS AND INCHES
Pig. 14. —Geanulaembtric Analysis op Mariquina Gravel to Pass a i.5-inch Opening
The analysis in fig. 14 shows 6 per cent of oversize and 3 per cent
passing the smallest sieve. Voids, 31.5 per cent.
The Maraquina gravel varies greatly in character since it is not care-
fully screened as the analyses above will show.
Efficiency. —There is no standard gravel with which gravels may be
compared after the manner that sands are compared with standard sands.
It might be well to select a superior gravel to use as a standard in testing
the efficiency of gravels in concrete. Cubes could be made with a good
cement, a given sand or standard sand, and the standard gravel, and
these could be used for comparing the crushing strength of cubes of
concrete in which the gravel to be tested is combined with the same
cements and sand in the same proportions. This would be especially
helpful when a gravel is found to break under a pressure which is less
than that required to crush the mortar of the concrete. In most gravels
the smaller sizes have a lower crushing limit since they are in a more
advanced stage of decomposition. It would, therefore, seem desirable
that a standard gravel should be of small size. At Calapan, in Mindoro,
a gravel Avas seen Avhich had been obtained from a beach Avest of the
port. It consists very largely of white quartz pebbles which will pass a
1.14-ceUtimeter circular opening and be retained on a sieve with 0.51-
centimeter circular openings. There are at present with the quartz peb-
bles some rounded fragments of shells and corals, and a feAv schist pebbles,
but these can easily be picked out because of their texture and color. It
is proposed to see Avhat results can be obtained by using this material as
a standard gravel and if it is satisfactory to recommend it for use. It is
believed that quartz pebbles will be superior to crushed stone for the pur-
pose of comparative tests of gravels because of the similarity of the


MATERIALS FOR CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION IN MANILA. 475
shapes of and the absence of partially developed fractures which are
found in the small sizes of crushed stone.
Thus far there has been accumulated only a small amount of data
concerning the efficiency of Pasig gravel. In crushing concrete cubes,
Mr. Reibling found that in several cases the gravel was weaker than
the mortar. In one cube 40 per cent of the gravel broke.
CRUSHED STONE.
Sources. —The only large commercial quarry near Manila is situated at
Sisiman, near Mariveles, at the entrance to Manila Bay. This point is
so distant that considerable expense is required for transportation, never-
theless a large amount of the stone has been used in Manila for concrete
construction. There are other quarry sites near Sisiman, some of which
show a better stone and there are places which are better protected from
storms.
Hear Los Banos on Laguna de Bay a quarry was formerly operated for
road material. To obtain stone from this situation a long tow across
Laguna de Bay is necessary, and in addition land transportation to the
border of the lake is required.
The city has for some time operated a quarry on Talim Island, but
present indications are that the plant will be moved to a better site.
Under the Spanish regime a quarry was opened in the hills to the
southeast of Angono, and a road bed was constructed to the border of the
lake and a stone pier built out into the water to enable the dumping
of stone from tram cars into scows. This quarry has not been operated
recently. To the north of Angono the writer has found a superior grade
of rock which the city is contemplating using for macadamizing Manila
streets, and it is probable that a quarry will soon be opened there. Land
transportation will be required for bringing the rock to the lake shore.
It appears that there are no good quarry sites of hard rock nearer
Manila than the vicinity of Angono. Crushed rock obtained at this place
can be brought in small barges which can enter the esteros in Manila and
permit of the landing of the material at many places; this is an advantage
since it saves land transportation in Manila. Rock from the Sisiman
quarry, or others which might be opened near it, could best be transported
on large scows and these, while they could land conveniently oh the water
front, could not ascend the Pasig River beyond the bridge of Spain nor
enter the esteros.
Nature of the stone. —The Sisiman stone is a gray andesite which in
the quarry shows columnar structure. This structure favors the quarry-
ing of large stone. Hear by the andesite has a somewhat better texture
and is a little harder, and at a few points there is a dark andesitic rock
which is superior to the gray andesite, but it is doubtful whether it can


k ao M ■ 7^7^“
S •« "
I," ”“■-“
x 5 ff0
<Q t X
kl so 1— 1 /
K Q «o H ''— : ~
5-
o J J 0 4/- —-T
<t !o /
<o . ;
5 20 — :
'fejfi l~~h r j —[—
CEN TIME TENS '-. $ £ * ‘ S
INCHES 10.13.20 30 .4 S .67 1.00 /.JO 225
DIAMETER OR PARTICLES IN CENTIMETERS AND INCHES
be obtained economically. The rock at Los Banos is andesitic with a
crystalline structure and is of good quality.
The Talim quarry supplies a basaltic rock which is dense and shows
practically no crystalline structure to the unaided eye. It is rather friable
and breaks with a splintery fracture. Crushed stone from the quarry
usually contains a considerable admixture of softer material and dirt,
especially when operations are carried on during the rainy season. The
old Spanish quarries near Angono show a dark green brecciated gabbroic
rock. A clean crushed stone can be obtained from it, and, although the
rock is brecciated and accordingly uneven in texture, it is believed that
it is suitable for concrete work, but not so desirable for road material.
When the city quarry is moved to the new location north of Angono, it
will supply a clean, fine grained, crushed stone of very even texture.
This is the best rock which can be obtained for use in Manila.
Granular metric analysis. —Crushed stone as it comes from the crusher
is usually very uniformly graded. In this respect it differs materially
from gravels. Unless it contains a considerable amount oi fines, it can
be used just as it comes from the crusher. Usually the fines can be
washed out by pouring water over the stone when it is measured up in
baskets for obtaining the proper proportions in mixing concrete.
Pig. 15. —Granulaemetric Analysis of Sisiman Crushed Stone Containing Fines
In fig. 15 the granularmetric analysis of Sisiman rock is shown just
as it was delivered from the crusher. Percentage of voids, 37.4; ITJ per
cent passed the smallest sieve and 98 per cent passed the 24-inch sieve.
Between these two points as plotted the analysis runs in a nearly straight
line. In fig. 16 the granularmetric analysis of the same sample of stone
which was shown in fig. 15 is replotted excluding the fines which passed


—m —— 7
30 — —
K, S' SO— ——
S 7 °-
% X^
V 5 «»-
03 £ />
kj S' SO ‘ X S
3 £
S q co
< /O
ki />
o < JO ,4.
5 g T/r
*■ 5 ’° U 7
,o : —
rz „ i i , r ...j z i. -
CENTIMETERS o *o O °o £.
INCHES .10.15.20 .30 CS .67 LOO LSO 2 2S
DIAMETER OF PARTICLES IN CENTIMETERS AND INCHES
MATERIALS FOR CONCRETE CONSTRUCTION IN MANILA. 477
the smallest sieve. In this diagram the analysis follows very closely the
even grade line. The percentage of voids in a sample of washed Sisiman
rock was found to be 43.4.
Fig. 16. —Geanularmbtric Analysis of Sisiman Crushed Stone, Pines Excluded.
Efficiency. —No tests have been made to show the strength which may
be obtained in concrete using the Sisiman stone. It appears to he very
satisfactory when used as crusher run. It may, however, prove to show
a higher percentage of efficiency when selected sizes are used. The fines
from the rock if replotted as sand, show 23 per cent passing a 100-mesh
sieve. This is really a rock flour, and as has already been suggested above,
should be excluded from concrete work by washing the stone.
The crushing strength of Sisiman stone was determined by dressing a
block to true edges and crushing it in a compression strength machine.
It broke under a pressure of 1,115 tons to the square foot (1088. kilo-
grams per square centimeter).
At the writer’s suggestion, the United States Army engineers opened
a quarry on Corregidor. The stone is a white dacite, very much sheared
and jointed so that it requires but little breaking up for feeding to a
crusher. A block of this stone dressed to true edges crushed under a
pressure of 1,009 tons to the square foot (985. kilograms per square
centimeter).
A stone from the site of the new city quarry near Angono crushed
under a pressure of 1,584. tons to the square foot (1547. kilograms per
square centimeter).
It is proposed to make further tests of the crushed stone available for
use in Manila and include in this work all the quarries which have been
mentioned above.


AGGREGATES.
Pasig sand and Mariquina gravel. —ln most of the concrete work in
Manila, Pasig sand and Mariquina gravel are used. In the tests recorded
above the sand in tensile strength briquettes showed in a seven-day test
but 65 per cent efficiency when compared with crushed quartz, and it
lias been demonstrated by crushing concrete blocks that a large percentage
of the gravel breaks under a lower compressive force than the mortar
will sustain. Concrete blocks of Pasig sand and Mariquina gravel in
the proportions 1:2: 4-1: 2 : 5-1 : 2: 6 showed but little difference in
compression tests. This is explained by the fact that the gravel is weak
and that the concrete crushed below the ultimate strength of the mortar.
Bangley sand and Sisiman crushed stone. —This combination has been
used extensively, as, for example, in the construction of the sewers. The
stone is of good quality since a block of it crushed under a pressure of
1,115 tons per square foot. The Sangley Point sand has at seven days
an efficiency of but 55 per cent. The crushing strength of concrete
made with this aggregate has not been determined, but it is probably
low, since the efficiency of the sand is low and the ultimate strength of
the mortar will not approach that of the stone.
Bangley sand and Mariquina gravel.— This is the poorest aggregate
which is used in Manila, and yet Mariquina gravel has been substituted
for Sisiman stone in some cases where Sangley sand was used. The
crushing strength of concrete made from these materials is yet to be
determined.
Pasig sand and Sisiman stone. —This aggregate has not been much
employed. It should prove superior to those above mentioned but
concrete made from it will probably fall far beloAV the limit of the stone,
since the sand has an efficiency of only 66 per cent in seven-day tensile-
strength tests.
Orani sand and Pasig gravel.- —This aggregate has been used in the
base of concrete paving blocks where but little strength is required.
Por constructions requiring great strength the combination is not desir-
able, since the gravel is not efficient. The mortar used in the surface
of the paving blocks was found to be superior in quality to those of
blocks made with Pasig sand.
Orani sand and crushed stone. —Orani sand and Sisiman stone have
been used in reconstructing the shaft of the Magallanes Monument. This
aggregate should develop greater strength than any combination above
mentioned. Other crushed stone available for use in Manila may be
substituted for Sisiman stone and some of it may even prove better,
as for exaple, the Angono rock. The Orani sand showed 97 per cent
efficiency in seven-day tensile-strength tests, and the strength of good
crushed stone is higher than mortar made with this sand.


CONCLUSION.
The field work necessary to make known the sources and nature of
the sand, gravel and crushed stone available for use in Manila has
been completed. An extensive deposit of a superior sand has been
discovered in the Orani River and some of this sand is now being
used. A new quarry site has been selected for the city near Angono,
the stone from which is considerably better than what is now being
used from the Talim quarries and is the best, obtainable for macad-
amizing the streets of Manila and is in every way suited for concrete work.
The testing of the materials, while incomplete, is sufficient to show
their relative efficiencies and to check the conclusions arrived at from the
geologic examinations. Further tests extending over longer periods of
time and embracing all the conditions which will be met with in practice
will be made in the testing laboratory of the Bureau of Science as soon
as the facilities will permit.
The economic problems of the cost of quarrying, dredging and tran-
sporting, and the more vital one of obtaining the best results in the use
of the materials is beyond the scope of this paper, but some data have
been supplied to assist in their solution.
For the tests, of materials which are reported in this article the writer
is indebted to Mr. W. C. Eeibling, in charge of the cement-testing labora-
tory of this Bureau, and to F. D. Reyes, assistant in the cement laboratory.


j I
IK
e
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
TEXT FIGURES.
Fig. 1. Index map of localities producing sand, gravel and crushed stone.
2. Granularmetric analysis of Pasig “banca” sand.
3. Granularmetric analysis of Pasig “dredge” sand.
4. Granularmetric analysis of Pasig “dredge” sand.
5. Granularmetric analysis of Quingua sand.
6. Granularmetric analysis of Sangley Point sand.
7. Granularmetric analysis of Orani sand.
8. Granularmetric analysis of Orani sand.
i 9. Granularmetric analysis of Tarlac sand.
10. Granularmetric analysis of Corregidor sand.
> 11. Granularmetric analysis of Mariquina gravel to pass 1.5-inch opening.
12. Granularmetric analysis of Mariquina gravel to pass a 0.75-inch opening.
1 13. Granularmetric analysis of Mariquina gravel to pass a 1.5-inch opening.,
14. Granularmetric analysis of Mariquina gravel to pass a 1.5-inch opening.
! . • 15. Granularmetric analysis of Sisiman crushed stone, containing fines.
16. Granularmetric analysis of Sisiman crushed stone, fines excluded.
PLATES.
Plate I. Fig. 1. Pasig sand. Fig. 2. Sangley sand. Fig. 3. Orani sand.
11. Fig. 1. Quingua sand. Fig. 2. Corregidor sand. Fig. 3. Tarlac sand.
481
I #
i &
I y


Fig. 1. PASIG SAND.
Fig. 2. SANGLEY SAND.
Adams : Sand, Gravel, and Crushed Stone.]
[Phil. Journ. Scl, Vol. IV, No. 5.
Fig. 3. ORANI SAND.
PLATE I.


Fig. 1. QUINGUA SAND.
Fig. 2. CORREGIDOR SAND.
Adams : Sand, Gravel and Crushed Stone.]
[Phil. Journ. Sci., Vol. IV, No. 5.
Fig. 3. TARLAC SAND.
P 1-AT E 11.


A GEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE FROM INFANTA,
TAYABAS, TO TANAY, RIZAL.
H. M. Ickis. 1
(From the Division of Mines, Bureau of Science, Manila , P. I.)
During the hot season of 1907, the writer made a reconnaissance in
the Camarines and examined the coal beds on the Islands of Polillo.
Returning to Manila from Polillo, he arrived in May at Infanta on the
Pacific coast of Luzon. The nearest well-known route of travel overland
from this coast to Manila is from Mauban, a port 60 kilometers south
of Infanta, by the way of Lucban and Ma jay jay to Pagsanjan on Laguna
de Bay; at Pagsanjan a boat may be taken to Manila. There is, however,
an unfrequented trail from Infanta to Sinaloan on the lake, and Lieut.
George W. Wray, commanding the Thirty-second Company Philippine
Scouts, informed me that the Negritos who inhabit the mountain country
near Infanta sometimes travel up the Agos River and thence across a
low range of hills to Tanay on Laguna de Bay. It was decided to
attempt to travel by the latter route, and, with the aid of Lieut. Wray
and Dr. B. B. Warriner, P. S., the services of the Negrito presidents,
David, the tentente of one of the barrios, two Negrito guides, four expert
Negrito banqueros, and one Tagalog cargador were secured.
Two light hancas were procured which were used to transport a small
amount of baggage and food, and to ferry the party across the river
when it was necessary to cross where the water was too deep for the men
to wade. Only expert banqueros can manage a banca in this river; the
two men stand up in the unsteady craft poling it against the current
and do not attempt to use paddles. Coming downstream, however, the
Negritos shoot the rapids like Indians, steering dexterously with a
paddle to avoid the many dangerous rocks.
The hancas were left hidden a short distance above the junction of
the Canaan with the Agos, since it was slow work moving them up the
numerous rapids and as it was thought that the river above could be
waded whenever it might be necessary to cross.
The equipment carried by the party was very light: no tents were
taken and the soldiers and cargadores carried no blankets or extra cloth-
ing; the mess outfit consisted of an iron pot to be used in cooking rice
t ,' »-
1 Posthumous publication.
90339——10


and a skillet for frying bacon. At night the men constructed a shelter
with palm leaves; the leaves of the anahao palm also served for buckets,
cups and plates. The food consisted of rice, canned corned beef, a little
bacon, and fish caught in the river.
A rapid survey of the route was made with a pocket compass and an
aneroid barometer, the distances being paced or estimated. Only two
and one-half days were occupied in making the trip, so that the survey
and the geologic notes were taken necessarily very hastily and there was
little time available for collecting specimens. However, as the bed of
the Agos affords an excellent cross-sectional view of the rock formations
over a little-known portion of Luzon, and since published maps of the
interior were found to be incorrect, it is thought that these notes may be
of both geologic and geographic interest. (See Plate I.) Petrographic
sections of many of the rocks collected have been made since in this
Bureau and have been examined microscopically by Warren D. Smith,
chief of this division.
*> s
The last habitation observed on the banks of the Agos Kiver was
estimated to be about 5 miles from its mouth, and the only people en-
countered until we were within a few miles of Tanay were some Negrito
fishermen and one family of Filipinos fishing along the headwaters of
Alasasin Creek. The Negritos fished in the large stream with spear and
bow and arrow, while the Filipinos killed their fish by throwing into
the small creeks a poison obtained from certain trees. Fish of excellent
quality abound in the waters of the Agos, some that were speared by
the guides being 20 inches in length. One crocodile, some 5 feet in
length, was observed and crocodile trails were seen frequently in the sand.
A short distance above the Macadata River Corporal Bromio shot a
large eagle which was identified subsequently by Mr. E. C. McGregor,
of this Bureau, as the rare Philippine eagle Pithecophaga jefferyi, which
has heretofore been suspected but not positively known to inhabit Luzon.
Published maps of this area show the Agos River as little more than
a creek a few miles in length, while most of them indicate a much larger
stream called the Tiauan or sometimes the Rio Grande de Lampon,
draining the interior between Infanta and Montalon. As will be seen
by a reference to the route map, the Agos was found to be one of the
largest rivers on the east coast of Luzon, having an extensive watershed
in the Eastern Cordillera. The Tiauan, therefore, does not extend as far
north as the town of Infanta.
In the office of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey in Manila,
there is a tracing of a map Avhich represents the Agos River as an im-
portant stream, but this map is far from correct. The tracing is from
an unpublished map in Madrid, presumably by d’ Almonte, and was ob-
tained by Mr. Putnam, formerly in charge of the Manila office of the
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. Sheet No. 32 of the Progres-


GEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE —INFANTA TO TANAY. 485
give Military Map of the Philippines, issued from the office of the chief
engineer officer, Philippines Division, United States Army, also ac-
curately represents the position and size of the Agos but does not indicate
the Canaan branch nor show the Alasasin correctly.
My trip was made late in the dry season, but even at that time the
Agos River below the entrance of the Canaan was found to be about
100 meters wide and from one-half to 1 meter deep at the rapids. The
Canaan enters the Agos from the north at a point approximately 12-
kilometers in a direct line from the mouth of the Agos. Although the
southern branch retains the name Agos above this point, the Canaan is
the larger stream and is entirely unexplored. This conjunction point is
called Pagsanjan by the Negritos, and the Agos River above this point
is sometimes called the Calua, but usually simply the Agos.
The main river was left at a point about half-way between Infanta
and Tanay and a tributary called the Alasasin followed to within 7 or 8
miles of the latter place. The Macadata, flowing in from the north, is
the only tributary of any considerable size between the Canaan and the
Alasasin.
Prom a low alluvial coastal plain at Infanta, not more than 3 miles
broad, a range of heavily wooded mountains rises rapidly to a height
of from 1,000 to 1,300 meters. This coast range is composed of andesitic
rock ranging from pure augite andesite to andesite porphyry, diorite
porphyry, and andesite tuff. The rock shows considerable variation in
structure but is apparently all andesitic as far west as the Macadata River,
In the river bed a large variety of rocks is exhibited, including limestone
and hard siliceous shale as well as andesite and diorite bowlders. Some
of the andesite bowlders contain a large amount of secondary white
chalcedonic silica. The principal jointing planes in this igneous mass
appear to strike about N. 75° E. and dip 75° to the southeast. There
are also joints that strike nearly at right angles to these and dip steeply
to the northeast.
A representative specimen from the eastern part of the coast range
consists of firm, tough, dark colored rock which, when unaltered, re-
sembles in outward appearance a basalt more than an andesite, the
phenocrysts not being prominent; but when slightly weathered, the
plagioclase phenocrysts are conspicuous. Under the microscope it is
readily determined to be an augite andesite.
A few hundred yards below the Macadata River a fine-grained, dark
gray rock is present, the nature of which could not be determined mega-
scopically. Under the microscope the specimen is seen to be badly altered
as shown by magnetite in the midst of patches of red oxide of iron
and the uralitized pyroxene. The feldspars are all quite obscure and
clouded, belonging probably to an andesite porphyry. One specimen
of this rock contains white and green chalcedony.


At the mouth of the Macadata River a dark rock was observed, with a
slight greenish tinge containing light colored phenocrysts and amygdnles
of white stilbite. Under the microscope the ground mass is seen to be
typically andesitic but the feldspar phenocrysts can not be identified.
Near the mouth of the Gain a a tough, hard, dark colored rock was
found in places, which has the appearance of a basalt and shows many
red spots, probably oxidized iron of the ferromagnesium minerals. A
few crystals of striated feldspar are visible in this rock. By microscopic
examination it was determined to be of a tuff consisting of consolidated
fragments of andesite as well as of some large individual crystals of
hornblende. Feldspars in some of the rock fragments show almost com-
plete alteration.
The river valley below the Macadata is 200 to 600 meters wide. On
both sides, the hills are marked by high sharp ridges and deep narrow
gullies, and are covered with a heavy forest growth. There are some
sharp bends, but there would be no unusual difficulties to overcome in
constructing either a wagon road or railway along the river banks.
Sedimentaries, consisting of limestone and shale in various stages of
metamorphism, appear a short distance above the Macadata and continue
as far as the ridge north of Tanay which forms part of the main divide
of Luzon. A hot spring bubbles up in the river near the contact between
the igneous and sedimentaries above the Macadata, from which the
locality has received the name Mainit (hot spring). The first sedi-
mentaries are shale beds striking IST. 30° W. and having a dip of 80° W.;
these are followed by vertical beds striking NT. 10° E. The guides here
left the river, taking the party over a heavily wooded ridge and down to
the river again where the rock is bedded limestone having a strike of
IST. 10° W. and a dip of 60° toward the east; a kilometer up the stream
the dip of the beds is reversed to 45° to the west, the strike remaining
the same. This rock was determined microscopically by Doctor Smith
to be foraminiferal limestone containing Orbitoides, Lepidocyclina in-
sulae-natalis, Jones and Chapman. The rock is from light gray to cream
color, hard and compact. Fossils are most numerous in the gray rock
but are not distinguished in either without careful examination. A
pebble picked up near the mouth of the Agos was found to be forami-
niferal limestone containing Cycloclypeus, a common miocene fossil.
The river bed is narrow and the walls precipitous through this lime-
stone belt which is about half a mile in width. To the westward, shale
beds and graywacke appear again, and an open and comparatively level
country, the source of the Agos River, is seen to the northwest. One
sample collected and classed as a graywacke is seen under the microscope
to be composed of grains of silicates, some of which are rounded, others
not, but all are clastic and consist mostly of fragments of plagioclase
feldspar; megascopic examination showed a greenish gray rock some-
what gritty to the touch. Some fractures have a greasy luster.


c
>
%
? \
\
\
GEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE —INFANTA TO TANAY. 487
Following the Alasasin branch to the southwest a ’ _
narrow limestone belt is first encountered, and this is fol- £ < I
lowed by very hard shale or schist beds that strike north- <5 J
west and dip 30° to the southwest. Hard shales and
graywacke continue for some two miles where another
limestone bed, having a strike of IST. 30° W. and a dip of vxnvjni
80° to the northeast, crossed. Under the microscope this U
limestone was found to contain many imperfect fragments
of foraminifera, among which were recognized species of y
Textularia, Pulvinulina and Globigerina.
At Sungay Creek the trail leaves the valley, ascending
a ridge the crest of which has an elevation of ap- K
proximately 500 meters. As one ascends from the valley, L
the sedimentary rocks gradually disappear. The exten- w h 8
a) fc
sion of this ridge forms Jalajala Peninsula and the rock *4 <
O)
which is found here very much resembles that found near « L o
Jalajala. It is a light colored igneous rock, composed < K <
largely of plagioclase and hornblende and classed as an R< *
andesite, but no well-preserved specimens were obtained m 5
for microscopic determination. This ridge is covered |
with an excellent forest growth as far as the sitio of „ I S
to o .£5 CO
Balabasa. Between Balabasa and Laguna de Bay the |ir€| “
country is open and overgrown with cogon grass in which J 1 o
great numbers of wild deer and hogs exist. ~ ® M o
X O O
At the Creek of Elog-na-batjala a tough, hard rock ”j || $
which looks like a typical basalt was observed; micro- " o || $
scopically it is seen to be closely related to the andesite. I
On the crest of the ridge west of Comall Creek a coarse- J ™ ill o
grained olivine basalt was observed, which was distin- §/V>
guished by large phenocrysts of almost colorless plagio-
guished by large phenocrysts of almost colorless plagio- 6
clase. These were the only good rock exposures to be * o r<
seen on the Laguna de Bay slope, but there is little doubt -
that this entire section consists of andesitic and basaltic y
igneous rocks and volcanic tuff. A general geologic sec- >j
tion of the route is shown in fig. 1. o >Z
C 05 <
A few lumps of coal which had been collected and left J g |
by Lieutenant Wray a few days before were observed at
the Macadata Liver. Lieutenant Wray, acting under
orders from department headquarters, examined some coal avnvj. y
beds that were known to occur near the headwaters of the
Macadata. They were found to be of doubtful economic J>,
value, although very little prospecting work was at- o
tempted.
No coal outcrops, quartz ledges, or bowlders of mineralized quartz were
observed on this journejA


:.0, _ I
L:. .


r
*
,«j|u
mm
&
■ -fW
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Plate I. Route map, Infanta to Tanay.
Fig. 1. (In text.) General geologic section, Infanta to Tanay.


■
If - _ «•
m , $
’ 1? .j&ffy
*
Ickis: Geological Reconnaissance, Infanta to Tanay.]
[Phil. Journ. Scl,
VOL. IV, No. 5.
i
_\, /O
\ o
a"«?INFANTA\
%n
Cpi n 0
*j 'v x
r* J§> \ 'J s \
c
-iSv'CN. '‘X, JL V °
x *. Tvx
e o XXXu. S r ?ftivXf V°'o?X
-° jX\ , Va.s°c. i
<* >X$S.. X XX ■
X,. ».\, ■ 5 \
r n 6e
o » °c*
-J« tjala S^°V 0 I scale
■' \ * i \V X \ 0 . 2 3 * S 6 -7 6 S
o
>
0 KM
t-\ 6 **'t Jo N
( j /***/< ■
’- N VvNAY° /c X A/Q !?e
\
Bearings taken with Brunton pocket
transit
r
\
Distances paced and estimated
LAGUNA DE BAY \
\ 1 [
\
Altitudes by aneroid barometer in
By Harry M -Ickis Ma_y 9-12-1907
feet
ROUTE MAP OF GEOLOGIC RECONNAISSANCE, INFANTA TO TANAY.
PLATE 1.


i
\
Order No. 405.
STUDIES IN MORO HISTORY, LAW, AND RELIGION.
Najeeb M. Saleeby,
107 pages. 16 illustrations. 5 diagrams.
A Treatise on the history and customs of the Moro People.
Priee $0.25, United States currency.
Order No. 408.
A VOCABULARY OF THE IGOROT LANGUAGE AS SPOKEN BY THE
BONTOC IGOROTS.
By the Eev. Walter Clayton Clapp.
Igorot-English and English-Igorot.
Price $0.75, United States currency.
Order No. 103.
A MANUAL OF PHILIPPINE BIRDS.
Eichard C. McGregor.
Part 1.—412 pages. ]
, TT , T \ >Tn two volumes.
Part II. — (In press.) j
Descriptions of all known species of Philippine birds, together with
complete keys to species and genera.
Price (for the two volumes) $4, United States currency.
Any of the above-announced publications may be ordered from the Business
Manager, Philippine Journal of Science, Manila, P. 1., or from any of the agents
listed on the cover of this Journal. Please give order number.
""V >


CONTENTS.
ADAMS, GEORGE I. Geological Reconnaissance of the Island of Leyte. 339
BEAN, ROBERT BENNETT. 111. Filipino Types: Racial Anatomy
in Taytay. (A.) The Men 359
BEAN, ROBERT BENNETT. A Cephalograph: The Description of an
Instrument for Reproducing the Outlines of the Head , and Face 447
BROOKS, BENJAMIN T. The Action of Organic Peroxides on the
Photographic Plate 451
ADAMS, GEORGE I. Tests of Philippine Road Materials 455
ADAMS, GEORGE I. Sand, Gravel and Crushed Stone Available for '
Concrete Construction in Manila 463
ICKIS, H. M. A Geological Reconnaissance from Infanta, Tayabas,
to Tanay, Rizal 1 483
The “Philippine Journal of Science” is issued as follows:
Section A. General Science, $2, United States currency, per year.
Section B. Medical Sciences, $3, United States currency, per year.
Section C. Botany, $2, United States currency, per year.
The entire “Journal” $5, United States currency, per year.
Single numbers, 50 cents, United States currency. 1
Authors receive 100 copies of their papers free.
FOREIGN AGENTS.
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY, 64-66 Fifth Avenue, New York.
WM. WESLEY & SON, 28 Essex Street, Strand, London, W. C.
MARTINUS NTJHOFF, Nobelstraat 18, ’s Gravenhage, Holland,
MAYER & MULLER, Prinz Louis Ferdinandstrasse 2, Berlin, N. W.
KELLY & WALSH, LIMITED, 32 Raffles Place, Singapore, S. S. I
A. M. & J. FERGUSON, 19 Baillie Street, Colombo, Ceylon. 1
(Entered at the post- office at Manila, P. 1., as second-class matter.)
A limited number of unbound copies of previous volumes are
available which may be secured from the Business Manager, I
Philippine Journal of Science, Manila, P. 1., at the following
rates: Volume I, 1906 (not divided into sections), $5, United
States currency; Supplement to Volume I, $2.50, United States
currency; Volume I (without supplement), $3, United States
currency; all later volumes at current subscription prices.
; i


