

Geological Investigations
Sambor Dam Site,. Combodia
AUSTRAL
snoww MOUNnMMx m¥bko-W;SWic mmamr*
sdf
MEKONG RIVER PROJECT, SOUTH EAST ASIA
Volume- 1
tv r* r * --■- '■ ■% ?w-,w.?a v
~ r »- w - ■+'
GEOLOdCftL KERtlll'






GEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
SAMBOR DAM SITE, CAMBODIA
AUSTRALIA
SNOWY MOUNTAINS HYDRO-ELECTRIC AUTHORITY
COLOMBO PLAN
MEKONG RIVER PROJECT, SOUTH EAST ASIA
VOLUME 1
1960-1962
GEOLOGICAL REPORT
to be read in conjunction with
Volume 2 Drill Hole Logs
Volume 3 Test Pit Logs
Volume 4 Drawings
By
D.H. STAPLEDON, C.C. WOOD, and B.K. McMAHON
Engineering Geologists
and
J. HARRISON
Project Engineer
Cooma, September 1962




PREFACE
At the Fifteenth Session of the Economic Commission for Asia and the
Far East (ECAFE), Australia made an offer of aid to the Mekong River project.
Australia did not nominate the manner in which this aid might be given, but
left its use to subsequent negotiations with the Committee for Co-ordination
of Investigations of the Lower Mekong Basin.
The Committee proposed that Australia might consider carrying out the
geological investigations and borings for the Pa Mong and Sambor dam sites.
These sites were included in the first priority group of projects recommended
for early geological study in the Wheeler Report (l) . This proposal was
agreed to by Australia, and announced at the Sixth Session of the Committee,
15 to 19 October, 1959, as follows:
" The Committee welcomed the proposal of the representative
of Australia to consider extending assistance in connection with
the geological investigations and borings at prospective main
stream dam sites, including Pa Mong and Sambor; and particular y
the proposal of the Government of Australia to send early in the
coming dry season a short term mission including an engineer an
a geologist from the Snowy Mountains Authority in Australia, to
make a preliminary investigation with the object of drawing up a
detailed plan of operations for consideration by the Committee.
The Committee hoped that the proposed plan would include not y
technical aid and guidance in geological investigations and borings,
but also equipment, and training activities both within the region
and in Australia."( 2)
In accordance with this arrangement, Mr. I.P. Sargeant and Mr. D.G. Moye
of the Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority, Australia, visited the
region from 7 January to 3 February, 1960.
The terms of reference of this short-term mission were, (a) to examine
the nature, extent and cost of the work involved in the geological investiga-
tions, including borings, at prospective main stream dam sites at Pa Mong and
Sambor, with the object of confirming that it would be appropriate for the


Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority to undertake the work on behalf of
Australia, and (b) to draw up a detailed plan of operations for consideration
by the Committee.
The on their mission by Sargeant and Moye became the basis of
the offer of assistance by Australia to the Committee.
The Agreement between the Australian Government and the Mekong Committee
was approved at the Eleventh Session of the Committee held in Vientiane in
(4)
November, 1960
Referring to Sambor, the Agreement specified that the geological
investigations were to be carried out in two parts:
"Phase 1 - The first phase should provide sufficient geological data
for the purpose of comparative estimates of quantities and costs for
dams located along different axes across the Samboc Rapids area, and
similar preliminary investigations at Stung Treng and Rhone Falls."
"Phase 2 - Intensive geological investigations, including diamond
drilling and geological mapping at the most favoured axis, with the
object of confirming its suitability at the site selected by the
Committee."
The area investigated at Samboc Rapids was shown on Photomosaic No. 2
in the Sargeant-Moye Report. The height of dam considered was giveft as from
17 to 23 metres above low-water level. The information existing at that
time, as summarized in the Flood Control Series No. 12 , suggested a top
water level for Sambor as 30 metres above sea level, and gave the low-water
level at Sambor as 7 metres above sea level.
Work was commenced at Samboc Rapids in December, 1960, and the interim
report on the progress achieved was given at the Twelfth Session of the
(6)
Committee at Saigon in February, 1961
The Australian team spent some time on topographic survey which was not
included in the original plan of operations. As a result the start of work
at the Stung Treng site and at Rhone Falls was postponed.


During the Seventeenth Session of ECAFE in March, 1961, the Government
of Japan offered to carry out a preliminary survey of the Sambor Project .
Late in March, 1961, Canada's survey profile of the Mekong River became
available (B^ . This indicated that the fall of the river between Samboc
Rapids and Rhone Falls was very different from that previously assumed.
It became clear that a new assessment had to be made of the height of Samboc
Rapids dam, and of the height, and particularly of the location, of Stung
Treng dam to enable this reach of the river to be fully developed. Accord-
ingly, the work during the first season was concentrated on the Samboc
Rapids dam site area.
At the Fourteenth Session of the Committee (31 May to 2 June, 1961) the
situation arising out of the knowledge of river levels was discussed.
The Committee agreed that:
" the work of the Australian team during the 1961/1962 dry season,
which had been programmed as the final season of the Australian
work, should extend and intensify the investigation at Sambor on
the principle that a somewhat higher dam would be constructed the . ( )
The progress report^ 10 '* on the first season's work was discussed at the
Fifteenth Session of the Committee in October, 1961. The Committee decided
that: •
•’...the Australian geological investigations during the second and
final year of the work now to commence, be concentrated in the area
of the southern line of the photomosaic contained in the Australian
report, at the end of the rapids, which area would be approximately
500 metres wide, though considerably varying in width at various
points...."(ll)
It was agreed that this work should proceed to an elevation of 40 metres,
allowing for a top water level of 38 metres as proposed by Japan in its
Tributaries Reportissued at the Fifteenth Session.
As a result of the Committee's decision, investigations during the
second season included two lines on the east bank, a large area of the river


section, and a line on the west bank.
The complete results of the geological work of the Australian team are
compiled in four volumes: Volume 1 contains the geological report, Volume 2
the geological logs and photographs of drill cores, Volume 3 the logs of
test pits and auger holes, and Volume 4 the detailed geological maps of the
dam site area.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Australian team gratefully acknowledges the considerable assist-
ance given by the Committee for Co-ordination of Investigations of the
Lower Mekong Basin, comprising Mr. Phlek Chhat, Member for Cambodia,
H.E. Mr. Phouangkeoh Phanareth, Member for Laos, Dr. Boonrod Binson,
Member for Thailand, and H.E. Mr. Pham-Minh-Duong, Member for Viet-Nam.
Work was greatly facilitated by the whole-hearted co-operation of
officials of the Royal Cambodian Government at all levels. Special thanks
is due to the Governor and provincial officials of Kratie Province.
The Advisory Board, the Executive Agent and his staff, the Bureau of
Flood Control and Water Resources Development, the United Nations Technical
Assistance Board, and the Service Geographique Khmer, all gave valuable
assistance.
Acknowledgement is made "of the work of other contributing countries,
particularly to Canada for maps and aerial photographs, and Iran for
petroleum products.
There was a frequent exchange of ideas and advance information between
the field teams of Japan and Australia who worked in close co-operation
during the latter stages of the investigation.


BASIC DATA AVAILABLE FROM OTHER SOURCES
(a) Aerial Photographs
A complete aerial photographic cover of Cambodia was made in 1954 by
the American Army Map Service of the Far East, on a scale of 1:40,000.
In 1959 the main stem of the Mekong River was photographed by the Canadian
Colombo Plan Project on a scale of 1:40,000, and an area of some 150 sq. km
around Samboc Rapids was photographed on a scale of 1:10,000. The latter
area was photographed again in 1960.
(b) • Contour Maps
The following maps were used:
Cambodia 1:100,000 Service Geographique de
I'lndochine
Mekong Main Stem 1:20,000 Canadian Colombo Plan Project
Sambor Dam Site 1:2,000 Canadian Colombo Plan Project
Sambo Dam Site 1:40,000 Service Geographique Khmer
(c) Geological Reports
The area on the east bank of the Samboc Rapids was first described by
(14)
Saurin in 1935 and later studies in the area were summarized by the same
author in 1955^"^.
The stratigraphy of northern and eastern Cambodia has been described by
n 6)
Fromaget and Bonelli v
A survey of the minerals of North-East Cambodia was made during
1960-1961 by geologists under the direction of the Office des Entreprises de
l'Etat du Cambodge.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
PREFACE iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS vii
BASIC DATA FROM OTHER SOURCES viii
LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS xi
LIST OF FIGURES xiii
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1
PART 1 - DESCRIPTION OF THE SAMBOR DAM PROJECT 5
PART 2 - AUSTRALIAN INVESTIGATING TEAM 7
PART 3 - GENERAL GEOLOGY OF SAMBOR RAPIDS AREA 9
Topography 9
Stratigraphy 15
Geological Structures 23
Alluvium 32
Weathering 34
Groundwater 38
PART 4 - DETAILED GEOLOGY OF THE DAM SITE 41
West Bank 41
River Channel 44
East Bank 45
Alternative Downstream Alignment 48
‘PART 5 - CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS RECONNAISSANCE 49
Concrete Aggregates 49
Earth and Rock Materials 50
TEXT REFERENCES 55
APPENDIX A - Petrographic description of common rock types at 57
Samboc Rapids
APPENDIX B - Petrographic description of gravel samples 61




LIST OF FIGURES
Figure No. Description Drawing No.
1. Map Showing Location of Sambor Project S7l
2. Mekong River, Elevation of Free Surface Line
in the Vicinity of Sambor Dam Site 572
3. Sambor Dam Site, Location of Preferred Axes S3B
4. Sambor Dam Site, Regional Geology 573
5. Sambor Dam Site, Generalized Geplogical Plan
and Section 574
6. Sambor Dam Site, Stratigraphic Column S7O
7. Sambor Dam Site, West Bank, Geology 559
8. Sambor Dam Site, River Upstream, Geology Sl2
9. Sambor Dam Site, River Downstream, Geology Sl3
10. Sambor Dam Site, East Bank, Geology, North Sheet 565
11. Sambor Dam Site, East Bank, Geology, South Sheet 564
12. Sambor Dam Site, Geological Plan and Section 575
13. Sambor Dam Site, Sketches of Rofck Exposures 576
14. Sambor Dam Site, Sand from the Mekong River,
Sieve Analysis No. 1392 523
15. Sambor Dam Site, Sand from the Mekong River,
. Sieve Analysis No. 1393 524
16. Sambor Dam Site, Sand from the Mekong River,
Sieve Analysis No. 1394 525
17. Sambor Dam Site, Gravel from the Mekong River,
Sieve Analysis No. 1385 526
18. Sambor Dam Site, Gravel from the Mekong River,
Sieve Analysis No. 1386 527




LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS
Photo No. Description
1. Sambor Dam Site, Photomosaic
2. Exploration using Auger
3. Diamond Drill in operation at Sambor Dam Site
4. Samboc Rapids near the mouth of Prek Kampi
5. Typical narrow channel between densely vegetated
islands in Samboc Rapids
6. Samboc Rapids, 7th November 1961
7. Samboc Rapids, 6th January 1962
8. Silt levee bank near Prek Kampi bridge
9. Shrinkage cracks in alluvial silt on flood plain
10. Typical open forest of softwoods on the valley
slopes beyond the flood plains
11. Typical exposure of Tmor Moykbyk Beds
12. Calcareous sandstone of the Tmor Moykbyk Beds
✓
13. Chang Krang Shale exposed in Prek Kampi
14. Kampi Conglomerate exposed in Prek Kampi
15. Chaik Tom Formation. Shale and siltstone outcrops
west of Preah Trorpeeung
16. Karng Preah Formation. Sandstone outcrop on island
in Mekong River
17. Kbal Cheour Formation. Sandstone outcrops in
shallow channel near east bank
18. Kbal Cheour Formation. Sandstone outcrops in Prek
Kampi, showing prominent dip\ slope along bedding
19. Sandstone suitable for rock-fill near existing
road quarries.




MEKONG RIVER PROJECT
REPORT ON GEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
SAMBOR DAM SITE - CAMBODIA
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
VOLUME 1 - GEOLOGICAL REPORT
As part of Australia's contribution under the Colombo Plan an engineering
geological team from the Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority, Australia,
carried out field investigations for the development of the Mekong River,.
Cambodia, during the dry seasons of 1960-1961 and 1961-1962.
The investigations were made in conjunction with the Committee for
Co-ordination of Investigations of the Lower Mekong Basin, as part of the
programme for the collection of basic data for the Sambor Dam on the Samboc
Rapids.
The proposed dam would have a maximum height of 45 metres and a length
of 23 kilometres, with crest elevation of 40 metres above mean sea level.
It would include a central concrete section about 2 kilometres long comprising
the spillway, hydro-electric installation and navigation lock. Earth embank-
ments would extend for about 10 kilometres inland on each bank. Provision
would also be made for diversion structures for irrigation channels.
The investigations consisted of geological mapping of the dam site area,
and subsurface exploration by diamond drill holes, test pits, auger holes and
seismic refraction surveys.
The work was divided into two phases. Phase 1 was to determine whether
suitable foundations for the dam existed in the Samboc Rapids area, and to
provide sufficient geological data to enable comparison to be made of several
alternative sites in this area. Phase 2 was to carry out detailed


investigations near the downstream end of the Samboc Rapids at an axis approved
by the Mekong Committee at the conclusion of the Phase 1.
The following conclusions have been reached:
(a) The site selected on the Samboc Rapids and shown on Figure 1 is suitable
for the construction of the dam and associated structures.
(b) Firm rock, suitable for the foundations of the engineering structures,
occurs at depths ranging from 1 to 3 metres across most of this site, both
in the river channel and on the abutments.
(c) Several important geological features which require special attention
are:
(i) A former river channel more than 2 kilometres wide on the west
bank is now filled with sand and gravel to a maximum observed
depth of 11 metres. Preliminary field testing has shown that
the channel fill material is relatively impermeable; if the
results of these preliminary tests are confirmed, no elaborate
treatment would be required.
(ii) There is a deep trough of varying width along the western side
of the present river channel. The dam axis has been located
to cross this trough where it is quite narrow, only about 20
metres wide, with a maximum depth at low water of 13.5 metres.
It is expected that the trough would not present a major
difficulty at this site. The trough is much wider and deeper
downstream, and may possibly be put to advantage in the location
of the approach channel to the navigation lock.
(d) Sufficient quantities of material for rolled earth-fill occur close to
the abutment lines on each bank.


(e) Rock suitable for rock-fill and rip-rap will be in short supply.
Material for the east abutment may have to be obtained from as far away as
15 kilometres; material for the west abutment may also have to be obtained
from the east bank and transported across the river.
(f) For concrete aggregates there are ample deposits of fine-grained natural
sand close to the selected dam axis. Some gravel occurs in the river channel
and in the islands in the Samboc Rapids. It is considered that some natural
coarse aggregate could be obtained by dredging from the river channel and sand
banks downstream from the Samboc Rapids. Crushed rock may be necessary to
augment the natural coarse aggregate.




PART 1 - DESCRIPTION OF THE SAMBOR DAM PROJECT
The Sambor dam site is located on the Mekong River at the downstream end
of the Samboc Rapids in Cambodia, 1800 km downstream from the Burma-Laos
border, and 565 km upstream from the China Sea, (Figure 1). The geographic
position of the dam site is longitude 106°00', latitude 12 37', and the grid
co-ordinates are East 610 km, North 1,394 km, (Universal Transverse Mercator
metric grid, zone 48).
The Sambor project is the furthest downstream of those planned on the
main stem of the Mekong River. The Samboc Rapids are the first serious
rock barrier to navigation encountered by vessels proceeding up the Mekong
from the sea. At the town of Kratie, 18 km downstream from the dam site
area, the water-level varies from about 5 m above mean sea level at low water,
to about 21 m above mean sea level at high flood. Upstream from Kratie the
bed of the river becomes steeper, rising 12 m in the 36 km from Kratie to
Sambor village. At Samboc village, 14 km north of Kratie, small low rocky
islands begin to appear in the channel. Near the mouth of the left bank
tributary, Prek Kampi, these islands become so numerous that they form an
almost continuous rock outcrop across the 2 to 4 km wide river channel.
The Sambor dam site discussed in this report is located on the downstream end
of the Samboc Rapids near the mouth of Prek Kampi as shown on Photo 1 and
Figure 3.
Early proposals for a dam at Sambor are contained in the ECAFE
Publication, Development of Water Resources in the Lower Mekong Basin
Possibilities for generation of hydro power, for improvement of navigation
and for provision of water for irrigation are all mentioned. The proposed
elevation of the reservoir water-level was 30 m above mean sea level.


(3)
At the time of the Geological Reconnaissance by Sargeant and Moye
in 1960 it was considered that the dam would be from 17 to 23 m in height
above low-water level, giving a top water level of elevation 24 to 30 m,
Respectively. Based on topographic maps existing at that time, it was
estimated that the total length of the dam would be of the order of 6 to
10 km, including the length of the abutment portion on each bank.
Mr. R. Berthelot in his report of 1961 has calculated that the
flood with a probability of recurrence once in 1,000 years at Kratie may be
taken provisionally as from 70,000 to 77,200 cubic metres per second.
The 1961 Report of the Reconnaissance Team organized by the Japanese
(12)
Government on the Tributaries of the Lower Mekong Basin suggested a
top water level for Sambor Dam at.elevation 38 to 40 m.
With the crest of the dam at elevation 40 m above mean sea level, the
approximate dimensions of the structure are as follows:
Height above low-water level 33 m
Assumed maximum height above foundation 45 m
Crest length
River Channel 2,200 m
East Abutment 10,000 m
West Abutment 10,800 m
Total length 23,000 m
The river channel section of the proposed site has adequate length to
accommodate the spillway, power plant, and navigation lock.


PART 2 - AUSTRALIAN INVESTIGATING TEAM
(a) Composition
At full strength the Australian team consisted of seven men, comprising
one engineer, two engineering geologists, one technical assistant, two
diamond drill foremen, and one mechanic. At times up to twenty local men
were employed to excavate test pits, to prepare access to the drilling sites
and for other works associated with the investigations. One diamond drill
was used at the site. Some Cambodian assistants received training as
drillers. The Cambodian Government provided an interpreter, and accommo-
dation for the Australian team in Kratie.
(b) Work Carried Out
Field work commenced in 1960 and was completed in May 1962. It was
suspended for four months during the 1961 wet season. Geological mapping
was carried out to study the nature of the rock outcropping at the surface,
and also the nature of the soil in areas without rock outcrop. Test pits
were dug to investigate the depth of soil and alluvium over sound rock in
areas of shallow depth to rock. Hand auger borings were made where the
depth of loose material was greater than the safe limit for unsupported pits,
•generally about 3 m (Photo 2). Diamond drill holes were used to sample deep
soil and alluvium, and also the rock at depth in critical areas of the
foundation (Photo 3).
The following figures show the extent of the exploratory work:
(i) Geological mapping in the vicinity of three possible sites for
the dam, at the following scales:
15 sq. km at a scale of 1:2,000
50 sq. km at a scale of 1:10,000


(ii) Test pits and Auger holes - to a total depth of 768 m.
(iii) Diamond drilling - 17 holes ranging in depth from 10 to 65 m,
a total depth of 943 m.


PART 3 - GENERAL GEOLOGY OF THE SAMBOC RAPIDS AREA
TOPOGRAPHY
In the Sambor-Kratie area the Mekong River flows from north to south in
the Eastern Cambodian Plain. Saurin (l4) in his report of 1935 considered
that the present arrangement of alternate areas of flat and steep gradients
along the lower Mekong is the result of regional tilting, which produced the
extensive flood plains of the lower Srepok, Se San and Se Kong rivers in the
Stung Treng area, and at the same time the rapids in the river to the south
of Stung Treng. The most downstream of these are the Samboc Rapids.
(a) River Channel
At the upstream or northern end of the Samboc Rapids, in the vicinity
of the mouth of Prek Kakot, the river is 2.5 km wide and flows quietly in
wide expanses of relatively deep water (mostly more than 2 m). Islands are
numerous in the western half of the channel, hut become less numerous towards
the eastern side.
In the next 4 km downstream, the river channel spreads out towards the
west, and widens to a maximum of almost 4 km. The grade of the river bed
increases to approximately 1.2 m per km, and islands become more numerous.
In the downstream half of this section the islands merge to form large areas
of almost continuous outcrop, between which the water flows as rapids in a
series of partly interconnected channels (Photos 4 and 5).
Many of the islands, particularly those on the western side, although
rocky near water-level, are Covered by silty or sandy alluvium, and vegetated
by tall grass, shrubs and trees.
Islands with sandy alluvium are mostly less than 2 to 3 m high, and
are sparsely vegetated; it appears that the sandy alluvium is to some


extent eroded and redeposited in the yearly floods. In a typical case the
island has a rock outcrop (Photo 16) at the upstream end and a tear-drop
shaped bank of sand extending downstream. The length of this sandbank
varies from one year to the next. For example, in 1959 many islands were
separated by water. During the low-water stage in 1962 however, these same
islands were joined by sand banks which extended considerably further down-
stream than in previous years.
Islands with silty alluvium, mostly between 5 and 15 m high and densely
vegetated, do not appear to be greatly affected by the yearly floods.
These islands, the largest of which include Koh Sayk and Koh Korr, occur in
a line trending roughly northwards from the west bank corner near Chuoy
Banteai village. They appear to be dissected remnants of a former much
larger, island, which was probably at one time a northern continuation of
this part of the west bank.
There are three main channels through the Samboc Rapids, as shown on
Photo 1 and Figure 8. The widest of these, locally known as Preah
Trorpeeung, is 800 m from the east bank, to which it is almost parallel.
A feature of this channel is its remarkable straightness. At low water it
averages almost 100 m in width and has fast-flowing water in most places
from 3 to 7 m deep. The maximum depth recorded during the investigations was
13 m. It is traversed by numerous rocky bars which form small islands or
are barely covered by very fast and often foaming water. This channel is
used for navigation when the Mekong River is in between high-water and
low-water stages. Navigation markers constructed either of mass concrete
or masonry with mortar joints, extend 3 to 5 m above low-water level and
are located at approximately 1 km intervals.


Almost parallel to Preah Trorpeeung, and 700 to 900 m to the west of it,
is another prominent channel, known locally as Cha Sorowoo. This is a
somewhat narrower, more irregular channel, but it carries a large amount of
very fast water and is feared locally because of its treacherous rapids.
It is not used for navigation.
The third prominent channel is the one used for navigation during low
water. In its upstream part it is almost straight and passes obliquely
through the western side of the Rapids area. Further downstream where it
closely follows the curved west bank it is known locally as Tmor Moykbyk.
Fathometer soundings were taken in this channel in the area of the dam axis,
and depths up to 17 m below low-water level were recorded. It has numerous
navigation markers which extend from 1.5 to 2.5 m above low-water level.
In addition to these three main channels there are several smaller ones
passing through the maze of islands, together with numerous interconnecting
channels. Many of the smaller through channels and interconnecting channels
are so shallow during low water that rock can be seen almost continuously
along their floors. Some are deep with fast-flowing water even during low-
water stages.
Opposite the mouth of Prek Kampi, the west bank curves eastwards and
then makes a right-angled turn to parallel the east bank. The river narrows
to a little more than 2 km and there is a marked decrease in the grade of the
river bed. Two of the main channels, Tmor Moykbyk and Cha Sorowoo, merge
near the right-angle bend and form a channel 150 to 200 m wide. Echo
soundings in this channel were taken by Harza Engineering Company International
in 1960 and by the Australian team in 1962, and contours of the reduced levels
obtained were plotted on the detailed geology plans (Volume 4 of this report).
The results show that a deep channel exists 100 to 200 m from the west bank,


in the Chuoy Banteai area. The channel has an irregular winding outline,
with a maximum width of 100 m at the mean sea level contour as shown in
Figures 8 and 9. The floor of the channel ranges from elevation minus 5 m
to the lowest recorded point of elevation minus 10 m which occurs near
navigation marker 309. This deepest point thus extends 18 m below low-
water level. It is not known whether the point shown by the echo sounder
was from a rocky bottom, or from the surface of an alluvial filling of sand
or gravel of unknown depth.
From Prek Kampi downstream to the first navigation marker, a distance
of roughly 5 km, the river width of 2 km between banks is maintained, but
during low water a wide sand bank on the western side causes the channel to
narrow to 1.5 km as shown in Figure 9. There are wide expanses of quiet
water, with relatively few rapids. Most islands in this section are rocky,
and extend less than 2 m above low-water level. They are quite numerous
in the upstream half, but become progressively less numerous going downstream.
The longitudinal profile of the free surface line of the Mekong River in
the Samboc Rapids area is shown in Figure 2. Several river stages are shown
including that of the 1939 flood, the highest in living memory. The values
for a low-water level, in May 1961, and several intermediate river levels
during 1961 are also shown. It can be seen that at the high-water stages
the Samboc Rapids become drowned. This is shown in Photo 6 of the Samboc
Rapids taken on 7th November 1961, while Photo 7 taken on 6th January 1962
shows most of the small islands appearing above water. On 7th November 1961
the level on the Kratie gauge was 13.46 m (reduced level 12.38 m), and on
6th January 1962 it was 7.67 m (reduced level 6.59 m).


(b) River Banks
The river banks consist of steep slopes of brown silt rising about 14 m
above low-water level. At the top of the river bank there is a natural
levee (Photo 8), the ground surface becoming lower in the first hundred
metres away from the river edge. Extensive swamps which retain water
throughout the dry season are present in some areas behind the banks. The
tributaries of the Mekong River (larger on the east than on the west bank)
meet the Mekong at the level of the low-water flow. They have silt banks
and natural levees at a lower elevation than those of the Mekong River.
Most of these creeks cease flowing for several months in the dry season.
During the river flood, the creeks distribute river water into the low ground
behind the Mekong levee banks.
A former river channel filled with water-bearing sand and gravel has
been found on the right bank of the river in the dam site area (Figures 8
and 9). This channel is 3km wide and can be traced downstream for about
11 km. It appears to have been continuous at one time with the channel on
the western side of the island Kag Trong, opposite Kratie (Figure 4).
(c) Flood Plain and Valley Slopes
The river valley in general consists of a broad, slightly undulating
flood plain gently rising away from the river, along a 5 to 10 km wide strip
on each bank. The natural vegetation is arranged in contour fashion, with
an upper boundary of tall coarse grass at elevation 20 m, corresponding with
the height of the yearly floods. Above the tall grass there is a contour
strip of short grass which gives place after a further rise in elevation of
about 2 m to an open forest of softwoods (Photo 10). The ground surface
continues to rise to the east and to the west and is shown on existing
topographic maps to reach an elevation of the order of 60 m at a distance of


20 km from the river. Away from the river, swampy depressions up to 200 m
in diameter are found on both banks at intervals averaging 1 km. They
always occur on the crests of divides and some contain water throughout the
year.
(i) East Bank. The three main streams on the east bank are Prek Kakot
to the north, Prek Kampi in the centre, and Prek Te to the south of the dam
site area. The dividing ridge between Prek Kakot and Prek Kampi generally
follows a north-east direction from Kbal Cheour. The dividing ridge between
Prek Kampi and Prek Te follows a south then east direction; it does not rise
uniformly, but undulates gently at elevations 30 to 35 m above sea level, at
distances from 3 to 5 km from the river, before rising above elevation 40 m
I
in the area 7 km east of Phnom Samboc (Figure 3).
(ii) West Bank. On the west bank the valley slope beyond the flood
plain is drained by three creek systems. The northern part is drained by
tributaries of Prek Krieng, which enters the Mekong River adjacent to the
widest portion of Samboc Rapids. The southern area is drained by headwaters
of Prek Krasang, a tributary of Prek Sop which enters the Mekong River
opposite Kratie. The eastern portion of the central area is drained by
tributaries of Prek Kampot, a smaller watercourse entering the Mekong River
about 1 km south of Prek Krieng.
From the Mekong River, Prek Krieng and Prek Kampot extend westwards
roughly parallel to each other for about 1 km, where they both make right
angle bends: Prek Krieng to the north, and Prek Kampot to the south along
the flood plain, close to the boundary between the flood plain and the
valley slopes. The eastward flowing tributaries of Prek Krieng and Prek
Kampot are spaced at an average of 500 m, and are 1 to 3 km long. The
watersheds of the three creek systems are separated by a T-shaped divide.


The point furthest east on this divide is approximately 2.5 km west of the
flood plain and has an elevation of 35 m. Along the line of highest ground
there is an average slope of 1 in 185 from the edge of the flood plain to
this point. Further to the west the ground does not rise above elevation
25 m for another kilometre to Bung Onchoyng where the divide is narrowest.
At this point the headwaters of Prek Krieng and Prek Krasang are only 200 m
apart.
From Bung Onchoyng westwards the ground rises steadily at a slope
of 1 in 360 to an elevation of 40 m. The ground 5 km beyond this point
has an elevation of 55 m and continues to rise steadily further to the west.
STRATIGRAPHY
The rocks at Samboc Rapids consist mainly of felspathic sandstone, and
siltstone and shale with calcareous lenses. This complex is moderately to
tightly folded and locally intruded by diorite. The generalized petro-
graphic description of these rock types is given in Appendix A.
Saurin^ described the rock's in the Kratie district as being of
Carboniferous to Permian age, capped by rocks of Jurassic age. The age
determinations were made on fossils collected from three localities near
Kratie.
The recent detailed geological mapping has shown that in the main 4 km
wide section of the Samboc Rapids the rocks fall naturally into two distinct
groups, separated by Cha Sorowoo, which is believed to occupy a zone of
faulting (Figure 5). In this report the tightly folded rocks on the
western side of this channel are called the Tmor Moykbyk Beds. To the east
of Cha Sorowoo, the rocks for the greater part dip uniformly towards the
east, and form part of the western limb of a broad syncline, which is further


exposed in the channel of Prek Kampi: in this report these rocks are called
the Samboc Group. The rock sequence is shown diagrammatically in the
Stratigraphic Column, Figure 6, and on the Geological Plan and Section,
Figure 5.
Tmor Moykbyk Beds (New Name). The name Tmor Moykbyk, meaning
"Bundles of Rocks", came from the well-bedded appearance of the outcrops along
the river edge (Photo 11 and Figure 13, Sketch Section C). The total thick
ness of the beds is estimated to be more than 2,000 m. The rocks are
characteristically interbedded, although there are a few sections of up to
100 m thick consisting mainly of one rock type. In a typical section,
fissile, well-bedded, dark grey shale or siltstone beds alternate with beds
of massive, light grey felspathic sandstone. The individual beds range in
thickness from a few centimetres up to several metres, but are generally less
than 50 cm. Limestone beds, up to 10 cm thick, occur interbedded with
calcareous shales in the Chuoy Banteai and Bung Onchoyng areas.
With the exception of some of the dark grey shale beds, the rocks
are usually rich in calcite, which is present both as a mineral constituent,
and as veins and joint coatings. Fossil lamellibranchs have been found in
siltstones of this group, exposed 200 m south from Drill Hole 4101, and also
on the edge of Tmor Moykbyk channel 600 m upstream from its junction with
Cha Sorowoo.
As shown in plan on Figures 7 and 8 and in section on Figure 12 the
beds are tightly folded. The fold axes trend from N 5 to 30 E, and plunge
from 10° to 25°N. Two plunging anticlines and a plunging syncline are well
exposed along the edge of Tmor Moykbyk.
Bedding cleavage is well developed in some of the shales and silt-
stones. Slaty cleavage is usually steeply dipping and roughly parallel to


the fold axes; where present, it is often more pronounced than the bedding
cleavage. In several places the combined effect of these two cleavages
causes the rock to break into pencil-like fragments when excavated or struck
with a geological pick. A third common cleavage direction in the Tmor
Moykbyk exposures strikes N 140° to 160°E and dips 40° to 65°E.
Narrow ridges of the more resistant sandstone beds occur as much
as 50 cm above the average level of the siltstone or shale beds. In many
exposures the water channels make angles of 45° to 90 with the bedding
direction, and in such places the water usually has cut numerous slots through
the sandstone ridges, which then appear as rows of pinnacles between troughs
of shale or siltstone (Photo 12).
From a total of 51 test pits and auger holes west of the buried
river channel, 56% exposed shale, 6% exposed sandstone, 324 exposed inter-
bedded sandstone and shale. In the remaining 6%, bedrock was not reached at
depths up to 2.5 m, but the presence of calcareous nodules (averaging 10 cm
across) indicates calcareous bedrock. The proportion of the rock types, as
found in the test pits and auger holes, is thought to be similar to the true
distribution of these rock types in the bedrock.
The felspathic sandstone is a massive, grey-green fine-grained
compact rock with a maximum grainsize of 0.5 mm. The constituents of the
rock are cloudy white felspar, and a lesser amount of quartz and angular shale
fragments: all are cemented with calcite. The joint spacing as observed on
slightly weathered outcrops, varies from 1 cm to 2 m, but is generally from
10 to 30 cm. Drill holes 4107, 4108, 4109, 4110 and 4111 passed through
typical sections of the Tmor Moykbyk beds, and the drill cores show the
relationship of the sandstone beds with the siltstone and shale beds. The
three groups are often arranged in sequence of graded bedding, with sandstone


passing up into a siltstone with decreasing grainsize, which in turn passes
up into a shale. The bedded units vary from 0.5 to more than 30 cm in
thickness, but average 1 cm. The shale is compact, hard and non-slaking,
and the siltstone is intermediate in properties between the sandstone and
the shale.
The exposures are generally uniform throughout the west bank area
with the exception of the calcareous rocks which are most common in a strip
800 m wide parallel to the regional strike and passing between Bung Onchoyng
and Bung Cheong. However, the calcareous members are not sufficiently
exposed for the continuous mapping of lithologic boundaries.
The rock sequence in the outer west bank area therefore closely
resembles that exposed in Samboc Rapids to the west of Cha Sorowoo. Although
separated by the buried river channel, the rocks in these two areas are
considered to form part of the same sequence, namely the Tmor Moykbyk Beds.
Samboc Group (New-Name)
In contrast to the uniformly interbedded nature of the Tmor Moykbyk Beds,
the Samboc Group can be classified into six relatively thick formations, two
consisting mainly of siltstone, two mainly of felspathic sandstone, one of
conglomerate, and one of shale. These are shown and described briefly on
the Stratigraphic Column, Figure 6.
The rocks are best exposed in the bed of the Mekong River at Samboc Rapids
for about 2 km upstream from the mouth of Prek Kampi, and also in Prek Kampi
itself. In this area they have a fairly uniform north-south strike. They
form an elongated basin which passes to the east into an anticline, with
associated minor folding. To the north and south of this uniform section the
beds are disturbed by faulting and folding, but the individual formations can
to some extent still be recognized.


Chans Krang Shale (New Name), the lowest of the six, is of unknown
thickness consisting of black hard shale (Photo 13) and occurs in the banks
of Prek Kampi 4- km upstream from its mouth. The shale outcrops over a width
of 250 m along Prek Kampi, where it forms the crest of an anticline. It can
be followed both to the north and to the south for several kilometres, where
it forms depressions which are arable land used for rice cultivation. One
of these is located near Prek Chang Krang.
Kampi Conglomerate (New Name), has a thickness of 350 m and rests
directly on the Chang Krang Shale. It outcrops prominently in Prek Kampi,
4 km upstream from its mouth, where it forms both the eastern and western
limbs of an anticline. The conglomerate is composed of boulders, cobbles
and pebbles of silicified limestone, black quartzite, coarse green quartz
porphyry, bedded blue-green chert, lava of intermediate composition, and
milky quartz. The silicified limestone boulders are well rounded and contain
fossils consisting of crinoid stems, brachiopod casts and straight cephalopods.
Some thin sandstone bands are included in the conglomerate (Photo 14).
Chaik Tom Formation (New "Name) is 650 m thick and overlies the
Kampi Conglomerate. It consists mainly of siltstone and shale with small
amounts of felspathic sandstone, occurring as lenses up to 15 m tnick and is
well exposed in the low-lying area of islands between Cha Sorowoo and Preah
Trorpeeung known as Chaik Tom. It also outcrops 3km east of the Mekong
River in the Sre Pring area. Most of the exposures in the river are either
at, or very close to low-water level. They have less alluvial cover and
vegetation than the neighbouring sandstone formations which probably give
this formation its characteristic pale grey colour on air photographs
(Photo 1). Photo 15 and Figure 13, sketch Section B, show typical outcrops
of the siltstone and shale of this formation.


Limestone and associated calcareous shale, siltstone and sandstone
occur in graded bedded sequence approximately 100 m thick near the base of
the formation (Figures 5 and 6). No individual limestone beds more than 1 m
thick have been found.
Karng Preah Formation (New Name), 95 m thick, is predominantly
massive sandstone. It forms a series of partly vegetated elongated islands
to the east of Preah Trorpeeung in the Samboc Rapids (Photo 16) and also
outcrops 2km east of the Mekong River in the Kantriou area. Exposures
near the north end of the Rapids contain several intrusive sills up to 4 m
thick, and also a conglomerate lens with a maximum observed thickness of 2m.
Kakot Formation (New Name), is 105 m thick, and consists mainly of
calcareous siltstone. It is exposed in a shallow rocky channel in the
Samboc Rapids, and also outcrops 1 to 2 km east of the Mekong River near
Kbal Cheour. The formation can be traced along a length of skm north from
the mouth of Prek Kampi up to the mouth of Prek Kakot, from which it is
named. An intrusive sill of rock of intermediate composition, ranging from
2 to 5 m in width, occurs within this formation and forms a chain of narrow
rocky islands throughout the length of the channel, as shown on Photo 1, and
Figure 8. Numerous dislocations of the sill are evident from the positions
of the islands. Some of the dislocations appear to be due to faulting after
emplacement, while other dislocations are caused by injection of the sill
along separate fractures. Drill Hole 4002 was drilled mainly through
siltstone and shale beds of the Kakot Formation.
Kbal Cheour Formation (New Name) is more than 230 m thick and con-
sists mainly of felspathic sandstone, interspersed with several relatively
narrow siltstone beds, and capped by a minor amount of shale. Several
andesitic sills from 1 to 2 m wide are also present. The formation is well


exposed near the east bank of the Mekong River at the Samboc Rapids, in the
Kbal Cheour - Prek Kampi area, where it forms numerous rocky and alluvium
covered islands, and narrow rocky channels. Photos 17 and 18 and Figure 13,
Sketch Section A, show typical exposures. The top of the formation is the
present erosion surface.
Drill Hole 4001, drilled at Kbal Cheour village, passed through
50 m of the beds of this formation. Felspathic sandstone occurred throughout
the hole, except for a few shaly and silty beds, each less than 5 cm thick.
Drill Hole 4100, located on the east bank, 800 m south of the mouth of Prek
Kampi, passed through these beds. A siltstone member about 30 m thick, with
thinner beds of felspathic sandstone, was met in this hole. Drill Hole
4106, sited at the mouth of Prek Kampi, passed through the same formation
which contained mainly felspathic sandstone with some local zones of inter-
bedded shale and sandstone. Several shale bands from 2 to 10 cm wide
occurred in isolated areas. Drill Hole 4114 was drilled 150 m downstream
from the mouth of Prek Kampi and passed through felspathic sandstone containing
zones of interbedded sandstone and,shale.
Intrusive Rocks
Minor Intrusive Rocks. Intrusive dykes and sills of intermediate
composition are common throughout the Samboc Group exposures, and occur to a
lesser extent in the Tmor Moykbyk Beds.
In the Samboc Rapids to the north of the mouth of Prek Kampi,
intrusive rocks occur predominantly in the form of sills which become quite
numerous near the east bank to the north of Kbal Cheour. The sills range
in thickness from Itos m. They are usually more resistant to erosion than
the host rocks, and form elongated rocky islands, 1 to 3 m above the level
of the surrounding rock. As can be seen on Figure 8, the pattern of


these islands indicates numerous displacements of the sills. Detailed
examination during geological mapping has shown some of these displacements
to be due to faulting, and others to the irregular, intrusive nature of the
sills. In many cases it was not possible to determine the exact nature of
displacement, because the exposures were obscured by deep, fast water. In
most places it was equally difficult to determine whether the rock masses
were intrusive or not. North of Kbal Cheour, however, in two localities,
intrusive tongues and narrow dykes were found to pass from the sills into the
sediments. These two exposures are considered to provide sufficient proof
of the intrusive nature of the rocks.
Some of the very narrow sills are fine-grained or microcrystalline,
and the thicker ones are often medium-grained or even medium-to-coarse-grained.
The rocks show in many places well-developed laminar flow structures, close to
and parallel to their contacts. Where the contacts are well exposed, dark,
fine-grained "chilled" margins were observed in the sills, and also indurated
contact zones a few centimetres thick in the adjacent sedimentary rocks.
Downstream from the main rapids, in the generally quiet water
opposite Samboc village, both dykes and sills occur, as shown in Figure 9.
They form rocky islands, many of which extend from 1 to 3 m above low-water
level. The best exposures are in the western half of the river channel, where
a steeply dipping sill striking N 20°E appears to be connected to several dykes
striking N 100° to 120°E, and dipping steeply northwards. Figure 13, Sketch
Plan E, shows a typical island along the line of the steeply dipping sill.
On this island, and on many others in this area, the intrusive nature of the
dykes and sills is well shown.
The rocks forming the dykes and sills in this downstream area are
generally coarser in grainsize, and appear more acidic in composition than


those of the sills in the northern part of the Rapids. Also in the down-
stream area, the siltstone within 2 to 10 m of the intrusions are indurated
to form banded, partly spotted, cherty rocks. This is in marked contrast
to the very slight contact effects observed in the northern area.
0 Svay Diorite (New Name) is an apparently steep-sided intrusion of
coarse-grained, grey, massive diorite consisting mainly of hornblende and
plagioclase. It has been incompletely mapped (Figure 5) on the eastern edge
of the dam site where it occupies an area of at least one square kilometre.
Where mapped, the diorite intrudes shales of the Chaik Tom Formation and is
surrounded by a metamorphic aureole 200 m wide.
Age of the Rocks in the Samboc Rapids Area
The Kampi Conglomerate contains silicified limestone with fossil crinoid
stems, brachiopods and cephalopods. It is believed that the Kampi Conglom-
(14)
erate is identical with conglomerate shown by Saurin (1935) to be of
Middle Triassic age. This same age is therefore likely for the whole Samboc
Group, since field relations show that the Kampi Conglomerate is one of the
youngest members of the group. The 0 Svay Diorite is therefore younger than
Middle Triassic.
The exact relationship between the Samboc Group and the Tmor Moykbyk
Beds is concealed by faulting. However, the greater degree of folding shown
by the Tmor Moykbyk Beds may indicate that they are older than Triassic.
They may tentatively be given a Permian-Carboniferous age.
GEOLOGICAL STRUCTURES
(a) Folds
(i) Folding in the Tmor Moykbyk Beds. The Tmor Moykbyk Beds are
tightly folded, with axes trending N 5° to 30°E, and plunging at shallow


angles to the north. The crests of two plunging anticlines, and the trough
of a plunging syncline, are well exposed along the right bank of Tmor Moykbyk
(Figures 4 and 8, and Figure 12, Section EW). The axes of the syncline and
one of the anticlines have been followed further to the north, partly by
mapping on the ground, and partly by interpretation of air photos.
Adjacent to the Cha Sorowoo channel, there is irregular folding
near the eastern margin of the Beds. There are also areas in which reversals
of dip occur in the partially mapped exposures to the north and west of the
known folds. Some of these are clearly associated with faults, and others
may be caused solely by folding, or by a combination of faulting and folding.
West of the buried river channel, the limited rock exposures are
only sufficient to give a general impression of the style of folding.
From the edge of the flood plain to the watershed divide at
elevation 35 m, the rocks are well exposed in the easterly flowing creeks.
Most outcrops strike N 30° to 40°E and dip 70 to 80 East or West. Fold
axes are spaced from 50 to 200 m.
From the top of the divide to Bung Onchoyng a more gently folded
sequence appears in the headwaters of Prek Krieng. In the eastern tributary
a broad, rumpled syncline is exposed with dips of 15 to 35 near the axis,
increasing to 55° or 60° away from the axis. A more tightly folded anti-
clinal structure occurs in the tributary to the west with bedding dips of
60° to 80°. Small drag folds are indicated on the flanks of this structure
by local reversals of dip. In one of the tributaries of Prek Krasang to the
west of Bung Onchoyng a broad syncline is exposed in bedded calcareous rocks.
Dips of 20° to 35° were measured on each limb.
Between Bung Chieng and Bung Chiengtol a series of symmetrical
folds is exposed in a creek 700 m north of the preferred dam axis. The


limbs of these folds dip at 70° to 75°.
The information on the strikes and dips of the beds has been used
to draw the section on Figure 12, the information being projected where
necessary. This section shows a slightly asymmetrical style of folding,
tightly and sharply deformed on the eastern side of the area and becoming
more broadly folded to the west.
(ii) Folding in the Samboc Group. The Samboc Group are broadly folded
into a basin structure, here termed the Tuel Barang Basin (new name), near
the east bank of the Mekong River in the Samboc Rapids area. A further 4km
to the east, the older formations of the Group are brought to the surface in
the Pnong Anticline (new name). Between the Tuel Barang Basin and the
Pnong Anticline the beds are folded into several minor folds with local
reversals of dip. The complete geological section is shown on Figure 12.
The Tuel Barang Basin is caused by the local reversal of plunge along a
synclinal axis, the actual amount of plunge being from 5 to 10 at each
extremity. The Pnong Anticline plunges to the south at about 5,3 km east
of Samboc village, but to the north-east it may be followed by photo-
interpretation for about 15 km. The regional strike of the folding in the
Samboc Group is N 10°E, but local variations occur from N 20°W to N 40°E
along the main fold axes.
(b) Faults
Cha Sorowoo Fault. The Tmor Moykbyk Beds on the western side of
Samboc Rapids are separated from the Samboc Group to the east by the Cha
Sorowoo Fault (Figure 5). This fault can be traced for a distance of 6 km
in the bed of the Mekong River, where it shows clearly on the air photos
(Photo 1) as one of the main channels through the Rapids, forming gaps in out-
crop 50 to 100 m wide, between rocky islands.


Evidence of this faulting includes the differences in lithology and
degree of folding on the sides of the channel, the presence of several narrow
deep channels which form pronounced lineaments, the local contortion of the
Tmor Moykbyk rocks to the west of the channel, the local dragging of the
strike of the beds to the east of the channel, and the existence of exposures
of sheared and partly altered rock in the channel itself.
The strike of the fault is generally between N 5° to 10°E, with local
variations to N 10°W. The general dip of the fault is believed to be
vertical, but the amount of movement is not known, except that younger beds
on the eastern side are brought into contact with older, more intensely
folded beds on the western side.
The fault zone was explored by detailed surface mapping, and by
Drill Holes 4101 and 4112. Near Drill Hole 4112 the Cha Sorowoo Fault is
represented by a 100 m wide zone of which only 10% to 20%> appears above low
water level as rock outcrop. The rock which does show, consists of closely
jointed sandstone, showing green chloritic alteration. The joints are
coated with calcite veins several millimetres thick, and are spaced from 1
to 5 cm. Drill Hole 4112 was drilled at a slope of 44° in a westerly
direction to intersect the eastern margin of the fault zone in the dam axis
area. Full core was recovered after the first metre of drilling, down to
the end of the hole at 97.5 m. Several zones of brecciated rock were
passed through, where the rock had been broken into fragments from 5 to 20 mm
in the largest dimension and recemented with calcite veins. Several small
faults were intercepted, along which the beds had been displaced several
centimetres. The bedding of the sandstone, siltstone and shale showed
considerable variation in angle of dip, indicating that intense folding
had occurred. A remarkable feature was the ability of the rocks to undergo


severe deformation without physical deterioration, most joints and faults
being completely healed by calcite. Below 8 m (inclined distance) the rock
showed very little leakage during water pressure tests. The drill hole
intersected only the eastern half of the fault zone, but all the material
encountered was found to be mechanically sound and free from serious defect
from the point of view of the structural requirements of a foundation material.
Near Drill Hole 4101 on the west bank, there are scattered small
outcrops of grey-green calcareous sandstone forming part of the fault zone.
This sandstone is softer than normal due to slight alteration, and is
intersected by an irregular network of closely spaced calcite veins, which
range in width from 0.5 to 20 mm. Solution of the calcite veins and
weathering of the rock close to veins and along joints, have produced narrow
slots and small cavities in many of these outcrops. In several cases these
effects are so pronounced that the outcrop has the appearance of a collection
of separate, loosely-fitting, angular blocks. Drill Hole 4101, sloped at
46° in an easterly direction from the river's edge, was planned to intersect
the western area of the fault zone in the dam axis area. The hole passed
through interbedded shale, siltstone and sandstone, containing several
banded, dark to light grey mylonite zones, and numerous crushed seams. The
mylonite, although flaky, was firm and compact. The crushed seams were soft
and friable. They were mostly between 5 and 20 cm in width, and consisted
of angular rock fragments, mostly in the 1 to 10 mm size range, set in a dark
grey, silty or clayey matrix. Water pressure tests on 6 to 10 m long
sections of the hole gave low leakages, of the same order as those in sound
rock sections in other drill holes. These results suggest that although
the rock is considerably weakened by the soft seams and flaky mylonite zones,
the rock mass is compact with its joints almost watertight.


The deep, wide channel, which occurs at and immediately downstream
from the junction of Cha Sorowoo and Tmor Moykbyk, is believed to have
resulted partly from the erosive power of the large volume of turbulent water
flowing through the area, and also because of weakening of the rock by
faulting. The Cha Sorowoo Fault is intersected by the Quorng Fault (see
below) in this deep channel area (Figure 8).
Quorng Fault. The Quorng Fault has been mapped over a length of
2 km in the Samboc Rapids and extends in a general south-westerly direction
to the vicinity of Drill Hole 4113 (Figure 8). Near the east bank of the
river this fault was explored by Drill Hole 4002. The fault is most
pronounced between Preah Trorpeeung and Cha Sorowoo, where it divides into
two channels, each from 5 to 20 m wide, which carry fast deep water during
the low-water stage. On the north-western side the siltstone beds of the
Chaik Tom Formation curve gently to parallel the fault direction. On the
south-eastern side the beds within 200 to 300 m of the channel are contorted,
and at the channel's edge they strike parallel to the fault and are over-
turned to dip 80°NW. Sheared, flaky zones which occur on the channel's edge
also dip 80°NW, and it is considered that the attitude of the fault itself
is similar.
Opposite Kbal Cheour village, the surface expression of the Quorng
Fault is a channel from 5 to 10 m wide, which is mostly about 1 m deep during
low water. Gravel and boulders cover the channel floor. Two small
exposures on the channel edge show rock which is partly brecciated and flaky
due to the close joint spacing of 1 to 2 cm. The joints strike roughly
parallel to the channel direction, and range in dip from 40° to 70°NW.
Drill Hole 4002 was sloped at 50° beneath this channel to determine
the nature of the material in the suspected fault zone. The hole showed


the rock in the fault zone to be fresh, but intersected by numerous calcite-
coated joints, and also by seams from 1 to 10 cm wide, of crushed and
brecciated rock. In the crushed seams the rock had been finely ground into
dark grey silty material containing some angular rock fragments up to 5 mm
in the largest dimension. The brecciated zones consisted mainly of such
rock fragments, with smaller amounts of silty or clayey matrix. Only one
core loss 70 cm long, occurred below the first metre of drilling. Water
pressure tests of most sections of the hole gave low leakages, which suggests
that most of the joints are tightly closed, and that the crushed and brecciated
seams are compact and watertight.
Drill Hole 4113 was sloped at 44° in an easterly direction, with the
aim of testing the channel of open water near the junction of the Quorng and
Cha Sorowoo Faults. After penetrating 2 m of sand at the surface, full core
was recovered from the rest of the hole down to its full depth of 91.4 m.
The rock consisted of sandstone, alternating with siltstone and shale in a
graded bedding sequence, and the joint spacing in the core ranged from 5 to
100 cm, averaging 30 cm, except in certain zones. In several zones of
shearing, some movement had taken place parallel to the bedding planes, but
k
the rock had later been weakly cemented by calcite veins. Several small
faults displace the beds up to 1 cm. Three zones of brecciation were noted,
from 40 to 120 cm thick, in which joints were spaced from 0.5 to 2 cm.
Some of the shale from these areas showed slaking on exposure. Below 11 m
(inclined distance) the water pressure tests showed very low leakage,
suggesting that the sheared and brecciated zones were compact and watertight.
The hole extended over a horizontal distance of 65 m under the channel, and
did not necessarily pass through the whole width of the Quorng Fault.


Other Faults. There are several localities where faulting is
evident because of displacements of known rock units. In at least eight
localities on the eastern side of Samboc Rapids offsets occur in the boundaries
of formations of the Samboc Group. The faults occur in two main directions,
namely:
Direction A, ranging in strike from N 30° to 70°E,
and dipping from 50°NW to vertical; and
Direction B, ranging in strike from N 100° to 130°E,
and dipping from 50°NE to vertical.
Two faults in Direction B occupy deep water channels between the
East bank and Preah Trorpeeung, 1 to 2 km north from Kbal Cheour. They
displace a 1 to 2 m wide conglomerate bed and several intrusive sills of the
Karng Preah and Kakot Formations. The displacements and deep channels in
this area are clearly visible on Photo 1.
Because of its remarkable straightness, it is possible that Preah
Trorpeeung channel is partly the surface expression of a fault system trend-
ing north-south. However, the presence of rocky bars, which in several
places extend almost across the entire channel, makes the existence of any
major fault very unlikely.
Several minor faults striking roughly east-west and dipping
vertically are exposed on the west bank of the Mekong River downstream of
Drill Hole 4101 for a distance of 400 m. They are each less than 1 m wide
and consist of flaky, closely jointed rock. There are numerous similar
zones exposed on the small islands in the stretch of river near Samboc
village (Figure 9). These zones occur striking in many directions, but
those striking roughly north-south with steep dips are in the majority.


(c) Joints
All rocks are intersected by numerous joints. During the mapping it
was found that in each locality there is usually one or perhaps two directions
of jointing which predominate. On Figures 7 to 11 it can be seen that,
particularly in the Rapids area, the majority of joints fall into two distinct
sets, which are the same as those of minor faulting, namely:
Set A, ranging in strike from N 30° to 70°E, and
dipping from 50°NW to vertical; and
Set B, ranging in strike from N 100° to 130°E, and
dipping from 50°NE to vertical.
The character of joints in typical rocks in the Rapids area is probably
best shown in the cores of Drill Holes 4001 and 4100. These two holes
encountered all the common sedimentary rock types, in areas free of major
faults. As both holes were drilled vertically they cannot give a true
indication of the spacing of vertical joints. Throughout both holes joint
surfaces were characteristically rough, suggesting that little or no sliding
had occurred along the joint planes. Calcite coatings or fillings, usually
Imm or less in thickness, were present on most joints. In many places the
core did not break along these calcite-filled joints during the drilling
operations. Smooth or slickensided joints, and joints with coatings of
powdery crushed calcite, were less common. Limonite staining of joints was
common in the upper 26 mof Drill Hole 4001; several joints were open to
0.5 mm. The joints in Drill Hole 4100 were tight without limonite staining.
Water pressure tests made during the drilling of these two holes gave generally
low leakage rates, indicating that the rock is impervious and the joints are
tightly closed.
The air photos show a criss-cross pattern of narrow, discontinuous slots,


and narrow continuous channels, most of which coincide in strike with one or
the other of the Joint Sets A and B. A few of the more pronounced sets of
these slots and minor channels are visible on Photo 1.
During low water many of the smaller channels and slots showed firm rock
floors at less than 1 m deep. Good examples of this type occur opposite
Kbal Cheour village, in exposures within 500 m downstream from the track to
Drill Hole 4002. The rock on the floor and sides of these channels was
intersected by numerous joints parallel to the channel directions.- Several
of these joints were limonite stained or coated, and the rocks were slightly
weathered. Other small channels and slots, where rock was obscured by
deposits of sand or gravel, were generally assumed to indicate similar zones
in which the rock was weakened by numerous joints.
ALLUVIUM
(a) River Channel
Extensive alluvial deposits occur in the channel of the Mekong River.
The surface material of the deposits consists mainly of fine micaceous sand,
brought down in flood from the higher reaches of the river. Well-rounded
river gravel is present with the sand, in islands in the Samboc Rapids, and
at places in the low-water channel of the river.
(b) Flood Plain
The river banks are covered with brown silt deposited by the yearly
floods. The banks are usually unstable during the falling river stage, and
show slope failures of the slip circle type induced under conditions of
rapid drawdown. The silt banks are subject to scour during the high flood
stages. Natural levee banks are formed by deposition of silty sediments
where the velocity of the fast-flowing water in the main stream is


first checked as it spreads out over the banks. The greatest depth of silt
encountered was 14.1 min Drill Hole 4100. Finer clayey material is
deposited in the low country behind the levee banks. Some of this sediment
exhibits open shrinkage cracks on drying (Photo 9). A surface cover of
sandy alluvium was found up to elevation 25 m in the Sre Pring area and up
to 27 m in the Kantriou area on the south and north banks respectively of
Prek Kampi, from 1 to 2 km inland from the river bank.
(c) Buried River Channel
On the west bank of the Mekong River there is a buried river channel
with a width of approximately 3 km. Where explored by drilling it has a
maximum depth of 11 m. (Photo 1 and Figures 3, 4 and 5). The buried
channel is slightly elevated above its surroundings. It is covered with
sandy surface soil and shows a dense rain-forest type of vegetation, con-
trasting markedly with the adjacent grassy plains and open forest with small
trees. The material filling the channel consists generally of fine sand
with silt and clay fines, and some coarser sand and gravel ranging up to a
maximum size of 1 cm.
Sixty excavations and seven diamond drill holes have explored the
material in the channel. The southern extension has been inferred from air
photo interpretation, and it appears that the channel follows a general
southerly course parallel with the present stream as far as the island of
Kas Trong, opposite Kratie (Figure 4). The eastern limit of the buried
river channel was defined by Excavations 37 and 170 and Drill Holes 4108 and
4109. An island of bedrock occurs between Excavations 44 and 38. The
western limit of the buried river channel was defined by Excavations 63 and
64, and 82 and 87.


Field permeability tests have been carried out at localities m the
sandy material filling the buried river channel. The test sites were chosen
adjacent to drill holes exploring the channel, and the results of the
permeability tests are:
Locality of Test Permeability
cm per sec metres per year
D.H. 4102 190 x 10 6 60
- 6
D.H. 4103 70 x 10 22
- 6
D.H. 4104 35 x 10 11
Each test was carried out in an auger hole 10 cm diameter and approxi-
mately 1 m deep. The test procedure and method of calculation are given
in the U.S.B.R. Earth Manual^ 17 "* Designation E-18.
No other former river channels were discovered.
WEATHERING
(a) River Channel
Throughout the Rapids the rocks exposed at or close to low-water level
are predominantly fresh to slightly weathered. There is a close relationship
between rock type and the pattern of the rock exposures. Apparently this is
because of marked differences between the common rock types in their resist-
ance to the erosive effects of the river and to chemical weathering.
The fissile siltstones and shales are evidently the most readily eroded
and are seldom exposed more than 50 cm above low-water level. They usually
form either floors of channels, as at Preah Trorpeeung, or wide expanses of
unvegetated or sparsely vegetated rock very close to low-water level, as in
the siltstone beds of the Chaik Tom Formation exposed in the low-lying island
between Cha Sorowoo and Preah Trorpeeung (Figure 13, Sketch Section B).


In such areas the beds are invariably fresh, and are usually very firm and
compact. Limonite stained joints, and joints which are slightly open due to
leaching out of their calcite coatings, have been observed in a few places
but are not common. Some mechanical loosening of the rock along joint or
bedding planes has occurred where the roots of shrubs or trees have penetrated
into the rock. The depth of root penetration is estimated to be less than 50
cm in most areas of shale or siltstone.
The massive sandstones, and the intrusive sill and dyke rocks, are
apparently more resistant to erosion, and commonly form vegetated islands or
chains of islands most of which extend more than 1 m above low-water level.
Many of these islands, probably because they form partial obstructions to the
river at high and medium flows, are partly covered by sandy alluvium
particularly at their downstream ends. The rocks themselves are usually
fresh to slightly weathered, often with a superficial slightly to moderately
weathered layer,less than 5 cm thick on exposed surfaces and adjacent to
joints. Sketch Section Con Figure 13 shows outcrops of fresh to slightly
weathered sandstone near the track to Drill Hole 4002; these are typical of
the exposures of the Kbal Cheour Formation. Joints are either limonite
stained or open from Imm to 2.5 cm. The open joints appear to have resulted
partly by the leaching out of calcite coatings and veins, and partly by the
weathering of the rock near the joints and the subsequent removal of the
weathered material by erosion.
In many of the thickly vegetated outcrops well above low-water levels,
the roots of shrubs appear to penetrate deeply into joints which are often
open several centimetres. Many joint blocks appear to have been dislodged
slightly from their original positions. In such cases continual weathering
along joints and removal of the soft, weathered material by water scouring


has probably produced open slots, allowing joint blocks to move. The
presence of soft, weathered material along joints, or of widely gaping joints
backfilled with silt or sand, has provided conditions suitable for the growth
of shrubs. Sketch Don Figure 13 shows the intrusive sill which occurs
persistently in the Kakot Formation and forms a chain of elongated islands,
most of which extend from 1 to 2 m above low-water level, and are of the
vegetated type described above.
Outcrops of limestone interbedded with shale and siltstone along the west
bank of the Mekong River show extensive weathering by solution, both at the
surface of the rock and along the joints. Joints at water-level are conm.only
open several centimetres, giving the area of outcrop the appearance of a pile
of loose blocks shifted slightly from their original positions. Some gaps
occur in the rock outcrops near masses of brecciated rock in which angular
rock fragments are re-cemented by calcite. Some buff-coloured beds effervesce
vigorously with cold dilute hydrochloric acid, while darker, finer-grained
types give little or no reaction. It appears that the latter, which are
more shaly types, are not subject to weathering by solution.
(b) Flood Plain and Valley Slopes
Weathering under the monsoon climate has produced laterite profiles above
elevation 20 m; below this elevation the ground is subject to yearly flooding
which has prevented completion of this process. On the west bank, beyond
the buried river channel, where the topography is uniform over large areas,
the laterite profile is correspondingly regular. On the east bank where the
topography is more variable, the laterite profile is irregular and in many
places incomplete.
The laterite profile can be subdivided into the following three distinct
zones on the west bank; these can also be distinguished locally on the east


bank.
"Surface Zone". On the west bank this zone consists of a layer of
brown,or grey, lean silt normally 10 to 20 cm thick, but up to 1 m deep in
some creeks and depressions. On the east bank the zone is often 50 cm to
1 m thick and consists of white or pale grey, leached sandy clay or brown
clayey topsoil. Almost all roots and other organic matter exposed in the
excavations occur in this zone.
(ii) "Ferruginous Zone". On the west bank- this zone is from 30 cm to
1.5 m thick (average 60 cm) and is separated from the surface zone by a sharp
horizontal boundary. It consists of a gravel formed by subspherical
ferruginous nodules 0.2 to 2 cm diameter set in a matrix of mottled brown and
white plastic clay. The gravel has a high dry strength and low shrinkage.
On the east bank this zone is mostly 40 cm to 1 m thick, but is in many places
indistinguishable from the surface zone into which it grades. It consists
of ferruginous nodules, similar to those on the west bank, set in a silt,
sand or clay matrix.
(iii) "Mottled Zone". On the west bank this zone is separated from the
"ferruginous zone" by a sharp but irregular boundary and varies from 20 cm to
more than 4 m thick (average 1 m). On the east bank the boundary with the
ferruginous zone is mostly gradational and the mottled zone is generally less
than 1 m thick. The material on both banks is similar and consists of grey
to white, plastic, kaolinitic clay with irregular red and yellow iron oxide
mottling. This clay has a high dry strength and high shrinkage.
The total thickness of the laterite profile is generally 1 to 3 m.
The mottled zone grades downward into highly weathered parent rock which
can be recognized by its intact joints and bedding. The upper portion of
this material is easily broken down mechanically to form, in the case of


shale, a silty gravel with angular fragments 1 to 4 cm long and, in the case of
sandstone, a well graded silty sand with maximum grainsize of 0.5 mm. These
materials have low plasticity, moderate to low shrinkage and low to moderate
dry strength.
Similar highly weathered rock underlies the alluvium on the flood plains
and in the buried river channel. Fresh rock was not reached in any of the
excavations but in most drill holes occurred within 4 m of the base of the
alluvium.
Post depositional weathering of the alluvium in the buried river channel
has often resulted in the formation of ferruginous nodules in a zone up to
1 m thick which is generally located 50 cm to 2 m below the ground surface.
For several metres below this zone the material has a mottled colour due to
partial segregation of iron oxides.
GROUNDWATER
By the end of the wet season in September-October, up to elevation 20 m
the water-table is at the surface and from elevation 20 m to 40 m is within
a few metres of the surface. Wells and excavations in December-January show
that the water-table falls to a depth of 2 to 3 m in low-lying areas, and to
more than 3m in the higher parts of the country. At this time Prek Kampi
and all the small non-perennial creeks cease flowing, but seepages from the
base of the silt banks along the river edge cause widespread slips. At the
end of the dry season in April-May the groundwater level in deep wells and
excavations is between 4 and 7 m below the surface, and most of the scattered
water holes are dry, with the exception of the large swamp areas behind the
levee banks. Scattered showers of rain in March and April start to refill


the water holes, but creeks remain dry until May. The river level falls
steadily from December to April, but during May it begins to rise with the
onset of the wet season.




PART 4 - DETAILED GEOLOGY OF THE DAM SITE
The location of the preferred axis for the Sambor Dam on Samboc Rapids
is shown on Figure 3, with one alignment for the west bank and the river
channel, and two alternative alignments for the east bank. The alignments
for each bank and the river channel are described separately.
A possible alternative location for the dam axis has been considered,
from 300 to 900 m to the south of the preferred axis in the river section,
and linking up with the preferred axis about one kilometre inland on both
banks. The geological conditions of the river section along this alternative
axis are also described briefly.
WEST BANK (Figures 7 and 8)
The type of structure envisaged for the west bank is an embankment of
rolled earth-fill with rip-rap on the upstream face. Adjacent to the river
there would be a transition from the earth-fill section of the dam to the
central concrete section. The earth embankment would have a maximum height
✓
of about 20 m above natural ground surface, and would extend for 10.7 km in
a westerly and north-westerly direction, to reach an elevation of 40 m.
The alignment commences at the bend in the Mekong River near Chuoy
Ban,teai village. For the first 500 m the line passes along the top of the
silt levee bank and then passes for 2800 m west to north-west across the
buried river channel. From the western edge of this channel it follows the
highest ground to the west and north.
At the Mekong River edge, loosely jointed, slightly to moderately
weathered sandstone outcrops extend up to 5 m above low-water level, and are
overlain by silty alluvium. Drill Hole 4107 was drilled from the top of the


silt bank in this area, sloped at 45° towards the river. At 5.5 m the hole
passed from alluvial silt into highly to moderately weathered shale and
sandstone. From 12 to 18.5 m alternating fresh and moderately weathered
shale was recovered. Below 18.5 m the core consisted of fresh sandstone
and shale with an average joint spacing of about 40 cm. There were numerous
calcite veins from 0.5 to 3 cm wide and a few zones of closely jointed rock
up to 50 cm wide. No water return was recorded below 15 m. In the water
pressure tests of 4 to 8 m long sections between 15 and 40 m, no pressure
could be raised at the full pump capacity of 55 litres per minute. Moderate
leakages occurred between 40 m and 60 m, and very small leakages were measured
from here to the end of the hole at 91.5 m. It is probable that numerous
open joints exist in the rock down to about 60 m (inclined distance), and the
joints become tighter below this depth.
Drill Hole 4108, a vertical hole, was drilled 250 m west of Drill Hole
4107, near the edge of the silt bank facing the low water navigation channel.
The hole passed through 4 m of alluvium, then into completely weathered
sandstone to 6 m, below which alternating beds of sandstone and shale occurred.
The rock became gradually fresh with depth, and the lowest noted limonite
stained joint was at 16.9 m. Full core was recovered from 6m to the end of
the hole at 61 m. Water pressure tests of the section from 10.5 to 14.5 m
showed high leakages, but below this depth most sections showed small or
moderate leakages indicating tighter, less permeable rock. High leakages
were again obtained in the section between 26.5 and 30.5 m, and the perme-
ability of the rock mass here was probably related to a crushed zone 4 cm
thick, partly recemented by calcite. Low leakages occurred from 30.5 mto
the end of the hole. The joint spacing in the core throughout the hole
ranged from 10 to 50 cm except in the vicinity of several 5 to 20 cm thick


crushed zones.
Drill Holes 4102, 4103, 4104 and 4105 were all vertical holes, located
at 400 to 500 m intervals across the western part of the buried river channel.
The holes ranged from 10.6 to 15.1 m in depth, and showed from 6 to 11 m of
sandy alluvium, overlying fresh to moderately weathered Tmor Moykbyk Beds.
The holes were not water-pressure tested.
A sample of the sandy alluvium from Drill Hole 4102 showed a Liquid
Limit of 36, and Plasticity Index of 14 and a Linear Shrinkage of 6.5%.
A sieve analysis showed 28% clay with little silt. A field permeability
test in the sandy alluvium at this point showed a permeability of 60 m per
- 6
year (190 xlO cm per sec.) Another field permeability test in sandy
alluvium at Drill Hole 4103 showed a permeability of 22 m per year
(70 xlO cm per sec.), and a similar test at Drill Hole 4104 showed a
- 6
permeability of 11 m per year (35 xlO cm per sec.)
West of the buried river channel, in the area between the 25 and 35 m
contours, the excavations showed 1 to 1.5 m of soil overlying weathered rock.
Between the 35 and 40 m contours, 'the depth of soil overlying weathered rock
was from 1.5 to 2.5 m. Only in Excavations 136 and 137 did the depth of soil
exceed these figures. In these excavations rock was not reached at a depth
of sm; large calcareous nodules in the soil suggest that the deep soil
*>
overlies weathered calcareous rocks.
Some of the overlying soil and some of the weathered rock may have to be
removed to prepare a foundation for the rolled earth embankment. Details of
the features encountered in the excavations are shown in Volume 3 of this
report.


RIVER CHANNEL (Figures 8 and 9)
The type of structure envisaged for the river section of the dam is a
concrete structure about 2 km long, comprising the spillway, hydro-electric
facilities and navigation lock. The concrete section would have a maximum
height of 45 m above the river bed.
The preferred alignment is shown in Figure 8. It extends from Drill
Hole 4107 on the west bank across Drill Holes 4113 and 4112 near the junction
of Tmor Moykbyk and Cha Sorowoo channels, and then across to Drill Hole 4106
near the mouth of Prek Kampi.
The generally rocky surface of the river channel lies mostly between
elevations 5 and 10 m. The rock exposed in the river is slightly weathered
to fresh, the degree of weathering depending to a large extent on the rock
type. Some open joints and narrow extensively weathered zones are evident at
and near the rock surfaces, but it is likely that a foundation suitable for
the proposed concrete structures could be obtained in most places within 1 to
3 m of exposed rock surfaces.
In the western section the river bed level drops to elevation zero in the
trough which runs roughly parallel to the west bank. River soundings by an
echo-sounder have shown that this trough becomes both wider and deeper further
downstream but it is not known whether the floor, as indicated by the echo-
sounder, is bedrock or alluvial filling. This trough downstream from the axis
could be used for the approach channel for the navigation lock.
The preferred alignment is intersected by two known steeply dipping
faults, namely, the Cha Sorowoo and Quorng Faults. These appear to intersect
about 100 m downstream from the axis, in the vicinity of the deep trough near
the western bank. Drill Holes 4112, 4113 and 4101 were put down in the
vicinity of the Cha Sorowoo and Quorng fault zones. Drill Holes 4112 and


4113 are located on the preferred axis, and Drill Hole 4101 is on the
alternative axis roughly 400 m downstream. All three holes showed rock
was mainly firm and compact, and in most places almost watertight.
Drill Holes 4101 and 4113 passed through several sheared, flaky zones, and
soft crushed seams up to 50 cm wide which would represent local zones of
weaknesses in the dam foundation. Several healed brecciated zones and
intensely folded beds were met in Drill Hole 4112, but in this hole there
were no soft seams which would represent significant weaknesses in the dam
foundation.
The Quorng Fault was also intersected by Drill Hole 4002, at a point
400 m from the east bank, about Ikm north of the preferred axis. The rock
was mostly siltstone and shale of the Kakot Formation and was fresh through-
out. Calcite coated joints were closely spaced (generally less than 10 cm)
in most of the core, and numerous soft crushed seams varying from 1 to 10 cm
wide were present.
In addition to these known faults there are several other narrower faults
present which may intersect the preferred axis. These would include those
inferred from the detailed geological mapping, and shown on Figure 8, and
probably other minor faults obscured by deep water or alluvium which were not
found in the detailed mapping or exploration.
EAST BANK
The type of structure envisaged for the east bank is an embankment of
rolled earth-fill, with rip-rap on the upstream face. Adjacent to the river
there would be a transition from the earth-fill section of the dam on the east
bank to the concrete section of the dam in the river. The earth embankment
would have a maximum height of about 20 m above natural ground surface and


would extend 7.7 km for the north-east alternative, or almost 10 km for the
south-east alternative, to reach an elevation of 40 m.
North-east Alternative (Figures 8 and 10)
This commences near the mouth of Prek Kampi and follows high ground to
the north and east. At the Mekong River edge, and in the bed of Prek Kampi
nearby, fresh to moderately weathered outcrops of sandstone (Kbal Cheour
Formation) extend up to 2 m above low-water level and are covered by silty
alluvium. Drill Hole 4106 was drilled vertically from the top of the silt
bank, to test the foundation conditions in this area. After passing through
10.1 m of recent alluvial silt, the hole encountered felspathic sandstone
interbedded with some shale. The rock was fresh right dcwn to the end of
the hole at 61 m. Caving of Ito 3 cm rock fragments occurred from the
sides of the hole between 28 and 34 m. This section of the hole was cemented
and finally cased, and no water pressure tests were made in it. From 11 to
13.5 m the leakage from water pressure tests was high, and from 13.5 to 24.5 m
it was moderate to slight. Below 34 m the leakage was very small, suggesting
that the joints in the rock in this section are mostly tight and impermeable.
Along most of the line inland from the river edge the ground surface
is covered by silty or sandy soil. Surface exposures of weathered in-situ
rock are rare along or near the first kilometre of the line, that is, west of
Prek Bung. To the east of Prek Bung exposures of weathered shale and sand-
stone are common in deeply eroded sections of tracks, and in creek beds.
A total of 35 excavations were dug in the vicinity of the proposed line.
Along the first 600 to 700 m inland from the river, the results of Drill
Hole 4106 and Excavations 94 to 97 suggest that silty alluvium occurs to a
depth of stolo m, overlying partly weathered rock. Further to the north
and east the excavations showed the weathered rock surface to be generally


within 2 m of the ground surface, except in the vicinity of Prek Bung.
Here a depth of 4 m of alluvium was found over a length of 100 m, in a section
across the creek bed.
Some of the overlying soil, whether alluvial or residual, and possibly
some of the weathered rock, may have to be removed to prepare a foundation
for the rolled earth embankment in this area. Apart from considerations of
permeability and compressibility, the stripping depth would have to take into
account the presence of roots and root holes, animal burrows and shrinkage
cracks. Details of these features are shown on the Test Pit and Auger Hole
Logs, Volume 3 of this report.
South-east Alternative (Figures 8, 9 and 11)
This alignment also commences from the mouth of Prek Kampi but follows the
high ground to the south and east. Foundation conditions near the mouth of
Prek Kampi are probably similar to those for the north-east alternative,
that is, roughly 10 m of alluvial silt overlying sandstone of the Kbal Cheour
Formation, as indicated by Drill Hole 4106. A similar section was shown by
Drill Hole 4114, drilled from the top of the silt bank about 200 m south from
Prek Kampi mouth.
Further inland the ground surface is mainly soil-covered, with a few
isolated rock outcrops and weathered rock exposures in eroded wheel-tracks.
A total of 23 excavations were dug to explore this alignment and for the first
500 to 600 m inland they showed alluvial material to depths of 2 to 3 m with-
out reaching bedrock. Further inland, the majority of excavations showed
in-situ rock at a maximum depths of 1.5 m, under either alluvial or residual
soil.
As with the north-east alternative, some of the overlying soil and some
of the weathered rock may have to be removed to prepare a foundation for the


rolled earth embankment. Details of the features encountered in the
excavations are shown in Volume 3 of this report.
ALTERNATIVE DOWNSTREAM ALIGNMENT
The river section of this alignment passes in a straight line from Drill
Hole 4101 on the west bank to Drill Hole 4100 on the east bank; it is 200 m
shorter than the preferred axis. The water depths in the vicinity of the
downstream alignment are generally greater, and there is considerably less
rock exposed during low water, than at the preferred axis. Possibly associat-
ed with this deeper water and decrease in exposed rock, is the relatively
large number of minor faults and closely jointed zones found during the
detailed mapping of the Rapids downstream from the mouth of Prek Kampi.
Many of these faults and zones of joints belong to a very pronounced set of
steeply dipping joints, striking N 50 to 70 E, that is, at small angles to
both the preferred axis and alternative alignment. As they become more numer-
ous downstream from Prek Kampi mouth, the majority of these structures would
appear to miss the preferred axis in the river section and intersect the down-
stream alternative in many places. Because of the presence of these structures
it is considered that foundation conditions at the downstream alternative would
be generally inferior to those at the preferred axis.
It is possible, but by no means certain, that Cha Sorowoo and Quorng
Faults may affect the rock at the preferred axis to a greater extent than
that at the downstream alternative.
The deep trough near the west bank has been shown by echo-soundings to
become deeper and wider downstream from the preferred axis. This is consider-
ed to be another factor in favour of the preferred axis.


PART 5 - CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS RECONNAISSANCE
The scope of the survey for construction materials at Sambor dam site
(3)
was defined in the Sargeant-Moye Report page 62 as a
"Reconnaissance in just enough detail to ensure that sufficient
quantities of suitable materials are available at convenient locations."
The construction materials considered are fine and coarse concrete aggregates
and earth and rock materials for the dam embankments.
CONCRETE AGGREGATES
As described earlier, extensive alluvial deposits are exposed in the channel
of the Mekong River during the low-water stages. These deposits could provide
both coarse and fine concrete aggregates for Sambor Dam. During geological
mapping of the Rapids, two samples of gravel and three of sand were taken from
alluvial deposits in the river channel. Each sample weighed about 2 kg when
dry. The co-ordinates and location of these samples are set out in the
following table:
Location of Sand and Gravel Samples
Sample
Number
Type of
Material
Co-ordinates
Location
1385
Gravel
E.609 km 300 m
Island near Cha Sorowoo,
N.1395km 070m
extending 1 m above low-
1393
Sand
water level.
1386
Gravel
E.609 km 800 m
Extensive sandy beach on
N.1391km 600 m
west bank of Mekong, opposite
Samboc village. Gravel
1394
Sand
sample is from below low-
water level, and sand sample
from above low-water level.
1392
Sand
E.608 km 150 m
Island extending 3 m above
N.1396km 250 m
low-water level, near low-
water navigation channel.


These samples are not necessarily representative of the bulk of the
sand and gravel deposits in the Rapids area, as they are small quantities
taken from only three localities.
Each sample was dried and then sieved mechanically using British Standard
(8.5.0.) sieves. The results are shown in tabular form and also graphically
on Figures 14 to 18 inclusive. The particle size-distribution graphs are
shown with B.S. sieve numbers and apertures in inches at the bottom, and
with the corresponding figures in millimetres at the top. Because of the
small sizes of the samples it was not possible to carry out any of the normal
large-scale laboratory tests to determine their suitability as concrete
aggregates.
The gravel samples are possibly not representative of the bulk of the
gravel deposits in the Samboc Rapids area but they probably contain the
majority of rock types likely to be encountered in the locally occurring
deposits. The individual fractions of the gravel samples were examined
•petrographically to obtain a general indication of the rock types present.
The results of this examination are set out in Appendix B.
It was not possible to sample the gravels appreciably below low-water
level, and it is therefore not known whether river gravels occur in the larger
sizes. This means that natural aggregates may have to be augmented by crushed
selected rock.
EARTH AND ROCK MATERIALS FOR DAM EMBANKMENTS
The investigations of the Sambor dam site were aimed not only at testing
the foundation conditions for the structure itself, but also at providing
information on the nature and distribution of the earth and rock materials for
the dam embankments. The details of the excavations are given in Volume 3


of this report, and their location is shown on the maps in Volume 4.
(a) Earth Embankment Materials
With the possible exception of the brown silty alluvium occurring
adjacent to the river banks, most of the soil encountered could be incorporated
in the structure as rolled earth-fill. Material can be taken from strips
adjacent to the dam axis to be placed in the embankment section. These areas
would probably have to be stripped of topsoil at the same time as the area
for the dam foundation. Although the earth material would be of variable
composition from one end of the axis to the other, it is probable that the
variations in soil properties would be of a gradual rather than an abrupt
nature. The borrow areas would probably be of shallow depth, of the order of
3 m, because of the closeness of the underlying rock.
(b) Rock-fill and Rip-rap
There is a scarcity of readily accessible rock, suitable for rock-fill
and rip-rap. Rock of a satisfactory nature occurs in surface exposures in
the eastern portion of Samboc Rapids, where surface boulders of sandstone from
the Kbal Cheour Formation have been used as a facing of rip-rap to protect the
river bank from erosion during floods. This rock was also used as coarse
aggregate in the concrete for the arch bridge over Prek Kampi. The quantity
of this sandstone which is available in this area appears to be limited.
Drill Holes 4001, 4106, 4114 and 4100 all passed through sandstone of good
quality but with depths of overburden from 3 to 14 m.
Sandstone similar to that in the Kbal Cheour Formation occurs both to the
north and to the south of the dam site area. To the north, there are some
shallow surface quarries near the road, about 12 km from Prek Kampi (Photo 19).
Rock from these quarries has been used in the macadam surfacing of Highway
Route No. 13. The stratigraphic thickness of the sandstone has been measured


as 350 m, so that a quarry site located in a region of flat dips should have
ample reserves. The surface topography is such that the quarry would have
to be dug as an open pit. Quarry sites in this area would be nearest to the
north-eastern alignment.
To the south of Prek Kampi, the sandstone outcrops on a low ridge to the
east of Samboc village, where detailed exploration in this area may reveal a
quarry site.
The Kampi Conglomerate was explored by the Japanese Team with Excavations
257 to 265. Boulders up to 30 cm in size were encountered, mixed with cobbles
and pebbles, but in the depths explored it was found that most of the con-
stituents had broken down into fragments from 2to 10 cm. Some areas of
the conglomerate appear to be silicified, and outcrop boldly over areas up
to a hectare. The usefulness of the rock in this area as material for rock-
fill and rip-rap will depend on the depth of stripping required to reach
fresh, unbroken material.
Existing surface workings, north from Kratie airstrip, supply a compact
fine-grained sandstone used extensively for macadam and also as building stone.
Some interbedded shaly material which deteriorates on exposure can be avoided
by selective working. This area could be of importance for the outer portion
of the south-eastern alignment, with a length of haul of the order of 5 km.
Adequate sources for rock-fill and rip-rap have not been found on the
west bank. The Tmor Moykbyk Beds, which outcrop over the full width of
the 10.7 km investigated, consist of interbedded sandstone, siltstone and shale.
Individual beds of sandstone of workable width were not encountered in the
exploration. Excavations 185 to 195 were dug by the Japanese team for the
investigation of a site for a rock quarry. Where encountered, (at depths
from 2 to 3m), the rock was mainly highly to moderately weathered, and any


occurrence of sandstone was limited to beds of 1 m thickness, in a sequence
containing up to 50% shale. The limestone encountered or inferred at
various places was not found to occur in beds of workable widths.
Further exploration may show durable rock under economic depths of
overburden allowing for a quarry site to be developed near the dam axis.
It appears more likely that the rock required on the west bank would have
to be hauled from an as yet unknown source or transported across the river
from the east bank.




TEXT REFERENCES
(1) R.A. Wheeler, (Chairman), "Program of Studies and Investigations
for Comprehensive Development, Lower Mekong River Basin".
Report of United Nations Survey Mission, January 1958,
TAA/AFE/3, p. 19 and Tables 4 and 5.
(2) Committee for Co-ordination of Investigations of the Lower Mekong
Basin, Sixth Session, 15-19 October 1959, Summary of Conclusions
Reached at Sixth Session, E/CN.II/WRD/MKG/R.20, p.B.
(3) I.P. Sargeant and D.G. Moye, "Report on Geological Reconnaissance
of Pa Mong and Sambor Dam Site Areas, January 1960". Snowy
Mountains Hydro-electric Authority, Australia.
(4) Committee for Co-ordination of Investigations of the Lower Mekong
Basin, Eleventh Session, 23-26 November, 1960, Vientiane, Laos.
E/CN.II/WRD/MKG/R.32 Annex. 6.
(5) Bureau of Flood Control and Water Resources Development, ECAFE,
1957, "Development of Water Resources in the Lower Mekong Basin"
Flood Control Series No. 12, (E/CN. 11/457).
(6) C.C. Wood and D.H. Stapledon, "Interim Report: Geological
Investigations of Sambor Dam Sites Area" WRD/MKG/INF/R.52,
21 February 1961.
(7) Committee for Co-ordination of Investigations of the Lower Mekong
Basin, Thirteenth Session, 13-27 March 1961, India. Draft
report of the Thirteenth Session (Special) WRD/MKG/R.41
Annex. 10.
(8) Committee for Co-ordination of Investigations of the Lower Mekong
Basin, Mekong River Survey. Report on ground control survey
No. 1959-June 1960 by Brocklebank, Canada, Hunting Survey Corp.
(9) Committee for Co-ordination of Investigations of the Lower Mekong
Basin, Fourteenth Session, (Special) 31 May-2 June 1961,
Bangkok, Thailand. Draft Report of the Fourteenth Session
. (Special) WRD/MKG/R.46.
(10) D.H. Stapledon and C.C. Wood, "Progress Report on Geological
Investigations Sambor Dam Sites Cambodia", September 1961,
Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority, Australia.
(11) Committee for Co-ordination of Investigations of the Lower Mekong
Basin, Fifteenth Session (Special) 18-20 October 1961,
Bangkok, Thailand. Draft Report of the Fifteenth Session,
(Special) WRD/MKG/L.51. 7 December 1961.
(12) "Comprehensive Reconnaissance Report on the Major Tributaries of the
Lower Mekong Basin". Y. Kubota, Leader, Mekong Reconnaissance
Team organized by the Government of Japan, Tokyo, September 1961.


(13) Committee for Co-ordination of Investigations of the Lower Mekong
Basin, "Estimated Probable Maximum Floods of the Mekong at
Vientiane and Kratie", by R. Berthelot.
(WRD/MKG/INF/R.60 Rev. 1) Page 3.
(14) E. Saurin, Etudes geologiques sur l'lndochine du Sud-Est.
Bulletin du Service Geologique de l'lndochine Vol. XXII,
fascicule 1. Hanoi, 1935.
(15) E. Saurin, Carte Geologique de l'lndochine a l'echelle de
1/500.000e. Notice Sur La Feuille de Khong. Saigon 1955.
(16) J. Fromaget et F. Bonelli, A propos des materiaux d'Angkor et sur
quelques points de la stratigraphie et de la structure
geologique du Cambodge septentrional et oriental. Comptes
Rendues de l'Academie des Sciences, Paris, tome 195,
p. 588, September 1932.
(17) Earth Manual, United States Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Reclamation First Edition. Denver, Colorado. 1960.


APPENDIX A
PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION OF COMMON ROCK TYPES AT SAMBOC RAPIDS
The most common rock types in the Samboc Rapids area are sedimentary rocks
consisting mainly of felspathic sandstone and calcareous and micaceous
siltstone. Dykes or sills of intermediate composition intrude these sedi-
mentary rocks.
The petrographic description of these rocks is given below.
(a) Felspathic Sandstone
Five specimens were examined. In hand specimen the rock is light grey
in colour, medium-grained, with grains of quartz and white felspar and black
siltstone fragments. Minor amounts of pyrite (less than 0.5% by volume) are
present.
Under the microscope, the rock is composed of subangular to subroun4ed
grains of quartz and felspar, surrounded by sericite, chlorite, and granular
epidote. The most abundant minerals are quartz and felspar. Felspar occurs
as untwinned K-felspar, microline perthite and well-twinned plagioclase. The
✓
felspar is variably altered. Minor constituents include epidote which occurs
as clear grains of high relief and high birefringence calcite, and a green
chlorite probably pennine. Other micaceous minerals are a slightly chloritized
brown biotite and muscovite. Very minor amounts of amphibole or pyroxene
occur in some specimens. Rock fragments present are mainly metasedimentary
fragments and include siltstone, felspathic quartzite, biotite quartzite,
impure sandstone, carbonaceous shale and siltstone. Fragments of vein quartz,
trachyte and augite andesite occur in minor amounts.
(b) Siltstone
Banded calcareous siltstone and also micaceous siltstone are common rock


types. The calcareous siltstone probably grades into an impure silty
limestone with increasing calcite content. Micaceous siltstone contains
more biotite than the calcareous siltstone.
Fifteen specimens were examined. In hand specimen the calcareous
siltstone is extremely fine-grained and dark grey in colour. Lustrous flakes
of muscovite are apparent on the surface of the rock. Tests with cold,
dilute hydrochloric acid gave a vigorous reaction, indicating the presence
of abundant calcite.
Under the microscope the grainsize was found to be 0.02 to 0.3 mm.
The rock is mainly composed of abundant calcite, quartz, biotite, sericite/
muscovite, and rare grains of plagioclase. Calcite occurs as interstitial
interlocking grains or as larger grains, about 0.07 mm in diameter. The
range of the estimated mineral composition of the siltstones is as follows:
Calcite 13-50 )
)
Quartz 30-55 )
)
Total Mica 0-35 )
) Percent by volume
Sericite 0-25 )
)
Opaques 0 - 8 )
)
Remainder 0-7 )
(c) Dyke Rocks
Dykes or sills of intermediate composition intrude the sedimentary
sequence. Five specimens were examined. In hand specimen the rocks are
fine-grained although one specimen was considerably coarser-grained. The
rocks are greenish-grey and rather massive and are composed of abundant
pyroxene and/or amphibole and felspar.
Under the microscope, the main minerals were green hornblende, colourless
augite and plagioclase. Quartz is a very minor constituent. One specimen


was characterized by the presence of actinolite. The rocks are generally
non-porphyritic and granular in texture. Alteration of the felspar into
calcite and epidote, and ferromagnesian minerals to chlorite, occur to a
variable degree. Minor amounts of K-felspar, sphene and pyrite occur.




APPENDIX B
PETROGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION OF GRAVEL SAMPLES
The individual sieve fractions of the two gravel samples (Sample Nos.
1385 and 1386), were examined petrographically. Those fractions larger
than B.S. sieve 14 were divided into groups according to rock type. The
composition of each of the fractions, by means of the percentage by weight
of the fragments of each rock type, are shown in tabular form.
GRAVEL SAMPLE 1385
Composition
Percentages (by weight) of Sieve
Fractions
Rock Type
Retained
on B.S. Sieve
Passing
3/4 in.
3/8 in.
3/16 in.
3/16 in.
IGNEOUS ROCKS
Porphyritic acid volcanics
33.2
12.8
15.8
Intermediate volcanics
7.4
N
4-1
SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
J-4
cd
£
cr
Felspathic sandstone
3.,6
5.6
8.1
•
o u
<D
Sandstone
Siltstone
_
5.1
0.9
-
CO 4-1
4-1 4J
CO cd
,_j a
Other Sedimentary Rocks
20.9
32.5
28.6
4.0
p
CO
£ O
Slate
—
O -H
O £
£ bO
OTHERS
O U
•H O
4-1
Quartz
21.4
35.6
34.0
O X)
cd £
Chert
13.5
3.2
1.6
<4-4
Cherty, chalcedonic opaline
4.3
-
CO 4-J
•i—1 r—1
rocks
X -H
H co
TOTAL
100
100
92.1
Rock Types
Both igneous and sedimentary rock types are present. The igneous rocks
are porphyritic acid to intermediate volcanics. Fragments of granitic rock


occur rarely in the coarse fractions. Sedimentary rocks are mainly impure
felspathic sandstone, sandstone, siltstone and other indurated sedimentary
rock. Cherty rocks probably containing minerals such as chalcedony, and
rarely, common opal are present. The quartz group which is often the most
abundant group in a particular sieve fraction is composed of vein quartz,
milky quartz and light coloured, aphanitic silica-rich rocks.
Weathering
Weathering in most rock types is slight to moderate. Advanced weather-
ing is seen in the intermediate volcanics and some fragments of sandstone.
Particle Shape
Fine-grained rock fragments tend to be elongate or flaky. Coarser-
grained fragments are irregularly equidimensional. Indurated sedimentary
rocks tend to be elongate or subtabular or roughly equidimensional. Sandstone
fragments tend to be elongate and, occasionally, flaky. Siltstone fragments
are flaky or tabular. Quartz fragments have an irregularly equidimensional
shape.
Roundness
Indurated sedimentary rocks and sandstone are mostly in subrounded or,
occasionally, rounded fragments. Quartz and chert fragments are angular or
subangular.
Surface Texture
Chert, siltstone and indurated sedimentary rocks have mostly a smooth
surface texture. Volcanic rocks are smooth but slightly pitted or granular.
Sandstones have a granular surface texture. Chert fragments are commonly
pitted.
Coatings
No surface coatings are present apart from fine dust.


Chemical Stability
The bulk of the sample is composed of quartz and indurated sedimentary
rocks. These are unlikely to be reactive with the alkalies in cement.
The chemical stability of the volcanic rocks is not known. The small group
q£ cherty, chalcedonic or opaline rocks is suspect for potential alkali
aggregate reactivity.
GRAVEL SAMPLE 1386
Composition
Percentages (by weight) of
Sieve
Fractions
Rock Type
Retained on B.S. Sieve
3/4in.
3/8in.
3/16in.
7
14
25
52
100
Pan
IGNEOUS ROCKS
Porphyritic volcanics
12.4
9.8
4.6
4.9
-
Granite
-
0.4
0.1
SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
Felspathic sandstone
5.6
4.1
8.1
-
-
Sandstone
9.8
3.2
-
-
-
Siltstone
-
4.7
7.8
-
-
+
Pale brown chert
19.5
-
-
-
-
Cherty, chalcedonic
8.7
5.6
2.6
0.7
opaline rocks
Other sedimentary
42.6
36.7
37.4
35.5
33.0
+
+
+
+
rocks
OTHERS
Quarts
10.1
30.8
34.6
44.4
58.4
++
++
-H-
++
Ferruginous oolites
-
-
0.9
12.4
7.0
+
+
+
+
Biotite, muscovite
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
Organic impurities
-
-
-
-
0.1
+
+
+
+
TOTAL
100
98.4
99.1
99.8
99.2
+ present
-H- abundant
Rock Types
The sample is similar in composition to sample 1385. Igneous rocks are
represented by porphyritic acid to intermediate volcanics and a very minor


amount of granitic material. Granitic quartz is relatively abundant in the
fine fractions. The volcanics are porphyritic in texture, with distinct
felspar phenocrysts. Flow orientation is rarely seen.
Sedimentary rocks and quartz are most abundant in approximately equal
proportions. Impure sandstone, indurated siltstone, sandstone and a pale
brown chert are the sedimentary rock types recognized. Sedimentary rocks
are commonly grouped as "indurated sedimentary rocks especially in the finer
fractions. These indurated sedimentary rocks are massive and fine-grained.
Coloured, aphanitic, silica-rich rocks are classified as chert, (usually a
pale brown variety). Some probably contain chalcedony or common opal (cherty,
chalcedonic or opaline rocks).
Ferruginous oolites occur in the finer fractions these oolites appear
to be composed of different rock types which have undergone "Lateritisation 1 .
The oolites are well-rounded particles with a coating of ferruginous material.
A few of the oolites are attracted by a magnet.
The quartz group includes milky quartz, clear quartz, granitic quartz
with traces of felspar, and light coloured, aphanitic, silica-rich rock
fragments.
Finer fractions contain biotite and muscovite flakes which make up 5 to 77,
of the fraction passing the 3/16 inch sieve.
Weathering
Nearly all particles are slightly to moderately weathered. The volcanic
rocks, cherts and quartz are generally slightly weathered and the sandstones
are generally slightly to moderately weathered.
Particle Shape
The sedimentary rocks tend to be elongate to equidimensional, with some
flaky, ovoid or tabular particles. Quartz fragments are irregularly shaped,


often nearly equidimensional. Siltstone fragments are flaky, subtabular or
elongate. Porphyritic volcanics are equidimensional or elongate, tending to
be flaky or tabular. The impure sandstone fragments are subtabular or elongate.
Roundness
Most rock fragments are subrounded. Quartz and some cherty rocks and
flaky indurated sedimentary rocks are subangular. Ferruginous oolites are
well rounded.
Surface Texture
Most rock fragments have a rather smooth surface texture. Cherts and
some quartz particles are commonly pitted. Sandstone fragments have a
granular surface texture. Ferruginous oolites have a polished, smooth
surface texture.
Coatings
No surface coatings are present apart from fine dust.
Chemical Stability
The chemical stability of the porphyritic volcanic rocks and cherts is
not known. The cherty, chalcedonic or bpaline rocks are suspect for potential
alkali-aggregate reactivity. The indurated sedimentary rocks and quartz which
make up the bulk of the sample are probably chemically innocuous.


SAMBOR DAM SITE
SAMBOC RAPIDS , PHOTOMOSAIC


PHOTO 2
Exploration using Auger.
PHOTO 3
Diamond Drill in operation at Sambor Dam Site.


PHOTO 4
Samboc Rapids near the mouth of Prek Kampi
Diamond Drill Hole 4106 in foreground.
PHOTO 5
Typical narrow channel between densely vegetated islands in Samboc
Rapids.


PHOTO 6
Samboc Rapids, 7th November 1961.
PHOTO 7
Samboc Rapids, 6th January 1962.


PHOTO 8
Silt levee bank near Prek Kampi bridge. The bank is being actively
eroded by the river and preventive measures in the form of wicker-
work have been carried out to protect the road.
PHOTO 9
Shrinkage cracks up to 4 cm wide developed in alluvial silt on
flood plain behind levee banks.


PHOTO 10
Typical open forest of softwoods on the valley slopes beyond the
flood plains.


PHOTO 11
Typical exposures of Tmor Moykbyk Beds.
PHOTO 12
Calcareous sandstone of the Tmor Moykbyk Beds showing slump
structure.


PHOTO 13
Chang Krang Shale exposed in Prek Kampl.
PHOTO 14
Kampi Conglomerate exposed in Prek Kampi showing a thin
felspathic sandstone band in poorly sorted conglomerate.


PHOTO 15
Chaik Tom Formation. Shale and siltstone outcrops west of Preah
Trorpeeung.
PHOTO 16
Karng Preah Formation. Sandstone outcrop on island in Mekong
River.


PHOTO 17
Kbal Cheour Formation. Sandstone outcrops in shallow channel near
east bank.
PHOTO 18
Kbal Cheour Formation. Sandstone outcrops in Prek Kampi showing
prominent dip slope along bedding. Background is base of silt
levee bank.


PHOTO 19
Sandstone suitable for rock-fill near existing road quarries. (12 km
north along road from Prek Kampi).


MAP SHOWING
LOCATION OF SAMBOR PROJECT
FIGURE 1
S. 7 I


FIGURE 2.
MEKONG RIVER
ELEVATION OF FREE SURFACE LINE
IN VICINITY OF SAMBOR DAM SITE
S. 72


FIGURE 3


FIGURE 4


FIGURE 5


FIGURE 6


FIGURE 7


FIGURE 8


FIGURE 9


FIGURE 10


FIGURE 11


FIGURE 12


FIGURE 13


FIGURE 14


FIGURE 15


FIGURE 16


FIGURE 17


FIGURE 18






