

Private Circulation.
GEORGE BENNETT, M.D.,




George Bennett, M.D.,
F.R.C.S., F.L.S., F.Z.S., ETC.
George Bennett was born at Plymouth on the 31st of January,
1804. In 1819 he visited Ceylon, and in 1821 returned by way
of the Mauritius (where he remained six months) to England,
when he immediately entered into training for the Medical
Profession. He studied for the first few years in Plymouth, and
subsequently in London, both at the Middlesex Hospital and at the
Windmill-street School, under Charles Bell, Herbert Mayo,
and Hawkins. He became a Member of the Eoyal
College of Surgeons in 1828, and was made a Fellow of the same
Institution in 1859, in which year he also obtained the degree of
M.D. of Glasgow University. After obtaining his medical
status, he went on a voyage for scientific purposes, the result of
which is laid down in various papers printed in the Asiatic, United
Service, and Medical and Physical Journals, also in the Medical
Gazette, Loudon's Magazine of Natural History, and other
Scientific Journals. At this time also he published observations
on the coniferous trees of New Zealand (February 6, 1832), in
Lambert’s Description of the Genus Pinus, and discovered a new
Pine, a Thuja, named by the Maoris, Kawaka, which was
described and figured by Sir William Hooker in the London
Journal of Botany (Vol. 1, p. 570), 1842, under the name of
Thuja Doniana. In the Royal Institution Journal for June, 1831,
he published a paper with an engraving on “ The mode of
Preparing Heads amongst the New Zealanders,” and in
December of the same year, he was elected a Fellow of the
Linnean Society of London. In 1831, also, he had contributed
several papers to the Mirror, then edited by Mr. Times, and
amongst these will be found the first published account (with an


engraving) of the monument to La Pbrousk at Botany, near
Sydney. He was also the first to discover the animal of the
Pearly Hautilus in a living state, and supplied his friend Professor
Owen with the then unique specimen which was so ably described
by the latter in a memoir published by the Council of the Eoyal
College of Surgeons of England in 1832. It had been
found floating in the water, in Marakini or Dillon’s Bay, Island
of Erromanga, Hew Hebrides Group, on the 24th of August,
1829, and was on the point of sinking when captured.
In the United Service Journal for 1831, he published papers on
several of the Polynesian Islands which he visited, viz., Rotuma,
Tongatabu, and some of the Hew Hebrides Group. In the
Asiatic Journal for 1831 and 1832, he published papers on the
Islands of Erromanga and Tanna, Hew Hebrides Group, in-
cluding also an account of the child Elau, a native of Erromanga;
this girl, the first of her race ever brought to England, arrived
there in 1831, and died in Plymouth in 1834. In the
same Journal he also published about this time other
papers on Manilla (Philippine Islands), on the Pulowat Islands,
(Caroline Group), and on the Polynesian dialects. In the
Medical Gazette for 1831-32, he contributed a number of papers,
among others being Hotes on the Karaka tree {Corynocarpus
laevigata), and on the Tutu or Tupakihi {Coriaria sarmentosa) or
Wine Berry-tree, the Puredi {Vitex littoralis), and other Hew
Zealand plants, with wood engravings by Vizbtelley; also
extracts from a Journal of Natural History, from England to
Hew South Wales, Batavia, Sumatra, Singapore, &c., a'nd Hotes
on the Practice of Medicine among the Hew Zealanders, and other
of the Polynesian Islanders. To the Medical and Physical
Journal for 1832, he contributed papers on the Kava, Nauclea
Garnbir, Ignatia Amara, and an account of the Intermittent
Fever at the Island of Erromanga. In a magazine which had
only an ephemeral existence, he gave Hotes on the Island of
Tahiti, 1831, and Hotes on the Sandwich Islands, 1831. In
Loudon's Magazine of Natural History (Vol. 5, 1832), he
contributed papers on the Botany of Tahiti; Hotices on the
Hative Plants of the Island of Rotuma ; an account of the
Ungka Ape of Sumatra (Simia syndactyla) ; an account of the


Sandalwood Tree, and observations on some of the plants of the
Sandwich Islands.
In 1832, he revisited Hew South Wales, to investigate
the habits and anatomy of the Monotremata and the Natural
History generally of the colony. His observations on the Orni-
thorhynchus are of the greatest importance to science. After
a visit to Java, Sumatra, Singapore, and China, he laid
down his observations in his first complete work. The Wanderings
of a Naturalist in New South Wales, Batavia, Pedir Coast,
Singapore and China, 2 vols. Bvo., 1834, Bentley. In 1884, he
was awarded the Honorary Gold Medal of the Koyal College
of Surgeons of England, for his discovery of the animal of the
Pearly Nautilus, and for preparations illustrating the generation
of the Kangaroo and Ornithorhynchus, both ably described by
Professor Owen in the Transactions of the Royal Society, for
1834. He was elected a Corresponding Member pf the Zoolog-
ical Society of London in 1832, and a Fellow of the Society in 1858.
He introduced into the Collection of the Society the first living
specimens of the Mooruk or Morrup (Casuarius Bennettii ),
Bennett’s Cassowary from New Britain in 1857-58 ; the Kagu
{Rhinochetus jubatus) from New Caledonia in 1862-63 ; the
Tooth-billed Pigeon, or little Dodo {Didunculus strigirostris) in
1864 ; Eyton’s Tree Duck {Dendrocygna Eytoni) in 1867 ; the
New Caledonia Rail) Ocydromus Lafresnayanus) in 1869 and
1873 ; the Wood Hen Rail from Lord Howe's Island [Ocydromus
sylvestris) in 1871 ; the Yellow Bellied Phalanger [Belideus
flaviventer) in 1859 ; and also presented living specimens of the
Ursine Dasyure, or Tasmanian Devil [Dasyurus ursinus') in 1869,
and the Australian Bustard [Eupodotes Australis) in 1867. He
was awarded the Silver Medal of the Society on May 7th, 1862.
Eventually he settled in New South Wales, and in 1836
commenced the practice of his profession in Sydney. He was con-
stantly on the alert for fresh discoveries in Natural Science, and
his liberality and energy in procuring new objects in order to make
them known to the world, have been frequently and widely
recognised. The Cassowary which bears his name, the Didunculus,
and numerous other Zoological and Palseontological objects, to
to which Professor Owen, Gould, Sclater, and other eminent


naturalists, constantly refer in their works, show what a single
liberal-minded man can accomplish, even though much occupied
with an extensive medical practice. In 1835, shortly after his
arrival in Sydney, he was appointed by the Hew South Wales
Government to investigate the cause of the Epidemic Catarrh or
Influenza, which at that time was prevalent in the colony among
the sheep, destroying great numbers of valuable flocks. He
sent in his report after a careful practical investigation which was
printed and published by the Government in October, 1835.
He was the first Secretary of the Australian Museum Committee
in 1836, having received the appointment to the Museum from the
then Secretary of State for the Colonies. He published a
Catalogue in 1837, and acted as Secretary till 1841, when he
resigned that position ; but in 1853, on the Incorporation of the
Institution, he was appointed a Trustee, which position he held
for over twenty years. He took an active part in the establish-
ment of the Sydney School of Arts from 1838 to 1850, giving
many Lectures on Zoology, and working as a member of the
Committee, and Vice-President for many years. In 1837 he
contributed papers on various subjects to a periodical called the
Literary News, published by Tegg, but which was discontinued
by the proprietor after the first volume ; but during the whole of
this period, his time was much occupied with his work, and it was
not until 1859 that he was enabled to take a holiday, which he
spent in making an extensive tour over Europe. It was at this
time that he took the advantage of his presence in London to
publish his Gatherings of a Naturalist in Australasia, Bvo., Van
Voorst, 1860. In the same year (1859) he was appointed an
-Associate and a Member of the Committee of the Biological
Section of the British Association at Aberdeen, and held the same
position at the subsequent meetings of the Section at Oxford in
1860, and Plymouth in 1877. In 1856, he was elected a Member
of the Board of Examiners in the Facility of Medicine in the
Sydney University, and in 1859, the second volume of the
Phycologia Australica, or History oj Australian Seaweeds was
dedicated to him by Professor Harvey, and in the following year
(1860) he received Diplomas from the Austrian Government as a
Member of the Imperial Austrian Zoological and Botanical


Society. On the formation of an Acclimatisation Society in
Sydney in 1861, he delivered (by request) a lecture on Acclimatisa-
tion and its adaptation to Australia. This Lecture was after-
wards published by the Melbourne Acclimatisation Society, which
sent 500 copies to the Sydney Society for distribution. Two years
subsequently, in 1863, he was elected Honorary Secretary of the
Acclimatisation Society, and this position he retained until the
dissolution of the Society in 1871. About the close of the
existence of the Society, a lengthy correspondence was carried on
with the Indian Government on Silk Cultivation. The selected
portions of the correspondence entitled Correspondence relating to
the Cultivation of Silk in New South Wales, were published by
the Government in 1870, and presented to the Houses of Parlia-
ment. A similar correspondence was about the same time carried
on by Dr. Bennett with the Government of Japan, through Mr.
Adams, the Secretary of Her Majesty’s Legation at Yokohama,
from whom was obtained much important information, accompanied
by specimens of silk, printed reports, and illustrative drawings of
the native mode of culture, models of the apparatus used in silk-
winding, &c., and a collection of choice eggs ; which were
distributed among the Australian colonies. In 1864 he was
elected a Member of the Imperial Society of Cherbourg, and a
Corresponding Member of the Royal Society of Tasmania.
In 1871 he visited Queensland in search of Fossil Mammals
and Reptiles, discovering many new specimens of great interest in
the drifts. In a letter to Professor Owen, he gave details of his
journey, and his mode of search. This letter was published in
full by Professor Owen in the Annals of Natural History for
April, 1872. In the Sydney Mail for the same year, Dr.
Bennett also published a series of illustrated articles, giving the
results of his observations during this excursion. In the year
following (1873) he received the Silver Medal of the Acclimatisa-
tion Society of Victoria, in recognition of the services which he
had rendered to the cause of acclimatisation. And in 1874 he
was appointed Honorary Consulting Physician to St. Vincent’s
Hospital in Sydney.
In 1877 he started on a journey to Europe, travelling through
the United States and Canada, returning in 1879 by way of
5


Bombay and Ceylon. During this visit he was elected a
Corresponding Member of the Literary and Philosophical Society
of Liverpool in 1877, an Honorary Member of the Geographical
Society of Rome in 1878, and a Fellow of the Royal Colonial
Institute, and Honorary Corresponding Secretary in 1879. In
the Leisure Hour for 1879 he also published Notes on a visit to
Melbourne, Tasmania, and South Australia.
He acted as the Executive Commissioner representing the
Ceylon Government at the Sydney International Exhibition of
1879-80. He has also contributed a number of papers to the
New South Wales Medical Gazette, many others of his contri-
butions are also to be found in the Zoological Proceedings and
Transactions, Journal of Botany, Gardener's Chronicle, Science
Gossip, Lancet, doc. In 1882 he was elected President of the
New South Wales Zoological Society.
In 1888 he was elected President of the Natural History
Association, and on its revision in 1891 was re-elected President,
it being then re-named the Field Naturalists’ Society of N.S.W.
In this year he also presented to the Medical School
(University of Sydney) a handsome stained glass window costing
£l4O.
In December 1890 he was awarded by the Royal Society
of New South Wales the Clarke Memorial Medal. This medal
is awarded “ for meritorious contributions to the Geology,
Mineralogy, or Natural History of Australia to men of science,
whether resident in Australia or elsewhere.” The same year he
bequeathed to the Sydney University the Ornithological works of the
late John Gould, and complete sets to that date of The Annals and
Magazine of Natural History, The Journal of the Linnean Society,
The Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London, in addition to
other valuable works such as Horsf eld’s Zoological Researches in
Japan (the conjoint value of these amounting to over £2,000).
For the last ten years, beyond acting as co-examiner
on Materia Medica and Therapeutics in the of Sydney,
subjects which always greatly interested him, he took but little
active part in his profession ; yet, though now advanced in age,
his mental faculties were remarkably clear, remaining so almost
to the last moment of his life.


He passed away on September 29th, 1893, at 167 William
Street, Sydney, N.S.W., at the age of 89 years and 8 months.
His final resting place is in Section No. 2 of the Monumental
Division of the Church of England Cemetery at the Necropolis,
Rookwood, and is indicated by a handsome monument erected by
his widow.
List of Specimens of Natural History named after Dr.
George Bennett :
BOTANY.
Phanerogams.
Eupomatia, Bennettii : Von Muller ; Queeensland.
Flinderda Bennettiana : Von Muller ; Queensland.
Muouna Bennettii : Von Muller ; New Guinea.
Ficus Bennettii : Seemann ; South Sea Island.
Antiaris Bennettii : Seemann; Tucopia, Fiji.
Cryptogams.
Alg^.
Glaudea Bennettiana : Harvey; Spectacle Island, Port Jackson.
ZOOLOGY.
Mammalia.
Dendrolagus Bennettianus: De Vis ; Queensland; a tree Kangaroo.
Beptilia.
Notaden Bennettii : Gunther; Castlereagh River, .% Bennett's
Gross Toad.
Diporoplioron Bennettii: Gray ; N.W. Australia ; a Lizard.
Aves.
Casuarius Bennettii : Gould ; New Britain ; the Morioh.
Bdgotholes Bennettii: Salvador ; New Guinea.
Inseota.
Eupholus Bennettii : Gestro ; New Guinea.
Mollusc A.
ffelix Bennettii : Brazier ; Ipswich, Queensland.
Goniodorus Bennettii: Angas ; Port Jackson, N.S.W.
PALEONTOLOGY.
Marsupialia.
Diprotodon Bennettii : Owen; Mandoona, N.S.W.
Lacbrtilia.
Clilamydosaurus Bennettii: Owen ; Gowrie Station, Darling Downs.


