

$
£




GEORGE MEREDITH:
POET AND NOVELIST.
A PUBLIC LECTURE
DELIVERED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE
Sydney University Union,
ON THE
12 th August, 1892.
M. W. MacCALLUM, M.A.,
PROFESSOR OF MODERN LITERATURE,
Sydney University.
Sgineg i
TURNER AND HENDERSON,
HUNTER STREET.




GEORGE MEREDITH.
POET AND NOVELIST.
fBOUT nine years ago some old college
friends were discussing the relation
of the will to the passions and the
reason, when one of them quoted a phrase
about “that wandering ship of the drunken
pilot, the mutinous crew and the angry
captain, called Human Nature.” That was
my first introduction to George Meredith ;
before then I only knew his name as the
butt of reviewing wit, and had held myself
exempt from the need of closer acquaintance
with him as with any other luckless novelist
of the hour. But the words quoted were
unlike those of a third-rate novel, they
suggested a writer who would at least be


worth looking into. It was not easy,
however, to do even this much, the only
one of his works that could readily be got
was the “Tragic Comedians,” from which
the quotation came, and I well remember
my feeling of bewilderment as I read the
opening chapters. No other novelist wrote
like that, no characters in fiction talked like
that, the story seemed the most wild and
absurd extravaganza, yet with bright rifts
in it through which the sun of genius
flashed. Meanwhile a sketch of Lassalle’s
career, which was not then, as now, pre-
fixed to the volume, fell into my hands,
and my astonishment was increased by the
discovery that the story was almost literally
true, the most extraordinary remarks had
actually been made. I went back to the novel
to find the style not tumid and stilted, as it
seemed on the first unintelligent perusal,
but aglow with passion and thought, the
action set forth, the characters interpreted
with a grand poetic power; from that read-
ing I emerged a student of Meredith for


life, resolved to make the rest of his works
my own. In the British Museum I found,
and was not surprised to find, that he was
a writer of poetry. A small volume of
verse had begun his literary career, and
since it was described in a later volume as
“now extinct,” I transcribed it almost in
full, and still have my M.S.* I found also,
and was surprised to find, that these poems
belonged to the year 1851, that his first
tale had appeared in 1855, and that he had
been born in 1828 ; that is, that he had
* Meredith’s Australian admirers may be glad to have the
following specimen, not to my knowledge hitherto reprinted, from
this first volume. The diction is a little juvenile and precious, but
the genuine Meredith appears in the idea, realistic, but with all its
truth not what other people would have thought of saying;—
Two wedded lovers watched the rising moon
That with her strange mysterious beauty glowing
Over the misty hills and waters flowing
Crowned the long twilight loveliness of June :
“ And thus in me, and thus in me,” they spake,
“ The solemn secret of first love did wake.”
Above the hills the blushing orb arose.
Her shape encircled in a radiant bower,
In which the nightingale with charmed power
Poured forth enchantment o’er the dark repose:
“ And thus in me, and thus in me," they said,
“ Earth’s mists did with the sweet new spirit wed,”
Far up the sky, with ever purer beam.
Upon the throne of night the moon was seated.
And down the valley glens the shades retreated.
And silver light was on the open stream :
“ And thus in me, and thus in me," they sighed,
“Aspiring love has hallowed passion’s tide.”


been before the public for thirty-four years,
as story-teller for thirty years, that he was
now at the comparatively advanced age of
fifty-seven, yet there were few who knew
him, and there was no cheap re-issue of his
works. This reproach was soon to be
removed ; a little later in the same year
Diana made her appearance, price six
shillings, in the comely grey boards that
some of us have got to love so well; the
others followed at short intervals: Meredith
at last addressed a larger audience, and he
found it. It is from this year, 1885, that
his name becomes an admittedly prominent
one, and that he reaps something like his
due harvest of fame.
Now, I would not have intruded these
personal reminiscences were it not that
they seem fairly typical. Nine years ago,
to persons decently acquainted with the
greater writers of the day, Meredith was
hardly so much as a name, though he had
been publishing for the third of a century.
Then, on a sudden, popularity, enthusiasm,


the beginning of a sort of Meredith cult,
which includes even some of the most
successful and dissimilar practitioners of
his own craft!
How are this long neglect, this ultimate
recognition to be accounted for ? Perhaps
first and chiefly, because he is not merely
novelist, but poet and novelist, a poet in
the truest sense of the word. I am not
thinking specially of his poetry, express
and avowed. That is, indeed, well worth
considering. It is significant that he began
his career with verse, that he has recurred
to it in three subsequent volumes, and that
it, too, is stamped with originality and
mastership, in quantity and quality easily
surpassing that of any other novel-writer
of the reign. Still, to me he seems a better
poet in his prose. That is the medium
most suited to his wealth of material and
his subtle dialectic; and his prose with its
figures and audacities, its flights and its
force has to my ear much of the magic of
verse. This is what I meant in describing


him as poet and novelist, poet first, and
poet pre-eminently when he writes his
novels : and it is just this that stands in his
Way, when we go to him, as I went to the
“ Tragic Comedians,” expecting the sign-
post notices and flaring posters of ordinary
romance, which he “who runs or lounges ”
may read. With our preconceptions it is
hard to understand that the novel may be
made vehicle of the intensest passion,
imagination, and thought; that there is no
divine fiat to forbid prose fiction from
dealing with the same themes as fiction in
verse, and from dealing with them approxi-
mately in the same way. If we read a
poem of Browning's or Milton’s, a drama
of Shakespeare’s or Goethe’s, we expect
that we shall have to take some pains; but
we pick up our novel at the bookstall with
the purpose of pastime, and are as in-
dignant if it makes demands on the brain
as some men are when women talk sense.
“ A woman who thinks, is as odious as a
man who uses paint,” says Lessing’s


Countess. A novel that thinks, in the
opinion of many, is as odious as our metrical
Latin Grammars, or the Barbara-Celarent
rules of Logic. But, after all, there is no
reason in the nature of things why prose
fiction should be set apart for mere amuse-
ment. The essay may express as well the
easy urbanities of Addison, and the concen-
trated sagacity of Bacon, or the perfervid
insight of Carlyle. Why should the novel
alone be taboo to the sage and the seer ?
We must approach Meredith’s books in
the same temper as we approach Sartor
Resartus: we must take a great part of
them as prose poetry, and as the prose
poetry of a thinker, a humourist, a bard, to
use a favourite word of his own. Then
much that might disconcert in style, in
theme, in treatment and scope, will seem
natural and just.
But it may be said that, admitting all this,
his style is radically bad, because so difficult,
so deficient in clearness. But is it certain
that simplicity is the chief, or even a very


great desideratum in a great writer? You
may remember what Carlyle says of Goethe’s
style in the interlude of Helena: “The
reader is kept constantly alert, ever con-
scious of his own active co-operation, light
breaks on him, and clearer and clearer
vision by degrees. . . . We love it the
more for the labour it has given us ; we
almost feel as if we had ourselves assisted
in its creation. A reposing state of mind
in which the Hill of Vision were brought
under us, not we obliged to mount it, might,
indeed, for the present, be more convenient,
but in the end it could not be equally satis*
factory. Continuance of passive pleasure
is an impossibility.” And after pointing
out that the main thing is not what we
gain, but what we do ; not what we receive,
but what we give, he proceeds: “True, the
mass of readers will object, because, like
the mass of men, they are too indolent;
but if anyone affect not the active and
watchful, but the passive and somnolent
line of study, are there not writers expressly


fashioned for him enough and to spare ? It
is but the smaller number of books that
become more instructive by a second
perusal; the great majority are as perfectly
plain as perfect triteness can make them.”
Of course, mere hardness, when it arises
either from carelessness or from affectation,
is bad, and the reader is quite entitled to
resent it as he would slovenly or eccentric
penmanship; he is hardly at liberty to
resent an ornamental script for ornamental
purposes, or a characteristic hand that shows
the individuality of the writer. M. Arnold
defines style as “ a peculiar recasting and
heightening, under a certain condition of
spiritual excitement, of what a man has to
say, in such a way as to add dignity and
distinction to it.” Chapman, in the same
sense, protests “ that energia, or clearness
of representation, required in absolute
poems is not the perspicuous delivery of
a low invention, but high and hearty
invention expressed’' in most significant
phrase; and he defends the obscurity “that


shroudeth itself in the heart of the subject
uttered with fitness of figure and ex-
pressive epithets.” The sort of thing they
refer to, may be illustrated from the opening
lines of Lycidas. Milton might have intro-
duced his elegy with some such note as
this : <! I had resolved not to compose any
more poetry till time had ripened my
powers and increased my knowledge, but
the sad death of Edward King compels me
again to write, though the result will be
immature.” And this w'ould have been
quite intelligible, and would now, I venture
to say, be forgotten by all save students of
his biography. What he did say was :
Yet once more, O ye laurels, and once more,
Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere,
I come to pluck your berries harsh and crude,
And with forced fingers rude,
Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year.
Bitter constraint and sad occasion dear,
Compels me to disturb your season due,
For Lycidas is dead.
The sense is far from obvious at first
sight, and commentators are by no means


agreed about the particular references,
or even the general bearing, but these lines
are a possession and joy to everybody.
It is the same with Shakespeare. Who
shall say that he understands his plays
without effort either in their scope or in
detail ? Take Hamlet’s soliloquy —“ So
oft it chances in particular men,” or
Macbeth’s “If it were done when it is
done, then ’twere well ’twere done quickly,”
If any one asserts that he grasped their
meaning, or got the hang of the thoughts
at a first or a second reading, I won’t
answer that I don’t believe him, but shall
express the same view more decorously by
saying that he must be a man of extra-
ordinary genius. And, remember, these
passages are familiar, and in the air; we
have probably heard them quoted before
we see them in print, and the traditions
of the stage have prescribed a fairly intelli-
gent rendering of them; but with Meredith
we have to find out for ourselves how to
place the emphasis, where the pauses lie,


what is the force. Nor let it be supposed
that the obsolete language is what
makes Shakespeare difficult. To say so is
to show ignorance of the facts. For turn
to Shakespeare’s lesser contemporaries,
and we meet no such impediment: the only
dramatist who is hard to read in something
like the way that Shakespeare is hard to
read is Chapman ; but there is nothing in
Jonson, or Fletcher, or Massinger, or who-
ever it be, to stop us short, save, perhaps,
an old-fashioned word or a corrupt reading.
Spenser is infinitely more antiquarian and
infinitely easier than Shakespeare,
The initial difficulty, then, that we
encounter in Meredith’s style is that it is a
heightened style—the style that we are
accustomed to accept in poetry, but that
for some reason or other we rebel against
in prose; it is of the same calibre as
Carlyle’s style in Sartor. On that level
Meredith’s mastery is manifested in innu-
merable instances and directions ; and,
remembering these, we may well hesitate


to accuse him of failure in the passages
that we do not like at first. Note, for
example, the rhythm of this sentence from
the story of Bhanavar: “ The twain were
as two waves heaving on the shore. Lo,
one is wasted where it falleth, one draweth
back into the waters.” Or could the colour
of a landscape be more tersely rendered
than in this single sentence : “ Beyond a
plot of flowers, a gold-green meadow
dipped to a ridge of gorse bordered by
dark firs and the tips of greenest larches?”
Or from his “ Autumn Even Song” take
a specimen of his power of revealing the
soul of a scene :
The long cloud, edged with streaming gray,
Soars from the west,
The red leaf mounts with it away,
Showing the nest
A blot among the branches bare;
There is a cry of outcasts in the air.
Has the attent, inspired look of Beethoven's
familiar portrait ever been better summed
up than in Emilia’s words : “ The wind is
in his hair, he hears with his eyes ?” How


many of Meredith’s utterances are as nails
fastened by the masters of assemblies, the
right kind of aphorisms, which, as Bacon
says, “ except they should be ridiculous,
can be made but of the heart and pith of
knowledge.” 1 ake as sample that noble
saying of Ottilia: “Courage implies one
half of the virtues, and dispenses with the
other half;” or this other, of the labourers
for frustrate hopes :
Still may they who sowed behind the plough
True seed, fix in the mind an unborn Now
To make the plagues afflicting us things past.
Let us bear in mind, then, that even to
cavillers Meredith’s diction must often
appear beyond cavil, that his sovereignty
of phrase will often brook no challenge.
But this does not mean that it is never
urged to excess, or that the heightened style
is never used when a pedestrian one would
be more suitable. His admirers are no
more concerned to deny this than the
admirers of Shakespeare to deny that his
command of language often degenerates


into word play. But to say that Meredith’s
prominent trait is over-elaboration, is to be
guilty of the same sort of exaggeration and
mistake as Dr. Johnson’s when he said
of Shakespeare: “A quibble was to him the
fatal Cleopatra for which he lost the world,
and was content to lose it.” And, as in
Shakespeare’s case, his faults are the
defects of his qualities. Shakespeare, in his
puns and conceits, beats his contemporaries
at their own weapons, and plays with the
language that he could wield at will,
Meredith, by the nimbleness of his in-
tellect, is drawn to ingenuities of allusion,
metaphor, or argument, and beats on its
own ground this super-subtle age. (May I
add that, for my own part, I wish no pun
away from the pages of Shakespeare, and
no intricacy from the pages of Meredith ?)
But meanwhile people should not hasten to
assume that our poet-novelist is wantonly
artificial, even when he may most seem to
be so. Precisely in the instance where his
diction is at its perversest, there is evidence


rather of tact than of affectation. I refer to
the story of Delphica in “ One of Our
Conquerors ” Here, again, a parallel from
Shakespeare will explain my meaning. The
play within the play in “ Hamlet ” opens:
Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round
Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbfed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
Above the world have times twelve thirties been,
Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.
And so on. I suppose no one can lay his
hand on his heart and say that he thinks
this superfine poetry. Now, the odd thing
is that the stiffness, the artifice, the inver-
sions, were an afterthought with Shake-
speare. In the first edition of “ Hamlet,” the
language of the included play is of a piece
with the language of the main drama. But
he saw that for the sake of the perspective
he must make a difference between them ;
and just as the diction of the tragedy is
removed from the diction of life, so the
diction of the included piece must be re-
moved from the diction of tragedy; there-


fore, like the conscientious artist he was,
he sacrificed a beauty of detail for the sake
of the beauty of the whole. Precisely in
the same way, Meredith, enclosing a novel
within a novel, employs in the former an
exaggeration, if you like, an abuse of his
style; but this very abuse must be credited
to the thoroughness of his art.
Hitherto we have endeavoured to discuss
Meredith’s style by itself, as a matter of
words ; but style can no more exist apart
from thought than the outside of a wall can
exist apart from the inside. And the last
consideration leads us to the inner aspect
of the case, which, after all, is always the
most important. When we broach Mere-
dith’s work on this side, we again find
abundant reason, both for his initial want
of popularity and his lasting power over
earnest readers. For, when most other
novelists deal with adventures and careers,
and the externals of life and character, he
deals with the tragedies and comedies of
the soul ; his business, in his own words, is


“ reading the inner as well as exhibiting
the outer.” This, you will observe, is a
good deal more than protraiture, as por-
traiture is ordinarily understood. For the
latter it is necessary and sufficient to select
characteristic words and deeds; and, if they
are chosen with skill and sympathy, we see
men in their very habit as they lived. This
capacity of seeing and selecting and re-
producing the characteristic, seems to me a
great and rare one, and the possession of
it already stamps a man as a genius of a
very high order. It is the power that was
Scott’s in a pre-eminent degree, and that
he displays almost invariably in his Scottish
personages, and occasionally elsewhere. It
presents us with what is typical and im-
portant, it is analogous to the biographic
tact with which Boswell lighted on the
right things to tell us of Johnson, or the
critical tact with which Lamb quotes the
superlative passages from old authors.
This power of fixing on the essential
aspect of a thing is a more noble, less


frequent, and healthier power, than the
talent for disquisition on given or random
data. There is in it an implicit insight, a
fine feeling for the distinctive, even though
the conclusions may not be drawn, and the
connections be left unexplained. When it
is present young and old, the gifted and
the commonplace, the learned and the
ignorant, may join hands in admiration.
Yet, unless it meets in the reader with
something like the instinct of the writer, it
may easily be taken for something lower
than itself, and even lead to a mere taste
for situation and effectiveness. One actu-
ally hears of people who have read Scott
in their childhood, and who can bear to
praise Mr. H. Rider Haggard when they are
grown up. In our introspective time the
true sequel to Scott’s picturesque present-
ment of character is not the exciting tale
“ enriched,” to quote Meredith, “ with the
applause of the boys and girls of both
ages;” but the Romance which, to Scott’s
power of seizing the typical, shall add the


power of crushing its full meaning out of it,
and of tracking the minds of men along
their devious course. But such mastery of
the outward hieroglyph is, to most of us, a
matter both of indifference and of difficulty:
we are content in a lazy way to admire the
gay symbols, their exposition seems to us
the work of special and technical research,
an imaginative Aegyptiology. Meredith
humorously bewails himself as “an ih-fated
minstrel who has been brought to see with
distinctness that man is not as much com-
prised in external features as the monkey.”
In truth he is interested less in what man
has in common with the monkey than in
what he possesses for himself, what makes
him man ; and that is mind. The stories
Meredith tells are not life-histories (natur-
alists compile life-histories of the lower
animals), they are mind-histories in which
all else is viewed merely in relation with
the one central theme. This description
both justifies Meredith (for what other
account of man can be so true ?) and


-explains his abstruseness. His material
is not only spiritual but intellectual, it
is mind in the fullest sense of the term ,
he is concerned with the brains as well as
with the hearts of his persons, he traces
not only their feelings but their thoughts.
“ Be wary,” he tells us in Diana, “of the
disrelish of brainstuff. Brainstuff is not
lean stuff: the brainstuff of fiction is
internal history, and to suppose it dull is
the profoundest of errors
A great modern writer of clearest eye and
head, now departed, groaned over his
puppetry, —that he dared not animate them,
flesh though they were, with the fires of
positive brainstuff.” Meredith has had no
such timiditv as here he attributes to
Thackeray—if Thackeray it be—and in the
face of thirty years’ neglect, persevered at
his Shakespearian task of portraying men
and women in the whole of their conscious
life. When we remember that the pheno-
mena of consciousness are just the most
complex and intricate of all, we need not


wonder that he is often hard ; nor, for the
most part, does he resemble George Eliot,
who may be said to have attempted some-
thing of a similiar kind, in helping us with
explanatory disquisitions on his characters.
He studies them in activity, not in repose ;
he does not dissect them motionless before
him while the narrative is motionless too,
but shows us thought following thought in
the rapids of the mind. His analysis is
given in, not apart from, the story. He
seldom forgets that the duty of a narrator
is to narrate ; even his apparent pauses,
like the reflective passages in Shakespeare,
generally help on the plot; like all good
story-tellers he avoids preaching, avoids
even unprogressive description, and the
story itself is his first care. But as the
story is less of physical event than of
mental process, this very obedience to his
art increases the difficulties of his readers.
His objects are remote from our ordinary
points of view, and it is hard to see remote
objects distinctly; but when these will not


stay still, but are ever on the wing, it
becomes a great deal harder.
Nor is this all. In “ Beauchamp’s
Career ” there is a noticeable passage,
in which Meredith gives his own theory
of his own work:—“Those happy tales
of mystery are as much my envy as the
popular narratives of the deeds of bread-
and-cheese people, for they both create
a tide-way in the attentive mind; the
mysterious pricking our credulous flesh
to creep, the familiar urging our obese
imagination to constitutional exercise. And
oh, the refreshment there is in dealing
with characters either contemptibly beneath
us or supernaturally above! My way is
like a Rhone island in the summer drought,
stony, unattractive and difficult, between
the two forceful streams of the unreal and
the over-real which delight mankind, —
honour to the conquerors ! My people
conquer nothing, win none; they are actual,
yet uncommon. It is the clockwork of the
brain they are directed to set in motion,


and —poor troop of actors to vacant benches
—the conscience residing in thoughtful-
ness they would appeal to ” No one can
fail to see the truth of this self-criticism.
His novels are never without their heroes
and heroines, he is fond of remarkable
people, his persons are “ actual, yet un-
common” Now this is somewhat opposed
to the predilections of our generation. “ I
have remarked,” says Carlyle, in the intro-
duction to his Life of Sterling, “ that a true
description of the smallest man, and his
scene of pilgrimage through life, is capable
of interesting the greatest man ; that all
men are to an unspeakable degree brothers,
each man’s life a strange emblem of every
man’s.” And this great truth has, I think,
inspired much of the fiction of the Reign.
In the Victorian novel we often note a
fondness for men who are not eminent as
the world counts eminence. Sometimes,
indeed, we may be confronted with a
village Hampden, qualities may be
sketched, that, in a larger sphere, would


have swayed the rod of empire. But persons
who could lay claim to actual notability are
comparatively seldom attempted ; generally
the most interesting interest in virtue of
their common human nature, and the
writers aim at showing the tragedy and
pathos of the common-place. Doubtless
such an attempt, if made in the spirit
Carlyle prescribes, is entitled to hearty
recognition—the faithful delineation of the
smallest man is of interest. Still the zest
will be keener, the treatment more exact-
ing, the result more noteworthy, if the
individual is interesting, not only as a man,
but as a great man, of powers and gifts
that stamp him extraordinary. Such merit
the closer attention and the ampler space,
as Carlyle would be the last to deny.
Assuredly Sterling was a man considerably
above the average, but Carlyle would never
have devoted to him, as he did to Frederick,
ten volumes instead of one. Now Meredith
deals with extraordinary people, he reserves
his first love for notables. When we are


allowed a peep into his green-room, we see
that his actors are illustrissimi, like Alvan,
who presents Lassalle, or Diana, who pre-
sents Mrs. Norton. But even without such
a hint, w r e feel at once that we have to
do with people who, though actual, are
out of the common, who are not exactly
insignificant folks like ourselves and our
neighbours, but belong to the egregious
spirits of humanity. This does not mean
any neglect of nature, rather it is study of
nature in her highest potence and preroga-
tive instances. It is Shakespeare’s method.
His Hamlets and Shylocks, his Prince Hals
and Falstaffs, his Romeos and lagos, his
Cordelias and Imogens, are very far indeed
from being on the level of the persons one
usually sees —the students and money-
lenders, the knaves and lovers, the scape-
graces old and young, the dutiful wives
and daughters ; but who will deny that
they are real, so inevitably real “that before
Shakespeare’s characters most ordinary
human beings seem like the shadows of


the dead in Homer.” That Meredith’s
leaders of parties and chiefs of revolutions,
his thinkers, scholars, queens of society or
of song, women of head and heart, are not
merely alleged to be such, but impress us
with the reality of their greatness, is among
his crowning triumphs. For any writer
can label his characters transcendent, only
a mighty genius can verily convince us
that they are in the forefront of mankind.
But of course it wants a special effort to
understand such natures, just as it wants a
special effort to undeistand a master mind
in actual life, or in actual biography. The
Hamlets and Cleopalras, the Alvans and
Dianas, are not to be grappled with the
same ease as people of similar calibre to
ourselves. ”We are like the spirits that
we comprehend, and not like these.” And
the tax on us is the greater that Meredith
is peculiarly fond of involved and tangled
characters. Perhaps it needs as much
ability to sketch with real depth the
simpler ones, and I dare say that Shakes-


peare shows his genius almost as well in
a creation like the Bastard Faulconbridge
as in that of the brooding Dane. So too r
Meredith may show his genius no less in
the single-hearted greatness of Vittoria, all
of a piece as it is, than in the shiftings
and involutions of his heroine of the Cross-
ways. But for one so keen in tracking his
intellectual quarry there is more sport in
a problematic nature, and he prefers to-
treat the complex. Also, as this is generally
found in high culture and in artificial social
surroundings, we see one reason why he
tends to linger among persons of aristo-
cratic rank.
This aristocratic leaning has sometimes
been made a reproach to Meredith, as
though it meant a narrowness, a want of
catholicity in his sympathies and art: but
certainly such a stricture is unjust. To
begin with, we must not commit the gross
blunder of confusing an author’s material
with his treatment. Many a one handles a
common subject in a humane way, many a


one handles a high subject in a coarse way.
It is as unjust to think of Meredith as a
merely genteel writer, because he is at
home in the beau monde, as it would be to
call Burns a vulgar writer, because he
generally frequents the lowlier walks of
life: each naturally chooses what he knows
best, but each interprets his subject so as
to transcend it. It would indeed be strange
if Meredith’s genius were confined by class
prejudice when he is known outside his
writings as radical and home-ruler, and in
his novels has a good word to say for
movements like the Salvation Army. “ The
love of the people,” writes one of his finest
characters, “is the only love worth having;”
and he compares bourgeois civilisation to a
piano, and despotism to an organ, with
which he contrasts the ideal democratic
commonwealth : “ Match these with the
trained orchestral band of skilled individual
performers . . . when each grasps his
instrument, and each relies on his fellow
with confidence, and an unrivalled concord


comes of it. . . . Each one to his work,
all in union ! There’s the motto for us.
Then you have music, harmony, the highest,
fullest, finest. Educate your men to join
a band, you shame dexterous trickery
and imitation sounds.” In point of fact
Meredith has given us many portraits from
humbler social spheres, conceived with
deep insight and appreciation. Sandra,
the daughter of a drunken fiddler, Rhoda,
the daughter of a Kentish yeoman, her
lover Robert, the gypsy Kiomi and the
Puritan sailor Welsh, Mrs. Berry, and
Farmer Blaize, will suffice as proof. But,
doubtless, he prefers for his principal figures
persons whose minds are a riddle and a
challenge, who have submitted to more
numerous influences than generally act on
the life of the majority, and he gives them
the chief place and the chief space. And
then, merely as a matter of artistic economy
and grouping, he has to sketch the others
in a briefer and more external way, for it
does not do in imaginative narrative to


give all the actors equal prominence or
portray them all with equal profundity.
There must be gradations of interest and
of realism, and it is not unbefitting if the
less important are even drawn with a touch
of caricature. Thus Shakespeare, beside
his Beatrice and Benedict, whose full
spiritual range he brings home to us, has
his Dogberry and Verges, who are hit off
sufficiently for his purpose with a few
comic and even ridiculous strokes. Both in
Meredith and Shakespeare the foreground
is kept for the notables ; and the minor
persons, some of whom are, some of whom
are not, of lower caste, are portrayed by the
way, none without his definite features and
these true to life ; but only with their
salient features, and since the outlines are
not filled in, it is occasionally their oddities
that strike us.
The outstanding individuality of his
chief figures, and the humourous present-
ment of the subordinate ones, have often,
when misinterpreted, given rise to the


conception of Meredith as a fanciful writer,
and this impression is increased by the
character of some of his plots. The story
of Evan Harrington, son of a provincial
tailor welcomed at the tables of the great,
who himself disports in these upper waters
ere he becomes resigned to cross-legs and
the goose, to be raised thence by the hand
of an heiress ; the story of Harry Richmond,
abandoned son of a bankrupt father, putative
claimant of the English crown, at one time
the betrothed of a German princess ; are as
improbable, in the sense of unusual, as they
well could be. But even were his plots a
hundredfold more surprising than they are,
Meredith could plead high precedent for his
choice. Do we object to the “ Merchant of
Venice,” which is combined of two exces-
sively improbable Oriental legends, the
story of the three caskets, and the story of
the pound of flesh ? If we do, Shakespeare
would probably answer: “Quite apart from
the infinitely greater interest, there is
more truth in my fantasia than in all the


most humdrum tea-table miscellanies ever
compiled by a Mr. W. D. Howells; fcr
the characters are intensely true, and,
given the circumstances, would not and
could not have acted otherwise than I
have made them act.” And if it is said that
a novel is not a drama, we reply—and the
whole purpose of this lecture is to maintain
it—that there is no reason why the novel
should not be a serious work of art, adapt-
ing a great deal from its older and nobler
sisters, and that in Meredith's hands it
has actually done so. In truth it is easy to
see why novelist and dramatist may often
derive rich gain from fanciful situations:
for a great, if not the chief object of both
is to set forth the secrets of human nature.
Now, the investigator of physical science
does not rest content with observing pheno-
mena as he finds them ; he makes them
confess, as Bacon says, “ under the trials
and tortures of art;” he resorts to artificial
experience, and arranges his experiments,
isolating the subject of his research, sur-


rounding it with a new environment,
watching how it behaves under new con-
ditions different from those amidst which
it occurs in nature. In the same way the
writer of fiction, who places his characters
in another atmosphere than that of every
day life, may plead that this is his experi-
ment to master the processes of character,
and that he is working out artistic problems
in free psychology. Even if he makes use
of impossibilities, provided he apply them
consistently, he is in no worse case than
mathematicians and mechanicians with their
hypotheses of perfect circles and friction-
less strings ; and yet we would not say that
mathematicians and mechanicians as a class
were inebriate with the fumes of heady
phantasy. Were Meredith’s stories, then,
inventions pure and simple, and nothing
else, it would not, to my mind, interfere
in the smallest degree with their claim
to the deepest verity. But in point of fact
in some cases we know, and in others we
may guess that he is adhering very closely


to literal truth, “ Beauchamp’s Career”
has to do with a well-known family that
still is flourishing. Diana has her original
in a famous lady not very long departed,
and the crisis in her history was a notorious
incident in politics. Even the marvels of
the “ Tragic Comedians ” are facts of prose,
explained, but not exaggerated, in the fiction.
In the opening lines of the last-mentioned
romance Meredith replies to the critics who
call him fantastic: “ Claimants to the epithet
will be found outside of books and poets in
many quarters, Nature being one of the
prominent, if not the foremost. Wherever
she can drink her fill of sunshine, she
pushes forth fantastically, . . . The
pair of whom there will be question pass
under this word as under their banner and
motto. Their acts are incredible; they
drank sunlight, and drove their barks in a
manner to eclipse historic couples upon
our planet. Yet they do belong to history;
they breathed a stouter air than fiction’s—
the last chapter of them is written in red


blood.” If Meredith is fantastic, it is
because, with extraordinary persons, he
chooses extraordinary careers with their
extraordinary problems ; he passes on the
blame to the arch-fantast, Life. Were the
ground of this bias merely love of the
Marvellous, nothing could be pleaded in its
behalf, but Meredith invents, or adopts, an
unwonted course of action just because
men better show the stuff that is in them
when confronted with an untried emergency
than when they follow the beaten tracks of
customary existence. As he prefers per-
sons and careers that rise above the
common, instead of the average sensual
man of the so-called realist, so he is fain to
consider them in their moments of strenuous
thought and feeling, not merely on their
baser and vulgar levels. He knows that in
a crisis the soul is revealed, and he loves to
dwell on crises : to them he leads up, on
them he expends his whole power to lay
bare their innermost nerve. It may be the
conflict of impulse with impulse, as in the


case of Wilfrid Pole ; of love with duty, as
in the case of Beauchamp ; the awakening
of youth to the problems of life, as with
Nesta ; the utterance of fiery passion in all
its phases, as in the wooing of Richard
Feveril, or Evan Harrington, or Neville
Beauchamp, or Percy Dacier. Wherever
the mental life is crowded and intense, there
his feeling is seized, his imagination fired
by it, and the glow and surge of his words
kindle us and carry us from our feet. But
his object is not merely to arouse emotion,
or even to give its natural history, but to
show its rationale. All the while his “ con-
science residing in thoughtfulness ” is at
its post, he illumines the commotion with
the search-light of his judgment —a. lumen
siccum, if ever there was one —and remains
above it, its master, interpreter, and critic.
These scenes display that rare yoking of
powers, keen thought, tingling sensibility,
implacable justice, which makes his realism
so broad, so intense, and so sane. He
shuns no problem and shuts his eye to no


fact, he vibrates sympathetically to the
most various moods and tempers, and
champions their cause with seeming
abandon; but he always keeps his head
level and is never entangled in his own
advocacy, he sees where the rights and
wrongs of the case lie, and is incorruptible
in his verdict. He submits men to a crucial
test, makes them betray their true self,
and then registers the result without the
slightest regard for their feelings or ours.
And this is a new ground for the sense
of estrangement that he gives his readers.
Sentimentalists often complain of a “ bitter
taste” in Shakespeare’s works. Severe he
is, though not cruel. He, too, is relentless
in his judgment, not to be entreated; and
where most writers would be bribed by the
gifts and graces of the victims, he lays his
finger on the flaw that spoils their lives.
And when we remember that the standard
of both writers is not only rigidly enforced
but is a very high and healthy one, so high
and healthy that it is apt to be misconceived,


it is easy to see how their justice may bear
an arbitrary face.
Meredith is quite unsatisfied though the
requirements of social convention are
fulfilled, and, indeed, has a very poor
opinion of the social ideals of his country-
men. “You English live for pleasure,” says
Professor Karstey.—“We are the hardest
workers in the world,” is Richmond’s angry
reply. — “ That you may live for pleasure !
Deny it You are all in one
mass struggling in the stream to get out,
and lie and wallow and belch on the banks.
You work so hard that you have all but one
aim, and that is pleasure and ease.” Much
of our cultivation of “ fine shades and nice
feelings” is merely the result of comfort
and high-feeding ; much of our civilisation
“ is rather a thing for hospital operations
than for poetic rhapsody; in aspect, too,
streaked-scarlet and pock-pitted under the
most cumbrous of jewelled tiaras.” These
are not the phrases of the socially orthodox,
and Meredith’s eye is keen to detect the


shams and blots of conventional codes;
his ear and heart are open to the rebels
that will not conform. If, at least, they
follow Nature, if they are original and
whole-hearted, he will listen to their claim.
Nowhere, for instance, do I know a more
powerful plea for love without the social
sanction as against the sanctioned alliance
without love, than in the case of Renee
and Beauchamp, of Diana and Percy, of
Nataly and Victor. But his knowledge is
too deep, his insight is too searching to let
him confound the abuse with the essence;
or, as the German proverb says, to “throw
out the child with the dirty water.” He
sees the imperfections of society, and he
cares not for the traditional adherence to
its shibboleths ; but he is a social critic,
not a social Nihilist; and he insists on the
acceptance in spirit of the spirit of society.
He knows and feels—feels fervidly—all
that may be said on the other part, but he
himself sides with the Puritanism of Dr.
Shrapnel against the loftiest and least


sensual passion which becomes anti-social
and considers only individual claims.* This
is how he admonishes young Beauchamp in
his fever of chivalrous revolt: “ Society is
our one tangible gain, our one roofing and
flooring in a world of most uncertain struc-
tures built on morasses. Toward the laws
that support it, men, hopeful of progress,
give their adhesion. If it is martyrdom,
what then ? Let the martyrdom be. Con-
tumacy is animalism. And, attend to me,
the truer the love, the readier for sacrifice.
A thousand times yes. Rebellion against
* An acute critic has taken exception to this on the ground that
Meredith in two of these instances has intervened externally
between the rebellious lovers and their purpose without purifying
their hearts. This is, no doubt, partly true of Diana and Dacier,
but the flaw in Dacier’s love is sufficiently indicated in the after
history of the man. It is not so true of Renee and Beauchamp,
though on a first reading it is plausible. The key to Beauchamp’s
position is struck in the passage : —“ The slumberer roused in
darkness by the relentless insane-seeming bell which hales him
to duty, melts at the charms of sleep, and feels that logic is with
him in his preference for his pillow; but the tireless revolving
world outside. Nature’s pitiless antagonist, has hung one of its
balances about him, and his actions are directed by the state of
the scales wherein duty weighs deep and desirability swings like
a pendant doll: so he throws on his harness, astounded, till his
blood quickens with work at the round of sacrifices demanded of
Nature; which is indeed curious, considering what we are taught
here and there as to the infallibility of our august mother.” In
other words, the “ lameness” of Beauchamp’s victory is nothing
more than our regret at leaving our beds when, after turning for a
moment onour side, we bring ourselves to get up. That this is
Meredith’s true conception, and that I have rightly stated it in
the text, I cannot doubt, especially in view of his ampler treat-
ment of the same subject in “ One of our Conquerors.”


society and advocacy of humanity run
counter. Tell me that society is the whited
sepulchre, that it is blotched, hideous and
hollow; and I say, add not another dis-
figurement to it, add to the purification of
it.” Not even Shakespeare, the celebrant
of faithful wives and daughters and mothers,
has a greater reverence for the sanctities
of wedded and family life than Meredith.
His attitude in this question is typical.
We are so apt to look in Meredith for
intellectual athletics, that we do not see the
simplicity and calmness that underlie all his
work. In a certain sense his fundamental
ideas are even commonplace, as the funda-
mental ideas of Shakespeare and Hegel are
commonplace ; that is, they are in agree-
ment with the instincts of right-minded
simple folk. No doubt the divergence also
is apparently, and even really, great; he
has learnt what adverse criticism can urge,
and this brings with it a difference of form.
He distinguishes between the kernel and
the husk, he substitutes reasoned conviction


for blind feeling, he has had to surrender
and to adopt. Essentially he is at one
with the better tendencies of the common
consciousness, but these tendencies with
him are articulate and rationalised, they
have gained illumination and security.
This is very evident if we glance for a
moment at his ultimate view of the world.
We cannot fail to be struck by the cheery
composure of his tone. He sees and knows
the disastrous in life, the tragedies of sin
as in Rhoda Fleming, of mistake as in
Richard Feveril, of failure as in Alvan, of
accident as in Beauchamp. But he is trust-
ful and joyous, not through temperament
but through conviction. He has a hearty
and humourous contempt for such as lie
down “in the thick midst of poniarded, slit-
throat, rope-dependent figures, placarded
across the bosom Disillusioned, Infidel,
Agnostic, Miserrimus.” He dismisses the
doleful dreamers of earth, who, in his own
phrase, “ live not in her heart of mirth,” as
Rosalind dismisses the melancholy Jaques :


“ I had rather have a fool to make me
merry than experience to make me sad.”
In his novels Meredith usually shows a
praiseworthy reticence in philosophical
disquisition, and, if we could only take
counsel with them, it might have been
possible to mistake the basis on which his
view of man and life ultimately rests.
Fortunately we have here assistance from
his verse, and especially from his third
volume, “ Poems and Lyrics of the Joy of
the Earth,” in which he seeks directer
utterance. The very title is significant;
it is the joy of the earth of which he sings.
Already, in his earlier “ Ode to the Spirit
of Earth in Autumn,” he had struck this dis-
tinctive note. Amidst the turmoil and ruin
of the storm, the crash of dead branches,
the eddies of dead leaves, he seems to hear
the voice of Mother Earth herself, a voice
of regeneration, not of decay :
Hark to her laughter 1 Who laughs like this,
Can she be dead or rooted in pain ?
She has been slain by the narrow, brain,
But for us, who love her, she lives again.


This might be-the motto of the third volume,
in which he works out the same idea in
various directions with various illustrations
and criticisms. Thus, in his sonnet on
“ Sense and Spirit,” he says of the Earth,
i.e., Nature :
Till we conceive her living, we go distraught,
At best but circle wind-sails of a mill —
Seeing she lives, and of her joy of life
Creatively has given us blood and breath
For endless war, and never wound unhealed,
The gloomy wherefore of our battlefield,
Solves in the spirit, wrought of her thro’ strife
To read her own and trust her down to death.
And, again, he comes back to this in the
sonnet called “ My Theme,” as if this were,
as indeed it is, all that he has ever written
of :
I say but that this love of earth reveals
A soul beyond our own, to quicken, quell,
Irradiate, and through ruinous floods uplift.
Now, the meaning of such utterances is
that Meredith accepts, without limitation,
the teaching that man is the product of
Nature, the “ great venture ” and “ chief
expression ” of the earth ; but he does not


stop here. To him the grand question
turns on the nature of Nature, He refuses
to consider It in any sense or at any stage
merely lifeless matter. He maintains that
from the first it is rational and at one with
what is deepest in man. The world is not
an “ eyeless ghost,” alien and horrible to
her children. It is only the perhaps uncon-
scious u goad of personal pain that causes
To view in cursed eclipse our mother’s mind,
And show us of some wretched harridan,
The wretched bondmen till the end of time.
Rightly understood, man is not the sport of
brute force —
The wind-whipped any-whither wave,
Crazily tumbled on a shingle grave,
To waste in foam.
Everywhere there is a gradual manifesta-
tion of mind, which at last in man himself
becomes clear and articulate. By such a
view of Nature he is taught
This life and her to know
For spirit; with awakenedness of glee
To feel stern joy his origin; not he
The child of woe.


And the progress of the earth does not
stop with the evolution of man, it continues
in the march of history. The recognition
of nature does not mean merely of nature
in the rough. “ Urban joins with pastoral"
when we s,ee that nature and man are in-
spired of the same spirit. They wage a
common war against their common foes,
the shapeless and misshapen. Man gives
nature her “mural crown” and smooths
“her haggard quarry features.” In city and
civitas, in ordered life and ordered reason
and ordered speech, he carries on her dumb
aspirations. Doubtless, the forward move-
ment, when entrusted to his charge, is slow
and tortuous. Often it seems as though
there were more of retreat than of advance,
but still mankind reels to its goal, as a
drunkard to his home :
Cherish the promise of its good intents,
And warn it, not one instinct to efface
Till reason ripen to the vacant place.
In this there lurks, perhaps, the tempta-
tion to a smug and smirking fatalism, and


Meredith admits of his doctrine, that “the
summer flies it mightily attracts.” But, in
truth, it should have an opposite tendency.
For the great hindrance to its acceptance,
(so Meredith would have us believe), lies in
the egotism that divides us off both from
nature and from our fellows, and it is only
through strenuous inner purification that
man’s vision of the world is purged and
clarified.
He will not read her good
Or wise, but with the passion self obscures,
Through terror, through distrust,
The greed to touch, to view, to have, to live
Through all that makes of him a sensitive
Abhorring dust.
Those who would find truth in the
“mystical woods of Westermain,” the
secret thickets of thought, must cast aside
all fear, malice, and lust; absolute self-
surrender is the condition of safety and
insight. But the surrender of self leads to
its transformation, since it is found to spring
rom the same fountain as nature, and their
common source is spirit. It is no longer


the “ sensitive abhorring dust; ” the reason
for the lower egotism is gone, for now the
nerve of our personality is the principle,
not of isolation, but of union, and ‘‘thrills
for service.” This is the song of Wester-
main :
Drink the sense the notes infuse,
You a larger self will find :
Sweetest fellowship ensues
With the creatures of your kind;
Aye, and love! if love it be
Flaming over I and me !
Love meet they who do not shove
Cravings in the van of love. . .
Granaries you will have a store,
Past the world of woe and bliss,
Sharing still its bliss and woe,
Harnessed to its hungers, No!
This is the great secret, at once condition
and consequence of the insight that
Earth is spirit in her clods
Footway to the god of gods.
A self-dedication surely that far exceeds
the Comtist enthusiasm for humanity; for
the Comtist with all his gratitude to man


finds still a brute residuum of nature that
cannot appeal to the feelings at all or only
repellently : but, in Meredith’s view
Look with spirit past the sense
Spirit shines in permanence.*
And this is-why he talks of the joy of the
earth. Sin and sorrow there are, harvest
fields, “ dragon-reaped from folly sown,”
for human life is still “ monster and blind
fit but to be led by pain.” But a glimpse
of the three-fold identity in the mind of
man and physical nature and the ultimate
ground of both, is enough for a valiant
confidence born of thought and love, though
not for the “unfaith clamouring to be
coined faith by proof.”
Whatever we may think of such poetic-
philosophy, —and I do not say that it is true
or new but only that it resembles what we
are taught by an increasing band of thinkers
and what probably we were taught long
* Most of these quotations are intended to illustrate Meredith as
thinker, not as artist in verse. To see him at his nest in the
latter aspect we must g> to such poems as “ The Day of the
Daughter of Hades,” or “ Modern Love,” or “ The Nuptials of
Attila.”


before we had anything to do'with thinkers,
—whatever we may think of such views,
they at least render intelligible to one
Meredith’s Shakespearian treatment of life
and character.
Meredith is terribly in earnest and un-
flinchingly severe, and every one of his
chief persons is measured by the spiritual
standard, not by any code of the conven-
tional man, or of the natural man. Yet his
books have not the melancholy undertone
that we note, say, in the positivist George
Eliot; there is no discord audible in them,
but a full-toned harmony that subdues the
jarring notes, that solemnises, but inspirits
and delights. Where George Eliot sees
only the irremediable in our acts, their
linkage in an iron chain of cause and effect,
the infinite generation of evil in a world
that, after all, is not spiritual ; George
Meredith has trust in a power that makes
even the wrath and the folly of man to
praise it, and so when our misdeeds have
been visited with their just reward, he can


say over the grave of the erring, “ Earth
makes all sweet,” and look for a harvest,
not of corruption, but of life. Talking of
Shakespeare’s profundity of knowledge he
says :
Thence came the honeyed corner at his lips,
The conquering smile wherein his spirit sails.
I should like to apply the words to himself.
Like Shakespeare of “ the bitter taste” to
those who are at odds with nature, he is
also like Shakespeare the “ bland and
mild,” to those whose spirits are in tune.
And this brings me to my conclusion. Not
that the subject, or even what I could say
of it, is more than begun. To-night we
must keep to generalities, though, as I am
fully aware, in generalities dolus est. It is
enough if I have persuaded any dissentient
that Meredith is not to be perused, but to
be studied ; more than enough, if any of
my suggestions should indicate the line of
study. The peculiar difficulty may, perhaps,
be stated thus : —>He must be read slowly if
we would understand him in detail, he must


be read rapidly to see the connection of the
whole ; therefore —this advice is addressed
to every-day plodders like myself, not to
the magnificent persons who pluck out the
heart of Shakespeare’s mystery at a first or
a second trial—the only thing is to read
him often. As I have done so myself, it
may be permitted me to say that the labour
will not be wasted. You will have obseryed
my frequent appeal to Shakespeare ; that
was a matter both of choice and necessity.
Of necessity, for frequently it was not ap-
parent where else the analogy, of which I
was in search, was to be found. Of choice,
for it was my wish to suggest a comparison
between Meredith and Shakespeare. That
is the highest praise that can be given to a
man, even if he falls very far short of the
standard ; it is a cruel ordeal, no matter
how great he is. I dare not say that
Meredith justifies the praise, or endures
the ordeal. He has been called the Shake-
speare of nineteenth century prose, but such
a phrase may mean 100 little or too much.


It means too little if he is ranked with
those ephemeral nineteenth century Shakes-
peares, of whom we see such a crop every
decennium, nay, every twelvemonth. Taken
seriously, with every limitation, it may mean
too much, for we are close to him, and often
one summit seems comparatively near the
level of a higher, only because we are beside
the former. Let us avoid then catch words
that may be injurious or flattering. But,
however it may be with mass and intensity
and range, I know no writer with so many
of Shakespeare’s characteristic qualities as
George Meredith, poet and novelist.
Turner and Henderson, Printers, Hunter Street, Sydney.




