

OEOROE ROBERTSON, 33 LITTLE COLLINS-ST. WEST, MELBOURNE.


NOVEMBER, 1883.
zpze^oszpzeottjs
GEORGE ROBERTSON k COMPANY
LIMITED.
TO BE REGISTERED UNDER THE COMPANIES STATUTE, 1864
CAPITAL: £250,000, in 50,000 Shares of £5 each.
(10,000 of which, paid up to £3, are taken, in part payment, hi/ Mr. Robertson, who hinds
himself to retain possession of same for five years, from 31st December, 1883).
Payable—los. on application; 30s. on allotment; further calls, if required, not to
exceed 10s. per share, and to be at intervals of not less than six months.
The Share List will positively close at noon on Saturday, Ist December, 1883,
provisional Directors:
JOHN BLYTH, Esq. (Messrs. John Blyth & Co.)
W. H. CALDER, Esq. (Messrs. Couche, Calder, & Co.)
R. J. JEFFRAY, Esq. (Messrs. Wm. Sloane & Co.)
HON. JOHN MACGREGOR (Messrs. Macgregor & Brahe, Solicitors).
DAVID SYME, Esq., Proprietor “ Age ” Newspaper.
HENRY G. TURNER, Esq., General Manager Commercial Bank.
Chairman anb flfcanaginq Director ;
GEORGE ROBERTSON, Esq.
Bankers:
COMMERCIAL BANK OF AUSTRALASIA.
WAREHOUSES,
OFFICES, &C.
Melbourne
33 and 35 Little Collins-street West.
Factory—Mackil I op-street.
Sydney
301 George-street.
Adelaide
Brisbane
London
103 King William-street.
Edward-street.
17 Warwick-square, Paternoster Row, E.C.


This Company is formed for the purpose of taking over as a
going concern the business hitherto carried on by Mr. George
Robertson as a Wholesale and Retail Bookseller and Stationer,
Publisher, Importer of Books, Stationery and Fancy Goods,
Machine Ruler, Bookbinder, Account Book Manufacturer, and
Lithographic Printer.
The business was commenced by Mr. Robertson thirty years
ago. It is well known for its wonderful success and increase
during all these years, and is at the present time in a more
prosperous condition than at any previous period. It is, neverthe-
less, capable of very great extension.
Mr. Robertson’s only reason for parting with the sole ownership
of the business is to provide for its more easy continuance in the
event of his removal by death or otherwise; his interest in it,
however, will still be very large, as he not only accepts 10,000
shares in part payment, but of the remaining 40,000 shares he
has agreed to take up on the same conditions as the other share-
holders all that may not be allotted to the public, thus conclusively
proving his belief in the continued success of the business in the
hands of the Company.
The Factory Plant is complete for all purposes of Bookbinding,
Machine Ruling, and Lithographic Printing.
The stock of Books and Stationery has been kept up to meet
all requirements, and is at present as perfect as such a stock can
be. On the other hand, the Directors have excluded from their
purchase, on behalf of the Company, all unsaleable and redundant
items.
Mr. Robertson has agreed to transfer to the Company the
leases which he holds of the business premises in London and
Adelaide, and as regards the premises in Melbourne and Sydney
(which are his freehold property), to grant to the Company leases
for 21 years at a fair and reasonable rental.
Also to hand over his Business to the Company on the Ist
January, 1884, as a going concern and unencumbered, the Company
paying for the Machinery, Plant, Implements, and Tools used in
the Factory, and also the Stock-in-Trade and Furniture in the
Warehouses and Offices in Melbourne and at the Branches, the
sum of £106,000; and for the Goodwill of the Business (which
includes all Copyrights and arrangements with authors) the sum
of £15,000 —making in all £121,000.


All Debts due to or by Mr. Robertson will remain with him
in liquidation, and the Business will be taken over by the Company
free from all such liabilities.
The Directors propose to pay out of the profits to end of
March an Interim Dividend in April of each year, and Full
Dividends as soon as the profits of each year shall have been
determined. It has been decided that the business year of this
Company shall end on the 30th September, but, having regard to
the magnitude of the stock, and the consequent great labour in
preparing the Balance Sheet of such a business, the yearly dividend
cannot be expected till December.
All applications for shares are to be made direct to Mr.
George Robertson, 33 Little Collins Street West, Melbourne, on or
before Saturday, the Ist of December next, at noon.
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
LIMITED.
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR SHARES.
To Mr. GEORGE ROBERTSON, 33 Little Collins Street W., Melbourne.
for the sum of £...
I enclose
being the amount of deposit of 10s. per Share on Shares of £5 each
in George Robertson and Company Limited, and I hereby apply for that number
of Shares, and agree to accept such Shares, or any smaller number that may be allotted
to me, and to pay the amount due thereon according to the terms of the Prospectus,
and I authorise you to place my mime upon the Register of Members in respect of
the Shares so allotted.
Signature
Name in full
Residence
Profession or occupation
Date ISB3.
