

George Milner Stephen
AND HIS
MARVELLOUS CURES.
BY HIS SON,
HAROLD W. H. STEPHEN,
Author of “ The Golden Yankee &c.
“ Der Mensch denkt, Gott lenkt.”
Sydney ;
TURNER AND HENDERSON,
HUNTER STREET.
Price Is.


IVAN HOE
VINEYARD DEPOT,
13 BRIDGE STREET,
SYDNEY.
All Classes of Albury and Hunter
River Wines in stock .
Wines grown and matured by us have
taken TWENTY-SIX PRIZES
at the Sydney International, Paris,
Singleton, Sydney Agricultural, and
other Exhibitions.
DINNER WINES, RED OR WHITE:
10s. per dozen, quarts. 6s. per dozen, pints.
3s. 6d. per gallon in Jars or Kegs.
G. H. STEPHEN and CO.,
WINE GROWERS & MERCHANTS.
N.B.—Wholesale Buyers liberally treated.


FIRST PRIZE SEWING MACHINE OF THE WORLD !
SINtSI 9 ! ISiiili BIWIIB imbu
aIS 111 jj 111 illM@ll
WITH SELF-ADJUSTING TRIPLE ACTION BALANCE-W’HEEL, WHICH CANNOT
BE TURNED IN WRONG DIRECTION.
-STE-A-ISS OTJTEOITE.
SINGER MANUFACTURING CO. MADE AND SOLD 431,167 IN THE YEAR 1878,
BEING 74,735 MORE THAN ANY OTHER YEAR.
Reduced Cash Price £6 ICs.
The public have the guarantee of the Singer Co. of over 25 years’ standing, employing
40,000 men, producing 8,000 SINGER MACHINES per week—that any Machine sold by th®
Singer Company’s Agency, G. J. WELLS, is exactly what it is represented.
The Grand Gold Medal was awarded the Singer Co. at the Paris Exhibition, 1878.
The PEOPLE’S AWARD to the SINGER MACHINE.
NEW HAND PLATFORM MACHINE, £4 15s.
NEW TABLE and TREADLE MACHINE, £6 10s.
THE NEW HAND ATTACHMENT, for WORK-
ING either HAND or FOOT, 20s. each.
Sales in 1878 over 1870, 228,599 machines,
BEING; A THREE-FOLD INCREASE
showing their vast populrrity.
BEWARE GERMAN, BRUMMAGEN BOGUS
IMITATORS.
Our terms are on the most LIBERAL SCALE
ss. DEPOSIT (fiveshillings), DEPOSIT
2s (two shillings) per week, 2s per week.
Reduced Cash Price £6 10s-
SOLE AUTHORIZED AGENCY FOR NEW SOUTH WALES:
Gr. 0". WB LLS
(Late STANFORD AND CO.)
No. 1 HUNTER STREET, 1 door off GEORGE STREET.
SYDNEY PUNCH
SUBSCRIPTION:
28s. per Annum, 7s. per Quarter—if paid Quarterly. 245. per Annum,
6s. per Quarter —if paid in Advance.
BEST MEDIUM FOR ADVERTISING.


WORKS by JOHN TYERMAN.
A GUIDE TO SPIRITUALISM. 3s. ; by post, 3s. 4d.
FREETHOUGHT VINDICATED; or, Infidel Christianity v. Honest
Unbelief. 138 pages. Price, Is. 6d.
SPIRITUALISM VINDICATED : being a reply to the Revs. J. Graham,
A. W. Webb, and D. Allen, and the Christian Advocate, of Sydney. Is • by
post, Is. lid. ’
HIDDEN SPRINGS UNCO\ ERED : being three Lectures delivered in
reply to Archbishop Vaughan, of Sydney. Published by request. Is. 6d • by
post, Is. Bd. ’ J
SPIRITUALISM, as a DESTRUCTIVE and CONSTRUCTIVE SYSTEM.
9d. ; by post, lOd.
IS THERE A DEVIL ? or, The Scarecrow of Christendom Unmasked.
Third edition. 6d.; by post, 7d.
IS THERE A HELL ? or, The Doctrine of Eternal Punishment Examined
in the Light of Reason, Justice, and Benevolence. Second edition 6d •by
post, 7d. ■ ’ j
IMMORTALITY : or, The World to Come, as Revealed in the Light of
Spiritualism. 6d. ; by post, 7d. &
CREEDS AND DOGMAS.—A Plea for Theological Revision : Addressed
to the Clergy and Christians of all Denominations. 3d. ; hy post 4d
CONTRADICTIONS OF THE BIBLE. 3d. ; by post, 4d.
To be had of the Author , 135 JVoolloomooloo Street, JVoollooinooloo,
Sydney; R. W. Skinner, 285 Pitt Street, Sydney; W. 11. Terry, 84
Russell Street, Melbourne; and all booksellers.
FREETHOUGHT PLATFORM
THEATRE ROYAL,
Mr. Charles BRIGHT
LECTURES
Every Sunday Evening.
PAMPHLETS by Mr. BRIGHT ON SALE:
RATIONALISM v. DOGMA: A Review of Archbishop Vaughan’s Lenten
Discourses.
A PLEA FOR THE SUNDAY PLATFORM, and a PROTEST
against the ATTEMPT to SUPPRESS it. A Lecture delivered
at the Theatre Royal, Sydney.


George Milner Stephen
AND HIS
MARVELLOUS CURES.
Author of “ The Golden YankeeBfc.
“ Der Mensoh denkt, Gott lenkt.”
pYDNEY!
TURNER AND HENDERSON,
HUNTER STREET.
BY HIS SON,
HAROLD
W. H. STEPHEN,




TO THE
ijteott
PRESIDENT OF THE
Psychological of ]N[ew }Vales,
This little Book is dedicated
BY
THE AUTHOR.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Chapter I. — George Milner Stephen and his Family ... 9
Chapter ll.—Conversion to Spiritualism 13
Chapter lll.—What Mr. Stephen learnt from the Spirits ... 17
Chapter IV.—Evidences of Spiritualism 25
Chapter V.—Healing by Laying on of Hands... ... ... 31
Chapter VI. —G. M. Stephen’s gift of Healing and Cures ... 40


P R E F A C E .
fHE marvellous cures effected during the last three or four
months by my father, George Milner Stephen, have been
already given such publicity through the newspapers, that
enquiries are constantly being made as to the origin of the power he
possesses, &e. With a view to supply the required information, and
in accordance with the wishes of those whom we are bound to.
respect, this pamphlet has been compiled.
So many persons are interested in ridiculing these cures and
our explanation of the source from which they emanate, that their
importance is apt to be overlooked by the general reader. If
“ miracles,” such as those reported in this book, are effected in the
present day, are we not justified in assuming that they are effected
by the same means as the “miracles” of the past? Or, if these
“miracles ” can be scientifically demonstrated to be in accordance
with natural law, is it not fair to adopt the same line of argument
with those older “ miracles,” the authors of which have been deified
or canonised ?
George Milner Stephen adopts the same method of healing as
was practised by St. Paul and other Christian heroes ; he ascribes,
his power to the same source as they did theirs, and the same results
follow: —Will the rational man be content to attribute the gift of
the modern healing medium to animal magnetism or the devil, whilst
he believes the mediums of old to be specially endowed by God ?
It has been urged that the cures of our time are not permanent*
but, if that were the case (which, most emphatically, it is not) what
evidence is there as to the permanency of the cures reported in the
Bible ?
Now, strip from the Christian heroes their power of healing, and
there remains but the teacher —and, in all ages, the teacher of
strange doctrines has met with sorry treatment when he has not
been able to support his arguments by proofs addressed to the
senses. Christianity owed its acceptance by the multitude to its
“ miracles, ” and Modem Spiritualism is making its way by the same
means.


Amongst the “miracles” of Modem Spiritualism are those
remarkable cases of sudden cure which are recorded in these pages,
and it is to be hoped they will have as good effect now as they
would have had if they had been performed in Palestine, 1800
years ago.*
The mesmerists, who deny spiritual agency in healing, are
challenged to produce similar cases of sudden cure—that they can
cure by continuous application may not be doubted, but in the
history of mesmerism it is impossible to find such repeated
instances of immediate cure.
I leave the matter in the hands of the reader, who will, I hope,
recognise the gravity of the question, and not be deterred from
investigation by the sneers and laughter of the ignorant and
prejudiced.
Before concluding I would call attention to the Sunday lectures
by Messrs. Bright and Tyerman, who have devoted their great
abilities to the cause of Spiritualism, and are most capable exponents
of its principles.
HAROLD W. H. STEPHEN.
* One of the best works on this subject is “ The Identity of Primitive
Christianity and Modern Spiritualism ” by Eugene Crowell, M.D., from which Mr.
Curtis (alluded to hereafter) obtained many of his facts and arguments.


GEORGE MILNER STEPHEN
AND HIS
MARVELLOUS CURES.
CHAPTER I.
GEORGE MILNER STEPHEN AND HIS FAMILY.
The subject of this memoir is descended from an old
Cheshire family, a member of which settled in Aberdeen
about the middle of the last century. His son adopted the
profession of the law, and thus set the example which has
been so diligently followed by his descendants. Of Ms
sons, James, a Member of Parliament and Master in
Chancery, made himself conspicuous during the agitation
for the emancipation of slaves, working diligently with
Clarkson and Wilberforce (his brother-in-law) ; John, first
puisne judge at Sydney, was the father of George
Milner Stephen.
From the above mentioned James were descended:
Sergeant Stephen, author of “ Stephen’s Commentaries
the Right Honorable Sir James Stephen, K.C.8., Privy
Councillor, Under Secretary of State for the Colonies,
Professor of Modern History, and author of “ Essays in
Ecclesiastical Biography,” &c., &c. ; Sir George Stephen,
Q.C., author of many works on law, &c.; Sir James Fitz-
James Stephen, K. 5.1., one of the Barons of the Exchequer,
author of some leading works on law reform ; Leslie
Stephen, editor of the Cornhill Magazine, author of the
“ History of English Thought in the Eighteenth Century,”
&c., &c. ; J. Wilberforce Stephen, Judge of the Supreme
Court, Victoria; and James Stephen, LL.D., County Court
Judge in England, and Professor of Law at the University
of London, who edited “ Stephen’s Commentaries.”


Of the family of John:—the eldest son, Sidney, died;
Chief Justice of New Zealand ; another, Sir Alfred
Stephen, C. 8., K.C.M.G., was for many years Chief Justice
of New South Wales, and now holds the post of Lieut.
Governor of that colony.
George Milner came out to Sydney with his father, in
1824, and began public life in the Commissariat. At the
age of 18 he was appointed Clerk of the Supreme Court
at Hobarton, Tasmania, and Archdeacon’s Registrar, which
offices he retained for about eight years. From thence he
went to South Australia, having been sent for on the
recommendation of Sir John Jeffcott, Judge of the Supreme
Court, to take the post of Advocate-General. Later, when
the Governor, Rear Admiral Sir John Hindmarsh, K.H.,
went to England, George Milner Stephen officiated as
Acting Governor. His services in that capacity were
acknowledged by the Home Government in the following
letter: —
No. 2. Downing-street, 27th June, 1839.
Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of the several
despatches addressed to this department by Acting
Governor Stephen, from No. 1 to 17, on various subjects
connected with the affairs of South Australia. It is not
necessary that I should notice in detail the different topics
embraced in those despatches; but I request that you will
convey to Mr. Stephen the acknowledgments of Her
Majesty’s Government of the satisfactory manner in which
he appears to have administered the affairs of the colony,
under the difficult and embarrassing circumstances in which
he was placed.
I have the honor to be, Sir, your obedient servant,
(Signed) Normanby.
Lieutenant Colonel Gawler, &c., &c., &c.
He also received an unusually complimentary address
from the colonists, acknowledging his “generosity, integrity,
and independence of character,” &c.
Shortly afterwards he was married to the youngest
daughter of Sir John Hindmarsh, and in the year 1840 he


returned to England, where (after some time passed as
Secretary to the Government of Heligoland) he kept his
terms at the Middle Temple, and was duly called to the
Bar. At this time he also studied miniature painting,
being undecided whether or not to adopt the career of ail
artist.
He painted portraits of Christian VIII., King of Denmark,
(for which he was honored with numerous sittings by His
Majesty), the Prince of Thurn and Taxis, Prince Esterhazy,
and several other notabilities, from whom he received
many compliments and rich gifts.
After being called to the bar, George Milner Stephen
soon left for Australia (having previously refused the
Colonial Secretaryship of New Zealand, which Lord Stanley
urgently pressed him to accept —war with the Maoris having
just broken out), and settled in Adelaide, where he practised
his profession until the gold discovery, when he removed
to Melbourne. There, for a time, he made a very large
income, being engaged in nearly every important case. He
established a Society of Fine Arts, of which he was elected
Chairman, and the Geological Society (since merged in the
Royal Society), of which he was the first Vice-President.
In 1853 he again left Australia and settled in London,
where he remained for two years, occupying himself chiefly
with mineralogy, of which he had made a special study.
He contributed papers on this subject to the Geological
Society of London (of which he is a Fellow), and was made
an honorary member of the Natural History Society of
Dresden, and the Geological Society of Berlin, &c.
At the request of the Secretary of State he also prepared
an elaborate Report, with drawings, upon the resources,
&c., of Heligoland, with, a view to its occupation as a
training dep6t for the German Legion during the Crimean
War ; and for his services the Secretary for War permitted
him to nominate several gentlemen for commissions in that
Corps.
In 1856 he returned to Melbourne, and at once took a
high stand in his profession; although for some years he
was engaged in warfare with The Argus, and another
journal. He sat in Parliament for some time as member
for Collingwood, then the largest constituency in Victoria,
but finally, after a year or two spent in the charming little


town of Beechworth, he elected to settle in Sydney, where
he still continues to reside.
During the early part of his career in this city, Mr.
Stephen was engaged in mining operations on an extensive
scale, and did not attempt to practice his profession until
after the panic, which completely destroyed the public
confidence in every description of mining enterprise.
Mr. Stephen performed the duties of Parliamentary
Draftsman for over two years, giving such satisfaction that
forty-one Members of Parliament recommended his per-
manent appointment. This, however, was withheld from
him, and bestowed upon another barrister, owing to the
enmity of the then Attorney-General.
As instances of Mr. Stephen’s versatility of talent, it may
be mentioned that he is an accomplished flute player, and
an excellent carpenter and mechanic, of which last he gave
proof by the invention of a gold-washing machine, which
met with much favour from those who understood its
working.
The foregoing particulars serve at least to show that
Mr. Stephen possesses more than average ability, and that
neither by the associations of a long life, by his training or
inheritance, is he likely to be either a charlatan, or the
subject of hallucination.
Of his disposition the writer cannot be supposed to speak
otherwise than partially ; but those who know him best
will probably agree that he is singularly sweet-tempered
and hopeful. He is not “ a good hater,” and has had many
severe losses through his trustfulness ; he is also generous
and sympathising.
As instances of his personal courage and sense of duty,
the following are extracted from documents the originals of
which are in the Colonial Office : —“ Accompanied solely by
Henry Inman, afterwards a clergyman in England (who
bravely volunteered, when a small party of marines placed
under the command of Mr. Stephen were panic-stricken
and halted), he” (then Advocate-General of South Australia)
“ entered the encampment of some 200 armed and excited
aborigines, and made prisoner of one of them, who had just
assassinated a colonist.”
“On another occasion, in the night-time, when five
armed bushrangers had got possession of a hut, and


threatened to fire upon a party of marines, again placed
under his orders, Mr. Stephen (to spare lives) halted the
marines, and proceeded alone to the hut, when he prevailed
upon the bushrangers to surrender to himself, and yield up
their arms.”
“ Mr. Stephen also personally arrested, in the night,
another armed bushranger, who had fired at the Sheriff in
his house, and who was thereupon tried and executed.”
Finally, it may be added that, throughout his life, Mr.
Stephen has evinced the greatest horror of smoking and
drinking, and that he has always been exceedingly temperate
in all his habits.
CHAPTER II.
CONVERSION TO SPIRITUALISM.
G. M. Stephen and his family were all members of the
Established Church, and it was his regular practice to
attend its services, take the sacrament, and read family
prayers. Never did he read what is termed an infidel
work, or subscribe to any of the advanced opinions of the
day. He was one of the millions who suffer others to
think for them on religious matters, and blindly believe
what is told them. He had no taste for religious contro-
versy, and was indeed so prejudiced against “ infidelity ”
that he would not have allowed a “ freefchought ” work to
remain in his house; and was also so far Sabbatarian in
his views that games and profane music were interdicted
on the Sunday in his home.
Nearly three years ago, it chanced one day, that Mr.
Stephen met the Hon. J. Bowie Wilson, whilst that gentle-
man was discoursing on Spiritualism to a mutual friend.
Mr. Stephen was so ignorant of the subject (as, by the way,
all non-Spiritualists are) that he asked what it meant. In
reply, Dr. Wilson asked him to his house to meet a young
man (Mr. Thomas Walker) who, he said, though young


and ignorant, would, under the influence of the spirits of
the departed, discourse learnedly on almost any subject
that might be suggested by his audience. The experiences
of that visit were so astounding that he was compelled to
believe that some super-mundane intelligence had been at
work. He asked Dr. Wilson for guidance in his search
after the truth, and was told to sit with his own family
arousd a table, and wait to see what would come of it.
On the first night of so sitting, one of the family felt
sundry twitches in her arm, and finally placing her hand
on a planchette (which had been procured for the purpose),
it moved, and presently began to write with inconceivable
rapidity, a message, to which the signature of a departed
relative was appended.
From that time forward regular sittings were held, and
it was soon found that others of the family possessed what
is termed the “ medium-faculty.” Communications were
nightly received from dead and gone friends, giving proofs
of identity which overcame every doubt, and G. M. Stephen
and his immediate family became Spiritualists.
At first they walked warily, fearing to part with any
cherished belief; but as soon as they began to study the
literature of Spiritualism, and read the enormous mass
of argument in opposition to the accepted beliefs of
Christendom, their reason obtained fuller play, and they
were gradually enabled to weigh the evidence and argu-
ments carefully, and decide in accordance with that intelli-
gence which alone elevates man above the brute. They
saw that, whilst the world had made enormous strides in
science and civilisation, the Christian community were
content to accept their religion from men who believed
that the earth was flat, and that the sun revolved around
it. They saw that God’s laws were immutable in the
present day, and they were compelled to reject the fables
that the whole economy of the universe was upset in order
that the semi-barbarian Joshua should be enabled to kill a
few more of his enemies; or the sun placed ten degrees
back because a petty king (Hezekiah) refused, without
some such sign, to believe that he would be cured of a
boil. They read, in the works of Alfred Russell Wallace
and Professor Crookes, how those illustrious men applied
every test that science could suggest in order to unmask


the frauds of mediums, and how, as the result of their
labours, they were content to risk their reputation by
announcing their belief in the genuineness of the
phenomena. And above all, amongst themselves, when
no stranger was present, phenomena constantly occurred,
to the solution of which science afforded no clue, whilst
orthodoxy was fain to ascribe them to the devil. Then
they found this magnanimous devil urging them. to
increased purity of life and charity of thought; warning
them to desist from evil habits and evil speech, and
indicating to them a future career, before which the glories
of the Christian’s heaven pale into insignificance.
Amongst the more curious phenomena with which they
were favoured were the brilliant improvisations of two of
the circle on the piano, either in the light or dark. These
two would often go off into trance, proceed together to the
instrument, and thereupon perform improvised duets in
which melody, harmony, and execution were all perfect
in their way. These duets have been heard by competent
judges, professional and amateur, who have stated that no
persons could, in their normal state, perform so admirably
without previous practice together. Another member of
the circle often obtained signatures of persons whose
writing he had never seen, and on comparison they were
found to be most excellent forgeries (?).
At an early stage of their sitting the planchette was
discarded, and neither table-tilting nor rapping were prac-
tised ; the spirits finding it easy to communicate by means
of writing or speech in trance.
What would you have ? I ask the intelligent reader
whether, if he experienced such things amongst those he
loved and trusted, he too would not proclaim himself a
Spiritualist ? To me, it seems impossible that any man
could doubt; though lam willing to admit that there is
always the devil to fall back upon. It is always possible
for the poor creature whose intellect is sodden by the imbe-
cilities which he imbibed with his mother’s milk, to take
refuge from unpleasant truths by ascribing such deeds to
the master of mischief. But surely, if we follow the
teachings of this devil, and live purely and charitably, it
would be rather irrational to suppose that even the Chris-
tian’s God would punish us for ever because we cannot


believe certain things, of which the evidence is so contra-
dictory that all Christendom is split up into sects, each of
which believes that its rivals are on the road to hell
Moreover, if we are devil-ridden after this fashion, what
are the angels about that they do not come to our aid p Is
Mr batan to have it all his own way (as, indeed, according
to Christian teaching, he appears to have had all the time),
without ever a kindly emissary from the good God, who
sees our peril and our inability to help ourselves, putting in
an appearance P 1 think, or I would like to think, that the
reader will see the force of this argument, and not too
hastily condemn us in the face of such experience as ours,
.j u beyond all, and above all, is this most potent con-
sideration Why is there a devil at all ? God, the Author
ot all, must have created even the devil—does it not ap-
pear just a little rough on us that He should afterwards
create us for the devil to amuse himself with ? A Chris-
tian pleader for his faith, attempting to answer this argu-
ment when I introduced it in an article in “ Freethought ”
says that he is not aware that “ any Christian church ever
propounded the dogma that God created a devil •” but that
the devil was originally an angel, and “ kept not his first
estate This is the kind of quibbling with which
Christian teachers succeed in satisfying their hearers,
it God created an angel who afterwards became a
devd, surely He is as responsible for the authorship of
the latter as for that of the former. The angel, so
created, must have lacked some essential, or he could never
have deteriorated ; and so at least God would be responsible
tor having made a defective angel. Without counting that,
as the. Christian’s God is supposed to be omniscient, He
must, m creating the angel, have foreseen that He’was
making a future devil. Unless, indeed, we are to assume
that God was not before all, but that the angels were
co-existent with Him, and that heaven was originally a
species of limited monarchy, in which the devil represented
the leader of the Opposition.
The writer under notice urges that the principle of evil
was a necessity, because, as “the existence of the right
necessitates the existence of the left, and there cannot be a
tuture without a past,” so there cannot be good without
evil also. How, then, are we to account for our own


existence F If we are to live for ever, we must have
existed for ever, and the doctrine of re-incarnation might
be accepted. But I am not answering that writer in this
pamphlet, and I only digress thus far in order to show the
kind of argument used by those who cling to tradition in
spite of their reason.
We Spiritualists know that, as the result of our conver-
sion, we have striven, more or less, to order our lives ; and
we are content in that knowledge, believing that no more
true saying ever was coined than “ by their fruits ye shall
know them.” We have never heard of a Spiritualist
committing a crime ; although it is possible that we now
number over thirty millions, and are daily adding to our
ranks. The records of no gaol contain the entry “ Spiritual-
ist ” as the religious belief of any prisoner, and we know
why this is so. Every Spiritualist has by his side a mentor
who loses no opportunity for warning, improving, and
encouraging him; whilst he can always rely for help and
comfort upon every other Spiritualist to whom he may
apply.
Let the reader further reflect that the act of confession of
faith in Spiritualism is usually ruinous to a man’s worldly
prospects, besides sundering him from loved relatives and
friends, and he will conceive that nothing but absolute
knowledge of the truth of this much-abused faith (if so it
may be called) would tempt anyone to such suicidal action.
Our family have suffered, perhaps not so much as many
other Spiritualists, but we would all bear fifty times the
punishment rather than part with the knowledge we have
gained, or forego the pleasant intercourse with those who
loved us whilst on earth, and are daily proving that love
dies not with the body, but is an integral part of the soul.
CHAPTER III.
WHAT MR. STEPHEN LEARNT FROM THE SPIRITS.
It cannot be out of place in this pamphlet (which is in-
tended to further the cause of Spiritualism) to refer briefly
to the teachings which have come to us from the spirit


world; but at the same time we would not have the reader
assume that we accepted them as truth on the mere ipse
dixit of a spirit. That error has caused so- much mischief
in the past (which mischief has been multiplied a thousand-
fold since the sanctity of age has been added to such
sayings) that Spiritualists are perpetually urged by their
guardian spirits to believe nothing except upon proof.
Tot homines, tot sententice, and as we do not regard the dead
as infallible, we know that as great a diversity of opinion
obtains amongst the lower grades in the spirit world as
amongst men. But on one or two points, all spirits,
wheresoever communicating, are agreed ; and, as a neces-
sary consequence, it may be assumed that all Spiritualists
are also in accord.
These are, firstly, that communication between mortals
and spirits is both possible and lawful.
Secondly, that the future of man is a state of pro-
gression ; and that, no matter what delay may take place,
every human being must attain to happiness.
Thirdly, that there is no such being as a personal devil,
or place of everlasting torment.
The all-important point, however, is that Spiritualism
demonstrates, beyond the shadow of a doubt, that there is
a life beyond the grave.
The Christian reader will say that he knows this already ;
but he is in error : he does not know it, he simply believes
it. There is a vast difference between knowing and be-
lieving, as a very slight examination will show. A man
knows only that which has been logically proved to him—
he may believe anything that is told to him. Now, logical
proof of future existence cannot be afforded by Christian
teachers, whose belief is founded upon manuscripts and
traditions ; although such a strong presumptive case may
be made out as to completely satisfy superficial enquirers.
That I am not overstating the case is evidenced by the
giant strides which Materialism has made in this reasoning
age. Amongst the leaders of scientific thought in Europe
and America, a large proportion decline to believe in a
hereafter, and openly confess that the proofs offered by
orthodoxy are wholly insufficient. If, then, Spiritualism
steps in, and gives evidence which cannot be rejected, the
Churches should (if they were earnest in their desire to


save the world from Materialism) gladly welcome its aid, and
point the way to the less instructed. But the Churches
abominate the new comer, and hold alooi from the
only thing which can save them; whilst the ground is
mined under their feet, and Materialism adds to its ad-
herents every day. (Always excepting, however, the
Roman Catholic Church, which needs not such an ally,
having spiritual phenomena of its own to aid it to maintain
its ascendancy.)
Now, as to the second proposition before stated, it is well
to note that many orthodox divines are inclining to a
similar view; naturally holding it more in accordance with
the attributes of a just and merciful God to suppose that
He would be content with punishing His erring creatures
for a term, rather than condemn them to everlasting
torture. (See Canon Farrar’s “ Eternal Hope.”) If then
the punishment be terminable, progression must be
assumed as the ultimate ; unless, indeed, we are contented
to accept the monstrous doctrine that God would finish by
annihilating the wicked. Humanity would revolt at the
notion of condemning a criminal to lengthy imprisonment
with frequent whippings, and winding up by capital
punishment. Should such a sentence be passed by any
judicature in the world an outcry would be raised which
would compel its reversal. Why should we then believe
our God to be capable of deeds which we should deem
horribly cruel in a mortal ?
Moreover, it is impossible to escape from the fact that
men are born into the world under such circumstances, and
with such constitutions, that crime is natural to them, and
they cannot be good and respectable. Society, governed
by Christian principles, has provided for these unfortunates
schools and churches, teachers and priests —and handsome
gaols and lunatic asylums. In these he is suffered to
reform —if he can. He is associated with a crowd of
men at war with society, who sustain one another by
recital of their evil deeds; and he is supposed to emerge
from amongst them chastened and purified! Is such an
one altogether responsible for his evil deeds ? If you
answer that the mercy of God is infinite, and that for-
giveness was accorded even to the thief on the cross, I
ask whether it is strictly in accordance with what seems


just and right that an abominable ruffian should be
“ forgiven ” and elevated into a place by the side of
cultivated, pure-minded men and women ? Spiritualism
teaches that no such incongruous grouping together is
possible ; but that in the other world, as in this, like will
be associated with like ; and that, until a man has fitted
himself for superior society, he will not be admitted to it.
According to Christian teaching, a murderer, whose
whole life had been spent in crime and debauchery, would,
if he sincerely repented prior to his execution, and faithfully
believed in salvation through the atonement of Jesus Christ,
swing off from the gallows into eternal bliss; whilst the
honest Freethinker, whose reason would not permit him to
believe in such a dogma, would fly from his deathbed to a
place of torment—there to be tortured through all eternity,
notwithstanding that his whole life might have been charac-
terised by acts of love and charity to his neighbours, and
abstinence from every debasing amusement or practice.
Is this doctrine in accordance with reason or justice, or is it
not rather a blasphemous slander of the infinitely just God?
The third proposition is so intimately associated with the
second, that it may be dismissed without argument, especially
as I have previously referred to the existence of the devil.
It is commonly asserted by the opponents of Spiritualism
that this theory of progression leads to crime and
immorality, the fear of hell being taken away. How, I
am going to venture on a statement which may at first
sight appear very absurd, but which a little examination of
his own heart may lead the orthodox reader to believeh as
some germs of truth in it. I say that the fear of hell is
not a potent deterrent from crime. I say that if a man
wish to sin, he will, in the immense majority of cases, do
so, unless he be withheld by fear of the law, of the verdict
of society and his friends, or of the evil effects to his own
health or purse. The fact is, that even the most orthodox
Christians cannot reconcile this doctrine of eternal punish-
ment with their ideas of the attributes of the Deity ; and,
besides, between them and the other world stretches such
a vast gulf that they cannot bridge it, even in their
thoughts ; and so live that it will be “ all right
in the end,” and that the Horatian maxim, dum vivimus
vivamus, is the only true philosophy.


But when man is brought face to face with the spirits of
those he loved —when he learns that they are with him at
all times ; that they grieve over his sins, and work for his
regeneration—when he learns from them that if he would
join them, and lead a happy, useful life, ever learning,
ever progressing, he must abstain from evil deeds, evil
words, and evil thoughts—why, then, he just abstains
from sin to the best of his ability.
The Christian is taught that the eye of God is ever upon
him, but he is not very much frightened—he reflects that
God sees so much crime, and is so used to forgive, that
he does not feel ashamed of the thought that his sin is
known. But let a man reflect that his beloved mother,
or his virgin daughter, would witness his debasing deeds,
and the chances are he will not care to offend them.
This may seem wicked, but it is human nature.
I now proceed to quote verbatim some of the sayings
which have come to us from the spirit world through the
mediumship of various members of our family circle, in-
cluding myself. I have culled the most pithy sayings,
being desirous merely to show the nature of the teach-
ing ; though, if space admitted of it, I could easily furnish
lengthy essays which have come to us from this source,
and some of which have already appeared in print as
ordinary newspaper articles.
It is necessary here to explain, for the benefit of non-
Spiritualists, what we understand by “ writing medium-
ship,” and, for that purpose, I extract from a diary, which
I kept at the time, my own initiation.
“ March 29, 1878. Was at a seance at my father’s.
After some communications, my sister” (who had been
acting as medium) “ left the room, and I began to copy
a communication ” (which was addressed to myself),
“ when, for the first time, I felt influenced, my fingers
being cramped. She re-entered, and the pencil fell from
my fingers, and I took it up and wrote as usual. On
my return home, I went to my own smoking-room, and
sate by myself. I had not been sitting long before the
control” (that is to say, the spirit control of the hand)
“ began, and, for at least an hour, my hand was exercised
after a most fantastic fashion, rapidly covering slip after
slip with evident efforts to form letters and words. lat


last felt tired and said (I think mentally) that I should go
as soon as that slip was finished. Immediately there was
written, ‘Do not go ’ —the first legible words. I waited,
and the undecipherable practice went on again, until at last
I began to ask leading questions, and found the answers
‘No ’ and ‘ Yes ’ came easily, in some instances accom-
panied by one or two easy words. I was only once or
twice impressed” (that is to say, “aware of”) “the
answer before it was written. Several times I thought
‘ No ’ was begun, and it ended in ‘Yes,’ and vice versd.”
The above experience is rather unusual, from the fact of
the developement being rapid, for, as a rule, the practice
spoken of goes on for some time before the spirits obtain
sufficient command over the medium’s hand to be able to
write. The first sensation is usually a pricking in the
fingers and twitching of the muscles of the arm.
Some writing mediums are what is known as “automatic”
—that is to say, they have not the slightest notion of what
they are writing, and will even laugh and converse on
trivial matters whilst their hands are rapidly covering sheet
after sheet of paper with communications of grave import.
After this fashion were written those beautiful poems which
have from time to time appeared in the Australian Magazine
under the signature of “ Phillip Dale.”
Other mediums acquire a knowledge of what they are
writing whilst the process is going on ; and others, again,
are what is termed “ impressional,” and are often aware of
a full sentence as soon as the first word is written. Nearly
all write much more rapidly than is usual with them in
their normal state, and yet it rarely happens that a word is-
omitted.
Mediums have different ways of holding the pencil, and
with some the process of writing appears to be extremely
painful, whilst others write with the greatest ease. It will
often happen that at any interruption the pencil will fall
from the medium’s grasp, and even sometimes be thrown
across the table. Some mediums are ambidextrous, and
write with either hand, and even, in rare instances, with
both at once. Another rare phase of this mediumship is
where the writing is produced backward, so that the
paper must be held upon a mirror in order that the
communication may become legible.


There are many other particulars of writing mediumship
which the investigator may learn more about by perusing
Allan Kardec’s “ Medium’s Book.” Generally, it may be
said that no two mediums possess exactly the same charac-
teristics, even as no two leaves on a tree exactly resemble
each other. It will also be noticed that alterations are
continually taking place in mediumship, and a medium
may at different times exhibit all the phases noted.
COMMUNICATIONS FROM SPIRITS.
Never neglect any worldly duty to follow spiritual
pursuits—you will always have time for that purpose.
The belief in punishment ending in annihilation is above
all others most opposed to the teaching of Christ, who
taught that God is Love, and is wholly irreconcilable with
the conception of a just and merciful Deity.
We are here to teach you that intercourse with spirits is
possible, and if after research you find that the teachings
that reach you through spirit agency are in the main pure
and good, and that you are continually urged to live as
Jesus Christ told you to live, how is it possible for you to
be so illogical as to attribute the work to evil agency ?
(This was given in answer to a question from a visitor—an
orthodox Christian, who believed that Spiritualism is the
work of the devil.)
You will develope by study and experience and leading a
pure life.
Honest doubt is never wicked.
In entering upon the solemn pleasure of conmunion with
loved ones gone before, preparation by study and amended
life is needed.
Sins cannot be wholly forgotten, and so cause grief and
suffering, but sincere repentance and an honest earnest
endeavour to live a new life will render the endurance of
such grief light to bear and short.
The pursuit of Spiritualism is hedged round with diffi-
culties and doubts, but none that cannot be overcome
by the earnest enquirer who brings his best intellectual
resources to bear on the matter, and strives, by purity of
life, to secure the aid of good spirits.


Enough has been quoted to show that the spirits com-
municating are in the habit of urging their friends on earth
to live purely and lovingly with all men. The reader who
is curious to hear more, need only address himself to the
kindly spirits who are daily watching over him, and who
would eagerly grasp at any opportunity for initiating him
into the mysteries of Life beyond the Grave. How to set
about it, he will learn from the rules for the spirit-circle,
which he will find further on.
Before concluding this chapter, I wish most emphatically
to point out that Spiritualism is not a creed but a science,
and that it is perfectly possible for a man to be a
Spiritualist and yet remain a Christian. It is true that
the majority of Spiritualists are not Christians, in the
ordinary acceptation of the term, but it must be remembered
that in most persons a belief in Spiritualism has been
preceded by a disbelief in orthodox creeds. The Christian,
satisfied with his faith, does not wander a-field in search of
the truth, thinking that he has it already, and to such
conviction comes by accident, if at all.
Of course, as in our own case, conversion to Spiritualism
may lead to disbelief in orthodoxy, but this is by no means
the rule, many clinging faithfully to their old beliefs in
spite of all the arguments which come before them. Of
these, William and Mary Howitt, and Mr. and Mrs. S. C.
Hall, are notable examples, being leaders in the Spiritual
ranks, yet still believers in Christianity.
It can scarcely be matter for wonder that many do
abandon their old faiths on accepting Spiritualism, when it
is remembered that the most bitter opponents of the new
movement are the orthodox Clergy, and that a Spiritualist
will receive neither help nor comfort from them until he is
prepared to abandon that communion which he knows has
more power to lead him to good than all the sermons that
ever were preached, or all the tracts that ever were written.
Add hereto that the grossest slanders relative to Spiritual-
ists and their belief are daily propagated by orthodox
divines, and that even the secular newspapers misrepresent
us, and refuse us fair play, and I do not see how we can
help imbibing a feeling of antagonism to orthodoxy, even if
we have not yet freed ourselves from its trammels.


CHAPTER IV.
EVIDENCES OF SPIRITUALISM.
When a Spiritualist is asked for proof of the truth of the
faith that is in him, he commonly replies that the enquirer
can best obtain satisfaction by sitting with his own family
and waiting for phenomena, after the fashion indicated in
the “ Rules of the Spirit Circle,” which will be found
further on ; but it rarely happens that the advice is followed
—or if it is, the procedure is rendered useless by the levity
and impatience of the sitters. Some preliminary teaching
is necessary in order to convince people that the subject
is of importance, and not to be lightly entered upon. It is
therefore advisable, where time will admit, to lay before
the enquirer some arguments; and the best of all arguments
is the evidence of persons of undoubted capacity and
integrity.
The following is a list of persons whose belief in the
reality of spirit phenomena can be proved by their published
works, or other incontestable evidence :
Archbishop Whately.
W. M. Thackeray.
Robert Chambers (of Chambers’ Encyclopaedia).
William and Mary Howitt.
Mr. and Mrs. S. C. Hall.
Elizabeth Barrett Browning.
Miss Florence Marryatt.
Jules Favre.
Victor Hugo.
Professor de Morgan, the arithmetician.
Lord Brougham.
Lord Lyndhurst.
Lord Lindsay.
Viscount Amberley.
The Earl of Dunraven.
The Countess of Caithness.
Lady Archibald Campbell (sister-in-law of the Mar-
quis of Lome).


The Emperor Napoleon 111.
The Emperor of Russia.
His Imperial Highness Nicholas of Russia, Duke of
Leuchtenberg.
Sir Charles Isham, Barfc.
Captain R. P. Burton, the great traveller.
Hon. Robert Dale Owen.
Mr. Serjeant Cox.
Prince Emile de Sayn Wittgenstein.
Goldschmidt, astronomer.
Flammarion, astronomer.
Professor Crookes, editor of the Quarterly Journal of
Science.
Alfred Russell Wallace, the eminent naturalist.
Cromwell Varley, electrician.
Professor William Denton, geologist.
Dr. Buchanan, anatomist.
Dr. Elliotson.
Dr. Gully.
Dr. Wyld.
Professors Wagner and Butlerof, of the University of
St. Petersburg.
Professor Perty, naturalist.
Professor de Savedan, of Vienna University.
Professor Zollner, of Leipsic University.
The list might easily be extended till it filled this
pamphlet, for, all over the world, amongst the leaders of
modern thought and of modern society, will be found many
of eminence who have embraced Spiritualism.
Of the foregoing, many have published works on the
subject, and those of Professors Crookes and Wallace, and
Robert Dale Owen, will be found especially valuable to the
enquirer.
The following list of works, if perused in the order
named, will furnish the reader with a thorough review of
the whole subject, and a complete history of both ancient
and modern Spiritualism :
“ Guide to Spiritualism,” by Emma Hardinge Britten.
“ Where are the Dead ?” by Fritz.
“Miracles and Modern Spiritualism,” by Alfred Rus-
sell Wallace.
“Researches into Spiritualism,” by Professor W. Crookes.


Copies of these works may be obtained from the pub-
lishers of this book, or from Mr. George Robertson, in
Sydney, and Mr. Terry, Swanston-street, Melbourne ; but
the enquirer would do well to join (if he reside in Sydney)
the Psychological Society, which meets on the first and
third Monday in every month at the Temperance Hall,
Pitt-street, and in the library of which will be found many
other valuable and interesting works on the same subject,
The subscription to this society is only 10s. per annum,
and non-members are admitted to its meetings without
charge.
There have also been published in Sydney and Mel-
bourne many excellent pamphlets on Spiritualism by
Messrs. John Tyerman and Charles Bright, and Hugh
Junor Browne, whose labours in the cause have made their
names familiar in the mouth as household words. “ The
Harbinger of Light,” a monthly periodical published by
Mr. Terry, of Melbourne, and “ Freethought,” published
by Mr. E. C. Haviland, Little George-street, Sydney, will
also afford valuable aid to the student.
The opponents of Spiritualism have many ways of
accounting for its phenomena, but the enquirer will soon
find that, however difficult it may be for him to believe in
the reality of the phenomena, he will experience ten times
more difficulty in accepting the ridiculous theories of the-
wise-acres who have from time to time sought, after the
most superficial examination, to solve the mystery.
I shall not waste space for the consideration of such
theories, for I am satisfied that the perusal of any one
Spiritual work will suffice to scatter them to the four winds..
But I may not omit to combat the propositions of those
who admit the reality of the phenomena, yet ascribe them
to the agency of the devil; although in the previous pages
I have advanced enough, I think, to annihilate them.
Orthodox Christians base their argument as to diabolic
agency upon certain prophecies in the Bible to the effect
that a time would come when the devil’s agents would put
on the garb of an angel of light, and go about the world
healing the sick, doing good deeds, and preaching morality
in order to deceive the people.
Those who believe in the infallibility of Bible prophecies,
and in the interpretation of them by interested persons, should


reflect that man. could not justly be accused of sinning for
believing that spirits who perpetually urged him to good
deeds were agents of the Author of all Good. The chiefest
attribute of Deity is justice—the Jehovah of the Old
Testament to the contrary notwithstanding—and it is
impossible to conceive of the great God punishing His
creatures without just reason.
We Spiritualists know that whereas, whilst we were still
orthodox Christians, we lived without heed of the future,
since our conversion we are brought face to face with the
denizens of another world, through whose ministrations we
are led to keep careful watch over our words, thoughts, and
actions ; and thus we find that the sins and carnal indul-
gences which, whilst we were orthodox, were of daily
occurrence, cease to have any attractions for us. It will be
hard to make the reasoning man believe that the pure-
minded, pure-living Spiritualist (and there are many such)
is a greater abomination in the eyes of his Maker than the
careless, swearing, drinking roysterer, who yet believes in
Christianity.
If agents of the devil are so active, is it, further,
reasonable to suppose that the agents of God are idle P
Our seances are opened with prayer and songs of praise to
God. Surely He would hear us and send us help in our
extremity.
But let it be noted that these very prophecies were used
against Jesus and John, and that the end of the world has
been supposed to be nigh at any time during the last two
thousand years. Orthodoxy, whether it be Christian,
Jewish, or heathen, has always been able to find such
argument against the innovator.
The same objectors also lay great stress upon the
prohibition of Moses against “necromancy,” or communion
with the spirits of the dead. In other particulars the
Mosaic code was abrogated, but that injunction is supposed
to have full force even to this day. We contend that the
object of Moses in making this prohibition was to keep the
power in the hands of the priesthood, and prevent the
ignorant people from entering upon a task which required
great discrimination.
In the days of Jesus the injunction must have been
removed, or we should not find St. Paul saying, “ How


concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you
ignorant ” (1 Cor. xii. 1) ; or St. John recommending his
pupils to “ try the spirits.”
Here, in Sydney, many very worthy people affirm that
the cures effected through the agency of G. M. Stephen
are the work of the devil. It is just possible that a
suffering mortal would consent to receive the boon of
health even from his Satanic Majesty.
To us this kind of argument appears ludicrously in-
sufficient, but still it suffices to prevent many sick people
from being made well; yet letters often reach Mr. Stephen
from clergymen, applying for aid for themselves or their
friends, and he is at this present time treating one of the
most prominent divines in Sydney.
RULES FOR THE SPIRIT CIRCLE.
Inquirers into the phenomena of Spiritualism should
begin by forming circles in their own homes, with no
Spiritualist or stranger to the family present.
The assertions of a few newspapers, conjurors, and men
of science, that the alleged phenomena are jugglery, are
proved to be untrue by the fact that manifestations are
readily obtainable by private families, with no stranger
present, and without deception by any member of the
family. At the present time there are only about half-a-
dozen professional mediums for the physical phenomena in
all Great Britain, consequently, if these were all tricksters
(which they are not), they are so few in number as to be
unable to bear out the imposture theory as the foundation
of the great movement of modern Spiritualism. Readers
should protect themselves against any impostors, who,
knowing to the contrary, may hereafter tell them that the
phenomena are not real, by trying simple home experiments
which cost nothing, thus learning how egregiously those
are duped who trust in worthless authorities.
Conjurors and their scientific partners cannot produce
their results in a house from which they are excluded, but
private families commonly get the real thing with no
strangers present, consequently those who say that the
phenomena are imposture, do not tell the truth.
One or more persons possessing medial powers without


knowing it, are to be found in nearly every household, and
about one new circle in three, formed according to the
following instructions, obtains the phenomena :
1. Let arrangements be made that there shall be no in-
terruption for one hour during the sitting of the eircle.
2. Let the circle consist of four, five, or six individuals,
about the same number of each sex. Sit in subdued light,
but sufficient to allow everything to be seen clearly, round
an uncovered wooden table, with all the palms of the hands
in contact with its top surface. Whether the hands touch
each other or not is of no importance. Any table will do.
3. Belief or unbelief has no influence on the manifesta-
tions, but an acrid feeling against them is weakening.
4. Before the manifestations begin, it is well to engage
in general conversation or in singing, and it is best that
neither should be of a frivolous nature.
5. The first symptom of the invisible power at work is
often a feeling like a cool wind sweeping over the hands-
The first indications will probably be table tiltings or raps.
6. When motions of the table or sounds are produced
freely, to avoid confusion let one person only speak ;he
should talk to the table as to an intelligent being. Let
him tell the table that three tilts or raps mean “ Yes,” one
means “ No,” and two mean “ Doubtful,” and ask whether
the arrangement is understood. If three signals be given
in answer, then say, “ If I speak the letters of the alphabet
slowly, will you signal every time I come to the letter you
want, and spell us out a message ?” Should three signals
be given, set to work on the plan proposed, and from this
time an intelligent system of communication is established.
7. Possibly symptoms of other forms of mediumship,
such as trance or clairvoyance, may develop ; the better
class of messages, as judged by their religious and philo-
sophical merits, usually accompany such manifestations
rather than the more objective phenomena. After the
manifestations are obtained, the observers should not go to
the other extreme and give way to an excess of credulity,
but should believe no more about them or the contents of
messages than they are forced to do by undeniable proof.
8. Should no results be obtained at the first two seances
because no medium chances to be present, try again with


other sitters. A medium is usually an impulsive individual
very sensitive to mesmeric influences.
Some of the above instructions are quoted from The
Spiritualist newspaper (established 1869), price lfd. post
free, published weekly by E. W. Allen, 11 Ave Maria Lane,
London, E C.
CHAPTER V.
HEALING BY LAYING ON OF HANDS.
The human body is enveloped in a certain subtle
emanation, which, under favourable circumstances, spirits,
are able to employ for the purpose of influencing a medium
to perform any of the abnormal acts of mediumship. But
not only have spirits this power, but mortals also. Hence
the phenomena known as “ mesmeric.” A deficiency of
this emanation is the result of insufficiency of vital
pewer, and a mesmerist (whether in the flesh or out of it)
can restore health by supplying this deficiency. The
subject is so difficult to deal with in the limited space at
my disposal that I must ask the reader to pardon me if my
definition is not sufficiently clear. My object is to show
that “healing by laying on of hands” may be accomplished
either by a man unaided or by a spirit unaided, or by the
combined forces of the two. It is probable that, in almost
every case, a human operator receives assistance either
from his own spirit friends or from those of his subject;
and the evidences of spirit cure without mortal aid are too
uncertain to be reliable, though, of course, it is right to
assume that, as every man has friends in the spirit world,
they would endeavour to help him whenever their services
could be rendered.
When any mesmeriser tells his hearers that he cures his
patients without the assistance of spirits, he errs—not
wilfully but from ignorance—his spirit friends would
al ways be anxious, for his sake, to help him to cure, and the
spirit friends of his patient would also lend their aid. These


spirits may not be able to do much, for they may be
ignorant of the way to set about it, but still they are there,
and although he may ignore them he cannot drive them
away. Had he the ‘patience to examine the phenomena of
Spiritualism—patience only is needed to convert any man—
he might speedily develop the healing powers he possesses,
because he would then know how to secure the aid of more
powerful spirits, and his “ magnetism ” and theirs would
blend in harmony. Mr. Stephen, however, has been
informed by his spirit guides that “ he is not a magnetic
healer in the ordinary acceptation of the term,” and that
he uses their spirit power to effect his cures. One of those
communications he recently read to the people assembled
in the National Hall before commencing his “ cures.”
The power to communicate health by imparting “ mag-
netism ’ (as I will call it) exists to a greater or less
degree in every human being, and may be greatly increased
by practice. It differs in degree at times in the same
individual, and even the most powerful healers fail with
certain individuals and in certain places. Even the mighty
Jesus was not able to perform his so-called miracles in
some parts of the country “ because of their want of faith.”
I know the Christian reader will think that I am guilty
of dire blasphemy in thus speaking of him whom they
worship as God ; but, I would ask, if Jesus were God, how
is it that he thus failed ? And how is it, for example, that,
instead of commanding a blind man to see, he resorted
to the expedient of making a poultice of spittle and clay
and applying it to his eyes ? We know that earth in itself
has powerful healing properties, and that no more effective
means could be found of transferring “magnetism” than
the spittle of the operator. To us, therefore, it is perfectly
clear why Jesus adopted this method, but to the orthodox
Christian it must always be a sore difficulty to account for
such eccentric conduct on the part of his God.
From an admirable essay by Mr. James Curtis, of Bal-
larat, entitled “ The Spiritualism of the Bible identical with
Modern Spiritualism,” I extract the following passages :
HEALING.
“To another the gift of healing by the same Spirit.”
I. Cor. xii. 9.


The Shumanite woman’s child died. She came, in
sorrow, to acquaint Elisha. Elisha, when he saw her grief,
said, “ The Lord hath hid it from me, and hath not told me .”
Eliza then sent his servant with his staff, and his instruc-
tions were: “ Lay my staff upon the face of the child.”
Gehezi, the servant, did as he was told, but did not succeed
in restoring life to the body of the child. Elisha expected
that his personal magnetism, some of which had been
absorbed in his staff, would be sufficient. After reported
failure, the prophet went himself, and succeeded in restoring
animation.
There is a curious case of restoration to life from the
dead, mentioned in 11. Kings xiii. 20, 21 :—“And Elisha
died, and they buried him. And the bands of the Moabites
invaded the land at the coming in of the year. And it
came to pass as they were burying a man, that, behold they
spied a band of men; and they cast the man into the
sepulchre of Elisha: and when the man was let down, and
touched the bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood upon his
feet.”
The story of the magnetised water, at the Pool of
Bethesda, is well-known. —John, v. 2,3, 4.
Jesus said signs should accompany his followers, “ they
shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.”—
Mark xvi. 18.
Those that were afflicted with divers diseases were brought
to Jesus, “ and he laid his hands on every one of them, and
healed them.” —Luke iv. 40.
Paul recovered his sight through the laying on of the
hands of Ananias.
A young man fell from a height in some building, and
was taken up for dead, when Paul embraced him. By this
means he was restored.
Elisha restored the widow’s son by the following process:
He went into the room where the child was lying, and shut
the door upon themselves alone; he laid upon the child,
and he put his mouth upon the mouth of the child, and his
eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands, and he
stretched himself upon the child. This performance he
repeated, and the child revived.
Naaman, the leper, apparently knew the usual process
adopted for restoring the sick. He said —“I thought he


(Elisha) will surely come out to me, and call on the name
of the Lord, his God, and strike his hand over the place , and
recover the leper.”—ll. Kings, v. 11.
Healing the sick, by magnetising, has been practised by
all nations that have a history, in all ages. The early
Christians were specially successful, but the gifts of healing
were not confined to them.
Plutarch says that Pyrrhus cured persons with diseased
spleens by passing his hand over the seat of the malady.
Appolonius brought a girl to life by touching her an
leaning over her. Vespasian, the Roman Emperor, restored
sight to the blind by rubbing their eyes and cheeks with
saliva, and cured a paralytic by his touch. Hume says that
the cures of Vespasian are better attested to than any
others of ancient history.
In the third century, Origen affirms that the Christians
of his day performed many cures. He says, “ I have myself
seen many cases healed, such as loss of senses, madness,
and innumerable other evils.”
I wish now to call attention to healers in our own times,
notably Jacob, the Zouave, and Dr. Newton.
Henry Jacob, musician in the regiment of Zouaves of the
Imperial Guard, was born on the 6th March, 1828, at Saint
Martin (Soane and Loire), in Prance. After twenty years
of faithful service in the army, having been in the Crimean
War, and in Africa, he was honourably discharged.
His book is written in answer to numerous letters asking
for information and instruction in the art of healing.
He says, “ You demand of me to know how I became a
healing medium. All that I can say is, that I have a
conviction that this power is given to me for the relief of
my fellow-men, and that I have brought it to its present
perfection by practising virtue, fraternity, charity, and the
love of God ; and by instructing all who come to me in the
doctrines of Spiritualism.
“ Love ye one another, and ye will all find that ye possess
more or less of the faculty of relieving each other’s pains,
and many of you will become skilful healers. Be ye always
charitable and generous, and you will always be aided by
good spirits. . . . This is my prayer: ‘My God, give
me power, and permit good and benevolent spirits to come
and assist me, in my holy intention to do this work of


charity, that I desire to accomplish, that this suffering one
may be relieved, and unto thy name be the praise, and may
thy blessing rest upon us all.’ ”
At the camp at Chalons, in 1866, the fame of Jacob as
a healer created as great an excitement as it has more
recently done in Paris.
At Versailles, after attending to his duties as a soldier in
the morning, he came to the city (Paris) in the afternoon
to perform miraculous cures. The blind, the deaf, the
palsied, the sick, and the dying, were restored at once to
health. Crowds of crippled and diseased humanity pressed
iuto the court-yard of No. 80 Rue de la Raquette, where
he worked his cures, and came away, it was asserted, whole
and well without taking any medicine, or submitting to any
surgical operation.
Persons were transported on litters, or carried in men s
arms to his presence; many being so utterly helpless as to
be unable to sit upright, and only able to support them-
selves by leaning against each other. As soon as the room
was full, Jacob entered, and said, “ Let no one speak until
I question him, or I shall go away.” Perfect silence
ensued. He then went from one sick person to another,
telling each exactly the disease from which he or she was
suffering. Then to the paralytic he simply said, “ Rise !”
In about twenty minutes, Jacob dismissed the crowd.
The manner in which his cures were effected is thus
described bv a correspondent of the Birmingham Gazette ,
and being the story of an eye-witness, it is worthy of
transcription. The correspondent says :
• “ The Zouave admits no one to his presence who is not
really afflicted with disease or infirmity ; those who are led
to the Rue de la Raquette by curiosity, being compelled to
remain in the waiting-room. Fortunately I was furnished
with a letter from his best friend, and became privileged at
once. I entered the room with twenty of the most ragged
and dirty of the whole mob, and am thus enabled to
describe the scene.
“ The Zouave was standing as if in a reverie, when we
entered pell-mell into the long low apartment where the
cures were performed. He was leaning against the wall
with his eyes half open, after the fashion of somnambulists
before entering completely into trance, the only difference


being in the intense light shot out from the living orbs,
beneath the drooping eyelids. He neither spoke nor
moved, while his father busied himself in arranging the
visitors on the low wooden benches before him. Every
crutch and stick was taken from the infirm patients, and
placed in the corner behind the door, amid the timid
whines of the poor frightened creatures, accustomed to
look upon the help afforded by these objects as absolutely
necessary to their safety.
“ When all were seated, thus leaning the one against the
other, the father, going up to the son, whispered in his ear.
He was aroused in a moment; and coming forward with a
movement brusque and hurried, savouring of the military
camp, and not in the least of the solemnity of the magi-
cian’s sanctuary, he walked up and down for a few minutes
before the eager line of sufferers. To each he told the
disease under which he or she was suffering, and the
original cause of the malady, and as no objection was
made in any one case, I am led to suppose him to have
been right in all.
“ Presently, however, I observed him to stop suddenly,
and fix his eyes upon one of the patients who sat at the
extreme end of the second bench, and, after examining him
for a moment, turn aside with a slight shudder, which, I
observed, was neither of disgust nor dread, but a kind of
involuntary recoil. He said, abruptly, pointing with his
forefinger straight into the face of the individual he ad-
dressed, ‘ I can do nothing for your disease, it is beyond my
power. Go, and remember it is useless to return.’ . . .
The Zouave again passed before the line, uttering simply
the words, * Rise, and walk!’
“ The sound which simultaneously burst from the as-
sembly could find no fitting description in any language.
It was a kind of infantine wailing, evidently produced by
fear and doubt.
“ One feeble old beggar-woman, whose hand had stopped
its palsied shaking from the moment Jacob had fixed his
glittering eyes upon her, was the one who gave expression
to the feeling which had evidently taken possession of
them all: * Oh, how can I move without my crutches ?’ and
having turned a yearning look towards the corner where
those old friends and supporters were standing, with a host
of others, she began to mumble and moan piteously.


“ But the Zouave looked, for an instant, down the line,
with an ominous frown upon his brow, as he found that not
one of his patients had obeyed his orders. No pretension
to the sacred character of a prophet, or inspired seer, was
there, for he stamped with such rude violence on the floor
that the casement shook again. He almost uttered an
oath, but it was unfinished ; and he once more uttered the
command to rise and walk, so that others might be ad-
mitted in their place.
“ Then came the most strange and mysterious movement
of the whole ceremony. One by one, did every individual
seated upon those low wooden benches, rise and stand
erect. No words can describe the singular spectacle
offered by this fearing, hoping, doubting crowd, as each
found himself standing firm upon the legs which for years
had ceased to do their office. Some laughed like foolish
children ; some remained wrapped in stolid wonder ; while
many burst into the most heart-rending paroxysms of
weeping. It was then that the Zouave stretched forth his
arm, and bade them pause. All was hushed and silent for
a moment. The pause lasted some time. I have been told
that it is always so, but have not been able to account for
its necessity ; and then the door was thrown open, and the
crippled, and the paralyzed, the halt, and the lame of the
hour, walked from that long, low, half-darkened chamber,
with somewhat timid gait it may be, but with straightened
limbs and measured steps, as though no ailment had ever
reached them. . .
“ I subsequently enquired of the Zouave by what im-
pression he was made aware of his inability to cure. He
answered, that in cases of this kind a veil seemed to fall
before his eyes, and impede his view of the patient. . . .
His own statement is, e I see the diseases, and sometimes
from twenty to thirty spirits acting on the invalids, while I
am standing in the room looking on.’ . . . His
character and conduct are excellent; and he is altogether a
fit subject for a mission of the highest order.”
Of Doctor J. R. Newton’s marvellous cures there have
been very many accounts published, and he numbers his
cures by tens of thousands.
Dr. Newton was some time ago on a visit to San
Francisco, and wherever he went he carried his healing


powers, and was always willing to use them. He exercised
his functions in this city, and I wish to give you an extract
from the San Francisco Daily Evening Post of February 14,
The article first describes the Doctor’s personal ap-
pearance, his rooms, and so on; then goes on to state—
“ Our reporter had a seat in a corner, and watched with
interest the continued throng of patients who passed in and
out. During the time he was there, a count showed their
number to have been eighty, of both sexes, and of all ages
and conditions of life, who were afflicted with pretty much
all the ills the flesh is heir to.
“ Dr. Newton does not pretend to cure all who comes to
him, and a number are turned away with the declaration
that it is impossible to help them. Others he tells he can
cure. The process is about this : The patients are placed
in a chair. The Doctor then talks, telling them that he
has love and sympathy for them, and himself feels their
ailments. Then he makes a few passes with his hands,
and taking the patient’s head between his hands, declares
a cure, and bids the disease depart. In cases of paralysis,
he generally rubs the afflicted portions smartly, and if it is
a joint that is stiff, he pulls the limb out straight, bends it
two or three times, and telling the patient he is cured, bids
him use the limb.
“ All this seems very ridiculous, yet it is undoubtedly
successful. While we were in the Doctor’s rooms, one
gentleman came in on crutches, limping along with great
difficulty. The Doctor said he could cure him, and put
him through a course of passes and rubbings; and in ten
minutes the man had thrown away his crutches, and was
dancing and gyrating in the most laughable manner. Some
of the lookers-on laughed at his ridiculous motions ; but he
told them to laugh away —he had the use of his legs again,
and could afford to let them laugh.
“ Another case was that of a woman, who seemed to have
a film over her eyes, and who said she was blind. The
Doctor talked to her awhile, made some passes, pressed his
thumbs upon her eyelids, and told her she could see. She
winked slowly, like a bat brought into the sunshine ; then
declared she could see; and taking up a newspaper, she
commenced to read it—the first reading, according to her


own declaration, that she had done for six years. Her joy
was affecting.
“ A little child was brought in on a pillow. It seemed
perfectly helpless, unable to move any portion of its body
except its eyes ; yet in half an hour it was sitting up
playing and laughing.”
The New York Herald is responsible for the following
paragraph respecting the cures of a certain Mr. Miller:—
“So great became the ‘ Doctor’s reputation that crowds
flocked to see him every day. They came from far and
near, some from distant States, riding 60 miles over rough
mountain roads from the nearest station. The little cluster
of log houses about the mill soon became filled to repletion,
provisions grew scarce, the mill-wheel stopped for want of
a watcher, and a crisis in the economy of the whole com-
munity was imminent. Miller had to go where the hundreds
that flocked to him could be housed and fed. Your cor-
respondent heard that he was moving, so taking the train
for Glade Springs, he intercepted Miller there on the
famous Tuesday night when the healer, tired and worn
from a 60-mile ride, arrived. It was intended that he
should get into the village quietly, and rest without dis-
turbance. No such consummation. The town was packed
at 10 o’clock that night with the halt, the lame, and the
blind. It seemed as though the alarm bell had waked them
from sleep in the farms and hamlets, and called together
an excited, jamming, crushing mass. The hotel was filled.
People poured into every room and crowded every hall.
‘ Miller! Where is he ? Send him here! There he
goes!’ were expressions of eagerness heard everywhere.
Miller, never excited, always in good humour, passed
among the throng of people, dispensing his marvellous gift
of relief or palliation, and two o’clock a.m. found the crowd
no less dense, while new comers told of scores of others
who were on the way from the woods and hills.”


CHAPTER VI.
G. M. STEPHEN'S GIFT OF HEALING AND CURES.
Two years ago G. M. Stephen, whilst on a visit to
Melbourne, received, through mediums in that town,
messages from spirits to the effect that he had been selected
to do a great work for the cause of Spiritualism. The work
was not specified, and he was enjoined not to trouble him-
self about it, but to pursue the even tenor of his way, and
when the time came his mission would be unfolded to him.
Similar messages were received in the family circle, and
G. M. Stephen fully believed that it would be his lot to
become an “inspirational lecturer,” for which his previous
training seemed to fit him better than for any other class of
proselytising work.
He had never felt any of the usual symptoms of “medium-
ism,” and was most anxious to receive some spiritual gift.
That he possessed no inherent healing power is evidenced
(to us who know him) by the fact that he tried to alleviate
pain in the head of a son, then suffering from typhoid fever,
but without success.
As Mr. Stephen has already published, he had for a
considerable time daily prayed to God that he might have
the “ power ” of “ convincing thousands of his fellow-
creatures of the holy truths of Spiritualism.” The wonderful
power he now possesses of healing has been given to him.
And, as is always the case, his power has greatly increased,
as he now frequently, in the presence of hundreds of
spectators, commands the most acute pains to leaye the
sufferers, and the patients immediately walk away relieved.
His career since that time may be best learned by
perusing the following paragraphs which are extracted from
various papers, but chiefly from The Sydney Daily Telegraph,
a journal which should be on the table of every liberal
inhabitant of New South Wales, if only because of its
daring to offend the “ unco guid ” by the publication of
such unpleasant truths.


“ On Saturday, the 17th April, a man suffering from
paralysis of the spine and lower extremities —the result of
a buggy accident—was carried into a saloon carriage at
Spencer-street station and laid on the seat. His moans
were piteous to hear, and he had that half of the carriage
to himself. In the other compartment of the carriage were
Captain and Mrs. Organ, of Prahran, who affirm that on
the journey, at Sunbury, Mr. George Milner Stephen
entered the sick man’s compartment and told the poor
fellow he would cure him in an hour. The man said he
was going to the Castlemaine Hospital, and, he supposed,
to be buried there, as no one could do him any good in
Melbourne. 1 1 will cure you,’ said Mr. Stephen, and he
commenced making mesmeric passes over the man’s back
and lower limbs. In a short time the man sat up, pro-
nounced himself much better, and when the train arrived
at Kyneton he actually got out of the carriage and got
himself a cup of coffee. On his way from there to
Castlemaine he remarked that it would seem queer for him
to go back on Monday carrying his carpet bag, but he ap-
peared quite able to do so when he left the train.”—
Riverine Herald.
Respecting this case, Mr. Max L. Kreitmayer, of the
Waxworks, wrote to the Melbourne Argus as follows :
“ Shortly after entering a saloon carriage on a trip to
Sandhurst, on Saturday, April 17, a man was carried in by
a clergyman and another gentleman, and laid on the seat.
After his friends left him I entered into conversation with
him concerning his malady. He informed me that he had
been thrown out of a buggy some two months before, and
had his spine injured ; that a week previously he took a
Turkish bath, and in walking afterwards in Collins-street
staggered and fell, and from that time had lost the use of
his legs ; that he was going to Castlemaine to get buried or
cured, as his friends lived there. I gave one of his legs a
good pinch, and he assured me that be did not feel it; and
consequently I put his case down as a decided case of
paralysis. I noticed that when he wished to raise himself
a little he had to hold on to the rack above, and on several
occasions I lifted the legs off and on the couch, to change


his position. At Gisborne station Mr. George Milner
Stephen (whom I knew by sight many years ago) entered
the carriage, and had to sit close to the sick man for want
of room. He offered his rug, to insure more comfort, and
naturally asked what was the matter. The man repeated
his story, and Mr. Stephen, in a decided tone said, ‘ I can
cure you.’ My curiosity was aroused to fever heat, and I
watched events. Mr. Stephen asked the patient to lie on
his face, and after making a few passes and breathing on
the supposed injured spot, he told him ‘to rise,’ which sum-
mons he obeyed with slight success, and he dropped on the
seat again, saying that the pain seemed considerably less.
He then rose and walked. After the lapse of some
minutes, and after undergoing a similar process as before,
the command was given by Mr. Stephen ‘ to rise and walk
across the carriage,’ which he instantly did, and returned
again to his place without any support. In 34 minutes
after leaving Gisborne, at Kyneton, I left the carriage for
a few minutes, and on returning, to my astonishment the
patient had gone. Looking out, I found him on the plat-
form, walking about very carefully, and on arrival at
Castlemaine he took his luggage and walked away. Alto-
gether the affair has been so vividly impressed upon my
mind that I can recall the most trifling conversation or in-
cident on this ever-memorable journey.”
“ Sir, —A few days since Mr. G. M. Stephen was speaking
to me about some instantaneous cures effected by him.
As they appeared to me to be very remarkable, I suggested
to him that it might serve the cause of science, by leading
to judicious and careful inquiry, if he could procure in any
one case from the person operated upon, a clear and definite
statement of the fact and mode of the cure. He mentioned
the case of Captain Broomfield, of this city, and gave the
names of Captain Hixson, Mr. Hcselton, and Mr. G. R.
Dibbs, as witnesses of the occurrence in question. Isuggested
that a statement from those gentlemen could be readily
obtained, as they are all in Sydney, and as they are all well
known, such a statement could be implicitly relied on.
I have this moment received the following letter from


Captain Broomfield, with the certificate underwritten in the
handwriting of Captain Hixson, and signed by him and
Messrs. Heselton and Dibbs, and also by Mr. Pope, who did
not see the cure effected, but saw Captain Broomfield at a
later period of the day. I send you this letter for your
inspection, in order that you may yourself see that the
signatures are genuine. Indeed, if this were not so, the
gentlemen would, of course, give a contradiction in your
next issue. May I request you to publish this note and its
enclosure in to-morrow’s Herald ? I withhold my name, as
I personally know nothing of the cure, and have only been
the medium of procuring a complete authentication of the
statement made to me in the first instance :— ‘ Dear Sir, —
Mr. G. Milner Stephen has asked me to state the circum-
stances of his late instantaneous cure of my attack of gout,
which I had been suffering from ever since laying the
foundation-stone of the new lighthouse, South Head, on the
18th of April last. My knees were so very weak that I
could not get up from a seat without the assistance of my
hands ; aud on sitting upon a log with a friend the same
morning, at Balmain, whilst waiting for the steamer, I
could not rise without assistance. Whilst sitting in a chair
in Mr. G. R. Dibbs’s room, in presence of Capt. Hixson, R.N.
("the President of the Marine Board), Captain Heselton,
and another gentleman, Mr. Stephen entered the room, and
after some joking on my part as to his healing power, he
stooped down and breathed into each of my knees, and then
made a pass across them (as if driving away the disease),
saying ‘ Gone!’ I instantly rose from the chair without
the slightest difficulty, and to the astonishment of myself
and friends, I sat down and got up on several chairs in
succession, and then sat down on the ground and got up
without any assistance. After lunch, the same day, at the
Royal Hotel, I raced Mr. J. Pope down the stairs and back
again, taking two steps at a bound. On the 24th of last
month the stiffness returned for a short time, but I am now
as well as I have been for years. —I am, &c., John Broom-
field. 125 Sussex-street, Sydney, June 3.’” “‘We
witnessed the occurrence referred to, and were assured by
Captain Broomfield that he experienced instant relief from
a complaint in the knee-joints he had been suffering from.
—Francis Hixson, Thomas Heselton, George R. Dibbs ;


John Pope- (as to after-lunch paragraph).’” Sydney
Morning Herald, 10 th June.
“ Mr. G. Milner Stephen, who has been in Gundagai
attending the Quarter Sessions and District Court, claims
to he possessed of wonderful curative powers. During his
stay he was visited by numbers of people who were suffering
from various disorders; and in some cases, we are assured
by the patients, he effected perfect cures. Among those
who sought his aid was Peter Linnane, of Yammatree, who
has been totally blind of one eye for fourteen years. Mr.
Stephen made a few passes on his face, and then gave him
a bottle of water, in which he had previously washed his
hands, to apply to his eyes assiduously, which he did,
Linnane assures us that he can at present see with the
diseased optic as well as ever he could. Mr. Stephen also
claims to have cured a well-known resident of gout (Mr.
Bibo, the ironmonger).” —Gundagai Times.
The following letters, received by Mr. Stephen, appeared
in the Sydney Daily Telegraph of the 26th June, 1880 :
“Deniliquin, 4th May, 1880. My dear Mr. Stephen
I have only just got your note, and hasten to reply to it;
as you say you will be at Elsternwick till Thursday only, I
am afraid this will not reach you. lam happy to be able
to say that my daughter is much better —in fact, cured of
her bronchitis. The other young lady staying with me, I
don’t mind giving her name, Miss , has left, and is
staying now with her uncle, Mr. ,of Kew. Before she
used your ring she suffered every day from severe, or rather,
I should say acute, neuralgia. Up to the time of leaving
Deniliquin she had not another attack, but I have not
heard since. When you go to Melbourne you might see
her. I read your case of the sick man in the Castlemaine
train in the newspapers with much interest. I think these
things should have publicity. We are all well. With my
kind regards, yours faithfully, J. Dowling Brown. Geo.
Milner Stephen, Esq.”
“ Mrs. Stubbs has been suffering for some time past from
severe ‘ hemicrania,’ which culminated some few mornings
since in a long swoon. At my solicitation, Mr. G. Milner
Stephen kindly came, and placing his hands for so'me
seconds upon her forehead, she appeared to feel, though
quite unconscious, a decided benefit. She then pointed to


the top of the head, his hands following ; and after resting
there were guided over the closed eyelids, when there was
also a short pause, upon which the patient awoke from her
insensibility, and said that the ‘ pain had entirely ceased.’
Up to this time (now four days past) there has not been
any return of the symptoms. Mr. Stephen also operated
upon a friend, and succeeded in a few seconds in dispersing
the pain from rheumatism.—R. F. Stubbs. Sydney, June
12, 1880. P.S. —I ought to add that up to this day Mrs.
Stubbs has not had any return of the pain.—R. F. S.
June 20, 1880.”
“Manly, 19th June, 1880.—My dear Sir,—At your
request I have much pleasure in stating the particulars of
my deafness, and the effects of your treatment for the relief
of it. For 20 years I have been almost stone deaf with one
ear, and I had become so deaf in the other that even with
the use of a long telephone tube, I could only distinguish
loud speaking, and could not hear a sound of music ; and
indeed I was obliged to relinquish a valuable appointment
in consequence. Since your operation upon both ears I
am enabled to enjoy the softest tones of the harp when
played by my daughter; and the clearness with which 1
heard the conversation you addressed to me, without even
putting a hand to my ear, in the presence of Messrs. R.
Want and A. Allen, the well-known solicitors, and Mr.
Larnach, proves the great benefit I have thus far obtained.
To myself and friends it is most astounding and gratifying,
as at my age I could not have expected such a wonderful
improvement in my stone deaf ear. I have also been
suffering from asthma a long time, but since you breathed
into my chest I have been very greatly relieved. Tour
simple yet effective mode of operation—viz., the laying on
of hands, and breathing into each ear —proves the curative
power, or whatever it may be termed, to be most extra-
ordinary, and well deserving the careful study of all
scientific men. I hope your good and disinterested labour,
to do good and benefit others, may be a source of happiness
and blessing to yourself. —Tours, &c. Charles Rent.
p.S.—X omitted to state that within five minutes after
laying on of your hands I heard you speak distinctly with
the stone deaf ear. Mr. Russom, J.P., was present at the
time. Gr. Milner Stephen, Esq.”


“G. M. Stephen, Esq. —Sir, —I beg to thank you for
getting immediate relief when suffering severely with
face-ache. — Mary Evans. (In presence of Richard Driver,
and of the undersigned, Mrs. Sims, Mrs. Driver.) June 23,
1880.”
“135 William-street, Sydney, June 24, 1880. —I have
been suffering for upwards of 20 years from rheumatic
gout; and lately it has come on with such violence in my
right arm and hand and both legs, that I was obliged to
take to my bed, from which I was unable to rise without
the assistance of ray daughter and a servant. Yesterday,
my son-in-law went to Mr. G- Milner Stephen, and begged
him to come and cure me. He came, and breathed on my
hand and arm, and at once the pain instantly left. As I
was unable to stand, Mr. Stephen made passes over my
legs, as I lay in bed, and then left the room with my son-
in-law, ordering me ‘to get up and walk.’ I immediately
arose without assistance, and walked up and down the room
without any pain anywhere. To-day I am quite free from
pain and able to walk about, and feel better than I have
been for years. — Priscilla Cohen. (We were present, and
confirm the above statement. Sara Levey, Joseph E.
Levey, [Mrs.] Elizabeth Jones, [Mrs.] Esther Salomon.”)
“ Government Printing Office, Sydney, June 24th. Sir,
—I wish to bear testimony to the relief you gave to my
wife, whose left side has been paralysed for over ten
months, on the occasion of your kind visit of Sunday last,
when you were enabled to straighten the arm, and send her
across the room without any halt in her step. I firmly be-
lieve that you will ultimately cure her. I have the honour
to be, sir, your grateful servant, A. F. Furber, superin-
tendent of bookbinders. G. M. Stephen, Esq.”
“ 24th June, 1880. I hereby certify that a lady, whom
I heard afterwards was named Mrs. Whitfeld, arrived here
in Mr. G. Milner Stephen’s office, saying ‘ she had had such
acute pains in her head all night, as if a knife had been
run into her eye, and having heard Mr. Stephen could
cure her, would he ?’ He said, ‘ Yes,’ and immediately
touched her head over the right eye, and said, ‘ Gone.’
She said the pain had gone there, but she had a pain on
the top of the head. Mr. G. Milner Stephen then ordered
it away, and Mrs. Whitfeld says it left immediately.—


Irwin Wilson. The above statement is perfectly correct.
Eleanor Whitfeld, Walter Beames, Louisa Stevens,
her x mark (totally blind), Jessie Whitfeld.”
“ 10, corner Marlborough and Miles-streets, Surry Hills,
June Bth, 1880. Milner Stephen, Esq. Dear Sir, I beg
to return you my sincere thanks for the wonderful cure
you effected on the 2nd June, at Yass, on my son,
Emanuel Alexander, at the railway station. He had lost
his voice, and had pains in his chest, throat, and head.
Heed I say how happy we were on hearing of his re-
covery. A minute after you had breathed on him he
was cured. Mrs. Alexander would like to see you, &c.”
—G. Alexander. (Memo. —The young man is a railway
guard, and woke me up in the night to see my ticket.
Seeing he was very ill, and voiceless comparatively, I
told him to stay in the carriage a minute, and I breathed
once into his chest. The result is made known in this
letter.—G. M. S.)
“ Halfway Diggings, May 17, 1880. G. M. Stephen,
Esq. Dear Sir, —I am sure you will be pleased to know
that two days after I saw you in Melbourne my eye was
quite well, and also my side, and I have felt nothing of
them since I have been at home, although there is a
mark on my eye which I think will always remain there.
Trusting this will find you in good health, and may God
bless you and yours, are the earnest prayers of mother,
sister, and yours ever gratefully, Thos. Martin, Hew-
bridge, Victoria.” (Eye and chest internally injured by
three kicks from a horse in a stable in the dark. T.
Martin was travelling from Wagga to Albury in the coach
with G. Milner Stephen, in April last, with his eye awfully
swelled, and his chest in such agony that he could not
lift his arms. G. M. S. made a few passes over his eye,
which instantly discharged copiously, and he breathed into
his chest, when Martin declared that all pain had left him.
The next morning at the hotel G. M. S. brought him into
the barristers’ room, and made him tell the story of his
cure to Messrs. G. B. Simpson, Fitzhardinge, and Fraser.)


The following letters appeared in the Sydney Daily
Telegraph of the 17 th July:—
“ Mansfield-street, Balmain, 16th July, 1880. To G. M.
Stephen, Esq. Dear Sir, —I am so completely astounded
at the almost miraculous cure you have effected in the case
of my wife, that I scarcely know how to adequately express
my gratitude, and her’s also, by any mere form of words.
The idea of my wife almost crawling from her home to
your chambers on Tuesday last, and returning with the
almost perfect use of all her limbs, is a circumstance that I
would not believe if I had not the testimony of my own
eyes. She has also been suffering from bronchitis for the
past five years, and was almost prostrated with it the day
before she visited you. It has also completely disappeared.
I may state that she has been under the most eminent
doctors in this colony, and also in Victoria, and not one of
them ever did the slightest good. The only result, as far
as we are concerned, is being some hundreds of pounds
poorer. There is one thing very peculiar to my mind in
reference to your marvellous cures which I cannot under-
stand, namely, the total absence of publicity in the leading
journal of the colony. If two dogs have a difference of
opinion which is referred to the arbitration of the teeth,
the fact will appear in the newspaper ; but here are a series
of miraculous cures wrought daily before our eyes, and not
the slightest notice taken. In conclusion, accept the undying
gratitude of my wife and myself; and hoping you may live
long to alleviate the pains and aches of poor suffering
humanity.—Yours, &c., M. Raleigh.
“ Within the past fortnight I had an attack of rheumatism
in my feet and knees, from which I suffered the most
excruciating pain for several days and nights. I was
persuaded by a friend to send for Mr. G. M. Stephen, who
on his first visit gave me instant relief. lam now quite
free from pain and able to attend to business, and so far I
have every reason to believe that I am permanently cured.
—Yours, &c., Wm. Henry Carter, Hereford-street, Glebe,
Bth July, 1880.”
“ I am rejoiced to say that my wife, who has been unable
to rise from the chair for the last 12 months from severe
rheumatism, has just been cured instantaneously by Mr.


Milner Stephen in the presence of 20 people, and she is
now walking about his room free from all pains.—Yours, &c.,
J. R. Myhill, late Deputy Harbour Master, 0. Myhill,
P. F. Hodges.”
“ We certify that we were present just now when Mr.
George Moody (who was suffering from sciatica for 18
months) was suddenly cured by Mr. Milner Stephen
breathing into his right hip, and passing his hands down
his left leg ; and he said he would try if he was cured, and
thereupon he jumped into the air and said he was cured,
and he went away rejoicing.—J. E. Goff, Samuel Hough-
ton, Anna Raleigh, Henry Moterman (Blue’s Point).”
“ I have this moment been cured of chronic pains in my
head and my hands, of burning fire and pains in my legs,
which last Mr. Stephen commanded to leave me, and which
instantly disappeared in presence of 14 witnesses. —J. E.
Goff, Samuel Houghton, Anna Raleigh.”
“ I have been suffering from rheumatics for nearly six
months ; I came to Mr. Stephen, he breathed upon the part
affected, and I immediately found the pains had all gone ;
this was done in the presence of 14 witnesses. —T. Scott,
J. E. Goff, Anna Raleigh.”
“ I certify that I have this instant been cured from
neuralgia, by Mr. G. Milner Stephen laying his hand on
the side of my face, in less than a minute. — James Dumelow.
We can confirm this statement. —W. Booth, John (his X
mark) Crowthers (being blind), Joseph E. Levey.”
«G. M. Stephen, Esq. Dear Sir,—l have been suffering
with pain in my side for several years, caused by my liver,
and after you breathed with me and passed your hands
down my side, in the presence of Mrs. G. H. Stephen, I
felt decidedly better, and have not had any return of the
pains since. I must now thank you for restoring me to
health- —Believe me, dear sir, yours truly, Ellen Conlan.”
I was present and confirm the above, A. E. S. 23rd
June, 1880.
“Glebe Point, June 30. Dear Mr. Stephen, —At your
request I have much pleasure in making the following
statementMy daughter has been suffering from weak
eyesight for more than a year past, and of late she had
experienced a good deal of pain. Some weeks ago, when
they were unusually painful, you kindly placed your hands


upon them, which afforded her immediate relief; they have
continued to improve, and are now quite well. —I am, sir,
yours faithfully, M. Ickerson.”
Prom among the many articles which have from time to
time appeared in the newspapers relative to Mr. Stephen’s
cures, the following are extracted from the Sydney Daily
Telegraph of the 17th, 22nd, and 24th July, 1880 :
Mr. Milner Stephen is not without honour in his country,
that is if the attendance of the ailing and afflicted to place
themselves under his hands for expected cure may be taken
as any evidence. Ho one passing down Phillip-street can
now fail to notice the place in which Mr. Stephen practices.
Publicity has been given, through the columns of the
Sydney Daily Telegraph, to the wonderful cures he has
effected, and the result is that the crowds which our
reports recently described as permeating the rooms, halls
and passages of Ho. 98 have extended themselves to the
pavement, and the footpath outside is occupied by a number
of people waiting for their turn to come to pass under the
hands of Mr. Stephen. Cabs and carriages, too, which have
conveyed those unable to move “of their own accord,” are
plentiful in waiting by the kerbstone, and however opinions
may differ as to the extent of Mr. Stephen’s powers, one
thing is certain, that numbers have recourse to him to be
healed. In another column will be found printed quite a
quantity of letters from persons who are strongly convinced
by evidence, in their own persons or in those of their own
kinsfolk and acquaintances, of Mr. Stephen’s ability to
drive out disease.
MR. MILNER STEPHEN’S MARVELLOUS CURES.
Mr. Stephen, at his chambers in Elizabeth-street, was
yesterday morning interviewed by a number of patients,
with whom he was more or less successful. One case was
attended with an incident of a remarkable kind. A middle-
aged man almost crippled with rheumatism, who had been
ten years in this condition, presented himself for cure. Mr.
Stephen seemed less successful than usual, inasmuch as the
man’s joints refused to yield to the influence, and he
pointed out that in a confirmed case like this it would take
more time to effect a cure. He, however, persevered in


breathing upon the naan’s joints, and the result was that a
severe pain in the hip was driven first into the knee and
then away altogether. The patient expressed himself much
relieved, and tendered Mr. Stephen a guinea. Immediately
Mr. Stephen’s daughter-in-law, who was seated at a table
with pencil and paper before her, seized the pencil and with
incredible rapidity wrote the words, “ Please don’t take
money ; a poor man.” Mr. Stephen observing the writing,
said he must obey the spirits, and returned the money,
remarking that the patient should have stated his circum-
stances. The latter said that although he was only a
working man, he would give the coat off his back to get
rid of the rheumatic affliction under which he laboured, and
went away highly pleased.
In the afternoon Mr. Stephen attended to “ the poor ” in
the Temperance Hall, Pitt-street, and the large room was
visited by a most extraordinary gathering of persons suffer-
ing from various “ ills that flesh is heir to.” There were
about 100 persons present, of whom nearly one-half were
“ patientsand the faces of those who had come to be
cured were a study for anyone curious on the question of
natural or supernatural phenomena. There were literally
the poor, the lame, the deaf, and the blind, all waiting with
anxiety depicted on their countenances; and it was with
great difficulty that the crowd could be kept from “ rushing ”
the gentleman they evidently believed could cure their
complaints. The fame which Mr. Stephen has acquired
had brought people from all parts of the colony, and one of
those he treated had been brought from Melbourne. To
give the details of the “ cures ” performed would only be to
repeat what has already been described, and while it must
be admitted that several remarkable results followed the
operation of breathing through the red cloth, and the
“ passes ” of Mr. Stephen’s hands, it has to be stated that
in some instances the “healing power” failed to produce
any beneficial effects. As a simple and uuvarnished state-
ment of what took place, however, it has to be recorded
that one man who came to the room on crutches walked
away without their assistance, greatly to his own astonish-
ment and that of his wife, who was with him, and asserted
that he had not been able to dress himself for four months.
Another man, who hobbled in with two walking-sticks,


which he said he had used for two years, was enabled to
walk without them. A deaf man was operated on, and he
must have been either a rank impostor or a remarkable
example of Mr. Stephen’s power over the ears. An old
man who had come from the Blue Mountains to be cured
of the asthma was operated on, and he declared the result
of the “ breathing ” process to be “ wonderful,” saying he
had not felt as he did for 10 years. Altogether about 25
or 30 persons were attended to, and in the majority of cases
the sufferers expressed their surprise and satisfaction with
the result of their response to Mr. Stephen’s invitation to
come and be “ cured.”
MR. MILNER Stephen’s marvellous cures.
By whatever agency Mr. Milner Stephen is enabled to
effect the cures to which we have from time to time directed
public attention, there can be no doubt that he does for the
time being, at any rate, assuage pain and alleviate suffering.
Whether it be by means of magnetism or spiritism, or
whether it be merely the force of fancy, it is not our present
purpose to inquire. We have simply to chronicle facts,
and to leave their causes to future investigation. Yester-
day was one of Mr. Stephen’s “ free days,” and it is no
exaggeration to say that the Temperance Hall was literally
crowded with the halt, the lame, and the blind. There
were people with all sorts of ailments struggling with
others who were equally sick to get upon the platform and
have their ills removed before the two hours devoted
to the poor should elapse. It was evident from
the first that Mr. Stephen would not have time
to operate upon half those who presented themselves,
and this led to the struggle to which we have re-
ferred. There were women hobbling along in great
pain upon crutches, children with paralysed legs, men
groaning in agony, deaf and blind persons pleading that
their hearing and sight might be restored, young men in
the last stages of consumption, and people of all ages and
both sexes suffering from complaints of almost every
variety. A more horrible sight could scarcely be imagined.
Nearly all the cases were those in which medical aid had
been sought and failed, and the patients, perhaps as a last


hope, determined to try the “ healing power” of Mr. Milner
Stephei. That they had confidence in his ability to cure
them was shown, not only by their presence at the hall, but
by their eagerness to submit themselves to his treatment.
At first, the platform was clear, but one after another forced
his way on to it in spite of the efforts made by Mr.
Stephen’s assistants to keep them back, and very soon the
crushing and pushing was past description. Those who
were unable to walk were lifted on to the platform, whilst
those too ill to stand, sat upon the floor, and upon the few
chairs provided. Besides these, there was a crowd closing
in upon the operator, and endeavouring to “jump” the
chair in which the patients sat for treatment. To describe
all the cases would be superfluous. Three or four of the
most interesting will suffice. One was that of an old
woman 5 7 years of age, who had come from the Middle
Harbour. She had been suffering from chronic asthma and
rheumatism for years, and was a most pitiable object to
look at. Her breath was so bad that she could scarcely
move, and the pains in her limbs obliged her at times to
utter groans. Mr. Stephen commenced by placing thO
little piece of red flannel, over which sceptics and critics
have made merry, on the woman’s back, and breathing
through it, not blowing through it. The effect was, to say
the least, remarkable. The woman said she felt his hot
breath “ go right through her and drive the pain away.”
The flannel was then applied to the chest, then to the arms,
and ultimately to the legs, after which the woman “ got up
and walked.” She declared that she was quite well; that
she bad not felt like it for years, and continued to utter
expressions of thanks as she left the hall. The next was
the case of a comparatively young woman, who had been
suffering for six months from lung and heart disease. She
could get no relief, she said, from the doctors, and had had
little or no sleep for months. This was her second visit.
On the first occasion Mr. Stephen had breathed upon her
chest and given her relief, but at night the cough came on
as bad as ever. The next day she took some of the
magnetised water he had supplied her with, and from that
time her cough had left her, and she was able to sleep.
She still suffered, however, from a pain in the chest, and
this she wished Mr. Stephen to cure. In less time than it


takes to write it, the little red flannel was applied, and the
woman stated that the pain was gone. Other cases followed,
and then came one of a German, a resident of Crown-street.
He had been bad, he said, for seven years with partial
paralysis of the stomach, and was in great pain. After being
breathed upon and having passes made upon him, he broke
out in smiles, as he declared that all the pain had left him.
Then came a woman hobbling along on crutches, groaning
and moaning in great agony. She could not get up on the
platform, but had to be lifted up. She had been a sufferer
from rheumatic gout for two years and was unable to stand
without her crutches. Her knees, she said, would collapse
under her. Mr. Stephen went to work in the same manner
as with the other patients. He put the red flannel upon
the affected parts, breathed through it and then made
passes down, when he declared the pain gone and, as the
woman said, “it was gone too.” In a few minutes he
ordered her to walk across the platform, and she did so
without the aid of her crutches, bending her knees to show
that she had got the use of her legs, as well as being free
from pain. Another case of a precisely similar nature
followed, the woman stating that she had no doubt she
could walk home without her crutches, which she handed
to a friend who was with her, and left the hall apparently
well. A case of blindness, resulting from paralysis of the
nerves of the eye, was next treated, and though the patient
was unable to distinguish anything, she could discern light
on turning her head towards the windows. These are only
a tew of 30 or 40 cases treated, but they serve to show
what was being done. They were not all successful, but in
nearly every one the patient experienced relief. As the
time for closing approached, those waiting treatment
became more and more anxious. By half-past. 3 o’clock
the platform was crowded with sufferers stumbling over
each other, and imploring Mr. Stephen to cure them. It
was, however, impossible for him to attend to all of them,
and when time was up it was painful to witness the disap-
pointment of those who had been unable to procure a
sitting.
On Wednesday last many similar cures were effected.
One was that of a pronounced subject. A consumptive-
looking young man, ghastly pale, with shrunken limbs


and weazened visage, which told of a protracted bed of
sickness, stepped feebly up to the table. He said he
suffered in his throat, lungs, and back. His malady had
baffled medical science and brought him to death’s door.
u I must strengthen you, my man,” said the healer, and he
blew upon the affected parts in succession through a piece
of red flannel. The patient professed to feel easier. He
could breathe without such a choking sense and gasping.
Then Mr. Stephen made some passes with his hands, and
dismissed the patient with the admonition that partial
relief was all he could expect he could be afforded. He
might come again. The next comer was an old man, who
hobbled up with difficulty on sticks, every one of his joints
racking with rheumatism. He prayed to be assisted, as
he was in great pain, and he had gone to physicians in
vain. Sitting on the chair with his legs, arms, back, and
fingers stiffened and contorted, he was the picture of
abject infirm and decrepid misery. After the same
formula as that shown in the previous case had been
gone through, the subject interrupted his benefactor
with cries of “ Wonderful!” “ Extraordinary !” and grew
more joyfully excited as first his body and then his
limbs were breathed upon, while his wrinkled face
beamed with rapture and gratitude. “ I could not have
walked like that for the world,” he exclaimed at
last, jumping briskly off his seat and trotting smartly up
and down the room like a delighted child. God love and
bless you, sir ; you are an angel,” he shouted. “ Why, I
can run !” and, suiting the action to the word, he took the
first canter towards the door which he had made for many
a day, all the while volubly raining down a torrent of
blessings on Mr. Stephen’s head. “ Will you make me a
present of your sticks ?” said that gentleman, seeing that
the man had no further use for them. “ That I will, and
welcome,” he emphatically replied, “ but I hope you will
never need to use them.” He then went on his way re-
joicing, and, as some of our readers may desire to authen-
ticate his cure, his address is given— Philip Lyons, 108,
Goulburn -street.
Now there came importunately forward another old man
named Henry Wilson, living near the Blue Mountains, who
had come to town to seek aid for a distressing cough which


denied him sleep, and he would not be refused. He would
pay any money, he would do anything, but he would not
go empty away. When told that his money would not
avail him there, he said he was in agony ; and this appeal
Mr. Stephen responded to by breathing into him, if not the
breath of life, at least the breath of partial health and
soundness. He, too, was hearty in his ejaculations of
thanksgiving and wonder, and went away with a far
happier and lighter heart than he brought. He said he had
been 10 years under the bane of bronchitis, and neither
medicine nor medical men could do him any good. His
complaint got worse and was aggravated by incipient dropsy.
After one or two comparatively mild cases of rheumatics
had been relieved to the utmost satisfaction of the patients,
a deaf man presented a letter of introduction from Dr.
Scholes, of the Callan Park Asylum. This case Mr.
Stephen said he had every sympathy with, and he would,
please God, restore to Alio way —for that was his name—
his hearing, for he had lost it as the result of courageously
jumping overboard to save a shipmate while on a voyage to
Bombay in a vessel of which he was mate. He saved the
drowning man, but next morning he awoke stone deaf, and
this so preyed upon his mind, together with the loss of all
employment, that he lost his reason and had temporarily
become an inmate of the Callan Park Asylum, where Dr.
Scholes was induced to take an interest in him. After
telling his auditory these interesting biographical facts, Mr.
Stephen clapped his hands loudly close to Alloway’s ears,
and asked him if he could hear the noise. He replied that
he could hear nothing. Dipping one hand into the water,
after breathing into the ears, Mr. S. washed them with
some of the water with the other hand, and still holding
the lobes, counted 60, repeating this on each side. Allo-
way now remarked that he could hear a little, and he “ felt
lighter in the head.” The foregoing operation was again
repeated together with some passes, and by this time the
man could hear a direction given him to come again on
Saturday —an improvement in his condition which he
greeted with cheerful smiles.
The sitting or reception was not over till long past 4
o’clock, and then of the people some yet remained to learn
that their ailments not being urgent they must seek another
interview.


ME. MILNER STEPHEN’S MARVELLOUS CURES.
The scene at the Temperance Hall yesterday afternoon,
both inside and in the street, defies description. When
Mr. Milner Stephen arrived, shortly after 2 o’clock, there
was a dense crowd collected on the pavement for some
yards on either side of the door, which was closed, and it
was with difficulty that he could make his way through the
mass of people who had been eagerly awaiting his appear-
ance. The lower hall having been taken for the Canary
Show, the upper hall was given for the scene of his
operations. As on previous occasions, there was a gathering
of the “incurables” of the metropolis and suburbs, including
“ the lame, the halt, and the blind.” Many suffering pains
more or less violent were clamorously invoking Mr.
Stephen’s power to relieve their agonies. He appeared
to be in great force, as he literally “ordered” pains away
right and left; and as the various subjects of his benevo-
lence invoked blessings upon his head, we may reasonably
assume that they experienced relief. The afflicted reached
their arms on to the platform, praying him “ only to touch
them,” which he did, and invariably received the grateful
acknowledgements of the sufferers. In most of the cases
Mr. Stephen simply placed his hands upon the people’s
heads to drive away rheumatism or rheumatic gout, or the
other ills from which they were suffering. Bystanders of
all ranks were looking on astonished as people made their
way through the crowded hall to the platform, and as they
left after being treated by Mr. Stephen many eager questions
were asked as to the number of years’ suffering they had
endured, whether all their pains had disappeared, and the
like. In all, about 50 people were thus sent away, express-
ing their belief that they were cured and their astonishment
at the wonderful power of the healer.
The following are letters from persons who have been
cured:—
Mr. Stephen: Sir, — I send a friend of mine to you to
get a bottle of that blessed water. My eyes are getting on
very well, sir. Thank God for His mercies to us, Sir, if
you could spare the time, there is here much labour about
Wagga for you. —I am, your obedient servant, James
McWilliams, North Wagga Station.


G. M. Stephen, Esq. : Dear Sir, —I, the undersigned, R.
Barlow, do hereby testify that I had my right hand severely
crushed by the machinery at the Sugar Works, Pyrmont,
on the 31st January, 1878, and have since then been
unable (till you kindly afforded me relief) to use my hand
without acute pain, and have been unable to write or hold
a pen till Friday, 23rd instant, when you gave me instant
relief by breathing on the crippled hand. I at the time
was so astonished that I for many minutes did not realize
the fact of the great relief I obtained from the first appli-
cation of your healing power, and I hereby tender you my
grateful thanks for your noble work to the afflicted. —Be-
lieve me to be, yours obediently, R. Barlow.
Certificates are appended to this letter, testifying to its
truth, and signed by Messrs. Robert G. Wallace, Walter
Harris, Richard Clam, Chas. B. Wright, William Dickey,
H. S. Luskey, George Jeferess, and Alfred E. Robbins.
Mr. Jas. Oram, of 299, Pitt-street, Sydney, writes to
testify that he has been cured by Mr. Stephen of asthma,
laryngal typhus, affection of the bronchial tubes and
internal abscess, which had afflicted him for five years, and
reduced him so that his life was despaired of, notwith-
standing that he had been under the treatment of eminent
doctors in California, New Zealand, and Sydney. The
account of his sufferings and cure, graphically written, is
too long to admit of its insertion here.
It may be remarked that Mr. Oram states that, as the
result of the treatment, he vomited a quantity of black
stuff, after which he “ felt like a new man.”
In the Sydney Morning Herald of Aug. 2, 1880, appeared
the following advertisement: —
This is to certify that my sister, Mrs. Sarah Behag, of
Cook’s River, was totally blind until she was treated by Mr.
Milner Stephen ; since her last visit to him she can see
distinctly.
C. Davies,
July 31, 1880. 15 Albion-street, Belmore Park.
It may be added that many of the cures were verified
by the well known writer, Mr. George Ranken, who pub-
lished the result of his perquisitions in an exhaustive
article in the Pacific Weekly journal.


SUITS MAKE T# MEASURE
M. GOTJLSTON
m
=y.
58 MARKET STREET, SYDNEY
A. COHEN & CO.’S
Trousers to Order - - 8s lid and 9s lid
Suits to Measure - - -47 s 6d and 50s
ALL GARMENTS WARRANTED SHRUNK.
Note the Address—
-526 GEORGE STREET 526
(next to a. j. watt’s, chemist.)
ANY MISFITS, CUSTOMERS


THE
CITY OUTFITTING WAREHOUSE,
364— GEORGE STREET—364
JOSEF! BULLARD,
Tailor, Mercer, Hatter, Hosier, &c.,
Invites the attention of the Gentlemen of New South Wales to his unrivalled
Stock of Mercery aud Woollen Goods, the latest Novelties from London
and Paris. Spring Goods now opening. Only First-class Hands employed
and Skilled Cutters, who can give our patrons every satisfaction.
JOSEPH BULLARD, TAILOR AND HABIT MAKER,
364 GEORGE STREET,
THE AUSTRALIAN
[ILLIISTR ATED BY PHOTOTYPES.)
Price One Shilling; or, 12s. per annum, delivered everywhere.
Tire Orrly- INPa-g-azirre in -A.-u.stra.lia.
_____
ISSUE: 5,000 WEEKLY. PRICE: ONE PENNY.
THa.© P-u.nru.est of IP-u-rm-y Papers.
FREETHOUGHT,
A Monthly Journal of advanced thought, Psychology, Metaphysics,
Spiritualism, &c. Price 6d. ; or, ss. per annum in advance.
The above are published by E. C. HAVILA.ND,
at 1, Little George Street, Sydney.
Next issue of “ Freethought” will contain a phototype portrait of GEORGE MILNER
STEPHEN by Boyd.


o
PITT STREET SYDNEY
BEAUTIFUL .
DlArn .. fc\s£
ALLWOOL
TWEED
V'
-svnV
TWEED
SUITS
MEASURE
Sc3.Ss
GUT lengths
AT WHOLESALE PRICES.
FROM
H L.SUMMERFIELD
PITTSTSYDNEY.


325 GEORGE STREET.
Intending Purchasers will do well to inspect
NICHOLSON AND ASCHERBERC’S
MAGNIFICENT STOCK OF
lia®
ail
©ft*
Which for Variety and Excellence is not equalled by any other
Hotise in 2'ou'n.
'HE CHIEF AIM of this house is to supply none but THOROUGHLY
RELIABLE INSTRUMENTS, and further, to obtain the best possible
selection. To this end they have appointed some of the best known
Experts in Europe, who select all Pianos ordered, so that customers
may rely on getting the PICK OF THE STOCK from the Original Manufacturers.
As a consequence. N. & A. are able to
ii&Mf'tt nmm ?@i taits imm » n<m,
And they undertake to Exchange any Instrument not fully approved of. Their
„ P?r*&s* 0R s mid Agencies are so extensive that they are able to supply goods
of fIRST-CLASS WORKMANSHIP at almost the same prices charged for the
inferior but showy rubbish with which the market is at all times flooded.
NICHOLSON # ASCHKRBERG
Cannot too frequently repeat that the
TIME-TAYMiIT SYSTEM,
As introduced and practised only by them in its entirety is extended to EVERY
CLASS OF INSTRUMENT, from the Cottage Harmonium at £6, to the Concert
Grand Pianoforte. Proportionate allowance is made for earlier Repayment.
A SPECIALITY is made in the attention to COUNTRY ORDERS.
THOSE LIVING AT A DISTANCE,
Or who are unable to come to town, can always rely with the utmost confidence
on getting the full benefit of Messrs. N. & A.’s long experience.
Each instrument is tested most completely by Messrs. N. & A., or their
Manager, before deciding, and customers can therefore be sure of securing even
a better selection than if they made the choice personally.
One of the finest Illustrated Price Lists in the world can be had, post free,
oil application.


Mr. Evelyn
J
\ Stephen Dies
'*i - 4
Mr. Evelyn A. Hind-
-1 marsh Stephen, formerly
! Registrar at the Department
t of Mines, died yesterday
after a short illness, aged
90.
He was a son of the late
George Milner Stephen, and
a grandson of Rear-Admiral
Sir John Hindmarsh, the first
Governor of South Australia.
He entered the Public Ser-
vice in 1886, and retired 40
years later.
For several years he was
vice-president of the Austra-
lasian Pioneers’ Club, of
which he was one of the oldest
members.
He is survived by Mrs.
Stephen and two married
daughters.
The funeral will take place
at the Rookwood Crema-
torium this morning, after a
service at St. John’s Church,
Ashfield.
h-i- Morning H...M W-*.. Auyu.t 8. l?il
