

GEORGE . . .
WOODWARD’S
Australasian
POULTRY
BOOK.
BALLARAT LITHO. AND PRINTING CO. PROP.,
LTD.
(Successors to F. W. Niven & Co.).
56 and 58 LYDIARD STREET NORTH, BALLARAT.


Geo. Woodward. A. J. Maude. J Fullerton, F. Meehan. S. Lukies. Geo. Brennan. F. Sandford. J. Oates. J. Sandford, W. J. Carthew.
F. Mann. M. Wilson. H. Dunstan. W. Bradby. R. Dodds. H. Bowd.
Geo. Woodward’s Field Spaniel, Storm Cloud.
R. J. Hughes. J. Bremar. R. Cant. F. Haymes. C. F. Kiel. S. Bathurst. H. J. Millar. R. Fawcett. G. Robson. R. Williamson.
Ballarat Dog and Poultry Society.


Iron Quartz Crystalized Grit, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzaek’s Address, 405 Bourke St. West., Melbourne,
CONTENTS.
Page.
Preface ... ... ••• ••• "•
Locality and Ground ... •••
House Positions ... ... ••• •••
Choosing Stock ... ... •••
Breeding and Rearing Chicks and Ducklings ... 14
Setting Hen ... ... ••• •••
Incubators ... ••• ••• 1®
A Few Hints on the Management of Incubator Chickens 20
Points for Raising Chicks ... ... ••• ••• 21
How to Test Eggs for Freshness ... ... ••• 23
How to Pick Your Best Layers at a Glance ... ... 23
Most Suitable Localities for Economical Poultry Farming 24
How to Make Market Poultry Pay in Australia ... 25
How to Start a Farm for Egg Production ... ... 26
How to Save Two Months’ Feed Bill in Rearing Chickens 30
How to Prepare a Bird for Show ... ... ••• 31-
How to Wash Birds for Shows ... ... ••• 33
How to Make a Pen of Birds to Procure a Larger Percentage
of Cockerels or Pullets, as desired ... 33
Quick Method to Moult Birds ... ... ••• 33
Breeding Late Chicks ... ••• ••• ••• 3 ”
Ducks ... ... - ■■■ ••• 38
Best Feeding Results ... ••• ••• 40
Balanced Rations... ... ...
Breeding for Buff Color ... ... ... ••• 42
How to Keep Fowls in Confinement for Egg Production Only 44
As a Hobby for Ladies ... ... ••• •••
How to Breed Three Breeds from the One Pen ... , ... 45
Is it Necessary to Rear Cross-Breeds ? ... ... 46
Grading Fowls or Ducks for Market ... ... ••• 47
How to Start Poultry for Profit as a Side Issue for Miners
and Others ... ••• •••
Fancy Poultry v. Utility ... ••• ••• ••• 48


Tick and Vermin Proof Perches, at Jas. Goss's, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St. Perth. Tel. 426.
Winners
at Brighton were Reared on Tyzack’s
Victorian Chicken Meal.
Staggers in Ducks ... ... ... ... 50
Turkeys ... ... ... ... ... 51
Geese ... ... ... ... ... ... 52
How to Fix Up a Leghorn or a Minorca’s Comb ... 53
How to Pick Indian Runner Drakes from Ducks at Time of
Hatching ... ... ... ... ... 54
A Fallacy Exploded ... ... ... .. 54
The Decline of the Minorca and the Remedy ... ... 55
Black Orpingtons... ... ... ... ... 56
The White Leghorn ... ... ... ... 57
Breeding for Cockerels in Silver and Golden Wyandottes ... 50
Pullet Breeding in Laced Wyandottes... ... ... 60
Breeding White Wyandottes ... ... ... 60
Partridge and Silver-Pencilled Wyandottes. How to Mate 61
Partridge Cockerel Breeding ... ... ... 61
How to Breed Cockerels ... ... ... ... 62
To Breed Pullets ... ... ... ... ... 63
Confinement v. Free Range... ... ... ... 63
Breeding for Export ... ... ... ... 65
Is it Easier to Breed Solid Colored Breeds than Part Colored
or Marked Breeds ? ... ... ... ... 66
Useful Items ... ... ... ... ... 68
Standard Judging Card ... ... ... ... 71
Anconas ... ... ... ... 75
Andalusians ... ... ... ... ... 76
Dorkings ... ... ... ... ... 78
Game, Old English ... ... ... ... 82
Indian Game ... ... ... ... ... 86
Langshans ... ... ... ... ... 88
Leghorns ... ... ... 00
Minorcas ... ... ••• ... ••• 03
Orpingtons ... ... ... ... ••• 94
Wyandottes ... ... ... ... ... 07
Indian Runner Ducks ... ... ... ... 102
Pekin Ducks ... ... ... ... ... 103
Diseases ... ... ... ... ... 105


CITY HALL, STURT STREET, BALLARAT, VIC.
MARGING OF LAKE WENDOUREE, BALLARAT, VIC.


G. Woodward. A. Raymond (Com.) A. Fahey E. O. Sullivan (Asst. Sec.)
Alex. Anderson. J. W.Orr.
A. Bunnerman. D. W. Gleeson. W. G. Swift V.P. H. Taylor, V.P. W. Freebrain. V.P.
POULTRY SOCIETY. J. Carson, Sec J. A. Treas. G. Harvey, Com.


Flower Stands, Flower Baskets, and Flower Stainers,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
PREFACE.
great strides made in the advancement of Poultry during
the last two years have been an eye-opener to the public and
to the old fanciers. It has almost approached a boom, and the main
reasons for the impetus are as follows :
First—The laying competitions have been the means of waking
up the public to the fact that pure-bred poultry, worked and
managed on proper lines, will turn in sufficient profit to ensure any
person desirous of undertaking poultry farming, for egg production,
a good living, with a free and healthy life.
The cost of feeding, and other expenses, have been illustrated in a
proper manner ; the receipts and expenditure for each pen of birds
also shown in detail.
The profits have surprised the general public and fanciers, myself
included.
The Hawkesbury third competition has just concluded, showing
a profit of £248 on 600 hens. This is the gross profit. So far I
have not been able to ascertain the nett profit ; but as they pay no
interest on capital, nor allow for other incidentals, such as rearing
the birds, deaths, etc., the extra class of birds operated with, you
would have to take that into consideration.
The second reason is that the Government of Victoria, acting
under pressure, beside catering for a laying competition, suddenly
launched out in a new direction, distributing gold medals at the
different shows for the best exhibits of popular breeds. This made
fanciers look round for popular specimens fit to win. This has also
helped to increase the number of fanciers.
In my opinion, the better way would be to offer a bonus on the
best 50 or 100 cockerels or pullets up to export requirements, care


Owosso Poultry
Goss’s, Wire and
Spice, Genuine, Is. Packet,
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.
Tel. 426.
at Jas.
Perth.
Winners
at Brighton were Reared on Tyzack’s
Victorian Chicken Meal.
being taken that the birds were reared by the exporter, and not
collected by some professional man, who went round gathering
special birds. This would help the industry in a proper manner, and
would encourage the breeding for export. Sixpence a bird bonus
would not bare cost the Government nearly so much as they spent
in gold medals, and would have been more beneficial to the farmer
and poultry breeder in general. Or, better still, both could be
given a sixpenny bonus on birds, and cut the number of medals
down by two-fifths or more. The bonus could easily be stopped as
soon as the industry was properly under way.
Third—The Government have appointed lecturers and demon-
strators, who are sent all over the country instructing the ones
willing to learn in the feeding, rearing, choosing, and general
management of birds, and although some fanciers are sceptical as to
the good they do, still, I am convinced, they keep the interest up,
and it is only a matter of time when Victoria and the other States
will establish the industry on a solid basis.
There is no doubt that the three reasons mentioned above have
been the means of securing a lot of converts to the magnetism of
feathers, and once a man or woman has started, he usually influences at
least another one of his friends or relations to follow on similar lines, as
99 out of 100 that have started during the last two years can show
a handsome return in cash, besides all the other joys that attend
the rearing and management of poultry. Of course, some are un-
lucky ; they started on the “ rocks,” and are still having an
uphill task, but this is the best experience. The man or woman
who starts in this fashion, and has enough determination and will-
power to keep going, is the one that will emerge triumphantly in
the end, as he or she will always be prepared to look a seeming
disaster in the face, and come up smiling for the next malady. To
a person who has the poultry fever nothing seems too hard or
irksome.
Even if a man does lose a little cash in the year attending to
the work of feeding the birds, buying fresh stock, &c., he is well
2


Gwosso Due 1 ! Cure. Only Remedy for Ducks, Is. at
Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Thermometers Tested (America).
Tyzaek’s
occupied, and is always kept employed in honest work, when he
might be otherwise engaged in mischief. Every woman should en-
courage her brother, father, or sweetheart to become a poultry
fancier, as she will then know he is employed in a healthy and honest
hobby, and that he will not be running away directly .after tea to the
gambling den, the public-house, or other resorts that a hobbyless
man drifts to. To a country school teacher, or any other person of
indoor occupation in the back blocks, the rearing of chickens and
attending to the welfare of birds of any pure strain would be
pleasant occupation, being, as it is, a decided change from his other
labor.
Since writing my last book I have had no end of experience. My
farm being in Ballarat is situated in a climate of quick changes, and,
unless personal supervision were undertaken the poultry farm would
not last many months. The matter contained in the succeeding
chapters is the outcome of successes or reverses, as the case may be.
Poultry is mainly a hobby or liking in general. 1 would not give
much for the poultry farm life if the manager was not a fancier, as
the work to an uninterested person is not pleasant. The individual
who keeps only one or two breeds, and combines it with his
ordinary daily toil, not having sufficient birds to become a drag, is
the person who reaps the full enjoyment of the poultry fancy.
To any of my readers who are keeping only a few fowls, I would
say, never mind how much your friend is making out of them, regard
it as a hobby, a pleasant recreation, which saves mental worry and
doctors’ bills ; even if you are spending two or three pounds a year
more than the income, you are just as far forward as your neighbour
who has gardening for a hobby. The cricketer, footballer, cyclist, or
golf player all spend a certain amount of capital throughout the
year, and never look for any cash return in the quest of their
hobby or enjoyment.
The profits have been the inducement held out by most of the
writers of books and magazines, but I know any number of people
who, even if the profits were double what they may be, could not be
3


Marking 1 Punches for Chickens, at Jas. Goss's, Wire
and Cag-e Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack’s Address, 405 Bourke St. West., Melbourne.
induced to give up their favorite pastime to enter into poultry-
fancying, simply because they have not the natural inclination for
it.
In commencing, I would advise you to start with the one breed
you have a particular liking for, and stick to it, if you want to make
a name in the poultry world. Unfortunately, most people start
religiously with one, and have from six to twelve different breeds
inside a year,
Don’t think of starting a poultry farm if you have to employ
labor of any description, unless you are there yourself to supervise-
two or three times a day ; even then you may be caught napping.
You tell the lad or man what to do ; buoyed up by false security
you perhaps relax your vigilance, only to discover presently that
roup, cholera, or dysentery, are on the war-path. It would be almost
better to have a bush fire than a bad attack of roup or cholera ; the
one is all over quick and lively, like a horse race, whereas, like a call
paying mining speculation, you never know when the other is-
finished.
There is not so much risk now as formerly in purchasing stock or
buying eggs. Most fanciers send stock on approval over a certain
price, providing carriage is paid both ways, which is only fair, as-
they take a big risk in moving birds ; and eggs are guaranteed so-
many to hatch, only don’t expect the moon for ten shillings. Try
and breed 100 to 800 of one breed, and see how they look all in
unison, compared to a mixed lot of all breeds.
Poultry as a hobby, or combined with other employment, is-
pleasant and fascinating, but step over the line to go into the game
altogether, and the allurements are apt to vanish, when it becomes-
your work and daily toil, and you would require something else for a.
hobby, providing you had time for one.
Duck farming is simpler and easier than poultry farming. Among
ducks less losses are likely to occur, as they have few diseases, and
the outlay is considerably less ; but very few people take in ducks-
as a hobby, as they object to being tickled under the chin.
4


ADVERTISEMENTS.
GOLD ai)d
PARTRIDGE
fyjvandottes
(9
(L.
MY SPECIALTIES !
Winners at all the Leading Shows
throughout Western Australia,. .
Including Championships, Special? at Perth, Kalgoorlie, Bunbury,
Gin Gin, Snbiaco, 1901 ; and several other minor Shows.
I import new blood every season trom the best yards
A BREEDER OF NINE YEARS IN WYANDOTTES.?
regardless of expense.
Correspondence and Juspectton
Cordially Juvtted.
Stock and Eggs
IReasonadle.
■so—
. . . White to . . .
J. H. MADDBRN,
Storekeeper,
WOODLUPLINE, WEST AUSTRALIA.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
my Specialty.
i$ “Pekins.”.
Pekin Ducks. *
* Pekin Ducks.
my Specialty
is “PeKins.”
<] 6C
■JI O)
£ to
>»
be
be
£3
C/3
be
be
O
QQ
Large Handsome Birds weighing 20 lbs* per pair.
- A
* ' : A
■. -4
3
&-
H
-<
rb
m
Z
Mr. A. Brown.
Over 60 First and Special Prizes and Government Gold
Medal at Leading; Shows-
STOCK AND SHOW BIRDS from £1 Is. DUCK EGGS, £1 Is.
•* Hlirlrc fnr prnfif }> Is.'ld- posted- Only bock this subject published in
UUUKO iUI rruill. Australia Second edition. Author,
A. BROWN, 7 Clive Road, Auburn, Victoria.


Nursery Fire Guards, Sieves, Gravel Screens, Crab Nets,
at Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cag-e Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426,
Egg- Testers, Is., Tyzack’s
I would advise anybody starting poultry or ducks solely for a
living, if not sure of his or her personal ability, to have his head
read by a phrenologist ; he may be able to tell you whether yon are
the possessor of the following bumps Color, shape, cleanliness,
regularity, determination, civility, love of birds. However, you will
know as the fascination or fever of poultry grows on you, whether
you possess some of these qualities.
I have often been asked “ Which is the best breed of poultry ? ”
The answer is, the best breed is the one that secures the best attention
—it's a cross between cleanliness and proper feeding and housing.
Any amount of pleasure can be derived from poultry. Your pen of
birds, gathering the eggs, setting hens, hatching and rearing
chicks, studying all the details, reading poultry literature, attending
shows or meetings, and winning the best prizes of the year with
birds of your own breeding—all these are enjoyments, and make
life worth living, where otherwise it might be a blank.
Hoping these few introductory remarks will be appreciated,
I remain,
Faithfully yours,
GEO. WOODWARD.
5






A well-balanced.
WHITE . . .
WYANDOTTE
HEN. . .
White Wvandotte Cock,
SNOWKING. Full
brother to MORE-
LAND. recently sold
for £29, at Prahran
Show. Bred by . . .
WOODWARD BROS.;
Present owner, Mrs.
BOSLEY JENKINS, of
S.A.
The RECORS for Australia
in WYANDOTTES.


Lucerne and Clover Chaff a Specialty, at Jas. Goss’s,
Wire and Cag-e Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel. 426.
Owosso Duck Tonic, Is., Tyzack’s
GEO. WOODWARD’S
AUSTRALASIAN
POULTRY BOOK.
LOCALITY AND GROUND
The most of my readers will have started keeping poultry in
the place where they reside, and possibly only intend to keep a few
fowls solely for eggs or as a hobby.
In this case as far as locality is concerned it is Hobson’s
choice. The situation and soil is half the battle in running a
successful poultry farm On certain sorts of soil, with ordinary
care in feeding and housing, it is very little trouble to manage
poultry, compared to what it is on unsuitable ground.
Those who have read my last book will remember I was very
particular in strongly recommending suitable soil and locality to run
a poultry farm to the best advantage.
The soil best adapted is sandy subsoil, such as we have from
St. Kilda to Frankston, and from Geelong to Queenscliff, in
Victoria. Those who have this sort of soil are lucky, as they will
find considerable difference in the growth of their poultry should
they ever shift to hard clay soil or drifty land.
Of course, there is a great gulf between keeping a few birds on
a small piece of land and running a poultry farm on ground of the
same nature.
• I have known a lot of people keep fowls well on a limited piece
of ground, but they were always pining for more space, and the
consequence was that as soon as they procured the larger space
they did not have the same results. Possibly they did not continue
to care for the welfare of the birds the same as when they had the
limited space, and probably relied too much on the larger block for
success, omitting the little details that are always necessary on large
or small blocks.
A limited space, well looked after as regards cleanliness, is
much more suitable than a larger block neglected.


Every Description of Wire Work Made to Order, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cagre Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel. 426.
Owosso Poultry Spice, Is , Tyzack’s.
This plan will be found suitable fora small area. Divide what-
ever ground you have into three distinct blocks, by wire netting, and
if possible, boarded up two feet high with the wire fixed on top.
Have one yard with good, hard, clean ground ; the house will be
built in this yard. This yard should be swept every day with a
good yard broom, and all droppings removed. The nests, dust
bath, water, and shade should be provided here. The water must be
kept in the shade, using earthenware vessels if possible. Sacks for
feeding the “ mash ” on should be always on hand, but they must
be picked up and shaken as soon as the meal is finished.
The second division of the yard should be kept covered with
litter, consisting chiefly of horse manure, care being taken that it
has come from a clean place, as some people arc in the habit of throwing
all sorts of disease-bearing substances on manure heaps. This
must be replenished about three times a week, and the whole lot
removed every three months. This is the main exercising yard for
the fowls, and all grain feed should be fed here, and shade should
also, if possible, he provided. The litter is to be always kept
slightly damp, especially during the summer, to save any unneces-
sary dust, and to make better scratching material. It is surprising
the number of birds and chickens that can be reared on ground laid
out on these lines, costing the minimum amount of labor, and
presenting a place that always looks clean, neat, and with the
general look of a healthy poultry yard.
The third part should be dug up, manured, and sown—the one
half with prairie grass, the other half in rape. Both of these are
ideal green foods for poultry, and afford considerable nourishment.
If your yard is very small, you could make a frame of wood, 4 to
(1 inches high, and stretch netting across so that the birds could
pick the grass without scratching the bed all to pieces.
In the event of you becoming overcrowded during the hatching
of chickens, you could utilise the grass yard in the same manner as
the scratching yard. For three months of the year the best plan is
to run your cockerels in one and pullets and hens in the other.
You will, of course, require to buy green feed during the temporary
occupation of your garden, which must be immediately replanted
when your cockerels are sold or removed.
With a yard laid out and managed on this system, the style of
soil required is immaterial, as either clay or sandy soil would be
suitable, only that if sandy soil your inner yard should be asphalted
or hardened in some manner, to enable you to sweep it clean, as
8


Any New Specialty Made to Order, at Jas. Goss’s Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. :426.
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
advised, every day. The birds would be turned into their garden
for half-an-hour each day. The size of block to be divided would be
thirty by sixty, or twenty by sixty, as the case may be.
If possible, it would be better to have an extra pen for your
breeding birds solely, providing you had room ; this would enable
you to have all the rest to utilise for your chickens. Even with a
larger area it is best to have a succession of yards planned as above ;
the only difference would be to have the garden part made in the
centre, so that all the birds could have access in rotation. It is well
to bear this m mind—that better results can be obtained on this plan
than in an ordinary yard. Either have yards laid out on this
system, or large enough to keep the grass growing all the year
round without overcrowding.
If you are choosing a site for a poultry farm, choose one with
the sandy subsoil as advised. The manner of laying it out will
entirely depend on the lay of the ground, but have every yard laid
out in uniform size, so as to ensure the minimum of trouble with
regard to feeding and watering.
Poultry for egg production or market purposes is better com-
bined with an orchard, and the yard can be arranged according to
the plan of the orchard. Your best plan would be to rent a likely
place with the option of purchase ; this would give you time to try
the land, and also allow you to find out if you were a suitable person
to run a poultry farm.
The size of the yards is 100 x 100 for 30 fowls all the year
round, to give them proper room for egg production ; this is large
enough to allow you to plough the land once a year, if needed. For
a breeding pen of seven birds, 25 x 50, if decent soil, will act well.
If keeping four or five pens of breeding birds in a line, have each
pen boarded up 2 ft. 6 in. high for shelter from wind, and also to
prevent war fighting through the netting, which is one of our com-
monest complaints, and generally with disastrous results. Two or
three blows through wire netting, and feet or leg trouble will ensue ;
even if the bird does not die it will probably be hors de combat
during the best part of the breeding season. Never make yards
within yards for egg production in farming, but have a row of yards
in line. It is a mistake to have to open two gates to enter one yard.
Work your yards like streets, if you wish to save time, trouble, and
often disaster. Personally, I prefer closer settlement up to 500
birds.
9


Hyde’s Color Food Gives a Bright Plumage to Canaries,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray
St. Perth. Tel 426.
Tyzack’s Grainoline.
HOUSE POSITIONS.
The style of houses most suitable for poultry are various, and
yon will have to plan your house according to the ground and
situation you are in. Most places have some sort of a house fixed
up for poultry, and particularly well ventilated as a rule.
Ventilation is needed, of course, but in its proper place. The
cracks in the side of the house are not needed, and are veritable
death-traps, as roup comes in every time the wind blows through the
crevices. If you have to build a house, do not stop for the little
extra expense, but use either weatherboard or iron for the back end
and sides. Do not use palings, as they only crack in time and
cause mischief, and are of no value if you ever want to sell or dispose
of your houses, as they tumble to pieces with age, and are a bad
asset. Weatherboards or lumber you can paint and save for years,
and if you ever want to realise you will receive a fair price.
If you have to build houses, the following plan and size will be
found most suitable :—Size of house, 12 feet by 8 feet for twenty
birds. Have the root as high as possible to allow of your working
freely when engaged cleaning out or any other operation. Besides,
the height gives your birds more comfort in the summer, and
plenty of air space at any season of the year. The floor is better
raised at least six inches above the outside level. This keeps the
place dry in winter, no matter how hard it rains, providi ig you are
not in a swamp. Earth, sand, or clay can be used to heighten the
floor, and the easiest way to accomplish this is to dig a hole right in
front of the door, throwing the earth inside the house. You can
easily fill up the hole made with rubbish after you have finished the
house. Whatever you use for filling the floor of the house should
be hard. Cement and sand mixed up in the shape of mortar make a
good top dressing, or asphalt. Some people mix up sand and
cow manure together for the final coating on the floor. This is
excellent, as it sets like cement, only keep the fowls off till it drys,
as it is used wet.
The roosts are best set about eighteen inches from the ground,
resting on supports, and should be left with a clear space of a foot
between the ends of the perch and the sides of the house. A couple
of six-inch nails driven on the skew into the supports will hold the
perches firmly, yet so as to be easily shifted to examine for lice.
The nests are better away from the house altogether, although
they can be accommodated inside—providing you have movable
boxes. On no account use fixtures, as you cannot clean them
10


ADVERTISEMENTS.
W. H MARTIN’S
Steam Marble, Granite and
Slate Yards,
NORTH VNLE V.
Hyde Park Tram from G.P.O.
Penny Section to Yard.
The Cheapest State Yard in the Common"
wealth for DAIRY or CELLAR SHELVES
SLATE FLOORS, STEPS, and BORDER.
Lavatory Tops in Dark or White Marble
Slate.
SOAPSTONE for Bakers’ Furnaces ; for all
Portable Stoves. Boiler Bridge, kc.
Special Shipping Terms.
Prices on Application. Discount for Prompt
Cash. Cemetery Work as usual.
PLYMOUTH ROCKS.
Prizes Won.—First and Special for Best
Plymouth Rock in Show at Melbourne,
Victorian Poultry and Kennel Club, 1002;
First at Royal, Adelaide, 1904, for Cock,
Cockerel, and Pullets. Eggs, It's. 6d.
A Limited Number of EGGS available from
Selected Stock of Utility Poultry, tested for
laying or ordinary farm treatment.
Plymouth Rock, 10s. od. doz.; Golden
Wyandotte, Os.; White Leghorn, 6s. In-
spection any day except Sunday.
P.R. Cockerel, 8i Months.
HAVE YOU SEEN IT?
Australia’s Leading Fanciers’ Journal,
“The Feathered and Kennel World.”
Devoted to
poultry Bogs, Coursing, pigeons, Canaries, Cage DBir&s,
ant Domestic pets.
Published on 15th of Each Month.
Subscription, 3s. 6d. pen annum. Anywhere. •
O NTERESTING alike to the fancier or utility poultry keeper.
• Contains the most reliable and up-to-date news that can be
obtained in no other publication published in the Common-
wealth. It deals with all branches of the fancy in an able and lucid
manner.
Specimen copies and further particulars can be obtained on
application to the Manager,
Gbe fanciers publisbincj Company,
161 CLARENCE ST., SYDNEY, N.S.W.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
EMBDEN GEESE,
THE MOST PROFITABLE
OF ALL TABLE POULTRY.
Early Maturing and Hardy. Thrive Even if Neglected.
Young Stock for Sale, from English and Australian Prize
Winners, in November next.
J. H, Hobbs,
IOWNJSriyIM,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BLACK ORPINGTONS.
Ife.
Winner at Adelaide Poultry and Kennel Club Show,! _
1904—1st, Special, 2nd, and Y.H.C., Pallets Specialty, g
3rd, Hen : 3rd, Breeder Pen.
Royal Agricultural, 1904—1st, Special, and 2nd,
Cockerel ; Ist, 2nd, and 3rd, Pullets.
\ cr' /
Hen ; Ist Special
<gfPresent Owner of Orpington Challenge Cup. Stock For Sale.
Eggs in Season, lOs. ©d., Sis.
Write to
F. J. WIMBLE, Brookman’s Buildings,
Grenfell Street, Adelaide, South Australia.


Incubators and Foster Mothers, at Jas, Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth. Tel. 426.
Jamieson’s Winners Reared on Tyzack’s Meal.
properly. Seaweed, pine leaves, dry grass, or Oregon shavings are
the best materials for the nests. With renewals, the lice should
easily be kept under.
Ladder perches such as we see one above the other should not
be tolerated, as there is a scramble every night for positions, and
they often hurt themselves in flying down. The wings and feet
suffer principally. High roosts should also be avoided. The
air may be sweeter higher up. but unless they are sleeping in trees,
or have plenty of room to fly down on the angle to the ground,
trouble will ensue.
The front of the houses should face the early morning sun. In
the southern parts of Australia, N.E. would be the position, as it
rarely rains from this direction. For the southern parts of Victoria,
South or Western Australia, fowl-houses should not open to the
east, as recommended by most writers and experts. You might just
as well open to the south, as all our so-called south winds blow on
the skew, mostly south-east, and these are the rheumatic winds.
Never have your house to face them, but rather N.E. Australia
is an island, and all winds tend to blow from off the sea towards the
centre of it. But in nearly every instance the weather winds—not
necessarily the quarter where the rain comes from—should be
guarded against.
Nearly all winds blow on the skew. The so-called north
winds blow from the north-west ; the south winds, south-west or
south-east.
Rain or wet will not hurt fowls, providing you have proper
shelter which they may seek as occasion arises. Cold weather does
not hurt them down to ten degrees above freezing point, or even to
freezing point, but wind is the fowls’ enemy. Keep the night wind
off, but allow for ventilation, and provide wind-bieaks during the
daytime. You, of course, can have your houses facing the east, but
do not have them open in that direction.
For the tick-infested areas of South and Western Australia,
houses with movable iron roof and canvas sides would be cheap and
convenient. If the frame were lime-washed to prevent it taking
fire, and the roof removed, the canvas part could be burnt each year
as it stood, and renewed. Failing this houses could be made of
iron with all the woodwork outside ; but even then the tick will
get in between the joints of the iron, and, as they can live for
eighteen months without food, you are not safe after all. But with
the proper roost and watchfulness, ticks can easily be checked.
The roosts could be made as follows :—Uprights of three by
three, with an auger hole bored in the end grain at top one and a
11


All Kinds of Poultry Feeders and Fountains, at Jas.
Goss s, Wire and Cage Worker. 253 Murray St. Perth.
Tel. 426.
Jubilee Incubatoi s, best. Tyzack, Agent for Jubilee.
quarter inch in circumference and two inches deep ; then piece of
round iron one-half inch in diameter, nine inches long, can be inserted
in the hole or cup and driven in two or three inches, the remainder
standing up for you te put the roosts on. The cup can then be
kept with carbolic liquid, phenyle, or caustic soda once a
week. This will trap all lice, tick, and other insects.
For warm districts, fowls would be better if they roosted in
trees for eight months of the year if kept for egg production, as the
time required in cleaning the house is considerable. You would be
better employed in growing green feed for your birds, and giving
more attention to the welfare of the young stock. In some parts
birds could be kept in trees all the year round, but you would have
to have a specially well protected spot. Even if they did lay twelve
fgg s a year less, your time could be more profitably spent in other
items. The places most suitable would be the Mallee districts of
Victoria, the west coastal districts of W.A., and parts of South
Australia. Houses for show stock are needed in every climate.
I rees will not do, as they require different treatment.
CHOOSING STOCK.
If you are going for one breed only, and do not intend using
incubators, running it solely for eggs and birds for the house in any
locality, use one of the utility breeds, such as Wyandottes,
Orpingtons, Langshans, Faverolles, Rocks. These birds set, hatch,
and rear their chickens ; lay well in the winter time ; and, if they
do not lay quite so many eggs in the .year as some of the non-sitting
breeds, still their value is very little behind by the end of the
season, as they lay in winter.
If you are going in for egg production solely, and your
district is fairly warm, use White Leghorns, or either of the Rose-
Comb Leghorns. Minorcas or Andalusians should also give a
good account of themselves.
The district and climate is another thing to take into con-
sideration. Ballarat, Ararat, Beechworth, Daylesford, and other
highly elevated places would find the fowls mentioned above
splendid breeds for all-round utility purposes. The hotter districts
like tne Mallee, South Australia, or Queensland, Leghorns or any
of the Mediterranean breeds should give better results, as they
stand the climate better. In the egg-laying tests of America,
Plymouth Rocks hold the record, and, if new blood were imported
12


A TYPICAL
PEKIN DRAKE.
WHITE WYANDOTTES AT PLAY.
PEARCE BROS.
Harvesting Lucerne
at
Bacchus Marsh.


THE RECORD FOR 9 £?Q
AUSTRALIA. '
For White Wyandotte Cock, MORE-
LAND, son of SNOWBALL, bred
by WOODWARD BROS., Ballarat.
We have still the breeding pen, headed by Snowball 11., a full brother to Moreland,
and the hens are still intact. A few sittings for sale at £3 3s. sitting.
MINORCAS—LAYING STRAIN.
WOODWARD BROS. LIGHT BRAHMA, WINNER OF THIRTY FIRST PRIZES.


Tick and Vermin Proof Perches, at Jas. Goss's, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St. Perth. Tel. 426
Jubilee Incubators Won’t Burn Your House Down.
here, they would, I feel sure, take on again, as they are really a
grand, bird. Light Brahmas are also in the van there, with 200
egg records, but their feathery legs are against their appearance un-
less in clean, sandy yards. The Langshan is also a useful all-round
fowl. As a winter egg-producer it is second to none, and in yearly tests
have splendid lecords. Indian Grams have receded rapidly in the
Australian States ; they are purely a fancier’s fowl, not a farmer’s or
cottager’s. Malay and British Game are the same. The old
English Game are a decent sort of fowl, hut their fighting propen-
sities are rather against them as birds for the farmer, unless he wishes
to take sly out of his neighbour.
Choosing stock is a matter of liking. We have so many new
breeds on hand lately that you would probab'y like the lot lunnino-
round your place. All the breeds I have mentioned are good ; as
for the breeds themselves, it all depends on who reared the chicks
and whether they were bred from healthy stock
Foi expoit purposes use a pure breed solely ; on no account
use crossbreeds. Use Faverolles, Buff, Black, Jubilee, or White
Orpingtons, or any white-legged variety, to suit the English taste.
W Idle breeding with pure breeds you always have the chance to
strike an exceptionally good strain of breeding, and turn out some
extra good specimens for stock and show purposes. The others can
go to the market for export. No more feed is required, nor atten-
tion, nor any other outlay for pure breeds, but the profits are trebled.
Yon could rear half the birds and have the same profits as running
the whole lot with cross-bred birds. Birds for the Australian
market could be worked with crossed breeds, as they, being bred out
of season, could in no case be used for show purposes. The best
breed of all for market or export purposes are White or Jubilee
Orpingtons. They are rapid growers, short legs, and plump breasts,
are hardy, and live to a great age. They are discarded on account
ot their peculiar colored feathers, but we do not eat the feathers.
The best crosses are Indian Game and Jubilee, Jubilee and Wyan-
dotte, Buff Orpingtons and Indian Game. The Asiatic breeds eat
more tender at two or three ymars old than any other breed ; in fact,
a Langshan will eat as tender at three years old as your common
fowl would at twelve months.
For the English taste, birds with white legs are required ; the
Americans like the yellow leg, but, so far, Australia has not
ventured an opinion one way or another. Personally, I think it is
a fad ; if they eat with their eyes closed it would be all the same
flavor.
Pure-bred fowls, such as Wyandotles, Orpingtons, Faverolles,
Langshans, Dorkings, Plymouth Rocks, can be grown from 1 lb. to
1 i lbs. a month, so why breed crossbreds ?
13


Lice Exterminating’ Nest Eggs, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack, Agent for Spratts. Spratts’ Dog Biscuits, best.
BREEDING AND REARING CHICKS AND DUCKLINGS.
Chickens do not require any feed for 48 hours after leaving the
shell, their first meal (and in fact for the following six weeks) should
be thewell-knowuY.C. Chicken Meal, with chopped up onions, lettuce,
and meat once a day. This will act properly on their digestive
organs, and cause no trouble, unless you have a dirty yard and let
food lay about or become tainted. V.C. meal is given semi-dry and
does not ferment or go sour under forty-eight hours ; a big boon
where time in mixing is a consideration.
The floor of the house should be bedded with chipped shavings
or dry horse manure, and cleaned out every third day. If you can-
not procure Y.G. meal, make up this mixture : 4 lbs. unsweetened
biscuits, crushed, J lb. ground maize, -j lb. oatmeal, J; lb, bone meal,
| lb. fine grit, thoroughly mix, and you will have a good substitute.
After six weeks, feed cracked oats, maize, and wheat alternately, not
forgetting the meat and green food. If chickens or ducklings are bred
early, very little green food or meat is required, as they can procure
plenty of worms and grass. It is the fourth, fifth, and sixth
clutches that require the meat, etc.; if hatched after September, one-
third meal, one-third meat, and one-third green food is the propor-
tion. You cannot beat meat to bring your chicks along rapidly, but
lettuce must be fed largely as well; failing this, rape, lucerne, or
clover. To keep chicks down on the leg, after six weeks old use
extra bone meal, or better still work in bone grit instead of ordinary
grit. House scraps of all descriptions are all splendid for chickens,
but always place food on clean bags and out of the sun’s rays. If you
have a large number of chicks, your best plan would be to dry feed,
using the following mixture : First three weeks, millet and a little
hemp seed with meat and lettuce ; fourth week, cracked wheat,
maize, oats, meat, lettuce or lucerne, chaff scalded. Gradually
wheat and maize can be given whole, and oats also as they grow
older. This method of feeding saves time, is cleaner, and is less
liable to contract diseases where a large number are to be reared
(even with hens), although the meal causes quicker growth. Sepa-
rate the cockerels and pullets of the Leghorns and Hamburgs when
ten weeks old, Minorcas at sixteen weeks, Andalusians at eighteen
weeks, Wyandottes, Orpingtons, Langshans, Faverolles as soon as
the cockerels commence to crow. Keep the floor of the house
thoroughly dry, and provide plenty of ventilation without draughts.
Keep all yards clean, and give plenty of pure water kept in shady
places. Watch for lice, do not over-crowd, and by thus attending to
these simple rules you should have no difficulty in rearing your birds.
14


ADVERTISEMENTS.
F. A. GUY.
MARTON HALL, SWERBY,
Near BRIDDLINGTON, Yorkshire, Eng.
& #
Breeder of
Gold, Silver, While Partridge,
and Silver - Pencilled Wyandoftes,
Puff and Plaek Orpingtons.
ALL GUARANTEED CLUB STANDARD TYPES.
+
-~s=£ 7 export to Australia annually,
PRICES MODERATE. ALL RISKS TAKEN.
For Prices and all Particulars, apply
A. F.
Western
FAR RANT, «
" YATALrA,”
CbARKMONT,
Australia,
Sole P 5 epresentative for jPLu.stra.lia,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
'The
Uafionai J?ire & UJarine Insurance
Co. of Tie tv Zealand,
Are prepared to accept
All Classes of
FIRE & MARINE INSURANCE
At Lowest Current Rates.
BRANCH OFFICE IN ALL THE STATES.
Victorian HBcancb: 52 QUEEN STREET
A. CAMPBELL, Manager. MELBOURNE, Vic.
The GARDEN and
'««■ FIEI.-D^
The Oldest Purely Agronomical Paper in Australia.
SpCClßltlC6 : —“The Amateur’s Garden,” “ Fruit
Growing,” “ Help for Farmers,” “Poultry.”
Trent all newsagents, 6d. a month.
SPECIMEN COPY.
If you write the Head Office, Grenfell Street, Adelaide,
and mention this Book one will be sent free.


Incubatop’s Tank and Fittings, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426,
Send for Tyzack’s Catalogue
Chickens running through wire netting or sleeping in corners of
small boxes are liable to contract deformities, such as roach back,
double joints, or wry tail. ’
Ducklings should be fed on meal for the first fortnight, but
always keep plenty of fine shell grit handy. It is surprising the
amount of grit they consume. Do not feed in dirty vessels, and
always keep ducklings separated from fowls or chickens as you’ can-
not keep the place clean when rearing the two together. Study the
article on “Staggers in Ducks.” After the first fortnight you may
substitute bran and pollard with house scraps, and also plenty of
green food chopped up fine. Ducklings require a vessel deep enough
to enable them to immerse their heads when drinking ; this is an
important item. Wind is also the ducklings’ enemy until they are
three months old, so see to your shelters. Never give ducklings or
fowls milk to drink but use it in their mash ; given in this manner it is
much cleaner. Have a dry house, with the floor strewn with chip
shavings or sawdust. They should be ready for market at ten weeks
old. On a country farm or where you have room it is advisable to
keep both ducks and fowls, as one half the year the fowls may pay
best and the other half the ducks should keep their end up.
Some fanciers feed their chickens about ten p.m. each evening
thinking to ensure a larger growth, but from practical experience I
have never found it to make any difference. Chickens raised in cold
climates generally made larger birds than those raised in warm dis-
tricts. They take longer to mature certainly, but their colors and
feathers are also better and last longer. Cool climates have a similar
effect on flowers ; they, take longer to grow, but the blooms are richer
m color and last. Feed young stock as often as they require it,
and if using a hen as a foster-mother, feed her with whole maize, or
else she will rush the chickens’ meal. Leave a little dry mixed food
overnight, so that the young stock can have a little before you are up
in the morning. These methods are simple, but if carried out properly,
the results will be good. There is no necessity to follow elaborate
plans of feeding. Do not feed raw cabbage to ducklings or grown
ducks ; it has a tendency to stick in the throat and choke the bird.
If you use cabbage, boil it first ; this is imperative.
SETTING HEN.
As the hen is generally the incubator used in the States, the
following are simple rules for your guidance. Fowls can all run
together, and then if separated and penned for breeding purposes,
each will breed true after they have been mated from eight to ten
15


Poultry and Canary Books, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and.
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack, Agent for Andrews’ Roup Cure.
days. In making the nest during the winter months set in a box,
using grass or seaweed, but set on the ground in ihe spring months
of the year as the weather becomes warmer. The ground requires
to be hollowed out somewhat in the shape of a saucer to guard the
eggs against rolling out. Always (unless very tame) set the hen at
night-time, in a quiet place, and, if possible, set two hens at once, as
in testing, especially early in the season, the fertility of the eggs may
•be weak, so you could place all the good ones under one hen, and
re-set the other. Feed the hen on wheat or maize ; soft food is not
needed. It is of no use to set a hen with both wings cut, as half of
the eggs will be chilled ; one wing cut is bad enough. When lifting
the hen off the eggs, pass your hand under the wings of the fowl,
otherwise yon may drag out an egg and spoil it. With good strong
fertile eggs, the hen will bring fair results in a number of ways, but
the above is a good method. If setting a number of fowls, a
room for their special benefit is best, as with feed and
water (not forgetting a dust bath) constantly before them, you
could leave all the nests open, and it would not matter if they changed
nests daily, only it is best to have a look during the morning, in case
two hens were on the one nest. Turkeys are useful for hatching, as
they will sit for months at a time when once they start; some of them
are always more or less broody and with a dose of port wine or claret
at night-time, and set in a nest that they cannot stand up in, keeping
it absolutely dark, seven out of ten can be made to sit at any time.
The dose of wine may have to be repeated for three nights, feeding
her also on whole maize. It she declines to sit on the dummy egg by
the fourth morning, it is useless to persevere with her. I prefer setting
turkeys on duck eggs, as the shells are stronger. Some turkeys are
very clumsy on hen eggs, and ducklings are more easily reared by a
brooder than chicks in a cold climate Always use insectibane or
Little’s phenyle powder on the hen before setting, and do not set
her in the fowl-house to breed lice.
INCUBATORS.
We will first of all glance at some of the advantages of In-
cubators. It is an old saying that “ there’s nothing new under the
sun,” and this applies to incubators. Hundreds of years ago the
hatching of poultry by artificial means was carried on in Egypt, but
it is only during the past 25 years that the incubator has reached
anything near perfection.
16


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Cyphers incubators.
BUILT FOR BUSINESS.
No Capsules
No Tanks.
No
Moisture.
The Best
Obtainable.
Self-
Regulating.
Hot Air.
Self-
Ventilation.
Satisfaction
Guaranteed.
Send for Circular for full particulars and prices. Kept in 60, 120, 220,
360 egg sizes.
CYPHERS BROODERS,
Two Sizes. No. A, 120 chicks ; No. B, 60 chicks.
Evekall’s Capsules, Bs. each.
Everall’s Tested Thermometers, 3s. each.
Mann’s Green Bone Cutters.
Enterprise Grit Mills.
J. &A. Boyes’ Chicken Feed. Send for sample.
Poultry Books (list on application).
)\gei\ls /or “ D\e Reliable poultry Journal,” Q.S %.
Subscription, 4s. 6d. year ; issued monthly ;80 to 120 pages. Illustrated.
J. & A. BOYES, 1 ' r °nj^oer S .
241-243 Elizabeth St, Melbourne.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
White Leghorns
MY
SPECIALTY.
-i
I have just landed a Trio of English Winners from
Mr. F. M. Webster's Famous Yards
a- £
B «
O 3
tr
to
White Leghorns.
VO
vo
LO
to
Pc :
OY
Cl.
in
cl.
"o,
a> «✓>
K
STOCK and SHOW BIRDS for Sale at Reasonable Prices.'
WD r* A rvn\7 Importer, Breeder, and. .
• Div.A-LM3 I . Exhibitor of WHITE . .
- LEGHORNS exclusively-
“ Dowlais,” Grant St, Ballarat East, Victoria.


Iron Quartz Crystalized Grit, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426
Tyzack, Agent Flood’s Roup Cure.
To get healthy chicks or ducklings from fresh fertile eggs,
three things are absolutely necessary, viz., heat, air, and moisture.
These elements must, of course, be applied in proper quantities, and
the incubator that can do this with the least trouble is the machine
that is required.
The first claim for an incubator is the simplicity of working,
and the small amount of personal supervision needed. After the
eggs are introduced, the attendant’s duties are so light and easy
that they may be carried out by any intelligent child, and if the
regular attendant be absent for a day or two, it can be looked after
by anyone who has seen the duties once performed.
Larger numbers of chickens can be obtained by incubators at
any season of the year, although I personally do not recommend
hatching during the very hot months, say January and February.
You will thus see it is quite possible to hatch your birds so as to
insure a supply of eggs all the year round.
Chickens reared artifically thrive better and are more independ-
ent than those reared in the natural way. They are less liable to
accident, as a hen in quest of food is very careless, and often leads
her brood into danger, and very frequently they overtax the weak
chicks, they not being able to keep pace with her; thus only the strong
ones survive. Another advantage, incubator chicks start life ab-
solutely free from vermin ; there are no hen lice in an incubator.
Ninety per cent, of sitting hens leave the nest with their brood
infested with vermin, and the little chicks are barely dry before they
are in a like condition. This alone retards the growth of the young
birds to an enormous extent.
To poultry-keepers who keep only the non-sitting breeds, the
incubator is indispensable. Then again, thin shelled eggs can be
used in an incubator without fear of being broken, as they are more
easily pierced by the chicks when hatching.
And lastly, the feeding of a large brood by hand, say 50 to 100,
can be done more economically, and with far less labor than the
feeding of half the number with hens. The special food “ tit-bits ”
that we supply to a brood of chicks is usually gobbled up by the hen
herself, or we have to watch every time we feed to prevent the older
fowls from intrading.
Incubators, without doubt, have come to stay, and are now
supplanting the hen everywhere, and if profitable poultry farming is
to be carried on, the incubator is indispensable.
Having mentioned some of the advantages of artificial incuba-
bation, we will glance at the old natural method.
17


Hyde’s Special Canary Mixture of Seeds, Fruits, Eggs,
Etc., at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray
St, Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzaek, Agent Flood’s Roup Cure.
The Disadvantages op the Hens.
Broody hens often give trouble by leaving their eggs for hours
at a time, thus endangering the health of the uuhatohed chick.
Hot only does the long exposure of the eggs weaken the future
chickens, but the time of hatching is prolonged. a hen enters
her nest she often accidently rolls one or more of the eggs in a corner,
and there it lies until perhaps quite cold, and if not noticed by the
attendant and replaced that egg is lost. Often the shells of eggs
are very thin, and are consequently broken by the hen, and you°all
know what a deplorable mess this makes of the nest ; so much so
that it is made so uncomfortable for the hen that she finally deserts
it and the eggs are lost. Then again, when a hen wants to sit she
often chooses a place where she has been accustomed to lay, and will
not sit anywhere else ; With the incubator these evils do not exist.
All that is required is to keep the lamp trimmed and supplied with
kerosene, the process then goes on constantly, at a regular heat, and
the whole time needed for attention should not exceed ten minutes
daily. This is why the chicks hatch out in an incubator quicker
than under a hen. If her family appear on the 20th day she has
done well, but in a good incubator chicks usually are all out on the
19th day, sometimes sooner. I have had strong healthy ducklimrs
hatched on the 2ord day. " 8
A Few Special Points on Incubatop.s.
Set the machine in a place free from draughts and vibration,
and away from any wall that has the sun playing on it. An asphalt
or cement floor is best, but do not have a damp earth floor, as that
may foster mouldy germs. Have all eggs as nearly equal in size as
possible. It is even better to keep the different colors separate.
Study your machine and the surroundings ; it will work and
regulate but has no brains.
Moisture is a problem which depends on the season, but gener-
ally more moisture is required in late spring than in winter. If you
are working your incubator at 1500 feet above sea level or over,
you are in a drier atmosphere, notwithstanding that your rainfall is
greater than other districts. If working over 2000 feet level it is
best to put the moisture in at the start in a hydro machine, taking
it away about five or six days before hatching. This is the same
principle as a hen sitting in spring ; you set her on moist ground
and she draws it all away in about 12 day’s time. For some
districts hydro machines need no water.
18


ADVERTISEMENTS.
A>jd
(St
s Austral Incubators,
Tiik Austral Hydro.
Poultry
Appliance.
eA9 (2A5) (2A9 (2A£) « ..
GYc) GYc) GYc) GYc)
Tub Ai stuai, Hot Aib.
Proprietor desires to draw the attention of Poultry Breeders, and the
Public generally, to the above well-known machines, which have now
been before the Australian public for nine years, and, as a proof of their
superiority, the sales are more than doubling each year, and they now hold the
position of the leading machines, and are acknowledged as such by the Govern-
ment Experts of Victoria and Tasmania, as well as some of the leading citizens
of the States.
The Austral Hydro, built on the sane lines as Hearson’a (English!
machine, the “ Champion,” which holds the highest awards and testimonials from
the leading authorities.
The tanka in the Hydro are made entirely from the best hard-rolled
copper, and muntz metal, which never corrode or wear out, and the regulation is
perfectly and automatically controlled by a capsule, which is absolutely correct,
thus doing away with the old method of having to watch the machine.
The Austral Hot Air is made entirely on the same principle as the
Cypher (American) machine, containing the aluminum and steel thermostatporus
diaphragms and heater, and are superior to the imported article and far cheaper,
and a number of them are in use, and purchasers are well satisfied with them.
The Austral Circular Incubator is a very useful machine, and also self-
regulating ; a good hatcher, takes up little space, and is also a cheap machine.
The various Brooders constructed are all well tested machines, and
chickens are easily reared in them, which is a very important point to rearers of
incubated chickens-
Attention is also drawn to the superior make of Bone Cutter imported
by the proprietor, who has the sole agency. They are manufactured by
Humphrey and Sons, U.S, A., one of which will do twice the work in a given time
cf any other make ; also to the Clover Cutter, manufactured by the same maker.
He is also agent for Hearson’s Champion Incubator, Reliable Poultry
Journal, &c
The public, before purchasing elsewhere, are cordially invited to inspect
the large stock of Poultry Requisites. Any information will be willingly given.
Catalogues giving fuller information, also TERMS OF HIRE, &c,, may be
obtained from
p. fl. ffisCLiEliliAN, Ppoppietop,
11 BARTON ST., HAWTHORN, VICTORIA.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Careen Rone.
EGGS IN ABUNDANCE.
How to Make Hens Doubly Profitable.
RAW MARKET BONES, MEAT and GRISTLE Fed to Poultry
*SM
I \ - ■
1 1 W\
-4
L *5
*. r
■X ; i' i
r
It is an Eyg' Producer.
Will Double the Number of
Eggs when you want them
most.
Stop Egg Eating.
Stop Feather Picking.
Prevent Roup.
Make Eggs more fertile.
Hatch more vigorous chicks.
Make chicks grow faster,
stronger, and larger.
Mature broilers earlier.
Make pullets lay sooner.
Reduce the grain bill.
The reason why raw market bones give the results stated above is because
it furnishes the raw animal food in its natural state, takes the place of bugs and
worms, that no medicines, beef scraps, or prepared food can do. It stands at
the head of egg producing feeds. Try it, and you will thank us for recom-
mending it.
G 705., Is.; 14 Ihs., Is, Od. ’iPhone. t?7O.
HISTORY Extends over Times Past. FACTS Pertain to the Time Present.
Our special imported strain of BLACK ORPINGTONS has been reared on
GREEN BONE, and their record speaks for them.
They are easy to rear. They are the premiers for laying. They are the most
successful Show Birds to date, and have secured a prize wherever shown —Vide
Ballarat papers.
Eggs for Setting supplied on the shortest notice. All Eggs guaranteed fertile.
Strong, well grown Cockerels or Pullets For Sale at Reasonable Prices
W. J. CARTHEW, Skipton St.
TRAMS PASS THE LOOK.


Hyde’s Parrot Foods for Cockatoos, Parrots, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Caere Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth.
Tel. 426.
Tyzaek, Agent Contey’s Roup Cure.
Hot-air machines, that are non-moisture machines, in several
districts often require the floor sprinkling, or a wet towel hung up
in the room.
Try your machine different ways, with moisture, without, and
according to the ordinary instructions sent with machine—the latter
first.
If your chicks are not all out by the twenty-first day your nest
was too low. Do not hatch ducklings and chickens together ; it is
not satisfactory, but there are exceptions.
Every person should possess one incubator, as oftentimes a
bird will leave the eggs and then, where are you ? I would advise
sceptical people to buy a small incubator and use “loving broodies ”
for the first twelve or fourteen days ; the eggs can then be placed in
the machine and no difficulty will be experienced in hatching, as the
critical period is past. \on can then set your hen again to work
a doubler, and, with good feed, using maize, and dusting the
nests a trebler. Your machine may have too much air or not
enough. Be regular in turning the eggs and other work in con-
nection with the'machine, Duck eggs, as a rale, do not require any
moisture at all. Try both ways. If yom chicks begin to hatch on
the eighteenth day you had too much heat. Study your air-cell
indicator, and try a couple of eggs in the water-test five days before
hatching, using the water at blood heat. Close the machine up on
the eighteenth dav, and do not open it till the hatch is ah off.
Don't'worry about the chicks, they can live seventy-two hours with-
out food. As the hatch progresses more heat is generated in the
machine, so allow for this.
If you set twenty hens yon will be lucky to hatch 120 chicks—
-50 per cent. An incubator worked with proper eggs will always
beat this.
I have found very little difference between the hydro and the
hot-air machine in Australia.
In the majority of failures you can blame the eggs or yourself,
not the incubator. An incubator should not be entrusted to a
child or boy, as they think more of playing tops than working
an incubator in a proper manner. Study the directions sent with
the machine. To prevent having the eggs too stale, place them in
the machine each morning they are laid, keeping the moisture going
all the time ; this has given good results. Keep brown eggs
altogether in one machine if possible ; they need more moisture than
white eggs as their shells are thicker.
19


Hyde’s Prepared Shell and Tonic Grit, for Canaries, ,
Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cagre Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426
Woodward’s Dinners Raised on V.C. Meal.
I found the best machines the Hearson’s Model, Austral,
Simplex, all on this system ; the Prairie State and Cyphers are the
best of the hot-air machines that I have worked, but there are
others. Different machines have their own set rules for working,
which are forwarded when buying the machine, but these few points,
are the result of my own experience.
A FEW HINTS ON THE MANAGEMENT OF
INCUBATOR CHICKENS.
If two or three of the young chicks are inclined to be weak,
keep them and feed for a day or two in the dryingibox of the incu-
bator. You will want an artificial mother. The most important
requirements of young chickens reared artificially are warmth,
cleanliness, fresh air, and judicious feeding. For the first two or
three days after they are transferred to the mother, a temperature of
99 degrees Fah. should be maintained day and night. After the-
fourth day, the temperature may be lowered gradually till 75 degrees,
is reached. Advantage must be taken of the sunshine ; discretion
should be used when the heat should be increased or diminished.
The behaviour of the chickens will be the best guide to go by. If
they remain in the sleeping room a long time during the day, a little
more heat is required ; but when they only seek their mother after-
ten or fifteen minutes of long exercise, it’s a sign they are all right.
Too much heat is injurious, hut be careful to have the required heat
at night, or they will crowd together and the weaker ones will suffer.
Thirty chickens is enough to have in one brooder. Keep the brooder
clean, wash it out once a week with chlorinated soda and hot water.
Keep the bottom with half to one inch of sand or ashes, as the-
chickens are liable to go wrong in the feet with bare boards. About
feeding : give oatmeal and egg boiled hard, mixed in a crumbly
mass, 24 hours after they are born. Sprinlde it in front of them
and they will soon start to eat. On the second day give an oc-
casional drink of milk which has been diluted with hot water. You
will have to teach them to drink, put their bills in one by one and
they will soon learn. When they are three or four days old, feed
out in the open run. Stop feeding with eggs, give oatmeal and
warm water or milk, start house scraps, a little salt and green feed,,
and not forgetting grit. Peed every two hours, see that they eat it
up clean, and don’t leave stale food about Suspend cabbage cr
lettuce and bit of liver for them to jump at, as it gives them exercise.
Give a little sulphur, it assists feathering, and a little charcoal. If
you find them not feeding well, stop their feed for a few hours, and,
as a rule, they will be ready for it.
20


/ Canary Cages, Parrot Cages. Cockatoo Cages,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.
Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
POINTS FOR RAISING CHICKS.
If your chicks are squeaking or crying out, more heat is required,
or else they have lice.
When you see them busy and working amongst the chaff, you
can rest assured all is well.
Clean the brooder daily ; don’t say “ It looks all right, I will
chance it to-day.”
Your chicks may he healthy and yet go in the legs. Use a
teaspoonful of tincture of iron in the water ; it is a sign of rapid
growth.
Always scatter a lutle of the dry food mixture overnight so as
they can work first thing in the morning.
If the chicks crowd together they need more heat. Early
morning is the most critical period. Too much bottom heat will
cause leg weakness.
It is best to use a little lime in the water always, but very
little is required.
Take an empty jam tin, and make a small hole with a nail a
quarter of an inch from the top, fill it with water, clap a saucer on
the top and turn it upside down. This will keep the chicks from
trampling in the water. It is best to tie the tin down as they grow
older.
Study the article on “ Breeding and Bearing Chicks.”
A workingman should never have more than one incubator
with two brooders, unless he has a good wife to attend to details.
Keep a little box of ground grit and charcoal in the brooder.
In most parts of Australia, ducklings only require the heat of a
lamp in the brooder for a fortnight.
In the lower parts of Tasmania and New Zealand, another
week would be beneficial ; use your common sense in this matter.
Ducklings can keep one another warm belter than chicks.
In the warmer climates, ducklings require no artificial heat,
just the brooder with a strip of flannel hanging round is all that is
necessary even in the coldest weather.
A simple brooder for a dozen chicks for the warmer climates is
made as follows : Procure a kerosene case, lay it on its side, have a
false top inserted inside with the back of it coming half-way to the
bottom ; this forms a sloping roof. Strips of flannel should be
hanging down connected to the false top, a stone bottle filled with
hot water, wrapped up in flannel, should be inserted every night and
21


Hyde’s Parrot Food in Tins, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth Tel. 426
Winners
at Brighton were Reared on Tyzack’s
Victorian Chicken Meal.
morning. This is to be kept under cover out of the way of the wind.
For a greater number of chicks, the brooders can be purchased, of
which there are a number of reliable makes.
Keep sawdust in the bottom of the brooder for ducklings.
A man can look after three hundred ducklings better than one
hundred chicks, but give them good comfortable quarters for the
night-time. Wind is also their enemy.
Follow the directions given under the article “ Staggers in
Ducks.”
Do not keep chickens or ducklings under boxes on bare ground
even with hens, as the sides will naturally become damp, and your
chickens and ducklings with the heat of their bodies will draw up the
dampness and trouble will ensue.
If your ducklings or ducks are troubled with cold or weakness
send for a packet of “ Owosso,” which is the only duck medicine in
the world. One dose will generally effect a cure in staggers if given
at once ; it should always be kept on hand.
How to Test Eggs for Fertility without Candle or Lamp
on the Third Day of Incubators.
This is the proper way to test eggs. You will require a cigar box
or a cardboard boot box for the purpose. Have a bit of a mirror to
fit in the bottom of the box ; next cut a hole in the top of the box
large enough to place an egg in endways without falling through,
also make a hole in the end of the box about 1 inch by 2 inches ;
you place the egg in the hole on the top of the box on a sunny day,
choosing your dinner-time as the sun is fairly well over head by then.
Place one eye at the hole in the end of box and look downwards at
the mirror. On the third day the whole of the eye and the veins
formed can be seen in the egg. This forms quite an interesting
object-lesson if the egg is tested each day in your “• camera obscura, ”
as the progress of the chick can be seen. If the sun is not available,
through cloudy weather, you will then have to use a lamp-light in a
dark room, or at night. It is much easier for the beginner to pick
eggs to make certain of fertility under this method. Eggs can also
be tested for the table ; in fact, in any household this machine
should be kept on hand, as it is impossible to make a mistake in
testing, and every egg, even for the fowl’s sake that is sitting, should
be tested. For eggs in incubators it is invaluable, as the unfertile
eggs can be tossed out and used without any compunction for the
table, as three day’s incubation will not hurt any egg that is unfertile.
22


ade By The Man Who Knows!
Miller runs the largest Poultry Farm in the United States. For
20 years he experimented with Incubators of various makes, with
varying success, but never with entire satisfaction, and so he built
an incubator on his own plan, and they acted so well for him that he
decided to give other poultry-keepers the benefit of his experiments
by placing on the market . . .
MILLER’S IDEAL ,ncuba ™b S R oo DER s.
These machines are now in the hands of thousands of poultry-raisers the
world over, and are giving better satisfaction, producing better results, costing
less money and less trouble to operate than any other incubator or brooder built.
Because:
1. They are BUILT ON A BETTER PLAN. 2. They are MORE CARE-
FULLY BUILT, and MORE RIGIDLY INSPECTED, a. They are BUILT
HY A MAN WHO KNOWS from 20 years’ experience on the Largest Poultry
Farm in the World, exactly what is required to produce vigorous healthy chicks
at least expense.
FIRE=
PROOF
IDEALS >
filler’s Ideal
|e Australasian Representative ; W.
Incubators
and Brooders
HARRIS, Alhambra, Haymarket, N.S.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
6old and Silver (Xlrandoms.
# Runner Ducks. %
*5
J^='_
3^
V/0
have some of the Best stock in Victoria in these
breeds.
-:o:
My stock has won consistently during the last eight
years at the leading shows in Victoria,
AH my birds are farm-reared, healthy and vigorous, and will give
satisfaction. A trial solicited.
o
Birds and in Season, Brices Moderate.
Write to . . .
J* BOYLE, Corindhap, Victoria,


Hyde’s Plain Canary Seed, Rape
at Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cage Workei
Perth. Tel. 426.
Millet, Hemp,
', 253 Murray St.,
Thermometers Tested (America). Tyzaek’s.
HOW TO TEST EGGS FOR FRESHNESS
Every householder likes to be sure of the eggs they use,
especially if bought from the grocers or someone you are not too
sure of.
Proceed in the following manner :—Have a pail of water and
place the egg in it ; if they sit fairly on the side they are fresh ; if
they tilt a little to one end they are beginning to go, and as they
grow older the more they will tilt until they reach the floating
period, when they become bad and are of no use even for cooking.
This is very simple, but effective, saving many a pang, as nothing
puts people off eggs more than serving up bad ones at the breakfast
table.
HOW TO PICK YOUR BEST LAYERS AT A GLANCE.
This system is not infallible in picking out your best layer, but
it is in the casting out your worst layers.
The following are the general points to be observed in picking
your layer, in which, after a little experience, you will make few
mistakes
The first portion of the bird to be examined is the head. This
is really the keynote to the situation. You require a bird with
rather a fine narrow head, bold, prominent eye, free from any
wrinkles or coarseness. The eye sunken, or showing heavy eyebrows,
is a sure indication of a bad layer. ■ The comb should be fine and
smooth in texture, not heavy, coarse, or rough. The body is not of
much consideration as regards looks, but it should be handled for
any undue fatness or internal complaint, such as dropping of the
egg bag. The bird looks, as a rule, like a worker ; is one of the
first off the roosts and one of the last to bed. I like the body with
a bit of length similar to what we have in Leghorns. The Orpington
is rather short in body, but, nevertheless, a good layer, so I do not
take any serious notice of its shortness. Long-legged birds are
poor layers, and birds with very large overhanging combs are too
highly strung to turn out good layers. Such are the principle points
to be observed in picking layers.
The bird with a long, narrow, snaky head and curled beak is
also a poor layer, but with a little practice you will be able to pick
out your drones from the workers without trap-nests, and thereby
save valuable time.
23


Garden Arches and all Floral Designs, at Jas Goss’s,
Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel 426
Tyzack’s Address, 405 Bourke St. West., Melbourne,
MOST SUITABLE LOCALITIES FOR ECONOMICAL
POULTRY FARMING.
The locality, position, and nature of surrounding soils hare to
be taken into consideration when selecting a site for poultry farming.
1 have travelled all over the main portions of the southern parts of
Australia, including New South Wales, and the most suitable places
will be found in the list below.
Victoria.— Geelong and the surrounding districts. Soil,
chiefly sandy subsoil. This district has easy access to markets.
Nearly all of the Western district is suitable ; Colao and
Camperdown through to Warrnambool, the soil being good loam.
All along the eastern shores of Hobson’s Bay—St. Kilda to
Frankston—is good. These localities are all easy of access to
markets. All Mallee country districts suit, providing you lay in a
good stock of lucerne chaff for summer green feed, but the markets
are farther off, though feed is much cheaper. All districts above
1000 feet sea level should be discarded, as the sudden changes ex-
perienced in summer are against a successful farmer. Colder
districts are more suitable for the breeding of show birds for feather,
as they require more substance in their feathers to withstand the
climate, and the colors are therefore stronger and purer. Flowers
act exactly hi the same way.
The eastern coastal districts of New South Wales are also
suitable, the nearer to the capital the better, but, of course, you
would have to be guided by the price of the land. Around Botany
Bay and all along that direction there is some suitable land.
South Australia has a number of fairly good districts, such as
Brighton, Victor Harbor, Payneham, and other places handy to the
capital, and possessing land of a sandy subsoil.
Western Australia has a fair range of likely places for poultry.
The ground is a bit too sandy in coastal districts, but here the yards
should be large, and not overstocked. The natural shade and
shelter should be left, then good results could be obtained. In fact,
I regard Western Australia as the pick of the States at the present
time. Eggs there are always at a good price, land is reasonable,
and this, coupled with the addition of the wonderful climate, makes
it very simple to run fowls. The natural shelter is all that is
needed. Even in the winter houses are not required for farming.
The expense of these, coupled with the saving of time in cleaning, is
a big item ; still I don’t recommend a rush there, as the population
24


Aviaries, Breeding- Cagres, and all Canary Breeding:
Requisites, at Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cagre Worker, 253
Murray St.. Perth, Tel- 426.
Egg’ Testers, Is., Tyzack’s
is limited, and there are a number of farms started lately, which will
help to bring the price down.
Tasmania and New Zealand possess good localities also, but
soil, access to market, and natural shelter from wind are the three
essential points to be studied. Fowls can stand rain and cold, but
wind is their natural enemy.
HOW TO MAKE MARKET POULTRY PAY IN
AUSTRALIA.
Under the general rules set down by all writers of our papers
and books, even if you procured the feed for nothing it is hardly
possible to make poultry pay for market purposes. You breed in
the ordinary months, September, October, November, and December,
you may possibly breed a few clutches in July or August, after
feeding for from five to seven months the cockerels are picked out
and sent to market, and what do they realise after paying expenses
and commission ? About two to three shillings per pair. If you take
your time into consideration, loss by deaths, interest on capital and
price of feed, you are out of pocket in every instance. Some people
never tell you what they spend on fowls, only the returns, and they
look upon what they receive as all profit. Now, if you want to
breed birds to pay yon a profit in Australia, reverse this order of
things and breed out of s°ason. Hatch your birds in March and
April, and sell the cockerels in November and December, when
they will average you five to six shillings per pair. You will have
few deaths and no trouble to rear your chicks, as they are fully
feathered before the winter comes, and it is not in the winter that
we lose our chicks but in the summer—contrary to popular opinion.
Your pullets will lay well into the depths of winter before moulting,
and you will show a decided profit all round, instead of an absolute
loss as under present conditions. Any of my readers can look up
and ascertain for themselves the relative prices of cockerels for each
month of the year. As you will not procure size by breeding birds
in these months, it will be necessary to breed birds in June or July
to have for breeding pens solely, breeding all your market poultry
from these birds, as they will lay in the months required for your
purpose. Of course, if you require to breed for export, you will breed
under the present conditions, but my article is how to make poultry
pay in Australia Market poultry always fetches the highest price
in November and December in Western Australia, South Australia,
25


Raw Seed, for Canaries out of condition.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.
Tel. 426.
at Jas.
Perth.
Owosso Duck Tonic, is., Tyzack’s
and Victoria. Readers in other States will gauge their seasons from
Victoria. This will suit farmers and poultry farmers, as they can be
breeding poultry to pay for nine months of the year, missing the
very hot months and taking a spell. It would not be suitable for
a small yard, as you require to rear a large number of birds to make
anything worth while out of market poultry.
Broody hens are generally plentiful for your requirements, or
are easy to procure, only you require to set them in as cool a place
as possible, and dust the nest with Little’s Insect Powder before
setting.
If running incubators, which is the best way if you are breeding
on a large scale, use a little more moisture than usual. If rearing
ordinary fowls in the proper breeding season, it pays better to pack
the cockerels off to market or kill them as soon as you can separate
the sexes, and leave more growing room for the pullets. If you keep
them you will be out of pocket in every instance when they are sold,
and you have had all your time and labor wasted, besides the risk
of disease through overcrowding.
HOW TO START A FARM FOR EGG PRODUCTION,
I consider that the breed of birds to start farming for egg pro-
dilation solely is Indian Runner Ducks. This may read upside
down, but for capital required, management, minimum of labor and
losses, and quick returns, the right strain of runners will suit you
best. Locality : Any ordinary scrubby land will do, but I would
pick a locality that had a running stream all the year round. Such
places are to be had in every Australian State. With ordinary
scrubby timber, or plenty of shade, the ducks will not take much
looking after, and Runners will show a fair margin of profit over feed,
even in their fourth year. The work entailed in breeding is not so
heavy as that of breeding fowls.
The yards enclosed with four-feet netting will be found suitable,
and a lean-to commencing from the ground to three feet high, will
give them all the night shelter they require ; in fact, Runners after
they are five months old need no night shelter, even in winter, provid-
ing you have some sort of wind-break on rising ground. With care
in rearing the ducklings (following the instructions given under
that heading and the article on “ Staggers in Ducks ”) you will
have little difficulty in running a successful farm. I consider that
one thousand ducks would be no more difficult to manage than five
26


ADVERTISEMENTS.
You can £reed the BEST CHICKS ij you Start €arly.
If you want BEST BIRDS hatch them in a
Champion Prolific Incubator.
ft
V. fc
i
I*3s=-.,
i-«£i
e&i-
- '
»*, •
White* Le^iioms,
I prove my word when I say the “ CHAMPION PROLIFIC ” is the Best. Please Note—what
no Yankee machine will do —viz., Hatch in January, February, and March—
February—Mr. Harris, Bon Ton tarm , Haddington .. .. 2<>o per cent.
January—Mrs. Wilson, Popanying Pool .. .. .. .. V 8 ~
March—Mr. Prescott, Churchill Avenue Vo ",
Mr. Moran, Gin Gin, got 100 per cent.
Mr Shaw. Chidlows, got 100 per cent, in Hens and Geese.
Mr. Thoinpson, Midland, hatched 85 per cent. Hens Ducks, and Turkeys.
And others, too numerous to mention, all swear by “ CHAMPION PROLIFIC.”
These machines are the only ones that have my Self-rolling Drawer, Self-safety Vaporiser
and Patent Circulating Heater.
TRY ONE, and you will ORDER LARGELY next season.
MACHINES (American Styles) from £2 10s. upwards.
Champion Prolific from £5 ss. to £35.
Bone, Shell Grits, Poultry Laying Powder, Roup Cure, Leg Weakness
Cure, Spices, Sulphate Iron, Douglas Mixture (mixed or ii powder for mixing'.
BIRDS—aII breeds—and EGGS.
W. J. FIST, Vitadatio Specialist Depot,
WELLINGTON STREET (Opposite Station), PERTH.
Catalogues Free
REMEMBER THIS ! If you have CORNS,
CHAMPION CORN CURE wi,leradicate I f™ certain.
FIST, Opposite Station, Perth.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Bred on Good Soil, from the Best Stock,
White and Silver Wyandottes,
White and Brown Leghorns, Andalusians.
I h
hand pood specimens of the alcove.
■*S. - *
*
V
7/ m
e. #
'
¥1
8
s
Y
Y
White Wyandottes.
My birds are winners at all the principal shows,
and bred for business.
If yon feel languid or depressed in spirits, try a
trip to Hampton and view our birds.
BGGS IN SBASON.
viz?
Ipy Correspondence
U and Inspection
' Cordially
\() Invited.
f
1.
'e)


Hyde’s Hartz Mountain Bread and Egg Food for Canaries,
at Jas, Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray
St. Perth. Tel. 426.
Owosso Poultry Spice, Is,, Tyzaek’s.
hundred fowls, as they only have three diseases—roup, staggers,
and the two-legged foxes —but they take a bit of catching in the day-
time, and at night, well an alarm clock would not have a chance.
You would of course have to rely on turkeys, incubators, or fowls for
hatching, and very likely you could work all three, as one could help
the other. Give Runners plenty of green feed (lucerne chaff is excel-
lent), plenty of grit, and you will have little bother with them. I
had six Runners average 280 eggs each the first year. The second
year I sent them to the Now South Wales Competition, and
after doing a double moult (Runners moult every time you shift
them from one latitude to another) they had an average of one hun-
dred and fifty eggs apiece, and that during a dry season—sufficient
proof that with the right strain Runners are on top. A new breed
of duck made a name for itself in the !New South Wales Competi-
tion of 1904 and 1905, but so far it is an isolated case. As they
were bred not many miles from the competition grounds they had a
big advantage over competitors from the other States. The name
of the breed in Australia is Buff Orpington Ducks ; in England they
are called Khaki Campbells. They are a medium sized duck, and
may suit some places better than Runners, but I have had them on
my place for some time, and am sure they consume twice the food of
a Runner. This would have to be taken into consideration. The
ducks would certainly market better than Runners, as they are as
big as ordinary Pekins.
If you do not care to meddle with ducks, your best breed of
fowl would be, for warm climates, Leghorns, Minorcas, Silver
Wyandottes, or Orpingtons ; colder climates, Wyandottes, Orping-
tons, Langshans, and Rocks. If stocking Leghorns solely, yon
would need incubators, or failing this, Leghorns and some utility
breed combined. Personally I do not envy any person trying to
run an egg farm with fowls solely for egg production, as the work
is heavy and the profits are not so large as the laying competitions
try to make us believe. However, lam not going into this, but I
tell you candidly, there is only oneway to run a successful egg farm with
fowl’s, and that is to run a show and laying strain combined. Yon
would have to work two separate strains in Leghorns, but you
could work the one strain in cockerel breeding for show purposes in
Rocks, Brown Leghorns, Silver, Gold, Partridge, and Silver-pencilled
Wyandottes, and Buff Orpingtons. With this plan, the price you
would realise for your show and stock specimens would help to show
the profit, but it would take from three to six years to get to the
front rank in any breed. I fancy I hear someone say, that “ Mrs.
27


Cage Fronts to fit Kerosene Cases, at Jas. Goss's, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzaek’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
Jones makes a living out of egg production alone,” but find out if she
advertises “eggs for setting and stock birds for sale.” There is a
vast difference between making a living and earning an existence.
Do not work out the probable profits of one thousand fowls from six
birds you have had running in your back yard or your calculations
may be shattered when put into operation. If you intend to try for
egg production solely, these are the main points to take into con-
sideration, viz., access to markets, plenty of ground, intense
culture (no half-and-half measures), good stock to start with, and
practise twelve months before yon launch out.
A person starting a farm for egg production in fowls needs a
tidy bit of capital for buying ground, erecting houses and yards, pro-
curing stock, incubators, &c. If you intend breeding Leghorns, the
bulk of your cockerels could be killed as soon as you could dis-
tinguish the sexes ; Leghorn cockerels would not pay you to rear at
any time of the year, as their price is only from 2s. to 2s. 6d. a
pair for market purposes, and that would not pay for tucker, leave
alone attention, &o. You also require enough capital to tide you
over the first eighteen months. By killing the cockerels, you would
save their room, feeding bill, to say nothing of your yard room, over-
crowding, etc. If yon had the yards 100 x 100 for thirty birds, it
would be sufficient, or you could cut this in half and use fifteen birds
in each pen. Even with this space, to run one thousand fowls re-
quires plenty of ground, besides all your other chicken yards, to rear
000 to 600 pullets each year to replenish your pens.
_ system of watering with pipes or drains would have to be
carried out, otherwise, the labor involved carrying water would be a
great hindrance. If you did not have the necessary capital to start
right away, your other plan would be, comm-nce with a few, work it in
connection with your other employment, until such time as you could
launch out altogether. I don't think any man could look after one
thousand fowls in pens, feed, water, clean houses, collect, grade, and
pack eggs, deliver to market, set, hatch, and rear one thousand
chickens to replace the others, unless he had assistance. Even then,
1 can see fourteen hours a day, working seven days a week, which
would not be as pleasant as some writers tell us.
Five hundred laying birds with your hatching would be nearer
the mark, and it would not overtax your strength. You would
have to try and average Id. an egg all the year round ; to accomplish
this, the Government cool stores would have to be patronised by you,
and this is another reason why you need to be as close to the metro-
polis as possible.
28


Show Cages for Canaries and all Cage Birds, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker. 253 Murray St. Perth.
Tel. 426.
Tyzack’s Grainoline.
The fanny part about poultry in my opinion is, that so many
papers, books and journals are devoted to the public showing how to
make a fortune out of fowls. It’s about time someone published a
book on “ How to start a butcher’s shop for profit,” or some other
industry. There is a chance for some writer to explore fields and
pastures new. Poultry is so well thrashed out in papers and jour-
nals now-a-days, that you have to be above the average to publish
any new articles to interest your readers, and yet not lay yourself
open to adverse criticism. I don’t think that we should be always
harping on the profits, it is getting a bit monotonous, always hearing
the same cry. It’s a wonder to me that all the public in the States
are not running poultry farms, but it’s only a certain portion of the
public that will take to eggs and feathers, as they all have their whims,
likes and dislikes, and it would not do for all of us to be alike.
Personally, I think the two combined—breeding for egg pro-
duction, and following my plan of breeding for market purposes in
Australia, would give you the best results. You could breed for egg
production in June, July, August, and September, finish your hatch-
ing, have a spell, and start again in February for the other. It
would not be so monotonous, as you would have a spell between the
breeding seasons, and it would bring in the quickest returns. You
would also have less losses, and a certain amount of freedom through-
out the year.
Breeding out of season is rather against the natural laws of
poultry, according to most writers, still, if the profits are there, re-
versing the order of breeding should not cause you any scruples. I
have written this article to show the best profits in my opinion for
eggs and market purposes ; I am sure it can’t be beaten at the pre-
sent time. I possess the secret of another system to run a poultry
farm for egg production, but it’s too valuable to put into print, as
three men possessing the secret in one State, would simply crush the
ordinary egg farming out of existence. Although I don’t profess to
be a utility man, still I keep my eyes open, and am always experi-
menting or making up pens for others, so that I could watch the
results. I have wandered here and there in this article, but at times
even an author has to let off some surplus steam, as I don’t possess
a safety valve. You will see by this that profits can he made out of
poultry worked on systematic lines, but it’s not wise to have .all your
eggs in the one basket, hence my reason for working the two com-
bined.
Mark Twain says “If any person is anxious to start a poultry
farm, he will assist them.” He states, the best way for you is to visit
the farm in the day-time, find out from the fanciers which are the
29


Goss’s Patent Water Fountains for Chickens, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel. 426.
Jamieson’s Winners Reared on Tyzaek’s Meal.
best birds, this is easy, as they are always anxious to show you their
best; then choose a nice, bright, moonlight night, and he will help
you to start from any yard but his own.
HOW TO SAVE TWO MONTHS’ FEED BILL IN
REARING CHICKENS.
Fully one-half of the chickens reared in Victoria, and I expect
all over Australia, are reared in the months of December and January.
By experiment I have found out that, ordinary conditions prevailing,
the birds hatched on the dates mentioned above, have shown no
progress compared to the earlier birds ; they were slow in growth,
ever ready to catch any epidemic prevailing, and were a hindrance
to the other young stock ; besides this, the owner, by this time, is
beginning to get tired of rearing chickens, and does not attend to
their wants or houses as he did with his first batches. As
they do not show the growth of the earlier birds, he begins to neglect
them in every way, and suddenly wakes up to the fact that late
chickens do not give any good results. Once more he swears never
to breed late chicks, only to forget all about it the following season.
If you will breed late chickens, leave it till March (I wish to say
that I am now referring to the Victorian sea coast conditions, and
my readers will have to gauge their locality from it). Chicks hatched
in March come on and thrive wonderfully compared with those hatched
in the months mentioned above. They will not stop in their growth,
will not breed lice like the others, will grow as large in five months
as the others would in seven, and will lay within a week or a fort-
night of the others, and will also lay deep into the autumn months
when eggs v are generally a good price. This 1 have found by
actual experiments, and it is sufficient proof that a two-months’ feed
bill can be saved, to say nothing of less mortality amongst your
chicks. The deaths amongst chicks hatched in December and Janu-
ary amount to fully one-third or even half. The reasons for the
progress of the February, March, and April chicks are that the
autumn rains start about that period and clean, freshen, and purify
the ground, giving all the necessaries that are needed for the welfare
of the chicks and cooler weather.
The chicks should not be put to roost in the same houses as
the other birds, but in clean boxes. After April lice do not accumu-
late, and your chicks do not get set back by this pest.
30


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE LEMON GROVE POULTRY YARD.
Orpingtons, Silver and Gold Wyandottes,
Leghorns-White and Brown,
Pekin and Runner Ducks.
CAN supply Farmers and Fanciers with a good bird at
moderate rates. My Orpingtons, Runners, and Pekins
hare won in the principal Melbourne Shows. Winner of
Gold Medal this year for Pekins of my own breeding.
Birds and Eggs in Season.
Write for Prices to
JOS. GREY, Fitz william St. t Kew t
-VICTORIA.-
©NE BREED ©NLY!
fluff Orpingtons,
(£^
TRUE TO TYPE AND COLOUR. FOR SHOW OR UTILITY.
ri'iT 11111 ii 11 i ii 111
Unrelated Trios. Cockerels from 21s. upwards to £5 ss.
Eggs in season, 21s. and 10s. (Id.
PRIZES WON BY ME, 1903-1904—3 Specials, 9 Firsts,
5 Seconds, 4 Thirds, and 2 V.H.C.
I MIDIifIW, JVIt. Bryan, South Australia.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Hocking & Humphreys,
BALLARAT BAST, VICTORIA,
Breeders and Importers of
1
Black and Buff Orpingtons,
Silver and White Wyandottes,
Buff Orpingtons, and Indian
Runner Ducks.
r
Eggs in Season. Fowls, 10s. 6d. and 21s. per dozen (each variety).
Ducks, 10s. 6d. per dozen. Returned unfertiles replaced.
Young Stock at Reasonable Prices.
At the principal Shows, 1904, we won 6 specials, 20 firsts, 10 seconds,
and 13 thirds. Correspondence Invited.
Breeder of Silver aiyandottesonly
======l4
Champion for LACING TYPE, &c.
My Birds Last Season WON
First for Best Silver Cockerel ]
First for Best Laced Bird in Show I WilliamstOWll
First for Best Wyandotte in a class of over 100 entries |
First and Special, Ballarat. First, Second and Third, Geelong.
I have started this season by coming First and Second in Cockerels,
Ballarat ; and First and Second, Geelong.
I have a splendid lot of Young Show and Stock Birds for Sale at
Reasonable Prices.
Eggs, £1 Is. a setting. Unfertiles replaced.
George % Brennan,
208 BARKLY ST , BALLARAT VICTORIA,


Hyde’s Esthetic
Jas Goss’s, Wire
Seeds are the best for Canaries, at
and Cag-e Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth Tel. 426.
Jubilee Incubators, best. Tyzack, Agent for Jubilee.
HOW TO PREPARE A BIRD FOR SHOW.
Birds that you expect to score a few bull’s eyes at shows
require different treatment from your ordinary laying stock. You
require a better class of house. If you have not already built a
decent one, your best plan would be to take a run round and view
several prominent fanciers’ yards. You could then learn for your-
self by observation what style of building would be most suitable
for your purpose.
Show birds, either young or old, to procure the best results,
should be kept by themselves, more especially the cock birds. If
you go to a show, and, by comparison, reckon your bird at home is
just as good as the winner, keep it to yourself, as all ignorant people
have been saying for years “that they have a bird home that could
knock spots off the winner.” Wo are all inclined to think our geese
are swans, and it would be poor for the poultry societies, as regard
entries sometimes, if we did not. But if you think, after going to a
show, that your bird has a chance, enter for the next show ; it will
only cost you from 2s. 6d. to 4s. as the case may be ; for this you
have your bird judged, a coop found for you, the bird watered and
fed, other birds to compare with, prize cards if you are successful,
also prize money and specials, to say nothing of the experience, and
your name in all the papers as the winner. It is a cheap four
shillings worth, and you have often spent money in a less profitable
way. Do not be too sanguine ; go ahead slowly, as no matter how
good a bird may be, sooner or later he will go under. A man or
woman who rushes away right off the reel with three or four first
prizes generally feels the fall severely when the tide of success turns.
After a few reverses they may get crestfallen, as people have a nasty
habit of asking how you got on, after a defeat, and some cannot stand
the way it is said. With another reverse or two they generally retire
from the contest. Always send your bird expecting to get beaten,
then you will not be disappointed. Some of the best wins 1 ever
had were with birds I did not reckon had too good a chance. Yon
see a fault once in your intended show bird, and every time you
afterwards look at the bird you cannot get past it, whereas the
judge may miss it, as the bird is only under his eye for a minute or
two. To prepare a bird of any breed for show, you will find it best
to enclose it in a room with just sufficient light to enable the bird to
see to eat. Some fanciers keep their show birds entirely in the dark,
only drawing up the blinds, or opening the door, to let them feed.
31


Meat Safes. Butter Coolers. &e, at Jas. Goss’s. Wire and
Cage Worker. 253 Murray St, Perth Tel- 426
Jubilee Incubators Won’t Burn Your House Down.
I do not hold with this ; the other method I have found to be the best,
Place about three inches of fresh horse manure, not too damp, over
the floor, which will be sufficient for the time you have your bird
enclosed, i.e., a month.
If hard feathered birds, such as Game, Minorcas, Leghorns,
and Andalusians, feed grain freely. To the looser feathered birds
you could give mash, beitig careful to place such food on a sack, or
in a wooden trough. It your Minorcas or Leghorns have not
developed sufficient comb, you could, in that case, give them soft
food, also toast soaked in ale. Be careful, for it is easy to put
comb on, but it generally means sacrificing the comb to take it off
again. It is better to have too little than too much comb, as the
excitement of a show will always extend a bird’s comb. It will be
close on three weeks before you notice any decided improvement, as
birds fret a bit during the first ten days, and have a tendency to go
off, but after that they improve rapidly. You cannot obtain the
same sheen on a fowl running out, even if it is a Black Orpington
or Langshan, as if you shut it up ; the color improves wonderfully
with Brown Leghorns, Game, Partridge, or Golden Wyandottes.
There is no comparison between birds shut up and birds running
out. All white varieties should bo kept in as they are putting on
their last feathers. Catch them while they are sappy or quilling
in the feathers, which then look creamy, but become white as the sap
leaves the feathers. You could let these varieties out each evening
after sunset to give them a stretch. Do not forget grit and green
feed. Handle the bird for lice, dusting with some insect destroyer,
if they are found. At the end of the month the bird should be
cherry ripe, fit to show, and at its best—providing it is old enough
and has properly moulted. On the day you despatch the bird to
the show you should scan the legs to see if any down is on the sides.
Remove it or any other objectionable matter, then wash and clean
the legs well, finishing off with a little vaseline : the head should
be cleaned and oiled with a little sweet oil, but do not leave the comb
with a greasy look : wipe off the oil with a little warm water.
Have your basket ready with clean straw on the bottom and lined
with canvas to protect the bird from the wind. Pen your birds as
early as possible overnight, as this gives them time to accustom
themselves to their surroundings and show off to advantage. If
you have a decent bird and want him to be particularly noticed,
enter three of the same variety. Take two ordinary specimens and
your good bird, place him in the middle pen with the poorer
specimens on either side. Result, “ enttff said.
32


BOTANICAL GARDENS (ENTRANCE TO FLOWER GARDAN), BALLARAT, VIC.
INTERIOR STATUARY PAVILION, BOTANICAL GARDENS, BALLARAT, VIC.


H. Dickeson. W. Humphrevs. P. W. Fisher. T. Port. A. Young.
C. W. Dickens. W. N. Nash.
A. W. Field. W. Mansfield. P. Wilde. F. McCarthy. E. J. Hooper. M. Atkins. G. Woodward, S. Hawkins.
P. A. Maude.
Sitting- R. D. B. Johnston. A. Anderson. P. J. Whitfield (Treas.) F. L. Hooper (Pres.) John Dickeson (Sec). D. McHarry. F. D'Helin. A. Lowe.
E. Springall. C. Hindall. W. Burr. M'Rashleigh.
J. Kells.
A. Robertson. J. Kinns. A. Banfield.
Gcclang Kauticl mid Poultry Sooiety, 1905.


Poultry Grits, Bone Meal and Grit, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack, Agent for Sppatts. Spratts’ Dog Biscuits, best
To make the most of a Leghorn or Minorca rub a stick gently
along the back once or twice daily, also stroke them under the chin.
These breeds are naturally wild, and a wild shower often loses the
ticket, so they should be handled and trained for the best results.
An Orpington or Wyandotte is generally a better shape if it
has been fed but not gorged before judging.
Kunner ducks should be fed on oats only a fortnight before a
show, and, if reach is required, place them in a pen, dark on all
sides, hanging up a lettuce so that they can just reach it when fully
extended.
The food and water should be given in the ordinary way, only
at the show leave a couple of lettuce leaves on top of the coop to
attract their attention. If your bird is inclined to show wild, it is
just as well to take a piece of canvas and place on top of show coops.
The luminous light through canvas sometimes hides a few defects.
It is the judge’s fault if he does not remove it, such a light will
often make a purple sheen look green.
Pekin ducks require to be caught when moulting and kept in a
fairly dark house, on a dry floor, well sprinkled with sawdust.
They want any amount of green maize, lettuce, or rape, so as to
bring out the canary color, so necessary to win in hot competitions.
Very little bathing should be given to them, as it takes the gloss off
the plumage, but do not forget grit.
Fowls returning from a show should have a dose of Epsom
salts —about a teaspoonful of liquid. Don’t rush them with green
food or grit, as they are likely to overdo it and bring on dysentery.
Give food and water gradually ; show them a dust bath, slightly
damp, and notice how they will enjoy it. A rubber band fitting
fairly tight on each leg, about the centre, will take off about half-an-
inch in the height of a bird, and make it look low set ; this is
particularly useful for Wyandottes and Orpingtons.
HOW TO WASH BIRDS FOR SHOWS.
These are the days of keen competition, and unless you show
your birds in tip-top order you will suffer. With two birds of
equal merit, the bird shown in the best condition would romp home,
and oftentimes a bird may not be so good as the other in points and
then win on condition and washing.
33


Hyde’s Insect Proof Medicated Nests for Canaries
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel 426.
Send for Tyzack’s Catalogue.
White fowls of every variety should be washed before a
show. This should be undertaken about two days before, and then
after drying before the fire in a coop, put in a pen with nice clean
straw, throwing the grain in for the birds to scratch ; this will help
the feathers to web out properly, and also keep the birds lively
working in the straw.
Colored fowls, such as Dorkings, Wyandottes, Orpingtons,
should be washed seven days before the show, as their feathers take
longer to web out and also for the sheen to come back on their
feathers.
The following is the method to be adopted in washing :—First
slice up some good soap that has plenty of lather ; boil the soap in
a saucepan or some suitable vessel, then have two baths ready about
half-filled with water—the one fairly warm but not hot, the other
with the chill taken off ; this one should also be blued. You will
require to have a lady’s opinion as to how much blue is required,
but if drying in the sun allow more blue than drying by a fire. Into
the unblued water pour the soap after it has melted properly and add
about two tablespoofuls of ammonia. Secure your bird firmly in one
hand and give his or her legs a thorough washing, cleaning the legs
well under the scales if they are dirty ; then place the bird in the
water and rock it to and fro, forward and backward, also working
the soapy water well into the feathers. It takes some time to
, properly wet a fowl all over, especially in the winter time, as there
.is more °'l in the feathers—nature’s method for keeping the rain
and cold off. Rub the feathers well with a sponge or flannel, being
particularly sure that the tail and under the throat are also well
washed. Rub the feathers all ways except direct up the quill until
you are sure they are perfectly clean. Then rinse as much of the
soap out of the bird in the same water, rubbing the feathers straight
from the neck to the tail. Place the bird in the blue bath, on the
side again, rocking it forward and backward, keeping the tail well
under the water ; then turn it over and repeat. The object is to
remove all soap out of the feathers, as any left in destroys the effect.
In a properly washed fowl, especially in the utility breeds, the
feathers should, when dry, look like a sort of embossed work.
Leghorns are a tight-feathered bird and they are closer to the body ;
after lifting out of the bath run your disengaged hand along the
back and rinse out as much water as possible. Have a clean towel
handy and dry the bird as much as possible. After this, balance the
bird in some awkward position to try and induce it to flap its wings ;
34


Danish Meat Meal for Fowls, Ducks, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St-, Perth. Teh 426
Tyzack, Agent for Andrews’ Roup Cure.
if this is accomplished the bird will dry much quicker. Then have a
fire going, but not in a draughty room—if it is, place a screen between
the door and the fire. Do not place the bird any nearer than three
feet from the fire, and if very warm, five feet should be the distance
off ; you will scorch the bird’s comb and lobe if you place it too near.
Turn the coop round every quarter of an hour for the first two
hours, after that they can generally look after themselves as they
will start pluming. Thorough washing and rinsing are the two
essential points to be observed. The following morning the birds
can be placed in the straw pen mentioned. Before sending to the
show rub the bird’s legs with vaseline and clean well. Anoint the
comb and wattles with a little sweet oil, only don’t leave it with a
greasy appearance ; rub it off with a warm damp cloth. The rest is
quietness and a clean coop to travel to the show in ; after that the
judge’s verdict and your reward.
Duck should be induced to take a bath before a show, although
the Pekins, if kept on clean straw the previous week, would be
better without if they are color fed birds.
HOW TO MATE A PEN OF BIRDS TO PROCURE A
LARGER PERCENTAGE OF COCKERELS OR
PULLETS, AS DESIRED.
IE you require to breed a large percentage of pullets procure a
■cockerel and mate him with two-year-old hens. Do not breed too
■early in season. A two-year-old cook mated with three-year-old
hens will give almost the same results.
To breed cockerels : pullets mated with cockerels will gener-
ally give you all you desire in cockerels.
The more vigorous the stock the greater the tendency to throw
cockerels.
A pen of birds that are unfertile in the early part of the year
will, when they do breed, produce a majority of cockerels.
I have heard it said that the fewer the pullets with a cockerel
the bigger the tendency to produce cockerels. After experimenting,
I found this was pure fallacy, as my one cockerel mated with only
one pullet produced more pullets than cockerels ; but mine may have
been an exceptional case. Another fallacy is the theory of setting
35


Carbolacene Fluid for washing- Dog-s, Fowls, &c, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth-
Tel- 426.
Tyzaek, Agent Flood’s Roup Cure.
eggs with gutter-like ridges in the end of eggs to produce cockerels,
and the round smooth-shelled eggs for pullets ; this also is a myth.
The latest theory is one I have from a scientific source —“ that
a cockerel with one private removed on one side will produce
cockerels, or if the other one is removed it will produce pullets.” It
is supposed to have acted with cattle, but I only give it for what it
is worth When caponizing again I shall try the experiment. I
think if it were true that it would upset the whole arrangement
in the breeding of poultry. Another fallacy is thunder killing
chicken hatching. Thunder will only kill the germ in the egg on
the eighth to the tenth day when it is sufficiently powerful to
vibrate the earth. The same result will occur if using an incubator
in a room where the floor is shaky or the door is violently slammed.
QUICK METHOD TO MOULT BIRDS.
To a fancier who has only one show bird on hand both for
breeding and showing this plan is invaluable, as he can moult the
bird early in the season, show it at early shows, winning a prize or
two to advertise his name, and then be in plenty of time for breeding
First make a frame of wood three feet square, covering it all
over with white or unbleached calico. Yon can have the door on top
so that the bird can be dropped in, as it is much easier to handle this-
way ; the top is also calico. On sunny days place your bird in the
tent, reducing the feed, and in a short time the peculiar heat that is
experienced under canvas effects the feathers, and the bird will soon
go into a full moult. You will, of course, place your bird back in the*
house at night-time, or make the tent waterproof and snug in case of
a sudden change in the weather. It is of no use placing the bird in
the tent unless it is fine and sunny weather, but avoid extremely hot
days, or else just put the bird in for the morning and remove him
during the extreme heat of the day.
The months to use this screen would be January and February
in New South Wales, and February and March in Victoria, South.
Australia, Western Australia, New Zealand, and Tasmania, but you
would of course study the situation you are in as to whether sea-
coast or on a high altitude.
It is best to change the food entirely, avoiding mash till they
are in full moult.
36


ADVERTISEMENTS.
W. T. MALE,
BREEDER op HIGH-CLASS STOCK.
HOUDANS.
Prizes Won from 1903 to 190,').—3 Specials, 75 Firsts, 21 Seconds,
10 Thirds. Eggs, 10s. 6d. per dozen.
SILVER WYANDOTTES.
1905.—First and Gold Medal for Best Wyandotte in Show, and
1 Third. Eggs, 21s. per dozen.
OLD ENGLISH GAME.
Prizes Won from 1903 to 1905.—2 Specials, 7 Firsts, 10 Seconds,
1 Third. Eggs, 10s. 6d. per dozen.
BUFF LEGHORNS.
Prizes Won from 1903 to 1905.—13 Firsts, 6 Seconds, 3 Thirds.
Eggs, 10s. 6d. per dozen.
Stock and Show Birds 'N* PARKLEY STREET,
always on hand. -vN BRIGHTON
ll Wflhh fflem^eF of the Ulater Focal Club
ll 111111, _ of Victoria,
Breeder and Exhibitor of INDIAN RUNNER DUCKS.
< >
Last Year’s Record, IQO4, — Out of Four Special Prizes given
for Indian Runners at the principal Shows in Melbourne, I won three.
My first appearance this year, 1905.—First and Second Old Drakes,
First Old Ducks, First and Second Young Drakes, Second and Third
Young Ducks, and the Special for the Best Indian Runner in the Show.
Forty-seven Runners competing.
I can supply DRAKES and DUCKS, unrelated, in any quantity,
up to 1000. Also PARTRIDGE, WYANDOTTES, BLACK
ORPINGTONS, and PEKIN DUCKS FOR SALE.
illlii„illli..illhi,altii,illt..,iyhi i JIi 1 ,,il
Eggs in season, 21s. per doz , nine guaranteed fertile.
Nearest Railway Station,
NORTH BRIGHTON.
“ MANAIA,” KORTH ROAD,
CAULFIELD. ~


ADVERTISEMENTS.
0. I%rsftall, *
& Road,
\/T«]Ve!rn. YlC>
Breeder and Exhibitor of Runner Ducks.
I have English Imported Stock from the well-
known yard of J. Digby, direct.
This is the Show and Laying Strain combined.
Grand Typical Birds of the right Shape and Style.
* BIRDS AjN'D EGGS.
CORRESPONDENCE INVITED.
ff you Wants*'
Sir si-e lass Indian Runner Duets,
White or Drown Leghorns ,
Danfams all varieties, Desf British
Game in Australia, all colors,
€ggs from ss. per Dozen,
~\XT rite: to —«= "V
DICK!NS BROS.,
MBRCBR ST., GBBBONG.


Owosso Scaly Leg Ointment, at Jas. Goss’s. Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzaek, Agent Center’s Roup Care.
BREEDING LATE CHICKS.
The general opinion amongst fanciers who have had experience
in rearing chicks is that it is utterly useless hatching them after a
certain month to secure any good results either for egg production
or show purposes.
The reasons given are various, but the main reason is that it is
out of season, and that for some inexplicable cause, though the chicks
do fairly well for a while, they soon stop in their growth, and finish
up stunted in size, and only lay when eggs are cheap.
Vermin, especially lice, are no doubt partly the cause ; but even
with this mastered, which can easily be done, the chick still remains
stunted under ordinary conditions prevailing, and hence we hear on
all sides “ Do not hatph ” after a certain month, according to the
state you are in, to secure good results.
The question then arises—ls there no remedy ? And most
fanciers state that, after years of rearing, there is practically no
remedy, as they have tried all breeds, with exactly the same
results ; the birds not only did no good themselves, but kept the
other ones back, and were ever ripe to catch any diseases floating
about.
To any fancier who had a bad season in the earlier months of
the year, and wishes to try a few late ones, I would say, if he will
follow the following system, he will find it beneficial and far in
advance of the old method :
After hatching the chicks and handling for lice, have a plot of
ground ready that has had no stock running on it for some con-
siderable time ; fresh ground altogether is preferable. And now
the secret is to keep this plot of ground regularly watered two or
three times a week, laying an old bag here and there to promote the
growth of worms and other insects.
The watering keeps the ground in good heart, washing away all
the droppings and keeping the ground sweet and untainted, which
is the secret of success in the growth of chickens during the hot
months of the year.
The feed can consist of oatmeal and bread crumbs moistened
and mixed crumbly for the first week, broken wheat and maize the
following week, and on till they are two months old, when you can
substitute whole wheat and hulled oats. Feed no soft feed, but give
chopped meat or liver two or three times a week.
37


Flower Stands, Flower Baskets, and Flower Stainers,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray
St. Perth. Tel. 426.
Woodward’s Winners Raised on V.C. Meal.
The reason dry food is used here is that in the warm months
soft food sours very quick ; and yon can easy forget yourself, mix up
too much, and often feed food that is really a rank poison to all
the lot. The dry feed is easier and better for the welfare of the
chicks, and they can be left longer without attention.
The reason why many late chicks have done no good was, after
hatching they were fed and watered in the same place and surround-
ings that all other young chicks had been reared in, which had taken
every insect out of the place, and ran it bare of all other delicacies
that they obtain from the ground, and the place had become dry and
hard, with no nourishment of any description left in, hence the late
chicks have only to eat just whatever you put before them, without
having any of their own foraging dainties so necessary for their
growth.
I am not writing this to advocate late rearing of chicks, but to
show, more particularly those fanciers who have laced or marked
fowls such as Wyandottes, Leghorns, Andalusians, Hamburg's,
Anconas, Campines, and more especially if breeding for pullets, that
they need not despair.
It is a peculiar phenomenon that the early-hatched chicks and
the late-hatched chicks are generally better marked than the chickens
that are reared in the main hatching months of September and Octo-
ber. This is more especially so in pullets.
Of course, only those who possess water sufficent for irrigation
purposes can follow out my plan, but even if the water is used only
once a week and the soil is new and fresh, you will secure far better
results than in the old way. At any rate, any breeder can try this,
for the competition is so keen in all the principal sections at the big
shows that it’s a pity to waste any egg, while there is still a chance
of breeding the best bird of the year.
DUCKS.
Ducks are different to fowls in this respect, nearly any class of
soil will suit them, only hare a rising slope to drain the land during
the winter. They have very few diseases and the soil has very little
to do with their culture. All that is required is a bit of grass land
with, if possible, a running stream or brook, so that fresh water is
always at hand, winter and summer. Districts that have a good
rainfall will be the most suitable, as the more rain the more grass,
insects and worms ; while these last so does the egg basket keep
filling.
38




ADVERTISEMENTS.
SARGENFRI POULTRY YARDS.
. . Importers and Breeders of . .
High-class Utility POULTRY.
’■v.
A
V--2
** ,T.
s §
-A*
I I
Wyandottes
A Typical Runner Duck.
One of the founders of the Sarjrenfri strain. f
WHITE —Bred from English Imported and Prizewinners
PARTRIDGE —Bred from Unbeaten Champions.
SILVER—AII Pedigree Layers.
Hr n i nrrtnno BLACK—Bred from English Imported and Prize Birds.
UI |J 11 Ig lUI lO BUFF—A Special Utility Strain.
Leghorns
WHlTE—Three strains ; pedigree layers ; tested from 200
to 220 eggs per bird.
BUFF—The Finest Show Strain in Australia.
BROWN—Our Special Show Strain.
ROSE COMB BROWN—A New Strain of these Marvellous
Layers.
Eggs in Season, ios. and 21s. doz. Guaranteed fertile.
FOR SALE. —A Splendid Lot of YOUNG BIRDS. Enquiries Solicited.
ADDRESS—
Send for our New Illustrated Catalogue.
O
East Fayneham, South Australia.


Marking- Punches for Chickens, at Jas. Goss's, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426
Tyzaek’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
During 1903 and 1904 Runners laid especially well. We had
rain every month consistently right up till March ; this accounts
for the record. In any ordinary year far less eggs would have been
produced. The 'New South Wales Laying Competition also showed
better results in every pen. That season and the record established
is not likely to be beaten till they have a similar season, notwith-
standing all the breeding for egg production thrown in.
The more plentiful the rainfall the fuller the egg basket, and
the dryer the season so will the basket suffer. Nearly all varieties of
ducks can be made to pay, but the Pekin, Aylesbury, Runners, and Buff
Orpingtons are the most suitable. If the last can keep up to their
competition record, then the Runners will have to look to their
laurels, as the public will take to the utility bird, because so far,
poulterers have an objection to Runners for table purposes. Runners
are good eating up to twelve weeks old, but after that their Sheffield
sprints run the fat off them.
The utility Pekin is a good all-round duck, providing you do
not rely on the show specimens for laying, as the larger the duck,
the scraggier the eyebrow, and the fewer the eggs.
Aylesburys follow on similar lines (I break away here and
advise you to use the cross Pekin and Aylesbury for market pur-
poses, as they carry more flesh at a certain age—ten weeks —than
either of the pure-bred varieties). I have never had a champion
layer among Pekins, but I hear of plenty who have them to lay one
hundred and sixty eggs a year. If this is true, then take them every
time. One drake to four ducks is a fair average for a breeding pen,
but you will be guided by the time of the year. The colder the
weather, the less ducks, and so on. Some ducks require to be
housed at night in colder districts, but have an open front. Plenty
of ventilation is needed, but they must have protection from the
wind. Runners are so hardy when full grown that as long as they
have wind protection, they need no housing accommodation even in our
coldest winters, and Ballarat is about as cold as any part of Austra-
lia at times, Mt. Kosciouski excepted. Foxes are very fond of ducks,
and they would have to be guarded against in districts where they'
are prevalent. You want plenty of room for ducks if working on
a large scale. The yards should be large enough to allow of
ploughing each year, and you will find that a splendid growth from
nearly any crop will result. As three-feet wire netting will keep
them within bounds, the outlay to start would not be considerable.
The hatching and rearing I have already touched upon, and I can
faithfully say, that an amateur is more likely to make a success of a
duck farm than he is to make a failure of a poultry farm, and that’s
saying a lot.
39


Owosso Poultry Spice, Genuine, Is. Packet, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker. 253 Murray St. Perth.
Tel. 426.
Thermometers Tested (America).
Tyzack’s
If running a duck farm, by all means keep half of those raised
pure, as the stock can be sold for stud purposes, and realise a good
price, according to standard points. I consider there is a good
opening to any person starting a duck farm in a good district, and
breeding four or fire of the pu: e breed of ducks for stud and exhibi-
tion purposes. Two-thirds of the ground could be used each year
for growing grain and green feed, and the duck yards shifted round
each year. This will keep your feed bill down and also manure your
land ; even if it is poor, after ducks have had twelve months run
any land will be fairly good. If you are near a slaughter house, so
much the better, as meat is necessary to procure the best results
both in egg laying and rearing ducklings.
If you intend to go in for exhibition purposes, buildings arc
required, as Pekins, Aylesburys, Runners, and Buffs require to be
kept under cover, to give color and also to retain it, if you wish to
have a chance in keen competition.
To prepare these breeds for show, you require to catch Pekins
just before they commence to moult, but the others can be left outside
till they have just come through their moult. The floors of the houses
should be cement, with a layer of sawdust on top, to be removed and
replenished every three days. An exercise yard is needed, all bricked
or asphalted if possible so that you can wash it down. You can have
a small bath about 9 inches high, and 4 x I in width and length
built in the yard. A wash about once or twice a week is all that
is necessary.
For feeding color in Pekins, plenty of green maize, red cab-
bage, carrots chopped up and mixed with their mash is a splendid
food. With plenty of grit and clean water, you should have no
difficulty in holding your own at shows, providing you started with
suitable stock.
BEST FEEDING RESULTS.
At laying competitions the feeding is carried on in simple lines
to show farmers and others that plain feeding is all that is necessary
to produce health and eggs.
The routine is as follows :—Bran, one-third, pollard, two-thirds,
with a little scalded chaff, all mixed up together, liver soup being
used three times a week. Give green feed in the middle of the day
and grain at night. This menu is easily followed, and where a large
number of birds are kept is all that is necessary.
40


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Wm
■H
sis
ms
if.
m
«4 )
V V
m
-r»
DEERFOOT.—Winner of Ist, Essendon, and
Ist, Prahran. The most stylish Runner
Drake shown this season.
Photo, by Sutcliffe, Melb.
Indian Runners
The Roslyn Strain.
OUlt OWN' BREEDING.
Winners and layers com-
bined show Record, season, ’O4.
Brighton—One Third in Ducks.
Northeote —Two Firsts in Drakes.
Essendon—-2 Firsts, 1 second in
Drakes.
Prahran —1 First, 1 second,! third,
Drakes ; 1 Second, Ducks.
V.P.K.C.—I Second, 1 Third in
Drakes ; 1 First, Ducks.
Geelong—2 Firsts, 2 Seconds, 1
Third and Special, Drakes ; 1
First, 1 Second and Special, in-
Ducks.
The best record for the season-
J.S. McFADZEAN,
Roslyn Poultry Farm,
St. Kilda Street,
Elsternwick.
This is What You Want !
White WYANDOTTES.
Nothing Better in the World!
I have some excellent specimens of this breed. They are snow white,
and excellent in leg color. They are grand layers of tinted eggs also.
Eggs in Season., Stock.
Inspect at any time.
Winners of First and Specials at Ballarat Shows.
S. BATHURST, Corner Clayton & Joseph Sts
•>
BALLARAT EAST, VICTORIA.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Mr. John Stuart, “™w" E
Breeder of High-class
Buff Orpingtons,
Silver=Pencilled and
Golden Wyandottes,
White and Brown Leghorns.
DARK DORKINGS.
Imported English Stock Used in Every Pen.
Prices Moderate. Eggs in Season.
THE UTILITY BREEDS .
3
I EVER WYANDOTTES
AND
RUNNER DUCKS.
®ST Eggs all the year from these Birds.
My strain of Wyandottes won at all the loading Shows, season 1904.
Specially Noted for Cockerel Breeders.
My Runners are typical : well marked, and Grand Layers.
-^SS S SiridL Stocrlc for Sale.
R. DODDS, Gregory Street,
Ballarat North, Victoria.


Owes so Duck Cure, Only Remedy
Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker
Perth Tel. 426.
for Ducks, Is, at
, 253 Murray St.,
Winners
at Brighton were Reared on Tyzaek’s
Victorian Chicken Meal.
If your birds are doing all right, let well alone ; but if you find,
after feeding the morning mash the birds are moping about and are
not laying, it is time to alter the programme. Provide a scratching
yard and throw some oats or wheat in overnight, just enough for a
light breakfast, then give plenty of meat and green feed at noon and
mash at night five times a week. This will be a complete change of
diet and routine, and providing your birds were not too fat, will have
beneficial results. You will have to catch your birds and feel for
any undue fatness about the bodies : if so, give two or three doses
of Epsom salts and only one meal a day on oats for a fortnight,
after which you can follow'out the above plan.
BALANCED RATIONS.
To procure the best results from a pen of birds you .have for
laying purposes, a balanced ration is needed. Birds in their wild
state, when caught and killed, have in their crops one-third worms
or bugs, one-third green food, and one-third grains or seeds. It
follows on the same lines in their domestic state. A bird fed with
a proper balanced ration will lay three eggs a fortnight more.
All starchy foods should be fed sparingly ; potatoes and barley
are two that should be fed very little, if you feed pollard and bran
in the morning, with wheat at night, day after day, you are entirely
wrong in your system. In the first place, pollard, bran, and wheat
are all the one grain, and you might as well feed wheat all the time.
Most people have run away with the idea that green bone is a good
product to make fowls lay ; this is a fallacy. Green bone fed clean
and fresh, as a balanced ration, in connection with your other food,
helps to turn out the three eggs a fortnight extra, and keeps fowls
laying longer. Green bone is feeding the egg ovaries all the time,
but it is so powerful and concentrated that one ounce a day per bird
is the maximum to be fed.
The early laying of your birds does not depend on cayenne
pepper, meat, or green bone, but on the health, cleanliness, housing,
and attention you give your birds. I say here emphatically that
for green food that has to be used on a large plant, or even on any
farm, lucerne chaff scalded, is best ; it is easily procurable, can be
kept for use, chaffed, till it is required For hot districts, in the
summer months, you have in it a never-failing supply of green food ;
41


Nursery Fire Guards, Sieves, Gravel Screens, Crab Nets,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack’s Address, 405 Bourke St, West., Melbourne.
all that is required is to scald it, leaving it stand for a quarter of an
hour to bring it back to its original green state. I have seen my
ducks pick the lucerne chaff from out of the mash, when they were
a bit particular and not too hungry. For duck feeding it is
invaluable during the hot summer months. To mix it properly,
scald the lucerne, then mix your bran in, about one third, and
finish off with pollard. Fowls or ducks may not rush it the first
morning, but no trouble is experienced afterwards. Mash food,
mixed like this, in the morning, green bone, meat meal or meat in
middle of the day, with oats as the staple night feed, will give good
results. Maize is also a good food for pullets ; when laying, twice
a week would be sufficient, with oats three times a week, and
wheat the remaining night. Maize should never be fed to fowls if
they are not laying, more especially hens going through their moult,
as it is too fattening. Of course, a feed once a fortnight will not
hurt the birds at any time. In the spring months, if your birds
have plenty of room and a good grass run, very little, if any, meat
or green food is required, but it is birds that are kept in an enclosure
or confinement that require to be fed on a balanced ration.
BREEDING FOR BUFF COLOR.
As this color is one of the most fashionable in fancy fowls at
the present time, a little advice on mating will not be out of season.
In the first place, I would advise you to breed for cockerels, as the
pullets take no end of shutting up to retain their color ; and too
close confinement affects' the laying qualities. Show pullets, in
buffs, are prisoners nine months of the year, and our climates are
too warm for so much enclosure. We have had several arguments
lately as to the proper colors to feed buff. Some maintain that
black is better than white, and nine out of every ten are working on
these lines. They said it gave a better body to the color, made it
richer and added more sheen ; but they did not state that it often
gave you a purplish under-color, black flights, tails, and tick-necked
hackles. Black will take three times as long to breed out as white
would. Ask any grainer to mix you up some buff color in paint,
and the colors used will be red, white, and yellow. It follows on
similar lines in feathers, and you will find, if you have to pick
between the two, that white is better than black. Neither, of course,
is required if you can get it without, but you would need to have a
long purse to buy standard specimens.
12


ADVERTISEMENTS.
(REGISTERED).
The only Preservative. “
Original
14- Years
use-
Proprietors,
I Q WIPI/FDV & QfiM 534 FLINDERS STREET.HELBOORNE.
J. O. V lUr\Lr\ I (X OUmj24 MAIR STREET, BALLARAT
Write for Particulars. Agents in Every State.
INDIAN RUNNERS.
Champion Birds of
W.A. for Laying . .
and Type.
Black . .
Orpingtons,
from . .
Imported
Stock
JPK
f* V.. I, J
W v
/
■Vl*
r
G'AKd
White . . .
Leghorns. .
Silver. . -
Wyandottes.
The EGG Machines.
rs
One of the Hest.
Malay Game a Specialty Pekin Ducks. Eggs Reasonable.
Young Stock for Sale, all Farm Reared. Write to . .
JOHNSTON & WELLS, Gin Gin, W.A.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
s.Dikcis,
Breeder and
Exhibitor of
CHAMPION.
White Morns and
Silver Wvandcttcs.
>
G
U
Winner of ISi&ht Firsts and Speeio/s, 1003- 4.
X
X
v.
■
a
w
ICi.V?
*
ra
cu
tr
•i
CU
C
T 3
a
rO
JJred in my Yards.
My Stock are Winners of numerous Specials, Trophies, Firsts, and Second
Prizes at the principal Shows (in strong competition), including Essendon, Mel-
bourne, Bendigo, Adelaide, Geelong, and Ballarat, &c., &c.
Birds for Show and Stock Purposes at Reasonable Prices.
PAIRS, TRIOS, and PENS properly Mated at Reduced Prices.
I.hold the Record of Winning MORE PRIZES in SILVER WYANDOTTE3
last year, 1904, than any other Breeder in Victoria, with birds bred in my yards.
WHITE LEGHORNS AND SILVER WYANDOTTES.
No. 1 PEN.—Well mated, including my principal Winners, 21s. dozen.
No. 2 PEN.—Containing Winners 10s. 6d. ~
MY GUARANTEE. —Ten Live Chicks Guaranteed to every sitting.
All orders carefully packed and delivered to any part of Australasia. The yards are
open for inspection at any time. Correspondence invited.
--234 SKIPTON ST., BALLARAT, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.


Lucerne and Clover Chaff a Specialty, at Jas. Goss’s,
Wire and Cag-e Worker, 253 Murray St.. Perth.
Tel. 426.
Egg- Testers, Is., Tyzaek’s
Laced breasts is another growing evil, in fact, they beat the
Wyandottes bad in this respect, but it is always easy to procure
things you don’t want. Procure your male bird as good as possible,
examining every feather down to the skin on back, breast, and
hackles. You can give away a bit in wing flights and tail ; but
procure your pullet sound in tail and flight, even if she is a bit
mealy or Jaoed on her other parts.
It is a question as to which is the worst evil in the show pen—
mealiness or lacing ; both are bad faults and hard to eradicate,
but mealiness is a bad fault in all birds, especially for pullet breeding,
although in cockerel breeding it gives good results.
The grandfather of the 1903 and 1904 Jlallarat, Williamstown,
Prahran, Maryborough, Moorabin, and Geelong winning pullets had
absolutely white flights, secondaries, and even part of wing bow. I
bred the winning 1900 Ballarat buff pullet from him, and she was
the mother of the winning pullets mentioned above ; all first prize
winners.
The proper shade of orange buff is very hard to breed, as they
have more tendency to lacing than the lemon buff, but, to my mind,
a good, rich, lemon buff all over is equal to the darker shade, and
keeps better if running out.
As you do not require to show pullets, when running a
cockerel breeding strain, you save a lot of coddling and also a vast
amount of time.
To those starting to breed buffs and who have to pick between
the two—black or white—choose the latter, and you will not go
far wrong.
Buff fowls are like Laced Wyandottes ; they must be bred,
not fluked. A man may fluke a white Wyandotte, Minorca,
Ancona, or Leghorn, but you cannot fluke buff or laced birds. Be
careful of the strain and stick to it if you find it right. Should you
have to bring in fresh blood, in scientific breeding introduce a hen,
not a cook, unless your own dies. A new cock bird will affect all
the offspring, but a hen, even if she does not knit, has not done a
great deal of harm as you will have chickens from your proved hens
to fall back on.
Buff fowls are more suitable for cold districts, if breeding for
shows ; this is why England and America are able to produce such
good specimens in this particular color. To retain buff color, and
to moult our pullets into decent hens, or cockerels into cocks, plenty
of chopped-up red cabbage, carrots, marigold leaves, green maize,
fed in mash every morning will have the desired effect. Be careful
of maize with adult birds ; handle for fat, or if not laying and fed
too freely on maize you will bring on liver disease.
43


Every Description of Wire Work Made to Order, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel. 426.
Owosso Duck Tonic, Is., Tyzack’s
HOW TO KEEP FOWLS IN CONFINEMENT FOR EGG
PRODUCTION ONLY.
As many people do not possess sufficient yard space in the
towns and cities to keep fowls on the ordinary plan, the following
will be found a good substitute :—The place will require to be com-
pletely covered over to keep off the rain. A large, well-lighted
shed will do, but it must be very well lighted. For twenty fowls a
place 20 xlO will suffice. The floor should be solid, then a layer of
fresh horse manure, six inches, should be put on and evenly dis-
tributed all over. Perches must be fixed up with the lice-preventing
supports. A corner should be run off for the insertion of fresh
earth, damp in summer and dry in winter, for a dust bath. Give
any amount of green feed, grit in tins, clean water, and chiefly grain
food ; also meat three or four times a week. Provide also a barrow
load of fresh manure every three days, removing the whole lot every
four months, and you will be surprised at the result. They wiil
keep scratching and working in the manure all day. Don’t over-
feed. Remember the light ; also be careful where you procure your
manure from. You do not require any rooster as you are not
keeping them to breed, but simply for egg production.
Tour best plan is to proceed in the following manner :—Buy
fairly early-bred pullets, either common, first-cross, pure-breds, or
sports, about February or better still in March. After they have
finished laying, which will be about the following January, sell the
whole lot off and purchase a new supply. You will then have the
benefit of the best part of their lives, and will miss the danger of
disease that occurs during the moulting season. There will be no
smell, as the horse manure kills all the germs of the fowl. Be sure
they are free from draughts, but have plenty of ventilation. One end
should be open to catch the morning sun, being wire netted, with
blinds to let down on windy days, or you could work it with
opening shutters.
The feed should be varied every day, but oats and wheat should
be their staple foods.
AS A HOBBY FOR LADIES.
For ladies who have been ordered by doctors a free and open
life, poultry, as a hobby, would be a splendid occupation. With the
place laid out as described, the work is not heavy, being only
sufficient to keep one in good healih. As ladies have, as a general
rule, more patience than men, they should be able to look after the
44


ADVERTISEMENTS.
White
Wyandottes Only.
I have made a specialty of this Grand Utility Fowl.
Fine Layers and Great Foragers. Hardy and Easy to Rear.
EGGS IN SEASON, Also YOUNG STOCK.
jPIT . . Rough Coated
STUD, Collie -
((
Ashleigh Victor,”
Victoria’s Champion 1904 Colonial tired Dog, by
Champion Graceful Perfection-Champion Ashleigh Perfection
Stud Fee, £3 3s.
R \SSS“ V J. H. BRADBY, “Rothsay,” Victoria St,
BALLARAT, VICTORIA.
Fred, jyi lelin,
GEELONG, VICTORIA., (O)
Breeder of BtoNlass Bantams,
JBlacft IRose Combed, Mbits IRose Combeb,
Spangleb ®lb English, anb 33lach=IReb ©lb
Englisb, dbuffeb anb plain. > jt,
■Can supply Reliable Stock and Exhibition Birds at Reasonable Prices.
Also Eggs in Season.
Birds from these Yards have Won at all the Leading' Shows.
o
AT STUD. —The Field Trial Pointer, “ GEELONG BRAG/’ also the
Champion Field Spaniel, “GEELONG FAUST,” winner of 100 First
Prizes ; Unbeaten.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
“Challenge ” Corn Paste.
The best Corn Cure in Australia. Sold by all the leading Boot
Warehousemen.
Wholesale by the Proprietor,
F. W. CHAPMAN, 230 Collins St., Melbourne.
N.B.—Orders by Post promptly attended to.
Sassafras Poultry YaPd.(c)»^
(S) SILVER AND GOLDEN WYANDOTTES
Woodward’s and Jamieson’s Prize Strains).
Eggs from 7s Gd. Buffi Orpington Ducks (Cook’s) Eggs, 15s. per
doz ; Ducklings, oi each. Indian Runners (l)igby and Knight’s) Eggs,
55.; Ducklings, 2s. each. Aylesbury and Pekin Eggs and Ducklings.
Orders are now being booked. Unfertiles replaced. Inspection Invited.
111 ii 1111 m 111111 iii i rnn rrn rt i m ii i i i ii i i m m
Mrs. E. DADSWELL, 26 Currajong Road,
AUBURN, VICTORIA.
C. Frank Vaughan,
MILL STREET, B ILL A RAT, VICTORIA,
Breeder for 15 years of
Rose and Single Comb BLACK ORPINGTONS ONLY.
Winning at all the Principal Shows.
Young Stock
for Sale:.
Eggs in
REASONABLE.
Write or Call to the above Address.
Season!


Any New Specialty Made to Order, at Jas. Goss’s Wire
_and Cage Worker. 253 Murray St.. Perth. Tel. 426.
Owosso Poultry Spice, ls„ Tyzaek’s.
petty details better, especially during the chicken season, when so
much regularity is required. Many fashionable ladies of England
and Australia have joined the ranks of poultry fanciers of recent
years, and they find the pastime interesting, fascinating, and
instructive. A lady with a little means and a natural liking for
birds can also make a tidy income out of pure-bred poultry kept for
show purposes. Ido not advise ladies to take on poultry farming
for market and egg production solely, as the same amount of income
can be made out of fancy poultry as by treble the number of birds kept
for egg production or market purposes would bring in ; this is of
course providing you start on right lines with good stock. But
any apprenticeship should first be served with some cheaper stock of
pure breeds. Take Mrs. Bos%-Jenkins, of South Australia, In
two years she was in the front rank, winning consistently, and that
with only two breeds. These were quite sufficient to bring her
name prominently before the poultry public. She started on right
lines, bought the best stock money could buy (after a year or two
practice), and now shows excellent profits at the end of each season.
Mrs_. Ladyman Smith is another South Australian lady fancier, and
is, at the present time, the principal Minorca fancier of that State.
A ictorian ladies I could name who are well known as successful
exhibitors are Mrs. A. Brown, of Pekin Duck fame, and Mrs.
Turnbull, who keeps three or four varieties of the most popular
breeds. Mrs. Travers, of Warragul, is also a specialist in her breed,
“ Favorelles,” and Mrs. Stanes, of Western Australia, is devoted
to Wyandottes. Start with one breed and improve each season,
and you will soon get to like it. Don’t over-tax your strength, and
you will find it one of the most instructive and interesting hobbies
on the face of the earth.
HOW TO BREED THREE BREEDS FROM
THE ONE PEN.
This is perhaps _ hardly required, but this article will show
that if any one is not in a position to procure new stock, it may suit
his purpose, and also people that are so fond of crossing birds for
new blood and stamina. The breed used is Wyandottes. Have a
silvei cock or cockerel at the head of the pen. The other birds are
White and Golden Wyandottes, pullets or hens. You will find the
progeny are pure Silver, Gold, and White Wyandottes, each of
which will breed pure when used in their own special pens.
This is invaluable if a fancier should have a good Silver cockerel
and no hens, as it is generally easier to procure a good Golden pullet
45


Hyde’s Color Food Gives a Bright Plumage to Canaries,
Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St,
Perth. Tel. 426
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
to put with him than a good Silver, and you will be sure of vigorous
stock. It’s worth a trial if you are running the two breeds. I don’t
say to use this in preference to the one variety if you have them
suitable, but if you like experimenting even with only one sitting, it
will not do any harm, providing an interesting study for you to employ
your spare time with. The same results may be procured by using a
Golden Wyandotte cockerel with Silver and White pullets or hens.
I have not tried it this way myself, but see no reason why it should
not act. If you are troubled with white sickles, this system will help
to eradicate it. It is invaluable to work for a certain point that you
cannot obtain with the one breed for you will very likely procure it
by working it with the other. Singleand Rose Comb Blaclt Orping-
tons can also be used in this way. It is not worth while breeding
many Bose Comb Orpingtons as they are not fashionable, but if
you put a Rose Comb hen in the pen with your Single Comb
varieties you will have as many birds perhaps as you require.
A Rose Comb Leghorn will also give yon two distinct and
pure varieties.
IS IT NECESSARY TO REAR CROSS-BREEDS ?
The day of rearing cross-breeds is past. It was only intended
to be used in the early days when we had no Plymouth Rocks,
Wyandottes, or Orpingtons. All of these breeds have been manu-
factured to breed utility birds, and to stop the indiscriminate rearing
of cross-breeds. You have in these a pure bred bird of uniform
color and type that will always fetch Is. to 2s. a pair more in the
local market than your best of cross-breeds. You have always the
chance to breed birds worth pounds, whereas your cross-bred birds
are always the same price, and besides they shatter that look of
uniformity which should exist in every yard, whether household,
fancier, or farmer. If anyone preaches cross-breeds to you, shut
both ears and move oil before you are tempted. It is only time and
money wasted ; a year lost in breeding is a lot in the poultry world.
If you will breed cross-breeds, study the last article and use your
birds in the way mentioned ; you will then have your unrelated
strains and pure-bred birds at the same time if you wish extra
vigorous stock.
It does not pay to rear cross-breds even for the English market.
The Orpington, Flavorelle, Wyandotte, and Dorking are all good,
and will bring a better price than cross-breds, and you still retain
that chance to rear good birds worth using as stock birds or for
showing at the local show.
46


ADVERTISEMENTS.
A. F. FAHEY,
“Broadview” Poultry Farm,
HALLAM’S ROAD, VICTORIA.
jNE of the largest and most complete Poultry Farms in Australia is the
“ Broadview ” Farm at Hallam’s Road, on the North Gippsland Line.
“ Broadview ” is surrounded by 45 acres, standing on a high and
picturesque spot, just a mile from Hallam’s Station. The proprietor
keeps some seven or eight hundred birds, all of the pure varieties, and
from high-class stock, embracing Minorcas, Brown and White Leghorns,
Golden, Silver, White and Partridge Wyandottes, Plymouth Rock, Buff
and Black Orpingtons. To show the extent of “Broadview” Farm, it
may be mentioned that 12 acres is enclosed in yards ; the runs are wire-netted
to a height of seven feet, and over seven miles of wire has been used, and the
yards are again being extended this season.
All the birds are hatched with hens, and reared under natural conditions,
and they show this by their hardy, vigorous constitution.
As an exhibitor of Prize Stock, Mr. Fahey has frequently been well to
the front, as last year alone birds bred by him won over 10n firsts, specials,
champions, trophies, &c., at the leading shows of Victoria and West Australia.
Some time ago he imported from America Golden, Silver, and White
Wyandottes and Pekin Ducks, and these have been blended with his own strains, so
there’s a dash of American blood in several of the varieties he keeps. This ia
noticeable among a number of Silver and White Wyandottes, and ia even more
pronounced in his Golden Wyandottes.
Stud Birds are consigned all over Australasia, and purchasers speak
highly of the vigorous healthy stock sent them. Numbers of testimonials are
received in the course of a season testifying to this and the egg producing qualities
of his strains. Utility points—Egg Production in particular—are made a
specialty of by Mr. Fahey, and his pen of birds in the Dookie Competition, just
completed, proved this, as although he had the bad luck to lose some of the birds
at different times —this upsetting his pen—he finished a close second in value of
eggs laid (the real test).
It is good to find a fancier of his type demonstrating the profitable and
practical side of the poultry industry. He breeds over 1000 birds each season,
retaining only the picked specimens for clients, and as he has always hundreds of
stock and show birds on hand, customers may rely on getting good value for their
money.
The operations on “Broadview ” are conducted on practical lines, and
might well be copied by farmers who have land suitable for poultry keeping, and
the results should not only be profitable, but a source of healthy and lucrative
employment.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
BROWN LEGHORNS
AND
SILVER LACED
WYANDOTTES
■ A SPECIALTY.
CHOW and Stock Cockerels and Pullets bred from my winners at
Melbourne Exhibition, Essendon and other leading Shows.
Hundreds to select from. All Stock Sent on Approval at MY Expense.
Inspection or Correspondence Invited.
LOVELL LANQSLOW, Casttonaine.
Jas. H. Shearing & Sons,
Tram Sheds, Hindmarsh, S.A.
Importers and Breeders of High=class
Pure - B . r^ B "» ORPINGTONS.
4
?
Winners of ORPINGTON CHALLENGE CUP, 1903-4.
Winners of CORONATION CUP, securing highest number
of points in any one class, Poultry and Kennel Club, J 904.
30 PRIZES WON THIS SEASON-
All STOCK BIRDS are either IMPORTED or bred from
High-class Stock.
A FEW YOUNG BIRDS FOR SALE.
Orders now booked for EGGS at 30s. and Jss. per setting.
4
?
Satisfaction Guaranteed. Inspection by Appointment-


Incubators and Foster Mothers, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzaek’s Grainoline,
GRADING FOWLS OR DUCKS FOR MARKET.
In sending birds to market, to ensure top prices it is necessary
to have them uniform in color and size. Send them in clean
coops or boxes, with clean straw, grass, or hay on the bottom. This
is how the pure bred fowls will look better, and also realise the
highest price. If you have ducks, sort them out, keeping the white
ones together and placing the colored ones in another coop.
Your eggs will always bring Id. a dozen more if graded, sepa-
rating the brown from the white eggs.
Never send birds to market, unless extra prime specimens, the
last week before Christmas, but if ready sell two or three weeks
before. Everybody waits for Christmas to sell, and the consequence
is, prices generally fall. If you have decent birds and do not want
it known you are selling your birds for other people to take advantage
of, use an assumed name to stop whoever buys from using your
name to the strain of birds.
It is best to put some sign on to draw attention from the public,
such as “These are birds, not feathers,” “ Something tasty,” “These
are good,” or any other catchy phrase you prefer. It all helps when
the auctioneer begins to use the stick.
HOW TO START POULTRY FOR PROFIT AS A SIDE
ISSUE FOR MINERS AND OTHERS.
I have often been asked, which is the cheapest, the most
economical, and the easiest way to start poultry as a profitable in-
vestment For a miner or a workingman, to help to earn a few shekels
for the house.
The bother is, that poultry cannot be started at once as a profit-
able investment : it means twelve months before any returns can be
expected, and while the grass is growing, the horse is starving.
The quickest way I know of to earn money with the least capital ex-
pended, is to buy common ducklings at one week old, feed till ten
weeks old on the plan laid in this book, and sell them all at that
time for market purposes ; it should show a profit of 9d. to Is. per
bird. If you bought the duck eggs and borrowed a broody hen,
you would come out perhaps fid. a duck better off, but there is a
risk here. Common ducks are generally fairly fertile.
47


All Kinds of Poultry Feeders and Fountains, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel. 426.
Jamieson’s Winners Reared on Tyzack’s
If you followed out my plan or system of rearing poultry for
market purposes in Australia, you would show a good profit in six
months time, without the outlay of much capital.
Broody hens are cheap in February and March, and anyone
possessing pure breeds would sell you eggs cheap from a cross pen
of birds, as very few are using them for setting at that time of the
year. You could hatch from fifty to one hundred, have very little
trouble to rear them, sell the cockerels about cup time, at a good
profit, and have all the pullets left to lay right through lent, when fresh
eggs are at a premium. Your outlay would be under £2, providing
you had a decent fowl house, still, if you were at all handy—and
miners generally are—with tools, you could soon fix up suitable
accomodation for the birds. By following the duck rearing during
July, August, and September, and the market poultry in lebruaryq
March, and April, you are sure of a decent profit with very little
outlay, I know of no better plan for simplicity, capital required,
with the least losses, than what 1 have laid down in this article, and
it is suitable for any struggling miner, widow, cripple, or any other
person, to earn a few shillings a week to keep the wolf from the door.
Another good way to earn a few shillings, if you have room, but
you want plenty of it, is to buy turkeys in June or July ; young
birds about eight to ten pounds weight, you can generally buy them
at to sd. per lb in these months. Bun them out to your farm,
and, providing you do not allow the foxes to beat you, you are sure
of doubling your money before Christmas, as they' cost nothing to
feed, and are gaining weight all the time. No labor, or very little
is required, as turkeys can look after themselves. Of course the
outlay would be more, but there are some people, although poor, that
could rake up £5 to £lO, providing they were sure of a good profit.
Still, this plan is only suitable on plenty of run, and a cottager could
not manage it at all.
FANCY POULTRY V. UTILITY.
Some people ride their hobbies to death, and more moderation
should be used ; if you are a utility man, don’t run down the fancy,
and vica versa. Both are needed in this world; the one helps the
other. The utility man states he breeds for eggs, not for feathers,
yet he uses pure breeds. And would they have come into existence
without the fancier ? Some journals state, they don’t profess to
study the fowl fancier, yet if they refused to take the fowl fanciers
advertisements, how long would they last ?
48


A DVERTTSE M ENTS.
MPLEX
UB A T O R
J
INC
Ttye Eqost
UP-to-date,
Ecoijouncal,
aijd Best Hatctjer
ip tfye World.
TESTIMONIALS to hand from
all parts of tho Stats.
N.B.—This Incubator has a Nursery for the newly-hatched birds, thus saving the
expense of a lamp brooder. Price Lists, etc., Otl Jlppiication.
pavTd 'TiXn yon. _
MANUFACTURER OF INCUBATORS
AND CHICKEN-REARING APPTIANCES,
108 RVNDLE ST, KENT TOWN, SA.
HECT ORVILLE-
LEGHORN PENS.
lIIIIIIIIIIIIMIMUI|||| | 1 n I I I i I I n II I I mi ITT
gREEDERS and Importers of prolific laying strains in White,
Buff, and Pile Leghorns. We have had these Birds before
the public for 9 years, and their laying record is unsurpassed.
Our Specialty Layers Indian Ifunner Ducks.
C
WRITE TO . . .
Birds and Eggs in Season.
rr i r ii 111111 n i r 111111 u 11
C FOOT. HECTORVILLE,
Near ADELAIDE, S.A.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Jf l£ou are Ifoesttattng
What Breed to Choose, clinch the matter, and try the
POPULAR UTILITY BREED
White, Silver, and Gold Wyandottes.
(9
3^
They are hardy, docile, great foragers, grand
layers, and beautiful in feather.
d kav-c iitwe ajt tkc J2}cst at
iiam mu
my
EGGS IN SEASON.
J. COXON, Narre Warren, Victoria^
MENTION THIS BOOK.
W. G. SWIFT,
“Olinda,” Prospect Grove, Northcote, Victoria.
BREEDER, EXHIBITOR, IMPORTER
WHITE AND
sVandottes.
Prizes at’ all Leading Shows. Best Laying Strain in State
Young Stock and Eggs in season.


Tick and Vermin Proof Perches, at Jas Goss's, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St Perth. Tel 426.
Jubilee Incubators, best, Tyzaek, Agent for Jubilee.
On the other hand, the fowl fancier’s business would be mighty
small if there was no utility public to sell their surplus stock to, as
very few breeders can show more than two or three first-class show
birds out of a hundred, unless it is Indian Game or Light Brahmas.
It is the fowl fancier who catches the peculiar fever or magnetism
that makes him walk six or seven miles for a broody hen, rush for
the paper or journals possessing poultry literature, studies breeding
to an ideal, watching his flock every night and morning for signs of
illness, and experimenting with new breeds ; so even the fowl
fancier’s worst enemy can hardly oavill at the different and beautiful
forms of poultry they have brought into existence.
_ Of course there are some cranks that the better class of poultry
larmiers have to fight against—those who are breeding for all reach
and lengths of legs in Leghorns, Minorcas, or Langshans, and all
lacing and markings in Wyandottes—but lam glad to say that
these extremists have run the length of their tether, as the pendulum
is swinging back towards minor points and type.
The fowl fancier should not sneer at the utility man, even if he
does use trap nests, or tell you this bird has such and such a record,
although to you it looks like a degenerate specimen of the breed he
states it is. I am not married to either side, but if it was only a
question of gathering eggs, I feel sure, I for one, would soon drop
out of the poultry. Its the same in gardening, some men have a
passion f< r growing flowers—these are the fanciers, others are just
the reverse, cannot see anything in growing flowers, their sole ambi-
tion is to grow the greatest number of peas in a pod, the largest
pumpkin or cabbage ; these we would class as the utility men, and
thus the world goes on. The one is necessary to the other, and both
working together helps to attract some new convert, and he or she
will soon find out which side they are best adapted for.
To be a first-class judge and fowl fancier, it requires certain
gifts, such as color and form. A man who was color blind would
not make a good man to judge fowls, although I can call to mind
one of the first shows I ever saw judged ; the judge used green
spectacles in judging White Leghorns, and a certain exhibitor fol-
lowed the judge all the way to the station. A man who could not
tell whether a building was straight or crooked, without the aid of
instruments, would not make a good judge of type in poultry. Even
a utility man should, if he has this bump of form well developed,
be able to tell to a certain extent, a good layer from a bad, just by the
shape of the body alone.
49


Lice Exterminating: Nest Eggs, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Jubilee Incubators Won’t Burn Your House Down.
STAGGERS IN DUCKS.
One of the worst complaints ducklings are subject to, especially
Indian Runners, is the above. You rear them all right for a month
or two months, as the case may be. and suddenly, when feeding, the
trouble begins, and the bother is, that although you may save their
lives, the stroke has been sufficient to stop their growth, and they
never properly recover. The principal factors in staggers are in-
breeding, want of shade, unwise feeding and watering, and trying to
rear ducklings up in the same manner as fowls. The mode of
rearing ducklings has been followed on tbe English and American
lines, simply because no Australian book has been published as a
guide to our local requirementts. The plan of feeding as advised in
the English and American books may be all right there, but our
climates are much warmer, and different treatment is required.
If any person has reared ducklings here in the winter and early
spring, I will undertake to say he had little bother in the rearing, but
as soon as the first warm day came along the trouble started.
Staggers is caused by not keeping water before them all the
time, in a cool place. It should be there ready for the ducklings to have
a drink first thing in the morning, and the vessel should be deep
enough for them to dip their heads under. Food should be placed
handy overnight so that they could have an early morning breakfast
before you are up, and, above all, shade is imperative for the hot
days. The head of a duckling is very sensative, and the sun will
drop it very quickly, especially when having meals. Keep a duck-
ling without food or water half-an-hour over and above the time
when it should have had a drink, and staggers is the result.
Some people shut their ducklings up at night, and then, follow-
ing on the lines of rearing chickens, place the coop so as to catch
the early morning sun. The consequence is, that nine times out
of ten they are in the sun in the morning an hour before they have a
drink. The result is they become overheated, and. as soon as the
water comes over on the back, they go. I lost a few myself but
soon found out the cause. In the early spring a hot day will come
out suddenly and catch you unprepared. I venture to say, that out
of every hundred Runners hatched, there have been fifty or more
lost with staggers, and in some yards have seen seventy-five per cent,
cleaned out. They require rye, grit, green teed, and chopped up
boiled liver or meat to build up a strong constitution, more especi-
ally from the middle of spring and into the summer months. With
plenty of shade for the spring and summer, unrelated and vigorous
stock, having food and water constantly before them all the time, a
suitable run protecting from the wind, you should be able in a very
great measure to overcome the staggers by following the article.
50


ADVERTISEMENTS,
W. X SiWrWift,
“ WARATAn.”
BEN ALLA.. VICTORIA.
and EXHIBITOR of=
High-class White Wyandottes.
IMf—
White Wyandotte.
Show or Stock Birds for Sale. Eggs, 21s. and 10s. 6d. setting.
I have also pens imported from W. R. Hayes, California,
bred from layers of from 220 to 240 eggs per year-
YOUNG STOCK FROM THIS PEN, FROM 20s. EACH.
EGGS, 255. SETTING.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society of S.A.
SEPTEMBER, 1904, SHOW.
HOLDER oi- . . .
The fl. J. Murray Challenge Gap,
G)
Value 20 guineas, for best breeding pen of six
hens or pullets, and cock or cockerel, against 21
exhibitors of pens of all varieties at above show.
Awarded also, with Numerous other
Prizes and Trophies, . . . .
The Sandford Challenge Gap,
(9
Value 20 guineas, at same show, for scoring
greatest number of points in poultry section
against all exhibitors.
Prize White Wyandottes, Pekin
Ducks, Bronzewing Turkeys.
Stock and Show Birds for Sale. Settings, 425. and 21s.
Mrs, Bosley Jenkins,
BALLARA PARK, BRIGHTON, ADELAIDE, S. AUSTRALIA.


A TYPICAL VIEW OF BALLARA PARK, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, THE HOME OF MRS. BOSLEY JENLINS.


A SCENE AT SARGENFRI, ADELAIDE.


Incubator’s Tank and Fitting’s, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack, Agent for Spratts. Spratts’ Dog Biscuits, best
TURKEYS.
Turkeys can be reared fairly easily in some parts of Australia,
and the profits are also lucrative, but if you intend breeding a fair
number, I may state emphatically that good land is necessary.
Land of a sandy sub-soil with plenty of timber and grass is best,
and if a running stream is handy, so much the better Turkeys
don’t want to be coddled even when young, but cold, drifty sub-soil
land will never suit turkeys when young, no matter how you feed.
If you have ground like that I have mentioned, you can, in any of the
coastal districts, turn them out after three days old and they will
thrive, as any rain which may fall quickly percolates through a sandy
sub-soil. A large shed or two or a Mia Mia is handy to have to
shelter in, should they feel disposed. If you have no natural shel-
ter about, sow patches of barley here and there for that purpose. If
a large plot of barley was sown, lanes could be cut through by the
reaper, in these the coops might be placed, and they would thrive
wonderfully. Wattle plantations are another natural harbor for tur-
keys. The most suitable breed for all purposes is the American
Bronze Wing. If you cannot afford to start with a full pen of these
birds, buy a Bronze Wing cock and mate him with your common
females, this will improve the progeny One cock mated with eight
or ten hens is about the right number. I prefer birds of two or
three years to breed with, as a turkey is not fully matured till that
age. The gobbler should not be extra heavy, but have him to suit
your hens, otherwise the result will be unsatisfactory. One visit of
the gobbler will fertilize all the eggs unless something is radically
wrong. Remove the eggs as they are laid, but in setting a tur-
key hen set her in rather a dark secluded place. They are such close
sitters that it is necessary to remove them off the nest daily, otherwise
they would starve. Feed them on maize, but do not let them wan-
der away, as they are forgetful when on free range
When hatched the young ones require no food for forty-eight
hours. For their first meal you will find the Y.C. chicken meal (an
excellent preparation) the best —see Rearing Chicks. This can be
continued for three or four weeks, also providing some chopped up
vegetables such as lettuce or onions. After the first month you can
scatter grain about. Turkeys and their offspring are greatly troubled
with lice, in fact, in these States seven out of ten die simply through
these pests. Examine under the wings and on the head, and if
they are noticed, dust with Little’s Insect Powder, and follow suit
with the mother. If the weather is cold and stormy the best plan is
to confine the mother in a good-sized, roomy coop, and allow the
poults free range in your barley lane This is the best method for
51


Poultry and Canary Books, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cag-e Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth. Tel 426
Send for Tyzack’s Catalogue.
early hatches. Turkey mothers are not quarrelsome, in fact two or
three will generally make up together with all their combined fami-
lies.
Some gobblers are exceedingly hostile to newly hatched poults,
so if you find your bird killing them, of course remove him out of
the way.
Young poults do not require to be overfed, as their natural in-
stinct ;s to search for the feed, so after the first month scatter it
about a little distance from home.
Every farmer should try and raise turkeys, as the market is
never glutted.
Each year turkeys are becoming more appreciated in all parts
of the world, so plenty of scope is left for the breeders to make good
money. Western Australia is a splendid place for breeding ; the
land and climate is suitable, and the market good. They realise Is.
per lb., anything over 12 pounds weight. Foxesare notin thecountry
which is another consideration, as they can roost out. Turkeys are
very hardy after three months old ; they prefer to sleep out in trees
or on fences, and can stand any amount of cold and rain.
Roup is their chief complaint after lice, therefore, keep your
eyes open so as to check any sericras outbreak.
If you can give them fresh soil every year, so much the better,
but with suitable soil and following these directions, you should show
a nice profit each season.
GEESE.
Nearly all cottagers in the country districts have their trio or
quartette of geese ; generally of the common or garden variety.
With ordinary watching, three geese will rear thirty goslings a
year, which realize in the market from 4s. to 6s a pair according to
their condition. As they cost very little to rear it is a sort of
Christmas box for the lady of the house.
They want a good run with plenty of grass to secure the best
results. The shed, it they are housed, should have the nest boxes lo-
cated adjoining. The nests should be about two feet six inches square,
each goose requires a separate nest. If they all lay in separate nests
the eggs laid can be left, otherwise you will have to remove them till
they set. Very little trouble is experienced in hatching, but do not
meddle with the eggs during that period. The goose is a good sitter,
but she should be induced to come off daily for a feed, also a bath if
you have one handy.
Uo not allow the young goslings to go into a pond till they are
at least a fortnight old
52


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CbclUorld’s A yandotjesj
Record in. * n £165 for- a Partridge Wyan-
dotte Cockerel in England.
Wahroongna Poultry Yard
Dower Mitohom, South Austi'nlin
v-
m
m
I
N 5
Partridge Wyandottes.
DUNSTAN’S PARTRIDGE WYANDOTTES,
Winners of 13 First Prizes and Specials at Adelaide Poultry
and Royal Shows.
,500 BIRDS TO SELECT I'ROM.
The whole of Mr. Dunstan's stock has teen purchased by the
Rev. AUGUSTUS BENNETT, Wahroongna Poultry Yard,
Lower Mitchem, Adelaide, South Australia.
Also PEKIN DUCKS, winners of many Firsts and Specials.
muns A.NJ) naas IN SHASON. Write io Ciliove.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Me “£)
9 9
ie jl>/cus\j
<Sreer> 9c)ot>e ©utter.
%
This Useful Tittle Machine will thoroughly cut up into
small particles GREEN BONE, so that the product may be fed
to poultry. Given in such form, bone is a valuable, nutritious food,
and is greedily eaten by poultry.
Most poultry raisers know the advantage of feeding ordinary Ground
Bone ; but to be able to grind bones it is necessary first to bake or boil
them, and such process removes fully GO per cent, of their nutritions
qualities, so that little remains which may be properly termed FOOD>
Green Bones, on the other hand, contain all the elements which went into
their composition, and these are just such as are required to build up the
body of the fowl, and supply nnterial for egg production.
Nearly all the large poultrymen of the United States use Green Bone
as a part ration for their fowls. Bones being comparatively a waste
product, the cost of food in this form amounts to little more than the
labor of preparation.
The machine is easily operated by either hand or power, the hopper
being filled with small bones, or broken up parts of large ones, pressure is
applied to hand-lever to hold the bones up to the cutters, which are
operated by the revolution of the fly-wheel.
"VICTORY Gas & Oil Engine manufacturer.
H. V. HAMPTON, Maker,
496, 500 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.


Iron Quartz Crystalized Grit, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel 426
Tyzaek, Agent for Andrews’ Roup Cure
The first week the food should consist of biscuit meal with a
little boiled oatmeal and rice ; after that they generally begin to
shift for themselves. Geese live to a good age but it is best to change
the gander every three years.
There are 4 or 5 varieties of pure bred geese, but the Toulouse,
Embden, and Chinese are the three best. The latter is the best
layer ; I have known them to lay up to sixty-two eggs in a season.
They resemble a swan in shape of neck and body, but they have none
of the swan blood in their system. The Toulouse are a fine, hardy,
and massive bird, and attain to a great size; anything between
eighteen to thirty pounds is their usual weight. There should be a
good opening for any farm to start with this variety, as new blood is
sadly wanted in the states.
The Embden is a pure white bird, with a very handsome appear-
ance, and is also a splendid bird for table purposes, as it shows no
black pin feathers when plucked. As a bird for crossing with com-
mon geese they have a good reputation.
It is pretty hard to separate the sexes up to a certain age ; I
generally found that the one that laid the egg was the goose, and
the one that didn’t was the gander. But if you shut them up and
go in to feed, vou will find that the ganders keep on the outside
edge, and are the last to feed—ladies before gentlemen.
HOW TO FIX UP A LEGHORN OR A MINORCA’S
COMB.
Very often the comb in the above breeds will not hang properly
on the side, but will crease and fold, overlapping on the head If
the bird is only an ordinary specimen there is not much need to
trouble with this, still, even in a breeding yard it looks ever so much
better to have the combs hanging properly. When the combs are
springing, examine them to see if they have a tendency to fold, if so,
each evening rub in some sweet oil, and gently train the comb to the
side The secret here is to train the comb to the side the base of the
comb is lying, and not to the way the serrations are lying ; this is
generally where the mistake is made. Gently work it each night,
and you will find it starting to lie right in about seven days time
If the comb of the bird is well out before you notice it, it would be
better to sew the comb to the neck with one stitch of thread. You
will have to hobble the bird for a couple of days, till she gets accus-
tomed to the ticklishness.
You will find these instructions simple and of considerable bene-
fit, as a comb hanging the right way makes all the difference be-
tween winning and losing in the show pens, especially in keen com-
petitions
53


Hyde’s Special Canary Mixture of Seeds, Emits, Eggs,
Etc., at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray
St., Perth. Tel 426.
Tyzack, Agent Flood’s Roup Cure.
HOW TO PICK INDIAN RUNNER DRAKES FROM
DUCKS AT TIME OF HATCHING.
Most people do not require to rear drakes, so the following plan
to separate the sexes is a simple one.
Until experience is gained, it is better to wait till they are
three days old. Proceed as follows : —Examine the bills of the birds,
and you will find the bills of the drakes fully a quarter of an inch
longer than those of the ducks ; also the top of the head, instead of
showing a rounded curve, is inclined to be flat, the bill tends to be
perfectly free from colored spots, the body is also longer, and the
general appearnce of a drake is stronger.
You will find that ducks have a rounded curve on the head,
the bills are shorter and show a decided tendency to dishing, and are
very often black spotted. Pucks, as they mature, show the mark-
ings on their bills. A dish bill means a hollow, very prominent
from the top of the skull to the end of the beak. As the bird
grows up, this should leave, otherwise it would be a serious defect in
the show pen.
With a little practice you will easily discern the difference be-
tween the sexes by following the above methods.
A FALLACY EXPLODED.
If we took notice of all we heard and read in the paper, the
general opinion would be that farmers lost on their poultry, and
that they would do a lot better by buying pure breeds and looking
after them in orthodox manner.
Farmers are not the class of men to lose money if they can help
it, and their fowls, even kept under the worst conditions, turn them
in a fair amount during the year. Why 7 Because they do not
feed them nor attend to their wants in any shape or form. They let
the hens incubate and rear their offspring in their own way ; if they
live—well and good ; if they die, no losses result. Their houses are
cleaned out about twice a year, and if any epidemic comes along, it
is a case of the survival of the fittest; the eggs are collected once a
week, and placed in a tub of water ; the floaters are thrown to the
pigs, the others go to market, and, as no time or money has been
put into the concern, the cash received for young birds and eggs is
all profit. Farmers have no time to attend to fowls, as the very
54


ADVERTISEMENTS.
WIMMERA POULTRY FARM,
Warracknabeal, Vic. a. snell, Proprietor.
Wgb-class Breeder of -— —
Silver, Gold, and White Wyandottes,
Brown and White Leghorns, Jtndalusians,
Buff and Black Orpingtons, lllinorcas, Pekin and
lndian Gunner Bucks. —— —i
Show Record, 1904: 305 PRIZES at SIX SHOWS.
Egg'S la season, 7s. fid. per setting. NIKE GUABANTEED.
MAIN ROAD, BALLARAT EAST, Vic.
GIVE ME A TRIAL.
GOOD STOCK CHEAP.
TINWORTH,
Breeder of
: Silver Wyandoftes, on,v as a hobbv -
Specially bred for Egg production.
I can supply a few Stock Birds.
Eggs in season, 10s. 6d. per setting.
I buy fresh strains from the Best Breeders every Season.
When Writing to Advertisers,
AS AN ACT OF
COURTESY. . .
Please mention
This book. . . _
faithfully Yours,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
QLENDONALD,”
88 SMITM ST.,
During 1904 my Birds Won 31 cards with 34 exhibits at the Leading Shows.
TT WON every First for W.A. bred Hens and Pallets at Perth, Claremont,
[J Fremantle, and Royal Shows. I have strengthened my Pens with a
Golden Cook, imported from F. Guv, of England, admitted by all judges
including Mr. G. Woodward, to be the finest specimen ever brought to Australia!
He is credited with 26 Firsts in England, including First and Special, Lancaster ;
First and Silver Medal, Dairy ; First, Special, and Gold Medal, Kendal; First
Cup, and Challenge Cup, and Gold Medal, Crystal Palace ; First and Special,
York. He was never beaten as a Cockerel.
SILVERS, a grand level lot, during 1904 won Champions, Specials, and
numerous Firsts at the leading Shows.
Young Stock from 20s. each. Eggs from 15s. to 30s.
per setting.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Breeder and
Importer of
High=class
GOLDEN and
SILVER
7 found the birds mentioned above excellent specimens
of their breed.” —George Woodward.


Hyde’s Parrot Foods for Cockatoos, Parrots, at Jas
Gosss, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel. 426.
Tyzack, Agent Contey’s Roup Cure.
months fowls and chickens need the most attention, are their busiest
when harvesting and carting are in full swing. Fowls do not
pay under any conditions in Australia to employ labor, unless you
are running a large plant, and are on the spot all day long super-
vising the affair yourself.
What farmers can do is this, and it will pay them twofold with-
out any extra labor, is to cull out every barndoor in the place, pro-
cure a pair of the utility breed ; good, sound, vigorous birds, not
degenerated specimens. Pick one breed solely ; a solid colored
' ariety would suit the best, but only have one breed. If you have
Orpingtons or Wyandottes, have them all the same color, and do
not mix the breed ; you then have uniformity. This is pleasing to
the eye, and chickens always look so much better when all are alike
in color and breed ; besides, your birds will fetch at least 6d. to Is.
per pair more in the cheapest market, and often ss. a pair extra would
be realised with superior specimens. All that would be needed then
would be to introduce fresh blood every year, to keep up the vigor and
constitution of your birds. With a little extra work as regards clean-
liness, the results would be beneficial, and if you secured a liking for
young birds, you could become a fancier afterwards.
This is the only genuine way for farmers to get experience, for
the general rules, methods, and regulations laid down by various
writers are only workable when they have become fanciers.
If the farmer will follow out this article, he cannot but become
a fancier, as his eye will soon educate him to the typical specimens
of his flocks. Once he is a fancier, he will find time somehow to
give his birds extra attention, even it he has to let something else
go-
THE DECLINE OF THE MINORCA AND THE REMEDY.
Minorcas at one time, had the reputation of being one of our
best layers, and birds of the old strain were certainly good, but the
fad introduced by English fanciers, for length of legs and excessive
lobes, undermined their laying abilities.
In a laying fowl, the leg should be not more than normal length,
any undue stiltiness that the birds show must cause the ess basket
to suffer. 88
The Minorcas and Spanish were never the layers some people
imagined. Iwas the size of their eggs that obtained for them their
good name, still, the shorter legged birds, with bold, prominent eyes,
neat head, and fine texture of comb, laid as well as the best of them.
55


Hyde’s Prepared Shell and Tonic Grit, for Canaries, at
Jas. Goss’s. Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Woodward’s Winners Raised on V.C. Meal,
The laying competitions have been a terrible example, as in
two or three oases Minorcas finished last on the list, and until the
competition of 1905, they did not manage to finish nearer than half-
way up. Owing to this public display they have declined rapidly,
and where thousands were reared before, hundreds now are sufficient,
in fact, fully one-third of the fanciers dropped them, and the public
have followed suit. It is to be regretted that such is the case, for as a
black fowl they should be in the front rank, as their trim carriage,
lobes, and neatly serrated combs, make a neat fowl, where white or
partly colored fowls are unsuitable.
To improve this breed and bring them back to public favor, it
will be necessary to cross in with the White Leghorn and breed
out again ; this could be accomplished in three years. Bring a noted
laying White Leghorn into the pen, using a specially selected pen for
the purpose, and breed her with a Minorca cockerel possessing good
head points, and of a good laying strain ; working the progeny back
with the father, and in three seasons, you will have a laying strain
second to none.
The Mediterranean Club have already taken on hand the task
of reducing the length of leg, and excessive comb and lobes. There
are very few Minorcas showing good carriage of tail, and if judges
looked less at the comb and more at the tail, they would confer an ever-
lasting benefit on the breed. I would warn Minorca breeders, if this
is not done, the Black Leghorn will take their place in the poultry
world. lam pleased to notice since writing this, that Minorcas have
shown a better record this season.
BLACK ORPINGTONS.
We have here one of the best of all round utility fowls. It is
one of the best layer of the heavy breeds, and seems to suit the
majority ol places in our States, as they are a solid colored variety.
Black, or rather, greenish black, they can be let run all the season,
as they have no feathers to fade or bleach.
You can pick a good specimen of a Black Orpington out of your
yard at any time and send him straight to the show. For a far-
mer’s fowl they should suit splendidly, as they are hardy, docile,
easy to keep within bounds, in fact they are a bit sleepy in this
respect. There is a vast difference between an Ancona and a Black
or Buff Orpington in your yard ; they hatch and rear their own
chicks, but are not particularly broody. They certainly eat more
than a Wyandotte, but as their eggs are larger, it makes up
56


ADVERTISE MEMT3.
“ KARLAMINDA "
Prize Orpington Yards,
HAWTHORN ROAD, CAULFIELD
(Via Malvern Railway Station),
Srce&ers of Champion Strain of Minning Black
Orpingtons, also Buffs.
Winners of innumerable Gold Medals, Trophies, Specials and Firsts
■ o
Every customer’s wants considered and filled. We never buy a
■bird to supply an order.
We sell our own rearing and no other. Our birds have proved at
Hawkesbury and Dookie that they are splendid layers as well as show
winners.
A. WEDLICH, Manager.
Black Orpingtons
Buff Orpingtons
Silver Wyandottes
White Leghorns
Brown Leghorns
Runner Ducks
Rouen Ducks
Young Stock for sale.
I
ALL
Utility Breeds
That give the
best results.
All healthy, vigorous
Stock,
Bred in healthy sur-
roundings, with plenty
of room.
Eggs in season.
R
Write to
SIEBERT, Ballarat
(Near Cattle Yards),


A DVERTISEM EN TS.
Mittagong Orpington Yards.
PREMIER YARDS OF GEELONG.
O
Black and Buff Orpingtons.
First-class Exhibition and Stock Birds always on hand.
n I I « i . i in i i i II 11 11 I I n I I I I i -i-i- ill i i i i i t II i i n It I m I I I I I I II , .
miii'ninnn rn mm mrnrn niii i rn rrmni 11111 mn 1111 nll n n
Inspection Invited.
F. B. Mathews, Mittagong, Geelong, Victoria.
--ny\
EGGS, in Season, 21s,
Unfertiles replaced.
Champion White Leghorns
AND
Silver Wyandottes
Winners of Leghorn Challenge Cup, 1904.
SHOW BIRDS AND LAYERS.
Some Clinkers lor Sale every Season. 200 ta
select from.
EggS in Season, 21s. Satisfaction Guaranteed.
n rmi 111111111 1 mm 1111111 ntttttt
Pearce $ Leslie, Bmamarsb, s.a.


Garden Arches and all Floral Designs, at Jas. Goss’s,
Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth Tel 426.
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal,
for the difference. They stand confinement well, but are inclined to
make fat the second year, so this you would have to avoid when feeding
during the moult.
The color is beautiful when all out, a rich metallic green all
over, any sign of purple is to be avoided, but you will not breed them
all green. It is a funny thing, but I have noticed the better colored
birds have the greater tendency to have whiskers on their legs, or
bull heads.
An Orpington should be all curves, no straight lines ; sym-
metrical outlines are the chief characteristics of this breed, coupled
with size, shortness of leg, and good bone. They require to be bred
early for show purposes, but as they are naturally winter layers, no
trouble should be experienced in this respect. Your best plan to
breed, if in a cold climate, would be to send eggs to a friend living
in a warmer district, providing he knows how to feed chicks, and
have them sent to you after they are four months old. In this way
you will have vigor and size, only remember, for utility purposes,
that the larger the fowl, the fewer the eggs, as a general rule. The
eye is a great point in this breed, in fact, some judges can only see
black eyes in Orpingtons ; a bird can be crippled, cow hocked, wry-
tailed, or have any other deformity, but as long as the eye is black,
up it goes. Some day we will have a class for black eyes only,
feathers barred. By all means have a black eye if possible, any black
fowl should have a black eye, as in the keenest shows several good
ones may have black eyes, and if two birds are equal in other points,
the one with the darker eye should win.
The comb should be neat, upright, and evenly serrated ; the
neck full and flowing, plenty of feathers setting well on the back,
which is a hollow centre and makes up the letter U when viewed
from the side.
THE WHITE LEGHORN.
This fowl has made a name for itself as a layer during the last
two years, and it would be unpardonable if I omitted to say a few
words on its merits.
To anyone who does not like meddling with ducks, and is situ-
ated in a warm district, with eggs as the object in view, and also
with an experience of incubators, you would be starting on the right
lines in beginning with the above breed, If you do not think you
possess sufficient patience for looking after machines with regularity,
do not attempt it, but run White Leghorns with White Wyandottes.
Leghorns do not hatch their own eggs, so either incubators or
some sitting breed of fowl is necessary, only it is better not to mix
57


Hyde’s Parrot Food in Tins, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Thermometers Tested (America). Tyzack’s
the colors, but if you will have another color, try Black Orpingtons.
Leghorns are a pretty bird when in plumage with their snow white
feathers, yellow legs, and overhanging red combs. For a laying
strain, the type of bird is smaller and rather racy, but there are also
good layers in the larger variety. You would have to follow the
article on “ How to pick your best layers ” here, but any undue
stiltiness or fatness should be at once discarded. There are plenty
of good laying strains of Leghorns, only do not expect every bird to
lay the number the competitions show ; allow a margin of twenty
per cent., as your style of feeding and situation may be a drawback.
To improve your stock, you should introduce cockerels from
some known and reliable strain. As you are not breeding for show
points, you will not worry your brain, as scientific breeding is not
required.
There are few better birds to specialise with than these. There
are more fanciers in this one breed as a speciality, than in any other
breed I know of ; showing that there must be some particular in-
fatuation or magnetism about it.
In breeding for show purposes, have the cook bird with deep
cut serrations in his comb ; this is important even if he has only
four spikes Do not have a bird with a lot of serrations, as they
rarely have depth or width ; he requires to be sound in face and to
have as good a lobe as possible ; the color should be snow white, and
he should be good Leghorn type (see standards). Above all, have a
good flowing tail with width of sickles. Give away anything, but
secure the sickle carriage. The bird is spoilt when seen with a ver-
tical or squirrel tail, and the cock has a big influence on the progeny
in this particular point. The hens for breeding cockerels need not
be show birds ; those having rather an upright comb, or rising half-
way before falling are the most suitable, but look to the leg-color,
beak, and face. For pullet breeding the cock has generally a little
heavier comb, with not so good a base but fine in texture. He needs
plenty of lobe, fair color, good legs, and fair tail ; removing the comb
has beneficial results. The pullets or hens require to be show speci-
mens (see standards), they need nice texture of combevtnly serrated,
good face and eye, lobes good shape, color, legs, and the forty-five
degrees angle of the tail.
Anyone starting with this breed will require to have a large
heart, as so much experience is necessary to enter into the lists with
the specialists who have had ten or twelve years experience in getting
up and preparing the birds for the show pen. However, if you stick
to them you will be well repaid, as I feel sure, they have the largest
sale in any one variety, and a fancier on top secures the reward
which he richly deserves.
58


ADVERTISEMENTS.
DUCKS. # flyle S and
Headquarters of . .
Australasia for . . .
HIGH-CLASS
WINNING. .
STOCK. . . .
Bred from
Successive
Importations of
ENGLISH . .
CHAMPION .
WINNERS. .
Pekin Ducks.
SILVER WYANDOTTES, from winners of numerous Firsts and Specials
BLACK HAMBURGS, ANCONAS, and WHITE LEGHORNS,
Of the Best Imported Strains.
EGGS NOW BOOKED. Many Winners Hatched from Sittings
previously supplied.
P. BRIGGS, South Brighton.
Lucerne Chaff, for Poultry.
£
\-/ict
oris,
a-.
1856
CHAFF
CUTTIHr ,?H0
S?USHWC
■
Have Improved machinery for Cutting and Bagging Lucerne Hay Chaff.
Bacchus Marsh is the centre of the Victorian Lucerne District.
PEARCE BROS, have special facilities for selecting the finest Hay direct from
the Lucerne Fields.
Samples and Quotations on Application.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ff £egjy
orns.
The Leading Yards. \vo
Breeder and Exhibitor of Champion Buff Leghorns, also Buff
—Orpingtons. tt"~r~
MY BIRDS HAVE NEVER BEEN BEATEN WHERE SHOWN.
''M
’-r}
T 3
CO
PH
CO
o
O
w
2*5
JOt-
sf-
o
o
3
o
p-
Buff Leghorns,
Stock and Show Birds for Sale at Reasonable Prices to
suit purchaser.
Ft> M A IVIV 122 darkly Street,
. P. Ballarat East, Vic.


Canary Cages, Parrot Cages, Cockatoo Cages,
at Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Winners
at Brighton were Reared on
Victorian Chicken Meal
Tyzaek’s
BREEDING FOR COCKERELS IN SILVER AND
GOLDEN WYANDOTTES.
The Wyandotte is perhaps the best variety of fowls for sceptical
people to rear, as some argue that it is impossible to rear a strain of
birds to combine laying and show purposes. It is as simple as A.B.C.
to combat all the arguments brought forward by them, such as (1)
showing pullets in pens steps the birds laying, (2) excessive showing
ruins the bird’s constitution, (3) a breeder always breeds from his
show birds, therefore, the offspring must follow suit and turn out
poor layers, (4) a hen shown at two or three shows is not a reliable
stock getter. Now, in a cockerel breeding pen the hens or pullets
are never shown, as they are no use for that purpose, and therefore
are, or should be sound birds ; the cockerel or cock required
is as good a show bird as is possible to secure. You may have
to show him four or five times, but as cockerels are not so nervous
or highly strung as females, the showing, if it does not go over
six shows, does him more good than harm ; they have a spell, eating
their full amount which they do not always do, as some are too gal-
lant when home, and the hens suffer very little by their absence. As
you also overhaul a cockerel before despatching to a show, you
can examine for lice, etc. The following is the mating cock or
cockerel show bird :—good comb, lobes, wattle, and eye, the head neat
and small, good hackle-top color, and wing bars, good legs, lacing,
and under-color, and a typical blocky customer. He must be mated
with pullets, comb fair, wattle and eyes good ; the eye should be
bold, standing well out in the head, which is neat and narrow
when viewed from the front, good hackles, and well laced on breast,
the wings and saddle need not be clean laced, pencilling in the white
part of feathers will do, but the general color of the bird should be
silver rather than black. The legs of both must be free from
feathers, and the pullets can even be a little longer in body than
show birds, which will allow more room for their egg laying organs
You will of course substitute the different color in the Golden variety.
The four main points in picking cockerels are comb, hackles,
lacing coming well down the hocks, and good wing bars. Mated
like this, you can breed a show and laying strain of birds combined,
suitable for the fancier, the pedigreed egg layer and the farmer.
The other breeds can also be worked on these lines in nearly all
laced, pencilled, or semi-colored varieties.
59


Hyde’s Plain Canary Seed, Rape Millet Hemp,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray
St, Perth. Tel 426.
Tyzack’s Address, 405 Bourke St. West., Melbourne
PULLET BREEDING IN LACED WYANDOTTES
Competition has become so keen at shows now-a-days, that
unless you specialise and follow the system, and run pens to breed
cockerels and pullets in Wyandottes, you will be left behind.
For pullet breeding, the cock requires medium comb, following
the skull, hackle good on neck, with plenty of lacing on breast, of
a good black and white color, good wing bars, but the surface color
of the bird, that is along the back and cushion can be blurred or
smoky throughout ; the tail is better black, but if a little white is
showing it will not hurt. Pullets bred from a smoky backed bird
will stand any show all right as pullets, but they never make into
show hens. The top color is better clear on saddle hackle, showing
striping (but the trouble is, these do not knit in breeding as a rule,
but some will, as I have had them myself) ; then your birds will not
only be show pullets, but show hens as well, a big consideration. You
want type also in your cock bird, good bone and good colored legs
free from feathers. The pullets require to be show birds of a good
black and white color, evenly laced, securing the same width of
feather if possible all over the bird, with the feathers as wide as
possible. A narrow feather is to be avoided, and, above all, see you
have a good neck hackle, as black or smoky capes on pullets or
cockerels will take you four years to breed out, once you allow it in.
The cockerels you breed from this mating will be pullet bred,
and the pullets show birds, but not necessarily all top notchers.
BREEDING WHITE WYANDOTTES.
This breed has come rapidly to the front in Australia during
the last two years, and deservedly so. Four or five years ago, I
used to sell winning White Wyandottes for 80s. to 50s each ; last
season one of my White Wyandotte cockerels realized £l2 ; the
highest price paid for an Australian bred Wyandotte in a straight
out deal. I was offered £l5 for the father, but refused ; it shows
how prices go up as the breed becomes fashionable. I consider them
one of the finest breeds on earth, both for utility and fancy. To any
person adopting one breed as a hobby they will be found suitable, as
they hatch and rear their own chickens. Plenty of shade is required,
and cool districts would suit the breed better than warm climates.
60


ADVERTISEMENTS.
White WyaDdottes.
COCKERELS and Pullets for sale, bred from Cockerel unbeaten
1904 ; winner First and Champion, Ballarat ; First and Special
best Wyandotte in Show, Northoote ; First and Special, Essendon ; First,
Horsham ; First and Champion for Best Male Bird in Show, any breed,
Nhill ; mated with Hen, winner of Gold Medal for best Wyandotte, hen
nr pullet, in a class of 52, Khill ; First and Second, Horsham ; First and
Second, Goroke. A snow white strain of splendid type. Eggs in season
10s. 6d. dozen. 8
Bdff Orpingtons.
COCKERELS and Pullets for sale. Winner of last year — Cockerel,
Second, Essendon ; First and Second, Horsham ; First and Second,
Goroke ; Second, Best Orpington, any color, cook or cockerel, Khill ;
Hen, First and Champion, best hen or pullet in Show, any breed, Horsham.
Eggs in season, 10s. 6d. dozen.
NINE EGGS GUARANTEED FERTILE.
FRfIUK MIIfihHUDSWEM. vicTotjifi.
Bun neman,
HALLAM’S ROAD,
VICTORIA. AUSTRALIA,
importer, Breeder, & Brbibitor.
Winner of Champion Challenge Trophies,
Specials, Gold Medals, &c.
" l U!l"' l| ||i IP'- l«l>
» White kcgljorrjs,
BroWp Ijcgtiorqs,
Silver Wyapdottes
White Wyapdottes
Black Orpipgtoi)s.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
John Wharton,
HONEYCOTT FARM,
Hawes, Yorkshire, England,
The Pioneer and Champion Breeder in England of
Partridge and
Silver-Pencilled
Is open to ship any quantity of the above
Varieties at Reasonable Prices.
SXg®®(sXS)<^!*XSl(SX9®®<^SX^^
The HONEYCOTT FARM, which stands
900 feet above the sea level, is devoted entirely to the
raising of Wyandottes, 1000 being bred each year.
JOHN WHARTON is prepared to execute
any order entrusted to him for any other variety in a.
straightforward fancier-like way.
Write for his Circular.
1000 Prizes won at all the Best Shows
in Britain and the Continent, including both
Partridge Challenge Cups outright.


Aviaries, Breeding Cages, and all Canary Breeding
Requisites, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253
Murray St.. Perth. Tel. 426
Egg- Testers, Is., Tyzack’s.
As one pen of Whites will breed you both cockerels and pullets,
there is no necessity to work two pens, as you can breed both with
the one pen of birds properly mated.
In mating, if your hens are a bit long in the back, procure a
cock or cockerel with a very short one, and a sharp rising tail ; this
will help to shorten the back of the progeny. The great trouble is
length of back in pullets and hens, and stiltiness coupled with cut
away breast in cockerels or unbalanced birds. Have the comb fairly
small in the cock, as the shutting up of the show specimens always
tends to increase its size, and a large bulky comb or an overhanging
one is a serious defect for the show pen, although to one not educa-
ted to Wyandottes a large comb is their principal attraction. Above
all, procure yellowlegsas this is the foundation of a good laying strain.
With a good, neat comb, bay eye, good color of feathers, and legs,
and the Wyandotte type, you will find the white variety the beauty
breed.
PARTRIDGE AND SILVER PENCILLED WYANDOTTES.
HOW TO MATE.
These two breeds have become very popular in England, but
they have not had sufficient time yet to become fashionable here.
However, as they show signs of making a move I have written this
article for breeders and the public generally.
In the first place, Partridge Wyandottes are exact representa-
tions of Partridge Cochins in feathers, and Silver Pencilled are the
same in feathers as Dark Brahmas.
For scientific breeding you have to use two pens—Cockerel and
pullet breeding.
PARTRIDGE COCKEREL BREEDING
First 1 will describe what is wanted in an exhibition male.
We will begin at his comb. It must be true Wyandotte in shape,
that is low, firm set with spike following the bend of the neck, if
full of fine work so much the better, his skull wants to be broad,
his beak strong, shading into as near a yellow color, his eyes should
be bright bay, with the pupil well developed. A bird with a bad
eye looks anything but well. Now as to his legs : they should be
yellow, not black down the front and red up the sides as many are,
his toes should be straight and well spread, in fact giving him
something to stand on. In type he should be blocking, not
61


Raw Seed, for Canaries out of condition, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel. 426.
Owosso Duck Tonic, Is., Tyzack’s
narrow or gamey, Next comes his color. We will begin by saying
from the throat right round his breast, between his thighs right up to
and including his tail should be a rich glossy black, some show a ticking
on each feather. These, if cockerel bred, are no use whatever either
to show or to breed from. The head should be rich orange, the
hackle should be orange or golden red, having a black stripe down
the centre of each feather, not running through the feather, or it
will give what is called a smutty hackle. The saddle hackle should
also have the black stripe as in neck hackle, and compare in color
also. His back should be a rich dark red, as solid and lustrous as
possible. The wing bar a rich black free from ticking. The flights
free from white.
The color in Silver Pencilled are the same in the inner markings
of feathers, but the outside ground is pure silver instead of gold.
Any of our old fanciers in Dark Brahmas would know the feather.
THE SHOW HEN
should also possess the same class of head as the male, also the same
color of legs and same in type, whilst the hackle should be golden
yellow with the black stripe, whilst all over her body we should have
a mellow brown ground color, each feather being distinctly pencilled
with black, or as some writers put it “ pencilled with a darker
shade.”
Now I will try to explain what puzzles many, viz., What is
meant by cockerel and pullet breeding pens. The answer is this,
you must have two distinct matings to produce exhibition cockerels
and exhibition pullets.
HOW TO BREED COCKERELS.
To breed cockerels you must have a cockerel heading your pen
as near like what I have described as possible, although let me here
say a perfect bird has not yet been bred. To him you must mate
hens or pullets that are cockerel bred. They will possess none or
very little pencilling—less the better. They will simply be large
framed birds with dark brown body color, but they should have a
well striped hackle, good head and eyes. Prom such a mating you
should breed exhibition cockerels, and the pullets so bred in turn
will breed cockerels again Breeders cannot be too careful to know
that the females of the cockerel pen are really cockerel bred, as now
and again a pullet may be produced from a pullet mating which
looks like a cockerel breeder, but she will only breed ticked breasted
cockerel and upset the whole mating.
62


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CHICKVITAL, Kic a keS od
A Dry Feed. No Diarrhoea or Dysentery with this Feed. It
is thoroughly screened and free from dust, and contains the
proper food in correct proportion for the rapid growth of chicks.
CHICKVITAL is equal to anything of its kind kmwn. Is. 3d.
for / lb. bag ; special quote for large quantities.
COX’S DUCK MEAL,
A. Meal for the Rearing of Ducklings.
Blended in proper proportions. Is perfectly nutritious ; fattens
quickly, and will keep Ducks in vigorous and robust health.
Is. 3d. per 7 lb. bag.
The High Note Mixture,
For Canaries and all Small Birds.
Ic is absolutely clean and free from dust and imperfect seeds.
The best Bird Seed Mixture on the market. In calico bags
at 6d.
Cox’s Excelsior Parrot Food,
Specially blended for all climates, 6d. per 21b. bag.
Everything in the Poultry Line.
E.B.Cox&Co.
SEEDSMEN, &c.,
Corner Rundle Street and East Terrace,
ADELAIDE, S.A.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CiDi>ite (jDvjcn>clottes
ffi
su ao{( ©rpii>gtoiv
T HAVE some first-class
Stock of these Three
Popular Breeds, all well-
grown, healthy, and vigorous*
9c)uff ©rph>gtons
Prices Reasonable.
gif I Win at all Leading Shows in Victoria.
Birds and. Eggs in Season.
Correspondence and Inspection.
FI HnODPD Qeringhap Street,
• L#• I lv/v/i Dl\j Geelong West, . .
VICTORIA.
Mrs. J. R. TURNBULL,
McKinnon road, north Brighton, vic„
j
%
Noted Yards for
Black Orpingtons,
White Wyandottes,
Silver Wyandottes,
White Leghorns, Brown Leghorns,
\k
r
Winner of First Special Champion Black Orpington Cock, Melbourne,
1903.
Winner of Gold Medals in Wyandottes.i
Stock and Show Birds always on hand at Reasonable Prices,
EGGS IN SEASON.
Inspection and Gorres; ondence Invited.


Hyde’s Haptz Mountain Bread and Egg: Food for Canaries,
at Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel 426.
Owosso Poultry Spice, Is., Tyzack’s.
TO BREED PULLETS.
A mating to produce exhibition pullets should consist of hens
or pullets as near the show standard as possible, and to them should
be mated a pullet bred cockerel. Now a pullet bred cockerel should
be the son of a really good hen—a winner if you can get one that
you know is honest. In color he is of no use for the show pen, as
he will be ticked on breast, and partly pencilled on his thighs and
fluff. Here is where many make the mistake, they see a bird that
looks pullet bred, but how he has been bred they know not, yet
they use him and he spoils the whole mating. A cockerel that has
a pullet breeding pedigree behind him is really a valuable bird, as
he will improve the worst of stock, and if mated to good females he
will produce females worthy of any yard.
The cockerels, of course, from above mating, are in turn pullet
breeders.
CONFINEMENT V. FREE RANGE.
This subject has been thrashed out at different times in various
papers and journals, but so far the result is doubtful.
The free range people argue that birds that have plenty of
liberty and run. must be better constituted birds than those fed in
confinement. If they said birds on free range did not require so
much feeding on balanced rations at certain seasons of the year, they
would be right. If on the other hand, a man keeps fowls in confine-
ment, but provides scratching litter, and feeds the balanced rations tor
the various seasons of the year, for quickness in growth, size, and
stamina, the confinement birds would come out on top. I will admit
here, that in chicken rearing, that if you could give them fresh ground
every six weeks, not necessarily free range, I am with you, for even
fowls on free range only wander a certain distance from their accus-
tomed feeding ground. Another thing is the district and locality,
class of breed used, as to whether all things are working together in
harmony. But so far, all birds I have seen bred on free range have
not come up for size to birds bred in confinement, simply because
they have too much liberty and are running the food away in sprint-
ing, when it should be building up their bone and flesh. Yards
100 x 100 are quite large enough for confining any fowls, and if not
overcrowded they will have plenty of vigor.
63


Cage Front'! to fit Kerosene Cases, at Jas. Goss’s. Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth Tel 426
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
Birds running on free range do not need the same attention as
the others, therefore you save time in cleaning yards, etc., but still,
if you only have a limited number of birds (and you should only have
a limited number even on free range), the amount of ground you
have to walk over would be considerable, and the birds are not so
much under observation. It’s a peculiar thing, that birds in confine-
ment are always trying to get out, and as soon as you let them out,
they are in a great hurry to get back again ; similar to country peo-
ple wanting to go to town, and town people into the country, and as
they get there they are in a desperate hurry to go home again. In
my epinion birds under control will give better results, as we are
told to feed birds with a balanced ration, so as to make biddy shell
out her eggs in the quickest possible time, as she is to be discarded
after the second season, as they deteriorate rapidly each season in
egg production.
On a farm is where fowls, as a rule have free range, and the
average weight of their full grown birds would be from four to five
pounds, even if they breed from unrelated stock ; as for producing a
a cockerel eleven and a half pounds at eight months old, that would
be beyond their biggest stretch of imagination, and yet, plenty of our
breeders on limited runs have no bother in growing cockerels from
one pound to one and a quarter, every month.
There are two forms of confinement, one form is like I advoca-
ted, in houses and yards—this is absolute closer settlement and gives
good results, especially where the ground is not too good, but here I
give horse manure principal credit, as it is easy to keep moist in the
summer, and they are constantly working and scratching in the lit-
ter. The other confinement is in large yards, 100 x 100 ; you could
secure good results here providing you don’t overcrowd, but if this
amount of ground were laid out in closer settlement, you could rear
one hundred and fifty to two hundred birds successfully, but eighty
would be overcrowding if the birds had the run of the lot. Still, you
could rear birds up to the standard weights in these yards, as you
would feed on right lines. Fowls on free or unlimited range gener-
ally have to take pot luck as regards feeding, and of course, cannot be
expected to come up to the properly ted birds in size and bone. Still,
I feel sure, that with the best of feeding, you would not rear birds on
free range to compare with the others, as they have too much exer-
cise. Exercise is wanted, but it can easily be given your birds by
providing a scratching pen. The Americans have to keep their birds
in close confinement for four months of the year, as their winters are
very severe, but the fowls are kept in the best of health by providing
these scratching pens, although I don’t hear of any using horse
manure. Leaves, chaff, and straw are mostly used, but if half and
64


ADVERTISEMENTS.
F. U, Jhtfhomj & Co,,
PAYNEHAM ROAD. ST. PETER'S,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
<9 W Q)
torrefied Barley manufacturers.
Importers and manufacturers of all Poultry Keepers’
Requisites.
Proprietors of the “ Munburnie ” Brand well-known
Poultry and Bird Foods.
Pure Bred Poultry Bought and Sold on Commission.
Agents for all leading S.A. Breeders.
STILL GrOILTGr STRONG.
Before
MANNING’S POULTRY SPICE
Before . till CURES fIND
UClUltl V , MaSr PREVENTS,
DISEASES i
AND
INCREASES
EGG SUPPLY.
Tins, sold . 1/-A C|-pJ
-.everywhere 9 ?/- ~ C|
' Usini
McVo.Agt — Eliz.St.
Usm
r
the Public Over 14 Years.
IN the year 1889 the Proprietor and Manufacturer commenced using it
freely on a certain pen of Leghorns that were taken very bad with
Roup, and the result was so successful that he sent some of them to the
Poultry and Kennel Show held in the Exhibition, Melbourne, and won Ist
Cockerel, and Ist and Brd Pullets, and became so enamoured with what
the Spice accomplished he placed it on the market.
WILLIAM MANNING, Seed Merchant,
Bendigo, "Victoria.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
F. K. 13running,
64 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
Manning’s Celebrated Poultry Spice, Roup Pills. Pure
Bone Meal and Bone Grit, Earthenware Bird Fountains
Simpson’s Poultry Spice, Poultonic Powder (an improved
Fowl Tonic), Brinsmead’s Handy Poultry Tonic, etc., etc.
Owosso Duck Tonic, Owosso Scaly Leg Ointment,
Owosso Poultry Spice.
gxsxg®®<sx*)«gx*)®®®sx®®
HR.
I am the largest Importer of Bird Foods and Sundries
in Australia, and will be pleased to forward my Special Price
List post free on application.
W. PEARCE,
Durham Street, Ballarat \XZ., ~\7 is.
ext-'
Specialities: |£
lack * Buff Orpingtons,
CAA £AS) eA S) C?AS) cas
GYe) G Ac) GYc) GYc) GYc) GYc)
I only keep First-class Birds for Breeding. Buffs direct from
Whitfield’s famous strain, England.
The Stock is noted for its Purity of Buff Color.
My Blacks are the right strain of Beetle Green.
o
jPI FFW BIRDS FOR. SjPs-LE.
EGGS IN SEASON.
Correspondence and Inspection Invited.


Snow Cages for Canaries and all Cage Birds, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker. 253 Murray St. Perth.
Tel. 426
Tyzaek’s Grainoline.
half were used the result would be better, as the ammonia in the
horse manure kills the smell of the fowl guano. Personally, I would
like to have duplicate yards lying fallow for shifting stock of any
descriptions, but this would entail extra expense in all directions.
Breeding birds on free range would not suit fowl fanciers, as
when they wanted clients to view the stock, you would not be able to
get within coo-ee of them, especially if they were Anconas. It is
grand exercise on a frosty morning trying to catch an Ancona, bred
on free range, but these birds are either very wild or very tame.
It you have time to attend to yards, try the closer settlement,
it your time is limited, the larger yards, and of course, if you have no
time to spare attending fowls, the free range.
BREEDING FOR EXPORT.
This is in its infancy yet here in Victoria. Of course, we send
away a fair proportion of birds over sea, still, there are very few who
are making any real pretence to breed for export. It would show a
fair profit, as the birds do not require to be more than five months
old, so that the feed bill would cost you le. Bd. per bird, and the
profit, after paying all expenses to England, about Is. a head all
round. This i- fair, as no one would work export trade by itself,
but would combine egg production with it.
Your best breeds would be White or Jubilee Orpingtons, Buff
or Black Orpingtons, Paverolles, or Wyandottes. You could of
course select your fancy, as no one cares about breeding a variety he
or she has not a particular affection for, even for export. You-would
require to breed in July, August, and September, solely. Its too
late after these months for export, as you must catch the market at
the right time in England to secure the payable prices. The pullets
would make good winter layers of these breeds, and the three
months hatching would not be monotonous. For the pen I would
use an early cockerel with early matured pullets, so as to procure a
fair margin of cockerels.
The main thing is feeding the birds ; you want to keep them
moving all the time. A check in their growth would be disastrous.
If possible, pen the cockerels off by themselves, and give plenty of
maize and barley, not forgetting the green feed, only if there was
any you decided were fit for show or stock birds, keep them away
from the others and feed in the ordinary way, as too much barley or
maize is not good for prospective stock birds.
65


Goss’s Patent Water Fountains for Chickens, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth-
Tel 426.
Jamieson’s Winners Reared on Tyzaek’s Meal.
If you still felt fit and willing you could, of course, in February
and March, breed for the Australian market with the same class of
birds, and the two should turn you in a fair profit for the year if you
knew anything about poultry at all, and had a suitable place. You
could obtain full particulars of the export trade by writing to the
Agricultural Department of which ever State you are located in.
In some of the States the Government are buying birds right out,
or they will export for you—you can please yourself—but let me say
once again, here, don’t breed cross-breds.
IS IT EASIER TO BREED SOLID COLORED BREEDS THAN
PART COLORED OR MARKED BREEDS.
I have often been asked which is the easiest breed of fowls to
breed to standard points.
At the present time a lot of Buff Orpington fanciers are
tumbling over one another to get out of this breed to take on Black
Orpingtons, as they imagine they are easier to breed. I can safely
say that they are jumping out of the frying-pan into the fire.
Blacks are no easier to breed than Buffs. I think we hare seen
Buffs as near stand points as any Black. The last Melbourne first
prize winner was as near perfection to standard points as any breed,
and this was a Buff Cockerel. We have also seen Buff pullets that
it would be hard to fault. There are several points to secure in
Black Orpingtons. Take color How many do we see with that
rich beetle green from top of neck to end of sickle feather. 90 out
100 have purple sickle feathers, even if they are green elsewhere.
If you have color, are the legs of the bird free from feathers. Is he
loosely feathered, or cut away in breast, or does he carry too much
tail, the serrations of the comb right, does he show any white in
lobes, or is the bird too large, too tall, too small, and finally, does
his feathers have the sheen required for a show bird.
There is this difference between black and buff that the public
possess sufficient education to know that in buffs, black or white
feathers are faults, that they cannot be pure on that account ; and
here their education ceases. Whereas, with a Black Orpington any
fair sized specimen will pass muster in the ordinary public yards,
and if he happens to be a bit larger than ordinary, woe betide you it
you start to find fault to the lady of the house. Blacks are easy to
keep and show once you have a good bird, in fact in this respect I
regard them as the lazy man’s breed, as he can catch hold of them
66


Hyde’s Esthetic Seeds are the best fop Canaries, at
Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth Tel 426.
Jubilee Incubators, best. Tyzaek, Agent for Jubilee.
any time out of the yard place in a pen and often carry off the
special for the best bird in the show.
Take Wyandottes—How many specimens do we see of the
white variety better than the silvers. I can honestly say that for
every first-class white one shown, we can find three silvers of equal
merit ana yet in white cockerels you have only to breed “ on paper ”
type, comb, eye, beak, color, lobes, and legs. In silvers you have
comb, eye, lobe neck hackle, top color, wing bar, tail, saddle hackle,
lacing, under color, type, size, legs, and beak Golden Wyandottes
run somewhat similar, and with Partridge Wyandottes, although a
part colored bird they should be able to beat the others out of sight,
as their color of feather are similar colors to the old original jungle
breed, and statistics tell us that all breeds possessing these colors
have a bigger tendency to breed true to feather.
No one can say that our WEite Leghorns are superior specimens
to the Brown, although the number bred in favor of whites is 50 to 1,
and in America about 200 to 1, yet some people will persist in
saying that White Leghorns are easier to breed than Browns. Take
last Northcote show, 1905—A brown cockerel wins the special for
the best Leghorn cockerel in the show, in keen competition ; then
on top of that the brown pullet wins the special for best Leghorn in
the show.
Even under American score card, the self-colored birds can
only show a point difference— i.e., score, 95, marked bird ; 96, self-
colored birds—and this is not an isolated case but an average.
All the different breeds are hard to breed true to standard
points ; its that which keeps urging men on and on to reach
perfection ; even if they should reach the coveted position, could
they retain it 7 No, for as soon as we reach perfection we must
start to tumble back again, as we could not retain it.
According to statistics, and my own experience, Light Brahmas
and Indian Game are the two isolated breeds that breed more
uniform than any other, but Light Brahmas are one of our oldest
and best established breeds. So that any person or breeder who
imagines that the solid colored varieties are easier to breed than the
others, I fancy after experimenting that they will alter their opinion.
One fancier informed me that he intended building a fowl-house for
Buff Orpingtons, with stained amber glass windows, to give the
desired effect in color, possibly one of our Black Orpington fanciers
could follow suit and build one having green glass for windows.
The difference in the price of the birds should soon pay for the
glass, providing you could always get your clients to enter your
special houses.
67


Meat Safes, Butter Coolers, &c, at Jas Goss’s. Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth Tel 426
Jubilee Incubators Won’t Burn Your House Down.
USEFUL ITEMS.
TO REMOVE SPURS
This should always be done if a fancier is running three or four
breeeds, as there is always a time in the year when you will be caught
napping in an unguarded moment, and the operation is very simple.
Proceed as follows : Place two potatoes in the fire till they are
almost baked, have your bird ready, place the spurs through the
centre of the potatoes, leave them on for about a minute, remove the
potatoes and run a sharp knife close up to the leg, right round the
spur—you don’t want to out deep—now clasp the spur in your fingers
and gently work it off ; if your potatoes were hot enough, no diffi-
culty will be experienced, nor does it hurt your bird, but it may be
the means of saving the life of one bird or another
If a fowl is mopy, examine for Ire, even if they are a bit out of
sorts, a bath (especially with the Leghorn breeds) will often act as a
good pick me up.
To send cockerels away in the same coop, that perhaps would
fight, it is best to hobble them, using some stout twine for the pur-
pose, so as not to cut into the leg.
If you want to place a rooster along with another one in a
breeding pen, the chances are that both would be hors de combat
through fighting. The best way to manage this is to select the bird
you think the most of, hold him in your hands near the ground and
spar up to the other fellow, as he keeps coming up for his gruel, slap
him across the head with your open hand ; he won’t know any dif-
ference, and in a short time will imagine he is the defeated bird, then
let the other go. If he is inclined to be too bossy, as some naturally
are, you had better hobble them till they become reconciled.
If you require to remove a Leghorn or a Minorca’s comb, don’t
have any scruples about it, as it is the only way of saving life in a
lot of cases, and the operation is simple, and the bird does not feel
it near so much as a fight of a minute’s duration. Take a pair of
fairly stout scissors or a short razor and cut the comb from the back
towards the front, keeping about half an inch from the head, or a
little less ; you will find the comb only bleed in the front part, unless
you went too near the centre of the head. After operating place
some flour over the cut and put him away ; he will not feel any
effects, and for a breeding pen he is much better with his comb off.
If a hen is crop bound, and after giving her some castor oil and
whisky, and pouring hot water down her neck into her crop, and
working and kneading it about with your hands, no improvement is
noticed, your best plan is to open it up and remove the obstruction
if you wish to save your bird. The operation is simple and does not
hurt or effect the bird. Proceed as follows : Remove a few of the
68


ADVERTISEMENTS.
W. GREGORY,
Importer of Incubators, Brooders, and all Appliances for
Rearing Poultry, sc.
CHAMPION GRIT AND TONIC, for Poultry, Pigeons, and all Cage Birds.
CHAMPION MANGE CURE (a positive cure), Is.
GRIT CRUSHERS, BONE CUTTERS, Best Makers.
PATENT WHITEWASH SPRAY PUMPS.
BREEDER AND RACER OF HIGH-CLASS HOMING PIGEONS. Young Birds
for Sale. Pedigrees Guaranteed.
High=class Poultry on hand. Exchanges made.
o
Orders taken for Settings of Eggs from all Breeds of Poultry.
TRY OUR CHICKEN MEAL, the Best in Melbourne.
Clubs supplied with METAL MARKING RINGS. Made ou the Premises.
ROUP. —GREGORY’S ROUP CURE has proved itself all that is required.
Effects a speedy cure. Price, Is. bottle.
CANKER AND WARTS CURED BY OUR SOLUTION.
INSPECTION INVITED. SATISFACTION ASSURED.
address^
454 Bourke St. West, Melbourne (TH Quf B N O sTREE™ OM
Buff Orptnfffons.
Essendon, 1903.—Cocks, Ist; Hens, Ist Champion
Challenge Trophy, and 2nd ; Cockerels, 2nd ; Pullets, Ist
2nd, and 3rd.
Essendon, 1904.—Cocks, 2nd ; Hens, Ist Champion
Challenge Trophy, and 3rd ; Cockerels, Ist.
Royal Agricultural Society, 1904.—Cocks, Ist; Hens,
Ist ; Cockerel, 2nd, and Pullet, Ist. ■
k
EGGS AND STOCK IN SEASON.
✓
C. B. ROCKE. “ Holmbush,” Balaclava Rd., E. St. Kilda.
* VIC.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
“‘paverolles
99
WO
The Popular English Table Bird
Flesh Absolutely White and of
Excellent Flavor.
A Grand Utility Breed. Eggs all the Winter.
XnwitecL.
/Ibis. XTravers,
<ro£atwm WlatraQiil.
. 1b
arman,
<3
Orpington Poultry Farm,
Specialties: Black Orpington. Silver White Wyandottes,
Minoreas, Imported English Stock used in Breeding Pens.
Winners of Several Gold Medals at Principal Shows of Victoria.
Stock for Sale . €ggs in Season.
NORMANDY ROAD,
Uia Canterbury.


Poultry Grits, Bone Meal and Grit, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzaek, Agent for Spratts. Spratts’ Dog Biscuits, best
feathers at the place you decide to make the incision, which must be
in the top part of the crop, cut the skin out about one inch long,
and the inner skin sufficiently large for you to insert a small spoon
to remove the trouble inside. Take care to remove all the mass, in-
sert your finger to make sure it is empty, then sew the inner skins
together with silk of a strong texture, take care you have sufficient
stitches in to close the skins well together, sew up the outer skin, feed
on soft bread soaked in milk for three or four days, and in ten days
the wound will be completely healed.
If you have a fowl that you catch eating her eggs—l think you
will find it one of the lighter breed Leghorns or Minorcas—your best
plan is to make a new nest in a dark corner, with the top of the nest
fairly low, a kerosene case laid on its side is a suitable one ; then
remove a quarter of an inch of the top beak of your bird, and as a
rule she will not trouble you any more.
If you catch a fowl feather pulling and eating, immediately re-
move the bird from the pen ; mind there is a big difference between
a fowl feather eating off the ground (nearly any fowl is apt to eat a
stray feather at times) and a bird pulling feathers out of another
fowl and eating them You require to annoint the bird that has
had its feathers pulled with a solution of bitter aloes and whisky, in
case any of the others start operations. Your fowl that is the cul-
prit should be removed to another pen and fed with plenty of meat
and vegetables, to stop the craving for the feathers. The funny
thing is how the cook bird will stand and let the hen pull feathers
from his neck without a murmur, even seeming to enjoy the operation.
Never feed fowls mash food on litter of any kind, as crop
troubles will ensue, always use a sack to place it on.
A White Wyandotte or a Leghorn with a good color of orange
yellow in leg, even it it does show a streak up the side of red, will
eventually make the best adult bird as far as beak and leg color are
concerned ; as a rule they have a more vigorous constitution.
Much has been written lately on protein and carbohydrates. Pro-
tein comes under the heading of nitrogeneous compounds, such as
we require to feed laying hens to form the balanced ration, or in
other words, it is meat, green bone, or meat meal. Peas contain a
large percentage of nitrogen, and where meal or its substitutes are
not obtainable, it is advisable to use this grain four or five times a
week, especially in winter Protein goes to form flesh, repair waste
tissues, and is the principle factor in white of egg and part of yolk ;
vegetable compounds enter largely into the make up of the yolk of
egg. This will be distinctly noticed if birds laying have been kept
without green feed for some time, the yolks will be pale in color, but
after feeding green feed, the color in yolk will be golden to rich
orange. Carbohydrates, oil, and fats are compounds formed l*y
69


The following is the table of food used at Dookie, 1904-1905:—
Table of average daily ration, with cost per week and year of
constituents :—
Proportion by
weight of food.
Constituents
of food.
Weight of food,
per day.
W eight of food
per week
Price of food
Cost per week.
Cost of food,
year 1904-5.
Part.
lb.
lb.
Ton.
£ S.
d.
1
Chaff, wheaten
3
21
45/-
0/5
1 1
8-7
lb.
1
Meat, scraps
3
21
0/2
3/6
9 2
6
bus.
2
Bran
6
42
0/8*
1/5-85
3 17
6-7
5
Pollard
15
105
09*
4/1.87
10 16
8-4
5
Water
15
105
nmV'.
24 18
5-8
8
Wheat
24
169
3-
8/4 8
21 18
0
Grit (shell)
1 5
0
Green food ...
3 5
0
Total yearly cost of food, £51 6s. 5'81d.
Hyde’s Insect Proof Medicated Nests for Canaries, at
Jas- Goss’s Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth Tel. 426
Send fop Tyzack’s Catalogue
chemical union of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen ; cellulose also acts
as a food carrier and is chiefly the fibrous husks in chaff, bran, grass,
etc. These technical names are apt to confuse the ordinary public,
but I have condensed them as much as possible. One pound of
meat is equal to 4 pounds of barley as an equivalent in food for laying
hens. This is the reason why barley or potatoes should be fed
sparingly to laying hens, or birds you are expecting to lay. But of
course, for feeding young cockerels for market purposes it will be
beneficial A hen has all the eggs in her ovary she will ever lay,
no matter how you feed her. It depends on your proper balanced
ration of protein and carbohydrates how soon you will induce her to
shell them out. Personally, about one third of the hens are not
worth the trouble and expense of trying, as no matter what sort of
ration you had, the bird would not show a profit.
70


Danish Meat Meal for Fowls, Ducks, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth Tel. 426
Tyzack, Agent for Andrews’ Roup Cure
Remarks.—The chaff was steeped in water overnight until soft
and pliable. An average of about 3oz. of the mash was given to each
bird per day.
Annual cost of morning ration, 2s. 2-9 d, per bird.
Annual cost per bird for wheat, Is. 11 - 6 d.
Each bird would, on average,eat, including grit and green feed,
4s. Bd. per year.
222 hens laid 38,294 eggs in twelve months, with an average
per pen of 1,034 - 9. There is no doubt, Dookie is a better locality
for egg production in fowls than Ballarat. Some of the birds ave-
raged over 10s. per head after paying feed, and if you could breed
and rear 1000 birds up to this standard, you could afford to pay for
assistance.
STANDARD JUDGING CARD.
Any new system that can be introduced to interest and en-
courage the public to attend shows of all descriptions should receive
every encouragement from the different societies for their own and
the public benefit. All societies that manage shows, and more
especially poultry societies, are generally at their wits’ ends to make
the show a success, and have to bring in side shows to induce the
public to attend.
Take away the jumping at most of the agricultural shows, and
the falling-off in the public would be considerable. Why ? Simply
because there is nothing in any of the sections judged to interest
the public. Have you ever been to a sheep show and wanted to go
again ? You see a number of sheep in a row, and certain ones
have prize cards attached to the pens. There is nothing to illustrate
why they have received a prize, and you see the whole show in a
quarter of an hour and wonder why people go to shows of this
description.
If the standard judging cards were introduced at all shows,
and in all sections, the public then would begin to learn the
difference between the prize-winners and the ones without a prize,
and in a few shows their interest would increase, and in a while they
would, even without looking at the cards, be able to distinguish the
difference between the various exhibits. I may say here these cards
are for the public, as the exhibitors, more especially the older hands,
know the points ; but even they can always learn when they see it
down in black and white. Most of the exhibitors would like to
know without worrying the judge what he puts their birds out for.
71


Carbolaeene Fluid for washing 1 Dog“s, Fowls, &c , at Jas
Goss’s, Wire and Cagre Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth,
Tel. 426.
Tyzaek, Agent Flood’s Roup Cure,
The public would not patronise cricket or football matches if
they did not know the different rules of the game, and they start
learning the different points when young, and are well equipped to
criticise any game they go to witness in after life. It is the same
at poultry shows. Let the public see in black and white the
different points illustrated ,011 cards, and in a very short time the
gate receipts would double. As shows are run now, you might just
as well have a brick show, for the attendance would be the same—
the exhibitors and their friends—and with a card hanging here and
there, the interest to the ordinary public would be just the same as
a sheep or poultry show, providing they had bricks of different
sizes and colors.
Exhibitors who enter a bird for show generally pays 4s. to enter
it, nurses it for a couple of months, and pays for carriage, and if
they cannot attend the show receive the bird back with no comment,
and are practically as wise as before the bird left their hands ; no
satisfaction is given, and they become disgusted and drop out of the
fancy. The present method of judging poultry is to rattle a stick
along the coops, and the one that strikes the eye wins the prize,
just through simply having one good point that stood out well. If you
ask the judge what is your bird out for, providing you have enough
courage, he will tell you “ That’s his fancy,” or it was the best bird
in his estimation at the time of judging. The judging cards would
stop, in a great measure, the different fads of judges, as they will
often when using the stick on the bird discover some particular point
that has given considerable trouble in his own breeding pen, and
pass the bird out, no matter how good that bird’s other points
may be.
The judging card will also make judges better judges, as they
have under this sytem to go through all the points of each bird, and
it is impossible for them if they know the standard to make a
mistake.
Although a number of the judges have studied standards there
are a good few who do not know the points of all breeds, and more
especially the disqualification points. Under the present system is
it not a lovely time you have showing a friend round and trying to
interest him or her ? What difference can he see in a class of 20
Black Orpington cockerels, and how soon would you get tired trying
to explain the different points to him, and both parties feel relieved
when the show has finished ? The Americans use a score card at
most shows, which is a decided improvement, but I claim not so
instructive as the Standard judging card, as the simple figures
opposite the points do not tell in any way what is the matter unless
72


ADVERTISEMENTS.
n Breeder of 20 years
*7l<'
FOE THE LOVE OF IT.
Langshans, Indian Game,
Black R. C. ORPINGTONS.
Always Up-tc-Date in Quality and Price.
WRITB TO
WALTER SKELTON:
Dunolly, , .
Victoria.
SUHHYHUJSTJGG FARM-
Champion TMbite Xegborns.
BRED TO LAV.
M Y Pen of WHITE leghorns
* in the S.A. Laying Competition made
the Sonnyhurst Leghorns famous.
Young Stock for Sale, and Eggs in Season.
Write for Full Particulars and Printed Catalogue.
W. L. WILLIAMS, BA ITLIZ LY ’
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


ADVERTISE MENTS.
THE BEST YARDS IN AUSTRALIA.
J. B. JfIfIDIESON,
GOLD, SILVER, WHITE, and PARTRIDGE WYANDOTTES,
BUFF and BLACK ORPINGTONS, WHITE LEGHORNS,
OLD ENGLISH and BRITISH GAME, GAME BANTAMS, and
At the Poultry and Kennel Club Show, 1904
(keenest competition in Australasia), 1 exhibited
thirty-two Birds, and thirty-one secured prizes,
including sixteen firsts, seven seconds, two
thud prizes, tour V. H. C., and Champion for
best Wyandotte Cock in Show, &c.
V fIEERim ROAD.
OAKLBIGH
(Ten minutes ffiaprambeena).
RUNNER DUCKS.
—CL-
EGGS, 21s.
DUCK EGGS, IDs. 6d.
111 nll n 111111111 m
SlfiGliE from 10s. 6d. eaeh.
Information Given.


Owosso Scaly Leg Ointment, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St. Perth. Tel 426.
Tyzaek, Agent Contej/’s Roup Cure,
you know the standard points. The cards, American and the
Standard card, introduced by Mr. Geo. Woodward at the late
Essendon, Prahran, and Adelaide shows, are shown below, and the
public can judge which is the better of the two systems. To judge
under the American score card system it would be necessary to judge
under their standard, which in a number of sections is entirely
different to the English standards. As we have bred and imported
birds according to English standard, to jump from our present style
of judging to the American score card would be too drastic, and
only cause confusion and disappointment, and thus the standard
card judging can be adopted without any change, manner or style of
breeding than what we practise at present.
The Adelaide Advertiser commenting on the system remarked:—
“ That the standard judging card was initiated for the first time at
the Royal show, and proved a decided success, judging by the
manner the public, in passing along the pens, remarked on the
points illustrated on the cards.” The Garden and Field in their
summary remarked that : “In the sections judged under the
standard score card very few of the cards were left behind, and that
it was a decided improvement even upon the American score card,
especially for the public and new beginners, and deserved every
encouragement from societies.” The Australian Hen , Australia’s
leading poultry journal, says : “ The standard score card introduced
at the Melbourne show was a decided success. The critics who
came to cavil of a failure were loud in their praise in the success of
the undertaking, and said the system was simple enough for any
person professing to be a judge to undertake and successfully
accomplish.” The Australasian, although silent at the inception,
admitted after, “ That the system of standard judging was the only
way to interest the public, and some such style needed to be adopted
at all the shows.” Now we find America’s leading poultry journal
commenting favorably on the system, and actually asks its readers
is it not a really better style than their own, and worthy of serious
consideration for its adoption at their shows.
One of the critics remarked that exhibitors would not like to
see posted up all the faults of the birds The cards are to illustrate
the good as well as the defective points, and no judge need be
offensive. I hope before long that the principal agricultural
societies will seriously consider some such proposition to be used in
all live stock sections at the show, as it will increase the interest of
the public. Exhibitors will stop all this wrangling with judges
after the adjudicating, as no judge will have the confidence to put
down in black and white on a card the faults or merits of stock un-
less he is thoroughly up to every point of the standard.
73


Flower Stands, Flower Baskets, and Flower Stainers,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 258 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Woodward’s Winners Raised on V.C. Meal.
The bird illustrated here is judged under the American score
card and the standard card. The cutting of points in the various
sections is either for bad style, shape, or color, but you cannot tell
which, as they do not make any distinction.
WYANDOTTE.
American Score Card.
Shape ... ...
Weight ... ... 1
Condition ... ...
Comb, ... ...
Eye ... ...
Wattle and ear-lobe ...
Neck ... ...
Back} ... ... 1
Tail | ... ...
Wing ... ... £
Breast ... ... 1
Flufi ... ... _
Legs and toes ...
Score ... ... 91|
Possible points, 100.
STANDARD JUDGING CARD.
Introduced by Geo. Woodward.
Comb : Good shape, but no work
Eye : Both good
Lobes : One good, other folded
Neck and hackle : Nice color, but weak in strips
Saddle hackle : Same
Tip color : Good
Wing bar : Well laced
Lacing : Well spaced and regular
Type : Bird not balanced
Fluff : Good
Legs : Good
Tail: Excellent
Size : Small
Condition : Good
Remarks : Very fair bird. Pails in size and type.
Since I introduced this system it has been' adopted by all the
leading Melbourne societies, Essendon, Prahran, Brighton,
Williamstown ; also Adelaide and Perth.
74


Marking: Punches for Chickens, at Jas. Goss's, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth Tel 426.
Tyzaek’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
ANCONAS.
General Characteristics of Cock.
Head and Neck.— Head : Deep, moderate in length, rather
inclined to width, carried well back. Beak : Medium. Eye : Bright
and prominent. Comb : Single, medium, upright, with deep, broad,
even serrations (five to seven) forming a regular curve ; coming well
back, and following line of head ; free from excrescences. Face :
Fine in texture ; tree from creases. Ear-lobes : Medium, inclined
to almond shape ; free from folds. Wattles : Long, fine in texture ;
in proportion to comb. Neck : Long, nicely arched, well covered
with hackle.
Body.— Body : Broad, tapering to tail, close and compact.
Breast : Full and broad, carried well forward and upward. Back :
Moderate length. Wings : Large, carried well tucked up.
Tail — Large and full, carried high with fine flowing sickles.
Legs and Feet.— Thigh not much seen. •'•bank: Medium
length, strong, set well apart, clear of feathers. Toes : Four, rather
long and thin, well spread out.
General Shape and Carriage.—Alert, bold, active.
Size and Weight. —Medium ; full grown birds from 6 lbs.
to 7 lbs.
General Characteristics of Hen.
Head and Neck.— Head : Moderate length, rather broad.
Beak and Eye :As in the cock. Comb : Medium, falling on one
side ; single fold preferred, partly hiding face ; free from excrescen-
ces ; broad serrations, fine in texture. Face :As in cock. Ear-
lobe : Medium. Wattles: Medium length, well rounded, fine in
texture. Neck : Medium length, carried well up.
Body.— Body : Round and compact, rather longer than the
cock. Breast : Full and prominent. Back : Rather long and broad.
Wings ; Large, carried close to the body,
Tail.— Full, carried well up.
Legs and Feet.- — As in the cock.
General Shape and Carriage. — Lively, active.
Size and Weight. —Medium ; from Sjlbs. to 6 lbs.
Color in Anconas.
In Both Sexes.— Beak : Yellow, with black or horn-colored
shadings. Eye : Bright red. Comb, Face, and Wattles : Bright
red. Ear-lobe : White. Plumage : Good beetle-green ground,
tipped with white, as evenly mottled throughout as possible, with no
inclination to lacing. Legs : Yellow, mottled with black.
N.B.—Tail and flight feathers to be black.
75


Owosso Poultry Spice, Genuine, Is. Packet, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel. 426.
Thermometers Tested (American Tyzaok’s
Value of points in Anconas.
Deduct
Defects, up to
Defects in comb ... ... ... 10
„ eye ... ... ... 5
„ lobes end wattles ... 10
„ color ... ... ... 30
„ legs and feet ... .. 10
Want of size ... ... ... 15
„ condition ri , l ;":T‘ ... ... 10
„ shape and-symmetry ... 10
A perfect bird to count 100
Serious defects, for which birds should be passed : White face ;
plumage other than black and white ; wry tail or other deformity ;
legs other than mottled ; other than four toes.
ANDALUSIANS.
General Characteristics of Coo .
Head and Neck. — Head ; Fair size, rather long and dee]-
Beak : Stout and moderately long. Eye : Full (see also color).
Comb : Fairly large, single, upright, perfectly and evenly serrated
with broad spikes ; perfectly upright ; and the back portion following
the curve of the neck but without touching ; to be set on the skull
with a firm and broad base. Face : Fine in texture and free from
feathers (see also color). Ear-lobes : Fair size smooth texture, and
free from wrinkles, almond-shaped, and fitting close to the face.
Wattles : Fine in quality, long, and broad Neck : Rather long in
proportion to size of body, and carried back so as to accentuate the
prominent breast, with plenty of hackle.
Body. —Large, broad at shoulders, and tapering to the tail.
Breast ; Full and round. Back : Slightly rounded, and sloping
towards the tail. Wings : Long, carried well up and close to the
body ; the ends should be well covered by the saddle feathers.
Tail.— Large and flowing, and carried moderately high, but
not approaching squirrel fashion ; sickles long and well arched.
Legs and Feet.— Thighs and Legs : Rather long, the shanks
and feet quite free from feathers. Toes : Four in number, perfectly
straight, thin, rather long.
76


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Adelaide Poultry Yards,
GIN GIN, WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Our Specialties.—Silver, White, and Partridge Wyandottes,
Rosecomb, Brown, and Singlecomb Brown Leghorns,
Indian Runner and Pekin Ducks.
This season we are importing fresh stock (including a pen of Buff
Orpington Ducks) from some of the best yards in the Commonwealth.
Our Birds won over 150 cards in 1003 and 1904. We are the
pioneer Runner Breeders of W.A., and our Runners are from the best
yards in Australia. Our White Leghorns are full sisters to the famous
Sunnylmrst Leghorns.
Our White Wyandottes are Hayes’ (American) strain, imported by
Mr. Stewart, of Berowra, N.S.W.
Our Silver Cockerels won at all the leading Show last season.
We solicit a trial and guarantee satisfaction. EGGS IN SEASON.
W. A. E. Smith,
BLACK FOREST POULTRY YARDS,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
WYANDOTTE SPECIALIST.
The Most Successful Breeder and Exhibitor of Wyandottes
in the State.
MY RECORD in the Show Pen and Laying Competitions is un-
approached by any other breeder in the Commonwealth of Australia to-day.
SILVERS, GOLDS, BUFF, WHITE, AND PARTRIDGE.
Also headquarters in S.A. for H. Van Dressor’s World’s Record Laying
Strain of American White Leghorns.
ADDKESS— W. A. E. SMITH, Biack Forest Poultry Yards, S.A.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CHAMPION
JJlaeH O r P if is tor ls
O NLY.
YOUNG STOCK FOR SALE.
Eggs £,l Is. per doz., Guaranteed.
Inspection Cordially Invited.
Correspondence Promptly Attended to.
Office : Lydiard St., Ballarat, Victoria.
Yards : Cattle Yards, Ballarat West.
J. A. S. BRAZENOR.
Secretary Ballarat Agricultural and
Pastoral Society, and.
Ballarat Dog and Poultry Society.
•vthoioia ‘LVfiv r rmi
l- rs ijijs fpc ‘NOtdanrid r
mini
•peoßiday S o|!iJBiun 'uezop jad 'sgi ‘SSS3
•UOIJOBJSIJBS OABq ][IAI tIOA pUB ‘SJUBAV JnoX SIIUBJS 81U OJ BJUAA
‘sSSd ajiqAV aSjß] jo saaLq juapa.wa puß sjauuuv paajq [juv juip uad
b jo ‘p.uq qoojs b ‘uaunaads uojuqiqxa ub jiibav uoa jj
’tOGI ‘si B PBM PFO 88.IMI 's.uoqg jjb qy
S3 l Hd Od i NOIdIAIVHO ‘SIVIO3dS ‘SlSdld
•Sjfivjoads} Aft
sp.uouiui uoidmeqg


Owosso Duck Cure. Only Remedy
Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker
Perth. Te). 426.
for Ducks, Is. at
, 253 Murray St.,
Winners
at Brighton were Reared on
Victorian Chicken Meal
Tyzack’s
General Shape and Carriage —-Very upright and strutting,
with breast carried prominently forward ; general appearance keen,
active, and alert.
Size and Weight. — As large as possible consistent with sym-
metry and activity. Weight from 7 lbs, upwards, somewhat less
being allowed for cockerels.
General Characteristics of Hen.
Head and Neck. — Head. , Beale, and Eye : As in the cook.
Comb ; Single, large, deeply and evenly serrated, falling over to
either side in a graceful curve so as to hide one eye ; a double curve
is not to be desired. Face, Ear-lobes,-and Wattles :As in the cock,
but the ear-lobes and wattles smaller and rounder ; wattles much
smaller. Neck :As in the cock.
Body. —As in the cock.
Tail.— Nicely tapered, and carried well back.
Legs and Feet. —As in the cock.
General Shape and Carriage.—As in the cock.
Size and Weight. —About 5 lbs and upwards.
Color of Andalusians-
In Both Sexes.— Beak : Dark slate or horn color. Eve :
Dark red or reddish brown. Comb, Face, and Wattles : Bright
red. Ear-lobes : Pure white. Legs : Dark slate or leaden blue.
In the Cock. — Head, Hackle, Back, and Saddle : Eich lus-
trous black, without lacing. Breast and Thighs : Clear silver blue
in ground color, with distant black lacing on each feather. Shoul-
ders and Wing-bows : Eich lustrous black. Wing-bars : Same as
body, with well defined lacing on outer edges. Secondary and
Flight Feathers, and True Tail Feathers : Same color as the breast,
the secondaries laced if possible. Sickle Feathers and Tail Coverts :
Purplish black.
In the Hen, — Head and Hackle : Eich lustrous black, with-
out lacing in upper hackle, but showing broad lacing on the tips of
the feathers at the base. Breast, Body, Back, and Thighs : Same
silver-blue ground color as the cock’s breast, with distinct black
lacing on each feather The wing bars should have well defined
lacing ; the secondaries and flights same shade as the body, the
secondaries edged or laced if possible. Tail : Same as the body
with the ends laced up if possible.
77


Value of points in Andalusians.
Cook or Hen.
Deduct
Defects.
up to
Defects in comb ...
10
Faulty lobes
10
Defects in face
15
„ color of plumage .. . ...
20
„ lacing ...
20
Want of size, shape, or style
15
„ condition
10
A perfect bird to count
100
Nursery Fire Guards, Sieves, Gravel Screens, Crab Nets,
at Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack’s Address, 405 Bourke St. West., Melbourne.
Serious Defects, for which birds should be passed : In cocks
squirrel or wry tail ; very white in face ; very rei lobe ; drab or rusty
saddle or hackle ; comb much over ; feathered legs ; crooked toes ;
any other color of legs and feet than light to dark slate. In hens,
erect, comb, and any of the above defects which also apply to hens.
DORKINGS.
General Characteristics of Cock.
Head and Neck. —Head : Large but dignified, free from
coarseness, and broad in skull. Beak : Stout, well proportioned,
and slightly curved. Eye: Full. Comb-. Single or Rose in Darks ;
single in Silver Greys ; Rose in Whites and Cuckoos. The single
comb should be moderately large, circular m arch, evenly serrated,
firmly set on the skull, being broad at the base, perfectly upright in
carriage, free from thumb marks or any excrescent growths such as
side spikes. The rose comb should be firmly set on the head, square
and moderately broad in front; free from any hollows, covered on
the top with coral-like points of even height, and narrowing behind
to a distinct slightly upturned peak. Ear Lobe : Moderately
developed, hanging as nearly as possible about one-third the depth
of the wattles. Wattles : Large and pendent, free from any ex-
crescent growths. Neck : Rather short, gracefully arched, with full
hackle, coming well over the back, making it appear very broad, and
tapering to the head.
Body. —Bodv : Deep, square, and massive, and as large as
possible ; long rectangular shape viewed sideways, and tightly
feathered. Breast : Deep, broad, and nicely rounded, the breast
78


Lucerne and Clover Chaff a Specialty, at Jas, Goss’s,
Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel. 426.
Eg-g- Testers, Is., Tyzaek’s.
bone long and straight. Back : Broad and level, with full saddle,
moderate in length, Saddle : Broad, inclining downwards to tail.
Wings : Large, carried well up and close to the body.
Tail.— Tail: Full, sweeping, and carried well back (a squirrel
tale objectionable). Sickles: Broad and well curved. Side hangers
broad and abundant.
Legs and Feet.— Thighs: Large, strong, and well developed,
carried “along” the body so as not to be conspicuous. Shanks:
Short, strong, stout, and round in bone (square or sinewy bone very
objectionable), set well apart, free from any sign of leg feathers ;
spurs set on their inner side, pointing rather inwards. Toes : Five
in number, nice and round in shape, and hard in quality (soft spongy
feet to be guarded against) ; the front toes long, absolutely straight
and well spread, the fourth distinctly apart from the fifth and
inclining towards the ground, the fifth coming away distinctly from
the leg, firmly set on, and nicely turned up the leg. Toe-nails :
Nicely shaped in proportion to the toes
General Shape and Carriage —Gay and stately, with
breast well thrown forward.
Size and Weight.— Very large. A cockerel should weigh
from 9 lbs. to 10 lbs., and an adult cock from 12 lbs. to 14 lbs
General Characteristics of Hen.
Head and Neck.— Head : Large, and broad in skull. Beak
and Eye: As in the cock. Comb : Resembling the cock’s if rose,
but it single, nicely hung and falling over to one side of the face.
White and Cuckoo should have the rose comb, Darks either, and
Silvers the single comb. Ear-lobes and Wattle : Similar to cock,
but proportionately smaller.
Body.— Long, level in back, deep and massive, wide in front
and broad across cushion, and tightly feathered.
Tail.— Well developed, with broad feathers, carried closely ;
fan tails objectionable.
Legs and Feet.— Same as the cock, although the spurs are
not so fully developed.
General Shape and Carriage. —Plump, deep, and massive.
Carriage staid and matronly.
Size and Weight.— Very large. A pullet should weigh from
7 lbs. to 8 lbs., and an adult hen from 9 lbs. to 10 lbs.
79


Any New Specialty Made to Order, at Jas. Goss’s Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth Tel 426
Owosso Duck Tonic, Is., Tyzack’s
Color in Dark Dorkings.
In Both Sexes. — Beak : Dark horn. Eye : Bright red or
yellow iris, the former preferred.' Comb. Fare , Ear-lobes, anti
Wattlex : Brilliant red (white ear-lobes a decided objection).
Shanks : Dead white, and free from red down the side of the leg or
any trace of feathers. Feet : Absolutely white, free from red
between the toes. Toe-nails : Pure white.
In the Cock. — Hackle : White or straw color, more or less
striped with black. Saddle : Resembling hackle. Rack : Various
shades of white, black and white, or grey, sometimes mixed with
maroon (bronze objectionable). Wing-how : White, or white mixed
with black or grey. Wing t l averts or Bar : Black, glossed with
green. Secondaries : White on outer web, black on inner web.
Breast and, Under-parts : Jet black ; white mottling not permissible.
Tail : Black, richly glossed ; a little white on primary sickles per-
missible, but white hangers decidedly objectionable.
In the Hen.— Hackle : White or pale straw, striped with
black or greyish color. Breast : A salmon red, each feather tipped
with dark grey, verging to black. Rest of Body : Nearly black, or
approaching a rich dark brown, the shaft of feather showing a dnll
white, and each feather being slightly paler on the edges, except on
wings, where the centre of the feather is a brownish grey ground,
covered with a small rich marking surrounded by a thick lacing of
the black, free from red in wings. Tail : Nearly black, or rich
coppery color, the outer feathers slightly pencilled.
Color in Silver Grey Dorkings-
In Both Sexes. — Beak : White, streaked with horn. Eye :
Bright red or yellow iris, the former preferred. Comb, Face, Ear-
lobes, and. Wattles : Brilliant red (white ear-lobes objectionable).
Shanks : Snow white, free from red down the side of the leg or any
trace of feather. Feet ; Absolutely white, free from red between
the toes, Toe-nails : Pure white.
In the Cook. — Hackle : Pure silvery white, free from straw
color or rusty feathers ; a narrow stripe of grey in the centre of the
lower neck hackle feathers permissible. Back : Pure silvery white,
free from any yellow tints. Saddle : Pure silvery white, free from
straw color or striping. Shoulder Coverts and Wing-bow : Silvery
white. Wing-bar : Lustrous black, glossed with green or blue,
Secondaries : White on outer web, black on inner web, with a black
spot at end of each feather, corner of wing appearing snow white
with a black upper edge when wing is closed. Primaries ; Black,
with a white edge on outer web. Breast and Under-parts : Jet-
black, free from any white mottling or white grizzling on thighs or
under-parts (in old cocks a little grizzling on thighs is not a fatal
80


ADVERTISEMENTS.
A. F- FARRANT
(WYANDOTTE SPECIALIST),
Yatala Poultry Yards, Claremont, Western Australia,
Breeder of White, Silver-Pencilled, and
Partridge Wyandottes. J> J>
My Pens were specially selected, and scientifically mated from rhe
old-established yard of F. A. Guy, England. I claim to have the finest
collection of Wyandottes in Australia.
Importer of Gold, Silver, White Partridge, Silver-Pencilled and
Buff Laced, Buff and Black Orpingtons.
Consignments executed ALL BISKS TAKEN.
Prices quoted, including all charges.
Sole Representative for F. A. GUY, England.
WHITE LEGHORNS—
Fine Pen of Birds, imported from W. H. Cook, of England.
INDIAN GAME-
A Pen of excellent Birds from the winning strains of the past five
years, and are now winning at the 1905 shows.
OLD ENGLISH GAME—
Black, Red, and Duckwing ; this strain won at all the leading
shows during 1904.
BUFF ORPINGTONS—
A Pen of a good laying strain of this popular breed kept.
PEKIN AND INDIAN RUNNER DUCKS—
Winners at 1904 and 1905 shows.
Agent for Insect-killing Eggs.
Rubber Stamps for marking Eggs, name of any breed, sixpence each ; or
your Name, any style of type, sixpence each ; Rubber Stamps, every
style and size, at reasonable prices. (Not home on Sundays).
Charges Moderate. a* Correspondence and Inspection Invited.
c. F. HmSiCHSEF,
*
Cm*IGHT ST.
flth. Brighton, Victoria.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
fjere’s Wll at Y o * l
during the past fire years at leading Shows all over Australia.
Remember we are Breeders, not dealers, andean supply
you with what you want in birds or eggs for setting.
Birds from 7s. 6d. to £lO 10s. Eggs, guaranteed to
hatch or replaced free, 7s. fid., 10s. 6d., and 2is.
Satisfaction Guaranteed or money returned. Try us and you won’t regret it
Addkess—
BEST BROTHERS, Great Western, Vic.
of R. V. FAWCETT, *
Winners of Specials, Firsts, and Second Prizes at the leading
Shows in Victoria.
Young Birds from 10s. each. Eggs in season 10s. fid. and 20s. Nine
SILVER-LACED WYANDOTTES
BUFF LEGHORNS
OLD ENGLISH GAME
JUBILEE ORPINGTONS
BUFF GAME
WHITE LEGHORNS
All Tested
for
Laying:
Qualities.
Birds BRED by us have won over 1000 First Prizes
Breeder and Exhibitor of
yandoffes.
•>©<•l
o-
live chicks guaranteed for every setting.
Correspondence and Inspection Invited. Address—
-80 DrtowuQond Street Ballarat.


Hyde’s Color Food Gives a Bright Plumage to Canaries,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray
St, Perth. Tel 426.
Owosso Poultry Spice, Is , Tyzack’s
defect). Tail : Coal black, free from any white, the sickles broad
and brilliantly glossed.
In the Hen.— Hackle : Silvery white all over, especially on the
top of the head, the lower hackle striped with a narrow line of black
in the centre of the feather ; a coppery colored hackle not admissible.
Breast : Rich robin red or salmon red, shading off to ashy grey on
thighs. Body and Wings : Clear silvery grey, finely pencilled over
with darker grey, and free from any red or brown tinge or any black
dapplings, but may vary in effect from soft dull grey to bright silvery
grey ; an old-fashioned grey slate best describes the color. Tail ;
Darker grey, inside feathers black.
Color in White Dorkings.
In Both Sexes.— Beak : White. Eye : Bright red or yellow
iris, the former preferred. Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and Wattles :
Coral red. Shanks ; White or pinky white, the former preferred.
Feet and Toe-nails ; Dead white. Plumage : As white as snow,
and free from straw color.
Color in Cuckoo Dorkings.
In Both Sexes.— Beak : White streaked with horn. Eye :
Bright red or yellow iris, the former preferred. Comb, Face, Ear-
lobes, and Wattles : Brilliant red. Shanks : Pure white, free from
red down the side or any trace of feather. Feet : White, free from
red between the toes. Toe-nails : Pure white. Plumage : Light
bluish grey ground, each feather barred across with bands of darker
grey or blue. The marking to be uniform throughout, and the
colors shading into each other so that no distinct line or separation
of the color is perceptible.
Value of Points in Dorkings.
DARK. COCK OR HEN.
Deduct
Defects. up to
Coarse head ... ... ... 4
Defects in comb ... ... ... 4
Fifth toe not perfect in formation and
development .. ... 15
Defects in color ... ... ... ,18
Tenderness in feet ... ... 8
Want of condition ... ... 10
~ size ... ... .. 21
„ general Dorking symmetry ... 20
A perfect bird to count 100
81


SILVER GREY. COCK OR HEN.
Defects.
Deduct
up to
Coarse head
4
Defects in comb ...
4
Fifth toe not perfect in formation and
development ...
15
Defects in color
24
Tenderness in feet
8
Want of condition
10
„ size
15
„ general Dorking symmetry ...
20
A perfect bird to count
100
WHITE AND CUOKOO. — COCK OR HEN.
Defects.
Deduct
up to
Defects in head and comb
17
Fifth toe not perfect in formation and
• development ...
15
Defects in color
15
Tenderness in feet
8
Want of condition ' ...
10
„ size
15
,, general Dorking symmetry ...
20
A perfect bird to count
100
Every Description of Wire Work Made to Order, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cag-e Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth,
Tel 426.
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
Serious defects, for which birds should be passed : Wry tails,
or any other actual deformity. Other than five toes. Legs any
color but white or pinky white in Whites, and absolutely white in
the other colors, or with any vestige of feathers, Very long legs.
Crooked or much swollen toes. Bumble feet. Spurs outside the
leg in either cock or hen. Round backs. Twisted breasts.
Distinct double toe-nails. Single combs in Whites or Cuckoos.
Rose comb in Silver Greys. Any colored feathers in Whites.
GAME, OLD ENGLISH.
General Characteristics of Cock.
Head and Neck. —Head : Medium length and tapering.
Beak : Strong at base and slightly curved. Eyes ; Large, bright,
82


All Kinds of Poultry Feeders and Fountains, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth.
Tel 426.
Tyzaek, Agent Flood’s Roup Cure.
and prominent, full of expression and alike in color. Comb : Single
small, evenly serrated, erect, and of fine texture. Face : Fine in
texture to match the comb and wattles. Ear-lobes :To match the
comb and wattles as nearly as possible. Wattles : Fine texture and
small. Neck : Long and very strong at junction with the body.
Neck Hackle : Wiry long feathers covering the shoulders.
Body.— Breast : Broad and well developed, indicative of con-
stitutional vigor ; straight breast-bone. Back : Short, broad across
the shoulders, and flat, tapering to the tail. Belly : Small and com-
pact. Wings : Long, full, and round, inclining to meet under the
tail, amply protecting the thighs, and furnished with very hard quills.
Tail. —Sickle feathers abundant, broad, curved main feathers
with hard strong quills.
Legs and Feet.— Thighs : Short, thick, and muscular, well
set and held wide apart. Shanks : Medium length, finely and
evenly scaled, not fiat on shin. Toes : Four on each foot, should be
clean, even, long, and spreading, the back toe standing well backward
and flat on the ground. Spurs : Low on the leg.
General Shape and Carriage. —Bold and smart, the move-
ments quick and graceful, proud and sprightly, as if ready for any
emergency.
Handling.— Clever, flesh firm, but corky and light, mellow
and warm, with strong contraction of the wings and legs.
Size and Weight. —slbs. to 6 lbs.
Plumage. —Hard, glossy, and firm.
General Characteristics of Hen.
Head, Neck, Body.—As in the cock.
Tail.—lnclined to fan shape and carried well up.
Legs and Feet.—As in the cock.
General Shape and Carriage, Handling, Plumage.—
As in the cock.
Size and Weight.—4 lbs. to 5 lbs.
* Note on Eyes and Legs of Game.
In white-legged birds, daw eyes and a few white feathers in
wings and tail are quite allowable and in character ; the hackle should
also be white at the roots of the feathers next the skin.
Color in Black-breasted Red Game.
In Both Sexes. — Beak :In character with legs. Eyes : Red*
Face : Bright red. Legs : Any sound self color.
83


Incubators and Foster Mothers, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzaek, Agent for Andrews’ Roup Cure
In the Cock. — Neele Hackle and Saddle : Orange red, free from
dark feathers. Back and Shoulder Coverts ; Deep red. Wing-
bow : Deep red. Wing-bar : Rich dark blue Secondaries : Bay
color. Primaries and Wing-ends : Black. Breast and Under-
parts : Black. Tail : Black with lustrous green gloss.
In the Hen (Partridge). — Neck : Golden red streaked with
black. Back and Wings : Partridge color. Bnast and Thighs :
Shaded salmon color. Tail : Black shaded with brown.
Color in Bright or Ginger-red Game.
In Both Sexes. — Beak :In character with legs. Eyes : Red*
Face : fright red. Legs : Any sound self color.
In the Cock. — Neck Hackle and Saddle : Light golden red
free from streaks. Back and Shoulders : Bright red. Wing-bow ;
Bright red. Wing-bar ; Rich dark blue. Secondaries ; Hay color.
Primaries and Wing-ends : Black. Breast and Under-parts : Black
shaded with brown. Tail : Black or black shaded with brown.
In the Hen. — Neck Hackle : Golden red. Back and Wings :
A darker shade of wheaten than the breast. Breast and Thighs :
Light wheaten. Tail : Black with a shading of brown.
Color in Brown-red Game.
In Both Sexes. — Beak : Dark horn. Eyes : Dark. Face :
Red or dark. Legs ; Dark.
In the Cock. — Neck and Saddle : Orange red streaked with
black. Back and shoulders : Dark red. Wing : Dark brown or
black. Breast and Thighs : Brown or brown marked and shaded
with black. Tail : Black.
In the Hen — Neck Hackle : Black striped or shaded golden.
Body : Black or of a uniform brown mottle. Tail : Black.
Color in Red Pile Game.
In Both Sexes. — Beak : In character with legs. Eyes :
Bright red.* Face : Brilliant red. Legs : White, yellow, or
willow.
In the Cock, — 'heck and Saddle : Orange or chestnut red.
Back and Shoulders : Deep red. Wing Bar : White. Secondaries :
Bay on the outer edge of feathers and white on the inner edge and
tip, the bay color alone showing when wing is closed. Primaries :
White. Breast and Under-parts : White. Tail : White.
In the Hen. — Neck : Light chestnut. Breast and Thighs :
Chestnut, shading lighter towards thighs. Rest of Body : White.
84


Tick and Vermin Proof Perches, at Jas Goss's, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St Perth- Tel 426.
Send for Tyzack’s Catalogue
Color in Silver Duckling Game.
In Both Sexes.— Beak :In character with legs. Eyes : Red*
Face : Red Legs : Yellow, white, olive, or blue.
In the Cock.— Neck and Saddle : Silver white, free from
dark streaks. Back and Shoulders : Silver white. Wing-bow :
Silver white. Wing-bar ; Steel blue. Secondaries: White on outer
web, black on the inner web and tip of feathers, the white only
showing when the wing is closed. Primaries : Black. Breast and
Thighs : Black. Tail ; Black.
In the Hen.— Neck : Silver, striped with black. Back and
Wings : Dark Grey, Breast and Thighs : Pale fawn. Tail: Grey
and black.
Color in White Game.
In Both Sexes. —Beak : Yellow. Eyes : Red or pearl. Face :
Scarlet red. Plumage : White throughout. Legs: White or yellow.
Color in Black Game.
In Both Sexes. —Beak : Dark. Eyes : Red or dark. Face :
Red or dark. Plumage : Glossy black throughout. Legs : Sound
self color.
Color in Brassy Wings.
In Both Sexes. —Same as in the Black Game, with the ex-
ception of a little dark lemon on shoulders of cock.
Color in Spangled Game-
In Both Sexes. —Beak :In character with legs. Eyes : Red
or daw. Face : Bright red. Plumage : Either black, red, blue, or
buff spangled with white ; the spangling as even as possible. Tail :
Black and white. Legs : Self color or mottle.
Value of points in Old English Game.
Deduct
Defects. up to
Defects in head, 4 ; beak, 4 ; eyes, 6 ... 14
~ neck, 6 ; back, 8... ... 14
~ breast and body ... ... 12
» wings ... ... ... 6
„ thighs, 4 ; shanks, 6 ; spurs, 2 ; ■
feet, 9 ... ... 21
~ plumage ... ... 7
„ carriage ... ... 10
~ color ... ... ... 8
~ handling ... ... 8
A perfect bird to count 100
85


Lice Exterminating- Nest Eg-g-s, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzaek, Agent for Spratts- Spratts’ Dog Biscuits, best.
Serious defects, for which a bird should be passed : Crooked or
humped back, crooked breast bone, wry tail, flat shins, duck feet,
bad carriage, rotten plumage, or any unsoundness.
INDIAN GAME.
General Characteristics of Cock.
Head and Neck. — Head ; Rather long and thick, broad in
skull, rather heavy eyebrows, giving cruel expression. Beak : Rather
short, stout and well curved. Eye : Full and bold. Gomb : Pea-
comb, close fitting. Face : Smooth and fine in texture. Ear-lobe :
Small and neat. Wattles : Smooth and free from wrinkles. Feck :
Medium length and slightly arched.
Body, —Thick-set, broad in form, with prominent shoulder
butts. Breast : Wide, deep, and prominent, nicely rounded off.
Back : Fairly flat, gradually tapering from shoulders to tail. Wings :
Short, muscular, and well nipped up.
Tail,—Medium length, tight feathered; the secondaries or
coverts a trifle narrow.
Legs and Feet. —Medium length, strong and thick. Toes :
Four in number, long, strong, and straight.
General Shape and Carriage. —Upright, commanding, and
courageous, with sloping back, and tail carried well down at an angle
of about 45 degrees ; general appearance broad and muscular, active,
vigorous, and sprightly.
Size and Weight. —Medium. Adult cocks should weigh
8 lbs. and upwards.
Plumage. —Close, narrow, and hard.
General Characteristics of Hen.
Tail. —Short and fine, each feather nicely overlapping. Other
Parts : Same as in the cock, with the usual sexual differences in head
appendages, etc.
General Shape and Carriage. —Upright, commanding
and vigorous, with sloping back, and tail carried well down, but
slightly higher than cook. General appearance broad and muscular,
active and sprightly.
Size and Weight. —Medium. Adult hens should weigh
6 lbs. and upwards.
Plumage. —Close, narrow, and hard.
86


Incubator’s Tank and Fitting-s, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cag"e Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Jubilee Incubators Won’t Bum Your House Down,
Color of Indian Game.
Ik Both Sexes. —Beak : Horn color or yellow, or both. Eye :
Varying from pale yellow to pale red. Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and
Wattles : A brilliant red. Legs : Rich yellow or orange color.
In the Cook. —Head ; A rich glossy green black. Neck
Hackle, Back, Saddle Hackles, and Shoulders : A rich glossy green
black, intermingled with rich bay or chestnut Wing-bows : The
same mixture of rich glossy green black with rich bay or chestnut.
Wing-bars : A rich glossy green black. Secondaries : Rich bay or
chestnut color on the outer web, and a rich black or green on the
inner web and end of feather. The rich bay or chestnut alone is seen
when the wing is closed, and forms a triangular patch. Primaries :
Black, with a short narrow fringe of light chestnut color on the
outer web. Breast, Under-parts, and Thighs : Rich glossy green
black. Tail, Sickles, and Coverts : Rich glossy green black.
In the Hen. —Head : A rich glossy green black. Neck
Hackle : Commencing with a rich dark green ; as the feathers
broaden the centre of the feather should be chestnut color edged
with a green border. Breast : A rich hay or chestnut ground color,
every feather edged with green, and where the size of the breast
feathers permits of it, they should be double laced. Belly and
Thighs : The same, though less distinctly marked. Back, Saddle,
Shoulders, and Wings : Similar in marking to breast, only much
more distinct, especially on the shoulders and wing bow ; wing-bars
heavier in lacing. Secondaries : The lower or visible web rich bay
or chestnut, edged with a narrow strip of green, inner web black.
Tail and Tail Coverts : A rich bay or chestnut ground color, clear
and distinctly laced with green.
Value of Points in Indian Game.
Cock or Hen.
Deduct
Defects. up to
Defects in head ... ... ... 3
~ beak ... ... ... 2
~ wattles ... ... ... '2
„ ear-lobes ... ... ... 2
„ eyes ... ... ... 3
~ eyebrows ... ... ... 3
~ comb ... ... ... 2
~ neck ... ... ... 3
87


Defects in shape and color of back
8
?) ‘ J)
breast
8
»5 V> »>
body and thighs
10
>> >>
wings
8
tail
8
?» 1» »»
legs and toes
8
Want of size
... ...
10
„ symmetry
...
12
„ condition
...
8
A perfect bird to count
100
Poultry and Canary Books, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth. Tel. 426
Jubilee Incubators, best, Tyzack, Agent for Jubilee,
Serious defects, for which birds should be passed : Mal-
formations of every description, such as wry backs, wry tails,
twisted beaks ; single or strawberry combs ; rod hackles ; knock-
knees or bowlegs.
LANGSHANS.
General Characteristics of Cock.
Head and Neck.— Head ; Free from coarseness, carried
rather high. Beak : Fairly long, slightly curved. Eye : Large.
Comb : Single, upright, straight, medium size, good substance and
fine in texture, evenly serrated (five or six spikes), free from side
sprigs and creases. Face : Fine in texture, free from creases. Ear-
lobe : Medium size, pendent, inclined to fold. Wattles : Medium
length, neatly rounded, fine in texture. Neck : Fairly long, grace-
fully arched, broad at base, covered with full glossy hackles, the
hackle feathers tapering off to a point.
Body. —Whole body large and deep, broad at shoulders.
Breast : Full and deep, a long breast-bone curving upwards in front,-
well covered with meat. Back : Broad, rather long, horizontal
when in normal attitude, the saddle abundantly furnished with
glossy flowing hackle ; saddle feathers not too long. Wings :
Fairly large, carried close to body but not clipped up or pinched in,
with brilliant coverts.
Tail. —Full and flowing, spread out at base, carried fairly
high but not squirrel-tailed, furnished with abundant side hangers
and two long sickle feathers, broad at base and gradually tapered off
to a point.
88


ADVERTISEMENTS.
3
*0
rtf
b/>
a
rtf
hJ
v o
a
C
o
vfl
o
fc)
c
O
h.w GSMANS.
rtf
>•*
bn
G
mm
«
i
£
%
«s
: sr*
Langshan Cockerel.
c/>
M
tn
t-
r*
n
3
tj
a*
rv
n
r>
D
w
ta
*|p%B has been the mainstay of the breed during the last two seasons, always
lIJ buying the best stock and keeping the birds up to standard points. His
_ team of birds fairly swept the boards at the last Melbourne Show, winning
Champion for Best Cock or Cockerel, and ditto Hen or Pullet—winning both £2 2a.
Specials. Mr. SEWELL is purely a fancier, and breeds them for love, not for
any pecuniary consideration. He is one of the very few who do so in these times.
The reputation of the Langshan needs no puffing up on my part, and as a general
purpose fowl in a farm, where a solid colored variety of fowls is needed, they will
fill the bill. They have no superior as winter layers when the strain is right.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Established ISBS.
Call
or Write
to
Ladies’ Glace Hide, Patent Cap, ss. 6d.
Sample No. 7S.
% C. Watts
Youths’ or Men’s Coloshed Balmorals, 4-s, 6d.
Size*, ito 10. Sample No. MO. 451 BURWOOD ROAD, HAWTHORN,
189 AUBURN ROAD, AUBURN,
68 CHURCH ST., WEST HAWTHORN,
]*cjr the following Tines;
Sample No. 39—Gent’s Glace Fancy Goloshed Balmorals (3 shapes)
189 —Gent’s Box Calf Goloshed. Bals., wells (3 shapes)
451—Gent’s Box Hide Goloshed Balmorals ; sewn
76 —Gent’s Strong Blucher Boots
12C —Gent’s Strong Watertight Boots . .
28—Ladies’ Queen 1-Rar Shoes
30 —Ladies’ Duchess 1-Bar Shoes ...
84 —Ladies’ Glace Kid Walking Shoes, patent caps
68 —Ladies’ Glace Hide Walking Shoes, patent caps
Children’s School Boots, 7-9, 2s. 6L;
10-13, 2s. lid.; 1-2, 3s. 9d.
House Slippers from 6d. pair.
Postal Orders prepaid, with 9d. added.
Established 1885.
Sample No 68 —Ladies*
Glace Hide Oxford or Button
Shoe. Pat. Caps 4s. 6d.
Sample No. 84—Ladies’
Glace !Kid Oxford or Button
Shoes, 6s. 6d.
Gents’ Box Hide or Glacs Kid Gol. Balmorals, 3 shades, Special Value, 8s- 6d.
Sample No. Sample No.-:9.


Hyde’s Special Canary Mixture of Seeds, Fruits, Eggs,
Etc., at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray
St, Perth. Tel. 426.
Jamieson’s Winners Reared on Tyzaek’s Meal.
Legs and Feet. — Thighs : Not too long, wide apart, well
developed, covered with close-fitting feathers, especially close round
the hooks. Shanks : Rather long, not coarse in bone, an even
fringe of feathers (not too heavy) on the outer sides, extending
down the outer toe. Toes : Four in number, long and straight, well
spread out, the outer toe alone being slightly feathered.
General Shape and Carriage. —Tall graceful, upright, and
alert. Strong on the leg, with the bearing of an active bird.
[Note : A cockerel will appear taller than an adult bird, as depth and
prominence of breast and fulness of body are not developed till
maturity is reached.]
Size and Weight.— Large. A cockerel should weigh at
least 8 lbs. ; an adult cook 10 lbs.
Plumage.—Close and smooth. Very little fluff until after
the first moult.
General Characteristics of Hen-
Head and Neck.— Head, Beak, Eye, Comb, Face, Wattles,
and Ear-lobes as in the cook, with comb, wattles and ear-lobes small
in proportion. Neck : Fairly long and gracefully arched, the hackle
feathers tapering off to a point.
Body. —Generally as in the cock. Back : Broad, rather long,
horizontal when in normal attitude, with no cushion or fulness at
saddle
Tail.— Full at base, feathers rounded at ends and overlapping
neatly : carried lower than the cock’s.
Legs and Feet. — As in the cock, but proportionately smaller.
General Shape and Carriage.— Smart, graceful, upright,
and alert, free from lumpy or squat appearance, strong on the leg,
with the bearing of an active bird A pullet will appear to be tal-
ler than the adult hen.
Size and Weight.— Large. A pullet should weigh at least
6 lbs. and an adult hen 8 lbs.
Plumage. —-As in the cock.
Color in Black Langshans.
In Both Sexes — Beak : Dark horn color to black. Eye :
Dark hazel to black, the darker the better. Comb, Face, Wattles,
and Ear-lobes : Brilliant red. Plumage : Black throughout, with
brilliant beetle-green sheen. Skin : White and transparent. Legs ;
Dark grey, with black scales in front down to the toes (turning
lighter after the first moult), showing pink between the scales and
on the skin between the toes, especially down the outer sides of the
shanks. Toe-nails : White. Underfoot : Pinkish white
89


Value of Points in Langshans.
COCK OR HEN,
Deduct
Defects.
up to
Defects in head properties ...
15
,, legs and feet
10
,, plumage
10
Too much fluff
10
Crooked breast
10
General coarseness
15
Bad carriage and shape
10
Want of size
10
,, condition
10
A perfect bird to count
100
Iron Quartz Crystalized Grit, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
Cagre Worker. 253 Murray St. Perth- Tel 426.
Tyzack’s GrainoUne,
Serious defects, for which birds should be passed: Yellow
skin ; yellow base of beak ; yellow or orange colored eye ; yellow
around the eye ; underfoot yellow ; legs other color than standard ;
shanks not feathered ; more than four toes ; permannt white in
face or ear-lobe ; comb other than single ; wry tail ; squirrel tail.
In blacks and whites, colored feathers. In blues, colored feathers
other than standard.
Faults : Absence of pink between toes ; feathering on middle
toe ; outer toe not feathered ; too scantily or heavily feathered
shanks or outer toes ; twisted toes ; short shanks ; crooked breast ;
twisted or falling-over comb ; side sprigs ; general coarseness ; too
much fluff.
LEGHORNS.
General Characteristics of Cock.
Head and Heck. — Beak : Stout, the point standing well
clear of the front of the comb. Comb : Fine in texture, large, but
not overgrown, single, perfectly straight and erect, deeply and evenly
serrated, the spikes broadening at the base ; extending well beyond
the back of the head and following, without touching, the line of the
hackle ; free from thumb marks and side sprigs. Face : Fine in
texture, and free from wrinkles or folds. Wattles : Long, thin, and
fine in texture. Lobes : Well developed and rather pendent,
equally matched in size and shape, smooth, open and free from folds.
Neck : Well arched and full in hackle.
90


Hyde’s Parrot Foods for Cockatoos, Parrots, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St„ Perth.
Tel. 426.
Tyzaek, Agent Contey’s Roup Cure.
Body.— Body : Wedge shaped, wide at the shoulders, and
narrowing to the root of the tail. Breast : Bound and prominent,
the breast-bone straight. Back : Slightly rounded, and sloping to
the tail. Wings : Large, carried well clipped up.
Tail.—Moderately full, carried at an angle of 40° to 45°.
Legs and Feet.— Legs : Long, the shanks free from feathers.
Feet : Well spread, the toes long and straight.
Carriage.— Upright.
Size.—Medium, rather large to be preferred, consistently with
symmetry and type.
General Characteristics of Hen.
Head and Neck. — Beak, Wattles, Face, Lobes, and Neck :
As in the cook. Comb : Fine in texture, large, but not overgrown,
single, deeply and evenly serrated, free from side sprigs, rising from
a firm base and falling gracefully over to either side of face.
Body.— Body : Wide at the shoulders and narrowing slightly
to the tail, longer and not carried so upright as in the cock.
Breast : Round, very full and nicely curved from the neck. Back :
Long, fairly broad, and but slightly rounded.
Tail.— Fairly long and moderately full, but carried closely
and at a slightly lower angle than the cook.
Legs and Feet. —As in the coek.
Carriage.—Description of cock applies.
Size.—As in the cock.
Color in White Leghorns.
In Both Sexes. — Beak : Yellow. Eye : Red. Comb and
Wattles : Bright red. Face : Bright red, without any trace of
white. Lobes ; White or cream, the former preferred. Toe-nails :
Yellow. Legs ; Yellow or orange. Plumage : Pure white, straw
color is to be avoided.
Color in Brown Leghorns.
In Both Sexes. — Beak: Yellow or horn. Eye: Red.
Comb and Wattles : Bright red. Face : Bright red, without any
trace of white. Lobes : White or cream, the former' preferred.
Toe-nails : Horn or nearly white. Legs : Yellow or orange.
In the Cock.— Head and Hackle : Rich orange red, striped
with black ; crimson red at the front of the hackle below the
wattles. Back, Shoulder Coverts, and iWing-bow : Deep crimson
red or maroon. Wing Coverts : Steel blue, with green reflections,
forming a broad bar across the wing ; primary wing feathers brown.
91


Value of Points in Leghorns-
COCK OR HEN.
Deduct
Defects.
up to
Defects in comb ...
12
,, ear-lobe, folded, wrinkled, or stained with
red
15
„ color
25
„ legs ...
8
Want of condition
10
„ size
15
,, symmetry
15
A perfect bird to count
100
Garden Arches and all Floral Designs, at Jas. Goss’s,
Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Woodward’s Winners Raised on V.C. Meal.
Secondaries : Deep bay on outer web, which is all that appears when
the wing is closed, and black on the inner web, and covering the
points. Saddle ; A rich orange red, with or without a few black
stripes. Breast and Under-parts : A glossy black, quite free from
brown splashes. I ail : Black, with green reflections ; any white in
tail is very objectionable. Tail Coverts : Black, edged with brown.
In the Hbn.— Hackle : Rich golden yellow, broadly and
sharply striped with black. Breast: Salmon red, running into
maroon around the head and wattles, and ashy grey at the thighs.
Body Color : A rich brown, very closely and evenly pencilled with
black ; feathers free from light shafts. Tail : Black, outer feathers
pencilled with brown.
Color in Buff Leghorns.
In Both Sexes. — Beak : Yellow. Eye : Red. Comb and
Wattles : Bright red. Face : Bright red, without any trace of
white. Lobes : White or cream, the former preferred. Toe-nails :
White. Legs'. Yellow or orange. Plumage-. Any shade of buff
from lemon buff to rich buff, on the one side avoiding washiness,
and on the other side a reddish tinge. The color to be perfectly
uniform throughout, allowing for the greater lustre on the hackle
and saddle feathers, and of the wing-bow in the case of the cock
only.
Color in Black Leghorns.
In Both Sexes. — Beak ; Yellow or horn color. Eye : Red.
Comb and Wattles : Bright red. Face : Bright red, without any
trace of white. Lobes : White or cream, the former preferred.
Legs-. Yellow or orange. Toe-nails : Yellow. Plumage-. Rich
blue black, perfectly free from feathers of any other color.
92


BREEDING PENS AT BALLARA PARK, BRIGHTON, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


JUBILEE ORPINGTONS
BRONZEWING TURKEY.


Hyde’s Prepared Shell and Tonic Grit, for Canaries, at
Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 263 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
Serious defects, tor which a bird should be passed : Cock’s
comb twisted or falling over, or hen’s erect ; ear-lobe red ; any
white in face ; legs any color but yellow or orange ; wry or squirrel
tails or any bodily deformity.
MINORCAS
General Characteristics of Cook.
Head and Neck.— Head : Long and broad, so as to carry
comb quite erect. Beak : Fairly long, but stout Eye ; Full,
bright, and expressive. Comb ; Single, large, evenly serrated,
perfectly upright, firmly set on head, straight in front, free from any
twist or thumb mark, reaching well to the back of the head,
moderately rough in texture, free from any side sprigs. Face :
Fine in quality, as free from feathers or hairs as possible. Ear-
lobes : Medium in size, almond shaped, smooth, flat, fitting close to
the head. Wattles : Long, rounded at the ends. Neck : Long,
nicely arched, with flowing hackle.
Body.— Broad at shoulder, square and compact. Breast :
Full and rounded. Back ; Broad and rather long. Wings :
Moderate in length, and fitting close to the body.
Tail. —Full. Sickles long, well arched, and carried well back.
Legs and Feet.— Thighs and Shanks : Medium length and
stout. Toes : Four in number.
General Shape and Carriage.— Upright and graceful,
Size and Weight.— Medium, rather large to be preferred,
consistently with symmetry and type. Adult cooks should weigh at
least 7 lbs.; cockerels 6 lbs.
General Characteristics of Hen.
Head and Neck. — Head, Beak, and Eye : As in the cock.
Comb : Single, fairly large, evenly serrated, arched, drooping well
down over side of face so as not to totally obstruct the sight, slightly
rough in texture, free from any side sprigs. Face, Ear-lobes, and
Wattles ; As in the cock, the ear-lobe rather more rounded. Neck :
Long and nicely arched.
Body. —As in the cook.
Tail.. —-Full and neat. Carried well back.
Legs and Feet.—As in the cock.
General Shape and Carriage.— Upright and graceful.
Size and Weight.— Medium, rather large to be preferred,
consistently with symmetry and type. Adult hens should weigh at
least 6 lbs.; pullets, 5 lbs.
93


Value of Points in Minoroas-
COCK OR HEN.
Deduct
Defects.
up to
Defects in face : bloated red, coarseness, or
too hairy
15
Comb badly shaped, or twisted
15
Wrinkled, folded, or stained lobe
10
Too light in legs, eyes, or beak ...
8
Other defects in color ...
10
Crooked breast-bone
7
Want of size...
15
,, style and symmetry
10
,, condition
10
A perfect bird to count
100
Hyde’s Parrot Food in Tins, at Jas.
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth
Goss’s, Wire
Tel 426.
Thermometers Tested (America). Tyzaek’s
Color of Black Minorcas.
In Both Sexes. — Beak : Dark horn color. Eye : Dark.
Comb , Face, and Wattles : Dark blood red ; face free from white.
Ear-lobes : Pure white Shanks : Very dark slate. Plumage :
Glossy Black.
Color of White Minorcas.
In Both Sexes. — Beak : White. Eye : Red. Comb, Face,
and Wattles: Blood red, the face free from white. Ear-lobes :
Pure white. Shanks : Pinky white. Plumage ; Glossy white.
Serious defects, for which birds should be passed : White in
face ; wry or squirrel tailed ; feathers on legs ; other than single
combed ; colored plumage other than black or white in the several
varieties ; other than four toes ; legs other color than black or slate
in Black Minorcas, or white in White Minorcas.
ORPINGTONS.
General Characteristics of Cock.
Head and Neck. — Head : Small, neat, fairly full over the eye,
carried erect. Beak : Strong and nicely curved. Eye : Full, bright,
and intelligent. Comb : Single or rose. The single comb to be of
medium size, erect, evenly serrated, free from side sprigs. The
94


Canary Cages, Parrot Cages, Cockatoo Cages,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzaek’s Address, 405 Bourke St. West., Melbourne
rose comb should be set straight and firmly on tho head, full of fine
work or spikes, free from hollow in centre, and narrowing behind to
a distinct peak lying well down to head (not sticking up). Ear-
lobes : Medium size and rather long. Wattles : Medium length
and well rounded. Neck : Nicely curved, with full hackle.
Body. — Breast : Broad, deep, and full, carried well forward,
long straight breast-bone. Back : Short, with broad shoulders.
Saddle : Rising slightly with full hackle. Wings : Well formed
and carried close to the body. Skin : Thin and fine in texture.
Flesh : Firm.
Tail. —Medium size, flowing, and inclined backwards.
Less and Feet. — Thighs : Short. Shanks : Shortand strong.
Toes : Four in number, well spread.
General ‘Shape and Carriage.— Cobby and compact ; erect
and graceful.
Size and Weight.— Large ; between 9 lbs. and 10 lbs. when
fully matured.
Plumage.—Close.
General Characteristics of Hen.
Head and Neck.— As in the cock.
Body.— Breast, Back, and, Wings :As in the cook. Cushion:
Small, but sufficient to give the back a short and graceful curved
appearance. Skin and Flesh :As in the cock.
Tail. —Medium size, inclined backward and upward.
Legs and Feet.—As in the cock.
General Shape and Carriage. —As in the cock.
Size and Weight. —Large. About 7 lbs. or 8 lbs. when
fully matured.
Plumage.—Close.
Color in Black Orpingtons.
In Both Sexes. — Beak : Black. Eye : Black, with dark
brown iris. Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and Wattles : Red. Shanks :
Black. Skm and Flesh: White. Plumage : Black throughout,
with a green sheen or lustre upon it, free from colored, feathers.
Color in Buff Orpingtons.
In Both Sexes. — Beak : White or horn color. Eye : Red or
brown, the former preferred. Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and Wattles :
Red. Shanks : White. Skin and Flesh : White. Plumage : Any
95


Hyde’s Plain Canary Seed, Rape Millet Hemp,
at Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cagre Worker, 258 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426
Winners at Brighton were Reared on
Victorian Chicken Meal.
Tyzaek’s
shade of buff from lemon buff to rich buffi, on the one side avoiding
washiness, and on the other side a reddish tinge. The color to be
perfectly uniform throughout, allowing fur the greater lustre on the
hackle and saddle feathers, and of the wing bow in the case of the
cock only.
Value of Points in Black Orpingtons.
COCK OK HEN.
Deduct
Defects. up to
Defects in plumage and condition ... ... 10
~ head, 5 ; comb, 7 ; face, 5 ; beak, 3 ; eye, 5 25
~ breast ... ... ... .. 10
~ saddle or cushion and back ... ... 5
~ tail ... ... ... ... 5
„ legs and feet ... ... ... 5
~ skin and flesh ... ... ... 5
Want of shape ... ... ... ... 15
Defect in carriage ... ... ... ... 10
Want of size... ... ... ... ... 10
A perfect bird to count 100
Value of Points in Buff Orpingtons.
COCK OR HEN,
Deduct
Defects up to
Defects in head and comb ... ... 10
~ color ... ... ... 85
Want of shape ... ... ... 20
„ size ... ... ... 10
Defects in legs and feet ... ... 15
Want of condition ... ... 10
A perfect bird to count 100
Serious defects, for which birds should be passed : Other than
four toes ; wry tail or any deformity ; the slightest feather or fluff
on legs or feet ; long legs ; yellow skin ; twist or side spikes in comb,
or comb over to one side ; yellow in legs or feet In Blacks. —Any
colored feathers. In Buffs. —Any white or much black in tail or
flights. Legs any color but white.
96


Aviaries, Breeding Cages, and all Canary Breeding
Requisites, at Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253
Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426
Egg Testers, Is., Tyzaek’s,
WYANDOTTES.
General Characteristics of Cock.
Head and Neck. — Head : short and broad. Comb : Eose, firm
and even on head ; full of fine work ; low and square at front, taper-
ing towards the spike, which should follow the curve of the neck.
Face : Smooth and fine in texture Ear-lobes and Wattles : Medium
length, fine in texture. Feck : Medium length, well arched, with
full hackle.
Body.— Breast : Pull and round, keel bone straight. Back ;
Broad and short. Saddle : Pull and broad, rising with concave
sweep to tail. Wings : Medium size, nicely folded to the side.
Tail.— Well developed, spread at base ; the true tail feathers
carried rather upright; sickles of medium length.
Legs and Feet.— Thighs :Of medium length, well covered
with soft and webless feathers. Fluff : Pull and abundant. Shanks :
Medium length, strong, but fine in bone. Toes : Pour in number,
straight and well spread.
General Shape and Carriage.— Graceful and well balanced,
resembling a Brahma.
Size and Weight. —Bather large. Matured cockerels about
lbs. for RuS Laced, 7 lbs. other colors ; adult cockerels about
71 lbs. in Buff Laced, lbs. in other colors.
General Characteristics of Hen.
Head and Neck,— Head, Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and
Wattles as in the cock, but the appendages smaller. Neck :
Medium length, with short full hackle.
Body.— To correspond with that of the cock. Back : Short,
and wide at shoulder.
Tail.— Well spread at base.
Legs and Feet.—As in the cock.
General Shape and Carriage.—To correspond with the
cock.
Size and Weight. — Pullets lbs. in Buff Laced, Gibs, in
others ; adult hens lbs. in Buff Laced, 7 lbs. in other colors.
Color of Silver Wyandottes.
In Both Sexes.— Beak : Horn color, shading into or tipped
with yellow. Eye : Bright bay. Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and
Wattles : Bright red. Shanks and Feet : Bright yellow.
97


Show Cages for Canaries and all Cage Birds, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker. 253 Murray St. Perth.
Tel. 426.
Owosso Duck Tonic, Is., Tyzack’s.
In the Cock. — Head : Silvery white. Neck : Silvery white>
with clear black stripe through centre of each feather, free from ticks.
Saddle : Hackles to match the neck. Bach : Silvery white, free
from yellow or straw color. Shoulder Tip : White, laced with
black. Wing-bow : Silvery white. Wing Coverts : Evenly laced,
forming (at least) two well defined bars Secondaries : Black on
inner and wide white stripe on outer web, the edge laced with black.
Primaries or Flights : Black on inner web, and broadly laced white
on outer edge. Breast and Under-parts : The web white, with well
defined jet black lacing, free from double or white outer lacing,
the lacing regular from throat to back of thighs, showing green
lustre. Under-color : Dark slate. Tail : True tail feathers, sickles
and coverts black, showing green lustre. Thighs and Fluff : Black
or dark slate, powdered with dark grey, with clear lacing round
hocks and outer side of thighs.
In the Hen.— Head : Silvery white. Neck : Silvery white,
with clear black stripe through centre of each feather, free from ticks.
Breast and Back : Under-color dark slate ; web white, with regular,
well defined jet black lacing, free from double or outer lacing, and
showing green lustre. Wings : Same as back on the broad portion.
Secondaries and Primaries as in the cock. Tail : Black, showing
green lustre ; the coverts black with a white centre to each feather.
Thighs and Fluff : Black or dark slate, powdered with dark grey.
[N B,—Regularity of lacing and quality of color in all cases to
count above any particular breadth of lacing.]
Color of Golden Wyandottes-
In Both Sexes.— Beak ; Horn color, shading into or tipped
with yellow. Eye : Bright bay. Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and
Wattles : Bright red. Shanks and Feet: Bright yellow.
In the Cock — Head : Rich golden bay. Neck Hackle : Rich
golden bay, with distinct black stripe down the centre of each feather,
free from ticks, black outer edging, or black tips. Saddle Hackles :
To match the neck. Back ; Rich bay, free from black, or from deep
maroon. Breast and Wings : Same as Silvers, substituting rich
golden bay for white in ground color. Thighs and Fluff : Black or
dark slate, slightly powdered with gold, with clear lacing round
hocks and outer side of thighs. [N.B. —Brightness and uniformity
of color to be considered of more value than any particular shade.]
In the Hen.— Head : Rich golden bay. Neck Hackle : Rich
golden bay, with distinct black stripe down the centre of each
feather, free from ticks, black outer edging, or black tips. Bust,
98


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ARTHUR J. MAUDE,
Golden Point Poultry farm, Ballarat Cast,
Breeder and Exhibitor of High-class POULTRY.
Black Orpingtons, Imported strain.
Buff Orpingtons, A very good strain.
White Wyandottes, Pure white.
White Leghorns, Guaranteed pure white
and layin
bred, for exhibition
Brown Leghorns, Tip -top Layers.
Andalusian, Good blue, latest type, and
Silver-Spangled Hamburgs, Good
splendid lacing,
layers, and splendid
marking.
o
In all the varieties I only keep the very best. Birds from my farm have
won First, Special, and Second Prizes at most of the leading Shows in Victoria.
I always take the greatest care, and keep two separate strains fcr mating pairs
and trios. Eggs in season, 10s. 6il. and 31s. per dozen. I replace all eggs
that do not hatch a live chick, if returned to me bearing my stamp mark.
Inspection and Correspondence Invited at any time.
D. W. OLEESON,
Breeder of all Varieties of
Wyandottes.
My consistent success in the leading Shows in Victoria is the best advertisement
I can put forward as to the quality of my birds.
I EXHIBIT Birds bred by myself only,
and do not purchase a Show
Specimen in order to sell duffers.
A
IV
ISY?'!
7
A T LEAST 50 per cent, of my White
Wyandottes will score a card in the
hottest company.
Being always strong in Show Specimens, I have NEVER shown the SAME
Young BIRD at more than one Show.
EGGS IN SEASON, £2 L 2s. and £1 Is. CORRESPONDENCE INVITED.
D. W. GLEESON, Middle Brighton, Victoria.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
BLACK MIIMORCAS.
Winners and Heavy Early Layers.
Chicks from the Leading Prize Winners of 1904, hatched July 29tb,
commenced to lay January 17th, 1905, bred from the following winners :
Hen (daughter of Crystal Palace Winner) winning 2 Firsts, 2 Trophies ; also
Ist, Poultry and Kennel Show, Ist, Royal, 1904, S.A.
Hen, winning 2nd Prize P. and K ; 2nd, Royal, 1904, S.A.
Cockerel, winning Ist Prize, P. and K.; 2nd, Royal.
Cockerel, winning 2nd Prize P. and K. ; 2nd, Royal.
Pullet, winning 2nd Prize, P. and K.; 2nd, Royal, Also,
Cockerel and Six Hens, winning 4th, Breeders’ Pen, Royal, 1904, against 26
entries penned.
Mrs. Ladyman Smith purchased the entire stock of Show Birds and
goodwill from Messrs. Pearce and Leslie, the celebrated Black Minorca
Breeders, to strengthen her yards, which previously contained imported
stock of high repute.
Ruthdbne Yariis are under the management of Ladyman Smith,
the English Poultry Breeder.
NOTE ADDRESS—
Mrs. Ladyman Smith, “Ruthdene,”
Near Mitcham Station, South Australia.
Hillcrest Poultry Farm t
BEROWRA, N.S.W.
r’TSn Devoted entirely to the raising of Pare Bred Stock; for EGG
PRODUCTION, and the selling of Settings and Young Stock at
Reasonable Prices.
Known all over Australia as RELIABLE BREEDERS of Bred-
to-Lay White Leghorns, White Wyandottes, Black Orpingtons, and
Indian Runner Ducks.
It will pay you to deal with us. Send for our Annual Catalogue.
JACOBS STEUWRT,
Author of “ The Poultry Keepers’ Egg Record and
Account Book,”


Goss’s Patent Water Fountains for Chickens, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth.
Tel 426.
Owosso Poultry Spice, Is., Tyzack’s
Wings, and Tail as in Silvers, substituting rich golden bay for
white as the ground color. Thighs and Fluff : Black or dark slate,
slightly powdered with gold. [N.B. —Brightness and equality of
ground color, and regularity of lacing throughout, to be of first
importance.]
Color of White Wyandottes.
In Both Sexes.— Beak : Bright yellow. Eye : Bright bay.
Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and Wattles : Bright red. Plumage : Pure
white throughout, straw color to be avoided. Legs and Feet : Bright
yellow.
Color in Buff Wyandottes.
In Both Sexes.— Beak : Rich yellow. Eye : Bright bay.
Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and Wattles : Bright red. Plumage : Any
shade of buff from lemon buff to rich buff, on the one side avoiding
washiness and on the other side a reddish tinge. The color uniform
throughout, allowing for greater lustre on the hackle, saddle, and
wing-bow in the case of the cock only. Legs and Feet : Bright yel-
low ; toe-nails white.
Color of Partridge Wyandottes.
In Both Sexes.— Beak : Horn color, shading into or tipped
with yellow. Eye : Bright bay. Comb, Face, Ear-lobes, and
Wattles : Bright red. Legs and Feet.-. Bright yellow ; toe-nails horn
color.
In the Cock.— Head : Rich orange. Neck ; Orange or golden
red, with paler shade at back, each feather having a glossy black
stripe down centre. Back : Rich dark red, from maroon or purple
shade. Saddle :As in the neck hackle. Wings : Shoulder rich red,
as in the back. Wing-bar : Solid black. Secondaries : Rich bay
on outer web, and black on inner web and end of feather, the rich
bay alone showing when the wing is closed. Breast : Black, free
from ticks. Fluff: Solid black. Tail, including sickles and tail
coverts, glossy metallic black.
In the Hen. — Head : Rich orange. Neck : Golden yellow,
striped with black. Breast, Back, and Wings : A light brown ground
color, free from red or yellow tinge, every feather distinctly and
plentifully pencilled with a darker shade. Pencilling uniform
throughout, to follow the form of the feather. A brick or yellow
ground color objectionable. Fluff: Brown (free from yellow or red),
slightly pencilled (the more pencilled the better). Tail : True tail
feathers black, shading to brown at top, which should be pencilled.
99


Hyde’s
Jas Goss’s, Wire
Seeds are the best for Canaries, at
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
Value of Points in Wyandottes.
GOLD or SILVER. COCK OR HEN.
Deduct
Defects. up to
Defects in comb ... .. ... 8
„ head ... ... ... 5
„ ear-lobes and wattles ... 6
~ neck ... ... ... 8
„ breast ... ... ... 14
„ back ... ... ... 14
„ tail .. ... ... 7
„ wings ... ... ... 12
~ fluff ... ... ... 6
„ legs ... ... ... 6
Want of size and condition ... ... 14
A perfect bird to count 100
WHITES. COCK OR HEN.
Deduct
Defects. up to
Defects in comb ... ... ... 8
~ head ... ... ... 6
~ ear-lobes and wattles ... 8
~ neck ... ... ... 10
„ back ...' ... ... 10
„ body ... ... ... 12
„ wings ... ... ... 10
„ tail ... ... ... 8
„ legs ... ... ... 8
Want of size and condition ... ... 20
A perfect bird to count 100
BUFFS. COCK OR HEN
Deduct
Defects. np to
Defects in comb ... ... ... 8
~ head ... ... ... 5
„ ear-lobes and wattles ... 8
„ neck ... ... ... 4
„ breast ... ... ... 5
„ back ... ... ... 6
„ wings ... ... ... 5
100


Raw Seed, for Canaries out of condition, at Jas.
at Jas Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack, Agent Flood’s Roup Cure.
Deduct
Defects. up to
Defects in tail ... ... ... 5
„ fluff ... ... ... 4
„ color ... ... ... 30
„ legs ... _ _ ... ... 6
Want of size and condition ... ... 14
A perfect bird to count 100
PARTRIDGE. THE COCK.
Deduct
Defects. up to
Defects in comb ... ... ... 8
~ head ... ... ... 5
„ ear-lobes and wattles 6
„ neck ... ... ... 12
„ breast ... ... ... 10
~ back ... ... , 12
~ wings ... ... ... 10
„ tail ... ... ... 7
„ fluff ... ••• ... 8
„ legs ... ... ... 8
Want of size and condition ... ... 14
A perfect bird to count 100
PARTRIDGE. THE HEN.
Deduct
Defects. up to
Defects in comb ... ... ... 6
~ head ... ... ... 5
~ ear-lobes and wattles ... 6
„ neck ... ... ... 8
~ breast ... ... ... 13
„ back ... ... ... 13
„ wings ... ... ... 13
„ tail ... ... ... 7
» fluff ... ... '.. 7
» legs ... ... ... 8
Want of size and condition ... ... 14
A perfect bird to count 100
101


Meat Safes, Butter Coolers, &e, at Jas Goss’s. Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth Tel 426
Tyzack, Agent for Andrews’ Roup Cure
Serious defects , for which birds should be passed : Any feathers
on shanks or toes. Permanent white or yellow in ear-lobes, cover-
ing more than one-third of their surface. Combs other than rose,
or falling over on one side, or so large as to obstruct the sight.
Wry tails. Deformed beaks. Crooked backs. Shanks other than
yellow in color (except adult cocks and hens, which may shade to
light straw color). Feathers other than white in Whites ; white in
tail, or any conspicuous spotting or peppering on ground of the
feathers, in Silvers or Golds ; black in tail, or any excess of blue or
grey in lacing, of Buff Laced.
INDIAN RUNNER DUCKS.
General Characteristics in Both Sexes.
Head and Neck. —Head : Fine and comparatively flat.
Bill : Strong at the base, broad and long, coming as nearly as
possible straight down from the skull, giving it the appearance of a
long wedge. Eye : Situated high in the head. Neck : As long
and thin as possible from base.
Body. —Body : Long and narrow, without any indication of
keel. Breast * Round and full. Bach i Long and narrow.
Wings : Carried close.
Tail. —Slightly elevated, with two or three well-curled feathers
in that of the drake.
Legs and Feet. —Legs : Set well back, causing the erect
carriage of body. Toes : Straight, connected by the web.
General Shape and Carriage.— Racy-looking, the body
carried erect somewhat after the form of a Penguin.
Size and Weight. —Drake, lbs.; duck, 4 lbs.
Color in Indian Runner Ducks.
In Both Sexes.— Head : The head should be adorned with a
cap, and cheek markings of fawn or grey to match body color as
near as possible ; a narrow line of white divides the cap from the
cheek marks, whilst a line of white about J-th of an inch should
divide the base of the bill from the head markings. Bill : Yellow
when young, gradually changing to green in the adult bird, with a
black bean at tip. Neck : Pure white from the head to where the
102


Manufactured by 44
One Who Knows-
-OWOSSO ” Poultry and Duck tonic.
K
m
m
<s^;
4.
SfcsS^
'OM
%ji;
UNSHINE
. s#«-:
Bv^
Ff!
*
POULTRY ARCADE
EEEEErr:: - I *££•
• ! a.x
■r
■*,
*-•« - ..
s**
, , The “ OWOSSO "Poultry Spice is noted for its marvellous results in keeping Fowls in grand condition. The Liver
is the chief organ of the Fowl, and “OWOSSO" acts direct. For Egg Production it is unequalled; contains no condi-
ments. One Shilling, packet.
OWOSSO ” DUCK TONIC. The only known remedy for Staggers in Ducks.
“OWOSSO” SCALY LEG OINTMENT.
AGENTS— TYZACK, Melbourne; F. J. ANTHONY, Payueham Road, Adelaide ; WOODWARD BROTHFRS
AUSTRALIAN HEN OFFICE, George St., Sydney ; Jas. GOSS, Murray St., Perth ; 2 WUYYAK U HKU I nt«S,
or from the Manufacturers,
Ballarat. Victoria
ADVERTISEMENTS.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Colonial Poultry farm.
6NT«- -> -- ■ -JV3
WM. PADBURY, GUILDFORD, W.A ,
Breeder and Importer of High-class Birds*
WYANDOTTES (Golden Laced).—The Champion Cock of the State. He beat the
Perth winner at Gin Gin, and beat the Fremantle winner at Bunbury, 1903 ;
also winners Essendon, Perth, and Royal.
BUFF WYANDOTTES.—The latest fancy breed imported.
HAHBUROS (Silver Spangled)—A grand pen, and winner of numerous First
Prizes. The best in the State. Won at Essendon and Perth.
PLYMOUTH ROCKS (Barred). —Champion Winners three years in succession ;
also, Perth, 1904 ; Melbourne Royal and W.A. Royal, 1904.
ORPINGTONS (Single and Rose Comb, Blacks, also Buffs).—Winners of many
Firsts, and £4 4s. Trophy, Bunbury, 1902; Melbourne, Essendon, Perth,
and Royal, 1904.
LANGSHANS (Black).—Winner of Firsts, Melbourne, Perth, and Royal, 1904.
DUCKS (Aylesbury) —Winning Birds just imported from Melbourne.
GEESE (Toulouse).-Winners of Firsts at all the leading Shows.
BIRDS.— The above birds, especially well mated by W. G. Wicker,
Esq., of Victoria, irrespective _of price.
BUYERS of either Young Stock'or Eggs can rest assured of getting
full value for their money.
Leghorns.—Laying Strain.
Inspection Cordially T Invited.


Poultry Grits, Bone Meal and Grit, at Jas Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Send for Tyzack’s Catalogue.
breast markings begin, about I -5 to 2 inches from the base of the
neck. Bad : Fawn or grey. Wings : The shoulders and top
part of wings fawn or grey, the flights white. Breast : Fawn or
grey, evenly cut about half-way between the point of the breast bone
and the legs. Fluff'. White, except an indistinct line of color from
the base of tail to the thighs. Tail : Fawn or grey. Legs and
Toes : Deep, bright yellow.
The color of an Indian Runner, whether fawn or grey, should
be uniform throughout the whole of the surface plumage, except the
tail of the drake, which is darker. The fawn or grey of the
shoulders, top part of wings, and tail should be the shape of a
heart pressed flat on the back.
Value of Points in Indian Runner Ducks.
Deduct
Defects. U P
Defects in head, eyes, and bill ... ••• 15
„ head markings ... ... ... 10
„ neck and neck markings ... ... 10
~ body ... ... ... ••• 10
~ body markings ... ... 25
„ legs ... _ ... _ ... _ _••• 5
Want of symmetry, typical carriage, and condition 25
A perfect bird to count 100
Serious defects , for which a bird should be passed : Claret
breasts, blue wing bars, horizontal carriage or shape, absence of
feathers from the flights or any other part of the body, twisted wings,
wry tail, or any other deformity.
PEKIN DUCKS.
General Oharacteristios of Either Sex.
Head and Nbck. —Head : Large, with broad and prominent
skull, rising rather abruptly from base of bill. Bill : Short, broad,
and thick, slightly convex between the juncture of the head and the
tip. Eye : Dark, and partially shaded by heavy eyebrows. Neel :
Long and thick, carried well forward, and well arched.
103


Hyde’s Insect Proof Medicated Nests for Canaries, at
Jas- Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426
Tyzack, Agent for Sprat ts Spratts’ Dog Biscuits, best
Body. —Body : Medium length, and as broad as possible.
Breast : Wide and prominent, and descending even, solid and uniform
with girth to paunch. No indication of keel. Paunch : Broad and
to end of tail forming a perfect half-circle when standing erect.
Back : Broad. Wings : Short and carried closely to the side.
Tail. —Well spread and carried high. The drake should have
two or three curled feathers on top.
Legs and Feet. —Strong and stout, set far back, causing
erect carriage. Toes : Straight, connected by the web.
General Shape and Carriage — Almost upright in appear-
ance, elevated in front, sloping downward toward the rear.
Size and Weight —As large as possible. Drakes from 8 lbs.
to 9 lbs. Ducks from 7 lbs. to 8 lbs Any excess over these
weights to count as extra merit.
Plumage. —Very abundant, with plenty of long, soft, downy,
feathers on the thighs.
Color in Pekin Ducks.
In Both Sexes. —Bill : Bright orange color, free from black
marks. Eye : Dark leaden blue. Plumage : Deep creamy white
color throughout. Shanks and Toes : Bright orange color.
Value of Points in Pekin Ducks-
Deduct
Defects. up to
Defects in head and bill ... ... 15
~ neck ... ... ... 5
„ body ... ... ... 10
„ tail ... ... ... 5
„ legs and feet ... ... 5
„ plumage ... ... 15
Want of style and symmetry ... 15
„ size .... ... ... 20
~ condition ... ... 10
A perfect bird to count 100
Serious defects, for which a bird should be passed : Crooked
back, wry tail, or any other deformity, white plumage, black marks
or spots on bill.
104


ADVERTISEMENTS.
W
.J
V
Snow Queen,
Bred by Woodward Bros.
Winner Ist, Northcote.
Ist, Prahran.
Ist, Melbourne, 1904.
Snowball.
Mated with Snowdrop, Snowdrift,
Snow Stag, Snow Girl, Snowflake.
Bred, Northcote, Cockerel.
Special for Best Wyandotte inShow;
Ist, Pullet,Northcote; lst,Essendon,
Cockerel.
Ist, Adelaide, Cockerel.
3rd, Adelaide, Pullet.
Ist, Prahran, Pullet.
Ist, Melbourne, Pullet.
Ist, Warrnambool ~
V.H.C., Prahran, Pullet.
Ist, Ballarat, Cockerel.
Ist, Ballarat, Pullet.
Season, 1904.
Woodward
Brothers,.
Champion Runners.
Marjorie, duck, unbeaten ; winner of 13 First
Prizes Melbourne, Prahran, Essendon, Bal-
larat, Bendigo, Geelong, Maryborough, and
Brighton.
Nancy, daughter of Mar-
jorie ; winner Prahran,
Melbourne, Ballarat,
Bendigo, and numerous
others.
BALLARAT.
Wallace, absolutely the
best Runner Drake
ever penned in Victoria.
Winner of numerous Firsts
Woodward
ißros.,
&
r&Sm.
!■
, \
f •
3*
n AI . I ALIAT
Ppvc XVaatiii’ «y t-. Pont! RallarAi-


ADVERTISEMENTS.
A BOON TO POULTRY BREEDERS.
“ Mervel.”
IT is a well-known fact that the majority of failures in
* Poultry is due to disease. “ MERVEL” has been
known to some breeders for a considerable period, and
they consider their success due to its use. The pro-
prietors have been urged to place this valuable Poultry
Remedy on the market, and it can now be obtained at
Cole’s Book Arcade and other centres. It is a certain
cure for Roup in all its stages, Cancer, Liarrho'a, Going
Light, Leg Weakness, and all Chicken Complaints.
“ MERVEL ” will increase the egg supply fully 25 per
cent., especially in the winter when eggs are scarce.
Agents Wanted Everywhere.
WHOLESALE DEPOT:
24 Eastern Arcade,
BOURKE ST., MELBOURNE.
ROGEN & ANDREW,
ORMOND, VICTORIA,
Breeders of High-class Silver and White Wyandottes, Lang-
shans, Buff Orpingtons and Andalusians; Winners of the
Club Champion Challenge Trophy for Silver Wyandottes and
Laugshans, and breeders of a large percentage of 1904
winners, including the sensational “Woodward” Silver
Pullet.
0
Agents for “ MERVEL.” The Ormond Incubator. Patent
Nest Brooder.


Carbolaeene Fluid for washing Dogs, Fowls, &e, at Jas.
Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St-, Perth-
Tel 426
Jubilee Incubators Won’t Burn Your House Down.
DISEASES.
Ailments of Poultry are mostly of a contagious nature,
rapidly developing, and probably attended with greater fatality than
the diseases of any other stock. Constant watchfulness must be
observed. Any fowl showing signs of going off its tucker, or moping
about, should at once be isolated.
BUMBLE FOOT.
This is a serious complaint, causing a lot of trouble in yards
where several varieties are kept Causes.— Decline of health,
gravelly soil, flying from high perches, and, lastly, a couple of blows
through wire netting at another bird. If caught early, apply
turpentine bandages, placing the bird on a bed of shavings or other
soft material. Add fresh turpentine night and morning for three
days, after this, place the bird’s foot in hot water, when the corn may
easily be drawn with the point of a knife. Common horse blister,
well rubbed in every day, is probably a better remedy, the foot being
soaked in the same manner. Another method ; Paint the affected
part with iodine, putting on three applications, letting one dry
thoroughly before applying the other ; repeat this for three days,
then place the foot in hot water and remove the corn. If the bird
is very far gone an operation is necessary, in which case cut on the
cross. A cross cut will heal very much quicker than a single cut,
and makes it much easier to remove the corn. After an operation,
wash the affected part with Condy’s Fluid and apply a bandage to
keep out all germs and dust. It will heal in ten days’ time. Some-
times there is no corn, only a swelling, if so, apply the iodine treat-
ment, which is generally successful, and lance the swelling to let the
matter out. It may be necessary to insert a stitch or two after an
operation, to draw the parts together.
CROP BOUND.
This is generally caused by feeding soft food on straw, or by
some foreign substance blocking up the passage. The crop is dis-
tended, and feels hard to the hand.
105


Danish Meat Meal for Fowls, Ducks, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker. 253 Murray St, Perth Tel. 426.
Jubilee Incubators, best, Tyzaek, Agent for Jubilee-
Treatment.— Pour 5 or 6 spoonfuls of warm water down the
throat, and knead the crop about gently while so doing ; also give
a pill of sulphur mixed up with lard. If no improvement comes
after a couple of tries, you will have to open the crop. First remove
the feathers at the top portion of crop, then make an incision at the
top of crop, cutting through the two skins ; about half to three-
quarters of an inch will be sufficient Then remove the contents of
crop with the small end of a tea-spoon. Place your finger in and
make sure all the matter is out, then sew up the skins separately.
Be sure you have the inner one well sewn, otherwise it will break
away. Peed a little soaked bread. No water to be given for twenty-
four hours.
CATARRH
This is a troublesome complaint, and, although often taken for
roup, is different altogether. Except in rare cases matured birds do
not suffer from it. Chickens are the great sufferers, the trouble
starting towards the middle of summer. I have almost come to the
conclusion that, on plants where a large number of chickens are
reared, it is impossible to avoid it. It seems to be a natural summer
complaint, especially in some parts of Australia—running on the
same lines as whooping cough in children. The affected ones should
be isolated and put on fresh ground in a well ventilated house. On
no account shut the birds up, as this only aggravates the complaint.
Put a little salts in their water, protect from wind, and give food
with some cayenne pepper in it. With the coming of the autumn
rains it will vanish as rapidly as it came. The principal cause is
the crowding of the chickens together at night. This overheats the
place, and the coming out of a heated chamber to perhaps a snappy,
cold change, that may have taken place overnight, results in an out-
break of this disease. Chickens should be broken up into small
clutches after the end of November
By those rearing only 40 or 50 chicks this trouble should be
easily avoided, especially in the milder districts ; but when you have
500 or 600 chickens to look after, it takes a lot of accommodation to
divide up your flock so as to give all sufficient room. Removing
birds on to fresh ground helps in a great measure to eradicate this
complaint.
CANKER.
There are two forms of Canker—canker of the comb and
canker of the throat. The first occurs chiefly with Leghorns,
Andalusians, Minorcas, and Anconas. It is generally the result of
106


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Poultry SALVITIS.”
®®®®x®®<^;sxsxs)(sx*xg®®^
It is a fact that one thousand pounds weight of good
business hen is about the most profitable half ton of live
weight that a farmer can have on his farm. The business
hen should be well looked after then and treated to
POULTRY “ SALVITIS ” which assists birds throughout
the MOULT, imparts brilliant lustre to the plumage, pre-
vents Roup, Croup, Diphtheria, Liver Disease, Gapes,
Redworm, Pip and Chicken Cholera.
gxSxSxs)®<sxs)®®®(SXs)®®<^
Is., 55., 10s., 20s.
Poultry “ SALVITIS”
insures Healthy, Well Conditioned Fowls, with PLENTY OF EGGS.
“ Have had eggs by giving my fowls Poultry “SALVITIS,”
when all my neighbours have been without.” —R. Hannah, Ascot Vale.
“ The Poultry “ SALVITIS ” served the fowls well, keeping
them in health, in good feather, and in good laying fettle.” — J. Bartlett,
Gerang Gerang.
“ The pills acted splendidly on the number of turkeys I had bad
with Roup.”— A. J. Trangmak, “ Enslaim,” Myamyn.
D1i..,i1l
Ihi..iilhi..idlii..ulii..iillo..■(!h> .ill Hi
SALVITIS ANTISEPTIC COMPOUND AND ROUP PILLS
for ROUP.
Try the Salvitis preparations for
Horses, Cows, Pigs, and Dogs,
Send Id. stamp (mentioning this book) for our Salvitis Book on the
Diseases of Live Stock.
Salvitis Proprietary Limited,
406 Collins Street, Melbourne.
R. J. OBHR, Manager.
ii..i>iii,..iiibi..iilli,..iilli,..iillii..jllii.,iiliii^
The Cheapest Egg Pre-
servative on the market,
“ Eternal.”
Sold in tins containing sufficient to preserve 40 doz., 2s. fid.
Write for testimonials and particulars to
U. J. CEHR, 40G Collins Street, Melbourne.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
R. Cant
Y 0
9 Humffray
St
• i
Ballarat, ~\T ictoria,
Breeder of BiglKlass Silver (Uyandottes.
ONE BREED ONLY.
inner at the Principal Shows*
Bred for Show and Utility Combined. Young' Stock for Sale.
Eggs in season, 10s. 6d., 2fs.
INSPECTION AND CORRESPONDENCE INVITED.
Cim/
S Plymouth
Rocks*
1
Silver Laced
Wyandottes.
PLYMOUTH ROCKS.
£9
A BREEDER OF 20 YEARS
I have an exceptionally good strain of the'above breeds for the
coming season. All line bred. Young stock for sale, and Eggs in
season. Write to
W. H. FRANKLIN, Baker, Sebastopol,
BALLARAT, VICTORIA.


Owosso Scaly Leg Ointment, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cage Worker, 253 Murray St, Perth. Tel 426
Jamieson’s Winners Reared on Tyzaek’s Meal.
overshowing, and through forcing the comb of the bird becomes top
heavy. The result is, canker will form in the weakest part, and if
not attended to will eat into the comb, and if further neglected, into
the brain, when the bird dies. It is curable it caught in time in the
majority of cases. First, wash the affected part and apply liquid
bluestone, also turn the bird out, not keeping it shut up, apply a
little zinc ointment, two or three times within a week, till it recovers.
If it has a grip your only other course is to remove the comb
entirely, with a sharp razor or scissors. This is a simple operation,
only do not cut any nearer than half an inch from the head unless
the canker is very low down, as there is an artery close in. The
comb will not bleed much except in the front ; it does not hurt the
bird nearly so much as a five minutes’ fight would do. On staunch-
ing with flour the bleeding will soon stop. You will then save the
bird for breeding purposes, and it will always be in good condition
after.
Canker in the throat is caused by overshowing, too much pen-
ning and confinement, and is also hereditary. A cheesy matter
forms at the entrance to the throat, stopping up the windpipe, and
which, if not attended to, will choke the bird. Treatment.— Force
the gullet up into the mouth, using your finger and thumb under the
jaw of the bird, then scrape the canker away with a bit of stick,
causing as little bleeding as possible, then anoint with tannic acid,
or, if this be not procurable, liquid bluestone, or flowers of sulphur.
Allow the bird freedom, do not keep it shut up.
CHICKEN POX.
This complaint generally comes at the fall of the year, after the
first autumn rains.
Ulcers break out all over the face and comb. Treatment,—
Mix up some flowers of sulphur, zinc ointment, and lard into an
ointment, and smear all over the affected parts. With a little
spice in the food, and cleanliness, you will be able to prevent it
spreading. It is one of the complaints my stock have missed.
Possibly Ballarat being a cold climate, is not so infectious as warmer
climates.
CHOLERA.
A deadly complaint. Symptoms.— The fowl has a dejected,
sleepy, and droopy appearance, and does not plume itself, it is very
107


Flower Stands, Flower Baskets, and Flower Stainers,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray
St , Perth. Tel 426.
Tyzack’s GFainoline.
thirsty, has a slow, stalking gait, and gapes often. The comb and
wattles lose their natural color, generally turning pale, but sometimes
turning purple ; there is diarrhoea, with greenish discharge like sul-
phur and water; afterwards it becomes thin and frothy. Prostration
comes on, the crop fills with mucus and wind, and food is not
digested, breathing is heavy and fast, the eyes close, and in a few
hours the bird dies. The preventive treatment is best, and consists
of keeping surroundings in a healthy state, although anyone is likely
to be caught napping. Treatment. —One small teaspoonful of
castor oil, warm, with a little cayenne pepper, or three drops of
laudanum in sweet oil, is about the only known cure. Eight or ten
drops of ohlorodyne in a spoonful of warm water, is recommended
by some writers. Personally I have tried this method often, but
have never effected a cure with it. These doses should be given
every four hours. Peed on boiled rice or bread soaked in milk.
Spice pills are also good, the best preparation for these being Man-
ning’s and Owosso spices.
DYSENTERY.
The symptoms are similar to cholera, and the treatment follow-
ing on the same lines. Throw lime loosely all over the yard, then
get your hose and wet the ground all over. Birds suffering with
cholera or dysentery should be removed to the hospital as soon as
possible, as their droppings are contagious, especially when you are
feeding the other birds.
DIARRHOEA
This is caused by sour food, stagnant water, want of cleanliness
and chills in old birds (especially when returning from a show),
change of water, or scarcity of grit. It is often nature’s method of
getting rid of objectionable matter, and therefore should not be
stopped too suddenly. A slight dose of castor oil, followed by Man-
ning’s or Owosso spice pills, will be found effective. Salvitis is also
a good condition spice.
DISINFECTION.
Whitewashing is a most essential element in the cleaning up
and sweetening of the poultry quarters. Lime makes the house look
a hundred per cent, better, and, what is worth more still, exercises a
108


ADVERTISEMENTS.
BIRD FANCIERS
When sending Birds away, write to.
£. K. Cormiek,
General Carrier.
BOAT AND RAILWAY WORK
A SPECIALTY.
Greatest care taken with Consignments of Birds
and Eggs.
■All ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.-
Glty Office:
368 Little Collins Street,
MELBOURNE.
Private Address:
11 Hart’s Parade, Auburn.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
AVOID WORTHLESS IMITATIONS
Insist on having 1
LITTLE’S
“SOLUBLE PHENYLE”
DISINFECTANT
TRADE
■ C 6*5
MARK.
WON-POISONOUS.
Vone Genuine unless the words “little’s Soluble Phenyle’
are blown on the bottles.
The Best Wash for Dog's and all Domestic Animals yet
produced. Cures Mange and all Skin Diseases.
Kills Fleas and all Insect Life, and keeps the Dogs healthy
and Sweet.
tl
LITTLE’S
PHENYLE” POWDER
rDISHSTFEOTjPs-ISrT.
For keeping Fowls and their Nests free from Lice
it is unsurpassed.
Beware ot Imitations-
SOLD BY ALL CHEMISTS AND STOREKEEPERS.
WHOLESALE —
Morris, Little & Sons, Limited,
DONCASTER, Eng., and 26 ST. JAMES STREET, MELBOURNE,
and 56 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.


Marking Punches for Chickens, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire
and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth Tel 426.
Tyzaek, Agent Contey’s Roup Cure.
great purifying influence. This effect is largely increased if a small
quantity of carbolic acid is added to the wash ; always add salt
which will harden the coat of the whitewash, rendering it capable of
standing longer than it otherwise would. Lime is best sprayed on
with the patent force sprays, and just smoothed over with a brush.
After putting on solely with a brush it tends to crack and flake, and
causes harbor for vermin. Little’s Liquid Phenyle is also a splendid
disinfectant, and is better for following after whitewash.
PREMATURE EGG LAYING.
Young birds often have a difficulty in laying their first eggs,
and not a few succumb through contraction of the egg duct.
Fowls should not be forced to lay too young—six months is soon
enough for any bird, but some lay at four months and a week old.
If you find the bird with the egg bag out, remove the egg, without
breaking it if possible, and place the bag back in its place. Keep
the bird quiet and give a little spice for a few days in soft food.
EGG EATING.
This is a bad complaint, and is caused mainly by your own
carelessness. Have plenty of litter in the nests, and keep them in a
fairly dark spot. Cut off a quarter of an inch of the top part of the
beak, and strew plenty of crushed grit and egg shells about.
FEATHER EATING.
This is another vicious complaint. Want of meat food is
generally the cause. The yard should be kept as free as possible of
feathers during the moulting period, and also give meat or its sub-
stitute in some shape or form. Change the birds into another yard,
and give them exercise. Follow out my instructions in houses and
yards. Any bird is liable to eat an odd feather from the ground, but
when they pluck one another the case is serious. I once saw a lot
of fowls that had this complaint badly, and they looked something
like those wooden horses you buy at a shilling each—a little feather
on the neck, and a couple of feathers in the tail. Mix up some
bitter aloes and whisky, and rub on the affected birds. It it is
found to be an isolated case, remove the one and use the axe, unless
the bird is a valuable specimen.
109


Lice Exterminating- Nest Eg-g-s, at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and
Cag-e Worker, 253 Murray St., Perth. Tel. 426.
Woodward’s Winners Raised on V.C. Meal.
LICE.
Lice irritate the bodies of the fowls, exhaust their vitality,
diminish the egg yield, and are the cause, direct and indirect, of
more deaths among chickens than any other disease. Healthy
fowls are rarely troubled with lice. The run of dust baths, and
judicious feeding help to combat it. Provide dry dust baths in the
winter, and moist ones in the summer.
Insectibane or Little’s Phenyle powder dusted on the feathers
will remove all body lice that exist. Spraying the perches with
Little’s Phenyle or caustic soda will settle the night bugs. Always
handle your bird for lice if mopey, and keep the place syringed once
a fortnight during the summer and early autumn months.
LIVER DISEASE.
This results from bad feeding, especially a too free use of
maize to the matured birds. Want of exercise is another cause.
The two grains to avoid are maize and barley. Give plenty of green
feed and meat in the middle of day, oats at night, and the advertised
spices in the morning ; Owosso, one of the best, as it acts directly
on the liver.
LEG WEAKNESS.
Some breeds are subject to this. Give some tonic or Douglass’
Mixture, stimulating food and dry bone, but avoid meat or green
bone. One grain of strychnine, crushed and made into 25 pills with
lard, is a good cure ; but be careful how you use this. I was nearly
passed out once experimenting with this poison. For the early stage
the following is a good recipe : One grain sulphate of iron, five
grains phosphate of lime, half a grain quinine, or buy some of the
advertised pills.
MOULTING.
Birds should be encouraged to moult quickly. If you could
place them all in a tent on a warm day, you would not be long se-
curing enough feathers for a bed. Fowls want plenty of nourishing
food while moulting, but this should be eased when nearly through
the moult, as it they did not start laying right away, liver disease
would ensue. A little of the spices is beneficial now. Give plenty
of exercise.
110


Owosso Duck Cure. Only Remedy for Ducks, Is. at
Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 253 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426.
Tyzack’s Victorian Chicken Meal.
ROUP.
With the exception of cholera, roup is the most troublesome,
offensive, and if neglected, fatal, of all poultry diseases. It first
attacks the nostrils, but soon extends to the head and throat, and,
if not stopped by timely treatment, it finally affects the fowl all over.
Fowls that have “ real ” roup, and are not treated, generally die in
three or four days after decided roup symptoms appear. Occasion-
ally a roupy bird will linger three or four weeks, eat well all the time,
and at last die suddenly. Roup never comes without a cause, and
the first cause is a neglected cold ; indeed, the first symptoms of
roup are almost like those of a cold in the head in the human sub-
ject—hoarseness, sneezing, watery eyes, and a watery discharge from
the nostrils. The disease progresses rapidly to the second stage,
when the hoarseness and rattling in the throat become more pro-
nounced, the fowl shows fever and weakness, the eyes are more in-
flamed and watery, the discharge from the nostrils grows yellow,
thickens, and becomes more offensive. In the third and last stage
the fowl is very weak, the nostrils are clogged, the head swells, one
or both eyes are closed, ulcers form in the throat, and sometimes
round the eyes, the comb turns black, and the fowl dies. In the
virulent form this disease kills very quickly. The time to cure roup
is before the fowl really has it—that is before the cold settles into
roup. Just as soon as you see the symptoms of cold, sneezing, etc.
—commence doctoring.
Treatment,— lf eye is closed, open the lid and abstract matter
or cheesy substance, then wash with a weak solution of Condy’s
fluid. If any cheesy growths are in the throat or nostrils, dust with
flowers of sulphur. Rub a little vaseline around the eye to keep the
cold out. Always wash your hands with some disinfectant after
meddling with roupy birds, otherwise you might be doing something
with the water vessel in the other yards and the germs spread rapidly.
One little slip while the disease is under treatment and no end of
trouble will ensue, to say nothing of the pecuniary loss. Feed on
soft food, with Owosso or Manning’s spice—both of these are
curatives as well as preventives.
A little Condy’s crystals and crushed bluestone in the water is
a great preventive of roup, especially in the summer months and the
fall of the year. Quantities. — Six grains Oondy’s crystals and as
much crushed bluestone as will go on a threepenny piece to half a
gallon of water, three times a week. Mervel is a new cure for
roup, and reports speak well of it.
111


Nursery Fire Guards, Sieves, Gravel Screens, Crab Nets,
at Jas. Goss’s, Wire and Cage Worker, 258 Murray St.,
Perth. Tel. 426
Thermometers Tested (America). Tyzack’s
SCALY LEG.
This is called the lazy man’s disease, and it is easy cured. There
is no doubt it is contagious. Set a hen that has scaly legs, and if
the chickens you are hatching are Wyandottes or Orpingtons, you
can rest assured that eight out of ten will develop this complaint as
they come to maturity. Wyandottes and Orpingtons are rather
soft in the scale and easily contract the disease, but Leghorns,
Minorcas, and Hamburgs are better in the scale ; still, they will also
catch this complaint, but generally in not so severe a form. Indian
Game are so hard in the scale that they rarely contract the complaint.
Trbatment.— Scrub legs with carbolic soap and warm water, and
apply flowers of sulphur mixed up with kerosene ; two or three
applications are necessary during the week. Give a final washing,
having the water hotter than usual, when all the incrustions will
easily come away. A little yolkine and ammonia will help to brighten
the color, if applied three days after the final wash, diluting the am-
monia with a little water. P.S.—Don’t use this if sending to a
show, as some judges object to it.
SOFT SHELLED EGGS.
This is caused by insufficient shell grit, too many males in the
pen, or the birds being too fat. Find out the cause and no difficulty
will be experienced in stopping this trouble. Reduce the feed or
give more shell grit.
GENERAL.
Fowls have a lot of complaints, but they nearly all arise from
neglect, bad feeding, or want of cleanliness. The chief organs to
suffer are the liver and bowels. Lay out your yards as advised ;
study this book carefully. There is no need to wade through other
volumes that give a dozen different styles of housing and feeding, of
which, when you have read them, you don’t know the one to follow.
American or English books are not adapted for Australia, and they
will only confuse you and put wrong ideas into your head.
Spices are beneficial during certain months of the year, but
more especially towards the end of summer and during moulting.
There is no need to use them often during the spring months.
Salvitis, Manning’s, Mervel, and Owosso generally give good
results, but no disease should be allowed to become chronic.
112


Woodward Bros,,
SUNSHINE ARCADE, BAhhARAT,
BREEDERS of
tr
s
««
s».
B
o
rx>
fS
P.
«5
■5
2
ffl
i
I' a i
« O 4
B H 3
T 3 "S
1 ®
v>
i.‘3V
#»»
v. If
- « r a
m ~
i«sf
is:
». w w
■MS) o
a o c
a*i
S «« s»
ST
i s s
> 2 y
t
Woodward Bros. Ist
Northcote Silver Wyan-
dotte Cockerel, ISOS.
t
Our SUNSHINE STRAIN of Birds have Won Prizes in the
Principal Shows of Australia.
WE have Won in Wyandottes at the principal Shows for twelve
consecutive years, with birds of our own breeding. We
supplied the principal winning birds for five years in
Wyandottes at the Perth and Fremantle Shows, W.A.
Our Runners were Unbeaten in New Zealand, 1904.
Our Special Pen of Runners for Laying.
The Record— 2,520 Eggs from 6 Ducks, for 24 months laying.
A few sittings for Sale from these money-makers on their
return from the competition, at 30s. sitting.
0
Send tor Our Illustrated Catalogue
For Season 1906


Every-
thing ",
Poultry
y
Line.
... .1
«sap»
Woodward. Bros ’ Silver Wyandotte Pullet.
Winner Ist Champion Best Silver Hen or Pullet; Gold Medal, Best Female Wyandotte
in Show: /'5 ss. Trophy.-Best Traced Wyandotte in Show, Poultry and Kennel Club,
Melbourne. 1904 ; also three other Gold Medals at Principal .Shows.
Shell Grit, Bone Grit, and Meal, Spices, Salvitis, Manning
and Owosso Canary Grit, Leg Bands, Pigeon Rings, Dog Soap,
Marking Punches, Danish Meat,Meal, Capsules, Thermometers,
Spray Pumps, Roup Cure; Canaries —Common Songsters, Plain
Head, Crested, and Crest Bred Norwich. The following
varieties of Finches in season —Waxbills, Snowflakes, Straw-
berry, Blue Java, Nutmegs, Black Throat. Magpies—Black
Nuns, Double-bars, Painted, Star, Pheasant, Diamond, Pekin
Nightingales, Saffron, Goldfinchs Marble-breasted, Crimson,
Parson's Long-tailed, Bullfinches, Chesnuts, Manikins, Weavers.
Parrots—Rosellas, Loury, Ring Necks, Cockatoo Smokers,
Cockatoo, Sulphur-crested, Major Mitchell, Gorilla, Gang Gangs
Foe Gardes and Lawn. —SEAGULLS and MANDARIN DUCKS.
Working Ferrets. Green Bone Cutters, Grain Cutters, Incubators.
oi>. iiilh. <»i.. .ill nk. nk ,>ik .
Woodward Brothers,
Sunshine Arcade, Ballarat.
