

HIS FELLOW STUDENT,
C^'.
itleUroutme:
GEORGE L. F. MACFADYES, Ml.
gytnbenV’
FRANK HI. Xj. X^TOZDsT
M. L. HUTCHINSON, Publisher, 330 Collins Street.
Kae Bros., Printers, 547 & 549 Elizabeth Street.




GEORGE L. F. MACFADYEN, Hi
HIS FELLOW STL DENT,
TPT?. A T\T~K~ EC. L. PATON.
|steU>*mrite :
M. L. HUTCHINSON, Publisher, 380 Collins Street.
KAE BROS., PRINTERS, 547 & 549 ELIZABETH STREET.






This Paper was written originally to be read at the Morning
Fellowship Meeting of St. Paul's, Glasgow, of which I am
a member ; but it is now published at the request of friends.
—F. H. L. P.
GEORGE L. F. MACFADYEN, M.A.,
A Faithful Student.
AS I stepped upon the platform of the Bonn Railway
Station, on Fri lay, 19th April, 1889, a young fellow
with dark moustache, of middle height, wearing a gray
overcoat, and swinging an umbrella, came forward and asked
if I was “ Paton,” and then we warmly shook hands. This
was George Macfadyen, whom I had arranged to meet in
Bonn, though we had never before looked each other in the
face.
The first I heard of George Macfadyen was from my eldest
brother, who was a fellow-student of his at Ormond College,
Melbourne. I had left Melbourne nearly two years previous
to our meeting in Bonn to study at Glasgow University, and
was living with my uncle and aunt during my stay in
Scotland. Last winter George Macfadyen w« nt to Edinburgh
to take a winter’s session at the Theological Hall there,
though neither he nor I knew of each other’s movements.
Another student from Australia, now Rev. J. Henry Davies,
of Korea, whom I knew and whom also Mac adyen knew, was
studying for the winter in Edinburgh, and frequently came to
spend a night or two at my uncle’s house. From him I first
heard of Macfadyen’s being in the Old Country. I told him of
my meditated trip to Bonn, and shortly before I left Glasgow
I received a letter in an unknown hand-writing. It was from
Macfadyen, who said he was about to leave for Germany, and
had heard that 1 was about to do the same. We at once
arranged to meet at Bonn, and there spend a month or so
together. Ah this happem d in a few days, and it would at
first sight appear to have been what men call a mere accident
that thus threw our arrangements together, but, viewed after
the lapse of three months, the finger of a Merciful Providence
is clearly seen to have been our guide.
_ ' ' / ✓ j r:
>


My friend first went a trip with the other aforesaid
Australian student, and then proceeded to Bonn, where I came
to him as above described.
Thus George Macfadyen and I met for the first time in our
lives, away in a foreign city, though both from tiie same
colony in Australia. We had never met there, we had never
met in Scotland, and it was only a few weeks before our
departure from Scotland that we found out each other’s
movements. It struck us both as strange that two young
fellows from the same city of Melbourne should meet for the
first time more than ten thousand miles away from home, and
all the more so because the one was intimate with the brothers
of the other, We thought it a remarkable coincidence, but it
was one of the many wondrous links in that chain of
Providence which had guided Macfadyen through his whole
life, and which now drew us together to this city of Bonn for
reasons of which we little dreamt at that time. George
Macfadyen was an Australian born, the only son of godly
parents, who dedicated him to the Lord to be used in His
Holy Ministry, at the same time leaving it to God’s guidance
to lead him into that calling. But when George came to the
age of choosing a profession he did not at all like the idea of
studying for the ministry, and chose the profession of his
father, who was a schoolmaster in Victoria. He went to a
training school, and qualified himself as a teacher. Soon he
began to develope fine literary abilities, and he wrote especially
many beautiful poems full of power and grace. He wrote also
for papers and magazines, and even produced a play for a
private Dramatic Club, of which he was for some time
president. For many years he continued at the profession he
had chosen, and took up his leisure hours with literary work
oil various kinds. He also joined the Volunteer force as a
cavalry man, and greatly enjoyed its invigorating discipline.
At last, moved by a train of circumstances, among which
was a severe illness which nearly cost him life itself, he began
to turn his thoughts once more to the Ministry, and entered
the Melbourne University as a student in Arts, residing in
Ormond College. Rapidly he made his way to the front,
specially distinguishing himself in Philosophy, Logic, and
English Literature. His poetic talents attracted so much
attention that he was invited to take part in publishing a
yolumne of poems in conjunction with another poet-student,


but he did not care to do so. After a few years at Melbourne
University he carried off his “M. A,” with “First Class
Honours,” and then entered the Theological Hall of the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, where he completed his
studies for the Ministry of Christ. It w r as during his
University and Theological course that my brothers came to
know Macfadyen, and they soon formed a very high opinion
of their fellow-student.
For some time he acted as Missionary to the Rev. I). S.
McEachran, of Carlton Presbyterian Church, Melbourne, and
here he gained valuable experience of work in the slums of a
great city.
At the end of his curriculum he naturally felt the need of a
change and thorough rest from his work, so he started for
Edinburgh to hear some of the Th* ©logical professois there,
and to see a little of the world before settling down as a
Minister of the Gospel in Victoria. He was an only son, and
it must have been a severe trial to his father, mother, and only
sister to part with him, tor all their hopes centred in him.
However, they thought that it -was for good in his future
usefulness. George was full of hope and enthusiasm, and
that kept their hearts from sinking.
He reached Edinburgh in safety, travelling with a Scotch
fellow-student who had gone out from Edinburgh a few years
before. He did not feel very well throughout the ensuing
winter, and had one or two sharp attacks of cold. However,
in the spring his strength and spirits rose, and he planned a
six month>’ tour before returning to Australia. Wishing to
get a good start in learning the language, he determined to
spend a few weeks in Germany, and hence our meeting in
Bonn as above described.
'* hese are but scanty particulars of his past life, gathered
wholly from what I heard at different times from his own lips,
and afterwards patched together from memory, and they must
serve to introduce the story which I have now to tell.
Our first adventure took place immediately on our leaving
the railway station. We jumped into a cab, telling the driver
where to go. In a few minutes my friend remarked that he
was driving us almost in the opposite direction, but we
resolved to wait and see what little trick he was up to. Soon
it began to dawn upon us that he took us both for strangers,
and was trying to cheat us into thinking that the hotel was a


long way off, whereas my friend told me that it was only a
few minutes drive. Our conjectures proved right, for he drove
us all round the town, up the roacT along the Rhine, and finally
landed us at our hotel evidently expecting a big fee, but when
I gave him one mark (one shilling) the face he put on was a
treat to see. He looked at the mark and then at me in utter
astoni'hment, and was just beginning an indignant demand
for more when he saw the landlord coming out bowing and
becking in his best first appearance style. Poor cabby then
prudently retired to his box and drove off, not a little sold,
while Macfadyen and I had many a laugh at his expense.
The landlord was profuse in his bows and goud wishes and
inquiries after my health, &c., but all I could do was to say
“ Ya” and smile graciously, as if I knew all about it, whereas
I could not make out one word.
My friend had chosen two very nice rooms next to each
other (as I had asked him to engage a room for me), and
from our windows we could see the Rhine close at hand and
the pier at which the Rhine boats touched—a fine view, but
accompanied with rather much noise.
After something to eat we took a walk through the city of
Bonn, each of us, doubtless, wondering what sort of a fellow
the other was and how we would get on together.
Bonn is a very pretty place on the Rhine just six miles
below the famous Siebengebirge or “ Seven Mountains,” with
the lofty crag of Drachenfels crowned by the proud and lonely
ruin of that name. Here it is that the far-famed Rhine
scenery begins, for below Bonn the country is flat and
uninteresting. The city itself is picturesque in the extreme,
especially when approached by the river, for then its lofty
spires and beautiful avenues along the river promenade are
seen to best advantage. It contains only one large Protestant
church, but several very large Roman Catholic churches,
including a huge “Minster” or Cathedral (for Bonn is a
great stronghold of the Roman Catholics, only 6,000 out of
31,000 being Protestants). We were much struck by the
beautiful avenues and parks about Bonn, while an old
“ bastion,” with only a road between its base and the river,
commands a vast and enchanting panorama of the country
round about, including the majestic Drachenfels, Siebengebirge,
and Goddesberg. Here, on a hot summer’s day, might be
seen many people of all classes sitting under the luxuriant


chestnut trees, or leaning over the parapets gazing upon the
lovely scenery, or watching the traffic far down in the street
below. The surroundings of Bonn were much prettier than
the actual city itself, but that is the way with most cities.
Our hotel was at the Rhine end of a street which ran up into
the centre of the town, where there was a huge market place
of triangular shape. Into this market hundreds upon
hundreds of peasants bring their produce every week-day
morning, and till well on towards noon it presents a very busy
and picturesque scene, blue being the almost universal colour
of the peasants’ dresses in many varied shades and patterns.
Here one can get fruit, vegetables, flowers, eggs, &c. in all
abundance. There were great numbers of soldiers in every
direction, and it was some time before we got used to their
gay uniforms. Fine looking fellows some of them were, but
we had reason to suspect that the tailor bad not a little share
in developing the broad square shoulders of not a few.
Macfadyen had been about a fortnight in Bonn before I
arrived, so he could pilot me about splendidly,
The second day we called upon Professor Christlieb (as we
had heard that he spoke English well and took a great
interest in English students), but we found that he would not
be home till the following Tuesday. Next day being Sunday
we made our way to the Protestant Church, which was
crowded to excess, the very aisles being filled, as it was some
special service. Of course we could not understand much of
the service, but my friend knew a good deal more German
than I. We thought that there was a great preponderance
of women, but we afterwards discovered that in Germany the
women and the men sit on different sides of the church and
that we had calmly been sitting among the ladies—or ratber
I should say standing, for we had to stand most of the time.
The service was simple and devout, and I liked the German
singing very much. It began at 10 a.m. and lasted till
11.80. The sermon was vigorous, but unintelligible to me.
In the afternoon we made our way along the “ Poppelsdarfer
-Alice ” —a double avenue half a mile long, with lovely lawns
along the whole extent—and then up a hill to an old Roman
Catholic church of historic fame, containing many fine statues,
crucifixes, &c. On the way up the hill we passed numerous
shnnes at regular intervals, while some of the crucifixes were
most ghastly and death-like. On entering the church we


found a service going on. We watched the priest for a while
going through a long rigmarole near the altar, surrounded by
lighted tapers, &c., while the people reverently crossed
themselves with holy water as they came in and did the
same as they retired, bobbing down towards the figure of the
Virgin. We watched and listened to the priest for some
time, and then made our way back again, intending to attend
evening service at the church, bat found that there was none.
When Wednesday morning came round we again called on
Professor Christlieb, and this time we found him at home.
We were shown into his library. A tall, broad built
gentleman, with venerable hair brushed straight back off his
brow, came forward and greeted us very kindly. We
explained our object in calling, and asked for particulars
regarding the University. He was exceedingly kind, and told
us all we wished to know. He also asked us to call on Friday
evening, and he would take us to a students’ prayer meeting
and introduce us to a nice set of fellows, and arrange with a
student to give us lessons in German. He also told us about
his own lectures, the matriculation, &c , and was most cordial
in every way. He was rather surprised when I told him that
I was a native of the New Hebrides, but he looked relieved
when my friend explained that I was a missionary’s son. He
shook hands kindly when we left, and afterwards showed me
much kindness for my father’s sake.
Punctually at the appointed hour we turned up at his house
on Friday evening. My friend agreed to be spokesman, as he
know more German than I. Mrs. Christlieb came to the door,
an 1 Macfadyen asked in his best German (thought out long
beforehand plus dictionary and grammar) if the Professor was
at home. To our astonishment he was not. He having
made the appointment we were not prepared for this. We
did not know enough of German, however, to tell Mrs.
Christlieb that we were there by appointment. My friend
was rather perplexed, and said half musingly in German “ He
is not at home ? ” Then followed an awkward pause while
Macfadyen tried in vain to find some German sentence or
other, and I had hard work to hold in the smothered laughter
that was shaking me, so ridiculous appeared our situation.
Suddenly a bright thought struck Macfadyen, and he asked
“ Wo ist die Kirsche” (instead of “ Kirche ”), which meant
“ Where is the Cherry” instead of “Church,” I had just


noticed the two words in my grammar a few days before, so
happened to o'serve his slip, and it was positively painful to
keep grave. I was even worse off than my friend, for I could
not attempt any explanation in German. However, Mrs,
Christlieb understood his meaning, and said something to him
which I could not hear properly. But I saw Miss Christlieb,
who had been in the back ground till now. dart past him and out
at the gate, while Macfadyen lifted his hat to Mrs. Christlieb
and followed the daughter. I did the same, wondering what
on earth he was running after Miss Christlieb for. However,
she offered no objections, so we walked on in deep silence,
neither of us being able to compose a single German sentence,
as we had already got far beyond our depth. The silence
became more and more painful, till at last Miss Christlieb
disappeared through a gate and Macfadyen after her. “ Talk
about Australian cheek,” thought I, “this beats all I have
ever seen.” However, I meekly followed in faith up the steps
and into what at first looked like a private house, but which
we found to be a hall. Miss Christlieb sat tlown on the right
among the ladies, so we sat on the left among the gentlemen.
As soon as I could trust myself to speak and get a straight
face on I asked Macfadyen what in the world made him trot
after Miss Christlieb like that, and then it was that he
informed me that Mrs. Christlieb had told him to do so.
Thus we called on the Professor, but ran off with (or rather
after) his daughter. A missionary from abroad addressed the
meeting sitting, and Professor Christlieb, who came in just
after us, led in prayer. We did not understand much, but
waited for the Professor at the end and he introduced us to
the Missionary and to Hr. Fleiderer, who is head professor of
Hie Johanneum Institution,” in which the meeting was held.
The Johanneum is an institution got up by Professor
Christlieb as a college for training evangelists and
missionaries, and is one of the most remarkable centres of
evangelical work in Germany. So famous was the Johanneum
Struggle that he -had several letters and donations from the
Hmperor. Professor Christlieb th n told us when and where
ns lectures began, and that he was to preach in the Protestant
Church on the following Sunday, and invited us to take the
front seat as all the seats were free and open.
Such were the amusing, though at the time painful,
circumstances under which we first met Mrs. Christlieb and


her daughter. Some weeks afterward*, when I was formally
introduced by the worthy Professor to his wife, I was not a
little astonished to hear her say in good English “ How do
you do Mr Paton ? lam very pleaded to meet you.” Oh
horrors ! the scenes of our first meeting rose vividly before me,
and I f It myself diminishing into even smaller space than I
usually occupy. But I felt still more crushed when I found
that Miss Christlieb also spoke English beautifully. It turned
out that Mrs. Christlieb was an English lady, and not a
German at all. After supper the Professor suggested a walk
along the Rhine, but first read two chapters and some poetry,
and then offered a very short prayer, while we all sat still in
our places. In our walk he talked on various subjects,
finishing up with Hudson Taylor. He is very vigorous and
realistic in telling a story, and he would suddenly stop and
thump me on the shoulder to emphasise something, to the
great danger of my equilibrium. I cannot here give you
particulars of his conversation in this and subsequent walks to
which he kindly invited me, and the great amount of incidenta 1
information 1 got from him, but I took full notes in my
journal when I got home. Our walks used to last over an
hour, and were very pleasant indeed. The Professor is one of
the most delightful men I have ever had the good fortune to
meet, and so nice and homely talking to you, as if he were
another student and not one of Germany’s famous professors.
Macfadyen and I generally spent our forenoons at study,
took walks and excursions in the afternoon, and wrote letters,
journals, &c., at night. It was some time before we got used
to the German food, dinner consisting of four courses, some of
which defy all description. The “ Herring Salad ” especially
amused us, as it contain°d fourteen different ingredients, and
our landlord expatiated and waxed eloquent on the nourishing
and strengthening elements to be found therein. I very
cautiously tried a little once, but never again could the old
landlord prevail upon me to taste it, at which he was much
disgusted, as it is one of their favourite dishes. At last our
landlord took pity on u«, and told us he would order us some
chicken as we did not like the German food. Well, we heard
about this chicken for some time, and when it did appear it
did not take long to disappear , and unfortunately none of its
kindred ever appeared to us on that table afterwards.


When lectures began we both went up armed with note-
book and pencil. The hour mentioned was 9 a.m., but none
of the students entered at that hour. We admired the desks,
&c. till 9.15, when the students finally gathered, and when all
were seated the Professor rushed in as if making for the last
train, hauled the chair from behind the desk, put down his hat
and umbrella, raised the desk to its proper level, placed his
manuscript upon it, and then, with a glance round at the
students, began his introductory lecture, stopping sharp at 10
o’clock. He wore no gown whatever, and was very animated
in his lecture. I felt rather humbled to find that I could
hardly even recognise a single word, much less understand it;
but I took down what I thought I recognised, though I could
find very few of them in the dictionary afterwards. At the
end of the lecture we met Professor Christlieb in the
Quadrangle, and he gave us further information about lectures,
&c., and told us he had arranged with a student to coach us
up in German on moderate terms, for which we thanked him
cordially. A day or two afterwards two young gentlemen
were shown into my room, and one of them introduced himself
as “ Mockert,” whom Professor Christlieb had asked to call,
and he introduced his friend as Mr. Kriege, who had come to
interpret for him in case we could not understand each other,
I called in my friend from the next room, and we proceeded to
make arrangements for a lesson every day. Herr Mockert
spoke English very well for a foreigner. Thus for the first
time Macfadyen and I met Messrs. Kriege and Mockert, all
unconscious of the wondrous events that were about to draw
that friendship closer and closer till it was cemented and sealed
by the death of one of our little band. Well it is for us that
we know not our future.
Next afternoon we had our first lesson, and began with
Otto’s German Grammar and also some German conversation,
though our attempts at German were most amusing.
Altogether we bad great fun.
Gradually our student acquaintances increased as we got
introduced to Herr Mockert’s friends, among whom were
included (besides the Germans) a Dutch student, one from
Cape Colony, and Mr. Kriege (the American). Kriege and
Mockert proved to be two of the kindest hearted and nicest
fellows I have ever had the good fortune to meet.


We were both struck by the painful formality of the
German students, who always lifted their hats to each other
with most unmistakable ‘‘ sweeps.” At the Students’ Societies
if a student sees a stranger he goes up to him with most
elaborate bows and says, “My name is So and so,” and the
stranger bows and says the same ; then they are considered
acquaintances. Those who are “unmatriculated” at the
University are “ Students,” and all the other inhabitants
of the city are “ Philistines.” There are also a
great many “ Corps,” with their different caps and band of
colours worn diagonally across the body inside the coat but
over the vest. These fellows strut about glorying in their
scarred faces, almost all the scars being on the right side of
the face. A face with three, four, or even six scars and more
was the tip-top of fashion. These are the far, famed German
Students’ Corps for duelling, &c. I have seen students with
their faces all in wrappers, except the eyes and mouth, out of
which the inevitable cigar protruded, while others had patches
on different parts of the head and face. The students go in
heavily for beer drinking and smoking, but the beer is so very
light that I do not remember once seeing a student the worse
for it. Beer is *hc:r nation"! drink, and thev think no wore
of drinking it than we of water.
One day, as we were strolling down the fields by the Rhine,
we heard the beautiful notes of the lark far above us.
Macfadyen was so delighted with it that on reaching home he
composed and wrote in my book the following sonnet, the last
lines of which proved, alas, prophetic, though we little knew
how soon they would be fulfilled ;
“ Out of the sky came a spring day song
Into the hush and dream of the day ;
The sweet voice was near, but far away
The lark in the blue sky lingered long.
How the living notes roll clear and strong,
Taking me back to the best I knew,
Lifting my eyes where the Heaven shines true,
Lulling within all tumult of wrong.
Pour out thy heart, thy message for me,
Is not thy song a song of the free ?
Shall not this soul, in Joyous release,
Rise, like thyself, in a sinless song,
Lost to this earth in a Seraph throng,
Who live in the tuneful light of peace ? ”


That soul, in joyous release, has risen in a sinless song
through the very air in which we heard the lark on that bright
spring afternoon, and he now dwells in the tuneful light of
peace. Lost to this earth I Yes, but not to the Seraph
throng—which may his friends some day join, and thereby
resume the joy of his fellowship again.
After we had spent a month together in Bonn, during
which we enjoyed ourselves immensly, my friend thought he
would like to take a “round tour” through Germany before
going on to Paris and London. And now began a wonderful
chain of incidents or “mistakes,” which kept him in Bonn—
mistakes on our part, but no doubt directed by a wiser hand
than ours. First of all there was some delay in getting his
money forwarded ; then when he went to order his “ round
tour ticket ” the form had not been filled up properly, so he
had to get another one and go home to fill it up from time
tables, &c. Meanwhile he went to cash his bank-note, but
just as he was leaving the bank he was called back, and they
told him that his name had been mis-spelled in the note.
Though it was only a transposition of two letters—an evident
slip—they could not accept it, and of course he had to pay
back the money and write again to Scotland to get matters
pIIT right, and therefore he delayed buying his ticket. Not
feeling very bright or well he decided to go to Coblenz in the
meantime for change and quiet, so we got packed up, and I
went down along with Mockert to see him off by the steamer.
When he went to buy his ticket at the landing he found that
the boat, marked to sail at that tour, would not begin sailing
till June. He was again frustrated in his attempt to get
away from Bonn. By this time he felt so hot and feverish
that he went straight from the boat landing to consult Dr.
Bohland, the assistant professor at the University’s Klinik.
The doctor ordered him to b’d for two days. This rather
threw him into a perplexity—-Bonn was far too noisy for him,
and yet he was really too ill to leave it. Mockert very
strongly advised him to go to the University’s Klinik for
Student *, where any student might have a private room with
best attendance both from doctors and nurses on very moderate
charges. He did not like the idea of going there, but it
seemed as though he could get quiet no where else. So, after
long consideration, he decided to go. He thought he would
be all right in a few days. So the three of us w r ent up, together


with a medical student, and engaged a fine large room with
every convenience. I then returned for Macfadyen’s bag, and
shortly after I got back the doctor sounded him very carefully.
Unfortunately he could speak no English whatever. I waited
with him till well on in the evening, and then returned and
had tea without my friend for the first time since I had come
to Bonn. It was rather a dismal tea, for I did not like the
idea of Macfadyen being in a foreign Klinik all alone. Still
it was really the best thing we could do under the
circumstances. What a merciful veil is spread over our
future ! I wonder how each of us would have felt had wo
known all that was to transpire in that room in which I had
left him that evening. He entered with the intention of
remaining only a few days and then setting out for his
projected tour through Germany, but the result shows that it is
as true today as ever that “ Man proposes, God disposes.”
Well for us if we can meekly say “ Thy will be done.”
Next morning, when I went round to see Macfadyen, I was
surprised to find that he had hardly slept at all, and felt just
as hot and fevered as yesterday. I thought this very strange,
but the nurse said he was not very ill. The nurses were
Roman Catholics, and wore most peculiar uniforms, with
hoods and a white band across the forehead just like nuns—
not a very bright uniform for a sick room. The head nurse,
into whose charge Macfadyen was given, was a very tall and
dignified “ Sister of Mercy,” with black eyes and a sad,
solemn expression, though very pleasant when she smiled.
She also seemed very kind hearted and sympathetic. Then
there were other nurses who were subordinate, or who took
charge of him at different times. There was also Jacob, his
attendant, one of the kindest and most sympathetic of them
all. Then, for medical attendance, there were the head
professor of the University’s Klinik, the assistant professor,
and two house doctors. So that, doubtless, he was well
attended to. The room was all that could be desired, and of
immense height and fine size. Near the head of the bed was
a lofty window through which the light streamed plentifully.
For the first two or three days the report was always the
same—high fever and no sleep. The doctors sounded him
carefully every day once, twice, and sometimes even thrice.
At last the nurse told me that it was inflamation of the
lungs, but that he was not very ill. This came as rather a


shock to me, as I had never dreamed of any serious illness, and
it was a painful duty to have to translate the German to
Macfadyen, which I would have given a good deal to get taken
off my shoulders. However, I had to break the news as gently
as possible, and give him the most cheerful view of it. He
was evidently shocked, and said that inflamation of the lungs
was about the last thing he would have thought of as he had
always been so strong in the chest. But he bore it splendidly,
and was very hopeful.
When mail day came round for writing Australian letters I
offered to write at his dictation, but he said it would be too
great a shock to his parents ; so he got propped up in bed with
pillows and manfully wrote a bright, cheery note to them,
though his hand was trembling dreadfully and as soon as it
was done he lay back exhausted. I asked him to allow me to
write to his friends in Scotland advising them of his illness,
but he would not hear of it. He would write himself as soon
as he was a little better.
Our two faithful friends, Kriege and Mockert, were frequent
visitors at the Klinik, and did all they could to help Macfadyen
both by their sympathy and by their interpretation for him to
doctors and nurses. For, truly, it was a most painful thing
neither to understand nor be understood by the nurses and
those who were doing their best to save his life. He knew
but little German and I knew less, but between us we managed
to stumble through some sort of understanding with them
when interpreters could not be had. Our two friends showed
thoughtfulness and common sense equal to their sympathy, for
though they were quite willing to visit him oftener and longer
they felt that it would excite and weary him in his weak state
as they were comparative strangers. Of course with myself the
case was quite different. I was the only old friend he had to
keep him company and manage all his affairs, &c., for him—
in fact he and I were just like brothers during his whole illness.
I would fain have remained with him all the morning as well
as afternoon, but felt that he should have the morning to
himself. So I spent my afternoons with him, though I often
called for an hour or two in the forenoon also. His utter
loneliness can scarcely be well imagined—lying ill with burning
fever and inflamation in a foreign hospital, spoken to by nurses
and doctors in a foreign tongue, with no gentle mother’s hand
to soothe his fevered brow, his father, mother, and sister far


away in Australia ignorant of his illness, and he, their only
son, with only a single fellow countryman and intimate friend
with whom to share his sorrows and a few foreign student
friends. But this utter helplessness only threw him closer on
Christ, and it was very beautiful to watch the quick
development of the Christ life in him. Macfadyen and I were
thus thrown closely together, and got to know and love each
other as well I think as human souls can know and love whilst
on this earth. Oh the deep and sweet joy of being able to bring
one ray of divine yet human sympathy into a soul oppressed
with sore affliction ! The doctors and nurses were doing
all that kindly skill could do to restore him to health, and
many loving friends, both known and unknown, were lifting up
hearts to God in prayer for his speedy relief and recovery.
He could get almost no sleep despite all the powders and
medicines that the doctors gave him, and his fever continued
most alarmingly high, while his pulse varied from 140 to 170
beats to the minute. He also coughed a great deal, and that
always weakened him. But a very strange feature of his illness
was that he had no pain whatever from beginning to end, still
that ceaseless, fiery, eating fever was almost more than human
strength could bear,
Friday was the day he sent his letters to Australia, and he
was always much concerned lest he should be too ill to write a
bright cheerful letter to the dear home circle. Even though
he was far too weak to write himself he always addressed the
envelope, that his mother might not get the shock of seeing a
strange hand there. Oh he did dictate such bright letters to
them for me to write, full of hope, and peace, and perfect trust
in his Saviour ! I could not help admiring the loving and
thoughtful heart that prompted such humorous little sallies
and sidelights, though they could only be uttered slowly and
weakly. He wished to give them the bright side, and to keep
the sad and painful all to himself.
One Sunday, a few weeks after he took ill, when I went
round early in the afternoon I found that he felt decidedly
worse, and thought that his end was near or at any rate might
possibly come very soon. He took out bis note-book and gave
me the names and addresses of his relatives in Scotland,to whom
he wished me to write if he should be taken away, and it was
with a sad and heavy heart that I wrote them down, earnestly
praying that I might never need to use them. I must say


that even then my hopes were very high, and I felt confident
that he would get over this sudden turn for the worse. He
then told me that he had written a farewell letter to his “ dear
ones at home.” He had placed it in his little drawer, and he
asked me to read it and send it to his parents in case he died.
He was too ill then for me to read to him, so I tried to speak
as cheerily as I could. He was quite happy and content.
His only trouble was the grief his dear mother would feel on
hearing of his illness. “Oh it will kill her, it will kill her,”
he would say to me, “ but I leave her to God ! He has taken
care of me, and He will take care of her,” He told me he had
no fear of death, but, though willing to go and be with Jesus,
he clung to life, he prayed for life, that he might work for
his Lord and his fellow-men. The doctors were very anxious
about him, and came in very often during the afternoon and
evening to feel his pulse and see how he was getting on.
Macfadyen had expressed a wish that I might stay all night,
in case he might be called away, and I at once agreed to do so.
But when I asked the doctors they said “ No ” very decidedly—
that there was no need for it, and that he would be better
alone, but that I might stay the evening with him. The
nurse also thought there was no need for me to stay. So, I
wrote my address on my card, and put it in the drawer of the
table at his side, that the nurse might send for me if he took
suddenly worse. I stayed wi f h him as long as the head nurse
would let me, and then left much against my will, though I
had a strange feeling, amounting almost to a certainty, that
that was not to be his last night on earth ; and Macfadyen
was quite well pleased, when I told him what the doctors had
said. I met my invaluable friend Kriege on the way home,
and told him that Macfayden seemed wor?e ; and he at once
arranged to meet me at the Klinik, after calling privately on
the house-doctor, and getting his report of the case.
Next morning with beating heart I opened the door of
Macfadyen’s room,/almost afraid to enter ; but, summoning up
my courage, I cheerily said, “ Good morning,” and asked how
he was. A moment of fearful suspense followed, as I could
not see his face properly from the doorway ; and great was my
relief to hear the well known voice again, and find that he w r as
not nearly so oppressed in his chest as yesterday. My heart
rose in silent thanks to God for His goodness. Macfadyen
had spent a fearful night ; the doctors had been in constant


attendance, and had kept his strength up with wine every little
while. He said he knew that it was a crisis, and that the
doctors were very grave and anxious ; but that lie had no fear
whatever of death, and that he felt “safe in the arms of
Jesus.”
In the afternoon I met Kriege, as appointed, and anxiously
asked for the doctor’s report. The doctor had said that
inflammation had first set in in the right lung ; that that had
got almost better, when the left lung became severely inflamed ;
that the inflammation was spreading despite all they could do ;
that his heart was in danger, as it was already weakened by
the enormous strain it had had to bear, and that the chances
were against his recovery ; but that he must on no account
be told about his heart and the doubtfulness of his recovery,
as his almost sole chance lay in his keeping up hope and
courage, and fighting against the illness. This was crushing.
I felt as if some awful leaden weight had been placed upon
my heart, and pressed heavily upon it. Kriege and I then
went up to Macfadyen’s room, trying to look as hopeful as
possible ; and Kriege told-him that his left lung was severely
inflamed, but that the doctors were taking a great interest in
his case, and were doing all that man could do to restore him,
but that much depended on his own hope and courage. I
found it desparately hard to keep a bright face ou that after-
noon, and felt almost as if doing wrong in concealing from
Macfadyen how ill he really was ; but at the same time I
determined not to do anything against the doctor’s orders,
who knew far better than I what was good for him, especially
as he was so perfectly ready and happy to go to meet his Lord
should he be suddenly called away.
The doctor had told me not to speak much or allow him to
speak too much, so I purposely kept very quiet. But when
he spoke, his conversation was very beautiful and ran as
follows :—“ I have no fear, if God has work for me to do
here, He will raise me; if not, He knows best. He has His
arms around me, and I lie there quite at rest. I can say with
David, “ Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow
of death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me,” I have
no fear of death, only I feel sorry for my mother and the dear
ones at home, who are so much bound up in me, their grief
will be so great. But I know they are safe, I leave them to
God. “ Let not your heart be troubled,” that’s just it, Frank,


that’s just where it is, “ Ye believe in God, believe also in
Me.” Thus he lay with perfect trust and happiness, in the
bosom of his loving Saviour, at rest amid all his sorrows. I
again suggested that he might let me write to his Scotch
friends, as they would be getting anxious about him, but he
said, “ Oh, no, wait till I am better.” We read the xci.
Psalm together before parting for the night.
Next morning, Professor Christlieb called upon Macfadyen
and spoke very kindly to him, telling him about his own
trouble and then prayed with him in German ; after which he
left, promising to call again that week. When I asked
Macfadyen how he felt in the afternoon, he looked up with a
happy, contented expression and said, “lam where I was
before, in the arms of Jesus.” He then went on to say that
he had learned many lessons on that bed of sickness, and that
there was blessing in it. “I cling to life,” he would say, “ I
cling to hope, but I am quite content to die and goto heaven*
It is not death, it is only a change.”
There was a star that shone in at his window about three
o’clock in the morning, a large, bright star, and he used to
get great comfort from watching it, as he lay sleepless and
consumed with fever. “It is like the great and loving eye of
God,” he used to say, “ looking down upon me in my illness and
telling me that I am not forgotten.” It shone deep down
into his soul, and soothed his troubled spirit. True to his
promise, Professor Christlieb again called, and spoke and
prayed with him very kindly. In speaking to me, one day,
about Macfadyen the Professor said—“ Every verb has two
voices, an active and a passive, we must learn both, but the
passive is generally harder than the active. Sc it is with life.
We must learn both the active and the passive. Mr.
Macfadyen and I are now learning the passive voice, and we
find it much harder !”
All the students were most kind and sympathetic, and all
asked after my friend whenever I saw them. One of them
sent him a little book called “ My Aspirations, Heart Chords,”
by Rev. George Mathieson, D.D., a beautiful book, of which
he read a great deal.
One day a German missionary called to see him, and on
another day, a Roman Catholic priest. So he had rather a
variety of visitors.


Day after day and week after week passed ; but still his
fever kept fearfully high. He consequently became weaker
and weaker, and, as he was by no means strong when be fell
ill, it was a great marvel to all tl at he kept up so well, bleep
would not come, except with wild and frantic dreams, or, if
without dreams, it was a dull, heavy sle- p, which did him no
good. But with bis growing weakness and distress, his
spiritual life gathered strength, and, like Jeremiah among the
ruins of the Jewish nation he forsaw through the ruins of his
own physical strength, a clear and glorious vision of a world
of happiness beyond ;he beheld the sun of righ eousness, who
was about to rise with healing in his wings and to take him to
Himself. One day the doctor told Mockert, who had asked
for a report, that if Macfadyen recovered, it would be five or
six weeks at least before his lung would be healed, and he
went up and told Macfadven Feeling much afraid of the
effect of such news upon him, I tiied to make it as bright as
possible next time I saw him, but he said to me—“ Oh, it has
put me neither up nor down much. I don’t care what those
doctors say, they can’t alter God’s will ! If He wants to
make me well, then He will do so. But if He wants to take
me, then the doctors can’t make me well.” He was very fond
of flowers, and I often took him up some roses. One day,
after taking a long look at some fine red roses, he said,
“ God’s roses ! when will I have the blush of health, that
these roses have ?” Alas, what a contrast they were to his
pale, thin face ! ah ! how quickly fever does its work!
In the early mornings, as soon as it was light enough, he
used to read his Bible and his favourite hymns. In this way
he read the Book of Job, and found much comfort in it. Some-
times, waking from a night of delirium, he would feel better ;
and then he would read all the joyful Psalms of thanksgiving
he could find. In the afternoons we used to read and pray
together. His prayers were most touching and beautiful, so
simple and child-like, so submissive, so full of tender love and
trust!
One morning, after reading the story of the Crucifixion, he
took his note-book and wrote in pencil the billowing notes,
under the heading of “ The Lord’s Sufferings ” :—“ He came
with benedictions, and was received with maledictions, —
crucify Him ! Him, the loving Saviour who wept over
Jerusalem ; who healed the sick ; who raised the dead and


spoke words of comfort to many ; who spake a* never man
spake. There, on that cruel cross, hangs the Saviour of the
world, humbling Himself even unto death. Oh, the bitterness
of that hour ! the ingratitude, the sin, the curses of the
people, smiting that tender, loving of Christ, even when
He was dying that they might live ; sin and death to be
destroyed for ever by the power and love of God ! *He saved
others, Himself He cannot save.’ What a miracle of love !
He might have saved Himself and confounded his enemies,
and we would have perished with them. But He died the
death and rose victorious, and we have risen with Him.”
After he had been ill about four weeks, he dictated some
letters and post cards to his Scotch friends, and soon got
answers full of cheering sympathy.
The doctor now said that he had not much hope of his
recovery, that he had, however, struggled on so bravely that
it was just possible for him to recover ; but that all depended
on his own courage and fighting against the weakness.
Professor Christlieb, on hearing this, again called, though
very ill himself ; and after speaking with Ids usual sympathy
and kindness, offered up a beautiful prayer in English.
Macfadyen was now getting very weak and weary, but his
patience never failed him ; da ly ho prayed for strength and
grace for that day’s illness, and daily that strength and grace
were granted, so that In's calm peace and bright faith were
never for a moment dimmed ; and, though he sometimes used
to wonder when his “ night of weeping would be over and joy
come in the morning,” he would say, when he felt more
oppressed in his chest, “ The hand of God is heavy upon me,
but it is a Father’s hand, and therefore a hand of love.”
Talking of his mother he said, “ There is no hand like a
mother’s hand, when one is sick. But lam not alone, with
praying friends about me, and God’s everlasting arm beneath
me.” Soon after this, the doctor said that his lungs had made
such rapid progress, that he was now “ out of danger,” and
would be up in a fortnight or three weeks. But still his fever
got no lower, nor his coughing less, and he said himself lie
felt “no better whatever.” Sometimes he got a few hours
sleep, but they were few and far between, and it was painful to
him wandering in delirium, when the fever burned extra
high. Still this report did raise our spirits, and we thanked
God for the ray of hope He had given us.


On Monday, the first of July (the forty-second day of his
illness) he took a sudden turn for the worse just after dinner,
and when I saw him a few minutes past two o’clock, he was so
weak that he could not turn, while his breath was very quick
and short and laboured. I saw at once from the ghastly
pallor of his face, that a great change had taken place*
Looking up at me he sad, “ I think I shall die.” But I said
as cheerily as I could, “ Oh, I hope not, George, Christ can
give us strength to tide over this weak turn,” Then the nurse
went for the doctor, as she became alarmed. After a while I
could just catch the words from Macfadyen’s lips :—“ Thanks.
O God, for Thy goodness to me ; thanks fora Saviour found.”
And afterwards, still lower and weaker came the words :
*• Thanks be to God, for His unspeakable gift !” We then
prayed together, but he could only break in with fragments of
sentences. The doctors were soon at his side, and did all that
human skill could do to save his life, ordering him a little wine
every half hour to keep his strength up. He lay perfectly
still while the doctors were with him. As they did not
understand English the position was a most heart-rending one,
for I could only speak German very imperfectly, and he was
too weak to speak in a foreign tongue though he sometimes
made the effort.
One time, when the doctors went out for a few minutes, he
said, “ I think I’ll have to give in ; it’s awful fighting against
death.” I replied, “ But Jesus is with us ; you must just rest
in Him for strength to pull you through.” “Yes, but the
more I rest in Him the more I want to go,” he promptly
answered.
When the doctors returned I asked Dr. Bohland aside if
there was immediate danger, and he said “Yes, I do not
expect him to live through the night.” This was dreadful
news, but I simply had to keep a bright face on. Still, while
I urged Macfadyen not to give up hope, I told him that we
must be prepared for whatever was God’s will and purpose.
When the doctors went out again he said, “ Frank, come near
me. Do you love Jesus ? ” “ Yes, George,” I replied, “He
is our best friend and master. Do you love him too ? ”
“ Yes, very much. Jesus is all in all,” he replied peacefully.
Then feeling that his end was near he bade me good-bye, and
sent his last message of Io»e to his dear mother, father, and
sister, till he and we should meet in Heaven. It was an


intensely sad, yet happy, parting. After a while he became
a little delirious, but that was only for an hour or two.
Suddenly he said, as if half dreaming, “ Give me some one to
look after . I want some one to look after.” Such was the
yearning of his soul when about to rise to God, a yearning for
some one for whom to live, for whom to die.
About 9 o’clock he seemed to fall into a deep sleep, broken
only by a few occasional groans. The doctors had now done
all they could for him, so they left him in charge of the nurses,
who were most tender and attentive. Every little while the
great, strong Jacob came in with unwonted quiet, walked to
the bedside, and gazed at Macfadyen with a deep tenderness in
his eyes, and then turning to me sadly shook his head and
walked out again without a single word.
There was a dread awe about that lonely, solemn evening
hour that I shall never forget, but I felt that Jesus was very
near. I was not the only person praying, for the nurse had
slipped down upon her knees, and, with rosary and prayer-book,
was earnestly, silently praying, crossing herself every now and
again. About 10 o’clock she said to me in German, “He is
dying now.” In a moment I was standing at his side holding
his hand in mine. He spoke not ; still sleeping he gently
passed away. The body that had tossed for six weeks on a
hot and weary bed of sickness was now at rest. The soul had
risen to his Saviour, and was resting “safe in the arms of
Jesus.” His night of weeping was forever over, and his
morning of joy had dawned, with not a cloud to dim its fair
horizon. He that had talked with me on that very evening
was now talking to his Saviour in Heaven. He had gone to
be forever with the Lord,
His own words came rushing back upon me—“ It is not
death ; it is only a change.” And truly there was no death
there. His soul had been merely set free from its earthly
body, and caught up to Jesus Christ his Saviour. 'All was so
calm, so peaceful, that it was hard to realise what had taken
place. Oh, how thin is the veil which shrouds the Invisible
World from our mortal eyes ! How near we are to the great
Beyond !
The nurse was the first to break the solemn silence that had
fallen upon us, and slowly I unclasped the hand which now lay
lifeless in mine. In his little drawer was the farewell note of
which he spoke. It ran as follows :


“ Dear, Dear Ones at Home. —
I write this in case / may not
recover. They have had a hard fight, and may win yet under
God. I trust in Him and in His Hon. I have no fear. God
is love. He made me, and He can re-make me in righteousness •
Yours, till we meet with God
George, His Child.
Thus died George Macfadyen in manhood’s bloom, bringing
terrible desolation into the little family circle of which he formed
the pride, the joy, the hope. And yet he will now be a strong
link in the chain that lifts them Heavenward and Christward.
“ A broken pillar ” some would sadly say. No ! no!
rather one of finest marble, carried upwards to support a
nobler structure in the Heavenly world. He was too good, too
gentle for this earth. God called him home, there to do
nobler service for his Saviour than he ever could have done on
earth. Say not that his life work here was cut short. Has
he not left behind him an uplifting influence over all his
friends ? In the souls of those of us who were privileged to
attend upon him in his last illness an undying fragrance of
hallowed memory has been implanted, and often, in times of
trouble or discouragement, we can gather once more round
that happy deathbed and there gain fresh impulse for the
battles of our life.
His was an utterly unselfish life. “ Work in and through
me till my task be done. Life to work,” was his prayer, the
last he ever wrote. Love was the power and motive of his
life—love to Christ and to his fellow man. Surely this is the
very essence of our nobler being—the soul emptying itself
into the life and sympathy of those around us, trying to cheer
them on life’s way, to share their burdens and their sorrows,
and to draw them nearer Christ, thus losing sight of ourselves
in our thoughts for others, losing sight of our own temptations
and trials in helping others to fight against their temptations
and trials, and thereby receiving a fuller enduement of the
Christ love and the Christ life. Let us therefore be more
earnest in our purposes of life and in our submission to the
loving and tender Saviour, and let each one of us pray with
George Macfadyen. “ Work in and through me till my task
be done. Life to work.


Copy of part of Mr. Macfadyeris letter of 14lh June, 1889 ,
daring Ids 4th week of illness: —
“ I have not yet spoken of the cause of my inflammation. It is due,
I think, to climbing Drachenfels one hot day. When I was in a
complete perspiration I rested half way to cool, and going on the
perspiration was renewed, but before reaching the top I eased off so
as to cool thoroughly. When we reached the top we had a cup of
coffee at the restaurant and I felt no ill effects from my walk. We
had our likenesses taken together as a memento of our visit. It is
good for that class of things, and I hope to bring it home to show
you. We did the Drachenfels Rock, wandered round, and before
long slowly made our way back to the steamer. It was now evening,
and on the steamer, having no overcoat, I felt the wind a little, and
had to seek for warmth by the engine fires. It was here, I think,
the trouble began. The cold evening air must have driven a chill
into me from my wet flannels. In no other way can I account for it.
I had no pain at first, and have none now. It is very singular. I
was surprised when I heard I had inflammation of the lungs. It was
the last thing I thought of.”
Mr. B. I. Haarhotf, theological student from Cape Colony,
South Africa, who was at Bonn at the time of his illness, sent
his parents a translation of Professor Christlieb’s service in
the Chapel on the day before his earthly remains were sent
across the Channel to find a resting place among his kindred:
“ 1 can only,” he wrote, “ give you the sense of what Prof. Christlieb
said on the occasion : In speaking of the strange circumstances in
which your only son was called away to change this life for a better
and a nobler, he remarked how man often plans and appoints his
own way and how God seems to step in and alter those plans. He
spoke of how this young friend had just come to the end of his
studies, and was seeking rest and enjoyment and more knowledge in
foreign parts to go back and work for the Master, The parents had
probably set all their hopes on him, and were looking forward with
great pleasure for his return and settling down to do service in the
Vineyard. Death under such circumstances seems very strange.
Truly has it been said that often man is apparently more pitiful in
suffering than God. In this case, in spite of the most favourable
circumstances (humanly speaking), God cuts off a young life to the
sorrow of many dear ones, and to perhaps great loss for His own
Kingdom But who are we to dispute any case with God ? 1 For
my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways
eaith the Lord.’ ”
“ We are apt to ask ourselves—why. how can God do such a thing ?
The fact that He is God ought to be sufficient for us. He has never
yet made a mistake. However dark and sad the matter is we may
rest satisfied that what God has done has been done for the best.”
“ Biased are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth .
. . . , and their works do follow them." —Rev. xiv,, 13.


The following are a few of his Poems
“ TARARUA.”
Wrecked on the Waipapa Reef, New Zealand, on Friday
29th April, 1881, and one hundred and twenty souls lost.
Cold, grey morn and barking billow’,
Fog fiend brooding o er the deep,
Hundred heads press downy pillows,
Slumber, wake not, calmly sleep.
On the Tararua presses
With her hundred souls or moie ;
None of death or danger guesses,
Hear they not the breakers’ roar ?
Slumber sweetly, would ye wake them
All too soon to meet their doom,
If it please their God to take them
In the morning’s misty gloom?
Hark I O God ! What fearful nightmare !
Crash 1 One cry of mad dismay !
Mothers, fathers, children cling there—
Men, bestir ye ; women pray I
On the reef the salt spray flying,
White with foam the angry sea ;
Launch the boats—in vain the trying,
Man must bow to God’s decree.
Breaks the day and wears to evening,
People gather on the shore,
Gazing, helpless, none relieving,
Useless, doomed ones, to implore.
Hands outstretched in mute appealing,
Hands tied down by circumstance,
Ea ; sed to Heaven—now they’re kneeling
On the deck with upward glance.
Noble efforts were not wanting,
And a randful live to-day ;
Out of place were human vaunting,
They, too, might have passed away.
Clinging still with hands all weary,
Hours of night seem years of pain ;
Watching in the darkness dreary,
Shudd’ring at the raging main.
Pale-faced morning on her white wing
Bears the cherub Hope to cheer,
And he whispers, sad eyes brightening,
Trust in God, help may be near.
meriting,


In the early, misty morning
Upwards rose a last wild cry,
Piercing ear and heart, a warning,
What an awful thing to die.
Horrid wh rlpool, burst of bubbles
In the fierce triumphant wave,
Tell of many earthly troubles
Buried in a watery grave.
Once again this tale of sorrow ;
Whose the blame and whose the woe ?
What may happen on the morrow
Who can tell or who may know ?
Luckless captain ! should we judge him 1
Biave was he not. weak as we ?
Life was sweet to him, why grudge him
All the credit that may be 1
Savage sea and barking breakers,
Iron rock and treach’rous reef,
Ye are all our God's, your Maker’s,
Could he not have sent relief ?
God’s the sea in all its power,
We His creatures blind and weak ;
But he loves the frailest flower,
Though the frost may chill its cheek.
Think you that the Great Eternal,
When He snatched His servants true
From this earth to realms supernal,
Had no glorious end in view.
Slumber calmly in the coral
Depths of ocean, while above
Mournful echoes preach a moral,
That, for all this, God is love.
Slumber, wake not, till the morning
Of a brighter day shall break ;
Then, with crowns fair brows adorning,
Sin and sea no more, awake.
George Law Farquhar Magfadyen.


A young man, respectably dressed, and name unknown, was found
dead by a creek in the country. . . , (Creswick Advertiser.)
There by the lone, sad creek he calmly lies,
A cruel rail is pillow to his hea i,
His couch the grass, his tent the ashen skies
Of sombre hue that sorrow o’er the dead.
Yes, dead is that dull clay that once was rocked
Softly to sleep upon a mother’s breast;
Now Mother Earth her wandering child has locked
Within her arms in an eternal rest.
Lulled by the water’s rippling lullaby,
By mournful whisperings in the friendly grass,
With eager eyes fixed on tfie sunless sky,
From hence to where did that freed spirit pass ?
Did echo?s of a mother’s sweet “ Good night ”
Come to his soul as if an angel spake,
While deathless sleep, with its o’erpowering might,
Has sealed those eyes that never more shall wake ?
Beside him lies his “ swag,” his only gear,
Thrown off his weary back and left behind ;
Perchance his treasure waits elsewhere, not here,
And care has fallen from a world sick mind.
Nameless, unknown, tho’ clad in neat attire,
Those fine cut features tell of gentle birth—
That lofty brow of intellectual fire,
And young as fair—prone on the kindred earth.
Did poverty’s cold, icy fingers chill that heart—
The grim attendant on an adverse fate—
Or was his doom self-wrought by sinful art,
And did repentance visit him too late ?
God only knows, who marks the sparrow’s fall,
And works in ways too deep for human thought ;
Doubtless ’twas Mercy sent the sudden call,
Since he has found what riches never bought.
As when a storm beshattered bark sinks deep
Beneath the wave and finds a peaceful bed,
So ’neath this sea of woe he finds in sleep
A thornless pillow for his aching head.
Chirp robin with the blood-red vest around.
Tlntt lonesome form, and drop a sheltering leaf ;
Ye songsters, let your peon dirges sound,
As fitting mourners o’er a hidden grief.


Speak softly stranger, drop one generous tear
Upon that mound beside the brawling creek,
And midnight dews refresh the flowrets near—
No obsequies do Nature’s children seek.
’Tis sad to hear of youthful warrior slain—
A Prince Impeiial—by a savage horde,
But then ’tis glorious on the lurid plain
To win applause, and die with reeking sword.
But oh ! to die like him were harder fate,
Alone expiring in a smiling land ;
No voice of love to cheer, no friend to wait
Beside the couch and clasp the quivering hand.
Deep, deep the woe of weeping mother’s wail
For idols shattered in a ruthless fight;
An empress mourns a son, the widow’s veil
Tells of a grief that shudders at the light.
But who shall mourn for him ? what heart will break
And wish itself had met the loved one’s doom ?
Chirp, robin with the-blood red vest, awake
Ye winds and sob a dirge above his tomb.
Thus die full many by a sad decree—
A nation’s hope or nameless waif alike
Death clutches by the hand, says “ Come with me ”
And they are gone to happier climes belike.
G. L. F, Macfadyen,
A REVERIE.
I stood in a mighty forest,
And talked with the aged trees,
And they groaned me back an answer,
As they bent ’neath the freshening breeze.
And I thought that the wood was the world,
And the trees my fellow men ;
When down a monarch was hurled
By the storm, as if under a ban.
And it fell with a mighty thunder,
To wither, to rot, and to die ;
So I turned me away in wonder,
As the heart wells brimmed up to the eye.
Then my spirit spake with the living—
Oh trees 1 can you tell of your birth,
Whence are you and what is yeur mission,
Why brought from the womb of the earth ?


And what is your destiny dying;,
What becomes of your essence, yonr soul,
Is there no resurrection or future,
Or sdent oblivion the goal ?
But the answer came with a moaning
That boomed like the sound df a knell—
We know naught of the dead or the dying,
Whence are we, and what, none can te 1.
Oh trees, we are brethren in sorrow !
From the same Mother Earth have we sprung,
And I wistfully think of that Eden
When the world and the forest were young.
Then my spirit spake with my conscience,
Some lesson or moral to teach ;
Oh soul! you know more than the forest,
But not so much as you preach.
You grow like a tree, and you wither
Before the chill tempest of deaih,
But oh, you have hope of a future
As you part with the life-giving breath.
G. L. F. MACFADYEX,
Creswick.
“GOD IS LOVE.”
These words were written in chalk upon his father's door hy a youth
of 16, a Sunday School scholar, when in apparent good health , a few
days before his sudden and unexpected death.
God is love, and He has given
His beloved children sleep ;
God is love, and He has riven
Every tomb, however deep.
God is love, He writes the letters
On our hearts and in our ways ;
Off are fallen sin’s vile fetters,
And our life’s a song of praise.
God is love, and we may know it
By the lives His children lead ;
Richly does I I e e’er bestow it,
As our faith is and our need.


“ God is love ” —the silent message
Of a young life lately here ;
Did his spirit catch a presage—
Wings of angels hovering near.
“ God is love,” his heart was beating,
And his voice was soft and low;
“ God is love ” he wrote, repeating
What the soul felt in its glow.
“ Christ in us the hope of glory,”
God is love —Christ has died ;
Will we not too tell the story,
We who thus are justified ?
Inward light and love should never
Feel ashamed the world should know,
But their burden must be ever
God is love—He loves us so.
. — —.
* ‘%r'^ r "
G. L. F. Macfadten,
March, 1885




