

Germany in the Pacific
HER PLANS FOR SECURING THE MASTERY OF THE WORLD?S GREATEST OCEAN?
WHAT IS TO BE THE FUTURE OF HER RICH ISLAND EMPIRE IN THE
TROPICS, NOW UNDER BRITISH AND JAPANESE RULE ?
Thomas J. McMahon, F. R. G. S.
ONE of the questions to be settled at
the end of the war is the future of
the magnificent islands, rich in so
many ways, that make up the great terri-
tory known as German New Guinea. At
present they are under British and Japanese
military rule, but by the terms of occupa-
tion they are still German territory. They
are still governed by the Kaiser?s laws,
modified only by the necessary restrictions
of war-time. Their chief law-court is con-
ducted according to German principles by
an Australian judge, and outside of military
cases all offenses are punished according to
the German code.
The German in German New Guinea,
while outwardly submissive to the present
administration, has not by any means given
up hope for the future. Until quite recent-
ly, he remained just as confident as he was
four years ago that German arms would
triumph in the end. Should that happen??
which now, fortunately, is manifestly im-
possible he was resolved to come with
an increased zest, flavored with racial
hatred, to lay his merciless hand upon new
territories. Indeed, he has often boasted
that Germany, at the end of the war, would
have America and Japan completely at her
mercy, and would proceed to take her pick
of the far-flung islands of the Pacific.
Besides its political and military impor-
tance, German New Guinea has great com-
mercial possibilities. It has prospered un-
der the Australian administration ?which
controls all of it except three outlying island
groups, held by the Japanese. Its wealth
of coconut, running into thousands of tons
annually, and increasing beyond the avail-
able means of removal, is a striking asset.
It is predicted that within the next ten
years its public revenues will amount to
hundreds of thousands of pounds.
Practically speaking, the present revenue
of the territory is paying for its manage-
ment. This says much for the. energy and
determination of the Australian adminis-
tration, for at the beginning of the war the
German authorities threw the finances of
their doomed colony into chaos by the
wholesale distribution of public funds to
all and sundry. They gave handfuls of
money to irresponsible persons of no posi-
tion, and made advances and loans reckless-
ly to officers and settlers. Moreover, they
wantonly destroyed valuable property, and
deliberately paralyzed industries and trade.
All this happened in the first frenzied out-
burst of disappointment and rage at the
downfall of their plans, when, instead of
Australia falling into German hands, they
found themselves unable to resist the Aus-
tralian attack.
This, however, was only a transient up-
heaval. To-day the German settler in New
Guinea is by no means like a man who
considers himself conquered or deprived of
hope. He has resumed his industries, he
is acquiring land, he is buying and selling,
and the result is that the revenue is al-
most double what it was under German
rule. It can hardly be supposed that he has
taken a liking to the enemy within his coun-
try. It is much more probable that he is
EDITORIAL NOTE ?The author of this article is an Australian writer who has had
special opportunities for studying present conditions in German New Guinea, having traveled
through the territory with an escort assigned to him by the military administration. The
death of General Pethebridge, mentioned on a later page as head of that administration, has
been reported since the article was written.
481


still hoping and working to realize his old
ambition?the dream of German commer-
cial and naval domination in the Pacific.
The Germans first appeared in that part
?of the world about forty years ago. Those
were the days when that great missionary,
Dr. George Brown, had already planted the
British flag in New Guinea. He warned
the Australian world of the encroachments
of the wily German traders, really wolves
in sheep?s clothing. These agents of the
imperial government declared that acquisi-
tion was not their intention, even at the
moment when an expedition was sailing out
from Sydney harbor to lay strong hands on
a territory that had always been regarded
as British ?British, because British mis-
sionaries and British pioneers of industry
and trade had long been settled there. The
Germans hoisted the German flag, changed
the English and French geographical names,
and actually defied British statesmen to
oust them.
When a German meets an Australian of-
ficer in German New Guinea, he doffs his
hat as a sign of respect. As is not at all
unnatural, the courtesy is most reluctantly
given, and it is not uncommon for Germans
to walk in the out-of-the-way streets to
avoid it. Such things are of little conse-
quence, perhaps; but there is a more se-
rious indication of the German settler?s at-
titude toward the future. It is a fact, known
to the administration, that he is carefully
keeping alive in the minds of the natives
the idea that the German government will
one day come back. This is a very easy
matter in the more remote parts of the
islands, where Australian district officers
seldom visit, or where immediate super-
vision is impossible, and where the German
planter or trader carries on his business un-
disturbed and in close and constant touch
with thousands of natives. The result is
that many of the natives are misled?
though they can never wish to welcome
A COCONUT-PLANTATION IN NEW MECKLENBURG (FORMERLY NEW IRELAND), THE SECOND LARGEST
ISLAND OF THE BISMARCK ARCHIPELAGO ?MR. MOULTON, OWNER OF THE PLANTATION,
IS SAID TO BE THE ONLY SURVIVOR OF THE ILL-FATED EXPEDITION OF
THE MARQUIS DE RAYS


AN AUSTRALIAN OFFICIAL COLLECTING TAXES IN GERMAN NEW GUINEA ?EVERY NATIVE WHO HAS
NO EMPLOYMENT MUST PAY AN ANNUAL TAX OF TEN SHILLINGS, THE PURPOSE OF
WHICH IS TO MAKE THE NATIVES WORK
back the taskmasters who at one time bit-
terly oppressed them, and who have always
regarded them as mere chattels in human
flesh.
The tremendous issues of the world war
must be decided upon the battle-fields of
Europe. It is easy to assert that Germany
must be driven out of the Pacific; but the
problems of the future cannot be solved by
an offhand phrase. The German territory
in the Pacific is immensely valuable. Great
sums of German money have been spent
upon it, and it promises vast profits in the
future. It is certain that Germany will not
give it without a mighty effort to keep her
grasp upon it. Whatever peace proposals
she may make, she is likely to fight to the
last man and the last mark before she will
give up her fondest dream ?a grand new
empire in one of the richest quarters of the
globe.
It is time for Australians, and for all who
are concerned in the destiny of the Pacific,
to be keener students of the political and
commercial geography of their own hem-
isphere. It is time, I warn them, to decide
that German possession in the Pacific must
end, for German possession means aggres-
sion. Just and unselfish ideals, not those
of Germany, must rule the islands and the
waves of that mighty ocean.
AN ISLAND EMPIRE IN THE TROPICS
The first impression that a traveler gets
of German New Guinea is a realization of
its extent ?it includes several hundred
islands ?and of the richness and importance
of every part of it. That impression is fol-
lowed by wonder that the statesmen who
held office in London forty years ago, or
just previous to the German occupation,
could have been so ignorant of facts, so
neglectful in the matter of investigation,
and altogether so indifferent to the amazing
possibilities of these tropical islands.
German New Guinea, as understood by


THE HOUSE OF A GERMAN PLANTER IN GERMAN NEW GUINEA-MOST OF THE OWNERS OF COCONUT-
PLANTATIONS ARE RICH, AND HAVE ALL THE COMFORTS OF WEALTH
NATIVES OF NEW POMERANIA (FORMERLY NEW BRITAIN), THE LARGEST ISLAND OF THE BISMARCK
ARCHIPELAGO, WITH THEIR GREAT WICKER FISH-TRAPS


the Germans, means all the territory gov-
erned from the central seat of administra-
tion Rabaul. This comprises Kaiser
Wilhelm?s Land, the large slice of British
New Guinea ceded in weak compliance with
German demands; the Bismarck Archipel-
ago, and innumerable islands, mostly small,
and is about equal to the combined area
of the States of New York and Pennsyl-
vania. It has a population of more than
three hundred and fifty thousand natives,
and some thousands of whites, Chinese,
Japanese, and Malays. Under Japanese
administration the native population is per-
NATIVE WOMEN, WORKERS ON A PLANTATION IN GERMAN NEW GUINEA, CARRYING SACKS OF SWEET
POTATOES, WHICH ARE ONE OF THE CHIEF ITEMS OF THEIR FOOD
dotted over a great expanse of ocean.
Among these are Naru, a tiny speck about
a thousand miles from Rabaul, and valued
for its phosphate at more than a billion
dollars; the German Solomon Islands;
Bougainville, Buka, and several other
groups, at present under Australian admin-
istration and garrisoned by Australian sol-
diers. The rest of the territory is made
up of the Carolines, the Marshall Islands,
and the Mariana or Ladrone Islands, occu-
pied and administered by Japan with Jap-
anese sailors.
The area occupied by Australian forces
is considerably greater than the State of
Victoria in the Commonwealth of Australia,
haps sixty thousand natives, with a few
whites and Japanese.
The German settlements or towns are
strikingly complete and well arranged.
Money has been lavishly expended, and
there is no doubt that German officials were
so well cared for that the colonial service
proved attractive to a good class of men.
A German district officer held a high posi-
tion, and was entitled to many privileges.
Not only did he receive a good salary, but
he had a spacious and well-furnished offi-
cial residence, with many servants. Every
few years he had a liberal holiday, which
he was obliged to take, so as to keep him
a fit, contented, and energetic servant. In


FLOWER-POT ISLAND, A NATURAL CURIOSITY OF THE LAURENBURG GROUP (FORMERLY DUKE OF YORK
ISLANDS), IN GERMAN NEW GUINEA
his shorter holidays he would usually visit
Australia; the longer ones ?six to twelve
months ?it was compulsory to spend in
Germany.
The most valuable asset of this German
territory should be the natives, as an abun-
dant and available source of labor. Un-
fortunately, in German New Guinea, the
native is ? sick.? He is not increasing in
numbers, and there is danger that a serious
decline will set in unless some effective
means of legislation is introduced to re-
generate the race ?which is quite a possi-
bility. The German administration recog-
nized this when it was too late for it to
get seriously to work.
In most of the islands of the Pacific the
native races are dying out, and all authori-
ties are agreed that there is no time to be
lost in checking this disastrous loss, which
is a serious menace to all forms of industry.
The intelligence of the native warrants any
effort that will successfully cope with it.
EARLIER HISTORY OF THE ISLANDS
The German territory is rich in historical
associations. One can go back to the days
when Spanish ships sailed the oceans, ap-
parently taking little notice of the fine
tropical lands, but searching greedily for
gold and silver. The Spaniards left behind
them but scanty records, mostly concerned
with their encounters with the warlike na-
tives. In more recent times we have stories
of the plucky missionaries and of enter-
prising British and American traders.
One of the heroines of the local history
was Queen Emma, a woman of splendid
courage and marvelous business ability.
Half a Samoan, she practically started
German New Guinea on its present lines
of prosperity. She opened up thousands
upon thousands of acres of coconuts, which
to-day are bearing profitable crops. She
was an enterprising trader as well as a suc-
cessful planter, and from her the German
New Guinea Development Company, in
which the Kaiser is said to be heavily in-
terested, bought the trading rights that it
has found so profitable.
One can drive for hours through the es-
tates planted under the direct management
of this remarkable woman. She strenu-
ously opposed the intrusion of the Germans.


The conduct of the German officers and
their cruelty to the natives, whom she al-
ways championed, so exasperated her that
she declared her otherwise hospitable man-
sion tabu to them ?that is, forbidden
ground.
For years this lady queened it in the
islands. Her liberality was unbounded, her
friendliness to the missions was steadfast,
and her memory is green in the hearts of
thousands of the natives and, many white
people. She had thousands in her employ,
drove each day in a very smart rickshaw
to her central office at Rabaul, and con-
ducted every detail of her many commer-
cial enterprises. She eventually married a
handsome young German officer named
Kolbe, and went to Europe, where her
wealth won her favor in the higher social
circles of Berlin. She died last year in
Monte Carlo.
Some thirty-eight years ago there was an
ambitious attempt at settlement on one
of the larger islands of German New Guinea
?New Ireland, since renamed New Meck-
lenburg by the Germans. A rich French
nobleman, the Marquis de Rays, had the
idea of starting a new kingdom there. At
any rate, he saw himself the prince or chief
of an active settlement of prosperous colo-
nists, enjoying broad acres, and by their en-
thusiasm and skill becoming rich on a
tropic isle of fertile soil and inexhaustible
mineral wealth. A magniloquent prospec-
tus was issued describing New Ireland as
a terrestrial paradise, with its green hills
ever gleaming and refreshing, its magnifi-
cent soil, its glorious climate, the everlast-
ing blue of its skies, and the calm of its
surrounding seas. Every settler was to get
about fifty acres of land, with a house and
all comforts ?a veritable dream of wealth,
A TYPICAL LANDSCAPE IN BOUGAINVILLE ISLAND, THE LARGEST OF THE SOLOMON GROUP THIS IS
AN ISLAND OF ABOUT FOUR THOUSAND SQUARE MILES. MOUNTAINOUS AND UNDEVELOPED


MOUTH OF THE TUNNEL WHICH THE GERMANS BUILT AS A PASSAGE
BETWEEN RABAUL, THEIR CAPITAL, AND THE NORTH COAST OF
NEW MECKLENBURG ?THEY BLEW THE TUNNEL UP
WHEN THE AUSTRALIANS ATTACKED THE PLACE,
BUT IT HAS BEEN RESTORED
possession, and earthly happiness to people
accustomed to. the crowded soil of France,
Belgium, and Italy.
The would-be colonists were numerous,
and among them were people of substance,
who gave up comfortable homes in order to
enjoy the ideal existence that was promised
them; but from the first the enterprise suf-
fered from extraordinary mismanagement.
To this day it is a matter of wonder to all
who know the story why the spot chosen
for the new settlers was selected. It was
the extreme southeast point of New Ire-
land, unsheltered, at the abrupt end of
the great mountain-chain that runs right
through the island. Here, upon the open
beach, were dumped steam cranes, machin-
ery for sugar-mills and sawmills. There were
piles of incubators,
carriages, gorgeous
harness, agricultural
implements, bricks,
and building ma-
terial. There were
crates of food and
immense piles of
clothing.
Money had been
liberally spent, but
the lack of organi-
zation brought
about the most ab-
surd, and, in the end,
the most disastrous,
results. Boxes of
handles for axes
and shovels were
landed, but no axes
or shovels could be
found. Steam-boil-
ers and machines of
all kinds lacked
some of their essen-
tial parts. There
were stacks of
wheelbarrows, but
no wheels for them.
Badly packed food
was spoiled, cloth-
ing was heavy and
unsuitable; in short,
nothing was suit-
able or complete,
except the materi-
als for building
a cathedral, which
were perfect to the
minutest detail. A
cathedral it was to have been in size and
finish, a gift to the settlers from the people
of France. Unfortunately, the materials
were never put together, because there were
no proper tools for such work, and there
they lay to go to ruin.
Many of the would-be settlers never left
the ship, so keen was their disappointment.
Malaria attacked those who landed, and it
was found that quinin had been omitted
from the medical stores. The colonists
scattered, many of them going to Austra-
lia. Only one of them, a mere boy, elected
to continue his search for fortune in this
island world; and to-day that boy is one
of the wealthiest men in New Guinea, and
still active and hearty. A steam-boiler and
some scrap-iron, rusted and useless, is all


ONE OF THE PRINCIPAL STREETS OF RABAUL, THE CAPITAL OF GERMAN NEW GUINEA? RABAUL IS DESCRIBED AS AN ATTRACTIVE TROPICAL TOWN,
WITH NEAT HOUSES AND SHADY, WELL-KEPT THOROUGHFARES, AND THE AUSTRALIAN AUTHORITIES HAVE GREATLY
REDUCED THE FORMER PREVALENCE OF MALARIA


that tells the tale of what was to have been
the Free Colony of Oceania.
WHEN THE GERMAN FLAG CAME DOWN
The story of the occupation of German
New Guinea by the Australian forces is
one of the most interesting of the minor
trenched, the whole foreshore was a net-
work of mines, and the landing-party lost
two officers and four men at the very in-
stant of stepping ashore. A desperate fight
ousted the Germans from their trenches,
but the Australians were harassed all the
way to the wireless station by native sol-
THE NATIVE SOLDIERY OF NEW GUINEA, ORGANIZED BY THE GERMANS, BUT NOW IN THE BRITISH
SERVICE AND COMMANDED BY AUSTRALIAN OFFICERS
chapters in the record of this great war.
In the territory, and on German war-ships
in the Pacific, everything was ready for
the break with England and for a sudden
attack upon Australia; but the promptness
and readiness of the Australian navy upset
the calculations of the Kaiser?s strategists.
Instead of the formidable squadron of Ger-
man cruisers raiding the Australian ports
and blocking the trade routes of the Pa-
cific, an Australian expedition was immedi-
ately organized and landed in New Britain
to capture and silence the powerful wireless
station near Herbertshohe.
The landing of the Australian force was
skilfully accomplished, and gave an oppor-
tunity for fine dash and bravery on the
part of the young sailors. The Germans
were everywhere prepared and strongly en-
diery hidden in the dense jungle. To this
day the keenness of the fight may be judged
from the thousands of bullet-holes to be
seen in the great gum-trees along the road.
The station was captured and destroyed,
and in less than a week the Australians
were virtually in command of German New
Guinea.
The Australian administration of the
conquered territory is practically a civil
government, with just enough of military
strictness to keep in check any hope the
Germans might have of being troublesome.
The officials in charge have the status of
victorious strangers holding the country
until the time shall come for a decision as
to its future disposition. It is easy to im-
agine that their task has not been an easy
one; and the undoubted success of the new


regime has been largely due to the fact
that Australia sent an exceptionally capa-
ble man to stand at the head of it.
Sir Samuel Pethebridge, an Australian
by birth, a naval officer of practical expe-
rience, and a former secretary of the De-
partment of Defense at Melbourne, has
done work of the highest quality, and has
ably guided the administration through
many difficulties. He found chaos and
restored order. He has set every depart-
ment in efficient operation. He has wid-
ened and improved the fine roads through-
out the territory. He has sent his district
officers into almost every nook and corner.
He has released the native from practical
enslavement. He has kept the small fleet
of boats that belonged to the German gov-
ernment going constantly. Trade has in-
creased a hundredfold, and the government
revenues have steadily risen. The German
planters and settlers have been tactfully
treated, and possess every reasonable lib-
erty ?a marked and characteristic contrast
to the savagery of German rule in Belgium.
Of the many departments of the adminis-
tration, special mention should be made of
the successful adjudication by an Austra-
lian judge, Colonel Mackenzie, of the liti-
gation of the colony. This, as has already
been said, is conducted according to
German-made laws?among them, for in-
stance, a statute of lese-majesty which
makes it an actionable offense to call the
Kaiser an ass. The German code is carried
out so strictly that even Australian officers,
when they are married in Rabaul ?as some
have been ?must first go through the civil
function in court and before the judge.
Colonel Strangman, the chief medical
officer of the Australian administration, has
also done remarkably good work. His en-
ergy has drawn admiration from the Ger-
mans themselves, though at first they were
inclined to resent the strictness with which
he enforced the regulations concerning the
QUININ DRILL AT RABAUL-EVERY OTHER DAY THE SOLDIERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE AUSTRALIAN
GARRISON LINE UP TO RECEIVE THEIR ALLOWANCE OF QUININ, WITH A
PANNIKIN OF RUM TO WASH IT DOWN


BRIGADIER-GENERAL SIR SAMUEL PETHEBRIDGE, MILITARY GOVERNOR OF GERMAN NEW GUINEA, AND
HIS STAFF ?GENERAL PETHEBRIDGE (RECENTLY DECEASED) IS SEATED IN THE FRONT ROW,
SECOND FROM THE RIGHT OF THE PICTURE, WITH A CANE IN HIS LEFT BAND
sanitation of houses and the supervision of
the health of native workers. Malaria has
hitherto been the plague of Rabaul, but
Colonel Strangman has waged such a vig-
orous war upon the mosquito carrying the
germ that cases of the disease have grown
fewer each year. The Chinese quarter of
the town, which under German rule was an
overcrowded and neglected hive, has been
largely rebuilt on better lines, and is sub-
jected to daily inspection by sanitary
officers.
Australians are proud of the success of
their administration in the territory con-
quered by their soldiers and sailors, but
what concerns them most is the problem of
the future of this great German colony.
They trust that all Americans will realize
how vitally important the question is to
every nation possessing interests in the
Pacific, and how dangerous it would be to
restore German New Guinea to the owner-
ship of a militaristic power that would un-
doubtedly use it in the future, as in the
past, as a base for aggressive schemes of
world domination.
TROPICAL TWILIGHT
The tropical twilight,
Half dusky and half bright,
Is like a magic flower
Born at the sunset hour,
Whose transient petals hold
Soft gray and shadowy gold.
William H. Hayne


The Night Before Christmas
KATHRYN JARBOE BULL
Illustrated by R. F. Schabelltz
THERE were two Jeanne-Maries, one
big and the other little. There had
been two ever since the wee baby
had been laid in the new mother?s arms, five
years before, and the white lips had
breathed:
? Jeanne-Marie! ?
But now the one was burdened with the
weight and wo that come to women, and
the other was shriveled and shrunken by
the waste and ravage of war. Desolation,
privation, even starvation, had dwarfed the
fragile bones, had left only a wrinkled skin
to hang upon them. And yet, in spite of all
of it, the soul of the small Jeanne-Marie
had not lost the celestial gaiety it had
brought with it to the earth.
The child?s gurgling laugh won an instant
way to the hearts of the khaki-clad men
who for a time were billeted in the shat-
tered hovel that had been her home. , From
the first moment there was a basis of con-
versation between her and the big American
soldiers ?consisting principally of signs, of
course, with a fair sprinkling of villainous-
ly pronounced French on the part of the
men, and a word or two of absurd English
on the baby lips.
To Jim Bassett, only a few short months
from the broad Western prairies, ever mind-
ful of the ten-year-old boy on the rich
Wyoming ranch, the puny child seemed to
epitomize the agony of the war. Jongmerry
he called her, and it was these two who first
discovered that they could converse with
entire mutual satisfaction. It was he who
?VOOS SAVVY SANTA CLAUS, JONGMERRY??


interpreted for her to the other men, and
she who explained his meaning to her mother
and to the other forlorn mites of the al-
most deserted village. And it was to Jim
Bassett that the big idea occurred, just a
week before Christmas ?the first American
Christmas that France had ever seen.
For a month and more gray-coated
women and white-clad nurses had stopped
at the door of Jeanne-Marie?s home and
asked the mother if she would not go away,
if she would not let them send her to some
place where she could be cared for, where
she and the little girl and the baby so
soon to arrive would be more comfortable.
Always her reply was the same?a negative
shake of the head; she would stay where
her man had left her, where he would come
to find her. He had been wounded once,
he had come back once. It had not been
so long?this with a pathetic, revealing
movement of the hands?and he would come
again. She was but she would
stay.
A light snow covered the ground, and
in front of the blackened hearth, where two
small bits of wood smoldered, Jim Bassett
sat holding the small Jeanne-Marie. There
was no warmth from the fire, but the little
girl, close-cuddled in the strong arms, half
covered by the khaki coat, lay content and
happy.
There was a brooding look on tire man?s
face. Only a week to Christmas! What
would his little son do without him?the
first Christmas he had ever been away from
home?
Then the big idea came. He laughed,
and Jeanne-Marie, pushing herself back
from him, looked up into his face and
laughed, too ?a rippling, gurgling peal of
merry notes.
? Vous ? ?the word was so like its En-
glish equivalent, so easy, and Jim prided
himself immensely on his fluent use of it??
? vous savvy Santa Claus, Jongmerry??
The tiny black brows puckered for an
instant.
? Sainte Marie?? she questioned. ? Saint
Jean??
? No, none of your heathen saints in
mine!? Jim returned. ?Just plain old
American Santa Claus!?
? Oh!? Jeanne-Marie clapped her hands.
? Le saint Americain ?mais ye-es!?
She laughed again in her pride over the
English word.
? Now, listen,? Jim began. ? ? ?Twas the
night before Christmas, and all through the
house ?? ?
Many of the stanzas he had forgotten,
many of the lines had lost both rime and
rhythm, but Jeanne-Marie?s tiny palms
measured the music of the words, and her
laughter pealed for every emphasized word.
? Now, of course, you haven?t understood
a word of that lingo,? Jim rounded off his
recitation; ? but vous savvy Christmas?
What in Sam Hill do they call it here?
Oh, Noel!?
? Le Noel!?
She breathed a happy sigh of relief. Once
more they were on the ground of perfect
comprehension.
?Bully!? Jim exclaimed. ?Well, Noel
? ?Santa Claus ?comes.?
He pointed up the chimney and then
hammered his own chest. Several times he
repeated the pantomime, but no understand-
ing dawned in the dark eyes under the puck-
ered brows. Suddenly a spasm of terror
contracted the child?s face, and she flung
her tiny arms about his neck.
? Good Lord! She?s thinking of shells,?
he groaned. ?No ? nong. Look here!?
He took a lemon-drop from a pocket.
? Santa Claus brings these, millions of ?em.?
The number conveyed no idea to Jeanne-
Marie; but, sucking the lemon-drop, she
was once more happy. Jim was happy, he
wanted her to be happy, and, of course, this
saint Americain must be happy, too!
? And chocolates, millions of ?em,? Jim
repeated.
The gurgling laugh rang out.
? Chocolats!?
Here was another word in common.
? And see here,? Jim went on. ? Vous
take these.? He drew off one dilapidated
little shoe, with its worn stocking, and dan-
gled the latter in front of the chimney.
? Good Lord! It?s too small, but I?ll bring
my own socks. I guess she?ll get the idea
all right from this. See, Jongmerry, Santa
Claus!? He rammed his fist into the top
of the stocking. ? Millions of lemon-drops! ?
He pointed at her mouth. ? Millions of
chocolates!? He bulged the side of the
stocking wide and full. ? Santa Claus, vous
savvy??
? Mats ye-es, ye-es! ?
At last she had grasped the idea that Jim
had been so slow in conveying. Le saint
Americain lived in the chimney, and would
come?that was what Jim had meant ?-
at the Noel and put the queer sour-sweet


BASSETT KNEW THE NECESSITY FOR INSTANT HELP
things and chocolates into a stocking. The
legend of childhood was complete in her
brain, and over the absurdity of it she
laughed and laughed until even Jim was
satisfied.
- But the big idea had grown bigger.
? Vous savvy doll?? he questioned.
The pathos of it filled her eyes with quick
tears. There was more that her adored
Jim wanted her to understand.
? Doll,? she repeated blankly.
The tall soldier picked the child up, cra-
dled her in his strong arms as if she were
a small infant, smoothed her hair, and pat-
ted her cheek. He even essayed a croon-
ing lullaby.
? Oh, bebe!?
Jeanne-Marie freed herself in laughing
comprehension.
? Well, baybay, if that?s what you call


it.? He put her down. ? And, by Jimmy
crimps, it ?ll be a big one, too! ?
Her lips followed the curious words, but
their articulation was too intricate. He
left her, then, to the vision of the Santa
Claus which he had evoked, not round and
pudgy, fur-clad and smoke-wreathed, but
tall and 'stalwart, and dressed all in khaki.
Straight to the hospital he went and
straight to the only woman he knew in
France.
? I?ve got to have a doll,? he announced.
? Gee, Miss Allen, ain?t it a relief to talk
good plain American after all this parley-
vooing we have to do??
?A doll, Mr. Bassett?? Dorothy Allen
gasped. ?We nurses are asked for some
queer things over here, but this is the limit.
A doll, you say??
? Yes, a doll,? he answered; ? or if you?d
rather call it a bay bay, as they say over
here, you can. I?ve got to have it, and I?ve
got to have it by Christmas eve; and, by
Jiminy crimps, it?s got to be a big one, too! ?
For only a second the girl hesitated, and
then she laughed.
? And, by Jiminy crimps,? she mimicked,
? I?ll make you one, if it?s only a rag doll
like those I made for my kid sisters at
home!? Sudden tears sprang into her eyes
and splashed over. ? It?s only a week to
Christmas?Christmas at home! ? But here
the tears were caught and stopped by the
curving smile of her lips. ? You shall have
your doll, sure. Come to me on Christmas
eve, and I?ll have it ready for you.?
II
lx was the night before Christmas, and
there was much stirring in the small village
so close behind the fighting-line?stirring of
sudden attack, stirring of shot and shell,
stirring of the wounded and dying, stirring
of succor and help; but in spite of the con-
fusion, Jim Bassett had remembered his
promise to Jeanne-Marie. His pockets filled
with small sweetcakes and candies, he had
gone down to her remnant of a home and,
with proper ceremony, had nailed to the
chimney a-pair of his own big gray woolen
socks.
Then, suddenly, he had heard a sound
from the woman on the bed. Some ten
years before, when the boy on the Wy-
oming ranch had been born, Bassett had
driven fifty miles for a doctor. He recog-
nized the sound, he knew the necessity for
instant help.
? Come to me on Christmas eve,? Doro-
thy Allen had said.
Straight to her he ran, but no thought
of the doll was in his mind. He found her
at the door of the hospital, where she had
come for a moment?s breath of air. She
seemed made of adamant as he voiced his
plea.
?Impossible!? Her white lips only
shaped the word at first, and hurriedly she
added: ?We are overtaxed here, over-
crowded. There is no one who could go,
no one who could leave for a moment! ?
? I am going off for an hour, Miss Allen.?
It was one of the surgeons who spoke, not
even stopping as he passed through the door.
? Report to Dr. Phillips, please.?
There were dead and dying behind those
walls, there was the grim fight to hold back
the dark angel and yet, such a little distance
away, there was life struggling to bring life
into the world. To Bassett?s mind there
flashed the thought of motherhood on
Christmas eve, of the Babe cradled in the
manger.
? For Christ?s sake! ?
They were strange words on the lips of
the rough soldier, strange words under that
cold, starlit sky.
?What is it?? the surgeon asked. To
Bassett?s explanation he answered only:
? We will go with you.?
In front of the blackened hearth the
small Jeanne-Marie sat, her eyes fixed in
steady contemplation on the big gray socks.
Around their tops ran lines of red and white
and blue, the tricolor of her own country?
always the colors of France, and now the
colors of the flag that had come to save
France. Hadn?t Jim made her understand
that? Hadn?t he made her understand that
his flag, with the big red and white stripes
and all the little stars on the blue sky cloth,
came to help and save?
The child moved a little closer to the
hearth. Le saint Americain was very slow
in coming.
In her absorption she did not notice that
Jim had come back, had brought with him
two strangers. She heard none of the com-
motion that attends life when it gives forth
life. She may have slept a little. She was
roused by a soft touch on her shoulder, by
a flannel-wrapped bundle that was laid in
her arms, by a gentle voice that breathed:
?Your little sister, child!? And the
voice added painfully; ? Votre petite sceur!?
Jeanne-Marie must have slept, for, as her
