

GERMAN AND VOLKS
MIGRATION
WILL FLOOD
AUSTRALIA
WITH NAZIS


WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY MORAN BROS.
PRINTING CO., 37 HIGH STREET, ST. KILDA, VICTORIA.


GERMAN AND VOLKSDEUTSCHE MIGRATION WILL
ELOOD AUSTRALIA WITH NAZIS.
The proposed plan to bring hrge numbers of German
and Volksdeutsche migrants to this country must prove in
effect nothing more nor less thaik a scheme for flooding
Australia with Nazis.
Although it may not be well known, hundreds of Germans have
already settled in this country since the end of the war, and a
majority of them were Nazis or soldiers of the Hitler army. Many
of the scientists brought here from Germany were active members
of the Nazi party. Even the former leader of the Victorian branch
of the Nazi Party has been allowed to return to Australia. This
is what the “Melbourne Truth” reported on October 14th:
“Max Oertel, foundation member of the Victorian Nazi
Party, who skipped from Australia back to Germany in
1939, and who worked there throughout the war, returned
to Melbourne this year by virtue of a Commonwealth
immigration permit. Oertel, urbane and self-confident about
his return, has rejoined his wife and child, who were interned
here during the war, and is employed at Hilton’s hosiery
works in East Coburg . . .”
The “Melbourne Truth” rightly believes that the return of
this notorious ex-Nazi highlights the whole problem of the proposed
mass immigration of Germans under the Commonwealth immigration
scheme. It is this type of migrant that can be expected to
arrive in large numbers.
WAR CRIMINALS.
In any migration scheme preference is shown to the able bodied
and single men and women. In Germany, the majority of these
will have been one-time members of the Hitler organisations —-the
Nazi party, Hitler youth, Nazi women’s organisations, storm
troopers or one or other of the arms of the German military forces.
This will be particularly so with the men and women between the
ages of 25 and 35, and even in the case of the 20 to 25 age group,
a majority will have been former members of Nazi organisations.
The record of these former Nazis is only too well known.
Millions of soldiers and particularly members of the Nazi
party were guilty of war crimes. Their conduct in the
occupied territories was so brutal and inhuman that there
is no parallel to be found in history. Apart from the allied
soldiers killed in the last war, millions of innocent people met their
deaths at the hands of the Nazi regular and auxiliary forces. There
is ample evidence that all the atrocity orders issued by Hitler were
carried out by the Army, as well as the S.S. and other auxiliary


sections. In the words of Brigadier Telford Taylor, U.S.
Prosecutor at the Nuremberg Trial in 1946, these atrocity
orders “were passed down the whole chain of command from
Army to Army, from Army to Army Corps, from Corps to
Division, and right down to regimental Units.”
VOLKSDEUTSCHE.
Similarly, a majority of the Yolksdeutsche willingly followed
Hitler in all his crimes against mankind. These Yolksdeutsche were
nationals of various European States who acknowledged allegiance
to Nazi Germany. They acted as the fifth column in Czechoslovakia,
in the Baltic States and in Poland. The Yolksdeutsche joined the
German army as soon as the war began, and rode roughshod over
the people in the countries they formerly adhered to. Many of the
Yolksdeutsche were officials in such concentration and extermination
camps as Auschwitz and Dachau.
It was only after the war that the Yolksdeutsche got rid of
their German identity papers and presented themselves to the Allied
authorities as Lithuanians, Latvians, Poles, etc., which their dual
nationality enabled them to "pass a s.
HAVE THEY BECOME DEMOCRATS?
Since the end of the war in 1945, there has been no indication
that the demobilised soldiers and the former members of Nazi
party have discarded Nazism and turned to a democratic way of
thinking. They have not heen given, a chance to change.
Their Nazi attitudes have heen strengthened by the rise of
Nazism once again in the territory of Western Germany.
Under cover of a seemingly democratic system, renazification
has triumphed. As long ago as October 4th, 1949, four U.S.
Senators, including G. M. Gillette and I. Ives, introduced a resolution
to the U.S. Senate calling for an investigation of the “resurgence of
intensive anti-Semitism and militant nationalism in Western
Germany.”
Throughout Western Germany to-day, the former Nazi
chiefs have regained the highest positions in the land. One
of Dr. Adenuer’s leading counsellors is Dr. Globke, a Nazi who
helped to formulate the notorious Nuremberg laws. In the schools
the greater number of teachers are Nazis, and the old text books are
still in use. Notorious Nazi generals like Guderian, Mantueffel, and
Haider are building up a new German army and the most inhuman
of the major war criminals, like Dietrich and Darre, who were
recently released from prison by the U.S. authorities, now enjoy
places of honour in the new Germany. Darre was the former
Nazi Minister of Agriculture, and was one of the organisers of the


bestial system of slave labour, and Dietrich, together with Streicher,
was responsible for the infamous anti-Semitic propaganda in
Europe. Anti-Nazis are persecuted, while high German officers are
voted large pensions. Above all, the great industrialists and
financiers who brought Hitler to power, are completely in the
saddle and plotting new onslaughts against the people in Europe.
Is it any wonder that the rank and file of the Nazi party and
the ex-soldiers, who must constitute the migrants that the Australian
Government proposes to bring to these shores, are confirmed Nazis?
WILL PROPER SCREENING KEEP NAZIS OUT?
It has been said that proper screening will ensure that no war
criminals and Nazis will get to this country. Yet the experience
of the screening of D.P. migrants reveals that Nazis and
former members of the Hitler armed forces have been able
to get into Australia with impunity. There are to-day in
this country many Hungarian officers who fought against
the Allies in the last war, Latvians and Ukrainians who were
members of infamous S.S. divisions which took part in the
destruction of Warsaw and other cities in Europe, even
Volksdeutsche who were guards in concentration camps.
There is no way of checking on false and worthless papers.
There is even less chance of checking on the pasts of the would-be
migrants.
In fact, screening is a convenient method for admitting into
this country able bodied men and women regardless of their pasts.
“WHO COMES?”
This is what a New Australian wrote in the “Argus” on
October 3rd: —
“A New Australian myself, I sometimes wonder what prin-
ciples, if any, govern the selection of my fellow migrants. Last
Monday, to my pained surprise, I heard a band of New Australians
lustily howling the Nazi Horst-Wessel song, followed by Deutsch-
land Über Alles. These singers did not seem to be German
nationals, but, as far as I could make out from their accents, Poles
or Czechs, or Volksdeutsche from those parts. I sometimes wonder
how many of the sadly famous, or infamous Waffen S.S. and
allied types are now gathering in this country to perpetuate
that evil spirit from which Australia has been free until
now. Is this what we fought for? Having witnessed Nazi
methods in Europe, I do not wish my name used.—Ex-Serviceman,
Allied Forces.”


This is what a new arrival told the “Sydney Morning
Herald” on 17th September about the screening of migrants:
“The only document I produced was the monthly tram pass
for Prague. The security officer asked me a few questions —my
father’s name, where I lived, my age and why I left Prague. I
tell him, but he did not check how can he?”
Another new arrival speaking of the migrants checked by the
Australian authorities said:
“Few of these people have identity papers, and those they
have are often worthless.” (“Sydney Morning Herald,” 17th
September, 1950.)
NAZIS WILL MAKE BAD MIGRANTS.
None of the would-be German migrants have had any trade
union experience. On the contrary, they are anti-trade union and
many have taken part in the mass slaughter of trade unionists, in
various parts of Europe. They have been trained to obey orders
given them by ruthless Nazi bosses or gauleiters. They will not
respect awards if ordered to disregard them. According to
Mr. W. H. Connolly, the assistant to the general manager of
the State Electricity Commission, the would-be German
migrant, “is used to working a 48-hour week.” He warned
that the Germans knew little of democracy and had been accustomed
to domination by leaders.” (“Age,” 31st August, 1950.)
There are certain people in Australia who are anxious
to abolish the 40-hour week, and destroy the present living
standards of the people, and the independent trade union
movement. How much better can this be done with a horde
of Nazi migrants accustomed to working a 48-hour week
and hostile to trade unionism? The destruction of the 40-hour
week and other hard-won gains would be complete if these migrants
took the place in industry of the Australians called into the army.
This is what some of the sponsors of the German migration scheme
hope to achieve.
The Australian people will easily recognise the danger of
importing Nazis and will do everything to defeat this plan.
MANY NEW AUSTRALIANS OPPOSE GERMAN
MIGRATION.
Many of the New Australians, particularly those who fought
against Germany, will strongly support the Australian people in
their opposition to German migration.


A New Australian, Henryk Majowski, writing in the “S.A
Advertiser” on 6th September, said:
“. . . . I was also a P.O.W. in Germany from October Ist,
1939, until May 2nd, 1945. I saw the Germans when they were
going to lose the World War 11, and I saw them victorious. Maybe
the Australians never hear of German cruelties and crimes.
“It is a pity officials of the R.S.L. were not in Germany during
the war; it is a pity they have never seen a German concentration
camp. They would never intend to bring here the German
migrants ”
“It is now suggested that they be brought to Australia. What
for? To put them together with Australian folk and with us, who
are their victims?
“I regret that I was not an Australian soldier during the last
war. I was a Polish officer, hut nevertheless I join my Aus-
tralian colleagues’ point of view that the proposal by R.S.L.
will be an insult to all Allied soldiers who gave their lives for
their countries.”
There can be no doubt that Mr. Majewski speaks for all those
newcomers who suffered at the hands of the Nazis and who will
never forgive them their crimes.
RACIAL HATRED IMPORTED.
The presence in Australia of Nazis will lead to bitter national
and racial hatred, and to the spreading of vicious anti-semitism.
Part of the Nazi teaching absorbed by the would-be migrants is
hatred and contempt for all other peoples apart from the so-called
master race. Anti-semitism was and is a basic tenet in Nazi
teaching.
The consequences of all this for democracy in this country
can be easily forseen. An increase of national and racial
hatreds in this country will be a natural consequence of
German migration.
CONCLUSION.
The Nazi Germans who are likely to come® to this country will
be bad migrants, and a danger to the Australian way of life. They
will endanger the living standards of the people and will bring
support to all those jin our midst who would divide the country on
racial and national lines. The suggested German migrants can not
be compared to the German migrants of the last century. They
were themselves vidtims of religious and political persecution in


the Germany of Bismark and the Kaiser, and were naturally
sympathetic to democracy. The new Germans are supporters
of Nazism.
The experience of South Africa is instructive. In that country
where racial hatred and oppression is not unknown, the new German
settlers recently gave the pro-Nazi Malan party a majority over all
parties in Parliament. Less than 6,000 people gave Malan that
majority. According to the “London Daily Express,” of the 4th
September, “Last minute orders from a secret Fuerher of fanatical
Nazis in South West Africa are said to have warned German voters
in last week’s elections: ‘Vote for Malan’s candidates or . . .’ ”
This could happen in Australia. Only those in country
who seek to destroy democracy can profit from German
migration.
can gel migrants from other countries.
Australia can get migrants from Great Britain and Allied
Countries. We will have no difficulty in inducing people from
Great Britain in particular to come here, if the large sum of money
required to bring German migrants is used to build more houses.
The Government contemplates spending £13,200,000 in 1950-51
on immigration. The Australian tax payer will be expected to foot
this bill; to pay for every German brought to this country. The
amount to be spent on Germans could be more profitably spent
on British migrants.
British migrants can only he an asset to the country:
Nazis whether German or Volksdeutsche are a menace.
