

SEVENPENCE.
GERMAN BARBARITIES
IN RUSSIA.
THE EVIDENCE ILLUSTRATED.
Published by Authority
The Imperial Russian Government.
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
AUSTRALIA.
1916.


PREFACE.
The authenticated records presented in the
following pages of Germany’s systematic viola-
tions in Russia of human and divine laws so
greatly exceed in horror and extent the out-
rages inflicted by that cruel nation on Belgium
and France that I feel convinced no civilised
reader will find the task of perusal appreciably
more palatable than that which fell to my lot
when I accepted the invitation to edit the
volume.
I, nevertheless, earnestly recommend my fel-
low citizens to study closelv and seriously the
Russian Extraordinary Commission’s Re-
ports, for the following reasons:—
(1) We are fighting for our lives and liber-
ties against Germany.
(2) It seems probable that we shall win the
war, but, even so, our subsequent security
must evidently depend on the terms we may
impose upon the enemy, and the precautions
we may take to prevent him again disturbing
the world’s peace.
(3) It is, therefore, of the very highest im-
portance that we should intimately compre-
hend the nature, character and disposition of
•our foe; lest we should be moved by a mis-
taken magnanimity to be unduly merciful, and
to repose faith (mortally dangerous to our
future) in his penitent assurances and pro-
mises of reform.
Germany’s invasion of Belgium proved that
the German nation has no respect for the
sovereign rights of smaller Powers; and is cap-
able of breaking the most sacred treaty obliga-
tions at the call of interest.
The German armies have committed in-
numerable shocking crimes in France and Bel-
gium. The German Government, however,
specifically authorised only a proportion of
these outrages, and evidence exists to show
that occasional pretenses were made in general
orders to restrain the armed forces of
Teutonism to conform with the laws of war.
Germany so acted because the eyes of the
whole world were focussed on the Western
battle fronts. For that reason, the German
Government sometimes endeavoured to hold
in some sort of curb the bestial passions of its
soldiery.
But on the Eastern front, there were no
foreign spectators. It is to Russia, then, that
we must turn if we would discover how the
German behaves, and is permitted and en-
couraged by his Government to conduct him-
self when removed from the immediate censor-
ship of civilisation.
I append a list of the Conventional War
Laws, which Germany has systematically
violated in Russian Territory. Germany
helped to frame these laws. Germany is
bound by all of them. Germany has re-
spected none of them. No moral scruple can
confine Germany. The Russian Commission
demonstrates that the belligerent German
needs but a suitable opportunity to fling aside
his mask of Kultur, and to reveal himself
such a monster of iniquity as Hell itself might
shrink from harboring.
AMBROSE PRATT.
Melbourne, Aug. 31, 1916.
CONVENTIONAL LAW OF WAR.—HAGUE REGULATIONS.
Article IV.
Prisoners of war must be humanely treated.
All their personal belongings except arms,
horses, and military papers remain their pro-
perty.
Article VI.
The State may utilise the labour of pris-
oners of war, officers excepted, but their tasks
shall not be excessive and shall have no con-
nection with the operations of the war.
Work done for the State is to be paid at
the rates in force for work of a similar kind
done by soldiers of the national army.
Article VII.
In the absence of a special agreement
prisoners of war shall be treated as regards
board, lodging, and clothing, on the same
footing as the troops of the Government which
captured them.
Article XXIII.
It is especially forbidden:—
(a) To employ poison or poisoned
weapons.
(b) To kill or wound treacherously in-
dividuals belonging to the hostile
nation or army.
(c) To kill or wound an enemy who has
surrendered at discretion.
(d) To declare that no quarter will be
given.
(e) To employ arms, projectiles, or
material calculated to cause un-
necessary suffering.
(f) To make improper use of a flag of
truce, of the national flag, or of the
military insigina, and uniform of
the enemy.


(g) To destroy and seize the enemy’s
property, unless imperatively de-
manded by the necessities of war.
(h) To declare abolished, suspended, or
inadmissible in a Court of Law,
the rights and actions of the na-
tionals of the hostile party.
A belligerent is likewise forbidden to com-
pel the nationals of the hostile party to take
part in the operations of war directed
against their own country.
DECLARATION OF ST. PETERS-
BURG.
Considering that the progress of civilisa-
tion should have the effect of alleviating as
much as possible the calamities of war:
That the only legitimate object which States
should endeavour to accomplish during war
is to weaken the military forces of the
enemy;
That for this purpose it is sufficient to dis-
able the greatest possible number of men;
That this object should be exceeded by the
employment of arms which uselessly exag-
gerate the sufferings of disabled men or ren-
der their death inevitable,
That the employment of such arms would
be contrary to the laws of humanity.
The contracting parties mutually engage to
renounce in case of war amongst themselves
the employment by their military or naval
troops of any projectile of a weight less than
400 grammes, which is either explosive or
charged with fulminating or inflammable sub-
stances.
This declaration was renewed at the Hague,
1907, and the following special Riglement was
added to it:—
“The contracting parties agree to abstain
from the use of bullets which expand or flatten
in the human body.”
N.B.—All the Powers signed.
By another International Declaration ori-
ginally made at the Hague in 1899, and
renewed in 1907. All the Powers agreed.
“To abstain from the use of instruments,
the sola object of which is the diffusion of
asphyxiating or deleterious gases.”
Article XLIV.
A belligerent is forbidden to force the in-
habitants of territory occupied by him to
furnish information about the army of the
other belligerent or about its means of
defence.
Article XLVI.
The family honour and rights, and the
lives of the persons living in occupied terri-
tory, their private property as well as re-
ligious convictions and practice, must be
respected. Private property cannot be con-
fiscated.
Article XLVII.
Pillage is formally forbidden.
Article L.
No general penalty, pecuniary or other-
wise, shall be inflicted on the population on.
account of the acts of individuals.
Article LVI.
All seizure of, destruction or wilful damage
done to institutions dedicated to religion,
charity, and education, the arts and sciences,
and historic monuments, is forbidden, and
should be made the subject of legal pro-
ceedings.
Note. —lt was not considered necessary at
any of the Hague Conventions to frame laws
especially forbidding infractions of the com-
mon precepts of humanity. Hence it is that
no law of war expressly prohibits the muti-
lation of prisoners, the murder of wounded
soldiers, or the violation of women.
Article XXL
The obligations of belligerents with regard
to the sick and wounded are governed by the
Geneva Convention.
REPORT OF DEPUTY E. P. KOVALEVSKY TO THE STATE DUMA ON THE
LABOURS OF THE EXTRAORDINARY COMMISSION OF INQUIRY, for investi-
gating breaches of the laws and usages of war, committed by the Austro-Hungarian
and German troops.
Having been deputed to represent the State
Duma in the Extraordinary Commission of In-
quiry, and deeming it, therefore, my duty to
keep the members of the Duma informed of
the proceedings of this Commission, the under-
signed takes the liberty of presenting the fol-
lowing sketch, which, in conjunction with the
documents already in print, will give an idea
of the work accomplished in the course of the
first 21 months.
Russia has now entered upon the second
year of war, and in order to prosecute the
struggle with our enemies to a successful
issue, we must profit by past experience. Par-
ticulars of all authenticated cases of violation
of the rules and usages of war on the part of
our enemies, and all their abuses and misdeeds
should be communicated to the Legislative
Assemblies and the Government, to the whole
of society and to the people. The Ministry
for Foreign Affairs would do well also to bring
more influence i.o bear upon our representa-
tives in neutral countries to induce them to
spread the truth about Germany’s methods of
conducting this campaign.
3
GERMAN BARBARITIES IN RUSSIA.


I.
Appointment of Commission.
The Extraordinary Commission of Inquiry
originated ir. the initiative of the State Duma,*
and was appointed by Ilis Majesty the Em*
peror on the 9th of April, 1915, under the
presidency of the Senator A N. Krivtsov. It
consists of 7 members, namely, two from the
Legislative Chambers, two from the Judicial
Authorities of the Army, and one from the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs.!
Methods of Working.
The Commission follows the rules of legal
procedure as laid down in the Criminal Code,
whilst the more important cases are investi-
gated separately by members of the Commis-
sion. The rest are taken in hand by the local
Examining Magistrates. For the purpose of
insuring thorough impartiality and authenti-
city, the majority of witnesses are examined
upon oath.
Report. ...
In all cases supported by tangible
evidence in the form of explosive
bullets, fragments shells, which
have contained poisonous gas, apparatus
for ejecting various kinds of combustible and
destructive fluids, these objects are submitted
to experts for examination. Physical injuries
3ir6 verified by 3. combined medical and judicial
examination of the victims, and photographs
are taken of their wounds and mutilations.
All objects thus collected, as well as the photo-
graphs, are being systematised and will soon
he placed on view for public inspection. On
the conclusion of its labours, the Commission
will present a full report; meanwhile printed
accounts of cases of the enemy’s violation of
the rules of civilised warfare, which have al-
ready been investigated, appear periodically.
The Commission points out that in this war
the Germans and Austro-Hungarians have
outraged, and continue to outrage, every rule
of human conduct elaborated by the civilisa-
tion of centuries. They set at defiance all
moral dictates of conscience, the binding acts
of human legislation, and the principles of
international law, which have become part of
the consciousness of all civilised peoples, and
which have been solemnly sanctioned at Euro-
pean conferences by the signatures of the
Powers now at war.
Grovping of Cases. . ,
All the violations of civilised warfare com-
mitted by our enemies are divisible into 3
groups, namely—(l) crimes against military
combatants, (2) against members and estab-
♦ See the wish of the Lama, accepted at the
Sit +s! B D^’Botkin, Minister Resident; General S.
F Krekhovetskv-Yush henko member of the
Chief Military Court; E. P. Kovalevsky, mem-
ber of the State Duma: N. A. Mashkevich, Ex-
amining Magistrate for vorv important cases;
V D Olishev, member of the Court of Appeal;
Major-General Siemashko Military Judge;
J. A. Shebeko, member of the Council of State.
M, P. Protasov, Chief of the Chancery.
lishments of the Red Cross, and (3) against
the peaceful population.
International Agreements.
The most widely practised and serious
breach of the laws and usages of war, as re-
cognised by the Geneva Convention of 1864,
the Petersburg Declaration of 1868, and the
Declarations of the Hague Conference in
1899, is the enemy’s extensive use of explosive
bullets and suffocating gases.
Use of Explosive Bullets.
By means of careful investigation the Com-
mission has established the fact that the Ger-
mans began to fire with explosive bullets as
early as the 7th of August, 1914, at the battle
of Goldap and Gumbinen. The Austrians be-
gan the same practice on the 12th of August,
1914, in front of Kielce.
The Commission has not yet been able to
exhaust all the numerous sources of evidence
of the enemy’s use of explosive bullets, as such
sources comprise all the lazarettos and ambu-
lance hospitals in the Russian Empire, but
particulars already obtained show that this
kind of forbidden ammunition is being used
from day to day against our troops at all
points of the fighting front. We have already
over 1000 authenticated cases of this descrip-
tion, and scores of Russian officers have been
wounded in this way. These figures, how-
ever, give but the faintest idea of the enemy’s
application of explosive bullets in general, as
they refer only to the few cases in which the
wounded men have remained alive. An
overwhelming percentage of wounds caused by
explosive bullets prove fatal, when they occur
in the chest, stomach or head. These cases do
not come before the Commission by reason of
the difficulty of registering them in actual
fighting conditions.
The fact of a systematic use of these explo-
sive bullets is confirmed by the large quanti-
ties of them, bearing the dates of 1910, 1912,
and 1914, which are constantly found scattered
over the battle fields and in the cartridge cases
of dead and captured soldiers of the enemy.
For instance, near the town of Nemirov our
troops took 10,000 Austrian explosive bullets,
and on the single front of our Bth Army about
31,000 of such bullets were collected from
September to January. The Commission also
possesses a series of reports from commanders
pointing out cases in which explosive bullets
exclusively have been used against our troops.
Prisoners taken from the enemy have con-
fessed that explosive bullets were given out to
them by their military authorities for the pur-
pose of firing them at Russian officers and
commanders.
In October 16, Austrian officers, taken priso-
ners, drew up a petition to the Ministry of
War in Vienna, protesting against the use of
explosive bullets, “in the name of humanity,’’
as the wounds which they produce are “fright-
ful.” . , , .
In spite, however, of the obviousness of this
use of explosive bullets in actual battle, the
chiefs of the Austrian Army assert that car-
tridges loaded with these bullets are only used
4
GERMAN BARBARITIES IN RUSSIA.


for range finding. For example, on the 18tk
of February, General Goroevich sent a parle-
mentaire to our army to explain that “for
every Austro-Hungarian soldier punished
with death for having on his person U-car-
tridges, which had been officially introduced
only for use in ascertaining distances, two
Russian soldier prisoners would at once be shot
in retaliation.” This explanation concludes
with the announcement that “Russian soldiers
found carrying dum-dum bullets, which is an
offence against international law, will be im-
mediately shot.” A similar announcement,
threatening death to Russian soldiers using the
dum-dum bullets, was issued by the German
Commander in Chief at the beginning of June
of the present year.
As we know, from a communication made
by the Russian General Staff, there have been
cases on our side of firing with bullets taken
from the enemy, and this has produced quite
an unexpected result. According to the state-
ments of several prisoners, great alarm and
indignation was caused amongst the enemy
troops by wounds received from explosive bul-
lets fired by our soldiers, as the enemy mili-
tary authorities, in giving out explosive bullets
to their men for use against us, had assured
them that similar bullets would not be used
against them by the Russian troops.
Asphyxiating Gases.
Another favourite means employed by the
Germans for the barbarous extermination of
their enemies is the application of asphyxiat-
ing gases. This method of warfare has had
most serious consequences, owing to our not
having been prepared for it. Several thou-
sand men were sacrificed on our side by the
first German attack with the help of this
means.
The action of this gas is well known. Its
injurious effect upon everything living and
growing is very striking. Its deleterious in-
fluence spreads over many miles. In spite of
the measures taken against it, no means has
yet been discovered of rendering it perfectly
harmless, and our enemies continue to use it
in a great variety of ways. One of the Ger-
man methods is to profit by a favourable wind
in order to discharge a previously prepared
quantity of this poisonous gas from enormous
metallic cylinders in the direction of our posi-
tions. It is principally composed of chlorine,
which produces a deadly effect on the organs
of respiration and the blood vessels. Im-
mediatelv following this operation an attack is
made on our soldiers, who have thus been first
poisoned bv the gas.
Shells Filled with Noxiou Gas
The Germans also frequently fire shells filled
with noxious gas. Their use of this kind of
projectile and bomb was proved in October
last year at Girardov, in January, near Borji-
mov, in June, on the front of the 3rd Army
over against the town of Krasnostav, and so
on. Sometimes the shells are filled with
poisonous acids.
Bombs Filled with Corrosive Fluid Use of
Burning Liquid.
The Commission has the remains of a shell
which experts declare contained prussic acid
when it burst on the front of the 13th Artillery
Brigade. At one of the last attacks against
the fortress of Osovets, our troops captured a
German officer and two soldiers, who had jars
filled with a fluid mixture producing gas. The
Germans often advance to attack with metallic
cylinders on their backs, these cylinders being
filled with a mixture of petroleum and benzine,
which ignites in the act of being discharged.
A burning jet of this kind reaches 30 paces,
consumes everything with which it comes into
contact, and inflicts cruel suffering on the
wounded.
Corrosive Acids.
Sometimes the enemy attacks our soldiers
with corrosive acids, which bite through the
skin and flesh and penetrate to the very bone.
For this purpose thev throw glass bottles, or
eject the acid from the above described cylin-
der pumps.
Leaving Objects, Apparently Harmless, but
containing Explosives.
When retiring, the enemy leaves in' his
trenches a number of apparently innocent and
harmless objects, such as various kinds of
glass jars, bottles, pots, etc., which explode on
being opened, and injure the inquisitive soldier.
Abuse of White Flag and other Signals of
Surrender.
Such are the technical means employed
against us by our enemies in this war. Not
much better, nor less inhuman, are their tacti-
cal methods, which thev consider lead to vic-
tory. A favourite trick o 2 both Austrians and
Germans is the misuse of the white flag, and
other signals of surrender and armistice.
When success inclines towards the Russian
side they rise out of their trenches, hold out
white flags in the daytime and show lanterns
at night, with the inscription “we surrender,”
throw down their rifles, and put up their arms.
Not wishing to attack unarmed men, our
soldiers cease firing, and move towards the
surrendering foe, when a volley is suddenly
fired by troops concealed behind, with the re-
sult of serious losses on our side.
About 100 cases of this kind have been at-
tested by authentic evidence in the possession
of the Commission.
German Soldiers in Russian Uniforms.
Finally, there are cases of dressing up the
enemy soldiers in Russian uniforms and other
similar deceptions.
Our enemies, in answer to the just charge
of barbarous conduct in these respects, may
endeavour in vain to justify their action by ap-
pealing to the harsh and rigorous laws of war
and their tactical expediency, but they cannot
possibly find any vindication for the cruelties
inflicted upon Russian wounded soldiers, priso-
ners, members and establishments of the Red
Cross, and peaceful citizens. Atrocities of
this kind, which have been attested by the
Commission, and which will now be more speci-
fically referred to, instead of lending them-
selves to the discovery of any means of jus-
tification, onlv bear undeniable witness to the
complete brutalisation of our enemies. They
thoroughly understand this, and in such cases


they make no attempt to put forward any ex-
planation in defence of their crimes; they
simply and categoricallv deny the very facts.
The Commission, however, has so carefully
worked up the information which it has col-
lected, and so confirmed it by impartial evi-
dence, that there is no possibility of refuting
the facts thus investigated and mentioned be-
low as examples.
Dispatching the Wounded.
The evidence collected by the Commission
may not constitute sufficient foundation for
asserting that the German and Austrian troops
systematically despatch the Russian wounded
left on the battle field, but the large number
of established cases of shooting and bayonet-
ing our wounded men is nevertheless a proof
of the existence of a widely prevalent idea
amongst the commanding officers and the rank
and file of the enemv’s army, that it is not
enough to put your foes “hors de combat,” but
that the object of the belligerents should be
to utterly destrov as many as possible of the
enemy’s soldiers.
Besides numerous cases of the killing of
separate wounded Russians by individual sol-
diers of the enemy, as vouched for by a num-
ber of eye-witnesses, there is proof also of
cases in which entire bodies and detachments
of the enemy’s troops have shot and bayoneted
all the Russian wounded in front of them, or
have smashed the heads of many of their help-
less victims with the butt-ends of their rifles.
The enemy’s officers have put themselves on
the same level with their men in killing the
wounded, and in this respect they have given
glaring examples of barbarous cruelty. Here
is a case in point, which took place on the 6th
of September, 1914, in the town of Kalvary.
After the Germans had taken that town, it
was entered by a reconnoitring party of four
Cossacks. They were noticed by a German
officer, who ordered his men to open fire on
them. One of the Cossacks being wounded
fell from his horse, and was left lying in the
street, whilst his comrades galloped away. The
German officer then came up to the wounded
Cossack, and cut his throat.
This killing of wounded men has not been
the work only of combatants actually engaged
in fighting, and therefore under the influence
of strong excitement; it has been practised
also by German Red Cross attendants. I give
an instance attested by the evidence of Alexis
Smerdov, senior subaltern of the 100th Kama
Regiment of Infantry, who was interrogated
on oath bv an Examining Magistrate.
On the 7th of August, during an attack made
by German troops against the Russian posi-
tions in front of Gumbinen, this man Smerdov
was lying on the battle field with wounds in
both of his legs. A German sanitary assist-
ant was passing by with a bag of bandaging
material, and with a Red Cross badge on his
sleeve. Smerdov made signs to him for help,
and this German ambulance assistant replied
by drawing a revolver from his pocket and
firing two shots at the wounded Russian. The
first bullet struck the ground close to Smerdov,
the second wounded him in the arm and shat-
tered the bone, so that Smerdov lost the use of
this limb for the rest of his life.
Killing of Surrendering Troops.
The Commission has authenticated a whole
series of cases in which German and Austrian
detachments have shot down and bayoneted
every man of our troops, who, finding them-
selves in inextricable positions, have thrown
down their arms, and begged for mercy.
Cruel Treatment of Prisoners.
The despatching and shooting of wounded
men on the battle field, the refusal to help
them, and to bury their dead bodies may be at-
tributable to the cruelty and heartlessness of
separate individuals, not perhaps fully ac-
quainted with the rules of civilised warfare,
or knowingly defiant of the demands of moral
principle, but ill-treatment of prisoners by the
Austro-Germans, as authenticated by the Ex-
traordinary Commission of Inquiry, leaves no
room for doubt that this cruelty is the out-
come of a predetermined system, which funda-
mentally rejects all principles of right, justice,
and morality.
The Commission has been able to examine a
considerable number of military refugees from
German captivity, and their evidence gives a
clear and vivid picture of the treatment of
Russian prisoners in the hands of the enemy.
Notwithstanding the complete helplessness
of prisoners, with no possibility of offering
resistance, or of making any kind of effective
protest, these enemies of ours miss no oppor-
tunity of reminding the Russian soldier, some-
times even when he is in the last throes of
death, that they are always and everywhere
his implacable foes.
Whoever the persons returned from German
captivity may be —whether private soldiers,
officers, doctors, sisters of mercy, or priests—
they always begin their evidence by declaring
that on being taken prisoners the Germans
robbed them of all their effects. Everything
was taken away from them boots, clothes,
provisions, money, watches, rings from the fin-
gers of the common soldier, and even pocket-
knives from priests. And this robbing is ac-
companied by blows, to which officers are sub-
jected as well as privates. In one of the cases
investigated by the Commission, the members
of a medical-sanitary party taken prisoners
were thus deprived of all their personal be-
longings under the direction of a major and
doctor, and the major himself struck those who
tried to conceal their money. The next com-
mon complaint of returned prisoners refers to
the impossible conditions of conveyance by
railway, 60 or 80 men were stuffed into each
truck and littered with the dung of horses and
cattle. During an entire journey, sometimes
lasting several davs, the prisoners were not
allowed to leave the train even to obey the
calls of nature, which had to be attended to in
the trucks, without any of the conveniences of
civilisation. For two and three days at a time
entrained prisoners received no food; some-
times their nourishment was restricted to a
cup of coffee and a small piece of bread; on


other occasions a small quantity of bread, not
enough for all the prisoners, was thrown into
the cars so that some of the men had to re-
main hungry. No medical assistance was given
during these journeys, and the wounds of
prisoners were not dressed.
And on these marches no distinction was
made between the healthy and sick; those lag-
ging behind were mercilesslv beaten with the
butt-ends of rifles, with sticks, and seven-
thonged whips, or were simply shot down.
The Commission has authenticated a case in
which the Germans took a party of Russian
prisoners, and kept them 22 days without
food and without dressing their wounds.
These prisoners subsisted on the charity of
local Polish inhabitants until they were
rescued by an advance of Russian troops. In
another place Russian prisoners remained 12
days without medical aid, also until they were
rescued by Russian troops. One of these
prisoners, a private named Klushin, was
wounded in the right leg by an explosive
bullet, and, in consequence of gangrene, caused
by neglect and insufficient food, the leg had
to be amputated. On being sent to an ambu-
lance in the rear, this man Klushin was so
enfeebled that he could hardly lift a glass of
water. Another case is attested by the de-
position of the refugee Zapolsky. The Ger-
mans brought a badly wounded Russian to
the village of Sedlovin, in the province of
Suvalki, and threw him into a cart-shed, where
he remained for days without food and medi-
cal attendance. On the second day Zapolsky
took pity on the unfortunate man, and gave
him some bread and milk, but a German
soldier soon arrived on the spot and thrust
Zapolsky out of the shed with oaths and
threats. This German also threw away the
remaining milk. A sentinel was then posted
at the shed to prevent any further communica-
tion with the prisoner, who died on the third
day. His body was buried by some of the
local inhabitants a week afterwards, by order
of the Germans.
Concentration Camps—Prisoners Employed as
Working Cattle.
The Germans give the same kind of treat-
ment to prisoners of war in the concentration
camps in the interior of Germany, These
prisoners receive extremely poor food, con-
sisting generally of a cup of coffee without
sugar in the morning, and soup, or rather a
mess of some kind of porridge for dinner and
supper, and also, though not always, a quarter
of a pound of bread per man per diem. On
this scanty fare thev ara forced to do very
hard work. For example, thev are harnessed
to the plough together with oxen, and put into
the shafts of heavy carts or wagons to drag
enormous loads. They are punished in the
roughest and harshest manner possible for the
slightest disobedience, or for not doing the
proper thing, and this often happens simply
through ignorance of the German language.
They are put on bread and water, forced to
run until exhausted, hung up, or lashed by
arms and legs to a post for a couple of hours.
This has often resulted in putting arms and
legs out of joint, and in one known case the
victim, when released, fell down insensible,
and did not recover for three hours. Prisoners
have also been compelled to kneel on sharp
pieces of broken brick. Besides this kind of
punishment, they have had to submit to insult
and mockery from the enemy, and have been
made sport of by both Germans and Austrians.
They have been beaten, worried by dogs, and
kept half starved, whilst being compelled to
look on at their captors enjoying excellent
meals. Russian officer-prisoners, who were
fed very badly and made to wait their turn
in a yard, often in the rain, had to sit at a
dirty and badly served table, whilst Ger-
man sentries and guards—German subalterns
—were purposely accommDdated with good
dinners at an adjoining table laid with a
clean cloth and furnished with other comforts.
Torment and Mockery of Prisoners.
The Commission has also investigated a case
of Austrians having on:e at Yanov made
healthy Russian prisoners lie on their
stomachs face downwards on damp soil, and
caused them to be thumped with the butt-ends
of rifles, or stabbed with bayonets whenever
any of them lifted up their heads.
Russian clergymen taken prisoners have not
escaped the common lot of their fellow country-
men in the same predicament. One of them
had the Red Cross brassard torn from his
arm, and a German private swore at him, and
broke the chain with a cross round his neck,
and then struck him so violently in the breast
that he reeled backwards several paces.
The priest was subsequently marched off on
foot with other prisoners, although he told
them that he had bad feet. Only after being
forced to tramp some 16 miles, and when he
fell down insensible from sheer exhaustion,
the Germans put him into a cart. On arriv-
ing at their destination he was made to sleep
in a barn on a heap of dung. Another Rus-
sian priest, condemned to be tried by court
martial, was brought to the court with his
hands tied together with rope.
The foregoing particulars give only general
characteristics of the ill-treatment of Russian
prisoners, forming a background, as it were,
to the horrible picture revealed by a more de-
tailed study of the tortures and mutilations
inflicted upon those of our officers and soldiers
who have had the misfortune to fall into the
clutches of the enemy. The following are
sufficiently authenticated examples: A tele-
phone operator named Vinicheno had his
tongue cut out and his eyes destroyed by the
Austrians; a Cossack named Zadorozhin, being
wounded in the leg, managed to escape from
Austrians, who were about to seize him. When
he fell into a trench, one of the Austrians
caught up to him and deliberately dislocated
his foot; another Cossack named Domanov
had his face stabbed all over bv Germans; a
rifleman of the name of Pozniakov had part
of his tongue cut off; a scout named Troshin
had his private parts cut off, and the subaltern
Vosikin had all the finger muscles of his right


hand cut away to the bone. Besides this, de-
tachments of our troops in places previously
occupied by the enemy have discovered the
following dead bodies, namely of a Cossack
“esaul” (captain) Apanasov, with amputated
arms and legs; of a not identified, with
both eyes put out, and of a Cossack with his
right arm severed at the elbow.
Murder, Shooting and Hanging.
With reference to the more atrocious cases
of cruelty to our troops, and without repeating
those which have already become generally
known, such as the torturing of Vodyani,
Panasyuk, Pichuvev and Makukha: (1) Sub-
lieutenant Niklyukov, having been contusioned
and wounded in one of his legs, was captured
by a German picket and taken to the enemies’
lines, where one of the Germans removed the
bandage from Niklyukov’s leg and begun to
cut into the wound. He then took some sharp
metal instrument, and tore off half of the
nail from the little finger of Niklyukov’s left
hand. The other nails v/ere then extracted
from all the remaining fingers of both hands.
The insufferable pain from this operation
caused Niklyukov to faint and lose conscious-
ness. (2) Subaltern Korshunov was taken
prisoner, and because he refused to give the
German generals information as to the num-
ber and positions of the Russian troops, a
piece of skin was cut from his back with a
knife, which one of the generals brought from
an adjoining room for the purpose. (3) A
reserve man of the first category, named
Shimchak, who was interned in one of the
camps for prisoners, was an eye witness of
the torturing of four Cossacks in the follow-
ing manner: —The Germans took the first Cos-
sack, placed his left hand on a not very high
post, and with a sword bayonet chopped off
half of his middle finger, half of his thumb
and then half of his little finger. These
severed finger pieces the Germans thrust into
the pocket of the mutilated Cossack, and led
him away; the second Cossack had his ears
pierced, the third his nose cut off, and the
fourth Cossack, seeing the sufferings of his
comrades, snatched a bayonet from one of the
Germans and struck him with it. This Cos-
sack was at once bayoneted by all the German
soldiers on the spot. (4) A peasant woman,
Anna Yadeshko, saw how a German doctor
forced a wounded Russian officer, made
prisoner, to take a poison powder. (5) For
three days in succession German officers tor-
mented an under-officer of Cossacks named
Zinoviev by applying electricity to his legs in
order to compel him to give information, and
on the fourth day one of the German officers
burnt the soles of Zinoviev’s feet with red
hot iron. (6) A soldier named Yasinsky saw
the dead body of a Cossack with eyes put out,
half of the tongue cut off, the fingers dis-
located, and strips of skin torn from the chest
and back.
In addition to the above described cruelties
of the Germans, they have contracted the habit
cf burning prisoners. Of such cases the Com-
mission has 18 under inquiry. Two of them,
which occurred in February last in the village
of Novi Dvor, and in September last year at
Opadkovits, when Russian wounded soldiers
were shut up and burnt to death, have been
truly authenticated by the Commission.
II.
Burning of Prisoners.
The Commission has obtained equally valu-
able evidence in another direction of the
characteristic behaviour of the Austro-Ger-
mans in carrying out with such uniform per-
severance the principle of “inflicting the
greatest harm on the enemy in order to
frighten him.” This evidence refers to the
investigation of Austrian and German viola-
lations of the rules of the Geneva Convention,
which guarantee the immunity of sanitary in-
stitutions and persons protected by the Red
Cross at the seat of war.
Violation of International Engagements.
This evidence is especially important by
reason of the fact that the Geneva Convention
was admitted as binding by both the Austro-
Hungarian and German Imperial Govern-
ments, and therefore the cases of infringe-
ment of the rules of that Convention,
registered by the Commission, still further
enable us to judge of the extent to which the
Governments of those Empires ignore the in-
ternational responsibilities, which they so
solemnly accepted. The large number of these
infringements, and the persistent uniformity
with which they have been committed from
the very outset of the war on all the fighting
fronts, make it perfectlv certain that the Aus-
trian and German attacks on our sanitary
establishments by means of rifle and artillery
fire and with bombs thrown down from aero-
planes, etc., as well as other attempts on mem-
bers of these establishments, are the results of
a general plan of campaign adopted by the
Austro-Hungarian and German Governments,
and that the enemy’s troops, in making such
attacks, are only willing tools in the hands of
the superior authorities in command.
Deliberate Attacks on Establishments of the
Red Cross.
The simple fact, that places occupied by our
sanitary establishments are always distin-
guished by proper signs and flags of the Red
Cross, is sufficiently convincing that our
enemy is actuated by distinct malice-prepense
in regard to each separate attack on these
establishments, the enemy’s intention being to
injure their means of locomotion and personal
staff, as well as the wounded men, who happen
to be in them at the moment. The Commis-
sion, however, has taken into consideration
the possibility of accidental firing at our sani-
tary bodies in the war zone, by giving special
attention to the point in each individual case
brought under its notice. For this purpose
eye-witnesses have been examined each time,
not only as to the distances over which the
firing has been carried on, and the presence
of sufficiently noticeable and distinctive signs
and flags of the Red Cross on the establish-
ments thus attacked, but also as to all sur


rounding circumstances in connection with the
possible presence of Russian military detach-
ments, drawing the enemy’s fire, in the im-
mediate vicinity.
With observance of these rules, the Extra-
ordinary Commission has now collected evi-
dence of undoubtedly premeditated violations
of the Geneva Convention on the part of the
enemy, and this evidence resolves itself into
the registration of 72 cases of throwing bombs
from aeroplanes on to Red Cross establish-
ments, 50 cases of attack on such establish-
ments with artillerv and rifle fire, five cases
of dropping darts into them, and one case of
firing into a lazaretto with explosive bullets.
Throwing Bombs on to Sanitary Trains, Etc.
Amongst the aforementioned cases, thor-
oughly examined by the Commission, the
following facts deserve special attention: —
(1) The dropping of bombs from aeroplanes
on to lazarettos and sanitary trains from such
an inconsiderable height that the flyers were
bound to see, not only the Red Cross flags, but
also the distinctive signs of the Red Cross on
roofs of lazarettos and railway carriages.
Witnesses are unanimous in declaring that
in some cases the aeroplanes pursued trains
and threw down bombs even when a train
stopped and the wounded occupants, in band-
ages and walking with crutches left the train
and tried to hide away from the firing. In
other cases, just before dropping the bombs,
the aeroplanes took the direction not of our
troops, but precisely that of our ambulance
stations and lazarettos. (2) Attacks with
artillery and rifle fire on our lazarettos, ambu-
lance stations, trains and sanitary vehicles
have been made at times when there were no
bodies of troops even remotely distant from
these sanitary establishments, and during the
bombardment of towns the enemy’s fire has
been concentrated precisely on houses which
contained Russia’s wounded soldiers.
In all these attacks on sanitary establish-
ments premeditation is so self-evident that the
seeming paradox cf persons, who have wit-
nessed them, to the effect that the flag of the
Red Cross only endangers the buildings and
positions over which it floats, is simply a
correct appreciation of the position of things
brought about by the disgraceful conduct of
our enemies.
Medical Men and Sanitary Assistants Made
Prisoners and Cruelly Treated.
Further characteristic evidence is furnished
by 22 cases investigated bv the Commission,
in which the rules of the Geneva Convention
have been broken by hostile action against in-
dividual members and servants of the Red
Cross. In this connection the following are
deserving of attention: —(1) Frequent cases
in which persons protected by the Red Cross
have been taken prisoners by the Austro-Ger-
mans in contravention of clause 9 of the
Geneva Convention, and cruel and offensive
treatment of such persons during captivity;
(2) numerous cases of attack with rifle and
even artillery fire upon our sanitary assist-
ants and stretchei bearers, when they have
been in the act of collecting wounded men on
-
the battlefield after an engagement; (3) cases
of robbing and plundering lazarettos and sani-
tary stations seized by the enemy.
A startling instance of the depths of sava-
gery, to which the Germans have descended, is
furnished by the following episode:—A
wounded German officer, whilst being picked
up and relieved by a Russian sanitary assist-
ant, actually plunged the blade of his pocket
knife into the latter’s back. And full of tragic
meaning is the fate of the young sister of
mercy P , aged only 17, who is now a ner-
vous invalid in consequence of the violent and
shocking experience through which she had to
pass. In April of this vear she was taken
prisoner by the Germans near Shavel, and
subjected to systematic violation by German
officers for about two weeks. This dreadful
case makes one think with a shudder, not of
our enemy’s non-observance of the rules of the
Geneva Convention, but of his complete dis-
regard of the laws of God and the feelings of
humanity.
III.
Violent Treatment of the Peaceful Population.
The barbarous methods of the Austro-Ger-
mans have been particularly conspicuous in
regard to breaches of the laws and usages of
war concerning the peaceful population, and
which are now under inquiry by the Commis-
sion.
These crimes simply excite feelings of
horror and learning for their cold-blooded per-
petrators. They are of the most varied de-
scription, and tall into twp groups, namely;—
(1) crimes against the lives, health and physi-
cal inviolability of individuals, such as murder,
bodily injury, violation of women, placing
innocent people under fire, cruel treatment,
and (2) crimes against public safety, such as
sinking ships, bombarding and setting fire to
towns and villages, forcible enrolment of re-
cruits, robbery and desecration of holy places.
The ill-fated inhabitants of the town of
Kalish were the first to experience all the
horrors of German brutality and cruelty.
Here the German? shot masses of unarmed
citizens, burned hospitals, public buildings and
private houses, plundered lodgings and robbed
individuals, bombarded the town several times
without cause or reason, committed rape on
several women, and also committed murders.
The most striking cases of murder were the
killing of the Jew Kaplan and his eight young
children for trying to prevent the plundering,
and robbing of his own house by German
soldiery, and the murder of the cashier of the
Government Office, Sokolov, who was
executed by tin Germans for doing his duty in
circumstances already detailed in the public
press.
But th* Germans exhibited their brutality
in other Russian towns and villages besides
Kalish.
On the 26th of June, 1914, a German de-
tachment of ahout 150 men entered the settle-
ment of Sudargi, in the Vladislav district of
the province of Suvalki. At this particular
moment a local police watchman named Abba


kumov, who knew nothing of the appearance
of the Germans, left his house, dressed in his
uniform and carrying his rifle. He was ob-
served by the Germans, and was at once
wounded in the chest, but he succeeded in
escaping back into his house, whither, however,
he was hotly pursued by some 25 German
soldiers, shouting and threatening in German,
which was a language totally unknown to
Abbakumov. The wounded man’s wife,
Eleonora Abbakumov, went down on her knees
and begged for mercy, but the Germans
dragged Abbakumov out into the yard, and
one of them cut off his nose with a kinjal, or
bayonet, also both his ears, and finally they
ripped open his Dowels and exposed his in-
testines. After this, it is almost needless to
add, Abbakumov '•oon expired in the most
fightful agony.
In August, 1915, two Russian police watch-
men were shot by German troops in the town
of Konsk. They were tied together by the
hands and led out from the headquarters of
the German staff into a field behind the house
of Count Tarrovsky. Here they were made
to dig their own graves before being shot on
the spot, one after the other. Twelve Ger-
man soldiers with an officer took part in this
execution.
On the 23rd of July, 1914, German troops
occupied the village of Alexandrovo Prograni-
chni and commanded the inhabitants to de-
liver up all firearms and ammunition. In
compliance with this demand, the inspector of
the local High School, named Panyutich, gave
over to a German under-officer two sporting
guns, a Biaunmg revolver and about 20 cart-
ridges. On the evening of the 27th of July
a party of Geiman soldiers, commanded by a
non-commissioned officer, entered the school
building, and the German subaltern told
Panyutich that meetings of the townspeople
were taking place in the school, and that bombs
were prepared there. The German soldiers
thereunon proceeded to search Panyutich and
the school premises Panyutich then informed
them that he had given up his two guns and
revolver to the German authorities, but that
he had two pounds of gunpowder buried away
in the cellar. He was ordered to give up this
powder, and, accordingly, he took the Ger-
mans down to the cellar, dug up three tins of
powder with his own hands and passed them
over to the soldiers. On being requested to
give up everything else of a similar kind, he
declared that he had nothing more. Then one
of the German soldiers placed the sharp edge
of his sword close to Panyutich’s throat, and
another soldier pointed a rifle at him with a
•demand to surrender the res' of the powder.
While this was going on, one of the soldiers
ran up to him and struck Panyutich four times
with his fist in the face. Panyutich again
assured the soldiers that he had nothing more
to give up. The Germans then ordered him
to go out of the house, and as he was going up
the stairs they beat him with the butt-ends
of their rifles and with their fists. Coming
outside, they made him hold up his arms, and
in this attitude they led him half a mile to
the guard house of the Commandant at the
railway station. Here Panyutich was placed
on his knees in a corner, ordered again to hold
up his arms, and m this position he was re-
viled and ridiculed in every possible way. The
Germans cursed him, protruded their tongues
at him, spat in his face, threw dirt at him
and bespattered him with water. In this
condition they kept him for two or two and a
half hours. Then a German officer came up
and swore at him in German, struck him twice
in the face, held a revolver to his forehead
and threatened to kill him as a spy and
bombist. When the officer went away, in
about five minutes, the soldiers on duty over
Panyutich continued to make sport of their
prisoner, pointed their rifles at him and
threatened to shoot him. Afterwards, when
he was taken into the building, the soldiers
again told him that he would be shot. The
next day, about one o’clock, he was set free.
Torture for Refusing to Give Information.
On the 14th of October, 1914, near the town
of Prasnish, some German troopers arrested a
native from the village of Smoshevo, in the
province of Plotsk, named Joseph Franz Maxi-
milianov Fliashchmsky, 63 years of age, and
because he refused to act the spy for their
benefit, they tortured him by first binding his
arms to a plank. He was then thrown face
downward, the plank to which his arms were
attached was fastened to the ground with
wooden pegs, and his legs were tied together.
In this position the Germans covered him with
boughs and pine tree fronds, which they set
fire to, and then they went away. Fliashchin-
sky, however, managed to release himself and
get up, thanks to the accidental burning
through of the rope, which bound his left arm
to the board, although one of his sides and
his hinder parts were very much burnt.
These circumstances were authenticated by
the results of a combined judicial and medical
examination.
Especially terrible are the cases that have
passed through the Commission with reference
to the inhuman treatment, which both superior
and inferior officers of the enemy’s army have
accorded to women, who have had the mis-
fortune to fail into their hands. Of these
cases we shall quote one or two examples.
Violation of Women.
At the beginning of the war, when the Ger-
man troops took Kalish, a young girl named
N ,18 years of age, was arrested, led out
on to the public place of the town, and tied
up to a tree. Here the Germans threatened
to shoot her. A number of inhabitants were
also drawn up in a line on this public place,
including a student acquainted with the girl
in question, named N , who was also to
be shot. But before riddling him with bullets
the Germans firs'; of all tortured him before
the eyes cf the girl lashed to the three, by
stabbing him with bayonets and pulling out
handfuls cf hair from his head. This scene of
murder so affected the girl N that she
fainted. On coming to her senses she found
herself in an apartment occupied by German
officers, one of whom violated her as soon as


she recovered consciousness During the
following days N was kept under arrest
in the same lodging, and the officer who first
destroyed her virginity, as well as two of his
companions, continued to abus»" her. The two
comrades of :he first officer forced her into
submission by threatening to cut her to pieces
with their swords if she attempted to resist.
The girl was eventually rescued by Russian
troops.
The fact of the rape having been committed
was estab’ished by a combined judicial and
medical examination of N on the 4th of
June, 1915.
In February, 1915, at Sopolski, in the dis-
trict of Augustov, province of Suvalki, the
following scene was enacted:—A drunken
German officer entered the lodging of Stefani
L for the purpose of violating her daugh-
ter Sophie, aged 20, who had run away from
the annoying attentions of a number of in-
toxicated German officers and taken refuge
with some neighbours. The German officer in
question sent his soldier servant to bring back
the girl, and this was accomplished by
frightening her w:th the threat of killing her
parent:, if she did not return home. When
she appeared, this officer seized her by the
arm, dragged her into the room, threw her on
to a bed, and began to tear off her clothes. . . .
On the night of the 16th August, 1914, at
Makovo, in the district of Kamenets Podolsk,
several Austro-Hungarian cavalrymen entered
the log cabin of a peasant woman named
Nelania K , and one of them threw her on
to the bed, while the others threatened with
their drawn swords to kill her if she offered
any resistance. Then all the three men raped
her in turn.
The Germans have another forbidden prac-
tice of fighting an enemy, in addition to all
their other prohibited methods, and this con-
sists in putting peaceful citizens under fire.
This is confirmed by the two following facts,
which have been established by the Commis-
sion.
On the 12th September, 1914, Hungarian
troops seized Yadvig Zmigrodsky and other
peaceful inhabitants on the estate of Kobernik,
district of Sandomir, and for 15 minutes made
them stand in the front trenches under fire
during a battle with the Russians.
On the 29th of April, 1915, near Popelian,
the enemy’s troops sent forward in front of
their line about 75 peaceful inhabitants, prin-
cipally women and children, during the firing
over a distance of about 80 or 90 paces, in an
engagement with the 2nd Sotnia of Orenburg
Cossacks.
In conclusion, amongst the many kinds of
infringement of established rules and customs
concerning public safety, which the Commis-
sion has under investigation, there are cases
of firing on churches, private houses, destruc-
tion and pillage of private property, burning
of homesteads, plundering of farms, etc.
IV.
HOW IS THIS CONDUCT OF THE GER-
MANS TO BE EXPLAINED?
Many more particulars might be added to
those already furnished by the Commission in
proof of German and Austrian contempt for
the laws and usages of war relating to the
peaceful population, as well as institutions of
the Red Cross and the Russian troops. But
this is scarcely needed. The fundamental
tendency of German action is plainly deducible
from the few examples already given. To
the Germans, war is not a contention between
civilised peoples, but ruthless slaughter, not a
struggle with the armed forces of an enemy,
but an opportunity of exterminating them by
all and every possible means, without dis-
crimination or compunction. Almost every
day brings fresh information of their new or
improved instruments and methods of whole-
sale destruction. But if there is some logical,
though cruel and inhuman, method in the use
of this kind of weapon, it is almost impossible
to find any explanatory motives for torturing
and tormenting individuals, for dastardly
crimes against defenceless prisoners, women,
old men, and children. These cannot be jus-
tified from any military point of view, and
they cannot be regarded as acts of revenge for
corresponding acts on the part of the Rus-
sians, as cases of coarse and vulgar cruelty,
such as those referred to, were discovered at
the very outset of the war, when there was no
reason for the Germans to entertain such a
bitter hatred of individual Russian citizens. It
would seem as if the Germans, in directing all
their thoughts and energies toward the in-
vention of various means of exterminating
their fellow creatures, had become so "pene-
trated with hatred of their future foes, that
they ceased to regard them as beings, for
whom there were any longer any laws, either
human or divine. By means of excessive ex-
aggeration of their own virtues and self lauda-
tion, the Germans had arrived at the idea of
their being a chosen people, a “master people
in contradiction to all other peoples, especially
the Slavs, who are supposed to be an inferior
race, only capable of living in subjection and
unfit for independent existence. But even
when we take into account theories like these,
and even when we remember that in Germany
the Russian nation has been called a mere
“cultur-dung,” or manure, it is impossible to
explain acts of callous cruelty of such a kind
that a cultured person would shrink from per-
petrating them on the lowest animal. At one
of the recent sittings of the Commission, we
investigated the following case, which is bad
enough to give anyone a night-mare. At the
end of last December, near a village in East
Prussia, one of our troopers, through want of
caution, was taken prisoner, while foraging,
by a party of 8 Germans, who stripped him
naked, drove him to the wood-pile, which they
had just set alieht, and began to roast him
over the fire. They surrounded him and the


burning faggots, and with their rifles they
kept him on the spot at the point of the bayo-
net. Neither his cries for mercy, nor the har-
rowing spectacle of a human creature being
burnt alive, had any effect in softening the
feelings of his executioners. The most hor-
ribe thing is that not one of these German sol-
diers attempted to restrain his comrades dur-
ing that frightful torture. Not one of them
seemed to understand that it would have been
a hundred times more humane if they had
killed him at once. Reflect, members of the
State Duma, on that awful and shocking
scene. What must be the depths of moral
degradation of our enemy, when not one man,
but whole parties of men, are not only able to
gaze unmoved upon tortures like these, but
actually find amusement in them. In very
truth, these are not men, but devils incarnate.
To find oneself in the power of enemies, who
count amongst their number such degenerates
as these, is to fall into a condition worse than
slavery. We are, therefore, stimulated to use
every means, and to strain every effort of the
nation in a steadfast, unrelenting struggle to
crush this horrible foe.
CONCLUSION.
Having now before us a whole series of facts,
strictly verified by the Extraordinary Com-
mission of Inquiry, and denoting violations of
the laws and usages of war by the Austro-
German troops, and acts of brutality and van-
dalism, which for cruelty, cynicism and
variety, are quite unprecedented, we are per-
fectly justified in asserting that Germany does
not carry on this war as a cultured State, but
on the contrary, knowingly violates all its re-
cognised rules, and that the authorities in
command of the German army approve the use
of means and methods of fighting, which are
absolutely condemned by all civilised peoples.
No. 1. —Vasili Vodyanoi.


No. 1. —Vasili Vodyanoi.
No. 1. —Vasili Vodyanoi.
EXTRAORDINARY COMMISSION
OF INQUIRY APPOINTED BY
ORDER OF HIS MAJESTY THE
EMPEROR OF RUSSIA.
The Extraordinary Commission
sends out another account of its
labours, with a further account of
atrocities committed by our foes.
May this publication serve as a
mute tribute of admiration and
affection for our heroic martyrs,
who have not forgotten their sense
of duty, and have refused to sully
their honour by betraying their
country to the enemy.
The Extraordinary Commission
of Inquiry, being of opinion that a
graphic representation of the atro-
cities committed by the enemy’s
troops will afford more objective
and convincing proof of the facts
than mere abstract narrative, has
decided to publish brief accounts
of each case of mutilation, illus-
trated by portraits of the victims
and descriptions of the cruelties
inflicted upon them.
ALEXIS KRIVTSOV,
Senator.
President of the Extraordinary
Commission of Inquiry.
No. 1.
Vasili Vodyanoi, aged 24, a
Corporal in one of the Russian in-
fantry regiments, was made pris-
oner by German troops on the 27th
April this year near the town of
Sh while reconnoitring the
enemy.
A German subaltern in a forest,
in the presence of two privates,
demanded information from Vod-
yanoi as to the position of the
Russian Staff and the number of
Russian infantry troop, and
threatened to gouge out his eyes
and cut off his ears if he refused
to obey.
As Vodyanoi declined to give the
required information, the German
subaltern, cursing the while, drew
his kinjal and cut off, first the lobe
of Vodyanoi’s left ear, and then
the helix of his right ear. The
German then said:—“We’ll teach
you how to speak;” whereupon
he seized Vodyanoi by the throat,
and throttled him until he fainted.


Vodyanoi lay senseless for several hours.
When he recovered consciousness, he felt that
his tongue had been cut out.
In spite of the pain from these injuries,
and the loss of blood, Vodyanoi managed to
crawl at random out of the wood, and was
soon able to attract the attention of a Rus-
sian patrol, who took him to one of the Staffs
of the Russian Army.
The foregoing was confirmed on oath by
Vodyanoi under examination by the Extra-
ordinary Commission.
ALEXIS KRIVTSOV,
Senator.
President of the Extraordinary Commission
of Inquiry.
No. 2.
On the evening of the 15th of March this
year, the senior subaltern of a reconnoitring
detachment belonging to the staff of the
Army named Porphyry Panasuk,
aged 26, was out scouting when he
was captured by a German picket
and taken to the village of Kozzokhi.
Here about ten German officers began to
No. 2.—Senior Subaltern Porphyry Panasuk.
question him as to the positions of our Sibe-
rian and other army corps, and promised to
reward him handsomely for the desired in-
formation. Panasuk, however, refused to
communicate anything. Then one of the
General Staff officers present said to Panasuk,
in Russian: “No more nonsense! We have
seen you at several places all along our front.”
At the same time, this officer gave some order
in German. Immediately another officer
brought a small pair of scissors, with which
the officer of the General Staff cut off the lobe
of Panasuk’s right ear. This outrage was
accompanied by the words: “Well, how do
you like that; perhaps now you will tell us
something?” But, as even this did not in-
duce Panasuk to comply, the same officer
with the scissors clipped off three more pieces,
one after the other, from the same ear of his
stoical victim, whom he then seized so
violently by the nose that the latter was much
injured and bent. Finally, to complete this
savage treatment of an inoffensive prisoner,
the officer referred to struck Panasuk in the
face.
The same evening Panasuk
succeeded in effecting his
escape, and in the course of
several days reached our
troops.
The foregoing facts were
sworn to by Panasuk under
examination by the Extraor-
dinary Commission of In-
quiry on the 9th of May.
ALEXIS KRIVTSOV,
Senator.
President of the Extraor-
dinary Commission of Inquiry
No. 3.
On the 2nd of May a Cos-
sack soldier of the N re-
giment, named Ivan Pichuev,
aged 33, was taken prisoner
by the Germans near the vil-
lage of O .
Being questioned by his
captors as to the positions
and number of the Russian
troops, Pichuev refused to
give them any information on
the subject, whereupon the
Germans began to torture
him. First of all they hung
him up by the hands; then
they suspended him head
’ownwards, and, as this treat-
ment failed to produce the de-
sired effect of making him
divulge military secrets,
several German officers, as-
sisted by a German soldier
acting under their orders,
proceeded to clip off the lobe
of Pichuev’s right ear. Even
this did not shake his firm
resolve not to betray the


No. 2. — Senior Subaltern Porphyry Panasuk.
Russian Army, and therefore his tormentors
next carved off the upper part, or helix, of his
left ear. Finally, they slit four long parallel
gashes in the flesh of his right hip to imitate
the two stripes of a Cossack’s trousers, and
threatened to hang him outright on the fol-
lowing day.
Fortunately, on the evening of the 3rd of
May, Pichuev succeeded in escaping from the
Germans and reached the Russian lines in
safety.
The above facts have been confirmed on
oath by Pichuev under examination before
the Extraordinary Commission of Inquiry.
On the 7th of May, Pichuev was examined
by the doctors of the Moscow Lazaret of
St. Seraphim, belonging to the Russian Red
Cross Society, in the presence of Colonel
Robert Cormick, of the National Guard of
the United States of North America, and a
German officer prisoner named Theodore
Raabe.
ALEXIS KRIVTSOV,
Senator.
President of the Extraor-
dinary Commission of Inquiry
No. 4.
A Russian infantry soldier
acting as telephonist, named
Alexis Makukha, aged 25,
was seized as a prisoner on
the 20th of March by two
Austrian officers while he
was mending telephone wire”
near the town of Z.
These officers clutched their
prisoner by the throat,
threatened him with their re-
volvers, and demanded infor-
mation as to the number,
composition, and positions of
the Russian forces.
When Makukha refused to
answer any questions, the
officers threw him to the
ground face downwards,
pulled his arms behind his
back, and then one of them
sat upon him, while the other
twisted Makukha’s head
round backwards, forced his
mouth open with a sword-
bayonet, pulled out his tongue
and made two cuts in it with
the same sword-bayonet.
Blood gushed from the
wounded man’s mouth and
nose.
After this barbarous treat-
ment, the officers preceded
to take Makukha to their
trenches. On the way
they stopped for a mo-
ment to light up for a
smoke. Taking prompt ad-
vantage of this oppor-
tunity, Makakha threw
both officers off their feet and took to flight.
Although fired at from the enemy’s trenches,
he managed to reach the Russian lines and
rejoin his regiment.
This man’s statement has been confirmed on
oath before the Examining Magistrate for im-
portant cases attached to the District Court
of Ekaterinoslav.
According to a combined judicial and medi-
cal examination of Makukha, the latter was
suffering from deeply cut wounds in the
tongue, contortion of the neck and compres-
sion of the larynx, which almost deprived him
of the faculty of speech, and made it very
difficult for him to swallow food. At the pre-
sent moment Makukha is able to speak only
in a low whisper.
ALEXIS KRIVTSOV,
Senator.
President of the Extraordinary Commission
of Inquiry.


No. 3. —Ivan Pichuev.
No. 5.
The junior subaltern of an infantry regi-
ment named Andrei Akeefiev and Corporals
Paul Mikhailov and Miron Kuzmin, were
wounded by German troops on the night of
the 22nd of April, 1915, while they were mak-
ing their way to the enemy’s positions on the
river B .
Birakhman Turabaiev, a private in one of
the regiments of riflemen, was wounded by
German troops on the 30th of May, 1915, in
the district of C .
A medical examination proved that these
men had all been wounded by explosive bullets.
The bullet, which wounded Akeefiev, entered
just above the right elbow and burst open
all the upper part of the arm in the region
of the shoulder. Mikhailov had the muscles
across the small part of his back torn and
exposed, and Kuzmin had a lacerated wound
on the ankle of his left foot. Turabaiev was
wounded in the left cheek, the exit gap of
the bullet’s passage representing “a huge,
lacerated and shattered wound, extending over
the whole of the right cheek.” This man
Turabaiev had his tongue torn to pieces, both
jaws and the right cheek bone smashed, and
in the roof of his mouth, torn from its base,
there was an opening, leading to the nose and
the base of the brain.
ALEXIS KRIVTSOV,
Senator.
President of the Extraordinary Commission
of Inquiry.
No. 6.
A private of the Regiment of Riflemen,
named Vasili Ivanov Anpilogov, acting as an
officer’s servant, was sent to fetch forage from
a military transport detachment, standing a
few versts off from the regiment, near the
town of Sokal.
While passing near the border of a forest
Anpilogov came up with an unknown man
wearing a jacket and grey coloured kepi. The
stranger fell in with Anpilogov, and asked


him in very good Russian where he was going,
and to which regiment he belonged.
During the conversation a second stranger
emerged from the wood and said something
in a foreign language to the first man. He
then ran up behind, pulled off the overcoat,
which hung loosely on Anpilogov’s shoulders,
and dragged the latter’s shirt over his head.
Anpilogov would have torn himself away and
No. 4. —Alexis Makukha.
fled, but he was knocked down by a violent
blow on the head from one of the strangers
with something very hard, and then dragged
into the thick of the forest.
After they had gone some distance, the
strangers, without freeing Anpilogov’s head
from under his shirt, began to ask him ques-
tions about the number, and positions of the
Russian troops, but Anpilogov answered every-
thing by saying he did not know. They then
enquired if he had any money, and Anpilogov
replied that in his trouser’s pocket there were
47 roubles, whereupon they pulled off Anpilo-
gov’s boots and trousers, and one of them hit
him so hard with a boot in the chest, that
it pained him to breathe. Directly afterwards
one of the men struck him
with something on the left
foot, causing the whole foot
to become inflamed.
As Anpilogov expressed it,
his foot was “all on fire.”
The two strangers then threw
Anpilogov into a ditch with
water at the bottom, and
went off, taking with them
his boots, overcoat, and
trousers.
After lying some time, and
being certain that he was
quite alone, Anpilogov disen-
gaged his head from the
shirt, got out of the ditch,
and made for the open coun-
try.
He was suffering much pain
in the chest, and felt that he
was wounded in the foot.
After prolonged effort, Anpi-
logov succeeded in quitting
the forest and getting on
to the roadway, where he
was soon picked up by a
couple of Cossacks, and taken
to the nearest village, and
thence to a field hospital.
Here he was bandaged up,
and as the toes of his left
foot had been half cut off,
they had to be completely
amputated.
Anpilogov has sworn to the
truth of the above statement
before an Examining magis-
trate of the District Court of
Kursk, who examined him by
order of the Extraordinary
Commission of Inquiry. The
facts have also been authen-
ticated by a combined judi-
cial and medical examination,
and by photographs.
No. 7.
In August, 1915, on the
Bielostock fighting front, a
guner of the Artillery
Brigade, named Semen Pilyu-
gin, remained behind to
execute a special order of his superiors, and
thus lost touch with his detachment. In try-
ing to rejoin it the next evening, he quitted
the forest for the fields, sat down against a
haystack, and began to smoke. All at once,
he was surprised by three Germans, who,
seized his arms, threw something over his


No. 5.—Private Birakhman Turabaiev.
head, and led him away with them. For
about two hours, he was being conducted by
the Germans to their trenches, and, on arriv-
ing there, one of them, who was an officer,
began to question him in broken Russian. He
wanted to know if the Russians had many
troops and much ammunition, how their troops
were distributed, and whether it had not been
rumoured that the Emperor intended to sue
for peace. These inquiries were accompanied
by a warning that Pilyugin was expected to
speak the truth, and that if he did so he would
be rewarded with lots of gold. Pilyugin, how-
ever, declared that no Russian soldier would
break his oath by telling the truth in such
matters, that vte had plenty of troops and
ammunition, and that the Emperor was not
thinking of peace, but only of thrashing the
enemy. This made the German very angry,
and he struck Pilyugin on the cheek, saying
that his tongue was too long, and would have
to be shortened. At the same time he asked
if the Russians had taken their boys and old
men for soldiers. Pilyugin replied: “Send
25 of your army corps into Russia, and it
will take them more than 25 years to count
all the troops that we’ve got.”
At this retort the German completely lost


his temper. He said something in
German to one of his soldiers, who
grasped Pilyugin by the forehead,
and held the Russian’s head tight
against his, the German’s body,
whilst another soldier forced open
Pilyugin’s mouth with a stick. The
officer then pulled out as much as
he could of Pilyugin’s tongue, with
some kind of pinchers, and one of
the German soldiers cut off the tip
of it with a pocket knife. After
this, they led Pilyugin away, re-
marking that he would be taken
before a General and have to un-
dergo more mutilation. On the
road one of the Germans stumbled
and fell. Pilyugin profited by the
mishap to leap over the fallen man
and take to his heels. Although
the men of the escort ran after
him and opened fire, Pilyugin man-
aged to escape, and the next even-
ing he rejoined the Russian troops.
A combined judicial and medical
examination established the fact
that Pilyugin’s tongue had been
severed at the point of attachment
to the frenum liguae, or the liga-
ment joined to the tongue’s under-
surface, and thus his speech had
consequently become difficult and
unintelligible.
No. 8.
On the 21st May, 1915, while
Matthew Pozniakov, a private in
the Regiment, and military
servant to the regimental surgeon,
No. 5.—Subaltern Andrei Akeefiev.
No. 5. —Corporal Paul Mikhailov.


was carrying his master’s dinner
from' the village of Gochistok to
the ambulance station, situated
half a verst from the advance posi-
tions, he was met near a wood by
two unknown men in civilian at-
tire, who accosted him in Russian,
but with a Polish accent. When
they learned that Pozniakov was
carrying a dinner to the positions
they requested him to follow them,
without offering and explanation
for such an order, but Pozniakov
refused. One of the two men then
snatched a revolver from his own
jacket pocket, and compelled Poz-
niakov to accompany them by
pointing the muzzle at his breast.
When they had gone about 200
paces into the thick of the wood,
the two men halted, and one of
them succeeded in throwing Poz-
niakov to the ground, and then sat
upon him. They both threatened
to shoot him, or cut out his tongue,
if he refused to answer their ques-
tions as to the number of Russian
troops in the surrounding district,
the location of separate detach-
ments, and as to whether there
were any militiamen in the imme-
diate vicinity. Their questions
were put to Pozniakov in Russian,
but between themselves the men
conversed in Polish. Pozniakov
paid no heed to their threats, and
refused to answer their questions.
The elder stranger then ordered
Pozniakov to put out his tongue,
and when he refused to do so, the
man seized him with one hand by
the throat and squeezed it, while with the
other hand he pressed his nose, and thus
made Pozniakov open his mouth. At the same
moment the other man forced his fingers into
Pozniakov’s cheeks with such violence that
Pozniakov could not help opening his mouth
wide, and protruding part of his tongue,
which was immediately caught hold of by the
elder man, who cut off the tip of it with a
kinjal, drawn from underneath his jacket.
Pozniakov instinctively clutched at the kinjal,
but the younger stranger drew back his arm,
and then, with the help of his companion, he
twisted both Pozniakov’s arms behind his back,
and bound them tightly with a belt. They
then tied Pozniakov’s legs together, and left
him hanging to a tree, head downwards. Poz-
niakov’s throat filled with blood, and he was
obliged to swallow a great quantity of it to
prevent himself from choking. After great
effort, he finally freed, first his hands, and
then his feet. Being afraid of another meet-
ing with his torturers, Pozniakov went into
the depth of the forest, and after some time he
was found there by Russian Red Cross as-
sistants.
All the foregoing particulars were vouched
No. 5.—Corporal Miron Kuzmin.
for by Pozniakov on oath, when he was inter-
rogated by order of the Extraordinary Com-
mission of Inquiry by the Examining Magis-
trate of the District Court of Moscow.
A combined judicial and medical examina-
tion of Pozniakov established the fact that
his tongue had been shortened, and it was
noticed that the remaining end of it showed
notches of an irregular, triangular form.
No. 9.
On the 7th of July, 1915, near the town of
Mitau, Kornie Petrov Lysak, a soldier of the
lnfantry Regiment, while reconnoitring
in a neighbouring forest, was taken prisoner
by a German cavalry patrol. His captors took
him to the German lines and handed him over
to a German officer and two soldiers, who
were disguised in the uniforms of Rus-
sian infantry men. The officer wrote
down Lysak’s name, and ordered the sol-
diers to take him away. After they had
escorted him about 150 yards from the line
of trenches, the Germans told him to sit down
on the ground, and then one of them began


No. 6.—Vasili Ivanov Anpilogov, private of the .... riflemen regiment.
to ply him with questions as to the number
and positions of the Russian troops. Lysak
was loth to answer these enquiries, and simply
explained that he had only joined his regiment
just before he lost his way in the forest, and
therefore he had no information to give.
Upon this, the second German standing behind
him gave Lysak such a violent thrust in the
back with the butt-end of a rifle, that it made
the blood gush from his throat. Then the
same German seized hold of Lysak’s left ear,
and began cutting through it slowly with a
kinjal, taken out of the top of one of his
boots. Three times this German carved into
Lysak’s ear, with the object of extorting from
him the desired particulars, but Lysak con-
tinued to profess ignorance on the subject.
Having thus failed to extract from him what
they wanted to know, they led Lysak away
to their transport detachment, and left him
there without any medical assistance, although
his mutilated ear was dangling from its place
like a piece of rag. Three days afterwards
Lysak made good his escape, and reached the
positions of the Russian troops.
This statement is authenticated by the evi-
dence of Lysak, given before an Examining
Magistrate of the District Court of Kharkov,
and by a joint medical and judicial examina-
tion.
No. 10.
The Use of Explosive Bullets.
A non-commissioned officer of infantry,
named Shishelsky, and infantry privates
Shelemin, Andrew Gubenko and Ahundian
Davliarov, were wounded with explosive
bullets, as proved by the investigations of the
Commission. Shishelsky was thus wounded
on the the 24th July, 1915, near Liublin; She-
lemin on the 22nd October, 1914, at a place
unknown to him; Gubenko and Davliarov in
Galicia, the first on May 26th, 1915, and the
latter on July 7th, 1915.
The total number of verified cases of wound-
ing with explosive bullets now exceeds—
-3000.


No. 7.—Semen Pilyugin, Cannoneer of the .. .. brigade.
ABUSE OF THE WHITE FLAG.
In the heat of battle, during rifle and artil-
lery firing, or in the midst of a bayonet at-
tack, the Austro-Hungarian and German
troops, when they see the tide of victory turn-
ing against them, very often have recourse to
the stratagem of waving white flags and
throwing down their arms as signs of submis-
sion. Sometimes they supplement this action
by holding up their hands and shouting, “We
surrender, take us prisoners!” On such oc-
casions, Russian troops are naturally con-
strained to cease firing by feelings of com-
passion for an unarmed enemy. They then
peacefully approach the surrendering troops
of the foe, but the latter suddenly sink to the
ground, recover their rifles, and pour a vol-
ley into our soldiers, or else a murderous
fire is opened upon them by other enemy
troops, concealed behind those who have
raised the white flag.
Such abuses of the white flag, as may be
seen from accounts given by German prisoners
of the Landsturm, have been reduced by tlie
enemy to a regular system, and are recom-
mended by his military authorities as strate-
gical manoeuvres to be used when the chances
of success are on the side of their adversary.
For this purpose, according to the statements


No. 8. —Matthew Pozniakov, Private of the .. .. riflemen regiment.


No. 9.—Kornie Lysak, Private of the .... regiment.
No. 9.—Kornie Lysak, Private of the .... regiment.
of prisoners, each non-commissioned of-
ficer carries with him a white flag (Case
of the Extraordinary Commission of In-
quiry, No. 56).
Similar misuse of the white flag and
other signals of surrender have been
authenticated by the Extraordinary Com-
mission in the following cases:—
On the 10th of August, 1914, 12 miles
from Galich, near the river Dniester, in
a battle between mixed Austro-German
troops and the Infantry Regiment.
On the 14th of August, 1914, close to
Krasnostav, in an engagement of Aus-
trian troops with the Regiment of
Riflemen.
On the 16th of August, 1914, on the
river Gniloi Lip, in Galicia, in an engage-
ment of Austrian troops with two of our
Regiments of Infantry.
On the Ist of September, 1914, near
Piaski, in the province of Liublin, in an
engagement of Austrian troops with the
Regiment.
On the 21st of September, 1914, be-
tween Aptaov and Sandomir, in an en-
gagement between combined Austro-
German troops and the Regiment.
On the 4th of October, 1914, near
Przemysl, in an engagement between
Austrian troops and the Regiment
of .
On the sth of October, 1914, near
Mostsiski in Galicia, during an attack
made by the Regiment of on
the Austrian positions.
On the Bth of October, 1914, a mile and
a half from Rudnik, on the river San, in
an engagement between Austrians and
the Regiment of .
On the Bth November, 1914, on the
Hungarian frontier, in a fight between
Austrians and the Infantry Regi-
ment.
On the 10th of December, 1914, beyond
the town of Tarnov, in an encounter of
Austrian troops with the Infantry
Regiment.
In the middle of January, 1915, at Voli
Shidlovski in an engagement between
Germans and the Regiment.
On the 19th of March, 1915, at the
village of Turzik, beyond the town of
Yaroslav, in an encounter of Austrian
troops with the Infantry Regiment
of .
On the 25th of April, 1915, near the
station and village of Krasno in Galicia,
during a fight between Austrians and the
lnfantry Regiment of .
On the 25th of April, 1915, near the
town of Rezheshov, in fighting between
German troops and the Infantry Regi-
ments of .
On the 26th April, 1915, near the town
of Kolomyia, in an engagement of com-
bined Austro-German troops with the
lnfantry Regiment of ,


No. 10. —Andrew Goubenko, Private of the
.... riflemen regiment.
No. 10.—John Shelemin, Private of the ....
infantry regiment.
No. 10.—Joseph Shishelsky, Corporal of the .... infantry regiment.


No. 10.—Ahundian Davliarov, Private of the
.... infantry regiment.
On May 6th, 1915, near Yaroslav, in an en-
gagement between Germans and the Re-
giment.
On the 7th May, 1915, beyond Lemberg, in
an engagement between Austrians and the
Regiment.
On May 11th, 1915, on the banks of the
River San, in an engagement between mixed
Austro-German troops and the Battalion.
On May 26th, 1915, 40 miles from the River
San, in an engagement between combined Aus-
tro-German troops and the Infantry Re-
giment of .
On May 27th, 1915, near Przemysl, in an en-
gagement of Austrians with the Infantry
Regiment of .
On the Bth of June, 1915, 14 miles from the
settlement of Zalotoi Potok, in an engagement
between combined Austro-Gedmans and the
■ Regiment.
On the 19th of June, 1915, in Galicia, 20
miles from the town of Zamosti, in an engage-
ment of German troops with the Infantry
Regiment of .
The foregoing facts have been authenticated
by victims or eye-witnesses, who have been
questioned by examining magistrates, pursu-
ant to orders from the Extraordinary Commis-
sion of Inquiry, with premonition of the crimi-
nal responsibility of committing perjury.
Apart from the facts denoting instances of
abuse and deception practised by the
enemy, which have already been inquired into,
the Extraordinary Commission has received
communications from various sources of 125
more cases of infraction and abuse of the rules
of war in this respect.
No. 10.—Basil Brouma, Private of the ....
infantry regiment.
MURDER AND TORTURE OF THE ROMAN
CATHOLIC PRIESTS PESIS AND
STRIMOVICH.
On the 31st July, 1915, when a German
patrol took possession of the village of Slovik
in the commune of Shilgal, district of Valdis-
lavov, five German cavalrymen entered the
yard of the house belonging to the parish*
priest, Johann Strimovich, who had concealed
himself, together with several other persons,
in the cellar. The Germans were unable to
discover the whereabouts of Strimovich from
enquiries of his coachman, Anton Shvelkis,
so they seized the priest’s horse, and went
away with it.
When all was quiet, Strimovich went to see
his vica, the priest Pesis, in order to con-
sult with him as to future action.
He had only just entered his colleague’s
lodging, when two German troopers galloped
up to the house, smashed the windows, and
proceeded to beat the servants and also several
workmen, who were standing near.
They next fired into the lodging of Pesis.
after which they broke into the apartment,
pointed their rifles at the breasts of Pesis
and Strimovich, and demanded who had firec!
from the lodging on the Germans.
When Strimovich assured them that no fire-
arms had been discharged from that house,
the Germans cursed and swore, and threat-
ened to shoot the two priests. Several times
they placed them up against the wall, took
aim with their rifles, struck them with their
fists, and pushed them about.
Strimovich further ascertained from their


conversation that one of the Germans, with
reddish hair and a pock-marked face,, and
who was rather intoxicated, was called “Her-
man,” and the other, a fair-haired man,
“Max.”
Subsequently Strimovich learned from our
men that these Germans soldiers belonged to
the 3rd Uhlan Regiment of Thorn.
“Herman” drove Strimovich out into the
yard, and continued to demand who had fired
shots from the house. Here he snatched from
the button-hole of the priest’s garment, a sil-
ver watch, with the monogram K. J. S., and
a gold chain, worth altogether about 45
roubles.
When Strimovich declared that no shots had
been fired from his colleague’s house, “Her-
man” drew his sword, intending to strike
Strimovich over the head with it, but the
priest warded off the blow. The half-drunken
“Herman” then grasped his rifle, but at this
moment Strimovich gave him an energetic
push and tried to escape.
After running a certain distance, without
noticing the shots fired after him by “Her-
man,” the exhausted priest at last stopped and
held up his arms in token of surrender.
“Herman” ran up to him, struck him in the
neck with the butt-end of his rifle, and drove
him back to the lodging of Pesis. There
Strimovich found Pesis standing near the win-
dow with his arms raised, and “Max” in front
of him, holding his rifle at the slope. Strimo-
vich was placed by the side of Pesis, and the
two soldiers first used abusive language to-
wards them. Then “Herman” rushed at
Pesis, and attacked him with his fists. When
Pesis raised his arms in self-defence, “Her-
man” put the muzzle of his rifle to the breast
of the priest, and with the words, “Your neigh-
bours say you are wicked Russian popes,”
he pulled the trigger, and Pesis fell down
dead. , . , ,
After “Herman” and “Max” had inspected
all parts of the lodging, they gave the stolen
handkerchiefs, a box of cigarettes, writing
paper, and envelopes to Strimovich to carry,
and ordered him to follow them, as he would
have to go to Prussia as a prisoner of war..
On the road “Herman” and “Max” stopped
at a beer shop, kept by Vladislav Palchinsky,
and while they were there they made Strimo-
vich stand up against the wall with his arms
raised
At the request, however, of Palchinsky’s
wife, “Herman” and “Max” let Strimovich go.
Strimovich felt very tired and exhausted
from all the excitement, which he had under-
gone, and on passing near a wall he staggered
up against it for support. Then the German
cavalrymen seized him again, and “Herman”
levelled his rifle at him ready to fire, but
Strimovich, mustering up all his remaining
strength, caught hold of the barrel and
averted the shot.
Strimovich afterwards learned from his'
parishioners that on July 31st the Germans
were in search of the local district constable,
who had managed to hide himself, and that
Pesis, owing to his grey hair, had been taken
for the incumbent of the church, and was
murdered by mistake for Strimovich.
By order of the Extraordinary Commission
of Inquiry, a soldier of the Artillery
Brigade, named Berko Rogozin, was interro-
gated by the Examining Magistrate of the
District Court of Kharkov, and he deposed
that at the end of December, 1914, or the be--
ginning of January, 1915, when his regiment
was stationed at Darheim in East Prussia, he
was sent out with five other men to recon-
noitre. During the expedition they lost their
way and found themselves in a hollow, near a
small German detachment, and consequently
they were forced to take cover and lie low.
From this position they observed an unknown
Russian soldier, mounted, who had also evi-
dently lost his way, and he rode straight into
the enemy’s camp. He was at once surrounded
by about eight Germans, who pulled him off
his horse, stripped him perfectly naked, and
dragged him to a pile of burning wood, which
they had kindled near by. Here they put him
right on to the top of the fire, and encircled
him with their rifles, so that he could not
escape.
When Rogozin and his comrades saw this,
and being too few to offer the unfortunate
man any assistance, they beat a hasty retreat
without being observed.
RUSSIAN PRISONERS IN AUSTRIA.
The First Days of Captivity.
Prisoners were robbed of everything. They
were made to give up their boots, overcoats,
money and watches; the small copper crosses
were taken from their necks, and the crusts of
hard black bread from their food bags.
Medals and other tokens of military distinc-
tion, shoulder-straps and badges on forage
caps were torn off, and even buttons were
stolen from overcoats and uniforms, which
their owners were permitted to retain only be-
cause they were too old and unfit to be used by
the Austrians. In fact, there is not an article
of the most trifling value, worn or carried by
Russian soldiers, that was not appropriated
by the rapacious foe, who threatened their vic-
tims with bayonet or bullet, if they objected to
part with any of their personal effects.
A private in the 48th Infantry Regiment of
Odessa, named Alexis Federov Shestak, relates
that he saw an Austrian soldier murder a
prisoner of war for declining to give up his
boots. The Austrian bayoneted him, and
then pulled the boots off from the dead man’s
feet.
Thus plundered and half naked, prisoners
were conducted to the rear of the Austrian
army, when their numbers did not exceed a
few dozen men, and here they had to pass the
nights in the open air, or in cart-sheds, stables
and cow-houses, in villages reduced to ruins
by the war, until the arrival of other parties
of captives from the front. When the number
of prisoners thus collected together numbered
several hundreds, they were all sent off to the


nearest railway station, and thence forvrarded
into the interior of Austria-Hungary.
Sometimes small numbers of prisoners were
moved along the line of the front, together
with Austrian transports, and in spite of the
rules of war, sanctioned bv international agree-
ment, the Austrians made use of the labour of
these prisoners for purposes of military de-
fence.
According to a statement made by Gabriel
Tomashev, a corporal in the 9th Regiment of
Finnish Riflemen, during an engagement on
the banks of the Dniester, on the 14th of June,
the Austrians compelled a number of priso-
ners, including Tomashev, to take part in
throwing a pontoon bridge across the river for
the passage of Austrian troops, who were re-
treating in front of a Russian advance. Any
of the prisoners who shirked the work were
threatened with summary execution.
On the Way to Concentration Camps.
While waiting to continue their journey, and
during marches to the railway stations, which
sometimes lasted 7 or 8 days, the prisoners
were either not fed at all, or else they had to
be satisfied with a few small pieces of dry
bread.
The local Slav and Polish population along
the route were anxious to help the suffering
Russians, and in the villages bread, fruit and
milk were offered to them, but the heartless
Austrians of the escort, especially the Hun-
garians, refused to allow the prisoners to be
approached bv the people, whom they drove
away with the butt-ends of their rifles and
with sticks. On the other hand, the same
soldiers of the escort were in the highest de-
gree amiable with the Hungarian portion of
the population, who insultid the Russian priso-
ners as the latter were being marched along,
calling them swine and dogs, and pelting them
with stones and pieces of wood. The crowd
was so brutalised that peaceful Hungarian
civilians broke into the ranks and struck the
prisoners with their fists, kicked them, and
spat into their faces. They even tore off
the bandages from some of the Russians, who
were wounded. In this wild outburst of
ferocity men, women and even children took
part.
Those of the prisoners who became overtired
and weak were urged on by thrusts with bayo-
nets and the butt-ends of rifles as usual, and
those who fell down and were no longer able to
follow in the ranks, were picked up and
thrown into carts behind. Towards the end
of the journey, these poor men, scarcely alive,
were piled up on the top of each other in the
carts in the greatest disorder.
The prisoners were so hungry during these
long marches, that although it was forbidden
by the escort, and in spite of assaults made
upon them by the latter, they eagerly devoured
rotting cabbage leaves from the fields, and
picked up potatoes, carrots and turnips thrown
out into the roadway.
Sub-Lieutenant Kondrati Fedorov Semen-
yuk, oi the 182nd Grokhov Infantry Regiment,
affirms that it was frightful to see these
crowds of men, hardly able to move their legs,
with pale and haggard faces, sunken cheeks,
and feverishly brilliant eyes. On one occa-
sion, such a batch of prisoners was met by an
Austrian doctor, who inquired with astonish-
ment the reason of such exhaustion. When
he learned that the prisoners had not received
any food for several days, the indignant doc-
tor at once appealed to the proper Austrian
authorities to have them fed, while at the same
time he used very severe language in express-
ing his opinion, that it would have been more
humane to order the prisoners to be shot at
once than to gradually starve them to death
in this way.
Not infrequently badly wounded prisoners,
unable to march with the rest, were, in the
majority of cases, bayoneted to death, and
their bodies pitched into roadside ditches.
Private Michael Ivanhov Skvortsov, of the
167th Ostrovsky Infantry Regiment, was an
eye-witness of how five Russian soldiers suffer-
ing from severe bullet wounds were unmerci-
fully despatched in this fashion. The Hun-
garian soldiers of the convoy found this simple
method the best means of getting rid of an
enemy that required so much care and atten-
tion.
A private of the 57th Modlin Regiment,
named Mark Ivanov Solovnyuk, has deposed
under examination that in the party of priso-
ners, in which he marched to the nearest rail-
way station, there were three men with very
bad wounds. When their strength completely
failed them, they dropped out of the party,
and sat down to rest on the edge of the road.
An Austrian soldier of the escort at once went
up to them, and with threats of using the
bayonet, ordered them to continue the march.
Two of the prisoners obeyed, one joined the
rest of the party, but the third one was unable
to raise himself, in spite of the shouts of the
Austrian soldier, who finally stabbed him to
death on the spot.
Those who were only slightly wounded
tramped on foot the whole distance. During
the march, although it lasted several days,
their wounds were not attended to, and their
bandages were not changed. These bandages,
which had been put on hurriedlv at the nearest
ambulance station, during a battle, had now
got shifted, and were saturated with blood, so
that the wounds began to suppurate and de-
compose. Not infrequently maggots appeared
in them.
While waiting to be entrained, the prinosers
were disposed in camps, regardless of order,
near the railwav stations, and here they had
to lie down on the bare ground in the open air.
On cold, rainy days their clothes got wet
through, and in this condition, hungry and
shivering, they were driven into the trains,
without any consideration as to space or other
accommodation, and each truck was made to
hold as many men as possible.
They were put into covered cattle trucks,
the floors of which were caked over with thick
layers of dung. So many prisoners were
packed together that it was quite impossible
for any of them either to sit or lie down. They
had to remain standing all the while, and in


that position they supported one another
throughout the journev.
The doors of the trucks were tightly shut,
and nature’s needs had to be attended to by
the men just where they stood, with the use of
caps, shirts and foot ra y s. Fresh air en-
tered the truck only through a small aperture
near the roof.
The stench of rotting dung, combined with
the transpiration from so many human bodies,
and the foul odour of decomposing wounds
produced such a poisonous and suffocating at-
mosphere that many of the men fainted, fell
ill, and even died.
On these journeys prisoners were deprived
of water as well as food. The oppressive-
ness of the atmosphere in the trucks and the
want of fresh air produced insufferable thirst,
and at every station .the prisoners begged for
water, but they begged in vain. When some-
one, taking pity on the sufferers, attempted
to give them a mug of water, the Austrian sol-
diers of the convoy snatched it away, and
roughly proclaimed to all and sundry that no-
thing was to be given to the Russian swine!
(“Nichts fur die Russische Schweine.”)
Concentration Camps.
This is the way in which our prisoners were
conducted and conveyed to the concentration
camps, where more trials awaited them.
On reaching the interior of Austria-Hun-
gary, the prisoners of war were distributed in
camps, the majority of which, in August and
the following months of 1914, were not yet
equipped for residence, and simply represented
stretches of waste land, often marshy soil,
surrounded by fences of barbed wiring.
In such places at Esterhom, Dunaserdagel,
Tamoria, and other camps, in which a con-
siderable number of prisoners were concen-
trated, there were no habitable structures be-
fore November, 1914. The prisoners had to
accommodate themselves on the bare ground,
and in the open air. In the damp, chilly
weather of autumn, without foot-gear, de-
prived of overcoats, and often of uniworms,
and wearing only their tunics, they suffered
terribly from the cold.
The prisoners had no place in which to
stretch out their tired limbs. Frequent and
abundant rain converted the ground into a bog
of continuous mud and slush and being afraid
of stiffening to death, the men tried to keep
themselves warm at night by running about
the camps.
There was no straw in the camp, and the
prisoners had to lie on the damp ground at
night, when they huddled together as closely
as possible, with some more fortunate man’s
ragged old overcoat to cover several persons.
The walls of the dug-outs were quite un-
supported, and they often gave way and
smothered the inmates with falling earth.
Sometimes they completely collapsed during
the night, and in the morning the corpses of
the unfortunate sleepers had to be dug out
of the graves, in which they had been buried
alive.
At Dunaserdagel, the prisoners were driven
by despair to have recourse to extremely dan-
gerous means, in view of the serious conse-
quences which it entailed. They took to
pieces the only wooden structures in the camp
•—the latrines—and began to use the planks
and beams to strengthen the dug-outs.
Many of the men paid for this attempt with
their lives. By orders of the Commandant of
the camp, more than 20 of them were shot or
wounded and mutilated by blows with sticks,
butt-ends of rifles, and bayonet thrusts.
At last, in some of the camps, wooden bar-
racks were erected by the time of the arrival
of prisoners. Life, however, in these bar-
racks did not differ much from the miserable
existence of the inmates of the dug-outs.
The barracks were constructed of thin deals,
hastily put together. Chinks were left be-
tween all the boards and the roofing was made
of pasteboard. On rainy days water soaked
through the walls and roofs, and flooded the
whole of the interior. The stoves in these
barracks were seldom heated, and there was
no advantage in heating them, as the cold
air penetrated freely into the buildings, and
very soon counteracted the little warmth de-
rived from the stoves. Inside the barracks it
was cold and damp.
Mattresses, pillows and bed covers were dis-
tributed in the camps onlv in December, 1914,
up till which time the prisoners, in spite of the
beginning of frosty weather, had to sleep on
the floor of the barracks, or on two rows of
wooden shelves, strewn with straw. The
worst feature of the arrangement was that
this straw was never changed, and, therefore,
it soon became a damp, decaying and evil
smelling mass, swarming with Vermin, In
wet weather, and during snow storms, the men,
who reclined on the upper row of shelves, were
quite unable to sleep. They got very wet,
and sought shelter amongst their fellow priso-
ners resting below, and who were protected by
the upper shelf against the rain-water and
melting snow, which dripped through the roof.
Food in the Camps.
The food given to the prisoners was the
same in all the Austrian concentration camps,
with only very slight variations.
At 6 o’clock in the morning the prisoners
received coffee—a decoction of barley, acorns
and chicory, or tea, made from dried black-
berry leaves. In some of the camps the morn-
ing tea and coffee were substituted by a kind
of thin mess of gruel (boltushka), made of a
little maize meal in boiled water. The dinner
consisted of soup—otherwise, water boiled with
potatoes, carrots, turnips, and beans.
Bread was served out at the rate of one
pound per day for each man, and this ration
was gradually diminished to a quarter of a
pound in the spring of 1915. The quality of
the bread also gradually deteriorated. It
became more and more adulterated with vari-
ous admixtures, including chopped straw. Its
quality improved only after the ingathering of
the harvest of 1915, and then the portions were
also increased.
In the evening the prisoners received coffee.


tea, or thin gruel made of flour and water, or
hot water boiled with red pepper pods.
Such nourishment was, of course, not suf-
ficiently satisfying, and prisoners went about
the camp trying to find some kind of additional
food, with which to stave off the pangs of
hunger, at least for a time. They were ob-
sessed by the idea of getting something more
to eat, and they ravenously devoured any rot-
ten potatoes Ivinp- about, a turnip obtained on
the sly, or bits of offal recovered from the dust
hole.
Epidemical Disease.
Insufficient, indigestible, and bad food, to-
gether with the physical exhaustion therefrom
resulting, were the causes of sickness amongst
the prisoners, of an epidemical character.
Hunger typhus and cholera carried off many
thousands of victims.
The first cases of cholera in the camp were
sporadic, and they increased in numbers daily.
There was no medical assistance, the disease
assumed a violent form, and death carried off
dozens of the sufferers every day.
The marshy nature of the soil, saturated
with the exrement of cholera patients, inade-
quate nourishment, and especially the want of
wholesome drinking water —these factors pro-
moted the further development of the epidemic,
and increased the mortality amongst the men
hv m
At last, at the end of August, 1914, when
the cholera became so bad that it threatened
to carry off everybody in the place, the Aus-
trian authorities decided to abolish this hotbed
of disease and death. All the prisoners were
removed in three groups. The first group,
which included about 7000 men, who were sus-
pected of being dangerous as regards infec-
tion, were taken some two miles away to a
hilly, sandy locality, overgrown with trees and
brushwood.
The accounts given by miserable men, who
were fated to be removed to the camp of sick-
ness and death among the hills, cannot fail to
evoke feelings of horror and profound indigna-
tion.
The prisoners ill with cholera, and those, in
whose systems the disease was suspected to be
lurking, were driven out of Esterhom into the
new encampment, where there were no build-
ings of any kind, and none to be seen in the
immediate neighbourhood. They had to go
bare-footed, and their linen, which had be-
come almost rotten with age and long wearing,
and their tattered uniforms and tunics barely
covered their emaciated bodies. Here, amongst
hills and mounds, clad with trees and bushes,
prisoners, like outcasts from the world, were
obliged to live, suffer and die.
The first night was nassed in the open air,
and those who survived until the next day,
dug holes for themselves in the sandy soil, like
wild animals. They had no straw, and noth-
ing else, on which to lie down, so that they had
to be content with the bare, cold ground.
The nights were made hideous by the groan-
ing and moaning of the dying, and the sobbing
of those who felt that their end was near.
In the morning life in the camp began by
the removal of the bodies of the men who had
died during the night. The corpses were
dragged out of their holes, and at the foot of
the hills they were picked up and carried for
interment to the one big trench, which served
as the common grave of the wretched com-
munity.
There was no river or lake near the
camp. Between two of the hills there was a
small well, which hardlv produced enough
water for drinking. There could be no ques-
tion of washing the men’s bodies, or their
clothes. The prisoners were weakened by
parasites, which worried them by day and
night. Soon after coming to the camp they
were forbidden to use the water from the well,
as it was situated in close proximity to the spot
where the men obeyed the calls of nature. The
soil here was saturated with filth, which per-
colated into the well, and poisoned the water.
The prisoners were obliged nolens volens to
take water from the contaminated well to
quench their thirst.
The prisoners were reduced to despair by
hunger and isolation. They were completely
cut off from all contact with persons outside,
and nothing could be bought, no matter how
much money they were willing to spend.
These conditions lasted about two months,
and more than 1400 of the unfortunate men
died. It was only on the Bth of November,
when the cholera epidemic had somewhat
abated, that the survivors were transferred to
a new camp, where barracks had already been
erected.
After the cholera had been got under, a new
and not less terrible scourge soon made its ap-
pearance in the form of typhus.
For a considerable time no measures were
taken to suppress .this epidemic. Nothing of
the kind was done until the mortality amongst
the prisoners threatened to be very serious,
and then the part of the camp where the men
lived in underground huts, and also one of the
barracks, in which the disease was most ram-
pant, were parted off, and isolated by means
of a tall, whitewashed wooden fence.
The Austrian doctors ceased to visit that
part of the camp, and medical care of the
typhus patients was left to several Russian
doctors brought from other camps. Entrance
to this enclosure was absolutely forbidden,
and sentries with their rifles and bayonets
drove anybody away who ventured to come too
near.
A few dozen Russian soldier-privates were
chosen from amongst the prisoners to look
after the men ill with typhus, and also to bury
the dead. A large number of coffins were car-
ried out every morning.
Treatment of Prisoners in Concentration
Camps.
The treatment of prisoners in the concen-
tration camps was revolting in its harshness
and cruelty.
There is hardly a single Russian soldier who,
during internment as a prisoner in those camps,
was not beaten with sticks and butt-ends of
rifles. And the blows were delivered with


such violence that the butts of the rifles were
often splintered to pieces.
The attitude assumed towards prisoners of
war, not only by the Austrian soldiers, but also
by the Austrian officers in command at the
camps, is best illustrated by reference to an
incident in the camp at Teresienstadt, which
was witnessed by a volunteer of the 13th Narva
Hussars, named Boris Nikolaievich Masoye-
dov. In that camp an Austrian sentinel al-
lowed himself to strike a volunteer prisoner in
the face, and the indignant comrades of the
insulted man made a complaint about it to
the Commandant. The latter only told them
that Austrian sentinels might not only strike
their prisoners, but also kill them. And as
a matter of fact, the Austrian soldiers con-
sidered themselves the masters and disposers
of the lives and health of their prisoners. The
slightest neglect was met by violence, often
ending in death.
We shall now quote a few cases as examples.
In the camp at Brisk, which contained a
considerable number of prisoners, a new party
of men was brought in from the fighting front.
As all the war news received in camp came
exclusively from Austrian sources, and told of
nothing but uninterrupted success on the part
of the Austrian and Hungarian troops, the
prisoners began to surround the new-comers,
in the hope of hearing something of the truth.
They were cruelly mistaken. An Austrian
soldier, without any warning, fired several
shots at them, and killed two of their number
on the spot. This scene was witnessed by
Sub-Ensign Dimitri Andreyev Mironuk, of the
73rd Crimean Regiment of Infantry.
Maxim Mitrofanov Khaustov, of the 16th
Regiment of Riflemen, relates a case of unex-
ampled brutality, of which he was an eye-
witness. A local peasant, who was walking
along on the outside of the wire fence sur-
rounding the camp, threw a piece of bread to
one of the prisoners inside, and the prisoner
having failed to catch it, was stooping down to
pick it up, when he was struck dead by an
Austrain bullet.
In the camp at Linz, the murder of two
Russian prisoners was witnessed by Michael
Ivanov Skvortsov, a private in the 167th Re-
giment of Riflemen of Ostrog. The two un-
fortunate men were simply asking the bakers
of the camp in a modest way to change a
portion of bread, which was in the moist state
of dough from not having been properly baked.
An Austrian sentry began first of all to drive
them away with the butt of his rifle, and then,
while the two prisoners were running back to
their barracks, he ran after them, bayoneted
one, and shot down the other.
Another prisoner in this camp was killed
with the bayonet before the eyes of non-com-
missioned officer, Nicholas Stepanov Shatalov,
of the 207th Regiment of Novo-Bayzet, for
complaining aloud of the insufficiency and bad
quality of the food.
A more revolting case of murder is com-
municated by Ensign Stephen Kondratovich
Kosetsky, of the 284th Vengorsky Regiment of
Infantry, who has returned to Russia as an
invalid. In the camp at Esterhom, a Hun-
garian sentry, without the slightest reason,
stabbed a prisoner, who was simply passing
near him, and when asked why he committed
such a brutal murder, he cooly replied that he
wanted to try whether his bayonet was sharp
enough.
In the presence of Corporal Thomas Kon-
dratov Konnouyuk, of the 128th Starooskolsky
Regiment, an Austrian sentry bayoneted a
prisoner right through the leg, simply because
he failed to understand the call made to him
in an unknown tcngue, and did not move away
from the boarding against which he was stand-
ing.
Punishments Inflicted on Prisoners of War.
Torture, blows with sticks, deprivation of
their food allowance, which was only too
scanty when they got it, and hanging up to
posts—all these punishments were applied to
prisoners for the slightest infraction of the
severe rules and regulations. Corporal Por-
phiry Terentiev Dimitrenko, of the 328th
Novo-oozensky Infantry Regiment, saw a
prisoner receive a very severe wound from a
bayonet, because being intolerably hungry, he
begged for a piece of bread.
The various kinds of punishment, inflicted
upon prisoners of war in concentration camps
are good examples of the inventiveness of the
Austrians in the matter of brutality.
Every Austrian military man, whether offi-
cer or simple private, went about the camp
with a stick or leather-thonged whip in his
hand. Blows in plenty rained down upon the
heads and bodies of the prisoners, mostly
without cause, as the slightest breach of estab-
lished rules subjected the offender to other and
more painful forms of punishment, such, for
instance, as arrest and maintenance on bread
and water, whipping with rods, tying and
hanging up to posts, chaining and fettering of
limbs, shutting up in coffins, and so forth.
An arrested prisoner was kept in an abso-
lutely dark little cell, without any current of
fresh air, and without bench, mattress or
straw. Bread was doled out to him in very
insignificant Quantities; warm food was given
onlv on every third day. The authorities re-
fused to sanction a constitutional, which is so
necessary for a man thus confined for any
length of time. The prisoner was allowed
to leave his cell only for the purpose of clean-
ing out the latrines. This was insult added
to injury. After keeping a prisoner locked
up for many days, without air or light, th§
Austrians, instead of giving him rest and re-
lief, compelled him to inhale a poisonous
atmosphere, reeking with foul emanations.
On completing his term of arrest, a prisoner
came out exhausted, half-dead and unable, at
first, to open his eyes in a strong sunlight.
Arrest and confinement was often combined
with the punishment of tying up to a post.
Every third day, when an arrested prisoner
received warm rations, he was tied up in his
cell for two hours to a post, or to a ring in
the wall. In the latter case the prisoner was
bound by the arms in such a position that he
could only sit on his half-bent knees. It was


impossible for him to sit down, to lean up
against the wall, or to stand up in order to
stretch out his swollen legs. His tired knees
very soon began to ache and tremble, the
tremor being communicated to the whole body.
This punishment, according to the accounts
of those who underwent it, was unbearable in
its tormenting pain.
The punishment of flogging was carried out
with all the cruelty peculiar to the German
race.
The person to be flogged was tied down to a
table or bench, and Austrian soldiers thrashed
the naked body with rods until the back and
rump became one sanguinary mass of lacer-
ated flesh, or until the unfortunate man, at
first shrieking with pain, finally became silent
for ever.
The punishment of hanging up to a post was
carried out in the following manner: —
The person to be punished was led to a post
sunk in the ground, his legs and arms were
tied with rope, the arms being crossed on the
back. One end of another rope was then tied
to the rope binding the legs, and the other end
of it was passed up between the legs and arms,
and put over a pulley attached to the top of
the post. The man’s body was then hoisted
up the post, until only the tips of his toes
rested on the ground.
Prisoners of war, however, were strung up
in a somewhat different fashion, which quite
altered the character of the punishment.
The prisoner had to stand on several stones
or bricks, placed at the foot of the post. The
binding of the man’s limbs and the hanging
up were done in the manner above described,
and then the stones were knocked away from
beneath the feet, so that the body drawn up
against the post was suspended in the air
without any kind of support. In this way
the suspended body leaned forward, blood
flowed to the head and issued from the mouth,
nose and ears, the face became livid, and in
about 20 minutes, or at most half an hour, the
prisoner thus hung up lost all consciousness.-
He was then let down A o the ground by means
of the pulley, and after haying been brought
to his senses by the application of cold water,
he was again hoisted up and suspended as be-
fore. This was sometimes done as many as
eight times before the punishment was com-
plete, and the time employed in restoring the
unfortunate man to his senses was excluded
from the two hours, during which he was
compelled to hang. At the end of the punish-
ment he was too weak to stand, and had to be
carried to the barrack room, or hospital. His
legs and arms were so swollen that free move-
ment was impossible.
There was another form of punishment
which those, who experienced it, almost dread
to mention; the bare remembrance of it still
makes them hudder. This was imprison-
ment in a coffin.
The man condemned to this punishment was
stripped perfectly naked, and placed in a
wooden coffin, which was lined with iron or
tin. The lid was then fixed down closely,
and an iron chain put round the coffin and
fastened with a padlock. A few very small
air holes were drilled through the head of the
coffin lid. The coffin was so narrow and
shallow that it was impossible for the man
inside to change the position of his body; he
was obliged to lie all the time on his back,
with his arms stretched out close to his sides.
Sometimes the Austrian executioners laid
heavy stones on the breast of the prisoner in
the coffin. The man’s breathing was difficult
enough without this weight on his chest, which
was, of course, calculated to render the tor-
ment of the punishment still more insupport-
able.
Now and then the Austrian soldiers, who
superintended the infliction of this penalty,
opened the coffin to see how the prisoner was
getting on. If he were found in a fainting
condition, they promptly dosed him with seve-
ral pails-full of water, without taking him out,
and when he revived he was shut up again in
the coffin. This went on until the one or two
hours appointed for the duration of this bar-
borous punishment had quite expired.
This atrocious punishment produced not
only physical suffering, but also had a most de-
pressing effect upon the mind. Sometimes a
punished prisoner, when removed from the
coffin, had a wild, unnatural stare, and ex-
hibited signs cf mental derangement.
There was still one more extraordinary kind
of punishment, applied exclusively to priso-
ners who were working for the enemy, and
we refer to it as another proof of the re-
sourcefulness of the Austrians in discovering
new methods of tormenting their defenceless
enemies.
In this case an offending prisoner was made
to sit on snow, with his outer garment tucked
up to his waist. At first the snow thawed
rather rapidlv from the heat of the man’s
body, and then melted away under him more
, gradually. His clothes got wet through, and
the cold and damp at last penetrated to the
verv bone. Although the man became blue
in the face and shivered all over, he was com-
pelled to remain sitting until all the snow
under him had quite disappeared without a
trace.
So much for the life of Russian prisoners in
Austria-Hungary in the XX. century.
The Extraordinary Commission of Inquiry
certifies to the veracity of all the facts re-
corded in the present report.
The returned prisoners have only one wish
and one request. They are all anxious to go
back to their old regiments as soon as possible,
and rejoin their ranks. We wish, they say,
to wreak vengeance on the enemy for all we
have suffered, and for our comrades still lan-
guishing in the power of the enemy. And if
in future we have to make a choice between
capture and death on the field, we shall not
hesitate to prefer the latter. We shall fight
till the last cartridge, till the last bayonet left
unbent and the last unbroken butt, till the
last drop of blood, but we shall never sur-
render alive. Better death than such cap-
tivity!
ALEXIS KRIVTSOV,
Senator.
President of the Extraordinary Commission of
Inquiry.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia, by Crltchley Parker, 376 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
