

UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
WAR LECTURES
No. 3.
GERMANY’S
INTELLECTUAL STRENGTH
and WEAKNESS
PROFESSOR OSBORNE.
TRADE AND THE WAR
R.' R. GARRAN* M.A.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
Propy Ltd.,
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, BRISBANE.


UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
WAR LECTURES.
ARRANGEMENTS have been made with the University Authorities,
and with the Lecturers, to publish the complete text of each night's
Lectures in booklet form.
There are many thousands who would like to hear the lectures
but are debarred by circumstances from that privilege, and it is for them
mainly that the lectures will be published* But those who have heard
them will also like. to have the lectures in print for reference, and for
passing on to their friends.
The complete course, with dates of delivery, is as follows. The
list is subject to possible variation, of which due notice will be given in
the papers.
Tuesday, June 15.—PROFESSOR TUCKER—* 8 British and German Ideals.”
PROFESSOR SCOTT- 88 The Nature of the Issue.”
Tuesday, June 29.—PROFESSOR WALLACE— 88 Recent Impressions of
Britain in War Time.” F. W. EGGLESTON— 8 ‘ The Significance of
the Empire.” ARCHIBALD T. STRONG, M.A.— 8 8 Australia and
the War.”
Wednesday, July 14.—PROFESSOR OSBORNE— 88 Germany’s Intellectual
Strength and Weakness.” R. R. GARRAN, C.M.G.—“Trade and
the War.”
Wednesday, July 28.—PROFESSOR HARRISON MOORE-“ International
Relations and International Law.” MAURICE BLACKBURNE,
M.A.—‘ ‘ Socialism and the War.”
Tuesday, August 10.-COLONEL HUBERT FOSTER, R.E., Director of
Military Science in the University of Sydney—“ Strategy on the
Western Front.”
Tuesday, August 24.—FRANK TATE, M.A. (Director of Education)—” Edu-
cation and the War.” DR. McKELLAR STEWART— 8 Nietzsche
and the Modern German Spirit”
Wednesday, September B.—PROFESSOR MASSON—“Chemistry and the
War.” PROFESSOR BERRY—-“Remoter Aspects of the War.”
PROFESSOR LABY-“ The Dominions and the War.”
EACH NIGHTS LECTURES IN ONE PAMPHLET.


GERMANY’S INTELLECTUAL
STRENGTH and WEAKNESS.
Lecture delivered at the Masonic Hall, Melbourne,
on July 14th, 1915, by
PROFESSOR OSBORNE.
IDO NOT think that it will be necessary for me at the
outset of this address to defend or qualify the
statement that we owe much to the activity of the
German mind. One of the surest ways to court defeat
in sport or war, in the friendliest or the most deadly com-
petition, is to undervalue the strength of our opponent.
Moreover, it is not consonant with the traditions of re-
straint and balanced judgment in our race to withhold credit
from anyone, no matter how sinister his record may have
since become. Even from the most materialistic of motives
it is necessary for us to discover what resources the enemy
possesses, so that we may imitate them or counter them.
Germany has failed to achieve greatness, but she has not
failed to acquire power. If, like the fourth beast in the
prophet’s vision, she has become dreadful and terrible and
strong exceedingly, it behoves us to examine her methods,
compare and contrast them with our own, and adopt what
in honour we can adopt. We shall surely find something
in the German system that is quite conformable with our
own traditions, and which we should assume without delay.
On the other hand, there are those gaps and pitfalls in
German culture from which we will shrink shudderingly.
In the first place, one must in fairness give Germany
credit for the immense intellectual energy she has directed


towards every problem which has ever presented itself to
the enquiring mind. There has been not only a fine
curiosity, but an indomitable perseverance until that
curiosity has been gratified. Scholarship was pursued for
its own sake;, investigation was encouraged at times when
one would think that calls other than intellectual were of
prepotent urgency. Two years after the peace of Tilsit,
when Prussian political influence was at its very nadir, the
University of Berlin was founded. Scarcely was Alsace
conquered from the French than a well-equipped university
was set. going in Strasburg. Hegel was writing his
great philosophic treatise, the Phenomenology, with the
roar of Napoleon’s cannon in his ears. When German
people were poor they could yet afford grants in aid of
knowledge, not only relatively but absolutely, far exceed-
ing those which England with all her wealth was willing
to bestow, and this at a time, too, when any practical
application of academic knowledge to industry had not yet
entered into view. No country has realised as Germany
has realised that a university must not only disseminate
knowledge by teaching, but create knowledge by research.
In the choice of subjects no question of monetary ex-
pectancy was supposed ever to arise. If we examine the
calendar of any German University we find a catholicity
of subjects expounded and studied to which no parallel can
be obtained in the British Empire, and should not forget
that not only have the sciences which underlie commerce
been prosecuted with the aid of large grants of money, but
also the more abstract pursuits from which no one expects
the nation or the individual to derive pecuniary advantage.
We find in Berlin, for instance, a hierarchy of instructors
and investigators not only in chemistry and electrical
science, but also in numismatics, Arabic dialects, and the
history of art. One thinks, too, in this connection of the
vast observatory, a veritable city of laboratories, which is
devoted in Germany to the most academic of sciences,
namely, astronomy; or the large staff of teachers in every
university which upholds the traditions of German pre-
eminence in metaphysics.
Germany has not only produced the men to work in


these fields, but the citizens who encourage and pay for their
efforts. There is no denying the fact that the attitude of
the average German towards intellectual matters is more
sympathetic than that of the Englishman. He takes a
pride in his country’s achievements in the world of thought,
and does not grumble if heavy calls are made on the
national purse for the support of any institution where
knowledge is to be taught or pursued. In connection with
this sympathetic attitude, I would remind you of one
characteristic of German administration, and that is the
faith which is placed in the specialist. The system of
higher education tends to foster the specialist, and to in-
culcate obedience to specialists. Each man has his parti-
cular Fach or speciality; all that he does or says within
the limits of that Fach are taken seriously; if he should
adventure outside its narrow confines he does not gain a
hearing. No doubt Germany occupies an extreme position
here, and her over-specialisation has been productive of
narrowness of outlook on large questions, much dogmatism,
and much repression of healthy activities, but we shall do
well to examine the good points of the system, for the
British Empire occupies exactly the opposite extreme. It
is a tradition of British administration to distrust the ex-
pert in any but an inferior and purely advisory capacity.
A legal or belletristic training is supposed to be the best for
all administrative positions. As a writer in a recent num-
ber of the Hibbert Journal has pointed out, the expert in
England is distrusted, and his decisions often overridden,
except in the case of the business expert, who is almost
deified. To that might be added that we frequently do
place trust in the expert knowledge of the seaman. The
captain on his bridge still remains absolute master of the
ship, though there are indications that wealthy passengers
with interests in the company of owners are beginning to
enforce their desires. The greatest supporter of English
public school education has to admit that for the navy some
other form of juvenile upbringing is necessary. The ad-
ministration of public hygiene is now directed by a medical
specialist, though he still remains chairman of a
non-specialist Board of Health. But in all other matters
the Briton gives power to the amateur rather than


to the expert. In Germany the director of a great
chemical factory will generally be found to be a
trained chemist, for it is expected that a chemist will
probably know more of affairs than a man of affairs will
know about chemistry. Each side has its own arguments
and its own illustrations of success and failure, but I am
one of those who feel that Britain has injured herself by
the tenacity with which she adheres to her policy of limit-
ing the specialist’s activity and initiative. How often in
the wars which England has conducted has not success been
matched by unexampled heroism out of the defeat which
amateur statesmanship had made apparently inevitable ?
How surely will the English-speaking public prefer to ob-
tain its facts from the journalist and the politician rather
than from the expert worker and investigator !
This belief in the specialist is part of that intense
seriousness which we find in all grades of workers in Ger-
many. We feel instinctively that they overdo seriousness
and dwarf their souls by an over-convergence of their aims,
but will not many of us confess that before this war they
often wished that a little more seriousness was discernible
in our midst? Do we not all of us know large numbers
of healthy, young men, clean in mind and body, splendid
friends, good fellows all, who have devoted a quite dispropor-
tionate amount of time and thought to their hobbies to the
detriment of their life work? I think it is Thorold Rogers
who points out how the Puritan and Quaker went ahead
in business by renouncing the play to which their political
and religious opponents were so addicted. To us the evils
of the unsportsmanlike are obvious and repellent, and so
we have again taken up rather an extreme position. But
the lesson of seriousness we are now learning as a nation
in a terrible school.
One other feature of German intellectualism which has
had an immense influence on the progress of knowledge has
been the great freedom and tolerance which " have
been so liberally granted to the German thinker. England
has established a magnificent record in the struggle for
freedom, but the freedom of speech, which is the very
breath of her being, is largely confined to politics, and this


touches intellectual life only in certain departments, such
as history, law, and economics. The German writer fre-
quently extols his country’s achievements in the cause of
political freedom, but the boast awakens only an amused
smile in British faces, for we feel and know that political
freedom as we have it is something which the German has
never experienced, and cannot understand. But in the
pursuit of truth modem Germany has enveloped her
workers in an atmosphere of religious and ecclesiastical
freedom which no other country can equal. Dr. Schweitzer
opens his famous book, “The Quest of the His-
torical Jesus,” with the sentence:—“When at some future
day our period of civilisation shall be closed and completed
before the eyes of later generations, German theology will
stand out as a great, a unique phenomenon in the mental
and spiritual life of our time.” This proud claim will
awaken feelings of assent in many thoughtful readers of
British race. For this great fabric of theology to arise
there were necessary not merely the scholarship and
acumen expended on it by a host of workers, but shelter
from intolerance. Thus there grew up those schools of
textual criticism and philosophic theology from which
France, and at a later date England and Scotland, drew
their inspiration. Another mighty development which the
German intellect can claim as largely its own gift to
humanity is to be found in metaphysics. In the somewhat
kaleidoscopic history of this recondite subject it is interest-
ing to observe that when expressions of philosophical
opinion concerning practical affairs of State ran counter
to the views of men in power, repressive measures were
invariably taken; but, on the other hand, the opposition
from the churches was always small in amount. England
witnessed almost the exact opposite of this. The utmost
freedom was given to enquiries concerning government and
politics generally, but both ecclesiastics and the common
people were exquisitely sensitive to any statement that did
not coincide with orthodox belief. That great generalisa-
tion which we know by the name of evolution, and which
constitutes the foundation stone of modem biology, met
with very different receptions in Great Britain and Ger-
many. In the latter country voices were, indeed, raised in


protest, but the new vivifying doctrine struck root deeply,
and was extraordinarily fruitful in many branches of
philosophy and science. In the United Kingdom the re-
ligious opposition was well organised, and ultimately suc-
cessful. The modem medical man at work in countries
like South Africa, where a vigorous aboriginal population
abounds, very often discovers that the most scientific
measure of prevention or treatment is rejected by the
natives in favour of some hocus pocus concocted by a > witch-
doctor. A state of mind somewhat similar to that of this
medical man is present in the British scientist who wit-
nesses the repudiation by his countrymen of that majestic
conception of organic nature which British genius helped
so much to elucidate. The witch-doctor has triumphed,
and no matter how well-intentioned the people and their
spiritual leaders have been, the episode remains a discredit-
able one in the history of thought. No English-speaking
student who has studied at a German university can
forget the atmosphere of freedom which prevails within the
academic walls. In a country of red tape and caporalism,
the university remains elastic, free and adaptable. Occa-
sionally the excess of freedom reacts unfavourably on the
student released suddenly from the iron discipline of school,
but in general the good effects have preponderated markedly
over the evil.
My next entry in the catalogue of German intellectual
virtues is their scholarship and thoroughness. Scamped
workmanship excites their abhorrence, carelessness their
contempt. I do not mean to suggest that the German is
always pre-eminent here over the learned men of other
nations ; on the contrary, I hold that when the Briton takes
it into his head to be scholarly he beats the German at
the latter’s own game. But the general average of scholar-
ship amongst intellectual workers is high, and a good tradi-
tion demands it. Whatever the subject be, whether
literary, philosophic, scientific, or artistic, an immense
mass of related references and facts are assembled, and
gleanings made from the most outlying fields of enquiry.
Germany is the land of the huge reference lexicon, the
cyclopaedia of information, always enormous in volume,


and as a rule verbally accurate in its contents. The British
classicist, biologist, or historian must each keep at his
elbow more than one many-volumed compilation, from
which he can acquire, with a minimum of effort, an array
of facts to guide him in his labours. Germany has so
organised her publication of abstracting journals that be-
fore the war broke out her language was competing not
unsuccessfully with English in many branches of intellec-
tual effort.
The abstracting journals, which give author, title,
and a brief resume of the contents of each article appear-
ing on a particular subject throughout the world, have
practically all appeared in Germany. The same can be
said of Year Books, or Ergebnisse, and many an unwieldy
Handlexicon or Corpus. The lesson of scholarship and
up-to-dateness is not so much required by the younger
school of higher students and workers in English-speaking
countries, for whether owing to the large numbers who
have studied in Germany or to the breaking down of
insular prejudice, an ever-increasing proportion not only
of literary and historical students, as might be expected,
but scientific students also have found it advisable to read
in more than one modem tongue, and particularly in Ger-
man. Scholarship, however great, has never been the end
of even the average German mind. The best organised
collection of facts is there simply to give a good jumping-off
ground for a plunge into original research. Very fre-
quently the research turned out is dull, trivial, or worthless,
but, as a German man of science put it to me, if a hundred
doctor theses are published of which ninety-nine are paltry
but one is good, it pays the State to have the lot carried out.
It may be put forward in the way of criticism of what
has just been stated that the description given is true of the
German intellect at its best some time ago, but not to-day.
To this I would reply with the admission that I have been
cognisant of a change, particularly in the last ten years.
I have become aware of this in my own and ancillary sub-
jects, and have hesitated to make any generalisation from
these premises. Yet the fact remains that my own ex-
perience coincides with that of several workers in widely


separate fields. Put briefly, the altered state is this: there
has been a certain easing off in those departments of intel-
lectual activity which are remote from financial or social
gain. I do not wish to be misunderstood here. The
amount of disinterested work turned out by Germany until
the outbreak of war has been enormous. But the quality
of this work has not shown that progressive improvement
which one might expect; indeed, in some subjects a retro-
gression in quality has been noticeable. In applied science,
however, and in all activities associated with industrial ad-
vancement, the rate of progress has in recent years eclipsed
former records. The change is most noticeable and least
defensible in the medical profession. In late years an ever-
increasing number of new drugs has been announced from
Germany. Each drug has been placed on the market with
every art which good advertising can bestow. But, in
addition to the usual and expected business methods, a
new departure has been in evidence. The advertisement
of each new drug has been accompanied by a reprint of
an article purporting to be the published account of a re-
search demonstrating the high qualities of the drug in
question, and claiming to be undertaken with all the
elaboration and precaution of scientific investigation. In
ninety per cent, of cases, if not more, the drug is worth-
less, but the article bears the name of a medical graduate
and a renowned laboratory or hospital. The inference is
obvious. I am informed by those who know that such
infractions not only of professional etiquette but of the
common rules of honour have become prevalent in other
subjects besides medicine. Then, too, in departments
which are remote from industrial applications a tendency
has been observed, quite unknown hitherto in German his-
tory, one should think, for the leaders to do reverence to
the powers that be and accommodate their teaching to the
prevailing or court fashion. The pursuit of knowledge for
its own sake in Britain, we can say dispassionately, has
been ever increasing. She has not only maintained her
standards, but has added to the fields where intellectual
gains can be made. But with many observers qualified to
express an opinion, the conviction is strong that dis-


interested research in Germany has lately shown indica-
tions of advancing decadence.
One charge which is frequently brought against the
German intellect is that it lacks imagination. I cannot
quite fall in with this view. In the facility with which
he can weave hypotheses, sometimes daring, sometimes far-
fetched, the German has often shown an excess of that
faculty. And in that legitimate and exalted type of
imagination which is operative in discoveries and inven-
tions we cannot say that the German has been lacking
though we will class him below the Briton. We owe print-
ing in its earliest form and in many of its recent improve-
ments and processes to German genius. Many inventions
in the art of war, from gunpowder to the latest Krupp
howitzer, are German. The medical appliance which has,
perhaps, done most good service to humanity, with the
possible exception of the stethoscope of Laennec, the
Frenchman, is the ophthalmoscope of Helmholtz, the
German.
The English-speaking specialist in every branch of
knowledge can surely think of some German mind whose
rich imagination has opened up new vistas of thought and
cleared up many difficulties. At the present time the
science of natural philosophy is pursuing one of those dar-
ing flights of scientific imagination which may be classed
with the finest efforts of the human mind. This new move-
ment is associated with the names of Einstein and Planck,
and has won many British adherents, though whether it
will persist and bear rich fruit or be annihilated by the
intensely mechanical school of thought in England re-
mains to be seen. Yet there is this truth in the indictment
that the stage dry-as-dust is rarely found in England,
practically never in France, but is not at all uncommon in
Germany. An excess of seriousness, with pronounced
mental egoism is incompatible with an active imagination,
and this defect one does meet, though whether the number
affected is so great that they can be regarded as typical of
the whole is another matter. In my own reading I have
found imagination most deficient in that department, where
many think the German excels, namely, education. We


owe a great deal to German paedagogy. The name Froebel
and the word kindergarten are indicative of part of our
borrowings. The English educationalist is apt to be
dazzled by Germany’s contributions to the theory of his
subject. Dr. Sadler, Vice-Chancellor of Leeds University,
writes as follows:—“In certain respects the educational
achievement of Germany has been unequalled in the world.
.... Nowhere else, except in certain parts of Switzer-
land, has the tradition of obligatory attendance at school
so deeply penetrated the national life. Nowhere else is
public and parental opinion so strongly in favour of edu-
cation. Nowhere else has compulsory schooling been
pushed so far into the years of adolescence. . . . Every
grade of British education, from the kindergarten to the
University, has been influenced by German example and by
German investigation.” The progress which German
paedagogy has made is certainly great, but it is a progress
built upon severely logical deductions and inductions, and
the application of certain branches of psychology. But the
faults are the faults of deficient imagination and those two
divine qualities founded on imagination—sympathy and
humour. Our secondary schools have much leeway to make up
in their intellectual standards, but it is probable that we can
say of them what Sadler says of the English schools, that
the product, though slower in comprehension than the Ger-
man, is surer in judgment. It is difficult not to be influenced
by experience in one’s own subject, and I would mention,
therefore, without comment, something that is probably
uncontrovertible, namely, that the young medical graduate
who has passed the State examination of Germany, though
more learned, is decidedly inferior in professional efficiency
to the young practitioner who has just obtained his M.B.
at a British medical school, or at our own University of
Melbourne. Recently in England I made enquiries in
several Universities concerning the relative merits of Ger-
man and British systems in many branches of knowledge,
and the replies were fairly uniform that the British
had still much to learn from the German in the way of re-
search and universality of effort, but nothing in the practi-
cal methods of teaching.


I have shown what may be regarded as Germany’s
intellectual strength. That patient, resourceful, and in-
domitable intellectualism has brought rewards in power and
wealth to modern Germany which the older country never
anticipated. Knowledge was once pursued for its own
sake with restless persistence and with superb organisation.
The shower of gold came rather unexpectedly, and has done
little good to the old ideal of plain living and high thinking.
England, by her lack of organisation in intellectual pur-
suits, and by her indifference or actual hostility towards
science, has brought upon herself a punishment which may
yet reach sinister proportions. Apart from the purely
material loss of trade in certain articles of luxury and
necessity, a loss which can still perhaps be made good, she
is faced with this unfortunate development, that the other
great nation with English speech and traditions has, for
many years, sought her intellectual refreshment in Ger-
many. The leaders of thought in American colleges and
other circles of culture, have nearly all been trained in
German universities; they have imported German methods
and ideals, and they have memories of happy student life
linked forever in their minds with Germany. With the
exception of a handful of Rhodes scholars and post-
graduate medical students, the number visiting England is
relatively small. This is one of the most unfortunate re-
sults of the amateur methods of the British statesman in
dealing with research in the higher branches of knowledge.
We must, in fairness and of necessity, admit the
strength of the German intellect. What are its weaknesses?
One hears nowadays very frequently the statement that
the German has sinned through over trust in his intellect
and by employing it unchecked by emotion and moral
criticism. There is, of course, something in this charge,
but it must not be pushed too far. For cool, remorseless
accuracy of mentality, untinged by emotion, commend me
to the British man of science, and particularly to the
British physicist such as Newton, Faraday or Clerk Max-
well or that galaxy which adorns our own time, and includes
Larmor, Rayleigh, and J. J. Thomson. The frictionless
British intellect has again and again met and destroyed


semi-mystic systems of Teuton origin which have sought to
invade the realm of pure science. In all those branches of
knowledge where an appeal can be made to experiment,
the German is usually inferior to the Briton, unless there
are extraneous repressive influences at work with the latter.
The Briton is a bom experimenter, the German is not.
We find, too, not only in experimental science, but in every
department of mentality, a greater tendency in the German
to armchair speculation, often at variance with the simplest
facts that can be observed or discovered. Napoleon, in
his famous Jena campaign, not only overthrew the arrogant
armies of Prussia; he scattered like chaff before the breeze
a myriad political theories evolved by the idealogues whom
he detested. I often wonder if the young men who get
atttracted by the presentation of Hegel’s philosophy which
they find in English books on metaphysics, ever attempt to
read the ponderous and exsuccous analyses which this
philosopher and his colleagues published in the Heidelberg
Year-Book and in his own Critical Review. There is a
prosing and theorising so far removed from the obvious
facts of existence that one sometimes feels sufficiently pro-
voked to join Napoleon and Lord Kelvin in denouncing the
writers as “impostors!” They are certainly not to be
classed among “the wise who soar but never roam.”
The conduct of debate shows a marked contrast in the
two countries, Britain and Germany. In Germany
opposition almost invariably begets temper, and hence clear,
clean thinking vanishes. German journals of science and
philosophy are continually occupied with violent polemical
discussions about the correctness of some conclusions, or
about senseless claims of priority. Of the few heated
debates which I can recall in British technical literature all
with three exceptions, and these on statistical matters,
strange to say, were written by men whose names were not
Anglo-Saxon. The German is dogmatic ;he is touchy
concerning criticism, and (one can say this deliberately),
constitutionally incapable of approaching any topic with
that balance and impartiality which the best British minds
evidence. The history of thought in Germany displays a
series of violent hypotheses, violently supported, violently


attacked, and ultimately violently denounced. Prejudice
of some form is rarely absent from even the most academic
research. This state of mind cannot surely be classed as
too much given over to the intellectual; it is not
intellectual enough. The young man who has the good
fortune to enter a British learned society, or society of spe-
cialists in any of the higher branches of study, often ex-
periences a moral awakening which comes to him as a sur-
prise. Debate is conducted with kindliness and perfect
courtesy; correction and refutation are taken in good
spirit; respect is shown to the elderly even when old age
has stranded them on some long abandoned hypothesis, and
a helping hand is offered to the young. The society has
been founded to advance a special subject; it succeeds in
this, but in addition exercises a moral effect of incalculable
value. I venture to think that this level of high thinking,
unruffled by temper and recrimination, is the exception
rather than the rule in German circles. The German has
not learned the truth of the maxim of Leonardo da Vinci,
“Dove si grida non e vera seientia,” —where there is anger
there is no true science—and this is one of the causes why
the highest German intellects, in all matters save in meta-
physics and music, are decidedly below the highest British.
Every British student of German thought and culture
is puzzled not once or twice, but many times, by a strange
lack of something in the German attitude. Often a French-
man with half the learning gets to the correct conclusion,
particularly in any matter involving human nature, in the
twinkling of an eye, whilst the German, like an angry
rhinoceros, is charging and recharging past it, but never
on to it. The study of any subject seems to help the Ger-
man only in that subject and has very little action on his
character or on his dealings with his fellow-men. The
Briton who can read another language besides his own, and
exercises that ability, shows a refinement in his speech, in
his manners, and his outlook on life. To the British
student visiting Germany there are few greater surprises
than the coarseness and brusqueness and lack of what used
to be called good breeding in many scholars of world-wide
repute, who read half-a-dozen or more languages and


literatures. Knowledge does not seem to beget that
restraint and tolerance and fine edge of sympathy which it
evokes in the British and Latin races. What is the reason
for this difference? Ruskin, in a well-known passage,
draws a line through Europe demarcating pure Gothic
architecture from the impure. Germany lies outside this
line. Ruskin may be an uncertain guide in questions of
artistic excellence, but it requires very little appreciation of
the merits of architecture to recognise in travel that there
is such a line, and that on the German side something is
wrong. He who makes this discovery for himself, and
foHows it out, will find that not only Gothic, but every
style of building that has arisen since, fails to achieve
beauty in Germany. The street decoration in Berlin, of
which she is so proud, is positively offensive to anyone
with ordinary appreciation of form, whilst the big cathe-
dral of this capital is the veritable inlapidation of the spirit
of hideousness. The wood-carving that adorns the hall
of the Rathaus of Liibeck, like most German work in
stone, metal, or wood, has been cut with infinite patience,
and is immensely rich in detail; but it makes little appeal,
certainly nothing comparable to French or Italian work
m the same line. Germany’s output in pictorial art is
small in quantity, and is recognised to be of low average
quality. We reach the conclusion, that many others have
reached, that in the German the artistic sense is un-
developed, or shall we put it that the aesthetic in him finds
one outlet only, namely, music. It is this dullness to
beauty and grace which runs as a flaw through the good
metal of the German character. Now art concerns itself
not only with the creation of beauty, but the method by
which that beauty shall be expressed. In every form of
art there is a medium with very pronounced limitations,
and it is the task of the artist to work within these limita-
tions and manifest the use of the imperfect
medium.” The same idea of loyalty to a limiting rule or
medium is the golden pivot of British sport. Of this prin-
ciple the German is almost wholly unappreciative. One
sees this deficiency alike in his table manners and
his conduct of war, in his literary criticisms and
in the formalism which constricts his educational


system, in his person, in his home and in his
morals. This has been the chief dram of ill that
has abased the high energies of his intellect. Amongst
the many fearful indictments against which Germany must
soon stand forth, there is this, that the glorious faculty of
reason which should guide us through both the known, and
the unknown, which puts us in such a responsible .position
as holders of power over nature, and which is in itself
operative to direct our conduct in principle, if not in detail,
she has besmirched and abused, and in the eyes of how
many, brought into distrust and contumely.




TRADE AND THE WAR.
Lecture delivered in the <sXCasonic Hall,
on July 14th, 1915, by
R. R. GARRAN, M.A.
TRADE is as much the concern of war as it is of peace.
Trade rivalries may be, and in the past often have
been, the cause of war. Again, the state of war,
when it has arisen, profoundly affects the course of trade,
dislocating it here, stimulating it there, diverting it else-
where. Trade is one of the sinews of war; to destroy the
trade of the enemy is a legitimate object, if pursued by
legitimate means, and to protect one’s own trade is a
military necessity. Neutral countries have also a lively
interest in maintaining, as far as may be, their existing
trade with both belligerents, as well as a very natural
desire to turn the quarrels of others to their own com-
mercial profit. And lastly, the re-adjustment of trade,
after the restoration of peace, is a matter of most serious
concern to all countries, whether belligerent or neutral, as
well as to individual traders in those countries.
The relations, then, between war and trade are very
numerous, and in the stupendous world-conflict which is
now raging, the issues which they involve are of immense
magnitude. It is to a few of the more important of those
issues, arising out of the present war, that I wish to direct
attention to-night.
In the first place, it is well to be clear that this war was
not forced upon Germany by an overwhelming necessity
for trade expansion. Nor was it—as the greater part of
the German people has been led to believe, and probably


does believe to-day—entered upon by Great Britain for
the destruction of a trade rival. We have heard from
the Pan-Germanists such complaints of Germany being
“ringed in” as suggest a nation whose commercial vitality
was being strangled by hostile European combinations.
Germany was ringed in, indeed, in the sense in which a
Boer farmer feels crowded if he can see on the horizon the
smoke of his neighbours’ chimneys; in the sense that she
did not have the world to herself, and that she had neigh-
bours on either side who did not own German sway, and
did not possess the blessings of German “kultur.” But
her trade was not ringed in. It spread and flourished
amazingly. From the time she first became a nation, it
had increased rapidly and continuously; and her merchan-
dise was being carried, by her ships and by the ships of all
nations, to every quarter of the globe. In the markets of
the world Germany, one of the latest customers, was also
one of the greatest, and as welcome as any. And to Great
Britain, more than to any other country, was due the policy
of the “open door” which enabled her to be so.
From the 16th century, when the New World swam into
the ken of the Old, the nations of Europe tried to
monopolize and exploit, each for herself, the wealth of the
new countries over which she established her sway. First
Spain and Portugal, with the sanction of the Pope, divided
the whole New World between them by a meridian of
longitude. Then the Dutch asserted a monopoly. England
was in those days an intruder on the high seas. And when
the English challenged these monopolies, and claimed the
freedom of the seas, at first they only claimed it for them-
selves, in the same exclusive spirit. The colonial theory
of those days was that a colony was a close preserve, and
its trade the exclusive privilege of the mother country.
But with the eighteenth century came a newer, freer
spirit. England repealed the Navigation Acts, by which
she had enforced the monopoly of her colonial trade, and
opened the seas to all. From then to now, the British
colonies have been free to trade with all the world, and
all the world with them. And in countless treaties Eng-
land has steadfastly set her face against a policy of
exclusion, and has maintained, as far as in her lay, the


policy of the most favoured nation and the open door.
Here in Australia, for many years, we have seen great Ger-
man liners, with the ships of other nations, in ever increas-
ing numbers, bring us her manufactured wares, and take
in exchange our wool and hides and metals. In 1886, our
imports from Germany were less than £700,000. In 1912
they were over £5,000,000, and our exports direct to Ger-
many were £7,500,000. Before the war broke out, more
than one-fourth of the trade of Australia was with foreign
countries, and of that foreign trade Germany’s share was
nearly one-third. And turning from Australia to the
world at large, we find that Germany’s total export and
import trade in merchandise was not very far short of that
of the United Kingdom. In 1913 her imports were 5i
hundred millions sterling, as against Great Britain’s 6J;
her exports were nearly 5 hundred millions, as against
Great Britain’s s|.
That Germany was, in the European race for colonial
possessions, to some extent left behind, was the fault, not
of her neighbours, but partly of her history, and partly of
her own deliberate choice. When the greater part of the
New World was parcelled out, Germany had not even the
claim of the noble lord in Beaumarchais’ comedy—she had
not even taken the trouble to be bom. And after the birth
of the German Empire, she for many years deliberately re-
frained from colonization, preferring to consolidate her
strength at home. She even encouraged the colonial
ambitions Of France, as tending to distract her attention
from Europe and dissipate her strength abroad. And
she looked on complacently at the colonial expansion of
England. “Fiji?” said Bismarck contemptuously to the
British Ambassador, who was mentioning England’s con-
templated annexation of that group; “where the devil is
Fiji?”
The German spirit in those days did not yearn for
colonization. It was otherwise engaged. It was not
yet wholly engrossed in material success. It was still in
the mood in which Heine had said, some twenty years
before: “The Portugese, Dutch, and English have for a long
time, year after year, borne home the treasures of India
In their great ships; we Germans could only look on. But


the spiritual treasures of India shall not escape us.
Schlegel, Bopp, Humboldt, Frank, and the rest, are our
modern East Indiamen ; Bonn and Munich will be good
factories.” At a later date, in the distribution of the
vacant lots that still remained when Germany began to take
notice of such things—chiefly in Africa and the Pacific—
she came in for her fair share.
No, Germany was not forced into the war by the trade
restrictions or trade rivalries of a hostile world. There
was no more danger to her trade than there was to her
territory. She willed the war because she was obsessed
with the glory and glamour of physical force; because, in
the madness of her ambition, she was not content with a
place in the sun, but aspired to be herself the sun, holding
the other nations of the world in their obedient orbits round
her. She deliberately threw the dice—which she believed
were safely loaded—for one of the two alternatives stated
by Bernhardi: World-power, or Downfall.
An important factor—and it may sometimes be a de-
cisive factor—in the operations of war is the attack on the
enemy’s trade. In this respect the situations of England
and of Germany show an important difference. The
United Kingdom is an island kingdom, and if the British
navy had been unable to keep open the sea communications
with the British Isles, we should have been within measur-
able distance of being beaten. Either in foodstuffs or in
munitions, or in both, England would within no long period
of time have been reduced to the verge of starvation. But
Germany and Austria, on several of their frontiers, touch
neutral countries—Holland, Denmark, Switzerland, Rou-
mania; whilst they also have access through the Baltic
Sea, which our navy has been unable to reach, to Norway
and Sweden. The enemy can, until we get well within his
territory, draw supplies from all of these; and taking into
account the food-producing capacity of Germany and Aus-
tria, it is obvious that we cannot bring them to their knees
simply by besieging them. It is not safe to trust to the
economists when they talk of bringing the war to an end
by a process of commercial and financial exhaustion. In
such a war as this, when the stage has been reached where
a nation is fighting for its national existence, no theoretical


tests of exhaustion apply. Germany may be bankrupt,
and yet go on fighting. It is not enough to beat her on
the exchange; she must be beaten in the field.
Nevertheless, there is reason to believe that, by cutting
off her oversea trade, we may be able to put her at a
serious disadvantage in the field. Modem warfare requires
vast supplies of many materials, some of which are not
produced, to any great extent, in Europe; the most impor-
tant of these, perhaps, being copper, which is indispensable
for shells and cartridges; cotton, for explosives; and rubber,
for motor-vehicles. Thanks to the British navy, inexhaus-
tible supplies of all these are available to the allies; whilst
it is quite possible that, in a long war, the enemy may be
seriously hampered for lack of them, if we can effectively
prevent his getting fresh supplies. Doubtless, Germany
started the war with immense stores of all these; but even
assuming that the duration of the war has not surpassed
her maximum calculations, it can hardly be doubted that
the vast expenditure of ammunition necessary has exceeded
Germany’s expectations, as it has exceeded ours.
Now, the first and easiest step towards cutting off the
trade of the enemy is to stop trading with him ourselves.
Every nation can, of course, forbid its own subjects to trade
with the enemy; and that is what, as a matter of fact, every
nation does. War is not a matter between armies only,
but between peoples; and it is inconsistent with the most
elementary duty of a loyal subject to enrich the enemy with
trade, and so help him to victory in the field. And so we
find that the common law of England forbids all trade with
the enemy, except by express permission of the Crown;
and this has been further declared and reinforced, since the
beginning of the war, by statute and by proclamation, both
in Great. Britain and the Dominions. It cannot be too
strongly emphasized that any kind of commercial inter-
course with an enemy country is not only disloyal and
unpatriotic, but is criminal, and punishable by law.
The English law as to trading with the enemy is
qualified, in one direction, by a legal fiction—and a legal
fiction, as the Duke of Plaza-Toro says, is a solemn thing.
If half-a-dozen Germans form a company in Germany, trade


with that company is forbidden. But if those same half-
dozen Germans, still living in Germany, have formed a com-
pany in England, trade with that company is not forbidden.
That company, in the eye of the English law, is not an
enemy, but (greatly to its credit) an English one. It
may still carry on business in England, though, of course, it
may not send any money to Germany during the war. In
Australia, that fiction has been abolished, during the last
few days, by a proclamation declaring such companies to
have the character of enemy subjects. Some indication of
the importance of this aspect of enemy trade is given by
the fact that in England nearly 200 companies have come
under Government supervision on account of the extensive
interests held in them by enemy subjects.
The enemy, then, is debarred altogether from trading
with us or with our allies. That is the first great blow to
his trade. Of course, it is also, to some extent, a blow to
-ours; but, owing to the wider markets available to us, a far
less serious one. The next thing is to prevent the enemy
from carrying his trade in his own ships. The usages of
naval warfare allow the condemnation of all enemy mer-
chant ships that we can capture, and also the condemnation
of so much of their cargo as belongs to enemy subjects.
Well, we have seen to that. The allied fleets have swept
the enemy’s merchant navy off the high seas. All that
are not sheltering in home ports or neutral ports, or trading
in land-locked waters, have been caught, and are now doing
transport or trading service for the allies. That is one
signal and undeniable success which we have gained—that
the enemy’s ocean trade in his own ships is absolutely
stopped; whilst our ships, subject to a small percentage
of risk from submarines, sail almost as freely as in time
of peace.
There remains the problem of neutral trade with the
enemy. Into the fascinating refinements of international
law on this subject Ido not propose to enter. That would
be poaching on the preserves of Professor Harrison Moore,
whom you will hear on the next evening of this series. But
there are a few general principles to which allusion must
be made.


Neutral countries are naturally loth to forego trade
with a country with which they have no quarrel, just be-
cause it is at war with another country. On the other
hand, a belligerent country, with equal reason, claims a
right to prevent, if it can, neutral ships from helping the
enemy by carrying him munitions or warlike supplies, or
by relieving the necessities of a blockaded port or region.
Out of this conflict of interest between neutrals and bel-
ligerents have developed certain rules and usages which,
with a wide margin of debatable ground, are fairly well
settled. Neutrals have established the right of their mer-
chants and their ships to trade with a belligerent, with
two important qualifications. First, if a neutral ship is
caught carrying contraband of war to a belligerent, it may
be captured, the cargo and in some cases the ship,
may be condemned, with its cargo. And, in the
absence of treaty agreement, each belligerent may decide
for itself—-subject, of course, to protest from neutrals, and
the possible consequences—what articles it will regard as
contraband. A neutral country has no duty to prevent its
ships from carrying contraband, but they do so at their
own risk.
Secondly, if a belligerent maintains, and notifies, a rea-
sonably effective blockade of any ports of the enemy, or of
any part of his coast-line, a neutral ship attempting to run
the blockade may be similarly captured and condemned.
At the outset of the war, the Allies did not attempt to
blockade the enemy’s coast, though their command of the
sea enabled them to do so. Neutral ships were allowed to
trade to and from the enemy’s ports, subject, of course, to
the delays incidental to visit and search for contraband by
the allied war-ships. This trade was allowed, not, of
course, out of consideration for the enemy, who could claim
no rights in the matter, but out of consideration for
neutrals. Notably, foodstuffs were allowed to pass, unless
they were believed to be destined for the Governments or
the armed forces of the enemy.
Early this year, however, the German Government
assumed control of all grain and flour imported; and as
this made it impossible to distinguish between civil and
military supplies, the British Foreign Office announced, on


4th February, that foodstuffs would thenceforth be treated
as contraband; though they seem not to have enforced the
full penalty of contraband, but to have purchased, instead
of confiscating, any cargoes captured.
Observe, that this action of England contravened no
rule of warfare. The right of a belligerent to cut off sup-
plies from an enemy country is recognised. Even if the
Allies’ action be thought—as America seemed to think it
an undue extension of the principle of contraband, that is
a matter between America and England. It is a question
of the rights of neutrals, not of the rights of the enemy.
But Germany complained bitterly of what she styled
Britain’s “hunger-war.” Finding herself unable, by fair
means, to counteract the effects of British naval supremacy,
she resorted to foul. The object of cutting off supplies
from Great Britain, which she found herself unable to
achieve by methods of civilized warfare, she resolved to
effect, if she could, by submarine piracy. Accordingly, in
defiance not only of international law, but of humanity,
she declared that she would endeavour to destroy, without
regard to life or property, all British merchant ships found
in the waters surrounding the British Isles; and she clearly
gave it to be understood that neutral ships in the danger
zone would not be safe.
England’s answer to this challenge was characteristic of
the moral gulf that exists to-day between the two countries.
She announced that neutral ships would not be allowed to
Proceed to any German port, or to proceed on any voyage
carrying goods destined for Germany, or of German origin,
or being German property. There was to be no condemna-
tion of ship or cargo—not even of enemy cargo. The ship
could proceed to any destination except Germany, after
unloading at a British or allied port; neutral goods could
be claimed by the owners; enemy goods were to be sold,
and the proceeds held till the end of the war.
The effect is that Germany’s whole import and export
trade by sea is stopped, so far as the vigilance of the British
fleet can stop it. It is virtually a blockade at long range;
a blockade with certain unusual features, it is true, which
are amply justified as a measure of retaliation; and it is
more considerate to neutrals than an ordinary blockade in


that a neutral ship trying to run the blockade risks the
voyage only, and not the ship or the cargo.
America—naturally enougki from the neutral point of
view—has made a protest, thoiugh not a very vigorous one,
against this treatment of her trade. The measure, of
course, is directed against Germany, not against America.
Incidentally, American trade must suffer to some extent;
but it is hard to conceive any effective form of reprisal
which England could have adopted which would have in-
flicted less injury upon neutrals. Germany’s attempted
blockade is represented by the shocking crime of the Lusi-
tania; England’s blockade mierely isolates the nation
responsible for the crime. Thue one is a system of piracy;
the other is a system of police.
So much for ocean trade with Germany direct. It is
much more difficult to prevent indirect trade through the
neutral countries in Europe to which Germany has access.
Where the enemy destination of contraband goods can be
proved or sufficiently inferred, they can be dealt with as if
they were directly consigned to the enemy, and the British
retaliatory blockade expressly extends to all goods whose
destination is Germany. But it can hardly be doubted that
a large quantity of goods consigned to neutral countries in
Europe finds its way ultimately to Germany.
It is possible, of course, to take precautions against any
British or allied goods reaching Germany in this way.
This end could be absolutely secured at the cost of stopping
all export whatever to neutral countries. This, however,
would be ruinous to a great deal of legitimate trade, and
would certainly be unpopular with neutrals. The game
would not be worth the candle. But there are many com-
modities of which it is worth while to prohibit or limit the
export, for one or both of two purposes: either to prevent
their reaching the enemy, or to conserve our own supplies.
To this end, all the Allies have adopted stringent regula-
tions, to which no neutral State can take exception, which
prevent the export, to any country whatever, of specified
articles which are likely to be of use to the enemy, or the
stocks of which it is important for us to conserve.
Thus, you will find in the London Gazette, and in the
Commonwealth Gazette, long lists of articles the exporta-


tion of which is either prohibited altogether, or is only
allowed with conditions as to destination, or subject to the
consent of the authorities.
The sum-total of all these restrictions is this: that by
prohibiting trade between our own citizens and the enemy,
by controlling the export of goods, by capturing the enemy’s
ships and blockading his coast, we not only destroy a great
part of his trade, and so weaken his sinews of war, but
we hope also to limit the supply of materials which he needs
for the conduct of the war. Germany attempts to do the
same by us; but as against our clean sweep of her flag from
the high seas she can only effect the occasional de-
struction of a ship and cargo by submarine attack, and her
oversea markets are gone altogether, whilst the bulk of
ours remain. It follows that her trade has suffered vastly
more than ours from the operations of war.
All this, however, is only a fraction of the great sum-
total of loss and destruction that the war has brought to
the trade of all the belligerents. The immediate economic
effect of war is that the main energies of the warring
nations are diverted from production to destruction. Be-
sides the millions of men who are taken away from indus-
trial pursuits to the fighting line—besides the awful
industrial wreckage in the path of the armies—besides the
choking of so many routes and channels of trade—we have
to reckon also the great industrial armies whose whole
activities are devoted to turning out war supplies and
munitions, and the fleets of ships taken from the world’s
trade for purposes of transport. The full extent of the
injury to trade is concealed for the moment by the ap-
parent stimulus—by the bustle of employment—but it is
employment in destruction, not in creation. Not only is
the accumulated wealth of the world being drawn upon
day by day with frightful rapidity, but whole nations are
working with feverish energy to create fresh wealth to be
flung into the orgy of destruction. In some way, if
civilization is to survive, out of this destruction must come
regeneration. And the problem, how to rebuild the shat-
tered fabric, is not one which can be postponed till the war
is over; we must begin to face it now. The armies in the
field have their task, and we know how nobly they are


performing it. This other is a task for us who are left at
home, and it is one in which all can have a share, not
only the Governments, but also the merchants and the
tradesmen; and not only theses, but also every individual
consumer—that is to say, every man, woman and child
in the community.
Now, before discussing what we have to do, we may
well take a lesson from Germany in how to do it. The
problem for the Germans is somewhat different. They,
with the comand of the sea lost, with their great foreign
trade for the time ruined, are thrown back on their own
resources. Their task is to develop to the utmost their
internal production and internal trade, and to husband to
the utmost their supplies of food and necessaries. And,
from the accounts which filter through of the way in which
they are doing this, the admirable and noteworthy things
are their organization and their determination. The whole
nation, in its daily work, in its eating and its drinking, in
its getting and its spending, is intent on one thing only—
victory in this war. That is the spirit which wins wars,
and that is the spirit which must animate us if we are to
win this war, and win it once for all. Every man, woman,
and child in Germany is exercising, and helping others to
exercise, the most rigid economy in the necessaries of life;
every spare plot of ground, every garden and vacant allot-
ment, is being tilled for food; and every business concern
is engaged, according to a well-thought-out plan, in produc-
ing the things that matter most, and disposing of them
where they are most needed. The whole nation is
organized for one end, and working for that end with grim
determination, sustained by the. conviction that 65 million
people working solidly together like that can never be
beaten. The Allies have many more millions of men;
have we the same solidity? We are equally confident of
victory; are we doing as much to secure it? or are we
sitting down, thinking, in the good, easy-going British way,
that it is somebody’s business to see this job through, and
blaming somebody for not seeing it through more quickly?
We must realize, to begin with, that we are all going
to be very much poorer before this war is over. We are
much poorer already, though we may not feel it yet. All


this huge destruction is not going to leave things just as
they were before the war. We shall not be able, like
Sheridan, just to draw a promissory note for the amount,
and say, “Thank goodness, that’s settled.” There is a com-
fortable doctrine in this country that we can somehow
shift the burden of unwelcome expenditure on to the
shoulders of posterity. That is a delusion—at least in such
a case as this. Posterity cannot raise armies, or equip
them. We may raise a loan, but what shall we raise it
out of? Out of the national capital—that is to say, out
of our own pockets. It is part of the price that we believe
it is worth while to pay for our liberty. Many have
paid it with their lives, but it must be paid also in goods
and chattels and ready money. This fact must be faced
sooner or later; the sooner the better. “Business as usual”
is a good, cheery motto, but it needs qualification. It must
be business with a difference. The business of profitable
production must be more than usual; the business of un-
profitable spending must be less than usual. The longer
the war lasts, the greater will be the drain on the accumu-
lated wealth of the nation. But that accumulated wealth
is the implement by means of which we earn the national
income—which is nothing more nor less than the sum of
our individual incomes. The more we earn, and the less
we spend, the longer will our capital last. Every pound
and every penny of useless or unnecessary expenditure
saved by each of us is so much more in hand for the
country’s need, and adds so much more to the country’s
resources after the war. Economy and industry—wise
economy, public and private, and well-directed industry—
are the first needs of the hour.
And next we must realize that there is a patriotism in
business as there is on the battle-field. Vaguely, and to a
certain extent, we have known this for a long time. “Trade
follows the flag” is an old phrase. “Preferential trade” is
a newer one; and has in Australia, and in other Dominions,
been to some extent expressed in our tariff policy. But this
war brings us face to face with what we have hitherto seen
through a glass darkly. We have built up our trade on
the assumption that peace would reign for ever and ever
or at least without any adequate realization of the possi-


bility of this world-war; and it has found us unprepared.
Whilst in Germany the whole social and industrial system
has been co-ordinated with the great military machine, with
a single eye to the national ambition of world-conquest, in
the British Empire trade has pursued its cosmopolitan
course, with a blind disregard of possibilities. We must
wake up to the fact that all this must be changed. Our
commercial system must be re-adjusted so that the Empire
may be self-sufficing, and as far as possible each Dominion
may be self-sufficing, as regards the vital necessaries of
peace and war.
This does not mean that foreign trade is to be thought
accursed, or that we must isolate the trade of the Empire
by insurmountable barriers. That would be to put the
clock of civilization back for three or four centuries, and
revert to the early policy of exclusion and monopoly, which
tended to war rather than to peace. But it does mean
that, in matters which are essential to our safety, we must
not be at the mercy of foreign trade, which may any day
become enemy trade. In Australia at present we are so
dependent. If during the last few months the unthink-
able had happened, and Great Britain had lost command of
the sea, we should have found to our cost that, thrown back
on our own resources, many of our industries would have
come to a standstill for want of some necessary material,
and, worse still, there would have been ugly gaps in our
ability to supply ourselves with munitions and equipment
of war—not for lack of natural resources, but for lack of
development and preparation. Even as it was, with the
world open to us except Germany, we found that for many
things we were dependent wholly on that country, and
living from hand to mouth to suich an extent that the hold-
ing up of the cargoes of a few German ships for a few
weeks threatened some of our industries immediately with
temporary dislocation. What iss urgently necessary for us
is to increase the variety and extent of our home industries;
and especially to acclimatize the great chemical and metal-
lurgical industries, which are not only important in them-
selves, but which would supply us with innumerable by-
products which would make possible the profitable estab-
lishment of other subsidiary industries.


The same weakness exists in the Empire as a whole,
though to a lesser degree, owing to its vast extent and the
variety of its resources. One striking instance will suffice.
Australia’s large output of zinc concentrates has hitherto
been treated mainly at works either in Germany or under
German control, in that part of Belgium which is now
occupied by Germany. At the present time, while thou-
sands of tons of zinc concentrates are stacked uselessly in
Australia, the whole resources of the British Empire are
inadequate to extract from them the zinc of commerce,
which is indispensable, not only for industrial purposes,
but also for munitions of war. For supplies of zinc. Eng-
land is to-day largely dependent on neutral countries.
Indeed, the whole subject of metals and metallic ores
calls for the gravest consideration. Next to wool, these
are now the largest item of Australian production. In-
vestigation shows that the world’s trade in metals is mainly
controlled by vast combinations, in which German influence
predominates. This is perhaps the most conspicuous in-
stance of German trade organization and thoroughness.
How it has been done is too long a story to be told here;
suffice it to say that wealthy corporations in Germany, by
means of daughter companies established all over the world,
the purchase of controlling interests in other concerns, and
various ingenious market arrangements and financial
devices, have secured such a hold on the trade that Germany
is able to control the output, the disposal, and the price,
and to secure for Germans the lion’s share of the profits.
If Germany were merely a peaceful trade competitor,
we might perhaps afford to view all this with true British
complacency. With Germany inflamed with a lust for
world-dominion, and consumed with hatred of every
nation, large or small, which resists her aggression, it is
one moie menace to our liberty. Fortunately, the weak
link in her calculations is her political mis judgment. Had
things happened as she expected—had England shrunk
from this conflict, and waited her turn to be attacked—
all these elaborate arrangements would have given Ger-
many, in her struggle with France and Russia, an over-
whelming advantage in supplies and munitions.
As it is, the plans have to a great extent miscarried.


The channels of German trade are blocked, for the time
being, and Germany is now devoting her efforts to prevent
our opening up new permanent (channels. If, for instance,
she can retain her hold over existing contracts for the sup-
ply of metallic ores from Australia, so that she can claim
resumption of deliveries after tlhe war, she hopes that all
will yet be well. It will not pay’ British enterprise to erect
new plant, and make new arrangements, if the plant will
be idle and the arrangements uipset after the war. And
Germany will come into her own again. But if, on the
other hand, the contracts are cancelled for good, and the
producers are free to make new permanent arrangements,
the German connexion will be gome for good.
For our national safety, we have to see that, so long
as German ambitions of world-conquest continue, that con-
nexion shall not be resumed. It will need vigilance, because
German control will lurk in all sorts of innocent disguises;
but it must be done. This is not a policy of vindictiveness,
it is a policy of common prudence. Well-intentioned people
say, “Don't humiliate Germany.'" It is not a question of
humiliating Germany. We are not yet in a position to
humiliate Germany. What we have to see to is that Ger-
many does not humiliate us. It is said that it is a dreadful
thing to put a great nation like Germany into a kind of
commercial Coventry. So it is; but the dreadfulness is
Germany's fault, not ours. If you found that your baker
had a habit of mixing strychnine in your bread, you would
change your custom, without regard to his feelings, until
you were quite sure that he was cured of his insanity. And
so long as Germany is bent on using her power and her
wealth for our destruction, it would be madness for us,
either from a sentiment of generosity, or from a commer-
cial instinct of buying and selling in a good market, to
help her to power and wealth. We can never forget—we
need not wish to forget—-the great services that the Ger-
many of past generations has rendered to civilization, in
literature, in science, in philosophy, and in music. But
the Germany of Goethe, and Heine, and Hegel, and
Beethoven is not the Germany of to-day—the Germany of
Nietzsche, and Bernhardi, and Von Goltz. The madness
which has overcome the nation has placed her, for the time


being, outside the pale; and for the sake of all the ideals
which she has forgotten, for the sake of liberty, which she
never knew, it is our bounden duty, as it is our only safety,
to have no commercial dealings with her till her heart is
changed.
There were idealists who told us that the inter-
nationalization of trade was an effective guarantee of
peace. We know now what that guarantee was worth.
There can be no guarantee of peace except a desire for peace
in the hearts of all nations. And until that desire has
found a home in the heart of Germany, and driven out the
devil of Prussian aggression, peace with her will be a
mockery, and peaceful trade an impossibility.


READY NEXT WEEK.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Companion Volume to “Soldier, my Soldier!”
THE
CLEAR CALL
DOROTHY FRANCES McCRAE.
“ SOLDIER, MY SOLDIER !” has been one of the most
popular books of verse published in recent years in Australia
and 144 THE CLEAR CALL” -has all the qualities which have
made that book so successful.
With Pictorial Cover designed by Walter Seed.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & COMPANY
PROPY. LTD.,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


How the War Affects Australia.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
ARCHIBALD STRONG’S
Articles on the War.
(Reprinted from the Melbourne Herald)
ENTITLED
AUSTRALIA AND THE. WAR
Will be published shortly in a handy volume.
Among the articles in the book will be “ Why. Germany Made War,”
“World-Power or Downfall,”' “ Our Dangers and Duties,” "“'The'
Worker and. Germany,” “ Our Stake in the War,” - “Facts to be
Faced,” “Australia’s Deadly Danger,” &c., &c.
ORDER NOW from your Bookseller or from
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO.
PROPY. LTD.
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane.
B. R. Gowan & Co., Printers, 492 Collins Street, Melbourne,
