

PASSED BY THE CENSOR.
GERMAN ATROCITIES
IN FRANCE
Orgies of Rapine, Fire and Carnage;
and
Outrages on Women and Children
UNPARALLELED IN THE HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE.
Commission’s Report, translated by
FRED. GENTY, J.P., Sydney, N.S.W.
COPYRIGHT.
PRICE - SIXPENCE.
A portion of the proceeds from the sale of this book will be devoted to the
French-Australian League.
Caxton Print. ’Phone City 1419.
Published with the authority of the Consul-General
for France in Australia.


Clarke and Solomons,
(Established over dO years.)
PROPERTY AUCTIONEERS, REAL ESTATE AGENTS,
VALUERS.
Rents Collected. Estates Managed. Properties Subdivided
and Auctioned. Loans on Mortgage arranged. Trust Moneys
Lent. Purchases or Building of Homes Financed on Easy
Terms. Expert advice freely offered on all Real Estate Matters.
VICKERY’S CHAMBERS, PITT ST., SYDNEY.
Travellers and Tourists
COSTUMES AND SUITS renovated to look
equal to new by an entirely NEW FRENCH
PROCESS of DRY CHEMICAL CLEANING
ALPHONSE EVEN, Parisian Expert,
(The Original French Cleaner and Dyer;
Receiving Office; 17 QUEEN VICTORIA MARKETS,
George Street, Sydney.
Telephone 6761 City. (Near the Main Entrance.)
PARCELS CALLED FOR AND DELIVERED.


THE CONSUL-GENERAL’S LETTER.
REPIIBL.IQIJE FRANCAISE
mars
Consul. at General
de France
£n Australis
Messrs. COMYNS & LLOYD,
&fo n.S.w. Masonic Glut,
218 Pitt street. SYDNEY.
Dear Sirs,
In reply to your communication of the 30th. Inst.
I nave tne honour to state that you have my permission to
translate and publish the official report of the German'
Atrocities In France which appeared in the French "Journal
OffIclel".
You are, therefore, authorised to print on the
front cover the Inscription "Furnished with the authority of
the French consul General at Sydney*.
The above authority Is given subject to the trans-
lation being made by a competent translator and to a proof
of the worK being submitted to roe before publication./.
Yours faithfully.
[?]
Consul General.


FAC-SIMILE OF FIRST PAGE OF THE REPORT.
Fitrait du Journal Offlciel dr la Htpiiblujur Franpaise du 9 Janvier 1915
LES ATROCITES ALLEMANDES EN FRANCE
RAPPORT
// PRESENTE A. Kl. LE PRESIDENT DU CONSEIL
PAR LA
Commission institute en vue de constater les actes coiiimis par I'eniieiiii en violation du droit des gens
(Ddcret du 23 septembre 1914)
MM Georges Pngelle, premier president- de la cuur des comptes. Armnnd Mutturd. nnnistre
plenipnlentiaire ; Georges Maringer , r.onscittcr d'Elal, et Edmond Paillol , conseiller d la
cour de cassation, a if. le president du Cornell des minislrts.
Monsieur le president du cmiieil
C.hargds, en vertu d un decrct du 23 sep-
tembre dernier, d alter proedder sur place 4
une enquelc, relativcment aux acles com-
inis cn violation dudroit des gens, dans les
parlies du territoire francais que I'ennemi
a occupdes, ct qui ont dtd reconquises par
les armdes de la Rdpubliquc, nous avons
I'honneur de vous rendre compte des pre-
miers rdsullats de notre mission.
Nous vous apportonS ddj4, monsieur le
president, une ample moisson de rensei-
gnements. Elio ne comprend, cependanl,
qu'une part assez rcstreinle des constala-
tions quo nous auriens pu faire, si nous
n'avions soumis 4 une critique sdvdre et 4
un contrdle rigoureux chacun desdldments
d informalion qui se sont prdsentds 4 notre
cxamcn. Nous n'avons cru devoir, en effet,
relcnir que les Luts qui, irrdfragablement
elablis, constituaiehl d une facon certaine
des abus criminals netlcmcnt caraetdrisds,
ndgligeant ceux dont les preuves dlaienl
Insutflsantes 4 nos yeux, ou qui, si domma-
geables ou si cruets qu'ils fussenl, pou-
vaient avoir dtd la consdquence d'acles de
guerre proprcmenl dils, pluldt que d'exeds
jj’olontalres, imputables 4 l enneml.
Dans ces conditions, nous avons la forme
assurance qu'aucun des incidents dont nous
•vans fait dtat ne saurait 6tre disculd de
bonne foi. La preuve de chacun d'eux, d'ail-
leurs, ne rdsulle pas seulement denosob-
•ervations personnelles; elle se fonde prin-
eipalement sur des documents photographi-
ques et sur de nombreux tdmoignages re-
Cos en la forme judiciaire, avec la garantie
dbi serment
l.a lache 4 laquellc nous nous sommes
appliquds tousles quatre, dans une dtroile
communauld d'imprcssions ct de senti-
ments, nous a paru souvenlpdnible,devant
•cs spectacles lamentables que nous avons
eus sous les yeux. Llle cut did vraiment
Irop doulpureuse, si nous n'avions trouvd
un puissant rdconforl dans la vue dcs trou-
pes mervcilleuses que nous avons rcncon-
trdes snr le front, dans I'accueil des chefs
militaires, dont le bienveillant couconrs ne
nous a jamais fail ddf.iut, et dans l aspect
des populations admirables qui supportenl
avee la resignation la plus digne.des calami-
tds sans prdeddent. Pans les rdgions que
nous avons traversdes, ct notamment dans
cc pays de Lorraine qui futsi frequemmenl
victime des lleaux de J la guerre, nous
n'avons entendu ni une sollicilalion, ni une
plainte; cl pourlanl, les misdres atTrcuses
dont nous avons dtd les tdmoins depassent
en dtendue ct en horreur ce que ['ima-
gination peut concevoir. De tous colds,
le regard se pose sue des ddeombres; des
villages enliers onl dtd ((dtruits par la ca-
nonnade ou par le feu; des villes autrefois
pleines de vie ne sont plus que dcs ddserts
remplis de ruines ; et quand on visile les
lioux ddsolds oil la torche de l euvaldsseur
a fait son oeuvre, on a continuellement l il-
lusion de marcher parmi les vestiges d une
de ces citds antiques que les grands cata-
clysmes de la nature onl andanties.
On peut dire, cn efTct, que jamais une
guerre enlre nations civilisdes n'a eu le ca-
raclere sauvage et fdroce de cclle qui est
en ce moment porlde sur notre sol par un
adversairo implacable. Le pillage, le viol,
J'incendie et le meurtre sont de pratique
courantc chcz nos ennemis; et les falls
qui nous out did journellement rdvdlds, on
memo temps qu its constituent do vdrita-
blcs crimes de droit commun, punis par les
codes de tons les pays dcs peines les plus
sdveres cl les plus intamantes, accusent
dans la mcntalild allemande, depuis IS7O,
uno dtonnante rdgresslon.
Les attentats contrc les femmes ct les
jeunes flllcs onl dtdd'unc frequence inoui'e.
Nous cn avons dtabli un grand nombre, qni
ne reprdsente qu'une quanlitd iniime au-
pres de ceux que nous aurlons pu relevor;
mats, par un sentiment trds respectable,
les victimes de cos acles odieux se refusent
gdndralement 4 les tdveler. II en aurait did
moins commis.sans doute.si les chefs d une
armce dont la discipline est dcs plus rigou-
reuses, s'dtaienl inquidtds de les prdvenir;
on peat toutefois, 4 la rigueur, ne les con-
siddrer que comme les acles indlviduels ct
sponlands de brutes ddchaindes; mais il
n'en est pas de mdme de lincendie, alu vol
el de I'assassinat; le commandemcnl, jus-
que dans ses personnifleations les plus
haules, en portera, devant 1 humanitd, U
responsabilitd ecrasante.
Dans la plupart des endroits oil nous
avons fait notre cnqudte, nous avons pu
nous rendre compte quo I’armde allemande
professe d une facon coustante le mdpris le
plus complot de la vie humainc, que ses
soldats et meme ses chefs ne se font pas
faule d'achever les blcssds, qu'ils tuent
sans pltid les habitants inoffensifs des ter-
ritoires qu'ils envahissent, et qu'ils n'dpar-
gnent, dans leur rage homicide, nl les fem-
mes, ni les vlelllards, ni les enfanls. Les
fusillades do Lundville, de Gerbdvlller, da
Nomeny el de.Senlis en sent des examples
terriilanls; et vous lirez, au cours de ce


Having been charged by virtue of a decree of the 23rd Sep-
tember, 1914, to proceed on the spot to an enquiry relative to
the acts committed in violation of the rights of man, and in the
parts of French territory which the enemy had occupied, and
which has been re-conquered by the Republican Armies, we
have the honour to give you the results of our mission:
Only Indubitable Facts Reported.
We bring you, sir, an ample harvest of information which
comprises, however, only a small part of evidence that we
might adduce if we had not been submitted to severe criticism
and a rigorous control of each of the elements of information
which have been presented for our examination. We con-
sidered it our duty to only keep to facts which are indubitable
and constitute in a positive manner the criminal abuses, ignor-
ing those of which the proofs were insufficient to our minds,
however damning or cruel they might have been. Acts of
war are preferably set out, rather than voluntary acts of
excesses imputable to the enemy.
Under these conditions, we have the firm assurance that
none of the instances which we state can be doubted. The
proof of each does not rest only on our personal observation.
They are founded principally on photographic documents and
on the numerous testimonies given in a judicial form under
oath.
Atrocities are Beyond Imagination.
The task to which we have applied ourselves in a narrow
community of impressions and sentiments appeared to us often
painful before the lamentable sights which we have had under
our own eyes. It would have been too heartrending if we had
not found a powerful tonic in the sight of the marvellous troops
which we have met at the front, in the reception by the mili-
tary chiefs, whose welcome co-operation never failed us, and
in the aspect of the admirable population, who bore with the
greatest resignation calamities without precedent. In the
regions which we have traversed—and notably Lorraine, which
was so frequently the victim of war —we never heard a solicita-
tion or lament, although the atrocious miseries of which we
have been witnesses are, in horror and extent, beyond anything
the imagination can conceive. On all sides the eye rests on
ruins Entire villages have been destroyed by cannon or fire.
Towns which hitherto were full of life are now merely deserts
of ruin, and when one visits places where the torch of the
invader’ has done its work he consequently experiences the
illusion of walking among one of those ancient cities which
the great cataclysms of Nature have obliterated.
Pillage, Rape, Incendiarism and Murder.
One can see, in effect, that never has a war between
civilised nations been waged with such savagery and ferocity
by an implacable adversary as that which is at piesent raging
in our territory. Pillage, rape, incendiarism and murder are
To the President in Council, —


current practices with our enemy; and the facts which are
daily revealed to us —at the same time that they constitute
crimes against common rights, punished by the codes of all
countries with the most severe penalties—are proof in the
German mentality of an astonishing retrogression since 1870.
The Dastardly German General Staff.
Outrages against women and girls are of incredible fre-
quency. We have established a large number of eases, which
only represent an infinitesimal iota, as against those which
we have not been able to investigate, and which
through a most understandable sentiment, the victims
of these heinous acts refused generally to reveal. There would,
no doubt, have been many less outrages committed on women
and girls if the officers of the German army—whose discipline
is the most rigorous—had attempted to prevent them. Most
assuredly, one can consider these crimes as akin to individual
and spontaneous acts of brutes off the chain; but such cannot
be the case with incendiarism, robbery, and murder. And
assuredly the German general staff-—even among its highest
personages—will have imposed upon them by humanity an
overwhelming responsibility and humiliation for their das-
tardly obliquity.
Brutal Contempt for Human Life.
In most of the spots where we have made our enquiries we
have been able to recognise the fact that the German army pro-
fesses constantly the most complete contempt for human life.
Its soldiers and even its chiefs do not hesitate to finish off the
wounded without mercy; they kill without pity the inoffensive
inhabitants of the territories that they invade: and in their
homicidal raids neither aged nor youthful women are spared.
The fusillades on Luneville, Gerbeviller, Nomeny, and Senlis
are terrifying examples; and you will read in this report par-
ticulars of scenes of slaughter in which officers were not
ashamed to take part.
Cowardly and Lying Excuses for Slaughter.
The mind refuses to believe that these acts of slaughter
took place without rhyme or reason. However, such is the
case. The Germans, it is true, always gave the same excuse
in declaring that French civilians had first fired on them.
These allegations are untrue, and those who have promulgated
them have been incapable of any substantiation. They actu-
ally habitually fired off guns in the vicinity of habitations to
enable them to swear that they had been attacked by the inno-
cent residents, whose massacre they had previo?isly resolved
upon. Of these treacherous acts we have many proofs. Here
is one among many others:
One night a gunshot was heard while the Abbe Colin, the
priest of Croismare, was with a German officer, when the latter
exclaimed: “Mr. Priest, this is sufficient to get you all shot,
including the mayor, and to justify the burning of a farm.
Here you are! there’s one now burning.” “Officer,” answered


the priest, “you are too intelligent not to recognise the noise
of your own rifles. For myself, I do.” The German did not
insist any further.
Contempt for Life and Liberty.
As with human life, liberty of man is, on the part of the
German military authority, a matter of absolute contempt.
Nearly everywhere citizens of all ages have been dragged from
their homes and taken into captivity. Many died or Were killed
in cold blood on the roads.
German Incendiary Plants.
Of more frequent occurrence than murder is incendiarism,
this being one of the usual proceedings of our adversaries. It
is continually employed by them either as a part of a sys-
tematic devastation or as a means of intimidation. The Ger-
man army possesses complete plants, which comprise torches,
grenades, fuses, petrol pumps, sticks of fusing matte is, and
capsules containing a compressed and very inflammable pov-
der. Incendiarism is principally directed against churches and
monuments which represent an artistic interest or memory.
In the departments which ive have visited thousands of
houses have been burnt, but we only report those that have
been fired with an exclusively criminal intention, and we d<>
not think we should mention those such as at Yillotte-dcvant-
Louppy, Rembercourt, Mogneville, Amblaincourt, Rretz
Louppy-le-Chateau, etc., which have been occasioned by shells
during violent engagements, or were due to causes which it
has not been possible to determine iri a positive manner. The
few inhabitants that remained in the midst of the ruins have,
however, made statements characterised by fairness.
Incessant and Methodical Pillages.
With regard to robberies, these have proved to be inces-
sant; and we have no hesitation in stating that wherever the
enemy troop has passed it gave itself up, in the presence of its
chiefs and often with their participation, to a methodical or-
ganised pillage. Cellars have been emptied to the last bottle,
safes have been burst open, and considerable sums of money
either stolen or extorted. A large quantity of silverware,
iewellerv, pictures, furniture, objects of art. clothing, bicycles,
women’s apparel, sewing machines, and even childrens toys
have been purloined, placed on waggons, and despatched to the
frontier.
No Appeal Against Criminal Excesses.
Against all these excesses as well as against all these
crimes there was no appeal; and if any unfortunate inhabitant
dared to supplicate an officer to save his life or the li\es of his
loved ones, or to protect his goods, he received no answer when
he was not threatened with menaces which were invariably
accompanied with a smile and an answer ascribing such treat-
ment to the exigencies of war.


SEINE-ET-MARNE.
Gravity of Crimes Against Humanity.
As you have learnt by our previous reports, it is in the
department of Seine-et-Marne that we made our first visit.
There we received numerous proofs of abuses of the customs
of war and of crimes against humanity, certain of which pre-
sented considerable gravity. At Chauconin the Germans set
fire to five inhabited houses and to six farm buildings by means
of grenades which they hurled on the roofs and sticks of resin
which they placed under the doors. In reply to M. Lagrange,
who asked the reason for such acts, an officer exclaimed: “It
is war!" The officer then insisted on Lagrange showing him
the locality of the farm named Proffit. A few minutes later
the buildings of that farm were in flames.
At Congis a troop of the enemy were making preparations
to burn twenty houses, amongst which they had thrown straw
sprinkled with petrol, when the timely arrival of a French
detachment prevented the execution of the project.
At Pen chard, where three houses were burned, Madame
Marina Rene saw a soldier with a torch, which, being in his
belt, made part of his accoutrement.
At Barcy, an officer and a soldier penetrated the town
ball, and after having taken blankets from the institutions, set
fire to the hall of the records.
At Douy-la-Ramee, the Germans set fire to a mill, the posi-
tion of which they had previously ascertained. A workman of
66 years of age was nearly thrown into the furnace; by strug-
gling violently and hanging on to a wall he just escaped the
fate that was threatened him. Finally, at Courtacon the enemy,
after insisting that the inhabitants should furnish them with
matches and faggots, sprinkled with petrol a large number of
houses and started a fire. The village, of which the greater
part is in ruins, presented a lamentable aspect.
Wanton Acts of Brutality.
Besides these attempts against property, we have to record
in Seine-et-Marne several grave acts against the inhabitants.
At the beginning of September, German cavalrymen pre-
sented themselves towards five o’clock in the afternoon to M.
Laforest at May-en-Multien, and asked him for a drink. He
quickly went to draw one from a cask, but a soldier, dissatis-
fied evidently at not being served quickly discharged his rifle
at the wife of his host, and she was grievously wounded. Taken
to Lizy-Sur-Ourcq, Madame Laforest received there the atten-
tion of a German doctor, and her left arm was amputated. She
died recently at the hospital of Meaux.
Massacre of Aged and Defenceless Civilians.
On the Bth September. 18 inhabitants of Varreddes, amongst
whom was a priest, were arrested without any reason and
faken by the enemy. Three of them managed to escape. None
of the others had returned on the 13th September, the date of
our leaving. From information received three of those men
were massacred. At any rate the death of one of the oldest of


the prisoners, M. Jourdain, aged 73, is certain, dragged to the
village of Coulombs, and being unable to walk any further, the
unfortunate was struck with a bayonet in the forehead and shot
with a revolver in the heart.
About the same date (Bth September) a man of 66. named
Dalissier, and living at Congis, was asked by some Germans
for his purse. As he could not give money, he was tied with a
halter and shot without mercy. We discerned on his body lo
shots. j.
On the 3rd September, at Mary-sur-Marne, M. Mathe,
frightened by the arrival of German troops, hid under the
counter of a bar. When discovered, he was killed by a knife or
bayonet wound in the chest.
How Thirty French Prisoners were Saved.
At Sancy-les-Provins, on the 6th of September, towards 9
o'clock at night, about 80 persons were arbitrarily arrested and
shut up in a sheep-pen. The next day, on the order of an
officer, about 30 prisoners were taken at 5 kilometres from the
village to the grange of Pierrelez, where there was a German
Red Cross Ambulance. There a surgeon-major, having ad-
dressed a few words to the wounded, they immediately loaded
four rifles and two revolvers with the obvious intention of
shooting the French prisoners. A French hussar, who was
wounded in the arm, being a prisoner, said to the priest, after
asking for absolution, “I’m going to be shot; then it will bo
your turn.” The priest, unbuttoning his robe, placed hnnsell
between the major and another fellow-citizen against the wall,
along which were aligned the hostages; but at this moment
there arrived two mounted chasseurs of the Irench army, and
the doctors with the personnel of their ambulance gave them-
selves up to these cavalrymen, alongside of whom the wounded
hussar ranged himself. „
To show the responsibility of the high commanding officer,
it is interesting to mention in connection with this affair that
the schoolmaster of Sancy, when he was being taken with the
others, had obtained from General Dutag, who was lodging
with him, the favour of being left in liberty.
Assassination of a Conscript.
On the 6th of September, after having set fire to a portion
of the houses of Courtacon, a troop which was believed to be-
long to the Imperial Guard, took five men and a child of 13 in
the middle of the fields, and during the whole engagement ex-
posed them to the fire of the French. In the territory of the
same commune a conscript of the 1914 class. Edmond Rous-
seau, who had been arrested under the plea that his age made
him subject to be shortly called to the French flag, was assas-
sinated under tragic conditions.
Interrogated on the situation of this young man from a
military point of view, the mayor, who was among the hos-
tages, stated that he had passed the medical examination and
had been recognised fit for the service; but his class had not


yet been called. The Germans then stripped the prisoner, so
as to satisfy themselves on his physical condition. They then
made him put on his trousers, and shot him within 50 metres of
his compatriots.
Mayor and Public Prosecutor Arrested Without Excuse.
The town of Coulommiers was thoroughly pillaged. Silver-
ware and clothing were taken, principally from abandoned
houses, and numerous bicycles were loaded on motor lorries.
The occupation lasted from the sth to the 7th September. On
the eve of their departure the Germans arrested, without any
excuse, the mayor and the public prosecutor, whom an officer
grossly insulted. The two magistrates were kept until next
morning with the town clerk. During the night the guards of
the prosecutor endeavoured to convince him by conversation
among themselves that his execution was imminent.
Violation of a Woman in the Presence of Her Husband.
The public opinion of Coulommiers is that several female
inhabitants were criminally assaulted; but one single attempt
of this nature is positively proved, a housekeeper being the
victim: A soldier having gone to her home on the 6th Septem-
ber, at half-past 9 p.m., sent away the husband by asking him
to fetch one of his comrades out of the street; then, in the pre-
sence of her two little children, the fiend attempted to rape the
young woman. Hearing her cries, the husband precipitately
returned; but, with the butt of a rifle, he was driven into a
contiguous room, of which the door remained open; and, under
the eyes of her terrorised husband, the wife was violated. The
exasperated husband could only calm the terror of his children.
Two Women Violated While their Husbands were at the Front.
Madame X, at Sancy-les-Provins, and Madame Z, at Beton-
Bazoches, were both victims of similar acts of violation. The
first mentioned, with a revolver at her throat, had to submit
to the brutal lust of a soldier. The second woman, after she
had offered great resistance, was thrown and outraged in the
presence of her daughter, aged three years. The husbands of
these women have been mobilised since the beginning of the
war.
Wholesale Massacres.
On the 6th of September, at Guerard, two workmen named
Maitrier and Didelot were killed at the advanced posts; the
enemy took six hostages, of which one alone escaped, and re-
turned to his town.
At Mauperthuis, on the same date, four Germans, who had
arrived at the home of M. Roger in the morning, presented
themselves again at 2 p.m. Said one of the Germans to Roger:
“There were three of you this morning; there are only two
now—get out. “ Roger and a Belgian refugee named Denet, to
whom Roger bad given hospitality, were seized and taken away.
The next day at the extremity of the village Madame Roger
found the body of her husband with two bullet wounds. Denet
had also been assassinated, his body having been discovered


some time afterwards in such a state of decomposition that it
was impossible to ascertain his wounds.
In the same commune the caretaker of the farm of Champ-
brisset, M. Fournier, was assisted by a Swiss named Knell. The
Germans took them on a lorry to Vaudoy, and there massacred
them. An inhabitant of Voinsles, named Cartier, suffered the
same fate. Passing on a bicycle on the road a little distance
from Vaudoy, he was stopped by the Germans, who felt in his
pocket in which was a revolver. Cartier, without resistance,
gave up his revolver. lie was blindfolded and shot on the spot.
On the Bth of September at Sablonnieres, where pillaging
was general, M. Delaitre, having left his house during the battle
to hide himself, was discovered by a German soldier, who fired
five shots at him; he succumbed the same day.
A Humane German Officer.
In the same place M. Jules Griffaut, aged 66. was peace-
fully minding his cows when an enemy detachment passed at
150 metres from him. A soldier, who was in the rear, aimed at
him and shot him in the face. It is only fair to add that a Ger-
man officer ordered Griffaut to be attended to by his own sur-
geon, and that he is rapidly recovering.
Pillage, Incendiarism, and Acts of Violence.
At Rebais, on the 4th September, at 11 p.m., the Germans,
after having first looted the jewellery shop of M. Pantereau,
set fire to the place; they also set fire to three houses in the Rue
de FEtang by throwing burning straw into them.
In this little town grave acts of violence were committed.
M. Auguste Griffaut, aged 79, was brutally maltreated and shot
at. His watch and purse containing 800 francs (about £80)
were stolen.
On the same day German soldiers maltreated Madame X.,
the keeper of a wine bar. Under the pretext that she was con-
cealing English soldiers, they stripped her and kept her among
them in that condition for an hour and a half. They then tied
her to the counter, saying that they were going to shoot her,
and having been called out they retired, leaving their victim in
charge of an Alsatian soldier, who loosened her bonds, and she
escaped.
A Storekeeper Shockingly Maltreated.
On the 4th September other soldiers attempted to violate
Madame Z. after having looted her grocery store. Arrested at
her residence, they tried to hang her, but she was enabled to
cut the rope with a knife, which she had in her pocket. She
was then beaten unmercifully until the arrival of an officer,
whom a witness of the scene had called.
A Woman Violated by a Uhlan.
At Saint-Denis-les-Rebais, on the 7th September, a Uhlan
compelled Madame X. to undress by threatening her with his
rifle; then he threw her on a mattress and violated her. The
mother-in-law of the victim, whilst being unable to interfere,
endeavoured to hide this brutal act from her grandson, aged 8.


Girl Arrested While Attending Sick Mother and Violated by
Two Soldiers.
On the same day at the hamlet of Marais, in the commune
of Jouy-sur-Morin, the three daughters of M. X., aged 18, 15,
and 13, were attending their sick mother. Two German soldiers
arrived, arrested the eldest girl, took her to an adjoining room,
and successively violated her. Whilst one of the ruffians was
satiating his lust, the other guarded the door, and with his
gun kept at bay the maddened mother.
An Orgie of Blood and Violence.
The Chateau of X., situated at Ferte-Gaucher, was the scene
of awful deeds. There lived in the chateau an aged man of
independent means with his servant, Mdlle. Y., aged 54. On the
sth September several Germans, among whom was a non-com-
missioned officer, occupied that property. After being served
with food, the non-commissioned officer proposed to a refugee,
Madame Z., to sleep with him. She refused the invitation; and
M. X., to save her honour, sent her to his farm close at hand.
The German ran after her, brought her back to the chateau,
and took her to the garret, where, having stripped her, he
endeavoured to violate her. At that moment M. X.. in his desire
to protect her, fired a revolver up the staircase. He was imme-
diately shot dead. The non-commissioned officer then forced
Madame Z. to leave the garret and to step over the body of the
aged man; he then took her into a recess, where he made two
more attempts to violate her, abandoning her finally to throw
himself on to the servant, Mdlle. Y. The ruffian then handed
the refugee into the hands of two soldiers, who, after violating
her in turns in the house of death, forced her to pass the night
between them in the barn, where one of them twice criminal-
ly assaulted her.
With regard to Mdlle. Y., she was compelled by the muzzle
of a rifle to strip completely naked, and was raped by the non-
commissioned officer, who kept her with him all night.
Murder of Two British Wounded Cavalrymen.
Finally, we note, after a declaration of a municipal coun-
cillor of Rebais, two English cavalrymen were surprised
wounded in this commune, and were shot by the Germans
whilst both were dismounted, one of them holding up his arm
to show that he was unarmed.
MARNE.
Looting and Incendiarism.
In the department of the Marne, as elsewhere, the German
troops gave themselves np to a general loot, always effected
in identical conditions, with the complicity of their officers.
From this point of view, the communes of Heiltz-le-Maurnpt,
Suippes, Marfaux, Fromentieres, and d’Esternay suffered par-
ticularly. Everything that the invaders lifted from houses was
placed on motor lorries and carts. At Suippes, notably, they
took away in that manner a quantity of diverse objects, among
others being sewing machines and toys.


Whole Villages and Boroughs Wiped Out.
A large number of villages and important boroughs were
set fire to without the slightest motives. Without doubt, these
crimes were committed by special command, detachments
entering the communes with their torches, grenades, and other
incendiary utensils.
At Lepine, a cultivator named Caque, who lodged two
cyclists, asked them whether the grenades with which they
were furnished were meant for his home. “No,’’ said they,
“Lepine is done with.” At that moment nine houses of the vil-
lage were consumed by fire.
At Marfaux 19 tenements were burnt.
At Gault-la-Foret, seven or eight houses were de-
stroyed by fire. The commune of Glannes is virtually wiped
out. At Somme-Tourbe all the village was burnt, with the
exception of the town haL, the church, and two private houses.
At Auve, nearly the whole borough was wiped out by fire.
At Etrepay, 68 householders out of 70 are without shelter. At
Hiuron, all the houses with the exception of five have been
burnt. At Sermaize-les-Bains there only remained 40 houses
out of 900. At Bignicourt-sur-Saulx, 80 houses out of 88 are in
ruins.
In the large borough of Suippes, of which the greater part
has been burnt, soldiers carrying straw and cans of petrol
were seen passing. Whilst the house of the mayor was burning,
six sentries, with fixed bayonets, had strict orders to forbid
access to the buildings and to oppose all help to extinguish the
flames.
Low Cunning Displayed by Barbarian Incendiarists.
All those fires, which only represent a small part of the
same nature of which the Marne has been the theatre, have
been lighted without being able to impute to the inhabitants
of these localities —now more or less completely destroyed—the
slightest thought of rebellion or the least act of resistance. In
various villages the Germans, before setting fire to them, got
one or two soldiers to fire a shot in order to have the pretext
that the civilian population had attacked them, an excuse of the
most absurd kind, as there only remained anywhere on the
arrival of the enemy old people, invalids, or those absolutely
deprived of any means of aggression.
Hostages Compelled to Mount Guard Over Bridges.
Numerous assaults against persons have also been com-
mitted. In most of the communes hostages were taken away,
many of whom never returned. At Sermaize-les-Bains, where
the Germans took 150 hostages, some of them were rigged out
in helmets and great coats, and forced, thus attired, to mount
guard over the bridges.
Brutality to and Massacre of Hostages.
At Bignicourt-sur-Saulx, 80 men and 45 women and chil-
dren were forced to follow an enemy detachment. One of the
men named Emile Pierre never returned, and no news has been


received of his whereabouts. At Gorfelix M. Jacquet, taken
away on the 7th September, with 11 of his co-citizens, was
found 500 metres from his village, dead, shot in the head.
Disappearance of Priest and Other Hostages.
At Champuis the priest, his servant, and four other in-
habitants, taken the same day as the hostages of Gorfelix, had
not returned at the moment the commission left.
Miscellaneous Murders.
At the same place an old man of 70 named Jacquemin was
tied on his bed by an officer and left in that condition for three
days; he died shortly afterwards.
At Vert-la-Gravelle, a farm servant was killed by blows
of a bottle on his head, his breast having been pierced with a
lance.
The rural guard, Brulefer, of Gault-la-Foret, was assas-
sinated at Maclaunay, where he was taken by the Germans; his
head was smashed in and his chest was pierced.
At Champguyon, a commune which had been fired, a man
named Verdier was killed in the house of his father-in-law.
The latter did not assist at the execution; but he heard a gun-
shot, and the officer said to him, “Son shot; he is under the
ruins.” Although searched for, the body was never found, and
must have been consumed by fire.
At Sermaize, a road maintenance man named Brocard was
one of a number of hostages. When ho was arrested with his
son, his wife and his who were maddened,
threw themselves into the river Saulx. The old man, being
able to disengage himself, ran in full haste towards them and
attempted to save them; but the Germans, without pity,
dragged him away, leaving the tw r o women struggling in the
river; when he was given his liberty, at the end of four days,
Brocard and his son found the bodies of both women shot in
the head.
Slaughter of Old Man and Child.
At Montrairail, a scene of absolute savagery, was enacted.
On the sth of September, a German non-commissioned
officer, nearly naked, attacked the widow Naude (in whose
house he was billeted) in her room. The father of the woman,
hearing her cries, ran to her assistance. Immediately 15 or 20
Germans broke in the door of the house, threw the old man into
the street, and shot him down. At that instant the little Juliette
Naude, having opened a window, was struck in the stomach by
a bullet, which transfixed her. The poor child succumbed after
24 hours of terrible agony.
Martyrdom of Innocent Man.
On the 6th September, at Ghampguyon, Madame Louvet
witnessed the martyrdom of her husband. Seeing him in the
hands of 10 or 15 soldiers, who were belabouring him with
sticks in front of his house, she rushed up and kissed him
through the iron grille of the entrance. Being brutally repulsed
she fell to the ground. Whilst his executioners dragged the


unhappy man along, covered with blood, he implored them
to spare ins life, protesting that lie had done nothing to deserve
such foul treatment; but his appeals were of no avail, and he
was finished off at the extremity of the village. The widow
found the body of her late husband horribly disfigured. His
head was battered in, an eye was hanging out of its socket, and
a wrist was broken.
Forty Ruffians Attack One Man and Massacre Him.
At Esternay, on the 6th September, a few minutes to 3
p.m., 35 or 40 Germans were seen dragging M. Laurenceau
along the street. He made a brusque movement to free himself
when he was immediately massacred with rifle shots.
Soldiers Attack Women and Murder a Girl.
In the same town the following facts were revealed to the
Commission: —
During the night of Sunday, 6th September, some soldiers
who were searching a house for loot, discovered the widow
Bouche, her two daughters, and Mdmes. Lhomme and Mace,
who had hidden under the staircase near the cellar. The sol-
diers ordered the two young girls to disrobe and when their
mother tried to intervene, one of the German fiends, taking aim,
fired in the direction of the group. The shot, after having hit
the left shoulder of Mdme. Lhomme, smashed the right arm of
Mdlle, Bouche. On the next day the unfortunate girl suc-
cumbed to the wound, which, according to the declarations of
witnesses, was of a horrible nature.
Acts of Bestiality and Lust.
The Commission’s enquiries disclosed numerous other at-
tempts by German soldiers in the department of the Marne to
criminally assault women.
On the 3rd September, at Suippes, Mdme. X., aged 72, was
arrested by a German soldier, who, putting his revolver under
her chin, threw her on a bed with the utmost brutality. The
arrival of her son-in-law happily delivered her from the lust
of this monster.
At the same place and on the same date a girl, 11 years of
age, was for three hours a martyr to the bestial lust of a soldier.
He found the child attending her sick grandmother, took her
to an abandoned house, and stuffed a handkerchief in her
mouth to stifle her cries while he committed his foul deeds.
On the 7th September, at Vitry-en-Perthois, Mdme. X., aged
45, and Mdme. Z., aged 89, were violated. The latter died a
fortnight afterwards.
At Jussecourt-Minecourt, on the Bth September, towards
9 p.m., Mdlle. X., aged 21, was violated by four soldiers, who
had forced the door of her house.
Bombardment of Reims.
The bombardment of an open town constituting, without
doubt, a violation of the rights of humanity, the Commission
considered it advisable to visit Reims, which, for 24 hours, had
been subjected to bombardment by the Germans. After having


taken the mayor’s deposition, from which it was disclosed that
about dOO of the civil population had been already killed, we
established the fact that in several quarters of the town
numerous edifices had been destroyed, and we were able to
make ourselves acquainted with the enormous and irreparable
damages that had been inflicted upon the Cathedral. Since the
7th October, the date of our departure, the bombardment has
continued. Therefore, the number of victims has been much
more considerable. Everyone knows how the unhappy town
has suffered from combined assaults, and also how the attitude
of its municipality deserves the highest encomiums.
During our investigations at the town hall, six shells had
been fired in its direction. The fifth fell a short distance from
the principal face of the edifice, and the sixth burst at 15 to
20 metres from the offices.
Pillaging of the Chateau de Baye.
On the next day we went to the Chateau de Baye, where
we found in that building traces of pillage. On the first floor,
a door, giving access to a room contiguous to the gallery, where
the proprietor had collected valuable articles of art, had been
smashed. Four glass show-cases had been smashed, and another
forced open. From the statement of the caretaker, who, in the
absence of his mistress, did not exactly know the extent of the
damage; it appears that the principal objects stolen were gold
medals and Russian jewellery. The Commission noticed on
small tablets covered with black velvet indentations where the
medals and jewels had been placed.
The bedroom of the Baron de Baye was in the greatest dis-
order. Numerous objects were scattered over the floor, and
the chests of drawers were open. A flat desk had been frac-
tured, and a Louis XVI chest of drawers and a writing-desk
of the same period had been robbed. This room had been
occupied by a personage of the highest military rank, for the
door bore the inscription in chalk: “J. K. Hoheit.” No one
could reveal to us the exact identity of that “highness.” How-
ever, the general who was billeted on M. Houllier, municipal
councillor, told his host that the chateau had sheltered the
Duke of Brunswick and the staff of the 10th Corps.
Another Chateau Looted and Left in Disorder and Filth.
On the same day the Commission visited the Chateau of
Beaumont, situated in proximity to Montmirail, and belonging
to the Count of Rochefoucauld-Doudeauville. According to the
declarations of the wife of the keeper, this chateau was looted
by the Germans during the absence of its owners. The occupa-
tion lasted from the 4th to the 6th September. The invaders
left it in great disorder and in a state of indescribable filth.
The sofas, writing desks, and bureaux were burst open, and
the jewellery caskets abstracted and emptied.
On the doors of the rooms the Commission were enabled to
read inscriptions in chalk, among which were the names
“Excellenz,” “Major von Ledebur,” “Graf Waldersee.”


MEUSE.
Ravaged by Fires, Intentionally Lit, Without Provocation.
In the Department of the Meuse, which the German armies
still occupy, a large section has been cruelly tried. Important
communes have been ravaged by fires, intentionally lit, irre-
spective of military exigencies, and without any provocation
by the civilian population, which had been so frequently
alleged prior to the perpetration of similar atrocities. Such is
the case notably at Revigny, Sommeilles, Triaucourt, Bulain-
ville, Clermont-en-Argonne, and Villers-aux-Vents.
The Sacking of Revigny.
After having completely looted the houses of Revigny and
having loaded their booty on carts, the Germans set fire to two-
thirds of the town, which burnt for three consecutive days,
from the 6th to the 9th September. The fires were started by
sprinkling with petrol the walls by means of hand pumps and
throwing in the fires tablets of compressed powder. The Com-
mission were handed specimens of these tablets and sachets, as
well as sticks of an inflammable and fusing character, aban-
doned on the spot by the incendiaries.
The church, which was classed among the historical monu-
ments of France, and the Town Hall which contained archives,
were destroyed.
Several inhabitants, among which were a number of chil-
dren, were taken away as hostages. They were, however, lib-
erated with the exception of M. Wladimir Thomas.
Sommeilles a Mass of Wreckage.
Few localities in the Meuse have suffered so much as the
commune of Sommeilles. It was nothing less than a mass of
wreckage, having been completely fired on the 6th September
by a regiment of German infantry, which was numbered 51.
The fire was set going with the aid of utensils resembling
bicycle pumps, with which many of the soldiers were equipped.
Fearful Acts of Carnage and Violence.
This unhappy village was the theatre of an atrocious
drama at the beginning of the fire. Madame X., whose husband
was at the front, had taken refuge in the cellar of the family
Adnot, the latter with their four children, aged 11, 5,4, and
1£ years, and several days afterwards the bodies of all those
unfortunates were discovered in a pool of blood. M. Adnot had
been shot; Mdme. X. had her right breast and right arm cut
off; the girl of 11 years had a foot cut off; and the boy of five
had his throat cut. Mdme. X. and the girl of 11 appeared to
have been violated.
Only One Building Left in a Village
At Villers-aux-Vents, on the Bth September, German offi-
cers advised the inhabitants who had not fled to quit their
homes, warning them that the village was about to be burnt
because, they alleged, three French soldiers had dressed
as civilians. Other soldiers gave as a pretext that a house had


been fitted with a wireless plant. The threat was so rigorously
executed that only one building was left standing.
At Vaubeconrt, where six houses were set fire to by the
Wurternburgers, the fire had been started in a granary with
straw heaped up by the soldiers.
The Huns Give Themselves Up to Terrible Excesses.
At Triaucourt, the Germans gave themselves up to the
very worst of excesses. Irritated, no doubt, by the remarks
which an officer had made to a soldier —against whom a girl of
19, Mdlle. Helene Proces, had lodged complaint of indecent at-
tempts—they set fire to the village and organised the massacre
of the inhabitants. They commenced by setting fire to the
house of the peaceful proprietor, M. Jules Gaud, and they shot
this unfortunate at the moment when he was escaping from
the flames. Then the soldiers spread themselves out in all
directions, firing off their rifles indiscriminately. A young man
named Georges Lecourtier, aged 17, who endeavoured to escape,
was massacred; and M. Alfred Lallemand met the same
fate, he having been pursued into the kitchen of his fellow-
citizen, Tautelier; the latter received three bullets in one of
his hands.
The Massacre of Three Women.
Fearing not without reason for the safety of their lives,
Mdlle. Proces, her mother, her grandmother (aged 71), her
aunt (aged 81), and Mdlle. Laure Mennehand, attempted to
cross on a ladder the trellis work which separated their
garden from an adjoining property. Only the young girl man-
aged to reach the other side, and she escaped death, or a worse
fate, by hiding among cabbages. As to the three women, they
were massacred by gunshots. The priest of the village, after
collecting from the ground the brains of Mdlle. Mennehand
where they had been spilt, carried the bodies into the house of
the Proces. During the night that followed the Germans played
the piano in the next room to that which contained the corpses.
Tragedies Through Fires.
Whilst the carnage was continuing the fires spread rapidly
and destroyed 35 Rouses. A man named Jean Lecourtier, aged
71, and a child two months old, were burnt to death. M. Igier,
who was endeavouring to save his cattle, was pursued by sol-
diers for 300 metres, and fired on incessantly. This man, by a
miracle, was not wounded, but five shots perforated his under-
clothing. When the priest Viller indignantly protested to the
Duke of Wurtemberg (who lodged in the same village) against
the evil treatment meted out to his parishioners, the Duke
answered: “What will you? Like you, we have bad soldiers.”
Brutal Treatment Causes Death of Aged Woman.
In the same commune three German ruffians made an at-
tempt to violate Mdrne. 1)., aged 47 years, but failed owing to
the heroic resistance of the intended victim. Finally, Mdrne.
Maupoix, aged 75, was so brutally kicked that she died a few
days afterwards. Whilst some of the brutes were treating her
so inhumanly, others were looting her room.


Looting’ and Firing by Wurtembergers.
The little town of Clermont-en-Argonne, on the flank of a
picturesque valley, received every year numerous tourists, * On
the 4th September, during the night, the 121st and 122nd regi-
ments of Wurtembergers heralded their appearance by smash-
ing in the doors of the housespand gave themselves up to a
frantic loot, which continued all next day. Towards noon a
soldier started a fire in the habitation of a clock-maker by
intentionally upsetting a spirit lamp with which he was pre-
paring coffee; An inhabitant, M. Monternach, ran at once for
Hie municipal fire pump, and asked an officer to furnish him
with men to set it in action. Brutally received and threatened
with a revolver, he renewed his application to several officers,
without any more success. During that time the Germans con-
tinued to fire the town by using sticks at the end of which
torches had been fixed. Whilst the houses were flaming the
soldiers invaded the church, which is isolated on a height, and
danced to a tune played on the organ. Then, before retiring
from the edifice, they set fire to it by means of grenades and
receptacles fitted with wicks and an inflammable liquid.
The Mayor of Vauquois Burnt to Death.
After the fire at Clermont, two bodies—those of the
Mayor of Vauquois, M. Poinsignon, and that of a boy, 11
years of age (who had been shot point blank)—were found
completely carbonised.
Theft of Medical Stores by Surgeon-Major.
When the fire was extinguished, pillaging was resorted to
in the buildings which the flames had spared. Furniture was
taken from M. Desforges and clothing from the shop of M.
Nordmann, which were packed on automobiles. A surgeon-
major purloined from the hospital all medical stores, and a
superior officer, after having inscribed on the door of Lebondi-
dier’s house a notice forbidding looting, took away the greater
portion of the furniture of that habitation, remarking cynically
that he required them to ornament his own villa.
During that time the village of Clermont-en-Argonne was
occupied by the 13th corps of Wurtembergers, under the com-
mand of General von Durach and by a troop of Uhlans, com-
manded by the Prince of Wittenstein.
Two Men Murdered in Cold Blood.
On the 7th September ten German cavalrymen entered the
farm of Lamermont in the commune of Lisle-en-Barrois, and
after having been served with milk left apparently satisfied,
After their departure, gun fire was heard, and immediately a
second troop of about 30 men arrived and accused the farm
inhabitants of having shot a German soldier. The farmer Ellv
and one of his hosts, M. Javelot, were arrested and taken away;
and, despite their protests of innocence, were murdered in cold
blood.
Brutality and Concupiscence Hold Sway,
At Louppy-le-Chateau, the Germans gave themselves up


to revolting acts of immorality and brutality. During the night
of the Bth of September, several women had taken refuge in a
cellar to escape bombardment, and all these unfortunates were
barbarously illtreated, Mdlle. X., aged 71. Mine. 5 ~ aged 44, the
latter’s daughters, 13 and 8 years of age; and Mme. Z.
were all ruthlessly violated.
Nine Hostages Disappear.
In many of the communes hostages were taken away. Thus
at Laimont eight persons were compelled to follow German
troops at the beginning of September. On the 27th October
none had re-appeared. The priest of Nubecourt, taken away
on the sth of September, has not returned to his parish.
Misunderstanding of an Order Leads to Death.
At Saint-Andre amongst the persons was M. Havette. He
obtained permission from an officer to watch over the body of
his wife, killed by a fragment of shell on the previous day.
In the evening an order was given to all the inhabitants to
assemble in a granary. Havette, thinking he was not under
any obligation to attend through the permission hp had re
ceived, remained in his house until 11 o’clock that night; then,
upon going outside of his door, he was immediately shot dead.
Other villages besides those we have mentioned were
burnt, notably Yassincourt, Brabant-le-Roi, which were more or
less completely consumed by fire'. Up to this date (October 27)
the /Commission has been unable to obtain full particulars of
their destruction. Their inquiry will be ultimately pursued.
Cruelties Inflicted upon French Military Wounded and
Prisoners.
It has been finally brought to our knowledge that in the
department of the Meuse the enemy has committed acts of
cruelty with regard to French military wounded and on pris-
oners.' We will set forth these facts at the end of the present
report.
MEURTHE-ET-MOSELLE.
We arrived on the 26th October in the department of
Meurthe-et-Moselle, and we have visited a large number of
communes of Nancy and Luneville.
Nancy Bombarded Without Warning.
Nancy, an open town in which the German army had been
unable to penetrate, was bombarded without preliminary
warning. During the night of the 9th September, about 60
shells fell in the central quarter and in the cemetery of the
south—-that is to say in the spots where no military establish-
ments exist. Three women, a young girl, and a little girl
were killed, thirteen other persons were wounded, and material
damages were caused.
Enemy Airships Drop Bombs on Nancy.
Enemy airships flew over the town twice. On the 4th
September one of them dropped two bombs on the cathedral
place. One of the missiles killed a man, a little girl, and six


other persons. On the 13th October three bombs were dropped
on the goods sheds, and four railway servants were wounded.
Towers of Hospital Flying Red Cross Flags Fire-shelled.
When we arrived at Pont-a-Mousson, on the morning of tin*
10th November, seven shells had been launched by the German
batteries a few hours previously. On the eve of the 11th of
August (the 24th day of bombardment) a young girl of 19
and a child of four were killed in their beds by projectiles. On
the 14th August the Germans specially selected the hospital
on the towers of which were the flags of the Red Cross, visible
from a great distance. That edifice received no less than 70
shells. We have inspected the damage* done.
Bombardments Without Warning.
About 80 houses were damaged in various bombardments,
which all took place without any warning. Fourteen civilians,
principally women and children, were killed; and about the
same number were wounded. Pone-a-Moussqn is not fortified;
only the bridge over the Moselle was put in a state of defence
at the beginning of hostilities by the 26th battalion of Chas-
seurs, who then garrisoned the town.
Nomeny in Ruins.
We were horror-stricken when we beheld the lamentable
ruins of Nomeny. With the exception of a very few houses,
which still exist near the railway station, in a position sep-
arated by the Seille from the principal agglomeration, there
only remain in that little town a succession of broken-down
and blackened walls, amidst a miss of ruins; and in each of
these one discerns here and there the bones of animals, par-
tially burnt, and carbonised human bones. The rage of a mad,
relentless, unchained soldiery is everywhere in evidence.
Youth Shot Without Motive.
Nomeny, through its proximity to the frontier, had from
the beginning of the war received from time to time visits
from German cavalry. Skirmishes had taken place in the sub-
urbs; and on the 14th August, in the yard of the farm de la
Horde, situated in proximity, an enemy soldier had, without
motive, shot a young servant named Nicolas Michel, aged 17.
On the 20th of August, whilst the inhabitants sought a
refuge in a cellar from the bombardment, the Germans, after
having, through a “mutual mistake,” shot at one another,
entered the town about noon.
Germans Inflamed with Stories of French Tortures.
From what one of the soldiers has narrated, their chief
had informed them that the French tortured the German
wounded by gouging out their eyes and cutting off their limbs.
They Avere therefore inflamed Avith an intolerable revenge.
Until the evening of the next day, these beasts in human form
gave themselves up to the most abominable excesses, commit-
ting acts of pillage, murder, and incendiarism. After having
purloined from the houses everything of value, and forwarded
the goods to Metz, they set fire to the houses with torches, com


pressed tablet powders, and also petrol, which they had trans-
ported on vessels placed on small trollies. On all sides fire-
arms were discharged.
Slaughtered Like Sheep.
The unhappy inhabitants, who were hiding in cellars for
fear of the fires, were slaughtered like sheep-—some in their
dwellings and others on the public roads.
M.M. Sanson, Pierson, Lalleraand, Adam Jaupirre, Meu-
nier, Schneider, Raymond, Duponcel, and Hazotte (father and
son) were assassinated in the street. M. Killian, seeing himself
threatened with a sword, placed his hand on his neck to pro-
tect himself. Immediately three fingers were cut off and his
throat was cut. M. Petitjean, aged 86, while sitting in his arm
chair, was struck with a bullet, which smashed his skull; and a
German brought Mme. Bertrand in front of the corpse, remark-
ing; “You have seen that pig!” M. Chardin, municipal coun-
cillor, acting mayor, was requisitioned to find a horse and cart;
and hardly had he promised to do all that was possible, when
he was shot dead. M. Prevet, who saw the Bavarians swarm-
ing in the pharmacy of which he was the guardian, told them
he was the chemist and would give them all they wanted.
Notwithstanding this, three shots were fired at him, and he
fell dead. Two women who were with the chemist, ran away,
but they were pursued and struck with rifle butts until they
reached the railway station. On the way thither they saw
numerous heaps of dead bodies.
Between 3 and 4 o’clock in the afternoon the Germans
entered the butcher’s shop of Mme. Francois. She emerged
from the cellar with her son, a youth named Stub, and an
employee named Cental. Stub fell wounded from a riflp shot;
and Cental, who ran down the street, was immediately assas-
sinated. Five minutes later, as Stub was still alive in a mori-
bund condition, a soldier stooped over him and finished him
with a blow from an axe in the back.
Terrible Massacres in a Suburb of Nancy.
The most tragic instance in these horrible scenes took place
at the house of M. Masse, who had collected in his cellar in a
suburb of Nancy a certain number of people. Towards 4
o’clock in the afternoon about 50 soldiers invaded the house
by smashing in the door and windows, which they set on fire.
The refugees endeavoured to escape, but they were slaughtered
one after the other at the exit of the cellar. M. Mentre was the
first assassinated; his son Leon fell next with a sister of eight
years in his arms. As the young man was not killed outright,
the executioners placed the muzzle of a rifle to his head and
blew out his brains. Then it was the turn of the Kieffer family.
The mother was wounded in the arm and shoulder; the father,
his son aged 10, and a daughter three years of age, were shot.
The murderers continued to fire on them whilst they were
prostrate on the ground. Kieffer, while in the agonies of
death, received another bullet in the forehead; and his son had


his skull blown off by another shot. Then M. Strieffert and one
of the sous of Vasse were massacred, whilst Mme, Mentre re-
ceived three bullets, one in the left leg, one in the left arm,
and one in the forehead, which, however, only grazed. M.
Guillaume, dragged to the street, there met his death. The girl
Simonin, aged 17, left the cellar with her sister Jeanne, aged
three. The latter had an elbow taken off by a shot. The elder
girl threw herself on the ground and feigned death, remaining
in awful anguish for live minutes. A ruffianly soldier-gave her
a kick, exclaiming, “Capout!”
An officer, arriving at the end of this butchery, ordered
all the women who were still alive to get up and go to France.
Whilst so many people were being massacred, others
(using the expression of a witness) “were taken away like a
herd of cattle to the fields,” under the threat of immediate
execution. The priest, notably, has to thank extraordinary cir-
cumstances for not being massacred.
Bavarian Barbarians are Aggressors.
From all the depositions that we have- received, all these
abominations were committed by the 2nd and 4th Regiments of
Bavarian infantry. In order to explain them away, the officers
made the excuse that civilians had shot at their troops, but, as
the Commission’s inquiry has indisputably proved, this pretext
is an abominable lie, for, on the arrival of the enemy, all the
arms had been deposited at the town hall, and that portion of
the population which had not left the district were hidden in
their cellars —the prey to the greatest terror. Howsoever, the
excuse, were it true, would not assuredly suffice as the reason
for the destruction of a whole city, the slaughter of women,
and the massacre of children.
The Martyrdom of Nomeny.
A list of the people who met their deaths during the course
of the fires and the fusillades has been compiled by M. Bievelot,
an alderman of the municipality, and comprises no less than 50
names. The Commission has not mentioned them all, and for
these reasons: Among the people whose deaths' have been con-
firmed, some died under conditions in which it is impossible
to glean the precise facts; on the other hand, the dispersal of
the inhabitants of the town which is to-day wiped out has
rendered our investigation somewhat difficult. The Commis-
sion’s inquiry will be continued, in any case what we have been
able to establish in an incontestable manner suffices to convey
an idea of what happened on the 20th of August—the martyr-
dom of Nomeny.
Looting at Luneville.
Luneville was occupied by the Germans from the 21st
August to the 11th September. During the first days they con-
tented themselves with pillaging, without otherwise molesting
the inhabitants. It is thus notable that on the 24th August the
house of Mme. Jeaumont was looted of all effects. The stolen
goods were loaded on a big waggon in which were three


women, one dressed in black and the two others in military
uniforms; and we were told that they appeared to he cantin-
ieres.
Sudden Onslaught Based on False Accusation.
On the 25th August the attitude of the invaders changed
suddenly. The mayor, M. Keller, visited the hospital towards
3.30 p.m., saw some soldiers firing in the direction of an adjoin-
ing house, and heard the sound of bullets, which appeared to
come from the rear. The Germans declared to him that the
inhabitants had fired on them. After protesting, he offered to
go round the town with them to prove the inanity of such an
allegation. His proposal was accepted; and as at the start of
the round they found in the street the body of M. Crombez, the
officer commanding the escort said to M. Keller; “You see
that body? It is that of a civilian whom another civilian has
shot in firing at us from a house adjoining the synagogue.
Therefore, as our law orders us, we have 1 burnt the house and
executed the inhabitants.” The officer referred to tin* murder
of a man whose timid character was known by all —the Israelite
Rabbi Weill, who had just been shot in his home with his
daughter, aged 16. The same officer added: “We have also
burnt the house at the angle of the Rue Castara and of Rue
Girardet, because civilians have fired from there.” It is from
there that the Germans allege that shots were fired on the
yard of the hospital; but the situation of the locality does not
admit of the possibility of such affirmation.
A Two Days’ Massacre.
Whilst the mayor and the troop which accompanied him
pursued their investigations, fires broke out in several parts of
the town. The Town Hall and Synagogue and several houses
of the Rue Castara, and the Faubourg d’Einville were in flames.
At the same time commenced the massacres which were to
last until next day. Without counting M. Crombez, the Rabbi
Weill and his daughter (whose deaths have already been men-
tioned) the victims were: M.M. Hamman-, Binder, Balastre
(father and son), Vernier, Dujon, Kahn and his mother, Steiner
and his wife. Wingerstmann and his grandson, finally M.M. Sib-
ille, Monteils, and Colin.
Robberies and Murders at Worms.
The murders were committed under the following circum-
stances: On the 25th August after having fired twice in the
interior of a tannery at Worms, in order to make believe that
they were attacked, the Germans invaded the workshop of that
factory in which were working a man named M. Goeury in
company of M.M. Balastre (father and son). Goeury was
dragged into the street and there robbed and brutally mur-
dered, whilst his two companions, found hiding in a lavatory
where they had sought refuge, were killed by gunfire.
Aged Woman Bayonetted, and Other Murders.
The same day some soldiers called to M. Steiner, who was
hiding in his cellar. His wife, fearing danger, endeavoured to


hold him back. As she was pressing him in her arms, she re-
ceived a bullet wound in her neck. A few moments later, hav-
ing obeyed the injunction given to him, he fell in his garden
mortally wounded. M. Kahn was also assassinated in the
garden of his house. The mother, aged 98, who was incin-
erated in the fire, had previously been killed in her bed by a
bayonet thrust. This statement was made by an interpreter
acting for the enemy. M. Binder, who was coming out to
escape the flames, was also slaughtered. The German, by whom
he was killed, acknowledged having shot him without motive;
also, that at the time of his death, the unfortunate individual
was quietly standing in front of a door. M. Vernier suffered
the same fate as Binder.
Horrible Death of a Boy.
About 3 o’clock the Germans, breaking the windows and
firing shots, invaded a house wherein were Mine. Dujon, her
daughter, aged 3 years, her two sons and M. Gaumier. The
little girl narrowly escaped death, as she had her face scratched
by gunfire. At that moment, Mine. Dujon, having seen her
youngest son Lucien, aged 14, stretched old on the ground,
invited him to rise and fly with her. She perceived then that he
was holding in his hands his entrails. The house was in flames
and the poor child was incinerated whilst M. Gaumier failed to
escape.
A Man and His Grandson Massacred.
M. Wingerstmann and his grandson, aged 12, who had
gone to dig potatoes at a short distance from Luneville, at
a spot called “les Mossus,” in the territory of Chanteheux,
had the misfortune to meet the Germans who placed them
against the wall and shot them dead.
Murders with Saw=edged Bayonets.
Finally, towards 5 p.m., soldiers had forced an entry in
the home of Mme. Sibille, in the same locality; and, without
any reason, took her son 200 metres from .the house and there
massacred him, as well as M. Vallon, to whom they had tied
him. A witness, who saw the murderers dragging their victims
to execution, observed that they returned without them and
that their bayonets (wdth saw edges at the backs) were bloody
and had pieces of flesh hanging to them.
Killed whilst attending a Wounded Enemy Officer.
On the same day a hospital attendant named Monteils, who
was attending a wounded enemy officer at the hospital of Lune-
ville, was shot dead in the forehead, whilst looking out of the
window at a German soldier firing his rifle.
Father Unmercifully Beaten and Son’s Brains Blown Out.
The next day (the 26th August), M. Hamman and his son,
aged 21, were seized in their home and dragged outside by a
band of Germans who had entered by smashing in the doors.
The father was beaten unmercifully; and as the son was strug-
gling, a non-commissioned officer blew his brains out with
a revolver.


Cruel Murder of an old Inoffensive Man.
At 1 p.m., M. Riklin, chemist, having been informed that
a man had fallen 50 metres from his pharmacy, went to the
spot indicated and recognised in his victim his brother-in-law,
M. Colin, aged 68, who had been hit by a ball in the stomach.
The Germans declared that the old man had fired at them; but
M. Riklin gave a point-blank denial to the allegation. Colin,
lie informed the Commission, was an inoffensive man, totally
incapable of doing an act of aggression and completely ignor-
ant of how to handle a firearm.
Aged Couple Maltreated and Robbed.
it appeared necessary to the Commission to relate acts of
less gravity at Luneville, but which throw a peculiar light on
the mentality of the invaders. On the 25th August, M. Lenoir,
aged 67, was, with his wife, taken into the fields, the man’s
hands being tied behind his back. After both had been cruelly
maltreated, a non-commissioned officer took the sum of 1800 fr.
(£75) in gold, which Lenoir carried on him. The most impu-
dent of robberies seems, as we have stated before, to be one of
the habits of the German army, who practise it publicly. Here
is an interesting example: —
Hospitality Returned with Treachery and Robbery.
During the burning of a house belonging to Mine. Leclerc,
the safes of two lodgers had resisted the flames. One safe,
belonging to M. George, sub-inspector of water and forest de-
partments, had fallen in the ruins; the other belonging to M.
Goudchau, land agent, had remained sealed in the wall at the
second story. The non-commissioned officer, Weiss, who knew
thoroughly the town —where he had been many times welcomed
when he visited it before the war for the purpose of his busi-
ness of hop merchant —went with a soldier to the spot, gave
an order to blow up with dynamite the side of the house still
standing, and saw to the transfer of the two safes to the rail-
way station, where they were put on a waggon, consigned to
Germany. This man Weiss had the full confidence of, and re-
ceived particular consideration from, his commanding officer.
It was he who, being installed at the Kornmandatur, (headquar-
ters) had charge of the commune and saw to all requisitions.
How Enormous Ransom was Extorted.
After having committed numerous acts of looting at Lune-
ville, and burnt about 70 houses with torches, petrol and
various incendiary engines, after having finally massacred
peaceful inhabitants, the German military authorities thought
fit to post up the following proclamation, in which they formu-
lated accusations to justify the extortion under the form of
indemnity of an enormous ransom: —
“Notice to the Population.”
“On the 25th of August, 1914, the inhabitants of Luneville
ambushed German columns and convoys. The same day the
inhabitants fired on sanitary camps marked by the Red Cross.
Moreover, German wounded and the military hospital and


ambulance were fired upon; and through these acts of hostility
a ransom of 650,000 fr. (£26,000) is imposed on the commune of
Luneville. Order is given to the Mayor to pay the sum in gold,
and in silver up to 50,000 fr. (£2,000) on the 6th of September,
at 9 a.m., into the hands of the representative of the German
military authority. All claims will be considered as null and
void. No extension of time will be allowed. If the commune
does not punctually execute the order to pay the sum of
650,000 fr., all th.e goods needed will be seized. In the case of
non-payment domiciliary searches will be made and all inhabi-
tants searched. Whosoever shall have knowingly consealed
or endeavoured to withdraw goods from the seizure of
the military authority, or who tries to leave the town, will be
shot. The Mayor and hostages taken by the military authori-
ties will be held responsible for the prompt and exact execution
of the orders above-mentioned. Command is given to the town
authorities to publish immediately these dispositions.
“Henamenil, 3rd September, 1914.
‘ ‘ Commander-in-chief,
“VON FOSBENDER.”
When one has read this unimaginable document, he has
the right to ask himself whether the acts of incendiarism and
murder committed at Luneville on the 25th and 26th of August
by an army which was not acting under the excitement of com-
bat, and which during the previous days had abstained from
killing, have not been ordered to render more likely the allega-
tion which had to serve as a pretext for the extortion of an
indemnity.
Eight Inoffensive People Massacred.
Situated close to Luneville, the village of Chanteheux was
not spared either. The Bavarians who occupied it from the
22nd August to the 12th September, burnt therein 20 houses by
the usual process, and massacred on the 25th August eight
people. MM. Lavenne, Toussaint, Parmentier and Bachelor
were killed—the three first-named by gun-shot, the fourth by
two shots and a bayonet thrust; young Schneider was mur-
dered in a dependency of the commune; and M. Wingerstraann
and his grandson (whose deaths we have previously related with
the crimes committed at Luneville). Finally, M. Reeb, aged 62,
who most certainly died from the bad treatment he received.
This man was taken as hostage at the same time as 42 of his co-
citizens, who were kept for 13 days. After having first received
terrible blows in the face from the butt of a rifle and thrust of
a bayonet in the side, he continued to follow the column whilst
losing much blood, and whilst his face was mutilated to such
an extent as to render him unrecognisable; when a Bavarian,
without the slightest motive, caused a further large wound by
throwing in his face a wooden bucket. BetAveen Henamenil and
Bures his companions found that he was no longer with them.
There is no doubt that the poor man succumbed to his terrible
injuries.


Other Unfortunates Brutalised by Troops.
If this unfortunate has been the most cruelly martyrised
of the hostages that the enemy took with them in this commune,
others also had to suffer violence and outrages. Before setting
tire to the village, the unfortunates were made to stand up
against the parapet of a bridge, whilst the troops marched past
and brutalised them. When an officer accused them of having
tired upon Germans, a schoolmaster gave him his "word of
honour that such was not the case. “Pig of-a Frenchman,” re-
torted the officer, “don’t talk of honour; you haven’t any!”
At the moment when the tiring of the houses commenced,
Mme. Cherrier, while in the act of quitting her home to escape
being asphyxiated, was drenched with an inflammable liquid
by a soldier who was sprinkling the walls with it. One of the
Germans exclaimed: “That is benzine.” She then ran to her
parents’ place to hide behind a stack of manure; but the incen-
diarist brought her back forcibly before the furnace, and she
was made to witness the destruction of her own homestead.
The Sacking of Gerbeviller.
Similar to Nomeny, the handsome town of Gerbeviller, on
the banks of the Mortagne, was, in these same frightful condi-
tions, the victim of the German fury. Oil the 24th August the
enemy troops met with a heroic resistance from 60 chasseurs
on foot, who inflicted on them heavy losses. The Germans
revenged themselves savagely on the civilian population. Im-
mediately on their entering the town, they gave themselves up
to the worst excesses; penetrating the houses, shrieking like
fiends, burning the buildings, murdering or arresting the in-
habitants, and neither sparing women nor aged people. Of 475
houses, 20, at the most, are still habitable. Over 100 people
have disappeared; 50 at least have been massacred. Some were
taken to the fields to be shot; others were murdered in their
dwellings, or slaughtered in the streets when they tried to
escape from the fires. Up to now 56 bodies have been identified,
as follow:—M. M. Barthelemy, Blosse (father), Robinet,
Chretien, Remy, Bourguignon, Perrin, Guillaume, Bernasconi,
Gauthier, Mena, Simon, Lingenheld (father and son), Benoit,
Calais, Adam, Caille, Lhuillier, Regret, Plaid (aged 14), Leroi,
Bozolo, Gentil, Victor Dehan, Charles Dehan, Dehan (son),
Brennevald, Parisse, Tong, Francois (town clerk) , Mdmes.
Perrot, Courtois, Gauthier, and Guillaume; and Mdlles. Perrin
and Miquel.
Unspeakable Atrocities on Male Prisoners.
Fifteen of these unfortunate people were executed at a spot
called “la Prele,” and were interred by their co-citizens. The
majority of them had their hands tied behind their backs.
Some were blindfolded, and in regard to the males, in nearly
every case their trousers had been unbuttoned and pulled down
to their feet. This last circumstance, as well as the aspect of
the corpses, made witnesses think that the victims had been
mutilated. The Commission refrains from stating its own


opinion, as the advanced state of decomposition of the corpses
might lead to an error. It is also possible that the murderers
had unbuttoned the trousers of their male prisoners to hinder
them from escaping.
Ten Inhabitants of Bodonville Massacred.
On the 16th of October, at the spot called “le Haut-de-
Vermont,” 10 bodies of civilians, who had been blindfolded and
shot, were found interred in soil from six to nine inches in
depth. On one of them was found a permit to pass bearing the
name: “Edouard Seyer, of Badonviller.” The other nine vic-
tims are unknown. It is thought that they were inhabitants of
Badonviller, and were brought by the Germans to the territory
of Gerbeviller to be shot.
Wounded Man Drenched with Petrol and Set Fire To.
In the streets and houses during the day of carnage, most
tragic acts were perpetrated.
During the morning the Germans entered the home of the
Lingenhelds, and arrested the son, aged 36, who wore the Red
Cross armlet. They tied his hands behind his back, dragged
him into the street, and shot him. They then returned for the
father, a man of 70. Mme. Lingenheld then fled from the house.
During her flight she saw her son stretched on the ground. The
unfortunate was still alive, and the Germans drenched him with
petrol and set fire to him in the presence of his horror-stricken '
mother. Meanwhile Lingenheld was taken to “la Prele,”
where he was executed.
Body of Aged Woman Violated.
At the same time the soldiers knocked at the door of the
house occupied by M. Dehan, his wife, and her mother (the
widow Guillaume, aged 78). The latter, opening the door, was
shot point blank, and fell into the arms of her son-in-law, who
had followed her. “They have killed me,” she said; “carry me
into the garden.” Her children laid her down in the garden,
and placed a pillow under her head and a coverlet over her
feet. They then crouched down along the edge of the wall,, in
order to escape the projectiles. After the lapse of an hour,
when the widow Guillaume was dead, her daughter covered
the body and placed a handkerchief over the face. The Ger-
mans then entered the garden, took Dehan to “la Prele” and
shot him. They conducted his wife on the road to Fraimbois,
where she found 40 people, principally women and children, in
the hands of the enemy, and then heard an officer of high grade
say: ‘“We must shoot these children and women. All these «
must disappear.” This threat, however, was not carried out.
Given her liberty on the following day, Mme. Dehan was
enabled to return to Gerbeviller 21 days later. She is convinced
—and all those who have seen the corpse agreed with her—
that the body of her mother was violated. In fact, she found
the body stretched on its back, with dress uplifted, legs spread
out, and the stomach ripped open.


Father and Daughter Arrested and Shot.
On the arrival of the Germans, M. Perrin and his daughters
Louise and Eugenie had sought refuge in the stable. The sol-
diers invaded it; and one of these sighting Louise 1 , shot her
point blank in the head. Eugenie managed to escape; but her
father was arrested in his flight, placed among the victims that
were taken to ‘da Prele’” and shot with them.
Incendiarism and Rifle Attacks on People in Hiding.
M. Yong, who was about to stable his horse, was shot in
front of his house. The Germans, in their fury, killed the horse
after its late owner, and set tire to the house. Other soldiers,
lifting the trap door of a cellar in which were hidden several
people, fired off rifles in their direction, and wounded Mine.
Denis Bernard and a boy named Parmentier, aged 7.
Father of Five Children Burnt Alive in Barn.
About 5 p.m., Mme. Rosier heard a voice, beseeching
“Pity, pity” These cries came from an adjoining barn belong-
ing to M.M. Poinsard and Barbier. An individual who acted
as interpreter to the Germans declared to Mme. Thiebaut that
the Germans had boasted of having burnt alive in one of the
barns the father of a family of five children, ignoring supplica-
tions and appeals for mercy. This statement is all the more
impressive when it is known that in the barn Poinsard were
found the carbonised remains of a human body.
Violation of Wife of French Soldier bn Service.
Besides this butchery, innumerable acts of violence have
been committed. Mme, X., wife of a French soldier on service,
was violated by a German soldier in the corridor of her
parents’ house, whilst her mother, threatened with a bayonet,
was forced to quit the premises.
Attempt to Abstract Sacred Vessels from Church.
On the 29th August, the matron of the hospital, Sister
Julie, whose devotion has been admirable, having visited the
parochial church (in the company of the priest, who was serv-
ing in the ranks), to investigate the condition of the edifice,
observed that an attempt had been made to force the steel
door of the tabernacle. The Germans, in attempts to abstract
the sacred vessels, had fired shots all round the lock. The door
was traversed in several spots, and the bullets had formed
symmetrical holes, which proved that they had been fired
point blank. When the nun opened the door, she found the
chalice perforated.
Crimes and Excesses were Instigated by General Olauss.
The excesses and crimes committed at Gerbeviller were
principally acts of the Bavarians. Troops, who had committed
them, were under the command of General Clauss, whose bru-
talities have been pointed out to us elsewhere.


Fearful Deeds Committed in the Village of Crevic.
On the 22nd August the Germans fired part of the village
of Crevic by means of torches and fusees, and 75 houses were
burnt. One of these belonged to General Lyantey, which the
fire fiends, under the leadership of an officer, had invaded. A
soldier shrieked : “Where are Mme. and Mdlle. Lyautey, so that
we can cut their throats”? A captain threatened M. Vogin.
Placing a revolver at his throat, he threatened to shoot him and
throw him on the flames with another inhabitant “whose
brains,” said he, “we have blown out.” He alluded to the death
of a man of independent means. M. Liegey, aged 78, whose body
was found in the ruins with a bullet through the head. “Come,"
added the officer, “and see the property of General Lyantey,
who is in Morocco, and which we have burnt.” During that time
a workman named Gerard was compelled, at the point of the
bayonet, to climb to his garret. There the Germans set fire to
a quantity of forage and compelled Gerard to stay by the fur-
nace. When the soldiers, driven away by the intolerable heat,
had retired, he managed to escape through a small opening,
but his cheeks had been already severely burnt. At Deux-
ville, when the enemy set fire to 15 houses, the Mayor Bajolet
and the priest Thirriet were arrested. The Abbe Marshal,
priest of Orion, seeing them both in his parish in the hands of
the Germans, approached his colleague and enquired the rea-
son for his arrest. He answered: “I made signs.” After giving
him a little bread, the Abbe withdrew. He had scarcely taken
30 steps, when he heard gun-shots. The two prisoners had been
executed. The following day, an officer, who spoke French per-
fectly, and who had been (as he said) for eight years attache
to the German Embassy at Paris, informed the abbe that the
priest of Deuxville had made signs, which he had admitted.
As to the Mayor, he added, “Poor devil; I really believe he had
not done anything.”
Houses Fired and Massacres Committed under Lying Pretexts.
At Maixe the Germans fired 36 houses and committed mas-
sacres, always under the pretext that they had been fired upon.
Those executed, were M.M. Gaucon, Demange, Jacques, Thomas,
Marchal, Chaudre, Grand, Simonin, Yaconet, and Mme. Beur-
ton. Gaucon, torn from his home, was thrown on a heap of
manure, where a soldier killed him with a shot in the stomach.
Demange, wounded in both knees in his cellar, managed to drag
himself to his kitchen. The Germans set fire to,the house, pre-
vented Mme. Demange rendering help to her husband, and left
their victim to burn.
Mme. Beurton was also in her cellar with her family, when
two soldiers, one bearing a lantern and the other a gun, de-
scended into it. The second ruffian fired on the group, and the
unhappy woman fell dead. Yaconet was struck with a bullet
in the side at the foot of the staircase of M. Rediger. As to
Simonin, he was taken towards Drouville. A few days after, a
note stated that he had been shot, and that his last wishes had


been written and the document left in the hands of the general
commanding the Third Bavarian Division. This was given by
a German officer to M. Thonvenin, municipal councillor of the
commune. This note (a copy of which lias been handed us)
bears the signature of an officer of the Third Regiment of Light
Horse. The three victims from Maixe met their deaths under
circumstances of which we are unable to furnish precise
details.
Young Girl Outraged by Nine Barbarians.
In the same village, Mdlle. X., aged 23, was outraged by
nine Germans during the night of the 23rd or 24th August.
An officer, who slept in the room immediately above that in
which the ignoble deeds were being perpetrated, did not think
fit to interfere, although there can be no doubt whatever that
he heard the cries of the unfortunate girl and the guffaws and
jeers of her fiendish captors.
Chateau Looted and Left in Disorder and Filth.
The Chateau Beauzemont was invaded on the 22nd August.
Towards the fifteenth of the occupation, there arrived seve-
ral automobiles, in which were some of the wives of the German
General Staff. There were subsequently packed in these auto-
mobiles the goods and chattels stolen from the chateau. These
consisted principally of silverware, hats and silk dresses. On.
the 21st October a lieutenant-colonel commanding a regiment of
French infantry took possession of the chateau. The soldiers
found it in a state of disorder and revolting filth; furniture was
ripped open and smashed; the flooring of the billiard room was
covered with filth; and in the bedroom which had been occu-
pied by a German general, chief of the seventh division of re-
servists, there existed an awful stench, the cause of which
was disclosed when the wardrobe, at the head of the bed, con-
taining underlinen and muslin curtains, was opened.
Sacking and Burning at Baccarat.
In Baccarat, the enemy army did not slaughter anyone; but
on the 25th August committed a general pillage, after having
ordered the population to assemble at the railway station so as
to enable the looters to operate without interference. This
pillage was directed by the officers. Clocks, various articles
of furniture, and objects of art were purloined; and when the
inhabitants returned to their despoiled homes, they were, after
about an hour, forced to leave them, being warned that the
town was to be set on fire. The centre of the town was soon
in flames, having been set going with torches and sockets, and
destroyed 112 habitations. Four or five only were fired by
shells. After this disaster, sentries prevented the owners from
approaching their homes; and when the ruins had cooled off,
the Germans searched them and opened the entrance to cellars.
After this devastation, General Fabricius, commander of tin'
artillery of the 14th corps of the Baden army, remarked to M.
Renaud, acting-mayor: “I did not think there was so much


high-class Wine in Baccarat; we had more than 100,000
bottles.” It is only fair to add that towards the crystal works
the enemy evinced a certain amount of probity, for they stipu-
lated, with revolvers in hands, that the prices of the goods
which they purchased must be reduced from 50 to 75 per cent.
Man Assassinated and His Body Thrown in Garden.
At Jolivet on the 22nd August, M. Yillemin was leaving the
house of M. Cahon, accompanied by the latter and M. Richard,
when some soldiers assailed the last-named. Struck by the butt
of a rifle on the head, Richard fell, while Cahon returned pre-
cipitately to his home. After following Richard for a short
distance, his aggressors went away, and Yillemin returned to
look after his cattle. Towards 5 p.m. he left his home to visit a
neighbour, when he was immediately arrested and shot. The
assassins threw his body in the garden.
Looting and Incendiarism.
On the 25th August, in the same commune, the lodging of
Mine. Morin, of independent means, was pillaged. The Ger-
mans took clothing, silverware, furs and hats. Two days later
they fired the house.
At Bonivilliers, on the 21st, 23rd and 25th August, the Ger-
mans set fire to 26 buildings with crackers and tapers.
A Poacher Odiously Martyrised.
At Einville, on the 22nd August, the date of their arrival,
the Germans shot M. Pierson, a municipal councillor, whom
they accused falsely of having fired on them. They also exe-
cuted, without motive, M.M. Bouvier and Barbelon, whom they
took a short distance from the commune. They likewise mas-
sacred a poacher named Pierrat, whom they found with a bag
containing a net and a dismounted shot-gun. This unfortunate
was odiously martyrised by his cowardly assailants. After hay-
ing dragged him from the village, they brought him back in
front of the house of Mine. Famose, who saw him passing in the
hands of the Germans. His nose was partly cut off. his eyes
were haggard ; “and,” in the words of that witness, “he seemed
to have aged 10 years in a quarter of an hour. ” At that moment
an officer gave a command. Eight soldiers left with the prisoner,
and when they returned without him 10 minutes later, one
said, in French: “He was dead before.”
Mayor Compelled to Find Men to Bury the Dead.
M. Dieudonne, Mayor of Einville, was taken as hostage
(with his deputy and another co-citizen) on the 12th Septem-
ber, by the enemy at the time they were retreating. They were
sent to Alsace, thence to Germany, where they were kept until
the 24th October. Before his arrest and during a combat which
took place adjoining the commune, M. Dieudonne was com-
pelled, under protest, to collect several of his burgesses to
bury the dead. Three of the inhabitants were wounded by bul-
lets, and another (M. Noel) was killed by the fragment of a
shell.


Burning- of a Farm, and Massacre of Four Labourers.
The farmhouse of Remonville, situated in the territory of
the same village, was burnt. The women were able to escape
uninjured, but four men who worked on the property were
murdered. The bodies of two of them (Victor Chaudre and
Thomas Prosper) were found two months later buried together
in proximity to the charred buildings. Both bodies were de-
capitated, and the head of Prosper was smashed.
Slaughter of Two Septuagenarians.
At Sommerviller, the passing of the enemy was markeed
by the pillaging of cafes, groceries, and private houses, and by
the slaughter of M.M. Robert (aged 70) and Harau (aged 75),
who were shot. The latter, when he met his death, was tran-
quilly eating a piece of bread.
Priest and Civilian Seized and Murdered.
At Rehainviller, on the 26th August, the Germans seized
i)i the street the priest Barbot arid M. Noircler. The bodies of
these two men were found a long time afterwards, buried in ;i
field several hundred yards from the village. Owing to decom-
position, the wounds on the body of the priest could not be
ascertained. As to Noircler, the head had been severed from the
body and interred with it.
Twenty=seven Houses Burnt at Rehainviller.
In this commune 27 houses were burnt. No one saw the
fire started, but afterwards a number of the fusing sticks —
which the Germans so frequently used to start fires—were*
found. These the peasants called “macaronis.”
Foul Deeds of Brutal Bavarians.
At Lambath, on the 24th August, the Bavarians shot a man,
aged 70, named Louis. This unfortunate had 10 bullet wounds
in his chest. His son-in-law, in the last stages of consumption,
was arrested and taken away. No news has since been heard of
him. Two other inhabitants of the same commune, who were
arrested with him, are now actually detained in Bavaria.
Priest Arrested and Witnesses Execution of Two Compatriots.
The abbe Mathieu, priest of Fraimbois, was arrested on the
29th August on the false charge that the Germans had been
fired on in his parish. During his captivity, which lasted 16
days, he witnessed the murder of two Frenchmen, M.M. Pois-
sonnier, from Gerbeviller, and Victor Meyer, from Fraimbois.
The first-named, an invalid, who could hardly stand, was
accused of having followed German armies for the purpose of
spying. The latter was arrested because his little daughter had
picked up a fragment of telephone wire, broken by shrapnel
fire. One morning, about six, Bavarian officers proceeded with a
mock trial by reading a document in German, and collecting the
votes of eight or nine lieutenants. Condemned unanimously,
the two men were warned that they were to die. The priest was


invited to administer to the condemned the late rites of their
church. They protested their innocence; and, with tears in
their eyes, implored mercy, but without avail. They were
forced to kneel on the road, and a detachment of 24 soldiers,
placed in two ranks, fired twice on the hapless men.
“What Will You? It is War!”
The village of Fraimbois was pillaged and the booty was
stacked on trollies. The Abbe Mathieu, having complained to
the Generals Tanner and Clauss of the burning of his apiary,
received this laconic reply from the first-named; “What will
you? It is war!” The second officer made no response.
Incendiarism and Monstrous Massacres.
At Mons, three houses were burnt with petrol. At Herrae-
nil, on the 29th August, the enemy, who had arrived on the
24th, committed acts of monstrous iniquity. The inhabitants
were herded into the church and detained therein for four
days whilst their houses were looted and whilst the French
troops were bombarding the village. Twenty-four prisoners
in the edifice were killed by shell-fire. With great difficulty a
woman slipped out for a few minutes and returned with a
little milk for some famished infants. A captain, furious that
this prisoner had been allowed out, exclaimed; “I didn’t want
the door opened; I wanted the French to fire on their own!”
The same officer had just previously committed elsewhere an
act of revolting cruelty. He assisted, with a monocle stuck in
his eye, at the turning out of a household, which, in his opinion,
was proceeding too slow. Mme. Winger, aged 23, obeying
the general order, was going to the church with her servants —
a young girl and two young men, each of whom was about 18
years of age. The officer ordered his soldiers to “Fire,” and
the four victims fell wounded. The Germans left the
bodies in the street for two days.
On the following day enemy troops shot M. Bocquel, who,
ignorant of the instructions given, had remained at home. They
also killed in his home M. Florentin, aged 77. This unfortunate,
who received several bullets in the chest, was probably mas-
sacred through deafness, which prevented him understanding
the brutal orders of the enemy.
In this commune 22 houses were burnt with petrol. Before
setting fire to the house of Mme. Cembeau, some soldiers, in dig-
ging over the soil in the cellar, found the sum of 600 fr. (£24),
which they appropriated.
Father Murdered in Presence of Young Son.
On the 23rd August, the youth Simonin, aged 15£, living
at Hadiviller, was returning from Dombasle, when the Ger-
mans, after having stopped him, seized him. He was first of
all unmercifully beaten, and then, at the command of an officer,
was taken away by a soldier. On the road he saw his father,
about 50 yards away; and the father requested the son to go
to him. The boy’s warder tied him to a telegraph post and fired


on the elder Simonin, who fell, vomiting blood, and expired
almost immediately. In the meantime the youth managed to
free himself and run away. He did not escape, however, with-
out having been fired at several times, one shot penetrating his
vest.
Young Girl Violated by Bestial Hun.
At Magnieres, where only one house was burnt, a German,
armed with his rifle, towards the end of August, entered the
house of M. Laurent, and compelled a girl, aged 12 (who was in
hiding), to follow him to a room; and on two occasions he
violated her, notwithstanding her protestations, amidst tears.
German Officer Shoots Farmer and Wounds Two Peasants.
At Croismare, on the 25th August, when the Germans had
to retreat, they were so furious at their check, that they fired
on everyone whom they met. An officer of Uhlans, after having
killed with his revolver M. Kriegel, who was in the fields dig-
ging up potatoes, perceived M.M. Matton and Barbier, return-
ing°froin their work. He approached them on horseback and
commanded them to stop and stand against an embankment.
The two peasants thought at first that the officer desired to
place them in shelter from gunfire; but they were soon dis-
illusioned when they saw him loading his revolver. In the
course of this operation three cartridges f6ll to the ground, and
the officer ordered the peasants to pick them up. One of the
men, in handing the cartridges to the officer, said: “Don’t
hurt; we have only been working in the fields.” The officer
replied: “No pardon; pig of French!” and fired twice. Matton
quickly dodged back, and was thus only struck in the light
shoulder. As to Barbier, a bullet entered his two thumbs and
took off a finger.
Bombardment and Incendiarism, and Aiming at Red Cross Flag.
At Kemereville, on the 7th September, the enemy lalsely
stating that the inhabitants had fired on them from the church
steeple, set fire to the houses. Only a few tenements escaped
the flames. Before the conflagration, the village was bom-
barded by the Germans, who specially aimed at the ambulance,
the flag of which was conspicuously displayed.
The Sacking and Burning of Communes.
The commune of Drouville, which was occupied on two
separate occasions, was thoroughly pillaged. On the sth Sep-
tember, the invaders burnt 35 houses by the aid of torches, and
without doubt, petrol, they having abandoned on the spot about
eight gallons of this liquid.
At Courbesseaux, on the sth September, pillaging and in-
cendiarism were the order of the day. Nineteen houses were
burnt. M. Alix, who was endeavouring to extinguish the fin
set in a heap of lucerne hay in his barn, was fired upon several
times, but managed to escape.


Officer’s Practical Method of Extorting- Money.
Finally, on the 23rd August, at Erbeviller, a Saxon cap-
tain found a very practical way of obtaining money. Having
assembled all the men of the village, he endeavoured, vainly,
by threatening to have them shot, to obtain from one of them
a statement that sentries had been fired on, though he knew
positively that such was not the fact. He then shut them up in
a barn. In the evening he called before him the wife of M.
Jacques, a retired school-master, one of the prisoners, and said:
“I am not positive that it was those men who fired; they will
be liberated to-morrow if you can give me l,ooofr. (£4O) in a
few minutes.” Mme. Jacques handed the officer the amount
of money demanded. At her request, he gave her a receipt
for the money, and the hostages were liberated.
The receipt, drawn up by the officer, is worded as follows:
“Erbeviller, 23rd August, 1914. Receipt. For the penance of
being suspected of having shot on the German sentries in the
night of the 22nd August. I have received from the commune
of Erbeviller IOOOfr. (one thousand francs).
“Baron (an illegible name follows) haupt reit. regim.
(Captain of cavalry regiment).”
Obscene Practices on a Nun.
In a commune in the department of Meurthe-et-Moselle,
two nuns were subjected for several hours to the lascivious
treatment of a soldier. By terrorising them, he ordered them
to strip off their clothes; and after having compelled the elder
to take off his boots, he gave himself up to the most obscene
practices on the younger. The promise that the Commission
made does not permit of mentioning the names of the victims
of these abominable acts or the village in which they took
place, but the facts were given to the Commission on oath by
witnesses worthy of the utmost confidence, and they take the
fullest responsibility of certifying to the exactitude of them.
Man and Woman Martyrised in the Presence of Villagers.
During our stay at Nancy and Luneville, we have received
the testimony relating to crimes committed by Germans in
localities where the troops were still in possession, and where
most of the inhabitants were compelled to leave. The most
cruel of these acts had for theatre the village of Embermenil.
Towards the end of October or beginning of November, an
enemy patrol having met. near the commune, a young woman,
Mme. Masson, who was about to become a mother, interrogated
her to ascertain whether there were any French soldiers at
Embermenil. She answered that she did not know, which was
perfectly true. The Germans then entered the village, where
they were received with gun-fire by the French. On the sth
November a detachment of the fourth Bavarian regiment ar-
rived and assembled all the inhabitants in front of the church.
Then an officer demanded to know who was the person that
had betrayed his troops. Suspecting that this demand referred


to the answer she had given the patrol a few days previously,
and realising the danger that threatened her co-citizens, Mine.
Masson most courageously advanced and repeated what she
had said, affirming that the same was uttered in good faith.
She was immediately seized and made to sit on a bench next
to a young man, Dime, who had been taken haphazard as a
second victim. The whole of the population implored mercy
on behalf of the unfortunates; but the officer remained ada-
mant. “A man and a woman,” said he, “must be shot; such are
the colonel’s orders. What will you? That is war! Eight sol-
diers, placed in double rank, then fired three rounds on the
two martyrs in the presence of the whole village. The house
of Mine. Masson’s father-in-law was then fired; that of M.
Blanchin had been set on fire a few moments previously.
“I Can Well Die for My Country!’’
Mme. Millot, of Domevre-sur-Vezouze, informed us of the
murder of her nephew Maurice Claude, aged 17, of which she
was an eye-witness. On the 24th August, on the arrival of the
Germans at Domevre, this youth, with his family, was stand-
ing at the foot of the staircase in his parents’ house, when he
observed German soldiers aiming rifles at him. He was unable
to reach shelter, and was struck by three bullets. The unfor-
tunate succumbed three days later, after evincing admirable
resignation. When he felt that he was dying, he said to his
grief-stricken mother: “I can well die for my country!’’
Two Old Men Murdered and 136 Houses Burnt.
The same day M.M. Auguste Claude and Adolphe Claude
(the latter aged 75) were also killed; and 136 houses in the vil-
lage were burnt. Finally, two inhabitants, M.M. Breton and
Labart, were taken as hostages, and have not been heard of
since.
Awful Carnage Related by an Eye Witness.
M. Veron, formerly schoolmaster at Audun-le-Roman, in
the ward of Briey, has deposed before us in the following
terms *
On the 21st August, towards 5 p.m., the Germans, who
had occupied for 17 days the village of Auduu-le-Roman,
started firing rifles and quick-firers without the slightest
motive. Four women, Mdlle. Roux, Mdlle. Trefel, Mme. Lapoli,
and Mme. Gigilo were wounded. Mdlle. Trefel was struck while
giving a German soldier a drink. Three men were killed. M.
Martin, a cultivator, aged 78, whose house was burnt, was
taken out of his house and shot in the street in the presence
of his wife and children. M. Chary, aged 55, head maintenance
man, was fleeing holding his wife’s hand when he was fired at.
I saw his body, which was riddled with bullets. M. Ernest
Samen received five revolver bullets in the body as he was
closing his stable door.
I saw the enemy set fire to the Cafe Matte with petrol.
Mme. Matte, leaving with a small handbag, which held her


savings, about 2000 fr. (£80) was robbed by a German officer,
who dragged it out of her hand.
dhe witness added that the mayor had been taken away
by a patrol and had not been heard of since.
At Arracourt, M. Maillard was killed in the field by a
bullet, and five houses were burnt.
The village of Brim-sur-Seille was almost wholly de-
stroyed by fire.
Violation of Wife of French Soldier Serving Under French
Flag.
Finally, the wife’ of a soldier, serving under the French
flag and living at Raucourt, stated to us that she had been
violated in her own home in the presence of her little boy,
aged 3|, by a German soldier who had previously threatened
her with his bayonet to overcome the resistance she was
making.
DEPARTMENT OF THE OISE.
In the Department of the Oise the Commission gleaned
the following facts:—
Dragoons Fire on Group, one being Killed and two Wounded.
When the Germans penetrated, on the 31st August, the
village of Monchy-Humieres, a group of 15 people were stand-
ing in the street watching their arrival. No provocation what-
soever was given the invaders; but the officer in command
thought he heard someone exclaim: “Prussians!” and immedia-
tely ordered three dragoons to leave the column and fire. The
young man Gaston Dupuis fell dead; M. Grandvalet had his
right shoulder pierced by a ball; and a little girl of 4, belong-
ing to a family of refugees from Verdun, was wounded in the
neck.
Commune Pillaged and Cyclist Shot Without Provocation.
Next day, the commune of Ravened was pillaged, and the
goods were sent away on vehicles. A man named Vilette, pro-
ceeding along the road on a bicycle, met an automobile with
several Germans in it. They fired on him without the least
provocation. He jumped oft' his machine and fled across the
fields; hut a bullet arrested his flight, and he died a few hours
afterwards, leaving a widow and two children.
Women and Children and Others Barbarously Exposed During
an Engagement.
The same day near Mery, the enemy fired on some British
artillery who were at a spot called le Bout-de-la-Ville. An en-
gagement took place between the cavalry of both armies. At
that moment the Germans seized the sugar works and made
prisoners the director, his family, and the staff of the factory;
and during the three hours that the engagement lasted they
made them walk parallel with them to protect themselves
against a fusillade that was taking them in the flank. Among


the 25 persons who were so outrageously exposed were a num-
ber of women and children. An artisan, Mine. Jeansenne, was
killed, and the overseer, Courtois, was wounded in the left
arm. At 10 o’clock at night the enemy returned in force and
left on the following day, after having burnt the houses and
pillaged the tenements generally.
How 105 Houses were Demolished by Fire.
On September 2nd the enemy entered Senlis, and it was
received with gun-fire by African troops. Alleging that it was
the civilian population that had fired on them, they set fire to
two quarters of the town. One hundred and five houses were
burnt in the following manner:—
The Germans arrived by columns in the streets. At a
whistle from an officer, a certain number of them left the ranks,
smashed in the doors of the houses and the closed windows.
Others then set fire to the buildings with grenades and fusees.
Finally, the patrols who followed these columns, whose firing
was not sufficiently active, launched with their rifles incendiary
projectiles.
Hostages Exposed to French Fire.
Officer Brutally Murders Wounded Man.
Whilst the French soldiers in the suburbs of the town
were firing, the hostages were driven through the streets by the
Germans, who prudently followed on the footpaths and com-
pelled the hostages to march in the centre of the road. M.
Levasseur, Mme. Danchy and her daughter aged o, M.M.
Pinchaux, Minouflet, and Leyraarie were among those hos-
tages thus exposed to death. Close to the hospital Levasseui
was killed. Shortly after Leymarie fell mortally wounded.
Whilst carrying Leymarie’s body away, Minouflet was hit by
a bullet in the knee. A German officer approached and asked
the man to show him his wound, and suddenly fired a revolver
point blank at his shoulder. At the same spot a witness saw
another officer martyrising a French wounded soldier by hitting
him in the face with a stick.
Inoffensive People Massacred and Wounded.
Meanwhile several murders were committed. M. Simon
was dragged from his home and shot. At 2 p.m. the Germans
smashed in the door of the house of M. Megret. This man came
forward, and, promising to give them all they required, brought
ten bottles of wine. He was immediately murdered by gun-shot
in the chest. M.M. Rarau, Vilcoq, Charabellant, and Gaudet,
urged on by curiosity, went to look at the burning of a forage
depot, which the French troops had set fire to before retiring.
Enemy soldiers fired at the four men. Ramu was wounded;
Gaudet was killed outright; Chambellant received two bullets
from which he died eight days afterwards; M.M. Simon, Ecker.
Ohery, Leblond. Rigauld, Louis, and Momus were also killed at
Senlis.


Assassination of Mayor and Other Harmless Citizens.
At 3 p.m. the Mayor, M. Odent, was arrested at the Town
Hall under an allegation (to which he protested) that the
civilian population had fired on the German troops. Finding
he was being taken away, the town clerk joined him near the
hotel of the Grand-Cerf (The Big Stag), and volunteered to
bring the Mayor’s deputies. “It is useless,” said the Mayor,
“one victim is enough.” Taken to Chamant, the magistrate
on the way was the object of odious brutalities. His gloves
were torn from his hands and thrown in his face; his stick was
taken from him, and he was struck violently on the head and
face with it. Finally, towards 11 o’clock he was brought be-
fore three officers, one of whom interrogated him and per-
sisted in accusing him of having fired on the Germans, or insti-
gated others to fire on them, and warned him that he was
about to die. M. Odent approached his companions in cap-
tivity, handed them his papers and money; and, after shaking
hands with them, bade them all adieu. With great dignity he
returned towards the officers. On the word of command, two
soldiers dragged him a distance of about 12 yards, and then
shot him in the head. The murderers then dug a shallow grave
and threw over the body such a thin layer of soil that the
feet were not covered by it. A few hours before that, some
few hundred yards away, six other inhabitants of Senlis, M.M.
Pommier, Barbier, Aubert, Cottereau, Arthur, and Dewart
Rigault were also assassinated and interred.
A Baker Hacked to Pieces with Bayonets.
On the same evening, M. Jeandin, baker, arrested at 3 or
4 p.m., without motive, and taken by the 49th regiment of
Pomeranian infantry to Villers-Saint-Frambourg, where
he was tied to a post and fairly hacked to pieces with bayonets.
The Sacking of Senlis.
It goes without saying that the town of Senlis was pil-
laged. Whilst they were looting the houses the enemy revelled
in inciting the mob to commit excesses by calling in women
of low character in order to give them a share of the booty.
A Married Woman Violated—Her Subsequent Escape.
At Villers-Saint-Frambourg, Mme. X was violated by a
soldier who had forced his way into her house. After this
violence, she fortunately took refuge with a neighbour, for
numerous comrades of the aggressor shortly afterwards in-
vaded her house, and, furious at not finding the victim for
whom they were searching, smashed all the windows and pur-
loined all the poultry and other live stock which they found in
the yard.
Barbarous Treatment of Prisoners.
On the 4th September at Creil the Germans invaded the
houses. Under the direction of a captain, who had endea-
voured to compel M.M. Guillot and Demonts to show him the


house register of the inhabitants, they smashed windows and
doors and looted with the complicity of their chiefs, to whom
they continually gave jewellery which they had stolen. De-
monts and Guillot were afterwards taken to the country, where
they joined 1000 inhabitants of Creil, Nogent-sur-Cise, and en-
virons. All these prisoners had to submit to the shame and sor-
row of working against the defence of their country by mowing
down a field of maize which was calculated to hinder the fire
of the enemy, and in digging trenches intended to shelter the
enemy. During seven days the prisoners were kept without
food. Luckily, the women folk of the locality were able to
provide them with a little nourishment.
Frightful Acts of Carnage in the Town of Creil.
During that time in the town several people were put to
death. M. Parent, who was running away in the Rue Victor-
Hugo, was shot by a Uhlan. No sooner was he down, than they
fell on the body and searched it. M. Alexandre had his skull
smashed in. The Germans entered the bar of M. Breche, and
finding, evidently, that he was not quick enough in serving
them, dragged him into the yard of his neighbour, Mine. Egasse,
where an officer accused him of having fired on his soldiers.
Though the unfortunate denied the allegation, the officer
ordered him to be shot. Mme. Egasse endeavoured to stop his
execution, but was brutally forced to quit the room into which
she had retired. She heard the firing, and saw the body of
Breche extended on the ground. When she went out again she
expressed the sorrow she felt at Breche’s death. An officer
replied: “What’s a dead man? We see so many; we take no
notice of them! Moreover, wherever we are fired on, we kill
and we burn.”
A young man named Odener, loaded with a bag of rice,
was brought from Liancourt to Creil. Arriving in the church-
yard, completely exhausted by the bad treatment he had re-
ceived, he dropped his burden and attempted to escape. Two
soldiers aimed their rifles at him, and he dropped dead. A com-
panion of his named Leboeuf, who had been in captivity with
him, died in a few days through wounds received during the
journey.
The Sacking of Crepy-en-Valois.
The army of General von Kluek arrived on the 2nd Sep-
tember at Crepy-en-Valois, and marched through it for four
days. The town was completely pillaged, under the superin-
tendence of the officers, jewellers’ shops being specially picked
out for attention.
In a house where lodged a general commandant, with
about a dozen staff officers, important thefts of jewellery and
valuable clothing were committed; and nearly all the safes in
Crepy were burst open.
Tragic Death of a Great Artist.
It was on the 3rd of September, at Baron, that an artist


of great talent, the composer, Alberic Maguard, fired two shots
from his revolver on the troop that had invaded his property.
One of the soldiers was killed, and another wounded. The
Germans, who, in so many places had given themselves up,
without any motives, to the worst of excesses and cruelties,
contented themselves by burning the house of their aggressor,
who committed suicide so as not to fall into their hands. The
commune, nevertheless, was sacked. M. Robert, notary, was
robbed of his jewellery, his clothing, and 1471 bottles of old
wine ; he was likewise compelled to open his safe, from which
an officer stole the 8,300 fr, (£332) which it contained. In the
evening he saw another officer whose fingers were adorned
with nine ladies rings and with six bracelets on his arms. Two
soldiers, moreover, told M. Robert that their chiefs gave them
four marks (45.) for any jewellery that they brought them.
A Lady Violated and Her House Pillaged.
In the same commune Mine. X., a young woman belonging
to one of the most honourable families, was violated succes-
sively by two soldiers, in the absence of her husband, who was
serving in the French army. After their abominable acts, these
ruffians pillaged the house.
A Professor Murdered by a Drunken Soldier.
At Mesnil-sur-Bulles, on the evening of the 4th September,
three Germans (of whom two were in a car and one on a
bicycle) went to the acting-mayor, M. Gustave Queste. Being
unable to understand them, he asked his cousin, M. Queste,
professor at the Amiens College, to interpret for him. After
having done so, the professor returned home. A little later,
having heard a gun-shot, he went out to ascertain the cause, and
found himself confronted by one of the three soldiers to whom
he had spoken in his cousin’s house. This soldier, who was
dead drunk, fired on the unfortunate professor, and killed him-
Fire and Pillage at Nourard-le-Franc.
The same three soldiers, in passing through Nouird-le-
Franc, set fire to seven houses with torches that they had in
their ear. A few hours previous to their arrival at Mesnil-sur-
Bulles, a patrol of Uhlans had already made an excursion in
the latter commune. Some eavalymen had forced an entry
into M. Amedee Queste’s house, broken the furniture, stolen
jewellery, and about 60fr. (£2 7s. 6d.).
The Sacking and Burning of a Village.
Two German Military Surgeons Assist in Looting.
At Choisy-au-Bac, Germans, who were in the village since
the 31st August, set fire to 45 houses under an absolutely
false allegation that shots had been fired at them. Previous
to firing the houses, the Germans gave themselves up to gen-
eral pillaging in the presence of their officers. The booty was
taken away in vehicles stolen from the inhabitants. Two Ger


man military surgeons, bearing the Red ( toss on their arms,
looted the house of Mme. Moinder.
Murder of a Carpenter and Hostages.
A carpenter named Morel, being in his garden, was fired at
by a soldier who was passing, and died the next day. Of tour
young men taken as hostages on the Bth September, one of
them managed to escape ; another, Rene Leclerc, was shot at
Besme (Aisne) ; as to the other two, their fate is unknown.
Gross Misuse of the Red Cross Flag.
At Compiegne, where the enemy remained from the 31st
August to the 12th September, the chateau itself was not much
injured, but a large number of houses were pillaged, ihe resi-
dence of Comte d’Orsetti, situated opposite the palace, was
literally gutted, especially by non-commissioned officers. Silver-
ware, jewellery, works of art, were brought into the yard o
the chateau, were checked, registered and packed; and then
loaded into two waggons, on which was placed the flag ot the
Red Cross.
Officer had no time to Stop Orgie in Villa.
Captain Schroeder, who was asked to terminate the pil-
laging and the scandalous orgie that was taking place m the
villa finally went to look; but having glanced m the interior
of the house that was being defiled, withdrew, remarking:
“This is war; and, besides, I have not got time!
Violation of Wife After Husband Driven Away.
On the 4th September a soldier, sleeping in a house of
which Mme. X. was guardian, drove the husband and several
relations away by threatening them with Ins ride, and com-
pelled the woman to remain with him all night.
“I regret, Madame, it is War!'
At Trumilly, where the Germans remained from the 2nd
to the 4th September, they looted the commune and took away
in the artillery caissons, as well as in other vehicles, the whole
of the plunder. On the first day Mme. Huet, who had a party
of the staff of the 19th regiment of Hanoverian Dragoons, and
a large number of other soldiers billeted on her, saw a non-
commissioned officer seize a casket containing her jewels, worth
approximately £4OO. She went to complain to the colonel, who
merely answered, with a smile: “I Tegret, madame, it is
war!”
Robbery and Violation.
On the 3rd of September, the drst troops having left,
stragglers remained in the town. One of them, a soldier of the
91st regiment of infantry, on whose medal was engraved the
name of “Aline,” robbed the servants ol Mme, Huet of A
10s. £l2 from the owner of the house, and £l6 from M. Corni-
net.’ He then went to the house of Mme. X., whose husband


was serving in the French army, and, under threats of death
criminally assaulted her.
An Officer a Contemptible Thief.
During the occupation of this commune, M. Cornillet, the
victim of one of the thefts, to which we have just referred,
lodged an officer. After the departure of his guest, M. Cornil-
let discovered that the sum of £6, which was placed in a chest
in the room where the German had slept, had disappeared.
Finally, M. Colas, aged 70 years, was searched in the street by
a soldier and robbed of 255.
Brutal Murder of Two Frenchmen and Two Belgians.
One of the gravest of the outrages that have been related
to us in the department of the Oise was committed in Marque-
glise by an officer of superior rank. Two young men of Saint-
Quentin, named Charlet and Gabet, who had left Paris to
return to their native homes, in order to answer to the call to
arms, met on their way two Belgian subjects going to Jem-
rnapes, where they lived. These having offered them seats in
their vehicles, the four men journeyed together until they
reached Ressous, where they were arrested by a German troop.
They were bound, then taken to the territory of Marqueglise,
where they appeared before a superior officer, who interro-
gated them. Learning that two of them were Belgians, the
officer declared that the Belgians were “dirty people.” Then,
without any other explanation, he fired on each of the pris-
oners successively. The two Belgians and Gabet were struck in
the head and expired immediately. As to Charlet, wounded in
the neck and right shoulder, he feigned death; and, after the
departure of the murderer, dragged himself a little distance.
Before being carried to Compiegne (where he died the next
day), the unfortunate man told Abbe Boulet, the priest of
Marqueglise, the account of the cowardly treatment, of which
he and his companions had been the victims.
THE AISNE.
In the communes of the department of the Aisne, which
the Commission visited, it was enabled to investigate numerous
acts of pillage and outrages on females:—
Revolting and Obscene Treatment of Young Wife.
At Coninges, on the Bth September, towards 9 p.m., Mine.
X. was the victim of grave acts of violence on the part of two
Germans who had entered the house of her father and mother-
in-law, with whom she was staying in the absence of her hus-
band, who was at the front. One of the Germans kept Mr. X.,
the father-in-law, outside the door whilst the other subjected
the young woman (after having threatened her with his rifle)
to acts of the most revolting and obscene nature, and in the
presence of her mother-in-law. This brute, his crime accom-
plished, took the place of guard, and the other fiend outraged
the victim.


Pillage and Burning of Chateaux.
At Bniraetz, where the German occupation lasted from
the 3rd to the 10th September, the village was tired. A house
as well as the chateau of M. Maleyssie, stall" captain oi the
6th French Army Corps, were burnt.
At Chierry, the chateau of Varolles was destroyed by tire.
The chateau of Sparre was also burnt, after the rooms had
been completely pillaged. Valuable oil paintings were taken
out of their frames, and tapestry was slashed with swords.
At Jaulgonne, from the 3rd to the 10th September, a Prus-
sian guard pillaged the cellars, took away clothing, and caused
£lO,OOO worth of damage, besides burning a house, under the
pretext that the proprietor had shot at them, whereas he was
hiding in his cellar.
Assassination of Two Aged Men.
Two inhabitants of this commune, one named M. Rem-
penault, aged 87, was shot; another named Blanchard, aged
61, was bayonetted in the street.
Abandoned Houses Pillaged and Women Violated.
At Channel, the Germans, on arrival, smashed in the
doors of the houses, and did not leave a single bottle of wine
in the cellars; they also pillaged the principal houses after they
had been abandoned, taking clothes, jewellery, silverware,
etc. At the school they stole the box containing the funds of the
Mutual Help Society, amounting to £l2. On the 3rd Septem-
ber, at 11 p.m., they set fire to the chateau of Mine. De Rouge,
and on the same day one of them forced his way into the home
of Mme. X., seized her by the throat, and violated her.
At Coincy, on the 3rd and 4th September, they pillaged the
cellars, sacked the inhabited houses, and criminally assaulted
several women of the village.
A Child-Servant Outraged.
At Bezu-Saint-Germain, on the Bth September, two soldier
cyclists arrived at the farm of , and remained there part of
the night, after having compelled the inmates to retire, pro-
hibiting them under penalty of death to move, no matter what
noises they heard. One of the soldiers then went to the room
of a female servant, aged 13, and, placing his hand on her
mouth, violated her. Having heard the cries of the child, the
daughter of the farm jumped out of the window and appealed
to some officers who were lodging next door. One of them
arrested the two cyclists who were returning from the farm,
and passed them at that moment, and ordered them to be taken
to the general quarters ; but the next day when the victim was
invited to recognise the culprit and point him out, she was un-
able to do so because he had disappeared.
Murder of an Inoffensive Youth.
On the 3rd September, at Crezancy, the soldiers drove out
of his house young Lesaint, aged 18, and an officer shot him


with his revolver. One of the comrades of the murderer after-
wards declared that the homicide had been committed because
Lesaint was a soldier; and on the denial of the fact by his
interlocutor, the officer added: “Well, he was to be one.” He
also said that the young man was a fool, because he had, with
intent to run away, blown out the candle which was lighting his
room. It was proved that this candle had not been extinguished
by the unfortunate Lesaint, but was taken away by a German
soldier Avho wished to search the house. The officer, at any rate,
consented to admit that his comrade had fired too quickly.
Treasurer Executed for Protecting His Cash-box.
In the same locality, M. Dupont, treasurer of a society,
was arrested on the 4th of September because he had attempted
to protect his cash-box against the cupidity of a soldier who
was rifling it. With a cavalry helmet, which had been thrust
over his eyes, and his two hands tied behind his back, he was
made the plaything of the Germans, who amused themselves
by making him climb a very steep incline whilst they were
beating him most unmercifully and prodding him with bayo-
nets each time he fell. He was transferred on the 6th to Charly-
sur-Marne in the midst of a convoy of military prisoners. On
the morning of the Bth his tormentors compelled him to follow
the column. As he was unable to drag himself along through
the brutal treatment he had received, the Germans redoubled
the blows, and pushed him along. About half a mile further on
his executioners put an end to his sufferings by a bayonet
thrust in the heart.
Thieving German Military Doctors.
At Chateau-Thierry, where the Germans sojourned from
the 2nd to the 9th September, pillaging was carried out under
the supervision of the officers. Subsequently military doctors
had been left in the town after the departure of their array,,
having been included in the party of prisoners exchanged;
their medical chests were opened and found to contain clothing
pillaged from shops.
Girl Violated by Two Soldiers.
On the sth September, a girl, aged 14, met a coldier as
she was returning from the baker’s shop. She was dragged
into the shop of a bootmaker, and there, in a room where two
other soldiers joined him, she was thrown on a bed (and being
threatened with a bayonet) was criminally assaulted by two
of the ruffians. The third was preparing to follow suit, but
was touched by the supplications of the -child, and desisted.
Woman Violated by Four Ruffians.
The aunt of the girl. Mine. X., was also the victim of
brutal lust at Verdilly, where her family has a farm. After
having bound her husband with ropes, four soldiers, belonging
to the heavy artillery corps, chased her into a neighbour’s


house. They terrorised the inmates by threats, and then each
successively violated the unfortunate woman.
Three Refugees in a Cellar Suffocated by Smoke.
At Hartennes-et-Taux, in the district of Soissons, the Ger-
mans, following their usual custom, pillaged the houses. In the
hamlet of Taux, they lit some straw, with which they had
plugged the openings of an isolated cellar, where three of the
inhabitants (whom they mistook for soldiers) had taken re-
fuge. The three men were asphyxiated by the smoke.
Offences Against Military Law.
The offences committed in violation of the laws of warfare
with regard to combatants, murder of wounded or prisoners,
ruses prohibited by international convention, attacks on doc-
tors and stretcher-bearers, have been innumerable in all places
where engagements took place. It is impossible for the Com-
mission to testify to the majority of them, because witnesses
thereat are mostly military, and compelled to be moved about
continuously. These acts, however, have been related in the
reports addressed by the commanding officers to the military
authorities, who could add these documents to our enquiry, if
they thought fit. A great number are also testified by evidence
that magistrates had collected in the hospitals in which we are
now at the present time investigating with the view of issuing
a complementary report. The Commission has, nevertheless,
been able to collect a certain number during the course of its
labours.
Fiendish Treatment of French Wounded Soldiers.
At Bar-le-Duc, Surgeon-General Ferry gave the Commis-
sion depositions collected by him in his corps. Sergeant Le-
merre of the regiment of infantry, declared to him that,
being wounded in the leg on the 6th September, at Rernber-
court, by a splinter of shell, he was left on the ground during
eight days by the German ambulance men, who saw him per-
fectly well. The fourth day, by command of an officer, who
traversed the battlefield, with revolver in hand, this sergeant
was wounded afresh by a gun fired at him by a soldier. He
has besides repeatedly seen around him German stretcher-
bearers firing on our wounded.
The soldier Dreyfus, of infantry, related to Dr.
Perry the following:—
Wounded at Somaine, on the 10th September, he was leav-
ing the battlefield when he met three Germans, and told them
in” their language that he had been wounded, but they
answered, it was no reason why he should not get another
shot, and he thereupon received a point blank shot in the socket
of one of his eyes.
At Yaubeeourt, an infantry sergeant and two privates
were shot by the enemy under the plea that one of the latter
had been captured in the church steeple, from where he might
have exchanged signals with our troops.


On the 22nd August a German detachment arrived at the
farm of Petite Rochelle, in the territory of Bonvillers in
Meurthe-et-Moselle, where the proprietor, M. Bouillon, had
given shelter to some French wounded. The officer command-
ing the detachment ordered four of his men to bring nine of the
wounded, who were stretched in the barn. Each one of these
was shot through the head. As Mme. Bouillon was praying
for mercy for them, the officer told her to “shut up!” putting
his revolver to her chest.
On the 25th August, the Abbe Denis, priest of Remcre-
ville, in the evening was ministering to Lieutenant Toussaint,
who, in July last, had gained first honours in the College of
Forestry. Wounded on the battle-field, the lieutenant had been
stabbed with bayonets by every German who passed by him.
Bis body was covered with wounds from head to foot.
In the hospital of Nancy, the Commission saw a soldier
named Voyer, of the regiment of infantry, who still bore
traces of German brutality. Grievously hurt in the spine, in the
forest of Charapenoux, on the 24th August, and paralysed in
both legs through his wound, he had lain on his stomach, when
a German soldier had brutally turned him over with his rifle
find struck him three smashing blows on the head. Other sol-
ders, passing near him, had also struck the poor fellow with
rifle butts, and kicked him. Finally, one of these ruffians had
made wounds below and about two inches from each eye, with
an instrument that the victim was unable to distinguish; but
which, in the opinion of Dr. Weiss, doctor-in-chief and pro-
fessor at the Faculty of Nancy, must have been a pair of
scissors.
A hussar, who had been treated by the same doctor, nar-
rates that, having fractured his leg by falling off his horse and
being pinned under his mount, he was assailed by Uhlans and
robbed of his watch and chain ; and one of them having taken
his carbine shot him in the eye.
Germans “Finish Off” French Wounded on Battle-fields.
Seven French soldiers, to whom Dr, Weiss also gave atten-
tion, affirmed to him that they had seen the enemy “finish off”
the wounded on the battle-field. When they feigned death to
escape the massacre, the Germans had struck them with the
butts of their rifles to find out whether they were still alive.
How German Officers Reward Humanity in Their Soldiers.
In the same hospital, a German soldier, wounded in the
stomach, confided to Dr. Rohmer that his wound had been
caused by a revolver shot from his officer because he had re-
fused to finish off a wounded Frenchman. Finally, another Ger-
man with a large wound in his back, produced by a shot fired
point blank, declared to Dr. Weiss that, in obedience to an order
given by an officer, a soldier had fired on him as a punishment
for having carried to a contiguous village several of our
wounded.


French Doctor Fired on While Rendering First Aid.
On the 25th August, at'Einvaux, the Germans opened fire
at about 850 yards on Dr. Millet, surgeon-major of the
colonial regiment, at the moment when, aided by two stretcher-
bearers, he was giving first aid to a man on a stretcher. As the
doctor presented his left side, the enemy could positively dis-
cern his Red Cross armlet. Besides, the enemy could not have
been mistaken as to the nature of the work the three men
were engaged upon.
One of Many German Ruses.
On the same day Captain Perraud, of the same regiment
referred to above, having noticed that the soldiers of a section
(taking his objective by machine guns) wore red pants. He
gave orders to cease firing, immediately that section fired on
him and his men. The section comprised disguised Germans.
The report was signed at Paris on the 17th December,
1914, by G. Payelle, President; Armand Mollard, G. Maringer,
and Paillot, Secretary.
Cast on I’rlnt. ’I'hone City 1419.


r
We can
success fully
train you
by our
Individual
Method or
by Postal
Instruction
Send your
name and
address
for
Prospectus
and
further
details.
We Build Strong Bodies
THIS is the age of the powerful man. Not for
the sake of his strength alone —but for what
it brings. Rich, red blood, coursing through
steel-strong muscles, results in a nerve tone that
makes for an alert mind -a resolute will. And,
are these not the requirements of EVERY man in
the march of such events as this book portrays ?
By means of scientific physical training, we turn
flabby tissue into healthy, strong muscle. For
fifteen years we have been doing fit successfully,
and only recently sent men to the front, who pre-
vious to our treatment could not pass the doctor.
Write and let us tell you more fully what a body
of 100 per cent, efficiency means to you.
THE DUPAIN INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION
Royal Chambers. Castlereagh & hunter Sts.,
Tel. City 33.
SYDNEY.
J


El CONSUELO CIGARS
The Little Square Box
with the Red Label.
THE FINEST BRITISH-MADE
HAVANA CIGAR ON THE MARKET.
RETAIL Box 50, 22/6. -6d. each
AS SUPPLIED TO ALL LEADING CLUBS
AND HOTELS THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA
If you want the finest cigarette pro-
duced in Bona Street, London W., either
in Egyptian or Virginian, ask for
“PHILIP MORRIS.” By appointment
to Royalty.
Wholesale only :
Capron, Carter St Co., Ltd.
127 YORK STREET, SYDNEY.
97 ELIZABETH ST., MELBOURNE.
97 EAGLE ST., BRISBANE.
