

GERMANY
AND
ENGLAND
BY
ROBERT BLATCHFORD.
Reprinted from
" The Daily Mail”
THE SPECIALTY PRESS PTY. LTD.
189 Little Collins Street, Melbourne


Australian Patriotic Post Cards
Six Cards for Sixpence
1. Entente Cordiale 2/
2. Good Luck to Our Boys!
3» Hoch '«ter Kaiser\' ''S':
4. King and Kitchener
(Watchwords of Empire)
5.. Admiral jfellicoe and Dreadnought
6. Australia Will be there!
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS




Reprinted from ‘‘The Daily Mail.”
GERMANY AND ENGLAND
BY ROBERT BLATCHFORD.
The author of these articles is the best-known leader of the English
Socialists, and is one of the founders of the modern Socialist
movement in this country. Under the nom de guerre of
“Nunquam” he wrote “Merrie England,” of which one and a
half million copies have been sold. He is editor of the “Clarion,”
which is by general consent the ablest and most influential of
Socialist journals; and he is master of a style that for vigour
and terseness has been surpassed by no English writer since the
days of Cobbett.
I.—THE MENACE.
I write these articles because I believe that Germany is deliber-
ately preparing to destroy the British Empire; and because I know
that we are not able or ready to defend ourselves against a sudden
and formidable attack,
I write from a sense of duty, and from a conviction that the
destruction of the British Empire would be a misfortune for Europe
and a blow to civilisation throughout the world.
I take this course against my own interests and against the feel-
ing of most of my political and many of my private friends.
I write in The Daily Mail in the hope of arousing the public from
the fatal apathy and complacent optimism which blind them to the
greatest peril the nation has ever been called upon to face.
At the present moment the whole country is in a ferment about
the Budget, and the Peers, and the Election. It seems sheer criminal
lunacy to waste time and strength in chasing such political bubbles
when the existence of the Empire is threatened by so brave and power-
ful and indefatigable a nation as Germany.
The public do not realise the gravity of the German menace.
Serious warnings have been uttered publicly by Mr. Asquith, by
Mr. Balfour, by Sir Edward Grey, by Lord Lansdowne, by Lord
Cromer, and by Lord Roberts. But these warnings have not been
sufficiently gross or sufficiently explicit to be understanded of the
people. _ They have been forgotten in the national excitement about
the Steinheil case, the football matches, and the terrific struggle as to
whether the dukes shall pay a halfpenny tax or foist it upon their
neighbours.
The Empire is in danger, but the people do not believe_it. They
have been taught to regard the German menace as a wild scare of in-
vasion, and they believe the Navy can protect them while they make
their money or take their ease.
But the danger of invasion is not the greatest or the only danger;
and the strongest Navy in the world could not save us from disaster
should the lowering war clouds break before we are prepared.


Invasion is not the greatest danger; is not the nearest danger;
there is a greater danger, and a nearer, from which the Navy alone,
howsoever powerful and gallant, could not deliver us.
But what motive can the Germans have for attacking us; and
how can they attack us except upon the sea?
Let us consider these two questions.
What motive can the Germans have for attacking us?
What motive had they for attacking Denmark in 1864? What
motive had they for attacking Austria in 1866? What motive for
attacking France in 1870?
Germany is preparing to attack us because we stand in the way
of her ambitions.
The ambition of the Pan-Germans, who are the war party, who
are the masters of Germany, is no new thing in world-history: it is a
very old thing, as old as it is evil. For the Pan-Germanic ambition
is the ambition for empire; the ambition to dominate and exploit the
world. It is the old, old lust for power and glory, the old, old greed
for trade and wealth.
World-domination, conquest! That was the dream of Babylon,
of Persia, of Greece, of Rome, of Spain, and France, and Russia. It
is the dream of Germany to-day.
What motive can Germany have for attacking Britain? Nearly
every German could tell us, if he would. Every public man in
America, France, Italy, and Russia could answer the question. We
have been told over and over again by speakers and writers in Ger-
many why Germany should and will attack us.
A motive? What has caused most of the great wars recorded
in history? Ambition and greed; the lust for glory and wealth and
power.
Why should Germany attack Britain?
The population of Germany is rapidly increasing. Germany
needs Colonies; Britain has taken all the Colonies worth having. Bri-
tain holds India, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Egypt, and the
most desirable parts of Africa.
Germany is hungry for trade and for influence in distant seas;
Britain holds fortresses and coaling stations all over the earth: Gib-
raltar, Malta, Cyprus, Capetown, the West Indies, and many others.
If we glance at a map we find the North Sea exit threatened by
Dover and the Mediterranean entrance threatened by Gibraltar.
Germany sorely needs more ports, a greater seaboard. Belgium
and Holland would he to her invaluable. How many wars has Russia
waged in her efforts to gain access to the sea?
Germany and Britain are keen commercial rivals. How many
wars have been caused by commercial .jealousy. A year ago the
Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, boasting of the growth of German
trade, concluded with the following significant words:—
Germany is gaining more and more ground, and hems in the other countries
in an increasing degree. And the natural result of commercial competition is
political antagonism.
The National Defence Magazine for October last quotes from an
article which appeared in the Standard as far hack as July, 1907. The
following passage is worth repeating here :
"German policy,” writes Eegierungsrat Martin, "does not now aim at


incorporating the Baltic provinces of Russia and Russian Poland in the German
Empire, nor does it aim at bringing about a closer relation between Germany
and Austria-Hungary, German policy does not aim at establishing a German
protectorate over European and Asiatic Turkey, nor at the addition of
Holland and Belgium to the Federal German Empire. Nevertheless, all
these changes will take place in our own time, within the next twenty or
thirty years, and no one in Germany will be able to arrest the inevitable
trend of events. Germany will achieve her destiny without consciously pur-
suing these aims. ;; England, having realised that Germany will be driven
by tne course of events to expand in this direction and to this extent, and
perceiving the extraordinary progress which the Germans are already making
towards a world-supremacy in commerce and politics, has adopted the deliber-
ate policy of hampering Berman expansion at every possible point. Germany,
declares the author, will not wait till she is attacked or until the anti-German
coalition is in a better position to dictate terms to her. She will strike out
at the first sign that her interests and her national honour are menaced.
Germany will “strike out” at the first sign of danger. She
regards world-domination as her “destiny,” and is ready to “strike
out” for it. She has an Army of four million men and a Meet second
only to ours, and she will “strike out” with these. And Britain
is regarded by her as the last barrier to the realisation of her destiny.
Why should Germany attack Britain? Because Germany and
Britain are commercial and political rivals: because Germany covets
the trade, the Colonies, the influence and the Empire which Britain
now possesses: because Germany, having defeated France and made
friends with Austria, and having no fear of Russia for some years to
come, feels that Britain is her only dangerous opponent.
Finally, and this I would say with emphasis, Germany will
attack Britain because she knows herself to be strong, and because
she believes that Britain, her rich and influential rival, has grown fat
and impotent and would fall an easy victim to a well-planned, reso-
lute, and powerful attack.
The policy of Germany is the Bismarckian policy of deliberate
and ruthless conquest, with world-dominion for its goal. The tradi-
tional policy of Britain is the expansion of the Empire and the main-
tenance of the balance of power in Europe.
It is not for the general good that any single Power should
dominate Europe. It would not be well that Britain, or France, or
Italy, or Russia should dominate Europe. It would not be well that
Germany should dominate Europe. It is desirable that Britain and
France and Germany and Italy and Holland should be free and
strong and independent. It is desirable that those nations should
preserve their integrity and should remain free to realise the genius
of their peoples.
But in the pursuit of a quite unlawful ambition the Pan-Germans
menace the honour-and the liberty of the British, and the French,
and the Danes, and the Dutch. All Europe is to be Teutonised. We
are all to be drilled and schooled and uniformed and taxed by Prus-
sian officials, and the Emperor William 11. is to rule us with a rod
of iron.
That is the Pan-Germanic dream. That is the ambition which
is driving Germany into a war of aggression against this country.
But the British people do not believe it. The British people
take little interest in foreign affairs, and less in military matters. The
British people do not want to bother, they do not want to pay, they


do not want to fight, and they regard as cranks or nuisances all who
try to warn them of their danger.
The danger is very great and is very near. It is greater and
nearer than it was when I began to give warning of it, more than five
years ago.
The public will not believe it; let us look at the evidence.
II.—EVIDENCES OF GERMAN HOSTILITY.
Bismarck’s famous declaration that the destinies of Germany
were to be worked out not by notes and speeches, but by blood and
iron, is the soul of the Pan-German policy. Let those who credit
Germany with a lamb-like nature ponder that grim phrase, and
weigh it in conjunction with the following historic facts.
In 1862 Bismarck became Prime Minister of Prussia. He imme-
diately forced through the Reichstag an Army reorganisation scheme.
Moltke and Yon Roon reorganised the Army. In 1864 Prussia
attacked Denmark, and annexed Schleswig-Holstein. This gave Kiel
to Prussia. In 1866 Prussia attacked and defeated Austria, crushing
the Austrians in six weeks and annexing Hanover, Hesse, and Nassau.
In 1870 Bismarck altered the Ems telegram, and Prussia fought and
defeated the French, and annexed Alsace and Lorraine. The French
paid also an indemnity of 200 millions. The result of this war was
the formation of the German Empire and the foundation of the largest
and most scientific Army in Europe. Such was the policy of blood
and iron.
Is there any reason to suppose that the nation which attacked
Denmark, Austria, and France would hesitate to attack us if their
interests dictated the step and they felt sure of victory ?
Is Germany under William It. more lamb-like than Prussia under
Bismarck ?
There was the Kruger telegram. Was that or was it not a hostile
act against Britain? And there was the significant speech of the
Emperor just afterwards, in which he said, “the Trident must be in
our fist.”
Then came the fierce outbreak of Anglophobia during the Boer
war, and again the Emperor voiced the general feeling by saying
We are in bitter need of a strong German Navy If the in-
creased demand during the first years of my reign had not been continually
refused to me .... how differently should we be able to further our
flourishing commerce and our interests oversea.
Then came the German Navy Bill, which laid the foundations of
Germany’s naval power. The preamble to that Bill was fairly sug-
gestive, but said less than the Kaiser had said in a telegram to his
brother; “I will never rest until I have raised the German Navy to
the position which the German Army holds to-day.” The premier
position. The position which would reduce Great Britain to the
rank of a third-class Power.
But the Emperor’s speeches were mild and pacific in comparison
with the speeches of German statesmen, generals, admirals, and pro


lessors. Here is an extract from an article by the great German
historian, Professor Treitsche: —
If our Empire has the courage to follow an independent Colonial policy
with determination, a collision of our interests and those of England is
unavoidable. It was natural and logical that the new Great Power of
Central Europe had to settle affairs with all Great Powers. We have settled
our accounts with Austria-Hungary, with Prance, and with Russia. Ihe last
settlement, the settlement with England, will probably be the lengthiest and
most difficult.
A year after after the Boer war began Yon der Goltz wrote in the
Deutsche Rundschau : —
The material foundations of our power are broad enough to warrant the
thought of successful opposition to British supremacy. Germany must meet
this war if it comes—and must lose no time in making her preparations.
In how many novels, speeches, articles, and pamphlets have Ger-
man soldiers and civilians declared the national hope and purpose of
destroying British naval supremacy and breaking up the British
Empire? Their name is legion.
The national enthusiasm for Count Zeppelin arises mainly from
the hope that German war balloons may be able to destroy the British
fleets and leave this country open to an irresistible German invasion
in force. No sooner does a German succeed in flying a hundred
miles in any airship than the artists and writers of the Fatherland
are busy with tales and pictures of German air fleets raining down
destruction upon British squadrons.
Is Germany as pacific and dove-like as British Liberals and
Labourists believe? What of the humiliation of France during the
Morocco trouble, when Germany threatened to invade France unless
M. Delcasse were compelled to resign office? What of the German
humiliation of Russia during the recent squabble in the Balkans? It
is the policy of blood and iron, or, to use a more modern phrase, the
policy of the “Mailed Fist.”
The German Navy League was founded upon the passing of the
German Navy Act. Of this organisation the Quarterly Review
says: . .i
The German “Flottenverein” or Navy League boasts a million paying
members, and is the largest and most spirited patriotic organisation of its
kind that has ever existed in any country. It draws its adherents from all
parts of the Empire. It is strong in the South German cities like Munich
and in the northern seaports. It is filled with Pan-Germanic feeling, and it
is, of course, saturated with anti-British sentiment. The open aim of this
organisation is the eventual achievement of naval supremacy. The achieve-
ment of that aim would mean, of course, the destruction of the British
Empire.
In “Our German Cousins,” a Daily Mail publication, I read: —
It was a close imitation of the British Navy League, but with this
difference, that it enjoyed from the first the patronage of all the German
royalties. Prince Henry of Prussia became its patron, and the leaders of the
German nobility enrolled themselves in its ranks. It grew in strength with
marvellous rapidity, till to-day it numbers over a million members, till the
circulation of its journal Die Flotte reaches nearly half a million, till its pub-
lications and maps are seen throughout Germany, in barber’s shops, in hotels,
in railway stations. It maintains armies of lecturers; it gives cinemato-
graphic shows everywhere. While the British Navy League has a revenue
of only about £3,500, the Germany Navy League has a revenue exceeding
£50,000. For more than ten years it has carried out an educational cam-
paign throughout Germany in favour of an all-powerful fleet, until to-day its
work is practically done.


One million members; imperial and aristocratic support of an
organisation wliich is Pan-Germanic and anti-British.
Vvbo has forgotten the Emperor's action after the Japanese war
with China, wlien Jb ranee and Russia and Germany handed Port
Arthur over to Russia? And what of the little attempt of our Ger-
man cousins to raise a coalition of Germany, Prance, and .Russia
against us?
And that toast drunk every night in every German warship, ‘ ‘ To
the day,” a friendly and paciric toast to the day when the German
Pieet shall defeat tne -British Pleet in the North Sea; how do the
peace party relish that toast?
Three years ago the British made proposals for a restriction of
naval armaments. That was at the time of the Hague Conference.
Germany declined to consider such proposals.
And when the British made more or less tentative suggestions to
the same effect to Germany, the offer was rejected with contempt.
Still, the Liberal Government were loatli to accept the situation.
They would not believe in the alleged magnitude ami celerity of the
German naval increase; they held back tffe construction of British
Dreadnoughts; and they found that Germany had secretly rushed
her naval preparations in the hope of stealing a march on us.
So much for the historic evidence of German hostility. Let
us take next the evidence of our own action.
In the preamble to the German Navy Act stress was laid upon the
fact that our fleets must in peace and war be scattered over the world,
while the German fleet could be concentrated in the North Sea.
Very well; we brought home ships from the Mediterranean and
from the China station, and we gradually concentrated most of our
naval strength in home waters. The strategic base of our Navy
to-day is tffe North Sea. When I began to write on the German
menace live years ago we had no fleet in the North Sea. Couple
together the German statement that our fleet must be scattered and
the fact that the German fleet is always in the North Sea and the
fact that our naval power is now based on the North Sea, and read
the lesson. "What do these things mean?
Pive years ago our officials said that there was no need for the
naval base at Rosyth. To-day that base is being constructed in some
haste. Why ?
The King and his councillors have strained every nerve to estab-
lish ententes with Russia with Italy; and have formed an entente
with Prance and an alliance with Japan. Why ? To isolate Ger-
many: the country with whom we are on such cordial terms: the
country whose intentions towards us are so brotherly and pacific.
As I have said, Lord Roberts, Mr. Asquith, Mr. Balfour, and
Sir Edward Grey have made speeches in which they have warned us
of some impending danger. What is that danger? We are in no
danger of attack by Russia, by Prance, by Italy, by America. By
whom, then, are we so seriously menaced if not by Germany?
To some of us there is sufficient cause for anxiety as to German
intentions in the facts within our own knowledge.
The Ministers and ex-Ministers of the King must in the nature
of things possess knowledge which we lack; and they are anxious, and
warn the country of impending dangers. Are we to believe that


they are mistaken? Or is it reasonable to assume that the King’s
political, naval, and military advisers are better informed than the
Labour members and Mr. Winston Churchill?
Very well: let us now consider the evidence of facts.
III.—THE EVIDENCE OP FACTS.
The strongest evidence of Germany’s designs against Britain is
the German Navy. There can be no stronger evidence of any nation’s
intention to make war than that afforded by wholesale, feverish, and
systematic preparations for war.
Now the German preparations are naval preparations. Against
whom can these preparations be directed if they are not directed
against us? Manifestly they are not meant for Russia, nor for
France, nor for America. The magnitude of the preparations points
to a prospective struggle with a fleet more powerful than that of
Russia or France. The construction of the German ships prohibits
their use in distant seas, against Japan, for instance, or the United
States. And whereas we have been told in a hundred books and
newspapers and pamphlets and speeches that _ the German Navy is
meant to wrest from Britain her command of the sea, it would he
difficult to find a single German suggestion that the German Navy is
meant to try conclusions with any Power other than Britain. Ger-
many can reach France or Russia by land. Her fleet is already more
than a match for Russia and France combined.
Her fleet is built for the North Sea, it is exercised in the North
Sea, it remains in the North Sea.
Her ships are built against our ships, the object of the German
builders being always to go one better than the British in each type.
In any discussion of the speed or power of her ships, and in any
discussion of the merits of her guns, or the quality of her officers and
men, Germany invariably makes her comparison with the guns and
ships and men of the British Navy.
I do not believe there is a single naval or military officer in Eng-
land or on the Continent who does not know this and understand it.
Consider the magnitude of the German naval preparations. When
her programme is completed Germany will have a fleet of at least
thirty, and probably fifty, battleships of the Dreadnought and Super-
Dreadnought class.
But German energy has not confined itself to the construction of
a number of ships as laid down in the various Naval Acts. Every
effort has been made to increase the capacity for rapid construction
of ships and guns. Two years ago we could outbuild and outgun
Germany with ease. But to-day it is doubtful whether we can build
as rapidly or arm as rapidly as she.
During the last two years (I quote The Daily Mail ) Germany has
launched nine battleships of the Dreadnought and Super-Dread-
nought class.
So strenuous has been the German endeavour in this direction
that working at high pressure Germany can now turn out one Super-
Dreadnought a month, fully equipped and armed. It would tax
our resources to the utmost to keep pace with such an output.


And, I think, no one will be foolish enough to suppose that all
this effort has been made for the protection of German commerce, or
for use against the Navy of either Russia or France. No; it is aimed
at the naval supremacy of Britain, and at nothing else in the world.
But the Germans have not confined themselves, as we have, to
the building and arming of battleships. They have fortified Heligo-
land, and are working night and day at a harbour there. They are
widening the Kiel Canal. They are constructing or have constructed
seventeen docks capable of holding ships of the largest class.
How many submarines and torpedo-boats and destroyers the
Germans have built and hidden in their ports and rivers German
secrecy makes it impossible to say; but we know that the number is
large.
Mines, again, have been made in vast quantities, and will be
largely used in any naval war which Germany may wage.
All these preparations, it must be remembered, are made in the
North Sea and its tributaries. It is in the North Sea that the Ger-
man Navy means to fight. Against whom? Not the Chinese, nor
the South American Republics, nor the Danes. No; obviously
against the nation which is so wisely sure of German friendship, so
sanely convinced of the criminal folly of the Jingoes who take a
perverse delight in fomenting mischievous and ridiculous war
“scares.”
And then there is Emden, with its “long quays.” At Eraden,
which is a small, obscure town, every preparation has been made for
the embarkation of enormous masses of troops. Against whom could
such troops be used? Not against Russia; not against France, which
could be so much more easily and effectually assailed by land. No;
the long quavs were made for the embarkation of an army for the
invasion of England. If the long quays were made for any other
purpose they were made by fools. Now, the Germans are not fools.
This is not all the evidence; but it will serve. The German
method has always been to prepare secretly and thoroughly for war,
while professing peace. Germany is now preparing for war upon a
greater scale than she ever before attempted, and is at the same time
professing peace to us. Germany behaved in the same way to Aus-
tria and to France, and when occasion served she fell upon her vic-
tims, defeated them, and annexed their territory.
Germany has on more than one occasion given wav to furious
and bitter manifestations of hatred against Britain. The acts and
speeches of the Emperor, of his Ministers, and of his officers have
been hostile and unfriendly to us on many occasions. Tim German
Press is, and long has been, sporadically unfriendly to Britain. Ger-
many has during the past eight years made naval preparations on an
unprecedented scale, and in three years’ time will have an enormous
and powerful fleet in the North Sea, and behind the fleet everything
needed in the way of construction and armament, and docking and
repairing. Germany has ships, quays, equipment and men ready
for an invasion of an enemy’s country. The German nation is a
nation of soldiers, all organised, all equipped, all capable of rapid
mobilisation. Germany is the commercial and political rival of
Britain. Britain alone stands in the way of Germany’s realisation
of her dream of world-power and domination. Germany has threa


tened us and warned us over and over and over again through a thou*
sand tongues and pens.
It has been said that all these threats and warnings come from
irresponsible Chauvinists. But it is a significant fact that all the
utterances of these Chauvinists have been borne out by the acts of
the rulers and leaders of the German people. The German Govern-
ment may be doves and lambs; but they have made, and continue to
make, strenuous and gigantic preparations for war with Great Britain.
It is easy, perhaps, to find a plausible answer to any one piece
of evidence. But the cumulative evidence is overwhelming. It
admits of no other conclusion than the conclusion drawn by all cap-
able critics and judges in every country of the globe.
Quite evident to the dimmest eyes, and reiterated over and over
by German politicians and military men, is the German motive
for hostility to Britain.
Very significant is the historic evidence of Germany ’s past action
against Denmark, Austria, and Prance.
Very significant are the anxiety of our soldiers and statesmen
and the preparations, naval and military, which our Government has
made against a prospective attack which no nation other than Ger-
many is capable of attempting.
Very significant are the thousands of abusive or threatening
utterances from the Pan-Germanic party.
Most significant are the magnitude and eagerness of the German
naval preparations.
Weighing the evidence calmly and dispassionately, I feel it my
duty to declare my conviction that the British Empire is to-day con-
fronted by the most tremendous danger that has ever threatened its
existence.
And I must confess, with sorrowful misgiving, that the nation is
blind to its peril, and is proving itself impotent to meet that danger
as it must be met if the Empire is not to go down in complete and
irretrievable disaster.
IV.—CONCILIATION OR COMPROMISE?
The Pan-Germanic policy is based upon Bismarck’s theory: “The
destiny of Germany must be worked out in blood and iron.” It is
a blood and iron policy, and all hopes of overcoming it by a policy of
milk and water are doomed to failure.
Take, as an example, the fate of the innocent proposal for the
limitation of armaments.
Any limitation of armaments must embody the principle of Bri-
tain’s naval supremacy. But it is exactly that which the Pan-Ger-
mans resent and defy.
It does not require a very great effort of the imagination to
enable us to see that proposal with German eyes. Were I a German
I should say, “These islanders are cool customers. They have fenced
in all the best parts of the globe, they have bought or captured
fortresses, and ports in five continents, they have gained the lead in
commerce, they have a virtual monopoly of the carrying trade of the


world, they hold command of the seas, and now they propose that
we shall all be brothers, and that nobody shall fight or steal any
more. ’ ’
That is how a German must see the position. But the Germans
see and believe much more than that. They believe that Britain has
grown fat, and stupid, and cowardly. They see that Germany has
a population 50 per cent, larger than Britain, and very much better
educated, better trained, and better organised. They see that our
Army is small and unready; and they know that theirs is excellent in
quality, overwhelming in numbers, and in readiness and organisation
without a peer. They are sure that they can crush us on land. They
believe they can beat us in trade; they hope that they can outbuild
and outspend us and so become our masters on the sea.
And their rulers hold the theory that the destiny of Germany
must be worked out in blood and iron.
To these strong, resolute, and stern men of blood and iron come
the suave and modest British ambassadors of compromise and con-
ciliation. “My dear brothers,” says one ambassador, “may I sug-
gest a cessation of this ruinous rivalry in battleships? Would you
mind curtailing your naval programme so that I may retain command
of the seas without incurring more expense than my constituents will
approve, lam really very sorry; but the command of the sea is
essential to our national existence. Our people absolutely decline
to become soldiers, .and unless we are allowed to boss the sea we shall
become an easy prey for an enemy. So if you don’t mind, we will
arrange with you for a limitation of armaments, which will save us
money and prevent you from using your superior military strength
against us.”
Now, is not that a pretty dish to set before a Kaiser? Really,
the men of bleod and iron did not laugh so loudly as one might have
expected.
In fact, they did not laugh at all. They just shrugged their
shoulders and went on building harder than ever. It is one of the
funniest political episodes I can remember; and the funniest thing
about it was the British Government’s innocent and pained surprise.
“ Ha! ” said the men of blood and iron, ‘ £ I smell funk. They are
beginning to feel the pinch. Hurry up with those Super-Dread-
noughts.” And it was so.
Then the Labour delegates went over to Germany and slapped
their German comrades on the back and cried, “Hoch, hoch, hoch!”
And Mr. Keir Hardie actually believed that the fraternising of Bri-
tish and German Socialists in Germany would so delight the Emperor
that he would, to use Mr. Hardie’s own words, perform the remark-
able feat of “killing the war spirit before it was born.”
Well, the British and German comrades “hoched,” and our boys
came home. And when I was in Germany a few weeks ago I stood
in Essen and looked at the chimney forest of Krupp-town, and
reflected that the German blood and iron works had recently taken on
twenty-eight thousand new hands, and that, in spite of our Labour
members, Germany was now able to arm thirteen Super-Dreadnoughts
in a year. It really looks as though the Socialists had not con-
ciliated the Kaiser for nuts. Even the resolution of the Labour
Party seems to have failed; perhaps because “the destiny of Germany


is to be worked out not by speeches and majorities, but by blood and
iron.”
Then there is the expedient of building Germany in with a series
of alliances. A really statesmanlike idea, were it not that Germany’s
obstinate resolution to break out makes it very unpleasant for the
allies who are within reach of the giant’s arms.
And there is the Socialist theory of joint action by British and
German Socialists for the prevention of war. The idea is to stop the
supply of coal and stores by means of strikes. It is one of those
harmless games with which some Labour statesmen amuse them-
selves on dull days. The main result of it would be to hamper our
fleet. The Germans would settle their strike in swift and summary
fashion—by the arguments of “blood and iron.”
And there is the dazzling Mr. Winston Churchill, who called Lord
Cromer and me a pair of “ridiculous Jingoes,” and illuminated the
whole crisis by the brilliant declaration that there is no danger as long
as we continue to build up to a two-Power standard.
Building to a two-Power standard means, when Germany is in
full swing, the arming of twenty-six Super-Dreadnoughts in a year.
This, as the Frenchman said when the band-box fell on his hat for the
third time, “becomes amusing.”
But we are told by many well-meaning countrymen of ours that
all this scare about Germany is absurd, because of the evident friend-
liness of the German people and the British people for each other.
“The British do not want war: the Germans do not want war,” say
these amiable persons. How true; how true. But it does not
account for thirty-nine battleships a year.
Now ! shall suggest that all these attempts at conciliation and
compromise are based upon a misconception of the policy and govern-
ment of Germany.
I believe the German people (although! they have a million mem-
bers in their Navy League) are not unfriendly to us. But the Ger-
man people have no control over the German policy. They cannot
prevent the increase of German naval power even if they would—
which is doubtful. They cannot prevent a war when once their
rulers have decided upon war. They do not know the game their
rulers are playing. They would be plunged into war before they
were aware of the danger, and once in their own soldiers would sup-
press any attempt at interference, supposing any attempt were made.
The Bismarck theory of blood and iron has the great merit of
being simple and concise. The Germany theory of warfare fits it as
a bludgeon fits the hand of a footpad. “Full steam ahead,” is the
motto for the German Navy. “Forward” is the motto for the Army.
Go straight for the enemy and smash him. Never mind the cost.
We have plenty of men. We can afford heavy losses. But we must
win.
This theory demands loyalty, courage, and discipline from
officers and men. The German Army and Navy possess them.
The theory of blood and iron is simple. You single out one of
your neighbours at a time. You cajole him with friendly treatment
while you prepare to make an irresistible and unexpected attack upon
him. When you are quite ready, and when he is off his guard, you


knock him down, jump on his chest, and accept his watch and purse
as compensation. Thus is your destiny fulfilled. ~
Now a gentleman working on those lines is not to be fobbed, ott
with fine speeches. He will not restrain his mailed fist because his
victim is weak. Weakness is the opportunity he looks for.
No. If we do not want war with Germany we must he strong
enough to cause Germany to want peace.
Though Germany is a brave, resolute, and mighty enemyshe is
not omnipotent, nor is she invulnerable. _ But she means business
blood and iron business —and all conciliation, subterfuge, and compro-
mise provoke her to contempt and scorn. _
Germany puts her destinies into the hands of warriors; veleave
ours in the hands of politicians. Germany acts; we talk. Words
count for nothing in the game of blood and iron. _
Arm or surrender; fight for the Empire or lose it. vV c can
choose our alternative; no middle course is open to us.
V.-WANTED: A MAN.
There is danger ahead. Mr. Asquith has told us so, Lord
Roberts has told us so, Sir Edward Grey has told us so. And we
are not ready to meet that danger. And we are not making ready to
meet that danger. And the great majority of our people are oblivious
of that danger or refuse to recognise its existence.
A few years ago Lord Wolseley said: —
We are never ready for war, and yet we never have a Cabinet that
dare tell the people this truth.
That is a grave statement of a grave danger. Let us consider
what that statement implies.
It implies that we have had many Cabinets who were conscious
of our unreadiness for war and were afraid to tell the people what
they knew. ,
It implies that Cabinet after Cabinet has failed of its duty to the
nation through fear. . _ . . ,
It implies that Cabinet after Cabinet, knowing the Empire to_ be
unsafe, has proved too cowardly and disloyal to ask for reformation
or to give the alarm.
It implies that British Cabinets are unworthy of the nation s
confidence. . . _
lam afraid it implies more than that. lam afraid it implies
that British Cabinet Ministers, for the sake of remaining in power,
have time after time concealed a state of affairs which in the event
of war would expose the Empire to serious risks of dishonour and
defeat. , . _ .
The statement is Lord Wolseley s, not mine. It is a grave state-
ment gravely made by a distinguished general of long and wide ex-
perience. . , _ .
Is the statement true 1 It was proven true in the days ot the
Crimean "Whr, and again in the days of the Boer W ar. It is true
to day. to-day for there is danger ahead, as several Cabinet


Ministers of both parties have declared, and we are not ready for war,
as all our military authorities well know.
The members of the present Cabinet and the members of the pre-
ceding Cabinet are aware of the danger, Mr. Balfour and Sir Edward
Grey and others have told us so; and they are aware of our unreadi-
ness, but lack the moral courage to confess it.
The party that goes to the country with a sound and safe pro-
gramme of national defence will be defeated at the polls. The vic-
torious party will go into power knowing that the country is deceived,
and will act once more the disloyal and cowardly farce of guarding the
national safety and husbanding the national resources.
Every Cabinet Minister in Britain knows this; not one of them
is man enough to tell the people and take the consequences.
Noble lords and honourable gentlemen are afraid. Lord Wolse-
ley says so. The facts say so. History say so. The debates prove
it, the Budget proves it, the Army and the Navy know it. Noble
lords and honourable gentlemen are afraid of the electorate, and will
repeat again and again a breach of trust rather than face their be-
trayed countrymen with the ugly truth.
Should a great war come suddenly upon us, noble lords and
honourable gentlemen would have Averse things to face than the
hostile votes of a crowd too stingy to pay and too selfish to fight. The
days of disaster would be bad days for Cabinet Ministers.
Now I am going to say, in the teeth of the anti-militarist and
anti-patriotic masses, what I believe noble lords and honourable gen-
tlemen know and have not the pluck to declare.
I am going to say that unless the British people are ready to fight
and pay and work as, they have not fought and paid and striven for a
hundred years—if ever —the Empire will assuredly go to pieces and
’leave us beggared and disgraced under the conquest of a braver,
better trained, and better organised nation.
I believe our Cabinet Ministers of both parties know this and
are afraid to say it. It would be so unpopular. Loose speeches about
national defence, the Navy, and the Territorials we shall have in
plenty. The “outs” will volubly denounce the “ins,” and will sail
so near the truth as to assure us that the Liberal Cabinet are not to be
trusted to do their duty by the Army and the Navy.
But will any noble lord or honourable gentleman in either Cabinet
have the manly courage to tell the people all that is wanted? No.
Not a Cabinet Minister will dare to mention the vast sums and the
drastic measures which in his own mind he knows to be required for
the safety of the Empire.
Against the Germans our Ministers have to work under serious
disadvantages. Here the Army, the Navy, and the Cabinet are separ-
ate institutions, and the naval and military policy changes with each
change of Government. Here the Cabinet fears to demand supplies,
fears to demand service, fears to disclose facts. The Services are
starved and disorganised for fear of an electorate who like their glory
cheap and their security cheap, and whose ignorance of foreign affairs
and of all matters military and naval causes them to swallow with
avidity the clap-trap of amiable doctrinaires who preach peace in the
face of armed nations marching to battle.
The people are conceited, self-indulgent, decadent, and greedy.


They want to keep the Empire without sacrifice or service. They
will shout for the Empire, but they will not pay for the Empire or
fight for Germany knows this. The world knows it. The
Cabinet Ministers know it. But no Minister dares to say it. We are
in sore need of a man.
In Germany the men are all trained and disciplined soldiers or
sailors. In Germany the work of the Army and Navy organisation,
control, and direction is not tossed from Cabinet to Cabinet at the
whim of an uninformed body of civilian electors: it is continuous. It
goes on steadily day after day, year after year. To it is devoted the
best work of the best brains in a military nation.
What chance have we against such thoroughness, experience, and
diligence as that?
It is related of Yon Roon, the Prussian War Minister, that when
war was declared with France he went home to take a few days’ rest.
His work was done. The Army was ready. The War Minister had
nothing to worry about. Imagine the British Minister of War’s
condition of mind if war were declared against us by Germany to-day!
The French were defeated by the Germans because they were not
ready; the Spaniards were defeated by the Americans because they
were not ready; the Russians were defeated by the Japanese because
they were not ready. We are not ready: Germany is ready. We
are never ready: Germany is always ready.
The Liberal Government made a fatal blunder when they hesi-
tated to lay down the four extra Dreadnoughts. They were trying
to economise. They were hoping for a cheap way out of the diffi-
culty. They were waiting for something to turn up. The Germans
knew this and made a tremendous effort to get ahead of us. It is
not safe to trust the tradition of Micawher against the tradition of
blood and iron.
Had the British Government, instead of trying to save a few mil-
lions, asked the nation boldly for the full amount required, and set
about the necessary work in earnest, the Pan-Germans might have had
an unpleasant time with the German taxpayer.
It is time our Government and our people recognised the facts.
Germany has challenged us. If we show weakness we are lost. We
cannot bluff our enemy. We cannot evade him. We cannot buy
safety for an old song. We can only hold our own against so power-
ful and resolute an antagonist by showing an equal power and resolu-
tion. ' r ’
In the crisis to which I have .just referred we took the weak course
when we ought to have taken the strong one. Economy at such a
time is the most profligate extravagance.
When the Government held the four Dreadnoughts back they
should have been pushing a dozen Dreadnoughts forward; when they
tried to save a few millions they should have laid out fifty millions.
Instead of reducing the artillery and pottering about with a handful
of Territorials they should have demanded an Army.
But the Cabinet were afraid. We want a man.


VI.—ARMAGEDDON: THE GREATER DANGER.
Mr. Balfour once declared that the problem of imperial defence
was the problem of the defence of Afghanistan. But times have
changed since then, and I shall propose an amendment to the fol-
lowing effect: —
The problem of British defence is the defence of France.
There it is: the greater danger, the nearer danger than the danger of
a German invasion of England, is the danger of a German invasion
of France.
A German writer, quoted by me in a previous article, says that
directly Germany feels herself menaced she will strike, and France
will be her victim. He continues thus:
Unhappy France! The British Navy may destroy the German Fleet and
ruin German foreign trade. But nothing on earth can prevent the German
Army from over-running France from Paris to Lyons and from the English
Channel to the Mediterranean. The French are labouring under a dangerous
delusion if they suppose that Germany would be satisfied with an indemnity
at the termination of such a war. Germany would take permanent possession
of the northern provinces of the French Eepublic, thereby gaining access
to the sea at Calais and Boulogne, while Belgium and Luxembourg would be
annexed to complete the triumph of the Teutons.
Now, what do the Blue Water school say to that? Supposing
France attacked and conquered by Germany, how would our fleet pre-
vent the annexation of Calais and Cherbourg? And what could our
Fleet do to prevent the German conquest of France?
As for Belgium and Holland there would be no need for Germany
to annex them. With Calais in German hands the Netherlands would
be quietly absorbed.
Then Germany would have Calais at one end of the Channel and
Cherbourg at the other. Also she would have Amsterdam and Rotter-
dam and Antwerp, which Napoleon said was like a pistol pointed at
the heart of England. Also she would have the Dutch Navy and
the Dutch craftsmanship. Then Prance would be a crippled Power,
and Britain would be unable to keep pace with the German output of
battleships and sailors.
That is why I say that the problem of British defence is the pro-
blem of the defence of France.
Whether or not we form an offensive and defensive alliance with
France the result is the same: the defeat of France is the defeat of
Britain. The downfall of France is the downfall of the British
Empire. The aggrandisement of Germany is the humiliation of
Europe.
Now let us ask ourselves whether the defeat of France by Ger-
many is possible. The Germans feel sure of it. The French appar-
ently believe it; for it is not long since Prance was challenged by Ger-
many and declined the combat.
The French have a grand Army: numerous, gallant, hardy, and
well trained. But the impression in military circles seems to be that
Prance lacks the German perfection of organisation and readiness.
Perhaps the presence of a great general, a Moltke or a Napoleon,
on either side would make the difference. But that may not be


known until the war begins. If Germany has the great commander
hranee is lost; if France has the great commander Germany may
suffer a disastrous repulse. But so far as we may judge the chances
are in Germany’s favour.
Now, should France prove unequal to the task of repelling a Ger-
man invasion, the Blue 'Water school would be helpless. Our Navy
could do nothing.
No. To make I ranee secure, and in doing that to make ourselves
secure, we should need a first-class British Army of at least half a
million men—a million would be better. With a British force of half
a million men in Belgium and Holland, with the French, British, and
Dutch Fleets united, Russia, France’s ally, might attack Germany on
the eastern frontier. Then if Austria and Italy came in we should
have Armageddon. Now, the Blue Water school have left Armaged-
don out of their calculations.
The Germans are a brave, stubborn, well-disciplined people, very
obedient to their rulers. But it is doubtful whether they would
allow themselves to be driven into a war so desperate and so unpro-
voked. A wanton invasion of France without the pretext of a quar-
rel would not, one may suppose, be popular in Germany, even under
present conditions; but a universal European conflict, provoked by the
ambition of the Pan-Germanic Party, would be calculated to exhaust
the patience of the German people.
But we have not an Army of half a million to send; and a two-
Power standard Fleet could not help France nor defend the Dutch
and Belgium.
that is what I call the greater and nearer danger: the danger of
a French defeat by Germany. While such a defeat is possible the
Germans have no need to risk an invasion of Britain. They can de-
feat Britain without fighting her.
The old theory of splendid isolation can be no longer held by Bri-
tain. An Empire like ours cannot stand aloof from the struggles of
Europe. The balance of power means more to us to-day than it ever
meant. A German Empire embracing Germany, Holland, Belgium,
Austria, and perhaps Turkey, and having ports and fortresses at
Calais, Cherbourg, Trieste, Antwerp, and Amsterdam, would wipe
us out: would defeat and conquer us without firing a shot. Our
Fleet would go; our trade would go, our Colonies would go; India
would go. We should sink into the position of what one of our
Cabinet Ministers calls “the conscript appanage of a stronger
Power.”
I am treating this problem from the point of view of self-interest
alone. I need only hint in passing that there is a nobler and more
human aspect of the case. The downfall of Prance would be a
calamity for civilisation. h ranee is and long has been the leader in
literature and art, in most of the beauties and graces of civilised life.
It would be an evil day for the world should Prance be Germanised or
Anglicised or Russianised. We owe Prance much, we admire her
much, we respect and love her much; our hope is that she may remain
France: France happy and free and gallant and proud: France great
in art, in arms, in science, and in letters.
But then, again, to keep the position clear, I must say that we
would not see Russia or Germany injured or humiliated. Let each


people keep its honour and its freedom, realise its own genius, fulfil
its own destiny. Keep, to that end, the balance of power. Arm and
unite against any attempt on the part of any one Power to impose
one-race Caesariism or Bismarckian domination upon the rest of
Europe. In the past we had to resist France; we had to resist Spain.
Side by side with Germany we fought against Bonaparte at Waterloo.
To-day we have to stand by France or fall when she falls. We can-
not escape our fate. We must uphold France or partake of her
humiliation and share her ruin. That is why the Blue Water school
is wrong; that is why the strongest Navy will not serve our turn; that
is why the nearer and the greater danger for us is not the invasion
of Britain but the invasion of France; that is why the problem of the
defence of Britain is the problem of the defence of France.
That is why we must have an Army as well as a Navy.
That, I believe, is what lay heavy at the heart of Lord Roberts
and the Cabinet Ministers when they spoke darkly of impending
danger.
That is what the British people do not understand and ought to
understand while there is time to avert the threatened doom.
VII.—THE TASK.
In my preceding articles 1 have tried to show; —
1. That Germany aims at European domination.
2. That to attain her ends she must break the power of Britain.
3. That all attempts at conciliation and compromise are foredoomed to
failure; nothing will deter Germany but a demonstration of power.
4. That if Prance falls we shall be unable to hold our own.
5. That France is not generally regarded as a match for Germany.
6. That we are not in a position to help France.
7. That unless the British people make greater sacrifices than they are
at present prepared to make we shall lose our Empire and our independence.
8. That our Cabinet Ministers of both parties know this and are afraid
to tell the people the truth.
Now, what are the sacrifices demanded of us by the situation.
What is it that our Ministers want and fear to ask for?
Money and service.
Let us first consider the Task and then the means for its perform-
ance.
At present the British people think of the German menace as
nothing more than a distant possibility of invasion. That is why
they are hot on the Navy and cold to the Army. That is why the
Blue Water theory holds the field. Retain the command of the seas
and we are safe is'the first and only article of the public faith. Main-
tain the two-Power standard and we have nothing to fear, says the
wonderful Winston Churchill.
But we have a greater task than that. We have to maintain the bal-
ance of power in Europe. On the day when we fail to maintain the bal-
ance of power in Europe our fall begins. Every British statesman of
any worth during the past three centuries has recognised that as true.
Every British statesman of the first rank to-day knows that it is true.
Now the command of the seas will not enable us to maintain the


balance of power: a two-Power standard fleet will not enable us to
maintain the balance of power.
Therefore the Blue Water theory is wrong and Lord Roberts is
right.
We must have an Army.
e must have an Army and an invincible Navy. Wh must have
both.
This will entail heavy expenditure and great personal sacrifice.
Those who put their trust in a big Navy or in foreign alliances over-
look one vital factor in the problem. The maintenance of the balance
of power in Europe is more difficult because the military situation
has changed.
In the Peninsular and Crimean days our Army was strong
enough to turn the scale. But now the Continental nations have all
adopted universal military service, and our Army is too small to serve
any useful purpose.
Hence Britain has fallen in the military scale. On land she is
not even a second-rate Power. Therefore she has lost influence in
the councils of Europe.
That is one great reason why we cannot depend upon alliances.
We have nothing to offer our allies but our Navy, which cannot help
them.
If we had an Army of two millions of trained men of the best
class, and capable of rapid mobilisation, the balance of power would
be safe, and the German dream of invasion would vanish into thin air.
The needs, the immediate needs, of the Empire in face of a great
and growing danger are, first, a large vote for naval purposes: we
want docks and naval bases for the North Sea, and we want a large in-
crease in the number of submarines and destroyers ; secondly, a highly
efficient, perfectly equipped and well-officered Army of a million men.
If I were a Cabinet, or an ex-Cabinet, Minister, I should go into
the impending election with never a word to throw at the Budget or
the Peers, and with never a thought about Protection or Free Trade.
I should go to the country with a plain warning of a great impending
danger, and with an equally plain appeal for the public sacrifices
which I believe to be absolutely necessary for the safety of the Empire
and for the preservation of our trade, our honour, and our independ-
ence.
I should go out and face the anger and the ridicule of an ill-
informed and self-indulgent people with the following programme;
1. An immediate vote of fifty millions for the Navy.
2. The immediate passing of a Compulsory Service“ Bill: to come into
immediate operation.
3. A Bill for the elementary military training of all schoolboys over the
age of ten.
4. The immediate establishment of a general staff for the Armv and
the Navy. J
5. A large increase in the vote for secret service and naval intelligence.
6. An official appeal to all employers of labour to employ British subjects
in preference to foreigners.
Also, if upon careful examination I found it would be to our ad-
vantage to tax certain imports of foreign manufactured goods (and I
believe it would be to our interest) I would advocate such taxation
without a tremor or a blush.
But this means conscription and Protection!


Call it what you please, lam not afraid of names. I call it com-
pulsory military service and fiscal warfare.
I am not in favour of Tariff Reform as Tariff Reform is likely
to be applied if adopted in this country. But Free Trade never was
a part of my political faith.
Free Trade means free competition, and free competition is anti-
Socialist, is anti-trade union, and anti-democratic. Free Trade is
based upon the fallacy that “as we are all consumers it is to the
general advantage that commodities should he cheap.” But though
we are all consumers w r e are not all producers, and the producers,
who are all workers, should be considered first.
Then, as to compulsory military service, I have, in the past,
opposed it. I preferred a kind of universal military training which
I have more than once explained. But I recognised always that my
plan would only serve as a safeguard against invasion, and would not
answer the problems of Continental warfare or foreign service in
India or elsewhere.
But now I am convinced that our existence as a free nation de-
mands the immediate formation of a strong and efficient Army, and
that the only means of getting that Army is compulsory military
service.
The country is in danger and we want the men: we want them
now.
Volunteering is no use: the Territorials are no use; Militia are
no use; we shall have to arm and train the manhood of the nation, or
other nations wdiose manhood is armed and trained will wipe us out.
Do I think the country would accept such a proposal ? No. It
is only a feAV months since Mr. Haldane asked for a few hundred thou-
sands of Territorial volunteers, and failed to get them. It is only
a few years since a British Cabinet Minister refused a request for a
comparatively small sum for a general staff because we could not
“afford” it. He knew that it was a vital necessity, but we could
not afford it. We who had to afford three hundred millions for the
South Africa war.
No. The public will not listen. They do not want to pay, they
do not want to drill, they do not want to fight.
But they want to keep the Empire, and they want to keep their
liberty, and they want to keep their trade. And they will have to
be taught that they will lose their Empire, their liberty and their
trade, and will suffer famine, disaster, financial ruin, and personal
humiliation first, and have to submit to conscription and taxation
afterwards unless they prove themselves worthy of the advantages and
the liberties which their forefathers won for them by their valour and
their unselfishness.
If the British people refuse to defend themselves they will become
vassals; and they will have proved that they are unworthy to be any-
thing better.
This is not a party question; it is an imperial question: it is also
a European question.
It is an urgent question too. The position is too precarious now
to admit of long delay or discussion. Let every commercial man in
the Empire understand that unreadiness for war means bankruptcy
and panic and such suffering and distress as this favoured people have


never known. Let every workman understand that his blind and
obstinate refusal to serve his country will inevitably drive him into a
hateful form of militarism under foreign officers.
If I did not feel this very strongly I would not say it. lam no
longer young. I have had more than my share of thankless labour in
unpopular causes. I would like to live a quiet life. lam reluctant
to offend and oppose my own party and ray own friends. But I have
never shrunk frorn a duty because it was unpleasant or unprofitable,
and I will not begin now.
The Empire is in danger. It cannot he saved by talk: it can
only be saved by sacrifice and work. We shall need all our courage;
we shall need all our money; we shall need all our strength.
This warning is not written by a politician; it does not come from a
Socialist, nor from a Liberal, nor from a Tory: it comes from an
Englishman.
VIII.—THE COST.
But the cost! Yes, the cost would be heavy, hut consider the stake.
The stake is honour, liberty, and the Empire. Be the cost what it
may, the stake is worth it.
Besides, as to the cost there are three things to be said: the stake
is worth the price; we can well afford the price; and if we refuse to
pay the price of safety we shall have to pay the tenfold heavier price
of defeat.
Richard Cobden, who has never been accused of Jingoism, said in
a speech at Rochdale in 1861:
I would vote a hundred million pounds rather than allow the French
Navy to be increased to a level with ours, because I should say that any
attempt of that sort, without any legitimate grounds, would argue some
sinister designs upon this country.
A hundred million pounds—on the Navy—Richard Cohden!
And our Government is afraid of the price of a Dreadnought or the
cost of a general staff.
Now, if there exists a danger of war, and a danger of an imper-
ial disaster, I think no Englishman would deny that let the price of
safety be a thousand or two thousand millions it would be wise to
pay it.
But the cost of a two-Power standard Navy and an Army equal
to that of Prance would not he nearly so terrible as might at first
sight he probable.
It would not be equal to the cost of the South African war, and
we paid that, and paid it without serious inconvenience. Three hun-
dred million pounds. If we can pay three hundred million pounds
for a war, how much can we pay for peace ?
It is cheaper to prevent a war than to wage one, even if we win.
But if we lose!
And, again, it must be said that if France and Germany can
afford to pay for universal military training we can. We are richer
than Germany, and Germany is already doing all that we need do for
safety. Germany can put four million soldiers into the field, fully


armed and equipped. And the British Empire cannot afford the
money for a general staff.
The fact is that in our present dangerous situation we cannot
afford to consider the cost. We cannot afford to he economical. We
have to pay some of our money to save our all: we have to make a
temporary sacrifice of some of our liberty to avoid slavery.
The trouble is that the nation does not recognise its danger.
If Germany declared war against us, or if Russia attacked India,
we should not hesitate for a moment over the cost. We should
understand that let the cost be what it would it must be borne. Once at
war we should give our services and our millions freely; but then
it would be too late.
Yet, if we could only see things as they are to-day we should
understand that the war has already begun. We are at war with
Germany now. For years the British and the Germans have been at
war: it is a bloodless war, but it is war for all that._ It is con-
fined to the building of ships and harbours and the finding of money
for material and men; but it is war. Again, the integrity of
France is essential to our safety, and to-day France has a German
pistol pointed at her breast. What is all this but a state of war; or
how far is it removed from war ?
The cost of peace may be high; but peace is worth it many
times told. Let us think of the cost of defeat and ruin.
Some of us who are no longer young can remember the effect of
the cotton famine in Lancashire. Thousands of workers were starving.
Mills and shops were closed. Provisions were very dear. The dis-
tress in the north of England was terrible. And that was all caused
by a temporary stoppage of the supply of raw material and a decrease
in the supply of food.
But imagine the effect of a disaster to the Navy; imagine the
effect of a German annexation of the ports of France and Holland.
Credit would be shaken to its foundations. Banks would break, food
would rise to famine prices, commerce and industry would be para-
lysed. And then as our power waned we should be starved and
crushed into an abiect surrender. We should lose India and our
Colonies. We should lose our fleet. We should lose our trade. We
should have to pay ten times as much as security would have cost us,
and after unimaginable suffering we should become the conscript
appanage ’ ’ of the men of blood and iron, and should be compelled
to serve as German soldiers under German commanders.
To say we will not serve and will not pay is folly: we must serve
and we must pay. If we do not serve our own country we shall
have to serve a foreign country; if we do not pay for safety we_ shall
have to pay for defeat. The price of peace is less than the price of
war: the price of security is incomparably smaller than the cost of
disaster and disgrace. . ...
The choice the fates have thrust upon us is not the choice as to
whether we will or will not build British ships and serve as British
soldiers; it is the choice as to whether we will build British ships or
pay for the ships being built in Germany: it is the choice as to
whether we will serve as defenders of our own country or as con-
scripts under alien control. The battleships and the soldiers we
must pay for —ours or Germany’s.


Australia, I rejoice to see, has adopted universal service and is
preparing the nucleus of a fleet. If Australia can afford it surely
Britain can. We are an Empire; if only we would make good use
of our advantages we are a powerful and a wealthy Empire. For
m estimating our military and naval force we must reckon on the
loyalty of our Colonies. Australia, South Africa, and Canada, once
framed and organised, would be a valuable military asset. And
the Colonies are high-spirited and loyal; free from much of the
poverty and degeneration of our overcrowded industrial centres.
. .We must remember also that we are already paying thirty-four
million pounds for an Army which is quite inadequate to our needs.
We must not forget that we have many sources of wealth unused and
untouched within the bounds of our Empire, and many workers now
producing nothing who, if organised, would produce much wealth.
How should he find the money ?
Where did^ we find three hundred millions for the Boer war?
We should get it from those who have it; and there are many wdio
have much. But if it meant hard pinching, if it meant self-denial,
it it meant a period of poverty and hardship, we must find the
money still. Whatsoever the price our safety costs us it will be
trifling in comparison with the price we must pay for disaster.
If the situation is as dangerous as I believe it to he (and I think
the evidence is irresistible), then the people have no choice hut the
choice between security and ruin.
. The money price we could meet without serious hardship; the
price of service seems to me a trifle. "When I was a young man I
served seven years in the Army and three years in the Volunteers.
That is very much longer than the service required from young 1
Englishmen to make the Empire safe. I served that time and
enjoyed it. Having served that time I cannot understand the dread
and dislike which most Englishmen feel towards military service.
Such a training would do them much more good than harm.
No. The service is nothing to trouble any young man. And
for the money, we must find it, and we can find it, as we have had to
find it on previous occasions.
The chief danger the nation’s ignorance that any danger
exists. To the great majority of the British people these warnings
will sound like wild exaggeration. But they are simply the plain
and frank expression of opinions held by thousands of the sanest and
best-informed men in the Army, the Navy, and the House of Commons.
The public dread of militarism; the public reluctance to pay the
inevitable cost of safety; and the public complacency and ignorance
of danger are the source of the Pan-Germans’ strongest hope. If the
British people can he kept in their present state of innocence until
Germany is quite ready, the Pan-Germanic destiny will he worked
out in blood and iron without risk of failure.
Blood and iron: that is what we have to face. Our fathers and
our grandfathers faced them often; faced them cheerfully, with forti-
tude and success. And I believe the men of Britain are as good
to-day as in the past, and that they will he equal to anv demand the
Empire may make upon them—if only they understand in time.
If only we can get the British people to understand in time.


IX.—SOLDIERING OR SLAVERY AN ALTERNATIVE.
Lycurgus told the Greeks that “the best walls a city can have
are walls of brave men trained to arms. ’ ’ _ All the Continental nations
have put the idea into practice. But Britain, because of her insular
position, has neglected to follow suit. .
Now, Britain is no longer as island in the military sense. Britain
can be attacked by land—in France. . .... ,
But the British people, who never study foreign politics, and are
indifferent to extraneous, historical, and geographical facts, preserve
their traditional dependence on the Navy, and their ingrained pre-
iudice against compulsory military training.
I having been in the Army, have known for forty years the
mental, moral, and physical advantages of military training, but I
have never gone out of my way to say so for political reasons. Hov -
ever of late years those political reasons have seemed to me less
cogent or less real, while my conviction hap deepened that universal
military training would be the salvation of the British lace.
For military training, if conducted on reasonable lines, is not
a bad thing, but a good thing for all young men. And lam sure,
and most soldiers will agree with me, that no gymnastics, nor athletics,
nor sports can replace it. Because military training infuses a collec-
tive spirit and an instructive discipline which can be gained in no
other way.
I have recently attended the German and the British Arm>
manoeuvres; and I have recently travelled a good deal in England
and in Germany.
A while ago I described in these columns the appearance of our
troops in Oxfordshire, and the march of the 10th Infantry Brigade
through Swindon. Since then I have had occasion to visit some
of the working-class districts of London, and I have seen something
of the London poor. The contrast between the young men in Ber-
mondsey and the Borough and the young soldiers who marched into
Swindon made a deep impression upon me The soldiers were
healthy, active, merry; well fed, well washed, properly disciplined,
and fit as fiddles.
The young men in the London streets were none of those things.
Yet the soldiers and the others were of the same class: the same
material.
I have seen coster bovs, mill hands, town bred hooligans, ignor-
ant round-shouldered, pallid, unwashed, and morally loose come into
a regiment; and in six months they were clean, smart, well-conducted,
well-spoken, well-built soldiers. I have seen the transformation
effected. I have myself gone through the mill. _I am convinced
that the Army saved my life. lam sure that it did me more good
than any other experience I have had.
The German working classes are more sober, more orderly, more
intelligent than the British. It is largely because in their youth
they have been trained and taught and disciplined.
Militarv training compels cleanliness and order and good be-
haviour It gives a youth at the right time, and in the right way,


good food, good clothing, healthy, open-air exercise. It provides a
course of physical culture. It enforces early rising, habits of discip-
line, and regular hours of sleep. It improves the health and the
physique, and it sharpens the mind and breeds a habit of self-reliance
and alertness.
Hut it does very much more than that. It trains men in com-
radeship ;it infuses what I call the collective spirit. The difference
between an army and a crowd is enormous: but its chief and most
valuable factor is that collective spirit. A regiment is very much
more than a crowd of men all dressed in the same uniform. It is
a regiment. It has that which a mob never has: a collective mind
a collective soul. The 10th Infantry Brigade is a very different
thing from a crowd of 3,000 young men in khaki: it is an organism:
all its units are parts of a whole; all its units move and feel and act
together. It is not what so many civilians often call it—a machine.
A machine has no soul: but a brigade of soldiers has a soul. When
it marches all its 6,000 legs move as one. When it charges all its
bayonets are in line. When it sings it has one great thrdling voice.
It is alive; it is an organism; it is the 10th Infantry Brigade.
Let the police attack a huge crowd of undrilled civilians and in-
stinctively the crowd scatters. The men do not know each other,
cannot trust each other, have never been taught to hold with each
other. _ But when the Arabs broke the square at McNeil’s zareba
the soldiers did the very opposite to what a crowd of civilians would
have done: they did not scatter; they closed: they did not run; they
stood: instinctively they formed together back to back in groups with
their faces and their bayonets turned to their assailants.
In camp and on the march, in action and at drill, in barracks and
at play, the soldiers learn comradeship and acquire the spirit of col-
lectivism. This is the great moral value of military training; this
gives power and coherence to the people of Germany. The German
nation is an army. The British nation is a mob of antagonistic
helpless atoms.
Compulsory military training would absorb a large percentage
of the unemployed. It would find work for thousands who now
have no work.
The building of warships and the making of docks and harbours
would find work for the workers; and those would pay who ought
to pay, because they have the money.
Compulsory military service accustoms men to clean skins, clean
clothing, clean beds, good food, proper lodgings. A nation of sol-
diers would not endure the slums. I saw no slums in Germany.
I think it would be well in this country to pass first of all a
compulsory service Act for a limited number of years, say six. Two
years training would be enough, and all young men over twenty
should be liable. But at first, in order to get a large force quickly,
it would be advisable to take as many young men between the ages
of eighteen and thirty as could be spared without disorganising trade
too much.
Such questions as that of sleeping in or out of barracks could be
arranged very quickly. The military law should be entirely over-
hauled and much of it wiped out. Soldiers need not be treated like
naughty children.


It would be advisable, also, to impose a code of moral restraints
and safeguards, of which it is not necessary to speak here and now.
This army should he put under the direction of one man, and the
man is Lord Kitchener. To him should be left also the arrange-
ment of the plans or organisation and mobilisation. That is what
Lord Kitchener was born for, and it would be a pity to waste him.
I believe, and I think most military men will agree, that in our
often unsuccesful looking youth we have a material for the making
of soldiers such as no nation could excel. I believe that, properly
handled, our youth would train into one of the finest armies the
world has been.
The German Army is very good; the French Army is very good;
but I hold to the belief that both are capable of much improvement.
I believe we could make the best army in the world in a couple of
years. But anything I know, or think I know, as to these matters
is not for publication.
This much I will say: our Army should, as far as possible,, live
throughout the summer in cantonments and be engaged in continual
field training, under conditions as closely as possible approximated
to the conditions of actual war. They should be scientifically and
thoroughly taught the use of the rifle, and they should be trained to
think and act for themselves.
On the day when the King of Prussia was declared Emperor of
Germany Britain ought to have adopted compulsory military service.
Had we raised a proper army at that time, I think it is not too much
to say that there would have been no Boer war, no Afghan war,
no Eusso-Turkish war, and no prospect of any war with Germany.
It is essential to the maintenance of the world’s peace that Bri-
tain should be strong. Compulsory military training would make
Britain strong: it would make for peace.
Besides —the alternative is slavery.
X.—A WORD FOR THE HOMELAND.
Before concluding this series of articles I shall endeavour to
avoid or to remove a few misconceptions. Firstly, as to patriotism:
if a patriot is one who wishes his country to dominate the world I am
not a patriot; but if a patriot is one who loves his country as he loves
his mother, or his friend, or his wife, seeing her merits as well as her
faults, hoping that she may be happy and free, trying to be helpful
to her when he may, then I am a patriot, and have been always.
Next, as to Jingoism. He who appeals to his countrymen to
arm in their own defence is not a Jingo. He who warns them of
their dangerous unreadiness is not a Jingo. He who tries to rouse
them to consciousness of the threatening conduct of a foreign nation
is not a Jingo. The Jingo is one who is boastfully and offensively
aggressive, who vaunts his country’s power, who shoutes for wai
upon the lightest provocation. I despise and dislike a Jingo, as
I despise and dislike a bully. But if we condemn a British Jingo,


why should we refrain from condemnation of a German, or a French,
or a Russian Jingo? And if we wax indignant when our own
country attacks or threatens a foreign Power why should we be
blamed for speaking the truth when a foreign Power attacks or
threatens us?
Next, as to peace and war. Those who object to the expendi-
ture of money on armaments are prone to call themselves the Peace
1 arty. Put most of those who think, as'l do, that the Empire should
eep itself ready for war are as much in love with peace as the
fiercest “little-navyite” of them all. But we think a weak nation
with large possessions is more likely to he dragged into war than a
strong one. Therefore we believe that readiness for war is the
surest guarantee of peace.
There are better methods of keeping the peace than the way I
have been recommending. Universal disarmament would be better
foi all than universal armament. If all the warlike preparations all
the fleets and armies in the world could be abolished, we should be
lappier, richer, and safer for the change. But Britain cannot dis-
arm while the other nations are armed: Europe cannot disarm while
America and Asia are armed. Dismiss every soldier on the globe,
and there will be universal peace. But is Russia likely to dismiss
her troops? Is Germany? Is France? Is Britain? The man who
suggested it would be regarded as an amiable crank.
Failing universal disarmament there is still a better course than
that at present followed by the Great Powers. It were better to
have the United States of Europe than the Disunited States of
Europe. But we shall have no United States of Europe while one
of the Great Powers is bent on working out her destiny by methods
of blood and iron.
These two arrangements being as yet impossible, the next best
course is the maintenance of the balance of power. That course
requires that Britain shall be prepared for war. While she has not
a sufficient Array she is not prepared for war.
Next, as to the use of the word Army. Many of those who
advocate the raising of Volunteers or Militia for home defence make
the mistake of supposing that a large number of soldiers is an army.
Such a force could he raised and trained in less than a year. Yet
it would not be an array in the true sense of the word. It is
possible to make a soldier in a year; or less; hut not an array. An
army must be trained as an army, not as a number of separate squad-
rons or battalions. Regiments must be used to working in divi-
sions ; divisions must be trained together as an army. It is the train-
ing of the officers and generals and the practice of coherent action by
large numbers of troops _in strange country that take up the time.
Then there is the organisation: the transport, the hospital service,
the communications, and there are the scientific branches of the
modern soldier s work, the signalling, telegraphy, ballooning, mining,
entrenching, scouting, mapping, cycling, motoring, and ambulance
work. All these require intelligence, diligence, and time. But an
army must have them.
Therefore it is absolutely necessary that at least two years shall
he given to diligent and serious training. That is why the only


possible way of getting an army under present conditions is by means
of compulsory service. The training must be continuous and the
numbers large.
Next a word as to the strategic positions of the German and the
British Navies.
It is generally understood, not only in German and British naval
and military circles, but in the naval and military circles of America
and Europe, that in any contest between Germany and another nation
hostilities will precede a declaration of war. The Germans do not
intend to give warning of their attack. They mean to attack sud-
denly, Before any declaration of war is made they intend to do, on
a larger scale, what the Japanese did at Chemulpo and Port Arthur.
Let us consider what this implies. It implies that until it suits
Germany’s book to strike we have to remain continually on the defen-
sive. We have to maintain day and night a sleepless watch; we
have to keep continually in the North Sea a fleet of sufficient pow'er to
meet the whole concentrated naval forces of Germany at any moment.
This fleet must never relax its vigilance, must never extend its line
too far, must be always ready for action, because we shall never
know the day nor the hour when the Germans may attempt their coup.
Is it necessary to enlarge upon the immense strategic advantage
which this state of affairs gives to Germany ? Surely that is patent,
even to Mr. Winston Churchill or Mr. McKenna.
With the threat of a sudden attack in force, in the night, in the
mist, continually hanging over their heads, a great fleet has to wait
and watch in the North Sea. It must not quit the North Sea. It
must not divide its forces. It must never cease to watch nor suspend
its readiness for instant action. It must not lie in harbours nor in
rivers, for there it will be defeated if attacked in force. It must
remain at sea, where the best authorities declare that no fleet is safe
from attacks by submarines, or torpedo-boats, or mines.
Finally, it must never go and seek its enemies; it must never
approach the enemy’s coast; because the enemy is a friendly Power
and war is not declared.
Such is to be the strategic position of the future. And I hope
that even the complacent noodles who edit Liberal newspapers will
understand that such a strategic situation demands a Navy of over-
whelming force, manned by officers and seamen of a vigilance and
courage more than human.
Although I have often described myself as a Little Englander
I have been cognisant of certain considerations which the more aggres-
sive Little Englander seems commonly to ignore.
Granting that we got most of our Empire by robbery under arms
—though often at the expense of less capable robbers who had got the
booty in no honester way—granting that we had no moral right to
snatch colonies from the French, the Dutch, the Spaniards, the
Mahommedans, or the Zulus, who had stolen them before us, there
still remain several knotty questions to be answered before we hand
over the stolen property to any other people.
We cannot give Australia back to the aborigines, for we have
civilised them off the face of the earth. If we gave New Zealand


back to the Maoris we should simply be transferring it to Japan
America, or some European Power. ’
If we have no right to our Colonies, neither has any other foreign
Power.
And then, again, there is the question: W ould any other Power
govern our Colonies better than we, or leave them to govern them-
selves as fully as we?
Now I have no doubt that in India and the other subject States
our rule is full of imperfections. But would our retirement in
many cases, be an advantage or a disadvantage to the subject race?
It is not a question only of the faults of British rule; it is a question
also of the comparative virtues of British and other foreign rule.
If we left India, could the natives hold it? If Russia, or France
or Germany conquered India, would the Indians be better off or worse
than they now are?
It has always seemed to me that we cannot abandon our Colonies
or dependencies; and that we might have to defend them against other
foreign Powers until we can make reasonably sure that our retire-
ment will not expose them to worse evils than our own rule.
To give India co the Indians, Canada to the Canadians, and
Egypt to the Egyptians, I for one am quite willing: when these
peoples wish for and are fit for self-government and self-defence.
But to atone for an injury by exposing our victims to a greater in-
jury seems to me an aggravation of the wrong.
Let us be just, even to our own country. The Belgians in the
Congo State, the Germans in Poland, the Spaniards in Cuba, the
Russians in all their dependencies, do not seem to have improved on
British methods, imperfect though our methods may be. The
Japanese in Korea, the French and Spaniards in Morocco, do not
seem to have inspired much love or confidence in the native breast
Give up India? To whom? And how? And why?
Improve the government of India? Certainly. And while
we are about it we might do a little for England.
We might trust our people more, and educate them better, and
exploit them less. Then perhaps they would be more willing to trust
their rulers than they now are. Then, perhaps, our ruling classes
would not be afraid to do their duty for fear of the public wrath.
To-day the ruling classes dare not trust the people with real
democratic powers, dare not trust the people with arms. The people,
on their part, dare not trust their rulers with the kind of Army essen-
tial to the safety of the Empire.
‘‘The masses are ignorant, they are lazy, they are drunken, im-
provident; prone to riot,” their rulers say in their acts if not in
words.
Whose fault is that, gentlemen ? Who has claimed the right to
govern, to educate, to employ the people ?
None knows better than the ruling class what will happen
should disaster come upon the nation. There need have been no
ignorance, no vice, no disaffection, no class hatred, no dangerous
poverty, had the ruling class ruled wisely.
There need be no disaster had the ruling class done their duty.


There need be no disaster yet if the rulers will be brave enough to tell
the people the truth and trust them.
The Empire is in danger. It is not well with us at home: it
looks dark for us abroad.
What the British nation stands most in need of in this porten-
tous hour is a man.
Look where we will, we see only party politicians; listen as we
may we hear only party politics. The nation is broken up into pur-
poseless factions; will for weeks be crazy over meaningless election
cries.
The German nation is homogeneous: organised. Their imperial
policy is continuous. Their rulers work strenuously, sleeplessly,
silently. Their principle is the theory of blood and iron.
Ido not want war: I want peace. lam not an enemy of the
Germans, but a friend. I like Germany; but I love England, as a
man loves his mother, or his wife, or his comrade, or his home.
And the Empire is in danger; and we are unready; and we
need a man.
XL.—A REPLY TO SOME CRITICISMS.
The criticisms,, mostly abusive,'with which I have been favoured
are not worth a lengthy reply. They may be briefly considered
under three heads: —
1. That this attempt to rouse the nation to a sense of danger is an election
dodge engineered by the Unionist Party.
2. That it is an “invasion scare” arising from delusions.
3. That I am a hopeless ignoramus and do not understand the subject 1 am
’ talking about.
First, as to the conspiracy. Two of the conspirators, 7he
Daily Mail and the Unionist Party, are innocent. The offer came
from me, and was made spontaneously. Indeed, when I made the
offer I had no more thought of the election or of the Unionist Party in
my mind at the time than 1 had of the Hittites or the Deluge. I
have been trying for years to wake the nation to this danger, and it
suddenly occurred to me that if I could get The Daily Mail to open
its columns I should at least have a chance to be heard. I selected
The Daily Mail because of its wide circulation and because I had been
writing for it. I should have preferred a time when the public were
not excited over an impending election, and when my action would
not appear so untoward to my own friends.
But I decided to act while I could, lest the chance might elude me.
My idea was in nowise a party idea. I believe I was foolish
enough to hope that if the case were calmly and clearly stated it
would be considered by the people from a national and non-partisan
. point of view. But on the eve of an election it is too much to hope
for a lucid interval of that kind.
The British politician cannot think of patriotism while he is
scrambling for office.
lam not a partisan. I have not been ‘‘bought” by any party.


lam not on sale lam risking serious financial loss and incurring
sprvp hatr ® d 1 and abu f e m a single-minded and unselfish attempt to
serve my fellow-countrymen. Hireling scribblers and honourable
bub it S is k true are not Sufficiently llonest nor intelligent to believe that;
P 1? ( ? e . r v nai r\ J * res ® is simply convulsed with merriment. From
Ml d ° f th l- * atlle I rland to the other every journalist is laughing
vptr g aw f usly. funny as my articles h J as come their w f f g r
jeais. They have enjoyed it. And lam glad they have found
offence^and 8 * them taken
But besides being a Tory minion, and a comic Tory minion it
appears that lam crassly ignorant. I write wildly and funnily
because 1 know absolutely nothing about the subject upon which I
have been writing my delightfully amusing and disgusting articles.
\ery well. Let us consider that suggestion. Perhans lam
ignorant and stupid If the Liberal Cabinet and the Labour leaders
die sensible and well-informed men, fit to be trusted with the honour
- a d s ® carit y °f a great Empire, then I am as ignorant and stupid
as certain able editors pretend. *
. ? + Ut }. am ignorant and stupid lam not alone in my ignorance
is a siorfnf "V my i ll die read ty of the German menace
is a sign of stupidity and ignorance, then Mr. Asquith, Mr. Balfour
stur>ir| d Msn d 7 ’ L ° rd Cromer ’ and Lord Curzon are ignorant and
stupid also. If my opinions as to the naval and military unreadiness
of this Empire are a proof of stupidity and ignorance,' how lament-
ably ignorant and stupid are Lord Roberts, and Lord Wolseley and
Lord Charles Beresford! y ’ d u
n) All< ?’. ye # ads ’ tbe Profundity and sagacity and the intellect and
schoMrship of the large-souled journalists who fill the leader columns
tiiienees! 6ra aiKl Lab ° Ur papers with their slip-shod, piffling imper-
Assume that I am a foolish man who knows nothing at all about
naval and military matters. What has that to do with the truth
or value of my articles? The facts are not my facts The ideas
are not my ideas. The case is not my case. I have only repeated
and restated a case which has been stated again and again dnrn*
the last five years in all the Service papers in the kingdom. I have
f ld m J he D aily Mail what has before been said by naval and mili-
tary officers and by naval and military experts in this country in
Germany, m America, and in France.
i J h j ca f a « 1 have submitted it is the case as it has been stated
by hundreds of men of eminence and special knowledge While
the articles have been appearing in The Daily Mail I have received
letters of strong approval from Lord Roberts and Lord Charles
Berestord, and from many officers of the Army and the Navy.
Are all these men ignorant and stupid, and are political wisdom
and military knowledge confined in these islands to the lawyer who
runs our Army, the lawyer who runs our Navy, and the simpering
nonentities who edit the Nonconformist organs?
Mr. Haldane has many personal friends in Germany; therefore


the idea of a German menace is absurd; and the Kiel Canal is being
widened for excursion steamers, and the German Navy is only meant
to protect the German bathing vans from attacks by Chinese pirates;
and we are to vote for “the Party of Progress;’’ and the muddle in
the Army and Navy does not matter.
Mr. McKenna counts up our Dreadnoughts on his fingers, and
thinks, with Mr. AVinston Churchill, that we can shut our eyes and
sleep comfortably in our beds in the sure and certain hope of having
“two keels for one.” Such necessary hut expensive impedimenta
as docks, sailors, destroyers, small cruisers, stores, ammunition, and
reserves do not trouble the right hon. gentleman in the least.
And there is the inevitable Mr. John Burns, the platitudinous
Mr. John Burns. ?
The Liberal Government, Mr. Burns informs the Powers, has
made the British Navy “supreme.”
There was a fool in France in 1870 who assured the Emperor that
the French Array was ready to a gaiter button. 'Well —it wasn’t.
Those famous military and naval experts and profound strate-
gists, Messrs. Lloyd George, Winston Churchill, Burns, McKenna,
and Haldane have made the British Navy “supreme.” _ Now the
Imperial Maritime League, which includes in its membership twenty-
seven admirals, thirteen generals, and a host of authors, naval experts.
Peers, and members of Parliament, speaks of our supreme Navy as
follows: —
The adequacy of its sea-training, its repairs, its personnel, its scouting
cruisers, its ocean-going destroyers, its reserve stores, including coal and
ammunition, and its docking accommodation on the East Coast have been
sacrificed to an insane desire for economy.
German naval experts claim that the German ships, guns and
armour are better than ours; they claim that their officers are more
scientific, and that their fleets are more fully exercised than ours.
But all these British and German officers are ignorant and stupid
where naval matters are concerned, just as all our foremost states-
men are ignorant and stupid where international polities are con-
cerned.
And if we want political, naval, and military wisdom, and the
highest technical knowledge, we must go for them to Mr. Lloyd
George, and Mr. McKenna, and Mr. John Burns.
No. The choice of the British people does not lie between the
ignorant and stupid author of these articles on the one hand and the
wise and well-informed lawyers on the other hand: it lies between
the grave and well-considered warnings of our best statesmen, our
ablest generals and admirals, our most experienced experts, backed
by the naval and military opinion of America and the Continent on
the one hand, and on the other hand the light-hearted assurances of
the Cabinet Ministers who were “astonished” a few months ago by
the “discovery” that Germany had stolen a march upon them.
0, wonderful Germany, that can so astonish a McKenna! Let
us wake up and substitute deeds for words, or that same Germany
will astonish us even more thoroughly than she has astonished the
supreme head of our supreme Navy.
I repeat, then, the warning given more than once by British and


foreign statesmen, soldiers, and sailors: the Empire is in danger • it
is unprepared to meet that danger; it will never be prepared to meet
that danger while the control of its naval and military affairs is left
m the hands of the well-meaning but incompetent members of the
present Liberal Government.
In conclusion, I beg to express my grateful thanks to the thou-
sands ot Daily Mail readers of all classes who have sent me letters of
encouragement and advice.
My object in writing these articles was to awaken the public to
a sense of danger.
The letters I have received suggest that many of my country-
women and countrymen are aware of that danger and are eager to
prepare against it. What can be done ?
In presence of the ignorance, the apathy, and the conceit of the
the mass of our people, can anything be done?
We want a man.




—
- :;k<K
r r- : c
&
WSPAPER READERS
'ANION TO WAR MAPS
CONTENTS
1. Area*, Populations, Principal
T«wm, Armies, Maria*,
Gorerameiit Radi other Fact* •-
tibout «*cb Dolli**reot Country. I
2. Distance* by Land and So*
between *11 important place*, la
the WorW.
Sr Australasian Statistic* of Im-
port* and Exports, »h«win| haw
Australia may be affected in her
Gretses Trad*.
- =
m
■iST *s
i
3
3
