

iff} y
GER R Y
AND
OTHER STORIES


pfresntteh <Eo
Prize
Class
j |










GERRY
AND
OTHER STORIES
Miriam Agatha
ppUpgrittt $c (En. 3Ct&.
543 George St., 240 Elizabeth St., 370 Queen St.,
SYDNEY MELBOURNE BRISBANE
63 Flinders St , 68 Gawler PI., 772 Hay St.,
TOWNSVILLE ADELAIDE PERTH


[All Rights Reserved.]
Registered at the General Post Office,
Sydney, for transmission through the Post
as a Book.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
PELLEGRINI & CO. LTD.,
522 Kent Street, Sydney.
1936


Gerry
GERRY was certainly not brilliant. Sister Mary Joseph's
heart was almost broken because of his inability to
remember "Tables" and other important things. His
writing was neat and stiff and correct, but that was simply
another proof that he was no genius. But Gerry was a
dear little fellow. He had a pair of honest grey eyes that
looked the world squarely in the face, and smiling, con-
tented lips that could never bring themselves to frame a
lie. So after all, you see, the "Tables" did not matter so
much. If a boy knows how to tell the truth always, it is
very much better than knowing how many elevens in one
hundred and twenty-one.
But Gerry had such a pleasing appearance, such a self
satisfied air, that when visitors came to Sister Mary
Joseph's class and asked the children questions, they in-
variably called on Gerry for an answer. And then he
would stand up, smiling—like a member of Parliament
about to give a speech—and make some dreadful blunder
that would send the blood to Sister's cheeks and fill her
dark eyes with a light of patient resignation.
Why, the last time the Inspector visited the school,
Gerry gave him some astonishing answers. The little boy
with the honest grey eyes and the contented lips seemed
to take such a lively interest in the affairs of the moment
that I am sure the Inspector thought him one of the "Show"
pupils.


The class was distinguishing itself by its knowledge
of geography. Tommy Ryan actually knew where to find
the Caspian Sea, without a moment's hesitation—and every-
one knows quite well that that old sea "sneaks" away and
hides itself in the land parts of the map, instead of taking
a bold stand in the blue-coloured parts like any decent sea
should! But Tommy Ryan walked up bravely to the map
of the world and put his finger right on the heart of the old
Caspian Sea. Someone else —I think it was Rosie Mahoney
—knew quite a lot of interesting things about the Coral
Sea, about the wonderful coloured sea-plants that make it
look a garden of Fairyland. And perhaps it is, too —per-
haps it is the front garden of the beautiful home of the
sea-fairies.
Many other seas were named and found on the big
puzzle of the map of the world, and still the Inspector
asked for more.
Gerry liked to be obliging, and since the Inspector
was evidently so interested in seas that morning, Gerry
wished he could think of one! Suddenly a triumphant
light came into his grey eyes, and Sister sighed patiently.
Well she knew what it meant —that triumphant light-—it
was a "danger signal." Gerry had had an inspiration, and
Gerrv's inspirations were usually startling.
He remembered having heard his father read some-
thing "aloud" the previous evening. It was something
about Rome and Ireland and a sea!
With a mental "hurrah!" Gerrv's hand shot above his
head. The other children looked amazed —Gerry Moore to
know something, anything, they did not! Sister's face
grew very pink. Whatever would he say?
"Well, little man?"
"Please, Father —the Holy Sea."


The Inspector's face remained quite serious looking,
but his lips twitched at the corners.
"And where is the Holy Sea, my boy?"
Gerry smiled, and said in his own self-possessed way.
"Near Rome, I think, Father. If it's not near Rome, it
must be in Ireland!"
"I suppose that is where the holy water comes from."
the Inspector remarked reflectively, as he looked into his
black book.
"Yes, Father," Gerry readily assented.
The Inspector laughed —but not at Gerry. Oh, no.
I think there must have been something amusing in that
black book!
Afterwards, when he was gone, Gerry stood up. slipped
his hand into the breast of his coat —for all the world like
a member of Parliament about to give a speech—and said
in grieved tones: "Please, Sister, Tommy Ryan said I
spoiled the class. Did I?"
"No. dear. Your writing was the very best."
"But —but" —Gerry's eyes grew sad. "He said I gave
silly answers. Is there —is there a Holy Sea?"
Sister explained to the class that there is a Holy See,
but it happens to be land.
Tommy Ryan nudged Gerry.
"There!" he whispered, fiercely.
Gerry's face was very red, and grew "redder" when
Sister explained that holy water is water blessed by a
priest—the prayers and the blessing make it holy. Why,
they all knew that—all except Gerry!
And then Gerry, like the little gentleman he was, stood
up and said: "I'm sorry, Sister, and I"—he took a deep
breath —"I beg Tommy's pardon."
Sister smoothed the matted over diplomatically, and


said that if all the little boys in her class were as manlv
as Gerry she would not mind how many seas they were
unacquainted with.
June and the Mission came. The three poplar trees
at the foot of the garden were leafless; Gerry could see
them from his bed —he watched them every night until he
fell asleep. On some nights it seemed that one could
gather stars from them. What pretty blossoms the stars
made, as they trembled on the bare branches of the poplars.
But there was no use getting up and going to gather them,
for Gerry had tried once —oh, long ago, when he was
"little," and had "no sense." And when he got to the
foot of the garden where the poplars stood, why they were
just tall and dark and bare —the white trembling stars were
miles away, up in the sky!
So Gerry just watched them from his bed, and pre-
tended they were sky-blossoms, until his eyes fell to blink-
ing and winking like the stars, and then he was asleep.
There was a little oratory of the Sacred Heart in
his room. Father had fixed a bracket in one corner, and
bought him a statue. Mother presented the vases. Gerry
hemmed the little white cloth himself, and stitched a cross
in red cotton in the front of it. You see he had no sisters
to do it for him, and mother was too ill to be worried.
Every day he brought a few flowers from the garden
and put them in the vases close to the statue. Every day
he said his prayers there, and asked the Sacred Heart to
make him "good."
When the Mission opened he was fired with a desire
to bring people to the church, and thus be himself a little
missionary. But there was no one to bring. Father went
gladly, mother would have gone if she could. All the
Catholic neighbours were practical members of the church.


Gerry was almost disappointed that there was not One on
whom he could exercise his missionary zeal.
"I want to bring someone to the Mission," he would
sigh, as he arranged the flowers near his statute, "but
there's no one to bring."
Then one day, quite suddenly, he thought of Mr.
Darley. He remembered hearing a lady visitor telling
mother that Mr. Darley "never darkened a church door."
Here was a chance to bring someone back to the Sac-
red Heart. What a pity he had not thought of it before —
the Mission was nearly over. He wasted no time in think-
ing about how he should approach the man, and what he
should say, but hastened to the big house in the front
street.
He hurried up the red gravel path, admiring the
flowers as he went. There were beds and beds of violets,
bed and beds of jonquils—Gerry had never seen so many
before. There was a flat tiled porch, with camellia bushes
on either side, and stone dogs guarding it.
He rang the bell and for one moment —while he heard
the clanging—he felt something throb, throbbing in his
breast. It seemed as if a little motor car with a throbbing
engine was standing where his heart should be. But that
feeling passed, and when the door opened Gerry was him-
self again, self-possessed, gentlemanly.
It was a man who opened the door —Gerry wondered if
his name were Mr. Punch, for his nose and chin bore a
decided resemblance to the features of that celebrated
gentleman's family.
"I want to see Mr. Darley," said Gerry with an im-
portant note in his voice.
The man gasped at the tone, and motioned him to a
chair in the hall. As he moved away Gerry called, "You


might say it's on important business—very important busi-
ness. My name is FitzGerald Moore."
"Yes, sir!" the man answered with a bow, and he
grinned when he was out of Gerry's range of vision. In
a few moments he returned.
"Mr. Darley will see you."
Gerry followed him; he was beginning to enjoy him-
self.
The Punch-featured man led him to an open door and
left him. There was a room with many books, a desk
with many papers, and a man with white hands and a red
face.
'Good mor|iing," said Gerry.
"Good morning, FitzGerald Moore." Gerry took the
chair the white hands indicated, sat down, and smiled.
Now, when Gerry smiled people liked it, and they
wanted to see him do it again. They felt they should
smile, too. Have you ever noticed the smile of a young
child —a child that has little, new white teeth shining like
pearls in a pink box? Well, Gerry had a smile like that.
Mr. Darley admired it immensely, and wanted to see it
again.
"The very important business?" he queried. "I sup-
pose your football smashed some glass and a few prize
orchids, and the gardener won't give it back. Eh?"
"Oh, no —something more important than that," re-
turned Gerry gravely.
"You want a subscription for a school picnic, or to
sell bazaar tickets?"
"No. Mr. Darley, I called —I came—because—l want
you to come to the Mission."
Mr. Darley sat upright and stared.
"Well, of all the " he said, and then words failed


"There's a Mission on, down in the church," Gerry
went on calmly, "and every Catholic in the town should
go. The missioner told us to bring someone with us. I
have no one to bring. All the people I know are good
Catholics. (Mr. Darley's red face assumed a deeper hue.)
I was sorry at first, because I wanted to say I took some-
one. And then I remembered I should be glad the people
did not need to be brought." He paused.
"Yes —and then?" Mr. Darley bent over and gazed
searchingly into the honest grey eyes. "Tell me the truth,
bov. Did anyone send you to me."
"Oh. no. I thought of- you. I heard a lady tell
mother you never go to the church, and so I told the Sacred
Heart I'd bring you to the Mission.'
Again he smiled his seraphic smile, and Mr. Darley
continued to sit upright and stare.
"Well, of all the "he said again, and paused at
loss for words that would express adequately his opinion
of Fitzgerald Moore.
"I told the Sacred Heart I'd bring you." The echo
of the words sighed round the room, and then died away.
"Well, well," Mr. Darley muttered, and then with a
twisted kind of a smile he said: "Just let me change the
subject for a moment. Could you tell me what you intend
doing when you are a man.'"
"Oh! I'd like to be an Archbishop, and if I could
not be that I'd like to go shooting lions in Africa, or with
a South Pole expedition."
"Indeed. An Archbishop! Shooting lions —Polar ex-
peditions." Mr. Darley smiled again, and said something
about aspirations and ambitions.
"I'm afraid I could not be an Archbishop; I'm not
good at my lessons. I'm worst in the class, except in


writing. And you know you have to study hard lessons
if you want to be an Archbishop. But perhaps I might
get clever later on. Perhaps my brain will wake up a
bit."
Mr. Darley muttered something to the effect that he
thought FitzGerald Moore was "wide awake" already, but
Gerry did not quite understand what it was.
"You are out after big game this morning," Mr. Dar-
ley said. "You are a hunter of men—not lions to-day."
"Are you coming to the Mission with me? Will you
come to-night.' I do so want to take someone."
"Ah! I see you are not thinking of my sanctification,
but of your own glory. Ah! FitzGerald Moore, that is
not a right intention."
Gerry did not know what the man meant, but he said:
"I do want to do something for the Sacred Heart. I've
never done anything for Him yet. I never get a chance
to "
His grey eyes were sad and wistful, and Mr. Darley
hastened to say: "'How would you take me—on a chain?"
Gerry smiled. "Oh, no; you must go of your own
will."
Mr. Darley shook his head. "Everyone has not your
fearlessness." He smiled. "Perhaps lam afraid to go."
"Afraid? Afraid to go to the church! I'd be afraid
to stay away —because it's a sin! The missioner said
Jesus is waiting for the people to come. Jesus was never
harsh with anyone who came to Him. He will be harsh
with us if we do not come to Him. I told the Sacred
Heart I'd bring you. He expects you now."
Mr. Darley looked as if he were trying to appear
very calm and indifferent.
"To please you. FitzGerald Moore, I'll accompany you


to-night, but to-night only. A young gentleman of your
—er —daring deserves encouragement, deserves success."
Mr. Darley assured himself that he would keep his
word to please this child, but as to going for the week or
approaching the Sacraments
"You will come? Oh, that is grand!" cried Gerry,
and Mr. Darley was treated to a series of seraphic smiles.
"You must call for me," Mr. Darley said. "Bring a
good thick rope, or I might get away." He pressed a
button in the wall, and the Punch man appeared almost
instantly. Gerry had an idea that the button was connected
with some part of the Punch man's person, his entrance
was so prompt!
Mr. Darley ordered milk and biscuits for the little
missionary.
They had quite an interesting conversation while
Gerry partook of these, and Mr. Darley learnt that the
little boy thought it would be lovely to wear purple robes, a
gold ring and a cross, and have folk call one "Your Grace."
"Ah, FitzGerald Moore" —Mr. Darley smiled —"me-
thinks thou art vain-glorious. 'Seek ye first '."
Gerry had no idea what he was talking about.
Mr. Darley must have been a little boy once —even if
it were fifty years ago—for when Gerry was leaving he
insisted on filling his pockets with biscuits. Gerry was so
polite that it was a positive torture for him to suffer such
a proceeding, but the thought of the particular deliciousness
of these particular biscuits helped him to bear it.
"Well, good-bye, Your Grace," smiled Mr. Darley.
"Twenty past seven this evening."
So Gerry took someone to the Mission after all, and
Mr. Darley must have changed his mind, for he went to


all the remaining exercises of the Mission, and seemed
sorry when it closed.
Gerry was delighted because he had brought someone
back to the Sacred Heart.
FitzGerald Moore is still the worst in his class-
except at writing. But what of that? And perhaps some
day —as he hopes himself —his brain will "wake up," and
he may be an Archbishop after all!


Father Tom
UNTIL he was fourteen Tommy was just an o'rdinar\
little boy, with an extraordinary capacity for falling
into mischief —and off walls and out of trees and into
waterholes. He had a bad temper, too (amongst an even-
tempered family). Mother said it was like her grand-
father's. Tommy was rather handsome and the other
members of the family rather plain. Mother said he re-
sembled her grandfather in looks as well as temper. He
was not over-fond of lessons; he did not like running
messages; or eating crusts or wholesome vegetables.
But, gradually, after his fourteenth birthday Tommy
changed. He had been to a Mission, and the appeal of
the Sacred Heart had awakened his love for the Heart
that so loves men and receives so little love in return.
Gradually Tommy changed. The family slogan became:
"Let Tom do it." His temper was so well chained that all
the teasing and tormenting of brothers and sisters could not
make it break loose. Tom went to Mass ever)- day; he
never missed Benediction. His rosary beads were always
in his pocket and his sharp-sighted sisters often "caught
him" fingering a bead during odd moments of the day and
night. Mother found him one night kneeling by his bed
when the whole household was slumbering peacefully.
At length a light dawned on the dull family (I think
mother had guessed it long before) and they told one


another in whispers: "Tom must have a vocation." He
used to be an idle, mischievous, bad-tempered young
scamp and now he was like a monk in the house. His
two elder brothers looked on him tenderly, but pityingly:
"Poor kid. He's going to have a hard life. Of course
it's great —and all that —being a priest, but " His elder
sisters felt an admiration for him but it too was blended
with compassion. "Tom a priest! Young Tom. He'll
never get through all the exams."
But the young brother and sister —having heard the
family whisper—were all delight and admiration and wor-
ship. They followed him about, waiting on him, causing
poor Tom untold misery. Father and mother said: "He's
young yet. He may change again." His temper almost
broke loose one day when his sisters and brothers spoke
in his presence of his future. He ordered them "to keep
quiet about it and not go babbling it all over the place."
His father and mother, being wise, insisted on the
family's respecting Tom's secret —no one was to be told
about it.
But Tom did not change, did not go back to the old
ways; he went on in the new way he had chosen. Over
his own little oratory, that he had had since he was seven,
Tom had printed in his best style the words: "Sacred
Heart of Jesus, I trust in Thee." He told mother that
he said the little prayer hundreds of times a day, and
that he trusted the Sacred Heart to find a way for him to
follow his heart's desire and be a priest.
"I know I am only a very ordinary chap, mother —
not very pious, not clever, not anything; but the Sacred
Heart will help me to be a priest—a simple priest, work-
ing every moment for the salvation of souls. Say the little
prayer for me, mother —say it hundreds of times a day."


Tom became a student, industrious, painstaking,
patient, cheerful. He did not distinguish himself in any
way at the Seminary. But his nickname —on examination
—proved he was appreciated. It was "Abou," because
so his companions said —his "name led all the rest in
charity and love of his fellows. Students and teachers all
declared that they had never met anyone whose words and
actions (and, no doubt, thoughts) were so full of sweet
charity.
Tom was ordained. His parents, brothers and sisters
wept when they saw his tall, young figure on the sanc-
tuary. His stooping shoulders and long arms gave him an
awkward appearance amongst the other priests. After the
ordination sentimental people amongst the congregation
said: "Who was the han —er —the good-looking one? He
looked like an early Christian martyr. He's a saint, I
suppose."
The stronger-minded in the group made answer:
"Martyr! Poor boy! God help them all —our dear young
priests. We don't want martyrs these, days, thank God-
We want plain, holy priests."
"He's not so plain," said old Mrs. Ronigan. "But he's
a lovely young man for all that. I saw the very light of
Heaven shining in his two eyes this day. God bless him."
Father Tom was sent to help in a very large, poor
parish. His sisters had hoped he would be appointed to
a "nice" parish amongst "nice" people; mother said he
would go where God wanted him. In Father Tom's parish
there were saintly souls who would rejoice the heart of
any pastor; and there were careless ones, wicked ones,
who would break his heart. Father Tom gave his whole
life to the erring ones; he pitied and loved them until by
degrees he won a place in their lives; gradually he gained


a stray soul here and there. Years passed. Father Tom
was happy. His sisters said it was time he had a transfer
to some "decent" place; but Father Tom wanted to stay
with his poor saints and his poor sinners. He had won
a place amongst, the parishioners that even the parish priest
had not gained—for they were rather in awe of him, but
it was all love and confidence and no fear they felt for
Father Tom. Many a wilful son and foolish daughter was
held back from a dangerous step by a mother or father's
remark: "What will Father Tom think of you if you do
this?" Neglectful husbands were brought, by their wives,
face to face with Father Tom and told to explain their
conduct. Extravagant wives ( poor creatures, they had so
little, and shops were so tempting) were brought to him,
too, and told to give an account of how they had spent the
household money and why the children were not better
dressed. Father Tom, young, inexperienced, found the
right word for everyone. His tender eyes, his kindly hand,
drove away anger, misunderstandings; they brought peace,
love to the poor hearts that needed them so. His prayer
was in the hearts and on the lips of his people: "Sacred
Heart of Jesus I trust in Thee." Hundreds of times a
day —nay, thousands of times —this prayer rose up from
workshop and factory, from ding}- rooms and crowded
streets. It was in the life of the people—trust in the
Sacred Heart; they were steeped in it. Father Tom had
proved to them that such trust is never in vain. The other
priests, following his footsteps, here and there in the
poorest part of the parish heard strange tales of how a
trust in the Sacred Heart had been fulfilled; the people
told the stories in whispers—someone was cured of a deadly
illness, a dying sinner, who had refused to see the priest,
at the last moment had said the prayer and called for a


priest; a deadly feud had been broken—murder perhaps
averted; a thief made reparation; a hardened sinner was
converted; work, money, food, clothing came in strange.
unaccountable ways.
"It is Father Tom's prayer. Father Tom is a saint.
He had grown very thin, his shoulders stooped still
more, as if he carried a heavy burden. Ihe people said
he was ill. he needed a holiday. Father Tom needed no
holiday of this earth's giving, but he agreed to go away
for a few months' rest. He was to leave the following
morning and his people were already wondering how the}
would get on without him.
That night he had a sick call He was surprised on
reaching the house to find that there were two Sacred
Hosts in the Pyx. After administering the Sacraments
and praying with the happy soul —an old lady, whose
joyous death was the close of a hard, sorrowful life —
Father Tom went out, wondering why he had been led to
put the two Hosts in the pyx. "There is another poor
soul dying perhaps, and I am to help it to Heaven.
A car was waiting for him. it w r as not late, and as he
drove towards the Presbytery he prayed his old prayer,
trusting that the Sacred Heart would lead him to any soul
in danger of death and calling for a priest.
Bells clanging, loud cries and shouts! A fire!
"Pull up, Bob," said Father Tom. "I may be wanted
here."
A Chinese furniture factory was on fire and the place
burnt like matchwood. Father Tom stood watching, his
hand over his breast, his eyes eagerly scanning the building,
his lips moving in prayer.
A story was circulated —a man was up there. No?
People make up sensational tales at a time like this. The


Chinese were all well out of the building. The story ran
through the crowd
"Yes, Spotty has a room up there sometimes. The
Chows let him sleep there when he's down on his luck.
He has done one or two smart things for them, you know
—opium —and got well paid for it. But last time he
missed gaol by an inch. Spotty might be up there in the
back room. But there's no getting out the back way, it's
all cut off. Don't worry over Spotty, he'll find a way out
—if he's there."
Spotty! Father Tom knew him well. He had been
on "his trail" ever since he came to the parish. There
was something in Spotty's handsome young face, spoiled
as it was bv wild living, that told one of a soul not wholly
bad, a soul that yearned for higher things. Spotty! He
had once been old Father Dan's altar boy. Father Tom
scanned the window eagerly. A cry went up from the
crowd —a face had appeared at one of the windows- —a
face just 011 a level with the sill, as if its owner could
not stand up. There was no fire very close to that window
from the front, but no doubt it was closing in at the back.
The crowd was still —no sound but the roaring of the fire.
"He doesn't seem to be able to climb up on the sill.
Perhaps he's hurt or almost smothered by the smoke.
Hurrah! The boys will soon get him out." The fire
brigade clattered up.
Father Tom had made his way to the front and no
sooner were the ladders fixed than he was mounting one.
"Get down. You can't go up with us. We'll bring
him down to you. It's Father Tom! We'll get poor old
Spotty out, Father."
"It may be too late. I'm going."
They fell back before some power stronger than
Father Tom's.


A woman tugged at his coat. "Don't go. You can
give him conditional absolution. Father."
He was gone.
Policemen had meanwhile driven back the crowd; the
hose was set going, the hissing of the water on the burning
wood mingled with the roar of the flames. The crowd
cheered the climbing figures. Most of the people cheered
the men who sought to save a fellow-man from a dreadful
death. The Catholics in the crowd knew that Father Tom
was facing death to save a man's soul. There was no
fire from the room yet, but smoke rolled about it; the light
from the roof showed a pair of blackened hands clutching
the sill, a face in agony above it. The crowd heard a
ringing voice with no fear in it. "I'm coming, Spotty.
Make an Act of Contrition. Oh, my God ..." They
saw the black hands raised, they saw the white face
change . . . Father Tom climbed in the window.
The firemen brought them down carefully a little
while after. Spotty died before he reached the hospital.
In trying to escape from the fire he had fallen down a
flight of stairs and broken his leg; he was dreadfully
burned, but had managed to roll and crawl into a room
free from the fire. He reached the window sill . . . His
tace in death had regained the beauty and innocence of his
boyhood.
Father Tom opened his eyes to say to his parish priest,
"I got Spotty." Then he fell into unconsciousness. For
some days he rallied and the whole parish rejoiced, but
then, very quietly, very peacefully, one afternoon Father
Tom, with his favourite prayer upon his lips, went trust-
fully to meet his Judge.
But in that poor parish his work goes on. People
speak of him as if he were still there. "What wouM


Father Tom think of you?" "Remember what you pro-
mised Father Tom. "Ask Father Tom about it, he 11
get it for you if it's good for you to have it."
Many a careless fellow who had promised Father Tom
to so to Confession "Some day," came humbly to his con-
o -
fessional where the new young priest was stationed. "I
promised Father Tom Fd come, and I want to come to his
own confessional. Seems as if he was still here. He said
he'd help me through."
Father Tom —God bless him!


"Forbid Them Not"
DADDY opened the garden gate and whistled; he
waited a moment, then whistled again.
"Out," he said to himself, and the little wattle near
the gate knew he was disappointed. But a few minutes
later, as he went up the stairs to his room, he paused at a
closed door; a very soft, soft sound, like a stifled sob,
came from within. He opened the door, and smiled com-
passionately on the little prisoner the room held.
She sat on a tall stool, her little legs dangling help-
lessly ; two blue eyes, as sweet as violets in a sunshine
shower, looked up sorrowfully.
"Naughty again?"
"Yes, Daddy."
He came to the tall stool and slipped a comforting
arm about the small, drooping figure.
"What now?"
"I tore my dress" —one fat finger indicated the rent
—"and Auntie slapped my hands. I hate having my hands
slapped like a baby, and I felt so hot and cross when she
did it. I wanted to do something back to her. But I
couldn't do anything, so I said: 'I am glad this old dress
is torn; it is a horrid, ugly, old dress, and if you mend it,
I'll tear it again.' Then Auntie told me to come in here
to the stool "
"Yes. What else?"


'My legs wouldn't."
What ?"
"True, Daddy! They wouldn't move for me. I tried
to make them, but I seemed two little girls then, and one
wanted to do what Auntie said and the other would not."
"What happened?"
"Auntie said, 'Go at once,' and something inside said,
I won't.' I didn't want to say it: I was frightened to
say it. It just said itself! My legs wouldn't go for me,
so Auntie picked me up" —she hid her shamed face in
his sleeve —"and I —l kicked and cried, but Auntie car-
ried me in here to the stool. I've been here a long, long
time, and I am so tired. My legs are so little, and there
was nothing to lean against —until you came."
One blue eye peeped out to see what this beloved
parent thought of his little daughter's wickedness.
'"You have been naughty," he said, sadly, and the
blue eye disappeared. "You have worried poor Auntie,
who works so hard for you and me. You have spoiled
my evening. How can Daddy be happy when Mary is
naughty?"
The child threw her arms around his neck. "Oh, I
am not! lam not. I want to be good. I don't want to
make you sorry. I'll be so good. I'll tell Auntie I am
as sorry as anything."
Daddy smiled wearily. "Auntie is tired of hearing
it. I fear she has lost all faith in my little girl's promises
to be good. But come, and we'll tell her."
He lifted her from the "Stocks," as he had named
the stool of punishment, and carried her out.
Aunt Helen was busy making some delicacy for a sick
woman. Aunt Helen was one of those excellent, charit-
able women who never know how to be kind.


'"This little girl wants to tell you she is sorry, and
to promise to be good."
Aunt Helen shook her head sceptically.
"Run and tell Auntie," Daddy whispered beneath the
yellow curls that hid Mary's pink ear. The child advanced
slowly. "I'm very sorry, Auntie, and I'll be good."
"Let us hope you mean it this time," she said, pushing
the child from her. "Run away now; I want to talk to
your father."
Mary went very slowly, her blue eyes asking Daddy
to call her back. But he did not.
"Of course, John," Aunt Helen said, when the child
was gone, "if you side with her, I cannot hope to train
her"
"What part did I take?"
"I left her in punishment; you brought her out.'
"Oh, but we came honourably to apologise and to
promise good behaviour. She was there long enough,
surely, perched up on that abominable stool. I'll burn the
thing one of these days."
"I meant to leave her there until tea-time."
"Oh, Helen, you must temper Justice with Mercy,"
he laughed, as he went to find Man-, but his laugh ended
in a sigh.
Aunt Helen was such a good creature, she managed his
small household perfectly, she gave Mary every care and
attention, but—but—but
The following afternoon his whistle was again un-
heeded. He sought her in the "Torture Chamber" and in
the tiny room where the Doll family lived.
"Where's Baby?" he inquired. Aunt Helen glanced
up from the warm, hideous-looking flannelette she was
making into petticoats for a little orphan, and said, primly:


"I sent Mary to play in the garden."
She never called the child "Baby"—a great girl of
seven. John was spoiling her with his petting, and when
she remonstrated he always gave the same, sad answ ei .
"She has no mother."
Daddy found her in the little Bower he had made for
her, where two hibiscus trees had joined hands in a corner
of the garden. A honeysuckle vine had been only too
happv to scramble up one side, and a sturdy seven-sisteis
rose vine had obligingly (after some coaxing) clambered
up the other. A statue of Our Lady adorned this leafy
retreat, and there, standing solemnly before it, was Mary.
Her lips had a downward curve that Daddy knew well.
She turned when she heard his step, and regarded
him with the same solemn look. He held out his arms.
"I'm too bad," she said, dejectedly.
"For what?"
"Too bad to kiss you."
Something in the sad hopeless little voice brought
tears to his eyes.
"My poor little motherless Babv,' he said, gathering
her up close in his arms.
"Who said you were too naughty?"
"Auntie. Auntie said I am a very bad little girl-
worse than naughty. She said I have she thought a
moment —'a vi'lent temper, and that it must be sub dued.
But that's not all. Oh, Daddy, Daddy, say I can; tell
Sister I can "
"What is it? Tell me, dearie."
"This morning Sister picked the girls for the First
Communion Class ,and she picked me. I hurried home at
lunch-time to tell Auntie: I thought she would be glad.
g u t- —but she said things about me for being naughty, and


she put on her hat straight away and went to Sister. We
went before lunch. Auntie said she could not eat.
"Father Ryan was at the school. He said I am one of
the best in the class. I know all the Catechism, and Sister
said I was, too. But Auntie said I am too naughty; she
told them all the bad things I do. She said they don't
know me. Father Ryan and Sister told her something
the Pope said about children going to Communion, but
Auntie kept saying I was too naughty. She told them I
have a vi'lent temper."
Daddy's face flushed angrily (no wonder Mary had
a bad temper!) to hear that his loved little one had been
so harshly spoken of to Sister and Father Ryan.
"Daddy," the child said, thoughtfully, "do you think
I am very naughty?"
"No, dear."
"Aunty does. Why don't you?'
"Because you are my very own little girl; because I
know how hard you try to be good ; and, because, child
of my heart, I love you."
She sat up in his arms, her eyes fixed searchingly on
his face.
"Daddy, if Our Lord lived on earth like He did long
ago, if He came in now, would He take me in His arms,
like you do, or would He say I am too naughty ?"
"He would take you in His arms, because you are His
own little child, because He knows you try to be good, and
because —oh, best of all, darling—He loves you."
That night, when Mary was asleep, Daddy and Aunt
Helen talked together.
"No, John. Allow me to say that I know best in this
matter. The child is too young, too giddy, too deliberately
naughty."


John's face flushed. "I think she is a good little
thing—no worse than any other youngster."
"You're her father," Aunt Helen said scathingly, and
silenced him. "You cannot see her faults—love blinds
you. The Sisters, dear, gentle souls, think all the little
ones angels.* And that dear Father Ryan, what does he
know? But we know; we know the child in her own
home."
fohn refused to be included in that "we.
"I know she is a dear little girl, who tries to be good.
"Her temper
"We have all tempers!"
Aunt Helen refused to be included in this "we.
"Speak for yourself, John."
"Very well, I will. I have an abominable temper, but,
thank God, I can control it. Mary, too, will learn to
control hers. What can help the child but the Sacra-
ments?"
But Aunt Helen poured forth on her favourite sub-
ject : the modern child and its naughtiness.
"It is to be expected —the times, the manners. Pic-
ture shows, too much ease, too much pocket money, too
many sweets; no little home duties to steady them.
Nothing but pleasure, pleasure. What kind of men an
women will they make? When I was a child, etc,, etc.
John closed his eyes and listened wearily. After a
graphic description of her own saintly childhood Aunt
Helen went on to say: "And then we were not allowed
to go to Holy Communion until we were eleven or twelve
years old; indeed, sometimes thirteen. We_ went then
once every three or four months." Her tone I
we, good little girls of thirty years ago, were thus strict y


restrained, what should be done with the children of this
restless age?"
But John's dark eyes opened, and the weariness dis-
appeared.
"You said something about the times and the manners,
and, oh, a lot more, Helen. Very well. Children of to-day
are very different from those of yesterday. Their parti-
cular spiritual needs must be looked to. The Church is
wise with the wisdom of her Divine Founder. What is to
help the child in these days you deplore for their paganism ?
The Eucharistic Food is the child's strength. Why allow
the child to grow in his faults —eleven years without the
Food of the Soul? But, anyway, Helen, there is really no
need for us to talk any longer. We need never have dis-
cussed the matter at all. As a Catholic, you must rely
on the Church's judgment, and not on your own. Mary-
is my child, and I must assert my authority "
"Oh, if it comes to that " Aunt Helen got up
with dignity. As he opened the door for her, she threw
out her hands, palms upward: "The responsibility is on
you."
"The Pope comes first, the parish priest next," smiled
John, but Aunt Helen was already out of hearing—she
always hurried away to escape hearing a "last word."
Perhaps talking of Mary and her First Communion
brought the dream to John; perhaps some kind angel,
knowing the loneliness in his heart, brought it to him.
He dreamt he stood in a far-off land and watched the
people hurrying along the way to meet Jesus of Nazareth.
The mothers had brought their little children to receive
His blessing. John's heart suddenly gave a leap of joy.
tor there, on the dusty road before him, he saw his loved
ones, his two Mary's. It did not seem strange, in the


dream, that this young wife, who died when Mary was an
infant in arms, should be there, leading the little one by
the hand: there was no death in the dream. The child
was just as he had seen her that afternoon in her little
Bower; his wife was just as she used to be in the dear days
of seven years ago. Mary was looking up into her
mother's face, and she bent down and whispered: "Jesus
will bless you and keep you a good little girl always."
But as the mothers drew near, some of the Master's
followers barred the way and told them to go back—the
children would disturb Him, they were too young and
thoughtless to be admitted to His presence. John's heart
sank at the look of disappointment on the faces of the
women and children. Someone came close to his wife and
child, and sternly forbade the child to approach Him. It
was not one of the Master's followers: John looked closer
—it was Aunt Helen.
But the little group of men gathered about Him was
opening, revealing the Majestic Figure of the Lover of
little children. He called them closer; He rebuked those
who would keep them from Him. The little ones ran to
Him; the mothers stood, smiling, as He blessed their
children.
John looked jealously for his own little one, and then
she came, sobbing bitterly: Oh, dear Jesus, lam too
naughty; too naughty to kiss \ou. too naughty to come
yy
near You.
John felt hot tears in his eyes for his poor, naughty,
little Baby. What would the Master do? Would He
turn away from the little hands held out to Him ? \\ ould
he frown into the tearful blue eyes?
But Tesus, the Lover of little ones, smiled, a smile


of tender love, sweeter than a mother's, as He bent down
and took John's naughty little one in His arms.
Mary made her First Communion; the flowers from
her own little bed near the Bower turned into a wreath
for her golden hair. Daddy watched her through a mist
of tears. The priest's figure as he came down the red
path of the Sanctuary, was blurred, but John seemed to
see another Figure near the altar rails; he seemed to hear
his little one say: "Dear Jesus, I am too naughty"; he
seemed to see the smile, sweeter than a mother's, that
Tesus bestows on "little ones."
The September flowers were gone, gone to the Land
where dead days and dead flowers live again. Daddy
opened the little white gate near the wattle, but he did
not whistle; he went up the path slowly, not in the quick,
eager way he sought Mar}-. He did not visit the Doll
family that lived in the tiny room near the stairs; he did
not tip-toe to the Torture Chamber, for Mary now had
"stars for playthings," and needed not dolls: her naughty
little deeds were all done, the tall stool stood in the corner,
the Torture Chamber was no longer used —she might play
forever in the "nurseries of Heaven."
Sometimes kind angels, who knew the loneliness of
his aching heart, brought Daddy sweet dreams of his
little one, playing at Our Lady's side among the lilies of
Paradise.


The Big Fight
THERE were Easter daisies in the gardens and Easter
eggs in the shops; but they had come in very early—
there was still to be travelled a long stretch of road that
led through the Desert of Lent before the Glorious Garden
of the Resurrection was reached. To Jimmy it seemed a
long, long way, indeed; for Jimmy was young, and to the
young days are long and time passes slowly. Old people
find the days very short, and the months fly by as if Old
Father Time were trying, each year, to beat his last year's
record; but when Jimmy said: "Three weeks until Easter —
two weeks until Easter," Easter seemed a long way off.
Sometimes he felt tired of plodding his way through the
Desert —it was heavy travelling; sometimes he felt inclined
to turn back to the easy path he had left on Ash Wednes-
day; but then he knew the easy way did not lead to the
Garden. Sometimes he felt inclined to cover his ears that
he might not hear the bell that was ringing, ringing all
the time of Lent.
Prayer!
Fasting!
Alms!
Holy Mother, the Church, was ringing the bell, and
even her tiniest children must listen and obey it. In every
country, in every clime sounded the warning penance bell.
Now is the time —


Now is the time —
Now is the acceptable time,
Now is the day of salvation
was the song of the bell.
The Pope heard it in the Vatican; the smallest child
in the Infants' School heard it.
The children in Sister Gabriel's class were trying so
hard to be good that Sister Gabriel wished Lent was twice
as long. There were fewer quarrels and arguments to
be settled; fewer children had to be sent out of the room
to wash sticky fingers, for fewer lollies were in the lunch
box and none at all in the little boys' pockets. It was a
forbidden thing to have lollies in one's pocket in the class-
room, but very often children fell into this fault. The
box that held the pennies for the Little Black brothers,
away up in Papua, bulged with copper in accordance with
the leanness of the lunch-box in the matter of sweets.
The box had to be emptied three times during Lent!
Childish fingers wrestled with pencils in an earnest
endeavour to "do good writing for Lent"; soft eyes were
fixed on spelling lists and tables in grave Lenten concentra-
tion and mortification.
Annabelle Carr actually requested her mother not to
curl her hair; as it was Lent, Annabelle preferred to do
violence to her vanity and let her hair hang as straight
as ever it liked! Only little girls with very straight hair
will understand and appreciate Annabelle's action.
Sometimes one of the children grew tired of the
Desert and, obeying the promptings of Nature, and turn-
ing from Grace, broke away and ran back to the "flesh
pots of Egypt," as found in the forms of lollies, chewie,
slices of melon, and ice blocks and "smacks." But these
weak, foolish ones always came back, sadder and wiser


and redoubled their mortifications to "make up."
Jimmy was pleased with his progress. He felt he
was keeping Lent well. He became just a trifle proud of
himself. When we become proud and trust in ourselves
our fall is near. The Evil One steals up close to us. and
we are so wrapped up in ourselves, so busy admiring our-
selves, that we do not notice him; we are not prepared for
him. Trusting in ourselves, we forget to call on God for
help, and in a moment the cunning enemy brings us down.
It was a hot day, but the children played as if it were
cool and pleasant weather; nothing short of a heat wave
or a thunder storm will affect them.
Jimmy felt pleased with himself. He did not know
that the Black Angel was even then, attracted by his pride,
stealing up to tempt him, to bring about his fall. Poor
Jimmy. The Black Angel did not tempt him to break his
lolly pledge; he did not tempt him to spend his penny on
himself. No. He knew better; he knew all Jimmy's
weak places, as he knows yours and mine. He has been
studying us and our fathers and mothers before us. since
sin came into the world. He's very clever; we are no
match at all for him; we must simply run away from him
and call out to Our Lady, call out to Our Lord to save us
from him.
Jimmy was sitting on a seat swinging his legs. He
had had a game with three other little boys. They had
gone about the playground, in a line, their arms about
each other's shoulders, singing, over and over again:
"We don't care who we bump;
We don't care who we bump;
We don't care who we bump,
LTiless we bump the wall."
The children, especially the little girls, all fled at


their approach. Now Jimmy was resting, well-pleased
with, and a little proud of, himself.
"Wish St. Patrick's Day would come," he said to
Tommy. "We'll have some good fun then. I'm going to
the .sports. My big brother goes to the Brothers'. He's
in the drill."
"So's mine!" jealously claimed Tommy. "And he's in
the races, too." Tommy and Jimmy had been fond of
quarrelling, but had taken a pledge against it.
"So's mine," Jimmy returned, and thrust his chin
out aggressively.
"I bet my brother could race yours.'
"Bet he couldn't."
"I bet my brother is clever'n yours. He learns Latin."
"So does mine."
"My brother is going for a hard exam, at Christmas."
"So's mine."
I bet my brother could fight your brother.'
"I bet he couldn't."
"I bet I can fight you."
"Bet you can't."
"Come on!"
"You come on!"
'To the secret delight of several small boys who were
near, and to the horror and consternation of Annabelle and
some other little girls close by, Jimmy and Tommy fell
on each other, raining blows right and left. Then they
got into such "a clinch" that it seemed nothing could ever
separate them again. They panted and grunted in a most
alarming manner.
Pat O'Rourke appointed himself referee and, stand-
ing close to them, said solemnly, "Break!" But the little
combatants took not the slightest notice of him; thev


weren't going to keep any rules. Pat approached and tried
to separate them in true referee style, but they held each
other as with bands of steel. Pat gave it up and joined
the spectators.
Annabelle, meanwhile, had run up the play-ground to
Sister Gabriel. "Oh, Sister, Jimmy and Tommy are having
a fight. I think one of them will be killed."
Poor young Sister Gabriel sighed. She had been so
happy about Jimmy and Tommy—they had given up quar-
rels and arguments since Lent had begun; Sister had
thought them converted, and had attributed it not a little
to her own earnest exhortations.
Always allowing for the exaggeration that came with
tales of heads "split open," fingers "nearly cut off," and
knees "all over blood," Sister Gabriel was nevertheless
anxious about fights and accidents. Every day she prayed
to the guardian angels of her flock to keep them from
injuring themselves or their little neighbours. To her
relief now she found that Jimmy and Tommy were in no
danger of killing each other. Sister Gabriel proved a
better referee than Pat O'Rourke, for at the sound of her
voice the little boys fell apart and stood, glaring at one
another like two little bull-dogs. A puffed cheek and a
few scratches seemed the extent of injuries recived.
"Oh Jimmy—Oh, Tommy," Sister said sadly. " And
it is Lent."
"He started it, Sister."
"He did, Sister."
"He said his Brother "
"He said his Brother "
Sister's uplifted finger silenced them. They were sent
to the wash shed —to enter at different doors, and to wash


as far away from each other as the length of the bench-
basins would permit.
"I thought I had converted those two," Sister Gabriel
said and looked up at the blue March sky. Then she
smiled at herself. "I thought I was working such a
change in them. With even the tiniest one I can do
nothing, get no result, unless You help me."
The two little boys came back with shining faces and
wet heads; a look of shame had taken the place of anger.
"You have both been angry and have quarrelled in
Lent," Sister said. "You have scandalised all the chil-
dren. You listened to the Bad Angel and now he is
laughing at you. He is glad you have offended God. He
is glad you have broken your Lent pledge."
The look of shame deepened on the little faces.
"I'msorrySister," Jimmy mumbled, all in one word.
"So'ml," Tommy muttered in another,
"Have you forgiven each other?"
"Yes Sister" —a duet.
"Then say so."
"I'm sorry, Tommy."
"I'm sorry, Jimmy."
"Shake hands," Sister said.
Two little hands clasped, limply, while a ring of edified
infants stood around. Jimmy and Tommy looked much
happier; indeed they were beginning to find some satis-
faction in their situation. But Sister's next words brought
the shame back to their faces, and the little heads hung
down again.
\ou have forgiven each other. I have forgiven you.
But Someone else has been offended bv your bad temper
and your quarrel."
"Yes, Sister," they said.


"Go and ask His pardon."
"Yes, Sister."
They trotted off across the playground to the church;
they knelt there and asked God to forgive them. They
promised to try to do much better —to avoid quarrels, to
watch their tempers; they promised to renew their Lenten
resolutions and to be "good boys." They came back across
the playground their arms about each other's shoulders
and a seraphic light on their little faces.
Sister Gabriel smiled to see them. "The darlings!"
she said —but not for Jimmy and Tommy to hear. So
don't tell them if you meet them.
Keep a watch on your pet fault. The devil knows it,
just as well as you do. When he sees you trying to correct
it during Lent, he will set all kinds of cunning traps for
you. Ask Our Lady to help you to correct that pet fault.
A happy Easter awaits all who spend a "good" Lent.


Christmas Eve
CHRISTMAS EVE! Christmas Bush and Christmas
Bells everywhere—ladies carried bunches of them,
gentlemen wore little sprays of them, and the flower sellers'
baskets near the Post Office were just masses of them.
1 oys in all the windows, for Christmas Week is the
children's week, the Holy Child made it theirs hundreds of
years ago, When He deigned to become a little child on
that first white Christmas night.
©
Christmas! What a delicious sound the word has,
like the sweet tinkling of tiny silver bells on a soft, clear
night.
The echo of the angels' song is still stealing round
the earth, and making music in our minds at Christmas
time.
"Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace to
men of goodwill, and that is why our hearts give a big
leap and we feel happy and young again when we say that
one word, Christmas.
Gerald could hear the angels' music, his heart beat
time to it, his eyes shone with the gladness of it, his feet
danced along with the joy of it. "Glory be to God on
high, and on earth peace to men of goodwill"—Gerald
was at peace with all the world.
Now and then his hand touched his pocket, where re-
posed the coins he had "saved up." What a long time it


had taken, and now at last the day had come when he
could exchange his money for a spring bat and a "six-
stitcher" ball.
Whew! What fun he would have during the holidays,
sending that ball flying down the paddock, and making
"centuries" to the admiration of his boy friends!
Mother had allowed him to go to the city himself that
morning. In all the strength and glory of his twelfth
Christmas, he needed no protector.
He came to St. Mary's. Should be make a visit or
wait until he was coming back? Perhaps he might come
back in the tram —better go in now. He knelt before the
Blessed Sacrament, put the thought of the bat and ball out
of his mind, and recited the aspirations Brother Bede had
told his boys to say when they were before the Tabernacle.
Then he visited the Crib, and prayed to the Holy
Child for his parents, his brothers and sisters. And if,
once or twice, a vision of the spring bat came before his
mmd, I am sure the Holy Child pardoned the little dis-
traction, for He understands the natures of all little boys,
tor He. the tiny Infant in the Manger, is their God, their
Creator.
One of the precious coins found its way from Gerald's
pocket to the little box near the Crib, and then he was
out in the Christmas sunshine again, hurrying in to the
citv.
There were one or two Christmas boxes to be selected,
for Gerald had not "saved" up for himself alone, and then
there was the all-important matter of the spring bat.
As he made his way to the sportsman's shop, he came
to a big window dressed as Toyland. Although he was
in such a hurry to possess that bat, he paused to admire


the window. There were all kinds of toys, toys to please
the tastes of all the children in Sydney.
As it was rather early there was no crowd of admiring
juveniles about the window, but just in front of Gerald
a shabbily-dressed woman was trying to coax her little
girl from the alluring display. But the child pleaded to
remain, her little face glued to the pane, while she talked
to the big blue-eyed doll the other side of the window —
"so near and yet so far." The mother tried to draw her
attention and admiration to a tiny doll in a remote corner,
for the big blue-eyed dolly was far beyond her means.
"No, no, Baby doesn't want little dolly—Baby too
big for little dollies —Baby want this one! Please buy this
big dolly. Baby very good girl—never naughty once."
Gerald felt a little twinge of pain in his boyish heart.
Poor little child, and poor mother. How hard that she
could not please the little one on Christmas Eve. What
matter if things were "too dear" all the year round, if
only they were procurable on that one grand day. He
heard the mother whispering to the little one, explaining
that the "shopman" wanted too many pennies for the big
doll —mother had not half enough pennies to buy her.
"Baby has pennies!" triumphantly shouted the child
as she opened her little fingers and showed two pennies
on a moist, pink palm.
And then Gerald drew in a quick, sharp breath, and
his head felt dizzy as if someone had given him a blow,
for a Christmas angel had sent a Christmas thought flash-
ing through his mind.
He could not do it, he told himself. Why should he?
What was this strange little girl to him? Why should he
care if her little heart was breaking for that big doll? It
had nothing to do with him. He was going to buy a bat


and a ball with his money. If he were rich, he might—
but he wasn't rich, and if the little girl cried her pretty
eyes red, and broke her baby heart with longing for that
doll, he couldn't help it. Shopkeepers should not put those
lovely toys in the windows, when they make poor little
ones long in vain for them, he thought angrily.
He couldn't help the matter, anyway, he told himself
a second time. He walked a few steps from the window,
and the little sorrowful cry of the baby followed him. He
looked back. She had dropped on her knees before the
doll, she clasped her little fat, pink hands closely, and
said: "Please God, make mummy buy the big dolly."
The mother's face was red and confused, and a trifle
sad too, as she coaxed the little one to go with her away
from the wonderful window.
The Christmas angel sent more Christmas thoughts
flashing through Gerald's mind.
"It would please God. Do it for the Holy Child's
sake."
He bit his lip quickly and spoke to the woman before
his determination might falter.
"You wouldn't mind, would you, if —if—l got her
the doll? I'd like to give it to her—for Christmas. She
expects it now, in answer to her little prayer. It would
make her happy. You wouldn't —er —be offended, would
you? I'll cut in quickly and get it."
The woman shook her head at first, but there was
such a frank, honest look about Gerald's face —he seemed
to be begging a favour —and her small daughter was still
on her knees waiting for the intervention of Providence,
that she felt she might let the child accept the doll from
this generous school-boy.
Happily there was no one near the window to witness


her confusion, passers-by just gave a glance at the little
kneeling figure, and never dreamt she was praying. There
were tears in the mother's eyes. "I don't know what to
say," she sighed, wearily.
"Then say 'yes,'" smiled Gerald. "Come on," he
cried to the little girl. "Your mother says you may have
it."
He gave the greater part of his savings in exchange
for the doll (a doll! Gerald had a boy's supreme con-
tempt for dolls!), and then hurried out of the shop before
the woman could thank him.
He stood before the sportsman's shop, and there was
something like tears in his eyes, but then, since only
girls cry —boys never do —it could not have been tears.
Of course, when a boy has made up his mind that he is
going to be in the Australian Eleven some day, it is—well
—rather hard to go and give his "cricket" money for —
for a silly old doll!
He smiled at his doleful reflection in the window, and
even whistled as he caught a Watson's Bay tram.
In the next compartment, facing him. sat a prettv
little boy and an old gentleman, and as the tram passed
St. Mary's Gerald and the little boy raised their hats
reverently.
"Hi! Grandpapa! Raise your hat! Quick! You for-
got, we are passing St. Mary's!" the little boy called out
in a high clear voice that could be heard through the car.
The old gentleman looked confused as he hurriedly raised
two fingers to his tall silk hat, and then the high childish
voice went on, heedless of the embarrassment the grand-
father suffered, "Gentlemen always raise their hats to their
friends, mother said, and God is our very best friend, isn't
He. Grandpapa? He can see us through the walls of the


Cathedral, too, although we cannot see Him. He knows
we raised our hats to Him. I wonder did He smile on
us? I think He did; I feel as if God just smiled on me,
don't you, Grandpapa? Ladies should bow their heads
passing the Church, shouldn't they? All the gentlemen in
this tram did not raise their hats to Our Lord, I suppose
they did not mean to be rude. I suppose they do not know
He is really in the Cathedral always. There is a nice boy
in there, he raised his hat. I like him. (Gerald blushed.)
I'm sure he is a great friend of God's. Doesn't he look
nice, Grandpapa? Do you think I'll be a big boy like he
is soon? It's horrid being so little." The old gentleman
sought to stop the chatter now and then, but the little
fellow talked on. "Did you say I am talking too loudly?
I am so sorry, but the tram makes such a noise, I have to
shout out. I love talking to you, Grandpapa, you always
listen so carefully, just as if I were a big man talking
about offices and shares and money and things men talk
about. I really could not wait without talking all the way
home. You see, I don't always have you to talk to, only
at Christmas time, and father says that then I make the
most of my opportunities. What does that man, Grand-
papa?"
After this flattering speech, the old gentleman made
no more criticisms of his little relative's conversation, and
when Gerald left the tram, he was still talking in his high,
sweet voice.
Gerald felt pleased he had heard him. He felt pleased
that the little boy should think him "a great friend of
God's." Perhaps if he had not listened to the Christmas
angel's whispers, the little boy's sweet compliment would
not have pleased him so much.
Ah, well! there were plenty of spring bats and "six-


stitcher" balls in Sydney, but for the little girl that morn-
ing there was only one doll. It was something to have made
a little child happy on Christmas Eve.
He grasped the Christmas boxes tighter and went on
his way, the angels' music sounding in his ears—"Glory be
to God on high, and on earth peace to men of goodwill"—
his eyes shining with the gladness of it.
Little boys and girls who read this story, listen care-
fully on Christmas Eve, and whatever the Christmas angels
whisper to you to do —do it! And then you will have what
I now wish you: "A Very Happy Christmas."


Grandpa's Flowers
MR. O'CONNOR was a flower-fancier. He had
several beds of his own particular dowers, and
there he worked away, late and early, among his "pets."
A big dower show was to be held at Easter-time, and
Mr. O'Connor was quite sure his white roses and white
chrysanthemums were going to take first prize. What a
victory over his friend Lane, who lived across the street,
and who thought his blooms the finest in Australia!
Mr. O'Connor walked up and down the paths admir-
ing the dowers, and finally halted before his cherished
chrysanthemums. Each plant had been stripped of all its
buds, save one, and that one would develop into a massive
white blossom of unusual size.
"Splendid, splendid," he said aloud. "They will just
be ready in time."
The roses, too, were admired. They were pure white,
with a slight tinge of pink on the outer petals, and Mr.
O'Connor smiled when he thought how far they surpassed
Lane's roses.
There was another dower-fancier in the house, and
that was Clem. Clem was Mr. O'Connor's six-years-old
grandson —as merry and mischievous a grandson as could
be found in the State. Mr. O'Connor loved him tenderly,
although he worried him from morning till night.
Clem's baptismal name was John Clement Francis,


hut this had been shortened to one syllable, "Clem."
"My Sunday name is John Clement Francis," the little
fellow would explain, "but my every day name is Clem."
Clem had been staying at his grandpa's for three or
four months, and during that time he had attended the
Sisters' Kindergarten class, and learnt many things. One
thing was that grandpa did not go to Mass on Sundays,
although Sister Mary Philomena said it was a sin to neglect
Sunday Mass.
Clem went to Mass every Sunday (Auntie Tess took
him), and he had a "Holy Childhood" prayer-book and a
pair of blue rosary beads.
He was constantly thinking about the eternal welfare
of his beloved grandpa. "Coming to Mass, grandpa?" he
would ask each Sunday, and when grandpa would shake
his head, and go off to his flowers, little Clem would sigh
disappointedly, and fell very unhappy.
Many a "Hail Mary" was whispered over the little
blue beads "to make grandpa come to Mass," and many a
childish prayer, for the same intention, went from Clem's
heart to the Divine Dweller in the Tabernacle.
On Palm Sunday Clem went to Mass, and stood
through the "long gospel." without moving a muscle.
Auntie Tess said we might help a soul out of purgatory
if we keep very still all the time, and Clem tried so hard,
although his feet felt like lead, and his sturdv legs ached
badly.
Mr. O'Connor was comfortably seated in a verandah
chair when Clem returned, waving two palm branches in
his hands. "Here, grandpa, I brought one for you. Kiss
it, and hang it over your bed."
Grandpa took it and touched it very lightly with his
lips.


"Come on, now; I'll help you to hang it up."
Grandpa was forced to leave his comfortable chair
and hang the palm branch over his bed, and then he had
to help in hanging Clem's branch over his cot.
The palm branch awoke many half-forgotten memories
in grandpa's heart, and at night-time the sight of it dis-
turbed his conscience annoyingly.
In Holy Week he and Auntie Tess went away for
a few days, and Clem was left alone.
Sister Mary Philomena told the children to bring
flowers —white ones if procurable —for the Altar of Re-
pose, and on Wednesday morning, very, very early, Clem
went forth to the garden with a big scissors in his hand.
He passed by the beds of coloured flowers, but paused
before grandpa's pet white ones. Of course, as grandpa
was away, he could not ask for them; but, then, Grandpa
would not refuse the flowers for God's altar, Clem told
himself as he snipped off the choice blooms. When he
finished there was not even a bud of grandpa's "pets"
left. Clem had gathered even the tiniest bud, for he said
they would be so disappointed if they could not go with all
the big "grown-up" flowers to decorate the Altar of Re-
pose.
When he presented Sister with a big bunch of beauti-
ful chrysanthemums and roses, she was delighted.
The other Sisters gathered round to admire them.
"How kind of Mr. O'Connor; they must be some of his
prize flowers," they exclaimed, and Sister said, "I shall
put them on the altar for his intention. Perhaps they may
do something for him, poor man."
When grandpa came home that afternoon, he went
straight to his garden to see how his flowers had fared
during his absence.


Surprise and indignation held him spellbound. All
gone! Not a bud left! Some malicious person had stolen
every one so that he could not compete in the show.
None of the servants knew anything about it, and Mr.
O'Connor raged and stormed, declaring that he would
trace the thief if it cost him half his fortune. He sent
straight away to the police station, and before nightfall
two or three detectives were on the trail.
And the beautiful lost blossoms were on the Altar in
the Church a few hundred yards down the street!
It was Clem's privilege to have dinner with grandpa
and Auntie Tess when there were no guests, and that night
found him sitting at grandpa's right, feeling pleased with
himself and all the world.
"Sister liked the flowers," he said, seeing that grandpa
was very silent and disinclined to open a conversation.
Auntie Tess looked slightly alarmed. "What flowers,
Clem?" she inquired.
"Oh, you know, the flowers I took her. I gathered
a lovely bunch of grandpa's pets this morning."
"What!" roared grandpa, upsetting the soup tureen
in his excitement. The soup poured over the table in a
soaking stream, but grandpa did not notice.
"You, you—you young pirate, you!" he managed to
gasp.
Clem laughed. "Did you think someone stole them ?
It was only me. I couldn't ask for them, you know, but
I knew you wouldn't mind, grandpa, when they are for
the Altar on Holy Thursday."
Grandpa only groaned.
"Sister thinks they're lovely. Wasn't it funny for
you to think someone took them?" He laughed again, and


poor grandpa mumbled something, and Mary came in to
try to repair the damage he had done.
Grandpa's appetite was quite gone. He sent at once
for the police to stop the search, as the thief was found.
"The dowers look so lovely, grandpa; you must ccme
and see them to-morrow." Clem rattled on, unconscious of
the pain he was giving; but grandpa said not a word. W hat
was the use? The flowers were gone, and the little thief
was so pleased with his work, and would not bel eve that
grandpa would begrudge his flowers to God.
A ery early next morning, Clem hammered with his
lists on grandpa's door.
"Get up, grandpa, and come to Mass and see your
flowers."
Once grandpa was disturbed in the morning, he could
not sleep again. So he got up and dressed.
Yes, he would go and have a last look at his fl nvers,
and. to Clem's great satisfaction, they set off to Mass.
Clem piloted him to a seat near the Altar of Repose,
and there he saw his chrysanthemums and roses looking
even lovelier than when in the garden.
As the little procession reached the altar, and the priest
placed the Blessed Sacrament in the tabernacle amongst
all the white flowers, Clem whispered, "He will like your
flowers best, eh, grandpa?" Then all regret for his "pets"
died down in grandpa's heart, and he bowed his head very
low and tried to pray.
Grandpa went to the church with Clem on Good Fri-
day. but felt that he could not walk up the aisle and kiss
the cross before the crowded congregration, man}" of whom
were intimate friends, and knew of his neglect of religion.
But Clem tugged at his sleeve. "Come on, grandpa;
let us go now. Nearly everyone has been up but us." And


poor grandpa buried his false pride, and, with Clem hold-
ing his hand very tightly, together they went up the aisle.
As the little procession passed back to the high altar,
Mr. O'Connor's heart, strangely moved, cried out, in humi-
lity and repentance, "Have mercy on me, a sinner!" His
cry for mercy was not to remain unheeded.
When all the bells pealed out joyously at the "Gloria"
on Holy Saturday, little Clem's heart kept time with them.
He was—oh, so happy, for grandpa was kneeling beside
him.
He did not properly understand what confession was.
but knew that all "big people" should go to confession, and
that night, when he heard the cook tell the gardener that
"the old gentleman had been to confession, God be praised,"
he felt supremely happy.
On Easter Sunday morning he was up before day-
break, waiting to see "the sun dance," and afterwards he
and grandpa and Auntie Tess went to early Mass. Grandpa
was strangely quiet, and Auntie Tess' eyes were shining
with a great happiness.
When grandpa heard that Mr. Lane's flowers won the
first prize, he only smiled; for Clem had told him that his
chrysanthemums and roses would go to Heaven when they
died. All the flowers that are used on Altars and Oratories
blossom again in God's garden when they die on earth.
Auntie Tess said so. She read it out of an old book of
legends.
Grandpa had lost the prize, but he had spent a happy
Easter —the happiest for many years.
As for Clem! He was the happiest little boy to be
found from Wilson's Promontory to Cape York, or from
Shark Bay across to Moreton's.


Pat's Vocation
PAT was absorbed in thought.
He forgot to kick the stones that were in his path;
he forgot to pat the stray dogs and cats he passed.
"I'll soon be fourteen," mused Pat. "Mr. Fraser pro-
mised to make a place for me. He is a decent sort; I'll get
on well with him. After a while I'll be a pretty good
help to them at home."
The thought of this brilliant future in Mr. Fraser's
motor works did not seem to give Pat much pleasure, for
he sighed, and his blue eyes looked far, far away as if
they saw visions of splendid things.
"Lots of boys cannot get any kind of a job these days.
I should be glad that Mr. Fraser is going to take me." He
looked far away again, and then ended, philosophically, "I
am, too."
When he reached home, the smell of hot scones floated
out from the kitchen; but it failed to raise his spirits.
"'Lo, Mum," he said, in his loving, undemonstrative
way.
"Well, Pat, my boy," the mother said, equally loving,
equally undemonstrative. She buttered a couple of hot
scones and put them before him.
"They're goodo, Mum," Pat said, but she sensed some-
thing was amiss with him, and her blue eyes, as beautiful
and visionary as his own, gave him a quick, questioning
glance.


There was an envelope on the table.
"The light bill?" said Pat, frowning at it.
"It isn't very light," smiled the mother. "But the
light's a wonderful thing. What would my grandmother
say if she could see it? She was always one to say the
"Grace for Light." She never lit a lamp or a candle with-
out praising and thanking God for light."
Pat, in the community spirit of the Australian family,
opened the bill and read it. "Never mind, Mum —I'll be
fourteen in September. I'll be able to help you a bit. Mr.
Fraser has a place for me, you know."
"It's a fine thing to have a big son," she said, but her
tone was one of forced gaiety.
'You'll be glad to be done with lessons, Pat."
'Oh, lessons are not too bad, Mum."
'Most boys are eager to leave school."
"Oh, school is not too bad."
"Have another scone?"
"No, thank you."
"Are you sick, Pat?"
"No, Mum."
"Have you had a fight with someone?"
"Aw—no."
"Have you boys broken a window with the football
and you've got to help pay for it?"
"No."
"Well, there's something on your mind; so don't deny
it. I know you better than you know yourself."
"It's nothing—that you can help. So don't worry."
"Do you like the idea of going to Mr. Fraser's?"
"Any job is good now."
"I thought Brother Ryan wanted you to prepare for
some examination and to go on to the High School."


'"Oh. if I were staying at school —the Intermediate.
Fellows who are going to work when they are fourteen
don't go for that."
"Brother Ryan thinks you are smart."
"Aw —I'm just average, Mum."
The mother busied herself with the second batch of
scones, and Pat looked out the kitchen window to far,
far off, where the fields were white with the harvest and
there were so few labouring to bring it in to the Lord's
house before the storms came to ruin it ... .
"Mrs. Brennan was in this morning," Pat's mother
said, in a casual voice. "Her eldest son is going to study
for the priesthood."
"Is he? I thought he'd go." Pat drew in his under lip
and pressed it firmly between his teeth. There was silence
in the little kitchen.
"Pat," the mother's .voice said, softly, "when you
were born your father and I told the Lord who had given
you to us that if ever He wanted you back again—"
Pat's face crimsoned and his head went down on the
kitchen table . . . his voice, wrung with pain, said, "Oh,
Mother —how can I go?"
"Why not?" She put her floured hand on his dark
head and smoothed it gently. "Why not, Pat?"
"I'm needed here, to help you and Dad. Dad's
always working, and so are you. The three little ones
will be no help for years. I'm just of age to start in and
help a bit. How can I go?"
"Who needs you most —do we, or does God ?"
"I don't know."
"Who has most claim?"
"God."
"He has, indeed. If He wanted you through the


gates of death we could not close them and keep you.
You might fall sick and die this very night. . . . You
might be run down going to school any day. . . . Could
we keep you from death? No—we could not. If He
wants you this other way, do you think we would close
the gates of the sanctuary —if we could —and keep you
from Him? The Lord forbid! We will do without you.
to give you to Him."
There was a look of exaltation upon the mother's face.
"I speak for your father; I know his heart. We will
miss you, but we will not hinder you. Humbly we thank
God for calling one of our family to His special service."
He took his mother's hands and held them tightly;
he kissed them, surprising himself and her by such a
demonstration of affection.
"Mother —you have always worked for me, cared for
me. I have made no return. And now, if I leave you,
I will give you nothing—nothing but sadness. I shall
never be able to help you and Dad; never help to get you
any little comfort when you are old.
"What we have done for you is our reward—the
doing of it has been our happiness. Pat, we would work-
all-our lives. The old saying—"Work the fingers to the
bone" —does not half express what your father and I
would do to help you to be . . . to be . . . She could
not pronounce the word.
Tears came and there, in the little kitchen, they wept
together until the smell of burning scones brought the
mother back to a realization of even- day duties.
A step was heard on the path outside, and a woman's
voice called, "Are you in?"
"It's Aunt Elizabeth —I'm off," whispered Pat.
"Take a few scones with you." she whispered in


return. "And cheer up. If God wants you, He'll find a
way."
Aunt Elizabeth was Mr. O'Donnell's sister. She paid
periodical visits to her brother and his family and gave
them advice on all subjects. Mrs. O'Donnell made her
welcome and put tea and hot buttered scones before her.
She enjoyed them and promised her hostess a recipe of
a much better scone next time she came.
"Well, Pat's nearly fourteen. Are you looking out
for a place for him? Denis will leave it all to you, you
know. Denis is a good father, as far as working hard
for his children goes; but he has no push. You will have
to take the man's part and get Pat in somewhere. Don't
let him be idle when he leaves school; I suppose he's
leaving when he's fourteen; most boys are counting the
days. Boys and men need to be kept occupied. Let Pat
take anything, anything at all, rather than have him hang-
ing about the house, and later on about the street corners."
"Pat is not leaving school. He's going on to Brother
Ryan at the High School."
Mrs. Tracy pursed her lips. "Oh, is he? Who is
going to pay for it?"
"His father, of course."
Aunt Elizabeth made a noise that was almost a snort!
"How can you do without his help while he is at school?
There are books, too, and school-money and clothes.
Much better get him into work straight away. High
School is all very well for boys who are going to enter
professions. If he were a brilliant boy, now, he might win
his way to High School and then on to the Lniversity.
But I dont think Pat is brilliant."
Mrs. O'Donnell's face stiffened. "Brother Ryan thinks
Pat is a very smart boy."


''Oh, yes —smart, perhaps, but so are hundreds of
boys. Well, I think you are very foolish. He'll get all
sorts of silly notions into his head. He'll want all kinds
of things you can't give him. He'll grow to look down
on his father's position . . . and to look down on you,
too. What is the use of killing yourselves to educate him
above his position. You'll ruin the boy and bring an un-
happy old age upon yourselves."
Mrs. O'Donnell looked angry for a moment. "Above
his position —and your name is O'Donnell. Don't you
think an O'Donnell is fit to take his place anywhere?"
"Oh, the old names are nothing now, in these days."
"They are—and it's a pity an Irish-Australian should
say such a thing. The names should live again in Australia
and be as bright as they were in Ireland."
"Well, don't let us quarrel over names. Think of
the boy's welfare."
"I am thinking of it and of the welfare of others.
Elizabeth, Pat will never look down on me or on his
father. It's the boy's secret —and I would not tell you,
only I know you would go for his father and for him the
minute they set foot in the door. Your are not to, Eliza-
beth O'Donnell. Eeave them in the peace of God —where
they both are, God bless them. Do you hear?"
Mrs. Tracy looked her astonishment. Whatever was
wrong with Mary?
"I hear you, Mary, but I must confess I don't know
what you are talking about."
Mrs. O'Donnell bowed her head as if she were re-
peating a prayer when she said, "Pat wants to be a priest."
A second time that afternoon a deep silence fell on
the little kitchen. Mrs. Tracy at last gasped out: "Pat!"


"Yes —our own little Pat. He wants to go to a pagan
mission—"
"Isn't Australia big enough? And aren't there pagans
enough in it to satisfy him? It's only a fancy, Mary.
He's been reading a book about martyrs, or the Brothers
have been firing his imagination. Pat a priest! Pat in
a pagan mission! He's full of tricks and nonsense. A
fine priest he'd make."
Mrs. O'Donnell's face stiffened again. "A better boy
than our Pat never breathed," she said.
"Oh, you are his mother," Aunt Elizabeth said with
a smile of pity.
"And you are his god-mother," Mrs. O'Donnell cried
with some heat, "and if anything should happen to me.
Elizabeth O'Donnell. I charge you to do all in your power
to help that boy to become a priest."
Mrs. Tracy opened her lips, but could say no words.
"There's a long way before the poor child—a long,
hard way. Instead of criticising. I hope you will pray for
him—and for us." Mrs. O'Donnell's lips trembled, and
her sister-in-law put an arm about her shoulders and the
two women mingled their tears.
Is that the end of the story?
What happened to Pat?
Did he go to the Islands, or to New Guinea, or did
he teach our own blacks?
There are many Pats in our schools —boys with brave
young hearts, that are so filled with the love of God, the
love of souls, that they are ready to leave father and
mother, home and country, to carry God's word to the
heathen. How are they to go? How are they to be
trained and made ready for the work?


This is where the ordinary Catholic man and woman,
boy and girl, can step in and help the boys. They can
pray for them; they can help the Missionary Orders to
receive them, to open the doors of colleges and seminaries.
The end of this story is in your hands.
Did Pat go?
It is for you to help to send him.


Two Josephs
LITTLE Joseph was standing in the school yard, in-
tently watching Big Joseph, who was putting in re-
pairs at St. Cecilia's.
Big Joseph was a carpenter, and had a hammer stuck
in his belt, and a nail bag hung round his waist. Little
Toseph was a schoolboy, and had a big, new, red, lead
pencil—an H.B. —stuck in his belt, and a schoolbag slung
over his shoulder.
He was thinking it must be great fun to be up on
a ladder all day, and have no lessons to do. Perhaps
Big Joseph was thinking it would be pleasent to be a little
honest-eyed schoolboy, with nothing heavier than a school-
bag on one's shoulders.
The bell rang, school "went in," and Big Joseph kept
his hammer still while the little ones sang their morning
offering, and said their prayers. Big Joseph had said no
prayers that morning, or any other morning for —well,
I would not like to say how long.
The sound floated up to the window where his ladder
leaned. "Our Father, Who art in Heaven, hallowed be
Thy Name " Big Joseph took off his hat.
"Hail, Mary full of grace, the Lord is with thee "
Big Joseph bowed his head.
When the prayers were over, the hammer went on,
noisily driving nails to their places, and many a time


Little Joseph raised his blue eyes to the window, where
he could see just the rim of a brown felt hat.
At lunch time he made overtures of friendship.
"Hullo!" he said shyly.
"Hullo!" smiled the man with the hammer.
"Please sharpen this, will you?" and the boy held
up his new, red, lead pencil, that had "snapped" in the
making of an elaborate capital "D."
The carpenter obligingly sharpened the pencil to a
beautiful point, and Little Joseph smiled his thanks.
They lunched together, and the boy pressed his com-
panion to have some of the sponge cake "that mother
made."
"Mother makes such nice cakes," he assured him
with a proud smile.
'What's your name, sonny?"
'Joseph—Joseph Curran. What's yours?"
Joseph Kenny."
"Oh, are you Joseph, too —and you are a carpenter?
Now that is very nice. I suppose St. Joseph likes you
very much, because he was a carpenter, too. I suppose
he likes you better than me because I'm only Little Joseph
—you are Big Joseph."
"I think he likes you best, sonny," Big Joseph said
unsteadily.
Oh, I'm afraid not. You see, I'm not very good.
Sister scolds me a lot, because I never seem to be able
to mind the board all the time, or listen to what she is
saying always. I like looking around, and watching the
children, and everyone who passes the window."
Big Joseph sighed. Such little sins to be bewailing!
Now, if he were to tell why St. Joseph could not like him
"best!' 5


"This is St. Joseph's month," the little boy remarked,
"and Sister said I'm to be very-, very good to please him.
I'll try, but it's hard, you know," and the small sinner
sighed and pressed his soft red lips into a determined
straight line.
"Now, I must go and help Sister. May I have my
lunch with you to-morrow?"
"Yes, sonny; of course."
The days went on. They were not pleasant for Big
Joseph. The children's prayers floated up through the
windows, or out through the doors, and wherever he
worked their voices followed him.
What a long time since he had been at school. The
Sisters had taught him, too —long ago —years and years
ago —and he had never entered a school since the day he
left St. Michael's until he came to work at St. Cecilia's.
It was a little old-fashioned school St. Michael's, and
the desks were long and narrow. He always sat at the
end, near the window. He was a little pure-souled school-
boy then, with honest eyes like Little Joseph's.
Bang! Bang! rang the hammer on the nails. What
a fool he was to let his thoughts go wandering in those
old dead days. What a fool he was, with the grey hairs
of old age already showing above his temples, to be think-
ing of the days when he was a little schoolboy!
He hammered and sawed and planed, and tried to
drive away the memory of the old-fashioned school, and
the thought of what he "should have been."
Every day Little Joseph had lunch with him, and now
it was Friday.
The oleanders' pink blossoms hung over the school
fence, and their nutty perfume scented the air when the
wind blew over their petals.


Little Joseph had a bright pink blossom pinned in
his coat, and was in the highest spirits.
He spread out his snowy serviette, set out his repast,
and Big Joseph did likewise.
"Egg sandwiches," said the little fellow, with a dis-
dainful curl of his lips. "I don't much care for them,
you know, but it's Friday. Fish sandwiches are nasty,
and cheese nastier still, but eggs are not so bad after all."
The carpenter had meanwhile commenced his lunch.
Suddenly there was a crash. Little Joseph had started
to his feet and upset the basket of tools.
"Oh," he cried. "Oh. oh, Big Joseph, you are eating
meat!"
The man actually blushed under the fire of those
childish blue eyes.
"Oh, it's Friday. You didn't know, did you? Oh,
say you didn't know. \ou would not eat meat purposely
on Friday? Would you?"
The man did not speak, but sat stupidly with the
offensive, half-finished sandwich in his fingers.
Little Joseph moved closer to him. "You didn't re-
member, did you? It's no harm if you forgot."
The man looked into the blue eyes, and tried to lie;
but he could not.
"I know," he said humbly.
Little Joseph's eyes were wide open, horror-stricken.
Children are so given to hero-worship, and the boy
had thought this big strong man a hero, a wonderful hero,
who could build houses, and was surely very dear to God
and the good St. Joseph. And now
"You won't eat any more, will you? It's a mortal
sin, you know. Catholics should never eat meat on Friday.


They do without it for a penance, because it was on a
Friday Our Lord died to save everybody."
Big Joseph knew all this; he had learned it years ago,
and kept the law rigidly, until —until —until he had
gradually strayed away from the path.
The boy gathered up the lunch. "May I take it away
to Tommy's dog ? Here, you eat mine; they are not so
bad; and I'll run home for more, because —" he stam-
mered—"because you will want a lot bigger lunch than
I do."
Big Joseph spoke not a word, he was ashamed even
to look at the boy; but he put the half-finished sandwich
on top of the others, and Little Joseph ran away down
to the end of the school yard, and tossed the parcel over
to Tommy's dog. Then he raced home for a big Friday
lunch for his friend the carpenter.
That afternoon, when the children were saying their
prayers, Big Joseph put down his hammer and listened
as was his wont. And when the sweet baby voices com-
menced the act of contrition, Big Joseph joined in too;
but, oh, so softly; none but the angels could catch the
words.
The children commenced a novena for St. Joseph's
feast day, and Sister Mary Philomena told them to ask
him for anything they wanted. The carpenter heard
every word of her instructions, and the lovely stories she
told about his patron saint. No one could tell stories like
Sister Mary Philomena, even the big carpenter fell under
her spell, and his plane moved quietly, smoothly, keeping
a sort of accompaniment to her soft, low voice.
Little Joseph listened joyfully. He knew one thing
he would ask the good saint. He would ask him to make
Big Joseph good, and not let him eat meat on Friday


ever again; and Big Joseph asked almost the same thing.
Before the novena closed, the carpenter's work was
finished, and one afternoon he packed up his tools, put
his hammer through the handles of the basket, and slung
it up on his shoulder.
Just as he reached the school gate, little pattering
footsteps sounded behind him, and his namesake caught
his hand.
"Good-bye," he panted. "I'm sorry you're going."
His voice sank to a whisper. "I put you in my novena
to St. Toseph. And here," he fumbled in the pocket of
his blue sailor blouse. "Mother said I could give you my
tiny pocket statue of St. Joseph." He drew out a little
tin case, about an inch in length, opened it, and revealed
a small metal statue of St. Joseph. "Keep it always in
your pocket. Mother will get me another one."
The man bashfully accepted the little gift, and bend-
ing down, pressed a shamefaced kiss on Little Joseph's
high white forehead.
"Good-bye, my little mate," he said; and then hurried
away, ashamed of his emotion.
Big Joseph is quite changed now, all through his
"job" at the school, where he met Little Joseph; and
commenced the novena with the children of St. Cecilia's.


Bennie and the Bishop
OUTSIDE the locusts sang monotonously. Bennie
wished he were a locust just for five min-
utes! A silence that spoke louder than any words hung
over the Infants' Class. Bennie could hear that silence
deep down in his heart —it sounded louder than the roar-
ing of the sea. Twenty-two other ''lnfants" were looking
at him with varying expressions—some eves said, '"We're
so sorry"; others, "It serves you right," and others again.
"Now you'll catch it, Bennie O'Brien."
Bennie's collar was torn; there was a long scratch
on his soft baby cheeks. Tommy Xaughton stood beside
him, his face blood-stained, his eyes drenched with tears.
Bennie didn't cry. Four other little boys were witnesses,
Sister, Judge and Jury combined.
The evidence all went well to prove that Bennie had
hit first, and second and third and all the time; that
Tommy only cried loudly and struck out helplessly; that
the buckles of Tommy's bag had accidentally caused the
scratch on Bennie's cheek.
Sister's brown eyes held such a shocked expression
—Bennie's heart blushed with shame for having been the
cause of it.
One witness, who "lipthed," ventured to remark that
Bennie "musth have been thorry, becauth he lent Tommy
a handkerchief to wipe the blood off hith fath."


A blood-stained handkerchief was produced from
Tommy's pocket, and surely was something in the priso-
ner's favour.
Sister searched diligently for her cane —and felt so
relieved when she could not find it, for Bennie was "so
little." But it would never do to overlook the offence too
quickly —the twenty-two little citizens would be scandal-
ised at such a lax administration of the law. Two little
girls flew to assist in the search for the cane. "It was
here when the bell rang, Sister, and Bennie was sent up
first from the line," Norrie Nolan said, and her sharp
grey eyes fastened accusingly on the culprit. Bennie
blushed.
"Did you see it, Bennie?"
"Yes, Sister."
"Where is it?"
Bennie sighed. "I—l—threw it out, Sister —out the
window."
The twenty-two Infants gasped.
O-o-o-oh! Bennie O'Brien was naughty!
For one brief second Bennie's heart stopped beating
—he was really dead —and then —he looked through the
door. A tall figure came quickly through the hall —the
Bishop!
With a little strangled sob Bennie fled out the door,
along the hall to the Bishop and claimed "Sanctuary."
The Bishop, like the Good Shepherd, lifted the little
run-away lamb and put him on his shoulder. "Why are
you crying, Bennie?"
"I've been very bad. m' Lord."
"Have you?" the Bishop said kindly, and he sat
down on the form outside the class-room door, and keep-
ing Bennie on his knee asked to hear all about it.


"Please, m' Lord, I had a fight with Tommy Naugh-
ton."
The Bishop looked grave. "Oh, Bennie —two little
boys fighting! What would the Holy Child say to them ?"
Bennie wept louder.
"I had to fight him, m' Lord. Tommy said my father
was a Communist! And he's not. So I had to punch
Tommy's head for him, hadn't I ? And his nose bled and
I was sorry, and I lent him my handkerchief "
Bennie wept bitterly as the recital of his sins sounded
in own ears, and the Bishop listened kindly, and even
straightened his collar and tied his shoe-laces. Not every
little boy can say a Bishop tied his shoe-laces —I am sure
Bennie appreciated the honour.
Bennie had no handkerchief, so the "episcopal one"
was produced, and Bennie's tears wiped away.
"And then," went on the small sinner determined to
make 'a clean breast' of it, "Sister sent me up to the
room, and —and the cane was on the table, and —I'd hate
to be caned before all the children —wouldn't you when
you were little? I would not mind if Sister had sent me
into a room by myself, but, you see, the children were
coming, and I was afraid I'd cry, so "
The Bishop waited expectantly.
"So —I—l" —Bennie fastened two shocked, grey eyes
on the Bishop's kind, blue ones —"I threw the cane out
the window!"
The Bishop tried to look as shocked as Bennie evi-
dently expected him to.
"Then Sister asked me did I see the cane, and I had
to tell her; and" —Bennie's eyes brightened—"then I saw
vou!"
The Bishop considered the case gravely. "Well,


Bennie, I think we may say you were provoked. I suppose
a little boy could not listen to his father's honour being
questioned and strike no blow. But as to the cane"- —
the Bishop almost smiled—"you must tell Sister you are
sorry. We had better go out and find the cane and re-
store it. Then if Sister still thinks you deserve punish-
ment you must bear it like a man."
"Yes, m' Lord," muttered Bennie, and, taking the
Bishop's hand, led him to the playground, There be-
neath the windows was the hated cane. They carried it
into the room.
The twenty-two Infants stood up and cried shrilly:
"Good-morning, my Lord." Then they fell on their knees,
and so did Sister and Bennie, and the Bishop blessed them
all.
"Well, Sister, this little law-breaker claims sanct-
tuary. He looks to the Church to protect him."
Sister smiled.
"Come Bennie," said the Bishop, "Tell Sister you are
sorry."
"Please, Sister, I'm sorry about the cane. Here it
is, and —and —you can punish me twice as hard to make
The Bishop explained Bennie's case. He had been
provoked—the honour of his father was at stake.
Sister was quite relieved to have some one plead for
the little sinner; and she said that since Bennie had
claimed the protection of the Church she no longer had
power to punish him.
Bennie's little hand, that had struck so hard a blow
for his father's honour, and Tommy's that failed so
miserably to withstand it, were placed in the Bishop's.
"Peace is it? Peace it is," smiled the Bishop, and


then he sent them to their places and told them to be
very good.
When the Bishop had gone, and Bennie had regained
his normal condition of satisfaction with himself and all
the world in general, he whispered to Tommy, "What's
sanctuary ?"
"Dunno," Tommy whispered in reply.
"I know," Jimmy Ryan put in, "It's a part of the
Church —near the altar."
"Naw" scoffed Bennie, "Couldn't be. The Bishop
told Sister I wanted sanctuary."
'"Perhaps it means a good caning then," Jimmy re-
torted, "because that's what you wanted, Bennie O'Brien.'
"So did you," Bennie cried
Then Sister called for silence.
"Please Sister," an obliging Infant called, "It's Bennie
O'Brien."
Bennie O'Brien again!
"Please Sister I asked Tommy what sanctuary was.
Jimmy said it means a good caning. The Bishop said I
wanted sanctuary and Jimmy said it must mean a good
caning, cos that's what I wanted."
Sister nearly smiled, and then to their evident aston-
ishment, asked a question that seemingly had nothing to
do with Bennie's perplexity.
"Why did the Bishop wish Bennie to be forgiven
this time?"
"Because he is a kind Bishop," someone suggested.
"Because he likes Bennie," someone else thought, and
Tony Bertini gave it as his opinion, that the Bishop had
felt "too much sorry" when Bennie cried.
Sister said the three answers were correct, that the
Bishop was kind, he "liked" Bennie and was sorry for


him. Bennie, meanwhile, swelled with pride and pleasure;
he felt that he was "the man of the hour."
Then Sister went on to tell them a story.
"Long ago all the kings of the earth knew that the
Pope is the highest king of all, because he takes Our
Lord's place. In those days if a man had done wrong
and the soldiers came to take him to. prison, they could
not take him if he reached a church before they touched
him. That was the law. The sanctuary is that part of
the church near the altar. No one would dare take the
poor sinner from God's house. He called on the church
to protect him, and the Pope always obtained justice for
him. Many men would have been put to death for crimes
they had not done, but for this law. The church is
kind, she loves the sinner, she sorrows for him. That is
why the Bishop said Bennie claimed sanctuary. He wanted
the Bishop to protect him, and the Bishop pleaded for
him, and he was not punished."
Bennie's chest expanded an inch beyond its ordinary
measurement while Sister said this.
Sister continuing, told them of the enemy who tries
to make boys and girls do wrong things and then comes
to claim their souls and take them to a dreadful prison
—did they know who the enemy was?
"Yes. Sister —the devil."
And there is Someone —a kind Friend—who loves
little boys and girls, who is sorry for them, who will take
them in His arms and keep them safe from the enemy —
did they know who the Friend was?
Sister's voice had softened, her eyes looked towards
the big picture, and the twenty-two voices lost their
shrillness as they answered: "Yes Sister—the Sacred
Heart."


Ah, yes, the Sacred Heart is Our Sanctuary. When
the devil wants to take our souls to prison let us rise up
quickly and run to Our Lord, let us steal into the Sanc-
tuary of His Heart, and there we will be safe.
Bennie looked humble again—the eyes of the picture
were upon him.
School-work continued, and Bennie and Tommy were
the most industrious boys in the room.


The Little Black Sister
T_f ER name was Angela Mary, for she was born on the
1. feast of the Holy Angels; she resembled those little
angel faces we see fluttering about Our Lady in holy pic-
tures. October is the month of angels and roses—roses
in the garden and roses falling from the lips of little child-
ren as they recite the rosary in honour of the Mystical
Rose.
Angela Mary received many birthday gifts, but the
"best of all," she thought, was the rosary Aunt Cecily
sent her. It was of blue beads with silver dots on them,
as if the Angels had prayed on the beads, and their fin-
gers had left silver prints. Angela liked it best, because,
although the other gifts ware very pleasing, a rosary is
abo\ e and beyond toys and sweets, and new dresses, and
story-books, and a little purse full of shining silver money.
All these things Angela had received—and others as well
—for she had many relatives who all kindly remembered
little Angela's birthday.
F resents, jou know, do not make us truly happy.
Some children -receive nice presents on their birthday or
on Christmas Day, and they are not happy at all. They
are dissatisfied; they grumble and wish for something
else. They are selfish and do not share with anyone.
Happiness must come from within—from the mind and
the soul. Poor, foolish children, they can never be truly


happy, because they are always thinking about themselves.
Other liftle children, who receive only half the num-
ber of presents —or receive none at all can be quite
happy, because they have kind hearts, and minds full of
kind'thoughts for others. These are the children who
love God and wish well to everyone for God's sake.
Angela Mary was (I am so delighted to be able to
tell you) a child of this second class.
She went to Mass on her birthday; she thanked God
for His care of her all the long seven years since He had
created her. She promised to try to be a good child
always. After Mass Father Vaughan blessed the new
blue rosary and asked for a share in the first rosar\ she
said on them.
No school on her birthday! She helped mother about
the house—dried the breakfast things, swept the kitchen,
beat the mats, put fresh water in the vases, fed the dog
and the cat and was very happy. She spent quite a long
time looking at her presents, sitting gazing upon them;
she could not decide what to part with to give to her
little sister.
Oh you did not know she had a little sister! This
little sister was a little, black girl away off in Papua; she
was Angela's spiritual sister; Angela had adopted her.
She had never seen her and did not know her name. She
had simply, in her mind, adopted a little girl of her own
age and called her, her "little black sister." With her,
Angela shared her prayers, her good deeds, her Masses
and Holy Communions.
Now, on her birthday, she was wishing she could give
her little black sister one of her birthday gfifts.
"I wonder what she would like?" thought Angela.
Just then (or so it seemed to her) the little black girls


Angel Guardian came and stood by the table—distance is
nothing to an angel—and smiled and pointed to the spark-
ling blue rosary.
"Oh, not iliat!" cried poor Angela, for although she
was a very kind child and very fond of her little black
sister, the rosary was the present she cherished most of
"You see," the Angel explained (or so it seemed to
her), "the rosary- will be an aid to piety and it will de-
light her; it is so bright and sparkling. Little black girls
love beads. Your little black sister would fancy this
rosary was made in Heaven, it is so beautiful; she would
wear it round her neck and say many, manv prayers to
Our Lady."
"Oh, I couldn't give it, Angel," Angela said and took
the beads in her hand and held them tightly.
The sun streamed in through the window as if he
wanted to see this wonderful rosary; the beads sparkled
again and gave out a blue light, like diamonds of the first
water. The sun moved off. the room darkened and the
beads looked like . . . like . . . tears —like a poor, little
black girl s tears falling on Angela's hand. She dropped
the beads quickly. The Angel was gone.
Five little girls came to have tea with her at four
o'clock. They admired all her presents and the whole five
agreed the rosary was the loveliest because it was a "holy"
present. There was a seventh place at the table. It was
the Holy Child's place. Ever since she was a baby, a
place for the Holy Child was set at her parties. The
prettiest cup and plate were there, the shiniest spoon,
the finest table napkin and a little vase of the choicest
flowers from the garden. To-day white roses stood in the
vase.


The children said grace, the seven candles were lit,
and Angela blew them out with one puff. A whit-rib-
boned knife was near the cake; Angela plunged it into the
pink icing; there was a delightfully crunching sound and
the five little guests smiled—and the "p art y" commenced.
Angela was not quite herself. She was a very atten-
tive little hostess and saw that her guests wanted for
nothing, but she was not really enjoying herself. The
five little girls laughed and talked. Their whole school-
day had been brightened by the thought of this hour; now
it had come, they meant to enjoy it to the full. Angela
could not look at the empty chair; she could not imagine
the Holy Child was there a Little Guest at her party, be-
cause she knew He had sent someone in his place—a little
black Papman girl, with sad eyes. She had a string of
shells around her neck. Two tears as beautiful as pearls
ran down her black cheeks.
"It is my little black sister," thought Angela, "and
she wants the blue rosary to hang round her neck instead
of those old shells."
Angela put a slice of cake on the prettiest plate . . •
The five little guests could not see a little black girl there;
Angela, alone, could see, or thought she could see her.
"The Holy Child will not take the cake," Betty said.
"But it's lovely to have a place for Him. I'll do it at
my party. You will have to give the cake to someone
for Him, Angela."
"Yes," foan said. "Some little child who has no
cake."
After the tea, they played games in the garden until
dusk. They had a Treasure Hunt; Angela's mother had
hidden bags of lollies and nuts, and little dolls, and pin-
cushions. It was great fun searching for the treasures,


but even this lovely game could not restore Angela to her
usual, happy humour; for the little Papuan haunted the
garden—her big black eyes looked out from behind the
trunks of the trees, her bare feet stole softly over the
grass; sometimes she smiled at the games, but more often
she looked very sad.
Angela said good-bye to her five guests when their
big brothers and sisters called for them. She watched
them go out the garden gate; it was almost dark now,
but there was a light near the gate. The sixth guest had
no one to escort her; Angela saw her fuzzy head under
the light, saw her bare feet in the dust of the footpath.
No escort? Yes. There was someone! A Lady and a
Little Bo\ had come for her . . . and there were Angels
about them.
Come in dear, mother called, and Angela could see
no more.
She said her prayers before the statue of Our Lady
and the little statue of the Holy Infant of Prague. At
the close of the prayers she said: "I am a greedy child.
I have my beautiful white Communion beads, and the
brown ones I got at the mission and the red ones I won
for knowing my Catechism. My little black sister has
no rosary beads to say her rosary. The Sisters cannot
gi\e all the black children a rosary. I will give them to
hei, Holy Child; and I'll send half the birthday money
in my new purse. Mother will take the beads'and the
money to the Mission Sisters and they will send them to
Papua. The Sisters in Papua will buy something for my
little black sister's birthday."
That night Angela had a beautiful dream. I do not
know if it was sent by her own Angel or by the little
black sister's Angel. She dreamt she was in a beautiful


garden —the garden of Heaven. She was walking along
a pearly path looking at the most beautiful flowers—the
flowers that were once prayers said by children on earth.
She saw a Child running- along the path to meet a Lad}
—His Mother. He had a blue rosary round His neck
and He showed it to the Lady. "Angela gave it to me,
he said.
"I gave it to the little black girl," Angela said in sur-
prise. "If You had wanted it—
"You gave it to me, Angela," the Child said, when
you gave it to the little Papuan girl. Whatever you do
to the least of My little ones, you do unto Me."


A Little Soldier
L 2 ERR\ S heart burned with a desire to do great
things. But it is hard to do great things when one
wears socks and belts and knee-long coats with big buttons,
so Berry had never really done any of the great things he
yearned to do.
Berry was a patriot, an intensely patriotic young
patriot, and had fought fiercely with the little Scotch boy
next door for saying disparaging things about Australia
in general and Sydney in particular. He had bruised the
boy s face, bled his nose, and received numerous injuries
to his own person, when mother rushed out horrified,
stopped the battle, and bore Australia's champion indoors.
Mother lectured him in the way mothers do lecture
their little boys, and father laughed in the way fathers
do laugh at their little son's "first fieht "
Mother s words sank deep down into Berry's earnest
little heart— mother's words generally did. She had a way
of saying things and looking things that never failed to
impress her small son. It was rather hard for so small a
boy to realise that the best way to serve Australia was to
take great care of himself, be always an honourable little
boy, and grow up an honourable man. Yes, it was rather
a hard lesson for Berry, and he often wondered why
mother did not seem to favour hand-to-hand encounters
with little neighbours, although she had given a smiling


consent when he had asked if he could be a soldier some
day, and fight Australia's enemies—when she made some!
She had also agreed (when he had changed his mind some
months later) that he could go on the H.M.A.S. "Warrego '
some day, and be an Australian bluejacket.
But it was three months since the encounter with
Colin next door, and Berry had forgiven, although he had
not quite forgotten, the offence.
School had meanwhile claimed him for its own, and he
was fascinated by its wonders—the maps and pictures and
statues, the counters, and colours and cards. It was very
new and very strange and very interesting. And the
stories! The stories of saints and martyrs! They fired
Berry's heart afresh, and he thought that perhaps he had
better be one of God's soldiers instead of a "mounted
infantry man" or a "bluejacket."
Mother agreed again, and listened patiently to his
plans. He would wear a long red robe like a Cardinal s—
he thought it much nicer than a black one like Fr. Gerald's
—and he would go about Australia saying prayers and
making people "good. '
Sister Mary Agnes often wondered why Berry Maher
always asked the same questions about the saints, whose
lives she recounted in simple words for the infants. As
soon as her story was finished, Berry would stand up and
'Please Sister, was that saint an Australian?
"No, Berry," Sister invariably answered, and won-
dered why he seemed so disappointed. There were English,
Scotch, and Irish saints, French, Spanish and Italian saints,
saints of all countries, but never, never one Australian.
One day a small boy with large blue visionary eyes


accosted Fr. Gerald near the school gate. '"Please, Father
may I ask you something?"
"Yes, Berry. What is it? How many ice-creams at
the South Pole, or how many bottles of red ink could be
got out of the Red Sea?"
Berry s lips smiled, but his eyes were still solemn and
visionary. '"No, Father. But could you please tell me
if there are any Australian saints?"
"Thousands of them, I hope, Berry."
Berry's face lit up. "Thousands of them!" he cried.
"Sister never reads about them for us; she only reads
about saints belonging to other countries. Where do you
get books about our own Australian saints?"
Pf. Gerald smiled. "Well, Bern*, we have not any
canonized saint yet, but if you were to trv hard and grow
O
up very, very, very good, we might have one when you
die. That is if they don't canonize me first—l am an Aus-
tralian, too. And he smiled again. Then he carefully
explained the meaning of the big word. Berry was much
surprised to learn it had nothing to do with the cannon
on the men-o'-war.
"Well, John Beresford Maher, are you going to be
our very own Australian saint?" Fr. Gerald asked.
"I'll try. Father," the little fellow said solemnly. "But
don't tell anyone."
Berry s conduct after that day was surprising. Mother
thought he was ill, he was so very well-behaved. Sister
Mary Agnes found he had suddenly given up talking and
quarrelling, his two chief offences against the school law,
and father suggested that mother and Berry had better
take a trip north, as the cold weather seemed to affect the
boy's spirits.


Then Tune came, with its jonquils and daffodils and
violets. The poplars that stood in a row by the church
fence were tall and bare, the wind had blown every leaf
off them. Poor things, they shivered and shook in the
cold, and Berry thought what silly things they were "to
go and let their leaves fall off in winter." Gum trees
wouldn't do anything so foolish!
In the schoolroom the statue of the Sacred Heart m as
surrounded with lights and flowers, and Sister had put
a big scroll in red and gold just above the statue . My child,
give Me thy heart." Every time the children's eyes looked
up at the statue they saw the words. They seemed to hear
them too, for the statue was a particularly life-like one;
the Sacred Lips seemed moving, and the Sacred Hand was
held out, waiting for those little baby-hearts to be put into
It. Berry put his in the very first day!
Every afternoon Sister recited the Act of Reparation,
the children sang a hymn, and said many sweet little
aspirations, then Sister would say the little prayer: Sacred
Heart of Jesus bless Australia." and all the little ones
answer with a fervent "Amen."
It was at this time the great idea came to Berry. For
a few days he went about mysteriously quiet, and his face
certainly looked pale and sad at times. He must be ill,
mother thought, although he ate and slept as usual.
One morning in the holidays she missed him. He had
been to Mass, had come home to breakfast, and then
evaporated! There was no Berry anywhere. His cap was
missing from its place in the hall, his schoolbag from its
place in the cupboard. / Wherever was he ?
Meanwhile a little boy with large blue visionary eyes
and a sad little white face was trudging along to the city.
He had a school-bag over his shoulder, and a parcel in


his hand. He wandered down Macquarie-street; the way
was long and unfamiliar. The north end of the street was
quiet, almost deserted; there was no one to seek directions
from. Oh, yes, there was. A big motor was drawn up
near the kerb, and the motorman was carefully examining
its machinery, while an old gentleman in a big overcoat
sat impatiently waiting the motor's pleasure.
The small boy approached with the polite self-
possession of Young Australia and raised his cap. "Could
you please tell me how to get to the Quay?"
"Keep right on. Turn to the left," said the old gentle-
man gruffly, and then the blue eyes threw a charm over
him, and he stayed the child.
"You are rather young to be going there alone. Rather
a dangerous place the Quay. What do you want there,
may I enquire?"
'l'm going to Japan."
J a What?" roared the old gentleman.
Japan, J-a-p-a-n," spelled Berry, as the old gentleman
seemed puzzled.
"Who is going with you ?"
No one just myself and this and this" (he indicated
the bag and the parcel).
"Indeed!" ejaculated the old gentleman. "Is that all
your luggage?"
"Yes. There's a surplice and a soutane in here, like
the altar boys have. Tim Ryan lent them to me, and I
have a catechism, a bottle of holy water, and some holy
pictures in my bag."
"Indeed!" ejaculated the old gentleman again. "That
seems strange. Step in her and tell me about it, will you?"
he said, while he wondered if little boys with beautiful
blue eves ever went mad!


Berry stepped into the car. "I don't want to miss
the boat, you know. I think it is the 'Yawata Maru' to-
day. I asked daddy about the boats. He didn't know
why, though," and the blue eyes grew tearful and the lips
trembled.
"Well, now, little mystery, tell me the whole thing.
Why in the name of all that's wonderful is such a little
chap as you setting out alone for Japan?"
Berry looked around him cautiously. The motorman
was lying in a horizontal position on the road near the
front wheel. He couldn't hear. A policeman hove in
sight at a distant corner, a stray dog limped by—they
couldn't hear.
"Well," he began, "I don't mind telling you. It's just
as well, because you could go and tell mother or daddy,
if you would be so kind. You see, I could not tell them.
I thought I'd write. I can write pretty well, you know.
I couldn't tell them, because I knew I'd cry. It makes
vou get a sorry feeling in your throat saying 'Good-bye,
and I knew if I cried they wouldn't let me go, and I must
go."
"Indeed! Why?"
"Well, you see, I want to be a saint, and serve God,
and I want to serve Australia, too. So I thought the best
way would be to do the two together. So I gave up
being a soldier or a sailor, and thought I'd go to Japan.
I heard a man say the Japanese might be down on us any
day. Father said there's no fear, but still, I thought I'd
go and stop them to be sure. You see, I am going over
there to teach them catechism and everything about God,
that will be serving God. Then they won't want to start
fighting us, or anything like that, so that is serving Aus-
tralia too. Then, perhaps, when I have made them nearly


all good, some savage ones might cut my head off or
something if I don't give up my faith. Then I'll be a
martyr, and then there'll be a saint for Australia. See?"
The old gentleman's eyes looked suspiciously soft as
he watched the young face, flushing with love and zeal for
faith and country, while he thought of another young face
that used to flush like that long ago. But he only said,
"Indeed!" in a shaky voice.
But what about your father and mother?" he then
asked.
Oh, they 11 be all right," said the little would-be
martyr, with a quiver in his voice. "I know mother will
cry a bit. But I'll write to them often, you know, and
they will be glad I'm serving God, and they are both as
brave as anything."
The old gentleman thought they must be, since their
young son was ready to face untold dangers on land and
sea for faith and country.
'And do you think you are brave enough to lose your
head for your faith? Don't you think you might be fright-
ened, and give it up instead?" The old gentleman put the
question nervously, for, alas! he had not prized his faith
overmuch, when
Berry broke in on his reflections: "Of course I would
mvself, but then God wouldn't let me. I'd ask Him not
to let me give it up. It is God makes the saints and mar-
tyrs brave, Sister said. So, of course, He will make me.
And. vou know, your head could be cut off in a little
mmute. and then you d get Heaven for ever and ever and
ever. But if vou denied God, and gave up your faith,
even if vou lived to be a hundred, it would be no good,
for \\ hen you died you'd go to hell for ever and ever.
Besides, the Sacred Heart loves us so much, it would be


mean to deny our faith. The Sacred Heart says, 'My
child, give Me thy heart.' I gave Him mine long ago,
and I wouldn't take it back."
Sister Mary Agnes' stories and instructions had not
been lost on her little pupil, and the gentleman leant back
amongst the cushions and sighed.
Berry stood up, his face grew even whiter. "I'd
better go now; the boat might start without me."
The old gentleman roused himself from his unpleasant
reflections, and tried to dissuade the young enthusiast.
"I think you had better wait until you are a man.
You are too young to be a missionary.'
"But I know lots of catechism. I know right up tu
'What do you mean by the True Church; Tou can ask
me. if you like."
He produced the catechism, and pressed ii into the old
gentleman's unwilling hands. "And, besides, I could learn
lots more on the way over."
The old gentleman turned over the leaves hastily and
gave the catechism back.
"Yes, my boy, but that would not suffice. You had
better make up your mind to wait. Go back to school,
study hard, and then, when you are a man, you can take
up this great work."
Berry sighed. "It's a long time to wait, you see, and
I want to do something for the Sacred Heart something
big, right away. And I want to serve Australia too."
Then the old gentleman found himself arguing and
coaxing and lecturing the little would-be saint with the
beautiful eyes. He felt such a hypocrite, too, as words of
pious advice fell from his lips. His lips advising the little
boy to be good and holy, and that one day, perhaps, God
would want him to serve Him zealously as a priest, and


Australia would want him to serve her by helping to keep
the faith burning brightly in Australian hearts! The old
gentleman was certainly surprised at himself. His lips
giving such advice, his lips that had said a stern, hard "No"
to —to —to someone who wanted to serve God at the
altar —someone with eyes as innocent as Berry's.
Berry's face lost its look of shining resolve, and a
quiver of doubt passed over it. What if this old gentleman
were right? What if it would please the Sacred Heart
more if he stayed at home with mother and daddy and
learnt his lessons "hard." and gave up missionary labours
until he was a man. The old gentleman said God might
want him to be a priest some day, and then he could be a
missionary, perhaps. And the old gentleman gave him
Mother's advice over again about Australia. Perhaps,
after all, he, Berry, was wrong, and the old gentleman was
right.
"Perhaps I'd better wait," he said, with a sigh. "I can
say prayers, anyway. Sister told us St. Teresa did as much
by her prayers as another did by his work amongst pagans.
But I'll go when I'm big."
"Very well," the old gentleman said relievedly, "and
now I think, if the car is right, and you tell me where you
live, we will take you home. And, by the way, have you
your passage money to Japan?"
"Money!" gasped Berry. "I forgot about money. I
suppose they wouldn't take me without money?"
Take you you baby. They wouldn't take you alone
—unless you stowed away."
The car drove off, and Berry's face lost the white,
strained look and coloured over a pretty pink, but his eyes,
his blue visionary eyes, had a gleam of disappointment in
them.


The old gentleman spent quite a long time with
Mother, and her eyes were full of tears afterwards. She
kissed Berry, and did not scold him for leaving home that
morning, because he had thought he was doing right. But
she made him understand that he must never, never go
away like that again. He must always tell Mother when
he was going, and where he was going.
The old gentleman drove back to the city, and the car
stopped before a big red warehouse. The old gentleman
went into his office, and sat down in his chair and reflected.
Two pairs of blue eyes came before him —a child's, large
and visionary, and a youth's of a darker blue, with all the
innocence of the child's, yet all the earnestness of a man's.
The old gentleman sighed. "Perhaps, if Mary had
lived, it would have been different. She would think like
the little saint's mother does. She would say it was an
honour she was unworthy of. But I—l want my boy all
for myself. I have no one but him. Why should God
want my only son? Are there not thousands of other
young men that are not only sons? Why should He deprive
me of my one boy.''' The clock ticked on, the noise of
the city came through the windows.
"Little Berry wants to do something 'big' for the
Sacred Heart, so does my boy. He has heard those words,
too. Mary would say that I am standing between the boy
and God, and preventing him from giving his heart to
him. I am, I know I am, but "
He sat thinking for a long time, then rose, and, walk-
ing softly along the passage, knocked at a door. A young
man with dark blue eyes and a scholar s forehead was
sitting at a book-covered table. He rose respectfully.
"Good morning, Tom, my boy."
"Good morning, Father."


"How long have you been at this, Tom?" the old
gentleman asked, as he waved his hand towards the table.
"Four months, Father, since I came from school."
"Like it any better now?"
The young man hesitated, and flushed. "Well —no; I
am afraid not."
"Hurnph! How old are you?"
"Nearly twenty."
"Still got your mind set on —on —what you asked me
about ?"
"Still, Father."
"The same desire, ever since you were a little chap,
like Berry. Well, my son, you may go. I give my consent
at last —and my blessing, too, if it's worth having."
The young man looked startled. "I may go, Father?"
"Yes, sonny, go. Don't write another word. I thought
I'd make a business man of you, in spite of everything,
but . Put those books aside, Rice will take them on.
Clear out. Go home. Have a holiday. Do anything you
like. I will arrange about the college. I suppose it will
take a day or two to see to everything?"
What can I say to thank you?"
"Nothing, my boy, nothing. I suppose you would have
gone in spite of me when you were twenty-one, you deter-
mined young villain! And I—l suppose I should thank
God; your Mother would tell me so if she were alive; that
woman, Berry's mother, told me so this morning. Perhaps
some day I shall be able to thank God for it. I must tell
you about my new little friend, Berry, and his mother,
another time. The boy said the Sacred Heart says: 'My
child, give Me thy heart,' and told me in a matter-of-fact
little voice that he had given Him his heart. I suppose my
sinful old heart is not worth giving; but Tom, my boy,


I'll —I'll give you to Him instead. 1 give you to Him now."
"Give Him your heart, too, Father," the young fellow-
said, as he grasped his father's hand in both his.
"There, there. Tom, that will do. Clear out now.
Quick! Before I make an ass of myself. God —bless you."
He sat in his boy's chair and put his stern old face
down amongst the papers. He fingered the pen that had
just been held by those firm young fingers.
And then —and then
Well, he was the old gentleman's only son, you know.
The young gentleman with the dark blue eyes told his
wonderful news to his friend, Father Gerald.
"It was the prayers, of course, but that little chap was
a sort of instrument in the hand of God, ' he said earnestly.
"Yes," replied Father Gerald, and then he smiled.
"Our little Saint is beginning to work miracles already.'


The White House
JASMINE clambered along the wall, and lent down
kindly fingers to the children in the street.
"One, two, three!" and a big jump, and one could
clutch a long trail of starry flowers that smelt like a big
church, and candles, and a holy day. Some flowers have a
"churchy" scent, you know, and jasmine is one of them.
All the children that came along the quiet street jumped
up at the smiling flowers —they were the best of friends.
Six stone steps led up to a rusted iron gate —no one
ever used the steps (except the children) ; they were thick
with fallen leaves and withered flowers. No one ever
opened the rusty gate; an old padlock faithfully resisted
the rattling of childish fingers. A plumbago hedge ran
along the wall, and fluttering blue blossoms tumbled down
to make a pretty pattern on the dull side-path.
If one ventured to run fearfully up the steps and
peep in between the rusty bars of the gate, a tangled garden
met the eye —paths covered in grass, trees with wild, dis-
torted limbs, neglected flowers blooming in the under-
growth. A white, square house, with many closed windows,
showed here and there between the thick trees. The child-
ren said it was a "haunted house," and many a story they
could tell of women in white pacing the paths at midnight,
and men in black lurking in the shadows at the same
witching hour. Some children were sure of a woman in


you've seen the Queer Lady who lives there. The ghost
is a man all in black . .
If all the stories were true, dozens of innocent people
had been done to death in that quiet, innocent-looking
house, and had left their spirit to haunt the garden. A
woman lived in the White House, but she was rarely seen.
The butcher-, the baker, and the candle-stick-maker left
their goods in a box at the front gate, and took their written
orders from there; each was provided with a key for the
box.
But the front gate held no fascination for the young
people of the neighbourhood, for it was a strong wooden
gate with no rusty bars to look through.
Easter was coming, and the old garden made as brave
a show as possible. Easter daisies opened tinv eyes to
peep through tangles of grass; hibiscus lit torches of red
amongst the green of the trees; and small, neglected
autumn roses sweetened the air—all the flowers were
dwarfed, but brave and patient. Neglected flowers remind
one of the souls of neglected children —striving to do their
little best, but receiving no help from man.
Poor mistress of the White House! The neighbours
said she was "queer" —sorrow had turned her brain. She
sat in one of the silent rooms busily knitting—she was
always knitting, her thin, white fingers trembling above
the silk, but she never finished her work, for now and
again she pulled out the stitches she had patiently done,
and started her work afresh.
Shock O'Shaunessy was always planning unusual
escapades to brighten the dull life of the suburb in which
he lived. His "real" name was John Patrick O'Shaunessy,
but no one ever called him anything but "Shock Perhaps


because of the electricity that seemed locked up in his
little body, or because of his mop of red hair, or on account
of the "shocks" his adventures gave the neighbours.
True to his name, he was a Catholic, and in school-
days the Brothers had the privilege, not unmixed with
pain, of teaching him many useful things. He was firmly
grounded in his faith, and laughed at the idea of ghosts
as ghosts. "But," as he said to a non-Catholic friend,
"there might be souls from Purgatory wanting prayers.
They could not do us any harm —except scare us out of
our wits. But ghosts don't 'get you,' like in story-books.
I'm not afraid of any ghosts, I'd just bless myself, and
say: 'ln the Name of God, tell me what you want.' "
The non-Catholic friend was awed into silence —he
did not know anything about Purgatory, and felt that the
subject was beyond him. Non-Catholic small boys are apt
to get beyond their depths when discussing spiritual mat-
ters with "Brothers' boys."
That afternoon as Shock went a message for his
mother, he, of course, jumped up at the friendly flowers
hanging so temptingly over the wall. He sniffed the starry
white things.
"Ooh —it's like Holy Thursday—putting out the
candles."
Shock was not an altar boy, he was rather young, and
somewhat apt to drop everything he handled, and rattle
anything that could rattle. But one of the Brothers had
allowed him "mind" the candles for a half-hour. Shock
was delighted. He was pious, and had decided to be a
priest.
He climbed the six stone steps. Always there he felt
the same thrill of adventure —like boarding a defeated
man-o'-war or a treasure-ship, or "something."


"Ahoy! there. Come out, Old Ghost! Come out and
meet Captain Shock O'Shaunessy."
No answer came to his bold challenge. The wind
sighed through the grass, the melancholy trees dropped
leaves —like tears.
"It would be a lovely garden to play 'Bobbies and
Bushies' or 'Pirates,' but none of the kids will come with
me —they're scared. The Queer Lady wouldn't notice it —
but it's the Ghost the kids are frightened of. I wish it
would clear out. Come on, Old Ghostie —out you come "
No answer.
Shock defiantly rattled the old gate, jumped down
from the top step, and scampered home. The butter his
mother had sent him for looked as if it had seen the
ghost and had melted away with fear.
In the evening he was in a softened mood —the pirate
was lost sight of. "I should not have said that. Perhaps
there is a poor soul in the garden of the old house. Why,
it's jolly near a sin to make fun of a poor soul from
Purgatory. Souls in Purgatory will be saints some day.
Nice way to help them —shouting out through the gate."
His blue, bright eyes lit up suddenly.
"Gee! I'll go along some night—and ask It . . . I'll
take some Holy Water and my Rosary. . . ."
He began at once "to plan" his adventure, and next
day looked out for a mate to share it w r ith him. But none
of the "kids" would support him. He did not unfold the
whole plan—promoters never do! He merely asked them
to accompany him some midnight to look for the Ghost.
Some sensitiveness of mind kept him from saying, "It
might be a Poor Soul." The others were not Catholics,
and could not be expected to be sympathetic.
"Aw —come on," Shock coaxed.


"Not on your life," said one.
"Nothing doing," added a second.
"Doesn't get this kid," decided a third.
Their English, like Shock's, was not of the purest;
they revelled in Americanised language, despite their
teachers' efforts.
So Captain Shock gave up coaxing and determined to
go alone.
"I wish I could get a surplice and a soutane and one
of those sprinkly things for the Holy Water."
On the appointed day Shock was very trying; his
patient mother was well nigh distracted—the child seemed
on wires. She did not know the nervous strain under
which little Shock was labouring.
He was in a hurry for night, and went, to bed at dusk
—to the great surprise and alarm of his mother, for Shock
generally manoeuvred to out-stay his appointed bed-time.
But the bright blue eyes were not closed.
He must keep awake.
He counted all the flowers on the wall-paper; he
recited mentally all the poetry he knew, from "The woman
was old and ragged and grey," down to "Sir Ralph the
Rover tore his hair," and "The Boy Stood on the Burning
Deck." His eyes felt hot and stary ... he said a Rosary
he counted ninety-nine white sheep jumping through
a gate ... he turned somersaults on the bed . . . tried
standing on his head
At last.
"Boom, boom" —a distant clock struck eleven.
He got up—dressed—secured his bottle of Holy
Water —and let himself gently out of the window.
How still everything was; how bright and far off the
stars. How they stared at him! Shock felt suddenly cold


and frightened, and very much out of sympathy with
spirits.
Go back! Should he ?
Yes, go back, jump into his bed, cover up his head,
and close his eyes —tight! Let someone else interview the
restless spirit—if there were one.
"Never say die." the pirate in him urged.
"It might be a poor soul," the priestly side of his
character suggested.
His little hand was raised solemnly to his forehead.
"Name of the Father . .
He went on.
He met no one. A policeman passed a distant corner
—a motor car whizzed by—the streets were deserted,
weird, as in a strange dream. Now and then he looked
over his shoulder. Were there not soft, cat-like steps
behind him?-
He reached the old wall, and the jasmine held down
white, friendly fingers ... but he did not jump up to
touch them. He looked up the dark steps ... to the dim
outline of the rusty gate. Was there a figure there?
Again the Mystic Sign saved him from running away.
He ran up the steps and rattled the gate.
"I'm coming. I'll help you —poor soul," he said, to
give himself courage. He climbed over the iron gate, and
dropped softly on to the grassy path. Sprinkling the Holy
Water, he crept quietly along . . . something damp touched
his cheek ... he stifled a scream—it was only a low branch
of a tree.
A hundred times he turned to run home ... to bed ;
a hundred times he "blessed himself" and went on.
No ghost came.
"Well, I cannot help It ... if It won't come. I'll go


now, and I'll pray for the poor soul every night."
The wind sighed through the pines ... a sigh like a
moan.
"It's in the house," the tree moaned.
"It's in the house," the grass sighed.
"I'm not going in there," Shock said aloud. "The
Queer Lady might catch me . . . and I'd be locked up."
He turned away, but again his sympathy for the Poor
Soul overcame his fear for himself, and he crept towards
the house. All the doors and windows were fastened,
and he was relieved.
"But I must get in." He climbed on the roof of the
verandah, stealthily making his way along ... at last . . .
a small window opened at his touch.
Captain O'Shaunessy shivered as he slipped in like a
little shadow ... he sprinkled Holy Water before him as
he walked on. Along silent passages he went ... up stairs
. down stairs . . . but no ghost.
H—ush . . . His heart gave one leap and then seemed
to turn to ice ... as a low cry fell on his ears.
"It's the trees," he half sobbed. "It must be the
trees. I'm not scared . . . God's here. Aren't you God?
You are everywhere ... I don't care what it is . . . You
won't let it hurt me."
A faint light sprang up in the far darkness of a long
corridor . : . it was coming towards him . . . just a light
floating on the air ... to him ... a hand held it ... he
could see fingers . . . then his eyes grew accustomed to the
light . . . and he saw a figure approaching ... a figure
wrapped round in some long, loose garment.
The cry came to him again. "Where are you all?
Come to me . . . must I die alone. . . . Empty . . . empty.
Why have they left me?"


Poor little Shock drew into the shadows instinctively,
and then he stepped out. blocking the way. his voice rang
out bravely.
"In the Name of God tell me what you want.
"I want a Priest. I am dying ... it is here . . . the
pain . . . my old heart attack."
A sob of relief came to Shock —"It's the Queer Lady."
"I have called my husband . . . my children . . . they
did not come ... I went to their rooms . . . their beds
have not been slept in. . . . Where are they? Where am I?
What has come over this house? I am old . . . old . . ."
Shock's heart was back again in its old place and he
was again as brave as a pirate.
"I'll bring them," he said knowing
they were all dead years ago. "I'll bring the priest, too
but you must lie down now."
He led her along the corridor, taking the candle from
her trembling hand. An open door revealed a couch and
pillows.
"Rest there," he said, gently, as he used to mother
when she had bad headaches. "They will be here soon.
I'll put out the candle ... it might catch. Here's some
Holy Water. . . . Say a Hail Mary. ... Is the pain very
bad? Ask God to make it better. . . . I'll run all the
Birds, startled, flew out of the bushes, as a little
figure "hurled" itself along beneath the trees . . . the
reckless climbing of the gate . . . the jump in the dark
would have given his poor mother heart disease.
"Don't let her die, please God . . . until the priest
comes . . ."
Doctor Fr never tires of telling how a taxi-cab
dashed up to his door shortly after midnight, of how the


bell rang violently and he was urged by a child's voice
"to cut like mad" . . . to . . . the driver would tell him
where —"A sick lady—says it's her heart."
The doctor found a taxi waiting for him, and saw
another standing at the presbytery door further up the
street.
"I don't know what that child will become," the old
doctor is wont to say, "you cannot beat red-heads. He
called at the garage on his way up, got two cars and had
myself and Father down at the White House before
I was awake. That child's will drove me along in my sleep
I believe. ... I woke up only when I saw the poor, suffer-
ing creature.
The doctor says they were just in time to save the
Queer Lady. Many weeks after, when she was better,
she explained how she awoke in agony, but her mind was
clear . . . and she had no recollection of the years of
derangement . . . she awoke as she had been fifteen years
before. She called, but no answer came ... in an agony
of pain she dragged herself from room to room.
Terror seized her . . . she saw an old woman's reflection
in a mirror as she passed. . . . Who was she? She would
most certainly have died ... or become a raving lunatic
if the child had not suddenly, calmly, come to her. to
soothe her with his promises, to turn her thoughts to God.
Shock had been the hero of the children before, but
now he is the Uncrowned King. There is no haunted
house now, the garden is beautiful with smooth grass.
"petted" flowers and orderly trees.
Little sick children come to the old White House,
from city hospitals, they gain strength playing in the


beautiful garden. There is no Queer Lady at all, but a
gentle person, with a sad, sad face.
The poor city children call her "The Angel Lady."
Captain Shock O'Shaunessy has the privilege of running
up the six white steps and opening the shining gate when-
ever he pleases, for the garden, the house, and the lady's
heart are all open to him.


Tarcisius
TOMMY was in the First Communion Class.
"Oh, Mother," he said one evening, "Sister told
us a beautiful story to-day about a little Roman boy,
Tarcisius. Someone was wanted to carry the Blessed
Sacrament secretly through the streets of Rome —in the
Pagan days, you know—and he offered to do it, begged
and prayed to b - e allowed. The priest was afraid for one
so young. But the boy said his youth was his safety, and
at last the priest put the Sacred Burden into his arms, and
told him to go through quiet ways of the city to his
destination.
"On his way he met some Pagan boys he knew. They
didn't know that Tarcisius was a Christian. They wanted
one more boy to make their game complete, and asked him
to join them. He told them gently that he could not just
then, but would on his return.
"They said that if he had any message to deliver, it
could wait, and if he carried a letter, to put it aside until
after the play. Tarcisius shook his head. Then they
coaxed, then they threatened, but it was useless. One big
boy said he would force the child to do as he wanted. He
caught hold of Tarcisius, and our little Christian folded
his arms over his breast, as if he hid a treasure there.
They became curious to know what he carried. They
kicked him, beat him, tore at his arms. But those arms


had become strong as iron—they could not move him.
Kicks, blows, insults to him and to the Holy One he
carried, followed. The little Christian fell to earth ex-
hausted, but still his arms were locked. Just then a soldier
—a Christian, who knew our little martyr —came up and
quickly drove off the cruel boys. He knew at once what
the child carried, and tenderly took up the double burden.
As he went along, a noble Roman lady ran out to look at
the child in his arms. She had spoken to Tarcisius a little
while before as he had passed her house. He had promised
to stay and talk with her some other time; he told her he
could not stop then. Now he opened his dying eyes and
smiled upon her. She became a Christian afterwards, and
understood why Tarcisius had looked so beautiful the day
he passed, carrying Our Lord with him.
"Tarcisius died. He was a martyr. Oh, Mother, it
was beautiful to hear Sister tell the story. I nearly cried.
Sister told us to pray to him every night, so that we will
be true to Our Lord, and never betray Him for the sake
of pleasure or companions."
Tommy made his First Communion on the Bth of
September; on that day he felt no holy envy of the little
Roman boy of long ago, for he carried in his heart, for a
few happy moments, the same treasure that Tarcisius died
to save. And he told Our Lord, in his own simple way,
that he was ready to die to defend the Blessed Sacrament,
ready to die to defend the truth of this mystery, that he
would never listen to bad companions who told him to
forget his duty and seek pleasure in play.
The story of the little martyr sank deeper into the
child's heart. Childhood, boyhood, manhood, found him
true to his promise—he tried to be another Tarcisius.
keeping Jesus with him. in the midst of "Pagan" com-


panions. He loved every kind of manly sport, but nothing
prevented his monthly confession and communion. No
coaxing, no jesting, could induce him to put off his duty.
Later on he made his communion a weekly practice.
His Mother's good-bye kiss was all love and grief.
There was no reproach in it, no fear for his spiritual
safety.
"I know, dear, you have great devotion to Our Lord
in the Blessed Sacrament. Take these beads —my parting
gift. Say them sometimes, even when you are not in the
presence of the Blessed Sacrament." She handed him a
string of grey beads, with a medal attached.
The boy smiled as he kissed the beads, and his tears
were hidden by the smile.
"Righto, Mother," he spoke cheerfully to hide his
emotion. "Mother, I should have lived in the time of the
Crusades. I would not mind having a slap at the Pagans
some how, but this war of Christians I don't like, I wish
they'd send me to Palestine. You remember my little saint,
Tarcisius. I hated those Pagan boys. Many a night I
thought of them, and dreamt of them, too. And always
I was struggling amongst them, fighting for Tarcisius and
Our Lord."
He went away like a young knight of long ago, high
resolve written on his young face. There was no hatred
in his boyish heart; he went to fight for Right.
Each morning as his mother knelt at Mass she could
see him, with the grey beads slipping through his fingers.
The men were weary, mud-covered, sleep-sick. They
had come back to the little half-ruined village to rest on
their way to N— —. What a haven of rest and quiet it
seemed now —that little, half-ruined village. Many of the


people had crept back to their homes, and were tending the
earth gently, caressing the beloved soil of their native land,
clearing away ruins. It was not work this, it seemed an
exercise of religion.
Weary, mud-covered, sick for sleep, some of the men
were already slumbering, hearing again the lullabies of
childhood.
But there —again! Those distant shells had been but
a slumber song. But there —! Again —! Closer
closer yet
"What's the game? There's nothing to shell here —
only us. We've been down close enough to them, they are
not after us now," said some of the men, and promptly
went to sleep again.
The poor little Church. Some weeks back it had been
damaged by shells; windows broken, a wall wrecked. But
now—closer . . . closer ... as if the little Church were
the mark.
"The Church —they're after. No machine guns there,
Fritz, old chap. You're in the wrong street. That was a
close one! Can't they let a fellow have a sleep ? We've
got to move on shortly to N to get rid of this mud.
I suppose they'll follow us there and shell the baths."
A little group of people had gathered on the road —
women, little children, and old, old men. They spoke in
quiet terror . . . children ran to and from the priest's
house. The old, old men looked along the road towards
the setting sun.
They had seen their village half ruined months before
and they had fled, only to come back when danger was
over. Well, they could do the same again . . . but the
shells fell only near the Church . . . their fear was not
for their own immediate safety.


One young soldier approached the group.
"Oh, it is the Cure —he is away, he cannot be back
for some time. He went to see old Madame ... to console
her . . . her two sons . . ."
"Ah, they are getting the range . . . There! How
close!"
The young soldier watched anxiously.
"It will be in ruins before nightfall," he said.
"Ah, say not so . . . say not so . . . What can we do?
The Blessed Sacrament
"The Blessed Sacrament —in there?" the young soldier
cried . . . "Where is the key of the Tabernacle? Quick!
The Blessed Sacrament was not there when we passed
through
No, no. Only the last few days, the priest has been
able to come to us."
"Where is the key?
An altar-boy gave him directions where to find the
key, hidden in the sacristy —the red ribbon would tell
him —which one.
He hardly waited to hear —the child cried out after
The young soldier, with the saint's face, was running
towards the Church, and far away up the road, where the
sun was setting, a weary, bent figure toiled on towards the
village.
"Where to, Tomo?" called a friend. "They are only
doing in the Church. Don't run away. Why, you are
running towards it. What ?"
The young soldier was panting, but not with fatigue,
but with fear, fear for the safety of the Blessed Sacrament.
The Church might burst into flame any minute.


A mate saw him. "I'm in this Tomo," he called.
"Where you go, I go. I don't know what you are going
to do, but I'm coming along." He ran after his comrade.
A little group of people had gathered on the road —
they saw him enter ... a minute later his comrade reached
the door.
Ah—there was a gap in the roof now. God grant he
was safe, the young soldier with the face of a saint.
Far up the golden pathway of the road they saw the
priest . . . the little ones hurried to meet him, to sob out
the story . . . but he could see . . .
"The Australian soldier has gone in
Flames sprang up . . . smoke came in clouds through
the windows.
He came out, bareheaded ... his hands folded on his
breast ... he was not running, but walking with dignity,
reverence—like a saint.
The "mate," who did not understand, walked beside
him . . . sometimes his hand guided him . . . over the rough
place in the road.
See, in the marks made by his feet . . . Have angels
come with red rose leaves, to scatter before the Blessed
Sacrament? Look closer . . . red, red drops . . . flowers of
his own young blood, sprinkled the way.
Why was his face so pale ? Why did his lips move
with difficulty?
He panted now, not with fear, but with pain and love.
Many of his comrades had not noticed his heroic act;
it had happened suddenly. But now, even the deepest
sleepers had awakened; several hurried to meet him. They
carried him, his hands folded on his breast. The old priest
hurried feebly towards them. They laid the young soldier
gently down, the old priest knelt at his side. The dying


eyes lit up when they beheld the priest, the arms opened;
they saw the wound in his side.
"Lord, I was not worthy," he said: the priest raised
his hand in absolution. His "mate" knelt near him.
"Tomo, Tomo," he whispered, "do you know me?"
The eyes opened, he smiled on his mate, as Tarcisius
did on the noble Roman matron.
They buried him at nightfall, for his comrades had to
"move on"; their little rest on the way of march was over.
A few hours later all was quiet again, except for the
familiar sound of distant guns. The little Church was a
pile of smoking ruins; the children had sobbed themselves
to sleep; a red light burnt in the priest's room.
Far away across the sea, Mass had begun in a little
city Church. His mother could not think of him, with
the grey beads in his fingers. She prayed for him, prayed
. . . prayed . . . After the Elevation . . . she prayed, too
for him. We pray for the dead after the Elevation!
Ah, yes, perhaps he was dead
"Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament, have mercy on us."


"Madame"
CLARE and her mother "had a room'' on the first
floor, with a window overlooking the pepper-tree, the
patch of grass and the camellia bushes that formed "the
garden" of No. 97. Madame Dunois' room was a back one
on the second floor, and her window overlooked clothes
lines, clothes props and the terrace washing.
Madame was "queer." She had no visitors, received
no letters, no telegrams, not even post-cards.
No one in No. 97 bothered about Madame, and
Madame bothered about no one —except Clare. She and
Clare were very good friends. The child cheerfully ran
her messages, brought her paper, carried out the little pink
jug to the milk-boy every afternoon, and searched the
greengrocer's cart for the tenderest lettuce for Madame's
salad.
Sometimes, but very rarely, Madame would spend a
few minutes in Mrs. O'Brien's room. It was a pleasant
room, half bed-room, half living-room. A red curtain
"halved" it and made it bright and cheery looking. There
was a small table near the window, and pictures covered
the walls. A large picture of the Sacred Heart hung over
the mantelpiece—a beautiful picture, a relic of Mrs.
O'Brien's better days, but Madame never so much as lifted
her brown eyes to it. There was another of Our Lady on
the opposite wall, but Madame always sat with her back


to it. From little remarks let fall now and then, mother
and Clare had concluded Madame 'was a Protestant.
Every morning Madame went to the Park and in-
dulged in a sun-bath. Every morning Clare's mother went
into the city, where she worked hard for a small salary.
Clare went to the Sisters' School in the next street, and
every afternoon had a budget of school news for Madame.
She had got all her sums right —multiplication by three
figures! She had arranged the flowers for the oratories
and Sister Man- Agnes said they were most artistic. There
was a "new" girl at school, and she had the loveliest long
curls and beautiful new leather bag and ever so many pens
and pencils.
But one afternoon Clare came rushing up the narrow
stairs, her face flushed with happiness, there was surely
some extraordinary news to tell.
"Oh, Madame, I am in the Communion Class! Won't
Mother be glad? I am not eight yet, but " Then she
paused disappointedly. "I forgot, you don't understand,
you are not a Catholic."
"Tell me about it, just the same, little one," Madame
said gently, and then Clare sat in the big chair opposite
the old lady and poured out all the joyful news.
"You see, I have been learning the Catechism and
listening to all the instructions, but Sister was not sure if
I understood properly, you see, I am only seven and a
half. But Father Breen examined me to-day, and said
I may stay in the class. I am so glad. There are just a
few weeks now until the fifteenth of August—that's to
be our First Communion Day. Father Breen said we've
to be very, very careful of ourselves during the time,
trying to be ready to receive Our Lord, and the harder
we try ourselves, the more God will help us. He said if


Our Lord sent a message that He was coming to see us,
how we would prepare the house for Him, make every-
thing as clean and beautiful as we could, and so you see
our heart is to be the house. He is coming, He has sent
us the message. Suppose Our Lord lived on earth now,
and we got a message that He was coming to see you,
wouldn't we set to work and make the place shine? Of
course it's nice and tidy now, Madame, but we'd make it
ever so much nicer for Our Lord, wouldn't we? We'd put
lots of flowers all about, too. I'd help you."
"Would you help me, little one?" Madame asked, with
a strange smile on her beautiful old lips.
"Yes, of course I would. Well, that's how it is with
Catholics when they prepare for Our Lord's coming.
Father Breen told us all this. We get our souls all clean
and beautiful from sin. There's confession, you see, to
take the nasty stain of sin away, and then there are prayers,
and good thoughts, good words and good actions to adorn
our souls, like flowers adorn our houses. Don't I re-
member it well, Madame? I listened so hard all the time
and I asked my Guardian Angel to fix it all fast in my
mind, because I wanted to tell it to Mother and you."
"Did you, dear one? You have remembered it all
very well. The Father would be pleased to hear you
repeat it so nicely."
"There's Mother calling me. Good-bye, Madame. I'll
tell you more to-morrow."
Every afternoon Clare repeated the instructions to
Madame, and then to Mother. Poor Mother did not get
home until six, but the tired look always left her face when
Clare met her at the door.
Clare was sitting in Madame's room looking up at a
picture over the mantel. "That's Napoleon up there, isn't


it, Madame? He was a great soldier, wasn't he? Did you
know him in France?"
Madame smiled, and Clare's face flushed. "Oh, I
forgot, he's dead a long time. Sister told us about him
to-day. He said the happiest day of his life was his First
Communion Day. Some people asked him which was the
happiest day of his life. They thought he would say the
day he crowned himself, or the day he won a big battle;
but he didn't. Of course, they might have known which
day was the happiest of his life, but then perhaps they
were not Catholics. I always forget you are not a Catholic,
Madame; you look like one, and I thought all French
people were Catholics."
Madame did not smile, "I look like one! How, child?"
"Your face is like a holy picture; like those holy
pictures with the black eyes. If you hadn't all those
crushes, 1 mean those wrinkles, you'd be like my picture
of Our Blessed La "
"Hush! Hush! child. Do not say it. I like a pic-
ture of " and Madame shivered.
"I won't say it, then, but I'll think it all the same,"
smiled Clare.
When the child was gone, Madame's beautiful old face
trembled strangely. The room seemed cold, the fire was
gone down, the wind outside howled dismally.
Napoleon frowned down upon her, his folded arms,
his haughty face seemed to say he would have nothing
whatever to do with her, she was quite beneath his notice.
Madame was fond of the picture for Oh! for manv
reasons connected with long ago, and she had always felt
a pitying regard for the great soldier. She stood looking
up at him. "So it was the happiest day of your life, eh?"
Madame often talked to her pictures and her canaries,


perhaps because she had lived so long alone. She rapped
the table with her knuckles. "The happiest day of your
life, was it?" The last flame shot up in the little grate,
and sent a golden light on the picture. It seemed to soften
the frowning face, and Madame smiled, "Ay, it was mine,
too, Sire —mine, too."
She unlocked a small box that stood beside the old
mirror, and took out an egg-shaped mother-of-pearl case.
She unscrewed it with trembling fingers, and a string of
beads fell into her hand. Madame regarded them sadly.
"So long ago—oh, so long ago!" she said softly.
There was a prayer book in the box, too —a prayer
book with mother-of-pearl covers, kept together by an old
velvet ribbon.
"It is too long ago —too long ago," Madame said
regretfully, as she put them back into the box.
The time flew, the great day drew very near.
One afternoon Madame and Clare had a serious con-
versation.
"I don't mind not having a new dress, for the dress
doesn't matter, it's the soul. Mother said if my soul is
white and beautiful, that is enough. Of course, we should
be neat and clean. Mother is going to do up my white
dress; I've had it two years. You see, Mother has not
much money at any time, and just now is worse than ever,
because the money she had saved up for my new dress and
everything she sent to Aunt Julie —she wanted it badly.
But we are going to buy some Brussels net for a veil and
get some white flowers, too."
Madame listened patiently, and her brown eyes beamed
as if with some secret resolve.
Madame wrote a letter that night, posted it herself
in the pillar-box near the grocer's, and the next morning


she had a visitor —a lady dressed in black of the very
latest "cut."
No. 97 was astonished, but Mother was in the city,
and Clare at school, so they did not know.
A few days later a boy bought a big white box to
Madame's door—a big white box that looked as if it came
from a dressmaker's, a big white box that suggested filmy
laces and white ribbons and flowers; in short, a box that
looked as if it belonged to a bride to be.
That evening Madame went down the narrow stairs
to the front room on the first floor, and she carried the big
white box with her.
Mother and Clare welcomed her. Clare drew out
the cosiest chair and the softest cushion, but Madame had
a little speech to make before she sat down.
"I have here something for the child. I meant to
give it on the eve of First Communion, but then I think
it well to give it some time before, for it might prove a
distraction at the last moment." (Mother's surprised look
deepened). "You, Madame, will not object to this present
from Clare's old friend."
She gave Clare the box, and the child opened it with
eager fingers.
A wreath of lilies, a veil of softest tulle with more
lilies in the corners, beneath that a snow-white muslin
dress with white silk ribbons, white shoes, white stockings,
white gloves, and the tiniest, daintiest little lace hand-
kerchief.
How lovely,' Clare cried. "Oh! Madame, they are
too grand for me."
"Too grand! Not so. Not for that grand day, little
one. ou know you said if the good God were coming
up to my little room to visit me, you would help old


Madame prepare for Him, and so the old friend helped to
adorn you for His coming. You understand? But there
is something else there."
Clare's hand felt in amongst the tissue papers in the
box and found a little prayer book with mother-of-pearl
covers, and a mother-of-pearl case containing a pearly
rosary on a silver string.
Madame would not listen to the thanks Mother and
Clare tried to pay her.
"No, 110 —it is nothing. I knew you would not mind
when it was old Madame's gift to her good little friend,
and old Madame is far richer than some folks think. And
the child is such a good little one, she will not think about
the veil 01* the wreath or the pretty ribbons on her Com-
munion Day. She will forget all about them, and think
only of the Holy One Who is coming. You look surprised
—you and Clare, but it is so, old Madame is a Catholic.
Ah! well I remember my Communion Day. I was a good
little girl then. I remember my white dress, my beads,
my flowers, my book, all like these. I was such a good
little one then, my soul was white. It was a happy, happy
day. I said then I would be good always—always. I
wondered then how any one could stay away from the
good God. For many years I was very good, very good,
like my mother and my sisters. And then—it must be
more than ten years that I have lived away from God. I
have been unhappy, such an unhappy old woman. I wish
I could want to go back to God, but I cannot want to.
Yet I have the faith, I believe it all. But the love seems
dead, the love for God and for holy things. Yet now
it will come right, the child will pray for me that day.
She will ask the good God to change my heart. She will
say, 'Harden not her heart! Oh, Lord, harden not her


heart!' Will you not, little one? And He will listen to
her that day and old Madame will once more be a happy
one. But I must go. The tears seem very close; those
pretty white things make me remember too well. I can
see my mother and Melie and Therese. I must go. I
think I will take Napoleon from his place of honour and
hang the Sacred Heart there. Your picture over the
mantel is so sweet, so comforting. I have many holy
pictures packed away, and Napoleon will do very well in
the corner."
"Did you see that old lady in front of us? What a
beautiful face she had. How lovely she must have been
long ago, when she was young. She was weeping softly
when the children approached the altar rails, and I saw
her kiss one little girl after Mass."
"She is a Frenchwoman. She lives at No. 97. I
never saw her at Mass before, but I suppose she goes up
to St. Peter's."
"I suppose so."
The ladies went on their way, and Madame climbed
the narrow stairs to her room, a happy smile on her
beautiful old face.


Jimmy
TWO little boys were standing on the steps leading to
St. Mary's Cathedral —two ragged little boys with
bare feet and grimy hands. The smaller one had a thin,
delicate face, large blue eyes, with that pathetic expression
in them so often noticed in the eyes of uncared-for children.
His companion seemed some years older, was thick-
set, and just a little "cheeky" looking, as if he had been
fighting his own battles all his life, and had grown hard-
ened and bold by doing so.
"Come on, Bob, let's go in," said the little fellow
wistfully, "p'rhaps I could do it."
"No yer couldn't, Jimmy, it's jolly hard. I tried such
a long time in by the door before I could do it, and you're
such a little chap."
Bob very slowly and laboriously genuflected, on the
top step, his arms thrown out to balance himself, and bowed
his head jerkily.
Jimmy sighed. He wanted so much to go in and see
what was in the church that could draw such crowds —
they kept coming and going all day. But Bob would not
let him go.
An old lady, richly dressed, had listened to the con-
versation. She was quite charmed with Jimmy's blue eyes
and brown curls, but she did not look twice at Bob.
Jimmy sat down on the steps when Bob left, and as


the old lady passed down to the waiting motor, she dropped
one of her gloves. Jimmy picked it up for her, and smiled
in answer to the smile on her kind old face. She opened
her purse and gave him a new, bright shilling.
When she had gone, Jimmy danced on the steps, and
played "catchers"- with the shilling, and flung it on the
stones, for the pleasure of hearing it ring. Then he tied
it up in the corner of a tattered handkerchief, and thrust
it in his pocket.
His thoughts came back to the church. Bob was gone.
Yes, he would go in and watch what the others did, and
perhaps he could manage it too.
He reached the big padded door. It was closed, but
others had gone in, so why shouldn't he?
Everything was dark at first, and he stole over by
the marble holy-water font, and crouched against the wall.
Yes, everyone was doing "it" —old men and old
women, young girls, schoolboys, and tiny little ones barely
up to Jimmy's shoulder. There they all were, dropping
down on one knee quite easily every time they passed in
front of a great white throne with golden railings round it.
But all the people, after kneeling for some time before
the Throne, made their way round behind it somewhere,
and Timmy wanted to know what was round there. But
he must first be able to do that strange action or he could
not pass the Throne.
Well, if those tiny children could do it, he could, he
was ten last August.
He steadied himself by the wall, and slowly genu-
flected, and bowed his head as all the other little boys
did. It was strangely hard to his unaccustomed knees.
He tried over and over again until he could manage it
without the wall.


He started off with a frightened gait, as if ready to
run, if anyone should give chase. But no one did. The
genuflection was accomplished, and Jimmy was quite proud
of how well he did it.
He followed the train of people, and reached the Crib.
A little crowd was kneeling round, and Jimmy could only
see the Angel on the top of the stable. He admired it
greatly, and wondered what those strange words meant
that the Angel was carrying.
He crushed his way in amongst the people, and a little
girl in a silk frock made place for him beside her.
His blue eyes fell on the little scene before him —the
lovely Babe, His Mother kneeling near, His foster-father
too, and the ox and ass looking on Him with their large,
soft eyes.
Jimmy knew all about it, for Bob's mother long, long
ago, when "things were better," used to read them "Bible
Stories" on Sundays, but now she had no time for any-
thing but work, work, even on Sundays.
Deep down in Jimmy's heart there was a love for all
things beautiful, and he knelt on the cold, hard floor, a
far-away, dreamy look in his big blue eyes.
The little lady in white stood up and dropped a coin
in a small box nearby then she sat down at the side to
await her mother.
Jimmy looked over at her, and she beckoned to him.
Wondering, he went to her.
"Can you read, little boy?" she whispered.
"A bit," he answered, his eyes fixed in admiration on
her fair, pretty face. He thought she was like the Angel
on the stable.
"You're not a Catholic, are you?" Jimmy shook his
head. "I thought you weren't. Here's a nice little prayer


to read," and she put a picture of the Crib in Jimmy's
hand. "I expect you do not know much about the Crib,"
she added pityingly.
He went back to his place and spelt the words on the
back to himself very, for Jimmy hated school,
and therefore was backward in his lessons.
Some of the words he could not understand, but
thought it a very nice prayer, and hoped the Holy Child
liked it too.
He took it back to the little lady in white, and she
made room for Jimmy beside her, and told him in whispers
the story of the Incarnation —some things Bob's mother
had never spoken of, especially about the Blessed Babe's
Mother.
He sat listening to the sweet story, his lips parted, a
faint flush on his cheeks, the silken flounce of the little
lady's frock touching his knees, and making his shabby old
clothes look older and shabbier.
Jimmy sighed regretfully when her mother came, and
the little lady smiled, "Good-bye, little boy," and left him.
He went back to the Crib and read the hymn over
and over until he almost knew it off.
Then he thought of his shilling—his bright new shil-
ling. The little lady had put a coin in the box, so had
her mother and all the others.
Should he give his shilling? Make a Christmas pre-
sent of it to the Holy Child ?
Visions of pink and white ice cream wafers, peanuts,
and butterscotch, passed before his mind's eye. Twelve
pennies!
A little boy, just as poorly dressed as he, but much
tidier, dropped a coin in the box, and Jimmy hesitated
no longer.


He untied the shilling and dropped it into the box,
and felt such a rush of joy as it jingled against the other
coins already there.
The Holy Child seemed to smile upon him, and Jimmy
was happy. He left the church walking firmly, and genu-
flected like a true "Roman Catholic."
That evening the rich old lady, the little lady and her
mother, were sitting in a beautifully furnished room, and
the old lady was telling the story of Bob and Jimmy and
the genuflection.
"Oh, mother, why didn't you take the poor little fellow
in?" asked the younger woman.
A look of regret passed over grandma's face. "Well,
well, I did not think of it; what a slow old woman I am.
What a pity you were not with me."
"What was the little boy like, grandma ?" asked the
little lady eagerly.
"He was a very pretty, sorrowful-looking little fellow,
delicate, with blue eyes and brown curls."
"Oh, he was at the Crib. Didn't you see him, mother?
And I gave him the little hymn, and told him all about the
Infant Jesus."
Grandma's face grew happy-looking again. "Ah, I
am so pleased, poor little boy."
"He knew a good deal about the Crib, but not about
Our Blessed Lady. I told him everything though," ex-
plained the little lady proudly, while the older ones smiled
fondly upon her.
The Christmas season was over. All the toys Santa
Claus had brought good little boys and girls had lost their
shininess and colour, and were in need of repair.
Jimmy's one Christmas present —the little picture, was
creased and soiled with his grimy fingers, but Jimmy knew
the hymn by heart, so that did not matter.


Jimmy himself was sick, and in a hospital, and the
doctors knew he would not get better. He was thinner
than at Christmas time, his eyes looked even larger, and
his face and hands in a constant state of cleanliness, made
him seem a different Jimmy altogether.
He had pneumonia, and his weak constitution could
not battle against the disease.
Sometimes the nurse would hear him murmur in his
sleep about the Crib and the Holy Child, for that first visit
to the Crib had been followed by many others. When
Father H visited the hospital, the nurse, who was a
Catholic, told him about the new patient, and after that
Jimmy had something to brighten his lonely days —the
priest's visits.
Bob's mother was sought out, and Father H
learned all there was to learn about Jimmy. His mother
had died when he was a tiny baby, and Mrs. Jackson had
taken him into her own large family.
"She was sich a nice poor thing, 'is mother," Mrs.
Tackson said. "So good like, but delicate she was, very
delicate. Her 'usband died just before she came to live
with me. She was a Catholic, sir, and I often meant to
take Jimmy to your big church up there and 'ave 'im
christened like, but I was always waiting until I could get
'im a decent turnout, and you see, sir" —with a pathetic
smile —-"the time never come."
Then she burst into a flood of tears, for although she
had eight children of her own, her heart held room for
nine, and Jimmy was the ninth.
Father H comforted her as best he could, and she
was pleased to know Jimmie was to be baptized at last.
"He won't want no nice clothes after all," she said mourn-
fully, between her sobs.


And Jimmy was baptized, "James Joseph Mary." He
selected the two names himself, and smiled happily when
Bob said disdainfully that Mary was a girl's name.
The little lady found him out too, and came to see him
every day, so Jimmy was very happy in spite of his suffer-
ings. He would often speak of the Crib to his little friend,
and she would tell him all that she had learned from the
nuns about the Sweet Holy Child and His beautiful
Mother. Every day Jimmy loved them both more and
more, and thought how lovely it would be to see them and
speak to them. Oh, if he had been one of the shepherds
who went to the stable to see the little Babe and His
Mother! And as he became weaker his desire to be with
Jesus and Mary grew stronger —a desire very soon to be
realized.
One afternoon, towards sunset, the nurse saw the end
had come, and Jimmy had but a few moments to live.
She knelt beside him to help him on his way to heaven.
The little eyes were closed, but the lips were moving, and
nurse just heard the whispered:
"When the hour of death is nigh
Then may Mary standing by
Take me in her arms to die,
Sweet Holy Child."
Then Jimmie's innocent little soul fled to enjoy for
ever the sight of his Sweet Holy Child.


Francis
THERE was a Mission "on" at Saint Michael's and
all the infants in Sister Ann's class were fired with
desire to save souls. They prayed for sinners each morn-
ing before lessons began; at twelve o'clock the Angelus was
offered for sinners. Every time the bell announced a
change of lessons a prayer for sinners winged its way to
the heart of God from all the little baby hearts in Sister
Ann's class. They brought flowers—oftentimes with
broken stalks and wilted petals—to offer to the Sacred
Heart for poor sinners. They did heroic "acts," foregoing
countless drinks of water and innumerable penn'orths of
chewing gum and chocolates. They brought pennies, held
tight in little, moist palms, to slip into the Holy Souls
Box. Such pennies were to be put in when no one was
looking. Many a time, before school commenced, Sister
Ann heard little feet tip-toeing towards the box. What
a clatter the penny made, and how hastily the little feet
ran out again! The little ones in Sister Ann's class be-
lieved that if anyone saw you put a penny in the box your
"act" lost half (or perhaps all, if you were proud!) of its
merit.
Sister Ann loved the little ones with a great love, and
they loved her. There was a beautiful sympathy between
them. Her blue eyes were just as fearless as theirs; her


soul, like theirs, was a garden fresh with the dew of
baptismal innocence.
Francis was six. He meant to be a priest when he
was big, and go about giving Missions all over the world.
With his baby brother and little sister he often played at
giving Missions. He made up sermons and delivered them
in a "chesty" voice, and with many graceful gestures. An
old cape belonging to Granny fell in picturesque folds
from his shoulders, and in his belt he had a cross —made
and painted by himself. He sang wonderful chants in a
Latin of his own, and poor Mary, who was just past four,
got many a scolding for forgetting the replies or for
"coming in" at the wrong time, and Babyjohn was "chased
out of the church" several times for laughing aloud with
jov.
"But Francis," mother said on one occasion, "poor
Babyjohn was so happy. He was so pleased to be at your
Mission."
"Well, the people never laugh at Missions, mother-
He must stop it."
"But people have sins that rob them of joy. Baby
has none."
So Babyjohn was given another chance and cautioned
to keep quiet. Aunt Alice (who was otherwise a sensible
person), said that Francis should not be allowed to play
Missions; she did not think it right; she would not allow
her children to do it. Mother made answer that when
she was a little girl her brother used to play Missions and
give them all great scoldings and make them do "penance,"
and now he was a really-truly Missionary away over in
the Islands.
"I don't think it's right," said Aunt Alice.
Father only laughed when he was appealed to and


said: "Let him play Missions. Every Catholic child plays
at being a priest or a nun. Why shouldn't they?" So
Francis went his way happily, and Mary's "Latin" im-
proved, and Babyjohn learned to be quiet and listen to the
sermon.
But Francis began to have higher aspirations. It was
all very well to play at Missions with Mary and Babyjohn,
and he loved doing it; but, of course, when one is nearly
seven one should do some real work for God. Sister said
to pray for sinners. The missionary had told the people to
try to bring a poor sinner to the Mission, to use kind,
tactful words that would soften his heart and break down
his pride. Francis made a mental review of his friends.
Any sinners among them? No, as far as he knew all the
Catholic friends of the family were "doing" the Mission —
not one black sheep on whom he could exercise his zeal.
Now, of course, father and mother should not have dis-
cussed a neighbour's spiritual affairs before such a pre-
cocious child as Francis, but as it happened, it was a
happy fault.
"A pity old Riley wouldn't come along to the Mission.
I'm sure those beautiful sermons would touch his heart."
said father.
"Yes, poor man. I've been praying for him to come.
I've given his case to Little Therese. She will surely
bring him round."
"It's years since the old scoundrel has been near the
church. Someone ought to approach him, but it's a hard
thing to do, you know. It needs careful handling. He
won't see a priest if he calls."
"You ought to go, John."
"I ?"


'"Yes. You worked for him when you were a boy.
You liked him."
"Oh, yes. He was not a bad boss. But it's years
since I've spoken to him; I don't think he'd know me. I
couldn't very well call on him and say: 'You know, Mr.
Riley, you are heading straight for hell, you'd better take
the first turn to the right and it will lead you to the
Mission.' Now could I?"
"Well, hardly," mother smiled, "but I wish someone
could get round him."
"Money has deadened his spiritual sense. Old Nick
has a mortgage on his soul."
Francis was listening. Francis was six and afraid of
nothing except "lions an' tigers an' mortal sin." Lions
and tigers eat you and mortal sin makes you bad friends
with God. Francis was afraid of nothing else. He would
go and save Mr. Riley from the devil. He had not known
until now that the old gentleman was a Catholic. Francis
felt his heart rejoice. He had found a black sheep!
Mother and father were still talking.
"Yes," mother was saying, "some tactful person
should go. You know St. Francis said you can catch more
flies with honey than with vinegar."
"Old Riley is more like a spider—an old money-spider
getting poor, foolish flies into his web."
Francis went to bed in a thoughtful mood. He dreamt
of lions and tigers and spiders and black sheep; he dreamt
the devil came in a fiery motor car and carried off poor
Mr. Riley.
Next morning at Mass, Francis prayed hard for Mr.
Riley, and through the day when Sister said the aspirations
for poor sinners, Francis thought of this "black sheep"
who had not been near the church for years. In the after-


noon, Francis, after manoeuvring to elude Mary and Baby-
john, set off up the hill to Mr. Riley's splendid house. It
was not far but the road was lonely—a low brick wall on
one side bounded Mr. Riley's property and the park ex-
tended on the other. Francis wondered if lions and tigers
often got out of the zoo or the circus. He knew they did
sometimes. There might be one, now, prowling behind the
wall .... and he would know there was a little boy on
that quiet road .... and he would spring over the wall
Francis made the Sign of the Cross and hurried on.
He must save poor Mr. Riley from the devil.
"Perhaps the old devil is prowling round too. He
doesn't want me to ask Mr. Riley to come to the Mission.
I'm not afraid of the old devil, anyhow," said Francis,
and made the Sign of the Cross again.
Mr. Riley was very much astonished when he heard
that a very small boy wished to see him. Mr. Riley was
one of those unfortunate old gentlemen who have no small
boy's names on their visiting list.
Francis came in, his big blue eyes wide open and just
a little startled looking. Mr. Riley was the first sinner he
had ever met.
"Good afternoon. I'm Francis."
Good afternoon. What can I do for you."
Nothing, thank you. I want to do something for
"Oh, indeed," said the surprised old gentleman, for
generally people who called wanted him to do things for
them. "Well, what is it you want to do for me?"
"I want to save your soul!"
Mr. Riley had been leaning back in the big chair
before his desk, his fingers tapping softly. He sat up
suddenly as if someone had given him a violent blow in


the back; he muttered something and stared at the child.
"You see, I heard that you have not been near the
church for years .... and there's a Mission on at St.
Michael's, so it is a good time for you to come. The old
devil has his claw on you, but you can easily shake him
off." He smiled sweetly. "Will you come to-night?"
If any man had dared talk to him in this way Mr.
Riley would have ordered him from the house; but a
child of six, a child with seraphic blue eyes and a fascinat-
ing smile could not be treated so summarily.
"Who sent you?" gasped the old gentleman.
Francis considered a moment: "God. I suppose."
Mr. Riley's eyes fell, he toyed nervously with his
fountain pen. "But—but —but —" was all he could say.
"Well, you see," Francis mercifully explained. "We
pray every day for sinners to come to the Mission. The
missionary said we should coax sinners to come. You
are a sinner. My mother is praying to Little Therese to
make you come, and I heard mother telling my father that
he should ask you, but he was afraid of offending you.
So I came. The devil has a mortgage on your soul, father
said. What's a mortgage ? I dreamt last night the old
devil came in a fiery motor car; there wer-e flames whirling
round the wheels and long flames flying out all over it
and the devil took you away in it! So this morning at
Mass I prayed like anything that the devil would not get
you, because God wants you; and all to-day I've said the
prayers for you and the acts —I did without three drinks
of water for you and I gave my best marble to Puggy
O'Connor, and my play-lunch cake to Jimmy Daly."
Francis put his head on one side and smiled again. "So
now it's up to you to come to the Mission, isn't it?"
Mr. Riley seemed mesmerised. He could do nothing
but stare into the blue eyes before him.


"So will you?" urged Francis. "Will you?" whispered
his guardian'angel .... "Will you?" whispered voices
long, long since hushed in death .... and a \ oice sweeter,
more tender than any, whispered, "Will you?"
"Francis! Wherever have you been?" cried mother
some time later as Francis came in breathless. (He had
run down the lonely road; there might be a tiger about,
vou know.)
•" . •
"Oh. Fve been up to Mr. Riley's, and he's coming
to the Mission all right. I told him you were frightened
to ask him, and I told him you said money made his soul
dead and that the devil had a mortgage on his soul and . ."
Father sat up just as suddenly and violently as Mr.
Riley had. Francis had a way of electrifying people!
"You —you —young " Father stuttered. He did
not know what to call Francis.
"I told him about the honey and the vinegar and he
smiled and said it was true. And he asked my name, and
he remembers you when you were a boy, and he d like
to see you." (Father groaned.) "And he said to tell you
he'd cheat the old devil about the mortgage; and he gave
me cakes and fruit and I told him about the sermons and
he's going to the Mission to-night. And I promised to
keep on praying for him and to ask mother to pray too,
and . . . ."
But Francis had so much to tell about his visit to
Mr. Riley's that it would not fit on this page. So you
must imagine the rest.


Love and Lilies
THE cottage stood back from the road, but still, from
the verandah, one could see beyond the garden into
the church yard at the other side. It was a little, old
church, surrounded by tall, dark Norfolk pines; and there,
beside it, were the graves of the early settlers of the
district. For many, many years no one had been laid to
rest in that holy ground—for now there was a cemetery
away beyond the hills—and the stones were old, and time
was slowly obliterating the letter on their faces; many had
fallen and broken. But others were well-kept, for in the
little township in the valley, names that showed over shop
and store and office were the names on the old grave
stones, telling that the descendants of those early settlers
still dwelt on the gentle hills and in the little valley, and
carried on the old honoured names and the old traditions,
and tended the old graves.
And once a year the little "God's Acre" came into its
own, for according to an old French custom —introduced
years before by a mission priest then in charge of the
place—there was a procession, after early Mass on All
Souls Day, and the old graves were blessed again, and
people knelt to pray about them.
In the white cottage amongst the cedar trees "new"
people lived —a mother and her invalid son, who had come
there for the health and healing promised by that peaceful
place. There was a garden before the cottage, with beds


of lilies everywhere—the lilies that Catholics call Assump
tion lilies, and other folk simply designate November lilies.
The former tenants of the cottage had evidently loved the
lilies, for they grew everywhere —in tall lines against the
wall of the cottage, against the fences, along the narrow
paths; in clusters in corners beneath the trees, lilies every-
where.
The new tenants were delighted with them. The man
was sometimes well enough to walk about the garden,
with the aid of his stick; at other times he sat in a chair
and wheeled himself about. At the back of the house were
lines of fruit trees, running down the little hill, and look-
ing, some time before, like waves of pink and white snow
drifting down into the creek below.
"It is a beautiful spot; a man should .get well here,"
the invalid often said, in a voice that seemed to imply that
if a man could not be healed in soul and body in this haven,
there was little use for him to look for healing elsewhere.
He did not expect to find bodily health; yet he looked for
it for his mother's sake. She was very hopeful. He
looked better, much better, since he came to live in "Villa
Maria" among its lilies.
His mother had meant to change the name of the
house, immediately on taking possession; but he had said:
"Oh leave it as it is, mother. Those old French
people called it 'Villa Maria' nearly a hundred years ago.
Since we now live under their roof and profit by their
labour, and the labour of their children, let us at least
have the grace and courtesy to leave the place the name
they gave it."
"Very well, Geoffrey. But it looks queer on our
letters. Our friends will wonder at it."
"Let them wonder! There is nothing like wonder to


make life interesting; and many of our so-called friends
have little interest in anything except themselves. I am
glad we came here. I am glad it is such a little, dull,
behind-the-times place, so that none of our so-called friends
will want to penetrate into the wilderness of it. Xo one
will want to come unless those who have a real friendship
for us. There are no fashionable golf links, no smart
tennis clubs or bridge clubs. We are safe here, because
we have nothing to offer them—only lilies and love!" he
ended with a laugh. "They do not want the beauty of
these gentle hills; the picture the old church makes amongst
its dark sentinel pines; the peace of the little grave yard."
"It is a dear place," his mother answered, "but I wish
we were not so near the church —the Catholic church."
"I wish to God we were both nearer to it, mother,"
her son burst out.
"Geoffrey! My dear, whatever can you mean?" his
mother cried, in alarm.
"Just what I said. I wish we both had the faith of
that old man over there cutting the grass round the graves."
M rs. Wakefield drew herself up. "Geoffrey, we have
faith."
"Not the faith he has."
"That old man! What do you know of him and his
faith ?"
"Very little. But I know this: he is a Catholic, he
understands the meaning of everything, life and death.
I know that happiness is his. Although his life has been
one of hard work and sorrow."
"How do you know all this?"
"The priest told me."
"The priest? Oh Geoffrey," Mrs. Wakefield said this


in a sad, accusing voice, as if she feared her son had got
into very doubtful company.
"Yes. He called one day when you were in the city.
He thought we might be Catholics. It is the first time
anyone but Catholics has lived in this house. The old
man passed by the gate when Father Clare was leaving.
I remarked on his beautiful countenance —"
"Beautiful?" interrupted Mrs. Wakefield in a tone
of surprise.
•'Yes —beautiful. I suppose the old chap is a saint,
really."
"Saints!" his mother said, as if she were quite sure
now that her beloved Geoffrey had wandered into strange
ways, among strange company.
Mrs. Wakefield sniffed. "A saint —that old man."
Geoffrey's face flushed. "A saint with horny hands
and thick-soled boots, but a saint for all that. I have been
watching him this morning. He is getting the paths tidy
for All Souls' Day."
"How you talk —priests and saints and All Souls' Day.
What is All Souls' Day?"
"It is the day after All Saints' Day," Geoffrey said
with a teasing smile; "and that is the day after Hallow
E'en. You know what Hallow E'en is, don't you, mother?
You remember the good times we used to have at Uncle
Aleck's on Hallow E'en."
"Those stupid games? Getting all wet, diving into
tubs of water trying to catch apples in your teeth. I don't
know how my sister Alice ever put up with her husband
and all his Scotch ways. She seemed to like them."
" 'Dooking for ay-pples' Uncle Aleck used to call it.
How we loved it. Oh to be a kid again!"
"But what have Uncle Aleck and tubs of water and


The soldiers are not forgotten . . . not one is overlooked.
. . . Our Richard's grave will be visited . . . some French
women and children that we do not know, will kneel and
pray for him. . . . We never pray for Richard."
apples to do with your talk of Saints and Souls? Uncle
Aleck was a Protestant —a Presbyterian of course; but
that is the next best thing to the Church of England."
Geoffrey smiled.
"Hallow E'en, like all the beautiful old customs, was
a Catholic institution. The Scots kept it, even after they
gave up the Faith and became dour and sour. On the first
day of November the Church commemorates all the
Saints "
"The Catholic Church."
"There is only one Church mother. There can be
only one. It is but reasonable. They can't all be churches.
Christ did not say: 'Thou are John Knox . . . thou art
Luther, thou art Calvin.' He said 'Thou art Peter'
and Peter's successor is the Pope of Rome."
Mrs. Wakefield sighed resignedly.
"All Hallows, of course means all saints," Geoffrey
went on, "the evening before was Hallow E'en. Folks
made merry and had innocent fun of all kinds. There was
an old legend that said the souls from Purgatory were
about during that time asking for prayers. Young girls,
who were brave enough, looked in the glass at midnight
to see the faces of their future husbands. All Saints' Day
was a holiday—everyone's feast-day. The following day
was given over to the remembrance of the dead—prayers
were said, processions to the graves, Masses offered. In
France the people all visit the graves on All Souls' Day
and deck them with flowers and pray for the Souls. They
visit neglected graves, forgotten graves, strangers' graves.


Mrs. Wakefield's eyes filled with tears; for the war
had taken Richard, her best beloved, and had made an
invalid of this, her other son; this son who was so dear,
so good . . . but yet not like Richard.
"Why should we pray for him ... he was good?
He is in heaven,'' she answered, and there was pain in
her voice, and a iealous defence of her beloved boy.
Geoffrey stroked her hand. "Yes. Yes. He was
good, as young men go. But the Catholic Church teaches
its people to pray, pray, pray, as long as life lasts, for their
dead. Who are we to say when a soul should enter
Heaven? How long to wait? What is time to the dead?
Nothing defiled can enter Heaven. Some trivial fault may
need a long purification. We cannot say days, weeks,
months, years, when we speak of that sojourn in the
cleansing flames of Purgatory. Catholics pray for the
purest among them —the little children, the nuns, the old
priests who have lived lives of sacrifice . . . they pray for
all . . . and leave the sentence to God. Is it not a sweet,
reasonable doctrine? When Richard and I were little chaps
and broke your laws, you always gave us some little punish-
ment, even though you kissed and forgave us. That was
quite right. God forgives us . . . but we must suffer some
punishment here or in Purgatory; so the Catholic Church
says: People who have led good lives, and have done
penance, borne great trials, will enter Heaven sooner than
those who, although forgiven, have done no punishment on
earth and so must do it in Purgatory. Can you see the
truth in all this? The Church also holds, that the soldiers
who bore their pain and hardship with resignation, will,
by this means, shorten their own Purgatory. But still she
prays for them, for no one knows the debt each soul owes
to God. God must pass the sentence; 'the fine,' as it were,


and the soul must pay it; but, —consoling doctrine —the
friends on earth, the saints in Heaven can help to pay the
fine for the poor soul by prayers, and Masses, and alms.
That old man cutting the grass still prays for his wife
and children; still has Masses offered for them; still sends
alms to the orphans in their names; and they are dead
years and years ago; before I was born."
"Geoffrey," his mother said uneasily, "you seem to
know a lot about the Catholic Church."
"She always interested me, even when I was a little
boy and had a Catholic mate —Tommy Doran. Then at
the war. I had Catholic mates again. But I held back.
My character was like that. Wait . . . put it off . . . later
on. Since coming home I have put the thought aside.
I suppose illness, disappointments, instead of helping me,
turned me back . . . made me weaker. But now, here in
this house, thoughts come, Catholic thoughts . . . there is
a Catholic atmosphere here. The people who lived here
during a century, have left something of their beautiful
Catholic life in this old house ... I really believe it mother.
It is here. I am steeped in it. Even the garden was
planned for the church. The Lefoys supplied the church
with flowers . .*. old great-grandfather Lefoy grew grapes
to make wine for. the altar ... he grew a little patch of
wheat and made flour for the same purpose—just as his
own father had done in France. Old great-grandmother
Eefoy made the flour into . . . altar breads . . . These old
people are with me all day . . . and at night . . .
"Geoffrey!" Mrs. Wakefield was alarmed. "You are
not . . . not nervous about it?YYoyou—you—"
"Not nervous, not mad, mother, I am in better health
(my mind I mean) since coming to live here, than I have
been since I left for the war, fifteen years ago. The souls


The old man was still at his task of tidying the paths
for the procession on All Souls' Day. The scent of the
cut grass mingled with the breath of the lilies, drenching
the air with sweetness. Geoffrey had paid visits to the
old churchyard ... he had paid visits to the church . . .
he had prayed . . .
of the saints, who were the Lefoys on earth, are evidently
praying for the people who live in the house they all loved
so well, all through a century. They should pray for us,
because I pray to them."
"Geoffrey, oh Geoffrey!" wailed his mother.
"Poor mother, the war took one of your boys and the
Catholic Church now threatens to take the other, smiled
Geoffrey. "Never mind, God will make it all up to >ou.
Some day, perhaps—well this is not the time to tell you
my hopes. Don't worry now. But think about my ghosts
—the old Lefoys. I found some of their old books in the
cupboard under the roof in the little top room. I'll give
them to you to read. Old books of piety and old diaries.
A few days later Geoffrey sat out under the big cedai
tree; a book was on his knees, but his eyes had stra\ed
away to the book of nature, open before him, at this peace-
ful scene —the gentle hills dappled with sunshine and
shadows; the comfortable, old homes scattered about, each
with its clusters of trees and wide garden; the one little
street wandering through the valley township; purple light
on distant mountains. His eyes came back, but not to his
book; they rested on the little church across the road. It
was old and small, with narrow windows; the names on
the grave stones were seen again here, on brass plates
beneath the windows.
"A hundred years ago those men and women went to
Mass there," Geoffrey said.


He closed his eyes from the glare. It was then he
heard children's voices.
"He's asleep."
Geoffrey kept his eyes closed.
"Can't he walk?"
"No. His legs were shot off at the war." Geoffrey
smiled inwardly.
"Poor man. Hasn't he a nice face?" This was the
girl's voice; the boys made answer as if jealous of the
compliment.
"He s not a Catholic. Tommy Byrne told me."
"Poor man. He can't help it."
"My father said it is a wonder the ghosts of the
Lefoys don't come and chase him out of their house. There
has never been anyone but Catholics under 'Villa Maria's'
roof, my father said."
Ooh. I hope they don't," the girl answered fearfully,
as if she half-expected the old ghosts to come, then and
there, in the sweet-smelling daylight, to banish this heretic
from under the tree planted by great-grandfather Lefoy.
It isn t his fault, she said again, championing the
stranger.
V ell whose is it ? His father's I suppose. Everyone
should be Catholic; everyone who believes in Our Lord.
Shouldn't they?"
"Yes." she agreed, and Geoffrey agreed too. "His
father s fault, certainly young man," he said mentally.
"Well I wish he had not come here."
"Why ? He looks a nice man."
Looks don t count, the boy's voice uttered wisely.
Girls always talk about looks. Men don't. What about
the lilies tor Our Lady and for the procession for the
dead. - ' If a Catholic had \ ilia Maria' we could ask for


them. That is what they were always grown for. But this
man does not pray to Our Lady I suppose; he does not
pray for the dead; he does not know anything about the
Mass and why we put lilies on the altar.
"Poor man," the sweet voice said again, and Geoffrey
was sorely tempted to open his eyes and view his little
defender.
"Poor man! Bother him, coming here! Why didn't
he go and live in some other house. No one could grow
flowers like the Lefoys, and my grandmother told me it
was always the same; when she was a little girl their
garden was the best in the whole countryside. Nice face!
He has a stern, hard old face. I bet when we ask for the
lilies he'll say 'no' like thunder."
"We'll try him. I bet he'll say 'yes.' '
"I bet he won't."
"What will you bet?
"I'll bet you all the fruit on my own peach tree —
when it's ripe."
"Oh, I wouldn't take that. We'll bet for nothing."
"Silly! You can't do that."
"Yes we can."
"Anyhow they are not his lilies. They still belong
to the Lefoys."
Geoffrey, at this juncture, opened his eyes.
"Hullo!" he said cheerfully.
The children at the gate started.
"Coming to call on me? Lift up the latch and walk
in. There's no wolf about. Red Riding Hood often comes
in and nothing happens to her."
The boy gave him a look of disdain, as if he thought
such a remark exceedingly childish.
The girl opened the gate.


"My name is Madeline," she said, "and this is Peter.
We are cousins."
"My name is Geoffrey. I cannot stand to-day. Sit
down." He indicated the rustic bench under the cedar
tree. "This is fine, two young people calling this beautiful
day."
Tommy Byrne said you don't like children," Peter
Then the truth is not in him. Because I do,
He said you chased him down out of the fir tree."
He was disturbing my little friends, the blue wrens."
"Serve him right then," Madeline said heartily. "I
am always telling him not to climb near the bird's nests.
Do you like living here?"
"It's the most beautiful place in the world. I feel like
a poet and an artist all the time."
"Oh do you?"
"Do you ever see any ghosts?" Peter asked darkly,
as if he hoped the answer would be yes; Peter wished the
Lefoy ghosts would oust this stranger from "Villa Maria."
"Often," was Geoffrey's short answer.
The children stared at him.
"Great-grandfather Lefoy was the first here. We have
a picture of him in our album. He was tall and thin and
had a big nose and a beard. Has he appeared to you yet?"
Peter demanded.
"Not yet. But I feel his presence constantly, although
I cannot see him."
"What other ghosts do you see?"
"My own."
"Aw," Peter said in a disgusted tone, as if he knew
he had been cheated. "You can't see your own ghost."
"Oh can't you? I can. I see a boy —a youth—a man.


They are my own ghosts. I see the ghosts of lost years,
lost opportunities . . . dreadful ghosts."
"How long are you going to live here?" was Peter's
next rather rude question.
'As long as ever I can."
Oh," was Peter's disappointed remark.
"Don't you like me? Am I not a suitable tenant for
Villa Maria'?"
Yes," trembled on the little girl's lips; and "no,"
on Peter's.
What's wrong with me, Peter?"
"You are not a Catholic. 'Villa Maria' is a Catholic
house. Why, my grandmother said the Bishop used to
have his dinner here in the old days when he came to visit
the Valley. And at Easter the priest used to come across
the road in his vestments and bless the whole house with
the Easter water. You should not be living in it. And the
lilies belong to Our Lady . . ."
"Aren't they Catholic lilies any more ?" Geoffrey said
teasingly. "Do they change with the tenant?"
"No. They do not," Peter said fiercely. "They are
still Our Lady's lilies; only you are robbing her of them."
"Oh Peter. Don't be so rude! Forgive him Mr.
Geoffrey. He thinks you won't give us any lilies for the
altar and for the graves on All Souls' Day. I said I was
sure you would if we asked."
"Yes. You may have as many as you please. I don't
want great-grandfather Lefoy coming to my bedside at
midnight, saying in the voice of the grave: 'Give —me—
my —lilies.' " Geoffrey had lowered his voice to a mys-
terious ghostly tone. Even Peter had to smile and the
fierce light went out of his blue eyes.
"Well now Peter, the question of the lilies is settled.


They are still Catholic lilies,, grown for Our Lad}-. But
what about me? How am I to follow the traditions of
the house of which I am now the head?"
"What do you mean?" Peter asked bluntly
"I mean just this: How am I to set about becoming
a Catholic?"
Peter leapt to his feet; his face had lost its distrusting
expression. He beamed on the heretic who was so humbly
ready to abjure.
"How? You pray. You learn the Catechism. You
tell Father Clare . . . I'll get you a Catechism."
He was gone . . . flying down the road towards his
home in the little valley.
"But," Madeline said warningly, "you can't become
a Catholic just to suit a house! That would not be a
proper motive at all. You must desire the Faith . . . you
must pray and study. The Drews joined the Church. They
have been here nearly as long as the Lefoys. They used
to be bigoted years ago. But now the whole family is in."
"I wish I were in, Madeline."
"Oh do you? Do you really?"
.o\ T u
i es.
It was Madeline's turn to jump up. "I'll run and tell
Father Clare.
She was gone, running as if there was not a moment
to lose; as if his salvation depended on Father Clare's
immediate attendance. Geoffrey leant back and laughed.
"Let her go. It is as well to bring things to a climax.
My shilly-shallying has gone on long enough. Poor mother
will have to put up with it as best she can. I iiave been
hoping and hoping. . . . But 1 should not delay any longer


Peter was back with the Catechism; and Father Clare,
with evident signs of great haste, was on his heels.
He smiled to see Geoffrey sitting there, looking so
well.
"The child was so excited. I thought you were sick,
dying . . . and had sent for me . . ."
"My soul has been sick with doubt for years ... it
has been dying through my own deliberate weakness of
decision, Father."
"Ah." Father Clare looked up at the blue sky; he
looked at the lilies.
"Here's the Catechism," said Peter. He was panting
like a little horse after a heavy pull up the hill.
Geoffrey put his hand on the well-used little book.
"I believe," he said solemnly; and then he smiled at Father
Clare and at Peter and Madeline.
"That won't do," Peter said in his direct manner.
"You must learn it. It takes some doing, 1 can tell you.
I am preparing for Confirmation and I don't know it really
well yet."
"I'll learn it, Peter. Perhaps I'll be ready for Con-
firmation with you. I think I know it all now. I have read
a good many of the Lefoy books."
"It will look funny a man being confirmed," Peter
said.
"It will look beautiful," Madeline said; and then she
added with the politeness of the Valley children: "Come
on Peter. Mr. Geoffrey wants to talk to Father Clare.
May we come another day, Mr. Geoffrey?"
"Come every day," he said heartily. "I want you and
Peter to instruct me as well as Father Clare. And re-
member. you are to take the lilies for All Souls' Day and
for Our Lady's Oratory."


"Thank you," they both said, and Madeline, smiling
radiantly on her cousin, said: "I won the bet, Peter."
"I'm glad you did," Peter had the graciousness to
reply.
On All Souls' Day after the early Mass, the procession
went along the neatly brushed paths among the old graves.
Mr. Geoffrey Wakefield walked in it . . . with the aid of
his stick and attended by two guardian angels in the form
of Madeline and Peter. The graves of all the Lefoys
were covered in white lilies . . . Geoffrey knelt near them
. .. he felt some kinship with the Defoys. He had assisted
at Mass on All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day ... he
was to be received into the Church in a few weeks.
Mrs. Wakefield visited the old graveyard during the
day; she knew that in France, some woman would kneel
at her son's grave, would place a chaplet upon it. She
sought out a most neglected-looking grave and placed her
flowers there . . . she knelt . . . she prayed for the dead . . .
"It is a beautiful doctrine," she said, "and as Geoffrey
remarked, sweet and reasonable." Lifting her eyes to the
old stones before her she read: "Pray for the dead that
they may be loosed from their sins."


Three Letters
LENNIE was writing a letter. It was an arduous
undertaking for Lennie, because he had only been
"put up into Second" just before Christmas. There was
a frown on his forehead, and his tongue made a round
bulge in his cheek when he took extra care with the capitals.
He had written the letter out roughly first, then mother
had corrected the spelling and "put the stops in" (you
don't learn stops in Second), but she had not altered the
phraseology.
Tara," Rose Bay.
Sydney, February, 19—.
Dear Grandpapa. —
I hope you are well. I am well. We are all well.
It is Candlemas Day on Wednesday, and I am taking
some wax candles for Our Lady's altar.
Our dog "Wallaby" died. And Rosa is taking wax
candles too, and a big bunch of white dahlias and white
asters. He died of old age, Mr. Smith said.
I hope you will like the medal. Put it on your watch-
chain. It is real silver, and blessed by the Pope. The
scapulars are from Rosa.
He died at six o'clock on Saturday morning, and Rosa
and I made a nice funeral for him, and put pink oleanders
on his grave.


I wish dogs could go to Heaven, even if they haven't
souls. Do you think God might make them alive at the
end of the world, and let them into Heaven? Rosa and I
are praying that He will. "Wallaby" was a very good dog.
He never hurt the chickens or the little brown sparrows
that come in our yard, and he never had fights with cats.
I hope all the good dogs and horses will go to Heaven.
Tack says they will not. He said only souls will go to
Heaven, and dogs and horses have no souls, so they cannot
go. I am sorry.
I wish evervbody in the whole world could go to
Heaven. Rosa and I pray for everyone to go to Heaven,
even that cruel man who threw stones at "Wallaby" one
day for nothing. Rosa and I would pray for all the poor
souls to get out of hell, but Sister Agnes said out of hell
there is no redemption. It is in the Catechism.
I hope I won't go to hell. I hope you won't go to
hell. I hope none of our family will go to hell.
"Wallaby" was white with nice black marks on him.
He was a foxy.
I am tired now, Grandpapa. I hope you like this long
letter. I hope you will write to me soon.
Love from all of us.
Your very loving grandson
LEXXIE.
P.S. —"Wallaby" was older than Rosa
P.P.S. —I am trying to be good like you told me. I
never told any more stories since that one about chipping
vour razors cutting my sticks. I am not going to tell
stories any more. Mother told me 1 can say stories instead
of lies, because lies is a very nasty word. —Lennie.
The letter was finished at last, folded, enveloped, and


stamped. Uncle Jack addressed it, and sent it on its way
to Grandpapa "up the country."
Joe Maher was sorting the mail. He had emptied
the mailbags, turned ' them inside out in order that no
letters might lurk in the corners, and now was slipping
the envelopes through his fingers with the rapidity of
experience.
Joe had almost everything to do in the little post-
office, and to-day there was a heavy frown on his face.
It was not caused by work, however, but by worry.
He was in want of a few pounds—just four pounds—
to pay a pressing debt. The man would not wait, he
threatened to complain to Mr. Dent. Joe's superior, and
Joe did not desire that at any cost.
Four pounds, just four pounds! It was not much,
but Joe had not the slightest idea where to get it, and he
must have it next day at eleven.
He had two bulky letters in his hands, he paused in
his work and examined them. One had something round
and hard in it—a sovereign perhaps. A senseless way to
send money, Jim reflected, but then people will do senseless
things even in this age of wisdom —yes, it certainly felt
like a sovereign. The bulky letters were both addressed in
business-like writing to a wealthy station owner.
Now, if Joe had been behaving himself as he should
have been during the past few months he would have gone
on with his work and wondered no more about the bulky
packages—he would not have listened to the temptations
that were poured into his ear. But when a boy or young
man grows careless about his duty to God. when he lets
months and months slip by without approaching the Sacra-
ments, when he has no time for prayers, and is too tired
to go to Mass on Sunday after the glorious half-holiday


of Saturday, why, then, when temptation comes he cannot
fight against it, because his weapons—prayer and the Sac-
raments —are gone.
Now Joe had been rather careless since he left home,
and he was very young. There was no mother to "wake
him up" on Sunday morning; no mother to gently remark,
"'Twill be the first Sunday of the month next Sunday,
boys, you'll be ready for confession on Saturday, of
course!" no mother to say just before bed-time, "Get your
beads now, and let us finish the day with the Rosary."
Joe was not bad, you know, he was "just careless":
he felt "too free" away from home. He came in and went
out as he pleased, there was no one to restrain him, and
gradually he gave up the home customs.
He felt those letters again and again, and then —he
was alone in the office —slipped them into his pocket.
That night, locked in his bedroom, Joe opened the
letters in such a way that they could be closed again after
he had extracted anything worth having. His conscience
had troubled him all through the long day. Several times
he had put his hand in his pocket to take the letters out
and send them to their rightful owner unopened, but each
time the hand came out empty. He had been honest as
the sun all the eighteen months he had worked in the little
post-office. Two letters would not matter much, he told
himself, and he would never, never tamper with another —
after these two.
By the afternoon mail he had received a home letter,
but had not read it yet, he was too ashamed to even look
at his mother's writing on the envelope.
The three letters were on the table before him. He
pushed his mother's away out of sight, took up the other
two, and opened the heavier one.


A few sheets of type-written matter —and yes, three
postal notes for a pound each, open notes too, Fate
favoured him!
With trembling fingers he put the notes aside and
took up the other letter —the letter with the round, hard
something in it.
He drew out neatly folded sheets, opened them, and
found —a shining miraculous medal and a pair of scapulars.
He dropped them instantly, and the red flush deepened
on his face and neck. The little shining medal glittered
under the gas-light and seemed accusing him. He caught
sight of his reflection in the mirror above the table, and
to his troubled brain there seemed another face reflected
there; a dark, ugly face, that peered over his shoulder and
smiled maliciously. He picked up the letter again, care-
fully contriving not to touch the medal or scapulars. It
was a child's letter, and Joe read it. He might as well
read it, he thought.
It was Lennie's carefully written epistle to his Grand-
papa, and Joe, despite his trouble, smiled at the child's
mixed phrases, and felt sorry for his longing after
"Wallaby."
"Poor little chap!" he murmured.
Then he thought of himself, and gazed again at the
medal.
Candlemas Day on Wednesday! Candlemas Day was
his father's "anniversary" and his own First Communion
Day. He had "been prepared" by himself, because he was
ill when the other children at school had received their
first Holy Communion. His father was dead ten years,
and each Feast of Candlemas his mother had a Mass
said for the repose of his soul, besides several times during
the year. She was very faithful to her dead, his mother,


she never forgot them. To-morrow his mother and
brothers and sisters would go to Mass and approach the
altar rails.
"If they could see me now!" he said aloud. "It —-it
would break mother's heart. She never took a half-penny
belonging to anyone. Neither did I. I haven't done it yet,
and I'm not going to. Graham can wait for the money,
and tell the boss, too, if he likes."
He opened his mother's letter. It was full of love
for him, pride in him, hope in his future. There was a
little reminder of his father's anniversary on Candlemas
Da)', and a motherly worded hope that Joe would be a
"good, honest, pious man like his father."
All the prayers his mother had sent to Heaven for
him, all the long, long nights he had been away from the
"roof-tree," had descended in a sweet flood over his soul
in those last few minutes.
His mother's prayers! How many men owe their
resistance to temptation to a mother's prayers, how many
men owe their salvation to a mother's years of prayers
and mortifications!
He replaced the postal notes in the first envelope,
touched his lips to the medal blessed by the Pope, and then
put it and the scapulars back in the second one.
The light shone from Joe's window very late that
night, and next morning before Mass the house-keeper at
the Presbytery told a young man with a tired-looking face,
but peaceful eyes, that Father Malone would be with him
in three minutes:
Lennie's Grandpapa, the wealthy station owner, won-
dered why two of his Sydney letters were a day late, but
he was not a very observant old gentleman, and therefore
did not notice the suspicious look of the envelope flaps.


"Dom's Chocolates"
SISTER MARY PHILOMENA had given her little
class an instruction on Lent and mortification. Sister
had a wonderful way of telling things—they went straight
to baby hearts, and remained in little active baby-minds
for oh, such a long, long time. When Sister told stories,
the children could almost see the people she talked about,
and sometimes, too, she showed real pictures and passed
them round for each little one to "hold" and admire "by
himself."
And it was Lent time. All the Church was doing
penance —cardinals, bishops, priests, everybody —and the
little boys and girls in Sister's class were to make little
"Acts," too.
Even the simplest things would count —to deny one's
self a glass of water, to go without lollies, to eat porridge,
and other wholesome, nasty things one did not like —all
these would be acts of mortification in keeping with the
Lenten Season.
Dom Donnelly was six years old and had been at
school only three months; he went home after Sister's
instruction fired with a desire for sack-cloth and ashes to
wear, and wild honey to eat. He sat down to dinner, and
thought the meal far too sumptuous. He manfully drank
his soup —Dom detested soup—and saw with a sigh that
pumpkin was amongst the vegetables. Dom "hated"


pumpkin, but it was Lent, so that he ate all Mother put
on his plate, and had serious thoughts of asking for more.
He refused pudding and asked for bread and butter. Now,
did you ever hear of a more heroic little boy? Fancy
refusing date-pudding, with delicious sauce, and asking
for plain bread and butter. When Mother passed him the
grapes, he took a tiny little bunch, instead of the big,
heavy one on the top of the pile.
His sister Eileen looked sharply at him once or twice,
for Dom was unusually quiet, and then he had refused
date pudding. She concluded that Sister Mary Philomena
had scolded him, or that he had the tooth-ache.
The next day, Aunt Nora called to see her nieces
and nephews, and of course she brought a quantity of sweet
things for the small people. Dom was her special pet, so
he was given a big box of chocolates (that Eileen longed
for), as well as his share of the other dainties. Those
chocolates worried Dom, because every time he opened the
box and looked at them their silver papers glistened tempt-
ingly, and still something said: "Don't eat them, Dom,
it is Lent."
What a chance for a "big act"! But then what could
he do with them, his brothers and sisters would ask em-
barrassing questions, and "Sister" said acts were spoiled
if we tell about them.
For a whole day Dom kept the chocolates, then he gave
everyone a liberal helping, and took the box away to his
private corner of the attic, where he kept his treasures.
"Greedy little thing," remarked Eileen, "he is keeping
all those for himself."
"He is not greedy," returned Claire, "he gave us all
some, and Mother and Father, too. Why he gave Martha
a great big handful."


"But he has half a box left."
"Well, they are his —Auntie gave them to him. and I
did not see him eat one yet."
Dom emptied all the sweets out of the box —Eileen
wanted the box to keep ribbons in, and wrapped them in a
brown paper. Then he asked his mother if he could go
out as far as Cook Street. Mother said yes, because she
saw something in Dom's eyes, something that only a
mother would notice. When he came back he seemed very
happy, and played about with even more than his usual
noise and laughter.
That night Dom presented Eileen with the chocolate
box for her ribbons.
"Where are all the chocolates?" she asked sharply.
"Gone," he answered, and his face grew red and
ashamed looking.
"Oh, you greedy boy, I'll just tell Mother."
"Don't tell Mother, Eileen."
"Yes, I will —you'll be sick."
"I didn't eat them —I—"
"Oh, Dom, what a fib! They are all gone—you must
have eaten them. Mother, here's this greedy little Dom
telling stories."
Dom fled away to the bedroom he shared with Jack,
and there Mother found him.
' "Well, Dom, Eileen has been telling me dreadful
things of you."
Dom's lip trembled, until his sharp little teeth grasped
it and kept it steady.
"Did you eat all those chocolates, Dom?"
"No, Mother."
"Where are they?"
"Please, Mother, I'd rather not tell you."


Mother asked no more questions, but took him on her
lap and talked of many things, but never a word about
chocolates. When she said "good-night," Dom whispered,
"Eileen does not believe me, she said I told a story. You
believe me, don't you. Mother ?
"Yes. my little son. If you tell me you did not eat
them, I know you did not. Dom never tells stories."
He gave a sigh of relief, and was fast asleep ten
minutes afterwards. He had a disquieting dream; he
thought he stood in the centre of a large room, filled with
men and women, boys and girls, and they were all pointing
their fingers at him and saying, "Oh. you greedy boy—you
ate all those chocolates." He was trying to tell them he
did not, but could not properly explain, for that would take
all the merit out of his act. He woke up screaming out,
"I never did —I never did eat all those chocolates."
Poor Dom had many a bitter moment for some weeks
afterwards. When his brothers wanted to tease him they
just whispered "Chocolates," and Eileen would cry out,
tantalisingly, "Chocolates, chocolates! Who ate the choco-
lates ?"
Of course Mother did not hear them, and Dom would
not tell her.
One day a ragged boy came up the garden path and
rang Mrs. Donnelly's shining bell. In his arms he carried
a little fat puppy, with a faded pink ribbon round its neck.
Mrs. Donnelly, herself, came to the door.
"Please, lady, this puppy is for the little boy who gave
my brother the chocolates."
"What little boy?"
"The hoy that lives here, the little one with the pretty
eyes —I think yer call him Dom."
"When did he give you chocolates.""


"Oh. about a month ago. He brought them to my
little brother. He can't walk much, you know, and your
little boy always stops to speak to him when he passes, and
he brings him things. The chocolates were great. We
live in Cook Street."
"And whose puppy is this?"
"That's my brother's, he has two; the man next door
grave them to him, and he wants Dom to have one. You'll
let him keep it, won't you, Lady? My brother would be so
glad if he keeps it."
"Yes, of course, he may keep it," smiled Mrs. Don-
nelly, and she took the little puppy from his hands, and
the boy went off whistling merrily.
When Mother told the story, the boys laughed and
said, "We'll call the puppy 'Chocolates,' " and Eileen hung
her head and looked very, very much ashamed of herself.
"Well," said Mrs. Donnelly, "I am very proud of little
Dom, and I hope his brothers and sisters are also practising
acts of mortification, and Eileen, dear, be slow to judge
for the future."


Michael's Birthday
MICHAEL was disappointed very disappointed.
Mother had promised to take him to town —in a
new tram —on his birthday. But when they returned from
Mass, she had complained of a headache and told poor
Michael that she could not possibly go out that day. Michael
was sorry for mother, and tried, bravely, to hide his dis-
appointment from her.
"Never mind, son, we'll go some other day," mother
said, but she knew how far off seems "some other day"
to a disappointed child of seven; and she was very sorry
for him.
"You may have the holiday from school all the same,
and we'll ask Denis and Terry to come iti to tea this
evening."
"Oh, but that might worry you and make your head
worse,"
"I hope it will be better by that time. What a shame
to disappoint you on your birthday! But never mind,
Michael, you understand we must be prepared for these
little disappointments —they are our little crosses."
"Yes, mother," Michael said in a dull voice of resigna-
tion, "I know."
"I'm glad I was able to go to Mass this morning. I
had a headache when I woke, but, thank God, I was able
to go to Mass before it came on so badly."


Michael brightened.
"Wasn't it beautiful —when the candles were lit at
the Gospel? It's a beautiful day for a birthday."
Mother lay down on the couch, after taking her
powders, and Michael put a light rug over her; then he
drew the blinds and shut out the brilliant light, and tip-toed
from the room.
He spent some time with his birthday gifts on the
verandah. He had some fascinating puzzles in glass-faced
boxes —putting rings on the rabbit's ears, the cat's tail,
the elephant's trunk; he had a beautiful book about animals
and a new cricket set —but there was no one to play with.
The blue sky called him out to the garden; it was a
day to be out. Mother had planned and promised the trip
to the city. They had planned to go in one of the new
trams even if they had to wait a long time for one. They
were to cross the Harbour bridge in a tram or a train,
then they would make a little visit to St. Patrick's; lunch
in the gardens and a play there for an hour or so; into
St. Mary's on the way back to the tram. In St. Mary's
they would look at the window that told, in coloured glass,
the story of the feast of the day—the Purification.
Michael climbed the gate-post and surveyed the long,
quiet street. The sunshine danced for joy, because it was
the Feast of Light. Light everywhere . . . like the grace
of God pouring down upon the world.
"It is a beautiful day," sighed Michael, as if he thought
it was being sadly wasted.
Old Mr. Malone, from the big house up the street,
was coming along. Michael was glad to see him, although
Mr. Malone was much nearer to seventy than to seven.
"Good morning, Mr. Malone."
"Good morning, Michael. No school to-day?"


"It's my birthday."
"And you are celebrating it, sitting up like a little St
Simon on a post doing" penance ?"
I was going to town
But—?"
Mother has a headache."
Too bad! And you are disappointed?"
A bit."
"You take it well, Michael. Just as well for you, my
boy. . . . But still, if you would like to come to town with
me —if your mother would trust you to me for the day—
I'll be very pleased to take you."
"Oh, Mr. Malone!" cried Michael, and the light in
his eyes danced like the light in the street. But then his
face clouded. "I would not like to leave mother."
"Is there no one in the house with her- 5 "
"Oh yes —Airs. Ward always comes to help mother on
Thursdays."
"See what your mother thinks about it. If you are
coming, run up to the house in about half-an-hour —about
eleven o'clock."
By the time he reached his own gate, Mr. Malone had
repented somewhat of his generous invitation. What could
have prompted him to offer it? A boy of seven for the
whole day! Perhaps Michael's angel and Mr. Malone's
angel exchanged smiles.
Mother was very pleased for Michael's sake. Despite
her throbbing head, she got up and directed Michael's
dressing.
"Isn't he a kind old man ?" she said.
"Yes." agreed Michael with a thankful sigh. "I did
not think he would bother much about little boys."
"You see, Michael, we never know how kind people


are, until some opportunity conies for them to show their
kindness."
Michael, as frech as a rose, with the light dancing in
his blue eyes, confided mother to Mrs. Ward's care and
went off, singing into the sunshine.
"O Sanctissima! O Purissima!" sang Michael at the
top of his voice as he ran up the street to Mr. Malone's.
The quiet air caught up his song and carried it up into
the blue, and the angels conducted it higher yet—right to
Our Lady's throne in Heaven and perhaps she smiled to
hear Michael's high, thin child's voice praising her.
Mother said, "Thank you very much, Mr. Malone
it is very good of you to take a little boy to town on his
birthday."
Now Mr. Malone had been thinking that it was very
good of him to burden himself with a little boy; but now.
when he heard Michael's words and looked into Michael's
blue, dancing eyes, he suddenly realized that it was very
good of Michael to be so pleased to go with him!
"Are we going in one of the new green trams. - ' I
haven't had a ride in one yet?"
"To be sure we are Mr. Malone said heartily, al-
though he had not thought of it before. To please Michael,
he was prepared to stand and wait patiently. It was only
fitting that Michael should ride in a new car on his birth-
day.
The church was at the corner, opposite the tram-stop.
Michael's little feet in their new, shining shoes did not
pause . . . but went straight on through the church-gate,
up the path to the door. His old friend followed.
No doubt the two guardian angels exchanged smiles
behind their wings as they went in, too.
After praying with great recollection before the high


altar a moment or two, Michael turned and whispered:
"Come and see Our Lady. The flowers are lovely around
her to-day. The candles looked so nice 1 over the Church
this morning at the Gospel . . . It's nice u have my birthday
on Candlemas Day."
Mr. Malone frowned and pressed his lips together.
He had not given a thought to Candlemas Day. He
knelt, heavily ... he was getting very stiff, very old . . . his
time was running out. He felt ashamed. He had not sent a
gift—not a flower, not a candle. He had not sent those
other gifts she loves —the Mass heard in her honour, Holy
Communion received . . . He used to keep her feast-days so,
in years gone by. How rarely now he remembered them.
Out in the hot, quiet street, thy waited patiently for a
"new" tram, Michael entertaining his thoughtful com-
panion with much chatter. Mr. Malone seemed to have
something on his mind, thought Michael.
"Here it is! What a beauty!"
Michael danced into the car and, as there were few
passengers at that stage of the journey, he was able to
try several seats before finally selecting one.
"Get near the window," Mr. Malone said. "Boys
like to be near windows."
Michael watched for friends and waved with goodwill
when he saw one —there was the butcher standing near
his door . . . there was Tommy Bright, the telegraph boy
there was Mrs. Graham wheeling her baby in the pram
there was Mr. Winn's dog
He swept off his hat when he saw two Sisters going
into the hospital. "They are going to see Jimmy Ryan,
I suppose. Poor Jimmy."
Michael talked all the way to town and Mr. Malone
was in rather a bewildered state when they stepped off in


the city. They looked in the shops, and Mr. Malone
bought Michael a very nice boat. They had ice-cream
and fruit salad and strawberries and cream—at suitable
intervals.
"And now for Wynyard and the Bridge."
Michael could cheerfully have spent the whole day
crossing and re-crossing; but time pressed.
"And now," he said, as they emerged from the under-
ground, "Where is St. Patrick's?"
His old companion groaned: " More churches."
"It's somewhere here. Mother always visits St.
Patrick's when she comes to town. I have been with her
sometimes. There is Exposition of the Blessed Sacra-
ment all day. Will you please take me to St. Patrick's
for a few minutes, Mr. Malone?"
Mr. Malone took him.
He was surprised to find the old church crowded; he
and his little charge had some difficulty in finding a place.
Benediction! He remembered there was benediction
each day during luncheon hour. He had never been present
at it. People came to benediction. He had never come.
He knelt and bowed his head in shame.
The priest came out on the sanctuary. The "Tantum
Ergo" began. Everyone seemed to sing.
Mr. Malone looked at the altar, gleaming with lights,
but there seemed to be a mist about them. Perhaps the
mist was in his eyes. He joined timidly in the singing . . .
The hymn ceased; all was hushed and still. The bell
rang.
Mr. Malone bowed his head; he struck his breast
humbly . . .
After benediction the people sang, "O Sanctissima'


O Purissima!" Michael's face was radiant, as, for the
second time that day. he sang his favourite hymn.
The people who had work to do hurried out of the
church : others still knelt absorbed in prayer.
Mr. Malone seemed in no hurry to leave the church.
He looked down at Michael and whispered: "Michael . . .
would it be too long to keep you waiting, if I —if I went
to confession ?"
"Oh no." Michael cheerfully whispered back. "I
always wait ages in St. Patrick's for Mother when she
comes."
With this whisper and an angelic smile, Michael dis-
pelled all Mr. Malone's fears. He stepped over and joined
the throng that pressed about the confessional.
Outside, afterwards, the years seemed to have slipped
from Mr. Malone; he seemed a much happier companion;
that something-on-his-mind air was gone from him.
"Lunch now, Michael. You must be starving. It's
long after two o'clock."
After lunch they went to the Gardens and passed a
few pleasant hours amongst the flowers; and they walked
three times (backwards) around the "Wishing Tree."
They looked at the tortoise and the emu and the birds.
"We can call in at St. Mary's," Michael said. "I
want to see Our Lady's window."
"More churches!" said Mr. Malone, but he did not
groan this time. They had afternoon tea in the kiosk and
then went through the Domain to St. Mary's.
They prayed before the Blessed Sacrament, went to
find the window that told, in coloured glass, the story of
the feast of the day—the Purification of Our Lady, the
Presentation of the Child Jesus in the Temple.
"Mother said it was near the Soldier."


They found the young soldier —the soldier that would
be young for ever —as he lay so life-like with the puzzled
frown on his thin, young face, and his young boyish hands
folded on his breast
He had died . . . far away ... a sacrifice for country.
"Come away .. .' Mr. Malone said. I can t bear to
look at him."
Rut Michael could. War meant nothing to him. He
liked to look at this wonderful thing—a man in stone, an
image of a dead man that was so life-like one thought of
life and not of death.
He was not dead . . . reasoned little Michael. He
was in Heaven now . . . and in the army of the great
St. Michael, his own patron.
Michael looked at his heavy army boots, so faithfully
reproduced in bronze. What a clever man had made them.
He was dead now. "Everything dies . . . everything
except souls," meditated Michael.
There was the window . . . Our Ladv was ascending
the steps ... St. Joseph was following her . . . the doves
in a cage. A girl knelt holding a long candle. At the
top of the steps the old priest stood, holding in his arms
the Light of the World. The lamps of the Temple hung
down . . . their light was His. At the foot of the steps
Anna stood, as if she had hurried to see the Child . . .
through the windows one could see the buildings of Jeru-
salem . . . and close by wise men bent over their books
(as they do to-day), not knowing that they had but to
lift their eyes to see Him, the Giver of all Wisdom . . .
They made their way across the park to the city.
Tired, but very happy, they reached home at dusk.
"Oh, thank you, Mr. Malone. it has been a beautiful
day."


"It has been a beautiful day for me, too, Michael.
I must thank you for it."
Michael laughed merrily at such an idea! No doubt
the two guardian angels smiled at one another.


Pat, the Altar Boy
HALF-PAST six!
Just as the clock struck the half-hour each morn-
ing Pat was awake, and a second later was out of bed —
no having "just five minutes more" for Pat; he knew what
that meant —a deep sleep for half-an-hour or more. "No!
when you wake, the best thing is to kid you like it, and
jump out!" was some of Pat's sound philosophy. Pat was
an altar boy, and Mass was at seven o'clock, and therefore
six-thirty was his hour for rising. Hot weather, cold
weather, rainy weather, any kind of weather found Pat
and'the clock both saluting 6.30. Pat could have "slept in"
three weeks in even* four, because "his week on the altar"
came only once in each month; but Pat liked to serve Mass
every day. He wasn't "a saint," but he felt "mean" if
he failed to go to Mass.
As an altar boy, Pat was punctual, careful, quiet,
orderly; as an ordinary specimen of Australian youth, he
was as careless, noisy and regardless of time and order as
any other Australian lad.
"Soon."
"To-morrow "
"Plenty of time
"After."
"Tust a minute."
"Wait a while."


These were all maxims in his book wherever or when-
ever school, home or social duties had to be performed; but
regarding Mass and the Sacraments. Pat was like a little
monk.
During his two-and-a-half years' service as an altar
boy, Pat had acquired a great zeal for the welfare of the
dying. Father Darran took Pat with him on sick calls,
for Pat knew the district better than any man or boy in
the parish; he knew all the "short-cuts." The boy had
learned the value of time, the precious moments of time,
that mean so much to the dying sinner. Five minutes! —
why one minute is so much when eternity draws nigh.
Pat knew how Father Darran had to break all speed laws
when called suddenly to the scene of a dreadful accident;
he knew how Father Darran (when his car broke down
and no help was in sight) had run all the way up Black Hill
to be in time to hear a dying man's confession —a man
who had refused over and over again, during his illness,
to see the priest. Pat, boy as he was, learned that a priest
will do anything, face anything, fear nothing if a dying
soul summons him. Pat liked to go "on" the sick calls, he
liked to think he was helping. To the other boys the
news that someone was ill meant very little, but to Pat
it meant: "I wonder is he very sick and if anyone will
send for the priest?" Pat felt a responsibility for the
souls of the dying; he dreaded that any soul in the parish
should die without a chance (as he put it!) to make peace
with God. He told Father Darran when he heard of any
illness in the parish.
"Father."
"Yes, Pat."
"Old Mr. Murphy is pretty sick."
"Who is he, Pat?'


"He does gardens, and he has a room at Mrs.
White's; Tommy White told me he is sick. The Whites
aren't Cathoics "
"We'll go round after Mass, Pat.'
Old Mr. Murphy, sick and lonely, was cheered by
the priest's visit, and later strengthened for the last jour-
ney by the Heavenly Food of Viaticum.
"Father."
"Yes, Pat."
"Jimmy Doolan said his grandmother is sick. I asked
him what about getting the priest, and he said his mother
said it would frighten his Granny and make her think
she was going to die, but "
Pat paused.
"Not a bit of it," Father Darran said heartily. "That
is a foolish notion many people have. If a man is not
in danger of death a priest's visit will not hasten his end
—rather it will help him to health. And if a man is in
danger of death it is a foolish, cruel —nay a wicked thing
not to tell him so and help him to prepare for death be-
iore it is too late. Anyhow, Mrs. Doolan is not afraid
of death. A priest is no fearsome sight to her or her
people before her. She is one of our old-fashioned saints
that are leaving us one by one. I'm glad you told me she
is sick. We'll call and see her after Mass. You run
along as soon as Mass is over, and tell young Mrs. Doolan
that I am coming."
So Pat went on with his wonderful mission of love
and zeal for the dying. Sometimes he dreamt he was
"going on a sick call" with Father Darran and thev had
all kinds of difficulties to meet —high mountains, floods,
wild beasts, fires. . . . Pat would often wake up, his
forehead cold and clammy crying: "Too late. Father."


How thankful he was to find it only a dream; how fer-
vently he made the Sign of the Cross and whispered a
prayer for the dying.
Yes, young Pat, healthy, noisy boy that he was, could
be as staid and thoughtful as a man when he heard any-
one was dying. How he loved sitting beside Father Dar-
ran, knowing that he was accompanying Our Lord to the
sick and dying. "Lord, he whom Thou lovest is sick,'
Father Darran would whisper as they stepped into the
car, and somehow it made Pat realise the nearness of Our
Lord, and as they sped on he found it very easy to pray.
It was Saturday.
Pat and several of his friends were returning vic-
torious from a football match. Pat's face was swollen
and scratched, and he limped painfully. He was a hero.
Only for his honest nature he would have limped more.
Boys will understand why—football wounds raise one
above ordinary mortals. But Pat was intensely honest and
frank, and limped only as much as was necessary. His
mother would not like the look of his face he knew, and
she would lament over his swollen knee —Mrs. O'Brien,
like most Australian mothers, hated football, but knew
it would be asking too much to expect her healthy, strong-
limbed son to forego the game. The boys crowded and
elbowed to walk next to Pat; they won the game all over
again; showed each other how they had brought down
the enemy, and talked together happily and cared little
if no one listened.
As they passed through a long, narrow street of a
poor quarter of the town Pat's alert eyes noticed Doctor
Fair's car outside a door. Pat the footballer at once be-
came submerged in Pat the altar boy.


At the corner he left his mates with an abrupt ex-
planation.
"Got to go back."
"Forget something?"
"No—but someone else might," was his cryptic reply.
"Ta-ta."
"Coming to the pictures to-night, Pat, its a goodie:
'The Red Trail through Deadman's Gulch'?"
"Might," Pat called back.
"We"ll whistle outside your place."
"Righto."
Pat was gone. He hurried as fast as his hurt knee
would permit—the doctor's car was not in sight. In a
few moments Pat had learned there was a sick man in
the back room of the house (the woman of the place was
glad to talk about it) —he had been ill a few days and the
doctor had just been —the man was too ill to be taken to
the hospital—he would probably die during the night—she
did not know his name, just "Joe." He had taken a room
from her some months before and paid while he could.
"Poor chap. He was a nice fellow —quiet, hard-
working."
"Was he a Catholic?"
The woman did not know; she was not a Catholic
herself and knew nothing about them. "He didn't go to
church I know."
"Were there any pictures or rosary beads in his room?"
She did not think so, but Pat could look if he liked;
she did not mind, and neither would poor old Joe, she
supposed; she thought it "real good" of this boy to take
such an interest in a stranger.
Pat went up quickly into the poor, dark room. He
did not seem the same boy that had made such fierce on-


slaughts on his football enemies a little while before.
There were no pictures, no beads, nothing to help him.
The man lay with his eyes closed. Pat put his own
rosary beads over the man's fingers. He bent and said
loudly in the man's ear, "Oh my God lam very sorry.
My Jesus, mercy." He repeated these words slowly,
clearly, loudly several times and then the eyelids lifted,
and the man's eyes stared into his. .. . Pat held up the
little crucifix of his rosary ... he held it towards the
man's lips. Some slight movement of the pale lips made
Pat's heart leap. He put the crucifix against the lips .. .
The lips moved feebly.
"Are you a Catholic? Shall I bring the priest?"
Pat felt sure the eyes said "Yes," and leaving his
beads about the hands, the little crucifix fixed in the
fingers, Pat sped away. His hurt knee was forgotten; he
sprinted down the street, until a policeman, suspicious of
his speed, called a halt.
"Oh, hang it all!" cried Pat. "I'm only heading for
a telephone box. There's a man dying and I want to call
the priest." Then his face brightened. "You call him
for me, will you please? They'll take notice if a policeman
calls. Come on. He's pretty low, I think."
The policeman obligingly sprinted with him to the
corner box and when he said the magic words: "a con-
stable of police speaking," you may be sure the message
got through in quick time. "Automatic, nothing like it,"
Pat reckoned.
Pat went back to the house and knelt beside the bed
praying in a loud, clear voice until Father Darran arrived.
Through the mercy of God a last flash of strength gave
the dying man speech and reason and he made his peace
with God and received the Last Sacraments. He was


even able to smile at Pat and say: "God bless you, my boy."
And Pat, big strong Pat, who never cried and who
could stand any pain on the football field, buried his face
in his hands and sobbed —for joy or sorrow, he did not
know which.
Pat did not go to the pictures that night .... his
mates whistled in vain . . . for Pat and his mother were
kneeling by the bedside of the dying man. The poor
people of the house came in and knelt too, while Pat said
the rosary and recited the Prayers for the Dying. . . .
The next morning Father Darran offered Mass for
the man's soul and Pat offered his Communion. . . .
After Mass, Father Darran said: "Well, Pat, my
boy, that was a grand day's work you did yesterday. That
poor fellow had not been to confession for years. The
old devil had almost driven him to despair. . . . How
did you know he was sick—that he was a Catholic?"
Pat told him. Father Darran gave Pat's dark head
a friendly rub.
"How's your knee?" was all he said, because his eyes
were moist.
"It's all right, Father," said Pat. They were both
Australians.


Garry's Candles
GARRY was riding up and down the path on the
Flivver Santa Claus had brought him. It was not
quite so spick and span and red as it had been on Christ-
mas morning; still, considering the time and the boy, it
looked very well. Garry could "hit up" some good records
on his little Flivver. Uncle Bob said he thought Garry
would be a Speedway champion some day. But Garry
had a far better future planned —he meant to be a priest.
Every morning he rode to Mass on the Flivver; he left
it in the church yard beside Father O'Dowd's motor bike,
and it looked so little and funny beside the big machine
—just like a tiny, three-legged spider near a big dragon.
As Garry went into the church porch, he would look back_
admiringly over his shoulder at it. The sacristan was in
daily dread that someone would "step in and walk off
with it." He hinted as much to Garry, begging him to
put his "trike" inside the porch. But the child was so
scandalized at the idea of the sacristan's thinking anyone
would steal from the church yard, that the old man had
to try and correct the impression.
"The weather, you know —the sun isn't too good for
it; and then on rainy mornings "
"Father O'Dowd doesn't take his bike into the porch,"
Garry said stoutly. Anything and everything Father
O'Dowd did was the correct thing in Garry's eyes.


To-day, Garry rode round and round the garden
paths; he had promised mother not to go outside the gate.
Garry pretended many things —he was riding right round
Australia, and had ridden into a blacks' camp, and now the
wild blacks were after him! How he worked on his little
machine round the side of the house, and out again
through the little rose arch beyond the kitchen. When wild
blacks are after you, you have to fly! There are some
wild blacks left in Australia, you know; Uncle Bob said
so. Garry intended converting them all when he was a
priest.
Then when this game was played out, Garry thought
of others. He rode recklessly to the relief of the sick,
the drowning; he brought aid to people in floods and burn-
ing houses, to poor lost travellers in the bush. Then
tired out at last, he flung himself on the grass, to rest
after his exertion.
The bees buzzing in the honeysuckle, made him re-
member. Bees make honey and wax. Wax is made into
candles. Garry sat up. '"To-morrow is Candlemas Day.
Sister told us about it. I forgot to remind mother to get
candles," he said aloud.
"It's the day Our Lady took the Holy Child into the
Temple, and St. Joseph carried the little doves in the cage.
And the very old priest took the Holy Child in his arms
and sang a hymn about Him. The priest had wanted and
wanted to see the little Saviour, and when he did see Him,
he was ready to die then; and the priest told Our Lady
about all the sorrows that would come to her. It's a
beautiful day and we should take candles to the church
to-morrow."
Now Garry had promised mother that he would not
go out of the gate —mother was away visiting Aunt Bessie,


who was ill—and he had meant to keep his promise. Rut
circumstances alter cases. He must get candles for the
morrow. He must buy his own special candles for Our
Lady.
"I'm sure mother didn't get any; we never use them
since we have 'lectric light everywhere in the house.
Father will not remember to get them either, I suppose,
and mother is so worried about Aunt Bessie she won't
think about the candles in time. I'll have to get some."
Garry ran inside and shook and rattled and rolled
his money-box until some pennies and a few three-penny
pieces fell out. "I'll buy a packet if I have enough money.
1 wonder how much they are. Wax are the very best
kind. I'll get wax ones, and if mother and father have
none. I'll share with them." Garry opened the garden
srate. and steered his tricvcle into the road. He felt sure
o ~ *
he was doing the right thing; he felt that mother would
be pleased with him. His spirit rose as he mounted and
set off; it was exciting to be riding to town on important-
business. He had never ridden to the town before; his
way to Mass was down a quiet street away from the busy
centre. He felt like a knight of old going forth to slay
dragons in the name of Our Lady.
At the first busy crossing a policeman, hiding a smile,
solemnly held up the traffic while Garry crossed; drivers
of motors and carts glared (or smiled), at the little
traveller. Some called out pleasantly: "Step on it, son!"
"Shake it up, old chap." "Get off and push it, Gold
Helmet!"
Garry smiled and waved his hand to the big police-
man. But where zvas a candle shop.' He left the road
and followed the side-path. There were no candle shops:
Garry could not remember ever having been in one. What
a pity he had not asked the nice, big policeman; but there


had not been much time tor conversation, everyone was in
such a hurry to cross. He determined to seek directions
from the first boy he met.
"Hi, son" (the boy was twice as old as Garry!),
would you please tell me where the nearest candle-shop
isr
"The what-shop?"
"Candle-shop. Where they sell candles.
"Oh —a grocer's, of course."
I didn't think of that. I've been looking all along
for a candle-shop!" He laughed so heartily that the boy
who was evidently in a hurry (he had a number of letters
in his hand), found time to stop and laugh too.
"I want to buy candles for to-morrow. It's Candle-
mas Day."
The boy looked pleased. "Well, I'm glad I met you.
I had forgotten about to-morrow, although I heard it
announced at Mass on Sunday. I must get up for Mass
to-morrow, and I must buy a candle, too. I'm boarding
with people who are not Catholics. I wouldn't have
thought a word about it only for you. I must run now
to catch the mail. Good-bye."
"That's a very nice boy," said Garry. I'm glad I
reminded him about the candles."
He next accosted a gentleman. "Please, would you
tell me where I can find a grocer's shop?"
"Why, you are just beside one."
Garry had expected to see a window filled with tins
of jam and bars of soap, and a doorstep adorned with
clumps of brooms like so many strange trees. The little
shop near Grandma's was like that. Put this shop was
like a Prince's palace.
"Can I get candles in there?"


"You can get anything, anything in that shop,' smiled
the gentleman.
"I don't want anything else—only candles," smiled
Garry, "to-morrow is Candlemas Day."
"Well, well, I am glad I met you," said the gentle-
man. "I had forgotten, although I heard it announced on
Sunday. / must buy some candles. I've never missed a
year, thank God. Well, well, my angel must have sent me
along this way for you to remind me!"
"That's a nice gentleman," thought Garry. "I'm glad
I met him, and reminded him about the candles for to-
morrow."
But alas, when Garry went to the counter to buy a
pound of wax candles (and the shopman had them "tied
up and all!") —his money was not sufficient to pay for
them! The shopman looked rather angry when Garry
showed his money, and the parcel had to be opened again.
"That's all I have, and I want to buy candles for
to-morrow. It's Our Lady's Day,"" announced Garry.
A soft voice at his side said: "Oh, so it is. How
could I have forgotten?"
Garry looked up and beheld a very pretty young lady;
the shopman looked more pleasant, but whether it was
Garry's smile or the young lady's that worked the change
I do not really know.
"You can have only one wax candle for that money,'
explained the man, "but you can buy a packet of cheap
candles —like this."
"I'd love a wax one —but then I'd have none to give
mother and father if they forget to buy any. Most people
seem to forget, don't they.'"
The lady smiled again, and said, "We do." She
offered to buy the wax candles for him, but Garry ex-
plained that would not do; he must buy the candles with


his very own money, or they would not be his gift. He
decided to have the cheap packet. "But I'll have wax
ones next year. I'll save up in time."
"Good-bye, dear," said the pretty young lady. "I am
so glad I met you."
"That's a nice lady," said Garry to himself. "I'm glad
I reminded her to buy candles for Our Dady."
Garry reached home just before mother came in from
Aunt Bessie's. Mother looked happy, because Aunt
Bessie was so much better.
"Mother, to-morrow is Candlemas Day
"Oh," mother said sorrowfully, "there isn't a candle
in the house. Is it six o'clock yet? I wonder will father
think to bring any."
Garry triumphantly produced his packet, and told of
his adventures. He was so sure he had done right, so
sure mother would be delighted, that all she could do was
thankfully accept her share of the candles and warn
Garry never, never again to go to the town alone.
When father came in, mother and Garry (who had
made it up between them) called out: "Did you bring
any candles for to-morrow T , father?"
"Well, look at that! clean forgot them!" said father
sadly. I meant to send young Davie out at lunch time to
buy a couple of wax ones. Isn't there any kind in the
house? I've never missed taking a candle to the church
on Candlemas Day since I was the size of Garry. My
memory has played me false this time. I wonder could
I get any, although it's 'after hours.' "
Garry triumphantly produced his packet, and told his
adventures. What could father do but accept thankfully
his share of the candles, and warn Garry never, never
again to go 'up the town' alone?


The Christmas Flowers
THE Christmas Angels watched over the Christmas
Bells and the Christmas Bush. They painted their
petals with colours that were bright with the light of God's
Garden. They folded a Christmas thought into each one.
"Be kind, be kind this Christmas time. For the Blessed
Babe be kind, be kind." If you gently swung a spray of
Christmas bells you heard their faint sweet music sing
those words. And the cheery little Christmas Bush
whispered them, but not with such a tinkling bell note as
the Bells.
Hundreds of people wore a cluster of the Bells or a
spray of the Bush, and the Christmas Angels were glad.
Many, many acts of kindness were done, because the
Christmas thoughts entered into the minds and hearts of
those who wore the flowers.
There was that pale-faced girl who worked at the
ribbon counter. She was so tired and cross. Christmas
Eve meant a longer time to stand there, showing ribbons,
ribbons, ribbons, until she was sick of their brilliant hues;
a longer time to cry, "Sign please," "Sign please," until
she was sick of the sound of the words. People were so
hard to please, too (that is, most people). Boxes and
boxes had to be dragged down and examined for their
pleasure, and then perhaps they took nothing. The lynx
eves of the "shop walker" had no Christmas kindness in
them, either, and she was, oh, so tired.


Then the Christmas Bush came.
A gentle-faced old lady asked for some black ribbon.
(Ah, yes, gentle-faced old ladies generally want black
ribbon, even on Christmas Eve.) The ribbon was for
bonnet strings, she said pleasantly, and smiled in her kind
old way on the pale-faced girl. She was evidently from
the country, for there was a sweet talkativeness and a
trusting smile with her that city customers usually lack.
They have no time for pleasant speech or trustful smiles
for pale-faced shop girls. There are boats and trams and
trains to catch, and the city somehow swallows up trust-
fulness. But the country people never hurry. Sydney is
always in the same place, and if one train is gone there is
another some time; and they trust everybody.
The girl enjoyed serving the old lady. She Talked of
"home" up Maitland way, of the grandchildren she had
come down to see —she must buy a blue ribbon for Xellie —
of the turkey she had brought down with her; the cakes
she had made for them.
The old lady had a huge bunch of Christmas Bush.
She offered the girl a piece. She gratefully accepted it,
but cast a fearful glance at the "shop walker." But the
little flower was doing its work. He had been watching
the scene, and now half smiled as if to say, "Certainly;
wear it."
The two girls at the glove counter were presented with
a spray, the old lady explaining in her gentle way, "It is
so cheery; it reminds us to be cheery, too, and sends a
Christmas feeling all round, as if God and His Holy
Mother were still at Bethlehem."
She walked bravely up to the much-feared person in
the long coat, and offered him a spray, too. "Just to wear
for the sake of the Great Day," she said smilingly.


He accepted it most politely, and fastened it in his
coat, and the Christmas thoughts the angel had wrapped
up in the little red petals entered into his mind and his
heart. He was quite "nice" to the assistants all that busy,
trying day, and even wished each one a Happy Christmas.
And the pale-faced girl was patient with annoying
customers, for the little flower kept whispering, "Be kind,
be kind, this Christmas time. For the Blessed Babe be
kind, be kind."
Christmas Eve!
There had been other Christmas Eves for her, when
she was not a shop-girl, when the world was an easy,
pleasant place for her. But that was all over; all over,
gone long ago, with the dear father and mother, who made
her life as happy as they could.
To Catholics the words "Christmas Eve" seemed con-
nected with "Confession." Ever since childhood's days
it had been Christmas Eve and Confession; Christmas
morning and Holy Communion. The pale-faced girl was
a Catholic —not quite so fervent as when her mother and
father were living, and aided her by their example. But
never once since First Confession had she missed Con-
fession on Christmas Eve.
"I'll go to-night, after we close," she told herself.
"You will be so tired to-night," something suggested.
"Mother and father were never too tired for Con-
fession," something else replied, and the girl said again,
"Yes; I'll go."
She went on sorting ribbons, serving customers, crying
"Sign, please! Sign please!" as before, and no one knew
the work was a preparation for the Sacraments.
Down near the Quay a little girl dropped a little cluster
of Christmas Bells. She had a big, big bunch, and did


not stop to pick up the little piece. The North Shore boat
was in; she wanted to catch it. She hurried on.
A woman walked over the little red bells, and crushed
some of them —crushed all the sweet Christmas music out
of them. A man in work-stained clothes picked the Bells
up, and those that were not crushed tinkled faintly, "Be
kind, be kind."
The man had just been paid; the money was "burn-
ing" in his pocket. It was a hot day; he was going to the
nearest hotel for one drink —just one!
But, then, "just one" rarely satisfied him. He stood
still and looked at the flower, and listened to its "sermon."
"I won't," he said. "I'll go home to Nora and the
kiddies, and give them a Happy Christmas all round."
But there were so many hotels to pass; he could not
trust himself completely on such a hot day.
He looked at the flower; he pinned it in the ragged
lapel of his coat.
"I'll take a tram right home from here, and then I
won't be too close to the hotel doors."
He bought a paper, swung on to a Newtown tram, and
when it passed certain hotels, the working man, with the
Christmas Bells in his coat, was deeply interested in the
political column.
Then there was the Rich Man. His daughter pinned
the little red Christmas Bush in his coat and said, "Christ-
mas Eve, father; don't forget."
Later on he was standing near Macquarie Street,
waiting for his motor. It was just three minutes before
the time he had told White to be there.
A woman came from out the hospital gates. She was
carrying a child —a boy far too heavy for her. One of his


feet was bandaged in fresh white lint, and his poor face
was pale with suppressed sobs.
"I think I could hop, Mum. Let me down. 1 know
I'm too heavy for you."
"Now Dick, don't you mind. I'll get you along to
Elizabeth Street somehow —it isn't far—and we'll get a
tram there."
They were passing the rich man, and the Christmas
Bush was whispering, "Be kind, be kind this Christmas
time. For the Blessed Babe, be kind, be kind."
"Er —excuse me, madam. The child is too heavy;
allow me to send you home in my motor. Here it is now."
The rich man smiled, and even raised his tall hat.
She gazed up in astonishment. "But we live away out
Paddington."
"Time is of no consequence on Christmas Eve," smiled
the rich man. "I can occupy myself pleasantly until the
car returns; or, stay, I'll go with you."
He lifted the boy tenderly, and helped his mother in
a courtly style as if she were some great lady of his
acquaintance.
And so they whirled away.
"It's great, Mum, isn't it? My foot hardly pains now."
The rich man conversed pleasantly, and when they
"pulled up" at the dingy terrace house, in a dingy back
street (to the very great amazement of the neighbours, we
must add) the rich man said, "Perhaps it would not be
out of place, since it is Christmas Eve, if I offered you a
little Christmas gift." He slipped something that clinked
into her hand, and the chauffeur, standing with the door
opened, pretended to have neither eyes nor ears.
They thanked the rich man. "Happy Christmases"
were exchanged, and the car whirled off again.


The woman set the coins out on the kitchen table, and
then sat down and cried.
"We wanted them bad enough. God bless him and
his to-day and every day."
Dick cried too, because she did. "Mum, it's the
penny we put in the Crib box this morning. It's come
back nearly a thousand-fold, hasn't it:
There are hundreds more stories to tell about the
Christmas flowers —a story about every piece that was
worn on Christmas Eve. But I couldn t tell them all now.
But it you don't believe about the music of the flowers
and all the kind things they help people to do at Christmas
time, why, just wear a piece on Christmas Eve and prove
it! There, now! Just do it. You will be surprised at
all the kind things you will want to do for the Holy
Child's sake —see if you don't.
You will hear ringing in your heart and your mind,
with pauses like the Bells make on Christmas Eve:
Be kind, be kind,
This Christmas time.
For the Blessed Babe
Be kind, be kind!"


His First Communion Day
SISTER ROSALIE was sitting at her desk looking
through the children's writing books. From the play-
ground came shouts and screams and laughter that told
how much the children were enjoying their few moments
play-time. It was a clear day with winter sunshine send-
ing its mild beams everywhere; just the day to make
children run and jump and shout.
The sun came in at the classroom windows, throwing
a golden veil over Our Lady, and tipping with fire Little
Therese's roses of love. The scent of jonquils and violets
filled the room.
A gentle tap sounded at the door
"Come in," Sister said.
A little boy, with a very intelligent face, lit with
thoughtful blue eyes, entered and stood at Sister's desk.
"Well, Guy. What is it?"
"Sister, I want to be in the First Holy Communion
Class. May I?"
Sister Rosalie dropped her big, blue pencil, quite
nervously.
"But, my dear child, you . . ." What should she say?
She must not hurt the sensitive little mind, must not crush
the desire of the yearning soul.
"I am not a Catholic," went on the child, as if he
knew this was a stumbling block, but considered it one


that could be got over. "I know all about Holy Com-
munion. I have heard all your lessons to the class and
all Father O'Neill's. When I am out in the corridor I
can still hear. Besides, I have Jimmy and his big brother
Tommy to teach me the catechism and to tell me all you
say to the children. You told them a story about a holy
little French boy named Guy. Our Lord wants to come
to me the same as to the other children. I want Him to
come. Why won't you let Him come?"
Poor Sister Rosalie was at a loss.
"Indeed Guy 1 wish . . . But, dear, you are not
baptised."
"I am. I asked my mother. I was baptised when I
was a baby."
"But you would have to be baptised again . . . (what
we call conditionally) in the Catholic Church."
"Father O'Neill will baptise me, then," Guy said
eagerly, as if he hoped she would, then and there, com-
mence the necessary arrangements.
"But your father and mother might not allow it."
Guy had no answer for this. He pondered what
Sister said, and she thankfully followed up the impression
she had made. "You see, Guy, you must obey your
parents. It is your duty. God wills you to do what they
say."
"When can I be baptised?"
Sister's eyes fell before the searching blue ones —she
could not bear to 9ee their light quenched.
"When you are big—grown-up; when you are old
enough to choose for yourself . . ."
"That is too far off. I am old enough now. I choose
now. I choose God."


"We will pray about it, Guy—you and I. We will ask
Our Lady to help us."
He turned away and went out the door; Sister Rosalie
looked after him, her kind eyes full of tears.
"Poor little fellow. What a pity. But God will find
a way to come to him."
As Guy went down the corridor he met Father O'Neill
coming to give the First Communion class the daily in-
struction.
"Well, Guy, where are all the smiles to-day?"
Guy called up an attempt, at one as he said : "Father.
1 want to be baptised over again—in your Church this
time."
"You do?"
"Yes please. I want to go to Holy Communion, and
Sister Rosalie said I must first be baptised."
"What do you know about Holy Communion ?" the
priest said with playful tenderness.
"Everything."
Father O'Neill looked into the upturned eyes, that
told of a soul so beautiful, so innocent of sin that God's
image flashed back Heaven from it.
"You do, indeed," he said softly. "You know every-
thing a human creature can know about It. God grant that
sin may never cause you to lose all you now know."
"You see," the child explained, "although I sit out
of the class at religious lessons. 1 always hear them. I
can hear Sister Rosalie quite easily. When you come, you
close the door; (the blue eyes looked reproachful) but still
I can hear you. Even on wet davs and on windv davs
* «' -• J
when the windows rattle I can hear. I ask mv ang-el to
help me to hear when it's a noisy day. Then Timmy and
his big brother Tommy give me their Catechism and teach


it to me in the afternoons when we go home. Sister
Rosalie said 1 would need to be baptised again . . . and
she does not think my father and mother would allow me."
"I suppose they would not, Guy."
"Sister said I may be baptised and go to Holy Com-
munion when I am grown-up. It is too long to wait
"It is a long time," Father O'Neill said sympathetic-
ally. "But perhaps Our Lord will think it is too long to
wait and will hasten the day. Pray about it, Guy."
"I do," said Guy solemnly, as if he had already spent
decades of years in prayer and watching and fasting.
Father O'Neill patted his head, and the child, feeling
a sudden hope, went on to the play-ground and was soon
running and shouting with the best of the runners and the
shouters there.
"Look at him!" said Father O'Neill as he watched
the children from the class-room. "A moment ago he
looked like a little saint dying of longing to be with God."
"Children are so strange," Sister returned. "One
moment they are like angels and seem to hear and under-
stand eternal things. The next moment they are like . .
"Like little yelling demons," smiled Father O'Neill.
"There's an old man lives at the end of the street. He
tells me he'll have a very light Purgatory. I asked him
why, and he said: 'Because I live near a school.'"
Guy was standing before his father and mother; and
by the expression of their faces he had just made some
surprising request. Mr. Grant looked to his wife for help;
she looked back and could give none.
"May I?" Guy asked.
The mother spoke, "But darling, you were baptised
when you were a baby . . . Nana took you to Church."
"But not to the real Church."
"There you are, Jean, see what you have got us in


for —sending him to the Sister's school. I've no fault
to find with the Sisters —they are splendid women; and
the teaching is first-class I know. But he should have been
sent to the State school straight away. I told you at the
time that some religious complication might arise. And
here it is."
"But the Sisters are so sweet. I wanted him to be
with them. Anyhow this is only a child's fancy."
"Oh no, it is not, mother," said Guy, with all the dig-
nity and authority of a Bishop.
"The children dress up, you know," the mother con-
tinued. "The little girls wear veils and the boys have red
sashes and medals. It has captured Guy's artistic little
soul."
"The dress has nothing whatever to do with it.
mother," Guy said as patiently as a Pope addressing an
ignorant world.
"Couldn't we let him go with the others —just to
please him ?"
My dear Jean, that would not be honourable. If we
allowed him to be baptised in the Catholic Church, we
would be, in honour bound, to bring him up a Catholic.
How could we do that—even if we wanted to?"
"Oh, just to please him—just to be with the others
this time. He'd soon forget all about It," the mother urged,
not knowing the Mystery of which she spoke so lightly, but
desiring only that her child should be happy, as happy as
the other children of the class. Her Guy must not be
deprived of anything he wanted.
"When you are older, Guy," his father said, "if you
still wish to become a Catholic, you may—as far as I am
concerned. You are not old enough to know your own
mind, now, little son. I could not promise to see that you
lived a Catholic life, because I know nothing about it;


neither does your mother. Can you follow what I am
saying to you ?"
"Oh yes, father, perfectly," said the wise child, sor-
rowfully.
"You know I have always given you everything —in
reason —that you asked for."
"Yes, father."
"Perhaps, son. you had better go to the State school
now; you will not be so unhappy then, if you do not see
the other children having their religious lessons —"
"Oh, do not send me away from the Sisters' school,"
pleaded Guy.
"Guy, when we are forbidden something we want very
much, it is better to keep right away from it; to make up
our minds to think no more of it —since we may not have
it. Isn't it?" said Mr. Grant.
"Yes —when we want earthly things," his little son
replied. "But in Holy Communion we receive God, Him-
self. I cannot keep my mind from wanting Him. I do
not wish to forget. I could not.".
His parents looked at one another.
"I'm sure," complained the mother, "I don't know
where he got this religious nature. No one in my family
was religious."
"No one in mine, either," the father said hastily.
"We were all sent to Sunday School until we were big
enough to dodge going. It's the Sisters' school has
awakened these ideas, I suppose."
"You will leave me with the Sisters," Guy pleaded.
"Oh do," the mother added her pleading to his. "He
loves being there."
"I promise not to worry you again—about—about this
matter," Guy said, like an old man making a bargain.
"Oh, very well." his father agreed.


Guy continued to go to the Sisters' school; he con-
tinued to hear all the prayers and instructions of the First
Communion class. His two "professors," Jimmy and
Tommy, continued to give him lectures in theology. He
heard the stories of Tarcisius and of Blessed Imelda. He
heard stories of the pious little French boy who bore his
own name —Guy.
He said no more to Father O'Neill or to Sister
Rosalie; he said no more to his parents; but he said "a
lot" to Our Lady and to Little Therese.
One day, Sister sent Guy home early. He had flushed
cheeks and sleepy eyes, and complained of a sore throat.
His mother was not alarmed, for children so often seem
feverish and complain of a sore throat. Even when the
doctor was watching for diphtheria, she was not alarmed.
In past days, the dread word, diphtheria, spelt death for
so many little ones; but now, medical science can put
diphtheria to flight. Guy's report was all clear- —no diph-
theria. But still he did not get well.
Sister Rosalie and Sister Patrick came to see him;
Father O'Neill came, too.
"You must hurry and get well, Guy," Sister Rosalie
said. "We want you to come to see the children on their
First Communion Day. The children told me to tell you
they want you to be there."
"I shall watch them from Heaven," smiled Guy,
"Darling! Don't say that!" his mother cried. "You
are not very sick. Doctor says you are not."
"I am not very sick," Guy agreed.
He made such slow progress towards recovery that the
doctor called in another, and they consulted together about
little Guy. But for all their learning, for all their earnest-
ness, they knew very little about him. They changed the


medicine and wrote out a different diet for him and hoped
for the best.
"I do not think Guy will recover," Father O'Neill said
to the Sisters.
Oh, father!" Sister Rosalie said sadly, "our little
Guy. He is not very ill."
"Perhaps not; but he had set his mind, his heart, his
soul on receiving Our Ford in Holy Communion. All
along he had been hoping that he would be allowed in the
class; he learnt the Catechism, he listened to the instruc-
tions. He was doing his part. He looked to God to work
a miracle for him . . . the miracle did not take place.
He is perfectly resigned in his own little saintly way, but
he can not bear it. He will not live long—the miracle
will come that way . . . Unless ... I have been thinking
of explaining the case to the parents. The child has
evidently been silent about his desire; they do not know
his mind is troubled. Should they consent to his being
received into the Church, 1 have no doubt that after Holy
Communion, little Guy will improve, that he will recover.
There is the difficulty of his being brought up in the Faith
afterwards. The father seems a very earnest man, very
anxious to do all he can for the welfare of his child; 1
am sure he would keep his promise. The mother will
agree to anything that will please Guy. \\ e will have to
keep the parents to their promise if they consent. I'll see
them to-day . . . I'll go now."
One morning Guy's room was a bower of flowers; the
Sisters had prepared it, and prepared the little table by
the bed-side. Guy was leaning up on his pillows; a red
silk sash crossed his white silk sleeping suit; a shining
medal was on his breast. He was a child of his Holy
Mother the Church and she was bringing him her Greatest


Treasure ... A car drew up at the gate; steps sounded on
the garden path.
"He is coming," sighed Guy. "It was too long to
wait until I am grown-up. It was too long for Him to wait,
too long for me . . ."


Bubbles
THE perfume of wattle filled the house and floated out
even to the verandah steps. There were bunches of
it everywhere —even in the kitchen. That morning as
Father rushed away for the train, he fastened a sprig of
wattle in his coat. Mother had a bunch pinned in her
apron and the three children displayed a piece proudly.
For, you see, it was "Wattle Day," and everyone should
wear wattle on "Wattle Day," shouldn't they?
Ted took a bunch to Sister Mary Agnes for the
orator}*. He supposed Our Lady wanted wattle as well
as everybody else. Molly took a bunch to old Mrs. Bran-
nigan. who lived near the bridge, and the old lady smiled
gratelullv as she said, " Tis shamrocks I should have, but
there's green on it whatever, and Australia is the best
place on earth barring Ireland, and Ireland, of course,
comes next to Heaven."
"I like Australia, Mrs. Brannigan," smiled Molly.
"You do then. Why wouldn't you ? What good would
vou be if YOU didn t love your own land best of all. But
keep a little spot in your heart for Ireland. Your grand-
parents —God rest them —came from the Old Land and
YOU Australians owe a big debt to Ireland."
"Oh. I know!" Molly said grandly; "you mean our
religion. I love Ireland, too, and when I'm big Uncle
Mick is going to take me there—if he has enough money."


"Is he now? Well, hurry up and grow big, and I'll
save up and go with you."
Mrs. Rrannigan broke off a little spray of the wattle to
lasten in her dress and Molly went on to school.
But there was the third member of the family—John
Bede, known to intimate friends as "Bubbles." This very
little story is mainly about him.
Bubbles saw Ted and Molly depart with their brave
bunches of wattle. Bubbles heard Ted say his was for Our
Lady, and Bubbles always had a burning desire to do
whatever his "big," much-admired seven-year-old brother
did. Therefore, he helped himself to a bunch of wattle
in the dining-room, and made off down the garden path
and out the gate, telling himself, the flowers and anyone
who cared to hear that his wattle was for God and His
Mother.
He trudged along the dusty street, his little brain rather
troubled about which turnings to take. He reached a big
grey building that looked like a church. Bubbles knew
that God is in churches as well as in Heaven. He had a
little house on the altar, and he knew that there were
wonderful statues of Our Lady, too —statues with blue and
gold and stars.
A lady was standing near this big grey building, a
grandly dressed lady with gold-rimmed glasses.
"Hullo!" cheerfully smiled Bubbles.
"Good morning, little boy," replied the lady.
"God's Mother in there?" he queried with a question-
ing nod of his head towards the door.
"No," the lady replied, with a puzzled frown
Bubbles looked disappointed. "God in there?" he then
asked.
"No," again answered the lady with a deeper and
more puzzled frown.


"Must he the wrong place," soliloquised Bubbles.
'Thought it was a church."
"So it is," the lady hastened to assure him.
Bubbles shook his head and smiled cleverly.
"No, God lives in the churches, and if He isn't in
there, it's no use going in. Good-bye."
He trudged away, and the lady stood looking after him,
lost in wondering thought. Then she followed him.
The next big stone building was locked, and Bubbles
passed by, with a few backward glances at it. It couldn't
be the right place, or else God was out, because His
door is always open for little boys to go in and see Him,
Mother said. And she also said that any little boy who
walked by and did not visit Our Lord was very unkind
and very unloving.
The third big "churchy" looking building was a few
yards further on. The door was open. Bubbles passed in,
and made a valiant attempt to reach the holy water. The
lady followed rather haltingly, saw him fall on one knee
and bless himself. She heard him say with a little sigh
of relief, "He's in, there's the lamp."
He clattered up the aisle, right up to the altar rails.
There he sat down on the step, and "halved" the flowers,
talking softly to Someone all the time.
The lady came closer to catch the words.
"There!" he said, when the flowers were "halved"
satisfactorily. "That's fair. These are yours, God." He
crept under the rail and put them on the red cushion.
"I hope you like them. I like You very much and I want
You to like me. Please make me a very good boy, same
as that little martyr boy in Ted's new book. I'm glad You
live in our churches as well as in Heaven, 'cos we couldn't
come to see You. if You didn't. Bless mother and father
and Mollv and Ted and me and everybody. Amen. And


keep some room for us in Heaven, up near You and Our
Lady. Amen."
He blessed himself, genuflected again, and took up the
other part of the bunch. Clatter! clatter! went the little
shoes, past the high altar, to the side aisle, and once more
the lady followed.
"These are yours, Blessed Lady," he said in his
"Prayer" voice, as he stepped on tip-toe to place them at
the feet of the statue. Then he knelt down, "I know you
can see us from up in Heaven, Blessed Lady. Pray for
me and Ted and Molly, and mother and father. Mother
said you like little boys a lot, because Our Lord was your
little Boy. Mother told me to ask you always to make me
try to copy Him. So please do make me, won't you?
Amen."
Again the blessing, but this time no genuflection, only
a very solemn little bow of a little curly head, and the little
clattering feet were off again.
At the door the lady spoke to him, and the light of
astonished recognition came into his blue eyes. "Did you
find the right place, too?" he said.
And something made the lady answer, "Yes."
She walked home with him, and Bubbles enlightened
her on many matters. She didn't know it would be Our
Lady's birthday in eleven more days. She didn't know
that everyone should go to Mass on that day and put
candles and flowers on her oratories. She had never heard
(until Bubbles told her) that the wattle comes out in
September "specially becos" Our Lady's birthday is in
that month. She didn't even know that Our Ladv was and
is the "beautifulest" lady of all, and that she never did a
sin, not the "littlest-little" sin, and that angels took her
up to Heaven when she died. In short, she was a lament-
ablv ignorant lady, Bubbles thought, and wondered vastly,


because his previous experience of "grown ups" had led
him to suppose they knew everything. Perhaps she had
never been to school.
She seemed very anxious to learn, however, and asked
Bubbles so many questions that he was quite surprised at
all he knew.
Mother was at the garden gate, looking anxiously
down the road. She thanked the spectacled lady for bring-
ing Bubbles home, and the lady recounted the events of
the morning.
"It was so beautiful to hear him," she said, and her
glasses looked misty, "And the most beautiful part of it
was that he was so sure there was Someone really there
listening to him —Someone who could see and hear him,
Someone who was pleased he had come and pleased to
receive his little gift. Oh, that I could be sure like he is!"
"You can pray," mother said, "Pray with confidence,
and some day, please God, you will find yourself believing
in the Real Presence."
They talked for a few minutes. The grandly-dressed
lady would not go inside, she said she would some other
day. Then she departed, and Bubbles sat on the gate-
post and "Good-byed" her until she was out of sight.
One vase in the dining-room was "wattleless" and
mother was looking at it.
"I took that bunch to the church," Bubbles said. "Ted
took some to our Lady's statue in the school, so I took
some to the one in the Church, and some to God, too."
"Did you. dear?" mother said absently, she was think-
ing of the grandly-dressed lady.
"Ted took some for the school altars, Molly took some
to Mrs. Brannigan, and I took some to God. That was
the best," Bubbles assured himself. "God makes the wattle
come out, so of course He should get some on Wattle Day.


I'll take Him some every Wattle Day—that's if we have
any, if Auntie brings us some like she did this time."
With this resolution Bubbles dismissed the matter
from his mind and gave all his attention to the grave under-
taking of building a fire-station with his blocks and bricks.
And so ends this little story.
A sp.i-2.
M bis <\C-












