

AND OTHER POEMS
Hoovincia ;
F. W. HOLDEIf, PBIXTKH, *• RECORD*’ OFFK’K. KOORINHA. S.A.
18 8 2.
i J


GETHSEMANE
CALVARY.
AND OTHER POEMS,
R . W. MATHEWS.
iloonuQci:
F. W. HOLDER. PRINTER. - RECORD" 1 OFFICE, KOOKIXOA, S.A.
ISB 2 .


indication.
our Master, we would praise thee.
We our ofTrings to thee bring,
Let Our hearts be bowed before thee,
1(1' Thou who art our Saviour king ;
}|T Jesus bless us,
Be thou gracious
As thine aid we now implore,
Help our weakness,
Grant us meekness,
While we worship and adore.
As thy agony we gaze on,
In the garden on the Mount,
See thee beaten, bruised, and spat on.
Bearing all on our account.
Mocked and jeered at,
May we feel that
Thou for us didst suffer pain,
See thee dying,
In death lying,
And behold thee rise again.


Jart I.—fpethdemane
“ And they come 'unto a plate which was named Oethsemane,
Mark xiv., 32.
’Twas in the gloaming,—
The light of the expiring day,
In lengthening shadows, died away ;
When He—the Man of Sorrows came to pray,
As. lie was wont to do,
Upon the mountain where the olives grew.
Culm was the evening hour,
The wind had hushed its sighing,
For prone upon the ground was lying,
He whom the Rulers sought to kill.
Been was the agony he bore.
The bloody sweat oozed from each bursting pore;
It seemed as if the “Son of Man”
Could bear no more.
Was there no way by which the cup might pass 1
Or must he drain it to the bitter dregs : Alas !
So bitter that he shudders as one doomed
To quaff the poisoned glass.
“ If it be possible my Cod,” be cries,
But from the Heaven of heavens,
A voice replies


“ It must be done, beloved son,”
“ Finish the work thou hast begun.”
He bows submissive to the Father’s will,
And rising from the ground, descends the hill
With feeble steps, to where a neighboring rill,
Gently meandering, trickles down the
He laves his cooling stream,
Which as it flows, the rocks between, "
Moans like a mourner, in his dream.
Tlie-strength, oft’ sc
Fttr on there wings,
The “ Hon of God.”
His soul now strengthened,
Firm on earth he treads, 4
Though the betrayer, weaving threads
‘"A-.
His Lord and Master to ent np,
Approaches with a rabble rout,
Who, as they throng him shout,
“ Quick ! point the false deceiver out 1”
Jesus draws near
To where his followers lie,
bath (auml A£*. « *
1 . V-- *■
tsbt Ucfori', ~'&rr-. , .
t ( <•• ■* ,-
\et He is not alone, , /*
An an„(,Fh'uiii God « throat
Supports his drooping frame,
Ami strengthens him to meet
The coining shame.
The struggle o’er, 1 ‘ -* tA,
A quietiido profound,Jwraps him,
His trembling heart hath found


Little they dream, lie socu must die,
Or that his murderers are nigh.
tie wakes them from their sleep,
Alas they could not keep
A watch for one brief hour !
They soon will cower bsforo the dread,
Which ’ere another day hath sped,
Will see their Master, —
Crucified and dead.
The m-ird’rous 3"ew have reached the place,
But something flashes from tile face
Of him they seek—and as they gaze,
A mu u satary panic and amaze,
Seizes the startled crowd.
Was his eye lit with that.supernal fire,
Which in its righteous ire,
Will wither an * consume
Those, in the “ Day of wrath,” whose doom
Will be most dire I
Did the dread Majesty of Heaven,
Assert itself unbidden,
Indignant at the crime.
Which through all time,
Mny never be forgiven 1
We caniiot tell, what was this magic spell,
Mayhap ’twas hut the prelude to the knell,
That waked thij traitor’s soul in hell !


Jart 2.—jlfhe Betrayal.
“Ann straightway, while he, yet spake, cometh Judas, one oj the
twelve, and with him a multitude with swords and staves,
from the chief priests and the scribe* and the elders .”—
Mark xiv., 43.
The night is dark,.
Fit season for dark deeds, —
A murky blackness, dra[)es the akic^ —
No star appears—
The very beasts whose midnight howl
Awake? the silence of the tombs,
Slink Lack into their holes and dens
As though mysterious forces were abroad,
Riding the air with hellish glee.
Phantoms let loose
From the foul dungeons of the nether he] I,
To enter into souls of men,
There for a time to rage—•
Them changing into savage brutes,
Who scenting blood, —
Remorseless follow on their victim’s track
Till bounding on their prey
With deadly fangs and claws,
Tear the heart, quivering,
From its rent and bleeding corse.
They come with swords and staves


The hireling knaves—
And binding him with thongs,
The/ drag the “ Prince of Peace”
Like some wild beast
Caught in the woodman's trap,
Destined to give unholy sport,
To the excited crowds, that flock
To some vast theatre in Pagan Rome,
There to behold.
Man against brute in deadlj’ strife,
Eich seeking each'tile other’s life.
To Annas first they lead him.
Then to Caiaphas, High priests of God,—
Whose priestly rank and high estate,
Marked them as arbiters of fate—
Surely in them, he ought to find.
Some faint resemblance, to his Father's mind !
Alas, the priestly robes and mitred brow.
Are but the outward symbols now
Of Wisdom’s sear, wherein did dwell
The glory once of Israel!
Gone ! like the cloud which on the Mercy seat.
Rested like pillow for the feet
Of Him, whose footstool is the Barth,
E’re since the time she first gave birth.
To man, in likeness to his God.
W hat though this van were kindly
Both in word and deed,
In vain his innocence they plead ;
A blameless life, unstained by sinful thought,


Simple and pure, the truths he taught—*
Endowed'with wisdom far beyond his age,
Throwing new light, upon the Sacred page.
Devoid of world!} pomp and show,
He mingles with the poor and low,
He lures them by no trickster’s art,
But with his love, he wins tlj.dr heart.
Had he but come in priestly guise
Of Aaron's seed, —-far otherwise
His teachings would have been received
By those who scoffed and disbelieved;
But, as the I uinble workman’s son,
Priestly pretensions he had none,
They scorned him as of low degree,
Obscurely bred in Gallileo I
Proud of their caste, like Brahmins in the East,
They magnihed the office of the priest,
Nor deemed that “ Truth” could e’er be found
Outside the ■‘Temple’s” hallowe I ground.
Could he the Nazareae despised,
Be the Messiah thus disguised !
What were these miracles he wrought
But sleights of hand by demons taught !
What though by multitudes he’s sought,
Who breathless listened, while he taught
Them heavenly things before unknown ;
Till with one voice as David’s son,
Him they excitingly proclaim',
And shout hosannas to his name 1


Puffed tip with sacerdotal pride,
His simple faith these priests deride.
Dreading the while in open day
Him ts arrest, his progress stay ;
But foulest treachery invite.
To work their purpose in the night 1


Hart 3.—|jpie judgment.
“Now Jesus stood before the governor.” —Matt,
It is the early morn—
The pallor that precedes the dawn
Seems like an icy chill
To settle over dale and hill.
The Sun awaking with surprise,
Flushes with shame the Eastern skies,
Blushing a deep, deep red,
As though his great heart hied
To see his sovereign Lord,
By wnose all potent word
The Heavens and Earth were made—
With wanton mockery arrayed
In gorgeous robes, by brutal hands,
While meekly, passively He stands,
The Captain of Angelic binds—
He who could scatter them like chaff,
And in derision at them laugh,
Submit to insult, injury, and scorn,
From ribald tongues, and slaves ignobly
From Heaven’s high battlements the angels gaz:
Perplexed, astounded and amazed ;
His frightened followers, their hopes dispelled,
Mute with astonishment beheld
Him spat upon, at whose command,
The raging seas and winds were calmed !


Before the Judgment-seat
Of Rome’s proud governor. He now appears,
Pilate, and not the captive fears,
The scales of Justice tremble in his hands,
The while he issues his commands
To scourge this Jewish King,
Like some vile thing,
Though against whom they cannot bring
One single charge,
Worthy of stripes, imprisonment, or death :
Yet with united breath.
As if bereft of reason and of mind,
By some unseen, but subtle poison
Floating on the wind—
Which as they breathe
Makes the brain seethe with maddening thoughts,
Till like so many fiends let loose,
Mingled with scurrilous abuse,
They cry—■
“ Away with him away !”
“ This is our Preparation Day,”
“ Barabbas unto us release !”
They would not have the 11 Prince of Peace.”
BEHOLD THE MAN !
His doom is sealed,
Sentence is passed,
It cannot be repealed.—
He leaves the Palace hall
Noiseless his footstepsfall—


He utters no complaint,
Though bleeding now and faint,
With lips together pressed,
And head, bent on his breast,
A mournful sadness shades his face,
0, what he suffers for our race !
The thorns that pierce his brow,
He thinks not of them now—
Scarce does he feel the cruel blow,
Which makes his pale cheeks faintly glow.
A deeper agony he feels,
Than that which o’er the martyr steals,
When tortured at the rack or stake,
His soul her lofty flight doth take?,
Supported by His strength who trod
The winepress of offended God.
Who can depict his feelings at that hour
When left to struggle ’gainst the power
Of foes implacable, by Satan led—
Who to avenge the past, poured on the head
Of God’s Annointed One,
His fury and his hate,
Suppressed of late:
While in the regions of Despair,
The fiends imprisoned there,
Made the infernal welkin ring
In praise of their Satanic king
Who triumphing o’er God’s own Son
Their liberty at length had won 1 1
* * * * * * « •» *


They lay the cross upon his bleeding back,
He staggers ’neath the burden, and alack !
Falls to the Earth,
Which never since its buth
From Chaos and Eternal night,
Beheld so pitiful a sight.
Simon ! thou of Gyrene ;
Heaven and the Angels blest thee,
Though unseen, —
Millions who since have bowed the knee
In reverence to die Christ, have envied thee
When in his stead the cross ye bore,
Of Him who died, but lives to die no more.
Jesus my loving Lord, t’was of thine own accord,
That Thou for us. did’st suffer thus,
And Thou ! the Son of G-od ! !
O Sin ! thou hideous fearful thing,
Wherein doth lurk a deadlier sting,
Than ever reptile with its poison’d fang
The death note with its rattle rang—
Thou that dost steal thy victim’s sense
Poisoning the streams of life, nor hence
Da parts, till on the shattered frame,
The vacant mind and sullied name,
Thou leaves’! the impress of a living death,
The vile corruption, of thy putrid breath,
Or, like the wind, that o’er the Desert blows,
And withers ov’ry herb that grows,


Whose furnace blasts the fairest flowers consume
And robs the apple of its virgin bloom.
Whence dost thou come, thou loathsome thing ?
From what foul region dost thou spring ;
That Heaven itself must own thy power
To kill, and mangle, and devour,
The choicest pro 'nets of creative skill
Daring to thwart Jehovah’s will ?
Whence comes thy shadow.
Which like darkening night,
Hides the Creator’s beauties Irom the sight ?
Or like some weird enchanter by Isis art,
Thou from the human form doth steal
It’s all—lt’s heart !
So closely dost thou imitate the good,
We scarce detect thee, when thou art not nul
Oft dost thou take an angel’s guise,
Posing as such before men’s eyes,
And counterfeiting Wisdom’s voice.
Mislead frail mortals .in their choice
Of that to follow in the hope to win,
A happiness, unsoiled by sin.
We see thee dressed in every tinge,
Thy garments, broad phylactries fringe—■
Sweet Cha’ ity, escapeth not thy taint
By gifts dost thou aspire to be a Saint :
Where’er we trace thee, thou art still the same,
Thou dost not alter—but in name !
Who may thy covert arts disclose,
Or guard men from thy secret blows?


To whom the mighty task assign,
This great exceeding sin of thine
To bring to light, thy deeds expose,
Thou fatal enemy, thou foe of foes !
Who, but the Saviour, promised from the first
’Ere by thy subtle wile the ground was curst


Jart 4. — ||he Srudfmon.
“And when they came unto the place which is called The
there they Crucified him.” —Luke xxiii., 33.
The hour of noon draws near, —
Along the road, outside the city walls,
That leadeth to “ The Skull”
The populace in fierce excitement
Crowd and jostle in their haste —-
Surging and pitching to and fro,
As doth the sea—
When its calm depths are stirred
By submarinal powers—
Yield to the force of pent up might
And rushing onward with its boisterous roar 1
Pour its wild waves
Upon some peaceful shore.
With hurried hands, bearing their ghastly load.
Three crosses they upraise,
Shouting the while in parody of praise
“ Hail to the King of Israel t”
“ Hail to the Great Immanuel ?”
“Thou who didst threaten to destroy”
“ Our holy temple upon lion’s hill”
“ Call on thy God, mayhap he will”
“ Deliver thee, it thou be He,”
“ Of whom our ancient prophets spoke !”
Thus with the ; r taunts they him provoke


To some miraculous display,
On this most dread, and fatal day.
With arras extended,—
to the Cross his hands and feet are nailed, —•
Tlie Powers of darkness had so far prevailed.
Intensest pain shot through his tortured limbs;
The angels shuddering, ceased their hymns
And robing them in sable hue,
Downward in haste from heaven they flew,
And like a curtain dense and vast,
Across the uooa-dav sun they passed,
Veili g its light in darkest night,
To shut the atrocious scene from sight.
A trembling seized the startled Earth,
She throbbed as though in pangs of birth ;
The birds and beasts in terror fled,
And torpid graves, disgorged their dead ;
The temple's veil by unseen hands
Is rent in twain at Heaven’s commands ;
the sea in anger tossed its crest,
Remembering by whose feet 'twas pressed;
The wild winds shrieked in alarm and fright,
As they Winged their way in their rapid flight;
While peal after peal through the mountains rung,
The loud voiced thunder’s terrific tongue ;
The infant turns from its mother’s breast,
The brooding sparrow forsakes its nest..
Then all is hushed, for a voice is heard
Like a wail of despair, of a heart that’s bared
To meet the heaviest stroke of fate
When driven home by the hand of “ Hate 1”


“ELOI, ELOI, LAMA SABACTHANI !”
Strange are the words he utters ere he dies,
Mysterious accents rend the humid skies,
Before his wounded spirit takes its flight,
In deepest gloom, midst dark Cimmerian night,
A pang shoots through his mother’s heart
Like stricken doe by fatal dart,
His murderers from the spot recoil
As demons shrink from hallowed soil— :
The proud centurion wipes his brow,
And bending low in reverence now,
Dares to proclaim unchecked by shame,
The “ Son of God,” Christ’s holy name—
While silently the downward tear,
In token of his faith sincere,
Courses his bronzed and rugged cheek,
More eloquent than words can speak,—
The loved disciple bids the mother “ come”
And gently leads her to his home.


Hart s.—Jfhe ||e6urrection,
" Be not amazed; ye seek Jesus the Nazerene , which hath
Crucified ; he is risen ; he is not here. —Mark xvi., 43.
Within a new made tomb hard by
The corpse is hidden from the eye,
His weeping friends with stealthy feet
In silence from the graveretreat,
The Sabbath eve with its maiden blush,
Calms the tempest’s wrath by its gentle hush.
Then all is still while he quiet sleeps,
And an angel a watch o’er his slumbers keeps.
The Sabbath is passed, and the rising sun
Tells of another week begun,
The Earth like a “ Titan” after his rest
TJpheaves a sigh from its mighty breast;
The ponderous stone from the sepulchte rolls,
The Homan soldier in fear beholds
The form of the dead, like a spectre arise,
And quails with affright as he screens his eyes.
The Magdalene as she nears the place,
With timid steps and veiled face,
Seeks to discern amidst the gloom,
The form she loved within the tomb ;
But Death, whose terrors spread dismay
As his icy hands chill the senseless clay,
Hadfled like a thief with returning light
For a stronger than he had put him to flight.


The “ Prince of the Ah - ,”
Now humbled and crushed
Prom the scene of his triumph
Discomfited rushed
To the Stygian pool to quench his thirst,
As the sun o’er the hills in splendour burst.
The heavenly hosts laud the great “ I AM,”
As they strike their harps to the “ Song of the Lamb”
All nature breaks forth'in a joyous strain,
For the dead in Ohrist, shall rise again !
Another era has come atld "gone,
A brighter age is coming on,
The lamp of truth no longer dim,
Will shed its light, as the evening hymn.
Ascends from the cloister’s stately halls,
Or is raised within the cottage walls.
gong of f|riiimph.
Let the blast of the trumpet in thunder proclaim
Glory, and honor, and praise to the Name
Of Christ, who,hath broken the power of,the
Who with majesty crowned, is new mighty to save,
Let the mountains and .valleys re-echo.the strain,
And nations bow down to■ the Lamb that was slain :
For He rises triumphant o’er Sin, Death, and Hell,
And Jehovah Almighty all things hath done well.
Errata.—ln line 16 on page 2 ihe words “ wraps around him*’
should read ‘‘ wraps him around.” And in line 18 on page 8 the
word “ submit” should read “ submits.”


©hridtmcw €?arol.
A virgin of Nazareth, heavy with child,
Has come to fair Bethlehem city,
Her features are pensive, and gentle, and mild,
For she’s blest of the Lord the Almighty.
rihe stops at an Inn, but no room is there there,
Ar.d so poor is this sweet bride of Heaven,
That she rests in a stable, both open and bare,
Errata.— On Page 27, Line 3, read “ shed its radiance.”
Do, do. 18, read “summer’s sigh.”
On Page 29 ; Line fi, read “goddess fair.”
mu, a voice unis mem r>e oi goon uneer.
As they learn the glad news, that a child is just born
Who a “ Prince” and a “ Saviour” will be,
They hasten to find in a manger for corn,
This Saviour, so humble was he.
To the gate of the Inn, three strangers have come.
Three strangers of noble degree,
They had followed the star from their far distant home,
This wonderful habv to see.


©hridtmcw €?arol.
A virgin of Nazareth, heavy with child,
Has come to fair Bethlehem city,
Her features are pensive, and gentle, and mild,
For she’s blest of the Lord the Almighty.
She stops at an Inn, but no room is there there,
Ar.d so poor is this sweet bride of Heaven,
That she rests in a stable, both open and bare,
With the ass upon which she had ridden.
As midnight draws near, there is heard a faint cry
Of a babe that has come to its birth ;
And a new star appears in the Eastern skv,
The herald of “ Peace” upon Earth.
As the shepherds are watching their flocks on this night
A strange melody breaks on their ear,
They see a great light, and fall'down in affright,
But a voice, bids them “ Be of good cheer.”
As they learn the glad news, that a child is just born
Who a “ Prince” and a “ Saviour” will he,
They hasten to find in a manger for corn,
This Saviour, so humble was he.
To the gate of the Inn, three strangers have come.
Three strangers of noble degree,
They had followed the star from their far distant home,
This wonderful hahv to see.


Their camels are laden with spices and gold,
To present to this King of the Jews ;
For, away in the East, in a dream they were told
Of his birth, and rejoiced at the new.v
The mother has taken the child on her knees,
And wrapt him with linen around ;
And her fond heart is beating with joy as she sees
The gifts that He spread on the ground.
So this Christinas tide, let our gifts be bestowed,
Without grudge on the needy and poor J
For Jesus by coming in poverty shewed,
That the best may privations endues-,
Ighc ||iidoW of- 'Main,
A widow once dwelt in the city of Naiu,
Her heart wi: nigh broken with anguish aid pain,
For an only s in, her joy and her pride,
Fell gidevcnsly sick, grew worse, and then dual.
Her friends and her neighbors to eimfort her came,
But the mother with sobs, kept repeating the name
Of her boy, the last hope and support of her years,
As she bowed ber aged bead, while Iter eyes ran with


The mourners without, beat their breasts aud bewailed,
The fate of the youth, whom “Grim Death” had assailed,
While within, the last rites were performed for the
And the corpse was prepared, for its cold narrow bed.
With linen enwrapt on the bier they have laid,
What remained of the lad, for whom prayer had been
made,
That his life might be spared for his poor mother’s
sake,
Whose limbs were enfeebled by many an ache.
From the home of his childhood they bear him awav,
Ah, sad was the heart of the mother that day !
To the gate of the city, they move slowly apace,
After taking a last, long, fond look at his face.
A stranger approaches ; aud as he draws near,
His glance falls on the widow who follows the hier
His heart melts with pity, his lips move in prayer,
He stops the procession, and asks whom they hear.
They tell him the story, doth it avail I
The mourners pour forth a most pitiful wail ;
But he raises his hand, and they stop, in surprise.
As he calls on the man that lies dead to “ Arise,”
Astonishment seized on the awe stricken crowd ;
But the widow drew near, and with reverence bowed
To (Elitist, aslie took the young man by the hand.
For his fame had begun to lie known in the land.


To his mothei he gave him, not’ for thanks did he
But he smiled as he saw them return from the gate ;
For with joy the glad mother walked close by the side
Of her soft; new alive, who that morning had died.
Hacchcetid.
In the City of paints*—the news spread abroad,
That Jesus was corning, the “ Prophet of God
Such wonderfiilthings had beau dun by this man,
That to meet him, and greet him, the people all ran.
No doubt there were: some who were curious to see,
What kind of a man this great Plot diet might lie;
Was he like old Elijah, that prince amongst men,
Or young Daniel—cast into the fierce lions deni
Would lie come like a King iu purple and gold !
For he claimed to be Christ, whom the sages foretold,
Would be mighty arid great—“ A Deliverer” strong,
To rescue them all from oppression and wrong.
Thus talk they together, as in groups they await
His approach by the road that leads up to the gate.
While' women and children in eHnrttmfc are seen,
On the flat tops of houses, —the palm trees between.


A shout is now heard from some boys on the plain,
And the people cry out as they bear it again,
“ The Prophet is coming, our welcome prepare,”
And a thousand glad voices resound in the air,
He enters tluir gates, but no costly array,
Bedazzles their eves as he keeps on his way,
He rides in no chariot, —-but walks through the streets,
And has a kind word for all whom he meets.
* * « *•** * * • «
There are people who think themselves better than
others,
And seem to forget, that all men are brothers ;
For God is our Father, and loves ev’ry one,
Though we have not loved Him, as wo ought to havs
done.
God sent the Lord Jesus, to lead to His fold,
Poor sinners, who wand'ring about in the cold,
Would perish for ever, if Christ had not come,
To save them, and bring them again to their home.
* •* * ♦
* •* * *
Mow as Jesus passed by, He saw up in a tree.
A man, who was said, a great sinner to be,
His name was Zacclueus, who in stature was small,
A collector of taxes and hated by all.
So when Jesus called to him to quickly come down,
This displeased some good folk, who beginning to frown,
Said one to the other “ He surely can’t know”
Who this fellow is, to speak to him so.”


But down came Zacchssus as fast as he could,
And joyfully ran to where Jesus now stood ;
To Ids house he then led him, an 1 when he got there,
He washed the Lords feet, and anointed his hair.
How Zaochseus was rich, but like many more,
Used means not quite right, of increasing his store ;
So when Jesus had dined and taken some rest,
Zaccheeus thus spake, as his sins lie confessed.
Good Master I know I have sinned against heaven,
And do not deserve that my sins be forgiven,
But one half of my goods, to tin poor I will give,
And wioug them no more as long as I live.
Have I taken from any man more than was right,
Four.times the amount, I will give him this night ;
I thank thee good Lord for thus deigning tosstar,} r ,
And honor my house with thy presence this way.
Now Jesus was pleased with the way he had spoken,
For a h.-oirt that is contrite, a spirit that’s broken,
Is just what ho likes, for then he can say,
As he did to Zacchseus, and will to yon if you pray
“ Salvation is come to thy house,” friend “ to-day.”


H ®rai)cr.
My God to thee my voice I raise,
riiO'i who lias kept me all ray days,
Thou knowest my frame how weak it is,
Make known thy strength in feebleness.
I know not what is best for me,
This I would humbly leaxo to Thee;
Help thou my trust and confidence,
Impart to me Faith’s evidence.
t do not clearly see my way,
Prevent me Lord, or else T may,
Stray from the path marked out for rae,
Shew me what Thou wouldst have me. lie.
M v soul doth often try to rise,
Superior to the flesh, and tries
To stimulate the wearied frame,
To noble acts,- -My constant aim.
But O how helpless do 1 feel,
How often am I fain to steal,
A moment’s quietness and rest,
To lean me on my Saviour’s breast.
Is not my body thine v.lso
Dost Tlion not life and health bestow f
Wilt Thou not strength to it impart,
A id help me thus, to play my part.


Remember I, ,||^u^.||icpt.
When troubles gather with each morn,
A ud life seems weary to be borne,
Or when our hearts for loved ones mourn,
Remember 1 Jesus wept.
When in afflictions darkest night,
O’erwhelmed with sorrow’s carking blight,
When struggling hopelessly for light,
Remember ! Jesus wept,
When raging storms becloud the skies,
When all is gloom before the eyes,
And “ Fears” despairing accents rise,
Remember 1 Jesus wept.
When deep our hearts are plunged in grief,
When nought appears to give relief,
When happiness is all too brief,
Remember ! Jesus wept.
When fortune frowns, and friends betray,
When all is lost, nor gleams one ray
Of sm'shine, on our dreary Way,
Remember 1 Jesus wept,
When sickness undermines our powers,
And nights are passed in sleepless hours,
Let no rebellious thoughts be ours,
Remember ! Jesus wept.
Though sad our lot on earth may be,
Yet should we put our trust in Thee,
Thy love will make amends, if we
Remember Jesus wept,


Ip fragment.
When the finger of God touched Chaos,
And out ot her womb sprung the world ; —■
When the light of the “ Sun,” sheds its radiance,
And its warmth, bade “ Earth’s” treasures unfold
When the “ Moon” took her place in the heavens,
A help, meet to tend on her spouse,—
Then the streams from the hills murmured softly,
As thev flowed through each meadow and dale,
And the “ Dew” : —-the.sweet breath of the morning,
Cast its spell on the mountain and vale.
Wheti out from the bosom of “ Nature,”
Sweet juices were drawn by each herb;
When the gay tinted flowers decked the greensward,
And loaded with perfume the breeze,
And the air was alive with glad sounds, —and the
buzzing of bees;-
Then the peach and tlie apple first blushed,
To the kiss of the. soft summers’s sigh,
And the turtle dove answered the coo
Of her lover’s first wooing
Ere the thorn and the thistle had sprung,
To tell of God’s curse on man’s doing.
Before rain-clouds had gathered to burst;
And wash out the records of “ Lust,”—
When “ Peace” like a bird on her nest,
Spread her wings o’er the slumbers of “ Night;”
Nor fled at the dawn of the “ Day star,”
That welcomed the “ Light’
Then the fawn knew no fear, but was tame,
And the birds had not learu’t to be wild,
And the mightest beast on the land could be led by a


When creation was robed in her brightest,
Her newest and best;
And no bodings of ill, came to ruffle her rest.
* * * ♦ * ♦ * # *
Like an Isle in the great Pacific,
Untrodden by foot of man ;
With its scented groves and forests,
Which the zephers gently fan ;
Where all is radiant with beauty,
And a gladness pervades the air
There it was that the Lord Almighty,
In a garden beyond earn pare,
Placed Iwo beings wondrous fair;
They seemed like two wingless angels,
So holy and pure were they,
And they laughed with delight like children,
On a bright and sunny day,
As if loosed from some deep enchantment,
Of numberless days and hours,
Or waked from a death like slumber,
Where memory loses its powers,
They gaze in breath less wonder 1 .
At the birds, and beasts, and flowers. -
And anon as they tread the mazes,
And drink in the joyous sounds,
Of the fairy like feathery creatures,
Whose happiness knows no bounds,
They looked in each others faces,
For words they could not speak;
And they stood like two silent graces,
So child-like and so meek.
Then the one with the golden tresses
That waved in the morning breeze,


With her finger pointing upwards
To the birds that sung in the trees;
Tuned her voice to the song of the bulbul
In her first attempt to please.
The trill of the bulbul ceased,
As midst silence this godness fair,
With sounds of the sweetest melody,
Flooded the balmy air :
Then Adam breathing the spirit,
Which issued from lips so sweet,
In deeper tones and grander,
Waked the echos in their retreat.
” d* V* «■
|fhe Blind |Pouth at the grgan
I sat by the window-one evening.
The “Day” its journey had run,
Anyl I turned as I heard a quiet tread,—
T’was a mother and sightless son.
They had entered the room so gently,
They scarce disturbed my r rest,
A few broken words were spoken,
But there meaning I only' guessed.
They had come from the land of music,—
The German father-land—
To seek their bread ’mongst strangeir,
Bv the skill of the the Blind lad’s hand.


He sat at the cabinet organ.
"Well pleased 1 should hear him play;
No score had lie placed before him,
The night to him was day.
His fingers instiuctivel\ r glided,
O’er the keys of the speaking hoard.
As it by some spirit guided,
Heaven-ward the music soared.
.Such inusie, methought as I listened.
As the Angels improvise,
When they thrill with some new emotion
Some rare and glad surprise.
And I thought as 1 looked on the mother;
As she gazed with a subdued joy;
That she would not change for another;
H( r blind, but gifted hoy.
©ream of the Suture,
j-J: (~-s<2
The night’s dark mantle wrapt its folds.
Close round the dying day ;
And “ Nature” in its varied moulds, '
Ceased from its busy toil, or idle play,
To seek in slumber, the renewing life
Which, with the rising suu
Girts it with strength, to meet its daily strife:—-
Beside the fire, that faintly, dimly,'burned.
As if it too had played its part,
And wished to be at rest;


I sat and mused, and mused,
And thought upon the past,
And in the shadows which it cast,
I tried to read with “ Fancy’s eye,
What was my future destiny;—
Scene after scene, in dioramic flight,
Now ’rose, now faded from my sight.
Till wearied with the vain attempt,
My eye-lids closed, and as 1 slept I dreamt.
THE DREAM.
Methought by some mysterious force,
Uplifted high, I floated in mid-air;—-
The earth in rapid motion, swift pursued its course,
Ami with it bore away, the bur 'en of my care; —
Cities and states in quick succession flew,
Until the “ Ocean” wide, appeared in view ;
In silence deep, and solitude profound,
I swept the horizon all round :
Poised like the eagle in empyrean high,
I scanned the depths with wondering eye
No type was seen of living thing,
Of human foot, or bird on wing.
Reposing gently as on eider down,
I seemed to dream again, a dream Within a dream
Around me bathed in moving amber light,
Visions of beauty, met the enraptured sight,
Bright faces beamed with loving tenderness,
And whispering voices soothed my every sense ;
Entranced, I yielded to the magic spell,
As on my ravished ear, tones like a silver bell,
High placed in air, h; oke into song
The while, —


Enchanting strains of sweetest sound,
Breathed in soft harmony around.
THE SONG.
Child of yonder glittering star
We have called thee from afar,
Summoned thee to learn thy fate,
Where thy guardian angels wait.
Oft in danger hast thou been,
We have guarded thee unseen,
Watched thee in the silent hour.
Kept thee from the “ Evil” power.
When thy wayward spirit led thee,
From the paths of Him who fed thee,
We, his ministers of kindness,
Flew to save thee in thy blindness.
When by friends thou wast forsaken,
And by sorrows deep o’ertaken, —
When thy heart was crushed and broken,
And thy woe could not be spoken:—-
When in mercy thou wast smitten.
On thy brow the words were written,
■ ‘ He must suffer and alone,”
“ I have marked him for mine own.”
Wandererin many lands,
We’ve upheld thee in our hands,
Went before thee, led the way.
Never left thee, night or day.


This thy duty hence will be,
Tend with care my lambs for me.
Plead with sinners, thou wast one,
Tell them what thy God hath done.
Mindful of the mercy showed,
Mindful of the love bestowed,
Let thy sympathy and love,
Lost ones lure to realms above.
God thy sun and shield will ne,
Grace and glory unto thee ;
Then he’ll give, nor will withhold,
Blessings, richer far than gold.
Boft fell the words, as snow flakes on the ground,
Or still small voices, imitating sound :
Unheard, save by the soul whose inward ear,
In slumber deep, alone can hear
What others hear not; and whose hidden eye,
Peoeives that which to strangers passing by.
Remains unseen, thou nigh.
♦ * -ft
■ft * * * *
The vision faded from my lingering sight
As phantoms vanish, with the morning light,
The heavenly strains, fainter and fainter grew,
As soars the tuneful lark, who
Prom his grassy bed beneath the early dew,
Ascends to meet the rising sun,
And heavenward disappears,
Erst his enthrilling song has well legun
As, when the infant cradled in its mother’s arms.


Seduced to sleep, soothed by the gentle charms
Of softest lullaby, while pillowed on the breast,
Fretful awakes,
When the sweet song, which distant seems,
Has ceased to echo in its baby dreams ;
So I awoke, regretful that the day
Had summoned me again to wateh and pray.
Yet when I pondered on the future cast,
Oblivion promised for the sinful past;—
A life no longer steeped in sorrow,
Hope pointing to a bright to-morrow,
I ’rose, no longer feeling weary,
The future seemed no longer dreary.
