









GILBERT GOGGER;
OR,
AUSTRALASIA VERITAS.
BY
JAMES AUGUSTUS EDWARDS.
MACKAY:
JOSEPH P. KEMP, PUBLISHER
SYDNEY STREET.
1876.




GILBERT GOGGER;
OR,
AUSTRALASIA VERITAS.
BY
JAMES AUGUSTUS EDWARDS.
MACKAY:
JOSEPH P. KEMP, PUBLISHER,
SYDNEY STREET.
1876.


COPYRIGHT RESERVED.
For the right of reprinting apply to Mr. J. P. Kemp, Bookseller
and Publisher, Mackay, Yathra, Queensland,
Australia.


PREFACE.
Dear Reader,
In the following pages, I have endeavoured to en-
lighten you upon a topic much talked, and written
about, but very little understood—namely, Australia;
or, as the Dutch delight to call it, New Holland.
Most of those who have written of Australia, have
never been nearer than 16,000 miles to the antipodes
of Europe, their only knowledge of those climes, and
of their natural history, being derived from travellers’
tales, and from dead specimens in museums.
Could I but be sure that these pages of mine
would wile* but one tedious half-hour away, or
smooth but one sick pillow, or cause but one smile
to appear upon the care-worn face, even at the
expense of the luckless Author, I should consider
myself fully repaid for my trouble.
In conclusion, I beg to state that the major part
of this fiction is founded upon facts.
JAMES AUGUSTUS EDWARDS.
* I have used this term to express the word “ beguile.”—J. A. E.




GILBERT GOGGER;
OR,
AUSTRALASIA VERITAS.
CHAPTER I.
NIGHT IN LONDON. LONDON BEGGARS.
It being night, of course, all that is not described, could
not be seen, because of the darkness, the author, there-
fore, knowing nothing about it, refers his readers to those
who do.
x- x x x x- x
When the weary and honest artisan, is returning from
his daily toil, to his last daily meal in the bosom of his
family, when the spoilt children of fortune, are repairing
to ball, soiree, or opera; when policemen with oilskin capes,
and dark lanthorns, make their appearance, silently,
stealthily, like the ghosts in some antique legend, gliding
and stealing along, as though anxious that even their own
shadows should not be aware of their approach ; it is then,
that the shops for the most part being closed, and the
business of the day done ; that the pariahs of society, who
have during the day been lying idle in their dens, like
wild beasts come forth to seek their prey.
From the hardened garrotter, who like the Indian thug,
follows strangling as a profession, the burglar, pickpocket
etcetera, all familiar with jails and convict settlements,
down to the exile of a few hours, a boy or a girl, as the
case may be, driven from home either through the cruelty
B


of those who should be their natural protectors, or from
their own natural bent to evil, to swell the ranks of the jail
king. Some bold and defiant, others humble and cringing;
in this street, a kinchen cadger,* in this, a duffing peg-leg. j"
Here, two little children hawking matches, there a bold
brazen-faced woman singing a popular ballad to a crowd of
listening people.
These, and many other scenes too numerous to mention
make up the night life of London.
A stranger in London, would naturally ask, where, if we
see little or nothing of these people when the sun is shining,
do they stow themselves away ? and echo might appro-
priately answer. Where!
However, availing ourselves of a privilege not possessed
by echo, we will penetrate into at least, one of the many
dens of the monster, Crime.
CHAPTER II.
WHEREIN’ THE READER IS INTRODUCED TO THE INSIDE OF A BEG-
GAR’S KITCHEN; ALSO TO SOME OF THE PROFESSIONALS OF THE
CROSS IN THEIR HOURS OF IDLENESS—A FAINT GLIMMER OF
OUR HERO AT LAST—A MYSTERIOUS CONVERSATION’.
In a thickly populated district, not far from the sound of
St. Luke’s Church, bells; crowded with cabbage stalls, fish
stalls, penny traders, orange girls, thieves, paupers, and
poor debtors (for reader, it was near to a once famous
debtors’ prison), there stood, or for aught we know, still
stands, a cadger’s ken (Anglice, beggars kitchen.)
To the eyes of a stranger the house so designated, would
attract no more attention than its neighbours, but to the
larey covesj the sight of a ragged coat hanging to a pole
that projected from one of the upper windows, would be
quite enough advertisement of its character. Passing
through the doorway of the house in question (for the door-
way is left hospitably open), we descend a flight of stairs
* Kinchen cadger, in thieves latin : a baby beggar,
t Duffing peg-leg: False wooden legged beggar.
I Larey coves: knowing ones.


and find ourselves in a densely crowded, musty-smelling
cellar; an indescribable heart sickening compound of
villainous smells assail the olfactory nerves, the smell of
onions and frying-meat predominating. A very babel of
voices, smite upon the untutored ear, in which a word or
two of English may now and then be distinguished.
Reader, they are conversing in the elegant tongue, un-
known to Oxford or Cambridge, albeit it is styled, '‘Latin.”
Motley indeed are the owners of those onions and frying-
meat, and unintelligible jargon; beggars of all ages and
both sexes, blind, halt, and duffers, * street hawkers,
knights of the Cross (not of the Legion of Honour), cross-
ing sweepers, etcetera, broke up into little knots of
threes and fours, as choice may dictate, planning schemes
of swindling, trade, or begging, as the different elements
may predominate.
With one only of these groups have we anything to do;
it is those three men that you see seated at that table in
the right hand corner, employed (0 ! shade of Epicurus
forgive them) in masticating potatoes and fried tripe.
Apparently fully employed as they seem to be in eating, a
close observer may see that they are likewise holding a
whispered conversation.
That gentleman, dear reader, who seems just now to be
seeking for something in the bottom of his tin measure
(the proprietors of this refreshment hall not trusting their
customers with pewter), is commonly known by the name
of Ikey Jonas. He has just returned from his travels, upon
which, a paternal government, anxious for the good of his
health, had persuaded him to go, kindly bearing all the
expense of his outfit, the voyage, and his sojourn for a
period of seven years, in the land of hominy and kangaroo
beef; he is dressed in trousers of blue pilot cloth, jacket
and waistcoat of the same, and seems at first sight to be a
sea-faring man.
The gentleman at the end of the table, who is dressed in
a seedy suit of clerical black, a greasy white choker,f and
shabby battered beaver, is Charles Smasher, Esquire,
attorney, solicitor, and proctor; he is commonly known
* Duffers: imposters,
t Choker: neck-tie.


amongst his clients of the Old Bailey, as Slimy Slasher, in
honour of his slippery tongue, and his profound knowledge
of all legal quirks and quibbles, whereby a murderer,
caught red-handed with the blood of his victim scarce dry
upon his clothes, may go scot free, through a flaw in the
indictment; or a pick-pocket may plead not guilty of
stealing, as he found the ankercher in the genelman’s
pocket.
The third individual in this select coterie, rejoiced in the
name of Solomon Low; his ferret eyes, hook nose, and
shining jet-black hair, proclaim him a member of that
nation whose ancestors crossed over the Bed Sea drysliod,
and after having been miraculously fed for forty years in
the wilderness, seeing miracles and wonders, such as no
other people before, or since, have been permitted to
witness, no sooner gained the promised land, than they fell
into idolatry.
He was dressed much after the style of Slimy Smasher.
So much, kind reader, for the personal appearance of three
individuals who will play no small part in this, our veritable
history.
Availing ourselves of our privilege of listening unper-
ceived, we will draw near to the table at which the worthy
trio are seated, and catch the low murmur of words that
proceed out of the capacious throat of Ikey Jonas
“I tell you what,” hums that worthy, “you just point
out the kid # to me, and I’ll guarantee to break him in, and
you shall defend him, and then if he ain't lagged f it will
be your own fault, ha! ha! you’ll defend him, the same
as you did me, and I got seven stretch.”^
“ Well, well, Ikey,” expostulated the lawyer, “youknow
I did my best, but the case was too plain against you ; let
bygones be bygones.”
“ Bight you are, so when the kid is lagged the rest of
the gilt § is mine, though why that old swell cove || wants
to lag the kid licks me.”
“ Beasons are of no consequence to you, Ikey,” answered
Slimy, “ and let me give you a little caution, if you blab f
* Kid: boy. t Lagged: transported. J Seven stretch: seven years.
i Gilt, from the German gelt: money. || Swell cove: rich gentleman.
IT Blab: speak.


one word about this affair I will lag you again, as sure as
that I now stand at this table.”
“Well, you have no need to threaten me, at any rate if
I get lagged you will sail in the same ship, and a man is
not so soon missed in Australia as he is here.”
“ Yell, veil, my tears, don’t cwarrel,” said the Jew fence,*
Solomon Low, “you are both honest shentlmen, only too
hot tempered.”
Slimy laughed, and bidding his companions good night,
he began to ascend the flight of stairs already spoken of.
He had, however, scarcely mounted half a dozen, steps,
when he was passed by two lads descending. A glance
quick as lightning was directed from Slimy’s eyes to the
younger of the two lads, and then as though a new thought
had struck him, he again returned to the kitchen, and
pointing out the younger of the two lads to Ikey Jonas, he
exclaimed, “ that’s him ! ”
“ That’s him, is it ? ” said Jonas, “ Oh ! that’s him, down
here and palsf with Billy the Bustler, why, ’taint half
such a job as I thought it would be; he’s arf broke in
aready.”
CHAPTER III.
WHEREIN THE READER IS INTRODUCED TO A MERCHANT PRINCE.
BIRDS OP A FEATIIER FLOCK TOGETHER. A CORRESPONDENCE
NECESSARY TO ELUCIDATE OUR STORY.
For more than one hundred and fifty years, the old
established firm of Gogger and Gogger had held up its
head in the foremost ranks of England’s merchant aristo-
cracy.
No bills belonging to Gogger and Gogger were ever
known to have been dishonoured, and “ rumour with her
thousand tongues ” talked of ingots of gold, and casks of
specie, that were lying in the vaults of Gogger and
logger- . , '
However, be that as it may, the present representative
* Fence : receiver of stolen goods,
f l’als: companions.


of the old established firm showed no outward signs of
rolling in riches, on the contrary, a stranger would be apt
to imagine him sunk in penury.
Punctually every working day, at nine o’clock in the
morning, was Sir Theodosius Gogger seen to enter his
counting house, dressed in a rusty suit of black : so rusty
indeed were they, that the head clerk (who had been in
Gogger and Gogger’s employment for the space of ten
years) was quite ready to swear that they were the identical
clothes that Sir Theodosius wore when he (the head clerk)
first came there. Punctually at one o’clock, he produced
from the pocket of his coat, a penny loaf and a piece of
bacon or cheese, and washing these edibles down his throat
with a pint of ale, procured from the neighbouring public
house (yclept the Rump and Stump Inn), pretended that
it was a luncheon. Whether he ever took any other re-
freshment during the four and twenty hours, was matter
of much speculation amongst the clerks in the employment
in the house of Gogger and Gogger.
As we said, not a day passed (Sundays excepted) without
seeing Sir Theodosius at his place, perched upon his stool,
with his books open before him; he looked in his small
office box, like a spider in his den or hole, watching for
flies.
And well might he crouch there from the gaze of his
fellowmen, for like the spider he had blood upon his claws,
not in the strict sense of the words, for Sir Theodosius had
never cut a man’s throat, or shot, or killed his man by open
violence, but still the blood of his cousin, Sir Gilbert
Gogger, cried unto the Lord for vengeance and on him.
Sir Gilbert Gogger and Mr. Theodosius Gogger, of the
firm of Gogger and Gogger, were cousins. Firm friends
at school and college, no boating party, cricket match, or
other athletic sport was complete without the two insepar-
ables, or as the wags of Oxford dubbed them, the Siamese
twins; how came it then that the blcod of his cousin, hung
like a millstone around the neck of Sir Theodosius Gogger,
and how comes it to pass that, that sly looking shabbily
dressed man, can dare to utter such words as he is now


addressing to Sir Theodosius Gogger; like bearding the
hyena in his own den.
“I tell you, sir,” exclaimed that person, who is no other
than our old acquaintance of the beggars’ kitchen —namely,
Charles Smasher, Esq.—“ I tell you, sir, that I will have
the sum I demand, or transport myself, and you too; surely
you have not forgotten the service I rendered to you a few
years ago, or the construction the public might be apt
to put on your motives for acting as you did, in a certain
affair.”
“ But my dear sir,” whispered Sir Theodosius, in a soft
conciliatory tone of voice, whilst his lips quivered and his
fingers clutched an imaginary Slimy by the throat, “ I told
you of that last unfortunate speculation in silver mines, in
Peru, and this house, whose name has always been synono-
mous with stability, will in a few years, one or two at the
farthest be bankrupt; how then can I comply with your
demands? At the present there is not ten thousand in the
firm. As to the affair you spoke of, I can deny it, and who
think you would be believed —you or I ? You have no
proofs, as I never wrote to you one single line ; you know
that I am a revengeful man, therefore, take what I offer
you, and when he is transported (as I swore before his
birth, that he should be), come to me for the other "five
hundred.”
“Very well, sir, I know I can believe you, so give me
the cheque, and I’ll be going; and before this day month,
his son shall have committed a crime that shall transport
him, I’ll answer for it, and you know me of old.”
“ Here it is then, and don’t come here again till it is
over,” rejoined Sir Theodosius, at the same time handing
Slimy a cheque upon his bankers for the sum of five hundred
pounds ; Slimy pocketed it, and gliding out was soon upon
his way to get it cashed. As the door closed upon the
shadow of the departing pettifogger, the face of Sir Theo-
dosius Gogger underwent a terrible change, his eyes opened
in a frightful manner, saliva ran from his mouth, and he
looked, as indeed he was for a time, a maniac.
After the first fit of rage had passed away, he commenced
to pace his small darkened cage, clenching his hands, and
muttering threats of vengeance against the Slimy, “ Fool!


fool!! that I was,” said he, “to place myself in his power
atill what could Ido ; but wait, sir, wait, what could P I do ?
My time will come, and then! but where could I have
found another so skilful, and so unscrupulous. No ! I could
WW V t bad i myreVen ? 6 without him; still wait! wait!
this”’ T^ y r- k and thenlwill crush him like
this . and Sir Theodosius ground his heel into the floor
.Leavmg him to muse over his plots, and Slimy’s insults
we will take the liberty of reading a correspondence neces-
sary to elucidate our story. 1 neces
Letter First.
From Theodosius Gogger Esq to Sir Gilbert Gogger, Bart.
Dear Gilbert,— Jla yheld Villa, London, February 20th, 1838.
Ini;/ f eceived y°" r message, and anxiously await vour coniine-•
d a e n e d pl C v°Xo n t int6l^S
Ppa aS P assi onately as I now love her
friend°let l T?. h 1 V lleart *° love another ever so little ; still my dear
triend, let us be, as we have always been—brothers. 7
Yours ever,
Extract from diary kept by Theodosius Gogger, Esq.,
, 1838.
aTtfm offieT"fa t 0 T d havin S nothin S to transact
„ u W Lodge IrZZ"* * “ d tbm ' !
ebruary 21st.-Dined yesterday with the Traceys; Julie as lively
pr d vSe e and e m ZV t 0l u “ e when 1 took a
L fhp - Stloned her, that she never had had a lover ;
howslowly the time goes, still six days before I can call her
FCbrU and 2 a 2 s n tutnv C as Ved & If 4 ® ,? ilheit ! he writes as lively
p wittily as ever, dear old fellow! J
U Traceys^li?w b mv and 1 introduced him to the
Traceys , how my head throbs, can it be that lam Jealous of
glances ? did th " y exchaa ge such
can it be rtP*? S at haVe never S6en each other before,
sicht Vm, ® sl hl® that there is such a thing as love at first
W h e n i a waL e t ! - S ! eep ! 0 ' la « dan ™. welcome,
Gilbert is too hnnn humble nightmare will have passed away.
e,t is too honorable, and Julie is my betrothed.


Letter Second.
From John Thomas to Mary Smudge,
Mayfield Villa, London, February 26th, 1838,
My Dear Mary,—
Master is fearful ill; on Friday he came home looking very cross
and sulky, and after ordering me in a manner thaf he never did
before, to fetch him a bottle of laudanum from the medicine chest in
the study, he shut himself up in his room. Oh ! dear, if I had only
known what he wanted it for, I would never have got it; but he told
me he was sick, and wanted a dose to send him to sleep. Now, my
dear Mary, do not whisper a word of what I am going to tell you,
when I went into master’s room on Saturday morning, I found him
lying full length upon the floor, the bottle of laudanum broken, and
all the things in disorder. Master was insensible all day on Satur-
day, but in the evening he awoke ; the doctor tried to make me
believe it was all an accident, but my opinion is that he meant to
kill himself; however, as I said he awoke about six o'clock on Satur-
day evening, and I gave him two letters that had come in in the
afternoon (although the doctor said that I had better not). V ell.
no sooner did he read them than he told me to get his. pistols, but I
just flatly refused; jumping out of his bed. and calling me a con-
temptible cur—Yes, he actually called me that —he swore, he would
have master Gilbert’s life, (Master Gilbert or Sir Gilbert, is a young
baronet, who came here on last Friday, a fine handsome young man,
and a first cousin to master; his valet was taken sick on the road
here, so I tended him for one night only, and hejgave me a. sovereign),
and called Miss Julie Tracey (who is to be married to him on Mon-
day, though I suppose it will be put off now) all the names he coujd
think of that are bad, however, he was too weak, and he soon fell
down on the floor, where he lay in spite of all his struggles to get
up, and his horrible curses; at last he seemed quite calm and I
helped him into bed, and gave him his diary off of the table, and pen
and ink, but though he tried to write, he couldn’t, at last he fell
asleep, and I went to bed so tired, that I did not wake up until
eleven o’clock in the morning, and on going into his room I found
him so busy writing in bed that he did not see me, so I quietly
slipped away again, and sat down to write this letter to you.
I intend to look into his diary at the first opportunity, and will
tell you all that he has written about it.
Hoping to see you soon, and tell you all about it,
I remain your loving and dutiful intended,
JOHN THOMAS.
Letter Third.
From Miss Julie Tracey, to Theodosius Gogger, Esq.
Charing Cross Hotel, London, February 24th, 1838.
Sir, —By the time that you receive this, I shall in all proba-
bility be the bride of another. After what has passed between us, I


owe it to myself to offer an explanation of my conduct. I once told
you that I never could love you, although I was willing to become
your wife as the wishes of my parents pointed in your direction, but
circumstances alter cases, and I have no intention to prove unfaithful
to the man of my heart, as I should do, were I married to you. Need
I say more?
You once asked me whether I had ever had a lover, and I
answered you, as I truly believed at the time. No ! hut here to clear
myself from tee charge of intentionally deceiving you, I will confess
that I did love once, and since Thursday have loved again, the object
of my love being Sir Gilbert, your cousin, whom I met last year in
Germany, but did not then know his name nor rank.
No doubt you will feel a little sore over the matter, but you
cannot feel it very severely, since you surely had no great love for
one who never repaid your endearments in kind.
Hoping that when we next meet it may be as friends,
I remain your obedient servant, soon to be,
LADY GILBERT GOGGER, nee JULIE TRACEY'.
Letter Fourth.
From John Thomas to Mary Smudge.
Mayfield Villa, London, October 3rd, 1838.
Dear Mary, I can t stand this much longer. For eight long
months have I.been attending, night and day, upon a raving mad-
man. Strait jackets, and indiarubber belts, have been the only
garments he has been able to wear. If he don't get better this
month I shall give warning. The doctor says he will get his reason
again soon, though it is awful the way he raves and curses. I would
not like to be either Miss Tracey or Sir Gilbert in his hands just
now. I copied the following out of his diary ; Isn't it awful ?
February 26th.—Gone! gone! oh traitor! I shall go mad. My
enemy alive, and I chained to this bed with this fever Curse
him ! Curse her! Gone! Be calm, my heart; be still, my
pulse. Vengeance is to come ! Fool! infatuated fool that I
was to oring him here ! Vengeance ! Yes, I can write calmly
now, and here let me record an oath ....
There, Mary, isn t that horrid, and isn’t he a devil to record such
an oath as that I have just heard the bell ring, and must inter-
rupt this.
Dear Mary,— Who would have thought it, when I left off writing
yesteiday to answer the bell, I found the doctor standing by master’s
bed, and ina-ter talking to him quite sensible. As soon as I went
in he knew me, and called me by name, asking me if I had put his
diaiy upon the table as he had told me to do. Only think how he
has lemembered that stupid thing, through eight long months of
madness; so I told him There’s that bell again.
So no more at present,
Yours,
JOHN T .


Diary Continued.
October 6th. —Once again, after (as they tell me) eight long months
of delirium, I take my pen to write. Can I ever forgive the
authors of all my misery ? who no doubt at this. present
moment are billing and cooing, as though such a being as I
was not in existence. However, to the patient, revenge is
certain. I will write no more to-day ; I must get well to begin
my task.
Letter Fifth.
From Charles Smasher, Esq., Attorney, etcetera, to Theodosius
, Gogger, Esq.
Faubourg St. Martin, Paris, January 17th, 1839.
Sir —According to our agreement, I embarked at London for
Calais, and have reached Paris this morning. I have already given
the first kick to the house of your enemy, Sir Gilbert Gogger; the
police will receive an anonymous letter to-day, accusing him of cor-
responding with the * * * * for the return of * * * *
and as ho goes to the opera to-night, I will take care that there is
plenty of proof for the police to-morrow; the skeleton keys of Ikey
Jonas (my travelled friend), and my good forgery of his signature,
will earn the reward agreed upon betwixt, Sir you, and your humble
BClVant ’ CHARLES SMASHER.
N.B. —Burn this, “Dead men tell no tales.”
Diary Continued.
January 10.—Sent a letter to-day to a certain Mr. Smasher, an
individual with whom I became accidentally acquainted.
Crafty, and unscrupulous, he wiil do anything for money. I
must use him, and then throw him away.
Letter Sixth.
From Charles Smasher, Esq., to Mr. Theodosius Gogger.
Faubourg St. Martin, Paris, April 24th, 1839.
Sir. —All has turned out well; our bird is caged and condemned
to death ; the hen and her chick have escaped across the frontier.
As it is a certain thing with the male bird, I shall start to-night
upon their tracks, and have no fear of not being able to soon give an
account of them. , ,
X have drawn on Monsieur for two hundred pounds. Please
honour the bill.
Yours obediently,
THE WRITER.


Diary Continued.
July 14th, 1839. —Ha! ha! Sunflower Lodge has changed hands;
the Traceys having gone to Australia, in the firm belief that
their daughter has eloped with Sir Gilbert, and is now living
with him without the benefit of clergy. Owing to the virtue
of a twenty pound note to the postman, they have received no
tidings from her. The plot thickens, and revenge crawls on
apace.
August Ist. —More triumphs; landed to-day, lady Gogger and child,
in great want, having taken scarcely anything with her at
the time of her flight from Paris. lam to take possession of
Gogger Hall as next in the entail; the public know nothing
of Sir Gilbert’s marriage. I have addressed a letter of con-
dolence and forgiveness to her, asking her friendship, and
offering her a home at Gogger Hall. Query. For what
purpose? to think to injure me with impunity. Theodosius !
Remember your wrongs.
August Ist. —Received a letter from charming Julie ; accepting the
home I offer to her. This will make mj r revenge more easy,
and will save me some trouble. I must get Mr. Smasher to
procure me a mock clergyman to marry us, when she consents
as she must, and will.
Letter Seventh.
From Charles Smasher, Esq., to Sir Theodosius Gogger.
Sir, —I have performed my part of the contract, and will call
upon you for the sum due.
Yours truly,
CHARLES SMASHER.
Diary Continued.
October 12th.—“ Necessity makes us acquainted with strange bed-
fellows. But to-day severs the connection between me and
Charles Smasher, Esquire—a scoundrel, par excellence.
CHAPTER IV.
WHEREIN WE RESUME OUR STORY—THE BEGINNING OP SIR THEO-
DOSIUS’S VENGEANCE—LADY GOGGER’S MADNESS AND ITS
CAUSE-THE BEGINNING OF TUB END-HOW MR. JONAS WAS
FORCED TO LEAVE HIS WIFE A GRASS WIDOW—AND HOW MRS.
JONAS CAME TO HAVE A SON WITHOUT A FATHER-AN ACCOUNT
OF OUR HERO’S EARLY EDUCATION.
From the foregoing correspondence, the reader will
perceive that bir Theodosius Grogger was not always the


unsociable, unloving misogamistical being, that he appeared
to be when first introduced to their notice. .
The vow of vengeance he had recorded in his journal
he had fearfully kept. ~ .
By his hellish arts he had (as he thought) brought her
to shame, and after ascertaining that she would again
become a mother, had turned her out of Gogger House
destitute, upbraiding her with her marriage with Sir
Gilbert, and taunting her that the marriage that she
thought had been consummated between her and lr lheo-
ddfeius, was a false one, and that the babe she carried was
a bastard ;in this, however, he was mistaken, hor fclimy
was only too glad to have him in his power; therefore,
instead of procuring a mock clergyman, as he promised his
patron he would do, he had procured a properly qualified
vicar of the established church, and although lie knew it
not, Sir Theodosius was legally bound to cherish ner,
whom he was bent upon destroying.
He had before casting her forth, caused her son, by bir
Gilbert, to be conveyed away by Slimy, cautioning that
person to always keep an eye over him, so that when
wanted he might be found. He had likewise placed a sum
of money in Slimy’s hands, wherewith to clothe and teed,
but not educate him ; in fact he wished the boy to live,
merely that he might in the fulness of time, visit the sms ol
the father upon the child. A
Ladv Gogger had become insane, and had been conveyed
to a private madhouse by Sir Theodosius’s orders ; she a
there been delivered of a still-born child, and was reported
to have died ; and the vengeance of Sir Theodosius seemed
nearly complete. But “man proposes, God disposes; the
kaleidoscope of life keeps turning and shifting, and form-
ing new combinations.
& * * * *
Years had elapsed since the incarceration of lady Gogger,
and secretion of her son by Slimy. Sir Theodosius Gogger
being as implacable as ever. #
The credit of the long established firm of Gogger and
Gogger was beginning to totter. Speculation had done its
work, and the end was nigh.
’ * * *- •* *


The traveller on proceeding down Whitecross-street,
would, no doubt pass by the house of the widow Jonas, or
rather, by the house inhabited by her. We say by the
widow Jonas, for she knew not that her husband was still
living ; in fact she had reason to believe that her husband
was dead, and did not think for one moment, that he often
frequented the beggars’ kitchen, situated in the same
street.
Born in a village, in the west of England, and educated
by the village schoolmaster, Jane Selby had grown up a
rustic beauty, wittv, and smart; she had attracted the
attention of the lady of the manor, and had been duly
installed as lady’s maid. It was whilst she was in the
service of Lady Morgan, that she became acquainted with
Isaac Jonas, then head groom at the house, and uncon-
nected with those companions who ultimately proved his
ruin.
After a courtship of a few months the young couple were
married, with the consent of Sir Edward and Lady Morgan
—Lady Morgan giving as the bride’s dowry, the lease and
goodwill of the Pig and Whistle public house—Sir Edward,
as the bridegroom’s portion, stocking it with all things
needful. “ All went merry as a marriage bell” for a few
months, and Jane Selby, now Mrs. Jonas, was as ladie3
who love their lords (and for the matter of that, those who
hate their lords and love somebody else) often are; and
Jonas in the exultation of his heart, declared he would
treat all comers for a day, to Yorkshire stingo and bread
and cheese, ad libitum; and so one fine summer’s day, the
house, yclept the Pig and Whistle, became a scene of de-
bauchery, and the quiet villagers were shocked at the sight
of eight or ten well-known poachers and vagabonds carous-
ing and singing, when all honest men were labouring to
lay by a store for a rainy day. From that time forward,
Isaac Jonas became restless and discontented. The wild,
exciting tales of these midnight prowlers of woods and
forests and preserves, had taken a strong hold upon his ill-
regulated mind, and he longed for a night with the gun
and the snare. “The wish is father to the deed,” and so
after a few nights of the coveted sport, Isaac Jonas found
himself in the body of Exeter Jail, sentenced to seven years


penal servitude. Jane, upon hearing the news, was taken
ill, and nearly died in giving birth to a still-born child. Isaac
Jonas was sent to Port Jackson (not Botany Bay, as some
people erroneously think, for Botany Bay never was a
penal port), and Jane, on her recovery, realised what little
property she could, and leaving the scene of her husband s
shame, repaired to London, where she supported herself by
keeping a small shop. Years rolled on, and she heard but
little of her husband, and the old love was gradually dying
out, although she often pictured him to herself, as he was
whiten they were married first, young, simple, and easily
led, either for good or evil. She wished to see him again,
but she little knew the change that evil communications
had wrought in him, and well was it for her that they did
not meet, for Isaac (or as we shall for the future call him,
Ikev), was amongst the vilest of the vile.
3Jy * * * * * *
About five years from the time of Mrs. Jonas settling
down in Whitecross-street, an adventure happened to her,
which gave her much cause for speculation at the time, and
also a small pecuniary profit.
Having little to lose, the widow (as her neighbours
called her) never thought it necessary to hire a watchman
to guard her house during the night, and consequently had
to open and shut the shop herself. She generally arose in
winter at about eight o’clock, and if the morning was foggy,
she lit the gas before opening the door. One cold, foggy
morning in November she had opened her shop as usual,
and on attempting to descend the flight of steps leading
from the shop to the street, she stumbled across what to
her appeared to be a bundle of clothes. On more narrowly
examining it, however, she found that the bundle contained
a full grown male child about eighteen months old, at least
she thought the child was quite as old as that. From its
deep breathing, and the difficulty of awakening it, it ap-
peared to have been drugged, no doubt to prevent its cries
attracting the attention of passers by. Taking it into the
shop, she found it rolled in a costly shawl, and searching
more narrowly, she found a letter pinned to the shawl and
addressed to her. She was about to open the letter, but
the infant began to cry, so placing tne child in her warm


bed, she began to prepare some pap for it, at the same
time wondering whose child it was, or why it had been
placed upon her doorstep. After feeding the babe, for
whom she already began to feel a mother’s love, she read
the letter, and availing ourselves of our invisibility, we will
do the same.
The letter bears no postmark, date, or other clue where-
by the writer may be traced ; it is worded as follows .
Madam— The child placed in your charge will be well paid for,
provided that you keep the secret of its acquisition ; in due time it
will be claimed; call it any name you please; every month two
pounds will be sent to you by post, &nd &s & fiist instalment, I lieie-
by enclose twenty-five pounds.
Years rolled over Reuben Jonas, for so the widow had
named the waif thrown by the waves of adversity upon the
shores of her benevolence. Although the letter promised
so much, no money had ever since reached her on account
of her charge, or her son, as she now called him. She had
taught him to regard her as his mother, and had long since
ceased to wonder at the occurrence.
Reuben had been taught by the widow to read and
write very fairly, although his studies had as yet been the
reverse of useful, his school books consisting of the library
that constituted part of the widow’s stock-in-trade; for
children she kept hardbake, toffee, toys, etcetera, and for
children of larger growth, such tales as Barney the Vam-
pire, or the Feast of Blood; Castle of Otranto, the Old
Gothic Baron, Jack Sheppard, Dick Turpin, etcetera;
occasionally such a book as the Pilgrim’s Progress to the
Holy Land might be found upon her shelves, alongside of
such an one as Sam Hall’s Progress to the Gallows.
Reuben had read these books o’er and o’er, and firmly
believed them all to be true
It is hard to say how long he might have lived in the
midst of the gigantic cesspool of Whitecross-street, sur-
rounded by, yet uncontaminated by the vice that stalked
in all its hideous nakedness through the narrow causeway,
had not an event occurred that changed the current of his
life, and caused him to undergo the adventures to be
hereinafter recorded.


CHAPTER V.
THE SKELETON KING—REUBEN LEAVES HIS HOME—A DAY DREAM-
REUBEN FINDS A QUESTIONABLE FRIEND—DEFINITION OF THE
WORD WATCHMAKER.
Bring out your dead! bring out your dead! “ and there
was weeping and lamentation, Rachel mourning for her
children, and would not be comforted, because they were
not.”
“ Weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth,” and
gritn death stalking in all his hideous nakedness through
the land, and his name is pestilence.
All, all were taken ; the young maid and the matron, the
head of the family and the childless, the green and the
sere, the just and the unjust; those who dreaded the ap-
proach of the skeleton king, and those who welcomed him
as a timely relief from toil and trouble.
Bring out your dead ! bring out your dead ! Hark to
the tread of his bony feet as he stalks through the church
and the council hall; merrily he laughs as they droop
before him, and shudder as he breathes upon them with
his icy breath.
Yet even now, when the vials of the Lord’s wrath are
being emptied over the doomed land, the gaudy tinsel is
still displayed before the glaring footlights, and ribald songs
and plays are sung and acted as of yore ; and the spectators
madly applaud, and again the skeleton king laughs, for
well he knows that the vitiated atmosphere will aid him
with new victims. Laugh loudly at the antics of yonder
buffoon, miserable fools ! to-night thy souls will be required
of thee.
Bring out your dead ! bring out your dead! Place
watchmen at the corners of the streets. Swing high the
bundle of straw by day, and the lantern by night. Deny
ingress and egress to all, save the doctor of the soul and
the doctor of the body, and that ghoul-like being who per-
forms the last offices for the dead, and still grim death
glides by you unseen to fulfil his mission.
Amongst the first to fall a victim to the cholera was
Reuben’s foster-mother; and he, poor child, had wandered
from the house, through dread of those rough officials of
c


the poor-house, who had taken possession of the shop and
goods, and had buried the owner.
All day long he had wandered through the streets,
through dread of the men before mentioned, crying low,
and sobbing as only a child can do, as he thought of her
who was now no more; but grief to a boy of his age is
never of long duration, and hunger and thoughts of where
he should sleep that night were combining to deaden his
sorrow.
At last he paused before a ready cooked meat shop, and
gazed wistfully at the unhealthy looking beef, pork, and
vegetables there displayed; and gazing, he gradually fell
into a trance, and imagined, as many others have done
before him, that he was the hero of his own dream. He
was a sailor, and the shop before him was a gorgeous
forest of tropical trees. The ivy • and the moss were
climbing to the tops of the lofty pine and mahogany trees ;
the monkeys and parrots were chattering around him ; he
smelled the perfume of the orange and the citron, and
heard the plash of the waves upon the beach ; and he was
happy, until a rude voice dispelled the vision he had
conjured up, and caused it to vanish for evermore.
“ Hello, kiddy! what are you staring at that grunter’s
head so for? I fancied you was ketching flies with your
tater trap open in that kind of a way; you look hungry, so
here’s a couple of browns, go and get two pennorth of
duff *, and have a gorge.” So saying, the speaker thrust
two pennies into Keuben’s hand, and pushed him into the
shop. Keubenmade his purchase and came out again, and
offered it to his unknown friend ; but that individual,
whom we shall presently have the pleasure of describing,
bade him “ peck at it himself, as he was not hungry.” The
boy needed no second invitation, but began to devour the
pudding with a gusto that an epicure might have envied.
The individual who had thus accosted our hero was a
youth of about sixteen years of age. He had fair com-
plexion and laughing blue
and perfumed; he was dressed in a tight fitting pair of
trousers, and a coat commonly known as a thieves’ sac, and
*Duff: pudding.


a cap set jauntily upon one side of his head; his hands
were remarkably long and white, like a lady’s.
“Follow me kiddy,” said the gentleman of the ringlets,
“ and tell us where you live.”
“I have not got any home now, mother’s dead, and I
don’t know where to go to,” replied Reuben.
“ Well, come alonger me, and I’ll learn you my trade,”
said ringlets.
“ What is your trade, sir ?” our hero ventured timidly to
inquire.
f “ That’s right, my boy, always bo perlite. My trade’s a
watchmaker, and I works anywheres ; I am going to the
play to-night, to see if I carnt make two, or three, and I
want you to cop bung.”* 1
“ Cop what ?” asked Reuben in surprise.
“ Why, cop bung, don’t you twig,f when I makes em,
you puts em in your pocket, and don’t tell any one as you’ve
got em, as there’s a Hact of Parliment out agin us watch-
makers, as how we musn’t work without a license, and I
aint paid my license yet, and so the traps;[ won’t let me
work if they sees me.”
The hands of the clocks now pointed to the hour of half-
past twelve, and the theatres began to give up their living ;
many of whom before that time, the next night, were
destined to meet the embraces of the king of terrors, but
blindly they laughed at the antics of the popular comedian,
as though there was not such a thing as cholera in the
world.
Pushing into the crowd, our two adventurers came
behind a gentleman dressed in the first style of fashion, and
Billy the Bustler (for that was the euphonious appellation
of Reuben’s new friend) intent upon his business of watch-
maker, eased the gentleman of his watch and pocket hand-
kerchief, and also his purse; thus combining the trades of
handkerchief-maker and purse-maker, with his original
trade of watch-maker. Now in all this Reuben saw nothing
wrong; he had seen Billy the Bustler look the gentleman
in the face whilst taking his watch from him; and as the
gentleman had made no resistance, he imagined it to be
* Cop bung: Receive the plunder. f Twig : See. t Traps: Police


quite an honest transaction, and so as his friend pushed out
of the crowd, Reuben kept close to his heels.
Imagining that he had done quite enough for one night,
in the way of his trade, Bidy proceeded, accompanied by
Reuben, to the kitchen described before ; it was whilst
entering, that they were met on the stairs by Slimy, who
to his great surprise, had recognized Reuben as the com-
panion of Billy the Bustler; not having heard of the
widow's death, he was at a loss to account for the presence
of Reuben. Of course, the reader has already divined,
that it was Slimy who had placed the babe upon the
widow’s doorstep; but the reader does not know, that every
week he purchased a penny periodical at the widow’s shop,
so that he might make sure that Reuben was to be found
at any moment, in which Sir Theodosius might want him.
“ The stars are a shining cookey darling,” sang Billy the
Bustler, as he landed his feet upon the floor of the cadger’s
ken.* “ Here’s a seat Ruby,” and added he, as he handed
four sovereigns to Reuben. “ Here’s your reglars,”f and
then placing sixteen more of the portraits of Her Most
Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria, together with the watch
and handkerchief, in his own pocket. “ Here’s my reglars.”
Both then commenced eating their suppers, for the boy,
had in the short period of four or five hours, acquired a vast
confidence in himself; no wonder, therefore, that seeing no
wrong, he should not question the proceedings of his com-
panion.
For several days, Reuben accompanied the Bustler in his
professional journeys, and no doubt, if nothing had inter-
fered to prevent it, step by step, his innocence would have
been undermined, and he would soon have rivalled his com-
panions, in wickedness and crime.
For let poets prate as they will about ihe Arcadian sim-
plicity of man in his natural state ; the natural bent of
man’s heart, whether in savage or civilized life, is, to do
evil continually.
But a change was to come o’er his life ; he was to be
snatched as it were, out of the very jaws of the roaring lion.
* Cadgers ken: Beggars’kitchen.
t Reglars: Fair share of spoil.


Slimy Smasher and Ikey Jonas, had planned a scheme,
that they thought could not fail to cause the expatriation
of Reuben, and the consequent reward to themselves from
Sir Theodosius Gogger.
The plan was as follows : —lkey, Billy the Bustler, and
aaother, acting on information furnished by the fence,*
Solomon Low, had decided on cracking a cribf near
Hornsey, the residence of a certain Captain Breaker, R N.,
\yho had just returned from a long sea voyage; he was
kuown to have drawn £13,000 from the bank, a day or
two before, and to have only three servants in the house—
namely, the coxswain, Ben Grummet; the butler, a creature
of Solomon Low’s; and a cook and housemaid, oftlienameof
Susan Dotty. Captain Breaker, his sister Mrs. Noble, and
her daughter Helen, completed the establishment.
The house was impregnable except in one part, that
point was a window twenty feet from the ground ; this
window was to be unbarred by the butler ; opposite to the
window and only eighteen inches from the wall, there grew
a poplar tree; by climbing up this tree—a strong active
boy like Reuben might easily gain the window, once inside
the house, a peg of iron was to be screwed into the wall of
the room, to which was to be attached a small rope, suffi-
ciently strong to sustain the weight of a man.
As soon as the plunder was collected and made secure, it
had been agreed that Jonas should knock the boy on the
head so as to make him insensible, at the same time secret-
ing some of the stolen goods upon his person, so that when
the garrison should be aroused (as it would be, upon Jonas
quitting the house and gaining the high road, by that
individual’s act of firing a pistol ball through one of the
windows), Reuben should be discovered and appiehended,
and no doubt existed in the minds of Ikey and his ac-
complices that the boy would be tried and found
guilty. Such was the programme ; bye and bye we shall
see the result.
* Fence: Receiver of stolen goods,
f Cracking a crib : Breaking into a house.


CHAPTER VI.
WHEREIN THE READER IS INTRODUCED TO A THIEVES’ SLUM—
OUR HERO GETS WOUNDED WHILST CARRYING OUT HIS SHARE
OF THE PROGRAMME—A LUCKY HIT FOR REUBEN—SEVERAL NEW
CHARACTERS APPEAR UPON OUR STAGE.
Dear reader, imagine to yourself a cellar (of course
underground), about thirty feet long, by twelve wide;
imagine likewise a long deal table occupying the centre of
the floor, and you have the stage and scenery, to which you
are about to be introduced. Ranged alongside the table
are wooden benches that serve in lieu of chairs, upon the
table are pewter mugs, knives, forks, plates, and several
loaves of bread.
The reader, from this description, will no doubt imagine
that a meal of some sort was in preparation, and the reader
is perfectly right, for those plates, mugs, loaves of bread,
etcetera, are intended to assist at the midnight meal of the
most ancient and worshipful order of the Knights of the
Cross.f
The cellar is the property of old Snowball—an individual
of African descent. He is at this moment engaged at the
further end of the cellar in frying tripe.
Seated in all attitudes upon the benches, are some thirty
men and youths, their conversation being every now and
then interrupted by angry exclamations against the head of
the culinary department. Look narrowly, dear reader,
and you will perceive amidst the motley throng, our old
acquaintances, Reuben, Ikey Jonas, and Billy the Bustler,
and you will also observe that the last mentioned individual,
tired with casting hungry looks at the empty plates and
mugs, has arisen, and in a loud voice addresses the child of
Ham, thus:
“I say nigger, aint them spuds J and belly done
yet? ’cos if they are, let’s have ’em.”
Snowball muttered something that sounded marvellously
like an oath, and advancing to the table, commenced
serving a portion to each man; in the meantime the
* Slum: resort,
t Cross: thieves.
J Spuds: potatses.
Belly bags : bullock’s tripe.


conversation that had been interrupted when Billy put his
question to the cook, was resumed. ,
“Well, Ikey,” exclaimed a young hopeful, ot about
fourteen years of age, “I dessay, as how kangaroo beef is
better than mutton, but how about shoving yer into th
plough, as the song says?” .
“ Shoving you into the plough,” exclaimed Ikey in a tone
of derision, “I s’pose it’s the Snivelling Ned/ 4 up at the
stone house at Wandsworth, that’s been telling you that,
whilst you’ve been serving your dragf; why look here
now, some of you chaps have gone in for a stretch, + and a
bashing § every drag; why I’d sooner be lagged || any day,
’cos why ? you’re as good as a free man as soon as you
land in Perth, and then when your time is done, you can
set down and farm a piece of ground on yer own hook/]
and then the traps** are all old lagsff themselves, and so
they won’t be too sharp, as long as they get their reglais.
Supper being over, the company broke up into gangs,
and departed on their several errands of robbery, with
or without violence. With one only of these groups have
we anything to do; it consists of Ikey Jonas, Keuben,
Billy the Bustler, and another individual, who
dress and appearance is evidently a swell mobsman out o
luck, who has condescended, as many superior natures have
done before him, to line his pockets by associating with his
inferiors. „ ~ ~
A great fall for Lord Henry Fitz Eustace, or as the police
called him, cunning Harry. .
On emerging into the open air, the party struck out in
the direction of Hornsey, and in a short time they came in
sight of what to them was an imaginary El. Dorado, only
requiring a little skill to be transferred to their own pockets,
but they reckoned without their host.
Captain Breaker happened to be a strict disciplinarian on
board ship, and carrying his habits of order on shore with,
bim, he had, as far as possible, assimilated the rules of his
house to the rules of his ship, and so it came to pass, that
* Snivelling Med: Chaplain,
t Drag: three months,
t Stretch: one year.
g Bashing: floeging.
II Lagged: transported.
Own hook: belonging to yourself.
** Traps: police.
+t Lags: convicts.
J J Reglars : share.


Ben the coxswain, on going his rounds at eight bells,
middle watch, had observed the butler (or as Ben called
him, the purser) in the act of casting loose the starboard
fore port, or in plain English, unbarring the window
through which his accomplices were to pass.
To seize him and tie him to the leg of a table, was the
work of a few minutes to a man like Ben, who stood six
feet high in his stockings, and weighed fourteen stone, and
could haul out the weather topsail earring in a gale of
wind, with any man in the British Navy, and who more-
over always had a supply of ropes ends and sennett in his
coat pockets.
A sharp kick or two from Ben’s boots to the prostrate
butler, elicited the information that the house was to be
broken into that night.
Ben lost no time in communicating with the captain, and
the two seamen, arming themselves with boarding tools, re-
paired to the room where the butler lay bound, and
happened to arrive exactly at the time that Reuben was
reaching out his hand to unfasten the window.
The captain’s sharp eyes discerned something moving in
the gloom outside ot the window, and he coolly gave Ben
orders to fire. A crack—flash—bang, and whiz were
heard, and then a dull thud on the sward beneath, and a
hurried pattering of feet in the distance, as Reuben fell
wounded and fainting to the ground, and the rest of the
burglars made their escape as fast as they could.
“Stop the vent, sponge, load, and run out!” exclaimed
the captain at a voice of thunder, evidently imagining that
he was engaged in long-bowls with an enemy’s ship, and
then suddenly recollecting himself, he continued, “ Stop
firing, Ben, and let us go and look at the craft you have
hulled.”
“Aye, aye, sir!” exclaimed Ben, as he returned his
musket to the carry , and proceeded to open the door of the
house, closely followed by the captain carrying a horn
lanthorn; after peering cautiously around to see that the
coast was clear, they proceeded to the foot of the poplar
tree, where Reuben lay more dead than alive.
The captain seeing a small delicate boy lying at the
point of death, and by his orders, given to Ben, forgot the


lion’s part he had been enacting, and turning sharply to
the discomfited Ben, he commanded him to take the boy
up and carry him into the house, exclaiming bitterly at
intervals, “Oh, Ben! Ben! why did you hit him ? its
almost as bad as fighting with women ; carry him in, and
make off as fast as you can for the doctor ; the women will
attend to him in the meantime.” Ben, heartily sorry for
his part of the night’s work (although he had done nothing
but his duty), handled the boy as tenderly as a mother
wmld handle her babe, carrying him into the house until
he reached the captain’s room, and by that gentlemans
orders laying him upon the bed, which done, he sallied
forth to tiie road, and made all possible haste to the iesi-
dence of Doctor Prussic. And whilst Ben has gone for the
doctor, and the captain has gone to call his sister and to
explain to her the cause of the uproar, and whilst Reuben
is lying in a state of unconsciousness, hovering betwixt
life and death, we will take' the liberty to inquire into
the antecedents of Captain Breaker, his sister, and her
daughter, and to describe the apartment in which Reuben
is now lying-
CHAPTER VII.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE DEN OF AN OLD SEA DOG —THE FAMILY OF
THE BREAKERS —DR. PRUSSIC ARRIVES UPON OUR STAGE.
The room in which our hero lay, presented to the unini-
tiated a rather startling aspect. A room it certainly did
not look like, neither could you imagine it to be a ship s
cabin; being neither one nor the other, it partook ot the
character of both combined ; with a due proportion of the
British Museum. .
In one corner, lay an immense, edible Mexican frog,
stuffed; in another corner, a mass of coral; here was a coc^
hat and regulation sword; there a Chinese Devil rubbed
noses with the embalmed and tattooed head of a New
Zealand Chief ; stuffed serpents, birds, strange fishes and
animals, were duly ranged on shelves and ticketed; even


the poor old Egyptian mummies had been compelled to
help to adorn this novel bed-chamber.
It was plain to be seen, that the room belonged to a
highly educated man, who had been to the five divisions of
the earth, and had brought something of interest from each
of them.
Captain Breaker and his sister, had been early left
orphans, and destitute ; the family lawyer, having upon
news of his patron’s decease emigrated to America, carry-
ing with him, the money, with which he had been en-
trusted.
A friend of the Breakers had then taken the children,
and had procured an appointment in the navy for the boy,
at the same time settling the yearly sum of £250 upon him,
until such time as he should obtain his commandership.
The girl he had taken into his own family, and had reared
her as his own, educating her with his only daughter.
At the age of nineteen, the lovely girl was united in
wedlock to Augustus Noble, who had steadfastly loved her
since she first set foot in Ivy Hall, the mansion of Augustus
Noble, senior. Need we add, that Helen Breaker was as
deeply attached to him, and that the happy father was
rejoiced to see his only son united to the daughter of his
early friend.
The elder Noble, having thus seen the bread that he had
cast upon the waters return to him after many days,
peacefully gave up the ghost, and was gathered to his
fathers.
Helen Noble was the issue of this union, and now at
fifteen years of age, she bade fair to rival her mother’s
early charms, which had set half of the young men of Mrs.
Noble’s acquaintance raving moonstruck for a time, and
the other half writing melancholy sonnets to her charms.
Bertha Noble, had been married to Mr. Tracey, and
when that gentleman and his wife had emigrated to Aus-
tralia, they had left their portraits with Mrs. Augustus
Noble. What connection those portraits have with this
story, will no doubt be seen in due time.
The captain upon ascending the stairs towards his
sister’s rooms, encountered that lady and her daughter


descending, and having given them all the information
necessary, he descended with them to the sick room.
“ Poor creature” ! exclaimed Helen, as she glanced at
the half uncovered form upon her uncle’s bed. “So
young, and yet so wicked.”
“Oh, Helen”! exclaimed the elder lady, in a tone so
sorrowful and tender. “ Perhaps the poor creature has
no father or mother, and besides he is so very young , he
cannot he so very wicked yet.”
Beuben lay listening half unconsciously to the conversa-
tion ; he felt that he was hurt somewhere, but in vain did
he try to recall and marshal in due order his scattered
senses. As obstinate as a party of raw recruits, they would
not fall into line, or as a soldier would express it, dress.
And now above the hum of voices, was heard the rat-tat-
tat, of the doctor, on the knocker of the hall door, and
Captain Breaker’s good humoured, gruff voice exclaiming,
as he hastened to open the room door. “ Pipe down, all
hands. Any lady in the fleet, who shall cowardly insult, or
illtreat a prisoner, shall be punished by sentence of a cour
martial. No appeal. Come Madame and Mademoiselle,
out you must go.” . ,
As the ladies quitted the room, the captain entere ,
followed by Ben and the disciple of Galen, whom Ben ha
roused from his warm bed and the embraces of the partner
of his bosom.
Doctor Prussic was a man of about fifty years of age,
with a thin face and sharp nose, small twinkling eyes,
small mouth, beautifully white teeth, and extremely small
and white hands. 1
He had an extremely kind heart, but so modest was lie,
and so afraid of hearing himself praised, that he en-
deavoured to persuade all of his acquaintances that he was
the most ill-mannered, ill-natured, and roughest man alive.
He had contracted the habit of saying the most disagree-
able things in the most unconcerned manner, accompanied
with a small inward chuckle that made a man s fingers
itch to knock him down. .
As he entered the room he was grumbling and abusing
Ben for calling him up in the middle of the night, and no
sooner did he cast his eyes upon the wounded lad than e


began to talk to him in a manner that was anything hut
calculated to aid in his recovery.
“ Humph ! my boy,” said he, “so you have committed
a burglary ; of course you know that you will be hung ; but
you will get used to that. So make your mind easy, and I
will answer for your recovery, at least I will guarantee to
make you strong enough to stand your trial, in a month or
six weeks.”
He then proceeded to extract the ball, during which
operation Reuben endeavoured to prevent a groan escaping
from him, or a movement indicative of pain, having in-
wardly determined that he would not let the doctor see
how much his words had frightened him.
Ben and the captain, who were standing by, could not
help admiring bis fortitude, and thinking how much better
it was for him to have fallen into their hands than into
those of Dr. Prussic, for I need scarcely tell the reader that
the captain had no intention of sending him to prison, as
the doctor advised him to do.
At length the doctor wrote a prescription, and departed
in the midst of a volley of grumbling, in which the words
“ burglar,” “ knowing youngster,” etcetera, were
conspicuous.
Reuben, who had borne up bravely during the time that
the ball was being extracted, now burst into a flood of
tears. Upon seeing Reuben crj r , Ben, who had taken an
uncommon fancy to our hero, could hold out no longer, but
forgetting discipline in the excitement of the moment, ex-
claimed, “D if I believe he is a real thief after all,
sir; he looks too honest and open in the face.”
The captain turned away to hide his emotion; and after
blowing his nose fiercely, and wiping his eyes, he turned
to Reuben and told him to be a good boy, and he should
be taken care of until he got well again.
Ben and the captain then left the room, and “ tired
nature’s sweet restorer, balmy sleep,” crept over our
hero.


CHAPTER VIII.
HONESTY THE POLICY REUBEN HAS FALLEN AMONGST
RELATIONS—DEATH OF SIR THEODOSIUS GOGGER— REUBEN TURNS
OVER A NEW CHAPTER IN THE BOOK OF HIS LIFE—LIFE ON.
BOARD OF A MAN-OF-WAR.
Two months had elapsed since, under such singular cir-
cumstances, Eeuben had become an inmate of Captain
Breaker’s house ; never once during that time had any one
of the household spoken a word in his presence as to his
forther life and companions. Thanks to Doctor Prussic,
iellies, chicken broth, sago, oranges, and such like deli-
cacies, he was becoming strong again; and often he won-
dered what was to become of him if the captain turned him
out again when he was quite well During his illness he
had had access to a different class of books than those
kent by the Widow Jonas as part of her stock-m-trade;
for Jack Sheppard’s Progress to the Gallows, he now read
the Pilgrim’s Progress to the Hapjiy Land ; for Barney the
Vampire, or the Feast of Blood (there really is such a
book) he read Robinson Crusoe. Fie learnt to look upon
thieving in a new light; instead of considering it as a
trade, he began to consider it as one of the mam pathways
to the burning lake, where the “ worm dieth not, and the
fire is never quenched;” and he mentally resolved never
more to associate with his former companions.
And happy was it for him that he had so resolved.
Reuben was one fine sunny day reclining upon a garden
seat at the bottom of the captain’s garden, busily engaged
in reading a book from the captain’s library; in one of the
most interesting parts he was startled from his reading by
the sound of a well known whistle, and before the sound
had well died away, Billy the Bustler made his appearance
from behind a rose bush. , •, ,
The fair Imogene could not have been more startled at
finding the spectre knight by her side on her bridal night
than was Reuben at the sudden appearance of this knight
of the cross. Billy, however, no way abashed at his cool
reception, advanced to Reuben, and giving his hand a grip,
like a young polar bear’s hug, exclaimed, ‘ Hello . old
un, how are you getting on ? I’ve been a watching


for yer these three weeks; I spose you know the butler
was let go, so Ikey sent me to tell yer to open the window
to night, as we mean to have another shy at the old
caboose.”
“ No, no, Billy,” exclaimed Reuben, his voice trembling
through his emotion. “ I advise you not to do so ; for God
has said, ‘ Thou shalt not stealgive over your wicked
ways, Billy, and earn an honest living; honesty is the
best policy.”
To this pathetic appeal Billy, laughing scornfully, replied,
“ Well! who wood a thought as you wood a turned par-
son?” and then, added he threateningly, “but if you wont
help us, tell no one what I have said, or Deadman’s Hole
will be your lot.”
“ Deadman’s Hole, or Lubber’s Hole, you young villain,
I’ve got you,” was shouted out in a voice that had often
been heard above the raging of the winds and the roar of
artillery. At the same time, the huge form of Captain
Breaker crashed through the bushes, and he laid his
enormous hand upon the shoulder of Billy the Bustler; but
the captain had forgotten Mrs. Glasse’s advice, of how to
cook a hare, namely, first to catch him, and then to skin
him ; and he was not prepared for the sudden dart that
the London arab made between his legs (that were ex-
tended like the legs of the Colossus of Rhodes) upsetting
the captain, and making his escape over the garden wall.
Old sailor as the captain was, he was upon his feet again
in an instant, but seeing the inutility of following Billy,
who ran like a greyhound, he turned his attention to
Beuben, saying, “Never mind, my boy, I heard it all, and
you shall never have occasion to herd with such wretches
any more ; and henceforth, my boy, always call me uncle,
for, strange as it must appear to you, I am really your
distant relative ; but come now up to the house, and I will
explain it all to you.”
Beuben rose and accompanied the captain to the house,
and there we will leave them for awhile, whilst we explain
to the reader the meaning of the captain’s words.
*******
Sir Theodosius Gogger sat in his counting house, awaiting


the arrival of his tool, Slimy Smasher, with the wished for
news of the completion of his vengeance ; his revenge (as
he thought) being complete, he could die contented. A
few days before he had had medical advice, and had been
told to put his worldly affairs in order, as he was smitten
with heart disease; he had, accordingly, overhauled his
accounts, and had found that his death would be the signal
for the breaking up of the long established firm of Gogger
and Gogger, for he was irretrievably bankrupt.
But what cared he for the house of Gogger and Gogger;
the Object of the latter part of his life was accomplished (so
he thought)had he not betrayed her by seemingly fair
promises to be the thing she loathed ; was not the child of
his false friend and perjured betrothed about to be branded
as a felon ; had she not died a raving maniac, cursing him,
and had not her husband been executed by a bloodthirsty
Parisian tribunal by his artifices ? What then, thought he,
had he to live for ? Nothing ; and as for the life beyond
the grave, it was all rubbish, or at any rate, he was content
to reap as he had sown.
As his thoughts reached this point, he was startled by
the ringing of a small bell that hung from the wall, and
rising up, he opened the double boarded well-baized door,
and admitted the object of his wishes, Slimy Smasher.
Slimy Smasher entered the room with just the same
downcast look and crawling motion that a hound beaten by
its master would have worn, and stood at the end of the
table opposite to where the prime devil in the plot (Sir
Theodosius) sat.
For a few seconds neither spoke a word, each one
evidently waited for the other one to begin the conversa-
tion. At length, Sir Theodosius, fixing his eyes upon the
features of his subordinate, as though he would read the
most secret thoughts of his mind, hissed, rather than spake,
the following words :
“ Have you come for the other five hundred, according
to our compact ? Speak out man ; you look as scared as
though you had seen your own heart, black and fiitky as
it is.”
“ It is no fault of mine,” snarled the human jackal, “ he
would have been safe enough by this time, only that he


got wounded, and has been taken care of by Captain
Breaker.”
Reader, have you ever been walking along listlessly,
happy, thinking of nothing in particular, and least of all
of the danger of a snake-bite? have } t ou all of a sudden
felt a rolling elastic substance moving underneath your
feet ? have you cast your eyes down at the object, as quick
as human eyes can move from one direction to the other,
and have you in the infinitesimal part of a minute, compre-
hended that the rolling elastic object was no other than
one of the most venomous of Australia’s ophidians? have
you felt an indefinable dread creeping over you, as to
whether you were bitten ? have you felt the blood course
through your veins, and stay at your heart like a bail of
ice? If so, you have experienged much the same terrors
and sensations that Sir Theodosius Gfogger experienced at
the news that his tool had brought him, for he remembered
the relationship of Captain Breaker with the Traceys, and
he dreaded a discovery that would baulk him of his
vengeance.
His rage now broke forth in a totrent of abuse of Slimy,
who, stung beyond bearing, retorted again, thus heaping
coals upon the already glowing furnace of the baronet’s
wrath. Sir Theodosius had however overtasked himself,
and as he sank back in his seat unable to speak, but
shaking his fist at Slimy in impotent rage, a torrent of
blood poured from his lips : he had broken a blood vessel.
Slimy’s first impulse was to ring for assistance, but think-
ing it would be better for him if Sir Theodosius departed
this life without any dying declarations, he quietly walked
to the desk of his patron, and appropriated all the spare
cash and sealed documents he saw therein the eyes of the
dying man following him all the time in a state of indes-
cribable fury. Not wishing to be found alone with the
dead man (for the Baronet was well nigh gonel, Slimy
Smasher opened the door, and proceeded to inform the
horrified clerks of the catastrophe. Whilst the porter ran
for a surgeon, the clerks crowded into the apartment,
arriving just in time to see their employer breathe his
last.
The End was Come.


A few days afterwards the newspapers throughout the
kingdom announced the failure of the old established firm
of G-ogger and Gogger, liabilities something fabulous,
assets, nil.
Letter, from Charles Smasher, Esq., Attorney, etcetera, to
Captain John Breaker, R.N.
Sir, —Having lately become possessed of papers relating to a
friend of yours, Miss Julie Tracey, and being able to clear her
character from all stain; also knowing where to find the child, the
issue of the marriage between Miss Julie Tracey and Sir Gilbert
Gog&er, I will deliver up all papers and documents on receipt of five
hundred pounds, and a written guarantee that I shall not be troubled
with any prosecution for any share that I may have taken in any
affair, relating to said documents. Your written word will he enough,
if sent by the hearer of this unaccompanied; I will then proceed to
your residence and deliver them up to yourself.
Your obedient servant,
THE WRITER.
Captain Breaker on receiving the above letter, wrote an
answer, agreeing to the stipulations, and appointing the
next morning for the interview, and Slimy Smasher
proceeded to the captain’s house, and disclosed to him
the following facts : that he had been engaged by Sir
Theodosius (then Mr. Gogger) to proceed to Paris, and to
procure the conviction of Sir Gilbert Gogger as a spy, by
suborning false witnesses, and forging letters to the different
exiled families, signed with Sir Gilbert’s signature, and
placed in his private desk hy the aid of Ikey Jonas and his
skeleton keys ; that at the instigation of his employer, he
had persuaded the sorrowing widow to return to England
and take up her abode at Gogger Hall; that Sir Theodo-
sius had after a time proposed and been accepted as her
husband; that he (Slimy Smasher) had been employed to
find a mock clergyman to perform the marriage ceremony;
that wishing to have a hold upon Sir Theodosius, he had
procured a duly qualified clergyman of the Church of Eng-
land, who had legally married them.
Also that the baronet, upon his wife becoming enciente,
had gone to the bedside of the mother and upbraided her
with her former love, telling her that her second marriage
was illegal, and that her child would be a bastard ; that
the lady went raving mad, and was sent to a private lunatic
D


asylum, where she was reported to have died, and that her
baby had died before its birth.
Also that, by the baronet’s orders, he had taken Lady
Gogger’s first child (the true heir to the baronetcy) away,
in order that he might become a felon and be transported;
that he had placed the child upon Mrs Jonas’s doorstep, and
had watched it for years; that the woman’s dying had
broken in upon his plans, and had caused him to hasten
the plot; that Eeuben would have been delivered up to the
police if the burglary had succeeded, and would have been
transported, sooner or later, through his means.
This statement was confirmed by registers of birtbs and
deaths, certificates of marriages, the diary of Sir Theodo-
sius, etcetera, and Captain Breaker was convinced that
Eeuben was really the offspring of the unfortunate Julie
Tracey, the grand-daughter of Augustus Noble, senior, his
father’s tried friend and his own benefactor.
Eeuben, on reaching the house, was taken by the cap-
tain to the room in which Mrs. Noble and her daughter
were sitting; a heap of portraits were on the table, and
Mrs. Noble was attentively examining one of them. The
captain had informed her of the discovery he had made,
and she was now surveying the portraits of Julie Tracey,
and Sir Gilbert Gogger, and could not but acknowledge the
remarkable resemblanee of Eeuben to both of them.
Mrs Moble then proceeded to inform Eeuben of all the
facts that had come to their knowledge concerning him,
and their plans for him for the future.
The captain’s ship was to sail in a few days, with des-
patches for the admiral commanding on the Mediterranean
station, and from thence he was to have a roving commis-
sion. He had decided that upon delivering his despatches,
he would cruise off the west coast of Africa, and from
thence to the shores of New Holland, and the land of
Van Diemen. Letters were to be written to Mr. Tracey—
who had settled down as a sheep and cattle farmer on the
borders of Gippsland —detailing all the facts that had trans-
pired, and in the event of his wishing his grandson to pro-
ceed to him, Eeuben was to have a berth as a passenger in
the captain’s vessel; but as Mr. Tracey might not want
our hero to go to him, he was in the meantime to study


navigation, in order to become competent to enter one of
the company’s ships as a middy —of which com-
pany Captain Breaker was a principal shareholder.
This was the programme, and a very good one it was
too, for our hero, whom for the future we shall call by his
baptismal name, namely, Gilbert Augustus Gogger.
The question of claiming the baronetcy was to be left to
the decision of Mr. Tracey.
A few days after this, our hero, having taking an affec-
tionate leave of the captain, Mrs. Noble and her daughter,
and even Susan Dotty, the cook, was snugly seated in one
of the London and Brighton South Coast Railway carriages,
en route for Portsmouth, under the charge of Ben Grum-
met, coxswain of the captain’s gig, who was strictly com-
manded not to touch a glass of grog, until he had seen him
safely landed on the quarter-deck of Her Britannic Majesty’s
steam frigate, the A n. On the road thither, they
were to drop into the establishment of Brother Ebenezer
Prim —quaker, clothier, outfitter and tailor —and they were
to order a complete middy’s outfit to our hero’s measure-
ment, that is to say, that they were to deliver a letter to
Mr. Ebenezer Prim, from Captain Breaker ordering it,
which duty being accomplished, Ben was to have liberty for
two days to have “a run round town” and get drunk,
after which he was to report himself on board . In two
days’ time Gilbert’s outfit was completed, and he proceeded
on board accompanied by Ben, and presented Captain
Breaker’s letter to the first lieutenant, Mr. Martingale.
That gentleman having read the letter, invited Gilbert to
enter the ward room with him, and having ordered the
steward to lay out a luncheon, he proceeded himself to the
middies’ mess room, to acquaint the young gentlemen there
assembled that the captain’s nephew was to mess with
them, not as a middy, but as their guest. And after
mentioning to them that he left it to their honour not to
play any practical jokes with him, or rather upon him, he
re-ascended to the quarter deck. In two days’ time
the captain came on board, his despatches came soon after-
wards, and the crew was soon busily employed in preparing
the ship for sea.


We shall now give a few extracts from Gilbert’s Diary,
as giving a better insight into his mode of life and feelings,
than we could hope to give unaided by them.
My Diary, kept by me, at the request of Captain
Breaker, for practice.
“ Bate. —l came on board yesterday and was put into the
middies’ mess; I like these young men and lads very much,
they are very kind and obliging to me and do not make too
much fun of my mistakes. I take care, according to my
uncle’s wish, to hear, see, and say nothing, as I can see
that my manners are anything but correct. However,
middies are not very particular, so I daresay I shall rub
along all right.
“ Date —l have made the acquaintance of the master’s
mate. The middies tell me he is one of the old sort , fast
dying out. He tells most wonderful yarns, but never
finishes them.
“ Here is a specimen.
“ ‘ I recollect,’ said he, ‘ before the skipper mounted two
swabs (he was only first luff at that time), I was sailing in
the same craft with him, (d the admiralty ;if a man
has no interest don’t enter the navy) ; well, as I was say-
ing, we were on the west coast, and Lieutenant Breaker
had gone on shore with two or three other officers for a
hunt (though I never saw anything that they shot) ; well,
the party got separated in the forest, and each one of
them tried to make back to the beach their own way; it
was a frightful hot day, and the luff on coming to a deep,
cool looking creek, threw himself under the shade of a palm
tree, and took out a pocket volume of Marryat’s Jacob
Faithful to read; he had scarcely read two pages when he
heard a rustling at his side, and looking up he saw a gigan-
tic ape alongside of him ; he instinctively felt for his pistols,
for he well knew the ferociousness of the animal; to his dis-
may, he recollected that he had laid them down about six
yards behind him; he turned his head in their direction,
and beheld a sight, which bold as he was, curdled the blood
in his veins; another monstrous ape was handling his
pistols, pulling the trigger and cock, the muzzles all the


time being pointed towards the unfortunate owner; he
jumped up to run for it, as his gun was not loaded although
within his reach, but all retreat was cut off, for on the left
hand of him were about fifty more apes, armed with clubs,
chattering and grinning, and evidently threatening ven-
geance upon the bold intruder upon their domains. He cast
his eyes up the stream as his only chance of escape, his
eyes rested for a moment on what appeared to be a float-
ing log, but only for a moment; the next instant showed
him the tail of an alligator slowly steering its owner’s body
down the stream, and, but here I keep chattering all day
as though I had nothing else to do,’ said my trusty story
teller, and all my after entreaties could not persuade him to
tell me how the captain escaped the threefold danger of
death by ape, pistols, and alligator; I almost fancy that he
don’t know it himself. However, Mr. Junk is not at all a
bad fellow.
“ Date. —To-day the captain came on board, and after
attending to his professional duties, he sent for me to his
cabin. ‘My boy,’ began my dear uncle, ‘I have sent
for you, to have a little private conversation with you.
You know that I have no children ; my sister and my niece
have both fortunes in their own right. I have, therefore,
decided upon making you my heir ; but, my dear boy, don’t
do anything to make me repent of my choice.’ And added
he, ‘ man is but mortal, I have, therefore, left my will
with my lawyer, ’ and then in a cheery voice, ‘ go now my
boy, and I shall expect you, and whichever of your mess-
mates whose watch below it may be, to dine with me.’ I
could scarcely thank him, so overcome was I with his kind-
ness. It will be too late to write to-night; so I have
written this, before dressing for dinner.
Date. —“ * Capen dines at six, sar,’ said an ugly featured,
ill-looking, and ill-favoured specimen of the progeny of
Ham (who officiates as captain’s steward) to me, as I closed
my diary yesterday, and I repaired to my chest to make
myself presentable ; and as it wanted still a quarter to seven
bells, I took a turn for an hour on the upper deck, and
watched the process of hoisting in our fresh meat and
vegetables ; the water lighter was alongside discharging ;
our powder was in; and it was rumoured that to-morrow


(to-day), we should sail, to add our mite to the upholding
of her Majesty’s supremacy over the sea, and to help to
prove Britannia really does rule the waves.
“As I walked towards the gangway, the side boys ran
down the side ladders, and looking over the hammock
nettings, to my astonishment, I saw Doctor Prussic,
habited in the uniform of a surgeon in the Royal Navy.
Now a predilection for the sea is what I never shouldshave
thought the doctor guilty of; but I had long observed that
underneath his disagreeable exterior, there ran a current
of kindness and good nature. Therefore, although I had
often heard him inveigh against a sea life, I could easily
believe that he might at heart, have quite another opinion
of the terrors of Neptune, and the comforts and discomforts
of a fifty-two gun frigate, salt horse, pea soup, holey stones,
cannon balls, etcetera.
“ Upon reaching the quarter-deck, the doctor went
through the cabalistic ceremony of saluting, although there
was no one either upon the quarter-deck or the poop at the
time, who could claim such a mark of respect from him;
then turning to me, he marked his sense of my presence by
saying (with a grunt at every two or three words) “so
here you are Master Reu Gilbert. I mean, humph!
Never been to sea before, humph ! The captain told me
all about it; good job he didn’t hang you, humph ! humph !!
Never mind ; it is a well-known fact that two out of every
three boys, who go to sea, get drowned. Die from sea
sickness or the plague in the Levant, fall from aloft, or get
shot, or die from a surfeit of hard pudding without suet,
humph! good bye. Born to be hanged, you know, never
get drowned,” so saying, the cross old mortar and pestle,
disappeared down the after-hatchway.
“Four bells, and punctual to time, we pass our legs
under the captain’s mahogany. At first our attention was
occupied by the good things provided, but appetite satisfied,
the tongues began to wag, and many and marvellous were
the stories of adventures by flood and field. I must try
and recollect some of them ; let me see, the master’s story
first.
“ ‘ Well, Mr. Zenith,’ said the captain, ‘ can’t you spin
us a yarn,’ and the rough old salt began thus :


“‘I remember when I was in the Alligator brig, we
were just returning from the West Coast where we had
captured two or three Portuguese and Spanish slayers.
We had sighted the Land’s End at dusk, and were sailing
up Channel; the look-outs had been placed, top-sights
rigged, the watch called, and orders given to the middy of
the watch to rouse me up at four bells in the middle watch,
by which time I expected that we should (with the wind
as it then was) be not far off Mount Edgecombe. Now it
happened that we had taken a slaver, and she had been
sent into Sierra Leone for adjudication. Of course she was
condemned, and her crew, with one exception (the captain),
dealt with by the authorities there ; but there being other
charges against him that could be only investigated at
home, and the Cormorant having come out to relieve us, he
was heavily ironed, and sent on board of us. One night
he disappeared, no body knew how; the sentry was put
under arrest, several persons were examined, but all to no
purpose; and the crew, as a body, declared that the d 1
had flown away with him, as his cruise w T as up.
(i 1 Now when I came on deck at four bells in the middle
watch, the night was dark as ink, black clouds were rolling
away to leeward, like the ghosts of some antediluvian con-
tinents ; so close did they seem that you fancied you had
but to stretch forth your hand to grasp them ; you could
hear the wash of the water against the ship’s side, but
could not see the water itself. Eather anxiously I gave the
word to heave the dipsey lead* The line was quickly
passed from stem to stern, clear of all; the word was
given, and with a plash that reminded the hearers of a
body committed to the deep, the lead sank to the bottom.
I satisfied myself as to the depth, and ordered the line in-
board. But now began the mystery ; it took the united
strength of ten men to hoist it out of the water.
“ ‘ Hold that lantern here,’ cried the middy of the watch.
The lantern was brought, and there hanging by the legs,
head downwards, was the missing pirate captain ; the line
was entangled in his shackles, and so had drawn him to
the surface of the water. So terrified were the men at the
* Dipsey lead: deep sea lead.


unexpected apparition, that they let the line drop again,
and when it was again hauled in the body was gone.’
“ Surprise, incredulity, astonishment, and a general
desire to laugh, were depicted on every countenance as the
old tar finished his story.
“At length Captain Breaker exclaimed with a chuckle,
‘ A rather tough piece of spun yarn that deep sea lead line
of yours must have been made of, master ; but how do you
account for fishing up the body upon it, when, as you state,
he must have been miles behind, having disappeared some
time ?’
“ ‘ Why,’ said the master, ‘it used to puzzle me at first,
but afterwards I used to think that the slaver had either
jumped or fallen overboard, his shackles had caught in the
ship’s life line, the weight of the lead falling upon it had
dislodged it, and becoming entangled, had drawn it to the
surface.’
“ A tremendous round of applause followed the master’s
explanation.
“As soon as quiet was restored, the captain begged Mr.
Sanctu (second lieutenant), to favour the company with a
song, one of his own composing. Mr. Sanctu, in my
opinion, is very foppishly dressed, and I know that he is
very fond of hawking his verses about, even making
presents of poems to some of the petty officers. However,
all the middies and men say he is a capital sailor and
darirfg leader in action.
“ The table was cleared, the boys in attendance departed,
the steward placed nuts, oranges, and other fruits upon
the table, with a fresh supply of wine. The middies rose to
go, and I followed their example, but Captain Breaker
having kindly told us to resume our seats, we did so.
“Mr. Sanctu in the meantime commenced clearing his
throat with sundry hems! and ahs ! after the manner of a
concert singer, or as the master put it, like a bum boat
woman choking herself in an ineffectual attempt to blush.
“ At length he sang the following song in a really rich,
musical voice ; at all events I liked it, but I am not much
of a j udge of singing :


BRITAIN'S SEAMEN.
From east to west, from south to north,
From Iceland's hills of snow,
We hardy sailors venture forth,
No matter what winds may blow.
And should old Boreas in his rage
Cause the angry seas to roar,
We laugh at his wrath, and plough the seas
With our keels, from shore to shore.
Old Britain’s flag flies o’er our heads,
Her bulldogs pace the deck,
Like a lion a true born Briton treads,
And he fears neither fire nor wreck.
We may sink with a wreck on a bloody deck,
We may sink in a stormy night,
But we’ll cheer as we go the waves below,
For Old England's might and right.
Then drain your glasses, brother tars,
And your anchors cast above.
He will keep you safe from wounds and scars,
To return to the girls you love.
In days of peace, in nights of war,
’Midst battles, fire and blood,
Old Britain's standard still shall soar,
And rule the briny flood.
No dastard slaves are we to fight
At an oppressor’s beck,
But for our Queen, and mankind’s right.
We’ll man the bloody deck,
Until the direful flag of war
No more shall meet the light,
And truth shall reign for evermore,
And right shall conquer might.
Then drain your glasses, brother tars,
And your anchors cast above,
He will keep you safe from wounds and scars,
To return to the girls you love.


‘ ‘ This song having been duly applauded, the fun began to
wax fast and furious, although the utmost respect was paid
to superior officers, and discipline strictly observed; song
succeeded song, and the middle watch had set in before the
company departed.”
CHAPTER IX.
MR. GILBERTS DIARY CONTINUED.
“Date, Friday. —l hear that we are not going to start to-
day, so I can have a spare hour or two at my journal.
* Mr. Q-ogger, sir.’ ‘ Yes, who calls me?' ‘ Me, sir ; the
captain wishes you, when the drum beats to quarters, to
take your station, on the port side of the main deck, after
divisions.’ This is what the master-at-arms has just told
me, and I must close my book and find out some one who
can tell me what are quarters, and in what part of the ship
the main deck is situated.
“ Yesterday, upon closing my diary, I hastened to the
cockpit, where I luckily met with Mr. Miller, middy of the
mizen-top, port watch. I there and then learnt that the
divisions meant inspection, and that the accustomed beat
of the drum with one roll (I was perfectly puzzled then, but
I know it all now) was the signal for quarters or, preparing
for action; I also learnt from him, that if the drum was
beaten with two rolls, it meant real action, and no sham
fight; whilst preparing for action, with one roll, was only
for practice.
“Accordingly I ascended to the quarter-deck, where I was
informed my division was stationed for inspection, and as
the sight then and there presented to my view, struck me
as a very novel one, I will endeavour to describe it to the
reader of this (I suppose that will be Susan Dotty or Ben
Grummet). Well then, the marines were drawn up in
line upon the poop deck, the brass band was ranged round
the cabin skylight, their instruments of music in their
hands, ready at a signal to strike up, and discourse enchant-
ing music; ranged in single file along the deck from the
poop ladders to the heads, were Her Majesty’s faithful sea


does: young and old were in the ranks ; clothes all as trim
and clean, as though Polly the washerwoman, and not Jack
the sailor, had had the cleansing of them.
“And now I saw that the word divisions really meant
inspection, for the captain and his officers paced along te
ranks, examining every man’s accoutrements with mmu e
scrutiny, and woe to the unlucky, lazy fellow who had
neglected his washing last washing day; black list, six
water grog, etcetera, will he his portion.
. “ At length, dear reader (it is well to cultivate the style
of an author, namely, as though you expected somebody to
read what you have written), the examination was over,
and the drummer having received his orders, the drum
began to roll, the men darted from the ranks, and hurry-
ing, some up, and some down the hatchways were soon
busily preparing the guns ; and clearing the decks of tables
stools, bread barges, breakers, etcetera, they began to cast
the guns loose, and in a few minutes every man was at his
post; the guns were now cast loose, shot grummets filled
with shot, powder boys with their leathern cases under
their arms standing in the rear of the guns, magazines
opened, screens down, and all in breathless silence waiting
for the next orders. „ „ , .
“Somehow, I had managed to find my way to my
station, and stood, if not exactly with open mouth, at all
events with eyes straining wide open at the scene of leger-
demain before me. Professor Sleightraan s tricks were
nothing to compare to it. A. second before the drum began
to sound, the men’s deck was crowded with mess tables,
mess kettles, wash tubs, bread barges, etcetera, so that a
landsman would think that there was not room to swing a
cat in (a common saying, though I never saw anyone
amusing themselves by swinging a cat), and now there is
not a table or stool to be seen upon the deck; the men
were ranged on either side of the guns, the captains of the
guns being armed with cutlasses and pistols ; several other
men, likewise, were armed with pistols, and Miller told me
that those were boarders. Presently the silence is broken,
by the order being given to fire three rounds and to wait
for further orders. Bang! bang!! Earthquakes and
thunderstorms! Oh! my poor ears ! lam sure I shall


never hear another word again, after this infernal cannonade.
Smash! crash ! there they go, but I am getting a little
more used to it now, and as the last round was fired, I had
forgotten all about the deafness, and had become eagerly
excited. I was about to rush forward and commence shout-
ing, when Miller (who tells me that he felt that way him-
self once) caught hold of me, and broke the spell that was
upon me.
‘ • And now the order was given, ‘ firemen away! ’ and
then in a few seconds, fire in the fore cockpit, instantly a
certain number of active young fellows sprang forward from
the guns, and seizing each man, his own fire bucket (no
chance work will do here, I see), ran as fast as they could
to the scene of the pretended fire.
“ ‘ F ire till further orders,’ and again the flames belch
forth from the guns, and the ship trembles from kelson to
truck with the shock. Xu the midst of the noise a voice is
heard shouting down the main hatchway, through a speak-
ing trumpet. ‘ First division of boarders away, portside
foksle, ’ another batch of men start from their guns (armed
with pistols at their belts, and cutlasses in hand), and
swarm up the fore, main, and mizen hatchways. Woe!
betide you mosoo crapaud, or Johnny Spaniano if those
bull dogs catch you trying to board her Majesty’s ship the
A -n. Although you may number two to one ;if you
are wise, cast the grapnels adrift, and rather trust to a
game of long bowls, than to a close embrace with John
Bull.
* Cease firing jas you were ’; and the men again stand
m their allotted'stations at their guns, and now the drum
begins to roll in a different manner, the guns are secured,
and the men are hurrying in all directions. I ask Miller
the meaning of the change; and he informs me, that the
retreat is beat. ‘ Pipe to dinner,’ and now arises a din, a
most hideous whistling and yelling, as the boatswain, and
his mates proclaim that the hour for feeding the bold
British lions has arrived ; and as Susan may perhaps like
to know how they cook for and dine four hundred men, I
will write a description of the operations for her informa-
tion.
“ It is twelve o’clock by the chronometer, and the master,


quadrant to eye, is engaged in taking a sight at the sun ;
on each side of him are ranged, two or three young gentle-
men, or as the sailors call them, reefers, each likewise
armed with a quadrant; and as they see that the master is
busily engaged, and cannot see them, they are taking sights
too (impudent young monkeys); and leaving them to their
elegant amusement, we will descend to the main deck, and
watch the lions feeding; those bold British lions whose roars
strike terror to their foes. In the extreme fore part of the
deck, starboard side, is the sick bay; port side same
position, butcher’s shop; and abaft these temples of
educated and uneducated butchers, is the galley, or as Jack
is fond of styling it—her Majesty’s kitchen.
“ ‘No I,’ shouts the cook, soup ladle in hand, and the
boy of number one mess steps forward and advances to the
galley, his tin mess kettle in his hand. ‘ How many ?’
demands the cook. ‘Twenty-one,’ replies the boy; and as
the cook upon referring to his black board, covered with
figures in chalk, finds the number twenty-one, correct, he
proceeds to ladle out twenty-one mens’ share of soup, beef,
etcetera ; as the succeeding numbers are but a repetition of
number one, we will follow number one in his progress to
the mess, steadying himself as though the vessel was rolling
in the swell of a nor-easter instead of lying at anchor at
Spithead ; the boy of number one mess rolls himself along,
his load of beef and soup is speedily portioned out by the
captain of the mess (who will retire by rotation to-morrow).
“ By-the-by, I forgot to mention that the boatswain’s
mates, as soon as the drums ceased beating, began to roar,
as only boatswain’s mates can roar. ‘D’ye! hear there,
come for your soup,’ and then after an interval of about five
minutes. ‘ D’ye ! hear there, come for your beef.’ I heard
one of them yesterday morning calling the men to come for
their bread, thus— ‘C-o-r-n in Egypttt,’ and then another
one roared out, ‘ come for your scran.’
‘ ‘ And now, behold the lions feeding, ranged along the
sides of their mess tables; the said mess tables being sus-
pended to the deck overhead by highly polished iron rods ;
between the timbers of the ship’s side are shelves for hold-
ing plates, basons, spoons, etcetera ; between the tables are
guns, polished so brightly with oil, that you can see the


reflection of your own face in them, the muzzles being
quite large enough for the powder boy to crawl up the gun
and clean the touch-hole out, at least that is what the sailors
tell me ; but between us both, dear Susan, I don’t believe
them ; overhead are sponge, rammer, worm, priming wire,
bent bit, etcetera ; also cutlasses and pistols; around the
coamings of the hatchways are ranged in sockets, shot
highly polished with coal tar.
“ The chain cable polished also, lays its length along the
deck like some gigantic sea serpent, subdued, yet not con-
quered, ready at a moment’s notice to leap forth through
the hawse hole into its native element, with a shriek of
defiance.
“ Each man has a plate of beef and a bason of soup before
him, there is vinegar, mustard, and pepper, provided by
the State to season the repast, and as soon as the dinner is
over, each man will receive a fair glass of rum, as dessert.
A large heap of broken and unbroken biscuit, is laid on the
centre of the table, from which heap each man helps him-
self ; one thing that strikes a stranger as -singular is, that
each man as he takes up a piece of biscuit, before convey-
ing it to his mouth gives it a smart rap upon the table.
“ Reader, that rap is the seaman’s Shibboleth.
“ In the beams overhead, at intervals of a few inches,
iron hooks are inserted, from which hooks the men suspend
their hammocks at night ; under the guns are great
washing tubs and breakers for holding water; each tub
and breaker is marked with the number of the mess, as
indeed is almost everything, from the basons, plates,
spoons, etcetera, the private property of Jack, to the bread
barge, monkey, kid, and vinegar breaker, the property of
Her Majesty Queen Victoria (God bless Her !).
“ But it is {eight bells (twelve o’clock) ; the watch is
called, and we will ascend to the quarter-deck and hear
the roll called. The officer is standing at the capstan with
the watch bill in his hand, and as he calls the names out,
the men respond and pass by him, so that there is no possi-
bility of counterfeiting. Against the name of every man
present a cross is made; those absent are marked for
punishment; the officer comes to the last name ; the book
is closed ; the watch is set, and the men are on duty.


<< Date —Hurra ! off at last, fresh vegetables in, water
lighter cast off, powder all on board, and we are about to
add our pound to the upholding of Britain s supremacy
over the sea. ,
“ ‘ Pass the messengers there ; heave around the cap-
ston, strike up, fiddler;’ and merrily the anchor comes up
from old Neptune’s domain, to the tune of The Girl I
left behind me.” ‘ Away aloft, unfurl, sheet home, are
orders given and obeyed, as only men-of-war smen can
obey, and now the good ship, answering the pressure of
the wind on her sails, dances along, splashing the spray
high over her bows, and walking the waters like a thing
° f the watch,’ and the whistle and the hoarse roars
of the boatswain’s mates ring through the ship and
escaping by the ports, spread over the surface of the waves,
to swell the murmurs of the world ; for do not philosophers
assure us that every sound that ever was made since the
first creation of the world, are still roaming about like
phantoms, never to be laid till the Heavens shall roll up
like a scroll, and the earth shall meet with fervent heat,
and the place thereof shall know it no more.
“‘Waisters, sweep decks, coil down ropes, and still
onward dashes our floating kingdom. Smile not, dear
reader, at the comparison ; for is not our captain a despotic
king, the commander prime minister, and our purser chan-
cellor of the exchequer? Have we not our cook shops, our
hospital, our rotten row, or promenade for aristocrats (the
poop deck), our blacksmiths, and artisans of every descrip-
tion : and also, alas! our jail and gallows (the main yard
arm) ? Dash on good ship, and whilst old England s flag
flies from your peak, you can defy all mortal enemies.
“ Date. Every day brings us nearer to the /Egean ot tne
ancients, past Cape St. Vincent, into the Bay of Biscay,
sea sickness, Cape Finisterre, and we anchor at that sign
board of old England’s prowess, Gibraltar. Up killock and
away again, through the gut, and into the blue waters ot
the Mediterranean; truly we are masters ot the deep.
Mark how even the fierce and savage sharks follow in our
wake, like pages supporting the train of a princess; and
the dolphins are kootooing and salaaming before our bows


acknowledging man’s sovereignty. Merrily we go, and
the blood dances in a fever of wild excitement from heart
to brow, and thence to the finger ends.
“ And now we are in the region of that dread fiend, with
which the boldest navigator hesitates to measure swords,
the White Squall. This moment the ship is skimming
along, all life and hope; the next, and a few bubbles, and
perhaps a drowning wretch, clutching at a straw and madly
grasping the air, are all that are left to tell the horrid
tale.
“0 ! ocean, how many brave hearts, pride of their
kindred, what treasure, accumulated with toil and labour,
how much of good, and how much of evil hast thou swal •
lowed up, and still thy insatiable jaws are for ever crying
more !
“Will there never come a time when man, overcoming the
difficulty of respiration beneath the waves, shall lay bare
all thy horrid secrets.
“ The skeleton forms of bygone storms,
And the treasure that no one knows.”
But the fate that has overtaken many a gallant ship was
not destined for us ; swiftly and surely (mostly sailing, but
sometimes steaming), we are approaching that spot of rock
so long the gate that held at bay the followers of the cres-
cent ; but the cross of St. John has given place to the cross
of St. George.
“ Date. —At last we have cast anchor inside of the har-
bour ; the sails are furled, yards squared, and anchor watch
set. The bum boats that had been hanging around the
ship ever since she had entered the harbour, having
obtained permission to come alongside, now make fast, and
are soon crowded with shellbacks, (Dear Susan, always
recollect that a shellback is an old sailor), eager for soft
tack (bread), goat’s milk, small fishes fried in oil, fruit,
pictures of the saints printed in Birmingham, and many
other articles, denominated by the sailors, curios.
“ Under our bows is a small boat, from which naked
urchins are diving for six-pences, unmindful of the ground
sharks that frequent the harbour, so true is it, that ‘ famili-
arity breeds contempt.’ ”


From the foregoing leaves taken from Mr. Gilbert’s
diary, the reader will perceive that he quickly accommo-
dated himself to the change in his destiny. He had, as it
were, taken leave of all old associations, and began to
imagine, that he had always been Mr. Gilbert Augustus
Gogger, nephew, and heir presumptive to Captain Breaker,
B. N., and on his part, the captain lavished as much love
and attention upon him as though he had been the issue
of his own loins.
Much as we should have liked to follow Her Majesty’s
ship, the A n, through her passage to the Euxine,
whither the admiral of the squadron ordered her upon
secret service, and much as we should delight to tell of
the glories of the Isles of the Grecian Archipelago, Cape
Matapan. the Dardanelles, the Sea of Marmora, Forts
Europa and Asia, Constantinople —as seen from the sea at
sunrise—Scutari, the Bosphorus, etcetera, we must refrain
and follow the fortunes of the young scamp, whose deeds,
for our sins, we are bound to chronicle.
CHAPTER X.
CONTINUATION OF MR. GILBERT’S DIARY.
“ Bate. —Four weeks a°:o, whilst superintending tho
hoisting up of a cask of pork for the cook, the hook of the
block broke, the cask balanced for one moment on the
coaming of the hatchway, and before I could get away had
rolled upon my right foot, bruising it, and crushing two of
my toes. In an agony of grief, such as he might have felt
had I really been his own son, Captain Breaker had me
conveyed to his own cabin. When the doctor came he
gave instant orders to have me conveyed on shore, at the
same time telling me that boys of my age never did die a
natural death, and that mortification might set in at any
moment. ‘But’ added old Verjuice, ‘ I don’t think you
will die this time; born to be hanged you know never gets
drowned, so keep up your spirits master monkey, as it will
greatly assist your recovery, although I have a good mind to
E


let you die for caricaturing me down in the middies’ mess
the other day.’
“ In two days time the captain came to see me, and after
embracing me affectionately, he informed me that he should
probably be absent for two or three months; and recom-
mending me to the landlady, Madame Falacey, he left me
to return to his ship. Before going, however, he gave me
letters from my aunt and cousin Helen, and also one from
Susan Dotty. But little did my uncle think that I should
have been so near becoming a passenger to old Charon as
I have been. The day after the departure of the dear old
A n from Malta, feverish symptoms set in and I
hovered for eight days betwixt life and death. However,
I was not to lose the number of my mess this time, and I
intend to get well in half no time ; how I long again to
embrace my dear uncle!”
CHAPTER XI.
WHEREIN THE READER IS ALLOWED TO READ A FEW LETTERS, WITH-
OUT WHICH THIS VERITABLE HISTORY WOULD NOT BE COMPLETE.
MR. GILBERT’S DIARY CONTINUED.
Lettek First.
From Captain Breaker to Mrs Noble.
My Dear Sister. —lnscrutable are the ways of Cod. How little
Sir Theodosius Gogger imagined when carrying out bis hellish plot
of revenge, that he was actually placing his victim in the hands of
his dearest friends; but man proposes and God disposes. I cannot
express to you. my dear Helen, the satisfaction that Gilbert’s intelli-
gence, docility, and general good conduct have given me. I seem to
renew my youth again when gazing upon him, and I sometimes
almost fancy I again see my dear son Gerald, as he was a* Gilbert’s
age ; may this one be spared to me is my earnest prayer.
Dear Helen, an awkward accident has happened to our dear boy,
but do not alarm yourself, I expect him to be all right in about a
week. One of his feet has got crushed by a cask of pork rolling on
to it, and as I have been ordered away for a month or two upon
secret service, I have left him in the care of a kind married lady
at Valetta, called Madame Falacy. I hope soon to have him with
me again. I will not fail my dear sister to attend to all your com-
missions ; and tell my pet that I have ordered a monkey for her:
.tell her that she must buy a dog chain to lead him about with ; and


also tell her not to fall in love before I come back again, or I will
cut her out of my will. And now, dear Helen, I must tell you posi-
tively, that I am in good health, so do not be anxious upon my
account, and I hope, with the blessing of God, to see you at no very
distant date I hope that your own health, and the health of Nelly
is good; and so my dear sister, commending you to His care,
I remain your loving brother,
JOHN BREAKER.
I
Letter Second.
From Susan Dottv, to Mr. Gilbert Augustus Gogger.
My Dear Boy. — l write these few lines to you. and sincerely
hope that they will find you in good health : morning, noon, and
night, the sole topic of conversation in this house, is Master Gilbert.
Strive, my dear boy, to merit the love and regard of all good
people. Study your Bible attentively, and if you follow the precepts
there laid down, you will not be far from the kingdom of God.
There is one pretty hymn I should like you to study, it begins
thus: —
“ God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform.”
How applicable, my dear, is this to your own case, and how
thankful you ought to be and I know you are. that you were arrested
in your sinful career; don’t he cross with your own Susan for re-call-
ing this painful affair; you know that my heart is yours, and that
next to tny God. I love and cherish you as a mother would her son ;
bye the bye. my dear. T must tell you to keep Ben from drink. I
have a right to demand that he shall not let liquor overcome him any
more, as I have promised to marry him upon those conditions as
soon as he returns Hoping that you will return to us safe,
T remain, my dear hoy, your loving nurse,
SUSAN DOTTY.
Letter Third.
h rom Miss Helen Noble, to Mr. Gilbert Augustus Gogger.
My Saucy Little Middy. —l dare say you imagine yourself
almost a man. How I shall laugh to see you strutting about with
your dirk by your side. But Gilbert dear, are there any nice young
men in your mess? (as you call it in the letter that you sent to ma
from Portsmouth.) What a name! I dare say it is a mess, where a
lot of awkward boys are tramping about all day long, and nobody to
cook for them but a negro How nasty ! and then to have a marine
soldier to make your bed, and wash your clothes ; how you must
miss Susan. But my dear, since ina read your letter, T have become
quite nautical, and begin to shiver mv timbers, and dowse my dead
eyes, and to ta'k (if reef knots, rattlings. shrouds, topmasts, and to
talic all the rubbish that sailors talk ; but seriously, dear, I want
you to do me a favour. Dear uncle vowed when he went away, that


he would bring me a monkey from Gibraltar; now I believe be will
do it just for the sake of mischief, so Gilbert dear, contrive to throw
the horrid creature overboard, and I will kiss you, O ! ever so many
times. , , .
Be sure and write again soon, and tell me all about your messy-
mates (dirty fellows), and tell me their names, and how old they are,
and whether they are nice young men, and—and tell me everything.
And I shall always remain your loving
HELEN.
P.9.—Don’t forget, dear, to drown that horrid monkey, and don’t
forget to bring me a love of a parrot, au revoir.
Letter Fourth.
From Mrs. Noble, to Mr. Gilbert Augustus Gogger.
My Dear Child,—l received your loving letter, and I am glad
to see that you can write so Sensibly. Be sure, my dear boy, to study
the lessons in etiquette that I have given to you, and always re-
member that a gentleman is supposed to set an example of politeness.
Never be haughty to your inferiors, nor cringing to your superiors.
Never swear, God hath said, Thou slialt not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain ” Keep your conscience clear, and you may
depend that you are doing light. I don t pretend to be capable of
criticising your nautical terms, but my dear boy, avoid the error of
slang ; call'everything by its proper name, and do not, for the sake
of a false mannishness, fall into the vulgarity of fastness ; there is no
reason why a sailor should not be a gentleman.
Helen writes a letter to you by this mail, and desires you to
write to her in reply. Susan also sends you a letter, and we all
unite in commending you to the care of our Heavenly lather.
Your uncle sends a very good account of you from Portsmouth,
which has pleased us all here, so no more at present,
From your loving aunt,
HELEN NOBLE.
MR. GILBERT’S DIARY CONTINUED.
“ j) a l e —To-day I received a visit from Captain Snob, of
Her Britannic Majesty’s ship, the Sneezer. He handed me
a letter from Captain Breaker, in which my uncle ordered
me to put myself under the protection ot Captain fmob,
who was about to sail for Corfu with despatches for the
A n. Much as I disliked the idea of a voyage with
Captain Snob, still I longed to be once more on board of
the A n, and to embrace again my dear uncle and my
kind-hearted messmates, and although my injured foot
would prevent me from joining in their merry games as of
yore, with my old activity, still I should feel the pleasure


of the sport, as it "were, reflected on rae ; how I longed once
more to see young Mortlake, as swing the monkey, whilst
the rest of the raids in vain essayed his capture. Well, to
return to Captain Snob. I read my dear uncle’s letter
standing up, cap in hand (for a middj’' dare not sit down or
keep cap on head, in the presence of a captain), and raising
my eyes at the conclusion, I encountered the sneering eyes
of Captain Snob fixed upon me. ‘ Well, sir,’ said he,
‘ when can you be ready ? as I can’t wait for you if you
are not ready.’ The captain spoke these words in such a
sneering, disagreeable manner, that I thought that I had
never heard such an obnoxious speech in my life.
“ ‘ I shall be ready, sir, whenever you please,’ I replied.
“ Without another word he turned upon his heel and left
the house, and I do not really know whether he intends to
take me or not; however, I will have my trunk packed,
and then I shall be ready at a moment’s notice.
“ Date. —Two days since Captain Snob’s visit, and I have
just received an epistle from that gentleman, which for
curiosity I will paste into my journal.
H.M.S. Sneezer.
Mr. Gilbert Gogger.
Sib,—Repair on board to-morrow morning, eight bells, mid-day.
HENRY SNOB.
“ Date. —Yesterday I arrived alongside a few minutes
before twelve o’clock, and on reporting myself to the first
lieutenant, that gentleman surveyed me from top to toe,
and having ordered a boatswain’s mate to start my traps
down to the cockpit, he thus addressed me ; —‘ Mr. Gog-
ger, you are on the supernumerary list, so make yourself
scarce, and look here, don’t get up to any of your monkey
tricks here, or you and the mast-head will become ac-
quainted ; off you go, vanish ! ’
“ I need not tell the reader that I was off before ‘ vanish’
left his lips —‘man, proud man,’ etcetera. —Spokeshave..
“Descending to the middies’room, I there found some thir-
teen or fourteen sucking Nelsons, sitting, lolling, and lying
on tiller case, table, and even on the deck of the mess room.
1 Well, sir,’ exclaimed a fat, flabby faced individual (whom
I immediately put down in my own mind for the bully of


the mess), * who the d 1 are you, and what the d 1
do you want? ’ Pretending not to notice him, I fixed my
eyes on the clock, and in a theatrical voice began : ‘ His
eyes remind me of a carriage lamp on a foggy night; his
nose the proboscis of an elephant outvies; his hair like
carrots hangeth, and ’
“ ‘Are you speaking of me, sir,’ said he, foaming with
rage, and planting himself right in front of me, so that, in
spite of myself, I was forced to answer him direct.
“ Giving an affected start on to one side, I pretended to
recognize him for the first time, and quite politely inquired
‘ What did you say, sir ?’
• ‘ ‘Say ! ’
“ ‘ Yes, sir, say ? ’
“‘I ask you’’ (said Bully, half cowed), * who you are,
and what you want here ?’
“‘0! indeed,’ answered I, stiil quite politely, ‘ I am
the nephew of Captain Breaker, and I have been sick at
Malta, and I have come on board this ship a supernume-
rary on purpose to rejoin my own ship.’
“ ‘Oh!’ said bully, fancying that I was afraid of him by
the quiet waj in which I spoke ; ‘ indeed, did they give him
cold cabbage and make ums belly ache, nussy pussy the
poor baby, poor little popsey wopsey, pull his nosey posey,’
at the same time reaching out his hand w r ith the evident
intention of interfering with my nasal organ.
“ Now, without any egotism, I may lay claim to being a
capital wrestler and a good boxer; and the way in which I
acquired those accomplishments is as follows :
“ Amongst the works of fiction kept by my dear foster-
mother, Mrs. Jonas, was one, a work upon athletics,
namely, swimming, riding, fenciug, boxing, wrestling,
and other sports. Being kept (as I always was) by myself,
I had manufactured a wooden figure, of giant size, with a
ferocious mask ; and this hideous looking object I used to
prop up against the w r all of my bed and play room, and
spouting all the heroical trash and bombast of my novel
reading, I used to go through most terrific imaginary com-
bats. according to the rules laid down in the work upon
athletics referred to.
“ Thus I had become an adept at a straight hit from the


shoulder, and could place my fist with the greatest precision
and most damaging force upon the nose of my helpless
wooden Joe. After two or three rounds, ding dong, in
which, although I invariably remained the victor, still I
often received severe contusions to knuckles, I would seize
Count Ugolino (my wooden enemy) collar and elbow, and
would go through all the mysteries of the wrestling ring ;
thus, cross buttock, padlock hold, inside crook, and outside
crook, back fall, etcetera, were familiar in my mouth as
household words. And, as a finishing stroke to my pugi-
listic education, Mr. Miller (a brother mid, who had ac-
quired the Art Bacculinum at Eton) had fitted on the
gloves with me ; and by developing my theoretical know-
ledge with actual practice, he had in two or three days, to
use his own words, given me the belt.
“ From the foregoing it w'ill be seen, that Mr. Bully, when
picking upon me as his victim, had as it were, caught a
tartar ; for recollecting Captain Breaker’s advice, never to
give an insult, never to decline a combat, no matter how
great the odds; to die before surrendering, and never to
refuse quarter to a conquered foe. I had in my own iniud
determined to make it a dear victory (this forced battle) to
the aggressor, if indeed he did become the victor ; a con-
summation, that I had doubts of. Bully’s hand, never
reached as far as my nose ; like a tiger cat (forgetting my
yet lame foot), I sprang into an attitude, a la pugilist, and
before the astonished coward knew what was the matter, I
had knocked two of his teeth out, blacked his eyes, bled
his nose, and to finish up,, had given him a terrific fall
upon the back of his head, on to the deck, where he lay
insensible.
“ Coolly getting up, I for the first time, since coming into
the mess-room, had an opportunity of properly examining
my brother mids. The most of them were lads even
younger than I, and I could easily imagine how Melbourne
(the bully) had tyrannized over them. They all seemed
heartily glad at the defeat of Goliath, and pressing round
me, they shook my hands in warm congratulation.
“ In a few minutes, Bully eat up on the deck ; and as I
intended to thoroughly cow him ac once, I advanced to
him, and in a mocking tone, asked him, ‘ is urn very sick


then, where does um ache most, does he want his mummy
pummy to nussy pussy him ?’ and then changing my tone,
* Well! Mr. Inquisitive, do you feel inclined for a repetition
of exercise number one ?’
“ Thoroughly cowed; Bully answered, ‘No, I give you
best.’
“ ‘ Well then, sir, get up, and listen to me. If ever you
dare to talk about fighting to any of the young gentlemen
in this mess, whilst I am on board, I shall consider myself
especially insulted, and shall administer scene the second,
act the first, of the comedy that we have just passed through
to you. And recollect, /am captain of the mess from this
forth, and as luncheon is ready, I shall now take my throne.’
“Suiting the action to the word, I took possession of
Bully’s chair at the head of the table, and amidst the hurras
and wild laughter of my new subjects, I installed myself
king of the mess.
“Later in the day, I overheard Sambo (our steward)
relating to his confidential friend, Jurnbel, the middies cook,
the tale of the fight. ‘He hit him, sar, like ad d alligator,
sar, and tumbled him up, sar, like a wild cat on a possum,
sar. Yes, sar, he’s all there, sar. 0, golly ! wasn tit fun.
Yah, yah, yah.’
“ Date. —Peace and quietness in my new kingdom ; Bully
very quiet and civil. No duty; nothing to do ; but keep
out of the first luff’s way, who protests in language more
forcible than refined, that supernumeraries on a fully
equipped ship, are a c —d nuisance, and threatens to mast
head any of them showing themselves on the upper deck
during his watch. And so I, and eight more young gentle-
men, eat, drink, keep snug, and read novels, and laugh at
the first luff’s folly in not setting us in watches.
“ j) a t e _on board of the old A n, I never once saw
a man triced up for punishment, although the captain and
crew were judged to be as smart, as any in the service. I
have frequently heard Captain Breaker affirm, that the cat
should never be used in his ship, except for mutiny, insub-
ordination, or theft; but alas ! all captains in the British
Navy, are not like Captain Breaker in that respect. The
cat, is in the majority of their eyes, the only punishment fit
for Britons.


“ To-day, whilst studying Euclid, and eating nuts, I heard
an unusual murmur arise throughout the ship; low, sullen,
and menacing, it sounded like the growl of some monstrous
lion, dreaming and growling in his sleep.
“ X rose up, and was about to inquire of our nigger
(Sambo) what was the matter, when I heard the drum beat
for muster, and a minute afterwards the hoarse roars of the
boatswain, and his mates. ‘ Aw-1-1-1 hands, witness,
punishment.’ , , . ,
“And now the master at arms, and ships corporals
hurry the men up to the upper deck. I now saw, what 1 had
failed to observe before, that the officers and middies were
in full uniform. I, therefore, hastened to fasten my dirk
to my side, and hurried up with the rest to the quarter dec .
“ Taking my place abatt the capstan along with the other
officers, 1 for the first time, observed the preparations com-
mon to the horrid ceremony of flogging. .
“Ranged along the break of the poop, in full uniform,
ball cartridges rammed home, and bayonets fixed, stood a
party of twenty marines. Under the poop upon the quarter
deck, was another party of marines about thirty in number,
and armed in the same manner, the evident object of this
display of force, being to overawe the blue jackets ; ranged
in front of the marines were the officers of the ship, in full
uniform, the captain in the front, middies m the rear ; on
the port side of the quarter deck stood the warrant, and
petty officers ; the boatswain holding in Ins hand a small
screen bag containing that dread instrument the cat, whose
office it is to claw, and tear the backs of the bold British
lions, terror of their country’s foes; (no wonder that our
seamen are ashamed to show their backs to their enemies)
and overhead floats that proud ensign, the union jack,
vauntingly proclaiming to the world, that Britons never,
never, never, shall be slaves.
“ On the starboard side of the quarter deck was ranged
another party, consisting of six blue jackets, and one
marine, guarded by a file of marines with fixed bayonets,
and the master at arms and his subordinates, the ship s
corporals. „ . .
• “Against the mainmast, facing aft, a grating was
lashed” and Ward of the mainmast the ship’s company


was crowded together. Silence fore and aft, amidst which
the captain advancing a couple of paces, reads the crime of
the first man upon the list, and the punishment awarded to
him.
“This man’s crime was drunkenness, his punishment
forty-eight lashes. '
“ ‘ Patrick Reilly, stand forward,’ said the captain, and
forth stepped the unfortunate son of Erin.
“ A tall, broad-shouldered, red-headed, pock-marked,
devil-may-care sort of a boy is Pat, and by the look of his
eyes he seems to care very little for the punishment about
to be inflicted upon him.
“ Perhaps he is like the eels when skinning, used to it.
“ ‘ Strip,’ continued the captain, and poor Pat divested
himself of his serge and flannel, thus being naked to the
waist. ‘ Lash him up,’ is the next order, and poor Pat is
seized by the ship’s corporals by the wrists, and lashed
firmly to the grating, the arms extended to their full
width ; another cord is then passed round each knee, the legs
extended and lashed to the grating. Poor Pat now pre-
sents the figure known to seamen as a ‘spread eagle.’
Thus lashed, to move is impossible, and Pat sinking his
head upon the grating, resigns himself to his hard fate.
“ ‘ Boatswmin, do your duty,’ comes next; and that
worthy, advancing to within arm’s length of the grating,
daintily unfastens his green baize bag, and produces to
view, the cat; delicately he draws its knotted tails through
his huge fingers, and poising himself upon his toes, he
swings the infernal instrument of torture around, and
rather high over his head, and brings it down with a hiss
upon the shivering shoulders of poor Pat: a dull thud, a
number of blue wheals, a ‘ shriek,’ such as a wild Indian
might have envied, from Pat, and the criminal has received
number one of his allotted number of lashes. Note book
and pencil in hand, the master-at-arins records the lashes
aloud, until they amount to twelve; then turning with a
military step, and facing the group of officers, he touches
his cap to the captain, and exclaims, ‘ one dozen sir.’
“‘Boatswain’s mate, do your duty,’ responds the cap-
tain, and so poor Pat at length receives his quantum.


“ But Pat during the operation had not been a submis-
sive victim, but had kept up a running string of oaths,
objurgations, prayers, and threats, somewhat in the follow-
ing fashion :‘oh ! jasus, oh! ’ Then again as the cat
drew blood, and tore small pieces of skin from his muti-
lated shoulders and back, ‘Oh ! captain, oh! that’s
enough ! oh! Moses’ (this with a smothered groan). ‘ Cuss
yer !oh ! h—l, oh ! forgive n»e this once, holy God ! save
me! h—l and d n tion, you b murthering
villians ! there! you hit me in the same place again, cuss
of Moses on ye ! ’ And so on, but still the cruel cat rose
and fell with the regularity ol a pendulum until the
allotted number was given, which fact being notified to
the captain by the master-at-arms, the prisoner was ordered
to be cast loose, and the next on the list triced up.
“At last to my intense relief, the disgusting performance
ceased, and immediately afterwards was heard the roars of
the boatswain, and his mates piping to dinner; such is
life, the comic treads upon the tragic, and let the world be
won or lost, man must have his dinner.”
CHAPTER XII.
OUR HERO ABDICATES HIS THRONE, AND RECEIVES A DEPUTATION OF
HIS SUBJECTS, AND ALSO BURIES THE HATCHET WITH THE BULLY
OF THE MESS.
“My loving subjects, white and black, over whom I have
ruled for the space of four weeks, namely, from the day on
which I found ye suffering under a grievous tyranny, and
from which, without egotism, I may claim to have freed ye
unto this day, which I fondly hope may be the last on
which I shall exercise regal sway over you ; have I in any
way injured one of you? have I done or said anything to hurt
one of your feelings ? If so, speak, and recompense such
as lieth within our royal power we will make.”
At the conclusion of this speech, which our readers will
divine was the production of our hero, an universal shout
arose round the mess table, of “Long live Gilbert the


Firsteven Melbourne, who at the bottom was not at all
vindictive, joined in the shout.
“ Such being the case,” resumed Gilbert, we beg leave
to inform you that to-morrow the A n will be in, and
that we, as in duty bound, shall have, not unwillingly, to
rejoin her; and now sirs, and loving subjects, we beg leave
with your approval, to nominate our successor, who is no
other than your former captain, Mr. Melbourne ; should
you approve of our choice, we beg leave to lay before you
the following conditions, upon which you should elect him
to the vacant throne, from which he was formerly deposed :
Firstly, that he shall promise upon his honour, as a gentle-
man and an officer, to respect the rights of every individual
of this mess. Secondly, that he shall not attempt reprisals
for any matters that may have past. And now our dearly
beloved subjects, those who are for it show their right
hands ; carried unanimously. And now before abdicating
this throne, -we wish to impress upon you the advice of a
great champion of freedom, “ Who would be free them-
selves must strike the blow.” Should, therefore, at any
time your ruler “ wax fat and kick,” instantly dethrone
him, do not delegate the task to one individual, but rising
up in your might, rush upon him and cob him until he
cryeth peccavi. Thus, and thus only, can you preserve
pure and unspotted the glorious heritage of freedom, with
which we have endowed ye.”
Viva! Bravo! Hurra! shouted the delighted mids, and
young Johnson advancing to the head of the table, with
mock reverence knelt down and thus spake :
“ Most puissant, high, and mighty prince, king of the
bread barge, monkey, kid, and cuddy, emperor of bosh,
and king of puppydom, also prince of the cob
“ We, thy most dutiful, loving and grateful subjects, beg
your imperial highness’s acceptance of the following gifts :
firstly, for myself, a silver toothpick; for Mr. Smith, a
silver toothpick ; for Billy Graham, a night glass ; and as
the time presses, and I am tired of kneeling, the following
gifts with the names of the donors attached.
“Photograph of my sister, Willy Duncan ; meerschaum
pipe, Geordie Fitzgerald; pair of silver nutcrackers,
Tommy Perkins; silk neck tie, John Wilmot; silver


mounted revolver, Lord William Mowbray; and,’ added
Johnson, “ the best wishes of the assembled peoples for
your highness’s health and prosperity.’’
Gilbert replied to this handsome address, in a very pomp-
ous, bombastic speech, and at the conclusion remarked,
“But although the presents so generously presented, will
ever be held by us as remembrances of pleasant hours, and
friendly laces, we shall carry with us one regret, namely,
that our quondam enemy has not torgotten the past; but lets
revenge, ‘ eat like a worm in the bud ;’ I mean plainly that
Mr. Melbourne still bears malice.”
“No! No! Mr. Gilbert,” exclaimed Melbourne, “in-
deed 1 do not, I admire you, and am ashamed of myself;
you have shown me what a gentleman should be, and the
only present that I will offer to you, and proud shall I be
if you accept of it, will be my hand.”
“ Hurra ! ” exclaimed Gilbert, as he delightedly shook
the proffered hand, and vacating his seat, he forced Mel-
bourne into it—“ Long live king Melbourne the second,”
cried Gilbert, and “ Long live king Melbourne the second,”
chorussed all the delighted mids.
At that moment the cuddy door opened, and Sambo, with
white grinning teeth, and rolling eyes, appeared, “ I say
young gentlemen, fuss luff say sar, d supernumery
middies sar, if you make any more noise sar, he cussed
sar, if he don’t mast head every d one sar, specs you’l
catch slops if you don’t dry up sar, an he say sar”- What
more the first luff said, is not known, as young John-
son, wdio had been sidling up to the negro all the time that
he had been holding forth, emptied the contents of a can
of coal tar over the unfortunate steward’s woolly head.
Like a flash of lightning Sambo disappeared, and amidst
the smothered laughter of the mids, Johnson returned the
can of tar to its pigeon hole in the ship’s side.
At intervals Sambo could be heard swearing and cursing
in his own peculiar style, as he rubbed his head all over
with slush,* preparatory to wmshing it with hot water and
soap. Thus virtue had its reward, but how differently
weie the rewards apportioned. Melbourne was raised to
* Slush: kitchen grease.


a throne without anointing, whilst Sambo was anointed
without any accession of dignity, as he himself exclaimed
to Jumbo later in the day : “ Dem’s no gentlemen, sar;
( 1 lot of washerwoman’s cubs, sar, not fit to feed a
bear, sar; and that cussed young Master Gilbert, sar, is a
nation sight the worst devil of the kit, sar; yes, siree, jes
so, zackly!’’
CHAPTER XIII.
WHEREIN OUR HERO JOINS HIS SHIP AGAIN—A CONVERSATION IN
A MADHOUSE—ROGUERY IN ALL TRADES BUT OURS.
Tjie next day Gilbert joined his ship, and was hugged to
the heart of Captain Breaker. How different everything
seemed on board of the old A n , at least so thought
Gilbert, to what it did on board the Sneezer. Gilbert
received the kindly greetings of his messmates with joy,
and felt a relief as he trod the deck without the ever
present dread threat of the mast-head to mar his enjoy-
ment; still, to a casual observer, the Sneezer was quite as
tnm and neat and sailor like as the A - n 5 her guns
were as highly polished, her ropes as neatly coiled, her
yards as square, and her men as smart as the others, but
to Gilbert the difference was palpable, and he felt himself
now really at home.
And now leaving our hero to settle down again, and the
good ship A n to resume her wanderings over the
pathless deep, we will follow the fortunes of another of our
characters,, whom we have neglected for a long time,
namely, Miss Julia Tracey, Lady Gilbert Augustus Gogger,
Lady Theodosius Gogger, the betrayed, the maniac, the
reported dead patient.
The reader will recollect that Lady Gogger had been
conveyed to a madhouse, where she was reported to have
1 1 \ report, Sir Theodosius (Jogger believed • his
tool, Mr Smasher, had his doubts, but kept his suspicions
to himself; but, as true chroniclers, we cannot allow the
matter to rest upon report, but will endeavour to sift it to
the bottom, and clear the mysterv up.


Doctor Seraphin Anderson was a physician of no mean
repute for the cure of diseases of the mind. His private
lunatic asylum—or hospital, as he styled it—was undoubt-
edly well conducted ; and it is not too much to affirm that
he would not knowingly allow, aid, or abet in any criminal
•evasion of the law to take place in his establishment; at
the same time he did not too scrupulously scrutinize his
neighbours’ motives ; thus he had no hesitation in admit-
ting a lady patient consigned to him with the following
note :
Gogger Hall, M-ireh 13tli, 1841.
Doctor Seraphin Anderson, D h Hospital. W , Kent.
Sir. —I wish to place under your care a lady relative of mine Lady
•Gilbert Gogger. 'dense spare n© expense on her treatment; hut as
you will perceive by the inserted certificates of Drs Armstrong and
Gr< en that she is an incurable. I trust to you not to allow her at
large again. Enclosed are bills to the amount of £2OOO which I
should think would be sufficient to defray your expenses whilst she
remains alive; but should she die, please notify me of the fact and I
will immediately forward the necessary funds for the burial, which I
should wish to take place in the usual place of interment for your
deceased patients.
P.B.—You need not think of accounting to me for any (if any)
unexpended sums, should her death take place speedily
I remain, Sir, yours to command,
SIR THEODOSIUS GOGGER.
The doctor read the letter, examined the patient, and
finding that she really was insane, admitted her; and hug-
ging the idea that he was not a villain, mentally calculated
how long it would be till he should have to write for funeral
expenses upon her account.
Not that the doctor would in the slightest degree hasten
that event ; but still, suppose that she died soon, what a
lucky windfall; still he was obliged to confess to himself
that Doctors Green and Armstrong w T ere either villains or
fools, since the patient was not incurable, and they must
have known that fact, when signing their certificates.
“Ah, well,” exclaimed our worthy doctor to himself, “ I
would not have done if. Among them be it. I wash my
hands of it. Nice little sum, £2OOO, and hang me, whether
our patient lives or dies, if my worthy correspondent ever
lays eyes upon any of it any more.”


Thus that arch fisherman, the devil, catcheth us all with
our own peculiar bait.
“ Mrs. Brown.”
“Yes, sir.”
“ How is our new patient this morning ? ”
“Very well, sir, eats well and speaks rationally, and I
fancy is almost well enough for removal into the convales-
cent, sir.”
“Well, Mrs. Brown, pay her every attention, —and 01
Mrs. Brown, please tell your husband I want to speak to
him.”
Thus spake Doctor Seraphin Anderson to his head nurse,
Mrs. Brown, some four months after the arrival and ad-
mittance of the unfortunate Lady Gogger as a patient at
D h Hospital.
It is needless to inform the reader that the above conver-
sation referred to that poor creature, the persecuted Lady
Gogger. Conscientiously had the doctor striven with the
fell disease, and the result was, as Mrs. Brown stated, the
patient was perfectly rational and nearly convalescent.
Now this state of things did not suit the worthy doctor’s
book at all. He would have liked her to have died, that
is, to have died in spite of his art, but he would have re-
coiled in horror at the thought of helping her upon the
road to the dusky tomb, ever so little. Thus the doctor
was now puzzling his brains, as to how he should retain
Sir Theodosius’s money, without giving the quid pro quo (in
the shape of Lady Gogger’s death) expected for it.
For the baronet evidently expected to hear speedily of
her death, so the doctor thought, for the doctor was not a
fool, and plainly perceived that the death of Lady Gogger
was the end aimed at.
At last, an idea seemed to penetrate to the interior of the
doctor’s cranium, and brightening up under its influence,
he entered the library, followed by Mr. Brown, his head
keeper. As soon as the head keeper had entered the
library, the doctor shut the- door, and looking the keeper
straight in the face, he began the following conversation :
“ Mr. Brown, you have been with me a long time, and
in all that time we have never had a dispute; you are the


only person I can trust to carry through a rather difficult
affair in which I am interested ; will you do it ?”
Mr. Brown fidgetted nervously upon his chair. He liked
his employer, his situation was easy and lucrative, still,
Mr. Brown was a cautious man, and the doctor had opened
the conversation in such a mysterious manner, that he hesi-
tated to answer. At last he screwed his courage to the
sticking point, and asked the doctor plainly, “ what is it
that you want done, sir ? anything in reason at all, I will
do.”
“ This is the case then, Brown, and if you don’t consent,
keep what I now tell you a profound secret. Our last
patient, Lady Gogger, was sent here for a purpose at which
I guess, but of which I have no positive proof; now had
our patient died naturally, there would have been an end
to the matter, as that was the point I fancy, nay, can swear
to, that the letter sent to me aimed at; but I need not tell
you, Brown, that anything unfair could never be practised
in this establishment. Now, Brown, our patient is conva-
lescent, and there is no fear of a relapse. The case then,
stands thus: in a few weeks’ time the commissioners will
be here, and the inevitable result will be an order for the
discharge of our patient. Now the man who did not hesi-
tate to bribe me (an litter stranger to him) to commit a
cowardly murder, would not hesitate to get her into his
power again, to accomplish his hellish designs. What his
motives are for acting thus, I know not, but I intend, if I
can, to save the unhappy lady from the danger that now
threatens her. This is the scheme I have formed, but I
want the assistance of you and your wife to carry it out.
Lady Gogger must leave this place, and proceed to some
out-of-the-way part of the world, never to return to Eng-
land. The commissioners, the baronet, and the other
keepers, must be persuaded that she is dead and buried.
Of the money that I have received from the baronet, you
will receive £2OO, Lady Gogger, another £2OO to start her
in a new country, and I shall receive the remainder, which
will be £600.”
“Phew,” whistled softly Mr. Brown, elevating his eye-
brows and catching his breath, “ £2OO, lot of ready money,
but it is impossible; you must show the body, and if you
F


share your secret with the underkeepers, Thompson and
Williams, I would not give you sixpence for your scheme.
No, sir, it is too risky; can’t be done.”
“ Softly Brown, i have thought of all that; Helena
Malcolm, our Scotch incurable, will, I am sure, die in seven
or eight days; let your wife remove her to the india-rubber
room, and keep the other servants to the other end of the
hospital, in fact always have work enough to fully occupy
them in the west wing; have everything in readiness for
flight. I will let fall casually my opinion that Lady Gogger
will soon die ; she will keep to her bed and pretend illness.
As soon as symptoms of death show themselves in Helena
Malcolm, I will tell you, and when Thompson or Williams
is on duty, and the other keeper in bed, I will engage the
one on duty in conversation in this room, and you will
convey Lady Gogger away on board an outward-bound
Australian, still pretend that she remains in the hospital,
give Thompson and Williams their quarterly holiday,
when Helena Malcolm dies, which will be on the night of
Lady Gogger’s flight; next day when the keepers are away,
raise a hue and cry that Helena Malcolm has escaped ; put
the usual reward in the county papers; place Helena
Malcolm in a coffin, and bury her as Lady Gogger. Quite
easy, Brown, if properly carried out; say yes or no, Brown ;
are you agreeable ? ”
“Yes, doctor, if the lady consents, not otherwise.”
“Very well, she will consent; let your wife explain all
this to her, and show her how to avoid the snare spread
for her by her bloodthirsty relative.”
And so it happened one Thursday, about four days’ time
after the conversation detailed above, that Thompson and
Williams, the underkeepers, were allowed a holiday by
Mr. Brown, their chief. They accordingly departed at six
o’clock in the morning, and as their holiday would be up
in twenty-four hours, they used all their speed to reach
Jj h soon (the place of their destination, also their native
village), the said village of L h being distant nine miles
from D h Hospital.
At seven o’clock the under nurse, Jane Biggins, pro-
ceeded to the refectory for her breakfast, and sitting down
at the table with Mrs. Judson, the cook, she settled herself


for (as she elegantly expressed it, “ a comfortable tuck
in-”) but oh! the mutability of human affairs ! the hrst
slice of toast had disappeared, followed by an egg, and a
nice streaky rasher of bacon, and Miss Biggins began to
feel (as she herself declared) “ tip top, and quite comfort-
able then taking up her coffee, she daintily poured out
a saucerful to cool, preparatory to sending it to keep com-
pany with the toast, egg, and nice streaky rasher of bacon
before mentioned. But alas! before she had swallowed
one half of her first cup ot coffee, a deadly pallor overspread
her face, a cold shivering came over her body, and she tell
moaning to the floor.
With a horrified gaze at her companion, Mrs. Judson
turned to fly to the part of the house inhabited by the
doctor, but she had miscalculated her ability; the same
pallor of the countenance and cold shivering that had so
alarmed her in the person of the under nurse nor, seized
upon her, and Bhe sank upon the floor of the kitchen,
uttering the ominous word “ cholera.” At that moment the
door slowly opened, and the jolly face and plump figure of
Mrs. Brown appeared; not at all astonished or alarmed
did that respectable matron appear to be as she lightly
stepped over the fat, prostrate form of Mrs. Judson, and
walking direct to the breakfast table, she threw the
remaining contents of the coffee pot and breakfast cups
into the slop bucket; then turning to the receptacle m
which Mrs. Judson kept her coffee, she took a certain
quantity of that delicious powder, and placed it in the now
empty Joffee pot, then pouring boiling water from the urn
into the coffee pot, she replaced the latter article upon the
breakfast table, daintily tripped over the now
snoring, unconscious forms of the under nurse and Mrs.
Judson, and disappeared, closing the do ° r of^ he refeC K.
behind her. Drugged! drugged! oh, Mrs. Brown, vhat
horrid treachery !
a. * 5f # *
n. * *
Bing ! ring at the hall door.
“ Mrs. Brown.”
•‘Yes, sir.” 0 „
“ What ringing is that, if you please t


“ The undertaker from the village, sir, come to screw
down Lady Gogger, sir.”
“ 0 ! indeed, pray usher him up, and I will join you in
a few minutes.”
And so Mr. Charneldust is ushered up to the room, where
lies the supposed corpse of Lady Gogger, and taking out
his pocket handkerchief, he blows his nose and wipes his
eyes (professionally), and thus having satisfied his con-
venances, he proceeds to his task of screwing down the
coffin.
“ Well, Mr. Charneldust, I suppose you will remove the
corpse this afternoon; and now suppose we go down and
take a glass of wine and a rusk.”
“ Thank you,” replied in a lugubrious voice, Mr. Char-
neldust ; and so the report was made up in due form, and
forwarded to the proper authorities ; and a letter was like-
wise sent to the baronet, acquainting him also with the
melancholy fact.
The next day, Doctor Seraphin Anderson received the
following letter from the worthy baronet:
Fenchurch-street, London,
Doctor Seraphin Anderson, D h Hospital, Kent.
Sir, —I am deeply grieved at the melancholy news that you. in
the performance of your onerous duty, have had to send to me; hut
it has been some consolation to me to know that no expense has
been spared to make.my dearly lamented relative’s end as painless
as possible.
I leave the carrying out of all details to you, as I feel too much
prostrated by your news to exert myself to come down to D h.
I remain, my dear Sir,
Yours to command.
THEODOSIUS GOGGEFt.
On the night of Thursday Mr. Brown let himself into
D h hospital, the door by some unaccountable negli-
gence having been left open.
Next day, the Great Britain , Australian liner, set sail
from old England, and in her sailed a cabin passenger of
the name of Mrs. Morgan. Her trunks were well packed
with all necessaries for a lady making the long sea voyage
from England to Australia, and her purse was stuffed with
Bank of England notes for £2OO.


That same night Mr. Brown received a cheque from
and Mr Brown a gallop, es S cap6 a
during the screwing down of Lady brogge p f
ceding day. # # * * * *
Mrs Hudson, and Jane Biggins, the under nurse, we
at *Wh e St OT the d meaning of this?” exclaimed that lady,
in annuity tie, at *e%ame hmhiug the pros«e
rook upon the most susceptible P a “ ot . n€ l r y , „ T „ nfl
lazy, drunken hussy! how dare happen
Sid b“hof Ton shall pack; a!id a pretty character
* toh" C'°'Jbe? ’ZeXiTes ehe
humped herself down into a chair not drink, never
dl< L Yes^mamChimed in°Mrs. Judson, “ seven years I
CO l?Co (fee, indeed! Fiddle dee dee, do you think I am a
“ well then, mam,” maliciously snapped out Mrs. Jud-
3g3t®HSS*«**
•?=«-aai;ES«
make me tipsy, the . Tudson begin to think about
added, “Come, come, Mrs. Juason, ucgm t


ftfSSEta? ; and Jane ’ you g 0 up and wash «>-»>■
The cook flew to her work; Jane Biggins bounded nn
two stairs at a time; an l Mrs. Brown walked sedately
agood time $
V ?^ am Mam •' Mis sis ! Missis Brown ! She’s gone '<”
and Jane her eyes staring out of her head, flew down the
stairs and bumped her head against Mrs. Brown’s chest •
down b °fh impelle ? h y the momentum, they rolled
down the stairs, together, screaming, scratching and
kicking. On arriving at the bottom of the stair? Mrs
Brown was the first to regain her presence of mind and
sitting upon her —, well, her haunches, she seized Jane
by the hair of the head, with her left hand, and placed her
right hand over the nurse’s mouth. "
“You idiot! what do you mean; what is the matter?”
“Bhe’3e ’ 3 ‘he door is open,
“ Nonsense, you fool! you are drunk still. Even if she
has got out of the room she must be in the house • come
let s have a search for her, she can’t be far off” ’ ’
Qd 80 , th ® women searched the house through •
lor l!? the T m Where the corpse, with
the coffin screwed down; but as they did not look in the
nght place Miss Helena Malcolm remained unfound.
paper! worded a [h“:l Verti9eme,lt app6ared “ the «“»*
NOTICE.
ESCAPED MANIAC.
£lO Reward.
/r V,««sr #££
kindly, and communicate at once with the adveSr. “ ‘ r °* t her
and Helermlvralool er Came porward t 0 claim the reward,
ana Helena Malcolm came no more to D fi Hospital
octor Seraphm Anderson slept the sleep of the righteous,*


the balance at his bankei’s augmented by the'deposit of
£l7OO, the last hundred being a cheque from bir iheodo-
sius Cogger to defray the funeral expenses.
Reader, were we right when we entitled this portion of
this chaper —roguery in all trades, except ours ?
CHAPTER XIV.
GOLD.
Money is the root of all evil. What superlative nonsense,
sir! Money is the sinews, the flesh, blood and bones oi
all \Vhat reared those magnificent cathedrals, sir? Money.
What tunnelled the Alps, and crossed America with an iron
road from Pacific to Atlantic ? Money.
What furnishes the means whereby the John Williams
traverses the ocean, spreading the glorious tidings of glad
news —news of the Man God, the Regenerator and Saviour
of our sinful race ? Money.
But whilst claiming for money its due right, we do not
insist that its possession is an unmitigated blessing. Wo .
as we employ the talent, money, so is it a blessing or a
curse. Say we then, man’s depraved nature is the root ol
all evil, and we shall be nearer the mark.
California had startled the world from centuries ot
slumber, and all Europe was watching with envious eyes
the mighty strides of the western giant towards the realiza-
tion of his dream, namely, universal dominion over the
American continent. ■,
And now, in the year of our Lord, eighteen hundred ancl
fifty-one, comes another thunderclap across the ocean; Aus-
tralia, that Ultima Thule of civilisation, that land of bad
savour, with its convict population, has become the arena
on which thousands are to struggle for the possession ot
that mighty archimedian lever, gold. Hargraves, the Ovens,
Bendigo, Ballarat, Araluen, Rocky River, etcetera, are now
familiar in men’s mouths as household words, and although
some of the diggings above specified were in existence in


the year of our Lord eighteen hundred and fifty-one, still
the majority of the individuals composing the first rush from
Europe, were totally ignorant as to where they were going
to, and how they were to procure the yellow god; the
mighty, all conquering juggernaut, gold.
They knew this much, they were going to Australia, and,
they were going to the diggings.
*- * * *• *
In a modest wooden house, in the upper end of George-
street, Sydney, near Brickfield Hill, resided a lady, by
name, Mrs. Morgan, a dealer in fancy goods, such as
tobacco, cigars, pipes, gloves, scents, etcetera. This lady
was supposed, by her inquisitive neighbours, to be the
widow of a half-pay captain, named Morgan. She had
arrived in the colony in the year eighteen hundred and
forty-three, and had immediately opened the fancy shop, or
store, as it was styled. Handsome, and fascinating m her
manners, her house had become the habitual rendezvous ot
all the young officers of the garrison, and all the young up-
country squatters, in town for a spell. Still, so ciicumspect
and proper had been her conduct during the eight years in
which she had kept her fancy store, that scandal, even in
that scandal-loving country, could not find a cracked pane
of glass in her moral edifice, at which to cast a stone.
Many had been the brilliant offers of marriage she had
received; her only answer to the unfortunate petitioner
was, “Don’t bother me! Buy a meerschaum pipe, or as
you say you will shoot yourself, allow me to sell you a box
of pistol caps.”
And the disappointed suitor would generally go-away
smiling, and vow, “Mrs. Morgan fine woman, but too
heartless ; glad she didn’t have you.
Such then was Lady Gogger, about eight years and six
months after her release from the hospitable mansion of
Doctor Seraphin Anderson.
At this date, May the first, eighteen hundred and fatty-
one, her son Gilbert was a lad of twelve years of age. lhe
inquisitive reader, therefore, who is fond of fixing dates,
may amuse himself by settling the chronology of t e
various events recorded heretofore in this, our veritable
history; and the writer of this, having for reasons known


only to himself, omitted the date of occurrences, as he re-
corded them, throws himself upon the mercy of his readers
for past offences, and promises from henceforth to avoid a
repetition of such conduct.
One fine sunny afternoon, in the month of May, eighteen
hundred and fifty-one, a young man, dressed in the first
style of fashion, rushed into the fancy store kept by the
widow lady, Mrs Captain Morgan.
“ Lemonade, my dear Mrs. Morgan ! ” gasped he, and
then added, before the beverage could be poured from the
bottle to the glass, “great news! what do you think has
happened, my beauty ? ”
“I don’t know, Mr. Jackanapes, or Orville, or young
puppy, or what other nickname you may be known by,
I don’t know what has happened; but I do know that you
are a very disagreeable, vulgar snob, to address me in
such terms.”
“ Don’t be offended, Mrs. Morgan,” pleaded the young
man, “but really I have such news, news that will soon
transform our sleepy, dozeaway town into a human bee-
hive ; news that will set half Europe mad, and leaye all
the married ladies in Sydney grass widows ; I am off for
one, hurrah! ”
“ You stupid elf, what do you mean ? ” exclaimed the
widow, amused at his extravagant antics and vehement
language.
“ Mean ! ” cried the enthusiastic youth; “ mean! why I
mean that Hargraves has discovered gold not twenty
miles from my station. Hurrah! Eat bullocks now at
thirty pounds per head, and when I have sold them all 1
will go and dig for gold myself.”
“ Go and dig a hole and jump into it, you foolish child,”
laughed the lovely widow.
“ Why,” cried young Orville, “ that is just what I intend
to do ; but I say, now, won’t you come too 1 I will send
the shandrydan down for you, and you can open a jolly
big store there and make your fortune.”
“ I suppose so,” laughed Mrs. Morgan, “ and marry
Mr. Orville.”
“ Oh, no ! hang it, don’t make a fellow look like a fool.
I have tried that on before, and lam quite cured. Really


I believe you have no heart, and I am jolly glad that you
are not Mrs. Orville.”
“ Thank you, monkey; that is the greatest compliment
that you could pay me. However, if your news are true,
perhaps I may go to the diggings, but not in your
shandrydan.”
“No matter so long as you come ; and I say, don’t for-
get to call and see my sister Rose; and look here, honour
bright, don’t tell her what an ass I was, or I shall be
chaffed to death by her.”
Reaching out his hand, which the widow squeezed ever
so little, he made his bow, and hurried away.
* •» % ■» *- *-
“True, quite true, Mrs. Morgan,” said Mr. George
Mortlake, a young physician then residing in Sydney, and
desperately enamoured of our charming widow; but
strange to say, she did not snub him as she snubbed her
other admirers, although 3he did not give him any decided
encouragement; therefore, the courtship, if courtship it
could be called, never reached any farther upon his part
than a shake of the hand, common to all her customers,
and permission to retail all the news of the town whilst
sipping lemonade or eating oranges at the widow’s shop
of an evening. But she was always civil to him, and never
let fly those shafts of ridicule at him that she shot so
mercilessly at the dandies of the Orville stamp.
“ All the men in the town, and a great many of the
women too, are off' to the diggings ; all the sailors in the
harbour have left their ships, and have started to the dig-
gings ; the captains, and other officers, unable to restrain
their men, are off too ; the man-of-war in the harbour has
hauled off into deep water, and has stopped the liberty
men for fear of deserters ; all, or almost all, of the police,
custom-house officers, and other public servants, have sent
in their resignations, which not having been accepted,
they have taken French leave, and have joined the universal
stampede.”
“ Indeed, Mr. Mortlake, such being the case, how is it
that you have not joined the multitude, and gone off to
make your fortune 1 ” said the widow, a wicked smile in
her eyes.


“Ah, why indeed! you know the reason better than I
do,” murmured Doctor Mortlake to himself, and then
added aloud, “oh, I don’t care about it, I like Sydney
"You don’t intend to leave Sydney then, Mr. Mortlake 1
Mr. Mortlake answered with a decided negative.
“0! in that case,” continued his fair tormentor, 1 shall
bid you good bye, and shake hands with you, as I intend
to start for the diggings in three or four days.
Mr. Mortlake trembled in every limb, as he asked him-
self the question. ‘ * Who is she going with . and then in
a voice which he in vain endeavoured to render firm, e
faltered out, “You are going? you did not tell me so
before ; may I escort you ? you don’t know the rough popu-
lation that gathers upon a diggings.”
“Thanks! Doctor Mortlake. You shall escort me, but
at a distance. Biddy, my Irish servant gir w,ll go with
me, and her sweetheart, Barney Flynn, will be my body
guard. You shall occupy a tent next to mine ; and Barney
shall share it with you. Will that suit you, my Bayard .
Mv Preux Chevalier ! ” , , ... -f „
“ Suit me, yes ! and woe be to the rowdy that will dare to
insult you in any way; but if you have no objection I
should like to include in the party two friends of mine, Mr.
Mertoun and Lord William Baxter. I must tell you, how-
ever, that Lord William is known only as Bill Baxter ;
having been wild and reckless, his father packed him 0.l
to Germany for a year or two; but his restless nature sent
him off to Australia, and having spent all his cash, and
not daring to write to his father for more, he lias actually
been driving a bullock team upon the road for the last
eight months; getting tired of that life he came to me in
Sydney; and now we are going (if you will permit it) to
accompany you to the diggings. . , -ii
“Very well! get everything m readiness, and we will
start in three or four days.”
“Leave all to me ; I will procure horses ? and waggonet,
tents, and everything else that is necessary.
“Very well, be off with you! there, don t be foolish.
hands are not made to be kissed. , ,
And so it was decided that the widow Morgan and her
party should start in a few days to the diggings.


CHAPTEE XV.
AN AUSTRALIAN CATTLE STATION—THE OVERSEER—BEN AND MARK
-MR. TRACEY IN HIS NEW HOME—HOT TIMES-AN AUSTRALIAN
POSTMAN.
The traveller journeying along the Avellanna township
road, would be delighted with the magnificent prospect
presented to his view, skirting as he would do the foot hills
from the W g range, and crossing at every quarter of a
mile the head of some brawling, rushing, stony bedded
creek, whose waters sparkle, like diamonds in the sun ;
whilst to his right rises the magnificent outlines of majestic
Mount C--p r ; and through the park like scenery to his
left lies Lake L th, down to the very edge of whose
shining waves, the iron bark ridges with their carpeting of
green burnt grass stretch.
Pen cannot describe the landscape ; tongue cannot tell
the thousandth part of the beauties of this lovely spot.
The laughing jackass with his eldritch shrieks of laughter;
the coachman bird, whose note exactly resembles the crack
of a carriage whip; the king parrots with their wild
shrieking cries ; the flights of white cockatoos uttering their
discordant shrieks, and many others are flitting from tree
to tree ; whilst low down in the valley, distant about two
miles from the main road, and near to the shores of the
lake, a mob of about five hundred head of red and white
cattle are quietly feeding, their sleek coats shining in the
sun, and the whole herd forming a delightful contrast
to the short green sward upon which they are spread out;
whilst away in the distance can be seen the dwelling house,
stores, stockyards, and paddocks of Avellanna station, the
property of Robert Tracey, Esq.
But lovely as this scene is, we cannot linger to gaze upon
it, but must push on, or the fortunes of our hero will never
be told, but will remain for ever in doubt. To avoid such
a catastrophe, we will at once proceed to introduce our
readers to the superintendent of Avellanna station, and his
two stalwart sons, Ben and Mark.
Mr. Brookes, the superintendent, is that strong built,
silver whiskered, red faced, determined looking man, who


whip in hand, and mounted on a magnificent hay horse, is
dashing at such a terrific pace through the iron hark forest,
in pursuit of that runaway white cow ; fifty-five years old
last birthday, and still as wiry and as active as ever.
Listen to what he is muttering betwixt his clenched teeth
as he flies along, and aims a terrific blow with his silver
mounted stockwhip at the rump of the refractory beast.
“Ah' you rip ! Won’t yard ; won’t you ! Take that! and
that! and that! Ah ! ha! ha ! I thought I should best
you.” And now the cow, smarting from the terrible strokes
that have opened her hide as clean as the cut of a knife,
dashes into the stockyard, and horning her companions
savagely, right and left, seems to say, “No more of that
“No mistake father, you laid it on heavy, exclaimed
Ben the first born son of Mr. Brookes, a handsome, straight,
six foot cornstalk* with fair hair, blue eyes, limbs like sap-
lings, and a jovial laughing countenance, a mouth tilled with
large white teeth, and surrounded by a beard of the same
hue as his hair. ' i
“Bather can hold a candle to us any day, said Mark,
his brother, who was as much like him in form and features
as one man could be like another, the only difference being
that Mark was two years younger than Ins brother, and
looked it; his hair also was different, the colour of it being
black. .
The two young men jumped off their horses, and began
to put up the heavy slip-rails of the outer yards. The rails
being fixed, they again leaped into their saddles to ride home,
the distance from the said home being about two hundred
yards; but don’t imagine a thoroughbred Australian would
walk two hundred yards and lead his horse ; “ not likely,
what is the use of having a horse if you don’t ride him.
“ Look alive now boys,” said the elder of the trio, as they
hung up their saddles on pegs, fixed for that purpose in the
wall of the hut under the verandah. “Now mother let s
have dinner ! and then to work ; we have at the least fifty
to cut and brand this afternoon, and we have to kill a
bullock to-night too.” At this remark the young men
Cornstalk: New South Welsh Native.


hastened into the house, and their mother, a healthy,
strong, stout, rosy-cheeked dame, of forty-four or five years
of age, commences to pour out the tea, ever and anon
glancing lovingly at her liege lord and master, who with
his foot upon the chair, is busily engaged in unbuckling
his leggings.
Dinner over in Mrs. Brookes’s cottage, and luncheon over
at the house, Mr. Brookes and his sons proceed to the
branding yard, not forgetting to shout to Jack the cook, to
“ bear a hand Jack, and come to the yard when you have
done washing-up.” “All right sir,” replied Jack; and
presently Mr. Tracey sallies forth from the house and pro-
ceeds to the yard, and doffing the gentleman for once, he
commences to haul away upon the head rope with Jack the
cook for a mate.
But little altered in appearance is Mr. Tracey since he
left dear old England and Sunflower Lodge.
And so leaving them to their cutting and branding, we
will take this opportunity to enlighten the reader as to the
antecedents of the worthy superintendent, Mr. Brookes.
Benjamin Brookes was born not ten miles from the
sound of Bow Bells. At an early age he had been engaged
as a stable boy in the stables of Lord Drawlingdom. Being
accused (and wrongfully) of the theft of a silver mounted
drag whip, he had been sentenced—on circumstantial
evidence only—by a* merciful judge, to seven years penal
servitude ; and accordingly he was packed off by a paternal
Government to Port Jackson (not Botany Bay, as some sup-
pose) in company with four hundred of as great villains as
ever disgraced humanity, or graced a convict hulk. As-
signed, tipon arrival at Port Jackson, to Lieutenant Daw-
son, R. N., who had just received a grant of land on the
borders of Gippsland, and who was preparing to settle the
said grant as a cattle station, his good conduct attracted
the notice of his master, and he was installed as groom in
that gentleman’s stables.
His knowledge of horses, and his aptitude for learning all
matters connected with the management of stock, rendered
him invaluable to his master. Thus upon his arriving at
the age of nineteen, his master made strong representations


to the governor in his behalf, and obtained the remission of
the two remaining years of his bondage.
During the first four years of the settlement of Avelanna
Run by Lieutenant Dawson, the blacks had quietly allowed
themselves to be dispossessed of their territory, or, as they
termed it, towri. But at last, the devil, who always keeps
poking his nose into matters that do not concern him, must
needs put it into the intellectual cobra* of King Billy Billy,
that white fellow altogether directly cut um down waddif
bailj more possum nabboo§, altogether bullocky parter||
grass, kangaroo And so the nation was mustered
up for a war of extermination against the whites. The
opening speech in this brilliant campaign would compare
favourably with a bulletin from the Iron Duke himself.
“Every one black fellor take him spear, take him
waddi** ; take him boomerangs; altogether kill him white
fellor ; kill him lubraff ; kill him narrangy || piccaninny,§§
by em bye roast um that fellor longa tally-bar |||| ;
altogether that fellor; budgeree*** fellor Com-
laroyfff; bail gammon
“What name, Sally?” exclaimed Mrs. Dawson one
morning, as Sally (a lubra belonging to the tribe located
upon the Avellanna run), rushed into the drawing room,
and bursting into tears, began to chatter and gesticulate
in an excited manner.
Finding that she could not understand one word that the
lubra spoke, she called her husband, but he was as much
at fault as she was, till luckily bethinking him that
Brookes could talk their dialect well enough to be under-
stood by them, he went to the kitchen door and called
him.
Brookes, upon entering the drawing room, hat in hand,
was astonished at the frantic gestures of the lubra.
* Cobra: head.
t Waddi: timjber, trees, wooden elub.
j Bail: no.
\ N abboo: sleep, stop here, &c.
|| Farter: pat up.
Yan : go away.
** Waddi: War club.
-ft Lubra. Female.
t$ Narrangy: Little.
M l’iccaninny : Child.
11 Tally-bar: Fire, in the Comlaroy
dialect.
Farter: Eat.
*** Budgeree : Good, fine.
Iff Comlaroy: The great inland tribe, whose territory reaches from the
Murray to the Hunter, and from the Snowy River to Calandoon.
Bail gammon: Without gasconade or prevarication.


Walking up to her then, he administered a good shaking
to her, which had the desired effect of making her calm
down. He then asked her what was the matter, and
elicited the information of the intended war.
In a few minutes alt was bustle upon the station ; Mr.
Dawson being for hunting the blacks up and offering them
battle at once. However, he allowed himself to be over-
ruled by his overseer, Brookes, and all hands being
mustered, it was found that they had but seven white men
to do battle with more than four hundred blacks ; but the
white men had the advantage of firearms, and perhaps
pluck, and convicts though the servants were, they did not
intend to allow themselves to be eaten without a struggle.
All that day passed without any signs of their sable foes,
and having partaken of their evening meal at about two
hours before sundown, the men were posted inside the
house, the walls of which had been loopholed during the
day. The first part of the night passed without any alarm.
At the first cock crow (three o’clock, a.m.), Brookes went
around and awoke the men, who had been asleep all night
and Lieutenant Dawson having divided the
watches of the night between them). Scarcely were they
at their posts, than the cry of the settler’s clock* was
heard, and Lieutenant Dawson, looking at his watch, found
that the time was just half-past three o’clock.
“ That’s a shofell”f said one of the men to Brookes ;
and Brookes, who had thought the same thing, held up
his hand to impose silence, whilst with suppressed breath
he listened intently.
Again rose the cry of the laughing jackass, and as the
cry died away, there arose a shrieking and yelling, second
to none out of Pandemonium.
“Be cool, men!” said the lieutenant; “don’t fire till
the devils come to close quarters, then depress your pieces
through the loopholes and fire.”
And now it was plain to be seen that the house was sur-
rounded. The first peep of day now began to appear, and
the men seeing Lieutenant Dawson and Mr. Brookes so
* Settler’s clock: Laughing jackass, always heard just before daylight,
f Shofell: Counterfeit.


cool, became doubly courageous from the sheer force of
example.
Emboldened by the silence, the blacks rushed in a dense
body under the back and front verandahs, and tried to
force open the doors.
“ Now men, steady! Fire ! Fire both barrels, drop the
empty pieces and pick up the loaded ones. Keep firm,
men ! So! ”
The order was obeyed to the letter, and with sixteen
shots —the fifteenth and sixteenth having been fired by
Mrs. Dawson—-twenty odd blackfellows were laid low, the
bullets in many cases having gone through their bodies
and into the next man, so closely packed were they in their
first grand assault. The enemy now retired quicker than
they had come on, leaving their dead and wounded upon
the gory field of battle.
“ Mr. Brookes, please serve out a nip * of brandy to the
men,” said the lieutenant, and Mr. Brooks obeyed.
By this time it was clear daylight, and Brookes proposed
to go outside and “ fight it out.” Accordingly, Mr. Brookes,
his master, and three of the men sallied out, each armed
with two double-barrelled guns. The doors of the house
were left open, to enable them to retreat if necessary.
No sooner, however, did they emerge from the house,
than they were assailed by a storm of boomerangs and
spears, none of them doing any harm, but coming near
enough (as one of the men expressed it) to frighten seven
years’ growth out of them.
The enemy were too far out of range for bullets fired
from fowling pieces to reach them, but were quite near
enough to hurl their boomerangs at the white men, so the
order was given to retreat to the house again, and fight
behind the walls. And now the blacks, emboldened by
the evident reluctance of the white men to come to close
quarters in the bush, rushed forward, whooping, yelling,
jumping, and throwing their tools, f On they came, for-
getting the lesson of an hour before, king Billy Billy in the
van. Pell mell, one on top of the other, into the house
rushed the white men, Mr. Dawson being the last man, and
G
* Nip: dram.
f Tools: weapons.


shouting ont (as he entered the doorway), “quick men!
close the door! here they come!” “Hold hard,” cried
Jack, one of the men who had been left in the house to re-
load the guns, when the white men made their unsuccessful
sally, “don’t shut yet!” and rushing forward he hurleu a
five gallon wooden keg (with a lighted fuze stuck in the
bunghole) out of the door and on to the verandah. A
similar operation had been performed by his mate at the
back door, the doors were closed, and Jack, grasping the
astonished lieutenant by the arm, hurled him rudely back-
wards. “ Stand back! lay down, you d d idiot! ” He
shouted, as his master attempted to rise from the floor of
the room, “ powder in the kegs! ”
The blacks were crammed on both verandahs, pounding,
thumping, and chopping with their tomahawks at the slabs
of the house madly, when fiz—zzz—puff—bang ! Shrieks,
yells, and groans arose, as the wooden five-gallon keg, full
of blasting powder, rusty nails, broken glass bottles,
etcetera, exploded in the midst of the dense mass of niggers.
The house rocked with the concussion, each white man held
his breath in terror. Two or three seconds elapsedj when
fiz-zzz—puff—bang! again was heard This time, the slabs at
the back of the house were blown bodily in, and one of them,
striking the lieutenant’s lady upon the head, tore a large
gap in her scalp, and stretched her senseless upon the floor.
So loud was the noise, so thick was the smoke, that the fall
of the lady was unnoticed. And now above the din arose
the clear, cool voice of Lieutenant Dawson, as he shouted
to his men to leap through the gap and charge the flying
foe. “Charge, boys!” shouted he, and through the gap
and. over the heaps of dead and dying blacks they leaped
like mad men. The enemy, thoroughly disheartened, now
fled in terror, and thirty paces behind them, raced the in-
furiated whites. “Halt! fire low!” is the command, and
the bullets whiz into the very thickest of the flying rabble.
King Billy Billy, who was heroically attempting to stop the
dastardly flight of his sable warriors, struck in the
heart by a ball and fell in the very act of hurling a boome-
rang * at his pursuers.
* Boomerang; a semi-circular weapon, eighteen inches long.


Like many another hero of ancient and modern times,
he had thirsted for fame and immortality, and had
found it.
And thus ended the famous battle of Avellanna. Of the
four hundred warriors led to the fight by King Billy Billv
scarcely one hundred escaped unhurt, whilst over one hun-
dred lay dead upon the field of battle, and more than one
hundred lay wounded. Such terrible havoc had the two
impromptu mines of Engineer Jack made, that the veran-
dahs were literally choked with pieces of blackfellows—
.mbs and bodies being torn asunder, and mixed up together
m inextricable confusion.
Many of the wounded made their espape from the san-
guinary field, and crawled far away into the bush to die •
and for many years after that fatal day the stockmen era-
ployed up® the Avellanna run would often pick up the
skull of some poor wretch, who had crawled from the fatal
spot miles away, to perish miserably in the bush.
And here we may be excused for noting a curious faot:
all the skulls, with scarcely one exception, were miriUs the
lower jawbone. Explain the fact who can.
When the second keg exploded, and the back of the
house was blown in, Mrs. Dawson (as we have before
stated) was struck upon the head by a falling slab, which
tore away two or three inches of the scalp from her skull
and rendered her insensible
But the blow, severe as it had seemed at first sight was
barring the injury to the skin, trifling; and in a few minutes
the lady recovered sufficiently to sit up and gaze around
her Feeling a great pain in her head, she then put her
hand up to it, and immediately surmising what had hap-
pened to her, she made a desperate effort and rose to her
feet, then tottered to a table and snatched the cloth from
off of it, and pressing the torn scalp into its place, she
bound the delicate white laced fringed cloth around her head
I ottering backwards, she sank into an arm chair and
mechanically gazed towards the broken side of the house
Upon the table, within reach of her hand, lay a double-
barrelled gun primed and loaded with slugs ; and as her
hand moved along the table, she mechanically grasped the
stock of the gun in her fingers. r


How long she sat thus, she did not know ; but at last
she was aroused from her trance by the sight of a wounded
blackfellow raising himself up on one knee, and poising his
tomahawk for the fatal throw.
Scarcely knowing what she was doing, she shouldered
the gun and pointed it at the hideous wretch, but dazed by
the blow which she had received upon her head, she moved
more by instinct than thought; another moment, and the
unerring weapon would penetrate her brain, still her finger
drew not at the trigger.
“ Rose, fire ! quick ! !” and at the sound of her husband’s
voice, the spell, which had enchained her faculties was
broken '; firmly she pulled at the trigger, and with a
shattered skull her enemy lay dead.
The blacks deserted the Avellanna run after that fight, until
the gradual settling up of the country had driven them back
to their old haunts ; many were the combats that took place
betwixt the Avellanna stockmen, and the aboriginal
inhabitants, but at last, the ever , decreasing number of
their tribe, and above all, the introduction of the long range
rifle conquered them ; and at the time at which we first in-
troduced Mr. Brookes and his two sons to our readers, they
were, to use Mr. Brookes’s expression, quiet as sheep,
cowardly as dingoes, * and treacherous as hyenas.
Brookes never forgave them, and the long years that had
passed, had in no wise softened him towards them.
He never allowed them upon the run, and although he
did not now “ shoot them down like native dogs” wherever
he met them, and although he had long given over the habit
of carrying firearms, still, so great was the terror with
which he had inspired them, that the mere mention of the
name of Cobra Billyf to one of them, was enough to cause
a stampede of the whole camp.
Mrs. Dawson speedily recovered from the effects of her
wound, and was again as sprightly and as merry as of yore,
and in due course of time she presented her liege lord with
a pledge of her affection, in the shape of a fine bouncing
* Dingoes : Australian -wild dogs or miniature wolves.
Cobra Billy - Long head Billy ; Con B i, a settler upon the Narran River,
New South ’Wales, is the original of Cobra Billy.


baby boy, followed at an interval of a few years by another
little stranger, a girl.
The fond parents had named the boy Harry, and the girl
Rosamond.
The good behaviour of his convict servants having been
duly reported at the proper quarter, the remainder of their
sentences had been commuted, and they were free men
once more.
Mr. Dawson, however, re-engaged them all at a fair
wage, and in the course of years, they all became able to
set up as small farmers themselves, that is, all, with the
exception of engineer Jack, who stuck manfully to his steam
machinery in Lieutenant Dawson’s kitchen.
In the course of years, cattle and sheep stations began to
rise in value, and Lieutenant Dawson had disposed of one
part of his run for a high figure, to Mr. Robert Tracey, a
few weeks after the arrival of that gentleman in Australia ;
and so the Avellanna run became divided into two, the
lieutenant forming a new station on Dying Lubra* Creek,
and naming it after his dear, deceased wife, Rosamond
Valley.
Harry Dawson, junior, at the period at which we write
of, namely; Anno Domini eighteen hundred and fifty-two,
was residing upon a station in Victoria, the property of a
relative of his, as superintendent. His sister, Rosamond,
was in Sydney at a boarding school, and was being
educated in all the fashionable follies of young ladyhood.
At the earnest request of Mr. Tracey, Mr. Brookes and
his two sons had consented to enter his service, but not
until Mr. Tracey’s entreaties had been backed up by Lieu-
tenant Dawson, who had studied the interests of his old
friends and servants, the Brookes’, inasmuch as Mr. Tracey
had agreed to allow the overseer Brookes a managing
share in the station.
As for engineer Jack, he loved his old kitchen, and would
have pined to death had he not been able to sit in his
squatters’ delight under the kitchen verandah, and hold
forth to his wondering auditors—the travelling swagmen,
iiis guests for the night —upon “how we peppered them,
* Lubra: Aboriginal woman.


mates, jest under the back verandah of the house there ;
and after the fight, lads, we were three days, with four
horses and two drays, carting their black carcases away
and throwing them into Deadman’s Waterhole, half a mile
back along the road, you know where you chaps have been
camping half the day making pots of tea, and sleeping, to
pass away the" time for fear you would get here before sun-
down and be told to push on to the next station.”
And with a chuckle at the effects of his own wit, Jack
would begin to wash-up the tea things.
With horses reeking with sweat, trowsers splashed with
mud, top boots the same, and spur rowels sticky with
blood, the mailman dashes up. Old Jack rushes out with
a look in his face as though he expected a letter from the
governor, or a legacy of £I,OOO at the least , and dashes up
to the hall door. “Mailman, sir! English mail, sir!
English mail, mam ! ” and now his important self-imposed
duty of announcing the arrival of the mail done, he
saunters back to the kitchen. The mailman unfastens his
leathern bags from his pack-horse, takes off his horses’
saddles, gives one horse a kick in the belly, and the other
one a lash over the rump with the bridle reins, and turns
them into the paddock for the night.
“ Go and eat grass, you ,” and so saying, this post-
man of the wilderness proceeds to deliver the Avellanna
mailbag to Mr. Tracey.
******** *
“ Julie married —thank God! Died raving mad—dear!
dear!! Left a son !my old friend Captain Breaker! wonder-
ful ! wonderful! Shall he come here ? Why, my dear
Bertha, where else should our dear Julie’s child go to ?
poor child!”
But, enough ! Over this scene, we will draw the curtain ;
for behold the aged couple are kneeling before their
Maker, and Mr Tracey humbly murmurs, “Let us pray.”'


CHAPTER XVI.
BALLARAT SOON AFTER THE FIRST RUSH MADAME MORGANA-
DOCTOR MORTLAKI, AND BARNEY FLYNN IKEY JONAS AND
SLIMY SMASHER CRACK A CRIB*-BIDDY FROM IRELAND,
PROVES HERSELF A HEROINE-SLIMY SMASHER’S DEATH-AN
OFFER OF MARRIAGE ACCEPTED.
For miles around the country was dotted with tents, bark
humpies, rough gunyahs, and tilted carts and bullock drays.
Deep, ugly holes yawned in every direction. Rough, fierce
looking, heavily bearded, shirt sleeved and sail dle-strap
belted men, were winding up wash dirt from the said holes,
by means of wooden windlasses, of the most primitive
construction. Butchers’ and bakers’ men were galloping in
and out of this Paradise of diggers, delivering orders “for
cash down.” Three-legged iron pots were suspended over
the fires, in front of the temporary dwellings, by means of
the primitive gipsey triangle.
Dogs of a ferocious breed tugged at their chains, or
threatened the perambulators of the passers by ; whils|
horses of every size, colour, age and brand, were scattered
here and there, their hobbles clanking, and their bells
jangling, as they cropped the sweet short grass, or switched
their tails savagely, to drive away the blood-sucking,
intolerably annoying March flies. Such was Ballarat, in
the year of our Lord, eighteen hundred and fifty odd.
The township of Ballarat at that time, was composed of
one long street of houses, or rather canvas booths. Here
and there a bark shed broke the monotony of the canvas
dwellings, which seemed as though they had all been
manufactured at the same establishment.
But if there existed an uniformity and sameness fatiguing
to the eye, in the long line of canvas called Ballarat, the
inhabitants of this flimsy city amply redeemed it from
the charge of uniformity.
Men from the east, west, south and north, Chinese, New
Zealanders, Kaffirs, Russians, Frenchmen, Yankees,
Englishmen, Irishmen, Scotchmen, Turks, and men from
all other countries under the sun were there, all bent upon
the acquisition of that mighty talisman —Gold.
* Crack a crib: Commit a burglary.


At the Melbourne end of the town was erected a canvas
booth, similar to its neighbours in shape and material, but
differing from them, inasmuch as the gable end that faced
into the street was painted in oil colours, to represent the
front of a small brick house, and over the door, in gaudy
colours, was painted the following sign :
MADAME MOBGANA’S GRAND PORTRAIT PAINTING GALLERY
OP ALL NATIONS.
PORTRAITS PAINTED AT ONE SITTING,
PRICE 25 GUINEAS PER COPY.
Another sign informed the public, that Madame Morgana
kept a general store, and that she was likewise a wholesale
and retail wine and spirit merchant.
The sign over the door of the next booth informed the
world in general, and the public of Ballarat in particular,
that the celebrated head physician of the Emperor of Cash-
mere and Lord of the Valley of the Indus, Doctor De La
Eontaine GeorgiMortlaki lived therein, and that his modest
fee for one consultation was ten pounds, ten shillings, and
no pence.
Barney Flynn also notified the digging public, that he
carted wash dirt, at five guineas per one horse load. Our
old acquaintances had been at various diggings for the
space of two years and six months, and could not execute
all the orders that poured in upon them ; need we say, that
they were not poor ?
Mr. Slimy Smasher had at last put his fingers into the
fire, and so hot had been the pursuit of the detective police
after him, that he had had no time to secure his valuables,
and had made his exit from old England in an Australian
bound ship, as a would-be digger, his spare cash, after
paying his passage money, only amounting to £lO, not
much to begin life in Victoria with, in those days.
The first person he encountered upon the landing at Port
Phillip (as the devil would have it) was no other than our
quondam friend, Mr. Ikey Jonas, professional burglar, and
Knight of the Cross.


The recognition was mutual, and Mr. Jonas, who had
arrived from England only the day before, inserted his arm
within that of Slimy Smasher, and escorted him to a larey
crib* 4 kept by an old Port Macquarie chum of his own
whom he had accidentally dropped across, only one hour
after his arrival at the golden city.
Mr. Jonas had with the rest of the world been smitten
with the gold fever, but being unable to procure the where-
withal with which to procure a passage from Londoxl to
Melbourne, he had persuaded an old gentleman from the
city (with whom he had become accidentally acquainted for
five minutes, by dodging that individual along a dark street,
in the neighbourhood of the Hoxton-road), to furnish him
with means, by knocking him upon the head with a neddy,f
and leaving him in the gutter, where he was found by a
policeman in about two hours afterwards, in a dying state
from concussion of the brain. Melbourne, although a
gold mine in itself to two such clever workmen as lkey
Jonas and Slimy Smasher, could not tempt them to make
a long stay therein, and so with two Imndred pounds ster-
ing, in each of their pockets (the produce of one or two
clever garrotte robberies), they marched gaily along the
road to the Black Forest, their carpet bags being carried
upon a dray (along with some other fifty such parcels) at
the modest rate of £2O per parcel.
Ballarat at last; and lkey casts his eyes about to dis-
cover old faces. For a long time he did not see anyone
with whom he could claim acquaintance. At last, with a
dig of his elbow in his companion’s ribs, he exclaimed—
garnishing his conversation with oaths not to be written—
“ I say, Slimy, look there, Billy the Bustler, by ! ”
Yes, sure enough, there stood Billy the Bustler, over-
looking certainly; but somehow, honester looking than
when we last had the pleasure of that young gentleman’s
acquaintance in Captain Breaker’s garden, at Hornsey
Wood, London.
Billy, no way distant, ceased his occupation of winding
Tip wash-dirt, and shook hands cordially with his old
* Larey crib: Thieves’ rendezvous,
t Neddy : Life preserver. What a misnomer I


acquaintance, at the same time questioning them as to
their intentions of digging.
“0, yes, of course!” said Ikey, “We intend to dig,
don’t we Slimy ? Only, Billy, you see we haven’t got a
claim yet nor no tent, nor tools, nor nothing.”
“0!” laughed Billy, “never mind that boys, there’s
our tent, make yourself comfortable, stop as long as you
like ; me and my mate will knock off in a few minutes, and
come and have supper with you.”
Good natured, and generous as ever, Billy, though let
us hope a little more mindful of meum et tuum.
“How the d —l did you come out here Billy?” ques-
tioned Ikey, as he washed down the end of his supper with
a glass of Billy’s brandy, cost price, five guineas per bottle.
“Well,” said Billy, “it’s a long story, so fill your pipe
(here’s tobacco) and I’ll tell it to you, and Tom here, as
he knows it all by heart, can lay down and go to sleep if
he likes. You must reckerlect that day on which you sent
me up to that crib* at Hornsey, to try and get little Buby
to open the winder for us again ? Well, I got inter the
garden, and come right up ter me coveyj- setting quite
goody-goody under a happerl tree. Well, I wissels, and
Buby starts up ; I tells him what we wanted him to do,
and he begins to preach out of his book ter me. Well, I
got a little savage, and warned him what wood happin if
he peached.J Just then the old Gorger flops out, and
tries to put, McGinnis§ on me. I slips through his legs
and floors him; up I j umps and runs. Law my eye !
didn't I run ! after me comes the old un, but I licked him,
and got right away. Well, then, I goes erlong, and
erbout aite erclock at night I gits up ter the King’s Cross
Station; well, I sees a swell cove|| with a nice birds eye
in his pocket, and gold ticker** in his waistcoat
pocket, and I warks up ter him, and I ses, if you please
sir, is it nigh upon eight o clock ? Er corse he pulls out
his watch to see, and er corse as he puts it back I cops* it.
Well, the gentleman warks erlong quite appy, and I takea
* Crib: house.
+ Covey: acquaintance.
X Peached: gave information,
g McGinnis: a well known pugilistic hold.
Stook: handkerchief.
|| Swell cove: gentleman.
** Ticker: watch,
ft Cops: take.


his birds eye; and as X pulls his andkercher out I sees a
railway ticket in it. Fust class ses the ticket, and fust
class ses I, I’ll take a railway trip fur the good of my cou-
stertution. Well, yer see, I didnt get inter the right
karridge; the old bloke misses his ticket jest as the train
starts ; the train goes off, the old fellow spots*' me getting
in, and when the train stops at the next station a trapf
collars me as I gets out of the karridge. I askes the
peeler how he knowed it was me, and he winks and ses the
telegraf. Well they takes me afore the beak,]; the watch is
found on me, no get out of it. Any former convictions ?
ses his honour. None your honour, ses the trapf. My
eyes, ses Ito myself, what a lie! Seven years con-
ditional exile to New South Wales, ses the judge.
“ And so they sent me out to Moreton Bay, with a lot
more exiles—Peter G 1, Charley B 1, Benny
L n, G m, and a lot more chaps. I got sent up to
a station on the Darling Downs, served years, got a
ticket, and permission to travel; takes a passage from
Brisbane to Sydney, then to Melbourne, and on Jo Bal-
larat ; and slap bang, here we are again!
“Tom here came with me .He’s a native ; and as soon as
I make a pile, I am going off back again to marry his
sister —ain’t I, Tom ?”
“0, yes!” laughed Tom; “ask my brother if I am a
liar ?”
“ Nice picter that,” said Ikey, nodding his head at a
piece of No. 1 navy canvas that hung over Billy’s bed, on
which was depicted in flaming colours the supposed por-
trait of Billy in his holiday clothes. The canvas in question
measured two feet long by one foot wide, and was mounted
at the top and bottom by round wooden rollers, after the
fashion of school maps.
“ Yes,” answered Billy, smiling with conscious pride,
“ That there pickcher was painted for me by Madame
Morgana, and I call it a first-rate likeness.”
“ So it is, Billy, how much did it cost ? ’
“ Cost! 0, not much ; twenty-five funt.” §
* Spots: sees,
t Trap : policeman.
J Beak: judge.
§ Funt: sovereign.


* “What? ” cried Ikey in astonishment; “ twenty-five
pounds! Does she get much to do at that ? ”
“Much to do!” scornfully cried Billy; “why, she
paints from ten in the morning till three in the afternoon,
and does three every day ; she has more work than time.”
“ Phew ! ” exclaimed Ikey in astonishment; “her crib
must be worth cracking.”*
“Hush, you fool!” quickly interposed Billy, “if any
of the diggers were to hear you speak only a cross word of
Madame Morgana, they would take you out and shoot you
like a dog.”
“ Who would ? ”
“ By heaven !” said Billy savagely, “I would do so too.”
“ Why ? ” queried Ikey, “ what is she then, she’s only a
woman, is she?”
“ A woman ! ” enthusiastically cried Tom, now joining
in the conversation, “she is an angel! Many a poor sick
fellow has she nursed through his illness, washing him, and
cleansing his clothes, and reading the Bible to him ; all
that I say is this, if any man only so much as looked cross
at her, and I standing by, I would put a bullet into him
with, as little compunction as I would have in putting a
bullet into a native dog; God bless her, and preserve her
from evil.”
“0! yes!” laughed Billy, “Tom is in love with her,
and so are all the men on Ballarat. Why he got his like-
ness painted by her, and as she was painting his nose, a
fly stuck upon the canvas, and dried there, and Tom swore
that he felt that fly upon his nose all the time that she was
painting him, and so he made her take one hundred instead
of twenty-five pounds. He always keeps the pickcher out
of sight through the week, and hangs it up on Sundays.”
Ikey and Slimy laughed heartily at Billy’s narrative,
and after partaking of another glass of brandy each, they
coiled themselves up in blankets lent to them by Billy, and
the quartette (if we may wrest the meaning of the word
thus far) were soon sound asleep.
Next morning at daylight, Billy and his mate arose.
Ikey and Slimy hearing them move, would have risen too,
* Her crib, &c.: Her house must be worth robbing.


but Billy exclaimed hospitably, “Lie still, mates ! Tom el
go fer a bucket er water, and I’ll make the fire, and get the
meat from the butcher.”
As soon as Tom and Billy had left the tent, Slimy turned
to Ikey and whispered, “don’t let onto the Bustler, I don’t
think he is safe now.”
“No! nor I,” replied Ikey, “mum ! here he comes.”
Tom had returned with the bucket of water. The tea-
billy was filled with hot fragrant tea, and Ikey and Slimy
were standing upon one side of the fire, and Billy and Tom
upon the other. When the butcher’s man rode up,
“Bootcher!” roared he, and “all right!” replied Tom.
“How much?” “Ten pounds steaks, fifteen shillings.”
“All right!” again replied Tom, “wait a minute,” and
going into the tent, he lifted a piece of board from off of
the floor under his bed, and inserting his hand into a small
cavity in the floor, he took fifteen shillings in silver, and
coming out of the tent, he placed the money in the butcher’s
hand. .
Off went the butcher at a gallop, and soon could again be
heard his well-known cry, as he stopped at a customer’s
tent, “ Bootcher! ”
The keen eyes of Ikey Jopas had seen all that took place
within the tent, and Tom’s money was not as safe as in a
b& After breakfast, Ikey informed Billy that he and Slimy
were going to take a lunar * round, and see what Ballarat
was like. „
As the two robbers sauntered up the mam street ot
Ballarat, they cast their eyes at the cradles, picks, shovels,
tents, water boots, bags of rice, flour, sugar, and salt, cases
of pickles, jams, brandy, etcetera, etcetera, displayed for
sale inside of the canvas stores.
As they passed by the studio of Madame Morgana, Slimy
gave a searching glance into the interior, and as his eyes
alighted upon the features of Madame Morgana, he gave a
sudden start of surprise; he had recognised her, and his
suspicions had become a certainty.
“ What’s the matter with you ? ” queried Ikey.
* Lunar: look.


“Nothing! thought I knew that woman, and I don’t,”
lied the unscrupulous agent of Sir Theodosius Cogger.
That same afternoon, as Billy was pulling up his wash-
dirt and singing a flash song that had been recalled to his
memory by the sight of Ikey Jonas and Slimy Smasher the
night before, Ikey sauntered up and carelessly remarked,
“Singing my old favorite, Billy; I suppose you soon
intend to go back to the big smoke, and carry on the old
business?”
“ Me!” cried Billy, “no fear! I don’t intend to do any-
thing upon the cross again ; as little Ruby said to me—
honesty is the best policy.”
“ Keep that way, my boy, and so good-bye Billy; me and
Slimy are ofl to look for a claim ; can’t afford to be idle.”
“ All right, boy ! take care of yourself, and if you want
anything, you know where to find us,” replied his host.
* * * * * *
One o’clock ante-meridiem ; dark as pitch, and a mizzling
rain falling; Ballarat asleep ; all quiet at Madame Mor-
gana’s store, etcetera ; Biddy asleep upon a low iron bed-
stead; and Madame Morgana asleep upon another bedstead,
the counterpart of Biddy’s.
A scratching noise, a square of canvas cut out, and
Slimy Smasher and Ikey Jonas are standing inside of the
studio and bedroom of the portrait painter Madame Mor-
gana, or, as the reader doubtless surmises, Lady Gogger.
“ Cuss you, be quiet!” and the ruffian Jonas seized the
struggling woman by the throat, and stifled the cry that
had risen to her lips.
And now Biddy wakes up, and quick as thought the
brave little Irish girl leaps from her bed to aid her
mistress. Seizing an old military sword that formed part
of her mistress's lay figure department, she made a lunge
at Slimy’s breast, and passed the sword clean through him,
screaming as she did so, “ Murder! fire! thieves! rape!” Ikey
let go his hold of Madame Morgana’s throat, and the poor
lady fell back insensible upon the bed. The sound of hur-
rying footsteps was heard; the door of the canvas booth
was burst open ; Ikey darted like lightning through the hole
* Cross: dishonest.


by which, he had entered the booth, and Slimy, beating
the air wildly with his arms, fell forward upon his face.
“You black varmint!” cried Biddy, as the eager multi-
tude of diggers rushed into the room, and a lamp was
lighted, or rather turned up higher, since the lamp had not
been extinguished by Biddy when she retired to rest. “ Bad
scran to your ugly carcase ! you murdering thief!”
Doctor Mortlake rushed to the bed upon which Mrs.
Morgan lay, and began to use restoratives. She moaned
feebly, and murmured incoherently, “George! George!!
Oh, save me ” ! In a few minutes she became fully con-
scious and shrank beneath the bed clothes; the diggers,
rough men as they were retired outside of the tent, and
Biddy, who seemed in no way abashed at her own state of
dishabille, assisted her mistress to dress.
As soon as Madame Morgana was attired, the doctor and
the diggers were again admitted into the room. Slimy
Bmasher was still writhing and groaning upon the earthern
floor, and the doctor advancing to him, examined his
wound, and carelessly shook his head.
bmall sympathy was then felt for men of his stamp,
there. r
“ Will he die, George ?” asked Lady Gogger, as she clung
to Doctor Mortlake’s arm.
George gave a glad start of surprise, for during the
whole term of his acquaintance with her, friendly and warm
though she had been, still she had never advanced so far
towards him, as to call him aught but Mr. Mortlake.
Tenderly then returning the pressure of her snow white
arm, the doting hopeful lover answered, “ Yes !”
At the sound of Lady Gogger’s voice, the dying wretch
ceased his convulsive struggles with an effort, and raising
himself up on his elbow, he murmured hoarsely, “ Water!
Lady Gogger, water !”
Lady Gogger at those words from the dying man gave a
shriek, and loosing her hold of the doctor’s a'rm, she wmuld
have fallen, had not her lover again caught her in his strong
grasp.
Who are you ?” faltered the lady, in vain endeavouring
to recognize him through the mask of soot with which his
face was covered.


“Water! water!” gasped the poor wretch again, and
Biddy holding up his head with one arm, kept a water jug
to his mouth with the other hand.
“ Lady Gogger,” gasped the dying man, as she bent over
him with clasped hands. “ I am—Mister—Smasher
“Oh, my God ! did he—did lie send you ?
“No! He—is—dead. Oh, God! Forgive me.”
“My son! Mr. Smasher, my son! Oh, tell me of him,
as you hope to he forgiven !” ~
“The the—Breakers —Oh, God ! Oh, Christ, save me.
“ He raves,” said the doctor, “ and thinks he is at sea ”
Lady Gogger knelt by the dying man, and taking his
clammy right hand in hers, she said soothingly, “Mr.
Smasher, 1 forgive all the injuries you have done to me,
let me pray for you.” .
The dying man looked his gratitude, and in a trembling
voice, the lady repeated the Lord s prayer. .
The doctor and the diggers took off their hats, and quietly
remained spectators of this singular scene. .
At the conclusion of the prayer, the dying man again
essayed to speak, “Your son,” gasped he, “is d -.
At this moment, a torrent of blood spouted from Ins mouth,
and saturated the white bosom of the dress worn by Lady
Gogger ; terrified at the hideous sight, Lady Gogger covered
her face with both her hands; Slimy gave a convulsive
struggle, and all was over. , • A
The doctor drew Lady Gogger away ; the body was carried
out of the booth; the two shopmen /smart, knowing
Svdney natives), thought this a good time to do a good
stroke of business, and so at three o’clock m the morning,,
they lighted up, and began to retail stone fences,* shandy
gaff* chain lightning*, all my own,* etcetera, etcetera, to
the assembled diggers; and Barney Flynn declares, that
Madame Morgana sold more grog that night than all the
other shanties upon Ballarat put together, and doubtless
Barney Flynn made a good guess at the truth.
•%. * * *
“Julie, dear Julie, after what happened last night, you
must see that it is wrong for you to remain without a
* Australian fancy drinks.


natural protector. Dearest! give me that right; I believe,
nay! lam sure, that lam not indifferent to you. So-
darling ! give me that right, the right to call you mine.”
Letting her head fall lovingly upon his shoulder, she
murmured, “ I do love you George ; but you do not know
my past history; wait till you hear that, and then, if you
still persevere in your request, I will become yours, and
yours only, until death do us depart.”
* ■» * * *
“Is that all, darling, that you have to tell me ?” said
George, as he fondly gazed upon her face and kissed her,
as she finished the recital of her wrongs and marriages
“ I consider you a victim, and love you more than ever, for
the dangers you have seen, mine love ! mine for ever ! I
claim your promise, and would not part with my prize for
a king’s ransom.”
And, continued he, sobering down, “ Let us leave this
place; I have wealth enough and to spare. My two
friends, Lord William Baxter and Mr. Mertoun, have each
speculated so well with the ten thousand pounds which I
placed in each of their hands, with which to try their luck
on their own and my account, that my share alone of the
profits amounts to forty-five thousand pounds sterling,
added to which I have made another hundred thousand
myself.”
“ Oh ! you mercenary dear, make haste and take your
penniless bride,” said Julie mockingly, at the same time
taking from her desk bills for more than eighty thousand
pounds, and forcing them into his hand.
“ Julie,” said her lover, “ I value not this wealth ; with-
out a penny I would joyfully take you, were I the
mightiest potentate in the world.”
“ Yes !” laughed Lady Gogger, “ even though you were
really your royal master, Emperor of Cashmere, and Lord
of the Yalley of the Indus.”
# # *
Slimy Smasher was buried under a gum tree by the
police. At the last hour’, this scheming, villainous, un-
scrupulous ruffian had, like the thief upon the cross, called
upon his Saviour; his body was covered with earth, and
H


his soul was, where? Judge not! 0! ye bigoted, hypo-
critical fanatics ; ye who rear sumptuous edifices, magnifi-
cent with pictures, gilding, and statuary ; who cause
celestial music to be performed therein; who steep the
senses cf your flocks, the votaries of your faith, in sensual
sights and sounds, and blindly imagine that God delighteth
iu burnt offerings, and sacrifices, and majestical genu-
flections, and the work of the hands of the sons of men.
Judge not! I say, “ That ye be not judged.”
And 0! ye broad-brimmed, sanctimonious, drab beclothed
sect, who make your yea, yea, and your nay, nay; “ye
that think ye stand, take heed lest ye fall,” and split upon
the rock of “ the pride that apes humility;” judge not!
Judge not! 0 ! ye bigots i of all sects, but go into your
secret chambers and make your humble petitions before
your Maker, and go not up into the synagogues, thanking
God aloud, that you are not as that publican :
“JUDGE NOT!”
CHAPTER XVII.
DOCTOR MORTLAKE BECOMES A SQUATTER-THE LOST FOUND-
ENGINEER JACK MISCALCULATES HIS STRENGTH-AND MISS
ROSAMOND DAWSON BOXES STOCKMAN BEN’S EARS.
“Ah then, sure, my dear mistress,” sobbed the heroic
Biddy, as her mistress bade her pack up to start for Mel-
bourne, “sore indeed will be my heart away from you,
darling ; but I cannot go with ye, avourneen ; Barney will
have it that I shall remain behind with him, and, poor
gossoon, how can I refuse him ? Ever in. my heart, dear
lady, I shall fondly remember you ; and when milking my
own cows in dear old Erin once more, I shall tiling upon my
own dear Bahona Sassenach* of a mistress.”
“Why, Biddy,” said Lady Gogger, as she kissed her
noble hearted but lowly born handmaid, “are you going
back then to Ireland ?”
* Bahona Sassenach: Black Protestant.


“Going back!” -echoed Biddy; “indeed then we a.-e.
Jo-morrow Father Maguire will marry us, and as soon as
Barney can sell his business, we shall be off. Barney and
I can muster two thousand pounds now, and we shall be
able to stock a fine farm in the dear old land.”
“Add this to the stocking, Biddy dear,” said Lady
Logger, as she slipped a bank note for a large amount into
the hand of the noble minded daughter of Erin.
Biddy went about her packing up, and thinking upon the
old people at the farm near Kilrush, hummed that noble
poem of Ireland’s greatest poet, beginning—
She is far from the land where her young hero sleeps,
And lovers are round her sighing.
**•* * * *
“Julie, dear, here is just the thing that will suit us,
listen,” and Mr. Mortlake commenced to read a glowing
account of a sheep and cattle station, placed in the market
for sale. According to the picture, painted by the genius
of a Melbourne auctioneer, Yackerdilly station was an
earthly paradise, undulating downs, traversed by never
failing streams of pellucid waters, sheep too fat to eat, and
wool of fabulous staple and wonderful fineness, a never
failing supply of aboriginal labour for shepherding, easy
access to market, etcetera.
“Go up and see it, love,” said Mrs. Mortlake, “if it is
only half as good as the description of it in your hand it
is cheap at the £lOO,OOO asked for it.”
“ But darling, I dont like to leave you behind me in
Melbourne,” said the doting husband.
“ Leave me behind indeed ! No, that you shall not!
Go out sir, purchase a carriage and pair, hire servants, and
buy horses for them, and we will go up and look at this
happy valley together, my Rasselas.”
* * » * X %
“ Well, darling, is it not lovely?” cried Mr. Mortlake,
enthusiastically, as he surveyed the landscape from the
Yackerdilly drawing room windows, of which mansion he
was now the owner.


His wife answered not, but sat closer to her lover, and so
they sat in the evening gloaming, husband and wife, speak-
ing not, but dreaming, 0! such lovely visions, too lovely
for utterance.
Dr. Mortlake had come, had seen, and had been con-
quered. Mr. Mortlake was now one of Melbourne’s
Victorian squatter aristocracy.
•9& #
“Well, sir,” said Mr. Brown, the overseer upon Yacker-
dilly station, “ I don’t know what we shall do to get the
sheep shorn this season ; there has been no men to be had
in the country for the last two years, and if it were not
that we have plenty of blacks to shepherd, all the sheep
would run wild in the bush. Only yesterday there came
by a party of twenty men, fourteen of whom I knew to be
shearers ; but when I asked them to stay and shear the
sheep, they coolly informed me that they w'ere coming to see
the station on purpose to buy it, but that as a great com-
pliment they would stay and shear the sheep, provided that
I gave them the wool, and bullock teams complete to convey
it to port.”
“Ah!” laughed Dr. Mortlake, “all that will change
bye and bye ; in the meantime we must grin and bear it”
“0! by the bye, sir!” resumed Mr. Brown, as his
employer turned to enter the house, “ Lieutenant Dawson
from the next station, and his daughter, Miss Bosamond,
are coming here to night upon a visit.”
“ Oh, indeed!” said Doctor Mortlake,” I have heard of
Lieutenant Dawson, and I shall be happy to make his
acquaintance.”
About an hour before sundown, a small party of travel-
lers could be descried emerging from the belt of myall
that skirted the western horizon, across the Yackerdilly
Plains. Mr. Mortlake took his glass, and having satisfied
himself that they were the expected travellers, he rang the
bell for his valet, and ordered everything to be in readiness
to give the coming guests a hospitable welcome.
“Dr. Mortlake, my daughter Bosamond, Madam Tracey,
and Mr. Tracey.” A great shaking of hands, grooms lead-
ing away horses to the stables, and in the darkness of the


evening Lieutenant Dawson, Rosamond, Mr. and Mrs.
Tracey, were ushered into the magnificent drawing room of
Yackerdilly mansion.
Doctor Mortlake had certainly been told by his wife that
her parent’s name was Tracey, but as the past had never
been alluded to by either of them since the memorable
night of the betrothal at Ballarat, it is not to be wondered
at that the names of Mr. and Mrs. Tracey did not bring
any thought of his wife’s parents to his mind. Not so did
it happen with his wife, as the door of the withdrawing
room swung open, and the servant announced Lieutenant
and Miss Dawson. Julie handsome as a Houri, a
magnificent diamond necklace around her Juno-like neck,
and bracelets of brilliants upon her arms —stood at the
flrawing-room door with outstretched arms to welcome her
guests. She had shaken hands with, and kissed Rosamond,
and was extending her hand to Lieutenant Dawson, when
the name of Tracey smote upon her ears.
Her eyes dilated with surprise, her lower jaw dropped
disclosing her magnificent teeth, one glance she gave, and
springing past Lieutenant Dawson and her father, she fell
upon her mother’s neck, uttering the one word “ Mother ! ”
“My daughter! ” screamed Mrs. Tracey, “My Julie ! ”
and closing her eyes, she fell forward in a fainting state.
But not for long did she lie upon the sofa; her eyes
kindled, her colour came again, and rocking her recovered
child in her arms, she covered her with kisses.
“My daughter! come from the grave again,” said the
grateful mother ; “ your son ! have you seen your son ? ”
“ My son ! ” cried Julie, breaking loose from her mother’s
arms, and kneeling upon the floor, with her head in her
mother’s lap. “My son, mother! oh! have you got him,
do you know where he is?”
“Yes love, your son is alive, and doubt not that the Lord
will restore him to you.”
Showman, draw the curtain; some scenes are too sacred
for pen to describe, and this is one of them.
Two weeks the visitors stayed at Yackerdillv, the load
taken from off the hearts of Mr. and Mrs. Tracey and


Julie. Time seemed to fly, and life seemed strewed with
roses. Lieutenant Dawson and Doctor Mortlake became
sworn friends; and Julie and Eosamond were like two
beautiful, full bloomed Australian water lilies; and Julie
laughed as she christened Yackerdilly afresh, “Happy
Valley.”
At length it was decided that Mr. Dawson and his lovely
daughter, Eosamond, must return home, and the gentlemen
wound up the last evening in anything but May-fair fashion;
not that they ran into excesses, but they begged the ladies
to remain in the dining-room, and whilst the gentlemen
sipped their wine, the ladies kept their company, and the
jest, ithe song, and the story, whiled away the evening
until bed time. ,
The last song of the evening was sung by Dr. Mortlake,
and as the composer is too bashful to print it, we will per-
form that office for him.
THE ROSY GOD.
Pass the glass, boys, let not sorrow
E’er upon your thoughts encroach ;
Think not of the coming morrow,
Fear not, care not for reproach.
Let the rosy god rule o’er you.
Let the wine mount to the brain,
Let not priest, nor parson bore you.
Drain! then fill your glass again.
For this world is ever spinning
Round, and round, as sages show:
Then heed not fool’s fanatic dinning,
Spin or stop, the wine shall flow.
But, my boys, forget not duty,
Whilst you quaff the sparkling wine,
Drink to valour, love, and beauty,
Drink to woman’s eyes divine.
Strew the path of life with flowers,
From the cradle to the grave;
Joy shall ride the merry hours,
No matter how fanatics rave.


Wine will make the stupid witty,
Wine will make the silent sing,
Wine will make the hashful skitty,
Wine will make a beggar, king.
“ Pa, dear, let us call at Avellanna on our road home ; I
want to give Ben and Mark some presents that I brought
from Sydney for them,” said Rosamond to her father, as
they crossed the Yackerdilly Plains, on their homeward
route.
“Why, Rosy dear,” said her father, “you know that it
is six miles out of our road, and besides I must get back ;
look how long I have been away from the station.”
“Never mind, dear, let the beastly branding be done
without you,” said the dear, delicious, fascinating, coaxing,
pouting, self-willed little fairy.
And man, proud man, succumbed, like the beast to
beauty. Fifteen miles of a ride, and they alight at Avel-
lanna station, in front of the old celebrated house.
Engineer Jack rushes out, cutting short his everlasting
stock story, of “ How we got them under the back
verandah,” etcetera, and holding out his arms to Rosamond,
with the familiarity of an old acquaintance and pampered
servant, he cried, “Jump puss, jump!” But puss had
grown a great deal heavier than she was, when Jack used
to coax her to jump off the kitchen table into his arms,
with bribes of sugar twelve or thirteen years ago. And so,
when Rosamond kicked her tiny little foot out of the
stirrup, and gathering her skirt around her, jumped right
off of the saddle and into Jack’s arms, the momentum of
the jump, added to her weight, and Jack’s increasing years
and diminished strength, caused him to reel backwards,
and treading upon the tail of J uno —the kangaroo bitch
he fell prone to th > ground, with Rosamond on the top of
him clasped in his arms.
Rosamond and Jack scrambled to their feet, and Lieu-
tenant Dawson, Rosamond, and Engineer Jack laughed
until the tears ran down their faces.
After tea in the evening, Mr. Brookes, superintendent
and part owner of Avellanna run, came in to have an


evening’s chat with his old employer, and to empty a bowl
of punch with him. Behind came his two stalwart sons,
Ben and Mark, the former now holding the responsible
situation of cattle overseer.
“How do you do, boobies?” cried Eosamond, dancing
up to the two young men, with both her hands extended.
Like a radiant vision stood the little mocking fairy, and
Ben and Mark wonderstruck, stood rooted to the floor.
Could that really be the little girl they used to carry
straddle legs upon their backs, whilst they crawled around
the room upon their hands and knees, she kicking and
spurring them, and shouting to them, “ Buck, Billy! Buck,
Gipsy! ”
Silly boys, they forgot that they too had grown.
“Halloa, bite,” laughed she, as she thrust-her tiny
finger into Ben’s huge, open mouth. Ben involuntarily
snapped his teeth and bit, what, her finger ? no ! his tongue!
The spell was broken, and she was to her old playmates,
Eosy, once more.
“ Now then, children,” laughed she, as the clock struck
ten, “I suppose your mamma is waiting to wash you and
put you to bed, and so I will fetch you the toys that I
promised to bring you from Sydney.”
Off she waltzed, into her bed-room, and out again ; in her
hands she carried two brown paper parcels, and unfolding
one of them, she displayed to the delighted gaze of the two
young men a superbly mounted pair of pistols. “ There
Mark,” she said, “I brought these for you,” and added
she, putting her hand in her pocket and turning to Ben,
“ I brought this for you” at the same time producing an
ugly indiarubber doll’s head, and thrusting it into Ben’s
outstretched hand.
Ben turned indignantly away, and made for the door of
the room, with the evident intention of leaving the house ;
the lieutenant and the superintendent burst into a hearty
fit of laughter, and the little imp of Satan running after
him, caught his arm as he was turning the lock of the
door, and raising her diminutive hand and jumping up on
her tip toes, she gave him a smart box upon his ear.
“ There !” cried she, “ you sulky boy, take that!” and then


added she, in a kindly, feeling tone, “ did you really think
that I would forget you, and yet remember Mark.
0! woman, how you can mould and twist us great Dig
silly he bears about. # . . ~.
Ben forgot his grievance, seized his present, seized ms
form enter’s hand and kissed it, and rushed out into the
open air without speaking a word or saying good bye.
“ Poor fellow !” said Rosamond softly to hersell, as sue
entered her bedroom to retire for the night, :t he actually
began to cry when he got outside.”
Ben and Mark were not in love with Rosamond; they
simply worshipped her.
CHAPTER XVIII.
IKEY’S NEXT EXPLOIT.-A CONVERSATION ABOUT SLANG.
After his murderous attack upon Madame Morgana., Ikey,
as we have before said, darted like lightning through the
opening by which he and Slimy Smasher had entered the
booth. ° Darting madly along through the semi-darkness,
Ikey made bis way to the tent of his hospitable friend
Billy, his intention being to obtain possession of his own
and Slimy’s carpet bags, and to leave Ballarat in the
morning, en route for some of the New South Wales
Upon reaching the tent, he, to his great astonishment,
found that it was untenanted. The temptation proved too
strong for his weak nerves, and he fell upon his knees, and
began to grope about under Tom’s bed for the hidden
treasure. Just as his hand rested upon the piece of board
spoken of in a former chapter, Ikey felt himself touched
upon the leg by the feet of a man who at that moment
entered the tent. , ,
Thinking that he was discovered m his felonious act, He
rose upon his feet and aimed a blow at random with his
bowie knife. He felt the knife strike a human body ; he
heard a gasp, as the victim of his murderous attack fell
heavily to the ground : and, seizing up the two carpetbags,


he darted through the opening of the tent and into the
dark night.
You may patter 1 of cly faker.®, 2 nicking a moll, 3
Of smashefs, 4 and ringers, s and duffers, 6 dy’e see ;
Of cracksmen 7 so jaunty, and ringing 7 doll,
But the cjross fanning, B watchmaking 9 lad for me.
With my pipe and my whiskey,
My blowen 10 so frisky,
The steel 11 or the tench 12 has no terrors for me;
There is many a slip ’twixt the cup and the lip,
You will never be scragged, l3 if you’re drowned in the sea.
When Andy O’Brien was lagged l4 for a fifteen,
For burking l6 a hawker in the way of his trade,
The beak 18 whilst his ogles l7 were raining lB arid lifting,
Said, young man, you’re lagged for using a blade ;
With your dummy 19 and jack screw,
Your bludgeon and chiv 20 too,
I must send you a sailing far over the sea;
You’ve escaped the gibbet,
The slip ) on will give it.
Though lagged for fifteen, you may remitted 21 be
Then hurra ! for the pockets so full to their sorrow,
They are good as a bank unto you and to me,
With fingers so nimble, a trifle we borrow,
lam never in want of a funt 22 or a fee ; 23
I am just the right man sure,
To cop 24 all I can sure,
If I can’t get four parts, why, I make shift with three.
Snap a skin, 25 snatch a stook 26
With my clippers 27 or hook, 28
O ! the life on the cross 29 is the life that suits me.
Notes to the above song.—(l) Patter: Anglice, talk (2) Cly fakers: handker.
chief stealers. (3) Nicking a moll: robbing a lady ; the highest neplus ultra of
pickpocketing. (4) Smashers: passers of spurious coin and bank notes. (5)
Ringers: thieves who enter shops, generally jewellers’ shops, and exchange by
sleight of hand, Brummagem jewellery for real gems. (6) Duffers: thieves of
any description. (7) Cracksmen: burglars. (7a), Ringing the doll; a peculiar
method of picking the vest pockets, by crossing the arms over the breast; it must
be seen to be understood ; the author will initiate any gentleman with a couple of
sovereigns in his waistcoat pockets. (8) Cross fanning: the highest grade of ringing
the doll. (10) Blowen : mistress. (11) Steel: Cold Bath Fields'Prison, London.
(12) Tench : penitentiary. (13) Scragged : hanged. (14) ; Lagged: transported.
(15) Burking: garroting. (16) Beak: Judge. (17) Ogles: eyes. (18) Raining:
running with tears. (19) Dummy, or Jimmy: crowbar. (20) Chiv: knife. (21)
Remitted: an allusion to the practice of tickets-of-leave and remission of sen-
tences. (22) Funt: sovereign. (23) Fee: £5 note. (24) Cop: take. (25)
Snap a skin : cut a purse. (26) Snatch a stook. steal a handkerchief. (27)
Clippers : scissors. (28) Hook: hand. (29) Cross: any dishonest way of living.


N.B.—Dear reader, judge not an author by the company
he seems to have kept; the amateur casual was not a real
tramp.
Such was the song that Billy was singing, as he threaded
his dangerous way along between tents, shafts, etcetera,
on his way home from the town (where he had been to hear
a concert, at five guineas per head), at a quarte*r-past four
o’clock, on the memorable morning on which the above
events had taken place.
Many were the fingers that were laid on triggers, as the
fierce dogs began to bark, and strain at their chains, trying
to lay hold of the bold midnight wanderer.
But as the voice was recognized, as Billy passed each in-
dividual tent, the fingers were withdrawn from triggers,
and the owners would content themselves with greeting
Billy, after the following style : “ I say townee! if you aint
out of that, I’ll loose the dog at you” ; and others would
remark, “ some people ar e paid for singing Billy ; but you
ought to be kicked for such an infernal squalling ” At last
Billy teached the tent, and entering at the doorway, he
began to abuse his comrade for being in bed and asleep.
“ I say Tom !” shouted he, “what the d ldo you
mean by sleeping like this ? Hello Slimy ! Hope I didn’t
hurt you;” continued he, as his foot struck rather smartly
upon the cranium of the man, wounded by Jonas—who
was still lying in the same position, as that worthy had
left him in.
Groping his way to the table, he struck a match, and
lit the candle; at the same time saying, “Well! you caw
sleep,’’ then as he turned around, his eyes caught sight of
the prostrate body, and horror ! the white shirt was stained
with blood, and Tom’s bed was empty.
With a cry of grief, Billy flew to the aide of his friend,
and began to bathe his head with water. The tears ran
down the Londoner’s face, and his usually merry voice was
broken by sobs, as he lavished all the terms of endearment
upon the unconscious Tom. In a few minutes Tom opened
his eyes, and gazed hazily around the tent, and as his re-
collection returned, a grim smile overspread his face.


“ My brother ! my boy ! what is it ? where are you hurt ?
who did it? how did it happen?” sobbed our poor friend,
Billy.
“What is it ? ” said Tom, now standing up straight,
“give me a glass of brandy, Bill. There! I feel stronger
now. Now my boy, I will lie down upon my bunk for a
few minutes ; open my shirt, Bill, smash up some tobacco,
and make a plaster with it and some water; it is only a
flesh wound, my ribs stopped the knife. There! thank
you, Bill; ” and Tom lav down upon his bed, his sorrowing
mate sitting upon the edge of the bunk, and holding his
hand fondly.
In a few minutes Tom said, “I say Billy! those were
queer friends of your 3, and I think that it was very lucky
that I shifted the money to-day, and sent it down to Mel-
bourne. I believe that Ikey Jonas is the man that stabbed
me, and I fancy that he was after the roll of notes, and
that as I came into the tent he thought that I was going to
attack him. I suppose he will skedaddle, but if ever I lay
my maulers* upon him again, God help him ! ”
“ Amen ; ” said Billy, “ the sneaking chouse ” f
“Look hero, Billy Irving; ” said Tom, sitting up in the
bed, “I have often intended to speak to you about certain
things, and I think that this time is as good as any, pray
do give over that nasty habit that you have of talking your
London thieves’ slang, and don’t talk about such things
as snabbing, J and hooking, || and copping, § and such like.
I know your heart is in the right place, Wllliam, or I never
would have let you cast your eyes at my sister Kitty. I
really believe,” continued the complacent moralist, “that
the Australian natives, taken as a body, educated and un-
educated, speak the purest English in the world.”
“ 0 ! indeed ! ” replied Billy, his eyes sparkling with fun,
as he surveyed the recumbent giant, “0! indeed! Mr.
Educated Australian Native, although you have had such a
good education, and can snout French, and play upon the
piano, your education has been sadly neglected in another
* Maulers ; Yankee, for hands.
t Chouse: This is pure English for cheat, vide, the Illustrated National Pronouncing
dictionary, page 62, the top of the first column,
t Snabbing, || copping, and ji hooking: thieving.


branch, namely Latin, which if you had learnt, you would
know the meaning of such words as snabbing, copping,
hooking, and the like, and also
“You be hanged! you are a con ”
“Hold hard, Tom! manners! let me finish what I have
got to say first. You talk about talking such pure English,
but I don’t think that calling a sheep, a jumbuck or a
monkey ; a horse, a prad or a yarraman ; a pair of shears,
daggers; a blackfellow, a miller; money, gilt: and a
variety of other terms, with which you, my highly
educated Australian native, garnish your conversation, is
talking pure English.”
“ I give you best,” cried Tom laughing ; and let us hope,
that the lesson was not lost upon him.
“ Look here Tom !” said Billy, “ if I have to give T2OO
for them, I will get a half-starved hull hitch, with a litter
of pups, to chain up to the tent as a watch dog.”
CHAPTEK XIX.
IN WHICH OUR HERO REAPPEARS UPON OUR STAGE—A JUVENILE
FLIRTATION, AND WHAT CAME OP IT—THE TRIBE OP COOLA-
MUNDI REGAIN POSSESSION OF THEIR CONQUERED TERRITORY.
Hail ! all hail! Britain, conquering mistress of the sea;
whose flag flies in every port, and the impudence and over-
bearing manner of whose seamen is proverbial throughout
the civilized and uncivilized world; from the Maltese boat-
man who curses behind his back, G- • d English flash
Jack to the Chinese street cook of Singapore, who grinds
his teeth, and handles his knife, as he picks up the debris
of his bamboo kitchen —and the materials of his monkey
lob scouse or stewed shark—which has been demolished by
a party of drunken English men-of-wars-men.
Hail! all hail! Britons, conquerors in a thousand fights,
heroes of Agincourt, Cressy, Bannockburn, and Waterloo;
whose fleets carry in their annals, the records of such
battles as Trafalgar and Aboukir Bay.


Still fly the flag of the dauntless, time honoured con-
quering "L nion Jack 5 still roam the seas, ye modern
vikings; and still pursue your civilizing, exterminating,
colonizing career ; and spread the English tongue from pole
to pole. r
The good ship, the A n dodged along under easy
■canvas, and skirting the sandy shores of that vast terra
incognita Africa, arrived in due course of time, in Table
Bay.
“ Stand, clear the chain cable ! Thatch take in sail!”
And the nimble, eager topmen crowd around the rattlings
in eager rivalry.
Stealthily, striving to crawl up only one or two rattlings
at a time, so as to gain the start of the other topmen, the
youngsters of the maintop are at length espied by the officer
of the watch.
“ Main topmen, lay down from the rigging,” shouts that
officer, delinquents reluctantly descend two or three
rattlings. The officer takes his eyes off of them for one
moment, and off they are again; this time half-way up the
‘ lower rigging, away aloft,’ and like a swam of bees the
seamen fly up the shrouds, through lubbers hole, over the
cat harpings, shoulder to shoulder, up they go !
“ Let go, topsail halyards ! Clew up ! 801 l up the bags
there! rollup! Oh, you crawling merchantmen !” shouts
the excited officer to the calumniated seamen.
“Let go the cable! Water to the hawse hole!” as the
sparks fly from the rushing cable chain. “ Jam her !” and
now with a jerk the ship comes to her bearings. “Lay
down! is the next order, and then; “Jolly boat’s crew
away! Square yards.”
“ Stand by side boys ! Captain’s—gig away! ”
. Captain Breaker proceeded to the shore, and obtained
his own, and his ship’s letters ; and after a few days’ delav,
to give the men ‘ a run ashore,’ and to take in fresh water,
meat, and vegetables, the anchor was again weighed, and
her head pointed to Australia.
* # # * * * .
“ Now Gilbert my boy, mount the carriage,” and Gilbert,
followed by Captain Breaker, jumped into a four wheeled


conveyance that had—as Captain Breaker expressed it —
been chartered to convey them from port to port, namely,
from the Royal Hotel, Sydney, to Avellanna Station,
Gippsland.
And so it happened that Mrs. Mortlake was apprised of
the coming of her son by Captain Breaker’s letter, directed
to Robert Tracey, Esquire, Avellanna Station, Yarrilla
township, Gippsland.
Along the dusty road, past forest, swamp, and scrub,
through tea tree flats, and over mountain gorges, day
after day, and now at last, the driver stops his leg-weary
horses, and sets, his passengers down at the head hotel of
Yarrilla township, distant fifteen miles from Avellanna
Station.
“ I beg your pardon, sir,” says the obsequious landlord
of the Shearers’ Arms Hotel, Yarrilla township, as Captain
Breaker orders a suit of rooms, and presents his card to
the host, “Mr. Mortlake, sir, has sent his carriage to
convey you to Yackerdilly ; he himself waited here yester-
day and the day before for you.”
“ Mr. Mortlake ! I am not acquainted with any gentle-
man of that name,” said Captain Breaker, “ except a
midshipman on board of my own ship ”
“Well, sir,” replied the host, “I will bring you his
letter, perhaps that will explain all that you require to
know.”
The letter was brought, but not read through; Captain
Breaker jumping up impatiently, orders his portmanteau
into the carriage from Yackerdilly, throws a sovereign to
the host, almost throws Gilbert into the carriage, and
jumping in after him, he shouts to the coachman, “Yacker-
dilly, quick! ’ ’
The coachman flogs his horses, like lightning the wheels
revolve, and as the carriage disappears from their view,
the landlord turning to old Jack Neil, the ostler remarks,
“ No end of a swell that, Jack.”
“Oh yes,” muttered Jack Neil, discontentedly, as he
remembers that the gentleman in question did not back-
sheesh him, “ I hope he will swell till he bursts.”
On the way to Yackerdilly Captain Breaker enlightened
our hero as to the contents of Mr. Mortlake’s letter ; and


Gilbert feeling a yearning to embrace his unknown mother,,
was as impatient as the Captain to arrive at their destina-
tion. Yaekerdilly at last, and as he steps from the carriage
he finds himself clasped in the arms of a magnificently
attired lady, who looks young enough to be his elder sister.
“My son! my darling long lost, recovered boy,” sobs
the mother ; and with his arms around her waist, and her
hand clasped in his left hand, they enter the house together.
Mother and son spent the greater part of that night
together, and when at last Gilbert retired to rest, and the
slumber of the innocent crept over him, his mother stole to
his room, and slightly opening the window curtains to
allow the silver moon to shed its beams upon his couch,
she watched her recovered darling until the day broke.
What -thoughts coursed through the mind of Mrs Mortlake
whilst sitting in the arm-chair, and watching the features
of her sleeping boy, her darling Gilbert, it is not our
province to disclose; the prayers that she offered up to the
throne of our heavenly Father are recorded in the Book of
Life.
j. *
“ Well, Rosa dear! what do you think of my son?”
asked Mrs. Mortlake of that young lady, a few days after
the arrival of Captain Breaker and Gilbert at Yaekerdilly.
“ Think! my dear Mrs. Mortlake, that God has been
very merciful to you, and that your son is all that a fond
mother could desire, only,” added she, as the person spoken
of entered the room, and seated himself by her side on the
same sofa occupied by Mrs. Mortlake and Rosamond, “If
I had known that he was so very ugly, I should not have
ordered papa to fetch me here to see him, and I think that
he is a very rude, vulgar young middy.”
“You audacious little madcap !” laughed Mrs. Mortlake.
“ There, don’t squeeze in behind me, it serves you right if
he does kiss you.”
“ Kiss me!” quotha madam “he could not kiss me, if I
did not choose to let him ; and so, just to punish him, I
will kiss him.”
“George, dear!” whispered the doting mother to her
smiling husband, “we must get those two married; what


a handsome couple they will make ; don’t you think so,
love ?”
And George laughingly replied, “ Plenty of time for that
yet.”
* ■» # * *
“Come, coward!” tauntingly cried Rosamond one day,
as she entered the withdrawing room, habited in a silk
riding habit, and carrying a gold headed riding whip in
her hand. “ I know that you are afraid to ride, or even
to look at a horse ; if }mu are not, I will take you out for
a ride, to knock the cobwebs out of your eyes.”
Thus challenged, Gilbert followed her into the square,
and Rosamond, pointing with her whip to a beautiful
thoroughbred mare, a bright chestnut, by name Cassandra,
cried, “ Mount, sir, and show us how sailors ride.”
Gilbert looked ruefully at the saddle without the vaguest
notion as to how he was to get therein; then advancing to
the near side of the mare, he looked the groom straight in
the face and whispered “ Where is the ladder ?”
The man being used to the jokes of young gentlemen,
only grinned at the supposed wit of our hero.
Gilbert looked around in despair. His fair tormentor,
who was seated jauntily upon her steed, urged him to
“ make hasteand desperately diving at the stirrup, ho
missed it, and struck the mare in the belly with the toe of
his boot. Cassandra, although by no means of as insane a
turn of mind as her Trojan namesake, still by no means
relished being struck in the stomach whilst patiently
waiting for her rider to mount; she therefore whisked her
tail about, and threatened to tread upon our hero’s toes.
“ Cranky craft,” said Gilbert to himself, “ I board
you somehow;” and suiting the action to the word, he
gave one bound, and placing his fingers’ tips upon Cas-
sandra’s croup, he alighted in the saddle.
Quiet lady’s mare, as Cassandra no doubt was, still this
novel method of gaining the saddle did not accord with
her notions of propriety at all; her years of docile work
were forgotten in an instant, and with a snort of terror,
she put her head between her fore feet, and commenced to
buck at a terrific rate. But our hero, although no horse-
man, was a sailor, and did not for an instant lose his
I


presence of mind ; imagining himself on the yard-arm in a
squall of wind, he stretched himself along the neck of the
mare, and clasped his hands underneath her neck.
Buck ! hack !! went Cassandra; and whizz ! whizz!!
went the empty stirrup irons, out of the square, past the
woolshed. up to a hurdle yard, savagely bucked the
astonished beast; with a flying buck she cleared the
hurdles, and by chance Gilbert’s feet became fixed in the
stirrups; his hands unclasped and grasped the yoke lines—
or, as a landsman would call them, the reins—and Cas-
sandra, evidently thinking that she had been very naughty,
allowed hersel to be quietly steered back to the stables.
All this had taken place in less time than it takes to
describe it. Bosa had sat on her horse pale and motion-
less, and was bitterly reproaching herself for goading her
unfortunate cavalier to an exploit so foreign to his habits,
as riding a horse. Mr. Mortlake had rushed out of the
house upon hearing the uproar, and with bare head, and
frantic gestures, he had pursued the fugitive, in the vain
hope of arresting his Gilpintonian flight.
Mrs. Mortlake had sunk upon the step of the hall door,
and pale as marble, and with clenched teeth, she had tried
to keep herself from screaming.
The blacks in their camp had risen in a body, old men,
crones, damsels, warriors, and picaninnys, and as they
watched the desperate attempts that the mare made to rid
herself of her unskilful rider, they yelled their terror, like
native dogs.
And to complete the uproar, all the dogs upon the station
set up a most unearthly howling.
Gilbert laughed merrily as he rode the mare up to the
stable door ; and Bosamond —now that the danger was
over —laughed immoderately at the ludicrous figure our
hero had made in his extempore steeplechase. Mr. Mort-
lake rejoined his wife; and she, not wishing to create a
scene, took his proffered arm, and re-entered the house.
And thus began our hero’s first lesson in riding.
Combo, the king of the tribe located at Yackerdilly,
thus delivered his opinion of our hero to his admiring
subjects :


11 Baail * that fellor—something' fool ; yarramanf plenty
eooler| ; Misser Gilber baail jarrand §; baail that fellor
want im sterrup, baail want im bridle, budgeree II rideum
that fellor.”
Stockman Bill, remarked to another stockman employed
upon the station, “Blessed wonder he didn’t break his
neck! I don’t believe he knows a horse’s head from his
tail; ’ and stockman Bill was not far from the mark.
However, our hero and Rosamond went lor their ride,
and we are bound to confess that for once in her life, the
fair Rosamond desisted from practical jokes, and so our
hero and his lovely companion returned safe and sound
before the sun set.
Mr. Mortlake having explained the use of the stiirupsto
Gilbert, he quietly practised imaginary buck-jumper riding
in his bedroom, on a saddle' that he fitted up for the pur-
pose, and in a tew days alter, when he again essayed to
mount Cassandra, he vaulted into his seat a la Australian
stockman, and Bill, staggered in his first belief, flew to the
opposite extreme, and muttered to himself, “Knows a
little, taking a rise out of us the other day; I expect he is
a crack
# # # #
“ Come on, Gilbert, let you and I take a ride this after-
noon.” The speaker was Miss Rosamond, and Gilbert,
nothing loth, speedily donned riding boots and—yes,
spurs!
And so the couple set off at a canter; not along the hum-
drum, beaten, common road, but away, over the green
sward, by the creek bottom, across the creek and over the
plain, through the belt of myall, and into the mouth of
the Borah Ravine. Up they go, and their horses feet strike
fire from the stones that cover the ground. Look there,
Rose ! a flyer,** by Jove.
A cut of the riding whip in Rosamond’s fair hand upon
the flank of her steed, the spurs driven into the shining
* Baail: that fellow is not, &c.
f Yarraman: horse,
i Cooler: angry, very savage, &c.
$ Jarrand: afraid.
|| Budgeree: very good,exceedingly well, Ac-
T Crack: a master of the art.
** Flyer : a certain kind of kangaroo ; thus you may hear of blue foresters,
wallabys, paddymeions, kangaroo rats, &c., ad infinitum.


ribs of Cassandra: glorious ! don’t they fly ! And now the
stones on the banks of the gullv in the middle of the ravine
are becoming more plentiful and larger in size, whilst the
gully is getting narrower and the bank steeper. Jump,
kangaroo, the race is for life ; leap, ye gallant steeds, and
strain every nerve to overtake the flying victim; not for
the sake of thy furry hide, 0, denizen of the forest; not for
the sake of thy delicious sinewy tail. No ! for neither of
those things do that fair, lovely, angelical creature, and
that handsome, bold, undaunted youth chase thee, and urge
their willing steeds to greater efforts to compass thy de-
struction.
No, old man ! but for the gratification of the instinct of
the chase, that seems to be implanted alike in civilised and
uncivilised man, do they chase thee ; and thy danger is
none the less, that thy enemies value not thy carcase nor
covet thy skin.
There’s a jump ! twenty-five feet clear. Turn, turn
kangaroo ; and darting down the space that separates ye
from the gully, with one bound spring clean across, thirteen
feet from bank to bank. Hurrah ! over he goes, and after
him —the blood of the rider and steed up to boiling point —
flies Rosamond and her steed. Well done, plucky corn-
stalk ! Ah ! now the Englishman’s mare, thoroughbred
flyer, nostrils dilated, legs well under her, takes the leap,
clear of all, and settling to her stride again. But oh !
treachery ! her two fore feet sink into a wombat’s hole, and
the gallant favorite saddle mare of Mrs. Mortlake lies with
a broken neck.
And where is her rider ? There ! huddled up in a heap
amongst those loose boulders of basalt. He is not dead,
for he is moving. With a drag at the curb, that checks
the mad career of her steed suddenly, the bold horsewoman
stops her flight.
But the horse with a mad bound, again essays to follow
the flying kangaroo, and exerting all her strength, she
drags at the curb until her horse is upon his haunches.
The foregoing events that we have endeavoured so feebly
to depict, had taken place upon a gully running into the
main Yackerdilly creek, at about twelve miles distance from
Yackerdilly station.


Rosamond leaped lightly from her horse, and throwing
the bridle reins over the horse’s head, she ran to the assist-
ance of her young companion. Her horse, too well trained
to think about moving from the spot where his rider had
left him, stretched out his neck, and with his fore loot upon
the bridle rein, be nibbled the sweet short grass within his
reach. Gilbert endeavoured to rise, but sank back again,
vainly endeavouring to stifle a groan of pain.
“ Where are you hurt, Gilbert dear ?” sobbed Rosamond.
‘‘ My ankle is broken, Rosa. What shall we do ; where
are we ?”
‘‘Oh, I know where we are well enough,” answered
Rosamond. “We are about four miles from Avellanna ;
but how shall we get you there ? Can you ride my horse ?
and I will walk.”
Again our hero essayed to rise, with the intention of
hopping upon one leg to Rosamond’s horse, and trying to
mount upon Rosamond’s side-saddle; but he found that
•one leg was certainly broken, and that the other one was
too much bruised for him to stand upon it.
“ Well, Rose!” said he, trying to laugh in spite of his
pain, “here is a nice situation for a young man, and a
female friend depending upon his exertions.”
“Don’t laugh, Gilbert, I am sure I cannot,” sobbed
Rosamond.
Just then a loud cooey* sounded close to them, and
looking round, Rosamond observed a mob of about fifty
blacks coming towards them; the mob was composed of
men, women, and children, all evidently bound to a fresh
camp.
Placing her tiny hands to her pretty little pouting mouth,
she answered the cooey* again, and the blacks crowded
around them, full of eager curiosity.
“j What name ? Miss Yose,” asked these simple,
naked, inquisitive children of the wilderness.
“ Yarraman J been tumble down bung ! White fellor
* Cooey: a prolonged shout, used by both whites and blacks in the hush
of Australia to recall wanderers. I have heard a cooey for the
distance of five miles upon a fine frosty night,
f What name: what is the matter?
X Yarraman been tumble down, hung: the horse has fell down dead.


Mundooee* Wo We,” auswered Rosamond, in the pe-
culiar broken English used by the station haunting blacks
of Australia.
“Arrrrrr!”f cried her questioners, in that peculiar
manner impossible to be described, but with which the
blacks all throughout Australia always express surprise.
“ Come,” cried Kosamond, as a sudden thought struck
her, “ Barrandilla, you take um tomahawk, bring uni up
two fellor narrangy + sheet-o-bark, all same make um
mundooee budgeree.” §
“Ui | ! ” answered his Royal Highness Prince Barran-
dilla, and he proceeded to an iron bark sapling, and at
once set to work to manufacture a pair of extempore
splints.
“You! Billy, muller-man-em-waddy,** black
fellor take um white fellor, Cargoolyah ” —Cargoolyah is the
native name for the Avellanna country.
Cooler Billy answered “Ui!” and in about half an
hour the blacks had constructed a rude litter, upon which
to transport our wounded hero.
An old lubra ff then commenced to examine Gilbert's
leg, and taking the two bark splints manufactured by
Barrandilla, she laid them along his leg, and set the bone
as artistically as any graduated member of the College of
Surgeons could have done.
“ You gib it nankercher,” said the hag; and Rosa gave
her a piece of scented cambric about the size of a playing
card.
“ Baail budgeree,” said the lubra, with a covetous
look at the dainty toy.
And now, ye over modest ladies, who shudder at the
sound of things called by their right names, turn away your
* Mundooee We We: his foot is sick ; Mundooee being foot, and We We, sick,
f Arrrrrr: a guttural note, made by quivering the tongue against the palate
almost impossible tor a white man to imitate.
% Narrangy : small.
? Make um Mundooee Budgeree: to make his leg well again.
|| Ui: yes ; all right; an affirmative varying according to the preceding ques-
tion, having a different emphasis to each mood. Thus, ui positive, ui quick, ui
sulkily, etcetera.
If Cooler Billy : angry Billy.
** Muller-man-em-waddy : take up in your hands the sticks,
ft Lubra: black gin ; aboriginal female,
it Baail budgeree : this is no good, etcetera.


heads, whilst our natural, unaffected Australian girl retires
behind yonder green w attle bush, and taking off her dainty
little boot, divests herself of her silk stocking.
“ Here", Nelly ! This one budgeree,”** said Rosamond,
handing her the stocking, and Nelly wound the stocking
arcund the splints; then, taking Gilbert’s silk pocket
handkerchief, she wound that over all.
“ What name, white fellor f ?” queried Barrandilla, with-
out any of that beating about the bush observed in putting
a question by his civilised brethren—“ Benjamin Jby em bye
belonging to you ?”
“ Baail,” replied Rosamond, at the same time blushing
up to the eyes.
The blacks now laid Gilbert upon the litter. A mis-
chievous, ugly, matted-headed piccaninny, mounted Rosa-
mond’s horse, and Rosamond, holding our hero’s hand, and
four blackfellows supporting the litter in their hands, the
cortege set out for Avellanna.
Upon reaching Avellanna, an express was immediately
sent off for Doctor Mortlake, and our hero was put to bed
pending his arrival.
The blacks were all clustered together at the back of the
house, ever and anon casting doubtful glances at their
terrible ancient enemy, Cobra Billy.§
“Well, you black varmints ! you have done me at last,”
said Mr. Brookes. “ Here, you Barrandilla, man em this
one bag o flour, chugar, pipeo, tumbacker.” Barrandilla
sprang forward, and amidst their satisfied exclamations,
the flour, sugar, pipes and tobacco were carried off by the
blacks.
Pitching their camp about two hundred yards from the
stockyard, they quickly lit fires, and commenced to roast
the opossums, bandicoots, iguanas, etcetera, with which
they were amply provided.
* Budgeree: very good.
f Wliat name: white fellor ? Who is this white fellow ?
J Benjamin by and bye, belonging to you ? Will he be your husband, by and
bye? M.B.—The aboriginals of Australia never fail to enquire your name, and
all other particulars concerning you; and they finish up by holding out the hand
and whining. Tumbacker !
§ Cobra Billy: Head man; master; likewise Head Billy, because he always
shot them in the head. Con. B , a settler on the Narran River, New South
Wales, is the original of Cobra Billy. “ I knew him well.”


“Ben,” cried Mr. Brookes to his overseer. “Yes, sir,”
was the reply.
“ Get that old stag* that is in the paddock, and take the
men with you, and kill it for the blacks.”
And thus the blacks regained their old territory, after
many years of exile ; and soon the news spread to all the
scattered branches of the once great Cargoolyah tribe of the
Comlaroy nation; and in a few days over four hundred
blacks were encamped upon Avellanna head station. Nor
was Mr. Brookes a loser by his tardy relenting ; during the
many years in which he had with the strong hand kept
them off his run, King Billy Billy’s fear that the cattle
would eat up all the grass and drive the kangaroos away
had been well nigh reversed, and wallabys, kangaroos, and
game of all kinds, had multiplied to such an extent that
their destruction was becoming a serious necessity ; so
when the run began to stink with fore-quarters and tails
of kangaroos, he chuckled grimly to himself and said,
“ Good job I didn’t shoot them all; they are good to keep
the wallabies down, it for nothing else.”
CHAPTER XX.
CAPTAIN BREAKER RETURNS TO ENGLAND AND RESIGNS HIS COM-
MISSION-LETTERS FROM HOME—HARRY DAWSON VISITS YACK-
ERDILLY, AND FALLS MADLY IN LOVE WITH A PORTRAIT-
GILBERT STARTS OVERLAND, IN SEARCH OF A NEW RUN IN
THE FAR NORTH.
At about ten o’clock upon the night of Gilbert’s accident,
an open carriage, drawn by four spanking bloods, dashed
up the steep incline in front of Avellanna House, as though
they intended to gallop through the garden and into the
drawing room wundows. The carriage was, however,
stopped in time to prevent such a catastrophe, and Austra-
lian Jeames, with an air of condescension that would have
delighted hunchbacked, hooknosed, witty, genial old Punch,
and would have tempted him to render Jeames immortal,
* Stag: a certain kind of bullock.


in one of his sparkling caricatures—descended from his
dickey, and advancing to the side of the carriage, he opened
the door and let down the steps.
Dr. Mortlake sprang lightly out, and reaching out his
jewelled hand to his lady, he assisted her to alight, Jeames
standing behind the carriage door, and simpering affectedly.
Captain Breaker w r as the next one to descend, and hap-
pening to catch sight of Jeames’s simpering countenance,
he looked that accomplished individual straight in the eyes,
then striding off towards the house, with a stern look in
his face, he muttered to himself, “If I thought you were
making fun sir, at my poor boy’s calamity, d e, sir, but
I would walk back and lay my stick over your shoulders
and in this way our best intentions are often misconstrued.
However, Gilbert’s hurt was not so bad, as was at first
supposed, and soon, under the watchful care of his mother,
he became convalescent.
Captain Breaker was at last forced to rejoin his ship, and
so with an affectionate embrace, he parted from the idol of
his heart. Pressing bills into Gilbert’s hand to the amount
of five hundred pounds, he stifled the big sob that tried to
rise to his lips, and tore himself away.
*
Dance ! dance ! 0, ye gallant ship ! spurn the opposing
waves; fly gaily at the mizen peak, flag of the free ; time
renowned, dominant Union Jack ; and whilst ye speed
across the bosom of the deep, sing the songs of your father-
land, 0, ye gallant British tars ; ye are bound to the land
of the Tartan and Claymore, to the land of Saint David, to
the land of Saint George ; and as ye near again the tight
little island and her sister, the gem of the west, your
hearts shall rejoice at the prospect of again enfolding in
your arms, mothers, and sisters, sweethearts, and wives.
It is a fine, beautiful, glorious sunny day, and as the
good ship the A n speeds along on a bowline, at the
rate of thirteen knots, her seamen cluster in knots, and
beguile the time with song, and story; on the poop, the
ship’s bandsmen are discoursing delightful music, and Mr.
Sanctu is singing the following song, to the officers and
middies grouped around him.


A LAMENT FOR THE PAST.
Broken hearted, I leave thee, thou ever green island,
Where I wandered in youth, and I first learnt to love,
By thy green groves of Blarney,
And tiiy lakes of Killarney,
Home of the wild deer, and sweet turtle dove.
Can I ever forget thee? Thou gem of the ocean!
Are thy pleasures for ever denied unto me ?
Doomed to roam with the stranger ;
’Mid peril and danger
From the shores of old Erin, the gem of the sea.
Though far I may wander I ne’er can forget thee,
Thou wilt ever be present when my eyes close in sleep ;
I shall wander in dreams by thy mountains and rivers,
Whilst I rock in my cot on the fathomless deep.
Other lands perhaps are fairer,
The sun may shine brighter;
But my heart shall remain ever faithful to thee,
Thee I love! I adore, thy sweet chalk cliffy shore!
Ireland, Hibernia, sla’ne leagth maehree !*
On arriving at Portsmouth, Captain Breaker lost no time
in sending in his resignation, and the powers that be,
having more applications for appointments, than appoint-
ments for applicants, were graciously pleased to accept oi
the said resignation.
* * * * * *
“ Hurra, Hoppy ! here is the English mail. There is
one from my Captain Breaker, I know his handwriting,
and one from an elderly lady ; Mrs Noble, for a thousand .
and one from a young lady, my rival!” so saying, Eosa-
mond dropped three letters and a large bundle of news-
papers-with the English postmarks upon them—at
Gilbert’s feet. Gilbert, who still walked a little lame, had
been christened Hoppy ! by the tormenting, aggravating,
good tempered, mischievous romp, Rosamond.
“ Now, Gilbert dear, open Miss Helen’s letter hrst,
and read it to me,” said she; and accordingly Gilbert
did so.
* Sla’ne length maehree: God be with you my darling, or my heart.


It began thus :
Ivy Lodgej Hornsey Wood,
loth, 185 .
My dear little Middy,
Hear uncle Breaker has returned to us, safe and sound ; but you
naughty boy ! how dare you stay behind in Australia? lam sure
we all cried upon the night on which dear uncle came home, when
he told us all about your dear mamma, and how happy you were in
that beautiful land, hut
Here Gilbert stopped suddenly short, and attempted to
fold up the letter and place it in his pocket. But Miss
Rose was not to be baffled in that manner ; reaching out
her hand as quick as thought, she snatched the letter
from Gilbert, at the same time exclaiming : “.Oh, you
wicked, deceitful creature ; I do believe that that is a love
letter. May I read it, Gilbert ? If you don’t let me read
it I will tear it in pieces Here, sulky baby, take your
letter, ! ” and the offended little beauty tendered the letter
again to Gilbert
“Listeners nsver hear any good of themselves,” laughed
Gilbert, as he tendered the letter once more, adding,
“ there, read it, Miss Curiosity ! ”
Rosamond opened the letter again eagerly, and read
aloud;
Gilbert, Dear, —Take care of your heart, and don’t let that for-
ward, romping, tomboy of an Australian girl steal it away from
you ; not that I care about your falling in love, you silly young sea
duck ! Only I should not like to see you caught by. an Amazon,
who would box your ears, and thrash you with her whip if you were
at all rebellious.
But, Gilbert dear, joking apart, is she really as handsome as you
describe her to be? Oh, dear! The night dear uncle told us about
your accident, and how Miss Dawson had helped you home, and how
she had shared the watch, night after night with your mamma, by
your bedside, I declare to you that I dreamt that Miss Dawson came
to me, habited like an angel, and that I threw my arms around her
and kissed her. Don’t laugh, you silly boy; of course it was only a
dream, the effects of the emotions I had experienced the evening
before.
Dear uncle has introduced several of your former shipmates to
mamma and me ; but my heart is still my own, and as dear uncle is
going to take mamma, and Susan, and me out to Australia, pray look
out for a nice young gentleman, with a nugget of gold as big as a
coach, and tell him to wait for me ; and herewith, my dear ambas-
sador, I have sent my portrait, and


Rosamond thrust the unread letter into her bosom, and
again opening the envelope, she drew out the portrait of
the lovely, beautiful, fascinating daughter of Mrs. Noble.
But in the heart of this daughter of the wilderness there
lurked not the smallest particle of envy, hatred, or malice,
and her expressions of “lovely! beautiful!” etcetera,
were the pure expressions of her feelings.
Kissing the portrait, she laughingly turned to Gilbert,
and said, “ give me this, dear ! and I will promise not to
beat you when you become rebellious.”
“I will give it to you, Rose, upon one condition,”
replied Gilbert, “ and that is, that you shall lend it to me
to show to my mother when I require it.”
“ Agreed ! my most munificent sea donkey ; but, Gilbert
dear, seriously now, which do you like the best, me or
Miss Noble ?”
To this embarrassing question, put bv the pouting little
beauty, what could Gilbert answer? "We think he got out
of the difficulty in the wisest way possible.
“Whisper, Rosa,” said he, and as she bent her lovely
head down to hear his answer, the audacious young scamp
actually threw his arm around her neck, and suddenly
drawing her to him, like Rory O’More —
“ He looked in her eyes that were beaming with light,
And he kissed her sweet lips, don’t you think he did right ?’’
“Oh ! you naughty boy ! ” cried Rosamond, as she
released herself from his puissant grasp ; “ upon my word
your impertinence is very great; don’t you do that again,
sir ! never again, at least,” added she with a merry laugh,
“not till I tell you.”
And laughing merrily, she darted off, and hastening to
her own rooms, she drew the portrait of Helen Noble
from her bosom, and kissed, “ and kissed it o’er again,”
* * * * * *
Young Harry Dawson had come home upon a visit, and
had, upon his arrival at Rosamond Yale, learnt that his
father and sister were visiting at Avellanna; accordingly,
partaking of a light luncheon, he mounted a fresh horse
from his father’s stud in the horse paddock, and gaily


singing the following song, he pursued his way along the
Avellanna road,
THE STOCKMAN’S SONG.
’Tis pleasant to glide o’er the restless tide
Of the dark blue boundless sea;
0 ! tis pleasant to dash like the lightning’s flash
Through the forest so merry and free ;
Whilst the kangaroo, and the fleet emu,
Are fleeing, are fleeing for life,
With a wild ha ! ha ! and a fierce hallo !
We join in the struggle and strife.
No spur I need in my headlong speed,
For staunch as a rock is my horse ;
Not a worthless weed, but a thoroughbred steed,
That will go till he droppeth a corse.
’Tis fierce delight on a moonlight night,
To follow the galloping herd ;
You will danger scorn, though your flesh be torn,
As you skim o’er the ground like a bird.
By the light of the day, you can pick your way,
You can look before you leap ;
Can crack your whip with a loud hurrah !
And can drive on your cattle like sheep.
But the treacherous light of Cynthia bright,
Will deceive both man and steed :
So keep a tight rein in your headlong flight,
To recover your horse in his need.
In the days of old, fierce Nimrod bold,
Chased the lion, wolf, and deer;
To-night, like him, o’er the ground we skim.
But our quarry is bullock and steer.
And a bull will often turn to bay,
And we scatter before him like chaff;
Tail up ! and head low, away he doth go,
And we greet his exit with a laugh.
Then give me the steed that is famed for speed,
Then give me the moonlight bright,
And merry men all of Australia’s breed,
Ever ready to frolic or fight.
Upon arriving at Avellanna, lie was welcomed warmly
by every person upon it. Old Jack, who had not seen him
for six or seven years, shook his hand as though he was
pumping water for a wager, and Mr. Harry Dawson’s right


arm was the pump handle. Impulsive Rosamond ran up
to him, and catching him by the beard, she pulled his face
down to a level with hers, and kissed him.
His father, Mr. and Mrs. Tracey, Doctor Mortlake and
his wife, and also Mr. Brookes and our hero, gave him a
cordiai welcome; whilst Ben, taking possession of his right
arm, and Mark possession of his left arm, they marched
him down to see Mrs. Brookes.
As the trio walked down to Mr. Brookes’ cottage, it was
amusing to hear the comments of the blacks upon his per-
sonal appearance.
“My word! karbonn fellor Misser Yarry now; plenty
tumbacker, baail cooler, budgeree fellor; by em bye that
fellor man em Mary, karbonn corroboree ! ”
■sc- * # * ■»
Now it happened that Miss Rosamond had inserted the
portrait of Helen Noble in her album, and that with her
usual carelessness, she had laid the said album upon the
drawing room table, and had forgotten to take it up again ;
and so, Mr. Harry Dawson, junior, had picked up the said
album; and being suddenly struck with the matchless
beauty of Miss Noble, he had felt so deeply in love with
this ideal, that forgetting honour and common honesty, he
had abstracted the portrait from the book, and was just
walking out of the drawingroom by one door as Rosamond
entered it by the other.
“Oh! the suspicious creature,” said Rosamond to her-
self, as she saw her brother shut the album, and leave the
withdrawing room. “ I expect he thinks I have my lover’s
portrait there;” and laughing merrily at her own conceit,
she picked up the album and retired to her own rooms.
Upon reaching her sitting room she opened the album,
for the purpose of taking out the portrait of Helen Noble,
and showing it to Mrs. Mortlake; but, to her surprise, the
portrait had disappeared. Instantly recollecting that she
had seen her brother with the album in his hand, she has-
tened to his room, to ask him whether he had noticed a
portrait of that description when looking over the book ;
*My word, &c. My word ! Big fellow Mister Harry now ; he has plenty ot
tobacco; he is not angry with us; he's a first-rate fellow. By and bye he will
marry a wife, and give us a great feast.


hut as she reached her brother’s bedroom door, she heard
his voice, as it were, speaking to himself ; and, peeping
through the ajar of the door, she discovered Mr. Harry
Dawson in the act, as she expressed it, of making a wal-
laby of himself. Down upon his knees was Mr. Harry
Dawson, and before him, upon a chair, la}' the stolen por-
trait ; whilst with clasped hands and extravagant gestures,
he apostrophised the portrait of his unknown, unseen, six-
teen thousand miles away lady love-
Rosamond thrust her finger into her mouth, and tried to
bite it to the bone, to stifle the peals of laughter that were
welling up to her lips.
Finding that she could not control herself any longer,
she darted away, and throwing herself upon the floor of
her own bedroom, she laughed and laughed until a fit of
hysterics seemed inevitable.
At last she grew calm again, and was just going to walk
out, when she heard a gentle tap at her room door; think-
ing that Mrs. Mortlake had come to have a chat with her,
she said, “ come in, dear !”
The door opened, and Mr. Harry Dawson entered.
“ Why, what is the matter Harry ? You have mistaken
the room,” said Rosamond to him.
“ 0 ! no Rose,” answered he, “I want to get a needle
and silk from you, please.”
“ Needle and silk ! silly boy ! what do you want with a
needle and silk ? ” asked his wondering sister.
Well, ha—you see Rose,” stammered he, “I—a—l
want to sew a button on.”
Rosamond kept her countenance capitally, and demurely
gave him the required articles.
Mr. Harry Dawson again entered his bedroom, and again
the traitress peeped through the door.
Was Mr. Harry Dawson sewing a button on ? No.
This is what Rosamond saw him do : First he tore his
white pocket handkerchief into four pieces; then folding
the portrait of Helen Noble in a small half-sheet of note
paper, he wrapped it up in a piece of the torn handker-
chief ; then with his penknife he cut a square piece out of
his mackintosh, and enclosed the other parcel in it But
now began his trouble. The treacherous little minx had


indeed given him a needle duly furnished with silk, but
the needle had a broken point. Push went Mr. Harry
Dawson at the needle, and push went the head of the
needle into his unthimbled forefinger. Up went the
wounded finger into his mouth, and up went the pocket
handkerchief of Miss Rosamond into her mouth.
Again he essayed desperately to push the needle through
the macintosh, when snap went the needle, and muttering
impatiently, Mr. Harry Dawson thrust the little packet
under his pillow, and turned with the evident intention of
leaving the room.
But Rosamond was off, and divining that he would seek
her again to obtain another needle, she rushed into her
bedroom, seized a piece of blank card, and a black lead
pencil, and dodging her brother out of the drawing-room,
and down the corridor, she ran into his bedroom. To seize
the packet, unfold it, take out the portrait and thrust it
into her pocket, was the work of a few seconds. Then
taking her blank card and black lead pencil, she rapidly
sketched a faithful representative of that melodious bird,
the laughing jackass, sitting upon a spoon; and making
the words “ Ha! ha!! ha !!! He ! he! !he !! ! Ho 1
ho !! hooo!!! ” appear to proceed out of its mouth. The
sketch finished, she wrapt the card up in the paper, hand-
kerchief, and macintosh, and laying the parcel again
under her brother’s pillow, she quickly left the room.
Just as she reached her own door she met her brother,
who had been seeking her throughout the house.
“0! Rose!” said he, “please to lend me another
needle, that one broke.”
“ Broke ! ” cried Satanus, “ how did it break ? ”
Driven into a corner, he desperately jerked out “ against
a button !” Oh! Rose ! Rose ! you have much to answer
for.
She gave him another needle, a good thick one this
time, and after allowing him sufficient time to reach his
room, she again sallied forth to play the spy.
This time he sewed the parcel up all right, and after
sewing two ribbons upon it, he opened the breast of his
shirt, and hung the parcel round his neck, next to his
skin.


Rosamond turned away ; she knew all that she wanted
to know, and laughing to herself, she muttered, “Nasty
fellow ! how sweet that macintosh will smell when he gets
warm.”
All through that afternoon she kept bursting out into
uncontrollable fits of laughter, so that, at last, Mrs. Tracey
declared, “ Rosamond, my dear, you must be bewitched to
laugh so without a cause; ” at which observation Rosamond
would begin to laugh as frantically as before.
Doctor Mortlake was a man of a speculative turn of
mind; it was this spirit of speculation that had enabled
him to amass his magnificent fortune at Ballarat
Mrs. Mortlake also believed in a smart, honest deal, that
would prove profitable ; and her sound sense often stopped
her husband from entering into schemes that would have
proved anything but a success; in a few words, she
believed in success.
Doctor Mortlake always took his wife’s opinion, before
entering upon business matters of a speculative nature.
Doctor Mortlake, and his wife, had decided upon start-
ing a mob of culled ewes overland to the Moreton Bay
district, to take up a now run, stocking it with the said
sheep.
Accordingly, men were hired to drive the sheep over-
land. Men were plentiful enough now, as great numbers
of disappointed diggers were returning to their old employ-
ments, emphatically pronouncing Ballarat in particular,
and gold diggings in general, rank duffers. *
The rate of wages, however, had very much increased-,
since the gold discovery; thus men now asked, and readily
obtained, great wages. For example: a bullock-driver,
whose wages before the gold find might have been perhaps
thirteen pounds per annum, now asked, and obtained, two
pounds ten shillings per week; shepherds, stockmen,
splitters, and fencers, and all other men accustomed to
station work, fared accordingly.
The sheep were drafted and branded, the bullock-drays
Itank duffers: thorough cheats.
K


were got in order, horses were looked up to send with the
sheep, and everything got ready for a start.
And so the sheep started from Yackerdilly, in charge of
our hero. Mark had been induced to accompany the expe-
dition by Rosamond, who, anxious for Gilbert’s safety, had
made Mark promise to watch over him.
Thirty shepherds, four bullock drivers, one cook, and
three stockmen were employed to drive eighty thousand
sheep, and three hundred and fifty head of breeding heifers
and bulls, and four bullock teams.
They made a long stage the first day, and camped at one
of the Yackerdilly sheep stations, distant four miles from
Yarrilla township. Our hero stayed behind to bid adieu
to Doctor Mortlake, and his mother, and don t doubt it,
dear reader, the down-hearted sobbing Rosamond.
However, some time or the other, the most loving friends
must part, and so with many caresses from Mrs. Mortlake,
and injunctions to take care of himself, and much shaking
of hands from Doctor Mortlake, and Granny, and grand-
papa, our hero left the withdrawing room, to seek his own
couch for the night. In the corridor he met with Rosa-
mond, and holding out his hand to her he wished her good-
bye, at the same time telling her that he intended to start
at daylight, and therefore he would not have another
opportunity of bidding her adieu.
Looking pleadingly up into his face, she faltered out,
“ Gilbert dear, do pray take care of yourself, away there
among these horrid wild blacks; and Gilbert dear, as soon
as you arrive at your destination, leave dear old Mark to
form the station, and you take horse at once down to
Moreton Bay, and come back in the steamer ; promise me
that you will do so, dear! ”
“i really cannot promise you that , Rose,” said he, “you
know that I am under the control of Doctor Mortlake, and
my mother; as they decide, so must it be.”
“ Oh ; but Gilbert, your mamma told me that you were
not to stop up there, and that you were only sent to gain
colonial experience; and now Gilbert dear, give me a token
before you leave, and I shall know then that you love me
as I love you.”
“ Love you, Rose! we all love you.”


“Yes!” said she, impatiently stamping her dainty little
foot, “ of course, they all love me, but you,” she added, “do
you not love me a little more than the others do ? Gilbert
dear! give me that ring upon your finger, as a token of
true love, and I will give you this one;” so saying, she
drew a splendid emerald from her finger, and pressed it into
Gilbert’s hand.
“ No, Rose! ” said Gilbert, “ I cannot give you this ring,
it is a present from my mother, but I will give you this
one, not as a token of true love —we are both too young to
understand our own hearts yet —but as a token of true
friendship.”
0 ! you cold, calculating bojq” sobbed Rosamond, as she
eagerly took the proffered ring, “ you are too young, but,”
said she, w T ith a mock assumption of dignity, “I am seven-
teen, sir! Nevermind! call it what you will, a token of
true love it is, and so now, good night, dear ! ” and kissing
him fondly upon the lips, she turned and fled like a doe.
Gilbert turned thoughtfully into his bedroom, and
pondered long upon Rosamond’s word : “call it what you
will, a token of true love it is.” “ Madcap,” said he at
last, “ she does not know her own mind ; perhaps in three
or four years’ time, when I shall be a man, she may think
differently ; however, Rose, I will be faithful to this token,
but will in no way hold you to the compact.”
But Rosamond did know her own mind, as the sequel of
this story will doubtless show.
CHAPTER XXI.
AN OVERLANDER’S CAMP-A NIGHT’S SPREE-THE FRONTIER OF
NEW SOUTH WALES IN 1858-THE LIVELY ALLIGATOR GRASPS
AT THE SHADOW, AND LOSES THE SUBSTANCE.
By the Fisheries and up the Barwon River, up the Macin-
tyre to Calandoon, by Gooda—the scene of one of the most
frightful tragedies ever known in Australia, namely, the
murdering and quartering of poor young Marks, by the
Jones’s River blacks—by Tierywinabah, and by the Retreat


by Jemmot’s station, and on to tbe Moonie at Tartha, up
the Moonie, and by a track cut through the Brigalow to
the Oondamine, over the range by station, and on
to the Dawson waters, slowly, but surely the Yackerdilly
expedition travelled. Many a fine piece of unoccupied
country did the four-footed woolly animals traverse; still
the commands were to push on farther north, and to look
out for eighteen or twenty blocks of Bottle Tree Country.
Many a camp of hostile blacks had retreated from Joff
their line of march to allow them to pass by, and had again
returned to their former haunts a clay or two afterwards,
in order to pick up anything that the detested white men
had left behind them, and aiso to kill and eat any knocked
up, or straggling sheep or cattle left behind the main mob.
At last it became imperatively necessary to camp for a
month or two, to enable the ewes to quietly lamb down for
the second time since leaving Yackerdilly.
Selecting, therefore, a fine piece of country out of half a
dozen pieces offered to him for the purpose, by different
squatters, our hero gave orders to make brush yards, and
to prepare a wash pool and box-bark shearing shed, and
everything necessary for the annual lambing and shearing.
In due course of time the lambing and shearing came to
an end, and the horses—from their long spell—being in
buck-jumping condition; the bullocks, too fat to pull
an ounce without thrusting out their tongues; and the
heifers and calves in fine trim for travelling, our hero
determined to make a fresh start, and to make for the
waters of the Comet, or the Mackenzie, and there found the
projected station. But before starting, he had made his
mind to give his men a debauch—we can call it nothing
else. Still the said debauch was a necessary evil; the
majority of his men w r ere the same with whom he had
started from Yackerdilly twenty months before, and with-
out one exception, they had all large sums due to them for
wages.
Gilbert, and Mark Brookes, dreaded the breaking out of
that fearful disease common to sailors and Australian bush-
men, namely, the drinking fever. They knew that their
men had been too long over their accustomed time for a
debauch—or as they expressed it, a spree—not to be longing


to convert the whole, or part of their money into liquor,
or rather into the villainous compounds then, and now
manufactured and retailed throughout the bush of Australia
by bush licensed publicans —query, licensed robbers.
Of two evils then, choosing the least, Gilbert had deter-
mined to let his men have their spree, well knowing that it
would be madness te enter the wilderness with men thirst-
ing for grog, and having the means of gratifying that long-
ing, in their pockets.
And this is what he did: after supper one night, he
called all hands up to his tent, and thus addressed them :
“ My men, you have travelled me now over twenty
months, and with very few Inceptions, we have jogged
along together without quarrels. We are now about to
start into the Never-Never country, and I should like all
the men that are now with me, to continue in my service ;
I don’t think that you can get better pay, and I don’t be
lieve that I could get better men,” —deep policy, that part
of your speech, Mr. Gogger—“ and so as I know that a
man must have a spree now and again, X think that it
would be the best plan for you all to have a good spree
here, before we start. Our drays will be up from port to-
morrow, and X have gotten a cask of real proper stuff! upon
one of them. You shall stave the head of the cask in, and
drink all that you chqose, in fact, my lads,” continued the
artful orator, “I will shout! ” *
“Hurra! Bravo! Stop with him for life! He s the
right sort! ” and such-like exclamations, resounded through
the camp, and Gilbert had gained his point.
Just then a man sauntered up, dressed like the majority
of Gilbert’s men, but carrying upon his shoulders and back,
a blanket rolled up, and fastened around with saddle straps,
the übiquitous tin quart and pint-pots depended from the
straps, and a sheath knife hung by his belt.
Touching his hat to our hero, the new comer enquired,
“ are you full handed, sir ? ”
Gilbert surveyed the man, and although he did want men,
still he was too politic to let his men see it, he therefore
asked the man :
* Shout: pay for the drink. Thus the common salutation, upon meeting au
acquaintance is, “ I say, are you going to shout t”


“ Where were you working last ?”
“0!” replied the man in broken German-English,
“ Working mit Mister Longfort, at five and dirtty bobs of
de veek, knokit de station about.”
“ What is that he says ? ” enquired Gilbert of one of the
men, who was grinning from ear to ear at the German’s
answer.
“ Why he says, sir, that he has been working for Mr.
Longford, at five and thirty shillings a week, to knock
about: that is, work about the station.”
“0 !” said Gilbert, “very well, you can go on here as
generally useful; your wages two pounds per week.”
“Dank you, sir,” replied Mynheer, and Gilbert retired
into his tent.
Gilbert had taken his measures well, so when the drays
came up in two days afterwards, he ordered the cask of
thirty o.p. rum to be set up on end, and the head of the
cask to be staved in, and most of the men immediately
began to carry away the fire water in their pannikins.*
Bill, said Gilbert, to the Yackerdilly head stockman,
“ you tell me that you can rely upon your men’s not getting
drunk ; now all these other fellows will speedily be so ;
therefore, let all the sheep be boxed f together, and let
them all feed out on the big plain ; you can’t lose any there,
as it is all burnt feed. Let your men ride around them at
twelve o’clock, and gradually drive them up to the camp.
I whl send a team of bullocks to draw wood, and make
large fires to scare the dingoes away, and your three men,
Mr. Brookes, you, and I must watch them, until these
brutes have sufficiently gorged themselves.”
“All right, sir,” replied Stockman Bill, “I answer for
myself and my men.”
The sun set, and Bill and one of his men took the first
watch, from sunset until twelve o’clock, midnight.
Three or four incorrigible soakers had—upon the principle
of, “ Birds of a feather they flock together ’’—stowed them-
selves away in a tent, apart from the other men, and having
carried a bucket of rum into the tent, they were now snoring
* Pannikins : tin pint pots,
t Boxed: mixed.


away in delightful disregard of all things terrestrial and
majority of the men were not really drunkards,
that is, they did not drink for the taste of the rum ; they
craved excitement, and the liquor supplied it
Gilbert and Mark, noticing their moderation, sauntered
up to the group, and saw that there were about five and
twenty of the men clustered around a big fire, singing
songs, and telling stories, a little excited certainly, but in
n °Mark t ßrookes, taking a proffered pannikin, took what
he called a nip; * Gilbert followed his example, and the
men, delighted with his condescension, urged him to k. it
down, sir? There’s a blanket, sir! ” and Gilbert and Mark
explained a young man, who had been
a grocer’s assistant in Sydney, and a member of a debating
club and whose real name was Tomkins, but who had
been christened Mr. Johnson by the other men, because he
crenerally spoke without interlarding his conversation with
oaths, or the bush slang common to them ; “you see, sir,
we have agreed to enjoy, but not abuse, your generous
rift; our compact is that every man m his turn shall sing
a song, in character, or tell a story, or forfeit half-a-pound
of tobacco; and that between every song, or story, or
forfeited tobacco, the company shall drink as much rum
and water as will barely cover the bottoms of their
p “ Capital!” cried Gilbert, “ I and Mr. Brookes will
keep you company upon those terms, and Mr. Mar
Brookes will play the choruses with his flute.
A round of applause followed this speech, and Mr.
Brookes drew his flute from his pocket. .
Mr. Johnson—as Master of the Ceremonies—now called
upon Paddy O’Brien for a song. ,
gtmre then, me boys! it’s meself that s abil to do the
same; but which will ye have, me boys, a song or a
“Both, Paddy, both!” shouted the company ; and one
of them added, “ tell us how you got lagged, 1 addy.
* Nip: dram.


“ Shure I will,” answered Paddy, in noway abashed;
“so listen, boys:—l onst owmed a fharm in Clare, up
there by Kilroosh, and one day, being in Limerick to sell
me whate, I saw a spalpeen* standing outside of a duor,
waving a flag and shouting out, ‘ Walk up! w T alk up!
gintilmin and ladies, and see the man wid his hed touching
the sailing ; only one sixpance ! ’
“Well, me boys, I wint in, and there sliure enough was
an omadaw’n f standing on top ay a ladder, and bumping
his hed agin the roof: and sis he, * gintilmin, don’t let on,
but sind some more fules in.’ Well, me boys, I sis to
meself, I won’t lit thim take in any more poor divils.
“ So I came out agin, and whin the rapparee J in front
axed me, ‘ what do you think av it, sur ? ’ I turned round
and said til him, it’s all stuff! Well, me boys, the
cunning divil scraches out, ‘ hear til what the gintilman
sis, it’s plintiful enough! ’ Well, me boys, a few months
after that I was in Limerick agin, and who should I see
but the same idintical vagabon shouting out, ‘ Come an
see what you nivir seen behind! Only sixpence! ’
Well this time I had a noice little blackthorn botteen §
kippeen wid me, and I marches in, and there, shure
enough, I seen the same ould divil as stood upon the
ladder, wid his bald head stickiug out of a windy, and ses
X, where’s the show, avick ? ‘Ye nivir seen my nose
behind, did ye ? ’ sis he ; ‘ pass on ! ’
“ on ! is it, avick ! sis I; and 1 lifts me kippeen ||
and smashes in his ould caubeen ; well, they takes hold
of me, and sinds me out here for fifteen years.”
“ What for, Paddy ? ” cried several of his auditors, “ for
smashing in his hat ? ”
“Yes, boys! Deed, thhin, it’s the truth I’m telling
yez.”
“Oh, nonsense, Paddy ; ” said Gilbert, in a tone of
disbelief.
“ Deed, thhin, it’s thrue, sur, ony his hed was in it; and
so I will call upon Mr. Brookes there for a song.”
* Spalpeen: vagabond.
'i Botteen kippeen.
f Omadawn fool,
fighting stick.
Caubeen : hat.
I Rapparee : robber.
|| Kippeen ; stick.


Mr. Brookes then arose, and sang the following song :
MOON RAKING.
The stars bright are shining, the moon is on high,
And the night hawk is seeking his food,
And the’possum is feeding, the dingo doth cry
As he prowls for his prey through the forest and wood.
With a wild hip ! hip ! for the horse and the whip,
As we dash through the scrub with a cheer on our lip.
Spur ! spur !! on we dash, and the branches do crash,
And our whips loudly crack as we head the mob back,
And sing steady! whoa! steady!
Let them ring! and to drive them be ready ;
For that old brindle cow is a charger I vow,
And many a man has unhorsed before now.
Now our coachers* they start on the track they well know,
To the yard on the top of the hill;
Whilst around on the flanks, and behind them we go.
They won't steady, but keep crashing, dashing on still,
With a wild hip! hip ! for the horse and the whip ;
Now Brindle doth charge, and a horse she doth rip.
They charge ! flog them hard! close them into the yard.
There’s the last of their tails ! up, up with the rails !!
And sing steady ! whoa! steady !
Now to bed, and to-morrow be ready,
To cut, and to brand, and when done we will stand ;
And in tea drink success to our bonny Gippsland.
“Now then, lads!” cried Gilbert, “chorus after me
and lie struck up that jolly drinking chorus composed by
Captain Marryat; all the men joining in it at the top of
their voices.
“ Very good song, and very well sung,
Jolly companions every one ;
Put your hat on, and keep your head warm,
A little more liquor will do you no harm.”
“Next song or story,” said Mr. Johnson; “I call upon
you Mr. Shuvlock.”
The individual called upon was an old shepherd ; clearing
his throat, he began the following song, in a weak quaver-
ing voice.
* Coachers: tame decoy cattle, used to entice wild cattle, to follow them into the
stockyard.


* WHIPPING THE CAT.
0 ! light is my pocket, and light is my pack,
For my spree it is done, and I’m toddling hack ;
So old boy we must trudge o’er the mountain and plain,
And look for a job with the jumbucksf again,
Now then, sir, behind! you’ve no business to run,
After wallabi]: nimble : although it is fun
To a mongrel bred cur; I’m ashamed, sir, that’s flat!
That you should go running and hunting like that.
We must first get a job poor old Bally, before
You can round up the cunning old monkeys§ once more.
Old fellow ! my pockets have very low shrunk,
You’re a happy old dog that you never get drunk ;
Your unlucky master will drink, and will swig,
God help him ! he soon gets as foul as a pig.
And some wretched day with a drop in his eye,
In a publican’s dead-house|| perchance he may lie ;
And unpitied by anv one, yield his last breath
To the king of the icy cold goblet, grim death :
Who will stretch out his bony cold hand with a shiver,
To help the dead sot. over Styx’s dark river.
On such a case ponder, 0, fool! and ne’er pass
Through thy lips the vile spirit, not even one glass ;
Not the smell of a cork, not one wee little drop :
If you never begin, you will ne’er have to stop.
Some men there may be, who can drink, and then stop,
And to such men of course there’s no harm in a drop ;
It may gladden their hearts. It was sent for our use,
But ’tis turned to a curse, by excess and abuse.
So old Bally we'l soon get a job on the plain,
And I swear ! I will never touch spirits again.
“ No, me boy !” said Paddy O’Brien, “ I know you won’t;
not till the nixt time, so lets have the chorus, and our
drinks.”
And again the wild chorus mounted up, and “very
good song, very well sung, etcetera,” was yelled from thirty
throats.
* Whipping : regretting past follies,
f Jumbucks : sheep.
t Wallabi: a small species of kangaroo.
£ Monkeys : cant word for sheep.
|| Dead-house; almost all of the bush publicans of Australia hare a rough
shed or humpy, away from the main building, into which they throw their drug
besotted victims ; it is most appropriately called “ The Dead-house.


“Now then! Mr. Nugget, a song from you. sir; profes-
sional if you have it,” said Mr. Johnson, to Mr. Nugget, a
disgusted gold digger, and Mr. Nugget sang.
VIRGIN GOLD.
O ! Virgin gold is bonny, and fair unto the view,
When you are turning up bright nuggets, how many envy you ;
How many envy you, and look with thievish eye,
And will ease you precious quick too, if you are not jolly fly**
But if you are sinking duffers,t they will cut you every one,
And cruel hearted buffers, will of your luck make fun ;
Will of your luck make fun, until you from them flee,
And you are half inclined then, to lay you down and dee.
Again goes the roaring chorus, and again the pannikins
are lifted up to lips; but we are bound to confess, more for
show than for drinking.
“Now then! Mr. Shuttle, it is your turn,” cried Mr.
Johnson to a poor, weak, half-starved looking little man ;
Mr. Shuttle had been a Lancashire weaver, and by some
extraordinary combination of circumstances, he had arrived
upon the frontier land of the country ; upon
the northern borders of the settled portion of New South
Wales.
“ I can’t sing!” stammered Mr. Shuttle, standing up,
and trembling in every limb, from sheer bashfulness.
“ Nevermind then,” cried Mr. Johnson, “you must tell
a story, or forfeit half a pound of tobacco for the smoking
of the company.”
“ Well then,” desperately jerked out Mr. Shuttle, 1
will sing a song, only it is very short” :
There —was —a bee —sat —on —a wall,
He said buzz —uz —uz uz —and that s all.
stammered Mr. Shuttle.
“ Sing it, sing,” shouted they all. Poor Shuttle
quavered out, “I carn’t,” and throwing down half a
pound of fig tobacco, he slunk back to his seat.
* Fly: knowing.
f Duffers: holes, without any gold in them.
I Never never country: unoccupied wilderness, beyond the frontier land.


“Nowthhin, gentlemen,” cried Paddy O’Brien, “chorus
to Mister Shuttle’s song,” and again the star bespangled
welkin rang to the wild refrain.
“Well,” said Mr. Windlass, a well sinker, “I will tell
a story for my share. I was down near Iron Pot Creek,
sinking a well for a squatter, and I had got down about
one hundred and twenty feet, when I struck water ; well, I
came up that night, and in the morning there was over
twenty feet of water in the well. It so happened, that this
squatter had a blackfellow’s gin* shepherding the rams for
him, and that one of the rams fell down the well, but did
not get injured in the least by the fall. Well, the gin
gave the alarm, and I hastened down with the covef to
hoist the ram up again. We lowered the gin down into
the well, and told her to make the ram fast to the rope.
Well, we began pulling the ram up, and the gin stopped
down the well, treading water; the ram was about half-
way up when the knot slipped, and the ram fell down
again. ‘Oh! my God,’ said the horrified squatter, ‘she
must be killed.’ I made no answer, but I thought, ‘if
she aint, she’s tough.’ After a second or two, Mr.
G s looked down the well, and cried in a trembling
voice, ‘ Nan-ny.’
“No answer ; we looked at each other for a minute, but
spoke not. Again he looked down the well and cried
‘ Nan-ny.’
“ ‘ Yes masser,’ came like a voice from the tomb.
“‘Why, I thought you were dead,’ he again shouted
down the well, ‘ how did you get out of his way ? ’ added
he.
“ ‘ I been dive masser,’ said the laughing gin.
“ ‘ You came away thenj,’ said Paddy O'Brien ;’ ‘chorus
boys,’ and very well sung again rung out.”
“Now then, next on the list, Mr. Vandensploshen,”
said Mr. Johnson.
The German, who rejoiced in the euphonious name, now
stood up, and having been paying frequent heavy visits to
the rum bucket, his wine was in, but his wit was out.
* Gin: aboriginal female. f Cove: master.
$ You came away then: equivalent to saying, what a lie. But the above
anecdote is a positive fact.


Steadying himself, therefore, against a blood wood sapling,
he gravely assured his auditors that “ he was not a Dytcher,
but an Irishman, and that he vood sing mit any mans, te
vearing off tee creen ” Then, amidst loud cries of “go
a-head Dennis, strike up Paddy, etcetera,” he began the
following song, jerking the words out as though he con-
sidered that due emphasis could not be given to them with-
out the said jerks.'*
DE VEARING OFF TEE CREEN.
Oh ! Gaffer Creen—and have you seen—
Tee noose —vots coing—arount,
No more te shamrock —shall pe seen,
To crow—on—lrish —crount.
No more on Patrigs holy day
Shall Erinck’s flack pee seen,
For —dare —hanging—men—and vomens for.
Tee —vearing—off—tee—creen.
“Hurra! Bully,” shouted Paddy O’Brien, in an ecstasy
of delight, “ chorus boys,” and the mob joined in with :
For—dare—hanging—men—and—vomens—for,
Tee —vearing—off' —tee —creen.
“Sar!” said Paddy O’Brien, to the delighted singer,
“ Sar, you are de finest man wot I never did see, for to
speak of de quane’s English. Two men likeit you sar, and
one fellor horse, would have takeit Sebasmapool.”
“Ahem!” said Mr. Johnson, “gentlemen,” allow me
to insinuate that it is past three o’clock, Tuesday morning,
and with your permission I will adjourn this meeting.”
“Gentilmin,” said Paddy O’Brien, standing up, “allow
me to sicond tha motion, adding the following rider,
which is, that our worthy prisidint himself shall give us
the last song, or ricitation, before we break-up.”
Carried unanimously; and Mr. Johnson, striking a tragic
attitude, recited :
BRITAIN’S FLAG.
Long ages they have passed away, since first upon the sea
The British Flag has held the sway, the foremost of the free.
On British soil no slave can stand, O! ’tis a glorious boast;
Raise high your thankful voices, all ye manumitted host.
And ye shall find ye tyrants, that oppose it as you can,
The British Flag in peace, or war, shall always lead the van.
* The above anecdote and following Bong are facts.


When Spaniards proud, a mighty fleet, to sack old England came,
With racks, thumbscrews, and gyves for feet, and faggots for a
flame ;
Our fathers then undaunted stood, and aided by the Lord,
Made Spain to rue the woeful day she drew her vengeful sword.
Thus ye shall find, ye tyrants, etcetera.
When Scotia drew her trusty sword against proud Edward’s might,
Her battle cry was, “ May the Lord defend ; defend the right!”
And many a day the victory to England seemed to turn,
At length the Scots their freedom proved at famous Bannockburn.
Thus ye shall find, ye tyrants, etcetera,
Long had the Welsh, with stubborn pride, fought ’midst their moun-
tains strong;
Proud Edward's might had long defied, with battles fierce and long.
< >ft had their hardy warriors’ deeds made themes for minstrel’s tales.
Till Edward's son their chief became, the Prince, the Prince of
Wales,
Thus ye shall find, ye tyrants, etcetera.
Oft hath old Erin proved the might and valour of her sons,
Hath made the might defend the right, stern justice, in her guns ;
Oft hath she fought by Saxon’s side, in battles fierce and true,
Witness the men, witness the chief, at famous Waterloo.
Thus ye shall find, ye tyrants, etcetera.
A scanty band of starving men, were camped at Agincourt,.
The Frenchmen, in their scorn and pride, cast lots for them in sport;
They boasted they would slay them, or would drive them in the sea,
Butwitli the light the Bulldogs gained a glorious victory.
Thus ye shall find, ye tyrants, etcetera.
England holds out the hand to thee, her wayward, youngest sou,
Think of the deeds by land and sea, united ye have done ;
Forget the bitter ages past, and grasp old England’s hand,
Severed from England, Erin falls, united, both shall stand.
To show those haughty tyrants that, etcetera,
Then let the shamrock twine and bind the thistle, leek, and rose,
And show a bold, undaunted front to all old England’s foes ;
For whilst the constitution stands, the charter of us all,
Old Britain’s sons shall still be prompt to fight at duty’s call.
Then Paddy in the strife of life, be foremost, as you can,
And strive with Taffy, Sawny, John, to lead old England’s van.


Three days afterwards the men, thoroughly sick of their
unchecked orgie, began to prepare to start, and without
askin <r our hero’s will, they again headed up the cask of
rum and placed it upon a dray. They had drunk about
thirty gallons of the fiery, thirty o.p. rum, and they one
and all declared that they would not want another spree
for the next two years.
Thus our hero’s scheme had succeeded perfectly; and
upon the fourth day the sheep were run through the
breaks* and counted, cattle mustered up, bullocks yoked ;
and amidst the bleating of sheep, the shouting of the shep-
herds, and barking of their dogs, cracking of stock and
bullock whips, lowing of cows, and mooing of their calves,
the expedition again got under way.
And now the discipline of the camp became more strict;
the shepherds were supplied with rifles and revolvers,
sentries patrolled the camp during the night, and all pie-
cautions were taken to prevent a surprise from the then
daring, treacherous Lower Dawson blacks.
Through miles of unoccupied country they travelled, and
many a°spot that now boasts itself as first-class sheep
country, our adventurers passed by in disgust.
One night—upon going the rounds at half-past eleven—
our to his great astonishment, could not find the
picket. After a search of about half an hour, he found him
comfortably snoring beneath a big log. Waking him up
with a kick, he discovered him to be an individual of the
name of Hocker, but whom the ether men had dubbed
Sprightly, on account of his incorrigible laziness, and his
habit of sleeping twenty-five hours in a solar day.
Threatening to make him run the gauntlet if he trans
gressed again in the same manner, our hero left him ; and
calling up the other patrol, they relieved Sprightly. Gil-
bert, after cautioning the next patrol not to close his eyes,
and to keep a sharp look out for blacks, retired to his own
couch. . „ . , ,
In a few nights afterwards, it again became Sprightly s
* Breaks : Temporary brush fences, built by parties travelling with sheep, to
count their sheep through, upon the road.


turn to keep watch; and upon the patrol party going to
relieve him, they found that a great number of the sheep
had moved from off their camping ground, and were
stringing* away into the darkness of the bush.
The noise the men made in driving the sheep hack to the
camp most probably awakened Sprightly; and that indi-
vidual quite indignantly denied Gilbert’s accusation, that
he had again been asleep.
The next night upon which Sprightly again had to watch,
our hero and Mark Brookes crept quietly around the entire
circle of the camp, without meeting the patrol, Mr.
Sprightly. Searching diligently about, they at length
found him sleeping soundly as before, under a dead log.
Collecting a great heap of dead brigalow, they encom-
passed the sleeping sentry with a cordon of firewood ; then
applying two or three lighted matches to the dead wood,
they retired a short distance away, to watch the denoue-
ment. n • i i
The circle of fire blazed up bravely, and at first, Sprightly
rather liked the gentle heat, but as the fire grew hotter, he
began to shift uneasily about; at last, the heat became
insupportable, and Sprightly 7 awoke.
Opening his eyes to their widest stretch, Sprightly gazed
for one moment in blank amazement at the devouring
element, then with a roar of pain, as his moleskin trousers
began to scorch his legs, he made a mighty leap, and landed
outside the flaming circle, just as a strong smell of roast
pig began to pervade the morning air.
His contortions and oaths were so extravagant to witness,,
that Gilbert and Mark yelled with laughter, and advancing
up to Sprightly, Gilbert enquired, “Were you asleep this
time, sir? do you think that we want all of our brains
knocked out ? you slothful ox! let this happen again, and
you shall be flogged through the camp with bullock whips ;
our lives in this part of the country, all depend upon the
vigilance of our sentries.’
Upon reaching their own tent, Gilbert remarked to Mark,
“X fancy that we have cured him.
* Strincine away: Travelling ahcop sometimes quit their camp at night and
Etretch out sometimes a mile, in double or treble file. This is called string „•


“ Well,” replied Mark, “if he is not cured , he is half
cooked.” However, unfortunately for himself, he was not
cured, as the sequel will doubtless show.
A few days after this, they were obliged—very unwil-
lingly—to pitch their camp alongside of a brigalow scrub,
and as it came on to rain—a mizzling rain—they could not
shift for two or three days. The second day upon which
they remained encamped, Gilbert observed a blackfellow
edging up to his camp ; he was (the blackfellow) entirely
naked, and also unarmed, and as he evidently wished to
enter the camp, Gilbert determined to try and find out what
he wanted.
Accordingly, our hero sharply cried out, “Indah!” an
exclamation equivalent throughout all of the aboriginal
tribes of Australia, to, “ Here ! I want you ! ”
The blackfellow came over to Gilbert without any hesita-
tion, and reaching out his hand he whined out, “ Tum-
backer! ” Gilbert threw him a piece of tobacco, and the
beggar, finding his first appeal to a charitable public so
successful, whined out —whilst with a peculiar motion, im-
possible for a white man to imitate, he drew his bowels,
Heavens knows where, and drawing in his breath, caused
the inside skin of his belly to rub against his backbone—
“ Nungaree! ” *
Gilbert threw him a piece of damper, f being desirous of
seeing how far the impudence of the knave would carry
him. The blackfellow, thinking to himself, “ White fellor
altogether fool! ” now boldly asked for “ bullocky ! ”
and a large slice of roasted beef was given to him.
The blackfellow now comfortably seated himself upon
the ground, and Gilbert enquired of him, “Where towri,
belonging to you ?” and then added, “ Baail you Myall ?”
“Baail!” replied the diplomatist, “masser belonging
to me, Misser Frasser, Horny Bang.” [Mr. Fraser, Hornet
Bank.]
“Ah , ” said Gilbert with a laugh, “ you must have lost
yourself then.”
The blackfellow grinned at the simplicity of the remark,
t 4
* Nungaree: hungry.
•(• Damper: unleavened bread.


and replied by demanding, “you gib it cbirt, trouseer,
cobracon.” *
An old shirt, trousers, and hat were thrown to him.
The blackfellow’s impudence arose with the evident
gullibility of the whites, and he now demanded, “ you gib
it gun, branket, yarraman,” f and then apparently con-
sidering what to ask for next, he scratched his head, and
demanded, “You gib it dingo ! ” J
“ X will bet you live pounds, Gilbert,” said Mark Brookes,
“ that he asks for a bullock dray next.”
“ Not on ! ” said Gilbert, and then turning to Stockman
Bill, he said, “Bill, go and get an old blanket, bring old
Bucking Sally, with an old saddle and a rotton girth, and
no stirrups, and there is an old carbine without a lock upon
Wilson’s dray, bring that too, and just lead up Wilson’s
old man-eater, the bull bitch.”
“Ail right, sir ! ” replied Bill, and soon he returned with
the specified articles, all the men in the camp crowding up
to see the sequel.
With his own hands Gilbert helped the blackfellow to
don the shirt and inexpressibles, front part on back, then
slinging the old carbine around his neck by a piece of green
hide, and fastening the bull bitch to his arm by another
piece of green hide, they gave the visitor “ a leg up, and
seated him upon Bucking Sally.
That sagacious quadruped, who well deserved her cog-
nomen, stood quite quietly whilst the blackfellow was being
mounted, but no sooner did Stockman Bill let her head go,
than up went her heels in the air, and buck! buck ! she
went, in amongst pots and pans, tents, buckets, drays, and
camp fires. The blackfellow turned to the colour of diity
dough; the man-eater made desperate attempts to spring
up and eat him ; the old carbine kept making terrible
havoc with his cranium; when crack! the girth broke.
Away flew the saddle, and away flew the blackfellow.
Bucking Sally turned round, and administered a flying
kick with both hind feet, upon the blackfellow’s seat of
honour; just as he was scrambling to his feet, the man-eater
seized him by the shoulder, pulled him down, and began
* Cobracon: hat.
t Yarraman : horse;
} Dingo: dog.


to devour him; and altogether the uproar was worthy of
pandemonium.
“Take off your bitch, Wilson!” said Gilbert, and the
feat was accomplished by passing a loop of green hide rope
around her neck, and two men pulling upon it, until they
choked her. The blackfellow then arose, and looked rue-
fully at his torn garments; Gilbert tauntingly exclaiming
to him, “ Baail! you budgeree ridem yarraman !” *
The blackfellow looked murder, but spoke peace
“ Budgeree fellor ! white fellor ! ” said he, and he limped
slowly away towards the brigalow scrub.
/‘Giibert,” said Mark Brookes, “that fellow means
mischief.
“ I know he does,” replied Gilbert, “he only came into
the camp to spy, and that is the reason that I served him
m the way that I did.”
That same night, Gilbert appointed two sentries instead
of one, and Sprightly—whose watch it happened to be—
was admonishe4 by Gilbert, if he felt himself sleepy,
to call up the next sentry, « For,” said he, “ I would rather
keep your watch myself, than chance a surprise by the
“No fear, sir!” replied Sprightly, “I shall not sleep, I
am too much blistered behind for that! ”
The other sentry was Mr. Vandensploshen, and a greater
contrast, than the two men were, could not be imagined.
Mr. uprightly was as fat as a fool, Vandensploshen was as
thm as a match, with the brimstone scraped off it.
Sprightly was an arrant coward, Vandensploshen was as
brave as a lion.
Sprightly was of so sleepy a nature, that he could sleep
under a thundercloud in th 9 act of bursting.
Vandensploshen had been a private in the Prussian armv
and could walk the “Sentry go,” with his eyes shut, and
could hear a pin drop in his sleep.
. so the watch was set, and the rest of the men re-
tired to their tents, and lay down to sleep in their clothes,
their loaded firearms by their sides.
For the space of a couple of hours, Sprightly kept awake
* Baail I you budgeree ridem yarraman: you are no good to ride a horse.


bravely, but at last, the silence, and his habitual sleepiness
overcame him, and forgetting Gilbert s caution, as to call
ing the next man, in the event of his getting sleepy, he
coiled himself up under a dead log, and fell into the arms
of Morpheus. .
At about eleven o’clock, Yandensploshen imagined he
heard the sound of muffled feet, and straining his eyes to
pierce the darkness, he distinctly saw a mass of glistening
eyeballs slowly moving through the darkness, and towards
the tents. At first he imagined the working bullocks had
strayed into the camp, but a second’s thought drove that
idea out of his head, and firing his rifle into the very midst
of the glistening eyeballs, he darted off towards the tents,
loading his gun with cartridge as he ran, and shouting out,
“ To arms ! to arms ! the blacks ! the blacks !
In an instant, the camp was roused; and the men dart-
ing behind trees and drays, steadily awaited the onset of
their foes. They had not many seconds to wait. Yanden-
sploshen darted up, and behind him came three or four
hundred yelling blacks, brandishing their spears, and
painted in their war costume, to represent skeletons, and
with cockatoos’ feathers in their top knots. #
Coolly, behind a tree glided Yandensploshen, and taking
deliberate aim he fired his rifle, and with a shriek, a black-
fellow fell. n
As methodically, as though upon parade, the German bit
his cartridge, and began to load his piece again. The other
men now poured in a destructive fire upon the blacks, who
had not bargained for such a warm reception, but had
imagined that they would have gained an easy victory.
Delivering a volley of spears, they began to retreat, the
white men dodging from tree to tree, and knocking them
over—as Yandensploshen expressed it -like veddercocks ;
this was easy to do, as the blacks were now within the
circle of watch-fires. . , , ,
And now let us see how it fared with the sleepy headed
Sprightly, during these stirring times.
The blacks had actually entered the camp close by the
sleeping sentry, and so sound had been his sleep, that the
subsequent shouting, yelling, firing of guns, and barking of
dogs, had failed to awaken him.


As the blacks retreated, they cut off about two hundred
sheep, and whilst the main army engaged the whites in
battle, the van-guard of the retreat began to drive the
sheep towards the scrub; now Sprightly in his sleep, had
rolled from under the log, and the terrified sheep rushing
past him, had failed to awaken him. However, what the
uproar failed to do, a firestick —thrown by a blackfellow,
and alighting amongst the sheep, and setting fire to the
grass, close to his head—did.
Imagining that he was again the victim of a practical
joke, he started up, right in the midst of the retreating
blacks. A shower of spears was thrown, one of which —a
jagged one—pierced his heart; and poor Sprightly, slept
the “sleep, that knows no waking.”
The expedition started again, and soon afterwards having
found country that suited them, Gilbert and Mark, began
to form the station.
When everything was in working order, Gilbert and two
gentlemen, run speculating explorers, started for the Fitzroy
River, intending to try and procure a passage from Keppel
Bay to Brisbane, in some passing vessel.
Camping one evening upon the bank of the Fitzroy
River, at about eight miles higher up the river, than where
the town of Rockhampton now stands, Gilbert and his two
companions decided to have a bogie*; they accordingly
began to swim about in a large water-hole ; the blackfellow
—Jimmy by name, a Murray River native —who accom-
panied the two gentlemen, proceeding further up the stream
to fish.
Their bogie over, they dressed themselves and sat on
the bank of the river watching the blackfellow fishing. ~
“Jimmy is pulling them out, Brae,” remarked Mr. Mas-
terton —one of the exploring gentlemen —to his partner,
Mr. Brae. “We shall have a fine supper of fish, to-night.”
Just then they saw the blackfellow pick up the fish, and
thread them upon a reed, and then turn round to come up
the bank of the river.
“By G—d !” cried Mr. Masterton, jumping up, “ Why 1
that infernal log is moving! by thunder!!” he shouted
* Bogie: bath.


in an excited tone, “ ’Tis an enormous alligator*, Jimmy l
Cooey ! ! Look out! !” Jimmy startled, looked back, the
alligator was within two feet of him, and with wide ex-
tended jaws, serrated horrid teeth, and blood red tongue,
was preparing to convert poor Jimmy into alligator; but
Jimmy was a man who had his wits about him, therefore,
jumping on one side, and yelling fiercely, he threw his
bundle of fish right into the open jaws of the alligator.
The alligator stopped to chew the savoury morsel offered
up to his godship by Jimmy, and Jimmy profiting by
the delay, ran up the bank, and rejoined the now yelling
with laughter trio of white men.
CHAPTER XXII.
HELEN" NOBLE IN AUSTRALIA—GILBERT’S PERIL—SAFE—THE TWO
CONSPIRATORS—THE THIRD CONSPIRATOR—THE PLOT—ONE OF
THE CONSPIRATORS TURNS TRAITRESS AND SAVES THE VICTIM-
GILBERT HOME AGAIN
“Welcome, Miss Noble, to Australia,” said Rosamond
Dawson to Helen Noble, as that young lady stepped on to
the Circular Quay, from the deck of the noble Australian
liner, the great “ Tasmania,” accompanied by her mother,
Captain Breaker, and Susan Dotty, the cook and humble
friend of the family.
“Thank you, dear,” replied Helen, as she passed her
arm through that of Miss Rosamond; she would have
kissed her, but Miss Helen was not as impulsive as Rosa-
mond, and too many people were walking about to allow
of the expression of too much sentiment.
Mrs. Mortlake also tenderly shook hands with her, and
the party getting into the carriage, they were driven to the
Royal.
******
“ Show you the lions, dear, there are no lions in Sydney,
except you count natural beauties as such. Of those dear,
* The aboye is founded upon facts, only substituting Mackay for Rockhampton,
and a Kanaka for Jimmy.


we have plenty, South Head, Botany, Pipers, Balmain, and
a legion of other beautiful spots, dear; then there is the
Domain, the theatres, cathedral and churches. Now then,
which will you go and see ?”
Thus spoke Rosamond Dawson to Helen Noble, a day
after the landing upon the Circular Quay, before spoken of.
“ 0 ! I dare say I shall find plenty to amuse me in this
beautiful land ; 1 shall delight to view the beautiful land-
scapes, to see the new and curious animals of this far away
country, the ungainly kangaroos, the fleet and beautiful
emus, the trees whose leaves turn their edges to the sun
and leave but little shade on the ground beneath them ; the
trees that distil from their leaves peppermint drops, or
manna; the pretty little birds that build a bower, and
gather shells and pebbles as toys for their young ones to
play with ; the laughing donk —no, jackass, and all the
other curious things that you have told me about.”
“Yes,” answered Rosamond, laughing at this outburst
of Helen’s, “not to forget the soldier ants, the jump-
ing ants, the green head ants, the Irish, ants that are
all green and live up the trees in the scrubs by the
sea shore, the white ants, etcetera; the death adders, black,
diamond, brown, yellow, ring, whip, carpet, and other
snakes; the tarantula, tree, and other spiders ; the green,
black and other scorpions; the centipedes, and all the other
things that sting you, and bite you, in this beautiful land.”
Poor children of Eve, said the pitying spirit,
Dearly ye pay for your primal fall,
Some flowers of Eden ye still inherit,
But the trail of the serpent is over them all.
laughingly warbled Helen.
0 ! could we do with this world of ours,
As you do with your garden bowers,
Reject the weeds, and keep the flowers,
What a heaven on earth we’d make it.
responded Rosamond.
“Have you any poets here, dear?” asked Helen, “in
such a beautiful country as this, with such stirring scenes
constantly enacting, you should have hundreds of poets.”
“ Perhaps we have dear, but, unfortunately, we are only
a colony, and are not supposed to be able to grow anything,


not even a cabbage as good as the mother country can; how
then can we be supposed to grow poets ?”
“What a dear thing you are to talk nonsense, dear
Rosamond!” said Helen, “pray do sing me something
composed in Australia, by an Australian.”
“I will sing you something that my brother Harry com-
posed,” said Rosamond. And taking her guitar in her
hand, she sang the following lines :
SERENADE.
• 9
Come with me love and roam to-night,
By the banks of yon mighty stream,
By the twinkle my love, of the firefly’s light,
And the mope hawk’s bark, in his midnight flight;
And the gleam of the waves, by the moonlight seen
Through the leaves of the trees, like silver sheen.
We will tread o’er the flowers and carpety heath,
We will watch the opossum his gambols make,
And the dingo fierce, with his snow white teeth,
And the glittering scales of the deadly snake ;
More beauteous by far than the glaring noon,
Is the chastening light of the silvery moon.
And we’ll fancy that I am an elfin king
And that you are my faery bride;
And I’ll dance awhile in the faery ring,
And you shall dance love by my side.
Whilst the sentinel stars that shine above,
Shall gleam like angels’ eyes, my love !
Then come my love, and with me rove,
And wondrous things shall meet your sight,
We will pledge our vows in the orange grove, _
Whilst the stars shall seem to shine more bright;
And the vows that are vowed beneath their eyes,
On angels’ wings to heaven shall rise.
At the conclusion of the above verses Helen spake not;
perhaps she did not think that they were worth talking
about, and as we are perhaps of the same opinion, we will
leave our two turtle doves to their billing and cooing,
whilst we inform our readers as to the whereabouts of our
hero.
Gilbert and his two white companions, with their black
boy Jimmy, had arrived in Brisbane, and Gilbert having


received letters concerning business, from Doctor Mortlake,
he had been forced to stay at Brisbane for a short time.
In the meantime the party at the Boval had started for
Gippsland ; so that when Gilbert’s business at Brisbane
was completed, and he arrived in Sydney, he found that
he was “ all alone by himself in that place.”
Being very desirous to again embrace his dear mother
and his friends, Captain Breaker, Doctor Mortlake, Mrs.
Noble and Helen, grannie, and grandpapa, and all the
rest of his old acquaintances, by no means, dear reader,
forgetting his ladye love, the fair Rosamond, he purchased
a fine bay horse at the Horse Bazaar in Pitt-street, and
started off for Yackerdilly.
As our hero journeyed up the country, his impatience to
reach home became a mania.
Thus, one beautiful, moonlight night, after having
retired to bed, he again arose and dressed himself, and
proceeding to the stable of the roadside inn, he saddled his
horse and started off along the road.
He had not ridden above five miles, before he came to a
deep sandstone creek. In fact, the country round about
that quarter is composed of nothing but white sand hills,
and sandstone mountain ■ ranges ; the ridges are covered
with spinifex and giant grass trees ; and the pure, spark-
ling streams of water are fringed with gigantic gum trees ;
the sides of the ravines are thickly timbered with immense
spotted gums, green wattles, pines, mahoganys, a few iron
barks, and different sorts of mimosas ; and the tops of the
ranges are covered with dense scrubs of bastard ballah, brig-
alow, and vines, and creeping plants innumerable. Crossing
the sandstone creek, which, by the way, was christened
Murdered Man’s Gully, he began to mount a pass between
two perpendicular mountains; the silence of the night, the
long ride of the day before, all combined to cause him to
fall asleep in his saddle* His horse, finding that his rider
no longer directed him, like a sensible quadruped, walked
along very slowly, in order to enjoy a bite at the grass by
the road side.
How long he slept Gilbert knew not, but both the horse
* This has frequently happened to the writer.


and his rider were rudely awakened ; the horse had almost
fallen asleep himself. The horse by a man’s left hand
laying a firm grasp upon his hit ring, whilst the right hand
severed the bridle reins with one stroke with a sharp knife.
The rider was awakened by a stern voice, ordering him
to “Bail up!”* and to throw up his hands, the owner of
the said voice presenting a revolver at our hero’s head at
the same time.
Gilbert at this rude summons woke up suddenly ; and as
he was unarmed, he at once saw the inutility and utter
uselessness of contending against two ruffians armed to
the teeth.
He therefore raised his hands above his head, as ordered
to do ; and the spokesman having satisfied himself that our
hero had no weapons upon his person, ordered him to
dismount.
The two ruffians then searched our hero, and as they
only found a few shillings upon him, they became so ex-
asperated, that the first man, with an oath, swore that he
would shoot him for a d d cheat, to travel the country
with such a horse, and suit of clothes, and only a little loose
silver in his pockets.
At the sound of this man’s now natural voice, Gilbert
started. “He certainly had hoard it before, but where ?
At sea ? No! in Australia? No! Where, then ? it must
have been years ago, ah !” Now, from the deep secret
depository of the brain, flashed back the telegraphic mes-
sage, and it said—this mental telegram—“ Whitecross-
street; Hornsey Wood ; Ikey Jonas !”
Well was it for Gilbert that he repressed the inclination
that he felt to make known his name to Ikey Jonas.
That individual, fronting Gilbert in the bright moonlight,
with his finger upon the trigger of his revolver, inquisi-
tively demanded of our hero, “Do you know who I am ?”
“No,” said Gilbert, “ I don’t, I never saw you before ;
and if I were to meet you in Cooma to-morrow I should
swear that I had never seen you before.”
* Bail up ! Equivalent to stand and deliver. Bail up ! is the exclamation used
to Australian milch cows, when being fastened in the bail—wooden stocks for the
neck—preparatory to milking Thus it is customary to say of a man who cannot
understand English, “He cannot say bail up to a cow.”


“ Humph!” said Ikey, as he removed his finger from
the trigger, “you are no fool; bring him in to the scrub,
Bill, and tie him up to a sapling.” Then, addressing our
hero, he added, “If you are lucky enough, you may be
found in two or three weeks, that’s if any one smells you
off of the road.”
Reader, can you wonder that our hero trembled with
terror at this threat ? it meant, as he well knew, a horrible
lingering death. Tied, with his back to a tree, a gag in
his mouth, the horrid glaring sun by day beating through
the tops of the scrub trees, and on to his bare head ; a
horrid thirst; no water; the thongs cutting into the
festering flesh; myriads of flies and ants, filling his eyes,
nostrils, ears and clothes; the sound of horses hoofs, and
the conversation of their riders a few paces off; the howl-
ing of the dingoes, impatient for their promised feast;
and then, the delirium, and the end !
Such has been the fate of many a poor wretch, victims
to Australian bushrangers
And so they gagged him ; and in spite of his desperate
struggles, they dragged him to a tree and bound him to it;
and then bidding him good bye, and advising him to carry
more money next time, they left him.
“ Wretches !” thought Gilbert, “If the Lord delivers me
from this, I will carry, not money, but weapons, for such
as you.”
But our hero was not to die this time; Ikey was not a
sailor, or he would not have tied a grannie’s knot, instead of
a reef knot, upon Gilbert’s hands, that were forced behind
his back and around a sapling.
Gilbert soon released himself from the clumsy fastenings,
although, an inexperienced landsman never could have
undone the knots, if fastened as Gilbert was; then sneak-
ing along through the scrub, he gained the road, and
fervently praying to God, to keep him from again falling
unarmed into the hands of the would-be murderers, he
marched quickly along, and as the day broke, he astonished
old Jack Neil, by walking into the stable room of the
Shearers’ Arms Hotel, Yarrilla township, and throwing
himself upon old Jack’s bed, and falling soundly asleep
thereon.


Jack Neil knew him not, and eyeing his unceremonious
visitor with disgust, he muttered, “ Some Jackeroo ! # been
on the bustf; loafer, I’ll be hound! them fellars never gives;
they’r all on the borreing suit; but he don’t git a nip]; from
me, not if I knows it; I hates Jackeroos* as well as I
hates water.”
“ Nelly dear ! Gilbert has arrived at Sydney, I expect he
will soon he here. Will you not be glad dear, to see the
dear old fellow again ? I know that you will, and I know
that I shall too ; for Nelly love ! I love him ! yes, dear, I
love him ! and he is worthy of my love, is he not ? Nelly !
what a man he must have grown. 0 ! I shall be so proud
of him ! and so will you be dear; hut not like me !”
“ No, dear Eose !” answered Helen, “I love him, dear,
but it is as a sister may love a brother; you know Eose,
where my affections lie.”
“0 ! yes, Nelly; and Harry is as madly in love with you
as I am with my darling Gilbert!”
“ Hush, dear ! and do not let any one hear you talk in
that wild manner.”
“No, dear,” said giddy Eosamond sobering down ; “but
now Nelly, will you agree to what I proposed to you ?”
“ I hardly like to, Eose ; it may make him too angry,
and — ”
“Angry! fiddlesticks!” interposed Eosamond ; “it will
be glorious ! such fun ; and I intend to tell Mrs. Mortlake
about it; I know it will delight her, she is always ready for
harmless fun.”
“ Well, then! if she consents, I will do it.”
“That’s a dear! now just listen; my big goose of a
brother,”
“ Goose ! I do not see any goose about him.”
“No, dear! of course you dont; well, never mind, the
long and short of it is, that he wears a parcel of cambric,
paper, and macintosh around his neck, vainly imagining
that he is wearing the portrait of the charming Miss Helen
Noble; but he is only wearing the sketch of a laughing
* Jackeroo : small swell, or half loafer, half gentleman; sometimes used to
denote a young gentleman gaining colonial experience,
t Bust: drunk Nip: dram.


jackass, dear ; and so you must pretend to be jealous, Nell,
and demand a sight of the hidden portrait, and then when
the parcel is opened, and he fondly believes that he is to
behold the portrait of his lady love, he will only see the
picture of a bird sitting upon a spoon —emblem of himselt—
and laughing, Ha ! ha ! ha ! He ! he ! he ! Ho ! ho ! !
ho-o-o!! !”
Thus saying, .Rosamond burst into a merry laugh, in
which Helen, in spite of her vexation, joined.
“Oh ! you naughty, wicked romp ! what a fund of mis-
chief there is in your pretty little head!” said Helen.
“ Yes, dear ; so there is, and now that we have formed the
plot, you and I will seek out Mrs. Mortlake and tell her
all about it and give her her cue ; come on Helen ! Let us
go and nurse baby Mortlake, and tell her all about it.”
“ You can tell her all about it, madcap! I am only a
passive victim to your arts, dear Rosa,” laughed Helen.
“Never mind, Nell! I will do all the plotting, take all
the blame, laugh the loudest; and all that I require of you
is, that you shall not spoil the sport.”
“I do not half like it, Rosa; if he should really think
that, I doubt him.”
“0, bother ! ” exclaimed Rosamond, “ what ridiculous
scruples! Come, Nelly! Turn, turn, turn, turn, turn ; tiddy,
iddy, iddy, iddy, turn ! How dull you do dance to-day,
dear!!”
And the pair of plotting beauties waltzed off together.
3? 3? * 4?
The same day, upon the morning of which our hero had
thrown himself upon old Jack Neil’s bed to the manifest
disgust of that individual, Mr. Harry Dawson had started
with the laughing jackass from his father’s station—Rosa-
mond Yale, en route for Yackerdilly ; but little did he think
that a plot was being hatched against his peace of mind, or
that his beau ideal of all that a woman should be, was one
of the prime actors in the conspiracy.
He arrived at Yackerdilly about an hour before luncheon
time, having ridden thirty-five miles since daylight, with a
halt of an hour at Avellanna for breakfast.


Helen sailed majestically up to her adorer, and inclining
her Juno-like neck, she allowed her betrothed to imprint a
passionate kiss upon her coralline lips.
Rosamond laughing out “Ha, ha, kangaroo!” threw
her arms around his neck and kissed him. Her brother
lovingly returned the caress, but little did the poor inno-
cent victim imagine that he was being led like a sheep to
the shambles.
“Why, Harry! you are pigeon breasted,” exclaimed
Rosamond, as she struck her pretty little hand against her
brother’s shirt front. “ Oh, you wicked fellow ! what have
you got hanging around your neck ? a lady’s portrait, I do
believe.”
Mr. Harry Dawson turned scarlet, and laughing a short,
awkward laugh, he said, “ what nonsense, Rose, it is only
a pad that I wear for my cold.”
“ A pad! story teller !” scornfully repeated Rosamond,
“as if a strong, lusty young fellow like you would wear a
beastly pad—let me see it.”
“No, Rose, I will not,” decisively returned her brother.
“Let me see it, Harry dear!” insinuatingly said con-
spirator number two.
Here was a dilemma, to which Captain Mac Heath’s was
a mere bagatelle. He knew enough of his sister to be
certain that once the precious parcel was exhibited, that
she would insist upon cutting it open to find out what sort
of doctor’s stuff there was inside of it; if, on the other
hand, he refused to allow his ladylove to examine the
parcel* he laid himself open to the gravest suspicions, the
least of which would be wearing another lady’s portrait.
“ Surely, Nelly, you do not wish to see a doctor’s pad,”
said he, trying to escape from the snare by the shafts of
ridicule.
“No, sir, I do not,” said Miss Nelly in an offended
tone ; “if it really is a pad, why hesitate about showing
it?”
“Surely, dear! you do not doubt me;” pleaded the
terrified criminal.
“Do not speak to me again, sir,” said Nelly, sailing off
indignantly.


“Oh, Rose! Rose! what have you done?” said Harry
Dawson, turning to the weeping traitress—that is, weeping
tears procured by rubbing an onion to her eyes.”
“ How could I tell, dear Harry,” sobbed Judas, “that
you wore one lady’s picture around your neck, and made
love to another ?”
Harry Dawson shook his sister from him as though she
were a death —or deaf—adder, and muttering something
that sounded marvellously like “d it,” he rushed away
to -his bedroom.
“ Oh dear ! ” said Rosamond a few minutes afterwards,
wiping the real tears from her eyes, and pressing her hands
to her aching sides, “ Nelly did it beautiiully. How mad
he is now ! Glorious ! glorious ! ”
Helen did not appear at luncheon, and Mrs. Mortlake
informed the company that she was suffering from a bad
headache.
“ Rosamond looked reproachfully at her brother, and
spoiled his luncheon
All that afternoon Helen did not appear; and Mr. Harry
Dawson began to revolve in his mind the surest way of
loosing the silver cord ; and the idea of revolvers, bowie
knives, half-inch cord, and bedposts, crept over his morbid
imagination.
Helen appeared again at dinnertime, but took care not
to accept of the proffered arm of her disconsolate lover.
Dinner over—and a weary dinner it seemed to Mr.
Harry Dawson—the ladies retired to the withdrawing
room ; Mr. Harry Dawson followed them as soon as he
could escape from the wine.
With a supplicating look he begged Miss Noble to allow
him five minutes’ private conversation with her.
“ What!” exclaimed she, “ here ? ”
“ Oh, no, Nelly ! Nay, then, I beg pardon, Miss Noble,
the interview that I wish for is a strictly private one.”
“ Very well, sir,” answered she, at the same time sending
a telegram to Rosamond, “I will speak to you in the
library.”
Rosamond glided out of the drawing-room, and running
down to the library, she hid herself under the table, first
turning the lamp down low.


Helen coldly accepted her lover’s arm, and accompanied
him to the library.
“ Mow, then, sir, what do you wish to say to me ?” said
Helen.
“ Oh! Helen ! in what have I offended you ? ” the cry
came from his heart.
“The—the portrait!” stammered Helen, who now
thoroughly repented her share in the plot, “ why would
you not show it to me ? ”
“ Helen dear, if you only knew whose portrait it is, and
how I have gloried in its possession.”
“ Yes, Henry dear, but oh! ”
The last exclamation was forced from Helen, by the pain
of a pinch in the calf of the leg.
Rosamond thought that Helen was growing tender too
soon.
“It is nothing dear,” she answered in a careless tone,
in reply to Harry’s anxious enquiry of “ What is the
matter, love ? ”
However, she moved a little farther away from the table,
and Rosamond had to content herself with tugging at the
skirt of Helen’s dress
“I am very sorry”—tug tug, from under the table—
“for causing you so much pain”—tug tug —“but, upon
my honour dear, the portrait which you wear around your
neck is not mine, Rosamond told me that crack, crack,
this time, as the gathers are ripped at Helen’s waist.
“ What is that dear ? ” asked Harry in alarm.
“ 0 ! I laced my stays too tight, good job the laces are
rotten,” fibbed Helen.
“Bad habit,” thought Harry, and Helen continued.
“ In fact, Harry, it is the picture of a laughing jackass:
and now dear, I beg your pardon.”
Harry Dawson tore the packet from off his neck, and
with his penknife cut open the envelope, and there sure
enough, depicted upon the card, was a laughing jackass
sitting upon a spoon.
“ Forgive me Harry 7,” pleaded Helen.
Harry threw the obnoxious packet from him, and was
about to become tender, but Helen whispered, “don’t dear,
hush ! Rosa is under the table.”


But, first catch a weasel asleep, and having accomplished
that feat, come and catch Miss Rosamond if you can.
With one eye peeping from under the table cloth she had
seen all that had passed, and finding that the plot had
reached its climax, she knew that it was time for her to be
off.
Quick as lightning she sprang from under the table, and
shaking her fist at Helen, she cried, “ 0 ! you deceitful
traitress, Nell,” then eluding her bi-other’s grasp she
darted through the door, and fled down the corridor scream-
ing with laughter, ha, ha, ha, he, he, he, ho, ho, ho-00.
*****
Gilbert did not wake-up until three o’clock in the after-
noon, and Jack Neil seeing him moving exclaimed, “ I say
mate, the next time you come this way, you had better
hire my bed by the week. ’
“Why Jack,” asked Gilbert, “ don’t you know me ? ”
“ Hey ! what, is that you master Gilbert ? Well I’m
blowed ; how did you get here sir ? ”
“ Never mind Jack how I came here, what time is it ? ”
“ Three o’clock sir,” answered Jack Neil.
“Jack, can you lend me a horse to take me home?”
asked Gilbert.
“Yes sir, I will with pleasure; take my old grey mare :
I will saddle her for you,”
“ Thank you Jack, ” and our hero walked into the par-
lour, and ordered the wondering host of the Shearers’
Arms to send him in a luncheon.
Gilbert mounted Jack’s mare, and had arrived at
Yackerdilly just as Helen Noble was beginning to turn
traitress.
Quietly taking the saddle off the mare, he turned her
into the paddock; then turning into the house he began to
make his way to the withdrawing room. Rosamond ran
along the passage laughing ho, ho, ho-00, and ran right
into the arms of a tall, handsome, bearded young man.
“Rose,’’ said he, “what is the matter? ” And at the
sound of his voice Rosamond falls into his arms exclaming
“ Gilbert, my darling ! my own, all my own! ”
“ Not quite, Rose,” said Mrs. Mortlake, emerging from
out of the semi-darkness, and throwing her arms around
JJ


both of them, “ I think his mother has a small claim upon
a part of him.”
In about an hour afterwards Harry and Helen entered
the room. No sooner, however, did they enter the room
than they were greeted by a peal of laughter. But Harry
could afford to laugh himself now ; so throwing the picture
sketched by Bosamond upon the table, he joined heartily
in the merry ha, ha, ha, ho, ho, ho, he, he, ho-00.
CHAPTER XXIII.
MATRIMONY. A KANGAROO HUNT ON A GRAND SCALE. WEDDING
FESTIVITIES INTERRUPTED.
Marriages are made in heaven. Are they ? Was yonder
poor wife, with her body bruised by the boot-heels of her
savage lord and master, pre-ordained by heaven to suffer
as she has done ?
Was the Honorable Lady Y n pre-ordained by
heaven to be cast aside, to make room for another houri
in the major’s harem ? If marriages are made in heaven —
we mean the heaven of the ancients, since the proverb has
been handed down to us from the priests of Jupiter Olym-
pus—then heaven must be but a bungling go between after
all; Cupid must indeed be blind to make such sad mistakes ;
Venus united to the blacksmith, Yulcan ; and Hecate to
Apollo; turtle doves to vultures.
Sill, Boreas, blow not with thy chilly hyperborean breath
upon the altar of Hymen, but rather let the fragrant, pas-
sionate southern breeze fan the torch into a flame.
Smile, Venus! upon thy sisters of clay, and let their
charms still entice unwary Mars to enter his name for a
stake, in Hymen’s lottery box ; and let us honestly confess,
that marriages, instead of being made in heaven, and sent
to nether earth—duly labelled and ticketted—by Jove’s
imperial penny postman, Mr. Hercury, are in ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred, the result of chance. Still we know
that “ there is a divinity that shapes our ends, rough hew


them, as we may; and since all metaphysical questions
of this kind can never be solved, let us, in choosing a help-
mate for life, like Curtius—
Leap boldly into matrimony’s gulf,
And act the part, the gods to us assign.
Eleven o’clock, a.m.
In the illuminated grand withdrawing room of Yacker-
dilly mansion, a numerous company of elegantly attired
ladies and gentlemen are assembled. The windows of the
rooms are purposely darkened by heavy opaque curtains,
and the lights from the grand chandalier flash upon arms
and necks as white as youth, or pearl powder can make
them.
“ And bright the lamps shone
O’er fair women, and brave men.”
The minister has pronounced the benediction, the cere-
mony is completed, and “ hey presto ! ” Miss Helen Noble
is transformed into Mrs. Harry Dawson.
“ When shall our turn come ? ” is the whispered query
put by many a languishing swain to his fair tormentor, as
bride and bridegroom, bridesmaids and bridesmen file out
arm in arm from the dazzling scene, and enter the breakfast
room.
And now began a scene, far past the power of our poor
pen to pourtray. Wine flowed, healths were drunk, ladies
toasted, musicians played ; roast beef, and colonial wine,
beer, and spirits, were served out to the station hands and
travellers, ad libitum; new tomahawks, blankets, tobacco,
a bullock slaughtered, a bag of flour, another of sugar,
pipes, etcetera, were thrown out to the blacks, for a grand
corroboree.*
After breakfast, the several guests retired to their rooms
to don riding apparel; the stockmen ran f up the horses,
side-saddles were fastened to the backs of the steeds destined
to carry the fair equestrians, and everything was got in
readiness for a grand hunt of kangaroos and wallabies.
* Corroboree: an aboriginal dramatic entertainment and feast,
t Dear reader, this phrase is colonial, and not ours ; we certainly never saw
a stockman running up a horse.


Mount, cavalier! mount, fair Dianas! ride forth stock-
men, whip in hand
The multitude, some three hundred strong, started at a
cantea across the Yackerdilly Plains, headed by Gilbert,.
Harry Dawson, Stockman Bill—who had returned to
Yackerdilly, and Benjamin Brooks, the Avellanna cattle
overseer.
A smart ride of ten miles brought them into a forest of
magnificient iron-barks, and the party then halted to enable
the stockmen to make a circuit of a few miles, for the pur-
pose of scaaing the game in the direction of the iron-bark
ridges. Hundreds of blacks were also out, yelling, shout-
ing, ahd gesticulating—as only Australian blacks can do—
throwing nulla nullahs, * boomerangs, f and spears at the
terrified denizens of the scrubs, and drivirg them into the
open country.
And now begins a scene of wild excitement, hundreds,
nay, thousands, of kangaroos and wallabies came bound-
ing over the crest of the hill; not thoroughly excited yet
are they, they only going at a canter, their joeys J still in
their pouches.
The party upon the hill string out in single file, a gentle-
man, and then a lady, and begin to surround the flying
victims upon the left flank; the stockmen and station hanns
can be seen half a mile away, driving in the mob upon the
right flank. The niggers are in the rear, and behind them,
are about fifty more horsemen, standing, bridle on arm,
and restraining the impatience of a hundred or more of
kangaroo hounds. New the mob are out upon the edge of
the plains ; they begin to fly, and Gilbert, galloping up to
the dismounted horsemen, shouts “ Loose the dogs.” The
leashes are slipped, and with a howl of maddening joy, the
noble kangaroo dogs dash after the foe three-quarters of a
mile in the rear; but pace tells, and the hounds are fast
lessening the distance that lies between them and their
prey.
* Nullah nullahs: short hunting clubs for hurling at the game.
t Boomerangs: the most wonderful weapons ever invented by a savage people.
We fancy that the first notion of it wp.s taken from the brigalow leaf. VVe have
frequently seen the blacks throwing these leaves for mimic boomerangs.
I Joeys: young sucking kangaroos.


With a bound each horseman gains his saddle, and
dashes after the ruck at a breakneck pace.
Straining every nerve, the now thoroughly terrified mar-
supials spring forward, and the mothers tearing the joeys
from out of their pouches, aud losing all maternal love in
their frantic efforts to escape, throw their offspring from
them, and fly along with redoubled speed, the poor little
joeys vainly endeavouring to keep up with the mob.
The pace is terrific; the thoroughbreds are at the top of
their mettle, yet still far behind ; men shouting, ladies
also—no, not shouting—laughing; stockwhips cracking,
and every now and then some poor unfortunate joey trod-
den to death between the horses’ hoofs, or torn to pieces
by the fierce kangaroo dogs.
Heading the flying mob are six magnificent emus, with
necks outstretched and racing for life. Ah ! they see the
end of the cattle lane now, three miles distance from
Yackerdilly yards, and half-a-mile wide at the mouth, the
said lane being in the shape of a funnel.
The cock bird suddenly checks his mad career and darts
away to the right, followed by his harem, the kangaroos
stringing after them. Now! whip and spurs, Gilbert,
Bill, and Ben ! They head them, and Gilbert misses his
bird by half-an-inch of the whip’s length. Back again
they fly, and madly up the break* thej r race. Half-a-mile
farther and the lane narrows to a few chains in width :
“Pull in, ladies! back, idlers without whips! Flog!
crack ! crack! keep them going, hurra! shut the yard
gates. And the panting half dead mass are captured.
Horses are led away and unsaddled, the blacks muster
around the yards, and the massacre of the poor innocent
creatures begins.
“ Mr. Brown,” said Gilbert to the Yackerdilly overseer.
“ Yes, sir.”
“Don’t let the men kill the emus, but turn them out
again.”
“All right, sir.”
And Gilbert, taking Rosamond’s arm within his arm,
they walked up to the house together.
* Break: the cattle lane described above. See Livingstone’s llopo.


*##•#**
Dinner over, the lamps lit, and night’s dark mantle en-
folding the sleeping beauty, earth ; most of the guests of
the morning have departed to their own stations in the
neighbourhood, and the remainder are collected in the
drawing-rooms, hearing and discoursing delightful music.
Every one is happy, and the evening promises to be as
great a success as the morning was.
But, alas! for the mutability of human affairs, a change
was to come o’er the spirit of the dream.
Rosamond sat at the piano, and as she played, she
warbled forth that delicious little ballad, “ The last rose
of summer.” Gilbert, as in duty bound, was standing by
her and turning the music; whilst Helen and Harry, en-
joying the glad fruition of their dreams of bliss and love,
sat lovingly side by side upon an ottoman ; the other
guests, to the number of eight gentlemen and ten ladies,.
3'oung and old, sat around the room as fancy dictated.
The clock struck ten; a gorgeously attired footman
entered the withdrawing room, and presented a visiting
card upon a silver salver to Doctor Mortlake.
Doctor Mortlake read the card, “Lord Henry Fitz
Eustace, admit him, John,” and John retired.
All eyes were turned upon the stranger as he entered the
Yackerdilly drawing room, and bowing to the company,,
approached Mr. Mortlake, and in a few graceful words
apologised for his intrusion.
Seating himself—at the request of Doctor Mortlake—he
spoke a few words in a low tone to that gentleman. Doctor
Mortlake gave a start of surprise, and passed his right hand
rapidly under his vest, to where, in his old Ballarat days,
he always carried his trusty revolver.
“ My dear sir,” said his lordship, as he noticed the action,
“ Don’t be imprudent, do not alarm the ladies ; the money
I must have, so you had best pledge your word for it, and I
will retire.”
The preceding conversation had been carried on in such
a low tone, that the guests present had not noticed anything
strange, and they were intently listening to a young lady
who was telling them in thrilling accents, “That love i&
wed to sordid wealth,” etcetera.


“ Sir,” said Doctor Mortlake, “ do you not know that you
will most likely be hanged for this ? ”
“ My dear sir,” replied his lordship—Fitz Eustace, alias
Flash Harry, alias Cunning Harry, or as the Australian
police called him, Captain Jack—“the probabilities are
that I shall escape the cord, to die by the bullet; will you
do my bidding? ”
“No sir!” thundered Doctor Mortlake, rising up and
confronting the bushranger, “I will not. Gentlemen,” he
continued, as the company arose in astonishment, “ this
individual has thrust himself upon our company under a
fictitious name. This card which I hold in my hand, pur-
ports to be from Lord Henry Fitz Eustace, but this person
has avowed himself to be a common bushranger ; he has
demanded a poll tax of five pounds per head upon the
assembled company.”
“ Lord Henry Fitz Eustace,” said Gilbert, coming forward
and looking the cool, nonchalant, smiling, audacious robber
in the face, “ Lord Henry Fitz Eustace, alias Flash Harry,
alias Cunning Harry, London swell mobsman.”
Cunning Harry lolled back in his easy chair, and surveyed
our hero calmly, “ It appears that you know me,” said he,
“ although I have not the slightest recollection of you, or
your features, however this gentleman ” —waving his hand
towards Doctor Mortlake—“ has stated my proposition
fairly, but I must beg leave to correct him in one point,
I am not a common bushranger ; I am a very uncommon
one.”
“ Come sir,” interposed Harry Dawson, “ you had better
depart, I should be loth to injure anyone on—to me—such
an auspicious day, and yod cannot imagine that thirty or
iorty men are going to yield their valuables quietly, to one
Claude Duval, however daring he may be.”
“ No sir, I do not imagine anything of the kind, and to
show you that I am not such a novice as you imagine me to
be, I will proceed to show you a few more arguments for
your compliance.”
“ In the first place then, you have ladies in this room,
whom I should be loth to annoy”—and the rascal bowed
politely to Mrs. Mortlake, Mrs. Noble, Rosamond, and the
rest of the ladies—“in the second place, there are but


fourteen men in this room—brave, determined men, no
doubt, but unarmed; thirdly, your servants are all tied
neck and crop, with a guard over them ; and finally, I have
twenty desperate armed-to-the-teeth devils, outside of those
French lights, upon the verandah.’’ So saying, the bush-
ranger threw open the folding doors leading on to the
verandah, and displayed to the astonished gaze of his
audience, a file of twenty rough, savage ruffians, as he had
said, “ armed to the teeth.”
Brave as lions, though the victims were, what could they
do but submit ?
For a few minutes they gazed at each other,- and then
the ludicrous side of the affair striking them all at once,
they burst into a hearty peal of laughter.
The bushranger closed the folding doors, and Doctor
Mortlake was permitted to retire to bring the ransom
exacted.
“I hope you don’t intend to visit us again in a hurry,”
said Ben to Captain Jack.
“No, my dear sir! I do not do such foolish things ; I
cannot always reckon upon finding all the gentlemen in the
drawing room, unarmed; and all the men in their huts,
half intoxicated.”
Doctor Mortlake now entered ; the bushranger received
the money and placed it upon the piano ; then seating him-
self at the instrument, he ran his fingers over the keys, and
casting a loving glance—impossible to be described —at the
gold upon the music-stand, he commenced to play and sing,
in a rich, cultivated voice, the ballad—
“ Ever of thee, Love, I am fondly dreaming.”
At the conclusion of the song he arose, and pouring him-
self out a glass of curacoa, he drank to the healths of the
bride and bridegroom, and the assembled company.
*****
“Well, dash me upon a rock, that was a cool chap,” ex-
claimed Captain Breaker ; “ and what a fleet of lubberly
merchantmen we looked like when the pirate opened the
ports, and we had not a gun mounted wherewith to repel
boarders.”


“ Yes, uncle, but what could we do ? We were at their
mercy,” said Gilbert.
f< For my part,” said Lieutenant Dawson, “ I think his
lordship behaved like one of the aristocracy. He contented
himself with a poll tax instead of rifling us of everything.”
“ X wonder has he gone, though, ’ said Doctor Mortlake,
and as he spoke he pulled the bell rope.
The bell was answered by the same footman who had
brought in the card, but his gorgeousness was gone, and
his coat hung in tatters upon his back.
“ Have the bushrangers gone, John?” asked his master.
“ Yes, sir, they have gone, and begging the ladie3 par-
dons, the d Igo with them.”
“ Have they ill-used you?” asked Harry Dawson.
“ Well, sir!” answered John, in an ironical tone, “I
don’t know about ill-using ; when I tried to run in here and
give an alarm, three or four of them threw themselves upon
me, and forced a soda water bottle with a handkerchief
around it into my mouth, and then tied my legs and arms,
and kicked me and cuffed me until I fainted. If you call
that ill-using, sir, why they did ill-use me.”
“How did you get loose, John?” asked Hosamond of
the exasperated slavey.
“ Why miss,” said John —this time quite politely,
“ when the bushrangers were going away they untied me,
and also the men in the huts.”
“ Do you know any ofm the ?’ queried Doctor Mortlake.
“ Yes, sir, I know one or two of them. There is Peisly,
and Frank Gardiner, the horse-breaker; and Davis, and
Ikey Jonas, the splitter and fencer.”
“ Did you say Jonas?” enquired Gilbert.
“ Yes, sir, I said Ikey Jonas, the bush work man and
well-sinker. ’ He is an uncommon villain, sir, and I don’t
doubt that he will be hanged yet.”
“ Amen!” quoth Gilbert.


CHAPTER XXIV
NEW ENGLAND IN 186 ROSAMOND AND OUR HERO ARE MADE ONE
—BILLY THE BUSTLER, AND TOM DEVINE, IN NEW CHARACTERS—
THE TRAGICAL END OF THE VILLAIN, IKEY JONAS-GILBERT
MEETS AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE—BACHELOR TOM.
Mr. Mark Brookes had returned to Avellanna from Kar-
goonyah station, in the far north. Kargoonyah was the
aboriginal name of Mr. Mortlake’s station in the northern
territory of New South Wales, or rather it was an abbre-
viation of the name, the complete appellation being Kar-
goonyah Talgi Coodgerah ; in English, the big sheep
river, or sea; and was enjoying the almost forgotten
delights of civilization.
* * * * *
“ Gilbert, you will have to start to Devine and Irving’s,
with as little delay as possible, to take payment and give
delivery of those sheep. I suppose you have no objection ;
if you have, my dear boy, why say r so.”
No sir, I have no objection to do so, only I have this
morning made an agreement with another party, that can-
not possibly be broken without forfeiting my word of
honour.”
An agreement,’ said Doctor Mortlake, in a hurt tone;
surely you cannot intend to take service; have I ever
stinted you of money ? and do you not know that all my
property is willed to you and your sister Bosamond Helen,
in the event of my death ? lam sure that your mother
will be more hurt than I am at your proceeding.”
My dear father, forgive me,” said our hero, “ the party
with whom I have made the agreement is Miss Bosamond.”
t( ‘‘Ha, ha, ha! you sly dog,” laughed Doctor Mortlake,
you should have done that six years ago; no matter,
better late than never ; I must find another ageht.”
I think not, sir; let the sheep start, and ask Mark
Brookes to take charge, and I will start in three or four
months and pull them up in time for delivery 7.”
“Very well my boy, let it be so.”
And so the sheep started, with Mark Brookes as super,


bound to the table lands of New England, to the station
belonging to Messrs. Devine and Irving.
A few daj-s afterwards, Rosamond Dawson became Mrs.
Dogger, with a prospect of becoming Lady Dogger, when
the lawsuit for the recovery of Dogger Hall and. the title
is settled.
The lawsuit had now been pending seven years, and
would most probably be settled somewhere about Anno
Domini, eighteen hundred and ninety.
Rosamond pouted and sulked a good deal when the time
came for Dilbort to start to New England, but Dilbert
pleaded his promise to Doctor Mortlake, and Rosamond
with a very bad grace yielded, under protest.
And so it came to pass that Rosamond was left a grass
widow.
* * * * ■s?
“You saw your brother go away this morning, Kitty,
did he say whether he would be back to-night or not?”
asked Mr. William Irving of his partner’s sister and his
own wife, Kitty Devine.
“He said he would be home to dinner, dear, and lo
here he comes.” And Kitty tripped off to order in the
soup.
******
“Billy, who do you think I saw in Tenterfield to-day ?”
“ I can’t imagine Tom, not Queen Victoria; it must have
been Ikey Jonas then.”
“ Why, have you seen him then ? ”
“Me! no, I suppose the wretch is dead years ago; -his
name only came to my lips by chance.”
“ Talk of the old gentleman, etcetera, it was him then that
I saw, and I tell you the truth AVilliam, I could hardly
refrain from striking him with my whip.”
“You saw Ikey Jones, Tom Devine. Well, let him
pass ; sooner or later he will meet the punishment of his
crimes ; do not soil your hands with him.”
“ 1 believe you are right, Billy Irving, so let us go to
dinner; I see your wife looking this way in wonder at our
serious conversation.”


“Ha, ha!” laughed our old acquaintance, Billy the
Bustler “ Kitty is always anxious if I have the toothache,
or catch a cold, or look serious for five minutes.”
Our two friends Thomas Devine and William Irving,
had left Ballarat wealthy men, and on repairing to the
station of Thomas Devine, senior, they had been welcomed
with open arms by Tom’s parents, and his sister Kitty. In
a few weeks’ time, Romeo (William Irving) espoused his
Juliet (Kitty Devine), and Tom’s father wishing to retire,
the two friends had bought him out for sixty thousand
pounds.
Thus it happened that the wheel of fate was a°:ain to
bring together our hero, and his old acquaintance and tutor
in dishonest practices, Billy the Bustler.
* s(t * *
“ Mr. Whelan, sir,” said the cook, to the overseer of Bin-
gala station. “ there is a man outside who wants work.”
“ Send him in, Wilmot,” and the overseer’s cook
presently reappeared, followed closely by our ruffianly
acquaintance lkey Jonas.
Not much unlike other men of his apparent class did he
seem ; he was dressed in moleskin trowsers, Scotch twill
under shirt and blue serge shirt over, cabbagetree hat,
blucher boots, a white muslin handkerchief around his
neck, and a sailor’s sheath knife at his belt; he had also a
leather pouch suspended to his belt to hold his pipe,
matches, tobacco, etcetera.
“Well my man,” said Mr. Whelan, with a strong
Hibernian accent, “ what work can ye do ? ”
“ Hurdle making, huts and yards, post and rail fencing,
dam making, well sinking, anything but shepherding.”
“ Well, go into the kitchen and get some supper, and I
will draw you up an agreement; what is your name ?’’
“William Turner, sir.”
“ All right,” and lkey Jonas proceeded to the kitchen
until such time as the overseer should have drawn up the
agreement.
The overseer drew up the agreement, and proceeded to
the kitchen with it, and having read the terms to lkey
Jonas, alias William Turner, and that worthy having
expressed himself satisfied therewith, he ordered lkey to


take the agreement and the copy of the agreement up to
the house to get them signed by Mr. Irving and Mr.
Devine.
“ Where is the house, sir ?” asked Ikey of Mr. Whelan.
“ You see that dark building ? that is the saddle room
and stables; it is light enough for you to see your way ;
well, the house is twenty yards behind that.”
•» *
“ Willy, dear ! there is a man outside whom Mr. Whelan
has hired. He is waiting for you and Thomas to sign his
agreement.”
“ All right Kitty! I will call Tom; tell the servant to
send the man round to the office door.”
Mr. Devine and Mr. Irving are seated at their desks,
when from the darkness emerges the hired man, and enters
the office, hat and agreements in hand; with a start of
surprise, Mr. Irving looks in the man’s face, then recover-
ing himself with an effort, he demands of the man.
“ Are you the man whom Mr. Whelan has hired ?”
“Yes, sir!” answers Ikey Jonas.
“Mr. Whelan has made a mistake ; we don’t want your
services.”
And now the brute nature of the man breaks forth; and
in a fierce tone garnished with oaths he demands — “ Why !
they have made a fool of him ?”
“We don’t want you on the station,” said Tom Devine,
and so no more of your swearing here; you had best clear
out!”
“ And if I don’t, you ?” queried Ikey.
“ In that case, Ikey Jonas, ruffian and murderer ! I will
flog you off'!” cried Tom Devine turning white with
passion, and seizing a heavy loaded riding whip in his
hand.
“ I know you both now!” roared Ikey Jonas. “ Qh!
oh ! ! Billy the Bustler ! and his picter loving chum !”
“ Yes, you scoundrel! you know me, and perhaps you
know the mark of your bowie knife upon my breastand
Tom rushed forward and inflicted a severe cut with the
whip, across Ikey’s face, The ruffian sprang back into the
darkness, and Tom Devine turned to enter the office door
again ; just then a flash of fire came from out of the gloom,


the report of a revolver is heard, and poor generous, high
spirited Tom Devine falls upon the office floor shot through
the lower jaw.
* * * * *-
“To horse ! to horse ! ride Billy Budgeree to Tenter-
field for the doctor!” and Billy Budgeree* starts in the
more than semi-darkness at headlong speed.
Morning comes, and Mr. Irving armed cap-a-pie sallies
forth, and takes his departure in search of Ikey Jonas;
he is accompanied by Billy Budgeree, likewise armed.
Tom Devine is under the doctor’s hands; Mr. Whelan
is in full charge of the station ; and Mr. Irving has departed
with provisions for six days; he swears to follow Ikey’s
trail and to shoot him dead.
“No law for me!” he says, “such a villain shall not
have the chance of cheating the gallows, by the pleading
of a colonial Slimy Smasher.”
Baailf that fellor been leavum track Misser Irvin,”
said Billy Budgeree, as they finished the circuit of the head
station ; that fellor been stealum King Lear ; you see um
track? there!” and the blackfellow pointed to the tracks
of a horse, leading up a spur of the ranges.
“King Lear Billy; how you know um, King Lear’s
track ?”
“You see ! Baail, nother fellor yarraman| long a Bin-
gala makeum track all same as that fellor.”
“ All right Billy! follow the track, the rascal has gotten
the best roadster in the district,” said Mr. Irving.
At first, the ascent of the spur was very easy, but
gradually the ridges began to get more abrupt, the spur
became narrower, and the precipices more formidable; at
last they reached the crown of the range and then the riding
became more easy ; still on went the tracks of King Lear,
and night overtook them, about fifteen miles in a straight
line from Bingala, but they had ridden at the least seventy
miles since cock crow.
„ ,* BUly Budgeree; Billy the good fellow; thus Kipper Billy, is young Billy;
1 h a “ gry Bllly ’ wyro Billv is hungry Billy; mill bung Billy is Billy
with the blind eye ; gammon Billy is lying Billy, etcetera. *
t Baail: he has not, &c.
+ Yarraman: horse.


They hobbled their horses out on a small peppermint
tree flat, and taking a nip—Auglice dram—from their
brandy flask, they partook of a supper of cold meat and
bread, and brandy and water; they dared not light a fire,
as their foe might perhaps be camped in their vicinity, so
rolling themselves up in their blankets, with their saddles
for pillows, they speedily fell asleep.
They awoke next morning as the morning star arose
above the eastern horizon ; and this time they lit a black-
fellows’ fire* and made a pot of tea—that almost indis-
pensable item of every bushman’s meals. Billy Budgeree
caught the horses and saddled them, the two men leaped
into their saddles, and as the sun arose they again started
upon the track of the would-be assassin.
They came upon Ikey’s camp in about five miles more,
and Billy Budgeree with a chuckle, pointed out a sapling,
unto which King Lear had been tied up all night.
“My word! Baail that fellor Iviny Lear been parter,j-
by em by we catch him,” said Billy Budgeree,+ chuckling
to himself.
On, on they rode. They stopped not for dinner, still on
they pushed ; and as the shades of night again came on,
they found themselves upon a narrow rocky ledge of about
one chain in width ; to the right and to the left of them
yawned seemingly impassable, unfathomable precipices;
whilst before them rose a perpendicular wall of rock of
about one hundred feet in height. It was too dark now to
ride any further; grass and water there was none, and so
they hobbled and tied their tired and hungry steeds up
to saplings, and supperless, men and beasts passed the
night.
At sunrise the next morning, Billy Budgeree went
forward on foot, to see in which way Ikey and his steed
had rounded the seemingly impassable wall of sandstone
rock in front of them. He carried his Terry carbine in his
hand, in readiness for any emergency. In about half an
* Blackfellows’ fire : the blacks make only verv small fires, and crouch right
oyer them. You may sometimes hear a blackfellow remark when looking at a
white man’s fire. Karbon—big—fool; white fellor big fellow fire. Nabbo—sit—good
way longa bush. °
f Parter: Eating.
t Billy Budgeree: Good Billy.


hour he returned, and reported “ BaaiH track. He had,
however, found a small spring of water, and so Mr. Irving
taking one of the horses and Billy Budgereef the other one,
they proceeded about two hundred yards to the B P TI “S*
Greedily their horses drank of the sparkling fluid, an
taking the bits from their mouths, their masters allowed
them to graze-hobbled and saddles on backs-upon lie
sweet short grass that grew around this oasis of the
mountains.
Billy then made a fire, and having partaken of a hearty
meal of tea, salt beef, and damper, + they again started
forth to look for tracks, leaving their horses feeding at the
spring.
Betracing their steps backwards for two or three yards,
they came upon a large flat, smooth rock ; at the edge of
this rock all signs of a horse’s track were lost, even to the
keen eyes of Billy Budgeree.f
Long did the blackfellow ponder upon the mysterious
disappearance of Ikey and King Lear ; in all his lengthened
experience, he had never been at fault befoie , along the
ledge of rock he paced ; his piercing eyes scanned each tree
and bush far away down fathoms below ; far, far, down
on the sides of the precipices; still no sign ; up the wall of
sandstone rock he gazed, but nothing rewarded his
scrutiny; he walked back to the spring, and still no sign
met his gaze; intently he gazed down a steep glacis of
polished rock, three or four hundred feet long, and steep
as a house top; and now his perseverance met with his
reward; away down, nearly upon the very verge of the
shelving rock he espied a small piece of a blue shirt, fast
to a small twig that grew in a crevice of the rock; and now
upon examining the rock upon the edge of the platform of
the range, upon which he is standing, Lilly can discern
small particles of iron and wool, the iron rubbed from a
horseshoe by friction upon the rock. , ~
n y ou S ee em ? Yarraman§ yan, white fellor—bung! ||
* Baail track: There is no track.
+ Billy Budgeree: Good Billy.
t Damper: Unleavened bread,
a Yarraman yan: the horse went this way.
f White fellor—Bung !! the white man is dead.


“ XJi ! * Mine see urn !” replied Mr. Irving, and there
being no doubt that both the steed and his rider were
smashed to pieces down that dreadful incline; the two men
recovered their now refreshed horses, and set off at a hand
gallop on their homeward route ; and upon the fourth night
from the murderous attack of Ikey upon Tom Devine, they
again reached the low country.
* * * * *
Ikey Jonas, as soon as he had fired the shot that sped
upon its errand but too well, turned to flee ; as he ran by the
saddle room, however, a sudden thought struck him, and
opening the door he seized a bridle and saddle—the first
ones that his hands encountered in the dark—groping his
way, bridle in hand, and saddle upon arm to the stables ;
he had seen the stables in the evening as he arrived upon
the station ; he forced the bit into a horse’s mouth, and
leading him forth, he flung the saddle upon him, and rode
swiftly forth in the direction of the mountains, the outlines
of which he could faintly trace against the sky.
A second or two afterwards, Billy Budgeree entered the
stable, saddled a horse, and galloped madly off for the
doctor.
Ikey reached the spur of the range by daylight; he rode
along all day, but night coming on he was compelled to
camp. Tieing King Lear to a sapling, he sat down upon
the ground and watched impatiently for the coming of
another day. He was on horseback again as the laughing
jackass began to shout, and rode on, reaching the wall of
rock at about four o’clock, or perhaps half-past three o’clock
in the afternoon. But here his progress was stopped;
rendered desperate by the belief that he was pursued, he
halted upon the ledge of rock before spoken of, and tearing
his under flannel in strips, he muffled the feet of his steed
with them ; and then hurling his boots down the preci-
pice, he walked to the edge of the inclined rock, leading
his horse by the bridle.
The docile steed fearing no treachery, allowed himself to
be placed upon the very verge of the rock, when Ikey with
a sudden twist at the bit caused the faithful creature to
N
* Ui! am ! yes ! I see that it is so.


■wrench its head suddenly to one side, and consequently its
hind feet to slide over the brink of the rock ; with a snort of
terror, the gallant steed clung with his fore feet to the upper
surface, but for one second only, for Ikey raised his fist and
dealt the struggling creature a terrific blow upon the
nostrils; his fore feet gave way, and he slid—but not
unavenged—slowly, but surely to his doom.
Ikey’s intention had been to throw the steed down the
incline, and then crouching upon the edge of the precipice
to await the coming night, and making his way back
endeavour to pass his pursuers in the darkness.
Let us see how the steed was avenged.
As Ikey struck the last blow at his faithful servant, his
right hand caught in the bridle reins, and before he could
disengage himself he found himself sliding down side by
side with his victim. Slowly they slide down, his hand is
clear of the reins, madly Ikey clutches at the shining rock
until his fingers bleed; still down, down, slowly, slowly, a
few feet more and the bottom ledge of the rock will be
reached ; and then, over the precipice, alaunch into space,
and a battered corpse.
For one moment his descent is checked, his blue serge
shirt has caught in a small shrub. Ah ! the shirt tears,
and down, down, over the ledge.
With a shriek of despair as he feels himself going over
the ledge, he throw's his arms out wildly and feels his hands
strike the branches of a tree ; a few feet he falls, he hears
a crashing of leaves and small twfigs, mechanically he
clutches, and after a few minutes of dazed thought, he finds
himself perched astride of a limb of a mighty stringy bark
tree that grew upon the side of a deep wooden incline.
King Lear lay twenty feet below him, across an immense
limb of a black butt tree, his back broken and dead as a
mummy.
Lowering himself by the vines that grew to the topmost
branches of the giant of the forest, he reached the ground;
and sliding, and grasping at stones, roots, and vines, he
worked his way downwards.
The sun had long set when Ikey at last reached a small
plain, or table land of about thirty or forty acres in extent.
This plain was bare of trees, but was covered by a smooth,


short, velvety-like grass. Thoroughly worn out, he fell
upon the green sward, and was asleep in two minutes.
He awoke late the next morning; the sun was high over-
head, and a magnificent prospect spread itself before his
gaze, bar away in the distance he saw a table land of
many miles in extent; it looked like an emerald plain ;
sheep and cattle could plainly be seen upon it, even the
very, shepherd and his dog were clearly defined in the
brilliant clear New England atmosphere.
Ikey, during his flight, had neither eaten nor drunk, and
the inner man now began to assert its rights, and Ikey
proceeded to search for a passage down to the lowlands;
but now to his horror he found that he was literally in a
trap, up he could not climb, down he could not go; the
small plain upon which he then stood is merely a shelf of
the rock, upon which the dust and dews of ages, and the
birds of the air, have deposited a scanty soil, and a short
stunted grass.
Below him the precipice stretched sheer down for seventy
feet. There was, however, one way to descend could he
but compass it. An iron bark tree reared its lower branch
to within nine feet of the cliff; could he but spring those
nine feet and twine his arms and legs around the limb, he
could work his way to the trunk, and clutching the rough
bark of the tree, could reach the ground in safety, or at all
events with only a few bruises. To stop where he is, is
death; so collecting all his strength he launches himself
into space, his hands grasp the limb, but only upon one
side of it, and Ikey again collects his strength in order to
pass his right arm over the limb and to clench his hands
together around it; but the limb is about eighteen inches
m diameter at that part, and he only manages to grasp the
upper surface without being able to join his hands;
desperate are his struggles to raise his feet to a level with
his hands and to twine his legs around the limb; but alas
it is impossible, his hands relax their held, he shrieks like
a damned soul, and turning over and over in the air, he
speeds to his doom.
r ull fifty feet he falls, and striking in the branches of a
green wattle tree, his legs are entangled in the fork, and


he hangs head downwards, but with both thighs broken ;
however, he is still alive, and strange to say, conscious. .
He hangs directly over the Government-road, from which
his head is distant twenty odd feet. f
No one passed along the road that day,, and Ikey s
agonizing groans were spent upon the desert air.
At about twelve o’clock that night, he gave up the ghost,
and thus died one of the most unscrupulous, blood-thirsty
ruffians that ever brought disgrace upon the name of an
Englishman. There are many undiscovered Ikey Jonas’s
in Australia.
The next day came, and two or three horsemen passed
along the road ; but the body was so well concealed in the
foliage of the tree, that no one saw it.
The evening of the third day came, and mark Brookes,
with the sheep for Devine and Irving, pitched his camp
upon the creek, not two hundred yards from the corpse.
“This is a fine camp,” said Mark Brookes to his over-
seer Mr. Simpson. “We will camp here to-morrow, and
I will ride on to Bingala to let them know that we are so
near. If Mr Gogger comes, show him my tent; I expect
him here to-day.”
So saying, Mark Brookes mounted his horse and rode
aW “ What a horrid smell!” said he to himself, as he rode
beneath the corpse of Ikey Jonas. “ Phew ! get along old
man! some old man kangaroo dead;” and so saying, he
drove his spurs into the old man’s ribs; the old man, liking
the spurs as little as Mark liked the stench, broke into a
canter, and speedily placed his master out of reach of the
odour.
At sundown that evening, Gilbert reached the camp, and
taking possession of Mark’s camp bedstead, he slept the
sleep of the innocent.
The next morning, Mr. Irving and Mark Brookes, accom-
panied by Billy Budgeree* started for the camp, and upon
the road Mr. Irving related to Mark the attempt at murder
and pursuit after, and supposed death of Ikey Jonas.
* Billy Budgeree ; good Billy.


“You see um little fellor mountain? There! all same
liket humpy, # close up sky ; there, you see um. Plenty
hawk fly about.”
“Ui!” f answered both Mr. Irving, and Mark Brookes.
“Well,” said Billy, “ white fellor been bung| there.”
“Why!” exclaimed Mark Brookes, “that is right over
my camp, and I smelt a most horrid smell there yesterday
morning; I thought it was a dead kangaroo.”
“Ha i ha;” laughed Billy, “you no know um smell
longa kangaroo; you no know um smell longa white
fellor.”
In a short time they reached the tree in which the corpse
was suspended, and Billy Budgeree, expanding his nostrils
like a thoroughbred Arabian entire, inhaled a long breath.
“Phew!” snorted he, as he forcibly expelled the foul
air again, “that fellor, white fellor, by um by I get a
tommyhawk, cut im down.”
“ All right, Billy, push on to the camp and let us get
dinner, and then we will all come back with you,” said
Mark Brookes.
Mark Brookes duly presented Mr. Irving to Mr. Gogger;
and although Gilbert thought he had heard the voice be-
fore, still he could not recollect where he had ever seen
that gentlemanly, well-spoken person before, and Mr.
Irving did not for one moment dream, that the heir pre-
sumptive of princely Yackerdilly, was no other than his
quondam apprentice of his watchmaking days.
if if if,
“ Look out, dare below ! ” shouted Billy Budgeree from
the top of the tree that held the corpse of Ikey J onas, and
as he shouted, the body crashed through the branches and
fell with a thud upon the white sandy road beneath
“ Yes ! ” exclaimed Mr. Irving, “ It is Ikey Jonas ; and
so, *as Bill’s no more ; why, so no more of Bill! ’ ”
“What! ” cried Gilbert, as a sudden inspiration struck
him, as Mr. Irving threw himself into a theatrical attitude,
ala Billy the Bustler, “ what ? Ikey Jonas! and Billy the
Bustler, or, the d—l! ”
* Humpy : a low hut.
f Ui: yes.
} Bung: dead.


Mr. Irving turned smartly around, and looked our hero
sternly in the face, “ And who are you, sir ?” said he, “that
know a name that I fondly thought was gone from me for
ever.”
“ And so it has, Mr. Irving; surprise forced it from me ;
I am Eeuben, do you know me now ? ”
Mr. Irving indulged in a prolonged whistle, then suddenly
seizing Gilbert’s hands, he said, “First let us bury this
carrion, and then we will talk over these miracles.”
“ Billy, go back to the camp and bring a spade, and a
green-hide rope,” said Mark Brookes, and Billy departed
upon his errand.
“ Got a match ? ” said Mark Brookes to Mr. Irving; and
the match having been produced, the three men lit their
pipes, and squatted —not sat—upon the ground, a la
Chinaman; bye-the-bye, a favourite attitude with men in
the bush, and commonly known as sitting upon your
hunks.
Billy Budgeree soon returned with the spade and rope,
and passing the rope along the ground, he shoved the
horrid carrion with his foot, into the loop ; the four men
then took hold of the rope and ragged the body under the
cliff, at about twenty yards distance from the road.
Billy then commenced digging, and the four men taking
turn about at the spade, soon dug a hole in the sand, five
feet deep, six feet long, and three feet broad.
Billy then took the tomahawk and cut three monstrous
sheep crooks, and the white men tugged at the corpse with
the crooks, whilst Billy pulled at the rope.
“Phew ! shovel the sand in, Billy,” said Mr. Irving.
“Mine want urn that fellor volver first time,” said Billy,
coolly jumping into the hole upon the corpse, and pulling
Ikey’s revolver from its case ; then jumping out of the
grave again with his booty in his hand, he said, “ Baail v
that fellor want um, budgeree belonging to me.”
Billy then commenced to fill in the grave, and in half an
hour’s time longer Ikey Jonas was for ever hidden from
human ken. They threw the sheep crooks and rope away,,
and Mark Brookes, drawing a long breath, exclaimed,.
* Baail that fellor, etcetera : he don’t want it, it is Tery good for me.


“Well, what do you say? after that I don’t think a
bogie* will hurt us ? ”
“You are a magistrate; shall you report this?” asked
Gilbert of Mr. Irving.
“ Oh, yes, I must; although I don’t think that it matters
much how such a scoundrel met his fate.”
“ What have you got there ? ” said Mark Brookes with
a laugh, to Billy Budgeree, as he saw him pick up some
bright object and thrust it into his trousers pocket.
“Mine got im shilling, white fellor been lose im ; sposen
that fellor got em more, I dig im up again ; my word ! big
fellor grasser grog now longa Tenterfil.’'
Such is life, and thus the comic treads upon the heels of
the tragic.
* *- * * #
“ And 30 you are really little Ruby?” said Mr. Irving,
as they sat by their camp fire smoking after supper.
“ Little Ruby!” laughed Mark Brookes, “why the
fellow weighs thirteen stone.”
“ You say that your mother married Dr. Mortlake in
Melbourne, and that they lived before that upon Ballarat.
What was her name before she married him ! ” asked Mr.
Irving of Gilbert.
“ I believe that she went by the name of Madame
Morgana,” answered Gilbert.
“Indeed! then lam an old acquaintance of hers. You
say that you have your mother’s portrait with you; will you
let me see it, if you have no objection ? ”
“Certainly, Mr. Irving, no objection in the least,” and
Gilbert took a chain and locket from around his neck, and
handed it to Mr. Irving.
“Yes!” said that gentleman, as he looked at the
portrait, “your mother is indeed poor Bachelor Tom’s
Fairy Bride.”
“ What do you mean ? ” asked Gilbert in surprise.
“Only this: that my partner, Tom Devine, fell madly
in love with your mother upon Ballarat, and although poor
Tom knew tbat it was a hopeless passion, still he would
not, or could not subdue it ; after your mother’s sudden
* Bogie : a bathe, to swim.


departure from Ballarat, poor Tom moped about and pined
away, and lost all his former cheerfulness; and although
since then many mammas have, as it were, thrown their
daughters at him, Tom never would bite, be the hook ever
so skilfully concealed; and so genial, loving, rollicking
Tom Devine, has settled down into quiet Bachelor-Tom, a
sworn ‘ cosogamist.’ ”
“Poor fellow!” said Gilbert, “so you think that he
would be glad to receive this miniature of my mother? ”
“ Glad, sir ! he would be mad—yes, sir, joyfully mad !”
“Well, then,” said Gilbert, “he shall have it.”
CHAPTER XXV.
A YARN AROUND A CAMP FIRE, IN WHICH YARN A NOTORIOUS
CHARACTER IS CHIEF ORATOR -A FEW FACTS CONCERNING THE
ABORIGINALS.
“What book is that that you are reading, Smithson?”
asked Mr. Simpson of one of the shepherds, who stretched
by the fire, was endeavouring to ruin his eyes and to
decipher the print of the novel, called “ Never too Late to
Mend ’
“Book!” said Smithson, “0, yes, very entertaining,
instructive, and moral work, but, sir, awfully improbable.
Pity the author did not know what he was writing about,
for it really is a very clever work. Here is one Jackey
Jackey, who performs some most unlikely things ; then
there is a cave all full of nuggets of gold lying about the
floor, just like English potatoes ; I reckon the author has
never seen a diggings. In fact, sir, the whole book as far
as conveying to the English reader a correct idea of life in
Australia, is ‘ Bosh! ’ ” and Smithson shut the book with
a vicious snap.
“ Well, Smithson, I believe you are about right; the
fellow has certainly got the gift of blowing,* for 1 have read
the book myself, and I endorse your opinion of it,” said
Mr. Simpson.
* Blowing: gasconading, boasting, or telling extraordinary improbable stories.


“ I don’t know what you may consider improbable,” said
a wiry, determined looking Cornstalk, * from the other side
of the fire. “ A cave full of nuggets is certainly very un-
common, but I have been where the foot of a white man
has never trodden before, and I yet live in hopes to dis-
cover th° mountain of gold, from which all the gold in the
country came from.”
“Why, surely ! Andy Hume,” said Mr. Simpson, “ You
don’t think that there is a mountain of gold in the interior.”
“Indeed, I do!” replied Hume; I have travelled in a
straight line for four months, at a time ; passing through,
and living with the Myall blacks, single handed; and as soon
as I get my cheque for this job, I shall load my horse with
ammunition, and start down the Sovereign to the Mclntyre
Brook, across the Warrego, and make for the north-west
coast of Australia. If I can get a mate to go with me, I
will take him; if not, I will takef the Wallabi alone.”
“Yu won't take me, I know !” said Smithson with a
chuckle.
“ No !” answered the intrepid explorer, Andrew Hume.
“ I want a man and not a gourmandiser like you ; the man
that goes with me, must live as Ido ; upon Currajong roots,
yams, bottle tree, water lily roots, wild limes, pomegranates,
and other wild fruits, ’possums, wallabies, rats, mice,
mussels, grubs or anything that we can find to catch, or
shoot, aye ! upon a pinch a black gin’s piccaninny cooked.”
“ 0 ! Hume ; that is about the piccaninny you
know ; but I believe you are the best bushman that ever I
saw,” said Smithson.
The following notes were written during a fit of delirium tremens, brought onT)y
an overdose of Ayer’s Ague Cure, which we had taken to cure ourselves of an
attack of that institution of Northern Queensland, namely, the shakes, or as some
people call it, the fever and ague. Such being the case, as the horse paddocking
advertisers say, all care taken, but no responsibility incurred
* Cornstalk: a white native of New South Wales, so called, because they re-
semble cornstalks, inasmuch as their bodies are generally thin and long, all legs;
their heads rather big like corn cobs, and like corn cobs, nothing of anything
good in the inside of them, and only horse provender upon the outside of them.
As the old lady said to her son, when he complained to her that the boys at the
school called him “ Big Head,” “never mind, my boy, there’s nothing in it / ”
f Take the Wallabi: start upon the road.
J Borack. humbug. Thus it is a common saying amongst bushmen, when any
person is attempting to make them believe something improbable. “O 1 don’t
poke borack at me !”


“Now, did you ever notice anything peculiar, to dis-
tinguish the waters that run into the sea direct, from the
waters that flow through the interior ?”
“You may think as you please about the piccaninny,”
replied Hume, “so let that pass ; as to the other question,
about the waters that run from the ranges into the sea from
the waters that run through the interior of the country;
the great range that run 3 all around the entire island of
Australia, in some places three hundred, and in some places
only twenty miles from the sea, divides the comparatively
small rivers of the sea coast side of the range from the
mighty rivers, or rather river of the interior. Starting from
above Killarney, above on the ranges here, above Warwick,
the Condamine runs in a circuitous course for hundreds of
miles, and changing its name to the Ballone, the Barwon,
the Darling, and the Murray, runs right through the in-
terior ; many other great rivers empty themselves into the
mainstream, of which the Mclntyre, the Weir, or Jones’s
River, the Moonie, the Namoi, Warrego, and Castlereagh
are only a small portion. The great or main range, is in
some places many thousands of feet in height, and in other
places not more than twenty or thirty feet above the sur-
rounding country, being low sand ridges, the sea coast
rivers have this peculiarity, that they contain eols, whilst
the rivers of the interior, although they contain almost
every other kind of fish that the sea coast rivers contain,
still, they do not contain one single eel. I know one place
between the Ballone and the Dawson, where the waters are
separated by only one hundred feet of a low sand ridge ; in
one water-hole you can catch eels, and in the other water-
hole, there are no eels, and the range is not more than
twenty feet high between the two waters.’ - *
“ Well, Hume,” queried another shepherd— a new chum
then there must be a great fresh water lake in the in-
terior ; if as you say, the range runs around the entire coast
of Australia ?”
“No!” said Hume, I did say all around certainly ; but
there is a gap through which the waters find their way to
*We hare seen these waterholes, and can verify Hume’s statement; the water-
holes in question lie between the Merrivale and Mount Hutton.


the sea, I believe somewhere about lake Alexander. The
interior of the country has at one time been an immense
fresh water lake before the cataracts wore away the falls,
and laid bare all the immense plains of Liverpool, Darling-
Downs, Warrego, Barwon, the Namoi, and of another big
river that I have been upon, away to the nor-west, v and
also all the low country of the Murray. I know one place,
three hundred miles from the north-coast, and on the top
of a very high table land, under the main range, where
there are heaps of stonef fishes, like mussels, and whole
plains covered with broken wooden stone, and also trees of
stone, roots, trunks, and branchesf; and on another river
I have found stone bones of some sorts of animals ; and
upon the plains where the stone wood is, there are quanti-
ties of immense stone balls, water washed ; this part then,
has evidently been under the water at some time.
“Yes, Hume, 1 have noticed the same fact about the
eels, although no white man has ever seen the other things,
I expect, except yourself; now what do you think about
Jacky Jacky in this book, throwing a nugget of gold down
a tree, to find a 'possum ?”
“ Quite likely, if he could not find a stone, although he
could have struck the tree with the butt of the tomahawk,
and have applied his ear to the tree with the same result,
and so have saved the gold; or if he tvas a good black-
fellow he could have smelt him, if the tree had any holes
in the trunk.”
“ In all your wunderings, Hume, have you noticed any
difference in the habits or toolsj of the blacks ?”
“Very little ; nor yet in their language. I could learn
the yabber§ of any tribe in a couple of months, no matter
in what part of the country it might be. Then again, they
all use the nullah, || boomerang,** spear, and
heilamon,ff and stone tomahawk ; but only some of tho
* Hume must have meant the Barcoo, and Cooper S Creek,
t Hume here doubtless refers to Nardoo Station upon the Nogoa Hirer, and
also to Clark’s High Downs, Mantuan Station, Nogoa. We fancy that when he
speaks of stone bones, he refers to fossil remains upon Elgin Downs, Belyando
| Tools: Weapons. ? Yabber : Talk.
|| Nullah: Hunting club. If Wa,ddie : War Club.
** Boomerang : Semi-circular weapon, for throwing a great distance,
ff Heilamon : War shield.


coast tribes use the two-handed sword and wommera.”*
“ They bury their dead differently, too. I know one
tribe, that drive wooden pegsf through the hands and feet
of their dead, and then cut the belly open and stuff it full
of stones, tying it up again with a vine wound around the
body. Four men then take hold of the corpse, and dive to
the bottom of a waterhole with it, and peg it t > the bot-
tom; others put their dead in hollow trees; other tribes
lay them out upon tables of bark, and let the crows and
hawks, but not dingoes, J eat them ; others bury them in a
sitting posture, in sandy ground; and some tribes that I
have seen far away to the north, eat their old men and
women, their sick and dead, and enemies taken in battle.
And there is another thing that I have never yet seen in a
myall’s§ camp, the bow and arrow.”
“ And that is very strange,” said Mr. Simpson, “since
almost all the natives of the South Seas use them ; and the
Pelagian negroes, from whom these blacks are descended,
also use them ”
“Well, men!” said Mr. Simpson, looking at his watch,
“it is five minutes to twelve. Andy Hume, it is your
watch till two o’clock ; there is a heavy Scotch mist falling,
so I am going to bed ; I advise you all to do the same;
you will have to be up at peep of day to-morrow. We
shift our camp to-morrow towards Bingala.”
“1 am off, for one,” said Smithson. “So I am !” said
another. “ Me, too !” “ And me, too !” etcetera, etcetera
And the silence of sleep settled over the camp.
* Wommera : A socket held in the hand, in which the butt of the war
spear rests.
f The author once saw a tribe of Duck Creek, Bogan River blacks, bury a
warrior in this manner, upon the Darling River,
j Dingoes: Native dogs.
I Myalls : Wild blaekfellows.


CHAPTER XXVI.
TN WHICH THE READER IS ALLOWED TO READ A NEW CHUM’S
LETTER TO HIS MOTHER IN ENGLAND—SCENE THE LAST—ACT
THE LAST.
The New England Arms, Tenterfield.
My Dear Mother,
I dated my last letter from Sydney five months since ; but since
then I have undergone a vast amount of hardships and dangers.
An agent in Sydney hired me to proceed into the interior of this
country to work for twelve months, for a gentleman of the name of
Mortlake. After many weary weeks of travel, with a cart drawn by
twelve bullocks, we arrived at the estate of the gentleman named
above. After a week’s rest, to recruit my exhausted frame, I again
had to start away as overseer over two thousand monkeys.* You
must imagine how scarce men are in this country, when they have
to employ the very monkeys to mow the grass down, tor fear that it
would ignite, and burn down the valuable trees.
And still, scarce as the men are, I only get the paltry salary of
five and thirty pounds per annum, board and lodging included.
The monkeys that I told you about are very industrious; yet,
strange to say, the more grass that they mow down the latter they
get; and also, unlike monkeys in other parts of the world, they never
climb up the trees. ...
There is a gentleman of the name of Andrew Hume, travelling
with us. He is a cornstalk. The natives of New South Wales are
so called, because they do not in the least resemble a cornstalk,
being mostly short, stout men : but this country is full of these con-
trarities. Thus the trees turn their leaves to the sun ; the moon,
when at her zenith, is in the north, and so is the sun at mid-day ,
the east is upon your right hand, the west on your left, the north in
front of vou, and of course the south at your back. Thus, to con-
tinue these paradoxes, Mr. Hume tells me that the kangaroos that I
have often seen in the distance, have four legs, but only walk upon
two. They carry their offspring in a bag in front of them, which
said bag they hold in their arms, and they sometimes cross the im-
mense dry plains of the far interior, by filling their bags with water
to drink upon the route. Hume told me this, and he seems to know
everything about the habits of the animals of Australia.
The kangaroos have also a sharp pointed tail, with which they
dig up the hard ground in search of their food, wild carrots, yams,
etcetera. The emus, a kind of ostrich, never grow, so Hume
says, higher than fifteen feet. They have two wings, but like every-
thing else in this paradoxical country, they never fly with them ;
they lay their eggs upon a plain, and the heat of the sun hatches
them. I have myself seen a young emu with a clutch of twenty odd
* The new chum has evidently caught the colonial fever, or in plain English,
he is humbugging his maternal relative, since sheep are here meant.


chickens running after her, hut the one that T saw was only about
seven feet high from the feet to the head. Hume also tells me of
another bird, which he calls the wooselum bird; this bird has a very
sharp bill, and its feet are as hard as bones, and when struck smartly
together they emit a sharp whistling noise ; this bird flies to a great
height, and suddenly compressing its wings, it descends head fore-
most with terrific speed to the ground, driving its beak nine or ten
inches into the ground in search of worms ; its body is thus perpen-
dicular, and it keeps striking its feet together in the air, thus mak-
ing the whistling sound, of which I told you. I heard one of the
men in the camp the other day talking about this bird; he remarked,
“ Like the wooselum bird, that sticks its bill in the ground and
whistles through his tail.” We have also the bunyip, a wonderful
water otter; and Hume shot a platypus to-day and showed it to me ;
it is like a puppy in the body, with four webbed duck’s feet, two
wings, a beaver’s tail, and a goose s head and bill; now a countiy that
can produce such a monstrosity as this can produce anything.
I have not told you of half of the wonders of this wonderful land.
Away to the north, in the country just explored, there are alligators,
and already the people of the projected new colony of Cooksland
are nick-named alligator quenchers, from the rumour that the
juveniles of the north are in the habit of hunting for and sucking
alligators’ eggs.
1 must now conclude this letter, and hope soon to send you more
descriptions of the habits of the native blacks, and other animals
indigenous to the land.
I remain, my dear mother,
Your loving and dutiful son,
PETER GOLLOP.
*****
“ A glass of wine to your safe return, Mr. Gogger and
Mr. Brookes,” thus spoke Mr. Irving. And our hero and
Mark Brookes duly drank the pledge.
“ How is Mr. Devine this evening, madame?” enquired
Gilbert of Kitty Irving, as she came into the drawing room
in the evening. ...
“ Nearly convalescent, sir, the doctor says that he will
be about again in a few days.”
“We start to-morrow, madame, upon our homeward
route, Mr. Brookes and I, via Tenterfield and Grafton,
thence by the steamer to Sydney, and so home. Will you
be kind enough to give this packet to Mr. Devine when he
is perfectly recovered, not before ? thus saying Gilbert
handed the locket and chain, neatly folded up in paper, to
Kitty Irving.
* Cooksland: the name first proposed for Queensland, 1858.


“ Certainly sir,” replied Kitty, as she took the proffered
upon Billy the Bustler, and Ikey Jonas, and then let the
past go to that boui’ne from which no traveller returns.”
“ With all my heart, Mr. Irving, but you shall give the
toast.”
“ Yery well, it shall be a toast that I learnt years ago
from a little boy sitting under an apple tree in an orchard,
near Hornsey Wood, not far from London. Raise your
glasses gentlemen, you too, Kitty—‘ Honesty is the best
policy.’ ”
******
Mr. Tom Devine is once more about; he is always smiling
and whispering to himself, and as he touches a something
underneath his vest and next to his heart, his fa.ce assumes
a gentleness and a look of love, and Tom Devine is Bachelor
Tom no more.
Rosamond now dandles ajyoung Gilbert Gogger upon her
knees, for which young gentleman Captain Breaker often
pleads as his privilege to nurse.
Mrs. Noble is still in the prime of life, and happy.
Doctor and Mrs. Mortlake doat upon their darling, Rosa-
mond Helen, at one time baby Mortlake.
Harry Dawson and his wife are jogging along an
uneventful happy life ; several olive branches call them
papa and mamma.
Old Engineer Jack still presides over the pots and pans
in Avellanna kitchen, and spins his stock yarn of how he_
got them under the back verandah, there mates, etcetra,
as of yore.
Jack Neil has bought his old master out, and has become
an adept at the art of lambing down, and another
Pharaoh has arisen in the stable “ who knew not Joseph.”
Flash Harry, alias Cunning Harry, alias Lord Henry Fitz
Eustace, alias Captain Jack, is supposed to hold a subordi-
nate position in captain Gardiner’s gang.
And so, dear reader, having brought our history down to
anno domini, eighteen hundred and fifty-nine, we will
make our bow, and retire. Should our efforts, however,


192 GILBERT GOGGER J OR, AUSTRALASIA VERITAS.
be crowned with success, which we think that they deserve,
we will endeavour to relate the adventures and tragical fate
of Mr. Yandensploshen, in his insane attempt to discover
Leichhardt, in company with Andrew Hume, the intrepid
explorer; in which tale will be shown many facts relating
to the career of that daring ex-convict, not generally known;
also an account of Ben Hall, Morgan, Captain Thunderbolt,
Frank Gardiner, and all the other notorious scourges of the
Australian bush, since the Lambing Flat rush ; also an
account of the first rush to the Palmer, and life amongst
the Endeavour River cannibals.
Doctor Prussic will also re-appear, and Ben the coxswain
be united to Busan Dotty ; in fact, almost all of the dramatis
personas of this novel, will be re-introduced, in “ Sir Gilbert
Gogger ; or, Queensland Since Separation.”
And so, dear reader, we and our puppets will, with your
kind permission, for a while,
Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.
F. Cunuinghame & Co., Printers, 188 Pitt-street, Sydney.








