

GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM
AUD
City Characters.
BY SAMUEL A. MAGKEEVER,
THE AMERICAN" CHARLES DICKERS.
PUBLISHED AT THE
NATIONAL POLICE GAZETTE OFFICE,
NEW YORK.


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1380, by
KICHAED K. FOX,
In,tbe office of tLe Librarian of Congress, at Washington.


Samuel Anderson Mackeeyer.
HIS LIFE AED WHAT HE DID IE IT.
In presenting to the public this series of sketches, whose appearance originally in the National Police
Gazette achieved immediate and pronounced success, the publisher is actuated by a desire to rescue from
the oblivion into which similar fugitive works inevitably fall, some of the best productions of a pen so full of
present performance and of future promise, that its loss leaves a vast gap in local literature. Samuel
Anderson Mackeever was a historic figure in American journalism. He was a journalist only in the sense
that his labors were in the busy field of newspaperdom, instead of in that superior walk of literature in
which far inferior men win more extended fame, and to high rank in which he held the clearest title: that of
genius. Although his duties frequently imposed such tasks upon him, ho was by no means a reporter, in
the accepted sense of the word. He was a thoughtful student of human nature, an artist whose quick eye,
keen natural wit and fertile ancy combined to direct a master hand, which gilded all it touched. What
Gavami and Dickens did with pencil and pen for the two great cities of the Old World, he performed for the
metropolis of the New. His works constitute a gallery of word pictures which paint New York as it had
never been painted before. Beaming with light, sombre with shadow, merry in the May sunshine, shud-
dering in the February sleet, the varying phases of its teeming life, waking and sleeping, fair and foul, from
cellar to garret, from boudoir to brothel, move by in a panorama vivid in local color, strong and symmetri-
cal in form, instinct with the vitality which grows only under the artist hand. Few nooks and crannies of
either the town or the ways and doings of its people, escaped the busy chronicler. During the past three
years his department in the National Police Gazette and the third column of the front page of the Eoening
Telegram became the medium through which the general public found daily and weekly introduction to
itself. That they did not object to the way in which the master of ceremonies performed his work, the
popularity of the sketches proved. It was not, however, till death rang down the curtain, that the world at
large knew anything of the man whose pen had procured them so many pleasant hours, and even then it
was only through brief and necessarily more or less incorrect obituaries in the daily press.
In consideration of this fact, nothing could be more appropriate as an introduction to this little volume
than the story of its creator’s life.
Samuel Anderson Mackeever used to describe himself as born in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, by the
accident of a railway. His father and mother were on their way to Philadelphia, on September 16, 1848,
when the event occurred. It cost his mother her life.
His early years were spent principally in Philadelphia, where his father for a long term filled
the position of Superintendent of the House of Refuge. From time to time during his life, there
would crop up in the publications to which the dead journalist was eontributor the names of
full blown criminals whom he recollected as mere midgets of villainy when he made the round of
the jail at his father’s side. Once the writer and himself went into a Nassau street restaurant to
invite nightmare with a Bohemian compromise between a very late supper and early breakfast
after a hard night’s work. A flashily dressed young female with red-rimmed eyes and tear stained
cheeks, and two men were eating oysters at the next table. It was a mockery of revelry such as
'ne rarely sees. One of the men, a handsome, though not prepossessing young fellow, was talking very
loudly, cracking rank jokes which no one replied to. But he had his right wrist handcuffed to the other’sdeft,


half concealed by the table cloth. They were a western detective and a murderer whom he had hunted
down in New York, and captured in the course of a spree in which he and his paramour were squandering
the spoil of his crime. The two men were the developments of two Philadelphia House of Refuge boys.
One had turned thief, the other thief-taker, and one was leading his old comrade to the gallows. Mr. Mac-
keever was recognized by both, and over the beer-dabbled table, with the maudlin harlot sobbing as she
drank herself into hysterics, the murderer and the police spy toasted the man whom they remembered as their
old jailer’s son. and whom both knew and admired in his profession. The last act of the assassin’s life was
to address the rude.but graphically written story of his career of crime, on the eve of his execution, to New
York, with the expressed hope that Mr. Mackeever would have it published “ over my name.” The thief’s
vanity lived still at the foot of the gibbet!
The name of Samuel Anderson Mackeever figured on the roll of the Philadelphia High School at an age
when other boys are usually still puzzling their tangled wits over minor studies. He graduated early, and
w'th such honor that his diploma was signed by the entire Faculty of the “People’s College,” as Phila-
delphians are fond of calling it. He had applied for a position in the First National Bank of Philadelphia,
a: d when he went to interview the directors carried his diploma in its tin case as the best recommendation
he could advance. It proved such. He commenced a commercial career which ended in his becoming re-
ceiving-teller of the bank, a post he only left to embark in journalism.
In one of his graphic sketches, “ The Bank Clerk,” occurs a paragraph which probably is a reflection of
own experience during this portion of his career :
“The bank clerk lives constantly in an atmosphere of luxury. The men he meets during the day are
monied individuals, from the millionaire notch down. If he is in the cash department he handles greenbacks
so constantly that the bills passing through his hands actually lose their monetary value, and become to
him as so much merchandise.
“ His work is light and he is well paid for it. The situation is a life one if he behaves himself, and as the
old roosters drop from their stools into their coffins he advances along the line of promotion.
“In his leisure hours the bank clerk is a great society or sporting man, just as his fancy determines.
He lives up town in a first-class boarding house. He is very particular about his dress, generally wearing
the English style of clothes which the brokers affect. If he is not calling upon the ladies in the evening he is
at the theatre, or in some billiard hall where he has a private cue. Too frequently he doesn’t get home
until very late, and when this happens it is necessary for him to have a couple of brandies and soda in the
morning before he can get his hand in steady writing trim.”
The line of promotion advanced too slowly for the ardent fancied, blonde receiving teller, who found his
bright intelligence handicapped by the rigid rules of business. During his clerical career ho had two
passions. One was the stage, the other literature. To gratify the first he joined a leading amateur com-
pany. The other found employment in the production of various fanciful sketches contributed to the local
press. His first story which ever found its way into print was identical in plot with the chief motive of
Wilkie Collins’ “ Moonstone.” It was the experience of a somnambulist who plays detective on his own
identity and hunts his respected self down.
One of the most talented of the amateur company in which the stage struck bank clerk figured as a
bright light, was a young lady who on one occasion assumed the parted Columbia in a patriotic burlesque of
the literary actor, his first dramatic work, as he often laughingly said. In Columbia Mr. Mackeever found
the wife whose tender care sweetened his last hours, and in whose company he made the last silent journey,
from among the rustling palms to the ice-bound cemetery in Philadelphia where he found final rest.
His retirement from the bank occurred shortly after his early marriage, and a little while before the
birth of his only child. Then commenced his real battle of life, with no better weapon than his pen. At
one time, in order to earn the living he required, he was directly connected with four papers and a con-
tributor to as many more as he could find a market in. At various times he figured in the columns of every
paper in the Quaker City except the Public Ledger. Some of his earliesi* reportorial work was done on Fitz-
gerald’s City Item, then in its infancy. His best labors were devoted to the Morning Post, of which John D.
Stockton and Major A. B. Calhoun were respectively editor and publisher. An ardent friendship sprang up
between the editor and his young subordinate, an amity which ripened steadily until the former s death.
The Morning Post did not run a very extended course. Mr. Mackeever then became attached to other
papers, chief among them being the Inquirer. It was in the interest of several papers, however, that he
attended the Presidential Convention which resulted in the nomination of Horace Greeley. There he met
John Gilbert, another newspaper man of local fame, now an attache of the staff of the Philadelphia
T.mes. After the Convention they went to Washington and thence to Long Branch, on business for their
respective journals. There the mad fancy of a vagabond trip to Europe took possession of them. They had
hardly money to pay for the passage, but they went on, trusting to fortune, and landed in Liverpool with a
single sovereign between them.
During the passage they had made the acquintance of a young Spaniard of wealth, Senor Santago De
Lima. The young Spaniard had a very imperfect knowledge of English, and was altogether likely to fall an
6
OF SAMUEL ANDERSON MACKEEVER.


easy prey to the sharpers of London. He requested his friend Mackeever, in whose vast knowledge he possessed
unbounded confidence, to act as cicerone for him. It was a burst of sunrise on a dark future. Mackeever, who him-
self knew London only from the books of his favorite author, Dickens, accepted the responsibility at once. “ How-
ever little I knew,” he used to say, “it was more than he did.” From London they went to Paris, whence the
grandee returned home to Barcelona. The Bohemians were left to shift for themselves in the very heart of Bohemia,
ignorant of the language, and within a few francs of bankruptcy.
Thanks to a loan from an American visitor whom they had met at home they managed to reach Boulogne!
There the vice consul furnished them with a passage to Southampton. They landed in England with a gold-
headed cane and their wits as their only assets.
Gilbert's overcoat had long since found its way into the bowels of the Temple, to figure as a relic in some Paris-
ian old do’ shop. Mackeever retained his, a natty, mouse-colored affair, which a shop-seller consented to sacrifice
half a sovereign for. The cane they kept to give them their start in life in London. They set out by the high road
for the Capital, nearly 200 miles away. The record of the trip would fill a volume, It was a tramp against hunger
lightened only by the most determined hopefulness of two stout hearts.
* One of its brightest episodes oocurred as they were nearing London. Their money had given out, they were hun-
gry, despairing, almost desperate enough to steal. Mackeever in addition was ill, and scarcely able to crawl along at
a snail’s.paco. A tramp tinker’s wife squatted on the edge of a ditch, bathing a bruised forehead and a black eye,
her liege lord, having performed the marital duty of inflicting these vigorous caresses on her, was stalking off in the
distance, leaving her to follow with his heavy kit.
Sorry as their plight was, the two famishing men found hers so much more sorrowful that they stopped to cheer
her. They shouldered her kit for her, and as they strolled along in company she learned their story. Under her
grime and degradation burned some of the divine fire of true womanhood, a remnant the blows of her brutal master
had failed to extinguish in blood. As they parted she slipped something into Mackeever’s hand. It was her last
half-crown, and she pushed on, empty-pocketed, to sup doubtless on a beating from her furious lord, and the
memory of an act of charity done in good time.
They spent their first night in London houseless, in the rain, snatching a brief shelter in a deep doorway, or
under the arch of Temple Bar, always, however, to experience, like Poor Jo, the nudge of a policeman’s mace and the
command, “ Come now, yen move on.” Next day they pawned the cane and slept with full stomachs in a “thrip-
psnny doss.” When the cane was devoured and slumbered away they found quarters for a night or two in St. James’
Park. Day followed day in the same dreary succession. They wandered about, wearing their hopes out on the
stones of London, which they began to think were no harder or more merciless than men’s hearts.
In their loiterings they began to haunt the docks, with a vague fancy that they might find one of the whole-
souled skippers they had read about, or, at least, obtain an opportunity to work their passage home. None of the
skippers seemed to be in London, and they were not promising enough sailors to be jumped at. Among the ships
they boarded in their apparently hopeless quest, and now they boarded every one they came across, was an old New
Fork and London packet, the Rhine. The captain, inspired with sympathy by Mackeever’s condition, for the merry
Bohemian’s hard life had told heavily on him, consented to give him a passage to New York, but for himself alone.
He refused to desert his friend, and a compromise was at length effected by which he shipped as cook’s mate and
Gilbert, whose athletic strength stood him in good stead, as seaman before the mast. They signed the papers, re-
ceived their sovereign advance, spent it in a feast of congratulation in a waterside public house, and went to sea
without a farthing in their pockets, but rich in the knowledge that they were homeward bound.
The passage was a long and hard one. The vessel carried a ’tween decks crammed with emigrants of the rough-
est soft, and the cook’s mate had his hands full. Unaccustomed labor and exposure did their work. When the
“Rhine” came up New York Bay Mackeever was completely broken down, a phantom, lost to identification in a wild
cloud of yellow beard and hair.
They found a landlady up-town with enough confidence in human nature to lease them a room on a week’s
credit, in spite of their rags and misery. In fact, it was the misery that worked it. Mackeever’s solemn assertion
that he would die on the doorstep scared her. There was a store in this room. On it they cooked enough food to
keep them alive, procured by some mysterious means known to Gilbert alone, for his friend was too sick to go
abroad. While in bed he dictated two articles, describing their trip across the Atlantic and their journey back.
These were sent to the Evening Telegram, then under the editorial management of Felix J. Defontaine. They were
accepted and Mr. Mackeever received S2O for the two.
It was the first money he had ever earned in New York.
He followed his first articles in the Telegram up with others. His winning manner and eminently mag-
netic joviality made him many friends at once. A very few weeks proved him to be a valuable reporter and
an able scribe. The consequence was that he was soon actively employed. His first real reportorial work
ere was performed for the Sunday Mercury, then under the managing editorship of Dr. Wood. It was a
nraotice with * he unat tached reporters on the daily papers to apply for Saturday night assignments on the
5
LIFE OF SAMUEL ANDERSON MACKEEVER.


Mercur y 0 n the night John Scannell shot John Donohue, Mr. Mackeever had made his first application for
work There was none. He was lounging in the office alone, hesitating to encounter the inclement night be-
tore Gilbert, who had been sent on a mission, returned, when news of the murder was reaeiyed. “ The Doctor
looked at me ”he said, “ and shook his head dubiously. Then he asked me, < Young man, do you think you
could report ’a murder ?’ ' I could tell better if I had the chance,' I answered. He gave me the chance and I
never heard him say he regretted it. I who had been loafing in the office without car-fare home rattled up-
town in a coupe, and with the prospect of a good night’s work, which it proved to be. for I made over $25
out of it." . .. ~
During his first couple of months in metropolitan journalism, Mr. Mackeever was a space writer on the
nieqram and He, aid, and a contributor of random articles to other papers, notably the Sun. He was then
employed on the Telegram at a salary, doing much extra work on the Herald. During this period he made
his several balloon voyages with Donaldson as special for the latter paper, becoming also a volunteer for the
Daily Graphic balloon voyage. In connection with Colonel James B. Mix he furnished many letters to the
Chicago Times during the Beecher trial. The same gentleman was associate editor with him of ex-Warden
Sutton’s “ History of the Tombs." The resignation of the Telegram dramatic critic led to his assumption <9t
that post, which he held with honor till he left New York to return no more. He now commenced the
nublication of a series of sketches on the editorial page of the paper similar to " City Characters” he con-
tributed later under the mm de guerre of Colonel Lynx to the National Police Gazette. The Telegram
series were styled •* Popular Pictures,” and were an immense hit. He also began the publication of those
spicy editorial paragraphs for which the Telegram soon became famous.
In 1874 Mr. Mackeever attached himself to the editorial staff of the late Prank Leslie. He was at various
times editor of Happy Homes, the Lady’s Magazine, the Young Men of America and last of The Day’s Doings. His
pen elevated this last out of the profoundest mire of feeble lewdness into rank as one of the brightest sen-
sational papers in the world. His co-editors at various times here were Mortimer Thompson, better known
as Q. K. Philander Doesticks, P. 8., whose most intimate friend he was to the last. Mr. C. Edmond Pillet,
now of the Sunday Hews editorial staff, and with whom he afterwards collaborated as dramatist in the play
of “Nathan Hale,” Sydney Kosenfeld, the dramatist. Frank Norton, now proprietor and editor of The Era.
Thomas Powell, partner of John Brougham in The Lantern, and various other of the genial comedian’s liter-
ary ventures, Bracebrydge Hemying (Jack Harkaway) and a score of others equally weU known. With one and
aU of these his relations were of the most affectionate sort. In fact, throughout his life, his acquaintances
were ever his friends. He died without an enemy if such a miracle is possible in this politely hypocritical age.
Although he was compeHed to relinquish his reportorial connection with the Telegram by his labors at
Prank Leslie’s Mr. Mackeever continued to fulfil his duties as dramatic critic and paragrapher. In 1872 he
severed his connection with Mr. Leslie, assuming the work of providing the Telegram with the now famous
third column sketches. At about the same time he became a contributor to the National Police Gazette
with his successful serial, “ The Phantom Friend.” The series of sketches now famous as “ Glimpses oi
Gotham ” followed, as did also the “ City Characters ” and the “ Midnight Pictures.” It is from these that
the selections which follow have been culled. It was Mr. Mackeever’s intention to have edited them him-
self Unfortunately, fate has called upon a friend’s hand to do the work of that which is forever still.
In addition to his regular employment. Mr. Mackeever was continually engaged in various works in
which his versatile genius was especially demanded. He wrote lectures and songs, edited books and corres-
■ponded with out-of-town papers, notably the Philadelphia Times, whose first New York correspondent he
was. Although a marvelously facile and rapid writer, a man whose train of thought seemed to run freely,
no matter how adverse circumstances were, or what surroundings hampered him, he had but little time for
rest until his increasing illness rendered it imperative. His dramatic work especially entrenched on his
time. After a hard day’s labor with the pen came the evening at the theatre, the excitement of the play
and the entracte, so that by bed-time but a few hours of rest remained. A constitution of iron would have
been shattered far more quickly than tough flesh and blood succumbed.
About a year ago Mr. Mackeever began to experience the necessity of a change. To avoid the rigor of a
Northern Winter, he pitched on Florida as the most convenient place of retirement. His wife accompanied
him their child going to Philadelphia to her grandmother’s care. Although his connection with the
Telearam continued his health permitted little labor, and half a dozen letters made up the sum of his contri-
butions to its columns. His sketches for the Gazette continued uninterruptedly, and in such spare time
as remained to him between this work and his battle with disease, he added a few chapters to a novel of
local life, on which his ambit? on was set.
As a dramatic critic, Mr. Mackeever made a host of friends in the profession, and nothing but want of
time -prevented his name becoming a marked one in the list of American playwrights. His dramatic
feuilletons were among the best of their kind. He contributed them at various times to the Frank Leslie
publications, to the Arcadian, whose chief writer he was, under Louis Engels’ management, and to the
National Police Gazette. , . ~ .
Mount Vernon Cemetery, in Philadelphia, was the scene of his interment, under the auspices of his


•wife’s family. His own family are now located in Washington. The funeral was attended by a committee
of the New York Press Club, of which he was one of the founders, and members of the Philadelphia press.
But one strange face was visible at the funeral. It was that of a hard-featured man of sixty, whom no one
knew, and who left the cemetery as quickly as he had come. The presence of this mourner is a reminder o
a curious episode in the dead man’s career.
Some years ago he became possessed of a fancy to live in a tenement house, to find out, by actual con-
tact with them, something about the poor, whose lives, so full of the hard romance of poverty, he was so
fond of picturing. He found a room in an up-town tenement on the East Side. The proprietor was ami -
ter-of-fact Irishman, who was popularly believed never to smile. He made friends with his lodger and was
reformed. He learned to laugh, and even to crack jokes on his own account, and, altogether, developed in o
asocial animal wonderful to behold. A year later the writer was invited by Mr. Mackeever to attend a
wedding up-town. The bridegroom was the tenement house proprietor. Now that he had discovered what
his old lodger was, he worshipped him almost as a Polynesian savage does his idol. He knew more about
his works than Mackeever did himself, and was particularly fond of writing to him suggestions for new sub-
lets. It was he who traveled to Philadelphia to pay his last tribute of respect to his dead friend.
It was this charm of spirit and of manner which made Samuel Anderson Mackeever what he was a
Benjamin of literature. Bright as his works were, they were but a reflection of his sunny nature. Sterling
as they were, they were no purer gold than his own warm heart.


glimpses of gotham*


A. BUCKINGHAM SHADOW DANGER




LADIES WHO WANT MOEEY.
I remember among other pretty bits of poetry which I
read in my books at school, was one about the robin and
the disastrous effect which the approach of winter was
supposed to have upon him.
There was one verse which began :
The fierce wind doth blow.
And we shall have snow l
What will the poor robin do then ?
Poor thing I
I was of an exceedingly sensitive nature, and the tough
out-look for the robin used to affect me wonderfully, but
as I gradually ascertained that they either went south on
the air-line, or put up with relatives in snug quarters
north, I ceased to worry.
But I never pick up a New York paper and read of the
preparations, more or less extensive, which certain
human robins are making for the winter but what I think
of the bird whose prospective sad fate used to cause my
childish tears to flow down my little nose, and thence
drop a sympathetic splash to the page of the book before
me.
Who are the New York robins ?
They are the shrewd poor, the sentimental hard-up, the
dead-broke men and women who have no money to buy
sealskins and grate-fires, but who appreciate those
creature comforts quite as ■well as the pampered people of
fortune.
Where do you find these bird-tracks f In the news-
papers’ advertising columns.
It was Henry Ward Beecher who said that the most
interesting part of the New York Herald was the adver-
tisements, and I am frequently inclined to believe him.
To-day I agree with him particularly, for I have been out
robin shooting, and have a bag full of game for my read-
ers.
Only don’t let the printer make it all into a “ pi.”
The favorite stamping ground of the robins is the
financial department of the paper.
Bight under the head of a bonailde advertisement about
borrowing SIO,OOO (as if anybody ever had so much money
all simultaneously), I catch my first bird.
It is a yonng widow, and a modest one, for she only
wants SIOO. And she doesn’t desire it for nothing. On
her part she contracts to furnish a handsome room, with
board. She signs herself “ Discreet.” A discreet young
widow tendering a handsomely-furnished room,
with board, is a rare combination of earthly happiness.
There will be no trouble in her getting the money. Hard
and harsh and cynical as the world is, there are dead
loads of bald-headed philanthropists just aching to help
such a worthy person along.
Next, we have a gentleman who states that he was once
a dazzling light on the stock exehange. He is free to con
fess that speculation ruined him, but although it robbed
him of his diamond studs and his coupe , and his credit at
Pelmonico’s, not to mention his box at the theatre, and
his standing in the club, it did not, thank God, as it could
not under any circumstances, take away from him his
extensive knowledge of the ins and outs of the street.
He might not have been able to hold on to the colossal
fortune he was rapidly amassing for himself, buthisvery
sad experience has been of priceless value to him, and he
is now ready,being in possession of some exclusive points,
to put a man with $20,000 in the way of making a
million.
This is surely a bird. I might spell it a “ robbin’.”
Ten to one this lump of sugar lands a blue-bottle. Some
back-country yokel, with a whetstone in his pocket, will
go in and purchase a vast deal of knowledge, if he doesn t
get away with anything else.
Softly 1 Here’s a nice birdie. It's a young, refined lady
who wants a hundred from a refined, honorable' gentle-
man. “No triflers need apply. ’
She wouldn’t take that money from a greasy, unrefined
pork-butcher, would sl;e ? Oh, no I I shouldn’t wonder
now if she wouldn’t prefer the money perfumed, a hun-
dred (scents) to the dollar, as it were.
In the same neighborhood I detect the “te-weet” of a
young lady of twenty years who wants a hundred until
she is of age. She also wants it from a gentleman.
Strange, isn’t it, that you never see an advertisement like
this :
A MODEST YOUNG WOMAN, FINANCIALLY EMBAR-
rassed, would like to borrow SIOO from another mod-
est young woman who has it to lend. Address, “ Mock
Turtle. ”
But you never do see such advertisements, whether it
is strange or not I must investigate this branch of the
subject.
What have I next in my game-bag ? Another refined
bird—refined perhaps in the furnace of misfortune. She
has a house, but she’s devilish hard-up. You can tell that
by the emphasis she puts on her prayer for immediate as-
sistance. Altogether this Is a mysterious case. Her
gentlemen must be wealthy. She names no amount. Per-
haps she wants thousands. I shan't answer that one.
One young woman contemplates housekeeping, and she
wants an elderly gentleman to assist her. She doesn’t
state what he is to do. Perhaps he is to wash dishes, fetch
up coal and answer the bell. It would simplify matters
all around if these birds who are in quest of winter quar-
ters would be more explicit. I know lots of elderly gentle,
men who would feel awkward and embarrassed if they
had to call personally and talk over an advertisement like
that. She signs herself “Marrion.” Ha, ha 1 A light
breaks upon me. She is a “ Marrion ” yonng party, and
the elderly gentleman is to assist.
There are any quantity of refined, elegant, handsome,
modest widows, married women and young girls who
want to sell pawn tickets. In these cases there are many
that are of genuine distress, but in a great number of in-
stances the design is to effect one interview and trust to
luck for enlisting the sympathy of the caller.
Many a proud woman who once entertained in regal
style and flashed through her drawing-room like a be-
jeweled comet has been forced to realize on her gems and
then on the flimsy memorandums of her hard luck.
These are romances of life in New York that have no
affiliation with the sharpers and pretty swindlers I have
called robins. And yet you can scarcely style them swin-
dlers. There are few of the discreet widows and refined
young women but who would like to pay back in coin, if
they had it. Not being possessed of that very useful


article, they mint their smiles only too frequently and
stamp them with a kiss.
Some try the pathetic, which is business in its way,
just as much as the cold advertisement of a lot of pig iron
for sale. Voila the case of the “young lady” who is
“ painfully embarrassed.” Ah 1 I have suffered from this
pain myself I It is a deplorable tightness in the chest.
She wants a hundred, also, and desires that the lender
shall trust to her honor.
Why do they all want a hundred dollars, or most of
them t Let me see:
Dress
Bonnet
Coat 2 j5
Shoes “
Stockings (of the right stripe) g
Gloves
Lingerie 12
SIOO
There you are. Now how do you suppose I found all
this out? Simplest thing in the world. I gave a lady
friend SIOO and told her to see what kind of robin plumage
she could get for it.
The more I have reflected upon the transaction the
more I am convinced that it certainly was the simplest
thing in the world. But this is the age of materialism.
You must pay for precise knowledge. Then, again, X am
a philanthropist.
Not infrequently the sick are appealed to. The pocket
is approached, in fact, through the stomach or the liver.
One lady of the most appalling culture, who is bang-up on
all kinds of chronic diseases, wants a “ sufferer” to assist
her. This is very fine. Think of gradually getting well
and cheering a cultured heart at the same time I In these
cases I presume the bleeding process is resorted to exten-
sively.
Just now there are a good many robins who would like
to make themselves cosy for the winter by selling their
mining stock shares at a tremendous sacrifice. J'hey
wouldn’t do this under any circumstances it they didn't
have to go to the south of France for their health. Is the
mine solid f Look at that red-streaked map on the wall
and that huge nugget of quartz on the window-sill 1 Why,
the mines of Peru are catch-penny swindles alongside
of it
Some of the ladies are not “cultured,” or “refined,” or
“modest,” but only “genteel.” They want to go into
business in a small way, and would like some honorable
gentleman, etc.
I like the ringing tone of the young woman who is not
even “ genteel,” but simply a young woman “who can
adapt herself to anything.” She wants $250.
A widow will explain all about it at an interview. One
hundred and fifty dollars will take her from the slough of
despond and put her upon the pinnacle of happiness.
A matrimonial agency will condescend to take In a part-
ner for SSOO. There is a chance. This is certainly the
matrimonial season. Everybody, who isn’t, should be
getting married. My friend Alphy, of Spain, is going to
buy another ticket in the amatory lottery, and no doubt
his example will be largely followed.
Injustice to Emeline, between whom and myself at the
present moment there is an honorable coolness, I will
state that the matrimonial establishment referred to is
not the one in Williamsburgh I wrote of.
It still flourishes. She has enlarged it by adding a
divorce bureau.
An inventor asks for means to help him bring to perfec-
tion a machine that will just knock the spots out of every
thing. He doesn’t gay what the idea is, but if you invest
gated you would probably discover another perpetual
motion or a Keely motor.
By the way what became of Keely f He lived a long
while on that pint of water. I consider him a boss
robin, a regular turkey buzzard.
A dressmaker wants a “ Silent Partner.” He's to say
nothing, and pay the bills.
And so they go on until, the female list exhausted, you
come upon the people who have business to sell. These ar<
a very remarkable species of the robin. You can have no
idea of the vast amount of wealth that is ready to pour
into the coffers of the man who has sums of mone'
ranging from SSO to $50,000 to put up, until you read thei
cards.
That’s the amount you pay to see the hand.
The preposterous number of oyster saloon, milk routes,
bakeries, gin mills and barber shops, that will just make
the eternal fortune of the one starving there now, and
the other fellow thatonghtto come with S3OO, are enough
to stagger you.
Some of the “ads” are densely mysterious. Such is
the ease with the one where a man of “ nerve ” is asked
for. He is to have $3,000, and is to “make an operation”
that will yield SIO,OOO “ immediately.”
As if to tantalize these poor robins the same columns
are crowded with the blatant offers of capitalists vho
have money to loan on anything and everything. And
yet the man with the gold-mine in the oyster saloon, and
the capitalist who is after a gold-mine rarely come to-
gether.
In other parts of any of our great advertising dailies
you will find the notices of philanthropists, who are on
the look-out for poor little robins, and who wish to be-
friend them.
The Spanish gentleman who wants to meet an American
lady for mutual improvement and learn English is of this
kind, this very kind.
Ho you not remember the case of the pretty shop-girl
who taught the rich Spaniard English in a west side
restaurant, where they have elegant private supper
rooms ? Well, she was a robin, working hard
week in a store for a pittance ; and she seemed glad
enough, when the “ fierce wind did blow,” and it looked
like snow to avail herself of the opportunities offered
her.
If I remember correctly the father raised quite a fuss
and brought the case into the courts, but the weak girl
had tasted champagne and quail. You couldn’t get her
back to pork and beans.
There is no question but that nine-tenths of these femi-
nine pipings of distress in the “ Financial columns ” of
the papers are mere blinds, and bold manoeuvres to get
acquainted with men of money.
They will always be so construed at any rate by the
men of money who take the trouble to answer them, and
if I possess any fair readers X tell, them plainly now that
it they resort to this method of raising the wind, they
must suffer the broadest construction to be placed upon
their action.
I have a friend who took the trouble, “just out of curi-
osity ” he said, to follow up one of the advertisements.
The distressed one wanted but SBO in order together
trunks from the rapacious landlady, who was holding
them as;collateral for board had and enjoyed.
The lady was a nice talker, a real fluent one, and in-
terested my friend from the start Her husband, she
said, was not long dead, and she was endeavoring to get
along by herself without appealing to that haughty


family, supposed to be rolling in luxury somewhere
from which her marriage had estranged her.
This resolute, noble spirit had its effect upon the chival-
ric gentleman.
“ You’re an old cynic, Paul,” he said to me one night
in my rooms, “ that’s what you are. I’m glad I gave her
the money. She’s a square woman.”
“ Yes, she’s a square woman,” I repeated, “ but she’ll
come round.”
He laughed at the double entendre and left me. The next
time I saw him he wanted $l,OOO.
“ But what for?” I asked, after giving the address of a
man I thought might accommodate him.
“ For her.”
“ For whom f”
“Why the woman that wanted the $BO. Don’t you re-
member f I’ve got to pay certain bills, you know.”
“ You don’t mean to tell me that the square woman—”
“Came round? Yes. I do.” And away he dashed,
looking more troubled and careworn than I had ever
seen him.
Now. I am going to ask a favor of you. Please insert
the following “ad” for me and charge to Profit and
Loss:
YTTON’T SOME GENTEEL, PLUMP, PRETTY, DISCREET
VY young widow come and see a painfully embarassed
Bohemian and loan him $l,OOO, trusting to his honor.
Address, P. P., Police Gazette.
I want to revolutionize this business and that’s the way
to do it. Heretofore it has been all one-sided. I too am a
a robin, “ poor thing.”
FIFTH AYEKUE ON SUNDAY.
There isn’t a man in the country—and I’ll put $5OO up
at the Clipper office —■which I believe is the usual “toot”
when you bet—to back it, who has a greater reverence
for the genuine article of Religion than I have.
And there isn’t a man who has a greater abhorrence
of the fraudulent material which you too frequently have
dealt out to you by the metropolitan pastors.
I was led into this train of thought by what X saw and
heard as I walked down Fifth Avenue last Sunday just as
the matinees were coming out—l beg pardon, just as the
congregations were breaking up.
What did I see f
I saw New York female loveliness in all its Fall glory,
and an expensive glory it is too. I saw the sun catch up
the sheen of the diamonds, and multiply their magnifi-
cence until the imagination as to their cost was perfectly
staggered.
I saw pretty women, pretty enough to eat, pretty
enough to make a man think that perhaps there is some-
thing in cannibalism after all, bowing to other pretty
women from carriage windows, and kissing their hands,
gloved out of sight, to tho agony of the young men on the
sidewalk, who acknowledged the courtesy with a bow.
I wish I could give you a description of the Fall style of
New York bow, but I am afraid that my pen is not equal
to the task. It makes me sadder when I reflect upon the
vast number of young sports in those rural towns where
the Gazette penetrates, who would be only too glad to
practice it to perfection behind the barn, and then try it
in all its full-fledged loveliness upon the Maud Mullers of
the vicinity who gather on Sundays at the meeting
house.
All that I can remember of it is that the right arm goes
up suddenly, like the patent iron hook that snatches the
mail bags at unimportant stations, and grabs the hat.
This is carried up about afoot in a vertical line, and
held there while “ with moderate haste you could tell ’
a lie, or a hundred, either, to give Shakespeare with a
little altering.
While this is being done the body bends at the pelvis
(be particular about the pelvis), until the spinal line of
direction is departed from at least tea degrees, but not
nore.
Then tho hat comes down, the arm gets to the side again
with military precision, and the vertebra) stack them-
selves up once more like bone chips to be swept in by the
dealer.
And so they are swept in, and the dealer’s name is
Death.
But this is getting into outside business, this is dis-
counting the game. What else did I sec t
I saw hosts of young men who were at tho Sixth Avenue
dance houses, and in worse places, the night before.
A Turkish bath, and two or three stiff brandy cocktails
had given them nerve enough to see the girls home
whom they are trying to marry, and purely for specula"
tive reasons, but the tell-tale flush of the cheek, and tho
false lustre of the eye, the nervous, debonnair use of the
hand and cane, could not deceive so old an observer
as P. P.
You can rest assured that they didn’t stay to dinner,
and that once round the corner from the prospective
fathers-in-laws’ residences, they made all haste to reach
the club, sink into a chair, strike the bell, and scrawl on
the pad offered by the waiter an order for brandy and
soda.
Since these young men do not go to church themselves,
except when an actor or actress is buried, or there is a
swell wedding, perhaps my remarks, which are intended
to point to tho sham quality of the religion of the period
—I do not mean religion in its generic sense, but in the
red-plushed pew exhibition of it—do not apply to them.
But still they form part of the pageant which makes
Fifth Avenue and Broadway so entertaining to me at
this season, when everyone is bound to have his or her
fall harness on, and the young men who still cling to the
straw hat sit pondering in their dismal rooms upon the
various ways of blowing out the penny dip of light.
To some it’s a chandelier with electric points of flaming
beauty. They are the ones I admire, and I am afraid
envy, when I see them returning from their devotions.
Tho horses step out bravely ; the well-appointed car-
riages flash in the sun ; the gay throng on tho trotioir have
the seraphic smile of beings who have just been told that
their seats are taken in Heaven’s best circle. Ah !it is
grand, it is inspiriting, but it is a terrible masquerade.
What do I hear f
13
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


I hear men who have just listened to sermons on the
advisability of laying up treasures in Heaven, discussing
the sudden rise in stocks in Wall street and making plans
for the “ puts ” and “ calls ” of the morrow.
Young ladies who are strolling along together gossip
about the bonnets and dresses, and analyze the merits of
the various matinees they attended the afternoon pre-
vious.
It is all the world, the flesh and the devil knows what
else beside religion.
There is none of that, no pondering over the text, no
going home in quiet meditation. Spiritual duty ceased
when the doxology was sung, and the last note of the
heavily-salaried soprano floated out from the choir
gallery.
What do we find in the choir f
We find a few ladies and gentlemen, some of whom may
have been singing “ Pinafore ” at a ‘ shneid ’ theatre on
the Saturday night, furnishing a variety of fancy music
that ranges from the measured cadences of old-time so-
lemnity to the melodious frippery of the Italian opera.
These are hired people, and it is not their business to
pay any attention to the preaching. As a general rule
they don’t. Those who do not stay awake to flirt, or
read a mysteriously produced novel, get behind a music
stand, and go to sleep.
I have heard of games of suchre being played in an or-
gan loft, but I prefer not to believe the stories. My opin-
ion of the empty forms of devotion indulged in at present
is unfavorable enough as it is.
The singers in big churches are all professionals. They
appear in opera and concert, and are always on the look-
out to cash their notes into greenbacks. I know two or
three church tenors and have always found them jolly
good fellows. They like a drink almost as well, but not
quite, as they like two drinks, and on more than one
occasion I have wondered, as the artist staggered from
the Sunday side door of the comer saloon to keep his
church engagement, how he ever managed to get through
with it. \
Sometimes they do make mistakes. There was my
friend Dunn for instance, a baritone. He’s dead now,
and it won’t harm him to tell the story, provided Ex-
Superintendent Kiddle doesn’t go repeating it at a seance.
Bob Dunn, in addition to being the baritone of an east-
side chureh was a singer in a Prince street “ Free and
Easy.” Those of the brethren who have attended such
entertainments know that Wednesday and Saturday
evenings are the occasions when the fun is indulged in.
Bob at the time I speak of was counted a rival of
Johnny Roach in his pathetic rendition of “ Muldoon,”
and on the disastrous Sunday to which I have reference,
Mr. Dunn was asleep in the organ loft after the opening
services. He had not reached his home until 4 a. m. , and
even at that hour he had insisted upon Mrs. Dunn getting
up to eat a Yarmouth bloater, and a welsh-rarebit which
he had brought home for her.
When you find a man about midnight commencing to
develop a desire to take home to the “ old lady ” some
pigs’-feet, or a box of fried oysters, you may rest assured
that the liquor he has taken has floated his conscience
from its moorings.
Mr. Dunn slumbered as I have said all through the ser- 1
mon. But he was not idle—he was dreaming.
He was In the Prince street saloon again. The tobacco i
smoke hung about like a yellow cloud shifted hither and (
yon by the waiters as they rushed around delivering i
“tobys” of ale, ‘‘hot scotches,” “shandy-gaff,” and 1
other orders. The tenor of the evening had just sat down
after singing something about meeting his darling girl | ;
* when the little stars were a-shining, and the little birds
’ were a-singing.
5 It was Bob’s turn. It was really Bob’s turn in church,
and the organist was shaking him by the shoulder. He
* rose to his feet and looking about him cried:
c “ Order gentlemen, if you please. ”
Then clearng his throat he began:
j. “ Come and see me, I’ll trate ye dacent,
I'll make ye drunk, and I’ll fill yer can,
, Sure, when I walk the strate
Says each one I mate
, There goes Muldoon, he’s a solid man.”
There was perhaps just as much religious warmth in
Mr. Dunn’s little verse as in the florid singing which had
preceded it, but the management of the church didn’t
think so, and Mr. Dunn’s services were dispensed with.
It is only a question of time when we shall have a full
brass band in the church gallery. As long as we are going
to depart from the simple, soul-stirring hymns and psalms
of our fathers, I am decidedly in favor of it.
What is the use of going half the waj' as they do over
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, where Arbuckle toots on the
key-bugle. If the key-bugle has a place in a choir gallery,
so has a Addle, and I am sure that there is as much the-
ology in a bass-drum as there is in a French horn.
There’s as much wind anyhow, and that reminds me of
Talmage.
If there is a cause for this undeniable sham which we
are making of our religious duties, attending to them pre-
cisely as we do to mundane affairs, and buying our pews
at auction as we buy pools at a horse race, it must be
found in the mouthings of such mountebanks as Talmage.
He robs religion of all dignity at the start. Instead of
a black-gown he put on a jester’s cap of bells, and where
we look for the grave diction of a man impressed with
his subject we find the blatant braying of an ass.
The familiar manner in which Talmage alludes to the
Almighty, Is something that actually appals me even.
You might judge that they had belonged to the same lire
company together, or had been associated just as inti-
mately some other way.
He would have us believe that his transatlantic trip
was a complete ovation. There is no use denying that he
preached to immense audiences, but then you must re-
collect that one fool makes many, and that Great Britain
has always been noted for producing an immense quan-
tity of crack-brained individuals who will drop their work
and run for half a day after a five-legged mule if one hap-
pens along
The sensible papers saw through Talmage at once, and
in some that I have just been reading he received a terri-
ble analysis. There certainly should be a law against
such men bringing‘discredit upon an entire nation by
working the game of their own aggrandizement.
I feel so badly about it myself that I shall not go to Eng-
land for several seasons yet, not until they have forgotten
our long-legged friend.
Beecher is somewhat accountable for the mixed condi-
tion of affairs in religion, although in an entirely different
way from the Tabernacle wind-mill. The Kev. Henry Ward
is a man of brains—too much brains in one quarter of his
head, and his intellectual strength is undeniable. He
preaches magnificently, but when you come to think it
all over you find it merely a lecture. He is vague, shad-
owy and non-committal in his creed. You get a general
idea that your duty on this earth is to do good and b*
happy, and that everything will be squared hereafter.
He preaches among other things, “ that you shall love
your neighbor.”


Now if your neighbor is cross-grained and unlovable, if
you can’t get your love invested on your neighbor, you
must love your neighbor’s wife, and the maid-servant
within his back-door.
Beecher tried this plan himself. He wanted to love
Theodore. No doubt he did. But Theodore was cold and
distant, especially his head, which was extremely dis-
tant
So he turned to Elizabeth, and with what results we al-
ready know.
Now take the idiocy of Talmage, the heterodoxy of
Beecher, and the shoddy atmosphere of nearly all our
fashionable churches, and you have a very good theory
for the present state of religious matters.
I repeat what I said at the beginning of this article,that
I have an abiding respect for true devotion, but I think a
small-sized crab-net would be large enough to land all
that could be found in a survey of the crowds that I met
walking home from church through the soft sunlight of
last Sunday morning.
It is getting to be a question of show, just as the silver
plate is trotted out on state-dinner occasions.
Pews are knocked down like horses at “ Tattersalls.”
and are upholstered in opera-box fashion.
The men attend as a matter of social form, and women
turn the church into a millinery bazar where the styles
can be studied from behind the barricade furnished by a
gilt-edged and Russia-leather prayer book.
The choir singers flirt, sleep, go out for beer, or study
their lines for next day’s rehearsal at the theatre.
And the pretty minister preaches a cup-custard sermon
that won’t disagree with anybody.
Do you wonder that I prefer to play chess on Sun-
days?
THEATRICAL. “ DEAD-HEATS.”
One of the most important Glimpses of Gotham to be
had just now is that through the opera glass.
The theatrical, concert, operatic and “nigger” minstrel
business is in full blast, all the places of amusements are
crowded, and if we may believe the managers who have
been interviewed, with the exception of Max Maretzek,
the future is flushed with golden promise.
As a rule I don’t go much to theatres now; I am a little
blase, and it takes a good play to get me into a black coat
after dinner and away from the comfortable chair where
I sit and smoke, and ponder upon what an awfully
wicked world this is, and how we ought to struggle and
strive to make it a little better.
But lately I have dropped into two or three Thespian
temples on the first nights, and feel more impressed with
the fact than ever that while theatres may burn up, or be
torn down and managers may go to the devil through the
non-appreciation of the public, the noble army of first
nighters will alwavs flourish, and the deadhead system
will never lose its grip.
I was at Wallack’s, for instance, on the Saturday night
when Boucicault presented his Cremorne Garden play to
the best families of New York. A play so utterly nasty in
some of its suggestiveness, although funny, that I couldn’t
enjoy even the humorous parts of itthrough fear of losing
some of my dignity. For all I knew some of the vestrymen
or members of the Committee on Poor Red Flannel—l
mean Red Flannel for the Poor—might have been present,
and I wouldn’t have had them see me laugh for the
world.
So I sat all through the evening as if it were a dentist’s
front parlor, and there were only two more visitors to
yell “ murder,” before it came my turn.
I feel easy in expressing my opinion of the play, be-
cause I know it will not conflict with your critics. I met
the estimable Marquis there, and we blushed together,
We blushed, in tact, several times together.
But I have nothing to do with either good or bad plays.
M y Purpose is to allude to the sameness of first nights,
and to the prevalence of the dead-head custom.
For ten years past a certain number of club men have I
been sure to be around on the initial representation of a '
Play. One by one they dropped in on the Saturday night 1
| I speak of. They always have good seats. Some pay, hut
I others are on the regular list as dead-heads, and although
j they are willing to stand a bottle of wine after the per-
I formance, or even purchase a box for a benefit, the idea
of “ giving up ” for an ordinary night strikes them with
j a cold horror.
I After a while the management accept their first night
demands for tickets, just as they would accept the dumb-
ague—f. f., with resignation. You can’t shake either
them or the chills. There is a little consolation, however,
in the reflection that they generally come in full dress,
! and so give tone to the house.
These, then, are the first rank of dead-heads, the impu-
dent fellows with money who think that their presence is
recompense enough.
After them come the newspaper men and members of
the profession. The journalists can scarcely be called
dead-heads since they have already furnished an equiva-
lent by preliminary noticing, and are yet to give a more
or less elaborate criticism.
The profession go in by courtesv, but not by right.
Sometimes the management will shut down on them like
a meat axe.
I don’t mean, of course, that Edwin Booth, or Clara
Morris couldn’t get into the show for nothing, but in their
case they would come it in a high-toned style. They
would write the note in their hotel and send it around by
a nigger. And what is more they would always ask for a
box.
It is the fellows who loaf about the lobby and try to
pass the gate on greasy cards and handbills, who are
sometimes bounced.
Well, you’ve got to draw the line somewhere. If I was
giving grand opera at the Academy at |3 a seat, I should
kick a little about passing a cannon-ball tosser, or the
tattooed Greek.
I came across that old story the other day, and It’s good
enough to re-print, since it bears on the subject, about
the song and dance men who were smart enough to get
through under difficulties. Here it is :
While Mr. Schoeffel of the Park Theatre, Philadelphia,
was managing Edwin Adams the company stopped one
night at Utica, N. Y. After looking after all the local
15
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


newspapers Mr. Schoeffel quietly sat down on free tickets ,
and said that not another one should be issued. Just be- I
fore the doors were opened Mr. Schoeffel said to Smith,
the agent, “Now, George, I’m too well known in this
town to take that lower door. You manage that and I’ll
gonp-stairs, where no one will see me; and mind, now,
we’ve got a full house and not a deadhead goes in to-
night. Mr. Schoeffel was quietly pulling in the tickets at
the balcony door when he saw two young fellows, about
the same age and dressed precisely alike, edging up to the
door. “ Hul'.o, Cully,” said one of them. The manager
went on taking tickets. ‘ Hullo, Cully,” came again. “ I
don’t know who you are calling to,” replied Mr. Schoeffel;
“ If you mean me, my name is not Cully.” “Now, look
here, young fellow, don't you give us any taffy; I want to
know if you’re going to pass two blokes in?” “Two
blokes?” said the manager; “no, I’m not going to pass
two blokes in.” “ What 1 you don’t mean to say that you
are not going to pass the profesh?” “The what?”
“Why, the profesh, young feller, ’ and putting his hand
on the shoulder of his companion, the two dancers clat-
tered off the “ Down-among-the-roses ’ step. “ Well, yes,”
said the manager; “ if I know you, I’ll pass you.” “ Well,
I don’t suppose you do,” the spokesman replied; “we’re
McGlinigan and McGlanagan.” “ I don’t think I can do
anything for you,” Mr. Schoeffel said. “ Say, young
feller,” McGlinigan replied, “ do you know Mr. Queen, of
the New York Clipper f" “Certainly.” “Well, do you
know that he’s a friend of mine, and that if I should
write him how you’ve treated us he’d make it unpleasant
foryou?” “ I don’t know,” said the manager; “per-
haps you had better try.” “ Well, 1 would if I only knew
your name.” “There’s no trouble about that; my name
is Schoeffel.” The dancer took out a sheet of paper, and
putting it against the wall, began to write. “ How do
you spell it?” The manager seized the paper and wrote
in a large, rolling hand, “John B. Schoeffel,” and gave it
to the dancer. “ Now,” said the latter, “ I’ll give you
three-quarters of a column in the Clipper." Three minutes
later Smith came up-stairs, and, shaking a paper in the
manager’s face, said, “I thought you weren’t going" to
issue any passes to-night? I sent these fellows up to you,
and in ten minutes they came back, threw that pass at
me and said that at least the manager of the concern was
a gentleman.” Schoeffel said, “ No, that’s my signature;
but look at that ‘ Pass two ’ written over it. Does that
look like my writing? ”
When a play don’t draw in New York, the extent to
which the house will be papered is something appalling.
And sometimes you will never know it, but keep as
steadily imagining that the theatre is doing a tremendous
business, and that it won’t be long before the manager
begins to build rows of brown-stone French plats up-town.
And all the time the manager is wondering how he can
ever be able to rake together enough to pay salaries on
the next Monday. How is it done? It’s the easiest thing
in the world.
The agent of the theatre takes a pocketful of seats, so
selected that they are by no means bunched, and starts
out on a distributing cruise. It is his design to dispose of
his deadhead tickets to people of the utmost respectability
and social position. He wants the occupants of the stalls
to be well dressed, and has no objection to diamonds being
worn by the ladies.
He manages to secure this exclusive clientele without
knowing one of them, in the following manner :
Entering a big store like Lord & Taylor’s, he t?oes to the
floor-walker and hands him twenty or thirty seats, the .
best for the walker himself. The man knows what to do. [
When Mrs. De Courcv or Mrs. M r,r ”morency roll up to '
I the door and saunter into the establishment in quest ol
j lace or gloves, the floor-walker, who is on terms of easy
familiarity with all old customers, presents the tickets,
after ascertaining that the evening is free.
That night at dinner old Montmorency and De Courcy
are informed that they are to go to the play. The carriages
rattle up to the entrance, and as the deadheads get out
and sweep pompously to their gratuitous places the loung-
ers become simultaneously impressed with the high-toned
character of the audience, and the success of the attrac-
tion.
It is related of Sothern that he obtained his foothold in
London by papering the house for two weeks and turning
many away.
Deadheadism is a disease. It belongs to the same fasci-
nating category with free-lunches. I know a gentleman
I of wealth who will pay cab-hire to visit the opening of a
new saloon where something to eat and drink can be had
for nothing, and it is equally true that once the mania
gets its fangs into a theatre-goer, once he has tasted blood
he is N. G. for all purposes of profit, so far as the house is
concerned.
You can’t call it meanness. When I was dramatic
critic of the Missionaries' Beacon o / Light, a paper published
many years ago in the Bible House, I had a chum whom
I used to take to the theatre.
He was always intoxicated with delight, (later on in the
evening it was rum and molasses) at the prospect of get-
ting something for nothing, and insisted upon my having
supper with him in the Old Tom’s Chop House, in
Thames street, now gone.
That and the grog between acts, together with the Welsh
rarebit and the Scotch ale at the old Shakspeare saloon
on Broadway, below Ihirteenth street, before we went
home to dream that our dead and gone grandmothers were
throwing back somersaults on our stomachs, used to make
his dollar and a half seat cost him about $lO.
But he was none the less convinced that he was a devil-
ish lucky dog, and that to get ahead of the theatre was
about equal to winning f tattle.
You see the same spiri among railroad deadheads. The
man who has been stung by a pass never recovers. If he
has to pay for a ticket he is almost mad enough to wish
there might be an accident, so that he could get mashed
and go in for damages against the company.
The hill-board and window lithograph tickets have their
especial nights, but as with the papers, it is a case of fair
exchange with their holders.
In the country (he pressure is terrible. T. B. Pugh, the
veteran manager, tells the following story. I clip itfrom
the Philadelphia Times:
“ The Fosters, of Pittsburg, were playing at Bucyrus
Ohio. Richard 111. was announced, and when 8 o’clock
came a single man sat solitary and alone in the middle of
the orchestra. There was, of course, the usual collection
of country youths before the door, and the manager looked
into the empty hall and said: ‘Come, this won'tdo; we
might as well throw open the doors and invite them all
in.’ The company were called together in the meantime,
and. after some discussion, it was decided that the towns-
people should not come in free. It would encourage dead-
headism, at the same time establishing a dangerous prece-
dent in the town. So the audience of one chose an eligible
position, and, cocking his feet on the seat in front of him,
waited tor the performance to begin. The curtain was
rung up and the play commenced. Never did the actors
do better. The audience applauded vigorously at different
points, and at times insisted upon an encore, which the
[ company, impressed with the ludicrousness of the situa.
, tion, gracefully responded to.”
16
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


There is a very neat idea just gotten out by an enter-
prising lager beer man on Fourteenth street. In addition
to selling good beer, he furnishes a concert every evening.
To obtain an audience he issues regular tickets with
“Admission—One Dollar” prominently printed at the
bottom of the card. Across the face is stamped in red
figures the word “ Complimentary.”
Now the joke is this, one of course which was not in-
tended by the proprietor: You take a handful of these
tickets and have them always with you.
Knowing that you are a newspaper man, Mr. Deadhead
on the street, or Mr. Deadhead in the hotel or boarding
house, swoops down upon you with:
“ Got any tickets about you ? I'd like to go somewheres
to-night.”
“ How are you on concerts?” you ask.
“ Bang-up concerts?”
“ Dollar a ticket.”
That lands him. He eagerly replies:
“ Certainly. A fine concert is one of the most enjoyable
entertainments in the world. How many can you spare !”
“ I’ll give you two.”
“ Couldn’t you make it three f that’s a good fellow. My
maiden aunt, a prim old lady, who has money and a dis*
eased liver, is on making us a visit. She wouldn’t go to
the wicked theatre, but a concert ”
So you squeeze out the third ticket. The delighted
gentleman rushes up stairs to get his ladies ready.
Your plan then is to get to the beer saloon in advance,
and, concealed behind a post or the harmonicum, calmly
await the moment when Mr. Deadhead, Mrs. Deadhead
and the aunt with the liver complaint come sailing in.
The first thing that strikes them will be the Schweitzer
kase, and then
But why continue the picture ? Let us pause here and
cipher on how much the aunt will leave the young man
when the liver has done its fell work, and the maiden
aunt has gone to join the shadowy deadhead audience that
crowds the dim theatre of the Future, watching the play
that has no last act—the drama of Eternity.
HOTEL. HORRORS.
1 was sitting in the lobby of the Sturtovant House the
other night, waiting to hear from the bell-boy who had
taken my card to a political friend who had lately arrived
from the South, when my mind got running on the Wal-
worth tragedy, which, as you know, occurred in this
hotel.
Frank Walworth is now living in the strictest seclusion
with his mother in Saratoga, and since she, a most esti-
mable woman, sanctioned both at his trial and since, the
taking of a father’s life by a son, I have no editorial
opinion to express on the subject.
Mansfield Tracy Walworth was a literary gentleman
who appears to have been in the habit of abusing his
family. This is a peculiarity of some literary gentlemen.
In the case of the Walworths, they did not take kindly to
it. and young Frank, suffering under the greatest excite-
ment, visited New York, put up at the Sturtevant, sent
for his father, and in the quarrel which ensued in the
room, shot him.
He was tried, brilliantly defended by Charles O’Conor,
convicted of murder in the second degree, and sentenced
to imprisonment for life.
His mind gave way under the affliction, and he was re-
moved to the insane asylum, from which he was subse-
quently released by gubernatorial clemency.
While pondering on this case, it suddenly struck me
that nearly every metropolitan hotel of any importance
has had either its horrible murder or shocking suicide.
I purpose to write in this sketch of two or three that
occur to me now, and may hereafter, if I feel in the gory
humor, continue the crimson list.
A hotel murder that has almost been forgotten, and one
that was opulent with all the elements of romance, was
the assassination of the beautiful Virginia Stewart, who
was shot to death on the steps of the Brandreth House,
Canal street and Broadway, on the 23rd day of July, 1859,’
by her lover, Robert C. Mac Donald.
The murderer was a North Carolinian of good family.
He was elegant and dressy in his appearance. By suc-
cessful cotton speculations he accumulated a large sum I
of money, and when chance threw him in the way of
Miss Stewart he was a man of considerable means.
The passion was a mutual one, and all would have been
well, if Mac Donald had not taken to drink. Miss Stewart
naturally “soured” on him, and when she in the South
saw no promise of reform she left her tipsy sweetheart
and came to New York.
Mac Donald discovered her flight and determined to fol-
low her. He did so. Reaching New York he put up at
the Metropolitan Hotel, but frequented the bar a great
deal more than his room. Naturally enough he soon ar-
rived at a state of delirium, and became the possessor of
of an imaginary snake foundry.
In this delectable condition he roved the streets of the
city, searching for his false mistress.
At that time Taylor’s saloon with its pier glasses and
gilded columns, was at Broadway and Franklin street.
It was the lon ton place of resort for the thirsty and
hungry. Staggering in there one day Mr. Mac Donald
sighted his beautiful quarry, lunching at a table with a
lady friend.
Taking a seat at a table opposite, he called for a bottle
of wine, which he drank in two or three bumpers, watch-
ing the women attentively all the time.
When they had finished their lunch, he arose too and
followed them to the corner of Broadway and Canal
street.
I here quote from an account of what happened then :
They turned a corner to go into the Brandreth House
and just then Mac Donald stepped up to Miss Stewart and
importuned her for an interview. She refused and told
him to go away and not annoy her. He then said ex-
citedly :
“lam told you are living with another man. Is that
sof ”
No reply save a contemptuous glance, and Miss Stewart
turned to go.
With that Mac Donald put his hand in his breast and
drew out a Colt’s navy revolver. Divining his purpose,
Miss Stewart cried aloud for assistance, and ran toward*


the entrance of the hotel. Mac Donald bounded like a
panther after her, and, placing the pistol almost against
her head, fired. She fell senseless upon the step, her
beautiful hair all dabbled with blood.
A Mr. E. Van Raust, who was standing there, immedi-
ately threw himself upon Mac Donald. A deadly combat
now ensued for the possession of the pistol, it being evi-
dent that the murderer intended to take his own life. As-
sistance was finally procured and Mac Donald was over-
powered and removed to the Tombs. Miss Stewart was
taken to a hospital.
She lingered eight or ten days imagining herself in
Richmond. Then she died.
While in the Tombs Mac Donald lived in a regal way,
having a colored waiter from the Metropolitan in con-
stant attendance upon him.
In his possession was found the following letter:
“ John W. Smith , Mobile , Ala.:
“ Dear Sir—l am about to commit that which will
astonish you and most of my friends in Mobile. I have
left some instructions with Messrs. Simeon Leland & Co.
in regard to my body, but have since drawn S3OO of the
amount I first wanted, leaving $1,500 in their hands,
which, after deducting my expenses, will be remitted to
you. Affectionately yours forever, Boa.
“ p. g.—And to you who find my body have my trunks
opened, and you will see a letter addressed to the Messrs.
Leland in regard to the disposition of my remains. Bury
me with my beard on. Robt. C. Mac Donald.”
He engaged splendid counsel, and boasted that he would
never be hanged.
Among his visitors was a lady who talked through the
grated door of his cell. By means of a powerful letter
she obtained an interview with him. Undoubtedly she
gave him the bottle of Muir’s Elixir of Opium with which
he committed suicide.
That was twenty years ago. but the hotel tragedy
business has been kept up pretty steadily. It is too warm
to recollect some of the old timers, but I will hunt
them up.
The killing of Samuel Adams by John C. Colt was done
in the building at the northwest corner of Broadway and
Chambers street. It is a clothing store now, and since
the murder has been used by Dolmonico. It was not a
hotel at the time of the dreadful deed—Friday, Sept. 17,
1841—but at one time the building had been used for hotel
purposes, and so it comes in the list.
Colt was a writing master. He also taught bookkeep-
ing. He owed Adams a bill for printing, and on that
Friday afternoon Adams went to collect it.
They quarreled, and Adams called Colt a liar.
The latter picked up a hammer, and in a few moments
the printer was as dead as a door nail.
The choice of weapons would seem to suggest that per-
haps Colt mistook him for one.
The story of the after attempt to escape detection by
packing the body in salt and shipping it to New Orleans,
the discovery, arrest, trial, conviction and suicide while
they were rigging the rope to hang him, are too well
known to need repetition.
If Ned Stokes, who was strolling down Broadway on the
afternoon of Saturday, Jan. 6, 1872, hadn’t seen or imag-
ined that he saw a pretty woman waving her handker-
chief to .him at a parlor window of the Grand Central
Hotel, he might never have crossed the street at that time
and place.
Naturally he would not have been at the head of the
private staircase just as the boy opened the door to admit
Celonel James Fisk, Jr-,
And he would not have shot the dazzling operator as he
did.
It was highly probable, however, that the murder would
have taken place somewhere. New York city at that time
wasn’t big enough to holdJosie Mansfield, Jim Fisk and
Stokes all at once.
It was a moral certainty that Fisk was armed, but the
position of the two men gave Stokes the advantage.
Stokes was just in the act of descending the stair. Seven
steps from the street is a platform, and Fish had reached
that when, glancing up, he discovered Stokes. One ac-
count says:
“ There was a mutual movement. Stokes leaped swiftly
to one side, as if to avoid something , ran his gloved hand into
the pocket of his coat, produced a four-barreled revolver
and fired, quick as thought, at Fisk.
The ball struck the Colonel in the abdomen, two inches
to the right of the navel and three above it. As soon as he
felt the perforation he staggered up against the wall and
made the single exclamation, “Oh 1” Another flash,
another report, and his left arm fell, shattered. He
turned to run, staggered and fell. Ho was carried to room
213. Stokes went down stairs and surrendered himself to
Mr. Powers, the proprietor.
We know the rest.
The last time I heard of the handsome Stokes he was out
West engaged in mining speculations. His hair is almost
white.
If the Gilsev House had never been built William Foster
might never have committed, on the 26th of April, 1871,
the murder for which he was subsequently hanged in the
Tombs yard.
Why is this statement true f
No Gilsey House and there would have oeen no illumi-
nated clock, shining high in the ornamental tower like a
painted moon.
No clock and William Foster, who on the night in
question was riding on the front platform of a Broadway
car, in which were Avery D. Putnam, Madame Duval and
her daughter, would not have alluded to the time piece
in some insulting manner, first attracting the attention
of the young lady.
He would not have come in and sat down beside the
ladies, making himself generally objectionable.
Mr. Putnam would not have had cause to remonstrate
with him, and then of course the following question
would not have been addressed by Foster to the unfortu-
nate Mr. Putnam.
“ Say, how far are you going up f”
There was no reply to this drunken query. After rock-
ing in his seat for a moment and leering at the women
Foster added, as if it were the result of reflection upon
the matter:
“Well I’m going as far as you and before you get out
111 give you hell.”
When the car stopped at 46th street, Foster watched
his opportunity and coming behind Mr. Putnam with a
car-hook crushed in his skull at a single blow.
Not only was Foster ably defended, but when he was
sentenced the most strenuous exertions were made to
save his neck. I remember that a Mrs. Bishop went
around the city with a petition to the governor that had
about a mile of names to it.
I signed mine, but it was the heart and not the reason
that dictated the act. If ever a man deserved to be hanged
it was Foster.
If we cannot go out with ladies in the city of New York
without having them insulted and'our own lives en-
dangered by the attack of drunken beasts in human form.
18
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


then civilization 's indeed a failure, and the Caucasian
had better hand tne belt to the moon-eyed Mongolian.
I saw Foster hanged, and want to call attention again
to the unseemly torture to which he was subjected by
some clerical ass, who read dreary prayers and inter-
minable bits of scripture while the doomed man and
everybody else was perishing with the cold.
The Coleman House has not had its murder, but it can
boast of a shooting scrape. “ Birdie ” Bell, it will be re-
collected, attempted the life there of Washington
Nathan.
The papers were full of romantic accounts, but the
transaction never amounted to much. It was probably
a sentimental “ tiff,” which the young people had no
difficulty in arranging. At any rate it never got into the
courts.
Speaking of this incident reminds one of the Nathan
murder in Twenty-third street, directly opposite a win-
dow of the Fifth avenue Hotel at which Montgomery Blair
was sitting at the time.
The Metropolitan had its recent murder in the death of
a policeman at the hands of a maniac boarder to disarm
whom the officer entered the room.
At the Brunswick a young Hollander, rich, with lots of
money, in perfect health, committed suicide because he
fancied some one had insulted him on the voyage from
Europe.
P. S.—Apropos of the Cincinnati affair and my men-
tioning Washington Nathan’s Coleman House scrape I
clip the following from the Sun of Oct. 15th. For the
shooting in the Coleman House Justice Murray granted a
warrant for Mrs. Barrett’s arrest. Soon afterward Mr.
Nathan went to Europe, and nothing further was heard of
the complaint until yesterday. Washington Nathan then
appeared in the Yorkville Police Court and conversed
privately with Justice Murray. A summons was made
out demanding the presence of Mrs. Barrett, who was liv-
ing under the name of Mrs. T. B. Black at 300 East Fifty-
third street. Mr. Nathan said that he apprehended per-
sonal violence from Mrs. Barrett. The summons were
served by Policeman Foley. Mr. Nathan advised him to
act carefully, as Mrs. Barrett might use firearms. Mrs.
Barrett accepted the summons calmly,and said she would
be in court. At 3 f. m. Mr. Nathan and his lawyer, ex-
Judge Cardozo, were in Justice Murray’s private room.
Mrs. Barrett arrived soon afterward. Half an hour later
Justice Murray stepped from his room and said; “ There
has been a strange scene inside. Mrs. Barrett is crying
and Mr. Nathan is standing over her. He has given her
money. It is all settled. No complaint was taken.”
PRIVATE GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS.
A friend of mine used to surprise me by the elaborate
nature of his dress and the unfailing yield of his pocket
money.
It wasn’t, of course, a remarkable thing to be well ap-
pareled and to always possess a $2O bill; but the singular
part of it was that, while enjoying no income, while
being in the receipt of no set sum from lawyers and trus-
tees, he nevertheless did no work, didn’t toil, didn’t spin,
but laid way over Solomon on suits of clothes, shoes, hats,
gloves, canes, etc.
So I said to him one day in my usual romantic manner:
“ Prithee, my brave boy, how is it that you do this
thing? Give me the office. The wink, tip him to me. I
would fain the labor give him up, the shovel and the hoe,
throw them down.”
So he took me into a place where they sold May wine, a
charmingly seductive beverage with strawberries floating
about it, and gave me the points. I shall quote his exact
words as near as I can recall them:
“You know,” he began, “that I have nice rooms up
town, and that no one bothers me in the house. Some of
my married gentlemen friends and a few bachelor ac-
quaintances like a quiet game of draw-poker occasionally,
say one night in a week. They can’t play very well at
their homes on account of their wives, who always
imagine that when a man bets a dollar on a card, provided
there is a brandy decanter near, he is going straight to
the devil.
“ In this dreary desert of despair my rooms loom up as
an oasis. I have plenty of liquor. I have cards, and a set
of regular red, white and blue chips. So they form a little
olub, after getting my permission, and on Saturday even-
ings we play. Owing to the wear and tear of the apart-
ment—for they all get drunk—and the cost of the rum, I
am allowed a certain small percentage of the pools.”
He stopped as if he had finished. I looked up and saw
him gazing intently at the ceiling.
“ But that don’t account for a life of gorgeous idleness,
for going about like an animated fashion plate, and for
always being flush.”
‘‘Well, you know, Paul,” he added, slowly, “that I
never drink anything on such occasions but sherry?”
“Yes.”
“ And that I am a pretty good poker player t Fortune
seems to smile on me.”
“ Not always.”
“No; but I am tolerably sure of her gracious counte-
nance when I have the deal. It’s a mere coincidence, of
course, but it’s a remarkable one.”
The ideas gained over two or three glasses of May wine
explained to me the existenee of several other gentlemen
whom I knew, and by pursuing the subject I found that
there was then—it was only last spring—as there is now,
a perfect system of private gambling in this city, which
seems an appalling spectacle of sin when considered in
the aggregate.
I do not refer to the clubs. I belong to several of those
seductive institutions, and know that the most solid of
them are houses of cards. But I allude to private houses,
or elegant rooms like those of my friend, where it is possi-
ble to hear the rat-tat tat of the roulette ball and the click
of the faro checks. In many instances there is no idea of
the gentleman who backs the game making a cent out of
it. He is content with the natural mathematical advan-
tages. Quite frequently, too, the dealer is changed every
night. The prime object is to have a den where the tiger
can be fought without the noise of the combat reaching
the ears of the outside world.
By special invitation I was present during the summer
at one of the sittings. The lady of the house, with her
19
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


children, was at Newport, where the husband couldn’t
join her on account of having to take ofl' at night an ac-
count of stock at the store. At least that is what he wrote
in the postscript of one of his letters.
The players met at dinner, the expense of which was
mutually contributed. It was a fine dinner, with at least
two quarts of the “ widow ” to each man.
In this prime and primed condition we began to play,
selecting the library for that purpose. I went in for $lO
worth of chips, just out of courtesy to the,host, and with
a sneaking desire, which a man always possesses under
such circumstances, to pay for my dinner.
I knew I had no staying qualities that would compare
with those of the jolly old bucks about me, and soon let
myself out of the game.
Then I took aglass of brandy, and getting abook, sought
the corner of a luxurious sofa that had been wheeled up
near a shaded lamp.
I fell asleep, and when I awoke the grey of the morning
was coming through the windows. The lamps and gas
jets, mixed with the daylight, gave a spectral hue to the
apartment and to the haggard faces of the men, who,
with blood-shot eyes and feverish hands, were still bend-
ing over the cards.
They knocked oil at nine o’clock and we had breakfasi.
But how different from the dinner. Even the winners
were cross and snappy. One young man breakfasted on
hrandy alone, and left the house hurriedly.
He had lost $1,500 during the night—his savings for
years toward marriage. He had filled up a check on the
bank where he kept his account, for the amount, and had
then rushed .from the house to do what ?
To commit suicide ?
No, my friends, not to commit suicide.
This was a pious young man who had been brought up
to believe that it was wicked to take one’s life.
He resolved to boar the burden as best he could.
What did he do upon emerging from the house that had
been the scene of his ruin 1
He went to a barber’s shop, got dosed with bay rum,
and then jumping into a coupe, reached the bank just as
the paying teller was letting down his little glass window
That pious young man drew another check for $1,498,76,
and got the money. He was married that afternoon.
But if you want to hear a man inveigh against the evils
Of gambling; if you want to listen to an eloquent denun-
ciation of the vice, go up to his little Harlem flat and take
tea with him.
No gambling there.
“ There isn't a card in the house,” says the wife; “John
won’t even play 1 old maid.’ ”
“ No, sir,” John hotly answers, “ it’s a terrible mania,
and is dangerous in its humblest disguise.”
In the meantime the winner of the $1,500 has still in
his possession a check for that amount.
It is a pretty check, with the vignette of a handsome
woman in the corner, and a regulation revenue stamp
on it.
But there is one peculiar thing about it; some one has
stamped across the face “ no funds.”
Short card games are naturally the mode in private
houses, but there are respectable members of society
here, who give largely to all charitable purposes, who are
so fond of the sport that they have regular faro lay-outs,
keno wheels and other expensive machinery.
I, myself, have sat in the parlor of a sugar merchant,
who is one of the most responsible men in the business,
played keno at 25 cents a card with his wife and daugh-
ters, and gentlemen, who, like myself, had dropped in for
the evening.
“ There can’t be any harm in it,can there be, Mr. Prow-
ler ? ” asked of me a pretty miss of some sixteen winters
and four Saratoga summers.
I said not the slightest. It’s the correct thing to say.
“Iknew it all along,” she continued; “it’s too much
like ‘ Lotto ’ to be wicked.” •
But all the same you see your quarters disappear, and
I never knew a person who had gone broke on “ keno”
derive much consolation from its resemblance to Lotto.
It’s a good game, however, to play when women take a
hand. If it is euchre or whist, at so much a corner, the
average male player is fool enough in a chivalric sense to
let the little dears win.
But at keno you are safe, because it’s a community
fighting for a pool.
It must not be imagined that New York does not possess
establishments where ladies can gamble real hard.
Just as there are dressmaking shops where sherry helps
on the tight fit, and sends a woman home with fire in hre
eyes and Satan astraddle of her tongue, so there are gam-
ing resorts for ladies—for ladies, mind you—exclusively.
One of them, the most prominent, has been but lately
broken up.
It was a gigantic affair, run by a firm of man milli-
ners.
They did a tremendous business with the best people in
town. Stylish turn-outs were always at their doors.
The rooms up-stairs, over the immense sales and fitting
apartments, were fitted up luxuriously and evidently by
a female upholsterer with a good eye for color and effect
in the drapery and pictures.
No one could enter these chambers save by a pass-key
obtainable down-stairs under the rose.
There was never any noise. All the servants were wo-
men who could be trusted. And there the fair ones gam-
bled to their heart’s content, playing against each other
with a recklessness that you rarely see in men.
Many a woman has been forced to cancel an order down
stairs owing to the unfortunate run of the cards.
As I said, this place was broken up, and in what I con-
sider a mean manner. The scamp of a journalist who
made the exposure should have remembered that all
work and no play—cards makes the woman a dull girl.
But he didn’t. Having got an inkling of the fact, he
saw only the sensation article within his grasp.
It was of course utterly impossible for him, in his per-
sonality, to obtain any information.
You might as well attempt to smuggle a steamship
stoker into the sub-committee appointed by Sorosis to
determine how long a dutiful wife should mourn for a
husband who never earned over $5,000 a year.
So he utilized his sweet-heart.
She got into the confidence of one of the club, and on one
occasion was admitted, under guarantee, to the rooms
She was a close observer, and had a quick ear. All she
heard and saw she gave dead away to the journalistic
miscreant, who not only published a full account of the
games, the money lost, but gave a list of the names of
those who were present.
Great grief 1 maybe there wasn’t trouble in some fam-
ilies on Murray Hill! Husbands began to understand
why a costume that used to cost $l5O was now worth $5OO.
All this is shameful. Ido not believe in exposing petty
foibles of pretty women. Their brutes of husbands
play billiards for drinks down town, buy lottery tickets,
and belong to draw-poker sociables. Why should they
not divert themselves ?
If I had a wife I would rather she lost ray money play-
ing cards with a woman than that she should save it by
taking luncheon at the expense of a gentleman.


And we shouldn’t throw stones anyhow. We should
remember that no matter how humble our homes may be,
there is a good deal of the Crystal Palace about all of
them.
Another species of semi-private gambling is the hotel
“ racket.”
A man with the capital approaches the proprietor of the
house—the one I have in my mind now used to be in
Courtland street—and arranges for a couple of rooms.
“ For what purpose f ”
* Business purposes ” —and they are explained.
“ I shall have to charge you more than schedule rates.”
“ I am willing to pay them.”
Under these circumstances the game is opened. Sales-
men stopping at the hotel, and down-town merchants and
clerks are the patrons.
To go into an Ann street, or a Barclay street day-game
is to become a marked man. But to walk into a reputa-
ble hotel, and go to the third or fourth floor by elevator is
something at which no one can cavil.
These games frequently do a big business. Many a
salesman sent out by a Philadelphia firm to disseminate
their patent combination cigar-holder sleeve-button gets
no further than this faro layout.
There he’s laid out.
You will notice, nevertheless, that the backers of those
games are generally willing and sometimes anxious to
advance enough of the victim’s original plunder to enable
to get him a hundred miles in some direction or an-
other.
The game in Courtland street was knocked among the
sky-scraping kites by a young man losing all he had,
even to his head, and then blowing his brains out.
The proprietor of the hotel thought it was a strange
transaction on the part of the young man.
I fail to see anything strange in it.
If you have lost your head, what good are the brains f
Now, to have a head and no brains is quite a different
affair.
Plenty of men whom we all know are in that predica-
ment, and experience not the slightest annoyance.
The situation is certainly no bar to political prefer-
ment and social success, while a man like me, who is all
brain, has a difficulty sometimes in negotiating a short
loan.
If you don’t believe I’m all brain, come and see the
heads I have on me in the morning.
DIVORCES WITHOUT PUBLICITY.
In an article which I wrote some time ago I described,
it will be remembered, the facility with which people
could get married, thanks to the ingenuity and enterprise
of Emeline.
You will pardon me, sir, if I pause here a moment to
weep Tracing that name has brought the bright eyes,
the saucy mouth and bewitching smile before me, and for
a moment P. P is not himself.
There are chords as you know—cords of them, and we
must be careful how we do the vibrating.
You may be surprised that I so seldom mention my
gifted and erratic friend. Ah, if you did but know all.
But I cannot lay my heart bare—at least not during the
prevalence of a low temperature. The slight misunder-
standing between us may yet be arranged, and then you
will share with me, through these articles, the wit, the
keenness, the pleasing style of that most remarkable 1
woman.
She promised once to tell me her life, so that I could
weave a romance from it for the Gazette. If she only
would I
But I have stopped long enough for one weep. Au revoir,
Emeline.
I repeat that it is the easiest thing in the world now-
a-days to get married. There is only one thing easier—to
get divorced.
And you don’t have to know anything about it yourself,
if you are the one from whom the divorce is obtained.
That is, it is not absolutely necessary. The other party,
the one seeking the divorce, man or wife as the case may
be, can keep the legal document as a gentle surprise, a
nice little arrangement to trot forth when circumstances
are ripe for it.
It was only a few weeks ago that the papers had the
ease of a man who obtained a divorce from his wife
locked it up in his desk, said nothing about it and lived
with her ten years.
For ten years she was his mistress and didn’t know it 1
Pleasant, isn’t it ? And yet it all comes from the extreme
facility with which the decree of separation can be ob-
tained. If you look carefully through your paper you
will And scores of lawyers who advertise in the most fla-
grantly public and aboveboard manner that their special-
ty is putting asunder those whom God hasjoined together.
“Without Publicity” they promise, and it is this
“ under the rose ” part of the business which brings them
so many clients;
I-et us imagine ourselves in the office of a prominent
Arm down town. They are on Broadway, and have ele
gant parlors. Although the law business in its generality
is their profession they have in some manner drifted Into
untying matrimonial knots almost altogether, “ without
publicity,” of course.
The spirits in the cabinet of the Davenport Brothers do
not disentangle more silently the cords binding the
mediums than do these gentlemen the silken chains, too
frequently turned to gyves of iron, of matrimony.
While we wait an elegantly dressed lady, closely veiled,
enters. The clerk motions her to a seat and vanishes to
see if either of the principals is at leisure. He returns to
report that Mr. So-and-so will see her immediately, and
so she disappears into the luxuriously furnished office set
aside for just such tete-a-tetes.
If we could follow there we would hear the fair one, her
beauteous face uncovered now, pour into the confidential
ear of the legal luminary a tale of domestic woe, the up-
shot of which is that she is tired of her husband and
wants a divorce.
“ But on what grounds, madame f”
“Ah, sir, I am so unhappy.”
“ Is he false to you?”
“ I do not know—l hope so. I fear not. Butcannotyou
ascertain f” *
“Certainly; the easiest thing in the world. We’ll


attend to that. Don’t you feel the slightest uneasiness on
that score, madame.”
“You are so kind.”
“Not at all. Has he ever beaten you?”
“ No, sir.”
“Nor attempted to ?”
“ He once picked up a cologne bottle from the dressing
table in a very threatening manner.”
“Ha 1 ha ! he did, eh ? Made an attempt to dash your
brains out with a bottle t”
“ Sir, I did not say ”
“ Madame, it is the same thing.”
The lawyer makes copious notes and then says:
“ Nothing more is required at present. This direct at-
tempt upon your life is very satisfactory, and will weigh
with the judge out in Nevada, if we have to go so far. It
may be possible to find that the monster has a mistress.
If that is the case we needn’t cross a ferry.”
So she pays the retainer fee and goes down to her car-
riage. The monster, all this while, is utterly unconscious
of the net that fate has commenced to weave about him.
I may have cited the visit of the lady in a slightly ex-
aggerated way, hut I mean every word of it in all serious-
ness. Just such business calls are made every day.
Sometimes it is the husband who is the applicant.
In either case, where there are no grounds alleged,
there is always a desire to he free in order to he at lib-
erty to enjoy the society of some one else. A man or
woman in the hack-ground is doing the prompting.
This you can gamble on every time. In many instances
the woman simply finds it impossible to live longer with
her husband. He abuses her, but in one respect resembles
“ Old Dog Tray.”
He is ever faithful, hut never kind.
These are a tantalizing sort of husband, and it is to fix
their flints that the divorce bureaus are established with
connections out West with wild-cat juries and judges that
would grant anything for five dollars and a drink.
The first thing to do, however, is to endeavor to get the
dead wood on the old man here in New York—to prove
him guilty of adultery. If that can be done it is all plain
-ailing. , .
„ t there are some men who are virtuous simply be-
cause i-iey are too “ cussed” mean to be otherwise.
In order to handle this variety the legal firm resort to
that branch of tactics known as “ putting up a job 1”
One of the firm’s agents happens to make the acquaint-
ance of the gentleman, who is all unconscious that the
wife who poured him out his coffee that morning is digging
the ground from under his feet and preparing a mine that
will blow him up “ among the little stars and all about
the moon.”
When they know each other right well the representa-
tive of the lawyers proposes an evening about town. Per-
haps in an evil moment the old gentleman accepts. The
agent has plenty of money and does the champagne act
until he thinks it sure to propose dropping around to see
some ladies.
If the game is very wary it is a little supper that is ar-
ranged and the ladies happen in. They know their busi-
ness, and the one who succeeds in capturing the enemy
is sure of a handsome price from the high-toned law-
yers.
It isn’t at all surprising under such circumstances if the
obtaining of evidence became a very easy matter. All
the agent, the spy, has to do, is to keep his eyes open and
take notes. He knows, also, that if it is necessary he can
at any time obtain the affidavit of whatever beauty the
poor, deluded victim of the horrid plot eventually deter-
mines to fancy.
Nice commentary on the legal profession this, and yet
every word of it is true. They will sometimes go to still
greater lengths and suborn witnesses to swear away a
man’s character for fidelity when no overt act of adultery
was ever committed.
The divorce must be obtained at all hazards.
Where the husband is a jolly, good-natured fellow, who
goes freely about town, all this evidence business is very
much easier. It is here that the special divorce detective
gets his lace-work in.
He does not make the gentleman’s acquaintance as in
the other ease. He simply becomes his shadow. When
he starts down town the detective is on the front platform
of the same car. He is at the next table in the lunch-
room; he is in a beer saloon opposite the club; he is more
faithful in his attentions than the person’s real shadow,
for there are scientific reasons for that imponderable
counterfeit leaving us occasionally for long seasons.
If there is a screw loose anywhere the detective is sure
to ascertain it. He is not hasty even then. He waits pa-
tiently until facts have been accumulated that will bear
but one significance, however skillfully used by the law-
yers engaged to fight a dissolving decree.
What show has a man got when he becomes the objec-
tive point of such systematic villainy, for I can call the
collusion of the legal profession and the encouragement it
gives the applicant by no softer name? Evidently no
show.
He is not aware of the approach of the enemy until he
sees his buttresses flying in the air and hears the crash of
his falling citadels.
In France just now they are endeavoring to introduce
divorce, which, singularly enough, is not permitted in a
countrv whose entire dramatic literature teems with rare
opportunities for its proper application.
And while a little divorce would probably do France
good, I think that some restricting limitation should be
applied to its wholesale granting in this country. This
popping into a railroad car, going out west, becoming a
citizen, etc., of another state, and then eventually ob-
taining a decree of separation between man and wife, one
of the separated parties being too frequently in absolute
ignorance of what is going on, is a deplorable instance of
the facility with which things can be accomplished in a
free country.
Rather than this system, and the hundreds of specialist
lawyers in New York it breeds, the well-defined and
thoroughly understood system of matrimony a la convert
ance of France is much preferable.
There, for instance, husband and wife, who occupy
separate apartments, meet over their breakfast chocolate
and the following dialogue ensues :
“ Bon jour, madame.”
“ Bon jour, monsieur.”
“ I saw you at the opera last night.”
“ Indeed— why did you not come to the box ? ”
“It was too crowded. By the way, who is that Span-
ish-looking gentleman I see you with so much lately? ”
“He f That is Setior Ortella Maria Jose Infanta y Agu-
illa los Esperanza. He isjusttoo sweet for anything.”
“So I should imagine. He is of the complexion of a
chocolate caramel.”
“ Oh, you are jealous.”
“I? On my honor—no.”
“ I also have to ask you a question, monsieur.”
“ I listen, madame.”
“ I saw you dining in the Bois yesterday. Yon did not
have that opera singer with you. Who is the blonde who
pleases your fancy now t ”
“ she is a danseuse of the grand opera.—a premiere."


“ Keep on, monsieur—you are descending bravely.
First it was the director’s wife, then the prima donna,
now a dancer. Soon it will be a coryphee at five francs
a week.”
“ Now, you are jealous.”
“ Not I. It is my interest in you which prompts me to
speak. I do not forget that you are my husband.”
“ Au revoir, madame.”
“ Au revoir , monsieur.”
Now, that is the way they talk in a country that has
never thought it needed the institution of divorce.
While conversing on this subject the other day with a
young lawyer, who says he wouldn’t touch a divorce case
of any kind, he told me incidentally that the specialists
in the business are not altogether content to wait until
clients come to them in the natural order of events. If
trade is dull they drum it up, precisely as a patent medi-
cine man is sent out by a New York house to introduce
the “ Famous Shake-no-More ” among the ague-stricken
people of the far west.
I laughed at this—it seemed so absurd, but he assured
me that such was the case, and proceeded to give me the
details.
“You understand, of course,” he said, “that society is
not happy in all its honors. All the brown-stone houses
have to have new closets put in every year in order to ac-
commodate the skeletons. Still many a woman and man,
if let alone, would bear her or his connubial burdens
meekly rather than face the scandal and publicity of a
divorce trial. Our special divorce lawyers know this and
so they invade society. They transfer the base of opera-
tions to the drawing-rooms. How ? By using swell mem-
bers of the fashionable world to first find out where there
is a canker in the rose, and then to deftly set forth in a
perfect Mephistophelian way how divorce is the only
cure. Nine-tenths of this delicate diplomatic business is
employed in persuading hesitating wives. Husbands
could hardly be approached in their own homes with
propositions to break them up. Take an impressionable
woman, already unhappy, who has once been thinking
of divorce, and the case is different. She is clay for the
moulder. The serpent whispers of how nice it will be to
bank her alimony, tells her lies about the old man, in-
duces her to believe that the firm down town will put in
no bill if they don’t succeed, and so the affair is ar-
ranged.”
“ And this high-toned guest of the. husband who abuses
his hospitality to blast his life, what can be his motive
for enacting so desplicable a role 1 ”
“ Ten per cent, of the fee paid. It's precisely like pat-
ent medicines or boots and shoes.”
“ More like boots and shoes.”
“How sof ”
“Because the individual getting the divorce so fre-
quently puts his or her foot in it.”
SOCIETY’S “ SWEEL.-MOB.”
It was my fortune the other day to be present at a
police court trial which was held with closed doors—in
fact it was more of an examination than a trial —and so
the particulars did not get into the newspapers.
X have no intention either of publishing names and resi-
dences, in face of the fact that mercy on one side, and
repentance on the other, effected a sensible compromise.
I merely take the circumstances as a text for my weekly
homily.
Briefly stated, the case was as follows: A lady belong-
ing to that vague and mysterious organization known as
our best society had given a party.
I cannot tell whether it was a “ German ” or a “ Kettle-
drum,” but I was given to understand that it was a very
“tony ” affair.
The house was brilliantly illuminated. An awning
stretched from the door to the curb, and there was virgin
Turkey carpet covering the muddy pavement, and so al-
lowing Beauty’s satin slipper to reach the spacious par-
lors unsoiled.
“Niggers” stood around like pedestals, directing you
to the “gents’ cloak room,” the “ ladies’ dressing room,”
etc., etc. Everybody was there; everybody of course in
the exclusive set. I was not. If I remember correctly I
■was playing pool that night in a German beer shop, eat-
ing vile sausages the while, and talking philosophy to the
bald-headed proprietor.
Notwithstanding my absence, which yon would natur-
ally imagine would be a most serious drawback, the en-
tertainment went off with great eclat.
The usual amount of nonsense was talked, and an ex-
traordinary quantity of wine, salad, ices and cake was
consumed.
Carriages began to be announced as they had been sum-
moned, and then it was discovered that while the dance
was in progress in the parlors, and the feeding was going
on in the drawing-room, some one had been busy up-
stairs ransacking drawers, examining overcoat pockets,
and quietly purloining articles of value and portable ob-
jects of vertu that happened to be about.
One lady lost a diamond clasp which she had foolishly
allowed to remain in her wrap.
The hostess missed bits of plate and any quantity of
jewelry that had been on dressing tables and in easily
rifled drawers.
Nothing could be done then, and nothing was done for
some little time, except to place the mystery in the hands
of a skillful detective. He worked at the case, and
finally ran his man down.
It was one of the “ niggers ” of course, you say.
The thief was nothing of the kind.
lie teas one of the quests.
A proper, dapper young man of most excellent family.
He holds a responsible position in a large concern down
town, where the prospective honors are supposed to be a
recompense for the rather small salary he has been re-
ceiving.
When he was arrested he confessed everything, and
threw himself upon the mercy of those he had
robbed.
It came to light then that he had been doing this sort of
thing, with the help of an outsider, for some time, sup-
28
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


plying himself with spending money by pawning the
plunder.
His mode of operation was to slip out for an ostensible
smoke, while the festivities were at their heighth, and,
carefully watching his opportunities, to ransack the vari.
ous rooms. If confronted by any one, he was looking for
the smoking room, and “ could you kindly tell me where
it is ? Oh, it’s down stairs ! Thank you.’ ’
It is easily seen that under the protection afforded by
being one of the invited, this system of thieving could be
carried on with the utmost impunity. Servants would
get the blame, or it would be put down to some of the
men from the caterer’s place.
The detection of this young man opened up the fact
that scores of other houses had suffered in just the same
way. There are many to whose spoliation he will not
confess, stating most emphatically that he had nothing to
do with the crimes in those particular instances. Since
he has no object in lying, and has been allowed to go scot
free out of respect for his family, the natural conclusion
is that there are thieves, petty purloiners, among our
best people. Heretofore society has always furnished
dishonest characters of the awfully swell order. A guar-
dian does away with his ward’s fortune. A banker nego-
tiates his paper when he knows he is on the eve of fail-
ure. The president of an insurance company affixes his
oath to a false balance sheet. These are all big fish.
It must be a huge consolation, then, to the regular
low-down thief who has done time for stealing a pair of
shoes, to know that in the brown-stone world of magni-
ficence up-town there are those of his kidney. They
wear good clothes, and are curled and perfumed, but they
belong to the crooked fraternity all the same, and if jus-
tice had its full swing, and every dog got his due, their
classic countenances should be among those which make
np that wondrous album at headquarters—the Rogues’
Gallery.
After the charge had been withdrawn and the examina-
tion ended, I asked those at the court if this sort of thing
was rare, and was told that it was by no means an in-
frequent occurrence. In one or two instances during the
year there was no let up. The cases were taken to court,
and there are delicate hands breaking stone at Sing Sing
now because they were too dishonestly active under
such festive circumstances as I have described.
Further investigation has shown me that no experienced
lady gives a party now without having among her black,
coated gentleman guests a regular detective, whose duty
it is to look as if he were enjoying himself intensely, and
to watch all the others at the same time,
You can't blame the practice, although it does take the
bloom off of hospitality, and makes the amenities of
fashionable life a rather ghastly farce. If those you in-
vite to your house number among them men and women
with the instincts of foot-pads, it becomes the duty of the
entertainer to protect his or her property, and the prop-
erty of the guests, at all hazards.
One of these detectives was introduced to me, and I had
quite a talk with him upon the subject. It is new work
for him, and he is mightily pleased with it. His first
capture was a woman, a handsome, accomplished widow,
who was invited as regularly to every swell affair as they
happened.
This is hoy/ he caught her:
“Itwas about the first of October,” he said, “that a
Igdy living on Sixty-first street issued cards for a very
elegant reception, on the occasion of her daughter’s mar-
riage. She had been one of the sufferers from the
fashionable stealing we have been talking about, and she
resolved this time that she would set a trap for the
mice.
“So she drove down to our office the day before—l be*
long to a private firm of detectives —and asked that some
one be detailed at her residence for that evening.
“I was selected by the head of the firm, who presented
me with regular cards of invitation that the high-toned
lady had brought with her. I was not a little embar-
rassed, you can well imagine, for ten years’ knocking
about among dangerous characters, and being constantly
engaged in putting up jobs on the most brilliant memberf
of what we call the * swell mob,’ had rather unfitted me
for contact with members of the upper ten thousand.
“ And I didn’t have a dress suit 1
“ But that was easily managed, thanks to a costumer on
the Bowery, and when I presented myself at the brown
stone mansion at about half-past nine, I flattered myself
I was quite the correct thing in my get up.
“ Necktie, kid gloves, suit, boots, all proclaimed me the
proper kind of guest. One thing I am certain of; I wasn’t
half as awkward as some of the gawks about me, and I
hadn’t been in the parlors ten minutes before I felt per-
fectly at my ease.
“ The hostess introduced me as a friend of her late hus-
band, and passed me over to a heavy old swell who turned
out to be in -the grain trade. He got me in the corner,
and kept buzzing me for nearly an hour about the crop
failures in England, and the immense exporting advan-
tage it would be to this country.
“ All this time while I was listening to the aged cove,
and trying to do my level best in replying to him, I didn’t
forget what I had come for. My eyes went up and down
the room like a patrolman, studying each face and watch
ing keenly if any of the guests disappeared from the
rooms, after formally entering them. There was no
reason for anticipating any dishonest operation, and my
position was looked upon, both by myself and the lady of
the house, as a sinecure; but, nevertheless, X could not
drive it from my mind that something of a sensational
nature would turn up during the course of the evening.
“And it did.
“ There was a very stylish, vivacious, handsome widow
present to whom I had been introduced. It struck me
then that she talked too much; that she surrounded her-
self with a cloud of conversation which concealed from
every one but myself a certain restlessness, which was a
sure indication of a project being evolved in her
brain.
“ The wedding presents, which were very handsome,
were all arranged in a sort of brilliantly illuminated
room up-stairs, which, when the survey of them was
finished, was left in charge of a faithful negro servant
belonging to the establishment. Among the collection
was a handsome, rare old point lace fichu. This was
very valuable, and in proportion to its size, really the
most valuable of all.
“ It was shortly after we entered the refreshment room
that the widow complained of feeling ill. A chocolate
ice had not agreed with her, and the apartment was too
hot. She would go into the parlor and rest awhile. The
time she chose was when every guest was more or less
occupied with the cheerful task of eating and drinking,
when all the servants of the house, excepting the one
guarding the presents, were employed down stairs.
“ I looked steadily at the lady of the house, and with
all the significance that I could command. This waste
prepare her for what I was about to say, which was:
“ * Hadn’t I better take Mrs. a glass of wine V
' * 1 Certainly; it is very kind of you,’ she replied, ‘ and


THAT LITTLE SUPPER OF OURS,




tell her I will be there in a moment to see if she needs
anything else.’
“ As I had anticipated, the parlor was empty, and what
was more remarkable, the front door was open.
“Iwent up the stairs as swiftly and as silently as I
could. When I reached the door of the room containing
the presents, I detected the odor of chloroform.
“ The door was partially closed. I pushed it open, and
It was easily seen from whence the scent came. There
sat the darkey insensible in his chair, his head thrown
back, his face covered with a handkerchief. The widow
was in the act of pocketing the fichu, the position of the
two parties in the room clearly showing how she had
stolen on the negro unawares. I could have arrested her
then, but I had a great curiosity to see what her future
movements would be like; so when she made a motion to
turn, I stepped closely back in the shadow of the land-
ing. She brushed past me, and floated down the stairs
like a silken sigh, 1 after her.
“All this hadn’t taken more than five minutes. In-
stead of going straight into the parlor, she passed to the
frontdoor, which, as I have said, was open. I crouched
down, and not sufficiently in range of vision to see hef
beckon her coachman, who was, singularly enough, in
the neighborhood at so early an hour. He came to the
stoop, and she passed him the fichu.
“Then she entered the parlor again, and when I, in
about ten seconds, followed her, she was the most beauti-
ful sick woman, lying among the satin cushions of a sofa,
that I ever saw.
“ I went to the mantel where I had placed the glass of
wine, and said, in my most engaging manner, ‘ Mrs.
sent me to you with this, and her compliments. Try it;
it will do you good.’
“There was no deceiving her. She saw at once that
something terrible had happened. How came the wine
to be in the parlor? I must have been there during her
absence. Still she did not give herself up to confusion.
She shivered a little, and said, ‘ Is there not a door open
somewhere f ’
“ ‘ Yes,’ I replied, ‘ the front door. Since you did not
close it just now when you spoke to your coachman, I
thought you desired it open. Fresh air is a good thing
after chloroform 1’
“ This ended it. She looked up at me and swooned. In
the meantime the hostess and the guests began to arrive.
They crowded about the widow, and I, taking an advan-
tage of an opportunity which presented itself, told the
lady of the house what had occurred. Just as I did so,
a servant discovered his chloroformed companion, and
came shouting down the stairs.
“All was confusion. Four or five other ladies fainted,
in convenient corners, and in a few minutes the theory
was that the establishment had been entered by means of
a skeleton key, and that perhaps even now every closet
was jammed with burglars and murderers. I know that
we had a jolly good search all over the house. The bride
was at first terribly annoyed at the loss, but when her
mother told her the circumstances, dumb horror and sur-
prise took possession of her.
“If I hadn’t been there the plan would have worked
beautifully. The front door was opened for three reasons
—to communicate with the coachman, to start the theory
of a sneak thief, and to have blown away whatever deli-
cate traces of chloroform may have clung to the widow’s
dress.
“ I saw the pretty widow home that night in her own
carriage. When we were a block away from the house, I
made her get the stolen article from the driver. He was
thunderstruck at the request, and was very much worried
at my presence. I returned the loot, and that’s all there
is to the story.”
“ Didn’t they prosecute her?”
“No; what was the use. They got the fichu—the fish-
hook as I always call it—but they let the fish oil. Such
things are not stealing among the way up—it’s klepto-
mania.”
“ But the coachman.”
“ He wasn’t a real coachman, any more than she was a
real widow. They were man and wife, but he could work
better as coachman.”
“ Then this was their regular business.”
“ Been at it for years. I squeezed Mr. Coachman on my
own account, and got over one hundred pawn tickets
from him, making quite a neat ‘ spec ’ by offering to re-
turn goods to parties if no questions were asked. Alto-
gether my first evening among the ‘ lum-turns ’ panned
out well.”
BOOK-MAKING AND POOL. SELLING.
We all remember “ Doc ” Underwood, the great Ameri-
can pool seller, and it isn’t so long ago that the little
theatre on Broadway,where they have been giving “ Pina-
fore ” by the Church Choir Company, was the regular
pool-room of the late John Morrissey.
That was in the time when the law allowed or winked
a t the sport, and when the locality at Broadway and
Twenty-eight street was marked by a degree of betting
activity which you look for in vain now.
There isjust as much betting going on, however—more,
in fact, but the American pool system has gone to the
''vail—it was known as the auction pool—before the Eng-
lish betting book idea.
1 must confess at first that I could hardly get the Eng-
lish book, in all its technical language, through my per-
ceptive faculties. I am rejoiced to state that I have suc-
ceeded at last. It was in three easy lessons, and I paid a
price so steep, per lesson, as to induce me to figuratively
wonder when the Metropolitan Soup Kitchens are going
to open.
Each lesson was in the form of a race. I laid “ odds,”
but they hatched nothing.
Still the man who grumbles at knowledge, however
dearly bought, is no philosopher. Therefore X can’t com-
plain on that score.
You have doubtless heard about the inexperienced hus-
band who came home at the milkman’s hour deathly sick,
and who, upon being interrogated by his wife, owned up
to sixty beers during the night, and laid the sickness to
one Frankfurter sausage. They always did disagree
with him.
Of course you have heard of this husband. Maybe in


the amateur theatricals of this life you have played his
part.
To explain the digression: I am an explanatory sick hus-
band. I ascribe all my ill luck to the fact that an upright
municipal government forced me into a speculation that
I didn’t understand.
If I bad bought the “ field ” on the good old American
plan, or even invested in the Paris Mutuels, I feel certain
that I would be ready now to prove my direct descent
from Croesus.
By the way, did you ever pause in this work-a-day
world to ponder a little on those lucky dogs of antiquity?
Look at Croesus 1 There wasn’t enough ink in the world
or a rapid enough stylus to enable him to overdraw his
bank account.
There was a man who could have fried lampreys for
breakfast every morning.
And Crichton, who couldn’t make a mistake. He was a
great gambler, too, and got away with loads of drachmae
and such like on chariot races.
The chariot whirls me back to my subject, that of the
English betting book and its principles.
Before I take the reader down town to where all the
principal backers have desk room, generally in saloons
like Casey’s and Thomas’s in Barclay street, I will try to
explain the English book.
It is constructed on severe mathematical principles, is
nothing more than a lesson in ciphering, and will undoubt-
edly become the fashionable form of betting at all such
aristocratic tracks as Pordham, Saratoga and Long
Branch.
You will be surprised at the authority to whom I go for
facts bearing upon the English betting plan as applied to
horse races. He is no less a man than Prof. Richard A.
Proctor, B. A., Camb., F. K. A. S., who is now delivering
a series of brilliant astronomical lectures in this eity.
I don’t know that the professor is good on giving you
points, although he could tell to a dot when comets and
planets should arrive at the judges’stand, but I think a
man with an array of such glittering titles would be dead
sure to name the winner twice out of three times.
Before quoting the description of the booking idea it is
necessary to explain that “ Camb.” does not mean “ come
and make bets.”
The professor says: “It is in reality a simple matter to
understand the betting on races or contests of any kind,
yet it is astonishing how seldom those who do not actually
bet upon races have any inkling of the meaning of those
mysterious columns which indicate the opinion of the bet-
ting world respecting the probable result of approaching
contests, equine or otherwise.
“ Let us take a few simple cases of ‘ odds’ to begin with,
and, having mastered the elements of our subject, pro-
ceed to see how cases of greater complexity are to be
dealt with.
“ Suppose the newspapers informs us that the betting is
2 to 1 against a certain horse for such and such a race,
what inference are we to deduce ? To learn this let us
conceive a case in which the true odds against a certain
event are 2 to X. Suppose there are three balls in a bag,
one being white, the others black. Then if we draw a
hall at random it is clear that we are twice as likely to
draw a black as to draw a white ball. This is technically
expressed by saying that the odds are 2 to 1 against draw-
ing a white ball, or 2 to 1 on—that is, in favor of—draw-
ing a black ball. This being understood, it follows that
when the odds are said to be 2 to 1 against a certain horse
we are to infer that, in the opinion of those who have
studied the performance of the horse and compared it with
that of the other horses engaged in the race, his chance
of winning is equivalent to the chance of drawing one
particular ball out of a bag of three balls.
“ Observe how this result is obtained. The odds are 2to
1, and the chance of the horse is as that of drawing one
ball out of a bag of three—three being the sum of the two
numbers 2 and 1. This is the method followed in all such
cases. Thus, if the odds against a horse are 7 to 1, we
infer that the cognoscenti consider his chance equal to
that of drawing one particular ball out of a bag of eight.
“ A similar treatment applies when the odds are not
given as so many to one. Thus, if the odds against a
horse are as 5 to 2, we infer that the horse’s chance is
equal to that of drawing a white ball out of a tag contain-
ing five black and two white balls, or seven in all.”
Further on the astronomer throws some starlight on a
point that would be otherwise murky. He says: “And
here a certain nicety in betting has to be mentioned. In
running the eye down the list of odds one will often meet
such expressions as 10 to 1 against such a horse offered,
or 10 to 1 wanted. Now the odds of 10 to 1 taken may be
understood to imply that the horse’s chance is equivalent
to that of drawing a certain ball out of a bag of eleven.
But if the odds are offered and not taken we cannot infer
this. The offering of the odds implies that the horse’s
chance is not better than that above mentioned, but the
fact that they are not taken implies that the horse's
chance is not so good. If no higher odds are offered
against the horse we may infer that his chance is very
little worse than that mentioned above. Similarly if the
odds of 10 to 1 are asked for we infer that the horse’s
chance is not worse than that of drawing one ball out of
eleven. If the odds are not obtained we infer that his
chance is better, and if no lower odds are asked for we
infer that his chance is very little better.”
I give this explanation, because I take it for granted
that once in a while my readers, who are ordinarily the
pillars of society and the shining examples of respecta-
bility, may feel in a risking mood. I do not wish them
to be cajoled into laying any preposterous odds when the
business of the moment is the making of a bet. The back-
ers are the most agreeable men imaginable. It is very
difficult to get talking with them on any event in which
you are interested without putting up something, and it
is iust as well to know how to put up.
They write your name down on a pretty colored slip,
which they tear from their little book, and carefully in-
sert the precise circumstances under which the bet is
made. With the information Prof. Proctor has given us
it is now possible to experience the sensation understand-
ing^.
Hid you ever notice what fearful odds are sometimes
laid ? When Parole went over to England for the first
time Mr. Lorillard was fortunate enough to negotiate bets
at 40 to 1. As the day for the race drew near this was cut
down to 7 to 1, 5 to 1, and 3 to 1.
Hurlng the late walking nuisances I saw one ticket
which stated that the holder had put up $1 against SI,OOO,
the bookmaker giving those odds against one of the dead-
beat contestants getting a certain place. As the man
could hardly remain on the tanbark the bet seemed logi-
cal enough. I bought a ticket at the same odds, as I
always would under any circumstances save the non-
possession of a dollar. Lightning has a habit of not strik-
ing twice in the same place, but the man who wouldn’t
put a dollar on a lightning strike coming loafing along on
its former track when SI,OOO could be “collared” if it
did, is no devotee of chance.
There are up-town offices, of course, where betting goes
on constantly, a good deal of it being done by wire. But
since horse races, yacht races and base ball matches are
28
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


generally managed in the day time, it was found neces-
sary to open down-town branches in bars and chop-
houses.
A man who comes out of his office for a drink and a
little lunch is enabled without any trouble to get in on
the races, say at’Louisville, or the yacht contest up the
Sound, or anything anywhere.
Think of bending over a stupid ledger, and seeing be-
tween the lines the fascinating picture of your horse on
which you got 15 to 1, coming in ahead of all the others,
with his tail straight out and the jockey almost riding be-
tween his ears.
Dost like the picture t But think of the other chromos
on the ledger page—your horse in a ditch, and the jockey
coming over to the grand stand on a stretcher.
If there were not two sides to everything we could have
lots of fun, couldn’t we?
This booking game is one that you can play in two ways.
You can buy a horse at the long odds offered, or you can
epen an office yourself and start in to back anything and
everything under creation. All that you require is a
character for reliability, a tremendous nerve, and a fac
nlty of so doing business that there is no chance of losing
anything. This can be done nearly every time by giving
just the proper kind of odds to offset a misdirected gene-
rosity into which you may have been led at the early
stages of the speculation.
In England it is customary enough to open books for the
Derby a year ahead. From that time down to the morn-
ing of the race a horse may fluctuate like the price of
gold in a panic. Some one circulates a rumor that he has
gone amiss in one of his legs. Immediately the book-
makers extend their odds against him. When it is dis-
covered that it was a mere rumor the figures change
again. In all this multifarious figuring it is necessary to
Maintain a cool, clear head, and to hear always the net
result of the bets booked so far ciphered out in the mind.
ah backers do not give the same odds, although they
are forced by the pressure of competition to maintain an
appearance of uniformity.
Another peculiarity about the English system is that
you don’t get your money back if the horses do not start.
For that very reason the man -who has a chance six
months ahead of the date of the event to pick up long
odds against a horse is made a little scary by the reflec-
tion that perhaps the brute will be scratched.
But any of the affairs of this life are equally uncertain.
Look at those pretty rowers, Hanlan and Courtney 1 Is
there the slightest moral certainty that they will race on
the Potomac?
You can go down in Barclay street now and get odds
that there will be no race on Dec. 9th.
And from the same man you can get odds that there will
be a race.
That Hanlan will beat.
That Courtney will beat.
You can almost get odds that both will beat.
Hunt this wide world over and you will find no more
accommodating men than the book-makers. Knowing
that there is a chance for every anticipated event hap-
pening, or not happening, it is their province to accom-
modate all who want to bet on the “ perhaps ” of it.
Of course races, billiard matches, pigeon shoots and the
like are their legitimate field of operation, but they are
always willing to go into an outside snap.
I sincerely believe that it would have been possible the
other day, when the Adventists were sitting around in
their best bibs and tuckers, waiting for the end of the
world, to have obtained from some of the booking frater-
nity bets on the occurrence or non-occurrence of the
wind-up.
I don’t know though. If the earth’s account had been
closed, settling the transaction next day would have been
a different matter.
For all we know bets may not be recognized in the bet-
ter land.
RESTAURANTS GOOD AND BAD.
A man who can’t satisfy the cravings of his intellect in
New York city, or find plenty of pabulum for those baser
qualities which demand mere recreation, is an individual
whom it would be hard to please.
And equally true is it that the person who cannot break-
fast, lunch and dine in this goodly city the year round to
his stomach’s content, is the one who will be likely to
* kick” at the surroundings the morning after his funeral,
even if he went straight through to the better of the two
stopping places.
Of course you must have money. That is something
that you can’t take with you when you leave this vale of
tears, and I am very glad that such is the case, consider-
ing how extremely difficult it is to freeze on to any con-
siderable amount unless you bacome a burglar or a Fall
River treasurer in a mule-spinning mill; you can’t take it
with you, I repeat, but it is very convenient while you
tarry here. It buys bread and butter, porter-house steak
with mushrooms and other gastronomic combinations
which equip you for the battle of life.
JEn pamint, as Mrs. General Gilflory would say, that was
a pretty tough story told iu the courts a week or so ago
about an old Dutchman who tried to “ hangup ” a Bowery
eating saloon for the price of a pork chop and then leftu
linen duster, which he swore contained $16,000, as
security.
That aged German was very foolish. You never heart if
me doing anything like that. I suppose I have worn linen
dusters off and on, but principally “ on,” ever since I was
a boy, and I never carried $16,000 around in the pockets
of one of them in all that time. It’s too “ shiftless like,”
as Aunt Ophelia in Uncle Tom’s Cabin would say.
If I have not already foreshadowed my intention in this
paper, I announce it now. I purpose to write of the
restaurants of New York and the opportunities presented
generally for browsing.
The New York restaurants, to begin with, are the best
in the world. This can be said safely, without the slight-
est fear of contradiction. It is the universal testimonial
of all foreigners who look kindly upon Epicurus and his
teachings.
Tffey are of the most infinite variety. Every taste can
be satisfied. The population of the city is no more cos-
mopolite than are its kitchens. I can get frog’s legs or
29
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


stewed rat as quickly as I can have a chop served. You
need only to know where to go if your taste is fantastic.
The bills of fare suit every purse, I do not care how
slender it may be. You can knock a hundred dollar bill
into a little loose silver for the waiter at Delmonico’s, or
you can go in South Fifth avenue or Wooster street and
have a dinner in courses for nine cents.
That’s luxury. You can do even better, or worse, ac-
cording to the standpoint from which you look at it.
There are places on the Bowery and down about the
markets where three and five cents will at least appease
hunger. And after all that is the fundamental principle
of all eating. When it embraces anything else the collat-
eral idea is generally based on style.
It is quite natural that we should all prefer to dine at
Delmonico’s or the Cafe Brunswick to munching hard
rolls and drinking chicory coffee in a shanty saloon, but
each experience is good in its place, and no man’s life is
complete that is not a gamut sweeping the space between
the two extremes. If I had been born with a silver spoon
in my mouth—and of course I was not, any more than I
was born with a $lO gold piece in my vest pocket and had
been fed on bon-bons and syllabub all my life—l would not
have possessed that varied experience which now makes
my quail and glass of wine seem so delicious after the
opera.
On the contrary, I have eaten as extensively as I have
traveled, and have frequently been the unhappy owner of
an appetite, to possess which a dyspeptic millionaire
would give a thousand dollars. It made me unhappy be-
cause it attained its full strength and most generous pro-
portions when there was nothing to eat. But that was
not in this country, and was most certainly not in New
York.
In treating your girl to a lunch after the theatre, where
to go to depends a great deal upon the girl. Sometimes
you are dreadfully fooled, as I was once. This, however,
was in broad day light, and I had met the young lady in
Union Square just as I was going to lunch. She was a
literary young woman and wrote a great deal I know
about moonbeams, and hearts that pine away, and all the
rest of that rot. What made my invitation of her, to have
a bite of something, necessary, was because I was her
agent in the matter of these poems. That is, I was the
young man who used to get kicked down the stairs of
newspaper offices, and fired out of windows for daring to
offer her manuscript and expect money for it.
She said at first that she was not hungry, that she had
had a late breakfast, and as she spoke this way my heart
carolled like a bird, for I only had $2, and it was a little
uncertain in those days when another bill would hap-
pen along.
But she finally went in to look on—only to look on, mind
you. Then she glanced carelessly over the bill of fare,
and said with a theatrical air of astonishment, as if she
had been hunting all over New York for the article, “Why,
they’ve got partridge I ”
I remember that the bit of turkey sandwich stuck in my
throat, and nearly did the sheriff’s act for me as I tried
to reply in a bantering way, “Have they, indeed ? ”
“I do adore partridge,” she continued; “I think I’ll try
a half a one.”
“What’s the use of doing things by halves,” I answered,
wrecklessly, “take a complete fowl, have a covey.”
But she took the half—sl,2s. If she had taken the en-
tire chicken I might have been in state prison now, for 1 |
recollect that in my mental agony the murder of the pro- I
prietor of the saloon, and the setting fire to the place, '
were but parts of my clan of escape.
As a rule the sentimental young woman who writes
about moonbeams is equal to four or five fish-balls as a
side-breakfast dish on Fridays.
The kind of lady companion when you go out to spend
the evening and have to run the lunch gauntlet in getting
home, should be like a married friend of mine. Her hus-
band was an invalid, rarely went out at night, but was
never so happy as when his wife, who was very fond of
music and the drama, had an opportunity to attend a
performance.
The escorting duty fell upon a rich young man in splen-
did business down town, and the subscriber, who at that
time was up to his ears, via five flights of stairs, in attic
philosophy.
X knew that she had been to Delmonico’s with the swell,
because I had heard it incidentally mentioned, and when
my turn came to do the gallant, I rose to the financial
occasion only after the most strenuous exertion. But I
was fixed, and to all intents and purposes quite as satis-
factorily so as if I had been A. T. Stewart.
X was not allowed, however, to assume the gilt-edged
style I had been anticipating. She said when I suggested
Delmonico’s:
“No, I’m tired of Delmonico’s and I don’t like cham-
pagne, at least not all the time. Now Xam very fond of
beer. Let’s have beer and oysters; it’s mnchjollier.”
All this, mind you, was done with infinite grace and
tact. But these ladies are scarce. I have told the an-
ecdote a dozen times to the fair ones I have had out for
an evening, but the story never seemed to have the
slightest effect.
The regular French dinners on the table d’hote style are
very extensively patronized in New York, but I never go
to one unless it is to secure a special dish like maccaroni.
They take up too much time. I can understand a party,
wishing to remain together, putting in hour after hour at
one of these restaurants, but just for the mere sake of eat-
ing it seems a terrible waste of Tempus. The hotels are
adopting the plan of giving a dollar dinner to transients.
This is done as opposition to the Frenchmen. You may
get a better dinner at the hotels, but you miss the boule-
vard atmosphere of the other places. I got so thoroughly
Parisian by going constantly to a French restaurant in
Thirteenth street, that I kept shrugging my shoulders for
two months, aud only stopped it then by being treated for
a nervous affection.
You certainly have your choice among these French
dining places. You can pay sl.soand you can goto South
Fifth avenue and dine for twenty cents, or even for nine,
as I said above. There won’t be much difference found
in the wine, and, so far as company is concerned, it is
much more communistic and entertaining in the cheaper
cafes.
A great many beer saloons set regular breakfasts, din-
ners and suppers. lam not a great admirer of Teutonic
cookery, but must admit that Frankfurter sausage, brown
bread and beer do not go bad on a winter’s evening. I
never knew what a Frankfurter was made-of, and I have
no desire to be informed. I know that with horse-radish
and mustard it is very appetizing.
The English chop-house is more a specialty in Brooklyn
than here. There is a decided charm about the quaint,
* snuggery ’’ kind of a bar, the glistening mugs and the
shining earthenware “tobies” which the waiter brings
you full of foaming ale, while your Welsh rarebit order,
steak or chops, as the case may be, is being attended to.
When the weather gets real cold these chop-houses be-
eome real halls of bewitchery, owing to the insidious
effect of warm drinks. The hot water is brought on in a
30
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


little j ug, the sugar and lemon in a saucer and the Scotch
whiskey in a bottle by itself. I am taking it for granted
that justice has been done to a good meal and the hot grog
is to build you up for the ferry side. There’s the great
trouble. To be dead sure that you will be braced up for
the ferry you have some more, and
Well, there is hardly any use in being too particular.
I know one young man who lives at 159 th street who left
the “Abbey” in Brooklyn after getting primed against
the ferry, and they found him next morning in a Coney
Island bath-house.
Outside of these English places Brooklyn is singularly
deficient in good restaurants, is worse even than Phila-
delphia, where they have the best markets and private
tables in the world, but the meanest restaurants to be
found anywhere. Their hotel tables are also poor.
Way down town the dairies, creameries, “ dime ” res-
taurants and pie and milk places abound. Between 12
and 3 o’clock these establishments do a rushing trade.
They employ pretty girls—fresh, neat, trimly-built young
persons—who represent that decent middle class of soci-
ety which furnishes the bar-maids in England. Young
clerks who go fluttering about these bright-eyed creatures
with light-waisted pocketbooks or anything but the most
honorable intentions are apt to get seriously fooled. I
knew a colony of girls, a regular flock of turtle doves,
who had taken three or four rooms in a tenement in Yan-
dewater street.
The young man who took me around there had made a
tremendous error in his calculations —a fact of which I
apprised him before he had been in the place ten min-
utes. We all drank beer and sang songs, and I must con-
fess that these pie and pudding wrestlers were very agree-
able company, just a trifle more free than the young lady
in her ma’s parlor, but with an air of business about
them and a constant tendency to talk about matrimony,
which showed which way the wind was blowing.
My friend took one of them to the theatre, and nothing
but the Cafe Brunswick would suit her. She had all her
canvas spread and looked as if she boarded there regu-
larly. But she was up all the same the next morning at 5
o’clock, slipping into her calico dress and getting ready
for the day’s campaign in Nassau street.
All in good time my friend was sued for breach of
promise, and was fed for a while from the cuisine of Lud-
low street j ail. He weakened there and got out by marry-
ing her. This was over a year ago, and he told me
no later than yesterday to congratulate him. He is a
father.
Tonjoura the milk business I
The American slap-dash restaurant, with its fifteen cent
meats, is too well known to need description. I never eat
in one if I can possibly avoid it. It is too much like a
game of base-ball. Neither can I stand up at a bar and
grab at things over a man’s head, as they do sometimes
in the Astor House rotunda. I would rather go over to
Park row and try the coffee and cake saloons, institutions
that are peculiar to New York. They make an oyster pie
there that I am sure is an infringement on the India rub.
her patent.
But there goes my dinner bell. I must stop. We have
turkey to-night, and I notice that the first served get a
better chance to study the succulent peculiarities of the
bird than those who come in to find the noble insect look-
ing like a Jersey barn with the stuffing knocked out of it.
A CHRISTMAS DRAMA,
These are pre-eminently the shopping days, and no
study of New York life would be complete that did not
embrace a consideration of Gotham’s comely matrons
and lovely daughters when they are on what might be
called the extravagant rampage.
Between the Thanksgiving turkey and the Christmas
bird there is a perceptible holiday flavor in the atmos-
phere. Store windows bloom like flower gardens. Paris
pours in her novelties. The toy and confectionery busi-
nesses assume gigantic proportions, so much so that bon-
bons and painted balloons are gradually looked upon as
necessities by the unfortunate citizen who has nephews
and nieces to remember.
A stroll along upper Broadway just now shows you that
there is no such thing as a lack of money, and that if there
ever was a time when people were
“ Hard up, hard up
For want of food and fire,
A-tying of their shoes up .
With little bits of wire,”
that time has long since been under the daisies. 1 do not
doubt that if we went over on the East side and nosed
about among the cellars and damp, reeking rooms of rot-
ting rookeries we might discover human beings who need
such commonplace holiday goods as bread and meat.
I have no doubt, either, that a good square meal to them
would possess all the novelty and unfrequency of a
holiday.
But there is no necessity to wander amid the odors of
the far East or West. It is the gladsome money-spending
time of the year, and if we haven’t any money of our own
to sling about, nor any purple-embroidered carriage in
which the clerks can toss our packages, we can at least
mingle with the throng, flatten our noses against the five
hundred dollars’ worth of plate glass in the windows, and
so catch something of the opulent spirit of the hour.
The animation of the scene is recompense enough any.
how. I often enjoy ten minutes on one of Stewart’s
corners watching the swell girls getting in and out of
their equipages, and noticing the starched flunkeyism of
the well-fed and warmly-clad coachmen. The private
police at Stewart’s are also funny creatures to me. They
are so awkward, so solemn and so pretentious in their
ungainly uniforms that they suggest the “beef-eaters” at
the Tower of London. I imagine they are of the same
utility. I have never seen them do anything else than
call carriages, open and shut carriage doors and raise and
lower umbrellas. These services performed, each one
picks out the particular flagstone to which he has become
attached and goes on with his imitation of a lamp-post.
Broadway shopping is the most aristocratic, but in
order to enjoy the bustle and activity you must go over on
31
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


the avenues. Sixth and Eighth. Since 1873 these thor-
oughfares, taking advantage of the genuine hard times
and the difference in the rental of stores as compared
with those on Broadway, have developed an enormous
business in all articles appertaining to women’s wear. It
is not de rigeur for the point lace people to shop on a West
side avenue, any more than it would be the correct thing
for them to get their bonnets in Division street; but when
you can procure the material for a dress in a Sixth avenue
shop ten dollars cheaper than the same stuff would‘cost
on Broadway—and there is nothing harder to do than lie
about the purchase—it is the most natural thing in the
world to find ladies from St. James patronizing store-
keepers who began business in St. Giles.
The whole transaction is no more than a little bit of
innocent deception. When I used to hire a coupe by the
month—X think it was used at night to meet trains at
Desbrosses street—l never told people that it wasn’t my
own trap, and no doubt had I been cross-questioned on the
subject I would have imperiled any chances I might have
then possessed for becoming a first-class harp player in
the next life by coolly asserting that I owned the entire
“caboodle.”
I often think that it was only the attenuated and for-
lorn condition of the horse which saved me from this sin.
Richard 111. would have wanted to fall from the offer of
his kingdom to two dollars and a half if that steed had
been proffered him in the emergency of Bosworth field.
The shopping that is being done now is of the genuine
order. Clerks and salesmen are not exercised in vain.
Palpable goods are purchased and genuine bills made out
for desperate men to swear over when they are presented.
But in how many instances the shopping business of the
average New York woman is a fraud, a device to kill time
and salesmen at the smallest degree of expense. I once
knew a young lady who came very near joining me matri-
monially in starting a poor but highly intellectual branch
of the Prowler family. It is not necessary to particular-
ize any more than to state that the golden bowl is broken
and the dream has faded. She was disposed of at a panic
price to a genuine Italian count, who now keeps a barber
shop in Chicago.
She was the “boss” shopper. I have heard her an-
nounce at the mutual breakfast table of the Lexington
avenue boarding house, where first I saw her, that she
had a certain shade of ribbon to match, she wanted just a
quarter of a yard, and that it was her intention to devote
the forenoon to its purchase. For fear that she might
not be able to get through the work unaided, she would
press two other ladies into the service. At 10 o’clock
they would sally forth in war paint and feathers and
begin the campaign. They always got the ribbon (price,
eight cents), and at dinner, during their conversation, we
would learn incidentally that they had been in about
forty stores and had walked at least fifteen miles. Women
possess this concentrating power in a remarkable degree.
For the moment the acquisition of that bit of ribbon be-
came as important a question as the Eastern one is just
now to England and Russia.
Three-fourths of the ladies you meet in large dry goods
establishments at seasons of the year other than this buy
nothing at all unless their fancy is attracted by accident.
This is possible in nearly every store catering for them
on a large scale, inasmuch as they sell everymortal thing
under the sun with the exception of mowing machines
and locomotives.
I have gone along with some cousins of mine, giddy
girls from Hackensack—gone along in the capacity of
a light porter (and at present I am so light a porter that
there is no mistaking me for “stout”) and been thor--
oughly astonished to notice the few things you can’t buy
in a pins and needle store. Candies, boots, books, pen-
knives, pickles, patent medicines and a wilderness of
goods you would never expect to meet under the cir-
cumstances stare you in the face at ridiculously low
prices.
They have lunch rooms, where you can refresh, and I
seriously contemplate making an offer for the privilege
of running drinking bars as an outside attraction. On re-
flection I think the bars would be an “inside ” attraction.
When it is possible for the American husband to get
drunk under the roof of a store where his wife and
daughters are conspiring against his financial well being
and peace of mind, then we have, indeed, realized the
ideal conception of a free country, and the beneficent
effects of our democratic form of government can no
further go.
There is no place so admirable for a rendezvous as the
New York stores I have been describing. This is particu-
larly so now when the “ boom ” rages, and an apparently
reckless use of money characterizes the hour. What is
the logical consequence ?
Come with me to any one of these bazars. You notice
four, five or a dozen young men lounging along the side-
walk, admiring the decorations of the windows, and act-
ing with elegant listlessness. We lose sight of them for a
little while, and take a tour through the store or down the
block. Handsome woman that, isn’t she ? By Jove what
style 1 Look at those two pretty girls. Been to school or
their music teacher’s. Going home now to practice or
read a novel by Miss Austen. Are they? Not much. In
ten minutes we meet the handsome women again coming
out of her favorite bazar, and with her is one of our ele-
gant loungers. Two of the others, later on, go by with
our school girls. These are cases wo see. How many are
there of whose existence we know nothing, know as little
in fact as the down-town husband, or hard-working
fathers.
It is absolutely impossible to prevent these meetings,
and the system of immorality which springs from them.
At the best we can but deplore, as long as New York city
possesses so many handsome, well-dressed, idle scoun-
drels who seem to have so little difficulty in making these
shopping acquaintances, so long will a practice exist
which is crowned at the start by the harmless flowers of
flirtation, but which, only too surely, bears the dead-sea
fruit of remorse.
Let us imagine a little drama, a Christmas play, which
will illustrate this:
Scene—A Sixth avenue store.
Time —The present—also 3 p. it.
Dramatis Persona: —Handsome married woman. Hand-
some man. (Doesn’t matter about his marriage, i.not
in this play.)
She— “ But really you ought not to come here so often
accidentally. You know I have to come here to shop.”
He— 1 ‘ Certainly I do; that’s why I come. ’ ’
She— “ But people will notice.”
He—“ Never fear that; they are too busy with them-
selves, and besides, we are so eminently proper.”
She —“ Why, of course we are—what should we be ? ”
He— “ Friends instead of mere acquaintances.”
She —“ But consider how we met—how impudent and
horrid you were to follow me from here and offer to carry
my bundles.”
He— “ Never mind that now. It’s ancient history. But
let us go and have some lunch. You know you didn’t
come in here to buy anything.”
She—" I came in to look at that cloak, the $l5O one. I
dream of it atnight.”


He- 1 “ What’s the trouble. Price too steep ? ”
She—“lt would swamp my husband’s business if 1
bought that.”
He—“ Why not let me present it to jou ? ”
She—“ Heavens 1 you take my breath away. And why
could yon?”
Hz—“ Simply because it pleases me. Here, miss. (He
beckons to saleslady.) You have this lady’s address. On
Dec. 24th send that cloak to it. Give me a receipt for the
money (Throws down filthy lucre). ”
She— “ But my husband—he will wonder 1 ”
He—“ No, he won’t- If he does, tell him it’s really in-
explicable how they get up these imitations. Then say
now here’s a cloak I only gave $3B for. It’s every bit as good
as one I saw marked $l5O. Then he’ll think what a provi-
dent, prudent wife he has. But come; I have thereceipt,
let’s take the little lunch.”
She— (Sotto voa). “ But am I prudent? ”
This is only the first act.
There are thousands of such histrionic stories being told
in New York to-day. Next to virtue as a basis of conduct
among the daughters of Eve comes a love for fine dress-
ing. It is not an acquired sin; it is a natural desire.
When Poverty is a third condition then Virtue and Fin©
Dress are always in battle array against each other.
It is so at least in the big cities; it is especially so in
New York. We are not able to be spectators in every in-
stance, but the jewel scene in " Faust” is in constant re-
hearsal. Never does Mephisto wield so much power over
the impecunious as in the holiday shopping time.
Conservative, law-abiding citizen as I am, I have fre-
quently concocted the most gory plots in order to be able
to obtain some gem to hang at beauty’s ear.
Imagine then the critical position of beauty herself who
goes shopping with an empty purse, amd allows Mephis-
topholes to purr in that pink ear as he jingles his gold and
she gazes upon the forbidden fruit, whether it be a dia-
mond necklace or a silk circular.
I think I will credit a modest sum to the account in my
ledger headed up, “ Sisters, cousins, aunts,” and do my
shopping in the Bowery.
HEW YORK’S CHRISTMAS RIHHER.
Christmas is not the holiday in New York to the extent
that “ New Year’s” is, but it is thoroughly observed all
the same in regard to its gastronomic and other pleasura-
ble details. Ido not think that the city enthuses as much
in the religious direction as it should, and I am afraid the
average young man—say the hard-worked clerk, for in-
stance—looks upon it as a secular holiday, during which
he is expected to eat a great deal of turkey, play consid-
erable billiards and punish untold hot drinks.
In the poetic past I used to getup by candle-lightforthe
sake of attending the services on Christmas morning at
this or the other Catholic or High Episcopalian church,
where a fine display and good music might be confidently
expected. But age is beginning to tell upon Paul Prowler,
and that significant fact, considered along with the equal-
ly significant circumstance of devoting Christmas Eve to
purposes of mild wassail, has militated against the early
rising habit.
It is generally the savory sauce of the dinner which
greets me when I open my eyes to find that I have a terri-
ble “ head” on me, and to wonder if the other fellows feel
just as bad.
On such occasions you can exorcise the remorse of
Christmas morning by saying, " Never mind; one week
more, and then I’ll swear off.”
I know that such is always the procedure in my case.
This church and social holiday comes to all of us this
year in vastly different guises. There were lots of fellows
who couldn’t conscientiously give thanks on Thanks-
giving day, and beyond a doubt the city holds at this
writing an immense horde of miserable beings who can
take no comfort in the celebration of December 25th. The
gentlemen in the Tombs are probably of this ilk, although
they are by no means the worst off. They get a good
Christmas dinner and plenty of it. Warden I inn is an
officer who appreciates the merits of a substantial meal,
and, like his predecessor, Mr. Quinn, has the sentimental
nature which urges him to look after the stomachs as well
as the moral apparatus of his charges.
It depends, however, in the case of a Tombs prisoner, a
good deal upon what he is there for in calculating the
pleasure and dyspepsia he may he able to extract from a
Christmas dinner. To the utterly callous wretch it
doesn’t matter. He eats like a hog, and only regrets the
absence of the distillery rum to which he has become
accustomed. The man of nervous organism, who knows
he is guilty of the crime for which he is soon to be tried,
can hardly be expected to enjoy the special meal when he
reflects upon the infinite possibilities of where he may be
next Christmas.
And how about the murderer ! There are in the Tombs
now several prisoners whose crime can be called by no
milder name than murder. As they look forward to the
death of 1879, and the hidden scenes of 1880, it strikes me
that the bone upon which they might be gnawing would
turn cold in their grasp and the most bounteous dessert
lose it piquancy. Still you ean’t tell. Look at the plow-
man’s appetite which the average victim of the gallows
generally possesses. “ After sleeping well for five or six
hours the condemned awoke and ate a hearty breakfastof
ham and eggs.” Such is always in the newspapers.
Toujours ham and eggs 1 There must be some reason for
this. It is strange, but it is no more certain that each
“ nigger ” hung down South goes straight to the bosom of
Abraham than that the last breakfast of those who are
roped into the other world is of ham and eggs.
But the coming Christmas dinner is a much more pleas-
ant subject than a murderer’s breakfast.
All of the missions, schools, and other charitable asso-
ciations which begin at the Five Points and seem to crop
up everywhere between that section and High Bridge,
will celebrate Christmas in the usual way. The children
will be scrubbed until their little ears and noses are
awfully sore, and then, after singing a lot of chilly
hymns, they will be set loose upon the provender.
In the Sailors’ Snug Harbor, on Staten Island, and in
the city’s senile retreats—such as the Home for the Re-
formation of Indigent Widows over 90 years of age—there


will be a high old time. Many gum games will bo played
upon the turkeys, and, in view of the condition of the
teeth of these aged wards, it is to be hoped the fowls
cooked for them will possess few of the attributes charac-
terizing the boarding-house turkey.
X will pass lightly over this portion of the subject. If I
•choose to put all my money where it will do the most
good for the directors of the “Yellow-Eyed Wild-Cat
Mining Company ” and so curtail myself that the Christ-
mas of 1879 still finds me in the “ forlorn hope ” that at-
tacks the boarding-house turkey, it is purely a matter of
private misery, and needs no prying into.
That is, the subject doesn’t. As for the turkey the re-
verse is considerably the case.
The proper spread for the day is what you will
probably find in the homes of the men who have been
making a million a week lately in Wall street, and by the
same token there are more than a few families in New
York on that day who will not have even a stereopticon
view of a turkey for their Christmas owing to this same
Wall street agitation.
Such families will have “lame ducks” for dinner—a
melancholy lay out.
Better is a good dinner with fine herbs than none at all,
and I take it that a Christmas table fixed up with plenty
■of Russell Sage would seem appetizing. Jay Gould will
probably dine well. Gould suggests “gold,” and “gold”
suggests “mint.” All these magnates need have no
worrying fear about being able to collar a square meal.
There is scarcely time enough for them to lose so much
money as to force them to do the lunch racket.
This is a very good metropolitan institution, and is quite
a lucky idea for the poor, lonely wretch of a boarder who
has to experience the desert island loneliness of his hall
bedroom until the mournful dinner-bell rings and sum-
mons him to his mathematical share of the popular bird.
I refer, of course, to the elegant lunches which the hotels
and big bars spread for their guests. If you arrive early
at one of these tables you are sure to fare well. They are
exquisitely arranged with glittering silver and snowy
linen, and really look so pretty that it seems a shame to
•disturb the picture. It only seems so for half a second.
Then you arm yourself with a fork, and while the waiter
gets you a bit of turkey or duck you go to spearing pickled
•oysters.
The only drawback about the free lunch on Christmas
day, outside of making it impossible for a man to eat a
set dinner anywhere, is that the leaning your waistcoat
against the numerous bars is apt to result in partial or
complete intoxication. At least, 1 have heard so. That,
however, is a phase of the question which I, moralist
though I be, have nothing to do with. These are the
merry holiday times, and I am not going to preach any
teetotalism.
Christmas is a pretty good day with the theatres, but
not so good as Thanksgiving day and by no means as bad
as New Year’s day. They will all give matinees, and in
the surrounding towns for fifty miles around there will
bo two performances by snap companies that are always
made up long in advance. Very few of these ventures
fail, and in the majority of instances you will see that
xeal good names are on the programmes.
I always pity the show people and envy the manager on
Christmas. He can always be at home in the bosom of
own turkey if he want’s to. but the players must take the
bird on the fly, or in the flies, or on the wing, or in the
wings. Anyway so that you get it I think it would be a
jolly good idea to play no pieces on Christmas day save
those that were based upon the idea, and I would have it
so arranged that the denouement should take place at
dinner, a real dinner, no papier mashe affair. An ingenious
author could serve the fool of the plot with the part that
goes over the fence last, while the villain might be
swindled out of his dinner entirely.
Christmas is a more than usually festive day at the
clubs, those gorgeous institutions w r here rich young swells
spend money twice over by squandering both cash and
time. And we know what old Temp«« is. Timeismoney,
and that is the reason it fugits. A clubman is called upon
to partake of the extra lunch which wich the steward has
spread, and if he doesn’t dip into the champagne and
brandy punch he is a renegade. Poor Fechter 1 That was
his favorite drink.
What is Christmas among the starving poor in our
reeking realm, for it is a fact that we always have them
with us despite flurries in Wall street and businessbooms.
I shudder to think. The Christmas of the poor, as
touched by the pen of Dickens, yielded to that wizard
some of his best creations. But Ido not allude to that
kind of poor. I mean the actually starving, always hun-
gry, desperate, wicked, wolfish element of our squalid
population that hides in cellars, skulks In alleys, and re-
fuses, perhaps logically enough, to see any good in a so-
ciety which forces them to their condition when all the
rest of the world is making merry.
I shouldn’t like to go through Jersey street at midnight
on Christmas eve. The appearance of a citizen with the
outward semblance of having had something to eat, not to
mention the liklihood of his possessing a dollar in his
pocket, would be too much for the Jersey street people.
Taking the time of the visit into consideration they would
resent it as an insult, and the visitor would probably fur-
nish the mincemeat for the next day’s pie.
It is natural for the poor to feel more desperate than
usual about the holiday times. Ido. There isn’t a Christ-
mas or a New Year’s that doesn’t inspire me with some-
thing of the sensations of a pirate. This comes from hav-
ing neither money nor a contented spirit, which they say
is the same thing if not a better article. Well and good,
it may be so, but if I had a cart-load of contentment just
now I’d willingly supply the neighborhood at so much a
bushel.
Christmas after all is the day for the little ones. It be-
longs to them. Candies, bon-bons, cake, fairy stories and
pantomimes should characterize it chiefly. Santa Claus
is a reality up to a certain age, and it is a good idea that
he is. We lose the charming superstitions of adolescence
quite soon enough. Personally, I regretted sadly at the
time the discovery of the fact that there was no such gen-
tleman as the one whom I fondly believed enjoyed his
yearly sleigh-ride over the roofs and preferred coming
down the chimney to any other way of entering the
house.
I shall hang up my stockings all the same.
It may bring luck and obviate the necessity of my hang-
ing up the bar-tender on the corner.


Ug.
"faSI fl i ni
I
* wijo wants wont;)’.




NEW YEAR’S GAELS.
I notice that there has been the usual row in the news-
papers about the young ladies having wine on New Year’s
day.
And I expect to notice on New Year’s day the usual
amount of drawing-room drunkenness, dilletante debauch-
ery and fashionable fuddling.
The institution of making and receiving New Year’s
callr is one which New York has inherited from its good,
old Dutch ancestry, and precisely as it is true that it will
never fall into desuetude, so is it true that the temperance
table will never become very fashionable. The ministers
may preach, and total abstinence papers may shriek
annually in cold water articles, but the custom of drink-
ing a glass of wine beside the cradle of the baby year is so
deep-seated that it is scarcely probable it will be done
aw-ay with under the pressure of any purely reformatory
movement.
And, besides, why should it be abolished ? This talk of
many a young man getting his first drink from Beauty’s
hand in a Fifth avenue parlor while making a New Year’s
call, and then rushing swiftly to a drunkard’s grave, is
all rot.
That kind of young man will get his first drink and do
the drunkard’s grave business with commendable rapidity
by merely utilizing the saloon advantages to be found on
every side. He need-never step into a parlor where the
refining influence of woman is to be met with, and ten to
one, if he exists at all, he is the kind of sottish calf that
drinks himself into the jim-jams by one spree, and then
jumps out of the window to spike himself upon the area
railings below.
The New Year’s table is spread for gentlemen by ladies,
and it is expected that a man calling himself a gentleman
will know how to deport himself at it. I have made New
Year’s calls for many years, and have never seen an
instance where what was drunk put one beyond the extra
vivacious and merry point. It is undeniably true that
some very young men do get drunk. But then they can
scarcely be called gentlemen, and their behavior must not
be cited in an argument against the ladies offering cham-
pagne and sherry along with the cold turkey and the
salads.
They would get drunk at the hotels and bars anyhow,
the only difference being that the intoxicating agents
would not be near so good as those to be met with in the
parlors of society.
X take it that this will be a very brilliant New Year’s.
It should be. For some time past we have had rather
doleful ones, and it is now that we should break the spell
and sail into 1880 with the determination to make it a
banner year of prosperity. I will admit that my sensa-
tions on January 2nd, at about 7 a. m., may be of such a
rueful nature as to make it impossible for me to see any-
thing but breakers ahead, but that will be merely a sample
of private woe, easily removed by the judicious use of
cognac and Delatour’s soda, which can have no effect
upon the improvement in the general outlook. By con-
sulting the cards that I have already received I find that
some ladies who have been clubbing together at one table
for a few years back are going to receive independently
this time. That augurs well. It means that the down-
town business of the old man is looking up.
I have seen in my time some gorgeous tables, and if I
i slip into my dress suit on Thursday next to make calls I
anticipate a repetition of the festive magnificence. On
my list are the names of two or three honafide teetotal
people. There will be no wine there, and no one will ex-
pect any. And what a swinish idea it is, anyhow, to
think that getting a drink is the chief end of this beauti-
ful custom. I take more pleasure in meeting the ladies.
My next pleasure is a salad, which I get at a particular
house. In fact, I attend to all details of eating and drink-
ing at this one table, exercising only my esthetic qualities
at other places I may visit.
New York’s belles certainly do present a stunning sight
when arrayed for the reception of New York’s young men
on New Year’s day. I remember last New Year’s day that
I called in Madison avenue upon a lady whose costume
was simply superb, only, as I thought then, it wasn’t all
there. But it was; every inch that had been intended
was in the dress. I didn’t object to the semi-nudity of the
exhibition, but I thought of Samuel Johnson when he told
Garrick: “ Davy, I sha’n’tcome behind the scenes atyour
theatre any more. The silk stockings and white bosoms
of your actresses excite my amatory propensities and
render me unfit for work on the dictionary.”
If the ministers want to howl about social misconduct
on New Year’s day let them preach against respectable
married ladies and young women who#xpect to be wives
dressing so decollete that a half-fuddled fast young man
about town might fall into the natural mistake of forget-
ting where he was.
In fact, I don’t know but what the ladies of the demi-
monde on dress, or rather undress, occasions are a little
more' severe. They can afford to be, just as the married
woman, safe in her position, can afford some of the
artistic freedom of the painter’s model.
Speaking of women in whose bright lexicon of youth
there is no such word as virtue, reminds me that New
Year’s day is made much of by the most stylish and popu-
lar of that class. I have seen tables spread in haunts of
gilded vice that outshone in splendor any to be found on
Fifth avenue. The collation, the linen, the silver, the
wine, the servants and all the other details were furnish-
ed on that scale of reckless magnificence always assumed
by such people.
Here it is the order of the day to get drunk, or rather
drunker, since the visitors all come late, and half of them
wouldn’t call at all if looking upon the wine when it was
red had not simultaneously inflamed their wanton quali-
ties and unseated their judgment.
Let us go further down the ladder and see how the lower
strata of New York city observe its greatest holiday. We
are now in the proper field for the workmen of Dr. Crosby
and the Society for the Suppression of Vice.
Take the barrooms, for instance. Every one of them
of any pretensions to style has a New Year’s table in the
saloon or a room up-stairs. I shall always remember
what a jolly time I had in a Third avenae house last year.
The table was in the second story, front, and was so


ample and so crowded with dishes and bottles that the
guests ate and drank only by using that dexterity neces-
sary in a steamer stateroom when five or six attempt to
toss off a “ bon-voyage ” glass at once.
I was introduced all around, and, being put forward as
something vague in the newspaporial and book line, found
myself suddenly raised to the position of special guest,
even eclipsing the claims to that distinction put forward
by an ex-alderman, who had a very red face and most
tremendous appetite.
We drank hot whiskey principally, and the men did
not hesitate to smoke cigars. You can imagine the con-
dition in which the atmosphere was in in a little while.
Owing to the cloud of smoke that rested upon the table
it was as much as I could do to keep the buxom landlady
located. She seemed to float o’er the scene like a vol-
uptuous fairy.
The narrow stairs were crowded with drinkers from
the bar below, who were being sent to the wife by the
husband in shoals. Under all these circumstances the
affair would have passed off pleasantly enough if some
one hadn’t introduced the subject of politics.
My red-faced alderman, glass in one hand and turkey
bone in the other, was on his unsteady legs in a moment.
It took about another moment for a man near the door to
call the alderman a liar.
The glass went first in the direction of the offender,
then the turkey bone, then a decanter, etc. I didn’t take
notes at the time, but it seems to me that the alderman
got on the table, which was a sort of barricade, and tried
to crawl over it. Some one pulled the table-cloth vio-
lently off, alderman and all, and, the fight becoming gen-
eral, the air appeared to me to be literally packed with
flying tumblers, bottles, jars of oysters, and other mis-
siles.
The bottle was taken up on the stairs and communi-
cated itself to the barroom. Seriously I was uncom-
fortable, although I had suffered nothing more dangerous
than a scalp wound, due to my being in the way of a
winged tumbler.
It was then that by the masterly move of crawling
under the table I reached madame, who was as much in
a corner as it was possible.
I asked her how I could extricate her from her warm
position, and it was then she thought of reaching a bath-
room by a door against which the table had rested. It
didn’t now, because it was upside down. The brawlers
were nearly all on the landing and stairs, with the police
in the possession of the barroom.
We reached the bath-room, but as it gave upon the
short hall where the stairs were it was clear she couldn’t
go out j ust yet.
The situation was embarrassing, I knew the proprietor
was jealous, and there was no mistake about his being
drunk.
The window remained. Recommending Mrs. to
take a bath and compose herself, and seeing to It that I
had firmly locked and bolted the door through which we
came, I got out of the bath-room window on to a shed
and jumped into the back yard of the saloon.
To meet with what fate ?
To be collared by a policeman, who was posted there,
and taken to the station house. Several of the New Year’s
callers were already on hand when I entered, among
them the ex-alderman, who had preferred a charge of
deadlj 7 assault against some one evidently not present.
The alderman was most assuredly a pitiable sight. He
had a black eye, some of his hair was scraped off, and
there was a pickled oyster entangled in his left beard.
The moment his fish-like eye fell upon me he said, tri-
umphantly, to the sergeant:
“There he is. That’s the viper that said I was n. g.
and hit me with the cruet stand.”
If I had suddenly been in collision with an iceberg I
could not have been more astonished.
“Lookslike it, too,” remarked the sergeant. “Evi-
dently an old hand.”
I didn’t say a word, except to answer that I was born
here, could read and write, etc., and then “ for crime un-
known X went to my dungeon cell.”
Of course, it was all right when the Captain came in,
and X got home shortly after dark, rather preferring the
gloom, in fact.
This secret has lain in my breast all through the year
that is now having its last round with old Father Time,
and I would not have told it save as a warning to my
readers.
It is perhaps better to confine yourself to legitimate
calling. If you must visit the gin dealers avoid the
saloons with political proclivities, and do not drink too
much hot whiskey.
And never allow yourself to be double-banked in a
corner of a little second story front room.
In closing let me give my readers a few rules for ob-
servance in calling :
No. 1. Engineer it to have some swell friend invite you
to a seat in his carriage. By doing this you avoid being
struck with a small-pox hack, and besides you visit all
his friends, who will send you cards next year.
2. Get ninety-cent gloves, and about five pairs. You
always show a good hand then, as you can put them on
between houses.
3. Say “yes” promptly when the people who have no
wine visible ask you faintly to have a glass. You may
not get any wine, but it’s fun.
4. If you run across a fellow who is soft on one of the
ladies you have seen during the day tell him that his
rival has been there hours, and you think has sent for his
trunk.
5. Take your worst umbrella along if it rains or snows,
but never leave a house without an umbrella.
6. Tell all the jealous married women that you have
just left their husbands at So-and-so’s, naming a rich
widow who is reported as being fast.
7. Don't mix your drinks, but get comfortably full on
good champagne.
8. Don’t leave money in your overcoat, and remember
where you put your overshoes.
By so doing you will pass the “ Happy New Year,’’
which Paul Prowler, Esq., now wishes you.


PEOPLE * WHO LIVE BY THEIR WITS.
There isn’t a city in the world more densely infested
with the social parasites called “card fortune tellers”
than New York.
Their style, their names, residences and characteristics
generally have changed since poor Doesticks wrote his
“Witches,” but they exist in sufficient quantities to
fleece the rural and the unwary generally, to trade upon
the weak spots in human nature, which they have studied
as closely as Balzac, and to make for themselves a very
decent living.
Take up a morning paper, the Herald especially. Under
the heads of “Astrology” and “Fortune Telling” you
will find scores of advertisements, in which the adver-
tisements profess to cast your horoscope, to show you
your future wife or husband, and all for the remarkably
cheap sum of fifty cents, ladies a quarter.
I could never understand the economical distinction
made in favor of the ladies. It is probably based on the
fact that they believe a great deal more readily than the
others, and that they are more frequent customers.
I am sure that if I didn’t like the first twenty-five cent
fortune told me I would go again and to another shop.
By perseverance and a liberal outlay of quarters it is
possible to strike a “ hummer.”
It seems strange that these men and women should
flourish in an age so enlightened as this and in a city
which possesses the focussed civilization of the day, but
it is true. I know personally one woman and one man
who do nothing else for a living, and who have confided
in me that customers are never scarce. But what is the
use of speculating on such idiosyncrasies of -fifty and
twenty-five cent shrimps when a gilded whale like Com-
modore Vanderbilt frequently ran his business on the pre-
dictions of soothsayers, and was altogether as super-
stitious as a sailor.
There are two kinds of the lower class of fortune tell-
ers—those who still stick to Egyptian mummery and
come the red curtain and black velvet gown over yon, and
the other, more modern, whose office is very little differ-
ent from that of a real estate firm, and who go about the
business in a cold-blooded manner. Both styles take.
The hysterical women and servant girls generally prefer
the people with the strange names and the outlandish
garb. It seems more like the genuine astrological affair,
and is certainly more for the money.
There are two or three of these mystery shops in
Bleecker street. The one I know is in Bedford street. I
have frequently been a concealed witness of a seance and
have helped drink the beer into which the money was
immediately turned when the woman—it is more fre •
quently a woman—was gone.
If it wasn’t that these poor wretches actually believe
the fanfaronade of taffy served up to them, that they are
so dumb or superstitious that they cannot see that the
whole system is conducted on the stale principle of telling
every card in the pack after you have become possessed
of a knowledge of one—if it wasn’t for this which makes
taking their money a species of revenge wreaked upon
them for being so stupid—l could laugh when I am behind
the Bedford street curtains.
But laughter is impossible in the face of genuine tears
and the quavering voice in which the dead are asked
after. When it is a light-headed girl, who is anxious
about her future lord, the case is different.
Mr. Charles Foster is at the head of all fortune tellers
in this country. He charges $5, and his statements are
as remarkable and startling, done as they are without
any pretence of side-show business, as the drivellings of
the Bleecker and Bedford street astrologers are puerile
and transparent.
I do not pretend to speak of him critically, and haye in-
troduced him simply to make the magic line complete.
He has always more work than he can attend to, and is
especially sought after by ladies. As many swell car-
riages have halted at his door as ever lined the curb at
Grace church, and in many instances the equipages are
the same. He gave me a setting once, and I shall never
forget what he said to me :
‘•You must remember everything X say, young man,
because I shall be in a trance, and will retain nothing of
what passes from the spirit world to you through me.”
Then he took off his coat—for the day was very warm-
lit a twenty-five cent cigar, and began.
What he told me doesn’t matter now. It was nothing
to smile at, I can assure you. What I want to do is to call
attention to the peculiarities of his trance.
His cigar happening to go out he lit it with a fresh
match, and then went on. Some one wrapped at the
door. He excused himself and attended to the business,
which I think had something to do with dinner, after
which we descended into Hades again. All this in a
trance ! I think he was still in the trance when he pro-
duced a decanter and gave me as good a glass of brandy as
I ever tasted.
I can understand the success of such people, but when
it comes to the shuffling of a greasy pack of cards by the
coarse, red, fat fingers of an east side seress, who ekes
out her financial requirements by taking in washing, per-
haps, I am willing to confess that I am puzzled ; but as
long as people won’t sit thirteen at table or undertake a
new business on Friday, the half and quarter dollars will
continue to flow into the purses of these operators from
those of their dupes.
I could explain all the card swindles, spirit photograph-
ing and all the rest of the damned nonsense, if it was at
all necessary. It isn’t. The peculiar class making up
the patrons of the astrologers are beyond the reach of
reason. They have Napoleon’s dream book in their bu-
reau drawers, and they are are as much sunk in super-
stition of the absurd sort as are the Vaudoo negroes of
New Orleans.
Another source of revenue for those who are smart
enough to coin money out of the supernatural is the
spiritualistic seance. The reader will at first think I mean
shows given in halls by regular professors. Not at all.
The people to whom I refer are ordinary citizens in the
humbler classes, who have discovered suddenly that they
are “mediums.” As soon as it is positively established
that an Indian maiden in the spirit land has selected
them as a speaking trumpet, then the vocation in which
they are engaged is dropped, and all their resources ar#
turned toward a cabinet show.
39
GLIMPSES OF GOTHAM.


I have been to many, but the one in Grand street, run
by a Mrs. Wilson, I think, is perhaps just the biggestfraud
of them all. You pay 25 cents to sit on a hard chair, be-
tween two long-haired disciples, and you are expected to
believe that Mrs. Wilson, who disappeared in the cabinet
is still tied tq her chair, and that the very hideous look-
ing gentleman, with the black beard, who tells us through
the opening in the door how he was drowned in Lake
Michigan forty years ago, is really “ Uncle Billy,” and
Hot Mrs. Wilson with a mask and whiskers.
If there is any movement on the part of one of the doubt-
ers to get at Uncle Billy, he is immediately squelched,
and if the spirit of criticism is too active, why the hus-
band of the “ mejum,” or some one else declares that the
spirits cannot work save where there is perfect har-
mony.
That means translated —“we can not continue to im-
pose upon you unless you sit perfectly still and believe
all we say.”
Wednesday and Saturday evenings these seances
flourish all over the city. The price is generally 25 cents,
but there are cheaper entertainments for 10 cents. An
inferior kind of angel is used at these.
I know a man and his wife, she being the “ medium,”
Who give cabinet entertainments at the houses of the
rich, just as the “Punch and Judy ” man does, and for
that matter just as Sarah Bernhardt recites or models be-
fore a drawing-room audience, or Nilsson sings, for so
much a night.
This preeminently the proper racket to strike. No one
in the Fifth avenue parlor is rude enough to interfere, the
parlor is always big enough to make the experiment a
tolerable safe one, and the whole affair is only looked
upon as an agreeable way of passing the time. A magic
lantern is just as good.
It is the cosmopolitan character of New York city which
makes all this aberration, if I can so define it, possible.
We have every religion under the sun practised in
Gotham. The Koran and Veda books are read here as regu"
larly as in the Orient, and I have seen with my civilized
and Christian optics the temple of Joss in the Chinese
quarter at a time when a Chatham square cigar mer-
chant was at his prayers.
I am not particularly acquainted with all its
ramifications, but the Chinese religion con-
tains the act of prayer reduced to a
beautiful system. They are painted on fire-cracker paper,
and are sold by a man who makes prayers a specialty.
When you feel a little wicked, or are conscious of any
sensation which calls for prayer as an antidote, you go to
the Jogs church in Baxter street, and burn one or two of
these slips. Certainly nothing could be more simple.
The Lascars also have their club room in that locality,
and observe faithfully their religious devotions. There are
by no means as many of them in the city as there are
Chinese, but there are still enough to make a colony.
Travelling in Baxter street takes me “ Five Points ” out
of my way.
Let us return. The most magnificent attempt ever made
to introduce a magico-religion into this peculiarly sus
ceptible town was that made by lime. Blavatsky and Col
Olcott.
These two are now in India, riding around on elephants
and otherwise disporting themselves. The madame had
elegant apartments np-town, fitted up with gloomy mag.
niflcence. She used to hold seances there, and succeeded
so well in making converts to the religion of Buddha that
1 believe she was enabled to form a regular church oi
society previous to her departure. As expounded by
Mme. Blavatsky there is something solid and attractive in
the Buddha faith, and if I should change, it would be t*
become one of her disciples.
Do not be surprised then if I should come down to the
office sometime, wearing a black skull-cap, and a chintz
night-gown with snakes worked all over it.
Why, you naturally ask, would so conservative a max
as our Mr. Prowler, give up the faith of his childhood!
I’ll tell you. All the other religions promise no felicity
of an absorbing nature until after death. If Mme. Blav-
atsky has been correctly reported she has made a wonder-
ful discovery, the utilization of which means fortune in
this world in a very little while.
The secret is this —she can dematerialize articles, waft
them to some objective point, and then by simple exer-
cise of will, it being all the same whether she is one or a
thousand miles away, she can cause the object to assume
its original form and value.
Mmd that, its value, for therein lies the applica-
tion.
So far she has succeeded, so the story runs, with noth
ing but kid gloves. That’s enough for me. Mme. Blavat-
sky is said to have sent a pair by the magic method from
Bnmbsiy to London.
When I have learned to do this, and perhaps if I am a
good Buddhist I may be able to handle lace and silk um-
brellas also, I will have no need to consult any of the
fortune tellers.
I will open a shop in Paris, and one in New York. By
the use of my supernatural power I’ll send enough kid
gloves over here at Paris prices to break the market; a
sufficient quantity of silk umbrellas to enable every
young man to possess an elegant article to “ put up,” and
lace to that extent that every back kitchen will have
some brand floating at the windows.
In the meantime the custom house officials will gradu
ally commit suicide one by one, or go to the asylum for
the hopelessly insane.
The only cloud in the sky is that I don’t believe the
madame can do anything of the sort. She is a fraud, just
as the Bleecker street women are, the only difference
being her noble birth, her magnificent style, and her in-
tellect.
Col. Olcott is either a dupe, or he stands in with her.
He was certainly fooled grandly by the Eddy family
of Vermont, a member of which, I see by the papers, can’t
go out, because one night not long since a drunken visitor
kicked the materialized spirit on the nos*.


MEN AND WOMEN WHO DEAL IN FANCY COSTUMES.
The business of letting out costumes—and that reminds
me that the last one I tried to wear needed considerable
letting out—has its peculiar seasons, just as other voca-
tions have.
We are now in the ball period of our metropolitan exist-
ence, and as the dealer in fantastic habits skips about
among his tinseled stock he feels like crying, “ On with
the dance 1” It is just at present that he makes money,
or tries to, at least, passing the rest of the year as best he
can, buoyed up by the same hope which animates a
watering-place hotel keeper.
He is something like such an individual in several of
his characteristics; as, for instance, his charges. He en-
deavors to come as near getting for one night’s use of a
domino or dress the price that either would bring, if sold,
as is possible. What is the consequence f He is continu-
ally selling his entire stock and getting it back for
nothing. This fact throws some light also upon his ability
to skim along so well in the summer.
There are costumers and costumers. Men like Lanou-
ette, who furnish the theatres with the dresses for this or
that entire play, are at the top of the heap. They have
always lots of dresses to hire, but their principal business
is to manufacture and sell, out and out. All society ladies
number one or more elegant fancy dresses among their
toilette collection, and should be capable at any moment
of accepting an invitation to a public fancy dress ball or a
private masquerade without the slightest embarrassment
or anxiety as to what should be worn.
No real bon-ton lady ever hires a grotesque ball dress.
You never know, you know, what horrid creature may
have worn a costume that is loaned, and to tell the truth
my lady is right. You hardly do ever know, you know.
I imagine that the confessions of a fancy ball dress
Would be racy reading. What a pity they can’t talk.
The humbler class of costumers are over on the East
River avenues, Second avenue especially, and are also to
be found along the Bowery and on Third avenue. They
have the second floor, as a rule, and in one of its windows
they stick their sign, a sort of political club transparency
affair, with the picture of an unhealthy young courtier on
one side, waiting for a shepherdess with a red nose to
come around the corner and join him.
When you get up stairs you find an old woman who is
deaf, a short counter, and a lot of pawn-shop shelving
with bundles on them. In the next room there are four
or five girls working away at new suits made out of old.
By the Judicious use of red velvet, ribbons and laces to
match, with a liberal allowance of spangles, you can
make a king’s royal rig into a bull-flghter’s magnificent
“get-up,” or into anything else for that matter.
There is a sameness about the stock of these people
which is simply disgusting. Vivandieres, muleteers,
kings, queens, shepherds, fat boys, French courtiers, Pad-
dies, Dutchmen, Indians, etc., etc., are the .constantly
recurring features.
This year there is a run on “ Pinafore,” and no fancy
101 l will be comnlete without Little Buttercup, Josephine,
Mr Joseph, Dick Deadeye, and the remainder of that
crew.
Why is the opera of “ Pinafore ” like the poor, and, W
some cases, the very poor ?
Because it is always with ns. The costumers will keej
its melodious story before the public long after it haf
ceased to be enacted upon the stage, and in years to come,
when I who write and you who read these lines have been
treated like bottles of champagne to the extent of being
put on ice—the only difference being that the champagne
will possess all the life—costumers will bring down fancy*
I suits, spread them upon the counter, and then say:
“ There’s a good Sir Joseph Porter, K. C. 8., sir, and as
for the lady, what could be more charming than this
Josephine f”
“ But who was Sir Joseph, and what Josephine is it?”
“Ah, there you have me. You know X inherited this
story and stock from my grandfather, and the names I
have just mentioned are on the tickets. Luckily I have a
sort of historical catalogue. 1 may be able to get some
information from it.”
Whereupon the costumer of the future will read as fol-
lows: “These are characters in a musical work called
* Pinafore,’ written by a Mr. Gilbert, of Sullivan street. It
ran at twenty New York theatres at once, and during its
career all the lunatic asylums had to be provided with
extra wings to accommodate the patients made mad by
hearing the tunes. The ultimate consequence was that it
became a paradox, for although successful it was heartily
damned all around. Men became frenzied when their
fellows whistled or hummed its tunes, and citizens were
wont to fall upon and rend each other in their excess of
rage. At last the government interfered, and imposed the
penalty of death upon all transgressors. Mr. Gilbert was
to have been hanged, but escaped by showing that he had
been changed at birth.”
So much for the costumer yet to be heard from. His
cousin of to-day is a practical chap, utterly unmoved by
his romantic surroundings. This absence of poetry in the
composition of a hirer of fancy suits often struck me
when I tried to analyze his character and ascertain the
motives which led to the choice of business. All that I
have met possess no more sentiment than a soap-boiler.
I suppose that in the majority of instances the men and
women who take to the trade are former attaches of the
theatres. Possibly a grizzled costumer I know was once
an actor himself, and began with his own wardrobe as
the nucleus of the rather extensive stock he now pos-
sesses. It was he who told me the following story. I will
put it in my own words:
About ten years ago a young man climbed up to his
place in Forsyth street and asked to be shown some hand-
some dominos for ladies. He selected an elegant mouse-
colored one, lined with white satin, and got a pale blue
silk mask additionally.
It was just at dusk. Being the costliest domino in his
lot, the costumer asked for a deposit of money to insure
its return. The young man willingly complied, and paid
for it in advance. There was no ball that night, and the
dealer supposed, of course, that it was to be worn at a
private party.
Next morning, at about 10 o’clock, a veiled woman


came into the shop and asked if a young man, describing
the one in question accurately, had dealt there the night
previous.
It’s part of the business to lie, and my old acquaintance
experienced no trouble in unblushingly remarking that
no such person had been in the place.
“ I only wanted to see if he had asked you to deny his
visit,” she said, scornfully, “ for he was here, he did deal
with you, and I now return the goods. You can keep any
deposit he may have left.”
Saying which she slammed a small bundle upon the
counter and left. The old man was thoroughly dazed at
the sudden turn in the conversation, at his discomfiture
when he thought he was very smart with his innocent
prevarication, and at the visit generally of a woman
of whom he could remember nothing beyond her eyes
burning like coals back of her veil.
When he recovered his senses he found himself holding
the bundle in his hand. He undid it.
The mask was red, with blood , and the domino had ten
crimson slashes across the breast.
He still has that costume just as it reached him. There
was no murder reported, and he did not hand it over to
the police. But he does not loan it. It embodies the one
mystery of his life, the telling of which never tires him.
It is hoped that this dancing season, between now and
Lent, will be as brilliant as the flurry about Christmas
and the revival in trade give us a right to expect. It has
been noticable that of late years the so-called masque-
rades grew meaner and meaner in their grotesque display.
This came from the young men about town largely attend-
ing each fancy dress ball with simply a nose and a
domino. In order to make the floor gay Clodoche troupes
of grotesque dancers had to be hired, and even their
antics failed to stir the guests upon the floor to any degree
of enthusiasm.
If I am to believe those costumers upon whom I called,
while writing something about masked balls was upon
my mind, the business “ boom ” will extend even to their
out-of-the-way trade. As a matter of fact I notice that
several societies that have never done such a thing before
announce the bal a la masque. We may confidently expect,
then, Terpsichorean festivals at the Academy, Irving
Hall, and at the Madison Square Garden which will recall
both the Gotham attempts of ten years ago and the genuine
article as witnessed in Paris.
The great trouble is with the police, who have been
stupid enough during the last few seasons to obtrude their
uniformed presence upon the floor for the purpose of pre-
venting any can-can exhibition.
This is simply absurd. The can-can is never vulgar ex-
cept when danced by women in long dresses, and it can
never hope to reach the licentious effect, under any cir-
cumstances, which is so easily obtainable by the waltz.
I am bound to say, however, that I consider masquerade
balls immoral institutions. This is more so after the
supper hour than before. When a fantastically dressed
woman, who has just eaten a few delicious birds and
washed them down with champagne, reaches the waxed
floor again and is caught in the whirl of the most demoral-
izing bouffe music, there comes between her and her ideas
of propriety a gauze-like curtain, and ten to one she is
more lenient to mankind generally, and to her especial
escort in particular, than she was before the Innch.
Property people at the theatres have control of any
quantity of glittering rubbish, and they sometimes turn
an honest penny by loaning a suit here and there to a
particular friend. A great many economical pleasure-
seekers make their own suits, and some of the most gro
tesque have to be constructed in that way. I trouble
costumes very little, being content to go in full dress
under a domino that cost me 80c. five years ago. I have
also a black silk mask that I bought about fifteen years
back, and through its eye-holes I have witnessed a vast
amount of folly, fun, debauch, immorality, remorse, and
all the other elements which go to make up a mammoth
hop of the fancy pattern.
The costumers do not depend by any means upon these
big dances. If they did they would certainly starve to
death, All the Social Clubs and Tea-Rose Assemblies,
coteries of young thugs and murderers of whom I have
written already in the Gazette, must give their annual
masquerade ball in the winter, just as they give a
drunken, head-smashing excursion to lona Island or Far
Bockaway in the summer.
They have their costumer, and some of the dresses he
turns outdo credit to his taste. These fellows all aspire
to silk stockings and small swords, and such a lot of
French courtiers, with close-cropped hair and prison
faces, can never be seen outside of Walhalla or Pythagorar
Halls.
Then there are any quantity of private masquerades.
The patrons of these are furnished largely by the cos-
tumers, as are the members of the various amateur
theatrical associations who give a performance at a place
like Terrace Garden Theatre, and then a ball after.
The country for miles around is furnished with fancy
dresses by New York costumers. Sometimes they fit out
“ snap ” theatrical organizations, but it is an awful risk.
Many a Claude Melnotte or a Romeo has been forced to
spout his dress in order to get home, and when such is the
case, or where the trunks have been seized by a rapacious
landlord, the costumer is sure to bid farewell to every
suit, and wipe his weeping eyes.
Colonel Mapleson, of “ Her Majesty’s,” owns his own
costumes. When the troupe go over to Brooklyn to sing,
the huge boxes that have to be taken along remind one of
the moving of an army baggage train.
All the opera-bouffe dresses in this country are owned
by Maurice Grau, and whether he produces the operas
himself or not, it is he who furnishes the grotesque rigs
in which the heroes and heroines of Offenbach and Le-
cocq are wont to array themselves.
I will tell you, as I close, why I never go to a ball in full
fancy dress.
I was very young and tender when I attended a mas-
querade disguised as a Sicilian bandit. I danced, I ate, I
drank, I had a jolly time. It must have been 4 o’clock in
the morning when I got to my boarding house in Seventh
avenue.
Then I discovered that my room had been entered, as
had several, my trunk rifled and every article of clothing
stolen save, a linen suit. This was in February.
For one solid week I was a Sicilian bandit, imprisoned
in my room. It took my tailor a day to decide whether
he could trust me, and six more to make a suit from my
old measurement. I couldn’t send the bandit suit home,
because there might have been a fire, and I wanted some-
thing to escape in. Better a Sicilian bandit in February
than a Zulu. The consequence was that my hire of the
fancy clothes was in excess of the price of my new ones'
and when I did throw off the gay robber mien and appear
in civilization once more it was with the intention of get-
ting even somehow if I had to commit murder.
Time has mellowed the transaction, but not altered my
decision. No more bandits in mine.


CHILDREN OF CRIME.
A close observance of the times as mirrored in the
doings of the police and other courts has convinced me
that the small boy, our street gamin, our New York “kid,”
who is unlike any other adolescent specimen of humani-
ty under the sun, is rather distinguishing himself.
He has always been hard to manage, has been the ter-
ror and annoyance of the police, but of late he has taken
a spurt and surrounded himself with the romance of
positive wickedness to such a degree that grey-headed
philanthropy wipes its gold-rimmed glasses and says
“ Bless my soul,” while justice finds her ante-rooms as-
suming the character of a reformatory nursery.
Last week, two boys, whose united ages make the sum
of nineteen years, overtook a little girl in Division street,
as she was on her way to make some purchases at the
store where her mother dealt. The subsequent legal in-
vestigations revealed the fact that these budding foot-
pads had become acquainted in some way with the pro-
posed sortie to the store, and arranged their plans
accordingly.
While one held the little girl the other forced her to
give up the thirty-two cents which constituted the booty.
Then the highwayboys fled. But they did not long
enjoy their ill gotten gains. The police were put upon
their track, and with nine cents still in their possession
the lads were apprehended in Pike street rioting with a
mince-pie.
In conversation with a court officer, while the goose of
these marauders was being properly cooked in the cuisine
of justice, I learned that there has been a perfect epi-
demic of boyish misdeeds lately, and that the petty
calendars are crowded with juvenile names. This set me
to thinking and investigating, and the result has been
that I am firmly convinced there exist in New York city
to-day regularly organized “gangs,” not of “hood-
lums,” or the half-grown ruffians who are the chief
element of excitement in summer Sunday excursions,
but of positive babes, of children who are popularly sup-
posed to be at school, or at home, when on the contrary
they are becoming “Artful Dodgers,” and “Charley
Bateses” as fast as a southern nigger’s mule eats oats
when he gets a chance.
Cases like that of Pomeroy, the Boston boy with the
white eye, I do not include in the consideration of the
subject I have chosen for this paper. Such a phenome-
non belongs to the realms of psychology and medical in-
vestigation. Pomeroy’s purpose was merely to inflict
torture upon lads smaller than himself, but the objective
point of the New York street waif is plunder.
The most astonishing thing about it all is the organism
displayed. In their rules and regulations, their blood-
curdling oaths, and direful vows of vengeance, we seethe
nucleus of the structure of the savage barbarism which
finally overthrew the resplendent civilization of Rome,
and which cheerfully upholds me in my theory that all
hoys are without any moral sense whatever, and are
possessed of a positive tendency to the merciless nature
of the Fiji Islanders.
Why, there is a six-year-old youngster in our house
whose mother thinks is so much of an angel that she has
to anchor him to the earth with hob-nailed shoes. Said
shoes are capable of making a most tremendous noise,
but nothing to the din the angel extracts from the celes- |
tial pastime of hammering the back fence with a club—
(lntroduced to show natural desire for hideous din.)
The poor cat, which has been forced to assume the
character of tiger, or bear, or lion, just according to the
fancy which dominates the angel when he invites two
boys next door to a grand hunt, agrees with me that a
Ute Indian is a much better individual than the angel in
all respects. If a Ute Indian could only carry out the
mother’s idea, and make our angel an angel in all truth,
I am positive that I would be very much obliged to him
and I think I can speak for the cat.
This may seem a digression, but it is not. It is merely
an example 1 have used to throw light upon my statement
that all boys are inclined to be bad. I do not exclude
myself. I remember, very distinctly, that it was with
great reluctance my family persuaded me from being a
gambler, one of those high-toned fellows with black
moustaches, “ shiny ” silk hats, and a flood of diamond
glory for shirt-front, who don’t get up until 3 p. m.,
and who always smell of the barber-shop. If lam not
much mistaken, an inability to manage the deep-black
moustache had as much to do with my abstention from
this particular vocation of sin as all the moral suasion
and theological argument brought to bear upon me.
Pernicious literature is a great deal to blame for this
sudden irruption of criminals, and for their having any
idea of cohesiveness. We all remember the gentleman
who was fired upon twice in Mott Haven by a would-be
murderer but sixteen years old. It was about a year and
a half ago, and the boy is in jail still I believe. I saw
him in the Tombs, and was struck then with the hardness
of feature, the lack of remorse, and the positive glorifica-
tion in the dastardly deed which characterized him.
He confessed that he got his first gory ideas from one of
the boys’ papers, and that he had no difficulty in sur-
rounding himself with followers once he had mapped out
the roseate life of crime they were to lead, and had
drawn up brass-bound rules and regulations that should
ensure method in their work,
He had attempted the murder because he wanted
money to transport his school-hoy guerrillas to the
boundless plains of the west, for it was there the blood-
stained heroes of his beloved romances had flourished,
and, in a great many instances died with their boots on;
a commendable idea in case it should so happen that
Charon’s battcau were out of order, and a fellow had to
get out and wade.
This gang had a cave rendezvous most ingeniously and
comfortably arranged. There they all ate roast potatoes
and such other food as pirates, road-agents, highwaymen,
“ moonshiners,” and he like more or less desirable mem-
bers of society get their fighting courage up on, and there
the captain, who had renounced a good home, and sisters,
cousins and aunts, beyond reproach, slept and abided
continually.
That was an isolated case. I had no idea then of the
existence of coteries of young thieves who ply their
trade with consummate daring, and in every way give an
imitation in little of those desperate burglars and sec-
tional gangs of outlaws ready for any crime with which
New York is infested.
But these youthful coteries do exist in great numbers.
I have investigated the subject, and know of all 1 write.


The frequency of the appearance of their members in
court has already attracted the attention of our magis-
trates, while the students of political economy find them-
selves confronted with a new problem. Those who
occupy the positions of leaders are naturally bad and
have generally had some experience in the House of
Refuge, the Catholic Protectory, and like institutions.
They use argument in a boy’s way, and so bring over to
their banner the nice little lads who had advanced no
further in a wild and irregular life than is implied in
sleeping away from home on top of newspaper boilers.
This, it must be understood, when it can be indulged in, is
considered a very nobby thing in the line of dissipation.
The dens of these human rats are difficult to find. In
the summer time there are any quantity of hiding places
arranged under the wharves where stolen articles can be
secreted. These somewhat Venetian chambers are also
used as places of refuge from the police who interfere
with their swimming business. But in weather like this
it is generally the loft of a stable, or the cellar of some
near tenement, that is selected as a club-room. Eight in
the Five Points I came across a colony who had bur-
rowed in the side of a cellar excavation, and were philo-
sophically taking all chances of the pavement on which
people were constantly walking, caving in on them. They
had a fire and had made the place habitable by carpet-
ing it, and putting up planks against the damp earth. I
was taken there by a bootblack who occupied the posi-
tion of courier between the camp and the outside world.
The three or four freckled, bold boys I saw were smoking
clay pipes and playing cards. In ths innocence of my
heart I attempted to guy them, and asked the boy with
the most freckles and the vilest pipe why, since civilizar
tion had been given up apparently, they didn’t go out and
fight the Indians.
There was a general laugh at this, and then I learned
by continuing the conversation, that although they had
no desire personally to abandon New York for such vicissi-
tudes of the ensanguined plain as must necessarily attach
to getting away with the Utes, the Piutes, Mince-Fiuters,
and all the rest of them, they were constantly on the look-
out for the rural youth who, in squads of two or three,
were almost daily appearing at our ferries, armed with
Mexican horse-pistols and about two dollars stolen money
each, and en route for whatever place it is in the west
where they kill Indians.
These lads become the prey of the city gangs. They (the
New Yorkers) either rob them in an easy, confidence way,
or they fall upon them in tnle buccaneer style, and leave
them with two black eyes they didn’t possess, and minus
certain property they did. Perhaps it is to this wise war-
ring of the gamins that the Indians owe the delay in their
extermination I
The markets are great stamping grounds for the boy-
thieves. They will take anything, and are so quick and
adroit that if they fail to escape detection they are toler-
ably sure to avoid arrest.
It would be impossible to catalogue the various ingeni-
ous ways in which they pilfer. They steal clothing from the
lines upon which it is strung out to dry; they levy upon
the sample display of grocers’and other green venders;
they pillage from the market basketof the staggering red-
faced boarding-house mistress as she laboriously plods to
her home; they filch parcels from the coupes and car-
riages of shopping ladies; they are here, there and every-
where, übiquitous, animated not so much by the copy-
book aphorism that “ Honesty is the best policy,” as the
more serious declaration that the “Lord helps those who
help themselves.”
One enterprising youth, but twelve years old, had made
for himself an American District Telagrapi suit, or rather
he retained one that he had had while in the employ of
the company. His plan of operation was to go into a
store, or broker’s office, and ask them if they had not
rung the bell fol a messenger. Then on his way out he
would trust to chance opportunities for picking up little
odds and ends, and in not a few instances he would be en-
trusted with a parcel by some cue in the establishment
who thought the boy might as well be utilized while he
was there. The career of this lad was short-lived.
Another instance which I observed in my study of the
situation shows how desperate the little villains are and
how they are willing to run all sorts of romantic risks
after the manner of Claude Duval, and “ Sixteen-String
Jack.”
A good little office boy was sent to the post-office for
about twenty dollars worth of stamps. Three of our in-
fantile footpads encountered him on his return going
through Exchange court, and without more ado they
went through him to the extent of the stamps. It is not
generally known, but there is a man in a cellar in Nassau
street who deals in postage stamps, only American ones,
buying them at a discount as a “fence” takes “ swag.”
He asks no questions. The people who bring stamps to
him are generally boys and young clerks. In a vast
establishment where the daily correspondence is im-
mense the loss of five or evefc ten dollars worth of stamps
in a few days is scarcely f«it and if the thief sticks to the
business industriously the ultimate amount of the em-
bezzlement, at the time of detection say, is sure to be
large. Our young friends constantly keep applying for
positions as they are advertised, each band being sure to
possess some lad of innocent face and quick intelligence
who would be apt to strike the fancy of the firm in ques-
tion. Both his salary and his stealings are supposed to be
turned into the common purse.
So far this suddenly discovered and growing evil has
been confined to such conservative lines as petit larceny
and picayune highway robbery. The babies have not yet
undertaken to murder people as they have in Paris, where
the institution of boyish banditti has long flourished. It
was only a few weeks ago that the government tried some
eight or ten children, the ringleader of whom was but
fourteen years old, for murdering a woman who kept a
baker-shop in one of the Parisian suburbs. Only two did
the killing, but the police apprehended the whole party.
Their constitution and by-laws were something terrible.
The document had been written in a swaggering way and
by some one who was fond of gore. Death was the pen-
alty for everything in the fault line. The whole trial was
intensely sensational and developed the fact that the first
thought of the club was engendered by reading some of
the criminal stories written by authors like Montepin and
Gaboriau.
Very frequently an adult brain guides the operations of
the young rascals. lam speaking now of New York, and
I base my remarks on what Libby O’Brien, the young
queen of sneak thieves, told me herself in the Mulberry
Street Station-House one morning I chanced to drop in.
She said that a certain woman, who had served the state
on several occasions, first instructed her in the art of flit-
ting through buildings, as the bee does from rose to rose,
but with less honeyed intentions.
There were five or six other girls in this hag’s employ.
She paid them so much a week, and took possession of all
the goods. Libby, however, possesses an enterprising
mind of her own, and when she got to understand the
rudiments of her calling, she saw no reason why she
should not strike out for herself, and she did with the
most lucrative results.


THE bane CLERK’S NIGHT OUT.




It was she, also, who told me that nearly ail the little
apple and orange girls who make daily rounds of down-
town offices were thieves. The girls have their places of
meeting as well as the boys, are quite as adroit in their
peculations, and as wicked every way. I write out Miss
O’Brien’s statement to show that both sexes are repre-
sented in this army of “ infantry ” that is marching so
steadily to the jails as a more or less permanent place of
residence.
The picture that I have drawn is not a cheerful one. It
makes one shudder to think that such things are possible
in a city like New York, whose educational and reform-
ing facilities are so ample. That it will be looked into by
philanthropists who make such matters a study, I have
no doubt.
If we had more Shepherds like Mr. Cowley, to whose
care all such children might be relegated, there would be
no need for the exercise of either philanthropy or legisla-
tion. The problem would solve itself.
How?
The dear, good man would starve them to death.
A KEY TO MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARAECES.
Some years ago I was in Philadelphia, and on the even-
ing of my departure, having nothing to do and desiring
to kill time until about 11 o’clock when it would be in
order to start for the midnight train at the New York
depot, I went into a variety show on Chestnut street.
It was a very good show, but only a most infinitesimal
bit of the programme has to do with this article, and that
was where two song-and-dance men were indulging in
gags and conundrums.
Said one to the other—“ Jimmy, what’s a grass widow?”
He answered promptly—“ A woman whose husband has
gone to New York.”
The howl of applause that this raised seemed to Indi-
cate that such disappearances were not uncommon in the
matrimonial annals of the City of Brotherly Love, and as
long as I staid in the smoking-car that night I devoted
my time to wondering whether any of my rather glum
fellow-passengers had been making grass widows by the
purchase of their railroad tickets.
This anecdote came to me the other day as I was read-
ing about the Fricke case, it leading me in turn to a re-
flection upon the immense number of missing people this
city is capable of producing. The latter sentence seems
rampant with a “bull,” for in the majority of instances
neither the city, nor the city’s police can produce the
missing people, and in order to be ultra-elegant we will
say that New York affords a grander field for mysterious
disappearances than any other city in the Union.
You can’t stay lost in Philadelphia, Baltimore, Wash-
ington, Chicago, St. Louis, New Orleans or San Fran-
cisco.
Here the potentiality of seclusion is unfathomable. (1
can hear my readers say, “get a gun.”)
I feel quite certain that men like “ Red Leary” so
thoroughly appreciate this fact that they never think
about visiting foreign climes until it suits their own
royal convenience.
According to one of the sensational accounts published
at the time Tweed used to calmly sit upon the porch of
his villa, back of the Jersey Highlands, and while the
hum of the vast metropolis came to his ears, he would
read the circumstantial accounts of his escape, and see
in the illustrated journals, faithful pictorial representa-
tions of how he stood on such a wharf, muffled to the
chin, of how he put his ponderosity on the thwart of a
small boat, which placed him on board a “ low, rakish
schooner,” etc., etc.
The missing people that we never hear of are in the
vast majority. The poor cannot afford to advertise or
offer rewards, and although the police are conscien-
tiously supposed to keep a sharp lookout for all reported
cases, still it is undeniable that the zest with which
search is prosecuted depends in a great measure upon the
importance of the missing person.
They looked for Oakey Hall. We all looked for him. I
don’t recall a case equal to his in the amount of earnest
enthusiasm it created.
And then to find him walking in a London park with a
lady who wore a green veil and had a mole on her
neck.
Mr. Hall’s disappearance was much like that of Red-
path, the Lyceum manager. He walked down town and
that was the last of him. There was a rumor published
that he turned up in San Francisco, but I never saw it
verified.
Mr. Fricke’s case is certainly a very queer one, both as
regards the gloom shrouding, at this writing, a portion of
the time he was missing but was not in the water, and
the cool manner in which the rest of the family look upon
the eircumstance. I have received this impression that
the sons consider that a great deal of fuss is being made
about nothing.
Many of these missing mysteries, could they only be
fathomed, would furnish a strange and startling pano-
ramic display of New York life and death.
Take the instance of a well-to-do merchant from
some western city who about a year ago left his up-town
hotel to go to the theatre, and turned up two or three
weeks after at the Morgue.
That is all we know—the Alpha and Omega. All the rest
is the hardest kind of Greek to us. But let Fancy take
her brush and paint some pictures, not many, only a few
that will answer both for this occasion and hundreds
like it.
First Picture —Broadway. He has got out of the “ bus ”
and has bought a cigar, as it is too early yet to go to the
play. So he saunters along leisurely, smoking his fra-
grant weed, and wondering how his wife is getting along
at home.
Second Picture —“ Nice evening.” This is given in a
silver tone, the speaker being right at his elbow. He
looks down. They are opposite a lamp-post, and he sees
such a pretty face, such snapping black eyes, such rich,
red lips, all apparent through the glamour of a most en-
chanting smile. While this observation Is being taken
the young woman has put her kidded hand through his
arm, repeating, “ a nice evening.” It is a nice evening,
and the merchant, being conscious of a wicked thrill.
47
GLIMPSES OP GOTHAM.


says, “ Certainly it is, and a nice girl too.” She smiles,
and squeezes his arm just a little. That settles it—he is
gone.
Third, Picture—K saloon where there are many girls like
the one in this story, sitting about at the tables, some
with male companions, and some disconsolately alone.
Our merchant has been ordering wine and showing his
money. Just as the waiter draws the cork of a fresh
bottle a yeung man comes in from the street and saun-
ters carelessly along between the tables as if he were
looking for some one. So he is, it is for the girl with the
black eyes and red lips. He sees her. There is a flash of
intelligence between them. He goes out, and the mer-
chant tosses oft his glass and unsteadily refills from the
bottle.
Fourth Picture—A. darkened room. There is a noise. It
is not at the door. Being repeated it awakens a man who
is in the bed. He is alone, and seems surprised at that
fact. He is more surprised when a gleam of light comes
throng a panel that has been slid open right back of the
chair where he had thrown his clothes. And still more
surprised when the young man who walked into the
saloon while he was drinking the wine that had befogged
him, comes through the panel and proceeds to rifle his
pockets. Our merchant springs from the bed. The two
men grapple and reel about the room, while the pretty
girl the merchant met on Broadway puts down the
candle she had been holding and suddenly disappears.
Quicker than I can write it there is another bully on the
scene, armed with a black-jack. He watches his chance
and strikes the strapger on the back of the head, felling
him like an ox.
Fifth Picture— After the completion of the robbery it is
suddenly discovered that the man is dead, he having
already been stabbed by our first friend, who was rapidly
being worsted, when the other scoundrel came to com-
plete the job with the skull-crushing “billy.” The body
is stripped and old clothes put upon it. Both men look
out at the night. It is dark, and the river is but four
short blocks away. But how to get him there. The girl
speaks up, and calls attention to a fish-vendor’s acquaint-
ance whose stable is in the rear. It is about his time to har-
ness up for his morning trip to Peck Slip. He will
probably loan his wagon for fifteen minutes.
Sixth, Picture— The two men on the first wagon talk
cheerily to each other as they rattle towards the wharves,
and the policemen seeing them go by simply falls to
speculating upon fish. He may be pondering upon the
possibility of his good wife having some nicely broiled
shad, with hot rolls and fresh butter, and good coffee for
his breakfast
Seventh Picture —From the darkness shrouding the end
of a wharf, so littered with wood and old refuse iron,
that it is difficult to make one’s way upon it, comes the
sound of a splash. Then there is silence, and presently,
as if fashioned out of the gloom, a man appears at the
street and leaps nimbly into a fish-vendor’s wagon,which
now, that the work is over, is driven somewhat cir-
cuitously to its impatient owner, who pockets the $5 bill,
asks no questions, and starts down town on his legiti-
mate trade. Before he puts his shining piles of fish in,
however, he washes the wagon out. There is blood upon
the bottom.
Eighth and last Picture— The bloated, disfigured, swollen
corpse at the morgue. It is the merchant, who, on that
evening he started from the hotel, had done much better
had he resisted black eyes and red lips and gone to the play.
Insane people have a constant mania for eluding their
keepers and putting their relations to the expense of ad-
vertising them minutely in the newspapers.
This was a favorite amusement with Dr. Ayer, the
celebrated pill and Cherry Pectoral millionaire, who for
many years before his death was not sound in his head.
He would make his way to New York somehow, and in
some instances it was weeks before the doctor would be
discovered in a more or less dilapidated condition, but
cheerful and happy.
The very latest case of disappearance that has some
thing whimsical about it, is that of the young man who
applied at Jefferson Market to be locked up as a vagrant.
At the same time he was worth from forty to fifty thou-
sand dollars and his lawyers were scouring the city for
him to pay him some accrued inierest. While they were
searching he was working hard in the kitchen of the jail
manufacturing soup, an operation which I understand
is his strongest accomplishment.
I can make a pretty good article of soup, but fifty
thousand dollars is a little beyond ipe. Still it must be
borne in mind that good soup ismade from good “ stock,”
and fifty thousand dollars worth is a fair starter.
Women and young girls of an hysterical tendency have
a great mania for disappearing. Examine the records up
at Police Headquarters and you will be surprised at the
number of straying damsels reported by their agonized
relatives. Some are found, some come home and are
frequently unable to state where they have been, and
others never turn up at all.
There are procuresses in this city who are as active
and energetic in plying their nefarious trade as any
person in a legitimate line of business. These women,
generally middle-aged and prepossessing in appearance,
are always well dressed, and of the most engaging
manners.
They meet a pretty girl on the street, in one of the big
stores, at the matinee, or where you will, and get in con-
versation with her. She is flattered, cajoled, made much
of, lied to, and finally persuaded to go home justfora
moment with her most recent friend.
In either case the idea is to get her compromised in
some manner, or better still to make her drunk. The
rest is very easy, and she becomes one of the “missing ”
in the most natural manner in the world. 1 am not ex-
aggerating and am quite aware that I am writing of New
York city, and in the nineteenth century. There are
elegant prison pens here from which escape is impossi-
ble, where the victims of procuresses are kept, constant-
ly assailed by temptation, until escape is no longer de-
sired. It has been but a little over two months since
all the police of Liverpool and London were employed in
tracing the whereabouts of a respectable, highly culti-
vated, beautiful young Liverpool girl, who left her home
one afternoon to pay a few petty tradesmen’s bills, and
to make several calls. She took a short cut through a
disreputable part of the city and that was the last seen or
heard of her until she was discovered in London,
At the request of her family her story was never made
public, but the community was given to understand that
it was horrible in the extreme. It isn’t necessary to go
among Italian or Sicilian mountain fastnesses in order to
be kidnapped. It can be done to perfection in any of the
great cities of civilizatiou.
Crime produces many missing men. The bank-teller
who sees that the jig is up, the receiver who has mis-
managed his trust and doesn’t want to face the auditing
committee, and all people of that kidney, drop from the
surface of events as if driven under by a spile-driver.
They are heard from eventually in Canada, or London,
or Brazil. More trouble is taken ordinarily to find this
variety of the “ missing ” than any others. The great
fault with them is that they don’t keep quiet in their re


treats, and it isn’t long before they “ sail the ocean blue ”
for this, their native land, in custody of special detec-
tives sent after them. Bee the case of Cooper, now doing
five years in an English jail for forgery. He swindled
the United States Government out of $50,000 by forging a
paymaster’s name to a lot of warrants, served five years
in Cherry Hill prison, Philadelphia, for that, and then,
on emerging into the sunlight of liberty settled down as
a stock broker in San Francisco.
He levanted from San Francisco with quite a fortune
realized from hypothecated bonds, and became a “ miss-
ing man.” In vain the police scoured this and other
countries for him. Wherever he was he was quiet as the
grave. But it couldn’t last. The active brain must be
employed, the forger’s pen was rusting. A new career
of crime was inaugurated in London, in one of whose
suburban hamlets Cooper was living in magnificent style,
He is a rascal of the romantic type and used disguises.
The inevitable slip-up came at last, and he was put away
for five years, with San Francisco to be heard from then.
Young men who signify their intentions of getting mar-
ried frequently astonish everyone and mortify the bride
terribly by never putting in an appearance at the cere-
mony, after all has been arranged, minister engaged,
cards for a wedding breakfast sent out, and every other
detail attended to. Sometimes they have a theory for such
conduct, but more frequently they can give no explana-
tion. Just like that Mr. Allan of Baltimore, who has at
last come home to Ms distressed family and gone to bed.
All the explanation he had to make was that he had
been overworked and felt he must go somewhere. He
got as far as New Orleans, Speaking of the bridal disap-
pearances I see in a recent newspaper that the latest one
was where the young lady lit out on the wings of the
morning. She was au agricultural damsel, and was
wooed and won by a steady young man belonging to the
same Hudson river town. When the wedding day ap-
proached she began to ponder the question deeply.
New York city was to her a vast lode-stone, offering a
life of constant gayety and sensation. What would her
brown-flsted lover offer! A farm-house, with all its
humdrum duties, such as feeding the pigs and chickens
and getting the cows out of the corn. She decided not to
get married, but to visit New York instead.
When the police found her she was selling candy, dis-
pensing taffy, in a Grand street confectionery store at a
salary of $5 a week. She refused to go home, and the
gentle farmer will have to look elsewhere for a gude
wife.
The champion missing boy is undoubtedly Charley
Ross. The amount of being missed that he has gone
through with is something enormous. No one can equal
him, and he takes the belt.
The champion missing merchant is A. T. Stewart. One
would naturally think that when a man was dead, and
had had the square thing done by him in the way of a
funeral, he would remain where he was planted.
But not so with A. T. He also takes the belt.


CITY GHARAGT&RS,


THE MAE ABOUT TOWE.
in nearly every city you will find a fair representation
of what they call the gilded youth in Pans, but the
variety in New York is the only genuine sample of the
article on this side of the Atlantic.
This is principally because New York is more like Paris
than London, where the stupid “ Crutch and Toothpick”
gang are supposed to represent the class in male society
whose members have nothing to do but to rise at noon,
pass through a perfumed bath to the barber, and so to the
“ Row,” to dinner, to the theatre, and finally to Evans’s
supper rooms, or some faster place, where the night is
given up to a heavy carouse.
I have found that the Parisian sport is as much too
light as the English swell is too heavy. One drinks sugar
and water and the other swills port when champagne is
impossible. The drinks are therefore fair indications of
their characters. When you want an idler with snap, a
butterfly with some virility, you must come to New York
and study the “ Young Man About Town,” whose picture
I shall proceed to give in a few free strokes.
He is entirely different from what he used to be, having
progressed with the city, and become faster and faster as
the rapid-transit ideas were evoked. In 1853 “Ik Mar-
vel ” wrote of him as follows :
“ With his fellows he will affect a sporting turn; he will
read the Spirit oj the Times , he will have a sporting-jacket
made with a world of pockets, and will sometimes take
it with him on a trip to a summer watering place; but
only wears it occasionally of a morning, when he is sure
no sportsmen are by; he will stuff a pocket with pressed
Regalias and regret that game is so scarce. He discourses,
top, about trout-fishing, and Alfred’s tackle, very much
as one of the falsettos in the papal choir might talk of
deeds of gallantry.”
This, you see,is a sketch of a mild-mannered individual,
fond of dress and adulation. My “Man About Town” a
fellow of enterprise, whose whole object is to keep up a
perpetual round of excitement while he’s awake, and to
be considered a regular trump by the actresses, ballet
girls, and the ladies who think that half a world is better
than none, whose pictures adorn his walls.
He has rooms down-town—that is in the neighborhood
of the theatres, and they are genuine curiosity-shops. In
these apartments he gives dinners to his lady friends.
They are more frequently midnight suppers that last until
the conservative people next door are getting ready for
breakfast.
When I was much younger than I am now I was roped
into taking rooms with a thorough good fellow who
aspired to be considered one of the gilded youth. The
apartments were in a club-house, of which we were both
pillars, and the presence in the basement of a French res-
taurant, presided over by a gentleman who still believed
in human nature, made everything pleasant.
When we had no money we simply signed a bit of paper
and the Monsieur jabbed it on a file. Eventually he got
two cents a pound for them at a place in Ann street.
But this is wandering from what I intended to say,
which is that it would be impossible for me to give any
better idea of the “ Man About Town ” when he is at home
and a host than by describing a supper we gave to a party
of ladies and gentlemen who were professionally engaged
at the time in an East side variety show.
One of them did something with cannon balls, and as he
was way down on the bill—just before the pantomime
which closed it—our table was spread at eleven o’clock,
and at half-past eleven we were discussing the soup.
I remember how lively we all were, and yet subdued, as
if we were on our good behavior. A female clog-dancer
ate her vermicelli with the delicate grace of a queen, and
the cannon ball man seemed scarcely able to lift his glass.
But this diffidence all wore off under the influence of
the wines and stronger liquors of which we had an abun-
dant store, and when we had been two hours at the table,
and about on the last lap, the hilarity was plainly notioe-
able, as I was subsequently informed, at the next corner.
There was a French lady present—one who stood on her
toes and tried to kick the chandelier while dancing—and
although she did not favor us with any Terpsichorean
performances of that nature, she consented to sing some
songs of La Belle France. They were of the kind you hear
at the Cafe des Ambaesadeurs in the Champs Elysees, and will
not be found as specimens of poetry in the French text-
books of any young ladies’ college.
At least I hope not.
We all laughed immensely, and, after more wine, the
French girl’s brother, a contortionist, did a lot of turning,
twisting and tying himself into knots on top of the piano.
That also was very amusing, butmust have proved rather'
confusing to the digestive machinery, which was con-
stantly being put upside down.
The contortionist, however, didn’t seem to mind it, and
so it must have been all right.
During these little performances my friend and myself
in duty bound, kept the conversation up to fever heat, amj
finally succeeded in inducing the young women, one ol
whom had brought her dog along, to embark upon a series
of more or less scandalous green-room revelations, the
memory of which makes my modest ink turn red as a
write.
We all smoked cigarettes. The French d ancer taught me
how to roll them with one hand, and then, after two or
three more drinks, began to cry—in French—and tell me
how the cannon ball man, her husband, beat her and
threw her about.
He utilized her as a Home Gymnasium. No family
should be without one.
But it was all sunshine In a minute. Down on the floor
were the “ Bouncing Brothers of Barcelona,” balancing
each other on their chins and noses. It was all very
well until one of the “ Bouncing Brothers ” came down
with a rush and knocked the French clock on the mantle
out of time.
Then we concluded that a little piano music wouldn’t
be a bad idea. On such occasions I notice that the com-
pany invariably become maudlin. We certainly did,
singing such songs as, “ We parted by the river, and our
dream of Idve is o’er,” and “ Under the willow my little
one sleeps.”
This last mournful ballad made the women weep, and
while they were at it the men tackled the brandy decan-
ter again.


So the night wore on. It was daybreak when we saw
them off.
I have been thus particular in describing the otherwise
insignificant occasion because it is a fair sample of the
“Man about Town ” spending his nights. It was anything
to kill time and add to the flash reputation he seemed so
anxious to acquire.
This ambition extended to his clothes which were al-
ways a little different in cut and texture from other
peoples, and to his hats. Luminous neckties helped out
the idea.
When he appeared at the theatre, young men just start-
ing in the life of the city would say: “ Who’s that?” and
be told that that was the famous Harry So-and-So, or
Willie What’s-his-Name. Then would follow a minute
description of his rooms and a glowing account of the
orgies had there.
One who leads an exclusively frivolous life cannot
avoid becoming a perfect slave to the habits he contracted
so easily.
The Goddess of Pleasure becomes a Demon of Despair,
a haunting Nemesis who cannot be driven away.
I have seen my “ Man about Town” reduced to the
verge of insanity because the city was stupid and there
was nothing on hand for the evening—no leg piece at the
theatre, no body to capture for dinner, nothing to go see
anywhere.
He never thought of a book, a pair of slippers, a softly
shaded lamp, a nice cigar, and—quiet
When, on an occasion like the one referred to, I have
positively refused to budge out of the house, he has gone
down into the cafe , on the vague chance of being intro-
duced to some French girl, and remained there half the
night drinking bad wine and playing with a greasy pack
of cards.
THE COLLEGE STUDEET.
Now York city is fortunately not a college town,
although we possess an admirable institution in Colum-
bia,” and a rather useless and expensive one in the “ Free
College 1”
And I am very glad that this city, in which I have the
honor and felicity to reside, is not an Oxford, Cambridge,
Harvard or Princeton on a grand scale.
Particularly Princeton, whose riotous students you em-
balmed pictorially last week.
The reason that I rest serene under the absence of col-
leges is because I consider the average student a cad of
the first water, and a prig that can’t be excelled.
Not that there are not hosts of noble, fellows in
college. There are hundreds of them. But I maintain all
the same that the typical student, the one who obtrudes
himself into notice, and is therefore the character I am
sketching, is generally a young man with a fuzzy mus-
tache, an impudent manner, and a most objectionable
person altogether.
I never run across him without wishing to sprinkle him
with salt, or have him soused in a surf bath.
No wonder they call a part of the students Fresh-
men 1” Most of them are fresher than the unborn egg.
The constant presence in New York of the college
student, and especially his very extensive appearance
about the May commencement days, make him a fit sitter
before our metropolitan camera.
He is generally a very loud-talking young man, who
would have you believe that he leads an awfully fast and
rakish sort of life on the sly—a rose-colored existence of
which the faculty do not dream.
His dress is inclined to be nobby, and in general deport-
ment, when strolling through the city, he may be likened
to a curb-stone broker at a dog-fight in a stable loft.
The cane he carries is a veritable club, and is exten-
sively used, according to the student, in midnight en-
counters with policemen and hack-drivers.
These classes of society the student seems to be slowly
but surely removing from the face of the earth.
Where ten or a dozen of the young men are out on a lark
together they certainly do make Rome howl. Aboutmid-
night they are full of beer up to their downy chins, and
then they begin to yell, and sing college songs, and ’Rah 1
’Rah ! ’Rah ! which is an intellectual whoop, much In-
dulged in at boat races and the like gatherings.
They get arrested, of course, and locked up, but are
generally let off with a light fine and a reprimand on ac-
count of their youth, and the necessity that exists for
their getting bach to class.
I have seen these young men, who by their very posi-
tion are supposed to be gentlemen, link arms until they
have covered the entire pavement, and then march up
Broadway singing one of their idiotic songs and crowding
ladies and gentlemen into the gutter.
“Oh, they are only students having some fun,” is what
is charitably said.
I call them blackguards making asses of themselves.
They are alwaye offensive when there are a number of
them together, the object being to have what they call a
good time.
When the Count Joannes was disporting himself at the
Lyceum Theatre I remember that whole rows of seats
were taken by college boys, who behaved in the most
scandalous manner. They were arrested eventually for
even excelling the gallery in buffoonery and obscenity.
We all know what the Princeton pets are when they get
to sampling Trenton beer.
What is the secret of all this? Why shouldn’t college
boys behave like gentlemen when they are outside the
walls and away from their campus ? It is a mystery. I
only know that they are nearly always impudent, boor-
ish and infernal nuisances generally.
If ever I leave anything to a college, it will be a fund to
establish a department in which deportment shall be
taught. It might have some effect in lessening the num-
ber of these well-dressed Zulus.
I sometimes think that the hazing practice, and the
system of making the younger students “fag” for the
others have something to do with producing a code of
manners that would disgrace a Comanche village.
Have you ever been in a small town where delegation*
from a dozen colleges have come to witness a boat race t
46^
CITY CHARACTERS.


If you haven’t, gentle reader, do a kindness to your
nerves by never going, and proceed to the lone and silent
tomb ignorant of the experiment, satisfied with my state-
ment that at 2 a. jc. in the morning after the race, such a
town is as fair a sample of the Fourth Ward of Hell, if
there is such a place, as you can well imagine.
And yet these frisky young people are those who are
expected to be prominent in all the intellectual walks of
life. Undoubtedly the colleges turn out some of our best
men. I am not regarding them now as having arrived
at years of discretion. It is the student in the callow,
vealy slate that we are digesting, and like all “bob”
veal he is hard to digest.
On commencement day he is particularly grand. His
sisters, cousins, etc., send him an express wagonload of
flowers, and with one hand in his bosom, and the other
waved toward the chandelier he tells us how the ancient
Roman lived, and what was really the cause, as ascer-
tained by him, of their decay.
That night he gets drunk, very drunk, disgracefully
drunk, and generally manages to float around the city in
a dress coat and a pair of white kids for about a week.
Then he sobers up and selects his pursuit in life.
There is always a certain proportion of the young gen-
tlemen who feel sure that they are born journalists.
They see the difficulties under which the country is stag-
gering and they are convinced an editorial from them
would fix things all right.
This class invade Park Row and Printing House Square.
The Tribune is never without a utility force of twenty of
them.
When you read that “ the empyream was lit up last
night by vast masses of corruscating splendor,” which is
the beginning of an article on the burning of a car stable.
you can rest assured that some college student has been
given an assignment.
My observation induces me to believe that the medical
students are the best fellows of the entire kidney. They
are manlier, and don’t have so much blank nonsense
about them.
I shall never forget one time in Philadelphia, ever so
many years ago, when at his earnest invitation, I visited
a young medical friend in the dissecting-room.
A lot of jolly dogs were carving and cutting another lot
of perhaps jollier dogs who were dead. They were drink-
ing beer and eating crackers and cheese at the same time,
i, e., the live jolly dogs were.
“ Come here. Lynx,” said my friend, “here’s a beauti-
ful subject. I already owned the left leg and head, and
I’ve just won the entire ‘stiff’ at dominoes. Come and
see me touch up some of the abdominalmuscles.”
It was a terrible ordeal, but I looked on. Nature has its
limit of endurance, however. Even a Lynx will some-
times weaken.
When my Esculapian friend, who was wild with en-
thusiasm, turned to me and said : “ Here, colonel, just
grab that flap, won’t you f ” I knew that it was time to
go.
I felt sure of it, and I did go. How I reached the street
I never knew, but I know that about a half hour after-
wards a very pale gentleman, holding his handkerchief
to his month, went into a corner saloon and asked feebly
for brandy.
This experience, of course, was long anterior to my be-
coming familiar with the field of carnage.
P. S.—None of my remarks with reference to drinking
and midnight carousals apply to Divinity students. They
generally keep a bottle in the closet.
THE COACHMAE.
When I first came to New York in the early part of this
century, and strode up Broadway with the usual shilling
in my pocket with which all great men begin life, I par-
ticularly admired the sleek and comfortable coachmen
whom I saw sitting on the boxes of their carriages.
This admiration was purely a physical one, and was
closely connected with a period of starvation, which I
foresaw must befall me when that shilling was gone.
I was not disappointed. As near as 1 can remember the
shilling accomplished the possession of two or three mut-
ton pies, and then evanesced. When hunger really did
attack my adolescent vitals, these well-fed Jehus excited
my admiration more than ever, and, as I gazed upon their
fat chops and swelling paunches, I came to the con-
clusion that the softest, cosiest berth in all this world of
work was that of a liveried coachman to a swell New
York family.
Don’t misunderstand me; 1 do not allude to any seedy,
bloated night hawk cabdriver, but to the blue-coated, and
brass-buttoned, snuff-colored and gold-laced gentlemen of
the whip, who wear corduroys disappearing in boots
with buff tops, and whose shining silk hats have pin-
wheel rosette at their sides.
They toil not, and I am sure they have no acquaintance
with the first principles of mule spinning, despite their
knowledge of horses, but Solomon in all his glory never
had to get up like one of these.
If he did, if the old gentleman of Mormon proclivities
ever turned out with a long blue coat with brass buttons
and a whip, both profane and sacred history have failed
to record the fact.
In those distant days to which I first alluded, the city
coachman was not looked upon as one of the family. He
was to all intents and purposes,a servant,and when he was
not in the stable you could find him in the kitchen. The
cook and he generally fell in love and married,although ha
was not averse to forming a matrimonial alliance with the
chambermaid, if he ascertained that she had some sav-
ings in the bank. His life was a perfectly blameless one,
and was not disturbed by any romantic fancies.
But how is it now f If we may believe the stories fur-
nished us by the newspapers of the country, the coach-
man of the period is marrying the young lady of the
epoch at a most remarkable rate. It has ceased, in fact,
to become a matter of surprise, and those fond papas who
do not want their daughters disposed of in this way,either
secure a Milesian with red hair, scrub nose, freckled wife
and seven children.or give up keeping a stable altogether.
So when 1 read of a dashing whip eloping with some
languishing blonde or sparkling brunette, In true New
53
CITY CHARACTERS.


York Ledger style, my admiration for the craft becomes
all the stronger.
They demonstrate that like all other driving fellows
they know how to get along in the world.
It has never been ascertained why maidens of high de-
gree look so kindly upon the men of horses. This is a
deep social problem which I mean to study out one of
these days.
You never hear of them falling in love with the
gardener, or the man who makes the fires, but it is al-
ways the coachman, and sometimes a negro coachman,
too, who kindles the flame of love in their hearts. I have
an idea that the liveried heroes give them an inordinate
amount of “ tally,” telling them perhaps of their good
family and how misfortune has made it necessary for
them to give up their own four-in-hand and handle the
reins for some one else.
You get a good-looking young fellow, neat and cleanly
shaven, pouring this sort of thing into the pink sea-shell
ear of Julia as he drives her slowly through the park, and
the consequences are nearly always amatory. He is like
Vice in the couplet. She first endures, then pities, and
then embraces.
No one can blame him for giving up the halter for the
altar, the bridle existence for the bridal tour. He has
nothing to lose and everything to gain going in double
harness. If the old man relents, he becomes a happy
groom; if the old man holds out he is no better or worse
off than a young man ought to be with a pretty wife.
When she becomes a little sulky he can console himself
by the reflection that it’s his phaeton, and that no man
gets through matrimonial life without hitches.
Since fifty years ago the coachman has become more
important in another respect. You can’t shoot him now
with impunity. The case of the bank teller at Montclair
is proof of this. The Grand Jury have found a true bill
against him, and he will have to stand a trial for murder
in that most uncomfortable state under such circum
stances—New Jersey.
Every man has his trials, but if ever I have one for
murder, I pray that my man will bo sensible enough to
live, up to the moment of the tragedy, in some state where
you stand a reasonable chance of acquittal. That reminds
me that you very seldom hear of a coachman committing
a murder. Farm hands, hostlers, and gentlemen of that
kidney figure in the annals of crimson crime, but it is not
often that the net of Justice catches the hero of this
sketch. I lay it to his peaceful, placid life, and the moral
rumination he has a chance to indulge in while waiting,
stiff as a plaster-of-Paris image, upon his box for his
people to come out of Stewart’s, or Grace Church, as the
case may be.
Some coachmen never leave the box, or move, or wink
while they are on it. But I don’t like them. I prefer the
more sociable fellows who get down to stretch their legs
once in a while, and who disappear in the corner tavern
for a nip to keep out the cold. These jolly dogs will get
together on the sunny side of the street and swap stories.
They know all about Mrs. A.’s sudden departure for
Europe, and why she went, and can tell you the cause of
Mr. B. having to do away with his own establishment and
hire a coupe by the month from the coachman.
If ever I start a scandalous paper in which the secrets
of society shall bo dressed up like important cable news
lam going to make friends with all the coachmen. They
are absorbents of family secrets, and what they don’t
know they can readily obtain from the cook or the up-
stairs maid.
In nearly all the prominent divorce suits, both in this
country and abroad, the coachman has played an impor-_
tant part as witness. It has been he who has too fre- •
quently driven madame along the road of ruin, and his v
story has always been interesting. Of what good is a.
close carriage if the coachman is communicative? Some
high-toned ladies have found this out when it was too late.
In this city the coachman has his club, his mutual pro-
tective association, and his annual dance. In summer ha
is at the watering places. He is always well-housed, well-
dressed, well-fed, and, whether he marries the cook or
his young mistress, he is a lucky dog.
THE BARBER,
He may be a Rooshian, or a Frenchman, or a Prooshian
and he very frequently is anl-tal-ian, but it’s greatly to
the credit of the Anglo-Saxon race that you very rarely
find him an American. My particular, personal barber is
a German. His name is Gohr. Appropriate name 1 If
you don’t believe me, go and hire him to shave you.
Not being a blood-thirsty Lynx,l hate Gohr. But, loathe
him as I may, I may not leave him. In a moment of fatal
weakness I bought a shaving cup from him, and became
his vassal. It stands on the third shelf, second box
from the glass. My name is on it. Lynx in the chain of
my serfdom which I long to break, but dare not.
Why?
Whisper I There is a sausage shop next door, and I have
not forgotten Sweeny Todd I
I once tried the experiment. I had been spending the
night with a friend in the gin trade, and felt courageous.
Didn’t care a schledam for any barber in fact. He was
whetting his razor as if it had been a broadaxe when I re-
marked:
“ I say, Gohr.”
“ Yes, sir; say away.”
“I’ve been thinking of leaving you.”
“ Of what, sirf”
There was the gleam of roused ferocity in his eye. My
heart began to crawl towards my boots, and I wished I
had taken another of those schiedams before I came down
town.
“ I am going to move out of town.”
“ Where to, sir?”
“ Oh, only to Newark. But still, you see, I won’t be
able ”
“ Oh, not at all, sir. Now that the elevated road is
running, all you have to do is jump into a car, and here
you are; and a pleasant ride into the bargain. Don’t you
see?” *
The sunlight flashed on his razor blade, and his fingers
dabbled the lather on my neck right over the carotid. I
couldn’t help seeing, under the circumstances, and all I
could say was:


CABBY’S PRIZE.




“ I never thought of that, to be sure.”
If I had only said Chicago now, or San Francisco 1 But
then he would probably have objected to my leaving town
at all. Anyhow, the attempt was a failure. And worse
than that he made me buy seven dollars’ worth of hair
tonic, cosmetiques and the like, on the plea that I would
need them on Sundays when 1 couldn’t come to town. I
gave them to an Italian bootblack at the next corner. I
fancy he imagined that the cosmetique was candy, for he
was eating it when I saw him last.
It must not be supposed that, because I am now the
hand-slave, so to speak, of Gohr and of the cup, that he is
the only barber I have met in my wanderings. My ex-
perience has been an extensive one, as my scars will tes-
tify. I have been flayed by so many nationalities that,
to use a vulgarism, I have come to the conclusion that
the business of depilitation is a universal skin. I only
need to be scalped now to have my practical knowledge
of the barberous craft complete.
This suggests a theory. It is asserted that the gentle
savages, who are now keeping our troops busy being
killed among the Colorado hills are led by numerous
renegades, whose deadly ferocity can only take its rise
out of some great real or fancied wrongs. May they not |
be barbers, ruined by the five-cent-shave movement, and
maddened by deep draughts of bay rum, which customere j
have refused to be lured into paying extra for? It would |
not be a bad idea to catch one and vivisect him. The \
mysteries of the barber’s mind migli’ then be solved.
We might learn then why he always insists upon talking i
when you want to ruminate, and why he never, by any !
chance, talks the commonest kind of sense. We might
also find out why his breath so invariably smells of Hun-
ter’s Point, thinly disguised with Florida water or hair
oil. We might ascertain, too, -why he is always eating
suspicious lunches when you are in a hurry, and why he
always licks his fingers, wipes them on his hair and then
commences to rub the lather into your jaw with them.
The minor facts that he always shaves you so close that
you suffer from a rash, that he blinds you with bay rum,
pomades you till you reek like a candle factory, and in-
variably crops your hair when you only want it to be
trimmed, are explicable on the grounds of a naturally ma-
lignant spirit. But why does he always try to sell yon
bill-board tickets when he knows you wouldn’t go to ths
theatre if you had a box, and why is he such an infernal
liar?
Your hair may be as black as a raven’s wing or the
record of a Tammany politician, and anchored to your
scalp like a Brooklyn bridge tower, but he will swear to
you that it is turning white at a six-days-go-as-you-please |
gait, and commencing to fall out by the peck. Offer to '
let him lift you out of the chair by it and he will only
smile sadly and shake his head, as if to say, “ Poor, be
sotted soul I You’ll find out different in the course of fifty
years or so.”
It is a significant fact that you always find a barber
shaves himself. He knows too much to let anybody else
do it for him. I was acquainted with one barber who
always used to gash me at a certain spot on my left cheek.
I noticed that everybody else who came under his razor
suffered the same disfigurement. One day chance ex-
plained it to me. I saw him shaving himself. There was
a mole on his left cheek which he cut every time he
reaped himself. The gashes he dispensed to us were in
retaliation.
It was this barber who used to shave the bald-headed
man. That personage was a stout, elderly gentleman,
who had no more hair on his head than could be dis
covered with a microscope on a cobblestone. Yet, the
I barber had persuaded him that by having his head shaved
regularly he could produce a fresh growth that would be
| a credit to a Circassian girl. He would come in of a hot
! afternoon, sink into a chair with a grunt and go to sleep,
j Then the barber would lather his head with great sym-
metry and care, go over it once with the back of his razor
j and charge him a quarter for the job.
I once went into a barber shop in Bleecker street to get
shaved. It was a barber shop of the African persuasion,
down six stepsin a cellar that smelled of mould. A thin
growth of fungus clung to the ceiling, and the walls were
clammy with a faint greenish slime. A back door which
seemed to open on the bottomless pit permitted a circula-
tion of air that would have made an Exquimaux shudder.
On the walls were portraits of Hicks, the pirate, and
other celebrities. There was a rickety stand with two
mirrors and a lot of cups labelled “Friendship’s Gift,”
“When This You See, Remember Me,” “ Forget Me Not,”
and the like. I shall never forget them. I never saw
dirtier china in my life.
The barber was a mulatto with a squint. He chewed
tobacco copiously, with a noise like a cow munching hay.
Ho jammed me down in a chair, shoved my head so far
I back on the rest that I felt my windpipe splitting across,
and draped my manly bosom with a towel which looked
as if he had been using it as a handkerchief. Then he be-
; gan to talk to his assistant, who was snipping pieces from
; the ear of a victim who wanted his hair cut. The victim,
| happily was drunk. Ho took his wounds for
I mosquito bites, and every time a fragment of his person
I joined the ensanguined heap on the floor he would slap his
bleeding face and grunt:
“ Umph I Damn them skeeters 1 Hurry up, boss, or
they won’t leave enough of me to swear by.”
I was about to suggest decapitation as the shortest cut
to the end the assistant was drawing at, when my turn
came. The barber made a sweep over my face that almost
pulled my backbone out, and asked:
“ How you like de razor, boss f ”
“ Good enough,” I said; “ only hurry up.”
“ It ort to be good anyways,” said the barber, shaving a
sandwich off my other cheek. “It am de boss razor,
shuah.”
“Indeed I”
“ Yes, sah. I don’t want no better razor dan dis yerone,
I done tell yer now. Yer see dat speck dar, boss V ’
The speck was a red rust smear that made my blood run
cold.
“ Well, sah, dat war Jim Jonsing. He’m dead now. An’
yer see dat one?”
I did.
“Dat war Sam Smlff. Julius I wha’ de debbil ebber
come ob Sam Smiff?”
“ He’m round yit, walkin’ on crutches.”
My barber chuckled in demoniac glee. “ Dey ginerally
does want crutches or coffins,” he said. “ Well, sah, dis
yer nick here war Jim Peters. I done tole him: ‘Jim,’
says I, ‘yer luff dat gal lone or I cut youah heart out.’
‘ Yer cut nuffln,’ he says. ‘ Drap dat razor, or I bricks
youah brains out 1’ Dat war ’nuff fo’ me, sah. I gin him
one gash, an’ ”
A howl of anguish interrupted the thrilling recital.
Julius had become so interested in the narrative that he
had commenced to cut the Ineoriated customer’s nose off.
When I gained the street my barber and his assistant
were as busy as mince meat choppers, and I fancied a
voice called from the dark doorway:
“ Hurry up, now I The oven’s red hot, and if we don’t
have them pies ready when the wagon gets round, there’ll
be hell to pay and nothing to pay it with.”
*•**
“Will you have bay rum,. / ' , r?” The barber was shak-
ing me by the shoulder. Ih ad been asleep.
57
CITY GHABA CTEBS.


THE CORONER.
Most cities have only one coroner, and there’s where
New York has the “ bulge ” on them If I may drop for a
moment into the frivolous language of the young men with
whom I am thrown in daily contact.
We are rich in coroners, we revel in them, and if a sud-
den and mysteriously made corpse can’t be sat upon
properly in this place, it can’t be done anywhere.
The coroner’s is a peculiar office and one that I never
envied in all my ambitious political dreams. I am per-
fectly willing to serve either party in the Custom House,
If there is no hard work to be done, or will give up all
social tics and go abroad to inspect foreign consulships—
but to be called in to view the remains of the murdered,
the accidentally killed, the fellows fished from the river,
the suicides—bahA
And yet it is a necessary office, and very luckily one
that will always fascinate and attract a sufficient number
of patriots to prevent the dread possibility of its ever
being vacant.
I have known a good many in my time, and I have found
that despite their calling, they generally a fund
of humor that surprises you.
It is rather grim humor, to be sure, but all humor can’t
be light and volatile. It has its degrees of ponderousness
precisely as other things have.
1 shall never forget one time in an Indiana town when
the coroner and myself—at that time I was collecting
items for a provincial paper—started to hold an inquest
upon a baby that had been found on a door-step.
It was a very little baby, and so four men did for the
jury. The law required more, perhaps, but as there was
no one to claim the child, and the town had to bury it,
there was quite enough expense clustering about the inci-
dent without going into a fabulous waste of time.
Such a pretty little baby, lying in its tiny coffin, it
seemed a child of wax, with its eyes closed like sensitive
flowers that had gone to sleep.
The inquest was held, the necessary papers made out,
the coroner’s fee and those of the jurymen attended to,and
then the official and I, with the little box under his arm,
started for that part of the place where both his office
and that of the newspaper were.
I don’t know why inquests should always be held in
taverns—but they are—any more than I know why every
body connected with an autopsy or an inquest are willing
to take a drink on the slightest provocation; but they are.
This inquest had been held in a tavern, and the coroner
was slightly mixed. Honesty compels me to state that
I too had been looking upon the wine without caring
whether it was white or red. It was Bourbon wine, and,
as near as I remember, of a pale amber.
At any rate we stopped at two or three places, and then
we had to sit down to rest, and then we stopped again.
Suddenly the coroner said:
“ We’ve lost the baby 1”
And wo had. The little box, scarce two feet long, which
had been wrapped up in a newspaper, was gone.
Have you ever gone back over the day’s adventures of
an umbrella to see where you could possibly have left it?
Well, wo did that with reference to the baby.
Was it this saloon T Had it been that one f Slowly the
trail was worked back, blazing our way as we went, and
finally success crowned our efforts. A good-natured Boni-
face had the package, as he called It, stowed away under
his safe.
“ I’m tired, coroner,” I ejaculated when the excitement
was over, and I sank into the only chair in the bar.
“ But what’ll I sit on, Lynxyt” said the official.
“ That in good,” cried out mine host. “ Here’s a coroner
with nothing to sit on I”
“By Jove,” whispered my friend, “ I’ll sit on the baby.”
And so he did, for the second time, holding an inquest
in the bar for the sake of getting a chair. Luckily, none
of our former jurymen were present. More papers were
made out, more fees charged up, and next morning my
journal had a prettily pathetic account of how hi one day
the indefatigable coroner had been called upon to hold an
inquest in the cases of two babes left in out-of-the-way
places by their heartless parents, who were either crimi-
nally responsible for their death or too poor to bury them.
No traces of violence, however, I added, were found upou
their bodies.
On the strength of this our editor pitched into the im-
morality of the age, and called upon the legislature to
change the name of the place to either Sodom or Gomor-
rah, since it was clearly drifting toward a brimstone
destruction.
The coroner and I were intimate lor years after, and
when he alluded to the circumstance he always said:
“ Didn’t we have fun, though f”
I have introduced this cheerful little anecdote to show
you his idea of humor.
The coroner’s office in New York is at the corner of Mul-
berry and Houston streets. It is utterly inadequate in
size for its purposes, and the sooner suitable apartments
are prepared for inquests the better all around.
When the Mrs. Hull inquest was held it was found that
the room was useless. One in Police Headquarters had to
be obtained.
There are a host of clerks attached to the department,
and each coroner has a physician whose business it is to
examine scientifically into the causes of the deaths they
are called upon to investigate. Thephysicians also preside
at those gay gatherings called autopsies. If the spirit can
look down upon the clay it has left it must feel awfully
cut up sometimes at the manner in which the remains
are treated.
The New York coroners and their physicians have their
carriages, and are so enabled to move about the city with
rapidity when the dread despatch requiring their pre-
sence is received.
In a great many instances they are met by a fierce op-
position on the part of the family of the deceased,who
will go to the extent of lying at a tremendous rate in
order to avoid the scandal and publicity of an inquest.
This is particularly so with swell people, one of whose
connections suddenly shoots himself or herself, or takes
poison. There are hundreds of instances every year in
this city where the public hears of just such irregular
transactions.
The family are aided in the deception only too fre-
quently by their private physician who gives a certificate
58
CITY CHA RA CTERS.


twisting the genuine facts to suit the purposes of con-
cealment.
Some rural coroners are very energetic. They sit in the
corner grocery eating crackers out of the free barrel and
employ scouts to hunt up cases.
I do not believe that story, however, of the young man
who on being elected to the position opened the ball by
holding an inquest on the village cemetery and sending in
a lump-bill his fees.
Still such political corruption would be possible under
a “ ring.” In Tweed's time there was nothing to prevent
the coroners holding inquests on the statues in the Park,
or the pictures in the governor’s room of the City Hall.
In Pennsylvania there is a place where four cross-roads
mark and separate as many counties, and it was there
that the most obliging man that ever lived met his death.
He was asronaut, an un-Wise one. When his balloon
was a mile high he fell out, but with unerring precision
he struck the centre of the crossing lines and splashed
into four counties.
Making four inquests necessary.
And four coroners happy.
THE L.UECH FIEED.
The lunch fiend is always a man who has seen better
days. It is true that he has seen them a long while ago,
but the genuineness of the apparition cannot be impugned.
You can tell that by the way he puts mustard on abitof
cheese, or uses his spoon in adding the warm bean soup to
the forces of his somewhat gaunt composition.
True gentility is noticeable in every movement; while
watching him you are sure that you behold the wreck of
a former gorgeous life, and there steals over you that
peculiar sensation which you experience in Greece when
you stand among the moonlit pillars of some famous ruin,
Not that there is any moonshine about the lunch fiend.
He is a practical man, and terribly in earnest.
The particular fiend whom I wish to describe, and in
whom I have taken a sort of proprietary interest, is met
whenever business or pleasure calls me through the drink-
ing places of Nassau street, Beekman street and Park row.
He is tall and cadaverous, reminding one of Don Quixote
in a particularly hard-up condition.
His seedy black coat, which shines like an octogenarian
fish, is buttoned close to the throat. Sometimes it is
pinned. His battered hat always has the semblance of
having been brushed a long time the wrong way, the mis-
take having been rectified partially by a liberal applica-
tion of melted butter or stove polish.
He manages to cling to an eye-glass, fastened about his
neck by a piece of black cord strongly reminiscent of a
shoe string, and when in conversation with j r ou upon
national politics, or some kindred subject, this eye-glass
is twirled with all the grace of the days when he had no
further use for its aid than to see if the bank-notes he re-
ceived in change were good.
My gentle fiend is always poor in the matter of shoes,
but there is noticeable an attempt at polishing them
which again bespeaks the gentleman in distress.
When X enter a place where he is I find him perusing
the newspaper. He is a great reader, quite a literary per-
son in fact, and he would as lief miss the drawing of the
soup or stew lottery of each saloon he visits as not keep
posted on the affairs of the day.
By knowing all about the massacre of the English at Ca-
bul he is cock-sure of an invite from the Tom-gin Londoner
who comes in promptly at twelve o’clock, and his ac-
quaintance with the circumstance of the death of Baron
Rethschild actually induced the proprietor of a Chatham
street clothing emporium to stand a beer. The Israelitish
gentleman went back to his emporium, it is true, and
marked up the price of an overcoat ten cents, but with
that we have nothing to do.
At eleven o’clock lunch is ready. The fiend does not
make any hasty or undignified move. He calmly reads on >
as if oblivious to the fact. But he is not. After the first
I hungry battalion has retired from the attack he rises to
■ his feet, saunters toward the door, and then turns in an
easy, careless way always denoting whose time
is his own.
It is then that he espies the lunch as if now for the first
time, and he goes up to inspect it with the slow but steady
step of death.
In another moment he is toying over a piece of bread
and trifling with his soup. As the result of the toying
and the trifling both disappear completely.
Now he is ready for the second place on the list, where
they have beef stew. In the soup saloon he is sometimes
dealt out the lunch when he hasn’t played in at the bar,
but when the savory stew is dispensed a rigid code is
maintained.
It becomes necessary then to obtain either five cents or
to run across an angel. Both angels and half-dimes are
scarce in this work-a-day world, especially when you
want them. It is sometimes so rough in this particular
with my friend that even on the coldest days he is forced
to contemplate the warm and smoky stew disappearing
down the throats of those about him without his even
being able to manage a plateful himself.
Was the position of Tautalus any worse than this? I
feel sure that it was not. By a singular combination of
disastrous circumstances this always happens when the
stew that he likes best is the programme of the day, the
mountainous mutton stew, with the red carrots casting a
luminous glow over it.
But let us imagine the lunch fiend under happier au-
spices. Behold him, then, with a plate of the steaming
compound in his hand I
Let him be ever so hungry and he will not forget the
genteel style of eating. Others may gulp and bolt, but
you can never tell that the lunch fiend is really enjoying
the dish before him. And yet, God help him, the misera-
ble repast may be his breakfast, dinner and supper com-
bined. •
He harpoons the bits of potato lazily and pursues the
pieces of meat in a dilletante style which means that he is
really doing wrong in spoiling his appetite for dinner.
He never falls to create this impression, and the more
lunches he succeeds in coralling, the better and more nat-
urally he can act the role.
The lunch harvest has to be reaped between about
I a. h. and 2 f. m. There is no more until a hot midnight
lunch is served in some down-town places.
When the dishes and soup-tureens are taken away the
fiend disappears. He is really a part of the idea, and he
becomes strangely out of place the moment all traces of
59
CITY CHARACTERS.


the repast are removed and the saloon settles down to a
strictly gin trade.
Where does he go ? Let us follow him as he shambles
down Frankfort street, and so find a miserable tenement
in Rose street, one of whose wretched garret rooms he
inhabits.
On the dirty window-sill are ranged bits of bread and
cubes of cheese. He adds to this stock as he comes in,
and contemplates it with complacency, and then throws
himself upon the sickening apology for a bed.
This is the home of the lunch fiend. Fetid, clammy
and close in the clam-chowder time of summer; biting
cold, dreary and damp in the bean-soup days of winter.
Here he lives with remorse, rats and vermin, dreaming
over his shattered past like a child contemplating a vase
it had broken.
Every day he issues forth to obtain his food, the coal
buttoned tight to the chin, the eye-glass twirling, the silk
hat shining in the sun. He is an actor there playing his
little part. It is hard work sometimes, and but scanty
prizes are won. Still, taking one day with another, he
fares not so badly. The saloons are his club, he has the
papers, he is sure of lunch and a reasonable quantity of
rum.
Some morning a busy, bustling man comes to inquire
for him of the Dutch landlady. He don’t speak of the
fiend by name, but want’s to knows where the body Is.
It's his first and last visitor—the coroner
THE BROADWAY STAGE DRIVER.
It is a curious fact, but none the less true, that a Broad-
way stage driver is built on entirely different principles
from those used in the construction of the rest of man-
kind.
When a cannon ball strikes me, as it frequently has in
my warlike career, it tears its way among flesh, nerves
and muscle. Aimed at the stage driver, the cannon ball
would be baffled; it would impinge upon the surface of
the semblance of humanity, but would hastily glide off
in a tangentical line of disgust.
Why ? Because the driver in question is constructed of
boiler iron, whalebone and tanned leather. Every year’s
experience and exposure only serve to harden his frame.
When at last death beckons him from his box seat, he
quietly throws his lines across the horses, and without
suffering any illness, but merely dying of old age, he
passes to that shadowy land where it is his day off all the
time.
Although there are no statistics to consult, I take it that
the average age of a well-seasoned stage driver is about
two hundred years. I know that a great many I have
ridden with have given me personal reminiscences of
famous people whom they could not possibly have known
unless such was the case. Methuselah was evidently in
the “buss” line, which readily explains the green old
age to which he attained. There may, indeed, have been
omnibi (how’s that?) at an earlier stage eveh than his.
Do we not read that Adam and Eve were driven from the
Garden of Eden ?
The stage driver has generally been at the business as
man and boy all his life. If you should take him from
his seat and lock him up in a sandal wood box for ten
years, he would still smell like a horse blanket at the ex-
piration of that period of time. Although there may be
epochs in his career when he sat between the spider-
spoked wheels of a trotting sulky, and thereby achieved
the reputation of being a fast driver, still his actions
have always been of a conservative order, and he has
never ceased to advocate the maintenance of a stable
government.
I dearly love to ride alongside of these old curmud-
geons, and listen to their stories of the past. There is
scarcely one on the Broadway lines—l am not speaking
of the young drivers —who does not remember Walt Whit-
man and the eccentric freak which took possession of
him when he drove a Fulton Ferry stage for several
weeks. He gave it up to continue the writing of poetry,
and thereby, in my humble estimation, spoiled a very
good driver to make an indifferent poet.
This may sound like sacrilege, but I can’t help It. I
have frequently seen catalogues of hardware stores that
possessed as much rythm and poetical fancy as are to be
found in some of the effusions of the author of “ Leaves
of Grass.”
But perhaps he became a stage driver in order to foster
the divine gift. Victor Hugo never misses his daily ride
on top of one of the busses that ply up and down the
boulevards, and has admitted that he composes there.
The elevation, the untrammelled view and the fresh air,
so different from that inside, undoubtedly do combine to
produce an agreeable acceleration of spirits. If it is a
lovely spring morning, with the sun tooling his golden
“ drag ’’ across the wastes of blue o’erhead, and the birds
are singing in the trees of the various parks, you are
dead sure to enthuse to Che extent of tipping his “ nibs ”
a quarter, and becoming extraordinarily interested in his
daily life.
How much does he get? How long does he drive?
When did he first begin? Does he like it? These and a
thousand other questions you ask the jehu, and as his re-
plies indicate as hard a life as you would wish your dear-
est enemy to lead, you become terribly indignant at the
ill arranged condition of society which permits such out-
rages, and resolve to write a scathing letter to the news-
papers on the subject. But you never do.
We also sound the driver on the Slawson box idea. The
old man is bitterly opposed to the box and the money-
package system which it inaugurated. Not that there
was ever the stage driver who knocked down a cent 1
Only that the great change implied in the box means less
change implied in the driver. This is a rather paradoxi-
cal statement, and I myself must confess that I don’t
quite understand it, but there is no denying the fact that
all these honest whips flourished exceedingly up to the
time when smarty Slawson sold his invention to the vari-
ous companies. Then they commenced to complain of
hard times.
In bad weather the driver has the top of the 'bus all to
himself. It is then, on days when the snow swirls about
him, and the whips of the wind that lash his face are
tipped with hail, that his peculiar composition of boiler
iron, whalebone and tanned leather stands him in good


stead. With four plunging horses to manage, and fingers
benumbed with the biting cold, driving a ’bus through
the crowded Broadway becomes a task reauiring at once
the delicate perception of the fencing master and the
hardihood of an Alentian seal fisher. It is no wonder
that when he gets down at the stables he goes straight to
the nearest saloon and tosses off a tumblerful of rye. An
ordinary mortal could not survive the ordeal of more
than one trip on the top of a Broadway ’bus during a mid-
winter storm
A stage driver who has not handled horses for at least
forty years Is of no account. The old boys look upon him
as a green hand, and are never surprised when they hear
that one of these novices has lost a wheel, or been badly
damaged on the port bow by a truck. The driver with
whom I am most Intimately acquainted belongs to the
Twenty-Third street and Ninth avenue line, and I remem-
ber that when riding with him one morning last May, he
spoke very bitterly about the discharge of an old stager,
a friend of his, and the substitution of a horse-car driver
whose experience even in that ignoble field had extended
over twelve years only.
My friend resembles the elder Weller in the multiplicity
of the the coats he wears during the inclement weather.
I asked him once if he did it to imitate Weller.
“Whose Weller?” he replied.
“ He was a famous driver,” I answered.
“ Never heard of him. Guess he must have belonged
on the Fourth avenue line. Never drove a stage from
our place anyhow.” !
When the Coaching Club parades, the Broadway I
drivers, and especially those who go up Fifth avenue,
never fail to saiute Col. Delancey Kane and the rest of
the heavy swells who handle the reins just for fun. It is
recognized at once that all drivers belong to a common
fraternity, the difference being simply in finely gradu-
ated degrees. They do not salute Col. Delancey Kane on
account of his wealth and social position, but simply be-
cause he knows how to drive and handle the whip grace-
fully.
These omnibus drivers have a mutual benefit associa-
tion which looks after them when they are sick. This
rarely occurs, however. Horrible as the life is in its
lengths of hours upon the box, in its absolute dearth of
times for proper rest and recreation, the men seem to be
accustomed to it, and to bear its rigors with the utmost
ease.
It has no future. What the driver is to-day he will be,
if alive, twenty years from now. There is no chance to
save money, or to lay up anything more substantial than
an umbrella for that inevitable rainy day which glowers
before all of us.
It is only a question of time when the stage lines will
be abolished. Let us trust that they will last as long as
the present generation of drivers, for I can conceive no
more sad spectacle than one of them out of work.
In the meantime, when you ride on top, do the correct
thing, and utterly ignore the existence of the Slawson
box. By so doing you show yourself to be a person of
spirit; and if you should run counter to the interests of
the company, why that is their lookout, not yours.
THE. BANK CHERK.
In the clerking world the hank clerk is the aristocrat.
I have made a careful study of him, being particularly
favored once by living in a house where it was possible to
compare him with a dry goods tosser, and it required but
the space of a dinner hour to see that one was “ fine cut ”
and the other “ plug.”
The bank clerk lives constantly in an atmosphere of
luxury. The men he meets during the day are monied
individuals, from the millionaire notch down. If he is in
the cash department he handles greenbacks so constantly
that the bills passing through his hands actually lose
their monetary value, and become to him as so much
merchandise.
His work is light and he is well paid for it. The situa-
tion is a life one if he behaves himself, and as the old
roosters drop from their stools into their coffins he ad-
vances along the line of promotion.
No wonder, then, that he is so many karats finer than
the miserable beings who decorate Broadway windows
with dry goods, or lug bolts of cloths about from early
morning until candle-light, and all for a salary that a
premium on dishonesty.
I am never surprised when I read about a clerk in one of
the Grand street stores, for instance, being detected in
stealing silk or any other trifle. Many of them are mar-
ried, and since the highest salary paid to the rank and file
would hardly keep a man and a flog respectably, the prob-
lem of supporting a family on it is one that is tragically
ridiculous.
Now our natty bank clerk labors under none of these
disadvantages. When he steals—and I regret to state that
there have been such instances placed upon record—it is
generally to cover up a flyer that he has been having in
I Wall street. He shoots a second golden barbed arrow in
order to find the first.
In his leisure hours the bank clerk is a great society or
sporting man, just as his fancy determines. He lives up
town in a first-class boarding house. He is very particular
about his dress, generally wearing the English style of
clothes which the brokers affect If ne is not calling upon
the ladies in the evening he is at the theatre, or in some
billiard hall where he has a private cue. Too frequently
he doesn’t get home until very late, and where this hap-
pens it is necessary for him to have a couple of brandies
and soda in the morning before he can get his hand in
steady writing trim.
I must not be understood as representing a young man
fond of fast life in limited doses and holding him forth as
a specimen of the fraternity. Every New York bank
clerk is not necessarily fond of beer and billiards any
more than every treasurer of a Fall River mill is an
honest man. But the conservative, respectable, always
home-to-dinner sort have not come my way much, and
I can only speak of the bank clerk as I have found him.
In two or three instances I have known tellers and book-
keepers who would suddenly be seized with a most in-
tense desire to go to Europe and gaze upon the monu-
mental memoranda of antiquity; and there have been
61
CITY CHARACTERS.


others, whom I have met, whose greatest ambition at the
time In question was to get to Canada and see whether
the Governor-General was running the Dominion in a
way that would please Mrs. Victoria.
By a singular coincidence the accounts of these gentle-
men would he found mixed.
A pure case of tangled threads among the gold. Yes;
and among the silver and the greenbacks and negotiable
securities.
The harsh, outside world calls this stealing, but it is not
so looked upon by the banking fraternity. It’s an “ir-
regularity” at the worst. In a few rare cases punishment
is meted out, but in the majority of instances the diffi-
culty is smoothed over by partial restitution, and the
sponge of compromise wipes out all record of the crime.
See how nicely the teller of the latest robbed bank kept
an exact account of the balances he bled, in order to
allow his outside 4 ‘ pal ’' to overdraw. He had it all down
in a neat, little book, even to the pennies. The bank, no
doubt, felt very grateful over this evidence of care, which
saved them the expense of an expert.
When these young men do begin to speculate on Wall
street with the funds of the institution they do it in an
elegant manner and on the wholesale plan. False balance
sheets, doctored accounts, hypothecation of bonds—these
are the instruments of their security while the operations
are in progress. When it gets too warm, or when the
time draws near for the government examiner from
Washington to put in an appearance, then they begin to
study up the climate of Canada or to invest in European
guide-books.
Out in the mining towns of the West there is many a
bank clerk wearing a woollen shirt, drinking, shooting,
gambling with the rest of them, who used to be a pink of
perfection in dress as he stood behind the glass barrier in
the down-town bank.
“What brought you here, Charley! ” I asked one of them
I met in Colorado some years ago. “Tell me her name.”
I felt sure that it was a woman scrape because my
friend was a most decided beau, and had more elegant
womena doring him than would be necessary for the
Sultan’s harem.
“’Twasn’t a petticoat,” he answered. “I simply went
in to declare a bigger dividend than the bank could, and
it kind of broke me up. Let’s liquor.”
Women, however are the cause of the ruin of ninety
per cent, of confidential clerks, whether employed in
banks or breweries, who go astray. Ido not mean sweet-
hearts upon whom presents are lavished, or wives who
are allowed to indulge their dressing tastes to the most
extravagant degree. The feminines I have in view are
the shady creatures who must be established in grand
style, who look unon money as a necessity, and who will
fly to another cage the moment the gold wears from the
bars of the one in which they are.
A young man in the Tombs, he was a bank clerk, con-
fessed to me that his girl had been the cause of his down-
fall.
“She ordered me to raise money somehow,” he said,
“and I tried to.”
“How!”
“I raised a hundred-dollar check to a thousand, and
here I am.”
Moral—Raise up a bank check in the way it should noi
go, and there will generally be trouble.
THE BOLD MILITIAMAN.
Although all my tendencies are naturally of a war-like
complexion—to that degree, indeed, that I would sooner
smell gunpowder than live near a Williamshurgh oil re-
finery—still I never gushed much over the militia.
I recognize the importance of the institution, of course,
and no one is more enthusiastic than myself when there
is a review being held and the splendid “ 7th ” comes
swinging down Broadway, with the ladies waving hand-
kerchiefs from store windows and hotel balconies, and
the Flemings of the police clubbing, jabbing and poking
those who unfortunately occupy the front line of spec-
tators.
It is needless for me to state that I was a constant
visitor at the Tth’s Armory Fair. My martial form loomed
up among other warriors to an embarrassing point of
notoriety, and in the evening I wore all my Mexican and
Seminole decorations. I flatter myself that the impres-
sion I created among the fair sex can be qualified by no
other adjective than “ stunning.”
That is the night they roped me into six raffles, or draw-
ings. I wanted a meerschaum pipe, and I succeeded in
winning a blue satin pin-cushion.
It has always been so with me in this life; I never loved
a dear gazelle, and, in fact, I wouldn’t have one of them
about to cheer me with its coal-black eye, or to perform
any other service, and so I can’t use that somewhat trite
quotation to express disappointment; but I never sighed
figuratively for a meerschaum that it didn’t turn into a
pin-cushion.
My experience was a contribution to the success of the
fair and I do not begrudge it. There remains now the
difficult problem of presenting this pin-cushion to some
young woman in a manner at once so polite and yet dis-
tant that she may not detect in it any amatory intent
either immediate or prospective.
Perhaps my dislike for the militia had its origin in
rooming once with a youngman who had drilling musters
and roll-calls on the brain. This was a good while ago,
before I had won my own spurs on the genuine tented
field. Scott’s tactics were just being superseded by Har-
dee’s, and I was forced to listen to explanations touching
the differences to be noticed in the drill details. The
position of the little finger in its relation to the seam of
the pantaloons always struck me then as something on
which the fate of battles, and consequently that of
nations, must naturally depend, so profuse were the
directions in the book touching such positions.
But it wasn’t all this minutiae that ennuied me. Too
much drilling is naturally a bore, but I stood it manfully.
It was when the young warrior came home drunk, which
was every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, and insisted
upon getting into bed with me “ accoutred as he was,”
bayonet and all, that I kicked. His continually borrow-
ing my white trousers on inspection days and bringing
62
CITY CHARA CTERS.


them home to me with mud up to the waist—a pure waste
of mud—was also annoying.
Then his conversation. Like all men with a hobby, he
became a nuisance. The squad, the company, the regi-
ment, were never-failing subjects for his martial mono-
/ogue. The sudden coming to the house of a young lady
who had a brother in the navy was hailed with delight.
We looked upon the circumstance as an antidote for the
military poison, and so applied it. Everything became
nautical, much to our militiaman’s intense disgust. The
young ladies sang “A Life on the Ocean Wave,” and I
went to the extravagance of doing the hornpipe for them
in the most approved foc’st’le style.
I don’t wish anyone to understand that I am decrying
the militia system. I consider the National Guard of the
State of New York an institution of which to be proud,
while the drill experience of the armory is undeniably
a good thing physically for our hollow-breasted, narrow-
chested young men, whose chief exercise during the day
would appear to consist in hopping from one high stool
to another, not exactly like the chamois, because there
are no stools in the Alps for the chamois to hoop on, but
in their general style. It gives the young guardsman an
erect attitude and an idea of discipline which is in itself
a valuable acquisition. I merely meant in my seemingly
derogatory remarks to express my own sentiments on the
subject. Having waded in blood I naturally long for a
life of peace. Knowing what it was to serve and com-
mand, I now appreciate the most untrammelled liberty.
If I belonged to a regiment I would be paying fines con-
tinually, and would be robbed of the pleasure of sitting in
the windows with the pretty girls and watching the gal-
lant fellows go by.
I wouldn’t mind being a colonel, but even the pomp and
glory of that position are only maintained at an immense
expense. It is a very responsible position, too. You are
answerable for the conduct of your men. Think of the
embarrassing attitude in which Colonel Charles Spencer
would be placed should a loaded brewery wagon pass by
just as he had sounded the signal for a charge upon the
enemy I
Jim Fisk was a colonel, but when the draft riots hap-
pened, he found that his exalted position didn’t enable
him to get over back-yard fences any faster than if he
had been a mere private.
It’s very nice, also, to go down Broadway at the head of
your regiment, but even then allaman’s joy may be dissi-
pated by his horse. Better far to own your horse and ac-
custom him to the circumstances of war, but every one
can’t do that, and when it comes to trying to make a
hired Second avenue car steed assume the gait of a
trooper’s charger the result is not always satisfactory.
It’s better, however, than being astride of a milkman’s
Kosinaute, for they want to dash down every street that
forms a part of their daily route.
There is one advantage about being a militiaman that
mustn’t be overlooked. All the handsome young fellows
are great favorites with the ladies. I found it to be the
case when I was young, and even now when I dress up to
go to the annual dinner of the 1812 veterans—but no mat-
ter. There is something in the military idea which par-
ticularly suits the feminine mind. In the opera of 11 La
Orande Duchesse ’ this adoration isbeautifullyexpressed
by the instantaneous admiration conceived for Fritz by
the Duchesse. It’s very nice to be that kind of a soldier.
The conservative, peacable element is a strong one in
the community and must be respected. There are Quaker
societies who wish our army reduced, and you see how
elegantly it is being done by the Ute and other Indians.
Bobby Burns, the poet, was opposed to all soldiering.
Do you not remember that verse :
“ Let those who wish to go to war.
Give me my peace and plenty—
I’d rather be the life of one,
Than be the death of twenty.”
I am afraid that Bobby was very Industrious in living
up to the principles of these lines.
THE THEATRICAL PRESS AGENT.
The press agent of a show or a star is as different from
himself in both instances, when working in the city and
“on the road” respectively, as if he were two human
beings, a sort of adjustable Siamese twins, for instance.
In the rural districts getting newspaper notices for the
attraction he represents is comparatively easy work. The
most influential provincial journals will have no hesi-
tancy in printing the most complimentary paragraphs
provided the agent does the correct thing in the way of
drinks, cigars and tickets.
And of course the agent does the correct thing. That’s
what he is there for. The “ local ” editor climbs to his
sanctum, full of his native rum, and cheerfully mentions
that the genial Mr. Blank paid them the compliment of a
visit yesterday and unfolded the scheme of the circus, or
theatiical combination, as the case may be, which is
shortly to honor the town with a visit. Then the editor
becomes eloquent, and hopes that every man and woman
in the place will look upon the purchase of a ticketforthe
entertainment as a duty but a trifle less sacred than send-
ing in back subscriptions and the formation of newspapo-
rial clubs for the future.
This is the granger way, and it works elegantly every-
where save at Salt Lake City. Poor Artemus Ward used
to say that after the editors and their families got seated
there were only about four 25-cent chairs left for the pay-
ing public.
In a big city like New York the duties of the theatrical
press agent become more varied and more difficult. There
is a certain amount of hack noticing which the theatres
expect and get in a perfectly legitimate way. Taking the
advertisements into consideration, it is a fair case of
quid pro quo. But to work up a fancy sensation, to create
a stir, to warm a dying idea into fitful brilliancy—these
are the problems which engross the minds of the inge-
nious gentlemen whose duty it is, no matter how crowded
the papers may be with startling locals or important cable
dispatches, to inform the reading world that the eminent
tragedian, the champion conjurer or the five-legged horse
is each in his or its way on exhibition at the well known,
etc., where every evening and on Saturday afternoons,
etc., etc.
Some theatrical stars have a monotonous way of being
advertised. The little dodge of Clara Morris is to have


her horse run away. When that is a bit stale she throws
open her bedroom doors and lets the entire world know
how sick she is. I do not think that her agent is a person
of good taste.
One of the most threadbare devices resorted to by agents
in order to keep the names of histrionic people before the
world is the published announcement of the theft of their
jewels. If we believed every story of this kind we would
have to credit the show world with the possession of more
gems than are to be found in Golconda and the South
African fields combined.
One of Mapleson’s prima’s—Mile. Ambre—has been
puffed exceedingly, both as the possessor of fabulously
valuable diamonds and as the ex-mistress of the King of
Holland. I have seen her. The diamonds are all there,
but she isn’t. I do not think the King of Holland a person
very difficult to suit.
Gerster can’t come to this country owing to the fact
that she doesn’t want the baby rocked in the cradle of
the deep, and immediately the press agent starts down to
Park row to work up Marimon, who is coming over in her
stead. We are told how often she was seasick, and what
dreams of shipwreck dire troubled the slumbers of her
French maid. All this is high art, and with people of im-
portance Jike pranas it is not difficult to get the gossip in
the papers. People like to read these things.
Now puffing an electric eel or an educated pig is quite a
different affair. The king at this sort of business is Mr.
“ Tody ” Hamilton. He actually revels in forcing an un-
attraction before the people, and is never so high-spirited
as when the obtaining of one line even seems an impossi-
bility.
It was he who educated the oysters at the Aquarium to
follow him all about the building, and not in the form of
a box stew either. That was wonderful enough, and at-
tracted crowds, but when he induced them to whistle
tunes and had scientists there from all over and two or
three blocks further still to study the phenomenon while
the operatic notices were cut down in the dailies to make
room for the oysters, he accomplished his masterpiece of
agitation.
I never heard them whistle, but then I was never there
on a day when the temperature was just right. Mr.
Hamilton’s oysters were very like the spirits you meet at
25 cent seances in Grand street. They wouldn’t perform
under disturbing circumstances.
The press-agent is continually writing manifold notices
or cooking up novel forms of advertisements, but still he
can always spare time, if it’s with a newspaper man, to
play a game of billiards or take a drink. Properly man-
aged shows allow him a fund for down-town expenses.
No one is bribed, no vulgar business promises are made
one way or the other, but the rosy reflex of an agreeable
hour spent with an entertaining gentleman, and they are
all entertaining, is often the light by which a generous
notice is given that otherwise would have remained un-
penned.
All critics are not the pirates that Mr. Boucicault, the
monumental literary footpad of the world, would have
you believe, and they frequently do what the press-agent
desires, simply as the evolution of a kindly nature, stirred
to the deed by the recent contact with the agent.
It is absolutely necessary to be a successful agent that
one should lie faster than any horse in the stable of Mr.
Bonner can trot, and the lie must be told with great
sauvity.
“Didn’t get those tickets I You surprise me. I put
them up in an envelope, addressed them, and gave them
to the boy myself.”
That's what he says on the spur of the moment when
you remind him of an utterly forgotten promise. Other
tickets come post-haste, with a note stating that although
the boy was the only support of a widowed mother, who
had been guilty of the baby act on nine other occasions,
you had discharged him after forcing a confession from
him that he had sold your tickets to a speculator.
You know the agent well, and do not feel worried about
the widowed mother and her starving brood.
All systematic agents keep scrap-books in which printed
notices of the play or curiosity are entered. Arranging
these notices is quite an art. The Daily Rolling-Pin, for
instance, says :
“ Perhaps the worst play ever written was produced last
night by the Booby Troupe. As we yawned in our seat
over its blatant nonsense and stupid situations we sighed
for the good old days of the drama, when a play possessed
sterling merit, logical action, and witty dialogue.”
Now in saving this notice you don’t want to greedy
with it. You simply paste in :
“ Sterling merit, logical action, and witty dialogue.”—
Daily Rolling-Pin,
This is the correct and only way. I have been an agent
myself, and understand the extraction of honey from
galL
THE PAWNBROKER.
At this time of the year the pawnbroker Is a very handy
relative. You are absolutely nothing without money, and
it is he who is only too willing to turn, as Mr. Midas used
to do, any of your temporal possessions into gold.
Not so willing as he used to be. The loaning trade hasn’t
made many advances lately. People have become so
thoroughly broke that the per centage of chance of their
ever turning up to redeem pledged articles has steadily
decreased, and the capitalist of the three golden balls has
not been stow to appreciate the situation.
His principal trade is his interest, and so philanthropic
is the pawnbroker, despite the horrid things that have
been said of him, that he much prefers to have prosperity
so fall upon you ns to enable you to take out whatsoever
you may have intrusted to his care. Still the revival of
trade has had its effect in making the business brisk. It
is generally so, anyhow, at this time of the year. Ducats
are a necessity, and if the chess problem of life can be
brought any nearer a satisfactory solution by the sacrifice
involved in a “ pawn,” it is bound to be done.
Many estimable citizens who have a stack of tickets in
the deepest recesses of their attenuated pocketbooks pro-
fess to look upon the entire system of pledging household
and personal goods as a disreputable one. Ido not
64
CITY CHARACTERS.


A CIRCUS AT THE FRENCH MADAM’S.




None of the Lynxes do. At this very moment there re-
poses in a Second avenue establishment of advanced ideas
one of my most magnificent uniforms. Letnjesee —who
was it I cut down in that suit? It was the tailor—sBo to
to $6O, and I remember that the fight was terrific.
But why is my martial cloak and all the rest of it in
the pawn shop? Is it because I needed money? No.
Those military garments are there to be taken care of.
When myself and the other warriors meet for a dinner I
get them out. The occasion passed, in they go. In this
way the pawnbroker becomes to me a valet who takes
care of my clothes. It gives me more room in my humble
apartment for brain expansion and the handling of my
health lift.
Originally the pawnbrokers came from Italy, and that
accounts for there being so many in Mulberry street and
all through the Italian quarter. The precise significance
of the three ball game they play with you has never been
explained. It is popularly considered as an exemplifica-
tion of the fact that it is two to one that the capitalist
will get the advantage of you. I cannot vouch for this.
There are many of the Hebrew children turning the
nimble sixpence as pawnbrokers. In each instance the
method of conducting business is precisely the same.
Say the article is a watch, upon which you want $l5.
The man behind the counter will begin to shake his
head before you get in the door at all. That means he is
up to your little tricks, and is well aware that you intend
to endeavor to gouge him in some way.
When you take the watch out of your pocket the pawn-
broker groans. This suspicious attitude of his is contag-
ious, and you really begin to feel that you are a thief, say
a thief trying to get over “ a fence.”
He picks up the watch deprecatingly, groaning more
and more, and really becoming so miserable that sym-
pathy is excited for him. He must be ill. The rolling of
the eyes and the uplifted hands indicate pain in the
stomach. But it isn’t anything of the kind. It’s a pan-
tomimic expression of an affection of the money chest.
»• Oh 1 Mein Gott in Himmel, vot you vant on this
vatch ?”
“ Fifteen dollars 1”
“ Mosish 1 Mosish 1 Koomin sie hler—quick Mosish. He
vants fifteen dollars 1”
Mosish falls down in a fit, and is dragged into the next
room. He has been sickly since his birth and any sudden
shock upsets him.
“ I tell you vat it is,” the pawnbroker finally remarks,
“ I give you one dollar, seventy-five.” And he groans all
the time he makes out the ticket.
This is the regular style with one kind of pawnbrokers.
Of course, they vary.
It isn’t always necessary to have a store when you set
up for a pawnbroker. If you prefer it you can just go
around through the city, quietly, in a social way, ar-
ranging business during an afternoon’s call, and leading
altogether a more agreeable life than the man of the shop.
Many ladies patronize these peripatetic lenders of coin,
the articles pledged being jewels generally. They also
catch the servant girls and coachmen Rr small transac-
tions.
Israelites do not monopolize the trade in New York by
any means. There are a great many English and Irish in
the business, and a few Yankees. It is a vocation, how-
ever, which seems to particularly suit the German Jew
character. They have the penetrating glance which tells
them at once how much they would be warranted in ad-
vancing upon a certain article. When they have settled
this in their mind they offer one half, and have the other
as a margin to fight over.
The shoddy pawnbrokers—the “fences ’’—they are the
ones who make money in that irregularly fast way known
as hand over fist. Being constantly aware of the fact
that they are liable to be visited by the police at any mo-
ment they give their villainous customers but little. A
set of silver that may have cost a murder, diamonds got-
ten at night in residences—all such goods are eagerly
taken but the burglar gets a beggarly amount.
The transaction once accomplished the “fence” loses
no time in getting rid of traceable stuff. Gold ornaments
are melted down and all dangerous goods are run off for
distant negotiation by agents. *
There is no question about the cheek of the pawnbroker.
He will offer you the price of an oyster stew for
a hundred dollar pin, and frequently gets badly
“stuck” with “paste.” When you get ahead of a
pawnbroker you want to put the date in red chalk on a
fence and then ask some one to help you celebrate the
glorious event.
The most monumental instance of the pawnbroker’s
cheek was that afforded by the Boston dealer who re-
luctantly gave up Mrs. Hull’s jewelry, upon which he had
paid her murderer, Chastine Cox, some money, and then
put in a plea for a share of the reward.
The laws regulating pawnbrokers differ in different
localities. In New York you have a year in which to re-
deem or renew, but in Philadelphia, for instance, it is a
question of four months.
It was ignorance of this fact which made it possible for
me, many years ago, to lose a watch which had been pre-
sented to me by the gentlemen of the office in which I had
been .temporarily engaged, the gift expressing either
their joy or sorrow at my leaving.
It was beautifully inscribed with my name, etc., and so
elegant altogether that I deemed it too valuable to carry
during a season in which pickpockets were flourishing
alarmingly.
So I temporarily intrusted it to the guardianship of a
gentleman whose name was either Isaacs or Nathan
thinking I had a year to contemplate It in a position of
absolute security.
It was a good “going” watch and was “gone” at the
end of four months.
57
CITY CHARACTERS.


THE REFORMED YOUNG MAN.
This is the only time I can sketch him at short range,
for during the new year that is about to dawn upon us he
generally melts into the ranks of ordinary mortals and
becomes lost as a distinctive character.
He is in our house, is the very youth in fact, I gave some
good advice to about political bets. It was yesterday
morning that he came to me as I was enjoying my cigar
in what our landlady calls the conservatory, although it
seems tome to be a particularly dirty extension-room de-
voted to a couple of tubs, two broken croquet mallets and
a flower pot, and said :
“ Colonel, I want to confide in you.”
“Ah, ha, my boy,” I replied, acknowledging his mili-
tary salute, “ you have come to the right place. I am a
perfect mine of confidences even at the present moment.
Buried here,” and I tapped my chest, “ are state secrets
the exposure of which would shake this country to its
center, while the New York Safe Deposit Company is as
nqjhing, when compared with me as a fiduciary agent
and repository of individual experiences. Go on my boy.”
He paused awhile, as he naturally would under this
shot, and then said :
“You may have noticed that I have been drunk ever
since Christmas.”
I told him that such was the privilege of a gentleman,
and that I had not noticed it. In fact part of the week
there had been storms all along the coast in my case, and
on this morning in question the sea was squally.
“ I did it more or less deliberately,” he went on to say,
“ because I am going to swear off.”
“ No more beer, eh ? ”
“No beer, gin, whisky or anything of that nature.
Only cider.”
“ Did you ever live long on cider ?•’’
“ No—l have generally taken it as an element of the
drink called a "stone fence.’ ”
“ But you have never grappled with the cider pure and
unadulterated?”
“ No.”
“ Nor seen the stomach of the dead man opened by the
coroner ? ”
“What dead man?
“ The cider drinker. You must know, my dear boy,
that the sudden stoppage of the use of fiery liquids and a
rush to cider is a reformatory experiment the result of
which you cannot certainly calculate. You must go slow,
my dear boy. You want to begin on very hard cider and
gradually work down to the temperance article. Then
you’re all right.”
He thanked me ever so much for this advice, and then
continued :
“I am going to reform also in money matters.”
“ You don’t mean to say that you are going to give up
the practice of having any money? ”
I asked this question with peculiar emphasis. The
young man owes me a draw-poker debt of $7.50.
“ Oh, no—nothing like that. But I want some system,
I am going to buy a little book, and put down every item
of daily expense, just like Benjamin Franklin.”
“ You will keep a diary ? ”
“ I have been thinking of that too. lam going to buy a
pretty one for about six dollars, and precisely at mid-
night, when the old year shivers into the graveyard of the
nast and the ros v -cheeked ”
“ Oome, young man, hold on a little. Have you had a
drink this morning ? ”
“ I’ve had two brandy cock-tails.”
“That explains it. Go on. ’ ’
“ I mean I’ll write my inmost thoughts, and all the
doings of the day. It will be a good thing to refer to iu
after years.”
“ Have you ever kept a diary f ”
“ This is my virgin effort.”
“ And you never reformed before ? ”
“ 1 can’t say that I have, but the sad and solemn mem.
ories of the dissipated past come up before one at this
time of the year, and the deeper nature of man ”
I instinctively moved over to a reasonable proximity
to one of the croquet mallets. When you are talking to a
young man who has had two brandy cock-tails before
breakfast, and he becomes poetical over his approaching
reformation you can’t be too careful. These reformers
are peculiar.
“ You will cultivate the mind also,” I suggested—“ no
more billiards, no bowling alley over in Fourth street? ”
“ No, sir—l have already had my name sent in to the
Pythagoras Debating Club of the Eastern Star Temper-
ance Lodge, No. 486, and I’m to speak next week on the
negative side of the question, * Isn’t it about time the
Czar of Bussia took a tumble.’ That is not the exact lan-
guage, but it covers the idea.”
He told me of various other reforms he intends inaugu-
rating and then asked my advice on the entire subject.
I went in heavy on the high moral and came the stage
uncle magnificently, and when he left me he was
strengthened in all his good resolves.
At this writing there are about one hundred thousand
young men who are going to imitate my young friend,
and turn over a new leaf. They will all be turned simul-
taneously and the noise they will make will sound like a
tempest roaring through a forest.
But will the reformed young men, the cider brigade, be
about Jan. 15th? I sincerely hope that each one will
still be drinking cider, keeping account of daily expenses
and writing up his little diary. But an experience of
many years leads me to the dismal prognostication that
eight-tenths of them will back-slide, and go on Just as
they did before.
I have reformed myself every New Year’s day since I
was twenty years old, and I intend to do it again this
time. The only difference between now and when I was
much younger is that my reformation fades away about
noon Jan, Ist.
No, my dear young readers, believe an old man when
he states that New Year’s reformations are not worth a
continental, whatever that is.
If the reformation does not come from the soul inde-
pendent of the date of the day when it is put in practice,
it is not a genuine article.
I shall go to watch meeting on next Wednesday even-
ing, and I shall roll into bed with an idea that I am about
to revolutionize my entire life. I may even buy a diary,
but before the work is over I will be using it as a scrap-
book, -will be taking my “ constitutional ” as usual, and
will be too busy with what matters 1880 may have for
me to consider to experience even the faintest twinge of
remorse at my fall from arace.
68
CITY CHARACTERS.


HARRY HILL’S.
Seeing a great city after the lamp-lighter has gone his
rounds has always heen a favorite amusement with those
sportsmen who combine a keen desire to hunt the elephant
with a natural disinclination to wander away from the
comforts of home.
Most fortunately for them a species of elephant has
been evolved by the construction of such places as New
York, London and Paris, whose pursuit is always quite as
expensive as the search after the quadruped whose tusks
were invented so that we should have material out of
which to manufacture billiard balls, faro checks and other
articles of vertu and vice.
Being “an old rounder” I can also testify that the
quest of the metropolitan elephant is as exciting as that of
his African or Asiatic counterpart, and frequently more
dangei ous.
In the series of sketches which I propose to write for the
Gazette I will take the reader in a leisurely way through
the entire city, meeting him in imagination each week as
old Trinity marks midnight, and leaving him at such hour
as shall warrant his getting home in time to save his
reputation.
We shall probably cross the trail of that theological
straddle-bug, the Eev. T. De Witt Talmage, who came
over here with a Brooklyn dark lantern which he pro-
ceeded to flash into New York slums, and if we do I war-
rant that we shall find things entirely different from the
way he says he saw them, forcing us to one of three con-
clusions, each of them irreverent —(1) that the Tabernacle
minister knows how to lie; (2) that they were buying him
taffy all the time; (3) that he was drunk.
We will begin with Harry Hill’s place, or “ ’Arry ’lll’s,’’
as he is called by his cockney friends.
There isn’t a better known man in the United States
than Mr. Hill, nor a place anywhere in this or the old
country like the one he not only keeps but personal.y
conducts at Houston and Crosby streets.
Midnight, then, at Harry Hill’s 1
It is just the best time, perhaps, of all times to see this
famous resort at its red-hottest.
All the young swells who have been taking country
cousins around to the legitimate and illegitimate theatres,
and all the commercial travelers in charge of junior part-
ners of the various business establishments, are now mak-
ing their way to this combination of both theatre and
dance-house.
We buy our tickets—twenty-five cents apiece—at a
little window down stairs and pass upward to where the
shouts of laughter and thunders of applause proclaim that
an amusing song or farcical “ nigger ” sketch is in pro-
gress.
The room is all ablaze with light and heavy with smoke.
The stage is occupied by a young lady in a wig the color
of “yellow-jack molasses candy,” and a pair of pink
tights.
Her cheeks blaze with excitement and paint, while
each energetic gesture accompanying the topical song she
is singing displays her bosom lavishly. She does not
mind this, however, and since we are all gentlemen, if
we arc out for a lark, no one notices it.
When the song is finished there is a chance to look
about. There is a gallery overhead and a wine room to
one side. There is also a long lunch counter piled high
with pigs’ feet, cold cuts, pies, etc., etc. You can also get
piping hot coffee and tea.
At our table srttwo young men, who are certainly from
the country. In fact, a glance over the room will show
you that the tiller of the soil, the driver of the oxen and
the hoer of the tubercle are out in force.
Singularly enough Harry Hill’s is more discussed and
made more of in the country than anywhere else.
There isn’t a young man who comes up to “York” to
spend his little sum laid aside for that purpose but takes
Harry’s in just at sure as later on he gets taken in by
some Dutch siren on the Bowery.
And when he gets back to Rushville or Punkton and
the gang assemble down at the depot to see the freight
train come in, he tells such glowing stories of the place
that those of his listeners who have not yet had such a
sensational experience dream all night of the account,
and never rest until they, too. have gone, and seen, and
conquered.
These two at our table, if they tell all they experienced,
will have to speak of the two young ladies in seal-skin
sacques that show never a trace of having been in a
pawn shop all summer, who sidle down beside them like
little birds going to roost.
“ Won’t you buy me a drink, dear ?” says one.
“ You’ll treat me, pet, won’t you?” remarks the other,
and without waiting to discuss the matter further the
beautiful creature waves one of the waiter girls, who are
flitting about like bees, to the table.
Of course, Punkton is equal to the emergency, even to
standing a treat for the plump little woman who brings
on the beverages.
Then the representatives of rurality and the two seal-
skin sacques, who live in furnished rooms on Crosby
street, get very sociable, indeed. I notice, during the
evening, that they keep the plump waitress busy, and
at about 2:30 a. m. the four depart together in a rather
tipsy but orderly condition.
That is the great charm about Harry Hill’s place.
There is nothing vulgar or obscene said on the stage, and
no disorderly conduct is permitted. No one can be robbed
there.
He has a very miscellaneous audience, and the women
of the streets are welcome as long as they behave them-
selves. But so they are at the “Alhambra” in London.
They may concoct all sorts of villainous schemes while in
Harry Hill’s, but the watch and pocketbook of the granger
are safe while he remains there.
“Order please, gentlemen,” shouts a major-domo.
“ Take your partners for a quadrille,”
There is an open space at the head of the stairs where
the dancing is done. On the walls are signs reading,
“ Gentlemen will please not smoke while dancing 1” “No
lovers wanted 1” and embodying other terse statements.
The orchestra strikes up and the quadrille begins. These
girls dance very nicely, gliding through the figures with
genuine grace.
Suddenly there is a crash and a table is upset. One man
has struck another in a quarrel about a girl.
In any other place this would be quite a little scrim-
mage. Glasses would be thrown about, and the audience
put in a panic.
But not at Harry Hill’s. That übiquitous gentleman,


who has the frame of a pugilist in constant training and
a grasp of iron, has already seized the man at fault, and
conducted him to the stairs, which he finds it to his ad-
vantage to descend.
The dancers hardly pause, and the orchestra goes on
merrily,while the superintendent shouts, “Order, please,”
and the guests settle back in their seats.
These little disturbances occur more or less frequently,
but like tropical squalls are soon over. *
We are certainly in for them to-night. See that hand-
some girl over there under the gallery larruping that
rather intoxicated blonde with her silk umbrella,and using
language which cannot be printed.
It’s all about a lover, who borrowed the diamond ring
of the tall woman and loaned it to the other. The dis-
covery has just been made.
“ Where did you get that ring? ”
“Pretty Jimmy gave it to me.”
“You’re a liar.” ®
And then the afray.
Mr. Hill is again on hand. “ Ladies, ladies 1” he says,
“Hi ham hastonished. Come, now, kiss and make up,
and both hof you give Pretty Jimmy the shake.”
All this time the performance on the stage has been in
progress. But as it becomes later, and the audience gets
outside of increasing quantities of stimulants no one pays
any attention to the histrionic performance.
We sit back out of the way and carelessly watch the
busy scene. A group of gamblers, elegantly dressed and
flashing with diamonds, come up the stairs, and ask for
’Arry.
Soon he is with them at a table, drinking champagne
and discussing a combination pool scheme that they have
come to propose to him.
There’s old Uncle Bill Tovee, watching with delight
somebody’s “chicken,” and some one’s “mouse,” slog-
ging each other on the stage.
That's a minister going down stairs, and the man hr
brushes by as the latter comes up, is a big dry-goods mer-
chant.
Two gents with new mown heads and pocket handker-
chiefs about their throats drop in to ask ’Arry if he’l
“ ’old the poodle for a scrapping match in ’Oboken.”
And so it goes on. Drinking, dancing, smoking, chaffin;
and having a glorious night of it, according to how yov
view such matters, until it is time for us to go.
The air of the room gives one a headache, and the coo!
breeze of the street, as we pass over to an all-night house
for a toby of ale and a golden buck, is very refreshing.
Then I tell you Mr. Hill is a man of considerable for
tune, that his reputation for business integrity is of the
best, that he has a nice countrv place near Flushing, and
that no deserving individual, in genuine distress, ever
went to him in vain.
A PROMENADE OE SIXTH AVENUE.
Sixth avenue is now the Haymarket of New York. All
it needs is a big, brilliant theatre like the Alhambra in
Leicester square, to turn out its gorgeous crowd of ladles
(?) and their attendant swells to make the picture com-
plete.
It is true that we would still be without the broughams
owned by the beauteous blondes, dainty carriages in pink
and blue upholstery, that follow their owners up and
down the square until such time as a tipsy duke, or a
newly-returned East Indian, or a flash American shall
have been caught in the meshes of the golden hair, or
stabbed by the coal-black eye of some “ Skittles ■’ or
“ Formosa.”
Then it is away to the St. John’s wood, or whatever
outskirt place or pretty villa rnadame may have selected
for her home.
The consequence is that Sixth avenue, lacking such
luxurious tints, is not by any means as elegant a picture
as the Haymarket. But it makes it up in liveliness, in a
shameless bravado that is shocking to the sensibilities of
decent men and women who are forced to take that
thoroughfare late at night, say on returning trom the
theatre or a party.
In fact, the avenue has become so notorious that repu
table citizens, who are posted as to its midnight peculiari
ties, much prefer the partial security of the street car.
Decency cannot go a-foot in Sixth avenue at night, in
that portion of it, to be more explicit, which blazes be-
tween 14th street and 35th street.
But we are not fastidious and panoplied with a con-
sciousness of our own integrity, and boldly turn from 14th
street into Sixth avenue, and'comraence our northward
stroll just as the thousands of clocks in the vast city
begin to strike the midnight hour.
Only a few moments ago we were in Eighth avenue,
and more recently still in “ Seventh.” What a contrast!
The other two were as silent and as eminently proper
as the tomb when compared with this noisy, babbling
road, with its demon trains crashing by overhead, leav-
ing a kaleidoscopic flash behind, and its throng of pedes*
trians continually passing and repassing the brilliantly
illuminated shops.
The first thing to attract attention is the number of
young girls, the unfortunates, who brazenly ply their
calling in the best advertised police precinct in the city.
They are loudly dressed; gay feathers stream from
their rakish hats, and their high-heeled boots make con-
stant music upon the pavement as they walk. In the
glare of the lamps you detect the rouge, the enamel, and
the dark penciling at the corners of the eyes.
These women are natural actresses. They know just
where abandon on the street should stop. Many are
French; cannot speak a word of English except “you
treat me,” “ goddam ” and “ fife dollar.”
In fact, it is only a step to Paris. We turn off into a
narrow street less than a block long, between Sixth avenue
and Broadway, and we are at a famous drinking and
dining saloon known as the “ French Madame’s.”
She used to keep a table d'hote in Sixth avenue, near
Twenty-Fourth street. She still sets a dollar dinner, and a
very good one it is.
At all the tables you will find girls whom you have seen
on the avenue, or will meet again before the morn begins
to blush for the follies of the night.
70
NEW YORK’S GAS-LIT LIFE.


They drink absinthe, ponies of cognac, and smoke
cigarettes. That pretty black-eyed girl is showing her
cavalier how the delicate paper should be rolled. We
order black coffee, and look on. Here comes the ma-
dame.
“ Bon soir, messieurs,” and she goes to her desk to dive
into her accounts.
All is quiet and decorous here. For noise, bustle and
fighting we must go back to the American saloons on the
avenue. There are supper rooms up-stairs at the *' ma-
dame’s,” more private. Three young men and as many
stylishly-dressed -women get from two carriages at the
door and ascend to these apartments.
Shortly after, Antoine is seen taking up an ice bucket
with three quart bottles of “ the widow ” rapidly becom-
ing frappe in its embrace. They are going to begin on a
pint a-plece.
Just as we rise to go, there come from above sounds of
laughter, of riotous merriment, and then the chandeliers
tremble, and the glasses jingle upon the tables. Our fes-
tive friends are dancing. We overhear Antoine tell
madame that they are doing the “ can-can ” like mad.
Madame is excited. “ Mon Dieu 1” she exclaims, “it
ees varee veeked—it ees too early in the evening 1”
“ More wine for up-stairs, Antoine 1 More wine I”
She looks pacified. The can-can is not so bad after
all.
On the avenue proper there are favorite drinking sa-
loons and oyster houses whose clientele are the birds of the
night.
The "Strand” and “Star and Garter” are sample
places. There used to be an all-night house called “ The
London,” but it is no more. In resorts like the “ Strand,”
you see the rough, intoxicated elements of Sixth avenue.
Girls lounge about in the midst of the smoke, do not hesi-
tate to sit on the laps of gentlemen, and are always ready
for one of the foaming glasses of beer which are pyra-
midally carried about by the übiquitous waiters.
There are many young men here being ruined. While
we look on an episode occurs that illuminates the whole
subject as a flash of lightning does a gloomy wood.
At one of the tables has been sitting with two girls of
the town a handsome boy of about eighteen years. The
rose of health is still on his cheek, and although the gin
and water that he has been drinking have given his eyes
a false lustre, you can easily see that he hasn’t gone tar
on the road. His vital organs are healthy. How about
his moral tone ?
Directly back of him sits a silent and apparently ab-
stracted individual who has gone to such depths in a
brown study that the glass of beer before him is as yet
untasted, although it has been there ten minutes.
The youth gives the waiter a twenty-dollar bill, and his
companions exchange glances. Just as the proprietor
thrusts it into the drawer, the detective, for the ab-
stracted man was none other, reaches over the bar, utters
a few words, and takes the note to examine it.
His suspicions are correct. It is a marked bill, marked
that day in the down-town office where the unfortunate
boy is employed.
It is quite a tableau when the arrest is made. He turns
pale as a ghost, and then goes out with an attempt at
bravery and carelessness that is pitiable to behold.
As for the women, in ten minutes they are drinking
more beer at the expense of some one else.
At about 2 a. m. the avenue is not so crowded as at mid-
night, but its life is more intense. The old “Argyle
Rooms,” “Cremorne” and “ Buckingham” have vomited
forth their crowds of dancers. They flood the oyster
saloons and fill beer shops with the rustle of silken
skirts.
In one beer saloon a negro band is in full blast. When
they stop to pass around the hand, a tipsy young woman,
bantered to it by her companions, goes to the piano and
sings “ In the Sweet Bye-and-Bye.”
It is a strange, sad scene. She is handsome, but unde-
niably drunk. Her hair is dishevelled. As she sings,
being at the maudlin state of drinking, the song over-
masters her with its pathos, and she breaks off abruptly
to begin to cry.
At this the “lovers,” petty gamblers and “strikers,”
generally break into a coarse laugh.
The poor girl falls sobbing with her head on the table,
robbed even of the sympathy of her drunken companions,
while the “ niiger ” band squares matters with the audi
ence by giving “ I’ve Just Been Down to the Club, Dear.”
Although it is time to go home—you can always tell
that when they refuse to tap a fresh keg—we have by no
means exhausted Sixth avenue.
Au revoir then until we resume its exploration-
ON THE BLAZING BOWERY.
We 'will pay obeisance to that variety which is the
spice of life, and not continue our Sixth avenue prome-
nade to-night.
Although, as I have said, itis a rare, richmine of metro-
politan sensationalism, we did hut graze its surface, and
yet we saw a good deal of the vice and vagaries of our
fellow-beings.
Next week, or the next, we will return to these pre-
serves and flush more game. But to-night I where shall
we got
What say you to the Bowery? It is one of New York’s
representative streets, and is always interesting. Broad-
way ! Fifth avenue 1 the Bowery I those are terms
familiar to thousands who have never seen America.
The Bowery it shall be. Crossing Broadway at Eighth
street we notice that that monster thoroughfare is In a
doze. Nothing is heard but the rattle of the wheels of
the last stages as they forge along with their blinking
lights. Cabmen lay around the Sinclair House and “ Mike
Murray’s” place, and scan the street up and down with
the fond idea of catching a “ drunk,” or some one who has
conceived the plan of making a night of it. Broadway
below Fourteenth street is dead after midnight. We leave
it willingly and turn into the Bowery around the corner of
the Cooper Union.
It is another city. The first block we see is nothing but
a string of gin-mills, with a bank and a drug store thrown
in to break the monotony. The cellars are eating houses
—all-night places, whose lights stream up to mix in
splendor with those radiating from the bars.
71
NEW YORK'S GAS-LIT LIFE.


Let us go in to one of the first so-called hotels that we
meet. We will have beer; always beer or Rhine wine in
these places. This establishment never closes its eyes.
The young man behind the bar is as fresh as a daisy, and
should be, because he has just come on. But what trade
do they have f Plenty of trade. The men in the Tompkins
Market must have their periodical drinks; so must the
policeman. Up to 2 o’clock in the morning the business
is but a continuation of that of the day. Between 2 and 5
o’clock the early workers, dealers in newspapers, young
men who went to bed at midnight, hot with rum, and
couldn’t sleep—they come in for their drams.
On a couple of chairs, heads sprawled upon the beer-
stained tables, are customers who could no more go home
than fly. The bar-tender shakes snores and drunks out of
them and returns disgusted to his work.
Suddenly the bell at the side door rings. Were we out-
side we would see a gentleman and lady standing in the
entry. The lady has her veil down, altho’ the precaution
is unnecessary, since the gas Is turned so low that it seems
a mere speck of red in the luridly tinted globe.
By the operation of an electric bell, manipulated on the
platform up-stairs, the door flies open. The couple enter
and ascend to the first landing, where, in an ante-room
filled with bottles and dishes, stands a servant who knows
his business. He is a combination of politeness, suavity
and silence.
The couple desire a supper room.
“ Certainly. Step this way.”
And he glides down a long hall, filled with the murmur
of conversation from rooms on either side, until he comes
to No. 10. There is the flash of a match, and a neat apart-
ment, furnished with table, chairs and a lounge, is re-
vealed.
We don’t see any of this, but we hear the order for oys-
ters, salad and a bottle of wine, which are consumed in
No. 10. Sometimes the wine has a marvelous effect upon
the silent, timid, hesitating woman who was so closely
veiled at the street door. She talks in a loud voice; she
sings. It is not the strangest thing in the world even for
the couple in the adjoining snpper room to join in the
fun and eventually to propose making it all one party.
In this very house that I am describing such a thing oc-
curred but recently and with the most unlooked-for re-
sults. Both ladies were under the influence of drink, or
it would not have happened. Their voices, in the pre-
liminary conversation, were husky, thick, unrecognizable
to each other.
But not so their faces when the invitation to coalesce
was accepted and one tipsy couple burst into the supper
room of the other.
‘‘My God, Fanny 1 ”
“You here I Hattie 1 ”
Imagine the scene. These two, respectable(l), married
ladies, discovering each other in situations which make
the life of such plays as “Champagne and Oysters,” “For-
bidden Fruit,” and the like.
The frozen attitude of astonishment, the bottles and
glasses, the bewilderment of the gentlemen, and the final
compromise and treaty of war over more wine.
As we go down the Bowery becomes a succession of
beer gardens, huge, brilliantly Illuminated places, with
an army of waiters, and a stage at one end on which ap-
pear variety actors. The dramatic part of the bill is not
of a very high order, but we don’t expect it to be.
Let us sit here. The waiter plants down two glasses of
beer and waits for the money. There is no disgusting for-
mality of asking you what you want in these places.
Beer is a fixed fact.
Who is that young lady in the seal-skin sacque who has
just sank into a seat ahead of us, only to be surrounded
by about six fast-looking young men, who almost fight in
their eagerness to treat her f
“Make it a schooner. Max,” she says to the waiter in a
tone of easy familiarity; “I’m as thirsty as the devil.”
Then she unbuttons her seal-skin, leans back, puts her
feet on a chair opposite, and wipes the perspiration and
paint from her hard, brazened face.
“Who is she Max? ” “Her? oh, she’s the gal the man
chucks the knives at. Want to know.her ? ” “No, thank
you.”
So we are in the society of a beer garden queen. She is
holding her regular court. Her knife-thrower is on in
the pantomime, and she has to wait for him.
The running of the cars all night keeps the Bowery alive.
Some of those that come down from Harlem have regular
gangs of pirates on board, drunken men and women who
fight, throw the conductor and driver off, smash the win-
dows. and yell murder. This is especially so in the sum-
mer time when moonlight picnics are in full blast. I
would as leave be on a slave ship, where the crew all
wear red shirts, as ride in some of the Bowery streetcars
in the hours along towards morning.
Approaching Chatham square the Bowery becomes
more degraded. It has any quantity of all-night saloons
in cellars, which are veritable entrances to Hades.
Look at the painted, gaudily-be-ribboned hag,cajoling the
honest sailor, who is very drunk, into entering one of
these hells.
He stumbles against the door, behind whose crimson
curtain the gas blazes, and as it is burst open, we see a
monstrous, bloated woman in the bar, and five or six be-
dizened females in tawdry Turkish costumes, making
love to as many drunken individuals, while a young man
in a red neck-tie bangs away at the piano.
The door closes. Our sailor friend is swallowed up. It
were better for him had he been wrecked at sea, and
landed on a desert Island.
TRYING TO SNARE A SOILD DOVE.
Sixth avenue, after midnight, has often been the scene
of litte dramas, with the pavement as the stage and the
street lamp the substitute for footlights, which excel in
pathos, in power, in the deep, quick insight they give
into the depths of degradation to which it is possible for
human beings to descend, which far excel, I repeat, the
carefully constructed stories told at the theatres.
I have one to speak of now. It is the story of a father
foiled in his attempt to reclaim his daughter from a life
of shame. This case is by no means an isolated one. If
you watch the newspapers closely you will frequently
find it duplicated in all its sad details.
It was between Twenty-eighth and Twenty-ninth
streets, and about 1 o’clock in the morning. The avenue


was very brilliant. The dancing places had sent out
squads of richly dressed habitues to swell the promenading
throng, already a rather pretentious one.
Two couples were approaching each other. One con-
sisted of an elderly gentleman, erect and dignified in his
bearing, but showing to-night the traces of extreme agita-
tion. The one with him was an officer of the police in
civilian’s dress. As they walked along the old gentleman
kept peering into the bold, painted faces of the girls who
passed him, and each time he did it I noticed that disap-
pointment and pleasure were equally represented in the
expression of his countenance.
He was afraid to find what he was so anxiously looking
for.
Nearer and nearer the two couples came. Fate had
arranged it for them to meet.
The other two were a young man and a bright, pretty
girl. He was the regular flaneur of Sixth avenue, a trifle
less rowdyish than the swell of the Bowery, and not quite
nobby enough for a Broadway or Fifth avenue sportsman.
He was dressed in a loud style, wore his immaculately
brushed hat a little to one side and swaggered, rather
than walked. The girl occupied one of his arms. With
the other hand he kept twirling his mustache, or arrang-
ing his hair, which was redolent of bay rum.
The young woman was still very pretty, was fresh and
sparkling even. At times she would seem to shrink back
when the bolder women passed her, to actually recoil at
their language, but in another moment she would laugh
merrily at something her companion said and strive to
force upon herself a gayety to suit the scene.
It was just as she had succeeded in arriving at a
bravado state that the four people met.
The officer looked first at the young girl when the old
gentleman signalled to halt, and then at the man by her
side.
The father gazed upon his child and stretched his
hands out to her, while the tears came to his eyes and his
voice quavered so with long-suppressed emotion that he
could hardly utter the words :
“ Come, Lucy, come to your father. All will be for-
given, my child. Come with me home, where your
mother, your heart-broken mother, awaits you.”
She had shrunk hack, and clasped both her arms about
the one of the scoundrel upon which she had been lean-
ing. Her form trembled, and she could not speak. Her
escort whispered something in her ear. The officer re-
mained passive, stern, immobile. It was not yet his time
to act. Finally he spoke.
“ Well, young lady, what is your decision f Will you go
quietly with your father to the home you have been de-
coyed from by such as the man you are with now, or shall
I use the authority I possess and arrest you f”
At this statement the young man whispered to the girl
again.
“Youleave her alone,” the officer said. “She is old
enough to decide.”
“ I was just telling her,” the fellow answered with a
sneer, “ that she was old enough to resist kidnapping.”
“ You villain 1” exclaimed the father, raising his cane
and stepping forward, “would you stand between that
girl and both her temporal and eternal welfare t”
“Softly, Mr. ,” the officer interrupted; “there is
no use wasting words on one of these creatures. If it
wasn’t for the unfortunate girls of Sixth avenue and
other streets they would starve.”
“ I guess they pay the police something, too, don’t
they?” the young man answered.
No attention was paid to this sally. Once more the
officer said to the girl:
“ Will you go with your father ?”
“ No, I woA” she answered, assuming a hardihood in
tone and maimer that half a glance showed to be thor-
oughly foreign to her nature.
“ Then I will arrest you.”
As the officer spoke he advanced and laid his hand upon
her shoulder. Then, turning to her companion, he
said ;
“ I would advise you to disappear. You can do nothing
around here except interfere with me, and I don’t want
to be put to the disgusting necessity of taking you in.
Some of the other young women will see to it that you
get your usual quantity of rum.”
The young woman resisted at first, and then became
mildly hysterical. The father insisted upon a carriage.
I knew the precinct to which they would go and so has-
tened there, anxious to see another act in the play.
In the station-house she displayed a sullen resistance to
all influences working for her good. She positively re-
fused to her home with her father, and still she was old
enough to act as her own guardian, it was easy to see
what the result would be in the courts. The father plead
again, the tears coursing down his cheeks. She stood at
the end of the desk, as cold, as beautiful as ice. The fresh
young face seemed to have turned to carved stone. The
officer who made the arrest on a regular issued warrant,
lit a cigar and smoked it with positive enjoyment. The
sergeant in charge wrote in his blotter with the imper-
turbability of a shipping clerk. It was a peculiar scene.
The gas-jets flared on the group, and penetrated to a mur-
ky corridor beyond, where in one of the cells an intoxi-
cated woman raved and swore in a manner to make the
blood of a pirate turn cold.
I sat back against the wall in one of the chairs, and
wondered how long it would be before the handsome
woman at the desk, the one who had but just started on
the downward path, would arrive at that stage of degra-
dation.
There is nothing but herself to stop her. It has already
been tested in the courts. She is her own mistress and
can become that of whom she chooses.
And so the play of the night ended. Exit a strong,
broken-hearted man to his carriage, while the young girl
is shown to a cell. The bolt shoots into its socket, and it
is all over.
Whether the court scene, yet to be played, makes or
mars her, will depend upon herself.
»•»•* • * . *
P. S.—l took the trouble to drop In at Jefferson Market
next day and obtain information enough for this para-
graph. Her mother and younger sister were with the
father at the hearing. She coldly refused to have any
thing to do with them. Naturally she was discharged,
and Sixth avenue claims her again. I should like to know
the romance of this ruined life.


PULLING A DISORDERLY HOUSE.
I am free to confess that when an official friend of mine
extended an invitation to me to he pi night last
week at the pulling of a disorderly house just off Sixth
avenue, the brilliant artery whose midnight pulsations
are at fever heat, that I accepted with a feeling akin to
that of positive pleasure.
Although the pictures which I knew would be unrolled
before me constituted a familiar pantomime, still there is
a recurrent excitement about a police raid which makes
it always a fresh sensation.
We must not forget either the charm of novelty. Admir-
able as our M. P.’s are—are they not called the finest force
in the world ?—they do not indulge in raids to that extent
where it would become a monotonous proceeding. There
was extraordinary reason, of course, but I did not ask it.
I went on the “ Pinafore ” principle of “ never mind the
why or wherefore,” and now that the affair is over I am
no wiser as to its animus than I was before. And
why should I be ? Am X not told that my mission
is to bag picturesque folly as it flies, and that in wan-
dering through New York at the hour when graveyards
gape and yawn as the Ohio resurrectionist slingshis spade
on the coffin and scores a trick, I shall regard the artistic
side of every situation before considering the moral ?
It was certainly in this mood that I met the ten or
twelve men detailed for the raid. They were in citizens’
clothing, and looked more like one of Talmage’s sub-slum
committees than anything else I could think of. Our ren-
dezvous was at a street corner unprovided with a lamp,
and as X advanced to grasp the hand of the chief I could
cot for the life of me disassociate the trip with a Guy
Fawkes gunpowder expedition. I was introduced in a
whispered way, and then given in charge of an officer
whose business it was to enter the house legitimately, if
it were possible, with me as a companion.
The others, each man knowing his portion of the detail,
seemed to disappear as if by magic. We were alone.
It wasn’t far to the spotted establishment, and when we
arrived there the abundant hilarity prevailing demon-
strated that no note of warning had been sounded. As I
afterwards learned, from a conversation on the subject.it
was the tendency which this particular mansion had to
tarn night into day, and allow the sun to gaze in on orgies
which had made the pale moon blush; it was this indus-
try in the particular realm of vice that had actuated
people in the neighborhood to make the complaint.
A good deal of wickedness can be stood, when it is quiet.
X don’t care if the man in the room next to me is a coiner
or counterfeit note engraver, provided he follows his
opposition-to-the-government profession in a silent way.
But as soon as the casting of a bad five-cent piece destroys
my morning nap, then I will complain to the authorities.
The officer rang the door bell. The door was opened a
little ways by a negress, and with the rattling of a chain
as an accompaniment. It had been determined upon be-
tween us that we should look a little drunk. I did my
best, and am sure that I must have looked a good deal im-
becile, sufficiently so to induce the portress to believe
that I was harmless at any rate. I even think that my
vacant countenance did the officer good service, acting as
a recommendation.
At any rate we were admitted.
“ Show the gentlemen into the little room, Ellen,” came
from some one elsewhere. “ There is a party who wishes
to go out.”
In the room we went, and heard the unsteady steps of
two or three men as they passed into the street. Lucky
dogs I They were escaping the doom of the rest. Their
desire not to be seen stamped them at once as those who
had gilt-edged positions of respectability to maintain in
in the day-time. This is a sad world, my masters.
And now we are in the parlor. A perfect blaze of light,
a swathe of warm coloring upon the walls where the
pictures hung. The communicating rooms were fur-
nished magnificently, albeit in the vulgar, rococo style
that you read about in the long accounts of the sale by
auction in Paris of the books, furniture and articles de
vertu of some successful woman of the half-world, who
has either gone to Nice for her health or entered a convent.
Three or four young men lounged about. Six or eight
girls, with their golden twists of Pompadoured hair, en-
gaged them in vapid conversation. One sang a senti-
mental ballad at the piano.
To conceal any embarrassment that might exist,
although I will give my companion credit for suggesting
the Police Department no more than he did a cathedral,
we ordered a bottle of wine—Hoboken champagne, im-
ported on the James Fisk, Jr., and sold at $5 the bottle.
The colored woman brought it.
“ Where’s madame t” asked my friend.
“ Who wants her?”
This question located Madame in a pretty pink boudoir
at the end of the hall, where she was reclining on a sofa
reading a novel.
The gentlemen just came in want you to take a glass of
wine,” answered the servant.
“ I certainly would be ungracious not to accept such an
invitation,” she replied, as the stiff rustling of her
starched skirts declared her getting up.
“ 1 hate, however,” she went on, coming into the parlor,
“to give up my book. The charming devil of a hero had
just escaped from the myrmidons of the law, ahd ”
We heard a whistle, and the bell rang violently. It was
the merest coincidence, but she grasped the situation im-
mediately.
“Gentlemen and ladies,” the officer said, “consider
yourself under arrest.”
He threw back his coat and showed hia sbield.
The landlady, who had been all smiles, turned to a fury
in an instant.
“ Devil 1 brute 1 ” she almost shrieked, and she threw
the glass, wine and all, at the officer’s head. Then she
essayed to escape. There was a crash of glass in the con-
servatory, two men had entered in that way. At a signal
from my friend I opened the front door, and the others
swarmed into the hall. Madame was still a tigress, but
a tigress at bay.
During this time it was brilliant chaos in the parlor.
Some of the ladies screamed, and one of the men showed
fight. The chief knocked him hown with his reversed
revolver. He turned out to be the regular bully of the
place, very efficient in dealing with a drunken boy on a
birthday spree but hardly equal to the emergency just
then.


T he visiting men were utterly crestfallen. One had at
tempted escape by a back window, but the movement
was futile. An officer was there. Officers were every-
where. The approach to the building had been as care-
fully executed, as it had been planned. For the nonce the
brilliantly lit apartments were a series of mouse traps.
One of the most amusing features of the evening’s ex-
perience was the discovery of a gentleman sound asleep
on one of the sofas in madame’s room. He had fallen
early in the evening before the battery of bottles, had
gone to sleep in fancied security, and was awakened to
find himself in the hands of the police. I wish I could de-
scribe the bewilderment of his countenance as he sat up
upon the lounge and insisted upon another drink. This
bewilderment became inexpressibly absurd when he saw
the young women all dressed for the street, and watched
the vindictive way in which the proprietress was putting
on her bonnet.
Nothing came of this case, at least nothing that showed
upon the surface. It was probably a visit of discipline,
a warning. The male visitors were let go at the station
[ with a reprimand, inasmuch as no specific charge was
made against them, while madame was required to fur-
nish financial security for her appearance at court. She
had no difficulty in doing that, and when the business
was transacted, she and her brood were allowed to go
their way. The house has been so quiet since, you might
imagine a sexton lived there.
As the now gay and dtbonnair throng passed out the col-
ored woman came up to me and said :
“Who pays for that bottle of wine?”
Madame heard the remark.
“ Nevermind the wine,” she exclaimed, “the gentle-
men’s company was recompense enough. I have to thank
them for infusing life into an otherwise stupid night.’'
As these words were uttered, she flashed one glance
upon my companion in the visit and myself that con-
tained as many daggers as you would probably find in an
Italian wholesale hardware store. Then she swept
proudly to the door, rustling and roaring like a silken
tornado.
ADVENTURES IN WATER STREET,
Dr. Elisha Harris, late Registrar of Vital Statistics in
this city, and now Secretary of the Prison Association of
New York, made a special study of mysterious cases of
supposed suicide for years, and in a conversation with
the writer declared his belief that a large proportion of
the cases of mysterious deaths that go on the records of
the city as suicides were really skillfully planned murders
by gangs of men and women who make murder and rob-
bery a business.
Along the streets bordering upon the river, or in adja-
cent streets, such as Water and Cherry, are located many
vile hells.
Investigations made in a very large number of cases
where bodies have been found floating in the water
showed that the victims were last seen alive in the com-
pany of female frequenters of these hells of the metropolis
or in the dance-houses. In most cases of this kind no
valuables of any account were found upon the remains
and rarely any external injuries were developed in a
post-mortem.
These facts led Dr. Harris to the conclusion that many,
if not all, had been inveigled into the low resorts by
women, where they were drugged.to death by some subtle
poison administered in liquors, and then, in the silent
hours of the night, the inanimate body, after being
stripped of money and valuables, would be carried by the
male murderers to an adjacent dock and quietly dumped
into the river. In due time the remains would be carried
to the surface and found by a boatman or the river police.
The deadly drug had left no tell-tale mark. The police
would investigate, and that was the end of the matter.
So impressed was I with the conclusions arrived at by
Dr. Harris that I communicated with a personal friend on
the detective force my suspicions that a certain house in
Water street, which I had occasion to pass as late as 2
a. m. daily, was a den of thieves of this class. He readily
consented to join me in an effort to discover something
positive regarding the place, which was a resort of aban-
doned women, sailors and countrymen, with a bar
attached.
One night at 11:30, dressed and disguised as Jersey
countrymen, Detective T. and I entered the main room on
the floor even with the street. In it were four or live
half-drunken women and half-a-dozen sailors. In one
corner was a small bar, presided over by a villainous-
looking, pock-marked ex-convict, and in another corner
was a fiddler playing for the dancers. We spent money
freely in treating all hands, talked about the price of
country “ truck ” and the best market in which to sell,
and promised to go around nextday after we had sold our
produce and have a good time all around, remarking that
we wanted the fiddler, so we could have a dance.
The convict boss of this den chuckled at the proposition
a,id readily assented to the further proposition thatno
sailor fellers ” should be admitted while we were guests,
as we weren’t used to “ thar rough ways, 5 ’ and wanted to
have “a clear swarth all to ourselves.”
A little before noon on the following day, well dis-
guised, we entered the resort. But two women and the
proprietor were there, and an air of quietude—in striking
contrast to the boisterous secret of the previous night—
pervaded the place.
Each of us had provided ourselves with a sponge, hid-
den away inside of our coat-sleeves, and, as we had pre-
viously arranged to drink nothing but “ pony ” glasses of
wine, it was an easy matter by a dexterous movement to
deposit the contents, after taking it from the glass, into
the sponges. My companion drank freely, or at least ap-
peared to drink, displayed considerable money, and after
the fiddler had been sent for and the doors were locked,
indulged in several waltzes “ between drinks.”
An hour was thus passed, when, to all appearances, the
“Jersey farmers” were “pretty well fuddled,” so well
had we simulated intoxicated men.
As our object was to see more of the premises we offered
no resistance when the women urged us to retire to a rear
room. There more drinks were called for, and in half an
hour we were both apparently unconscious in a drugged
and drunken stupor. The women retired from the room,
which was dimly lighted by the kerosene lamp, and Vo


were left side by side on a mattress in one corner for
some time. There was a peculiar taste to the wine that
satisfied us it contained a drug.
In a little while “ Big Charley,” the boss, returned with
one of the women, who passed as his wife, and, stooping
over us, he remarked : “ I’m blowed, Hanna- 1 *- vf them
fellers isn’t good game. Now you hold the dot" - .i’ hold
the light, an’ the fiddler an’ me’ll soon 'i- • away till
night. They’re well salted, and - _,jin at mid-
night, when all’s still.”
The fiddler was called, and we, limp a\ jrently in-
sensible, were carried down a rickety stairway to a sub-
cellar and quietly deposited on the floor, which was of
stone. Our entertainers retired, leaving the lamp burn-
ing dimly.
My detective friend got up and cautiously explored the
place.
I confess I was not pleased with his report.
On one side he found a blind door leading into a dark
passage-way, which, from the sound of running water,
he supposed to be one of the city sewers, through which
they carried their victims. I was so alarmed that I sug-
gested we had seen enough, but he was inexorable.
“ Let us see the end,” he said. “We are well armed;
we’re enough for them. Why if I only showed my shield
they’d beat a retreat. Keep quiet and watch me.”
We did not wait long in suspense. “ Charley ” and his
woman entered.
The former examined us critically, and, turning to the
woman, said : “You go up and tend bar, if any one drops
in ; send Lize down to watch the clodhoppers, and have
her pour a little more of the “ stuff” down ’em in half an
hour. I must now go over the river and get Bob to come
over and help me plant ’em after we close in the morn-
in’.”
Again we were alone.
The detective whispered his plans to me, and a few min-
utes later the woman Lize came down with a bottle in her
hand, and, sitting down on the only chair in the cellar,
engaged in the occupation of knitting.
Half an hour must have passed—to me it seemed two
hours —when the woman picked the bottle up from a
shelf and walked deliberately over to our corner. With
Hosed eyes I felt her warm hand on my forehead; then
fffie turned my head over, fane upward, and forcing open
ny mouth when my companion, with a quick movement,
.hrew himself over'and drawing a pistol, hissed, “Ah,
Lize I I’Ve got you I Now open your head, and I’ll blow
it off your lousy body 1 See this shield t Ha Iha 1 trapped
at last, eh t ”
So sudden was the thing done that the woman crouched
down quietly, as the detective threw off a wig, and she
identified him as one who had twice arrested her for
shoplifting.
To be brief, the woman “ Lize made a clean breast ” of
the fact that sailors and countrymen were drugged and
taken to the sub-cellar, where they were visited by “ Big
Charley,” his wife and two men.
What disposition was made of the victims she never
knew, or professed to know not. The officer promised
her protection if she would aid him in solving the mys-
tery of the removal of the drugged victims who might
visit the place in future, at the same time warning her
that he would have her watched, and it would be useless
for her to attempt to flee the city. It was also arranged
that when the sub-cellar again had an occupant she was
to find means to hang a white cloth from the front win-
dow as a signal, and at all events to meet him at a place
appointed a week hence. She then released us through a
side door.
Daily the house was watched—no signal. The try sting
time arrived, and Lize came not. Over another week
passed without other news of the woman. It was sup-
posed she had escaped the detective’s vigilance.
Reading a description of the body of a drowned woman
found at Fort Hamilton, the detective believed it was
Lize. He went there and recognized her as the Water
street woman.
The detective always maintained that he believed “ Big
Charley ” and his gang, suspecting Lize of treachery, had
murdered her and thrown her body into the river.
Shortly after this, my friend, who still had the house
under surveillance, became insane, and a few months
later died.
The Water street den has been demolished to make way
for the Brooklyn bridge, and the inmates are scattered.
Yet I still firmly believe that Dr. Harris was right, and
that there still exists in this city, under the very eyes of
the police, one or more organized gangs whose business
is the inveigling of strangers into suspicious places, the
robbing of their persons and the consignment of their
bodies to the waters of the rivers and harbor.
Where is the Vidocq who will fathom the secrets of
these malefactors?
A THIEVES’ TAVERN.
2 shall not write the street nor the number of the house
} n the street where the thieves’ tavern is in which I spent
a evening last week, passing the midnight line, in fact,
nd never rising to leave until a disreputable clock be-
hind the bar—a timepiece with a bad face—announced
hat it was about the hour when Peter’s Cochin-China
ooster raised all that row in Jerusalem.
It wouldn’t be fair in me to publish the whereabouts of
,ne place. I was the guest of the thieves, or rather of the
. find proprietor of the saloon; and although my being
i onest, and my never having been “ crooked ” or “ done
. me” was slightly against me, I was treated with such
c ilfcrni politeness and deference that I would be a despic-
able wretch indeed to repay the courtesy which made the
experience possible by “squealing” on those I met.
I believe that they call tt “ squealing.” I heard a good
deal of slang that night, but it has changed so of late years
that it is difficult to understand their jargon.
1 went down a flight of stone steps illuminated feebly
by a lamp, and when I pushed the door open I found my-
self in an ordinary bar-room, with sanded floor, a short
counter and five or six tables, about which as many young
men were sitting, two at cards and the others engaged in
a conversation which ceased when I entered. I looked
hastily around for a young thief who had come to me with
a story of Sing Sing horrors, and who had promised to
meet me at 11:30.
It was 11:45, and he was not present.


“ Who’s that?” said the short, thick-set, blind proprie-
tor, leaning over his bar as his abnormally acute ears de-
tected the presence of a stranger.
As he spoke one of tho young men rose, sauntered to the
door and went out quietly.
The situation was an awkward one. I was considered
either a spy or a stranger. In any event I was fair game.
So I spoke out boldly, telling them in as many words
that I was a “literary cuss,” and that I had an appoint-
ment with “ Box-Stew Charley.” Then I asked the house
to drink. Another young man silently disappeared and
brought back the first one, who had assumed the position
and duties of a sentinel.
It wasn’t long before my friend arrived, and then we
were all en rapport. He told them that I was acquainted
with the character of the rendezvous, that I was a gentle-
man despite the fact of my never having been in jail, and
that they could talk unreservedly before me.
Which I am certain they proceeded to do in a most
agreeable manner. Charley, having been the latest up
the river, was naturally the chief spokesman. He was
eagerly questioned as to how this and that was getting
along. He had plenty of messages to deliver, one especial-
ly from a burglar to his wife.
“ I told her to be here at midnight,” said a red-headed
youth who had been instructed to acquaint the woman
with the circumstance of Charley’s arrival within the
realms of ordinary society.
“ And here she is,” said the blind man. “ I know Kate’s
step.”
A pretty woman and elegantly dressed, may it please
you, this wife of a housebreaker. She was bade good
evening, and had a smile for every one until her eyes
rested on me. Then she assumed a look of keen inquiry.
No one spoke, but some one must have reassured her
facially that everything wasO. K., for she sank uncon-
cernedly into a chair, and said she didn’t mind if she did
have a wet of gin. As she spoke she betrayed London, and
particularly Whitechapel.
“ Jim’s all right,” said Charlev, “ and sends his love, of
course. He expects you up en next visiting day. And
there’s an order for the ‘kit’ of tools he had made in
Canada. I’m to have them, and the plan of that house in
119 th street. If I do the thing, you’re to divvy.”
“ All right, Charley,” the pretty woman replied. “ I’ll
send them here.”
This little bit of business disposed of, we all drifted into
the most agreeable conversation, which was shortly in-
terrupted by the arrival of an excited young man. It was
telegraphed to him instantly, also, that I was not in the
way.
» x’ve got ‘ Big Moll ’ in a coach around the corner. She’s
just over from the Kings County Jail, and she wants her
sparklers.’ Pop, you’ve got’em, she says.”
“Yes, I’ve got 'em, and she owes twenty-two dollars
bar bill on them,” the old man growled.
“ Don’t you be afraid about the‘sugar;’ she’s fixed. I
came in to see if the coast was clear. She mustn’t meet
Patsy or she'll put a knife in him.”
“ He’s in the hospital,” one of the party remarked,
getting his legs in condition to stand up for trial in the
General Sessions.”
With this satisfactory information regarding the doleful
whereabouts of Patsy, the courier of “ Big Moll” depart-
Ed, and soon returned with that lady herself. She proved
to be a big, bold, dashing woman, showing no traces of re-
cent prison life. She was also dressed expensively, and
was slightly drunk. Pulling out a roll of bills from her
bosom, she insisted upon all of us standing up to the bar
and indulging in champagne, which we drank out of tum-
blers. Jim’s wife, who had been missing no tricks while
the gin bottle circulated, was also made very merry by
thechampagne.
The diamond earrings and breastpin were produced on
liquidation of the old bill, and adjusted in Moll’s ears and
at her throat by the other woman. She insisted upon hav-
ing a looking-glass hunted up so that she could survey her
magnificence, which seemed to give her infinite satisfac
tion. It was like a scene from the “Beggars’Opera.”
The old man held the glass, Moll swaggered before it, and
all the rest of us, tumblers in hand, grouped ourselves
about the central figure. I didn’t feel precisely like a
footpad, but the sensation was a strange one. Where did
she get her money so soon? How about the jewels? These
questions I asked “ Box-Stew Charley.”
“Moll always has money,” ho answered, “or knows
where to go and get a hundred or so at any time. She’s on
a little drunk now, celebrating her release after doing ten
months, but she’s a sharp business woman all the same,
and when she s flush she puts some by. The diamonds
were given to her by a man who’s dead now. They were
stolen in Paris.”
“ What is the lady’s particular line ?”
“She hasn’t any unless it’s shoplifting, at which she’s
very‘fly.’ But she can’t do much in New York. They
know her. She travels a good deal, is a kind of roper-in
for diamond sharps, and big jobs like that.”
A long, low whistle. Instantly the blind man turned
down the gas, and we sat in gloom. Some one descended
the steps and knocked significantly at the door, which
had been locked after Moll’s arrival and out of deference
to the lateness of the hour.
A conversation between the boss and the one outside, a
conversation which I could not follow, took place, and
then the new comer was admitted. It was something im-
portant and mysterious at the same time. There was
silence after a short talk, and I could hear the retreating
footsteps of the man outside. Tho door remained open,
for the cold wind blew in perceptibly. Footsteps return-
ing. They came down toward the saloon as if it were one
man leading another. Such in fact was the case, for when
they had entered, the door had been securely barred, and
the light turned up slightly, we saw that two men had
been added to the company.
One was deathly pale, and on his shirt front was an area
of crimson stain which located a gun-shot wound. His
companion put him into a chair and asked for brandy.
I saw that this was a case which explained itself, and I
did not ask about it. Some one had been shot in the com-
mission of a crime and had escaped.
When I left, both Jim’s wife and “Big Moll’’were
doing all they could to stanch the flow of blood with their
lace handkerchiefs against the arrival of a doctor who
had been sent for.
“And do you have a physician and surgeon?” I whis-
pered to Charley.
“Couldn’t do without one. He’s a good one, too. Did
three yearsfor malpractice.”


FIVE CENT LODGING HOUSES.
It was my good, bad, or indifferent fortune once to sit
up with a friend all night in a cheap lodging house in
London. We did it out of the merest curiosity and would
not have been there even to gratify that curiosity had
not the proprietor, Mr. Jno. White, who euphinistieally
called his den “ The Workingmen’s Retreat,” been under
obligations to my companion.
Mr. White’s place was called in the slang of the thieves
and costermongers who frequented it, a “ thripenny
doss,” the word “ doss” being gypsy talk for bed. The
experience was a very peculiar one, such an experience
which one seldom cares to repeat, except in the line of
duty. All night long we beheld the spectacle of drunken
men and women staggering into the place, slamming
down their three coppers with an oath and then reeling
to whatever questionable pallet John White chose to
allot them.
But repulsive as the place was my memory reproduces
it as a Fifth Avenue Hotel in comparison with the estab-
lishment which your artist and myself investigated a few
nights back, one of those nights with a snappish cold
spirit abroad that prevented much luxury attaching itself
to slumbering in an alley or cart.
Cherry street boasts the. possession of the particular
five cent lodging crib under consideration. Cherry
street has a good many of them, but I think that the one
we decided upon is the most unique.
I will back the landlady against the proprietor or pro-
prietress of any of the others for being the most pictur-
esquely bestial woman in the business. As she sat just
inside the door of the sleeping room—it was not in the
cellar but gave upon the rough, cobble stones of a filthy
court in the rear of a tenement—with the sickly rays of a
red lamp fastened at the window streaming upon her, I
thought of some huge, bloated spider, surcharged with
blood to bursting, and possessing the most ravenous of
maws.
She expected us. I had once done a little reporting for
a morning paper, and had been forced to visit her hotel
in quest of particulars regarding a society woman who,
being born in opulence, educated and married in social
pride, had passed through the lurid phases of illict love
and bad gin to be found dead one winter morning in this
wretched room.
I recalled tlie circumstance to her when I visited her
in the day time to arrange for a midnight seance. She re-
membered me, and although she could not understand
why two human beings should deliberately seek her
abode as a place in which to spend an hour or so, still she
consented, and even went to the trouble of borrowing two
chairs from one of the families in the tenement.
“ Yousee,” said the spider, “you won’t want to sit
down anywhere in here, although I do try to be very par-
ticular; it isn’t safe.”
I also ordered some gin for the old lady from the dis-
tillery on the street, and repeated the operation when we
called. This had the effect of making her mellow.
Mrs. Glump, for such is her name, owns but ten beds,
or ten tattered rnattrasses, ranged along the wall, and
since she never carries things to the extremes by allow-
ing more than three to one mattrass, it is easy to ealeu-
late that her night’s revenue is but one dollar and a half.
But the dormitory is never closed. As the lodgers stagger
out in the morning others stagger in. No one ever comes
to Mrs. Glump’s until he or she is dead drunk, and the
ime of the visit depends upon whether the lodger does
her boozing by day or night.
There were about a dozen in the room when we called.
It was awful close, and a pauperish looking Are in a stove
made the atmosphere sickening. She noticed our pale
faces and opened the door slightly. This precaution and a
generous swig of brandy from a private flask enabled us
to keep up the tone of the stomach.
Of the twelve lodgers already in three were women.
They lay in horrid dishabille, two of them upon their
backs, their mouths open, and an expression of gutter
sottishness upon their faces. The other one was curled
in a ragged lump, her knees reaching her frowsy head.
Suddenly she screamed in her sleep—a regular blood-curd -
ler too—and striking out wildly hit a man in the mouth
who lay next her. As we subsequently learned it was her
husband.
The brute sprang half up with an oath and turning
quickly took her by the throat while with his other hand
he struck her a sounding blow. But only one. Mrs.
Glump seized a club at the side of her chair and deliber-
ately knocked him down upon his bed with it. Then
standing over the human dog, still brandishing her agent
of domestic peace, she said :
“ No one knows it better than me. Bill Welch, that you
will be hung yet for killing that woman,but you slum t do
it here. You touch her again, and I'll get one of the gen-
tlemen to go for the police.”
He looked up with a fierce scowl penetrating his matted
hair, glared a moment upon us, and fell back into his in-
ebriated stupor. The wife was already asleep, and none
of the others had stirred.
“ I’ve got another lodger,” said Mrs. Glump, resuming
her seat, “ like the one one that died here, you know.”
She was addressing me and referring to the past. I
nodded.
“ She is going precisely the same way, and I think she
started the same; she comes in about 1 o’clock, always
drunk, sometimes merry, sometimes wicked and full of
fight. She doesn’t sleep on these common rnattrasses, but
gives me ton cents for the one behind that screen.” She
pointed to an alcove at whose entrance floated a curtain.
“ And whore is your home, Mrs. Glump f ” I asked.
“ I have a floor in a street up-town. I only stay here at
nights. In the day time my son runs the place.”
Business becomes brisk suddenly. Old bums, shivering,
hardly able to stand or hold themselves together, came
through the glare of the red lamp, tossed their nickle or
rattled their pennies upon the little table on which
glimmered Mrs. Glump’s candle, and after a vacant stare
at two strangers, who were apparently possessed of no
intention of going to sleep on the premises, fell like bags
of meal upon the vermin-infected beds and dropped into
forgetfulness.
“ Here she comes—here comes Sarah I” said Mrs. G., in
a cautionary way, and as she spoke a young woman who
had crossed the courtyard with a song upon her lips.
78
NEW YORK’S OAS-LIT LIFE.


JACK TAR AMONG THE LAND SHARK*.




staggered into the place, and straightened in a moment
when she saw that visitors from the outside world were
present.
“It’sonly two friends of mine, Sarah,” said Mrs. G.,
“ two gentlemen I used to know in England. Go on with
your song.”
*' I will if they stand treat,” she said, “ and they’ll have
to hurry; Mike’s about shutting up.”
I took out a coin, and held it indefinitely toward them
both.
‘ I’ll go for it,” she said, “ and there’s no change, mind
you.” Saying which she opened the door and disap-
peared.
While she is after the gin I will state that this Anonyma
is not handsome now, but she has been. She is notreflned
now, but there still remains something of the grace of
the drawing-room in her movements yet. As she put
down the bottle on the table on her return and pocketed
my change, I thought of Sarah Bernhardt selling cups of
tea in the French Fair in London.
She took a terrible drink, as did Mrs. Glump, for that
matter, and then began to sing in a mild, rambling way,
‘■When other lips, and other hearts.” All at once she
ceased, and began an address, pointing, gesticulating
fiercely, and mouthing some lines from a play. I knew
what was coming; so did Mrs. Glump. Just as her eyes
set in the paroxysm of delirium tremens, and the froth
came upon her lips, while the distortion of despair passed
over her countenance as she cowered with her face in her
hands, the lodging-house keeper caught her. and threw
her upon a mattrass.
At her suggestion I ran around to Oak street, and got
police aid.
In twenty minutes Sarah, the “unknown,” her shapely
armsin a straight jacket, rolled upon the floor of a padded
cell, and talked gibberish to the ceiling.
This was enough for us, I was sick at soul and stomach,
and never relished the cool air so much as when I reached
it after bidding Mrs, Glump good night.
LIFE ALONG THE WHARVES.
Along the river front to-night 1 How black and forbid
ding the water seems, and what a gloomy, sullen plash it
has as it swirls by the end of the wharf and gurgles among
the slimy spiles and posts. It always seems to me that
the rivers, both the East and North, change their entire
character when the gloaming comes and the many-colored
lights begin to hover over the murky waves like so many
fantastic insects in a realm of diablerie. In daytime the
sunlight kisses the stream until it breaks into a million
smiles of merry radiance. It dances on its way so the sea,
whose monotonous croon of welcome the roar of the great
city drowns.
But at night the river becomes sinister. It reflects the
character of the spectral shadows who pull the phantom
boats in and out of darksome slips, and so noiselessly that
they are upon you, have glided by and are gone, before
you have half realized the fact of their existence.
It is these craft that the police patrol keep an eye of
guardianship upon.
The darklantern of the law’s uniformed representatives
frequently transforms into a Whitehall boat pulled by two
villainous-looking wretches what to the unpraoticed eye
seemed but a shadow. Then it devolves upon the gentle-
men in the dogskin caps and pea-jackets to unfold the pur-
poses of their aquatic prowling.
No particularly honest man selects midnight, and after,
as the time for a purely pleasure trip upon the water. In
nine cases out of ten all moving row-boats upon the rivers
at night, barring the police craft, contain thieves who
become murderers when the occasion demands with the
celerity with which the modern fakir turns a rabbit into
a nosegay.
They board the canal-boats, sloops, schooners and other
vessels lying at anchor and in fancied security, the object
being to pick up rope, bits of chain and anything else that
can be cashed by the junk dealer. If the captain or mate
sleeping below overhears them, it takes but two or three
muffled strokes to shoot the robbers’ boat into the safety
afforded by the darkness. If the thieves have no time to
tscape, then it is a desperate struggle with pistols and
knives. There isn’t a night that flies over New York like I
a black-plumaged bird of ill-omen that doesn’t chronicle
; one or more of these desperate encounters. There is
scarcely a day that the Morgue does not receive some
beaten and battered corpse, carried hither and thither by
restless tides until recognition is impossible, whose
wounds speak eloquently of a midnight murder. It is
only a very small percentage of these outrages that are
ever classed among the solved mysteries of the metropolis.
It isn’t a comfortable sensation, standing on the end of
a pier at midnight, I must admit. The neighborhood
selected by me for the beginning of this tramp is by no
means the most inviting in the city. We are on the North
River front at about Thirtieth street, and are walking
down toward the Twenty-third street ferry. Huge piles
of lumber and stone are on the piers. Lumber yards and
gas-houses alternate with blocks of tenement houses,
whose corner saloons in some instances keep open all
night. The men met in these bars are a peculiar set.
They look furtively at you and stop talking when you
enter. There isn’t one of them that couldn’t put yon in a
boat now and land you, say at a special dock in Commu-
nipaw, without making the slightest error in calculation.
These are sea-gulls that fly at night, and every inch of the
river is known to them. Standing here on the string-piece
and looking out upon the murmuring waste, I begin to get
cold both from the searching wind, which gets inside
your overcoat in true pickpocket style, and the thought
that I have been followed from the saloon.
A knock on the head, a quick rifling of pockets, and a
plunge—such are frequently the skeleton outlines of many
a marine drama. Let us go on to Twenty-third street,
where the civilization of the bob-tailed car is to be found.
What is the excitement in the ferry house ? Men are
running to and fro, and catching the fever, we run also.
A young girl attempted suicide 1 Have they got her ?
Yes; dial which they are putting upon the floor—tha
damp, sodden bundle —that is she. A lantern’s light i
thrown in her face as the usual remedial processes art
resorted to, and we see a pretty girl, with face so pale, so
wan now, and eyelids, with their long lashes, closed over
eyes that are sunken far in the head. The yellow hair is


matted, twisted, tangled. In the torn dress that shows
the white shoulder we see the red-line made by the boat-
h How did she do it? It was the work of a second. The
boat had just left the slip, that same boat now midway in
the stream, when she rushed to the rear chain stumbled
over it. regained her feet, said something which the man
who started to seize her could not understand, and was
g °She is reviving. A flush of pink, like a flower amid
snow, warms her cheeks, and the eye-lids quiver. Poo
thing 1 She tried hard to leave a world of sin and suffer-
ing but she has been baffled. The boat-hook and the ,
ha’stily summoned doctor have defeated her purpose. In |
the morning she will be fined by the magistrate for acting
in defiance ot the law. .
There are economical suicides, patronizing
front, who do not go to the extravagance of a ferryfar*
They spring from the end of a wharf. There is one pier
near Roosevelt street, East River, that is quite a fasffion-
able resort for the frail, miserable women of the neigh-
borhood who drink the bad rum of the cellar dives unti
the ashes of their brain are in a lurid Maze again, and
then with feverish baste, handicapped by unsteady step,
!Ly stagger to the river. There is always an officer there
to lead them back and put them either in a station house
cell or in some haunt where a putrid, swinish sleep robs
them of the spasmodic energy of suicidal purpose.
iTctually think it is a mistake to save.these people.
Female denizens of the down-town East River fron -I
mean those scorbutic specimens whose pimples and nb-
hons are noticeable at half open cellar doors on fine after-
noons—are lost to everything. There is no reform, either
"physical or moral, possible, and “ making a hole in the
drink,” as the sailors put it, appears to me to be as neat a
thing as they can do.
But let us go back to the North River for a moment. We
are down-town now. below Canal street, and have the
good luck to stumble upon a garbage scow being madet.
It is a really picturesque scene. Huge lanterns and flam-
beaux throw light upon the carts on the wharf, the scow
in the river and the brown-skinned Malians, bending to
their work with hooks and bags, who are everywhere
Young women, with huge hoops of gold at their ears, and
wearing flaming kerchiefs about their necks, assist in the
ghoulish picture.
Although the river front is carefmly patrolled, it is a
favorite stamping ground for footpads. Approaches to
1 the WUliamsburgh ferry are particularly infested,
j” Help 1 Help I Police 1 Murder!” are not infrequent
! sounds of blood-curdling import during the night. We can
i imagine what has occurred. The citizen held under the
! throat by one ruffian, while the pockets are turned inside
outbyothers. It is a matter of about a minute. The )0 b
done, the thieves and assassins flee, up dark alleys
through tenement houses and over familiar fences, while
the police find the stunned and bleeding victim too inco-
herent to intelligibly relate his grievance. Many of the
sloops and canal-boats are haunts of the lawless, all the
gin-mills are run on neutral principles, junk dealers are
frequently "fences,” and too often the policemen along
shore find it convenient not to Interfere with these little
operations of the lovers of darkness. What we need is the
electric light along both edges of the city, and further
than that, we need steam launches for the river patrol.
STATION-HOUSE SCENES AND INCIDENTS.
Although I have seen a great deal of condensed uf e in
New York, I never knew that an entire night spent in the
comfortable reception room of a station-house won d pan
out so well in the matter of sensationalism and grotesqu
incidents, until I sat up with a sergeant friend of mine for
tl e purpose of obtaining material for this article.
I am now convinced thatatno moment is New York m
in teresting. It is only necessary to know where to look
for romance to find it in regular bonanzas.
Your brigandish-looklng artist was on time, at the re -
dezvous. and behind the fragrance and ruddy til f
two good cigars we strolled toward the gt Ughts of the
station balefully throwing an unholy light av.
S. "ina.u K .'.ln S ..n,y MMU. «“
emerald eves of a sea serpent. ,
All was quiet, snug and orderly as wo tilted back in the
chaHi to which sergeant assigned us, and gave c-
selves up to the calm waiting for developments. It
an exceedingly drunk and terribly dirty old man, whose
St. Patrick’s day hit was mashed in, who had mud m i s
hair and lime in his whiskers, and who presented alto-
nether the appearance o! having eo.n. from Minnesota on
“sSSSSTSSSw- •»<■ *“
climbing a Third avenue elevated railroad PUlar. He smd
he always reached his room by way o£ the fire-escape
when he came home late.” . „
The ancient gentleman Said not a word to all this. He
blinked at the lights, at the sergeant, at us and at the
officer like an evicted owl. They led him quietly away
Perhaps five minutes had elapsed, perhaps ten, but at
any rate it seemed but a short space of time between this
Sent and one a great deal more tragic. The doorman
of the corridor on which the cells open was suddenly
heard running and jingling across the stone floor while
an officer rushed in from the rear to tell the sergeant that
the woman in No. 1 had committed suicide.
We aU sprang to our feet, the officer remaining in
charge of the room, and sought the cell. The gas-jet in
the hall which was directly opposite the door, and the
lantern which the keeper had placed on the damp flags ot
the cell enabled us to see him clearly as he was in the act
o? cutting down the body. She had maae a rope with her
ga T r ie r corpse,aswe imagined it to be. fell into his arms
. ™. 1v like t, sack of meal. He knelt upon the floor and
ehed for hU lantern, flooding the somewhat swollen
reache she was not dead; far from it. Signs
‘ fevisible, and before the
ph S- a who n_d been sent for arrived she wasrecov
82


ered sufficiently to stand upon her feet in the cell, her
wild eyes flashing, her hair floating about her stalwart
shoulders, and in that attitude to damn to eternal perdi-
tion the man who had cut her down and all who had
assisted in her resuscitation.
“ Now that you’ve brought me back to this hell of a
world,” she went on in a blood-curdling way, “ there isn’t
one of you man enough to get me a drink of whisky.”
There was a good deal of the grimmest kind of philoso-
phy in the remark. I mentioned this view of the case to
the sergeant, and although such things should not be told,
I think that Maggie (her name) got the nectar she so much
desired.
The doorman had discovered her attempt by the merest
accident. He had heard her kick away the stool, or what-
ever it was she stood upon, and he recognized the familiar
sound.
“ Why, Lord bless you,” he said, “ ’tain’t no uncommon
thing. They’re at it all the time, and they always cut up
that way after you cut them down.”
This was the doorman’s little joke.
“ Now, here is something,” said the sergeant,about half
an hour after, as we heard a commotion in the street.
'lhe doors were flung wide open, and four officers brought
in a groaning man on a stretcher. He was covered with
a bloody sheet. Two other officers dragged in his assassin,
hatless, almost coatless, from whose head the blood had
been streaming. He looked as if he had thoroughly de-
served the clubbing which he had evidently received. At
first I imagined it a genuine murder, but it was only a
severe stabbing case following a row in a corner liquor
saloon.
The New York Hospital sent an ambulance in response
to a telegraphic call, and after some preliminary medical
attention had been paid the injured individual he was
driven aw-ay, while his assailant, still defiant, still sug-
gesting the wild beast and man in his yawping, barbaric
state, was locked up. The crowd inside and out silently
dispersed.
The next to enter was a little, nervous woman, dressed
in black. Her face was pinched and wan. Furrows and
tightly drawn lines ran across the places on her cheeks
where once, no doubt, the roses and lilies of health
mingled in their pink and white beauty.
•• Well, my good woman, what is it ?”
Her voice trembled. “ I wish to know, sir, if my hus-
band is here.”
“ What’s your husband’s name?”
“ John Carr. He’s gone since Saturday.”
“ Describe him.”
She did so, minutely—photographed him, in fact.
“ I haven’t seen or heard of any such person, ma’am.
Have you bean to the Morgue ?”
Here she hurst out crying, answering through her sobs:
“ I went this afternoon, but X came away without ringing
the bell.”
“And why?”
“ I was afraid to.”
She went out into the night, into the glare of the green
lamps, with her faded shawl athered up and pressed to
her face.
There were many ordinary “ bums,” “ drunks and dis-
orderlies,” men and women, brought in during the night.
A respectable-looking gentleman, who struck me as being
a seedy clergyman, applied for lodging. It was a rainy,
disagreeable night, and he looked as if he had been hauled
out of a pond. At about 3 o’clock we were rewarded by
the arrival of a shoal of fantastics, masqueraders, who
had been fighting among themselves on their return from
a ball.
There was Bombastes Furioso charging a Spanish
courtier with “ smashin’ ” him in the nose. The courtier
retorted that his noble friend had drawn his sword on
him.
There were three or four ladies in the party, as well as
some other high-toned dukes, dons and kings, who had
come along to contribute testimony and see the affair out.
The ladies were Indian princesses, a vivandierc, and a
“ Little Buttercup.” They had all been drinking, and the
rain had so soaked their fine feathers that they were in
reality the most comical group I had ever seen.
There was nothing very serious done to the Furioso
nose, and since they showed a disposition all around to
make it up, the courtier was discharged. The fracas had
occurred in a street car.
A young girl found wandering about aimlessly and ask-
ing for the Boston depot, although she could give no satis-
factory account of why she left Boston; a brace of bur-
glars caught in a Bowery store; a sprinkling of “ bums,”
and finally a young man in full dress, who had driven off
with a milkman’s wagon, “just for a lark, you know,”
constituted the rest of the arrivals during our vigil.
“ Some nights,” said the sergeant, “ it’s not so stupid.”
Stupid 1
WHAT A HACKMAN SEES.
I know a very nice fellow who drives a hack for a liv-
ing. Xt is his own vehicle, and he naturally takes a pride
in it, as he does in his horses, which are always neatly
groomed.
It is his own choice that he works at night instead of
daytime. He is something of a student of human charac-
ter like myself, and he avers that the pursuit of the occu-
pation is much more entertaining at night than in the
garish, vulgar day.
And then again he makes more. There is always some
eccentricity about people who take carriages after mid-
night, which is just as apt to find expression in a liberal
system of payment as in any other manner.
I must be very careful to explain that my hackman,
with whom I have just had a long talk, must not be con-
founded with those disreputable fellows who stand in
with burglars. He is an honest whip, and during all the
time that I have known and hired him I have detected
nothing wrong in his character. I first made his ac-
quaintance when there was an all-night eating and drink-
ing saloon in the basement at Clinton place and Broad-
way. His hack stood outside.
He knows all about the disreputable members of his
fraternity, however, and has told me many a story of
their collusion with thieves. The burglar has frequently
escaped owing to a hack being in a dark alley ready for


him to jump into and bid defiance to the pursuing police.
There was a case about two years ago where a robber got
away successfully with his swag owing to fleet horses,
and amused himself furthermore by firing a revolver
through the back window at the policemen.
The Jehu of my acquaintance haunts the railroad fer-
ries, and generally gets a fare. One of the most myste-
rious that he ever had he picked up at Desbrosses street
at 4 o’clock in the morning. She was a young girl from
Philadelphia who took his carriage and told him to drive
anywhere until daybreak. She had no baggage.
“ * But it is cold and damp, Miss. Had you not better
stop at a hotel, or with some friends?' I asked her.
“ She looked at me sadly—my eye, but she was pretty—
and said; ‘ I have no friends. Drive till the sun rises. I
will pay you. ’
“ So I did. I remember that it was down near the Bat-
tery I had gotten to by sun-up. It was a Spring morning*
and the birds were singing, while the waves in the bay
had just begun to glisten. I got down and looked in. She
was dead I stone dead, with the revolver still in her hand
and a purplish hole in her temple. She had so arranged
a shawl and her handkerchief that the blood had not
soiled my carriage a bit. If it had I would not have been
ruined, for she had pinned a $5O note to the lace of the
coach, with a penciled line on a piece of paper, saying it
was for me.”
“ And what did you do ?”
“I drove her to the Morgue, wondering all the while how
I never heard the report of the revolver. She must have
done it during the clatter made by some market wagons
from Long Island that I got mixed up with. After leav-
ing the body I informed the police. Nothing was found
upon her, and the chief of police in Philadelphia could
get no trace. They buried her up the river.”
Cabby tells curious tales about the balls at the Academy.
He says that he is frequently told by the gentleman, after
the lady is assisted into the vehicle, to drive up to Central
Park at a walk. He has then been requested to drive to
High Bridge, or anywhere else. Sometimes on these oc
casions the most violent scenes take place, and one night
the woman screamed to him for assistance. It was at a
lonely place on the Kingsbridge road, hnd about 3 a. m.
He halted his horses, jumped down and opened the door
the young woman, who was costumed as a page beneath a
pink domino and mask, springing out almost into his
arms, begging him to protect her.
“ That I certainly would. I then asked what was the
matter, but got no satisfaction. She cried and he laughed.
It was easy to surmise, however. I ordered him from the
carriage, and then put her back, she telling me where to
go. I left him standing in the road in his full dress suit,
calmly smoking a cigarette 1 The lady lived in a swell
house near the Windsor. She made me come around the
next day and gave me $lO, although I had been paid for
the night’s work by the Lothario in the dress suit.”
“ Have you never gotten in trouble about these myste-
rious night fares?”
“ Once only. A young man picked me up on Broadway
and took m e way over to Hoboken. We stopped at a house
from which a young woman, all muffled up, and so weak
that she had to be carried, was brought out. I suspected
something wrong then, but I was younger than I am new
and the night was wasted, and I resolved to stick it ouv.
They had me drive to a place in Grand street—a disrepu-
table-looking house, with a light burning in the second-
story window. I got a glimpse of the young woman’s face
as the young man and an old lady helped her out. It was
pale as death. She turned her head, and seemed to look
right at me as if asking for aid. An old wretch in a skull-
cap came to the door with a lamp.
“It was an abortion case, of course. The girl died, and
when they advertised for the hackman I drove down and
gave myself up. I believe that the old man got ten years.
The young one jumped the town, and I never heard of his
being caught.”
He old me a great many more curious things; how an
old gray-bearded man took him at Courtlandt street ferry
once, and it was a young, smooth-faced fellow who got
out at the Grand Central Depot, where he had been told
to go.
On another occasion a veiled lady, carrying a baby,
hired him to catch the midnight Washington express. He
caught it, but when he opened the door the woman was
missing, and the baby, tucked up in a corner, was all that
remained. He turned it over to the police. The woman
must have jumped out while he was going at full speed.
In the case of the old man, my cabby thinks he was a
criminal, fleeing from justice, who used the cab as a
dressing-room in to remove his disguise.
