

fifties
REY. DR. BOAG,
HINTON
SEB M O F
Price , is, 6d.




* jSl
ilW,
wvft
<mM
1 ma
#•^1
R| m -
m
■ #r-
a»
■ te ? 4l
1 Pa
1 (pIS^
tl?
- W
1 f'^7
1 r^
iH 1
jW&v.
|y |j|
m> 1
pur ®S*
18k
lS|r
r S SV I
Jr#
%pk
Wr
(gpylf
Jr
' <sm*




“ GOD’S JEWELS,”
Malachi hi., 17.
A SEEMON,
REV. EGBERT BO AG, LL.D,,
FRESH YTBRIAN CHUR CH,
HINTON;
WITH AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY AND PORTRAIT OP
THE AUTHOR.




PREFACE.
The author of the following discourse was born on the
third day of January, 1813, at Kilwinning, an ancient town in
Ayrshire, Scotland. He was deprived of his parents at an
early age, but he had the watchful care of two maiden sisters
who w’ere well known for their piety and strict consistency.
Before the age of 16 he was a Sabbath. School teacher, and
though busily employed as a clerk to his uncle, he found lei.
g ure for study and self-improvement. In 1833, he married
Jane, the third daughter of William Rankin, Esquire, of Stan-
ley Bank, Dairy; and in the following year opened a private
academy in that town, which had remarkable success.
In order to meet the growing requirements of his pupilg,
the self-taught teacher often walked fourteen miles on the
Saturday to have the advice of an eminent scholar.
In 1838, he was present as an elder at a meeting in Edin-
burgh, to complete the Union between the Old Seceders and
the Established Church of Scotland; and in the same year he
was the successful competitor with four candidates for the
mastership of Gordon Street Academy, Glasgow. His ruling
desire to attend college seemed at length realized; but the dif.
ficulty was how to do so with profit, and not violate his con.
science in neglecting his duties as a teacher. He could only


do so in the early morning honrs, and was therefore obliged to
d 0 what is rarely done, enter the senior Greek the first year,
and profess the Latin. This profession, generally known as
the Blackstone Examination, was attended with the happiest
results, as it led him to be recommended as a collegiate tutor
by the professor. The three years following the Session of
1839-40 found him absent from college, as his scholastic du-
ties fully engaged his attention, and upon a proper discharge
of these his whole credit and character depended. He had
also undertaken by special request the superintendence of the
Model Sabbath-School of the city; and he had also taken in
hand, under the auspices of the Bridgeton Religious Associa.
tion, the re-modelling of their Charity Evening Schools on Bi-
ble principles and the influence of Sacred Music. The health-
ful tone of morality that pervaded these schools of neglected
children from the cotton-mills, brought visitors from all di-
rections, to witness the happy transformation. In 1841, after
competing with thirteen candidates, he became head-master
of Bridgeton Public School; and from the success that attend,
ed his labours there, he was appointed in 1843 to the Regent-
Place Grammar School, Glasgow. In this responsible situa-
tion, he resumed his college career, as soon as he could do so
in keeping with his engagements. His students by way of con.
gratulation presented him, on his appointment, with Bagster’s
Biblia Polyglotta beautifully bound in Morocco; this has the
whole Bible in eight different languages, besides the New Tes-
tament in Syriac and portions in other Oriental languages.
During the eight years he was head-master of that Institu.
tion, he was an elder in St. James’ Church and Parish-Super-
intendent of the Sabbath School, President of the College
Missionary Society among the poor in the city, also President
of the Phonetic and Demosthenic Societies, and treasurer of
a Philanthropic Association. During eight years’ curriculum,
many of his students took their degrees under his auspices,
while he looked forward to the same honour at the close o f


his course. He was licensed by tbe Presbytery of Glasgow in
January, 1851, and baying received a unanimous call from
Belford in the north of England, he accepted it and was
ordained to that charge in September of that same year.
As moderator of the Presbytery, he visited Carlisle and
Newcastle, and also London, where he addressed a meeting
on the prospects of the church in the Eev. Dr. Cumming’s,
Convent Gardens. In 1853, he visited Edinburgh for the
purpose of meeting the Eev. Dr. Cook, of Quebec, but missing
him, he became acquanted with the Eev. William Purves,
who induced him to think of New South Wales as a field of
labour. Arrangements were accordingly made with this view,
and leaving England, with his wife and family, he landed in
Sydney, on the 3rd September, 1853, and was received by the
Presbytery.
After preaching two Sabbaths in Sydney, he proceeded as
recommended to Port Stephens District, leaving his family
behind him. On his way he preached at Hinton for the Eev.
Eobert Blain. He was cordially welcomed on his arrival in
the district assigned to him, and arrangements were made for
regular services at Stroud, Dungog, and Bandon Grove. As
the people were anxious for his settlement among them, a
numerously signed call was submitted to the Presbytery of
the Hunter; this call was in the meantime declined till some
place of shelter was procured for his family. Being required
to officiate elsewhere, he found himself in Maitland during
a time of continuous rain, and, other routes being impractic-
able, he was advised to return to Sydney, which he did and
found his family far from being well. On the following day
he attended a meeting of Presbytery, the principal business
being the settlement of the Eev. Mr. Smythe of Bathurst in
St. Andrew’s Church, Sydney. At a service in the evening
which he conducted he was requested to supply St. Andrew’s
on the following Sabbath, which, after considerable hesitation,
he assented to. The sermon of the forenoon is now before


you. It was said at the time to have been got np for the oc-
casion, as if the preacher’s object was to divide, not to edify
the congregation. It was certainly not the intention of the
preacher to cause division. But during the week, some
persons published an advertisement calling a meeting of the
Presbyterians of Sydney. At that meeting resolutions were
passed to the effect, that a church should be built at WooL
loomooloo and Mr. Boag called to the pastorate. Now it was
known to him by letter that a minister was ordained at home
for this very field, and so his answer to those who urged a
settlement was, that they should wait till the arrival of the
minister appointed, and then see how matters stood.
Meanwhile, the minister elected to St. Andrew’s declined
to come to Sydney, and the old church again became vacant.
The movement, therefore, for Woolloomooloo in the meantime
ceased, and the movers settled down, resolving to have the
minister of their choice in the old church, or failing that,
to fall back on their former resolutions. But, they were too
transparent in their conduct, and so opposition to their plans
speedily showed itself. The simple new chum himself never
dreaming of mischief had returned to the bush, after receiving
a token of consideration from his friends in the city; the
same happy welcome met him wherever he went, and a wide
field of usefulness opened up for him in the localities which
he visited. He still retains a lively recollection of the families
at Gloucester and the Barrington Biver, who often arranged
their business so as to be present in Stroud at the Sabbath
day services. In the midst of much usefulness, he, in the
month of March, decided upon leaving the district, as nothing
in the shape of a house had presented itself. The magistrates
on hearing this, requested him to preach his farewell sermon
in the Church of England, as his usual place of meeting, the
Court House, was too small. This he did on the following
Sabbath at three o’clock, after having preached at Bandon
Grove in the morning'.


The day of election for St. Andrew’s was now come. The
new field at Woolloomooloo had been occupied by the settle-
ment of a minister the night before, but not by the one that
had been designated to it in Scotland, Mr. Dougall, for he, on
his arrival, was brought forward as a candidate for St.
Andrew’s; but the adherents of the former movement, sup-
porting their own candidate, succeeded in securing for him a
majority of 57 votes. This result they reported to him that
night at Redfern • and it was but natural for one, not given to
suspicion, to think of nothing but the reality and responsi-
bility of being chosen to such an important charge. This
result was obtained by open voting, and why should there be
anything but openness and genuine sincerity in all that belongs
to the service of God. Circumstances, however, which are
known to the older members of the Sydney Presbytery, pre.
vented his settlement in St. Andrew’s Church. Shortly after
this -we find him junior minister with the Rev. Dr. Lang of
the Scots’ Church, Church Hill. He had much comfort in this
connection, and it is with no little pleasure that he can look
back upon his several labours, in all of which he was free and
untrammelled, Bible classes, district meetings for prayer and
the exposition of the Scriptures. At the end of the year, he
opened a classical academy, but still continued to officiate
occasionally for his old friends. The house although large,
was soon too small. Many students, especially of the Church
of England, joined his classes and continued under his tuition
till they entered the ministry. He became at this time a Vice
President of the Young Men’s Christian Association, which
office he held till 1858, When, on leaving for Victoria, the
young men presented him with a testimonial in books and
money. At the earnest request of the Rev. Robert Hamilton
of Collingwood, he visited Melbourne, and, after officiating for
him while he was absent on a missionary tour, he supplied for
some time the United Presbyterian Church at Geelong, and
latterly at Portland Bay, in the room of the Rev. William


Ridley, now of Sydney. He soon after returned to Sydney,
but in a short time, he complied with an nrgent request to
revisit Victoria. His labour was more varied this time and
full of interest. His stay extended over eighteen months, and.
the churches of East Collingwood and Talbot owe their origin
to him. A severe cold from exposure and wet, induced him to
come home, and after visiting Queensland as recommended, he
settled down again to his scholastic duties. These were varied
by frequently preaching for his friends in and around Sydney
till his settlement at Hinton in 1866. In this beautiful river-
ine district, he has enjoyed much of the blessing of God; and
to the people of his charge he would dedicate this sermon, the
first he wrote in the colony.


SERMON.
Theme;
BELIEVERS ABE GOD’S JEWELS :
HIS SPECIAL PROPERTY.
They shall he mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day
token I make up my jewels. Malachi, in, 17.
The Bible, like what we might expect as a revelation
from God, is the most wonderful and comprehensive of
all books. For, while divine knowledge is the grand
subject of its teaching, it yet refers in many places to
matters of philosophical research, and allusions are made
in it to most of the objects in the range of vision. In
condescension to our weakness, the Almighty is pleased to
employ imagery suited to our external observation that
he may thereby impart to us spiritual instruction. The
glory of the sun, the beauty of the moon, and the gran-
deur of the stars, are used to describe at once the great-
ness and excellence of their Creator and the purity and
blessedness of his saints. The height of the heavens,
the depth of the sea and the extent of the earth are
employed to convey to us ideas of the omnipotence and
omnipresence of God and of our comparative littleness.


The clouds as the store-houses of fertilizing liquids,
the air so necessary for animal and vegetable existence,
and the products of the earth so bountiful and varied,
are adduced as proofs of God’s universal goodness and of
our dependence on his bounty. Nay, the very bowels of
the earth are referred to as containing the riches of the
divine beneficence, and if there is one thing more pre-
cious in heaven above or in earth below, to that is God’s
grace compared and his people’s virtue likened. What
favourites, then, must God’s people be when such figures
of dignity and similitudes of beauty are selected for our
encouragement and consolation, and what more expres-
sive of affection and regard than the words of our text:—
“ They shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that
day when I make up my jewels.” Let us first notice
the comparison in the text;
First, The people of God are compared to jewels, for
their origin .
These precious stones called jewels are not so easily got
as the pebbles that lie strewn along the beach or as the
common stones that lie scattered in our way, but they
are got by digging or quarrying into the bowels of the
earth, or they are discovered by patient research among
some natural irruptions of stones. And when found in
their sealed depositories they are taken up to be after-
wards submitted to the scrutinizing eye and the skilful
hand of the polisher; so the Lord finds his jewels in the
rough quarry of nature and it is only by bringing them
out of it that he raises them to the rank of jewels, turns
them from darkness to light and from death to life. He
takes them all out of the horrible pit and brings them
out of the miry clay of sin and misery, places them in
the keeping of Christ for salvation and gives them a
high order in the scale of created intelligence. In one
10
SERMON.


respect, however, do they differ from earthly jewels;
they have nothing in or about themselves to attract or
to admire. Their souls are no better in their native
state than those of others, but the Lord selects whom he
will; it is grace that makes the difference, conversion
that effects the change. They have all the impress of
original corruption upon their souls and every imagina-
tion of the thought is only evil and that continually. The
understanding is full of ignorance ; the will perverse and
rebellious; the conscience seared, blackened and dormant;
the affections impure, grovelling and alienated, while the
appetites are often worse than brutalized; His jewels are
all, like the rest of mankind, of the earth earthy; from
the crown of the head to the sole of the foot there is no
moral soundness in them, but wounds and bruises and
putrifying sores, which have not been bound up nor
mollified with ointment. Such is the natural condition
of all men whatever, and nothing but the grace of God
can bring them out of such a state into the purity and
loveliness of his family. Surely, then, it becomes all who
have been made the jewels of the Lord, to remember
with lively gratitude and deep humility the rock of cor-
rupt nature whence they were hewn, and the pit of ini-
quity out of which they have been taken.
Second, The people of God are compared to jewels
for their beauty.
Jewels are admired for their beauty and lustre, and
the more they are polished the brighter do they shine.
They not only surpass the common pebble in splendour
and brightness, but they have a richness and a beauty
which no composition of art can equal. They admit of
a polish which makes their inherent beauty shine and
dazzle the eye; nay, they even reflect a radiance in the
dark : so the Lord’s jewels after being polished far tran -
11
GOD‘S JEWELS.


scend other men. They are the light of the world and
the image of their Maker; they shine in a dark place and
reflect the rays of the sun of righteousness; and so the
saints of God have this command given them, * Let your
light so shine before men that others, seeing your good
works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven. ’
The claims of the law and the demands of justice being
satisfied in their behalf, and a principle of holiness im-
parted to their souls, they walk in love and perform
good works like the shining reflections of the Redeemer’s
character. True, like the natural luminaries of heaven
they have still some spots and dark shades in their life,
but, in comparison with those who are the dross of the
world, they nevertheless shine. They are sensible of their
sinfulness and imperfections, and so lay thenselves open to
the sanctifying influences of the spirit of God as well as
bathe in the fountain open for sin and for uncleanness:
and this they will continue to do till Christ present them
in heaven at last without spot or blemish or any such
thing. Here, on God’s footstool, their graces glimmer
amid much infirmity, sin, and suffering, but there
before His throne, they will shine as the firmament of
Leaven and as the stars for ever and ever.
Third, The people of God are compared to jewels for
their value.
Jewels are so greatly esteemed that there is more value
set upon them than on any other species of property.
They are not only reckoned a treasure but a peculiar
treasure; and so true is this that the great and the noble
who are in general the possessors of jewels, make them
the last articles, even in their straits, with which they
will part. Tempting as is the high price they would
bring, and princes have been known to be in want not
only of every princely but even common comfort, and yet
SERMON.


in these circumstances, to have clung to their jewels and
retained them to the last; so the Lord esteems his saints,
who are his jewels, as his peculiar treasure. They are
his own, his peculiar treasure in which he delights; not
that the Lord is enriched by his people, as men are by
earthly possessions, but he values them more highly than
all external objects. Though the earth and the fulness
thereof be his, though the heavenly world with all its
glory be his, yet he never says of either of them, "my
earth’ or "my heaven;’ but to express his peculiar delight
in his saints we hear him say, "my people,’ "my sheep,’
‘my heritage,’ "my vineyard,’ "my portion,’ "my jewels,’
or "my peculiar treasure,’ the beloved of my soul; not
that they are all of the same excellency of character and
attainments ; for, as one jewel differeth from another in
value and in quality, so do they differ from each other,
though they are all jewels of inestimable value to their
God and Saviour. However despised they may be by
the world; however slighted by their fellow men; how-
ever trodden under foot they may be as things worthless
and unprofitable, they are all the special property of
heaven. Men esteem their treasure because it is the
source of their power and grandeur, but the Lord es-
teems his people because they are the trophies of his
love and the vessels of his mercy. Well then may it be
said, " The Lord’s portion is his people.’
Fourth, The people of God are compared to jewels for
their rarity.
The localities where these jewels are to be found are
few and far between, and the possessors of them either
in their natural or in their dressed and ornamental state
are only certain favoured individuals. Were jewels
common, they would cease to be so valued, but because
they are rare they are greatly desired; so the Lord’s


jewels are as yet but rare; they are to be found only in
the keeping of Christ, treasured up in the cabinet of his
grace, and, in many cases, yet undistinguished from the
mass of iniquity around them. How few seem living,
through faith in the gospel, a life of holiness! The
gospel even in this our day is anything but universally
known, and, even where it is known and preached, con-
versions and their sanctifying effects are far from being
common. A small company are Christians still in this
world of sin and folly; Christ’s flock.in this world is but
a small flock; of not every one can it be said ‘ Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.’ In the days of the
prophets such characters were rarely to be found; they
were men then wondered at, as we learn from, the com-
plaint of the prophet Isaiah, ‘ Who hath belie-ved our
report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed;’
and in Elijah’s time God himself spake of only seven
thousand in all Israel who had not bowed the knee to
the image of Baal; such characters are still rarities.
As our Saviour said in the days of his flesh, so may it
still be said, ‘Many are called, but few are chosen.’
Multitudes of professors enter Zion’s courts, but this
will not of itself constitute them saints. As there are
many counterfeit jewels, so are there many hypocrites
to be found in the external Zion. This man, it is
true, and that man are born in her, but this cannot be
said of all her attendants. Instead, then, of asking 'Are
there few that be saved ? ’ strive thou to enter in at the
strait gate, for many shall seek to enter in, and shall
not be able.
Lastly, The people of God are compared to jewels for
the care taken in their preservation.
As precious stones, are placed for ornament and use,
in rings, seals, stomachers and crowns, and worn upon


the hands, arms, breast, head and other parts of the body;
so, the Lord hath his jewels ever before his eyes, ever
near and dear to him ; they are said to be fastened npon
his hands, fixed upon his breast, set as a seal upon his
heart and as a bracelet on his arm. And, as kings have
their jewels carefully inserted in their crowns an d worn
by them as ensigns of honour and majesty, so the King
of Kings and Lord of Lords hath his crown bestudded
with the gems and jewels, which he hath purchased, his
chosen people whom he hath redeemed. He, who for
their sakes once wore a crown of thorns, now, in their
preservation, wears a crown of glory and honour. Thus
it was said by admiring hosts to the Father on the
day of his Son’s espousal to the church, •' Thou crownest
him with glory and honour,’ and, Who are his crown
of glory and honour? Those whom he hath saved and
whom he ever preserves. The redeemed washed in the
blood of Jesus and sanctified by his spirit are ever near
the footstool of his grace, and their spiritual Aaron
wears them on his breast, while pleading in the holy of
holies for them in the outer courts of his temple. How
safe, then, must those be whose names are written upon
his breast plate; who are found in that book of life; who
*are engraved upon that tablet of everlasting love! What
can remove from his love those who are written upon his
heart ? what enemy can pluck them from his hand, or
tear them from his breast ? Hear the advocate pleading,
‘ Father, I will, that those whom thou hast given me be
with me where I am, that they may behold my glory
he prays, but he wills the answer to the prayer; he
pleads but never fails in securing the best interest of all
who entrust their case to him. The very breath of his
prayer carries with it life and salvation; so are his peo-
ple kept as the apple of his eye, preserved as his dear-


bought treasure, and in due time prepared for their final
manifestation in glory.
11. We come now to consider, in the second place, the
means hy which the Lord prepares his people for their final
manifestation in glory.
The Lord prepares his people for glory by the Word
and Ordinances of his grace. The word of inspiration is
the grand instrument which the Lord employs in bring-
ing his people out of the rough quarry of nature, and
from the dark mine of misery, into the light of everlast-
ing felicity. It is indeed an instrument of great power,
for ‘the law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul,
the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the sim-
ple.’ And this powerful instrument he can apply in
countless ways to effect his purposes. ‘ls not my word
like a fire,’ saith the Lord, ‘and like a hammer that
breaketh the rock in pieces ?’ ‘Wherefore, brethren,’ saith
the Apostle, ‘laying aside all filthiness and superfluity
of naughtiness, receive with meekness the engrafted
word which is able to save your souls.’ Nor is the word
less efficient in polishing God’s jewels than in bringing
them out of a native into a gracious state. ‘Ye are
clean’ saith the Saviour to his disciples, ‘through the word
which I have spoken unto you,’ and to the Father he
prayed, ‘ Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is
truth.’ For this grand rule of life at once commends
holiness, supplies motives for action, and presents to the
heaven-born spirit many encouragements to go on to
perfection. Faith, the grand ruling principle of life in
the soul, is begotten through its influence, and we have
still the promise of a g acious power at work in its public
ministrations. ‘ln all places where I make known the
name, will I come unto thee and bless thee,’ is sull my


promise of him who said to his commissioned heralds of
the cross ‘ All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth; go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you ; and, lo! I am with
you always, even unto the end.’ This word is the food of
the believer; while in the ordinances of baptism and
the supper, he can read his adoption into the family of
God, his growth in grace, and his preparedness for glory.
And these are means whereby the Lord moulds and
smooths his people to the fashion of his own most
glorious image here; for, when he shall appear, they
shall be like him as he is, when prepared for their
final manifestation in glory.
2." Again, the Lord prepares his people for glory,
by the operations and dispensations of Providence.
In the operations of God’s providence, or in his deal-
ings with his people, we may see, as in a glass darkly, the
unfolding of the glorious plan of man’s redemption. All
events contribute to the accomplishment of this great
work. The greatest revolutions in kingdoms, the most
trifling changes in families, and all the movements that
take place in our churches, will the Lord overrule for
the making up of his jewels. At the time when Stephen
fell a martyr to the cause of Christ, the church was
persecuted, and the people of the Lord were scattered
abroad, but by them was the gospel carried to other
lands, and great multitudes believed and turned to the
Lord. And still, in all the changes that take place on
earth, the Lord hath a wise and gracious end to serve.
The tide of emigration to these colonies, and all the
moving to and fro of the earth’s inhabitants, will the


Lord overrule for his glory and the good of his people.
Whatever object men may have in their varied pursuits,
the Lord is at the helm of Providence regulating every
movement. Shall the earth then give forth its golden
stores, and the house of the Lord lie desolate ? Shall
gilded earth eclipse the interests of that house, or put
for a moment in the shade the beauties of holiness ? It
is a sad proof of man’s blindness to his true interests
when it is so. Earthly things would find their level
and their use, did men but look upon them in their
proper light, and estimate them accordingly. Then
would the earth yield to God its spiritual increase, and
heaven become filled with the heirs of glory. But the
Lord, faithful to his word, will make up his jewels,
though it be after manifold trials they enter the king-
dom. As in the production of vegetable life, clouds
charged with rain are as necessary in their turn as the
fairest sunshine, so we may suppose that the darkest as
well as the brightest aspects of God’s providence are
necessary to the spiritual growth of his people. Many
are brought to serious consideration by afflictive dispen-
sations. The prodigal is brought back to his father’s
house through the chastening rod calling forth a repen-
tance that needeth not to be repented of, a faith which
worketh by love, and a hope that maketh not ashamed.
Yea, the people of God often stand in need of bitter
chastisement, not only for their present correction, but
to improve their graces and smooth the natural rough-
ness of character that may cling to them throughout
their probation. Paul had a thorn in his flesh to keep
down his pride, and David was often tried with family
broils to deepen his convictions, and keep him humble
on account of sin; and Peter was cured of his natural
forwardness after recovering from his unhappy fall; and


though we may not see the design of these afflictive
dispensations now, we may rest assured that they are
means necessary in preparing the subjects of grace for
the kingdom of glory. An ignorant person, on entering
a jeweller’s workshop, would at once conclude, that the
operations going on were only destructive of the pre-
cious stones, till the result became evident in their
beauty and lustre; so are we believers ready to conclude
that the church will be destroyed in times of persecution,
and individual Christians overwhelmed by personal cala-
mity, yet it will be seen that all these were necessary in
purifying the church from corruption, and in rectifying
and regulating the lives of its members, that they may
all appear collectively at last, and shine forth gloriously
in the light of eternity.
3. But the Lord also prepares his people for glory,
by the Work and influence of the Holy Spirit.
For the Word and Ordinances of God’s grace, aided
by the operations and dispensations of his providence,
can do nothing to convert or sanctify a single soul, unless
the Spirit accompany them by his blessing. The word
and ordinances of God’s grace, however administered by
the ambassadors of the cross, have no inherent virtue in
themselves; nor have the dispensations of providence,
however awful or singular they may be, any saving
power in their own natural force. The efficacy of every
dispensation of providence, and of the preaching of God’s
word, consists in the saving application of them to the
soul by the Holy Spirit that Almighty Spirit who,
at creation’s dawn, brought order and beauty out of
chaos and breathed into dead matter the breath of life;
this same quickening Spirit has breathed into earthen
vessels his life-giving word, that he may bless the world


through them with his heavenly influences. The Holy
Spirit is the grand interpreter of gospel truths, the
revealer of its hidden mysteries, and the sole dispenser
of its blessings. No man can say that Jesus is the Christ
but by the Holy Ohost; and except a man be born of
water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the king-
dom of heaven. As an instrument can effect nothing
without the hand of the mechanic, so, without the agency
of the Holy Spirit, providences and ordinances, powerful
instruments though they be, cannot convince a sinner of
sin, and turn him from the ways of error to the paths of
righteousness ; it is the Spirit that quickeneth through
the instrumentality of means ; the letter killeth, but the
Spirit maketh alive. He it is that must begin the work
of sanctification in the soul, carry it on and perfect it on
the threshold of the eternal world. What then though
the first operation be rough, trying, and severe; the end
will be glorious. For, as the work progresses, the design
opens up to the delighted vision, and the subject of the
gracious change is brought to look upon trials as heaven-
ly visits, as marks of a Father’s love, as proofs of a Sa-
viour’s friendship, and as abiding evidence that believers
are not orphans on the earth, that they are not forgotten
by their elder brother in his kingdom, but continually
watched over with the most tender care and solicitude;
so the work begun shall go on unto perfection, and the
subjects of it be prepared for the heavenly kingdom.
111. Let us, in conclusion, notice the time specified when
the Lord will make up his jewels.
This is called, by way of eminence, ( that day ’ —that
great day for which all others were made, and in which
the interests of all time find a common centre. This
day must not be circumscribed by our limited notions of


time, as it includes not only the day of death, when be-
lievers shall be called home individually to their Father,
but it comprehends also the day of judgment, when they
shall appear collectively on their way to glory. From
the nature of spiritual things we might suppose that
those who are preparing for the glories of that day will
have peculiar marks of character by which they are
distinguished. We look around us for such marks among
professing Christians, but with little success. Instead of
the eye resting on a fair spot of spiritual life, it is
wearied and sickened at the sight of disease and death.
Religion, with the multitude, is but an empty dream and
idle profession ; our churches stand out like sacred enclo-
sures amid the wilderness, but the moral waste is
undisturbed by their hallowing influence. The mass
still lie unmoved, as if uncared for ; as ignorant of their
souls as the dull earth is of the gold which it contains,
or as the rocky cavern is of the gem that may be
embedded in its depths; while Zion’s travellers, few and
solitary, feel their need of guidance and direction. How
is this earth to become the Lord’s and its fulness made
instruments for his glory? The Lord of Hosts hath
spoken, and, blessed be His name. He will magnify His
word. Notwithstanding the dreary wastes that sin has
made, the Lord hath a people on this earth, whether they
be virtually his in covenant or already in the hands of
the Spirit preparing for his crown. This work must
begin and be completed on this earth. No confusion
can take place in heaven about the fitness of its inhabi-
tants for the places assigned to them. All shall have
their places prepared, and each shall be prepared for
the particular place which he is to occupy in that family
circle. As the stones used in the building of Solomon’s
temple were all fitted and prepared in a foreign land,


that the sound of a hammer might not be heard in the
rearing up of that splendid edifice, so must the lively
stones for the heavenly temple be all fitted and prepared
on earth, and receive a final polish on the shores of time
before they enter into heaven and take their place in
that temple of jewels. Messengers are waiting till they
are prepared and ready to be taken home. At every
fresh arrival, heaven resounds with Hallelujahs; another
and another jewel sparkles in the Redeemer’s crown;
another and another voice unites in the song of victory ;
and another heart beats in harmony with the universal
hymn of praise. You must then be born into that
family if you would mingle with the blessed. The
Spirit of God tells you that when the church was filled
with sacrilege, and when infidelity undauntingly and
unblushingly raised its head, ‘ Then they that feared the
Lord spake often one to another; and the Lord hearkened
and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord and that
thought upon His name. And they shall be mine, saith
the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my
jewels,’
SERMON.


C. S. Boag, ‘The School Press’, Maitland.


