

eencsjous p^ms
6.0* U 3
'/f.'/<&A
<• (• r
|)od in Srictttc and |]otl in
OK, THE
RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS OF PHYSICS AND HISTORY
CONCERNING THEISM AND CHRISTIANITY.
WILLIAM ROBY FLETCHER, M. A .
PRICE SIXPENCE.
j£i.Mai(k:
GEO. ROBERTSON, KING WILLIAM STREET.




|jni in and |)0il in | ; limt:
J J J «
OR, THE
RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS OF PHYSICS AND HISTORY
CONCERNING THEISM AND CHRISTIANITY.
WILLIAM ROBY FLETCHER, M. A.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
GEO. ROBERTSON, KING WILLIAM STREET.




PREFACE.
The contents of the following pages have already been given to the
public. As Chairman of the Congregational Union for the year 1878-9,
it was my duty to deliver two Addresses—the first in April, the second
in October of last year. I selected as my theme the relations between
Modern Science, Theism, and Christianity, in the hope that I might be
of some service in guiding those who are eager truth-seekers, from mental
disquiet to a haven of rest. I have avoided in my revision all references
to the minor questions which divide Christian opinion, because their
discussion would interfere with my honest desire to be helpful to the
numerous bewildered enquirers who are to be found in all Christian
Churches. These addresses have already been made public through the
courtesy of the press. My thanks are due to the Register, the Advertiser,
and to the Methodist Journal, for their full reports given at the time
when I delivered these addresses. A wish having been expressed that
they should appear in a separate and more convenient form, I send them
forth as a pamphlet.
Whatever profit may arise from the sale of this book will be handed
over to the Committee of the Children’s Hospital.
W. R. F.




ON THE RELATIONS BETWEEN RELIGION AND
SCIENTIFIC THOUGHT.
AN ADDRESS DELIVERED AT THE ANNUAL MEETING OF THE
CONGREGATIONAL UNION, AT NORTH ADELAIDE, ON APRIL 9,
1878.
Christian Brethren
I cannot fail to be sensible of the honour you
have done me, who have so recently come among you, in
appointing me to the position of your Chairman. It would,
however, ill become me if I were to abuse your confidence in
me, and were to assume the position of “ a Daniel come to judg-
ment,” or were to attempt to gain that easily-won credit for
wisdom which arises from a mere spirit of fault-finding. I
prefer on this occasion to leave the practical matters of our
denomination to the discussions of the Council and the Com-
mittee, and to confine myself in this inaugural address to other
and wider themes. In this Ido but perpetuate a noble custom
among the Congregational Unions of the world, which enjoins
upon its Chairman to present to his brethren and to the
Churches his thoughts upon matters of wider and mere general
interest which are hardly suitable to the ordinary discourses
of the pulpit, and are too technical for the platform. I say
wider themes; for, important as the mere details of Church
life may be, we ought on such an occasion as the present
to remember that we are a part, and that but a small part, of the
great Church of Christ; and that there are themes which effect
our common Christianity which are of vast moment to us all.
As the villagers dwelling in some secluded valley may on some
holiday fete leave their cottages, and their fields, and their daily
household toils and worries, and ascend some one of the engirding
rampart of peaks to view the wider range of tangled mountain
glory, and so may learn afresh that the hamlet below is not all
the world, though to them it may almost seem so ; so let us in
company climb some of the mountains that are round about us,
and in thought survey the vaster area of the world’s throbbing
activity and terrible toil. The prospect that may open before us
may be disquieting, and even tragic. We may have to take
note of clashing facts, daring conflicts of opinion, onward move-
ments of thought, and wild speculations. We may be called,
as we look in one direction, to contemplate with sadness how
the Church, in her rashness and in her zeal for certain expres-
sions of truth, is waging a warfare against truth itself. Or we
may see her retreating in timidity into the dark caves of
Ritualism, tenanted by the owls and bats of Medievalism, as
though too weak to bear the sunlight of truth. But whatever
be the prospect, we need not fear. To the healthy mind the
upland air is bracing and inspiriting. Let us stand where we


are, as upon the Mount of God, with the sunlight of heaven in
our souls, upheld by our faith in God, and then nothing can
harm or affright. As a rock is unmoved amidst the roar of an ocean
tempest, so may a human soul be calm which has the conscious-
ness of God within it As the ancient Hebrew patriarch, in his
hour of greatest anxiety, obtained the new name “Israel” in his
victorious agony of prayer, and called the name of that place
“Peniel,” because, said he, “I have seen God face to face;” so let
us, by the might of our faith, in such fashion lay hold upon the
unseen verity of God, as to call this, our hour of vision, a blessed
experience. Standing upon the giddiest brinks of thought, and
peering into the deepest abysses of destiny, it may be given to
us, if we be the loyal worshippers, to see that God after whom
our souls are ever yearning.
The warfare be'
tween truth and
In all ages the Church of God has been called to assume a
error repeats
itself.
MILITANT ASPECT AGAINST SIN AND ERROR.
Our own times are no exception to this discipline of conflict. She
has had to contend with foes without and foes within. Assaults
have from time to time been made upon her creed and her prin-
ciples, her sacred records, and the still more sacred person of her
Lord. Each century has had its own heresies to deal with, and in
successive ages the aspect of the battle has been changing as the
panorama has been unfolded. Old difficulties crop up, but they
appear with new faces and armed with new weapons. Buried errors
arise from their tombs like suckers from the roots of certain trees
that have been cut down, concealing their identity under a verdant
foliage of seeming novelty. Renascent heresies like the young
eucalypti of our forests put on leaves of a new shape, which
made the inexperienced deem them other growths than their
progenitors. The cannon-balls that were used in Milton’s
description of the war amid the hierarchies of heaven did no
great harm to the attenuated frames of the combatant spirits.
So do the arguments of logic and earnestness sometimes seem
powerless to inflict fatal wounds among the ranks of evil.
There is no form of opposition to Christian doctrine that
cannot boast of a venerable antiquity. Critical rationalism from
without .old ritualism from within endangered the Christianity
of the first three centuries as they do to-day. The arguments of
Celsus and his followers troubled the early Church, and taxed the
energies of its scholars, as the Tubingen school does the modern
Church. Daring speculation borrowed the forms and assumed the
verbiage of Christianity in the fantastic schemes of the Gnostics,
just as its wretched modern counterpart called Spiritism does to-
day. The thinkings of mankind have wearisomely run round
and round the same circle of tendencies, bringing forth again
and again the phases of materialism, scepticism, pantheism,
and idealism, as if chained to a treadmill of destiny. Plato and
Aristotle seem still to divide the world of thought between them,
and form again the old schools of the Academy and the Lyceum
under new phases. In spiie, however, of all this recurrent
sameness, I believe there is onward progress. The circles of
human thought rise one above another in a spiral rather than in
a plane. Each age advances on that which goes before it. The
pendulum of speculation may swing with monotony to and from
the same apparent points, but the great clock-face of history
Primitive rational-
ism and ritualism.
The spiral of
progress.


■shows movement towards the climax of destiny, when the last
watoh of the night will be over, and the chimes be heard which
will usher in the millenium of Divine promise ‘ * to which the
whole creation moves. ”
Two conspicuous antagonistic movements force themselves
upon our regard as we survey the wide field of Christian litera-
ture and enterprise. These are —
I. —THE RECOIL IN THE CHURCH ITSELF UPON THE IDEA OF A
PRIESTHOOD.*
11. —THE ATTITUDE OF SOME MODERN SCIENTISTS TOWARDS
CHRISTIANITY.
It is no new thing for the Church of Christ to come into T1 fl ':^ u^ h i “ n^ n ~
conflict with materialism. They have many times wrestled for
very life and honour on the arena of history. There is, how-
ever, something peculiar about the warfare between them to-day,
which lends a new interest to the questions at issue. The
rebellion of an unbelief said to be based upon scientific truth is
nothing remarkable, but never before has it been so keen in its
tactics and the attack so fraught with peril. There have been times
when its relative successes have been greater, as for instance
during the earlier part of last century ; but the mental struggle of
our times is carried on on both sides with sharper weapons of
logic and keener arrows of fact. It may be likened to a naval battle
of our day, in which armour-plated vessels mounted with
enormous rifled cannon have to prepare for and return the fire
of similar iron-clad monsters ; a very different spectacle from an
engagement in which old-fashioned wooden ships met their
equals and received and gave back their broadsides. It covers,
moreover, a wider area. It is not confined to a small and select The modem conflict
aristocratic circle of literati and book-writers. It permeates all
ranks of the community. It engages the attention of the
working man at his dinner hour, as well as of the student in his
library. If Professor Huxley is announced to deliver a lecture
or preach a lay sermon, it is sure to be attended by listening
and applauding thousands, gathered from among British artizans among the people,
as well as from among the devotees of physics. Avowed
Atheism is now no disqualification for the holding of high
positions of influence in the educational establishments of
England and Germany. Our most popular periodicals often
contain articles which appeal in the interests of anti-Christian
thought to a wide circle of readers. In the pages of the
Contemporary or the Fortnightly an essay by Professor Clifford
may be found side by side with one by Mr. Gladstone or
Cardinal Manning. Mr. Tennyson, the poet-laureate, has to
acknowledge that his greatest rival is not Browning,
but Swinbourne, the poet of sensuousness and passion.
Moreover, the movement is very widespread. Every Church amongtim churches
is occupied with symptomatic difficulties in its own management,
which are both perplexing and curious. The Anglican Church
does not know what to make of its Broad Church rebels against
the authority of its Articles. The Presbyterian communions
north of the Tweed are engaged in the unhappy work of dis-
' I emit in these pages the few words to which I gave utterance on the first-
named of these movements, as they might tend to divert attention from the
theme to which I gave the greater prominence.


cussing what is to be done with members suspected of heresy-
The Wesleyan Church, so avowedly conservative as it usually is,
has had to cut off certain offending young brethren who ventured
to depart from its standard of orthodoxy. Our Churches as a
rule are more responsive to the impressions of the age, but the
Leicester Conference has created among them no small amaze-
ment and alarm.
And not the Churches alone, but the politics of the
world are likewise gravely affected by this movement towards
liberty of thinking and of rebellion against ancient creeds.
In Italy the traveller will hardly find a monastery or a
convent which has not been forcibly closed by the authority of
Government. Buildings redolent with an air of sanctity are
turned into national museums. No longer do long-robed monks
tread ‘the cloisters of San Marco at Florence or St. George at
Venice, but the curious public are admitted at a franc per bead
to gaze upon the pious pictures of Fra Angelico as upon a show,
and vto examine in glass cases the illuminated missals of the
ancient ministers of the national Church. The floor of the
Coliseum is no longer left to the undisturbed occupation of the
pilgrim reciting his prayers at the twelve stations of the Via
Dolorosa, but is given up to excavators and antiquarians anxious
to explore the mechanism of the godless and bloody shows of
pagan Rome. Florence no longer abhors the memory of
Savonarola, whose martyr spirit ascended unto God in a chariot
of fire from the Great Piazza, but erects a marble statue to his
memory, and exhibits his study and his books and his cell as
relics of a man whose greatness and whose purity are above all
praise. In Germany a movement is on foot among some of the
leading scientists to get the Government to abolish in all the
leading schools every reference to the name of God, and to
eliminate from the class-books of the gymnasia all allusion to
the creation of the world by Divine power. The gospel of
Evolution is to supersede the Gospel of Christ. Carlyle relates
how the “ mad fool-fury ” of the French Revolution saw God
dethroned, and a bedizened harlot crowned as the Goddess of
Reason ; but these savans of Germany are trying to do the
same thing in cold-blooded calmness, and in place of a personal
Creator, above all, through all, and in all things, are enthroning
an effigy of ice—a cold scientific abstraction, called by divers
worshippers, Law, or Force, or Matter, or Motion.
We have had many difficulties to contend with in this con-
troversy heretofore, but there is a notable peculiarity about the
conflict at this time. The question to be debated is narrowed
down to a very definite issue. It is not whether this or that
religion is right, but
WHETHER OR NO ALL RELIGIONS ARE WRONG;
not whether this or that theory of inspiration be correct, or
whether Moses was or was not the author of the Pentateuch ;
not whether John the Apostle or John the Presbyter wrote the
fourth gospel; not whether Jesus of Nazareth were a divine
man or no ; but whether the very notion of worship, and prayer,
and inspiration, be a fiction or net. The disputants at the
famous Council of Nic;ea would be told by some modern savans
that their discussion was a mere logomachy, for there was
nothing to fight about save words—no Son, no Father, no Spirit,


no God. The creed of the Roman Church, the standards of
Presbyterians, and the shadowy semblance of a creed which
obtains among the Unitarians are each and all passed by as
■equally untrue, equally opposed to the new gospel of Evolution,
and equally beneath contempt. All our minor questions are
absorbed in this greater question, which ranges on one side all
the various sects of Christianity who cling to the idea that all
things were made by a personal God, and in whom all things
consist. It is not the outworks but the foundations of the
citadel of our faith that are being assailed. The nicer shades of
difference between contending sections of Christendom are ignored
and the very fundamentals of all religion are upon their trial.
For ourselves, as loyal soldiers of Christ, we need not give T '£ r y ofT^tVI*' 1 *'
way to timidity. We hear the tumult; let us rather rejoice in
the stir of arms. If our foes are strong, it may be ours to
know “that stern joy that warriors feel in foemen worthy of their
steel.” All truth is of God, and all our discoveries of truth
will erewhile be found assisting mankind to interpret its
God-consciousness aright. To know nature better will be
but to find in nature a personal friend, and in this
world of moral evil a Divine Saviour. This supreme
object of our quest may never be grasped by our finite
intellects, but there is that in all of us which answers in T h« yearning alter
reverence to a hidden soul in nature greater than ours—more God *
wise than we are, for with him is the fountain of knowledge—
more holy than we are, for our yearnings are ever after him—
more living than we are, for He is and must be the very central
sun of life. If we in our piety strive upward towards Him we
are strong ; if we look downwards we tremble. If we can say
with David, “My heart and my flesh crieth out for the living
God,” we may be able to add, “I shall be satisfied when I
awake in Thy likeness. ” Like as it was with Moses, who when he
had grasped the mystic reality of the Divine personality, and had
had some experience of His presence, yearned for something yet
higher, so it is with the soul that has found God in Christ. The
great lawgiver did not cry out, “ Show me if Thou art,” “Prove
to me Thine existence,” but “I beseech Thee, show me Thy
gloryso we, rising from our limited vision of the divine
purposes in redemption, send our cry, not downward into the
aoysses of cosmic laws, but upward to the regions of light,
anticipating that promised Theophany when “we shall be like
Him, for we shall see Him as he is !”
I purpose before I close dealing in a practical fashion with
our relations with this anti-Christian aspect of our age, but
before doing so let us all consider the
POSITION ASSUMED BY OUR ANTAGONISTS,
and note—(l) its strength, and (2) its weakness.
ITS STRENGTH.
(i) The anti-Christian scientist will affirm that modern Modern science is
science is working on the only true lines in philosophy. What f U£i “*
he means is this. We are surrounded by mystery and wonder.
The world is a mystery, life is a mystery, and ourselves are
of all mysteries the most obscure. Now, there are two ways
in which we may attempt to pierce the veil, and to behold the
invisible realms of truth. One is the old-fashioned method of


deduction, which takes certain principles for granted, and
evolves therefrom a whole scheme of truth ; and the other is
scientific induction.
Deduction, we are told, has given birth to endless cosmogonies
among the ancient Greeks and modern thinkers, which like card
castles put up by clever children, have no sooner been erected
ol than they have come tumbling down in ruins. As the hills of
Palestine are marked by the remains of forty successive genera-
tions of builders, so is the domain of human thought touched
with a mournful beauty in its numerous ivy-clad fragments of
temples of speculation and its ruined castles of ambitious
thought. As a traveller may note when passing through Greece
or Egypt the remains of this or that renowned city, so may the
historian of mankind point out the shattered mementoes of
those abodes which man has builded wherein to rest amid the
storms of mystery. There, we may be told, once dwelt Thales,
and there Pythagoras. On yonder summit Plato built his cloud
castle, and on yonder plain Aristotle put up his colossal fortress
of thought, strong as a Theban palace even in its decay. There,
in the far distance were the airy structures of oriental Theosophy,
which like the Tower of Babel aimed at reaching even unto
heaven. And there, again, the more modest ruins of the Neo-
Platonists of Alexandria. Not far off we may be pointed to the
sites that mark the barbaric splendour of the Gnostic heresies,,
now utterly vanished ; and again to the mighty structures of the
Christian theologians of the middle ages, now graceful in decay
as “ fair Melrose” or Newstead Abbey. The history of philo-
sophy, we are told, is sad and pathetic, for it is a history of
failure and defeat. An inward impulse has been ever at work,
driving man like a captive bird to batter his wings against tho
brazen bars of the prison of mystery in which he dwells. His
efforts have been noble, heroic, grand, but they have been
useless. After 3,000 years he was no nearer to the goal than at
the beginning.
Then we are told that there arose in England a certain very
wise man, by name Francis Bacon, who said to the world,
“ You are all wrong. You begin at the wrong end. Reverse
your methods. Let theories alone, and examine facts. Collect
facts, classify facts, set facts one against another, and wait for
the result. The process may be slow, but it is sure. Out of
facts will emerge laws, and every law when known is a step
towards the knowledge of Him or It who is the one law among
many. Gather facts anywhere and everywhere, from the skies
and from the waters, from the movements of the stars and from
the habits and ways of insects and worms, from the deep work-
ings of the human mind and from the growth of social ideas in
history.”
The world felt that Bacon was right. He had hit upon a new
method, and that method was the key which, put into the wards
of the great lock of mystery, would disclose the unknown. It
might creak in the using of it, but it was the right key never-
theless. The incrusted rust of ages would soon rub off. It
only needed time, industry, and patience, and one by one would
be thrown open the chambers and halls of the vast palace of
nature.


Modern science is the result of the application of this common-
sense method of Lord Bacon. It has been tried, and great have
been the consequences. It has made the stars and the planets
give up the secret of their cosmic dance, as expressed in
Newton’s law of gravitation and Kepler’s three laws of planetary
motion. It has measured the speed of the lightning, and taught
us how to govern the pulsations of magnetism, and as a result
this vast globe is being covered with a network of iron nerves
along which human thoughts are passing and repassing. It has
drawn from the sunlight the knowledge of what bodies are burn-
ing in the sun, and what is their state, and is doing the same
for the far-distant stars. It has come down with its useful
discoveries into the realms of popular and household life,
lightening human burdens and raising the race to a higher
position in its practical energy. It has probed into the inner
mysteries of those laws of force which are around us, and by a
slow and careful induction of facts has proved for us that all the
cosmic forces are indestructible ; and more than that, that they
are all modifications of but one central energy. Heat is light,
and light is heat, and both heat and light are but modes of
motion, which motion again may appear as muscular contraction,
chemical combination, or magnetic affinity. Great indeed have
been the achievements of Baconian science, but the proudest
result of all that has been accomplished is the establishment of
the indestructible nature of energy and the correlation of the
physical forces of the universe.
We see, then, how strong is the position of our antagonists,
built as it is on the foundation of Baconian induction. The
foundation is solid, the method is the true one, but it behoves
us to take care what sort of an edifice is builded thereupon.
There is a danger besetting all inquirers in these remote regions
which may be likened unto what befalls the superstitious peasant
who climbs at early dawn the famous mountain of the Brocken.
He stands on the solid earth, but the rising sun casts a shadow
of himself, huge, ugly, and distorted upon the surrounding
banks of mist, at the sight of which he may be pardoned if he
tremble. Many such spectres have arisen in the day-dawn of
new truths—spectres which need but fuller light to rob them of
their terror by dissolving them in God’s sunshine.
RELIGION FREQUENTLY OPPOSED TO SCIENCE.
(ii) We cannot deny that our antagonists have gained advan-
tage from the fact that they have won their position by contend-
ing for it inch by inch. Beligion has only retreated unwillingly
from territory which she had no right permanently to occupy.
The history of science, I admit, does not reflect credit on the
annals of Christianity. Unholy attempts have been made, and
are still made, to silence the voice of truth by the godless arm of
authority and power. Men have fed the fires of martyrdom for
their devotion to study, as well as for their heresy in doctrine.
The famous trials of Galileo before the authorities of the
Church, and the injunction laid upon him to recant his state-
ment that the earth went round the sun, stand as a type of how
the spirit of timidity in the Church has been driven into a false
position, from which terrible injury has arisen to the cause of
truth.


Our enemies have the advantage of us here. They can tell
how the leading Church of Europe, the Roman Church, has its
, 'toriro~ Eir) ’ irea index of forbidden literature, in which have been placed, as
soon as they have appeared, books containing scientific novelties,
as well as fresh ideas in theology. They can point even to the
tuc reformers. leaders of the Reformation, and tell how Luther and Melancthon
were determined to banish philosophy from the Church. They
can quote the writings of godly men in other Churches which
are filled with suspicion of science and her work. They can
recall how even among ourselves geology was looked upon as
a dangerous and doubtful study because it might prove the
extreme antiquity of the globe ; and how when the great
American discovery of anaesthetics was first applied to obstetic
cases it was opposed ‘ ‘ not so much for physiological reasons as
under the pretence that it was an impious attempt to escape
from the curse denounced against all women in Gen, iii. 16,”
and how the controversy was amusingly closed by the apt
quotation of another text, which informs us how at the creation
of Eve “ the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam,”
apparently that he might not feel the operation.
This tardy recognition of the claims and conquests of know-
ledge 1 ' may be excused or palliated, but it remains and will
remain as a fact that gives an enormous vantage ground to those
who take up the case of physical science, as though it were
M “'w™“re er3 ° f reall 7 opposed to the truths of Christianity, The ministers of
scientists. “ religion have done much for science as individuals. A galaxy
of noble clerical names could be collected from the history of
the several Churches, which shine brightly in the firmament of
, science, as has been done by Dr. Mueller, the Government
Botanist in Melbourne, in his recent lecture. Still we must
admit that such men have been exceptions, and that they have
been generally in advance of the age in which they have
flourished.
Scientists [assume (iii) A further element of strength in the position of these men
Christian ideas. • ~
is the
ASSUMPTION BY THEM OP CHRISTIAN IDEAS.
The ideal morality of mankind to-day has been learned, not from
science, but from the religion of Jesus. It was He, and not the
philosophers, who practically taught the world the dignity of
gentleness and the power of love. From Him has Come forth that
river of living water of which all men perforce must drink who
hear His name. In Him the world has learned that kindness
and unselfishness are intensely human virtues, and are yet
superhuman. It is His influence that has made men call wrong
wrong ; which shows cruelty to be hateful, which bids men care
for the sick in hospitals, and take up the cause of the poor;
which gradually is putting an end to slavery, and which shows
war to be the last not the first resort of aggrieved nations. Its
morality is the glory of Christianity, which shines forth as the
smile of God through all the most uncouth incrustations of
doctrine. It is this morality which those would borrow who
deny the Divine origin thereof in the teachings of Jesus. They,,
too, speak of self-denial and suffering with tender solicitude, and
indulge in the heroics of eloquent appeal when glorifying the
martyr spirit of persecuted science.


But if our antagonists be thus strongly entrenched, let us also
note, secondly, where they are weak ; and here I remark,
(1.) If the Baconian method be a true method, it is not the Induction not the
only method. There arej other lines along which thought can unly methud-
and must travel. There are other facts to be considered than
the facts of telluric and cosmic science, and these facts must be
allowed to have full weight in the arguments of the day. There
are certain intuitions in our consciousness which demand recog-
nition, and without them even physical science is an impossi-
bility. Whence, for instance, come the relations of number and Mathematic* a»d
the laws of logic ? Do they arise from any indnction of pheno- J ' K ‘
mena ? Time and space are mere forms of thought, yet we are
compelled by our very nature to conceive of them as realities linc,m -cc '
outside of ourselves. Deep in our consciousness lies the dis-
tinction between rightness and wrongness, and no theory of Morality,
selfishness can rob us of this feeling as of a real distinction.
The existence of the external world can never be proved save by The external
the argument of a common sense, which like Alexander the worW -
Great does not untie, but cleaves the Gorbian knot of the
mystery. These ideas the physicist is bound to take for granted,
and taking them for granted, he is bound in honor to allow them
■due wait in solving the problems of the world. They are to his
mind a sort of atmosphere which he must breathe, or thought
would die. Breathing is necessary to bodily life, and eating is
equally indispensable ; but that would be a one-sided way of
accounting for our health which did not go further than to
examine what the body does with the food that is put into it.
Certain fixed laws may be learned from observing the facts of
nature, and inferences equally irresistible arise from viewing the
facts of psychology, and the latter are even more firm than the payohoiogy
former, for they precede them.
Our friends are very busy poking into the mystery of animal
brains. Countless frogs, birds, rabbits, dogs, and monkeys are
being sacrificed on the altar of knowledge. Pigeons are made
to walk about without the cerebellum, and newts are watched as
to their behaviour with a divided backbone. Dr. Perrier is
astonishing the world and giving us a new phrenology by his
experiments on living nerves, and his discoveries of the localiza-
tion of function in the brain. Still it is to be remembered that No analysiß of nor
no examination of animal structure, no analysis of throbbing vous ac «? n <*a
. 7 . « ~ " . , -P account for cer-
nerve tissues, can in any way account for tne existence of sucn tain ideas,
ideas as duty and conscience, or give us a moral law resting on
an immutable foundation, or account for our conceptions of
honor and nobleness, the virtue of self-sacrifice, or the sublime
and the beautiful in nature and art. The brain may be the
servant of the mind ; by brain work the mind may grow into its
knowledge of these things, but they themselves come from some
other source. Physical changes in the grey matter of our brains
may determine the modes of our activity ; but surely they are
utterly powerless to account for that element of volition which
reigns within, and by which a man is not a mere automatic
machine working by instinct, but a living will, owning no
allegiance save to an implanted law of rectitude.
That every effect must have its adequate cause is the central
doctrine of both physics and metaphysics. I for one would
never dispute it. I leave that to the extreme men of the


opposite camp. 1 am prepared to admit the identity of all the
physical forces that are at work within us and around us. I
believe it will be proved that even animal chemistry is only
another form of that one force that pervades matter. I will even
go so far as to say that all muscular movement and all brain
work is but the force stored up in the bread and the meat that
we eat, appearing in another form. But volition is something
of another order. Thought belongs to another category.
Gravity may make the Post-office clock tell the hour and ring
its chimes, but you cannot weigh time by ounces, or measure it
by the yard. What is it that draws a railway train from Ade-
laide to Glenelg— the engine or the engine-driver 1 The
strongest ribs and bars of iron, the most potent fiery furnace
beneath the boiler, are nothing without a mind to direct them.
Beyond physics is the realm of metaphysics, as real though not
so tangible. The gateway to the one may be our Baconian
knowledge of facts ; the doorway to the other is the pearly gate
of faith. “ There are more things in heaven and earth than are
dreamt of in our philosophy.”
(2) A second element of weakness in anti-Christian scientists
is the
LACK OF AGREEMENT AMONG THEMSELVES.
This statement I know is a sharp sword with two edges that
cuts both ways. It touches ourselves as well as them. We
have, however, a right to expect that those who demand of us
that we part with cherished ideas because they, in their scientific
pursuits have proved them false, should clearly state what it is
that has been proved. Whatever is proved we ought to be glad
to accept, for all truth is noble ; but I do not see that I am doing
wrong or am guilty of bigotry if I refuse to accept of mere
guesses. For instance, Dr. Bastian tells us that spontaneous
generation is an ordinary every-day fact, and says that he has
proved it. Tyndall replies that every proof breaks down, and
that the alleged facts proved the very opposite. These two
opinions represent two antagonistic modes of thought among
physical enquirers. Which am I to believe 1 I ask the
question, but the answer is not forthcoming.
Again, on the question as to the ground covered by the Dar-
winian doctrine of evolution, opinions are very perplexing.
Some carry it to extreme lengths, and include in it all material
changes, and see its origin in the gyrations of cosmic dust, from
which as from a chaos all things are evolved. Others say it will
hold only in relation to animate existences ; while others again,
would exclude mankind from the operation of this law. I my-
self heard Sir W, Thomson say, in Edinburgh, that the first
germ-cells may have come hither borne from afar on some
wandering meteorite. This theory of a celestial postman did
not, however, find much sympathy among his auditors, for it
was felt to be a postponment of the difficulty, and not a straight-
forward answer to the questions involved.
Then, as to where are the boundaries of life, we find no concord.
We read in Hseckel, the most thorough-going of all this school,,
that■ “allnatural bodies that are known to us are equally ani-
mated ; that the distinction that has been made between animate
and inanimate bodies does not exist.” In other works we find a


clear distinction admitted and enjoined between the power that
forms the rigid frond of a fern-like silver tree, and the force that
builds up the leaf of a rose-tree ; while Dr. Carpenter leads us to carpenter,
conceive of human volition as a new power, sui generis, intro-
duced by Divine arrangement among the phenomena of auto-
matism.
These are not superficial discords, but radical divergencies,
wide apart as the most opposing theologies. But our catalogue
is not yet exhausted. Dr. Dalton’s famous atomic theory has Atomic . ry
long been taught as a recognised law. It has been put beyond
and above the region of guesses. But we find many modern
scientists who now are viewing it only as a convenient formula
for expressing the fact that elementary substances always
combine in definite proportions. No sooner have we got our
minds face to face with this idea than we are assailed with argu-
ments which go to prove that all matter is force, and that there
are no atoms at all.
Moreover, in recent times the world has been edified by a very
pretty quarrel among our learned advisers in matters scientific. crooked
Mr. Wallace and Professor Crookes are telling the world that
they have found a new force, that is not heat, nor electricity,
nor anything else known to their brethren, but something above
and beyond all such, a force which will talk through tilting
tables, play upon floating accordions, hand books about in the
dark, and carry people to the ceiling of a room so as to write their
names on the plaster. They say that they have proved the
existence of this force as clearly as they and others have de-
monstrated that magnetic currents move the armature of the
telegraph or the drum of a telephone. To this Dr. Carpenter
and many others reply that this is all a delusion, that their co-
workers have been caught in a net of superstitious folly, and are,
to use plain language, the victims of a mild and pitiable insanity.
We do not find fault with students of science because they do
not agree, but we do object to being blamed because we refuse
to surrender cherished and old-fashioned ideas before new ones
are established. We will welcome truths, but must be per-
mitted to be shy in our treatment of hypotheses. We are not
disposed to discard our everyday conveyances, our cabs and
railways, in favor of balloons and flying machines, which, how-
ever clever, are yet untested. We Congregationalists have a
history which tells how we have usually found our place in the
van, not in the rear guard of intellectual effort. Our system,
which is but organised liberty, is more permeable to the light
which in successive ages breaks forth from most unexpected
quarters, than are the stiffer creed-bound ecclesiasticisms of the
world. One article of our unwritten schedule of doctrine is that
truth is many-sided, and that we do not see the whole of a truth
at once. But we are also conservative. Our fragments of truth
are very precious to us, and we hold by them with tenacity. If
other’s can bring us fresh truths from the heavens above our
heads, or from the earth beneath our feet, from the history of
bygone ages or from the facts of social life to-day, from science
or from the Bible, we will gratefully add them to our store; but
we have no wish to count those things jewels of God which
may be only paste. Every crystal is not a diamond of the first
water. Before we buy an ingot from the new El Dorado let us


wait till it be tested. The fire will not hurt the metal, while it
will consume the dross. “All things,” says the proverb, “ will
come to the man who waits.’”
There is a curious legend in German literature which tells
how at one time —when I know not—the race of man possessed
The mirror of truth, the great magical mirror of truth. It was a thing of beauty to
look at —one grand sheet of silvered glass, without a crack,
without a flaw. It came to pass, however, that a company of
envious and playful imps stole this mirror and carried it aloft to
an serial station above the blue firmament, and thence in mischief
let it fall. It fell crashing upon the rocks, and was shivered into
ten thousand fragments. These fragments seemed, however, to
belie their origin, for as people picked them up and looked into
them everything seemed imperfect, and when any of the fine
dust-like particles of the magic glass got into human eyes they
caused a curious perverseness of vision. When, however, any
one of these fragments was fitted into another, a sudden flash of
light revealed their innate fitness for each other. The lessons of
the old story are singularly applicable to our times. Angular
fragments of truth may and do act as irritants in the mental
eyesight. Truths severed from cognate truths may seem like
error and even may bewilder instead of guide the enquirer.
There is, however, a heavenly kinship in truths, for they all
come from Him who is all truth. All beauty is but the skirt of
the robe of His hidden majesty. All righteousness is but the
reflection of His will. He may wrap up and yet manifest His
potent wisdom in the laws of matter and the subtler laws of
mind, but He reveals the deeper truth of His personal self in
the consciousnees of man, and especially in the sorrow of that
Divine man who loved us all.
3. Science must be weak in her attack on Christianity when
we consider the
LOGICAL ISSUES TO WHICH SHE IS DRIVEN.
b^theC o ,' y°u read the writings of Tyndall, Huxley, and most of that
school, you will find that they often indulge in very striking
flights of moral eloquence. This they do even when couching
their thoughts in the language of a professedly Godless atheism.
They appeal to honor and nobleness! They speak continually
of certain actions as good and bad. They constantly employ
such words as “ought,” “right,” “wrong,” and moral responsi-
bility. If they were consistent they would abandon all such
terms, for there is no logical place for the ideas they represent
in any system which denies or ignores a personal God and a
future life. Dissolve the Deity in the laws of nature, blot out
all thought of a world to come, and where I ask is the foundation
for our sense of virtue ! Practical ethics may be expressed in
Beutham. the fitness of things and the principle of Bentham, that the only
test of moral law is the greatest happiness of the greatest number,
but the foundation is gone. Conscience evaporates in a dream.
Obedience to duty is a folly. Self-sacrifice becomes an absurdity.
Why, I ask, should a man feel any claim to give himself up as a
patriot for his country if existence be but a scramble in which
the strongest and the fittest survive 1 Why should a man feel
any shame over any thing whatever, when his whole outlook is
upon a cold and passionless ocean of law T 1


Some of our more advanced thinkers, as they deem themselves,
do not hesitate to take this position, and we thank them for so
doing, Mr. H. G. Atkinson and Miss Martineau in their joint M £. At ’“"! on a, “ l
o i Miss Martineau.
work on the laws of man s nature and development use these
words : “ I am what I am, a creature of necessity ; I claim
neither merit nor demerit;” and again, “ I feel that lam as
completely the result of my nature, and am impelled to do what
I do as the needle points to the pole, or the puppet is pulled
according as the string is pulled. ” “ I cannot alter my will or
be other than what I am, and cannot deserve either reward or
punishment.” Spencer seems to be carrying us to the same spencer,
conclusion, for he says in his book, “ Unless all that is contained
in these pages be sheer nonsense, there can be no such thing as
freedom of the will.” These are but specimens culled out of
many similar sentences. They are very sad. We are inclined
to say with Carlyle, “ Ah, it is a sad and a terrible thing to see ( arlyle '
nigh a whole generation of men and women professing to be
cultivated looking round in a purblind fashion and finding no
God in the universe. ” Nevertheless we cannot but think that
every system, however adorned with the flowers of moral rhetoric,
which treats of the human mind as a result solely of the ordinary
laws of physical causation, which ignores the presence of Deity
on the one hand and man’s free agency on the other, must, if
followed out lead to this one melancholy conclusion. There is
no escape. The stone rolling down hill must roll to the bottom.
Materialism destroys not only religion but morality, and lands
us in the philosophy of Hobbes, who asserted that the only right
was might, and that force was the only law of obligation.
See, then, what a dilemma these men are placed in ! It is one
of their great doctrines to which we also subscribe, that every
effect must have its cause, and that whatever is, existed in some
antecedent form. Whence then came the moral sense and our 7d e “ C of aut"!
instincts of duty, and whence our responsibility ? Conscious-
ness tells us that they are not mere generalizations of experience ;
they rest on an eternal law, or else they are mere words. Whence
did they arise, and who made them ? They are effects in the
biological series which no conceivable physical law can account
for. They have no business in our minds at all if Evolution be
the sole method whence order has arisen out of cosmic nebulae.
Yet they do exist. By them we govern our actions. To them,
and not to the coarser elements of our being, we attribute our
keenest joys and sorrows. In them, and not in the maxims of
political economy, is to be found the closest bond of connection
between ourselves and our fellowmen. It is they, and not our
physique, our animal organization, or our automatic instincts,
that make us men. Manhood itself is grounded in honor. The
man grows as he grows in virtue ; man would perish if he sank
down into what was merely the most splendid human animal.
I admit the very close connection between thought and brain,
between emotion and the state of the blood and nerve tissues;
but I affirm that they cannot even be thought of as identical as
long as one holds to the faintest glimmer of a higher moral
nature in man. This moral nature as well as our muscles
and bones, demands a cause, and as morality involves personality,
the cause of this our manlike soul can be no mere theory of
physical evolution, but a personality—that is, God, the Father


of our spirits, in whom, as Paul said, we live, and move and have
our being. Says Carlyle in his old age—“ The older I grow—
and I now stand upon the brink of eternity—the more comes
back to me the sentence in the Catechism which I learned when
a child, and the fuller and the deeper its meaning becomes,
‘ What is the chief endof man 1 To glorify God and enjoy him
for ever.’ No Gospel of dirt, teaching that men have descended
from frogs through monkeys, can ever set that aside.” And
Carlyle is right.
The moral heroics of our English scientists are, however, to us
a proof of the rebellion of themselves against their own logical
conclusions. As men they are nobler and truer than as physicists.
The spirit within them speaks out in spite of themselves. They
are in themselves witnesses of the falseness of their position.
They illustrate though they would scorn to adopt the noble
words of the poet—
“lf e’er when Faith had fall’n asleep
I heard a voice, ‘ Believe no more.’
And heard an ever-breaking shore
That tumbled in a godless deep,
A voice within the breast would melt
The freezing reason’s colder part.
And like a man in wrath the heart
Stood up and answered, ‘ I have felt.’ ”
In bringing this lengthy address towards a close I trust you
will excuse me if I trespass yet a few minutes on your time by
indicating one or two of the
PROBABLE RESULTS OF MODERN SCIENCE
which will give new strength to some of our old beliefs and
place them on a new foundation.
1. The examination into the nervous mechanism of animal
organisms seems as if it would establish on a physical basis
the fact of human volition ; that is to say, that there is a
power in man which is above chemical laws, which is not nervous
automatism, but which may for want of a better term be called
Will-power. To distinguish the details of its operate n from the
other forces that go to make up man is not easy. The sphere of
volition is both narrower and wider than organised instinct. A
man cannot build a nest like a wren, or construct a honeycomb
like a bee, or follow a scent like a dog ; but he can do much
more, for he can direct his own course of action by deliberate
intention. He can rule himself. An animal is an automatic
machine. So is a man ; but he is more. As a machine he is
not equal to an ant or a beaver, but he is a machine with some-
thing added thereto. Our rivals are divided on this point.
Some are doing their best or their worst, to prove their own
descent from what Carlyle calls “ frog-spawn.” The researches,
however, of Dr. Carpenter, and the experiments of Dr. Ferrier,
as detailed in Carpenter’s “Mental Physiology,” seem to point
in the other direction. Even those who do not agree with this
view of the case are obliged to leave it among the mysteries
which it is better to ignore, for to disprove it is impossible.
2. The grand doctrine of the correlation of physical forces
gives us a new argument for the theological tenet that there is
but one God, who is above all, and through all, and in all things.


Nature is not many, but one. Polytheism becomes scientifically
impossible, for all the forces which fashion and mould the uni-
verse are but modifications of one central energy. The great
“It,” or as we say, “He,” “ weigheth the mountains in scales,
and the hills in a balance. He holdeth the waters in the hollow
of His hand, and taketh up the isles as a very little thing.” It is
true even in a physical sense that “ He clothes Himself with light
as with a garment. ” Light is the messenger of knowledge among
the spheres. We see a star on any particular evening blaze into
sudden brilliancy ; the light of that star tells us that not on that
night, but years ago, perhaps ages ago, that sun “melted with
fervent heat. ” And as we follow the flying waves of luminous
vibration as they pass from realm to realm, from world to
glittering world as far as the universe spreads out its unthinkable
immensities, carrying as they go messages of deeds done in the
far gone past, we can gain some faint semi-material idea of an
Omnipotent One to whom space is not, and to whom time is an Miracles,
eternal now, and “ a thousand years as one day.”
3. Modern scientists are finding for us, and in spite of them-
selves, a place for miracle.
It is a favorite dogma with these men that miracle is impos-
sible, that every miracle must without enquiry be dismissed as
absurd, and cast aside as traditional rubbish. But I reply,
where is the possible limit of God’s force in nature 1 If the
same force can appear in so many changing forms and all these
be changes according to law—if our gaslight be, not in a figure
but in reality, “buried sunshine” let out from its prison of
ages—if the muscular power by which I am now inflating my
lungs and moving my organs of speech be but the transmuted
energy that was once growing in the grass at the Reedbeds before
the butcher bought the bullock that fed on that grass and sold a
part of it into my kitchen to be cooked for the sustenance of my
household— if the tiny bud of a zoophyte blooming in a rock
pool, modest and shy as a violet among the waving fronds of
giant seaweeds, be the same creature that afterwards we re-
cognise in the enormous vulgar flapping jellyfish—if the diamond
be but opaque charcoal, with its particles polarised by a hidden
law of crystallization—if colorless actinic sunrays have power to
call forth life in a seed or to decompose metallic salts, and give
us thereby the portraits of our loved ones—if a solid wire can
transmit the delicate magnetic vibrations which are occasioned
in an iron plate by the tones and timbre of the human voice—if
my intangible mind can by the pulsations of air in this room
awaken in your intangible minds whole trains of thought leading
to, I know not what, courses of action—if, in short, God in
nature can and does do such wonders, where shall we say that
the domain of law shall stop ? Who shall say to the tide-wave
of the Divine working, “Thus far shalt thou go and no further ?”
Who, again, shall say that there are not other laws yet unknown
in the realm of physics ? And if, as I have argued, there be also
a realm of superphysics, who shall presume to tell the laws and
liberties of supernal mind ? When I knew less, and had studied
science less, 1 used to stumble at the miracles of Christianity;
as my knowledge increases I find it impossible to do so. I bow
down in wonder and love before the mystery of God, and thank


Him that by my emotional instincts I can grasp what by mere-
intellect I can never find out by searching.
4. I cannot but note that the old distinction between matter
and force, between the physical and the metaphysical, between
subject and object, is fading away. Physical enquiry is running
out, as it were, on the other side of matter. The natural and
the supernatural shade off into each other.
There are few hard-and-fast lines in the arrangements of the
universe. A tree may differ from an elephant, but the animal
kingdom overlaps the vegetable kingdom when we come to the
simplest forms of both. An oyster may differ from a fish, but
the young of the oyster can swim, and some fishes live an eyeless
life in the mud at the bottom of the ocean. We see plants that
are endowed with rapid motion, and animals that grow rooted in
one spot. Bats may be seen wheeling about like birds in the
gloaming, and birds are to be found on our plains that never
fiy. The rainbow of life, like the rainbow of color has many
hues, but no one can say where one begins and another ends.
And thus it is in the hitherto little-known realms ot physics. If
an atom be proved to be merely a centre of force, it will be
another triumph for the common sense of humanity. It is very
hard to get any one not trained to philosophic thought to take
in the idea of “ substance ” underlying phenomena, and men
have refused to believe in it. What, then, if Science herself
shall demonstrate that—matter is only force ! Our reply will
be that it is a positive relief to our faith to find that the oppres-
sive mass of inert unknown stuff which wise men have posited
in thought, is being dissolved in the precious light of knowledge,
as Cleopatra’s pearl was dissolved in Antony’s wine cup, or as a
seeming solid cloud on an Alpine peak melts in the sunlight.
5 We find here a new foundation for the doctrine of prayer.
Man’s instincts bid him pray. These instincts, says the
godless savant, are babyish, and should be outgrown. .No, say
we. We trust those instincts because they are part of our
nature. We follow them because they lead to a peace which no
stoicism may possibly afford. And now, we are able to add, we
trust them, because we see, though but dimly, how the interac-
tion of will between man and God, between the'finite and the
infinite minds, can find a place in the management of this
world’s affairs. “The deep-seated instincts of humanity and
the profounder researches of philosophy alike point to mind as
the one and only source of power.” If this be so, and if this
mind be, as we have said, the fountain of moral sanctions ;if
this Divine power outside of us be, as Matthew Arnold says, “a
power that makes for righteousness,” then it is just here that we
see how in the vast arrangements of the universe prayer may
and must be dovetailed into the chain of causes. Will-power on
earth plays upon the laws of cause and effect like a musician
upon an organ, and creates new influences, and turns and alters
and controls and holds in check the cold forces of physics.
Shall Will-power be bounded by this earthly plane of being 1
Shall we limit it to what is terrestrial 1 The seen, the known,
is but a small fragment of the universe of God, and into that


small domain this Will-power is obtruded as it were from above.
Who shall say what it means from the upper side of it ? “ The
things which are seen are temporal,” says St. Paul, “ but the
things which are not seen are eternal.” “If ye then,” says our
Lord, “ being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much ifiore shall your Father in heaven give His
Holy Spirit unto them that ask Him.”
I have endeavoured, my brethren, to indicate what I believe is concluding re-
tire real relation between Christian Theism and scientific marks -
enquiry. For myself I see no cause for fear as to the results.
Truth.is great, and must not shrink from being tested. Truth
cannot be hurtful, but let us hope that if there be any incrusta-
tions of error about the truth, such may fall ofi in this process
of testing, when the truth will appear in her own divine love-
liness. That this will be the effect of modern physics i have no
doubt. If Balaam has a mind to curse, a divine force overhead
will compel him to bless. Our foes may think to raise earth-
works against our fortress, but they are, in very deed, erecting
buttresses to uphold the citadel of truth. They are our friends,
not our enemies, and we are their friends in spite of their dis-
belief in our good intentions. Let me close by a figure. 1
remember sitting one evening on Rousseau’s Isle at Geneva
watching the strong tide of the Rhone as it emerges from the
lake. It is transparent, mighty, unutterably blue, and very
beautiful. Some little distance below, the river receives into its
bosom the turbid milky-white glacier stream of the Arve. The
two currents are slow to mingle, and flow on for some time side
by side like discordant and unamiable companions. It is only,
however, for a time, for the old river takes the noisy stream into
its embrace, absorbs it and purifies it. Thus united the streams
flow on, one river, grander in energy and volume than before.
Even so does the stream of spiritual life, of Christian life, come
Ultimate union of
forth from the vast lake of history into which a thousand rills of “ d
thought have plunged as muddy cataracts and there been
filtered ; and as this stream receives the turbulent influx of
modern science, the two run on side by side down the ages helping
each other’s volume, and yet not without some ugly jealousy of
one another and some sulky dislike—Religion saying hard things
of Science and Science despising Religion Ephraim envying
Judah, and Judah vexing Ephraim. The time, however, will
come when the two shall mingle in heart and mingle in life, and
as the world advances to its golden year the song of the old
Hebrew Psalmist will be heard once again as the expression of
the highest life of an intelligent and redeemed humanity—
Praise the Lord from the earth! Ye dragons and all deeps;
Fire and hail; snow and vapor; stormy wind fulfilling His word;
Mountains and all hills ; fruitful trees and all cedars.
Beasts and all cattle ; creeping things and flying fowl;
Kings of the earth and all people; Princes and all Judges of the earth ;
Both young men and maidens; old men and children ;
Let them praise the name of Jehovah, for His name alone is excellent.
And His glory is above the Earth and the Heaven !


THE JESUS OF HISTORY, THE CHRIST OF GOD.
AN ADDRESS DELIVERED AT THE HALF-YEARLY MEETING OF THE
CONGREGATIONAL UNION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AT GLENELG,
ON OCTOBER 8, 1878.
When it was my privilege to address you six months ago from
this chair to which you elected me, I chose as my theme certain
aspects of Theism which are assailed in the modern controversies
of science. I did so in the hope that I might be useful to
Christians of all denominations, and might be of service in
showing how the idea of a personal God is not a relic of the
world’s infantile thought —to be discarded in this age of
enlightenment, but is rather the apex of the crown of all human
speculation, and that to grasp it is the last and brightest result
of all mental efforts to find truth ; for it is a fact in human
experience, whether founded on error or not, that the heart of
man, as Augustine says, “ is ill at ease until it rests in God.”
I need not do more than remind you of a few of the posi-
tions to which we were led, and I do so because to remember
them is essential to a clear understanding of the course of the
argument I wish to unfold to-night.
1, While giving all credit to the scientific method and its
results, we found ourselves utterly unable to track the chain of
material or semi-material causes to its ultimate origin.
2. Among the effects to be accounted for is the existence, in
the cosmos, of thinking beings who are possessed of a moral
nature, and are conscious of the existence of an ethical law
which ilistinguishes actions into right and wrong. As no effect
can contain what is not in th£ cause, this peculiar and unique
phenomenon in the universe must have an adequate cause —that
is, the unknown cause or causes of things must have a moral
element. Mere force may be conceived of as the origin of the
charming complexity of nature, but something beyond force is
required to account for a man’s conceptions of duty, and rec-
titude, and self-sacrifice.
3. Rightness and wrongness do not inhere in things, but are
attributes of personality.
As a consequence to these conclusions there emerges from
the dim vista of our thinking the idea of a “ Someone ”in whom
originates not only the forces of nature, but the law of rectitude.
In the course of this enquiry, and as we touched upon various
facts in physics and biology, we found that the tendency of
modern science is toward a metaphysical unity of forces, and
even matter itself—the ancient crux of all thinkers, from Thales
downwards—is being pushed to the verge of this unknown region
of forceful law in which every atom is in danger of being dis-
solved. Mental Philosophy and Psychology have, of late, fallen
into comparative disrepute ; but if I can rightly divine the signs
of the times, I< expect that the study of metaphysics will arise


from this temporary obscurity into a renewed youth and greater
power than she ever possessed before. The fable of the Phoenix
is yet once more to be exemplified in fact. The scientists of
Germany, England, and America Hieeckel, Draper, Huxley,
and the Comteists —are singing their poeans over the obsequies
of that venerable study. They deem it slain by the wisdom of
modern chemists and physiologists. It has, think they, been
killed by too much light. It is deemed to be dying or dead, and
all that remains is to give it honourable burial in the mausoleum
of history. But lo ! in its grave already there are strange move-
ments. Its ashes give tokens of a resurrection. In losing its life it
is finding it again, and on its uprising the human mind, as a spark
of the Divine essence, will reassert itself in a dignity and a truth-
fulness surpassing all previous conceptions of itself, and all
nature will manifest itself as full of God. “The invisible things
God” will be more clearly seen and understood as “ the things
that are made” are better known and mastered.
But I wish in this address to lead you, if you will allow me,
into regions
MORE DISTINCTIVELY CHRISTIAN ;
and 1 feel that we can advance with all the more security from
having laid the foundations broad and deep in our primal concep-
tions of God. It is a blessed fact that the religious life in the vindication o
soul of man is independent of all these perplexing questions; and ChmtlMUtr *
I doubt not that some of you, my hearers, and that many who
may hereafter read these words of mine, may be conscious of
some feeling of impatience in being thus conducted into that
darkness of questioning which is a region never willingly
entered, or one very rarely explored.
Let me explain my purpose by an illustration. Crossing Knowledge and
the Menai Straits in Wales is a well-known suspension bridge. * '
It spans the abyss 100 feet above high-water mark. Beneath its
fioor pass fair-sized vessels in full sail. Standing on that bridge
on a gusty day the effect is peculiar. It sways from side to side
and rocks in the gale. It seems impossible that it should remain
firm if a tempest should beat upon it. Yet it has stood, and still
stands—a roadway for the passing traveller, for the market-
gardeners going to sell their produce, for little children going to
school, and as a highway for commerce. Often had I stood on
that bridge and admired it as I had passed over it ; but one day
the fancy seized me to go down into those hidden chambers of
darkness where the fastenings of the mighty chains in the rock
are to be seen, and where, even more than in the airy structure
itself, the mind of the engineer who designed that bridge was to
be traced. I came up again and paced the bridge once more.
It seemed to me stronger than ever. Its swayings did not alarm
me. Its rockings were even fraught with a sort of charm. I
knew then that it could laugh at the tempest, and can never
break till the rocks themselves give way. Such a bridge between
God and man is our Christian Theology. Men pass to and fro
with safety, and with little thought concerning it. It rocks in
the breezes of opinion and in the storms of speculation, but still
it stands as the highway which leads to God. Old men and
little children tread it. The untaught and the weak may walk
it. The infantile heathen may pass over it in their obedience


to the Gospel. The busy man of the world, the faithful pastor
amid his flock, the Sunday School teacher in his class may both
commend it and use it; and all this spiritual traffic may and
does exist without any knowledge of, or even curiosity about,
how God has bolted those chains of truth and doctrine from
which the structure depends. If, however, any one should speak
against that bridge, or if our own fears should make us nervous,
or if mere curiosity should impel us, and if, as a consequence, we
should look into the profound philosophic principles on which
our religion is based, our enjoyment of the same will be the
keener, and our gratitude to God the more intense, and our con-
fidence in its stability bo confirmed.
Christianity, whatever may be our opinions about it, is a
GREAT FACT IN HISTORY.
It is the chief, the central, and the most abiding movement in
human thought and progress.
Our customs, our laws, our principles of government, and our
social ethics—all have their origin more or less in Christian
practices and teachings. It cannot be ignored by any honest
enquirer. It must be faced as a phenomenon. When Gibbon,
with his mind filled with grief over the decadence of classic
Rome, began to write its history, he found himself, sceptic as
he was, installed as a historian of Christianity. It demands an
explanation, and that explanation must not be like the famous
attempt of that wily historian to account for it, who deliberately
ignores the primary causes and contents himself with tracking
those which he deems secondary.
Now this fact, this Christianity, may be divided into three
distinct parts—l. The existence of a unique personage in
history called Jesus of Nazareth, who died in early manhood, a
victim of the ecclesiastical authorities of His day.
2. The existence of a singular collection of fragments of
literature written by various members of the Hebrew race,
which, with all their diversities of style, and age, and colouring,
have yet such a common purpose in them and such a common
thread of meaning running through them, that they are together
styled “ the Bible” or “ the Book.”
3. The record of how the human consciousness has grown into
a fuller and ever fuller comprehension of the man Jesus, until
nothing would satisfy the claims that this man made upon the
heart of mankind less than that which was affirmed by the
Councils of Nicea and Chalcedon, which pronounced him to be
the manifestation of Deity in humanity. The pendulum of
opinion has often since then swung to this side or to that, but
religion has been most pure, most potent, and most manifestly a
moving force in human affairs when it has returned to that
singular position, which, say we, can alone give us any true
conception of God and his thoughts, whether in nature or in
providence.
These three divisions of one great fact are with difficulty
separated. I will alter the order in which I have named them
and consider the second before the others. My reason for doing
so is that the chief attack is of course made on the last of the
three divisions, and in order to destroy the result that emerges


in human consciousness from a steady gazing on the man Christ
Jesus, an attempt is made to explain away and invalidate the
sacred records which are our chief source of information and
our chief stimulus to thought. Inspiration is denied to the
writers in any higher form than the common inspiration of
genius. The miraculous element is cast out, a priori , in
obedience to the supposed demands of imperious science. The
prophetic element is deemed an absurdity because it implies
miracle, and the whole mass of the Hebrew literature of the Old
and New Testaments must by some means or other be accounted
for on such wide principles of historic philosophy as will allow
ci’edit to the human mind to indulge the extremest vagaries of
superstition and error, while rising thereby into the grandest
conception of duty and right.
These attacks are accompanied by a vast show of learning, and
with a critical acuteness which makes weaker minds tremble.
Its leaders, styling themselves apostles of ‘‘the higher criticism,”
take our Scriptures, and like a conjurer with his cards, play
astonishing feats of legerdemain. “Whole books are detached
from the places they have hitherto occupied, writings are cut in
two and assigned to different authors.” Hebrew erudition, like
a magnet among steel filings, boasts of being able to separate by
intuition the diverse parts of the Pentateuch and to polarise the
fragments in new arrangements. We are told that Paul did not
write the Epistles to the Thessalonians or the Ephesians, and did
write the Epistles to the Galatians and the Romans, and the
only reason given for the statement is that Baur has lighted
upon the difference in his study of the subjective development
of sacred history. Isaiah could not have written the last half
of his book, nor Daniel any part of his, simply because the
predictions therein contained have been fulfilled ; and as all
predictions are impossible, the books that contain them must be
otherwise accounted for.
THE FOURTH GOSPEL
is, however, the chosen point of attack. That Gospel is
the citadel of our fortress. It contains the most complete
and the maturest expression of Christological doctrine. It
is at once the simplest and the profoundest of all the books of
the Bible. If that stands unassailed, the whole line of bastions
may as well be let alone. If that holds,, everything is safe. It
portrays at once the clearest picture of the man Jesus, and
utters the most daring statements of his divinity. It records
the most stupendous miracles. It possesses the most deep-
reaching philosophy. All Christian doctrine is contained
therein, more fully wrought out than anywhere else. The
incarnation, the atonement, and the resurrection, the connection
of the Christ with the Old Testament, and the bond that unites
his teachings with Greek philosophy, are all clearly enshrined in
that wondrous book. It is the Gospel of an immanent God,
and, as actual fellowship with a person, be he human or divine,
belongs not to reason but to will, affection, and faith—this
Gospel is the Gospel of divine love. In the mountain ranges of
thought, other books may lead us to this or that height, but the
Gospel of John takes us by the hand and says to us—you may
rise yet higher ; and, leading us upwards along dizzy pathways


and over deep chasms of mystery, and on the narrowest brinks
of thought, where reason could not find standing room, conducts
us to that cloudless summit around which play the airs of
paradise, and upon which settles the eternal sunshine, and bids
us in the light whereunto we have reached read and know and
respond to the divine name as a “ God of love.” In this blessed
discovery man reaches the goal. Here he is at rest. Here at
last mind and heart accord. He can go no further, and he
needs to go no further. ‘‘ He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in
God, and God in him. ”
It is this unique character of the Gospel of John that has
made it so open to attack from the army of critics. Now, Ido
most sincerely hold that any Christian ought to be prepared to
accept of truth in any shape if it only comes to him in a proven
form. The cause of God can never be served by a slavish
adherence to exploded errors, however venerable or comforting.
If science establishes anything against our cherished opinions,
let us accept the correction of our creed with thankfulness, If
criticism can purge the Church of any superstitious adherence
to old mistakes in interpretation, the Church ought to be ready
to accept of its teaching. But let us be cautious. It is very
foolish to hunt after novelties. Let us not forget the wisdom
of that wise old Greek, JEsop, as embodied in his fable of the
fox that had lost his tail in a trap, and forthwith proceeded
to descant to other foxes in eloquent language on the general
uselessness of tails to all foxes, and the peculiar advantages of
paying a visit to the trap to get them easily and quickly cut off.
There is a meaning in this fable which should teach us caution,
and it is this—the critics who affect “ the higher criticism” have
come up from the Theistic schools of what is called Absolute
Idealism. Hegel, the great leader of modern Pantheism,
resolved all the universe into the orderly development of
necessity.' With him being and non-being are identical as mere
modes of development of the Absolute. The universe is simply
a bundle of abstractions which become realities by logical
necessity. This man was a mighty master in the realms of
thought, and has had more influence on modern speculation
than any man of our age. The rationalistic school of Germany
is the offshoot in criticism of his philosophy. It would never
have been what it is but for him. He was not a -biblical critic
himself, but he is the father of that philosophy of history, of
which the extreme section of German biblical scholars is one
branch. \
It is well to remember this in our estimate of their work
and that of their imitators in England and America. They
start with a foregone conclusion. They are Hegelians in
opinion, and as such must be judged. They come to the Bible
as a phenomenon in history which must be made to square with
their philosophy. But, like the legendary bed of Procrustes,
their system is too short and too narrow and perfectly unyield-
ing, and whatever is too long to lie thereupon must be cut off,
and what is too short must be stretched to make it fit. They
have no room in their system for the idea of Providence.
Nature, as the expression of a divine mind ; history, as the
theatre for the development, under divine guidance, of a human


life ever pressing on a golden ideal ; sin, as a violation of a
divine law ; redemption, as the arrangement of God for the
restoration of man to more than primal purity ; immortality, as
tne personal hope of any one, are all relegated to the dusthole
of exploded notions. There is no room for them, and they
must be either ignored or explained away, or their existence in
the history of mind accounted for as phenomena. Approaching
the Bible with these foregone conclusions, they must eliminate
from it all that is supernatural, and in order to do this they
must twist and torture the evidence to make it square with their
theory. If the facts will not bend to the mould they must be
ground into powder and squeezed into it, for, whatever may be
said of the facts, the mould must be spared and honoured.
Now, I repeat, no Christian ought to ignore the results of fair
Their position not
and honest criticism ; but I hold that an honest welcoming of ours-
unpalatable truth is a very different thing from being ready to
accept of those conclusions which are forced upon our assailants
by a position which we deny altogether. We are not Absolute
Idealists, as Hegel was ; nor are we Materialists or Pantheists,
as many of his disciples are. We are prepared to maintain and
defend our position as believers in a personal God living in and
through nature, whose thoughts are expressed in the laws of
nature, and whose power is everywhere manifested. God is not
identical with law, nor is law to be magnified into God ; but
God is among us a living, thinking, working, loving personage.
We hold all that makes Pantheism have a semblance of truth,
and much more. We can put the query as we look upon the
universe—
“ The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills, and the plains,
Are not these, O Soul, the vision of Him who reigns ?”
and reply in the words of the same poem—
“ Speak to Him, for He hears, and spirit with spirit can meet;
Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands and feet.”
I say that is our position, and it is so fundamentally different
fi’om that of our assailants that we should never be cajoled into
terror by the way in which they are compelled to contort the
miraculous in Scripture and History. To us it is no difficulty ;
to them it is. Carlyle, among many wise things that he has
said, has in one of his books given us a curious parable, which,
as I give it you in illustration, will carry its own meaning. It
is entitled “ The man standing on his head,” and runs thus :
“ Once upon a time a man, in drink belike, raised a dreadful
outcry at the corner of the market-place that the world was all
turned topsy-turvy, that the men and cattle were all walking
with their feet uppermost, that the houses and the earth at
large, if they did not mind, would fall into the sky ; in short,
that unless prompt measures were taken things in general were
on the highroad to the devil. As the people laughed at him he
cried the louder and more vehemently. Nay, at last he began
objuring, foaming, imprecating, when a good-humoured auditor
going up took the orator by the haunches and softly inverting
his position, set him down on his feet. The which upon per-
ceiving his mind was staggered not a little, ‘Ha ! deuce
take it !’ cried he, rubbing his eyes ; ‘so it was not the world
that was hanging by its feet, then, but I that was standing on
my head. ’ ” The application of the parable needs no comment.


It is not my intention to follow out this line of remark into
detail. Ido not wish to weary you by tormenting you with a
review of the arguments which are hurled against any special
books of the Bible. All I say is, that knowing whence they
come, we are justified in holding our own for the time being.
JESUS, THE CHRIST OF GOD.
Having thus spoken of the way in which the second fact in
Christianity is treated by modern unbelief, let me come back to
the first and third, which I will take together, as they set forth
severally the existence in history of Jesus and His reception by
the consciousness of the Church as “ the Christ of God.”
In my previous address I made a passing reference to the two
great methods of scientific enquiry which have been pursued by
inquisitive human minds in discovering truth. These are the
deductive and inductive. The former, which is the more
ancient, starts from principles and proceeds to apply them to
facts. The latter starts with the facts and thence arises to the
laws which govern them. The former is the more venerable
and the easier ; the latter is the more difficult and at the same
time the more modern. Deduction is more liable to error ;
induction is sure and safe, though somewhat tardy. In thought
we may thus sharply define and distinguish them, but in reality
they cannot be so easily separated. No scientist can avoid
deductions however he may boast of his method as the only one;
no moral philosopher can avoid inductions, for he needs facts to
verify his theories. In fact, wherever moral questions come in
the union is most complete, and cannot be broken by any effort
of thought.
Now, one characteristic of this age of induction is the applica-
tion of this method to the facts which belong to the life of Jesus
of Nazareth. That wondrous life looms as a veritable marvel in
the far distant past. It shone out in the midst of the dense
darkness of an age strange to high conceptions of spiritual
emotion. It was a curious phenomenon in the history of a
people which was ever at war with its own ideals of God and
duty. It was a life which by some means or other has taken
such a hold on the affections of mankind that for eighteen
centuries a vast number of our fellow-creatures have spoken and
thought and acted as if that life were still present-in the world.
It is the foundation on which rests the entire structure of the
doctrine and the practice and the hopes of the Christian Church.
It is the corner-stone to-day of that edifice of ideal grace and
beauty which is being slowly but surely formed out of the con-
flicting actions of mankind. What is that life, and what shall
we say concerning it 1 To our lips there comes at once a ready
answer, for to us that life is the enshrinement of the divine in
the human. But let us for a moment or two consider this
question from an independent position. Let us forget our
wonted homage to our Lord and approach the problem anew,
that we may learn to understand and to sympathise with the
thousands who are compelled to do this by the exigencies of
education in this inquisitive, testing age.
It is a trite saying, but none the less true on that account,
that no great man can be measured and understood in his own


age, and that the judgments which are passed by contemporary
critics are mostly shallow and incomplete. A man who 'makes
his age has nothing around him with which he can be properly
compared. A great mind, or the great work of a great mind,
gains instead of loses by being contemplated from a distance and
looked at with frequency. It requires a constant mental effort
to be conscious of the vastness of St. Peter’s at Rome. Stand-
ing at the foot of the great Pyramid of Ghizeh it is impossible
to realize that each face of (hat mimic mountain contains seven
and a-half acres of masonry. One of Michael Angelo’s statues
or one of Turner’s landscapes will bear to be looked at again and
again, and each time its beauties will be more apparent. The
lives of Socrates and of Lord Bacon among thinkers, and of
Alexander and Charlemagne among potentates, were better
understood by the succeeding generation than by their own age.
This is pre-eminently the case with Jesus of Nazareth. To
men of his day he was but a very wise, very gentle, and very
eloquent talker about the current theology of the Jews. He
moved among them with such a wondrous power of fascination,
that “ never man spake like this man” was the verdict of all who
heard Him ; and likewise of repulsion, for in spite of His
eloquence He was hounded to death. His excellence dazzled all
who beheld it, and yet it was an offence. His doctrine tore to
shreds the most venerable maxims of the authorities, and yet all
felt that it had a ring of truth in it. Around Him was a mass
of political and social corruption ; but His companions, to their
grief and dismay, saw that mere political questions did not
interest Him and that corruption did not sully His serene purity.
He did not preach so much as talk, and they heard Him scatter-
ing His words of wisdom by the wayside, strangely careless, to
all appearances, where the seeds might fall. Unlike all the
pedants of His day, He was a homeless wanderer; He wrote
no books and formulated no system. They saw Him attaching
a few enthusiasts to His person, yet utterly careless of popularity;
and when at the early age of thirty-three He died on the Cross
it would seem as though His day were passed, His light
quenched, and the most lovely human life that had ever been
lived was to be numbered on the list of the martyred victims of
imprudent virtue.
I purpose asking you to accompany me as I endeavour to
represent that life as it manifested itself to the intelligence and
the conscience of the believers at five successive periods in
history, in order that I may enforce the idea that the
COMPREHENSION OF THE CHRIST GREW WITH TIME.
(1). As His contemporaries looked on that life it was to i,
them incomprehensible. To say He was a pious Jewish peasant
who was in advance of his age only gave a fragment of truth.
To say He was a mere martyr was not true, for He voluntarily
gave Himself to death. To say He was the wisest of all
teachers was not enough, for though true His wisdom did not
save Him from being entrapped by treachery. He did no sin,
and yet to say of Him that he was a pattern man was only
giving Him faint praise, for faultless men only win a cold
applause from their sinning brethren. They -who saw Him and
heard Him and loved Him called Him “the Christ,” but they


hardly knew what that meant. It was in their lips the grandest
title they could give Him, and as He accepted it they crowned
Him therewith in their devoted loyalty.
I remember standing one cloudless evening in the Valley of
Grindelwald and looking up at that mighty mass of rock called
the Giant. It rose Irom the green valley into the snowy regions
of the upper air, and its top seemed to sleep in the depths of the
blue sky overhead. I was told it was 10,000 feet high ; I tried
in vain to believe it, and could not. The perfect transparency
of the air was so deceptive that it did not appear much loftier
than many a hill which I had scaled. When, however, I saw it
the next morning at sunrise, encircled by five belts of cloud and
with the peak piercing into the region above them, then I was
enabled better to measure those wondrous precipices. But when
a few days after 1 saw it from fifty miles away, catching the
roseate hues of the setting sun after all the plain -was wrapped
in shade, then, and not till then, did I know the true magnitude
and dignity of the range in which it stands. So it seems to me
has it been with the world’s comprehension of Jesus. His
believing contemporaries loved Him, and, as 1 have said, blindly
called Him “The Christ,” but they were too near to understand
Him.
(2). As, however, His form grew more manifest in the loyal
reverence of the Church, and the memory of His sayings and
doings was becoming dim, a new picture was given to us of
Jesus in the three synoptic Gospels. The writers did not theorise
or give us any opinions of their own ; they simply recorded
facts ; but those facts are unconsciously selected so as to present
the human Christ in such a fashion that something superhuman
is needed to explain and measure His simple yet grand life.
Without knowing it those evangelists were the pioneers in a
process of historic induction, and did a work which is of far
more value than if they had become religious dogmatists.
(3). We pass down the century a few years, and as we read the
Epistles of Paul, and especially the Epistles of Peter, whose
experience as one of our Lord’s companions is more illustrative
of our meaning, we find that the Jesus of the Evangelists is
unhesitatingly measured by a faith which exalts Him far above
all ordinary mundane life, and which yet does not divest Him of
one single attribute of brotherly gentleness and tender wisdom.
His life, His sufferings, and above all His death are but the
preludes to the victory of His resui’rection.
(4). A few years further distant from the sad date of the
crucifixion, and we are again called to look back on this life. It
is the end of the century. The image of Jesus has been stamped
upon the world. Thinkers have begun to philosophise con-
cerning Him. The mystery of His greatness has tempted
ambitious speculation to try to express in human formulae His
unique character. Some have tried to lessen this growing
reverence for the mysterious Messiah, and have called him a
mere man, a wise teacher, and nothing more. Some have so
exalted Him, and become so enamoured of the incomprehensible,
the celestial side of His career, that they have denied His
humanity. The tumult of controversy rages in the Churches.
Who can stay it ? Then, precisely at this juncture, comes forth


from Ephesus the voice of John, the aged Apostle. He knew
Jesus after the flesh. He has known Him in memory as he has
grown into something divine. He knows, too, the meaning of
these clashing opinions, and ere he dies he takes pen in hand
and writes for us his record of that mysterious life. He will
still the noise by narrating anew the old story, and he tells
that story in such a fashion that from that day to this the
Fourth Gospel has been deemed the choicest of the four, the
guide of aspiring thought, and man’s deepest comfort in his
hours of despondency. But let us note that John’s Gospel is
unlike ihat of his brethren in that it was controversial. The T he Fourth Gospel
time had come when the doctrine of the person of Chri t had controversial. v
developed in consciousness, and needed expression. The
heresies of the Ebionites on the one hand and the Cerinthians
and Gnostics on the other witnessed to the need of such a new
manifestation of the Christ as John has given to us. The
previous Evangelists had given fragments of biography. John
describes the person and office of Jesus. The others showed
Him to us ; John demonstrates His authority and power. The
others told their tale, innocent of the great problems attaching
thereto ; John tells the same tale, and in doing so declares on
the one hand that Jesus was the incarnate “ Word of God,
“the same who was in the beginning with God,” who was
“ made flesh and dwelt among us,” revealing the glory of God ;
and on the other that no one among all our loved ones was so
human, so friendly, so intensely one with his brethren as was
that Jesus who wept by the grave of Lazarus, who at his last
supper washed His disciples’ feet, and who when dying thought
so tenderly of His mother.
I am well aware of the controversies which are waged
around this gospel. They do not, however, disturb me, for
though there be certain difficulties attaching to the Johannine
ltd Johannine
authorship, yet the difficulties of any other solution to the authorshi P-
question are vastly greater. Besides, as far as my present
argument is concerned it would make little matter. It would
but move us on a few years, and bid us speak of the fourth
Gospel as the expression of the Christward consciousness of the
middle of the second instead of the end of the first century.
What I wish to unfold to you is how the doctrine of “ the
Christ” grew with time, and as the work of Christ was more
and more understood, became more and more clearly defined
and scientifically apprehended.
With the Gospel of John the canon did not, however, close • The “ Revelation ”
Yet once more did the apostle wing his eagle flight into the ~f st-
realms of God’s mysteries. Very shortly after his gospel, and
perhaps before it, he gave the world his “Revelation of Jesus
Christ.” I know that disputes disturb the opinions of the
modern Church concerning the date of the Apocalypse, but as
the rival date is an earlier and not a later one it does not touch
our argument. In that book, which must be read side by side
with the Gospel, we have the counterpart to the homely story of
the divine man. The “ Lamb upon His throne,’ the victor
champion on the white horse, the Judge of mankind, are visions
of Jesus, which dawned upon the inspired imagination of the
same mind that was even then telling the story of how once he


sat wearied by the well of Samaria, and how again he comforted
Mary and Martha concerning their brother. None knew Jesus
as John did, and he was not afraid to depict side by side the
man living as a brother among men and the omnipotent “ King
of Kings and Lcrd of Lords. ”
It seems to me that an invincible philosophic necessity led the
Church to welcome the last effort of St. John as precisely what
her consciousness demanded. It was the only solution which
would satisfy the facts of that unique life which had shone so
gently in the midst of the turbulent country politics of Galilee.
But the solution was not completed. The mountain had still to
be contemplated from a yet more distant position. The lapse of
time made the obscure grandeur of the Christ yet more palpable.
(5). I cannot now stay to trace the process through the writings
of Clement (which are saturated with this faith in the divinity
of Jesus), and of Irenmus, Tertullian, and Cyprian. Let us
take our position at the beginning of the fourth century
and again look back. The same controversies are raging
as before, but on a vastly wider scale, in different terms, and
with much more learning and acumen. The world is the
theatre. The Emperor himself is the presiding genius of the
discussion. The whole East and West are involved in disputa-
tion, and in the confusion an appeal is made to a General
Council. The assembling of the veterans who met at Nicea
when Athanasius, the youthful deacon of Alexandria, compelled
the world to hear him and follow him, is among the romances
of history. lam not concerned to narrate the story, nor do I
hold that any peculiar and authoritative power adheres to the
decrees of that or of any other Council of fallible men ; but the
voice of that assembly has an undying truthfulness in that it was
the expression of the consciousness of the Church when sufficient
time had elapsed to allow of a just estimate of her mighty
founder. Gibbon makes sport of it as a dispute concerning a
single Greek letter, and that the smallest in the alphabet ; but
that infinitesimal distinction between the two words homoousion
and homoiousion stands as a signpost at the point where two
roads diverge—the one illuminated by a living Christ, the other
thorny with the brambles of rationalism. They were no fools
who adopted that Creed of Nicea ; they were earnest men, who
had but lately come from the fires of persecution, and who were
but too recently saved from the fear of death to have been
spoiled by the sunshine of imperial favor or the subsequent cor-
ruption of the hierarchy. They looked back upon Jesus; they
pondered anew the words of the Evangelists ; they thought
eagerly over all that John had said ; and as the result they
affirmed anew the divinity of our Lord and expressed it in a
theological form as the doctrine of the Trinity. I have no inten-
tion of defending the curious verbiage of the Nicene Creed,
which sounds in our ears like an abortive attempt to express the
ineffable in crabbed words of human speech. Still less do I
approve of the more pronounced form of the doctrine of the
Trinity as it w r as subsequently detailed in that interesting theo-
logical fossil miscalled the Creed of Athanasius ; but both these
creeds are on the side of what we deem to be truth. They tell


’us that Jesus was the Christ, and as such was man and more
than man. They link Him on- to the Deity itself, and glorify
His life as an incarnation of the Divine.
From that day until now the controversy has been always
raging, and never more fiercely than now. The literature of the
life of Christ is more abundant in our age than in any previous
period of history. The inductive spirit of this century has Modern biographic*
seized upon the fragmentary memorials of Jesus, and is en- of JeßUS-
deavouring to reproduce anew the actual man whom all the
world admires and whom nearly all Christendom worships. The
inductive method is in itself incomplete when it comes to deal
with any life-history, and this incompleteness is strikingly mani-
fest in the various pictures of Jesus which have issued of late
from the press. Induction fails in the region of the moral and
the spiritual, but the very failures are instructive and helpful to
those who, guided at once by scientific induction and ethical
deduction, have come to see that the only possible solution of
the mystery is that after which the Nicene fathers were groping,
blinded by excessive light. Strauss, an earnest disciple of the Strauss,
school of Hegel, made the first attempt to give us the real
Christ. His work made a prodigious sensation in its day, but
no cleverness or learning or novelty on the part of the author
could save it from passing into disrepute as a failure, as even its
author confesses, for before he died he gave the world a second
“Life of Jesus,” which contradicts every part of the first.
German scholars might recall a long list of such works which are
little known in England, but the same cannot be said of the
work of that brilliant Orientalist, Renan, which is so charming
in its style and so graphic in its simplicity that it has been read lle " !U1 .
as a novel by hundreds of persons who never dream of opening a
theological book. That the sparkling story of Jesus in the
character of a Galilean Frenchman does not cover the facts of
the case is notorious from the very small effect that it has had on
the current of opinion on this subject. 1 need not do more than
recall to you the names of Young. Beecher, Dixon, Parker, Be6 o'f£ r ar°*" e ’
Hanson, and Farrar, to say nothing of hundreds of printed
sermons and essays which affect to deal with “ the Christ of
history,” to show how fascinating is this theme to the thought-
ful minds of our age. There are two books, however, which
stand forth as singular in their freshness and originality which
demand especial reference. The one is the work called “ Ecce
Homo,” and the other, which is too recently published for its
influence to be properly gauged, and which bears the title “Philo-
christus,” and is, like the former, the production of an anony-
mous author. Both these books are very incomplete, but as far
as they go they have a ring of beauty about them which will save
them from oblivion.
The life of Jesus has, however, yet to be written—if indeed it The “ Life of Jesus’*
be not impossible to accomplish the task so to write it as to yet t 0 be writte “-
satisfy the developed consciousness of a piety which has been
nurtured in the inductive spirit of our age. It may be that
some gifted and sanctified genius may arise who may do for the
thinkers of Christendom what Farrar has so beautifully accom-
plished for average readers. Such a work—the result at once of
profound scholarship, honest enquiry, fervent piety, and deep
insight—would do more to still the hubbub of criticism than


aught else I can conceive of, for it would express the Christward
consciousness of our age, which with all its intensity has as yet
no adequate embodiment either in the creeds of councils or the
narratives of scholars. Meanwhile, my brethren, the records of
the human career of Jesus are in every hand, and they possess a
new meaning in the conviction that He abideth ever. We prize
the book because in it we find what leads us to the living Christ.
We glory in our Christological theology because we know that
however feeble or however far-reaching may be our creeds or our
thoughts He is greater than our creeds and larger than our
thoughts. Piety is not to be measured by dogma. Let us not
jeeK the living among the dead. Creeds and systems, decrees
of councils, and philosophies are but the graves in which different
ages have lovingly entombed the crucified one ; but as He burst
the bonds of Joseph’s sealed sepulchre on the first glad Easter
morning, so has He again and again arisen from theological
graves and moved about among those who have waited and
watched for him as a living presence. He, the living Christ, is
the highest expression of that “ power that makes for righteous-
ness.” He is the hope of the world. In Him and in Him alone
can the human spirit in its hour of weakness or of strength find
rest. In Him and in Him alone are the dreams of humanity,
groaning amid sorrow and sin, changed into hopes. The name
of Jesus is God’s “Amen” to the manifold yearnings of the
world for something better, something purer, and something
more enduring than our cribbed and cabined life can afford. The
universe is an iron prison of destiny and law if there be no
Christ to explain it by His presence ; but all nature becomes a
temple of prayer filled with the loving radiance of a personal
God, when we grasp the truth that He, our Lord, is the image
of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation, in whom
dwelleth all the “ fulness of the Godhead bodily.” “ Christ, my
Lord,” sings St. Gregory Nazienzen—
“ Christ, my Lord, I come to bless Thee;
Thou who knowest do beginniug;
Light of the eternal light;
Thou the darkness hast dissolved,
And the outward light created,
That all things in light might be.
Thou enlightenest man with reason
Far beyond the creatures dumb;
That light in thy light beholding,
Wholly light he might become.
Thou has set the radiant heavens
With the many lamps of brightness,
Filling all the vaults above,
Day and night in turn subjecting
To a brotherhood of service
And a mutual law of love.”
K. K. THOMAS, PRINTER, GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE.








