

he. j£.
ONE PENNY.
GOD
PUNISH ENGLAND;
Can You Give Me a Job?
The War that will
Come After Peace.
German Hate and Lust Undiminished by Defeat.
ROBERT BLATGHFORD,
Editor of ‘ ‘ The Clarion. ’ ’
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney,
1915.


WHAT ARE YOU DOING FOR
THE WAR?
The illustrated penny supplements to the
“Statesman and Mining Standard” are is-
sued primarily to kill German trade in Aus-
tralia. We will endeavour to root out the
German cum Australian cum English firms
existing in this country for the purpose of
extending German trade after the war.
There is a subtle influence amongst us on
behalf of the German trader; but the indi-
vidual who is willing to buy and sell with
this Nation of Assassins after the war de-
serves to be driven out of every Club, Cham-
ber of Commerce, and Exchange in Aus-
tralia.
Our cheap pamphlets are issued under
actual cost in order to insure wide pub-
licity among every class. Our belief is that,
it is by such methods that the public, the
daily press, and finally the politician will be
brought to see the folly of permitting Ger-
man goods to be sold in this country after
the war unless under a heavy tax, or of al-
lowing German Houses to continue business
in Australia on equal terms with our own
people.


PEEFACE.
If we are to hold and consolidate the liberty and
the security we are fighting for, and for which we
shall, even if victorious, have to pay such a bitter price;
if we are to develop the power and weld into unity our
Empire, we must continue to be Britons, and patriotic
Britons, after the war is over. There must be no
more cosmopolitan sentimentality. The time for the
“Brotherhood of Man” and the “Solidarity of Nations”
is not yet. We must make the Empire safe; we must
knit more closely and still more closely the bonds of
our alliance with France and Kussia and Japan. We
must redeem brave Belgium, and ensure her safety from
attack, and — we must make no political, commercial,
industrial, or fiscal truce with Germany. All this we
know, and now it is time we realised that as it has
been in the past so it will be in the future. Though
she be completely defeated in this war, Germany will
begin again to plot and scheme and arm. Her envy
and her hatred, her greed and her lust for domination
will not be diminished by defeat. They will be in-
creased, and they will be reinforced by an implacable
desire for revenge. If we admit German goods, and
German labour, German finance, German intrigue, and
German spies; if we allow her to grow rich again by
trading with us or our Allies; if we treat her commer-
cially and fiscally as generously as we treat our Allies
and other nations, we shall be playing into her hands
and helping her to arm and to intrigue against us. . . .
We built a great Navy to keep the Huns, our bitterest
enemies, out of Britain. The Navy has kept them out.
Are we, when the war is over, going to let them in?
If we allow a parcel of doctrinaire economists or of
unpatriotic sentimentalists to muddle up the issue the
German invasion will succeed. And every German who
lands here, or with whom we trade, will be an enemy
and a spy. We are Britons. We do not trust the
Germans. We do not want the Germans. We will not
have the Germans. Before we begin to talk about let-
ting Germany down lightly, let us ask ourselves how
she will let us down if she wins.


GOD PUNISH ENGLAND:
GOD PUNISH ENGLAND: CAN YOU GIVE
ME A JOB.
ROBERT BLATCHFORD,
Editor of “ The Clarion.”
From the “Daily Dispatch.”
Instead of greeting as the Germans do with
“Good morning; God punish England, 7 ’ we Britons
ought to say, “ Good morning. Have you had the
war brought home to you?’’
Let us talk about the war.
Let us talk about the war, not as Liberals or
Tories, as workers or employers, as Churchmen or
Nonconformists, as Irishmen, Scotsmen, Welshmen,
Colonials, or Englishmen, but as Britons. When
we entered upon this war we chose patriotism and
cast out partisanship. We did more than that,
more than some of us knew; we took a course
which tacitly enlisted us as patriots for good
and all, after the war as well as during the war.
Why? Because the danger to our Empire will
not cease when w r ar ceases.
An American admiral, whose really magnificent
and inspiring name is Tiffany Bowles, was kind
enough to state on his return from a visit to Ger-
many that “a German invasion of England must
not be regarded lightly.” I agree whole-heartedly
with Admiral Tiffany Bowles, though I don’t
mean what he means. The German invasion of
Britain will not be attempted until the war is
over, until “peace breaks out,” But it is not
to be regarded lightly, for it will be attempted
then, and it will be successful unless we begin
to organise our defences now.
War after Peace.
Good morning. Have you had the war brought
home to you? I wonder how many of us realise
that the w r ar with Germany will not be over when


CAN YOU GIVE ME A JO^?
terms of peace are signed. Speaking frankly,
I do not believe that war between Germany and
the Allies will ever cease. That is why I say
that this war which has compelled ns to become
patriots will compel us to remain patriots.
For many years the British have been the least
patriotic people in the world. We have been
broken up into factions and schools and cliques
and parties, into sects and castes and classes. We
have wrangled about wages and profits and privi-
lege; we have diluted our nationality with all sorts
of political, philosophical, and economic nostrums,
the most dangerous of which are pacifism and the
cult of pseudo-cosmopolitanism. The first great
peril that has come upon us has demonstrated the
folly and the rottenness of that division. To save
our souls and our skins we have been obliged to
throw the lumber overboard; we have had to
unite; we have had to force our Government to
govern; we have had to become patriots; we have
had to remember that we are and must be
Britons.
If we are to hold and consolidate the liberty
and the security we are fighting for, and for which
we shall, even if victorious, have to pay such
a bitter price; if we are to develop the power and
weld into unity our Empire, we must continue
to be Britohs, and patriotic Britons, after the
war is over. There must-be no more cosmopolitan
sentimentality, , The time for the ‘ ‘ Brotherhood
of Man 7 / and the “Solidarity of Nations” is not
yet. We must make the Empire safe; we must
knit more closely and still more closely the bonds
of our alliance with France and Russia and Japan.
We must redeem brave Belgium and ensure ' her
safety from attack, and—we itiust make no poli-
tical, commercial, industrial, or fiscal truce with
Germany
PREY OF THE HUN.
“None But Ourselves Can Save Us.”
I do not hate the Germans; but I cannot trust
them. I am not suggesting retaliation; lam only
asking for prudent measures of self-defence. In
the past Germany has used the other nations, Bri-
tain especially, as tools for the enlargement of her
5


•GOD PUNISH ENGLAND:
commerce and for the development of her military
power. She has flooded Europe and America
with cheap goods and cheap labour; she has sent
into friendly nations whole armies of military and
commercial spies. She has picked the brains of
friendly peoples. She has intrigued in every Court
and embassy and bank and office and dock and
shop and factory, with the purpose of sowing
jealousy and suspicion among her rivals. She has
spared no labour and hesitated at no treachery in
the work of her own aggrandisement, and she has
all the while been planning and perfecting mur-
derous armed attacks upon her neighbours.
All this w r e know, and now 7 it is time we realised
that as it has been in the past so it will be in
the future. Though she be completely defeated
in this war, Germany will again begin to plot and
scheme and arm. Her envy and her hatred, her
greed and lust for domination will not be dimin-
ished by defeat. They will be increased, and they
w 7 ill be reinforced by an implacable desire for
revenge.
lf we admit German goods, and German labour,
German finance, German intrigue, and German
spies; if we allow her to grow rich again by
trading with us or our Allies; if we treat her com-
mercially and fiscally as generously as we treat our
Allies and other nations, we shall be playing into
her hands and helping her to arm and to intrigue
against us. The Germans have been cunning, and
we fools. Are we to resume our respective roles
when “peace breaks out”? She will envy and
hate us, and will plot and scheme to hurt us. Are
we going to trust her? Are we going to help her?
Shall we ever again allow twaddle about Free
Trade and the solidarity of nations to drag us
into such a horrible and deadly trouble as that
we are in to-day? We built a great Navy to keep
the Huns, our bitterest enemies, out of Britain.
The Navy has kept them out. Are we, when
the war is over, going to let them in? If we
allow a parcel of doctrinaire economists or of un-
patriotic sentimentalists to muddle up the issue
the German invasion will succeed. And every
German who lands here, or with whom we trade,
will be an enemy and a spy.
None but ourselves can save us. Let the British
6


CAN YOU GIVE ME A JOB?
people get the essential facts well into their blood,
and the invasion will fail. What are the essen-
tial facts'? They are these. We do not trust the
Germans. We do not want the Germans. We
will not have the Germans.
Let us perpetuate our friendship with the Rus-
sians, the French, the Japanese. Let us help
those three great nations in every way possible.
Let us develop our splendid Empire. When the
Kaiser heard of the attack on the Dardenelles,
he said, “We must not allow’ Odessa to become
a second Hamburg.” We helped to make Ham-
burg. Why should we help to make another Ger-
man port? I write at length because I want to
make the issue clear. What do the Germans mean
when they say God punish England?” Let us
say, “Good morning. Have you had the war
brought home to you?” Let us bring it home,
this war, each to his own heart and his own under-
standing. Let us be wary and wise and convince
ourselves that we do not want a German invasion,
and that we will not have it. No Germans need
apply!
JOHN BYRAM’S AXE.
Story of Stern Chase and Its Moral.
I believe that in some of my previous contri-
butions to these columns I have alluded to my
friend John Byram. John was a great carpenter,
and what he did not know about lock-gates was
not worth the tail of an earwig. Talking to me
one morning about his craftmanship, he
told me the following story:—
“I’ve made moore lock-gates than any man in
Cheshire. Does that surprise you? And I’ve
earned bigger money. Could you guess the biggest
price I’ve earned. No. I’ll tell you. A pound
an hour. One pound an hour. That’s as true
as the devil’s a lawyer. Haw, haw! I once worked
for an old cheat an’ bully called Simperkin. And
I made big money. And he had to pay it, and
it drove ’im looney wild. «
“So one day he come flusterin’ an’ blusterin’
into the shop and found fault with my plans. He
did, sure as March is windy. He had the cheek
to —find —fault —with —my plans. Do you know
what he said? You won’t believe me. He said


GOB FUN IS II ENGLAND:
I was as ignorant as a hen, and as stupid as an
armadillo. He did. And then he kicked the glue-
pot and said I was a liar.”
John stood up and beamed on me. He had at
the moment the face of Mr. Pickwick. As he
seemed to be waiting for me to speak I said,
“ What did you say, John?”
John did not change his benevolent expres
sion. He answered, “I said nothing.”
“Nothing, John? But ”
“He Hopped It.”
“I never,” replied John Byram, “said one
word. No. Not a word did I give ’im back.' ’
Here a green light sparked in John’s eyes, and he
continued. “I took up my broad axe and I
chased that old divvle round the village for three
days and three nights. Haw, haw, haw! He
ran like a goat.
“No. I didn’t catch ’im. ’E got through th’
winder in a cow mistel an’ I couldn’t squeeze
through. An ’he got away in a baker’s cart. He
stayed away for a week. An’ then ’e walks into
the shop where I was workin’, an’ says, ‘Byrara,*
’e says, ‘I want to apologise. I was hasty,’ 'e
says. And that was true. He went through that
winder as hasty as a rat with a ferret at his
tail. ‘I want to withdraw them words,’, ’e says;
and then I spoke to the dirty scrub. I says “Mr.
Siraperkin, ’ I says, ‘l’ll give you three God-a-
mercy seconds to ’op it,’ I says, ‘while I gets ray
axe. ’ Haw, haw, haw. He ’opped it. He ’opped
like a tip-cat. And ’e never come nigh me agen. ”
John smiled softly, then he said, “I didn’t chase
the brute that time. I only wanted for to give
’im a hint. ”
I have repeated this radiant reminiscence of
John Byram’s because I think that John’s kind of
hint is exactly the kind of hint we ought to give
our German comrade when he comes across the
blue water to England and says, “Good morning.
I haven’t managed to murder you this time. God
punish England. Can you give me a job?” There
it is. Mr. Byram’s repartee would be so absolutely
right. “Give you a job? Where’s my axe?”
We must be wary also of our anti-British fellow-
countrymen. These fellows seem to hate England
8


CAN you give me a job?
as starkly as any German. Directly the war is over,
even before it is over, these lovers of exotic hu-
manity will be falling on the neck of brother Hun
and weeping tears like marbles down the back
of his blood-stained tunic. “Forgive and forget,”
“Kiss and be friends,” “Don’t humiliate Ger-
many,” I can hear them bleating now. Let the
'Germans begin the forgiving. Imagine Kluck,
Hindenburg, and Tirpitz singing “God Save the
King.” As for retaliation or humiliation, we
don’t want that. All we want is to give the Huns
hint.
PRO-GERMAN FACTS.
No Anti-German Alliances With Other States.
Which reminds me that I promised some fur-
ther language to our friend John Smith. One
of the pet excuses of Germany, used freely by pro-
Germans in this country, is the plea that King
Edward VII. roused German suspicions and hos-
tility by his attempts to ring Germany in with
alliances. A reference to facts and dates will
squelch this falsehood completely. The alliance
between Germany and Austria was made in 1879,
At that time there was no understanding between
France, Eussia and England. In 1882 Italy was
persuaded to join Germany and Austria and to
form the Triple Alliance. This left Germany
with two allies, and France, Britain and Eussia
with none. Fourteen years after the Triple Alli-
ance was made, Eussia and France became allies.
That was in 1896. Britain remained isolated until
1904, when King Edward established the Franco-
British Entente. The British Entente with Eussia
came later. Now, Mr. Smith, if <any Power should
have been jealous and suspicious it was surely
Britain. Germany made the Triple Alliance twenty-
two years before we made the French Entente.
No “Secret Diplomacy.”
And, remember, also, that while the Triple Alli-
ance of Germany, Austria, and Italy was a real
alliance, and while the Franco-Eussian alliance
was a real alliance, Britain’s entente with
Prance and Eussia was no more than
a friendly understanding. King Edward,
therefore, did not make any alliances at
9


GOB PUNISH ENGLAND:
an And the result of the “ring of alliances”
8 , to have drawn round Germany was
only to place two allies and one doubtful ally
against three German allies.
The anti-British Briton is very fond of dark and
mysterious hints about “secret diplomacy.” He
su Sg es t s that we were drawn into war by secret
agreements. Well, that is not true. As a matter
ot fact, we had no agreement as to helping
h ranee, and up to the last minute our Govern-
tnent would not promise any help to France. When
b ranee asked what we should do if Germany at-
tacked her, Sir Edward Grey answered, as he tells
us in his own statement, “I said that we had
come to the conclusion in the Cabinet to-day that
we could not give any pledge at the prseent time.”
That was on duly 31. Obviously, then, Britain
was not bound by any treaty to help France.
And now let us investigate one of the pages of
t 'Monkey,” and see what we shall see.
In 1912 Lord Haldane went on a wild-goose chase
to Berlin. He went to try conciliation; to try
to come to some kind of understanding which
should ease the strain between Germany and Bri
tain. Lord Haldane seems to have come back
no wiser than he went. At any rate, he seems to
have brought back an impression that Germany
would moderate her naval programme if Britain
would make certain promises. The British Cabinet
drew up the following memorandum, and sub-
mitted it to Germany:—
The two Powers being naturally desirous of
securing peace and friendship between them
England declaims that she will neither make’
nor join in, any unprovoked attack upon Ger-
many. Aggression upon Germany is not the
subject, and forms no part of any treaty un-
derstanding, or combination to which England is
now a party, nor will she become a party to
anything that has such an object. ’
Alluding to the above memorandum Mr \s-
quith, in his speech at Cardiff last October * said •
But that was not enough for German states-
manship. They wanted us to go further. They
asked us to pledge ourselves absolutely to neu-
trality in the event of Germany being engaged in


CAN YOU GIVE ME A JOBi
war —and this, mind you, at a time when Ger-
many was enormously increasing both her aggres-
sive and defensive resources, [and especially
upon the sea.
I suggest to you, Mr. Smith, that the offer
made by Britain in the above memorandum and
refused by Germany is evidence of a desire for
peace on our part and of an intention to make war
on the part of Germany. The German demand,
for our neutrality in. all cases, was made two years
before the war. What does it point to, if not
to a contemplated attack on France and Russia f
The Pro-German Way.
A favourite trick of the anti-British Briton is
to discredit every statement made by the Allies,
and to credit every statement made by the enemy.
You know what I mean, Mr. Smith. A report of a
Hunnish atrocity in France or Belgium is received
with a sniff of scorn. It is a wicked invention
of the wicked French or Belgians, or the still more
scoundrelly English. But a German complaint of
Russian barbarity is waved on high as if it were
‘ ‘ the scarlet banner. ’ ’ That sort of thing need
not deceive a rabbit. We know that the German
battle cruisers bombarded Scarborough and Hartle-
pool. We know that German Zeppelins dropped
bombs on Yarmouth and Lynn and the Norfolk
villages. We know that German submarines tor-
pedo merchant ships without warning.
We know that British men, women, and children
have been killed or injured by these acts. These
things which we know of our own knowledge are
enough to stamp the Germans with infamy., We
know that none of our men were saved in the
naval action off the coast of Chili. We know
that in the Falkland Islands battle our sailors
saved the Germanns. We know that in the fight
off the Dogger Bank, when our boats were picking
up German sailors out of the sea, a German aero-
plane dropped bombs upon them. Our dear com-
rades the Huns began as they have gone on.
When the French sent home the German Ambas-
sador in a special Pullman-car train, the Boches
stole the train. Ponder these facts, Mr. Smith, and
get ready for Chadband and Stiggins and Mae-
Pecksniff against your next meeting.
11


GOD PUNISH ENGLAND:
We are Britons. We do not trust the Germans.
We do not want the Germans. We will not have
the Germans. Before we begin to talk about let-
ting Germany down lightly, let us ask ourselves how
she will let us down if she wins. My word!
That Interview.
I should like to give thanks for the cheery
words of Sir John French as reported by a cor-
respondent of the Havas Agency; but I cannot
place implicit confidence in that interview. In the
fiist place, there is the name of the agency —the
Havas Agency! And then in the first paragraph
of the report the interviewer makes a statement
which would never have passed Sherlock Holmes,
although it has passed the Censor. Perpend:
My interview took place in a large and well-
lighted room, the sole furniture of which was
a huge table spread with maps and some arm-
chairs.
Mow, does that sound credible? Does it sound
natural? Sir .John French is one of the tidiest
soldiers in the Army. Is it like him to spread
his armchairs on the table? Observe, the inter-
viewer says there was nothing else in the room.
There was nothing spread on the table besides the
armchairs and the maps. Nothing that might
have afforded a plausible explanation of the inter-
viewer’s amazing statement. I simply decline
to discuss that interview. Let the world wait.
1 am always rather shy of printing letters, as
it seems hardly playing the game. But the fol-
lowing letter will be its own apology
PBEJIJDICE OE PATRIOTISM?
Sir, —I am a continual reader and a great
admirer of your articles in ‘ ‘ The Weekly Dis-
patch. ”
I read in the number of March 14 that you
consider there is a probability of the war lasting
two years. I beg you, therefore, to give the
following case publicity:—
I am an Englishwoman, a professor’s daugh-
ter, thoroughly well educated, fluent French and
German, and diplomee from Leipzig Conserva-
toire. I have been teaching many years in Ger-
many, but last November was forced, through
the war, to return to England. In less than
12


CAN YOV GIVE ME A JOB?
three days my teaching and my possessions were
completely gone (it being impossible to bring
anything but hand luggage), and I was face
to face with the problem of —a new start in'
life!
I fully expected to find over here work, suit-
able work, but to my intense amazement have
everywhere been refused employment owing to
the fact that I had earned my living hitherto in
Germany! In one case a servant’s place was
offered me! and I can but ask, Is this all that
England can offer to her educated but ship-
wrecked sisters? The result of this strange
and short-sighted policy can but be that gentle-
women, such as I, must at last appeal for
charity, and thus become a burden to the coun-
try, It is no question of kindness, but of abso-
lute justice.
I feel convinced that when this latter is laid
. fairly and squarely before the public the women
of England will undoubtedly, with their love of
justice and fair-play, lose their prejudice against
their stricken sisters from abroad, and, by giv-
ing us the employment we so earnestly seek, will
prove their true patriotism.
A.E.B.
l«have the address of the writer of that letter.
Her case seems a very hard one. Surely some-
thing could be done to help her.
The Truth About the Workers.
During the war two charges have been re-
peatedly brought against the workers. One, that
they did not realise the seriousness of the war;
two., that they lacked patriotism. I tried to show
last week why the workers did not understand the
national danger. I shall stress that explanation
now. Also I shall make it plain , if I can, why a
great many working men are not patriotic. I
do this because, as I said before, at a time like
this, there is urgent need for mutual understand-
ing between the classes. I should be a disloyal
citizen and a dishonest witness if I did not tell
the whole truth, as far as I know it, or if I leaned
more to one class than to another. The time has
come when it is imperative we should know the
13


GOV PUNISH ENGLAND:
facts, even if our pride and our prejudices have
to suffer.
Few journalists and few politicians come from
the ranks of the workers. The consequence is that
those who make laws, or make speeches, or write
articles on industrial affairs, seldom understand
the workers, and, very naturally sympathise more
with their own class. Working folks know this
very well. They know that in any big industrial
war the bulk of the Press and the sympathies
of the classes are against the workers. During
the most recent of the big strikes the present Gov-
ernment made a fatal mistake of employing sol-
diers as blacklegs. It would be difficult to make
an average editor, leader-writer, or M.P. under-
stand the strength and bitterness of resentment
which that action raised in the minds of the whole
working-class population of Britain. But it should
not be difficult for anyone to believe that the em-
ployment of soldiers as blacklegs did not increase
the popularity of the Army nor the confidence of
the people in Government and the governing
classes. Is it necessary to point out that such a
policy does not make for patriotism among the
people? I understand these things better than
“The Times.” I know better where the shoe
pinches: I have worn it.
PATRIOTISM’S DECAY.
The Evil Influence of Pacifist Cant.
There has of late years been a decay of patri-
otism, and it has not all been the fault of un-
sympathetic Pressmen and ill-informed politicians.
It has been very largely the fault of the unhappy
political philosophers we call pacifists. These paci-
fists have been assisted in their work by a number
of anti-patriotic cranks among the Socialists and
Labour leaders. For years the workers have been
told not only that war is wicked and preventable,
and expenditure on armaments foolish waste, but
also that patriotism is a mean and narrow senti-
ment. They have been taught that they must
not love or defend their own conutry, but must
love all men equally well, and must sacrifice nation-
ality to “the solidarity of nations,” The day
U


CAN YOU GIVE ME A JOB?
before war was declared the Bishop of Lincoln
said: “For England to join in this hideous war
would be treason to civilisation and disaster to
our people.” In February, 1914, the “Daily
News ’ ’ said: ‘ ‘ The German bogey has vanished,
and even the anti-German Press is silenced. Its
occupation is gone. . . . We know that neither
the Kaiser nor his people aim at aggression.” On
New Year’s Day, 1914. Mr. Lloyd George made
the arresting statement that “this is the most
favourable moment for twenty years to overhaul
our expenditure on armaments.” Norman Angell,
in his book, “Europe’s Optical Illusion,” made
the phenomenal discovery that ‘ 1 the ‘ German ’ and
the ‘ Englishman ’ are pure abstractions, and do not
really exist. ’ ’
Their orators and writers told the workers that
if they would unite they could stop war. They
were advised in a war crisis to resort to a general
strike. They were given to understand that ‘ ‘ our
German comrades” would help us to forbid war.
Said Mr. ,1. R. Macdonald: “Next year, on Ger-
man soil, we should declare in the name of the
workers here that the people of England are for
peace, and that the people would see to it that
no section of society should launch us into war.”
Voice of the Crank.
That remarkable Briton, Sir John Brunner, said
at the time I was raising the “German scare”:
“As a commercial man, I declare emphatically
that I should infinitely prefer the protection of
recognise,d international law to the protection af-
forded to us by our Navy. ’ ’ About the same time
the “Nation” illuminated the controversy on war
by declaring that: “On our side the Liberal and
Labour Parties, on the German side social de-
mocracy, with its 20 per cent, of soldiers in the
German Army, will stop both it and the growth
of European armaments.” Mr. Arthur Henderson,
leader of the Labour Party, congratulated the
Prime Minister of Australia, who had “declined
to be a party to a panic which had been engineered
for political purposes.” Mr. Keir Hardie told
Newcastle: “If the worst comes to the worst,
I am prepared to advocate on this side, white our
15


/ /
V ' I A r ‘ ' / j ‘
C f \ w / cx j / L
GOD PUNISH ENGLAND:
German comrades do the same on the other side,
that we take matters into our own hands and make
war impossible by declaring that if war is being
engineered, we shall stop the supplies which make
war possible. ’ ’
That kind of tosh was being served up to the
workers year after year, while Germany was arm-
ing. And it was not being served up by the cranks
only. It had the backing of the whole Liberal
Press. It had the approval of most of our Cab-
inet Ministers. And it was hardly ever challenged
by any statesman of influence on the Opposition
side. It went on up to the hour when war
was declared. A good deal of it is going on yet.
And statesmen and journalists, whose business it
is to understand and guide the people, wonder why
the working classes are not patriotic, and why
they do not realise the justice and the gravity and
danger of the war.
There is a small but blatant section of the
Labour Party who persist even now in their
efforts to undermine the patriotism and pervert
the minds of the workers. The term pro J German
would be a misnomer for these men. They are not
pro-German, they are anti-British. Perhaps they
cannot do very serious mischief, but they are
doing all they can, and the country is paying
some of them for doing it. Such decadents are
“the cankers of a calm world and a long peace.”
When the war is over and their voices become more
generally audible, the people will wonder why it
ever stood them, and, wondering, will snuff them
out.
Uniform With This:
QUEEN ELIZABETH AND HER
GERMAN GARDEN.
COLLAPSE OF THE BRITISH
GOVERNMENT.
In the Press:
THE GERMAN MUST GO.
64pp. Threepence.
July 1. 1915.
*
