

Box 1/
' ' . ' . « ',.• —— ;
f '
(j/ -,■■ /
God the Source of Growth.
A SERMON
PREACHED IN ST. PAUL’-S CATHEDRAL,
ON
St. Barnabas’ Day, June iith, 1885,
AT THE
Consecration of tije &eb* M. fijornijill ®efifcer,
to tije Bishopric of Brisbane*
•!>’,
BY
J. W. SHEPARD, M.A.,
Master in St. Paul's School, attd Lecturer of Si. AndrrPs, Holborn.
London:
EDWARD BUMPUS, 5 and 6, HOLBORN BARS, E.C.
1885.
Price Threepence.
.




God the Source of Growth.
A SERMON
PREACHED IN ST. PAUL’S CATHEDRAL,
St. Barnabas’ Day, June iith, 1885,
AT THE
Consecration of tije Ecb. M. Cfjornfjtll SHrfrtjcr,
to t!)e 13isijopric of iikisfcane.
J. W. SHEPARD, M.A.,
Master in St. Paul's School, and Lecturer of St. Andrew's, Holborn.
London:
EDWARD BUMPUS, 5 and 6, HOLBORN BARS, E.C.
1885.




HIS Sermon, written without any thought of publication,
is now printed in compliance with the request of the
Bishop of Brisbane. In preparing it for the press, a few
corrections have been made, and one or two sentences added.
Some paragraphs that are now printed were omitted in delivery.
The proceeds of the sale of the Sermon will be given to the
Bishop of Brisbane’s Mission Chaplain Fund.
J. W. S.


&
B
9
Oi/rt 6 <p vtc.v oj r
AW’ 6 av^avtav
e (tt i 7i , ovre
9£o c •


“ Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth ; but God that
giveth the increase.”—l Cor. iii. 7.
HE Apostle is here protesting against the abuse of
a tendency which has often wrecked the peace of
churches and of communities. It is the tendency to
glorify human powers; to exalt and to magnify the personal
importance of men.
Great men—poets, thinkers, reformers—the intellectual fathers
of the race —are among God’s best gifts to the world. But, like
other good gifts of God, they are often abused. And this may
be done in various ways. Sometimes eager partisans gather
round the great and the good, and father upon them their own
miserable contentions; sometimes political capital is made out
of the very virtues of dead heroes; or, again, the names of the
world’s benefactors are written upon party flags, and the dust of
controversy gathers round their graves.
Most often it is as regards religious teachers that the evil spirit
of partisanship appears in its most virulent form. The truth,
which should unite men, is so perverted as to become an instru-
ment of division. The word of life, by a process of degradation,
is made the watchword of a noisy faction ; and so differences,
in themselves insignificant, are magnified, and men between
whom there are no real grounds of quarrel, are parted from each
other, and even “ Christ is preached of contention.”
As far back as apostolic times, this abuse had rooted itself in
the Church. Eighteen hundred years ago, in Corinth, Sectari-
anism was the enemy, as it has been the enemy ever since,
wherever there has been a vigorous and independent spiritual life.
Then, as now, great names were used as the war-cries of discord-
ant factions. Men said “lam of Paul,” and “I of Apollos.”
These old controversies have now lost all their meaning, and
much of their interest; but we still have reason to be grateful


to those men of Corinth for having given St. Paul an opportunity
of delivering his judgment on the whole question of party spirit
in the Church.
It seemed to him to be nothing short of an affront to God
that men, who at best were but his instruments, should claim all,
or indeed any, of the credit of His work. It was all so clear to
St. Paul that man’s highest privilege is to be “ a fellow labourer
with God,” that he seems here to pass to the opposite extreme,
and altogether to disparage human agency.
“Neither is he thatplanteth any thing , neither he that watereth':'
There is no denying that these words, by themselves, have a
discouraging sound. It is a dreary creed that, in the sum of
forces, individuals count for little or nothing; and that what to
superficial observers look like the achievements of great minds,
are really the results of an impersonal tendency. There is
obviously a danger in insisting too strongly on the doctrine of
man’s incapacity to do anything great or good. For there will
always be plenty of people to take you at your word. They
will ask what is the good of toiling and striving, if, with your
utmost endeavours, you cannot hope to accomplish anything?
They will say, if men are powerless for good, on what grounds
can it be assumed that they have any power to do evil.
To deny that human beings are centres of moral force is
practically to cut the roots of human responsibility. If men—
even great individualities—are really nothing , nothing can be
required of them. Moral distinctions cease to have any meaning
when, as regards the results of their lives, the generous worker
for God and the selfish hireling stand upon a common level of
barren insufficiency.
This, however, is not the assertion of St. Paul. He does not
say that men are nothing in this sense—that their life has no
fulfilment, and their work no recompense. He does not deny
that men differ in zeal and capacity. He distinctly says that
they do differ. And not only do they differ, not only are some
“ wise master builders,” who build solidly on the one foundation,
while the flimsy fabric reared by others will vanish at the first
touch of the judgment fire, but God’s fidelity is pledged to reject
these and to recompense those. “ Each man will receive his own
reward, according to his labour.”
Take it therefore, with its proper limitations, and there is


nothing in this protest of St. Paul that conflicts in any way with
the ordinary experience of mankind. It is natural to us to
believe in men, and, in certain cases, to expect great things of
them. As we look back upon the great movements of the
world, we see how invariably the original impulse was given, not
by institutions, but by individuals. The individual man was
always first. The institution followed in his train. In every
case where great evils have been overthrown, and the way has
been cleared for moral progress, history has had the same story
to tell. Some predominant mind stamped itself upon the great
mass of its contemporaries, and set in motion a wave of feeling,
which rolled on with irresistible force.
Hence we get a new principle for forming our judgments of
character. Men differ in a hundred ways ; and God means
them to differ. We catalogue them roughly as wise or foolish,
strong or weak. But a distinction even more essential than
these, is between productive and unproductive lives. “By their
fruit ye shall know them,” said Jesus. And half unconsciously
we are ever applying this test. The critical question as regards
every human life is : does it bear fruit, or is it barren ? And on
the answer given to this question does our judgment depend.
All around us there are people, of whom there is nothing worse
to be said than that they have never contributed anything to the
growing good of the world. Often they are amiable, well-
meaning, inoffensive; but no harvest ever seems to come of
their efforts. No vigorous, thriving thing have they ever planted
or watered. Theirs is neither the productiveness of words, nor
the productiveness of deeds. They are the “fruitless trees,”
which cumber the ground.
Here, then, are our two separate portions of truth. Men are
nothing ; and yet men do great things. They plant institutions :
they build churches: the world is better and happier for their
having lived. Yet the most productive minds are just those
which have the profoundest sense of their own insufficiency.
What, then, is the larger truth in which these seeming con-
tradictions are reconciled ? It is that “ Godgiveth the increase .”
God, in other words, is the Source and Author of growth, as He
is of life, of which growth is the index and expression. The
mystery of growth is always and everywhere a divine mystery.
There is no onward-pushing impulse in the direction of a larger


life, whether it be that of the tiny green blade, as it thrusts itself
up towards the sunshine, or the growth of ideas, or the spread of
knowledge, or the expansion of nations—that does not proceed
from the eternal Source of moral order, whom we adore as the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. All productiveness, I repeat,
is of God. The fruitful lives are those’*that are rooted in Him
who said “ Without Me ye can do nothing.” The fruitful minds
are the minds of men who are persuaded that “ a Power not
themselves ” —a Power that wills and loves—is using them as its
appointed instruments, and uttering itself through them. Such
minds in the highest sense are receptive of God. God owns
them and their work. What they do, often in doubt and per-
plexity, and with a consciousness of having failed, God takes to
Himself, and the threads of it are woven into the web of His own
eternal purpose. “I can of mine own self do nothing.” Jesus
spoke these words out of the depths of His own filial heart ; yet,
in so speaking, He was the representative of the race, whose
nature He took upon Him. It is a part of universal experience
that moral strength flows from a sense of contact with a Higher
p OW er—a sense of being borne up and supported in spite of natural
weakness. As in the highest sense it was true of Christ, so in a
lesser degree is it true of every child of God who is abundant in
labours —be his visible success great or small—that “ the Father
who is in him, He doeth the works."
Certainly if there is any book in the world which exalts our
ideas of what men can do when they cast their self-love behind
them, and claim the support of a Divine Spirit, that book is the
Acts of the Apostles. Throughout, we know not whether is the
more astonishing, the success of the earliest preachers of the
Gospel, or the means by which they won it. When the Holy
Ghost said, “ Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work where-
unto I have called them,” it was the liberation of an incalculable
spiritual force. Yet Paul and Barnabas to the world’s eye were
nothing. They had no wealthy organization at their back: no
übiquitous press advertised their movements. 1 hey were poor
and unfriended ; yet what a power they wielded !
It is said that when the sacred earth from the soil of Jerusalem
was brought to the Campo Santo at Pisa, there sprang up a new
flower of surpassing beauty, the like of which had not before been
seen. So it was with the soil trodden by the feet of the Lord’s


Apostles. Before them was a moral desert ; but as they passed
from province to province, and from city to city, there sprang up
in their track the new flower of Christian love, the seeds of which
have been carried all over the world.
And what was the strength of those earliest preachers and mis-
sionaries, is no less everywhere, and at all times, the secret of
power. It is the strength of perfect dependence on God. Not
by man alone, nor by God alone, is the divine kingdom furthered,
but by God in man, and by man reaching up to, and working
with God. The Word of God grows and multiplies, not so much
by the mere accumulation of dogmas, and systems, and methods
of organization, as by the spiritual power that resides in men who
are persuaded that “ God giveth the increase.”
I. “ God that giveth the increase ,” In how many different
spheres does this saying of the Apostle hold good ? or rather of
what department of life could we venture to say that its growth
and augmentation lie outside the circle of God’s providence ?
To-day we are especially called upon to think of a growing
world, and an advancing Christianity. One from among us has
been called to leave home and friends, and to go forth to a distant
colony, there to enter upon a new and untried scene of labour ;
and to-day’s solemn service sets a consecrating seal upon that
call. The occasion may therefore fitly serve to remind us of what
has been called “ the great fact in modern history,” viz : —the pro-
digious growth of the English people. Such a fact, affecting as
it does the happiness and well being of millions, cannot but have
a religious as well as a political interest. Certainly it is not from
the Bible that we learn to identify religion with individualism, or
to disconnect the providence of God with the ordering of national
life. On the contrary, it is from the Bible that we get the idea
of a Messianic people, in whom all families of the earth are to be
blessed. All through the Old Testament, at least, the reign of
righteousness is bound up with the religious development of a
nation, which, though steadfast in separateness, was chosen by God
to leaven the world. And even in the New Testament, “ God
hath not cast away his people which he foreknew.” There is still
an “election” of nations, as well as of individuals. In the world
redeemed by Christ a blessing is still inherited by those who are
true to a lofty ideal of national life.
We cannot, then, speak of the growth of the English people as


a fact merely of secular interest, or as alien to the minds of wor-
shippers on such an occasion as that which now calls us together.
All history has its sacred aspects —modern history as well as ancient,
English as well as Jewish. The distinction between sacred history,
and what is called profane , is one that must tend to disappear in
proportion as men come to have a clearecwiew of the “ increasing
purpose ” which runs through the ages, as well as of the “ divers
portions and sundry ways ” in which God has revealed himself
to the world.
No apology, then, is needed for speaking from this pulpit of
the growth of the people of England, and of the responsibilities
which are thereby entailed upon us.
And our first thought is this How inconspicuous in this great
movement has been the guidance of human forethought! To
how small an extent has the colonizing activity of this country
been the fruit of a deliberate and far-seeing policy !
Emigration from these shores has been the outcome of a great
necessity. To a certain degree we may say that the impulse to
emigration has come from tendencies inherent in our race—ten-
dencies which, long dormant, have been called into pronounced
activity by the over-population of these islands. But the striking
feature of the movement from the first has been its extemporane-
ousness. Just as the waters of a river, when they overflow, are
guided, as regards their distribution, by natural causes, so no ex-
ternal constraint has driven thousands upon thousands of our fellow
countrymen, crowded out of their old homes by the competition
of numbers, to seek new homes in lands across the sea.
They went forth of their own free will, and it is an utterly fal-
lacious assumption that, in so going forth, they have broken the
tie that unites them to the land of their birth. They are united
to us still by blood and religion; and what ties can be named that
are more indissoluble than these ?
“Greater Britain” is a phrase that is now in the mouths of many.
But how many of those who use it realize to themselves all that
it implies ? For, if the phrase have any meaning, this at least is
implied in it, that our popular conceptions of what is Britain and
British need to be revised in the light of existing facts. We are
in truth no longer the insular people we once were. That stage
in our national history has been out-grown and left behind. We
must find room in our conception of the commonwealth of


England for those ten millions or more of our own blood who are
perpetuating English traditions in distant quarters of the globe.
Distance notwithstanding, nothing should be unimportant to us
that concerns their welfare. Let me quote to you the words of
a distinguished man of letters, who has written admirably on
“ The Expansion of England.”* “If the colonies are not, in the
old phrase, possessions of England, then they must be a part of
England ; and we must adopt this view in earnest. We must
cease altogether to say that England is an island off the north-
western coast of Europe, that it has an area of one hundred and
twenty thousand square miles, and a population of thirty odd
millions. We must cease to think that emigrants, when they go
to the colonies, leave England, or are lost to England. We
must cease to think that the history of England is the history of
the Parliament that sits at Westminster, and that affairs which
are not discussed there cannot belong to English history.”
This may be an ideal view of our colonial empire, but is it not
a truer, as well as a more ennobling view, than that which regards
the colonies merely as a convenient outlet for our surplus popula-
tion, or a vast estate which, for a time, may be cultivated for the
benefit of the mother country ? We need not ask which is the
more religious view. For the province of religion in practical
life is to purify the springs of action, and make us quicker to
apprehend our duties than our interests. Above all, from religion
we learn to see, in the facts of history, and the lessons of experience,
authoritative disclosures of the will of God.
Look, for example, at the truth about God which we are con-
sidering this morning. Apply it fearlessly in its simple and
obvious meaning. “It is God that giveth the increase .” Surely
this implies that the growth of states and communities, as well as
of churches, is part of the Divine Order. “Itis He that hath
made us, and not we ourselves,” is as true of national as it is of
individual life.
What, then, follows from a recognition of this truth ? This,
first, that it should set us enquiring as to our duties and responsi-
bilities, For the immense augmentation of our national life
cannot be dismissed as a matter of trivial importance. All
through God’s dealings with nations, as well as with individual
“ The Expansion of England,” by Professor Seeley, p. 158.


men, there runs a thread of moral purpose. No gift of His is
merely an idle boon. Every addition to the sum of well-being is
meant to awaken in us the spirit of sonship.
Rightly regarded, therefore, this momentous fact, that for more
than a century England has been multiplying copies of herself in
distant regions of the globe, will not fill us with foolish pride.
Neither shall we adopt the grovelling view that the duties of
English citizens toward the inhabitants of Greater Britain are to
be measured solely by the political exigencies of the hour. In
the light of the Divine Order we come to see that we dare not
wantonly renounce, or endanger, ties which are not of our own,
but of God’s making. We come to see that
“No distance breaks the ties of blood,
Brothers are brothers evermore.”
We come to see that, among communities bound together by a
common nationality and a common faith, “do ut des ” is not the
highest maxim of statesmanship. There is a higher ideal than
this of social obligation ; and St. Peter * has expressed it in the
words, “ As each has received a gift, even so minister the same
one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.”
11. But the thought of a national stewardship carries us a step
further than this. Mere bulk and numbers cannot satisfy our
higher aspirations. The rapid growth, the material prosperity,
of our colonies may, in certain moods, arouse in us an indolent
complacency. But in our higher moods we ask for some other
test of progress than that afforded by statistical tables. After all,
the great question as regards a community is not: Is it rich ? Is
it strong ? Is it acquiring fresh territory, and developing new
resources ? but rather, What is the type of manhood it tends to
produce and to educate ? What evidence does it afford of a regard
for true civilization ? For a civilization destitute of spiritual
culture is like a body without a soul. The true wealth of a nation
is not measured by its exports and imports ; the increase of these
may be paid for by moral deterioration. Men of our race may
go out to distant lands ; they may subdue and replenish the earth;
they may conquer and civilize barbarous peoples; they may
spread themselves over vast tracts of territory, making the desert
to rejoice, and to blossom as the rose. But in this alone there is
* i Peter iv. 10.


no ground for exultation. “ Man doth not live by bread alone.”
The proper goal of human strivings is perfected character. The
end of education is to elevate men above the bondage to their
own physical needs ; to equip the soul with a passionate desire
for all things that are righteous, true, lovely, and of good report.
Here, then, is where our responsibility hinges as contributors to
the great sum of English opinion. Just so far as we are a righteous
people, cherishing a high ideal of moral excellence, will our
influence upon colonial life be a healthy and inspiring influence.
Emigrants from this country “go out,” * it has been well said,
“ into the wilderness of mere materialism, into territories where
as yet there is nothing consecrated, nothing ideal.” Where are
they to find these but in the distant home which they have left
behind ? From what other source are they to draw the inspira-
tion of a national sentiment fed by historic precedents, and the
consciousness of a mighty past ? The day will come, assuredly,
when we in England shall be judged by our colonies and
dependencies. But the hour of our responsibility is now. It is
we here in the mother country who, by our faith or our faithless-
ness—by the books and newspapers we write, the public opinion
we generate, the lives we lead—are helping to mould the
civilization of the future. Whether Christianity is to exert a
commanding influence on public and private life in the new
world, during the present generation, must depend in no small
degree on the influences that go forth from English society.
111. It is time, however, to turn from these generalities to the
special field of labour which claims our sympathies to-day. The
growth of Brisbane, and her sister cities, is among the latest
fruits of colonial expansion. A generation ago the colony had
no distinctive name. It was then known as the Moreton Bay
District of New South Wales. It was only in the year 1859 that
the vast region of N. E. Australia, hitherto a penal settlement
regulated from Sydney, received the name of Queensland, and
became a self-governed community.
Of the energy and enterprise that since then have developed
the natural resources of the country, and provided for its educa-
tional wants, there is no need to speak here. That the colony
has a great future before it may be considered as certain.
* Seeley’s “Expansion of England,” p. 155.


But look at it as a field for missionary enterprise, and, in
spite of the self-denying labours of those who are now working
there, how arduous is the task it presents ! For all experience
goes to show that it takes some time for religious feeling to root
itself deeply in a new country. As in the lives of individual
men and women, so with struggling communities,* “ that is not
first which is spiritual, but that which is natural.” The forces of
nature have first to be subdued. The struggle to wring a
subsistence from the earth exhausts most of the energies. Then
again, there is the lack of those old associations, which play so
important a part in disposing the mind to worship. Add to this
the vast distances to be traversed ; and, apart from the towns,
in lonely sheep-farms and secluded cattle stations, the benumbing
influences of spiritual isolation. Finally, there are the migratory
habits of many of the colonists, and the need, so often painfully
demoralizing, of living in contact with men of inferior races.
And these are real difficulties. Resolutely to grapple with
them, effectually to penetrate so vast a region with the leaven
of Christian influences, is a task which demands no ordinary
qualities for its accomplishment. Courage first, the courage
which shrinks not from new ventures ; and then the personal
devotion which is the soul’s answer to Christ’s appeal, “You have
not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that
you should go and bring forth fruit.”
But even the strongest faith, and the completest self-surrender,
avail but little without the sober wisdom which, avoiding the im-
practicable, measures its resources, and prudently adapts means to
ends. If apathy means death to a church, enthusiasm sometimes
means danger—the danger of sowing discord, and ministering to
confusion. This danger, a wise Father in God, who aspires to be
a centre of union, will anxiously avoid. He will keep his mind
open. He will assure himself that, in passing from an old country,
with its fixed traditions and settled habits, to a democratic com-
munity, where the elements of social order are being moulded
after a new type, there will be much to learn, much also to un-
learn.
And “ who is sufficient for these things ? ” This, I doubt not,
is the question which has been much in the heart of our Brother,
* I Cor. xv, 46.


as the thought of coming responsibilities has weighed upon his
soul. He will accept this burden in no lightly confident spirit.
They who know him best, know that he has ever set before him
a lofty ideal of duty—restlessly unsatisfied until the most has
been made of every opportunity that offered itself. That, if God
spares him health and strength, his will be a productive Episco-
pate, rich in enterprise, his past career affords a sufficient guaran-
tee. Here, in London, a church second to none in beauty, with
schools and parsonage, erected by his exertions, will speak for
him when he is gone, as the abiding fruits of a ministry which,
not content with the organization of a parish and its kindred
duties, overflowed into other channels, and fertilized other fields.
Certainly, among other qualifications for the post which he is
called upon to fill, a practical acquaintance with social and educa-
tional needs, and an intelligent sympathy with the claims of
labour, are not among the least important. A true Father in God
claims everything that affects the happiness and well-being of the
people as part of his province, and, repudiating the notion that
he is concerned with men and women only in their relation as
worshippers, looks at human life as a whole, and refuses to spend
himself upon petty details. Seeing the intimate connexion of
religious with social questions, he will not shrink from speaking
his mind, when he can do so with effect, even at the risk of being
accused of going beyond his legitimate sphere.
Assuredly to one who, as a working Bishop in a new colony,
desires to enter into cordial relations with all sorts and conditions
of men, freedom from old-world prejudices, and a sympathetic
breadth of character, will be among the most indispensable
requisites. And here too may we not feel that the omens
are favourable ? May we not trust that the discipline of work in
London will bear its appointed fruit in the new world ? This,
at least, we can say: one, who, as a member of the School Board
of this great city, has so borne himself as to win the esteem of
his colleagues, and the cordial goodwill of the large body of
School Teachers (many of whom are here to-day to offer up
their prayers for him) has gained a vantage-ground of experience
which will be invaluable to him in his new scene of labour.
Armed with that experience, he will go forth, not to work upon
party lines, nor in the spirit of ecclesiastical pedantry; but
resolute to claim for God the whole of human life—its work as


well as its worship, its joys and sorrows, its struggles and aspira-
tions, its dreams of a better social order, its thirst for a fuller
knowledge—as genuinely part of thefruits of Christ’s Redemption.
And now to bring this to a practical issue. Our Brother asks
to-day not only for our prayers : he as&s for our help also in the
initial stages of his work. If enabled to do so by the liberality
of Churchmen, he hopes to take out with him a band of Mission
Chaplains, fresh from contact with the highest spiritual culture
of this country, to reinforce those who are now labouring in the
diocese of Brisbane. Working in, and through them, God, we trust,
will give the increase. But we must help them. We must do
our part.
“ The harvest truly is plenteous.” “ The field is the world.”
Do not these words mean more—far more—to us, than they could
ever have meant to the earliest preachers and missionaries of the
Gospel ? How wide alone is the world ruled over and inhabited
by men of our race ! What vast undeveloped possibilities lie in
that Land of Promise that lies—
“ By the long wash of Australasian seas,”
roofed over by another firmament than ours, with other stars !
The day will come—it is not far distant—when the millions of that
vast continent will have grown to tens of millions, and the great
traditions of our race will be handed on inviolate by communities
united in ordered freedom, yet mindful of the ties that bind them
to the mother country. There, too, we dare to hope, God will
make for Himself fresh embodiments of the faith which has
changed, and will yet again change, the world. There He will
fashion new types of energetic manhood and saintly devotion,
drawn from the great fountain of life which is in Jesus Christ.
Such visions of the future may well animate us in our personal
struggles with evil, and inspire us with courage to do our appointed
work. For the same Divine Lord, who is the life, and presides
over the growth, of nations and churches, is also the source of all
that bears good fruit in us. If ours is a growing faith ; if our
sympathies are enlarging ; if our life, with all its powers and
capacities, is opening out into something richer and wider than
before, the impulse is from Him “ without whom nothing is
strong, nothing is holy,” of whose fulness we have all received,
and in whom “ we live, and move, and have our being.”




