

God’s Men of War,
AND
Other Company Recitations.
Suitable for Sunday School and Christian Endeavour
Anniversary Celebrations, Demonstrations, Concerts,
&c.
By JESSIE LILIAN SMITH,
Authoress of
“The Mission of Flowers,” “At the Cross,” &c.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
COPYRIGHT IN AUSTRALIA, OCTOBER, 1910.




God’s Men of War,
AND
Other Company Recitations.
Suitable for Sunday School and Christian Endeavour
Anniversary Celebrations, Demonstrations, Concerts,
&c.
By JESSIE LILIAN SMITH,
Authoress of
“The Mission of Flowers,” “At the Cross,” &c.
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
COPYRIGHT .IN AUSTRALIA, OCTORER, 1910.


Index.
Page
GOD’S MEN OF WAR 1
GOODNIGHT 5
THE HARVESTERS 8
ROCK OF AGES 15
CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR ... 19
LIFE’S LITTLE DAY 24


God’s Men of War.
Dialogue for eight Senior or Intermediate Boys,
and one Young Man to take the “Stranger’s” part.
Ihe boys should be dressed as Jack Tars, and
each should carry in his belt a cutlass, rifle, or
other weapon. Around the band of each boy’s
cap should be plainly printed the name of the ship
he is supposed to represent, viz., H.M.S. Courage, &c.
As the boys march in, the air of their battle-hymn
should be played by a brass band, piano, cornet,
organ, or other instrument. They then halt and
sing the first verse and chorus of the hymn.
Tune : Keep Step With the Master.
Gospel Hymns and Sacred Solos, No. 81.
1. We come from a battle on life’s stormy sea;
All true-hearted, whole-hearted soldiers are we ;
For where there is fighting, on sea or on shore,
We are the fighting band—God’s Men of War !
CHORUS—
Christ the Lord is our Commander ;
On His word we will rely ;
And, till all His foes surrender,
For His glory we will fight or die.
Stranger (entering)—“ln port again, boys ?”
Boys (in chorus) —“Aye, sir !”
Stranger—
“ Just been cruising round the coast ?
Had any skirmishes ?”
H.M.S. Courage—
“ Aye, sir ! the very day 'we left the port
Both his Satanic Majesty’s warships—
The Fearful, and the Cowardly—opened fire
On us ; and then there was a short, sharp fight ;
But our Commander gives good orders, sir,
So we came through all right !”
Stranger—
You say He gives good orders, but, I ask you,
Does your Commander never make mistakes,
Nor lead you into trouble ?”


Boys (in chorus) —“No, sir ! Never !”
Stranger—
“ But surely you have sometimes been defeated—
A battle has been lost ; and you have been
Disheartened and perplexed ?—”
H.M.S. Faith—
“ Aye, sir, we have !
And shall I tell you why ? Then here's the reason'?
We knew that our Commander’s orders were—
‘Go forward !’ and ‘Obey !’, but, human-like,
We saw how strong, how terrible, how countless
The hosts of Satan were ; and, to our shame
We say it, lost faith in Him Who could not fail,
Surrendered to the foe, and lost the battle.
Oh,, men ! have faith in Christ ! Put your weak hands
Into His mighty clasp ; and then go forward,
Fearless and strong and brave, to fight in faith,
And conquer through His Name !”
Stranger—
“ But tell me now,
Who are the foes you fight ?”
H.M.S. Temperance—
“We war against
Evil of every kind ; for Satan’s fleet
Of battleships is strong and terrible.
There is that big, red-funnelled iron monster,
Known as ‘Strong Drink,’ and then there is the-
‘G ambler/
And vet another is the ‘Greed of Gold.’
All these are manned by demons, dark and evil,
Who threaten to possess our sunny land,
And to invade the sacred ports of Home,
Unless we watch and guard them ceaselessly.
But even these will be subdued at last,
If we are loyal to our Lord’s commands.”
Stranger—
“ And are you always loyal to your Leader,
Or are there some deserters from the ranks ?”
H.M.S. Duty-
“W'ell, once, sir, when we went ashore,
Some men belonging to the wily crew
Of the gay warship ‘Pleasure,’ came to us,
With crafty, flattering words, to tempt our mem
To quit their posts on board the good ship Duty,.,
And join the Pleasure’s service.


H.M.S. Duty (continued) —
Oh ! they told us
Wonderful tales, to show to us how easy
Life was on board their boat, and while they talked,
One of our men believed the tales they told,
Grew discontented with all discipline ;
And very soon he left us. Now, we hear,
He finds himself under a tyrant* master,
And bitterly repents the day he left us.”
Boys (in chorus) then sing 2nd verse and chorus
of hymn.
2. Oh ! who is a master like Jesus our Lord ?
So strong yet so tender, so true to His word.
Then let us be loyal, and stand evermore
True to the name we bear —God’s Men of War !
CHORUS—Christ the Lord, etc.
H.M.S. Truth—
“ Yes ! our Commander is a conquering King ;
And truth—His truth —must triumph to the end.
One time, sir, Satan set his two big guns,
‘Dishonour’ and ‘Deceit,’ to storm a town —
A little town that’s called Humanity.
And I remember how we held the fort—
A few of ms—and kept our proud flag flying,
Till ; our Commander came to reinforce us,
And Satan’s men, thinking to work our ruin,
Found themselves tangled in the treacherous traps
That they had set for us. So we descended,
And forced them to surrender, one and all,
And, oh ! I never, never will forget
How, when the guns were battering at the town,
And we were growing weary of the fight,
Seeing the signal of our Lord appearing,
We gave a ringing cheer, and sang this song ” :
Boys (in chorus) —Hold the Fort. S.S. and S.
No. 1. (one verse).
H.M.S. Hope (carrying life-belt) —
“But, men, forget not,
Though we are soldiers, we are sailors, too.
Ours is the life-boat, out on life’s rough ocean,
Where we are needed most ; for, day by day
Along the treacherous, rock-bound shores of Time,
Some lives are being wrecked ; and who but we
Should go to rescue them from death and doom ;
And, in the Name of Him Who died to save them,
Throw them the life-line of salvation—Hope.”


Hymn—Throw out the life-line. S.S. and S. Nov
23 (New Part, one or two veises).
H.M.S. Love and H.M.S. Life (carrying banner
inscribed “God so loved the world, that
c _ He gave His only begotten Son, etc.”
“No army is complete, without its banner,
And God has given to His Men of War
This Banner of the Cross—this royal standard-
pledge of His love Who oaves us life eternal —
The pride and jov of every Christian soldier—
The hope of dying souls. Under this banner
Thousands of battles have been fought and won,
And souls redeemed from Satan’s slavery.
Wherever this flag floats, on sea or laud,
There Christ holds sway, and to His Sovereign rule
Satan and all his forces must submit ;
And Sin and Heath must fall before this standard—
The Banner of the Cross !”
(Repeat text, “God so loved,” etc.)
Hymn, “The Banner of the Cross.” "S.S. and S.
No. 551.
The Stranger—
“ One moment, boys ! Just let me say, I thank you
For all that you have told me. Very truly
To be a soldier is a noble thing—
To be a Christian soldier is the noblest,
The grandest thing of all ! And now it may be
That He, to Whom you give your glad allegiance,
Will let me serve Him, too ?”
Boys (in unison)—“Aye, sir ! He will !”
Stranger—
“ Then if He will accept me, I am willing
To fight the salf-same battles, that you fight,
And serve the same Great Master.”
All together ioin in singing the third verse and
chorus of the battle hymn.
3. All hail to our Captain ! All hail to o'ur King !
His Name we will honour ; His praise we will sing.
W hen He leads the battle, there’s vict’rv in store.
Oh ! we are proud to be God’s Men of War !
CHORUS—Christ, the Lord, etc.
Chorus to be repeated as the “Men of War” march out..
FINIS.


Good=Night.
To be given by Nine Little Girls.
Attired in white gowns, each child carrying in one
hand a small lighted candle, and in the other hand
a large, coloured letter (one of those needed to form
the word “Good-night”) mounted on a wand, they
enter, singing, Jesus bids us shine,” ’S.JS. and S.,
No, 590. The first verse concluded, they separate into
groups of three, each group reciting in unison.
First Group—
“ Sometimes —have you ever noticed,
On a dull and wintry day,
How* the sun will shine out brightly,
Chasing all the gloom aw r ay ?
Then the world grows full of gladness,
Birds sing sweetly, flowers look bright ;
And we cannot think of sadness
While we’re laughing in the light.
Darker than the depths of winter,
Colder than the sleet and rain,
Are those souls that live for ever
Under clouds of sin and pain.
Let us then be like the sunshine—
Glad and cheerful, sweet and bright,
Making all the world around us
Happy, warm, and full of light 1”
Hymn—“ Jesus wants me for a sunbeam.” Ist verse
and chorus.
Second Group—
“ When it’s night upon the ocean —
Dark as dark can be —
And the big ships toss, and shudder,
On the angry, foaming sea ;
’Mid the deafening roar of waters,
And the boom of thunder-shocks,
There’s a frail boat steerino- slowlv
Straight towards the awful rocks.
Out across the swelling water,
Shining through the night,
Saving human lives from peril,^
Streams a flood of warning light.
So should we be, like the lighthouse
Shining through a night of gloom,
Warning lights, to souls in danger
Of a never-ending doom
T Hymn—“Let the lower lights be burning. S.S. and
S., No. 29 (Ist verse and chorus only).


Third Group—
“ Have you ever watched the starlight—
Stood and watched it. all alone ?
Every star a flashing, far light,
Blinking, burning, every one.
Have yoii paused for fust a moment,
Wondering what they really are— ‘
Angel-eyes, that watch and guard us,
Lamps of Heaven, or worlds afar ?
Have you thought, while gazing upward,
Baffled by such lights as these,
Who but God, the great Creator, :
Could control such mvsteries ?
Then your thoughts have been uplifted
By those silent, starry gleams ;
Why ? Because those stars above you
Are realities—not dreams !
So ought we to shine—to comfort
Tjhose who fear to look above—
Shine like stars, to lead the lo^ 0 ’”
Up to Heaven, and God, and love !”
The following verse and chorus is then sung, to
the tune, “'When the King shall come.” G.H. and
S.S., No. 85.
Little lights of joy and comfort, shining when the
skies are grey,
Let us shine as shines the sunlight, making glad the
world each day—
Like the lighthouse, warning others from the rock
bound shores of Time—
Like the starlight, help them Heav’nward in their
upward climb.
CHORUS-
Bright starlight ! sweet sunlight !
Shining down from Heav’n upon us, night and day !
Lord, make us, Thy children, >
Shining lights for Jesus, through the world’s dark
dark way !
...(Repeat chorus softly.)
Each child in turn then recites two lines of the
following—
* G “God came and put the birdies all to sleep,
A little while ago” ;
0 “Out of the big black sky the bright stars peep,
And watch us down below.”
0 “Over the treetops, down into the west,
The sun went out of sight.”
D “Dreamily soon will little heads be pressed
On pillows soft and white.”


N “No more of lessons now —no more of play
Until to-morrow” ;
I “In store for each awaits a glad new day—
Or one of sorrow.”
G “God guard us then, and keep us, every one
Through the dark hours !”
II “Hushed by His angels till the night is done,
Peace will be ours.”
T “To God we lift our hearts in praise and prayer,.
And all is right.”
(All in unison) —
“We leave you, friends and loved ones, in His care,.
And wish you all “Good-night !”
Then follows the Retiring Hymn, sung to the'
tune of “The Christian’s Good-night,” S.S.
and S., No. 528.
The day is done ! Soft shadows round us creep ;
The lamps of Heav’n their watch above us keep j
God guard us all, and grant us restful sleep !
Good-night ! Good-night ! Good-night I
We part to-night, to meet another day ;
But sometime soon shall end our earthly stay ;
Then, for the last time, everyone must say,
Good-night !
Great God ! Our Father ! At Thy feet we bow.
Look down and hear Thy little children now ! v
Oh ; bless us while we’re singing soft and low :
Good-night !
Oh ! may we ever shine for Christ, our King ;
And find some joy, some good in everything.
Oh ! bless us now, while each to each we sing :
Good-night !
As the children slowly retire, they hum the air
of the hymn, to the end of the third line,
when they halt, and, standing with their
wands held so th"t 4 he word “Good-night” is
visible to the audience, they sing very clearly
and distinctly :
“Good-night ! Good-night ! Good-night !”
FINIS.
* If very little girls are to render this piece, or
if a shorter rendering of it is preferred, the
part preceding this mark may be omitted.


The Harvesters.
Recitation in Character for 20 Scholars (12 Girls and
8 Young Men or Boys).
This piece commences by the singing of “Sowing
the Seed” (Sankey p. 42), either as a solo or duet.
“The Sowers” (four girls) come on the platform,
carrying baskets of seed, and during the singing of
the chorus scatter the seed around them. At the
conclusion of the hymn they each recite.
Ist Sower—
Tis morning !’ The shadowy curtain of night,
That had draped the world in its dusky folds,
Has vanished before the all-conquering light
That Mature, awaking, now beholds.
Our work is waiting. The dark, damp soil
Is ready for us to sow the seed.
Let us hasten, then, to the day’s new toil,
Wherever'our Master’s call may lead.”
2nd Sower—
“ Yet wait one moment ! Let us take care
What kind of seed we sow ;
For we know while sowing it everywhere, \
That the kind of seed we have scattered there-
The harvest day will show.
And the future may either yield
Just a lot of tares, only fit to burn,
Or a bountiful harvest, in return,
For what we have sown to-day,
While striving to follow in Duty’s way,
In the world’s great labour field.”
3rd Sower—
“ Thus into the great wide world we go,
Over mountains high, into valleys low,
Sowing the seed for God.
Ihrough sunshine and shadow we labour on,
W here the light of hope has seldom shone,
Or the feet of a Christian trod.
And ’tis not for us to wonder why
The Lord has called us to live—or die,
Perhaps, in a lonely land.
We only know that our duty here
Is to do His will in oiir own small sphere,
And follow His guiding hand.”


4th Sower —
“Life’s early morning hours pass by, and still
We’re sowing, sowing ceaselessly, until
The dazzling noonday sun has risen o’er us
And finds us sowing still. Time passes on,
Evening is drawing near. The sun goes down.
Dark shadows fall. Life’s work at last is done,
And the calm night of slumber lies before us,
The night of slumber deep.
While we have sown the seed, the day has flown,
And other hands must reap what we have sown,
For Death’s bright angel will be waiting for us,
And we shall fall asleep !”
Then follows the hymn, “Where are the
Reapers ?” (S. Songs and Solos, No. 199),
to be sung bv a‘ choir or chorus of children.
When the chorus of the first verse begins the
eight young men, attired as reapers and
carrying sickles on their shoulders, march on
to the platform, and pretend to reap (a
quantity of hay being strewn on the plat-
form beforehand). Other verses of the
hymn follow, after which “the reapers”
recite :
Ist Reaper—
“ How beautiful the morning is ! It seems
As if the night, departing at sunrise,
Had left to us some portion of those dreams,
Wherein we caught a glimpse of Paradise.
In the far distance rise the purple hills,
Darkly outlined against the glowing sky,
Forming a scene of loveliness that thrills
Our very natures with sweet ecstasy.
A soft breeze, laden with the scent of flowers,
Blows cool and fresh across the harvest plain,
Ruffling the surface by its unseen powers,
Until it forms a sea of rippling grain
But it is time for reaping, and I know
That time is precious to us. We must go !”
2nd Reaper—
“lnto the field where the ripened harvest stands,
Like ripples of gold in the sunlight glittering,
We go with our sharpened sickles in our hands,
While birds to welcome the morn are twittering.
The richly-covered fields before us spreading,
Remind us that our work will not be light,
For there are few of us to reap the harvest,
And we can work no longer when ’tis night.
So may we work with willing hands and hearts,
And let each moment tell of deeds well done.
That we may finish as the day departs,
And night draws on.”


3rd Reaper—
“lt has been said that Music's magic finger
Cam touch the breaking heart and make it whole,
While cheerful words and mem’ries seem to linger,
Like benedictions on the weary soul.
Then let us, while the tasks of life surround us,
For ever strive to labour cheerfully,
That we may raise the drooping spirits round us,
And bid the weary workers look' and see
The pleasures waiting for them,
And the rest that lies before them,
When the harvest day in shadows closes o’er them,
And the reapers from their toiling shall be free.”
4th Reaper—
“ Reapers for God in the world ! How soon
Our hearts grow faint when our strength is tried,
And we sigh in the heat of the glaring noon ‘
For the cool of the eventide.
But the work that we have to do is great,
And time is fleeting-. We dare not wait ;
But when our souls grow faint with care,
And our frail natures spent and worn,
When, in the tightening clutches of despair,
Our strength is almost gone, ;
Then may we listen to the angels’ song,
And pray, ‘Strong Lord of Glory, make us strong !’ ”
sth Reaper—
“Of those who work for God, there is but one
To whom the promise of reward is given,
And it is he, who, at the Great White Throne,
Shall gain the blessing of the King- of Heaven, —
He who, through sorrow and adversity,
With noble courage still works dauntlessly,
He that is faithful !
So may we, workers in the world to-day,
As reapers in the service of the Lord,
Like true and loyal servants ever stay
Close by His side, obedient to His word.
And though all others should forsake His cause,
While He has need of help, like mine and yours,
May we be faithful !”
6th Reaper—
“ Why do we sometimes hesitate.
To do God’s will, and fear defeat ?
The task He sets us, whether small or great,
He’ll help us to complete.
And though we may not understand
Why we should go that wav or this,
It is the path vdrich God himself has planned,
And leads 1 to endless bliss.
So while we labour in the harvest field,
We may put all our confidence in Him,
For soon in dazzling strength will be revealed
The light which now looks dim,


6th Reaoer (Continued'* —
And everything of mystery,
Now hidden from our mortal eyes,
If we sincerely trust Him now, will be
Revealed in Paradise.”
'7th Reaper—
“ There are those, living in the world to-day,
In every land, ’mid widely-varied scenes
Who work, but only in a lifeless way,
Like over-worked machines.
Half willing, half reluctantly,
They do what duty most demands they should,
But it is done so carelessly,
’Tis very little good.
And if, as reapers for the Lord on high.
We toiled in such a listless, aimless fashion,
Men, knowing nought of God or Heaven, would die
Slaves to their own dark s’n and evil passion.
The golden harvest, waving far and near,
Would not be gathered at the close of day,
But left to spoil for want of greater care,
And waste away.
Then may the work God gives to us be, done,
With all the zeal and fervour we possess,
And, while the day lasts, may we labour on,
With earnestness.”
Bth Reaper—
“iSo when the harvest day at length is over,
And life’s brief hours are drawing to a close,
We’ll watch the fleeting sunlight as it goes,
Till the cool shades of night our .souls shall, cover,
And when the Lord Himself shall come from Heaven,
To take us to the Harvest Home on high,
How happy we shall be when we remember
'That we have tried to serve Him faithfully.
Then, standing by the Throne of our great Lord,
We’ll lay our sheaves of treasure at His feet,
And when He gives to us our grand reward,
While all the- angel harps swell one great chord
•Of welcome—then our joy will be complete.”
“Sowing in the Morning” (S. Songs and Solos,
No. 274)! is sung next, in. which those on the
platform join. When the chorus “Bringing
in the Sheaves” begins, “the Gleaners” (8
girls), wearing in their hair and on their
white dresses touches of ! red ribbon and pop-
pies, and each carrying on her back a sheaf
of grain, march through the building, and
on to the platform from the opposite direc-
tion to that in which “the Reapers” came.
One or two more verses of the hymn may be
sung, “the Gleaners” joining in the chorus.
“The Gleaners” then recite their individual
parts.


Ist Gleaner—
“ The first bright token of the morn had risen,
Over the gilded summit of the hill,
Seeking within its glory to imprison
All things whereon the shadows lingered still,
I stood and looked across the scene before me,
And, while my glance into the distance strayed,
I saw the reapers enter through the gateway,
Into the harvest field, where breezes played
Among the waving treasure, and I‘thought,
'Surely the day that’s dawning must have brought
Some work for me to do.’ Then, suddenly,
I heard a voice, like someone calling me,
Quickly T followed where it bade me go,
And soon it led me to the plain below,
Where in the harvest labour I might share,
And I became a gleaner then and there.”
2nd Gleaner—
“l went with others to the field
While yet the day was dawning.
To glean where’er the reapers went
Throughout the busy morning.
The pure air seemed to cast a spell
Of quiet gladness over me,
While, in sweet cadence, rose and * fell
The song-birds’ notes of harmony.
The world of fame and rank might rave
Of pleasure gained by wealth and station, —
’Tis but a gilded imitation
Of the real joy those first hours gave,
When, as a gleaner, glad and free,
With fear left far behind me,
Under the sky’s broad canopy,
I‘did the work assigned me.”
3rd Gleaner —
The sun had risen high
On his blue and white-flecked throne,
The morning hours were passing by
And yet —what had 1 done ?
Though I had laboured well
Since the first hour of dawn,
I’d found but little grain to swell
My stores of garnered corn.
I grew despondent then,
Beginning to repine ;
What was the use of toiling when
Success would not be mine ?
Then someone near me whispered :
'Sad heart, be strong ! Look up !
For better times are coming,
So toil on, child, and hope !’ ”


4th Gleaner—
“ From its meridian height the sun looked down,
And in the scorching light that round me shone,
My heart grew faint, my hands grew feeble too,
Yet there was still much work for me to do.
Just then a tempter came into the field,.
And with entreaties sought to make me yield,
'What is the use/ said he, ‘for you to stay,
And work so constantly throughout the day ?
I know where there’s a bower of shady trees,
Where you could rest a while, and take your ease'
In idleness/ Then, suddenly, I turned,
And, moved by an impulsive pride that spurned
His offer, gave him just this answer : ‘No,
While I have work to do, I’ll do it. Go !
sth Gleaner—
“ Only a gleaner ! Oh, how much
I wished my toiling had been such
As gave the reapers their employment !
If , such great sheaves of plenty were my share,
Instead of just a little here and there,
Then work, I thought, might bring me some enjoy-
ment.
So I worked discontentedly,
Till someone came and said to me :
‘The greatest work is often small, so
Remember this must be the test, —
They that are faithful in the least
In much are faithful also.’ ” _
6th Gleaner —
“How long the day had been ! I paused to wonder
If it would ever end, for still I saw
The brazen sky above, the dry land under,
And night seemed just as distant as before.
I could not take the rest that I desired,
Though I was very weary then, and tired ;
But still, I thought, the day, however long,
Must finish at the setting of the sun.
And all the workers, whether weak or strong,
Will cease their toiling when their course is run,
And soon the night of rest will come to me,
If, till its coming, I work patiently.’’
7th Gleaner —
“Thus, side by side, in the early morn
We gleaned where the reapers had reaped the grain,.
And side by side in the blazing noon
Continued to work on the harvest plain.
And side by side through the weary day,
When the work was hard, and hours seemed long,
We toiled together, a busy throng,
Till the fall of the twilight grey,—
Each helping the other to glean some igood,
United toiling as gleaners should.”


Bth Gleaner—
"At last the quiet hush of eventide
Has settled over all, while far and wide
The earth is shadowed by that misty light
Which always comes between the day and night.
Now that the harvest day is at an end,
The faithful, tired harvesters may come,
And bringing in their sheaves of golden grain,
Rejoice together in the Harvest Home.”
Then follows the singing of a duet, "To the
Harvest Field Away,” Alexander’s Hymns, No. 8.
During the singing of the chorus each time, "the
Sowers” stand apart, while "the Reapers’ and
"Gleaners” march in regular file around and between
them, afterwards coming back to their proper places,
and standing still while the next verse is sung,
The chorus after the last verse is repeated, the-
Harvesters” leaving the platform as the singing
comes to an end. —FINIS.
(All girls taking part should wear white dresses.)}


Rock of Aqes.
To be performed by Seven Senior Girl*.
Two girls representing “The Christian’ and The
Enquirer,” appear on the platform, standing ,1
of what appears to be a big rock, surmounted b>
cti OnTither side of the rock stands a
the one to the left of the audience marked 8.C., and
the one to the right, A.TI. An invisible chorus sings
“■Rock of Ages” (one verse) at close of which ine
Enquirer” addresses “The Christian’ thus .
•‘What is this song they sing ? Full oft I hear it ;
And while I listen, wonder what it means.
Can’ you not lift the veil that intervenes
Between my soul and perfect understanding
What is the Rock of Ages ? Should I fear
Or is It Something that demands of me
Worship and adoration ?
“The Christian”—
“Certainly
Your prayer for understanding shall be heard,
And vour petition granted, in so far
As lies within the reach of mortal power
To grant it you. Wisely have you preferred .
To know the truth. Now hear me patiently .
There is, beneath Eternity’s broad sk\,
A land which men call Time—a vast country
Divided in two parts-one called
The other known as Anna Domini ;
-Vnd on the border-line between the two,
There stands the Rock of Ages-firm, unchanging,.
strong and true. > .
To this, all men before the time of Christ
Looked forward ; and the dumb life sacrificed
Was but a type of Him Who was to die
In later years. From Anna Domini
All men look backward, counting time and years
According to the distance that appears
Between their present standing and Golgotha s
tragedy.


The Christian (Continued) —
Christ is the Rock—Eternal, Strong, Divine !
The Centre of all Time and Space—the Shrine
Lit by the glow of countless hearts, brimful of
adoration,
And immemorial incense-fires of praise and suppli-
cation.
Around Him gather, one by one,
*The Ages that have come and crone—
The Age that we have lived to see—
The Ages that are yet to be—”
Ist Girl—" The Age of Disobedience”
“First came the age of Disobedience,
When man's will clashed against the greater will
Of God. This age is with us still ;
hor we are sinful as the consequence
Of our first parents’ sin. Yet, when they fell,
Even into the yawning mouth of Hell,
God in His mercy gave to them the hope
that some day, through the gates of Sacrifice,
They might re-enter their lost Paradise.
And though to-day we grope
Through dismal paths of sin and unbelief,
We find this hope out-weighing all our grief :
Through Christ, Who is our Living Sacrifice,
We too can claim the joys of Paradise.
So Christ, the Rock, stands firm, while passes hence
The dread, dark age of Disobedience ! ”
2nd Girl—“ The Age of Prophecy”
“The Age of Prophecy ! When this age dawned
Upon the sleeping world, mankind were warned
Of judgments that should follow sin, and then,
"When, through the prophets, God made known to men
His Sovereign Will, and uttered His Decree,
Mankind in very truth began to see
Their need of a Redeemer—One Whose hands
Should free them from Oppression’s iron bands,
And save the world fron Sin and Slavery.
And so men lived and waited—hoped and prayed
To see the Christ, Whose coming was delayed
Throughout the long, long age of prophecy !”
Here tne five girls representing the Ages enter,
the first two taking their stand on the side
8.C., the others on the side, A..D. Girls
representing the "Ages” each carry a shield
inscribed with the name of the age she repre-
sents, viz., "Age of Disobedience,” etc.


3rd Girl—" The Age of Fdlfilment”
BarWnT "ment X."S? H& broke through.
A mother’s smile-so sweet, so true, so fond !
A baby’s fingers clinging round her own .
A brief life, lived within a little town,
Quiet, unnoticed by the world beyond .
A Preacher on the hill and riverside
Beloved and hated by the surging crowd.
A Healer of the body, soul and mind.
Loved by the poor, and hated by the prou
A homeless, friendless Man at dead of night,
Suffering alone in Nature s solitude
A Man Whose heart was broken, m the, d ,
By which the world was saved, and Hell subdued .
Rejected, scorned, forsaken, and denied ;
A Man of Sorrows—yet a Comforter .
For others’ sins betrayed and crucified—
Could any cup than His be bitterer ?
A sunless noon ! A black, convulsing sky,
Shrouding in awful gloom the shuddering earth .
A reverent burial when the night _wias nigh .
But was there one who realised His worth .
A woman weeping on the cold earth’s sod 1
A Voice ! a cry of joy ! A dawning day !
The Risen Christ—no longer Man, but God ;
Himself the Rock, for ever and for aye .
A solo is sung by "The Christian" to the tune
of “Will there be light V 9 (G.H. and 0.0.,
No. 3S). All jo ; n in chorus.
1. Christ is the Rock—the Riven Rock,
Through all the ages shown—
Thp Refuge Stroner, for which we long,
When out in life’s storms alone.
CHORUS—
Rock of my soul ! Oh, Refuge Eternal !
Around me Thy Shadow fling !
Safe I abide, and dread not the tide,
While closely to Thee I cling !
2. Christ is the Rock, beyond the tomb
That claims our mortal dust.
The grave has no terror> and death is not doom,
If only in Him we trust.
CHORUS—Rock of my soul !< etc.


4th Girl—" The Age of Persecution”
"‘ls life a thing to be thrown away
Thoughtlessly, heedlessly ? Is it worth
So little, that men, true men, to-day
Would carelessly slip from the scenes of earth,
Without a struggle, without a care,
Into the Future—they know not where ?
Then what of the noble, fearless men
Whose names we read on the long, long roll
Of martyrs ? And women- who flinched not, when
Their bodies were tortured, until the soul,
Released by the pitying hand of death,
Went back to the God Who have them breath ?
These might have clung to their lives, we know ;
But they clung to Christ, for they loved Him most.
Deny Him, and save their lives ? Ah, no !
They could not save them at such a cost !
Oh, Hock of Ages ! 0, Christ Divine !
What terror could darken a light like Thine ?”
sth Girl—" The Present Age”
"To-day, with its teeming forms of life—
Tts arts and commerce, its ceaseless strife ;
Its pleasures and sciences, crafts and gains ;
Its social problems ; its joys and pains ;
To-day—a part of the living age,
Is making its mark on history’s page.
And Christ is more to the world to-day—
More loved, more honoured, then yesterday.
Ages of storm and tempest-blast
In vain their fury on Him have cast.
A perishing world, with desperate hands,
Clings close to the rifted Hock, that stands
Safe and secure, though the wild storm rages—
The strong, immovable Rock of Ages !”
"The Christian” and "The Enquirer” join hands,
in front of the rock, and all sing softly,
"Rock of Ages.”
"‘The Christian” and "Enquirer” wear Sashes
inscribed with those names. All taking part
wear white.
FINIS.


Christian Endeavour.
Suitable for Junior or Intermediate C.E. Celebra-
tions. To be performed by 10 children (10 girls
and 9 boys).
The children march on to the platform singing
“The Christian Endeavour Army” (G.H. and S.S.,
No. 75). They are dressed uniformly, boys, if pos-
as soldiers, and girls in simple white.
Nine girls each carry a wand surmounted by a
floral letter—all letters read consecutively, making the
word “Christian.” Each boy carries a shield or
wears a shoulder strap bearing a plain letter all
letters together spelling the word “Endeavour.”
The nine girls are arranged at back of platform-
boys in front.
A little girl in front comes forward displaying a
motto —“For Christ and the Church.” She says :
“This is our motto : ‘For Christ and the Church !
A boy and girl then sing as a duet the hymn,
“For Christ and the Chhrch” (G.H. and S.S., No.
155) all the children joining in chorus.
The little girl with motto then continues :
■“lf you wish to live a life of happy usefulness,
If you wish to bless the world, and make its sorrows
less,
Listen while we tell to-night
Of the Truth that lives for ever,
So that you may learn aright
Some of those great lessons that are taught by
our Endeavour !”


The other nine girls then recite in order, com-
mencing with the letter “C” :
“Christ crucified ! This is the theme
We preach in every time and place ;
Tor none but Jesus could redeem
Those who had fall’n so far from grace.
And so He lived and suffered,
’Neath the world’s great load of guilt,
Until His heart was broken,
And His precious life-blood spilt.
And by His death on Calvary
Men’s souls are justified.
So we will preach for ever
To the world : ‘Christ crucified !’ ”
H
“Holiness to the Lord !
In every thought and word,
In every act of life, may we confess
The sovereign power of Christ our King,
And honour Him in everything,
Still keeping as our watchword : Holiness !”
R
“Redemption for the world, through Christ alone T
This is our creed, and we will make it known
Whenever opportunity is given.
For Christ has power to snap in twain
The links of every sin-forged chain
And fit the soul for Heaven.
He hears the penitents who pray—
Forgives the past, and day by dav
Makes conquerors of those who seemed
The weakest of us all.
So let us answ-er to His call—
‘Repent, and be Redeemed !’ ”
I
“Industry in the service of our Lord
Must always mark our lives, for if we prayed
All day and night, with eyes shut tight
Against all worldly vanities,
Blind to the work fihat ever lies
'Waiting ; and thus, with folded hands, implored
God’s blessing on the world, would life be made
Better for all our idle prayers ? y
No ! We must bravely face the cares
Of life, for Jesus’ sake : and thus
’Bo something to uplift the world ; and be industrious.’’


s
“Some folk seem to be for ever doomed to failure'
and defeat,
Though they ready are as c’ev r r as their neighbours
up the street.
Yet they fail because they live so carelessly. _
And without a settled purpose nothing great is ever
done. . .
So we need to start in earnest, and as Christians,,
every one,
Learn the secret of success —Sincerity !”
T
“Truth is our armour. Ye need its protection,
To shield us against all those poisonous darts
Falling around us in every direction,
Piercing and torturing innocent hearts.
Cruel, cold slander, and deadly deceit
Trample men’s lives with their murderous feet.
Oh ! let us fight till we cause their defeat ;
And while we walk in the pathways of youth,
Wage war with falseness, and conquer by Truth .
I
“In every soul dwells immortality.
And though around us, day by day,
All things are falling to decay,
The soul of man live 3 on eternally.
And this is why we strive to win
The hearts of all men, from all sin.
For, on the border of Eternity,
The sinner’s dread—the Christian’s hope is Immor-
tality !”
A
“After the night, comes morning—
After the day—the night !
After the storm—the sunshine,
Robing the earth in light !
After the discord of anguish,
The thrill of angelic chords !
And all the sweet joys that are absent now,
Will come to us—afterwards !”
N
“Never despair ! though the night frowns above you,
Leaving no glimmer of light in the sky.
Never despair ! though the world may not love you,..
God’s looking on, and His love will not die.
Should you be tortured and tried by temptation,
Shrouded in sorrow, or blinded by care,
Just look to God for His promised salvation —
Pray for His guidance, and never despair !”


All children (or girls only) then sing together,
“Army of Endeavour’’ (G.H. and S.S., No..
131) after which the boys recite their parts :
Ist Boy— E
“Be earnest ! For God’s sake, the world’s, and your
own,
Live out what you preach, so that men, looking on,
May know that you mean what you say.
Look not upon sin ’with a tolerant frown,
But fight it in earnest, and trample it down.
For whether in warfare, at work, or at play,
Earnestness carries the day !’’
2nd Bo}^ — N
“Be noble ! Set your standard high
Above the sordid things of earth ;
And make of your life’s destiny
Something of noble worth !
Let nothing that is low or mean
Command your love. Be strong and true ;
And let no barrier come between
Your high ideal and you !’’
3rd Boy— D
“Be decided ! Never waver
From the goal you have in sight !
Do not let the world persuade you
That the cause of wrong is right !
Make a calm and wise decision
Of the path you mean to tread ;
And though men may seek to stop you.
Heed them not. Go straight ahead !”
4th Boy— E
“Be enduring ! He who wearies
Of his work, ere half-way through it,
Might as well have never started
(Though, of course, he meant to do it !)
(So although through life’s long journey,
’Neath a heavy cross you bend,
Don't give in ; for he who conquers
Must endure unto the end !”
st.h Boy— A
“Be ardent 1 For the cause of Christ
Is worthy of our utmost zeal ;
And men will never be constrained
To leave their sin, till they have found
That Christianity is real.
Sc rally round your King anew
And choose the soldier’s lot.
Enthusiastic Youth may do
What sober Age could not !’’


6th Boy— V
“Be valiant ! Fear not man nor hell,
Since God upholds you by His might.
“With God to lead you, all is well.
Be brave, and battle for the right !
And though from out the foeman’s ranks
A shower of deadly darts may fall ;
The wisdom of our God out-flanks
The foe, and rides victorious over all.”
7th Boy— 0
"“Be obedient ! A soldier is not worthy of the name,
If he disobeys his orders ; and a Christian’s just the
same. ,
All his will must be surrendered to his Lord s
supreme control,
And the law of God must ever be engraven on his
soul. _ .
He must never doubt God’s wisdom if He bids him
go or stay ;
Tor the dutv of a Christian is in all things to
obey !’’
Btli Boy— U
“Be unselfish ! Do not worship at the shrine of
cruel Greed ;
For its incense is the life that’s wrung from hearts
that break and bleed.
But be like your Great Example, Who for all was
sacrificed —
Live for others, and, if need be, die for them, and
live with Christ !”
9th Boy— R
“Be righteous above all ! The man who spends
His time and talents in the cause of right,
May suffer while on earth, the loss of friends,
And part with pleasure ; yet he keeps in sight
The joy of that great dav when he shall see
His Saviour’s face, so full of tenderness,
And hear his Master say, approvingly :
Well done ! Take thou this crown of righteousness!”
All children then sing “Endeavourer’s Marching
Song” (G.H. and S.S., No. 147.)
During the singing of the chorus various marches
may be introduced.
The chorus is repeated at conclusion as the chil-
•dren retire.


Life’s Little Day.
A Recitation in character for Ten Girls, each one of
whom should wear a long white robe.
“The Dreamer”
“Night—black and grim and starless ! A dark sky
Over the sleeping world had spread its wings
When I, with thoughts that dwelt on many things,
Sat by the fire, in silent reverie,
Watching its fitful gleams. I was alone ;
And like the gloom that marked the night so seemed
The musings of my mind. No brightness gleamed
Out of my thoughts, for Pain had thrown
A shadow on my life. The heavy hand
Of Sorrow pressed my heart ; so that to me
Life had itself become a mystery,
Which, in my grief, I could not understand.
I longed for rest and pleasure. Oh, if only
Life were not quite so long, or I so lonely—
Happiness might yet light the skies !
Then while I mused, a vision seemed to rise
And slowly pass before my wondering eyes :
And once again
I see it, as I saw it then.”
*Each of the girls who take the following six
parts carries a shield inscribed with the
name of her part.)
“Daybreak”
“Lone, lovely star !
Seest thou from those dim heights afar
How the flame-mantled sunrise waits
To burst the grim, grey shadow-gates
Of darkness ? Knowest thou,
When thou hast vanished from us, how
The ship of Dawn will sail away
Over/the restless billows of the Day?
Now, ere that ship departs, I look, and lo !
Calm on the deck a sleeping infant lies,
Heedless of good or ill, its soft-shut eyes
Kissed by the light that flickers to and fro,
While gentle beams caress
The clustering locks of hair, and press
The rosy lips ; and smile in tenderness
On that fair picture of pure happiness—
Innocence cradled in unconsciouness !”


“The white clouds drift like foam-flakes upon an
And. 6 birds in ’noisy chorus twitter in ev’ry tree. t
The smiling sunbeams sparkle on the spray
That crests the tumbling waterfalls, so reckless m
As toy scramble down the rocty mountain slope,.
and make their way v ~
Through bowers of verdant splendour. Here tort
Buoyant and strong, his eager heart and hands
Ready to grasp an opportunity ...
Of doino- something great. His dreams are free
From thoughts of failure. All life s mystery
Is golden-tinted in the light of Hope.
Joyfully he looks up ;
Then out across the future’s dim expanse
His bright eyes wander, till their searching glance
Discerns" the hidden pathway to success, _
And all that now ho fondly hopes will bring him
happiness !”
“Noon”
Morning has come and gone .
Straight from his vaulted throne
The sun looks down upon the busy world.
There, in the city’s noise and hurry,
Where men are ever striving, after gain,.
One man toils ceaselessly, his busy brain
Seeking to solve great problems. All the worry
And grave perplexities of life., have burled
Their stinging darts upon him, leaving often
Upon his brow, deep lines which time may soften,
But ne\ er will efface.
Time hurries an apace
And so, amid the constant whirl and rush.
His thoughts, his hopes, and all his energies
Dwell on the present ; and past memories
Slumber forgotten. Every thought of ease
Is banished from his mind. The quiet hush
Of eventide is but a pleasant dream
That rises in the distance, like the gleam
Of a bright beacon-light that shines across dark
troubled seas.”
“Afternoon”
Under the vaulted arch of heaven’s blue dome
Nature works steadily. The drowsy hum
Of bees falls softly on the languid air •
While the great world’s machinery is throbbing
everywhere.
And here, amid his work, stands one
Whose youth has gone—
Whose manhood’s prime
Has almost vanished, like the years
Thrown backward on the march of time,
Hidden away beneath the tide of other hopes an
fears


“Afternoon” (Continued) —
Age has taken her 'brush, and here and there
Has painted silver-grey a thread of hair
Among the dark ones. On his brow
The furrowed lines are deeper now
Then ever. Here 'upon the shore
Of eventide, he turns once more
To the dim past ; and on his fancy rise
The lingering visions of sweet memories,
Whose strong cords draw him with resistless power
Back to the days of merry youth and childhood’s
sunny hour.”
“Evening”
“The ocean waves call sadly to the onward coming
night :
Ihe blue hills in the distance grow dim and fade
from sight :
The twilight, in her mantling robe of shimmering
silver grey,
Comes in a car of fiery gold to close the gates oE
day.
The sound of a faltering foot step startles the silent
air,
And an aged man walks slowly by, his thin and
snow white hair
Tossed roughly by the boisterous breeze that bends
the tree-tops bare.
Far out across the ocean, where wave on wave is
thrown,
He looks, and there he seems to see
An emblem of Eternity,
V ast—wonderful—unknown—
And while the sun goes down
He gazes on its glory till the last red gleam has;
flown,
Then slowly totters homeward through the deep’ning
shades—alone !”
“Rest”
“Silence ! tread softly !. speak, low !
Golden stars glimmer and glow.
Day has departed, and soft and slow.
The shadows of night round a still form creep,
Veiling the face that is lifeless now ;
While sweetly rests on the still, cold brow,
The calm of a dreamless sleep !
Hush !' there are sad ones weeping.
Mutely they gaze on the lifeless clay
And sigh for the life that has passed away
Into the haven of God’s safe keeping.
1 hen quietly cover the dear, dead face
1 hat goes to its last lono - resting-place \
While the soul departs in the firm embrace
Off Death’s imperious majesty !
To Wake in the presence of Him Who rules in the
realms of eternity !”


“The Dreamer”
“So closed Life's Little Day !
Then, ere it passed away,
Justice and Mercy, who were standing near
Each spoke, and I could hear :”
“.Mercy”
“Life, borne upon the rolling wheels of time,
Speeds onward from the cradle to the grave,
Still marking as it goes, with ceaseless chime,
The falling of the noble and the brave.
And if alone by Justice men must stand,
Death would at once assert its sovereign power,.
And Pain and Sorrow, with relentless hand,
Make bitterer than death each passing hour.
But while my voice in pleading still is heard,
These terrors can but hold a partial sway.
My staff of true Compassion is my sword,
And with it still I strive to win the day.”
“Justice”
“Some men might think the world a better place'
If I were absent from its pleasure throngs,
But, in the past, has not the human race
Had need of Justice to avenge its wrongs ?
See, yonder where the cruel Nero stands,
Gazing with fiendish pleasure on their pain.
The tortured victims, who, at his commands,
Were mercilessly slaughtered. Yet again,
Down the long vista of the vanished years,
The innocent have suffered wrongfully ;
Hearts have been crushed and broken, while their
tears
Fo\md no response in kindly svmpathv.
Shall these not be avenged ? THiey shall, I say !
For soon shall come the mighty judgment day.
When Mercy shall stand silent at the Throne,
And God with justice shall avenge His own.”
“The Dreamer”
“They paused. And then in fancy I could see
The vision of a green, but fruitless tree.
And on the still night air the clear words rang,
As anxiously.! I waited, and they sang :
“Justice” and “Mercy” then take their parts,,
and sing the hymn, “Cut It Down” (S.
Songs and Solos, No. 399).


“The Dreamer”
“They ceased. The tree had fallen ! Must I part
Thus suddenly with life ? My God ! I cried,
Thy justice cannot have been satisfied
With my poor useless life and sinful heart !
And should Thy justice suddenly demand
That life should cease, I fear the wasted years
Would rise before me, and my soul would stand
Hopeless ! condemned ! tormented by a host of
haunting fears !”
“Love”
“Peace ! ye wild surging torrents of despair !
Breathe soft and low, ye winds of faith and prayer,
Upon the silent harp-strings of the soul !
And let the sound of Hope’s sweet music roll
In one uprising song of praise to Him,
Who, through the ages dim,
Has won the adoration of all humanity.
Yes ! God is good. I see
Yonder there stands a cross. Come, kneel with me,
And learn the lesson, taught at Calvary,
Of love and sacrifice. Life’s little day
May then grow brighter as it dies away !”
The two then go and kneel at the foot of a
cross that stands on the platform, and,
with the others forming a group beside it,
they all join in singing the first two verses
of the hymn, “Abide With Me” ; also the
last verse, commencing “Hold Thou Thy
Cross before my closing eyes.”
FINIS. *
N.B.—Each of those who represent “Justice,”
“Mercy,” and “Love” should wear a sash inscribed
with the name of her part.
It is not necessary for the girl representing “The
Dreamer” to have any distinguishing mark on her
dress. The name is used for the convenience of the
girl who will learn the part.
The performers may enter the platform in a pro-
cession, which might be headed by “Justice” and
“Mercy,” carrying between them a large banner (sus-
pended at each side by a long pole), inscribed with
the title of the piece, viz., “Life’s Little Day.”
The hymns should be sung to the accompaniment
of an organ or other instrumental music.




Southern Cross press.
Telephone 46 Brighton
