

Godly Miracle
Childbirth
(Mrs.) ELIZABETH McSWEENEY
A Roman Catholic Woman
Born in the Queen’s County, Ireland
All Booksellers
1 Darley Place, Darlinghurst,
Sydney, New South Wales


Author of the
following:
First:
“Woman, Church and
Press.”
Second:
“Jesus, the Jews and
the Irish.”
Third:
“Ireland and her Three
English-made Gods.”


Godly Miracle
Childbirth
(Mrs.) ELIZABETH McSWEENEY
A Roman Catholic Woman
Born in the Queen’s County, Ireland
All Booksellers
1 Darley Place, Darlinghurst,
Sydney, New South Wales
PRICE 1/-




THE GODLY MIRACLE OF CHILD-BIRTH.
1 heard a lecture at the Royal Colonial Institute in
Hligh Street on “Maternity.” One of the ladies on the
platform introduced Professor Windeyer. I presume he is
a medical doctor. Anyhow, the title is neither here nor
there. What we want is a good, honest man to settle things.
With all due deference to the Professor’s great book-
learning, much-belaboured book-learning, expensively and
painfully acquired book-learning, which may be, probably
is, very useful in other walks of medical science, but still he
knows nothing about Motherhood.
We can—l think we wouldn’t be far wrong in tracing
all our humanity to the influence of developed Motherhood.
Let us try and reach this developed Motherhood.
Go back as far as we can, you find among all tribes
and clans, races and colours and creeds of all peoples, in-
cluding the alleged savages of Fiji and the Solomon Islands.
When closely sifted and investigated, what do we find?
We find a proverb with one similar meaning in all of them,
viz.: “No breast-milk, no mother.”
We Avill be apt to arrive at saner conclusions if we
observe and keep in mind that the Almighty, or what-
ever Power is running the universe, bestows no more
attention on us than is bestowed on what we still call the
lower animals.
The least amongst these animals is able to breathe,
to move, to take in nourishment, to evacuate or throw off
the waste, and to reproduce its own kind. This is all that
man can do.


ENGLAND AND AMERICA.
The smallest insect in the sea is capable of building a
coral-reef that will wreck to pieces the biggest boat that
man. ever built. These coral builders are surely not much
inferior to our Melbourne neighbours, whose plasterings
and concrete buildings, under the supervision of dis-
tinguished architects, fell around their ears, killing and
injuring many.
For marine warfare, these coral-builders can give points
to the two great democracies—England and America. For,
of course, as Johnny Bull says, “Don’tcherknow, the Ger-
mans could never build a submarine!”
These coral-reefers are democratic workers. Why not
admit them to the League of Nations? Surely we can’t
say they are Bolsheviks, Sinn Feiners or Germans. These
three, according to English propaganda, are bound to des-
troy democracy and present-day civilisation.
NO FATHERHOOD WITHOUT A DAUGHTER.
With all due veneration for Father and Son prominent
in ecclesiastical history, I say there is no love for an only
child. How long more will clergymen, newspaper men and
others keep the world in turmoil and misunderstanding by
repeating the old gag of the only son? Moreover, there is
very little love for two or even three. There must be more.
And there is no fatherhood without a daughter. The advent
of a daughter is spiritualising on parents. No man in the
world is more welcome home than the father of three or
four little daughters. A man rarely forsakes a woman with
daughters.
Another thing noticeable, a man with a majority of
daughters born to him finds his fatherhood so highly
developed, he b’ecomes bound up in the family. His greatest
happiness lies in the atmosphere and surroundings of the
home.


An ounce of practice is worth a ton of theory. I don’t
hold with Professor Windeyer’s scheme of pre-natal pre-
paration. The more fuss and feathers, or medical
interference you make with a woman going to be confined
of a first baby, the worse it will be for her. She will
worry herself greatly, wondering what kind of an ordeal
she will have to go through. Loose clothing, not too
heavy, allowing freedom of limb, a copious supply of good
cold water, internally as well as externally, enough nourish-
ing and suitable foods; these, with plenty of exercise,
preferably in the open air, are indeed almost the only
essentials.
Fully developed parenthood creates love in the com-
munity, just as its absence creates hate and bitterness.
HIDDEN AGENCIES AT WORK.
It isn’t a fair deal to blame the doctors —as so many
are doing—for all the smashed-up motherhood of
Australia. There are several agencies at work. Some
well hidden. Let us see how some of these agencies creep
in. There is one indelibly fixed in my mind which I will
try and relate.
I knew a beautiful Irish-Australian girl, whose only
child wasn’t brought forth through the knife-wielders over
the human frame. Was fed from her own breast. Hence
her Godly love of offspring was not destroyed. Her
husband, as men go, was a likely, healthy Scotch-Australian
in the prime of life, who, in his presumptious and audacious
ignorance, to use his own words, said: “I’ll take good
care there won’t be any more bawling kids around me.”
What a colossal and fatal mistake! This would-be
clover man so engineered the sanctity and sacredness of the
marriage-bed that his words came true. Through the
undeveloped motherhood, her love and interest for the
little one began to wane. Yet enough motherly instinct
left to cause her to frequently speak to him about it. This


otherwise good man, on this subject he always chided her,
asking, “What kind of a woman are you? God Almighty
had an only Son. He was satisfied. You have an only
son and you are not satisfied.’’
This apparently cogent and logical mode of reasoning
repeated over and over again drove her into silence, be-
coming gloomy. Whipped up by the undertaker. Lost
in the prime of healthy womanhood.
This is not an isolated case, neither is it exaggerated—
justice is not done to the narrative. For whose is the
pen and the mind to depict the mentality of the married
woman who is robbed of the only thing worth having on this
earth? How long more will we weak mortals keep running
our affairs on a lie and a mockery. This developed mother-
hood grows like a divine and invisible plant, requiring its
own divine nourishment, namely, increased birth-rate.
SOVEREIGN REMEDY.
On October 13th, 1925, at the Education Buildings, I
heard Doctor Watson Munro lecture on “Child-birth in
Relation to Infantile Mortality.’’ In an answer to a lady
from the body of the hall as to the pernicious influence of
chloroform, he said: “It wasn’t at all injurious; it was
something similar to a couple of cigarettes when first taken.
Aiso, that it isn’t on record where chloroform ever killed a
woman in child-birth.”
No doubt this statement is quite correct. But the
Doctor didn’t mention—perhaps he didn’t know—that
although chloroform does not kill the body, it kills the
miracle and leaves the memory always recurring back to
the labour pains. No amount of chloroform will obliterate
these pains. God’s miracle must be allowed to do its work.
It, and it alone, is capable of perfection.
In Doctor Munro’s dilemma, he cried out, “What shall
we do to be saved?” I don’t know—no, not even unto this
day—l don’t know whether it was an ironical skit on the


numerous religious to save souls, or an honest appeal to
the audience for help to save the mother and child in
child-birth. If the latter, then I hold a sovereign remedy:
Keep the doctors and all chloroform out of the confine-
ment room.
Doctor Watson Munro paid a high tribute to Dublin,
with its one accident in two thousand. This, as far as
comparisons go, doesn’t look such a bad showing when
we think of the one in less than two hundred in N.S.W.
What about the statistics of other doctors and world-wide
scientists, who tell us there isn’t one accident in two, six,
eight—no, nor in tens of thousands, nor even in a whole
million? It runs up to a million and a quarter before one
accident occurs to either mother or child.
One scientist speaks very strongly on this point, de-
claring that the absence of doctors tends greatly towards
this good result, saying we have only to look at our cattle.
We wouldn’t have such splendid herds of cattle if we gave
special privileges to the bull to take the calf away.
Speaking of the calf brings me to my first remark,
viz.: “No breast-milk, no pother.” By means of the
cow and calf we can verify this proverb. For example,
if the calf is taken immediately away, we can do whatever
we like with it without molestation from the mother. The
mother is, at this stage, just like the woman—not interested.
But the instant it is allowed to draw the teat, her mother-
hood springs mysteriously into being, and, to use the lan-
guage of the farmyard, “If you only look crooked at that
calf, you must scoot or the dashed old cow will tear you
to pieces.”
If the cows tampered much with Nature, as it is alleged
our women do—another of the hidden agencies—the bull
would not be able to save them any more than our doctors
can save our women. They, too, would die.
It’s not too much for the mind’s eye to see the bull
come along with a gold ring in his nose and a wristlet


watch hanging somewhere handy, and in the best Oxford
and Cambridge brogue say, “Good morning, Lady Cow. I
am so and so. an expert in Obstetrics. The kidneys are
generally affected with the first child. I’ll try and find
accommodation for you in my own private hospital.”
COMPENSATION FOR THE MOTHER.
Let us take a walk round the corner and carefully note
what is going on at the first confinement of a married
mother.
Great confusion and excitement. The Doctor who was
previously engaged hasn’t arrived. Husband’s feelings in
an awful state through having to listen to the loud and
terrifying cries of the agonising labour pains. Meantime,
Nature, or the heavenly disposer of events, is doing His
work as He only can do. Just as the infant makes the
final plunge for a new atmosphere the mother has a changed
mentality. She is instantaneously and momentarily
enveloped in a pleasing atmosphere of forgetfulness or
lapse of memory. The Almighty God has worked wonders.
The previous never-to-be-forgotten excruciating and agonis-
ing labour pains have completely disappeared. It is as
though it was something that occurred thousands of years
ago. It has passed like a dream that can’t be remembered,
even with the assistance of the sub-conscious element. Be-
hold, the law of compensation! She doesn’t even want to
talk about it. She is greatly soothed with her little baby
close by. She turns round on her elbow and finds herself
possessed of a very strong desire to get out of bed and go
about her duties —domestic or otherwise.
But no! That unfeeling bugbear we call the “Social
Law” is borne down on the poor wretch. She is bound
and gagged and told, “Now, don’t stir; stop as you are.
Keep quiet until the Doctor comes in.” All these things
happening, the Doctor comes along, hangs his hat in the
hall, takes his gloves off, walks to the bedside, all this


time trying to keep himself from smiling. Feels the
patient’s pulse, makes a few casual remarks, looks approv-
ingly at the little stranger, and with artificially-acquired
dignity politely backs out again.
This kind of foolery continues for many days. I have
known it to continue even for weeks, according to cir-
cumstances. I have known women to be made positively
sick by being kept too long in a confinement room. The
smile or grin of any man while these things are going on
is, to say the least, very dangerous. It’s not exactly sar-
donic, yet easily seen through.
GET CONFINED IN HER OWN LITTLE HOME.
THE WRONG BABY.
It is of the highest importance that this first confine-
ment should be allowed to go through without any inter-
ference whatsoever. This gives great confidence. She will
have the rest of her family—no matter how many—in per-
fect silence. The woman who is unduly interfered with at
a first confinement never regains the requisite confidence,
and is generally a failure for maternity purposes ever after.
Far better for the mother to be confined in her own
little home, no matter how small it may be, than run to
an institution. If the latter, the mother is apt to have a
suspicion, under some conditions it may be slight, but still
a suspicion, that she was given the wrong baby. I have
seen an Australian woman—mother of three children—
raise her hands in frenzy and say, “What do you think?
There is another child coming! I must go to some one and
get rid of it! If I let it come we will all starve!” Take it
from me, it’s not the fear of future starvation that causes
any woman to have such morbid feelings; it’s the absence
of the loving motherhood maltreatment during the three
previous confinements.
Is it not the very poorest who always had large
families? The environment raised around woman has a


lot to do with these morbid feelings. Under decent living
and mental conditions, the Australian woman will be found
courageous enough and patriotic enough to give you all
the children you want for your empty spaces. Are we
giving these doctors power to crucify—justifying what is
not in Nature?
THE UNMARRIED MOTHER—HOW SHE GETS ON.
Although not there, we can all see how the unmarried
mother gets along. She keeps constantly at her usual work.
During the whole nine months she is plotting foul murder.
The Almighty has not forsaken her. She successfully
brings forth her little infant, entirely alone in the deepest
of all silences. Surely this is powerful example for the
people who preach “mind over matter.” Like lightning
she raises herself up and oh! alas! how frequently she
slaughters the little innocent. What an object lesson! Be-
hold how deeply and murderously destructive a false social
law can become.
Our young women, it is alleged, are very keen on stop-
ping the growth of the fetus. Are we able to differentiate
between this and murder? Murder is rife—it’s in the air.
Young fellows of the present generation prefer giving a blow
that may kill sooner than be discovered at any so-called
crime.
Now, Professor Windeyer will have conferred a great
boon on the country. His book-learning won’t have been
in vain if he, or any other doctor, will tell us in the case
of the unmarried mother becoming, as sometimes happens,
a married mother. Will the offspring from such a womb
and such a mentality contract the instinct (if I may use
the word) or tendency to murder? If so, the human family
hold the power to kill the bugbear.
Although the young mother does not realise this
miracle at first, second and even third or fourth confine-
ments, not thinking nor observing, but taking things as
they come. Eventually it comes quite clear to her. The


weaker and poorer the child is, the better the mother loves
it. How lovingly we listen for its little infant wail and,
hearing it not, we tenderly tip-toe and peep into that most
hallowed receptacle—the cradle.
WE HOLD NO PRE-EMINENCE; WE ARE NOT AS
HONEST AS THE CAT.
True, all the animals look after their young as well as
woman. We have no pre-eminence whatever in this direc-
tion over any of the animals. Even the cat —poor thing!—
that conceives in such agony. Scientists know why this
happens. But, like Sir Truby King’s instructions to the
Australian women re child-birth, they are very wary about
spreading the knowledge.
It’s the ways of the strangers;
When they want to confuse
They alter and fit things
To conceal the news.
At such times the cat is very shy and greatly fright-
ened of dogs. If, by some law of Nature she brings forth
only one, she quickly kills it out of sight. If two, she so
shockingly neglects them. They are rarely reared, and
if reared they are generally feeble and useless, showing
that the absence of mother love is a damper. Yet when
her full quota of little ones come forth and the motherhood
is visioned, her fighting propensities develop wonderfully.
To protect them she will face a mastiff dog—side-step him,
out-manoeuvre him, scratch his eyes out, and otherwise
maltreat him to such an extent that he is quite satisfied to
slink away and leave herself and her little family un-
molested.
We are not as honest as the cat. When these kittens
are fully reared up, the mother cat, not having lost first
principles, raises her paw and says, “Hiss! Get away!”
Of course, woman is trained to do the pretence. Query:
Are we straying away too far from first principles? As I
have already remarked, there was no love for an only child,
and very little for two or even three; there must be more.


THE EARTH AND THE ELEMENTS HAVE NO CHARM
FOR HER.
So let us watch the hen. “She doth take her chickens
under her wing,” as mentioned in Scripture. When her
eggs fail and she has only two, she stands like a gawk. The
earth and the elements have no charm for her. She seems
to have lost the faculty of scratching and providing. It
is utterly impossible for her to love and care for these two.
As in the case of the woman, Nature won’t allow her.
HER MOTHERHOOD IS UNVISIONED.
Compare the actions of this same hen when she has
a large clutch of ten or twelve. She keeps up a running
all over the place, scratching and working, providing worms
and grain; an incessant chirping and cheerfulness. See
how she finds a nice cool place very suitable to rest them.
And no matter how pushed for room, she will accept a
ccuple of more neglected waifs when pushed under her wing.'
I have seen such a hen stretch her wings and tremble with
love and tenderness lest she should lean too heavily on the
least amongst them.
Compare this to our own sometimes brutal—mostly
always begrudging and spiteful—treatment of a couple of
step-children. What man, lay or clerical, is bold enough
to assert that the spirit of such a hen is not welcome into
heaven ’/
Even the goose and the gander combined are not able
—they certainly don’t care—to rear three. Notwithstand-
ing, the former’s wife gives great assistance, they are
generally a failure. Now take a look at his lordship the
gander when his dear old goosie brings out a large flock
of goslings. His fatherhood develops. He struts about with
pride. He raises his head defiantly, and with father-love
in his eye, he warns all-comers off the hallowed ground.
Woe betide the little boy or girl or small animal that ap-
proaches his loved ones. Ho is no longer careless, as in the
case of the three.


I APPEAL TO THE ENTIRE WOMANHOOD OF THE
NATION.
There is a Scotch proverb which says, ‘‘Na bairn is
better than ae bairn.” That is, no child at all is better
than only one child. I hold with this proverb. ‘‘Rachel
wept because her children were not.” Behold the mourn-
ful cry of the married woman ‘‘whose child is not.” The
sound is like unto the sound of a hurricane. Once heard is
never forgotten. Notwithstanding, the woman with the
half motherhood is greatly to be pitied. On the other hand,
no man or child is safe from the-wrath, callousness or des-
pair, to say nothing of other evils, that follow in the wake
of distorted motherhood.
So I appeal to the entire manhood of the nation to
see to it. Every man from twenty upwards must look into
his own home. He will find something more engrossing to
occupy his mind, than the cissy-boy admiration of his
variegated socks.
No religion ever put on the market will save a man
from the hate of such a woman. Man is surely a bad
animal. And oh, alas! under some conditions I’m sorry to
say woman, thou art worse. Through the treatment meted
out to the unmarried mother, we- can all see the severity
in man. How few of us observe. While God doesn’t for-
sake her, we do. We even taunt her; some with the
withering look, others with the cruelly-spoken word.
‘‘Oh, thou of little faith.”
Knowing that woman is created pure and passive, who are
thou, 0 man, to teach sexual law to the Creator? Dost
thou think thyself fit to improve on the Creator’s plan?
See what a celebrated Celtic poet says of woman’s purity:
‘‘Yes, for a spirit pure as hers
Is always pure, even while it errs;
As sunshine, broken in the rill,
Though turned astray is sunshine still.”
Is woman going through a change? Is woman going to be
unsexed ?


SIR JOSEPH CARRUTHERS’ MILLION MEN FOR A
MILLION FARMS.
If the Australians are in earnest in this hue and cry
about natural increase (here I fall back on that oft-repeated
but honest remark of the Scotchman, “I hae me doots”-,
is it not better to try the system with its one accident in
thousands upon thousands of cases than continue with its
illegalities and tragedies, more injurious in the land than
a whole regiment of enemy soldiers with drawn bayonets?-
By attending to the motherhood of Australia you can
get your “million men for your million farms,’’ one of Sir
Joseph Carruthers’ pet schemes. Is Sir Joseph Carruthers
simpleton enough as not to be able to see that England is
trying all she knows to get the people into her own country
and to keep them in her own country? If Sir Joseph
Carruthers doesn’t know this, what does he know? He
seems to know how to advertise himself. Has there been
any resulting benefit to Australia from all his “lime-
light?”
Take Buenos Ayres, a Catholic country, purely Catholic
government, yet its great proverb is, “One ounce of
mother is better than a ton of church.” They depend
greatly on natural increase. Reported on reliable authority
that their population is increasing rapidly and satisfactorily.
These Buenos Ayres mothers are among the best and most
devoted in the world, notwithstanding they rarely, if ever,
go to Mass.
DEEP DOWN IN THE HEART OF WOMAN LURKS A
DEMON.
On all sides I hear men saying they cannot understand
women. Well, may be so. It’s a pity that it is so. If we
women were to do away with the pretence and speak
honestly and openly to one another on these natural and
Godly subjects, it is possible we would find it beneficial.
Under the heading Household Hints, Women’s Column,
“Sydney Morning Herald,” January 19th, 1926, a writer


puts it thus: “A household of a man and wife and one
child, that poor, lonely little Australian that usually adorns
the present-day household.” Oh, you Australians, I warn
you, beware of the “lonely households!” Know ye not
that deep down in the heart of woman—where there is a
paucity of offspring—lurks a demon, constantly urging on,
not only to indifference, hut to actual despising of the
opposite sex.
On the other hand, we women don’t always understand
men. The following from St. Francis of Assisi will help.
When the colleagues of this great, grand, superior, saintly
man—interested writers of the present day say he was
“head and shoulders above all men”—upbraided him with
having a tender passion for what they considered a poor,
weak, frail, inferior woman, he rebuked them. Yes, he re-
buked them, saying, “You have eyes and you see not. Be-
hold the mighty elm, it loves to be embraced by the tiniest
twig in the forest.” What poor observers we are, else we
need not go back hundreds of years, nor to the Saint Marys
of Egypt for a simile of this kind. We can find it nearer
home,
In my grandfather’s neighbourhood in the County
Kilkenny, a farmer’s son went into one of the neighbour-
ing counties and brought home a wife. Well, she was no
sooner installed than the neighbours commenced the very
same antics as the Saint’s colleagues—they began chipping
at her. One said she couldn’t do this, another said she
couldn’t do that. They all soon agreed that she could do
“neither this, that, nor the other thing.” But the husband
silenced them—yes, he silenced them. This Irish husband
rose to Godly heights and said, “I like her for her failings.”
This divine motherhood plant, at first so frail and
easily crushed out of existence, if allowed to function
honestly and naturally grows into a very strong tree. Once
the developed plant is established it lives while we live. The
more branches that are lopped off this tree, the more en-
during and more loving it becomes. It shows itself very
prominently in the “great” now abbreviated grandmother


stage, and still more ( vigorous, sustaining and Godly in what
is known as “relapsed motherhood.” This all-embracing
motherhood; this self-sacritieing motherhood, with all self-
satisfying, all loving and forgiving all, trying to provide all,
and uncomplainingly tries to do all. After all is said and
done, the grandest thing a woman can do is to bring forth
an infant. One thing this developed motherhood regrets,
it is sorry it cannot have another ten or twelve little beau-
ties toddling around her.
Having made a few remarks on this most vital and
voluminous subject, I now invoke the spirit of the immortal
Tommy Moore, who -said:
“There’s a bliss beyond all that the minister has told,
When two that are link’d in one heavenly tie
With heart never changing and brow never cold.
Love on through all ills, and love on till they die;
One hour of a passion so sacred is worth
Whole ages of heartless and wandering bliss;
And oh! if there be an Elysium on earth,
It is this, it is this!”
ATTENTION TO HOME AFFAIRS
Another thing we ought to try to do; it will possibly
help matters greatly. If our numerous public women—“the
Lady Bountifuls, mostly with other peoples’ money,” as the
American in his own country calls this class of woman-
would leave unto men —who are surely quite capable, any-
how more capable than we women for doing this kind of
work—such questions as Leagues of Nations, Singapore
Bases, etc., and attend to our private and public bases right
here in Sydney. See to it that the beautiful Tasmanian
food is not daily manipulated on the Sydney wharfs by
so-called wholesale and half-sale merchants as to be greatly
deteriorated—almost unfit for human consumption—before
it reaches the hands of our useful small traders.
It is within the province of woman to inquire as to
what has become,of all the lovely “Granny Smith” apples
that were so plentiful a few years ago right here in Sydney.


I’m told on what appears fair authority that the only
fruits exposed for sale are the ones rejected as not good
enough to go overseas. Any woman calling herself by
the sacred name of mother ought to look into these matters.
Surely our motherhood is not so reduced as to think “the
poor lonely little Australian” not worthy of the fruits that
are raised on his own Australasian soil.
It’s surely not an insurmountable task—in these days
of numerous scholarships—to make the paper currency of
N.S.W. as useful to the Tasmanian orchardist as the paper
currencies of over the seas. By this means we can secure
a fair share of these fruits without injury to anyone. In
all conscience, give England the preference of what we
don’t want for the welfare of our own families and the
upkeep of the nation.
MR. LAZZARINI’S VIEW.
Mr. Lazzarini, our Chief Secretary, says the unmarried
mother (as per Press reports) must get out and make her-
self good with the world. To my mind, this is exactly what
she tries to do. In her endeavour to this end, what happens?
Through the absence of any humanity in our social and
criminal laws, she frequently drags respectable nurses and
doctors, as well as herself, deeper into the mire. Now, I’m
trying to put the case from the woman and motherly point
of view. Knowing, as we all do, that in the very first
instance the man is the aggressor, will Mr. Lazzarini please
give us the man and fatherly point of view? It would be
a tremendous help in solving the problem. I’m sure it
would be very useful, most interesting, and greatly sought-
after.
LADY DE CHAIR’S ADMIRERS.
According to “Labor Daily” and other newspaper
reports, great things are expected from Lady de Chair’s
management of the doctors and the confinement room. I
venture to predict that it will be disappointing. I say this
in spite of all the clapping and cheering of Lady de Chair’s
ignorant (on this point) and inexperienced admirers.


I’d like to know what the doctors think of my plan
with little children. I would allow them to prattle and
play, play and prattle, all day long, preferably in the open
air, until they w T ere fully eight years old, and their little
teeth established. All our plans will fail if we haven’t
love for the little ones. Earlier than this, schooling is
almost useless, the organism not being quite ready to re-
cieve. They can be watched and taken care of. Don’t let
them see you are watching them too closely; it would
diminish their happiness.
Between the ages of twelve months and six years, little
children can learn to pronounce with the greatest of ease
not only two, but three or more languages fluently. This
faculty is greatest at the age of three. After six it begins
to drop; after seven they experience difficulty; at ten or
eleven they cannot learn correct enunciation.
THE PRESS DELEGATES AND LYING PROPAGANDA.
Solemnly, sincerely and without reservation, I ask this
question: Is the English-speaking world going to be set
on fire with lying propaganda? It behoves us all to look
into it, or we may have a “throw back.’’
Some time ago, when the Press Delegates visited Aus-
tralia and the deportation of AYalsh and Johannson was
the burning question of the hour, the public expected them
to say something on the subject. But the public were
doomed to disappointment. What did we get? A renegade
Irishman and a member of the Delegation, known and
styled as Captain Shaw, allowed himself to be used as a
tool. They started off by getting this tool to give us a
tirade of lies about Ireland. Along with other things, this
renegade said: “The Empire must be one; but Ireland must
be divided.” Anything said about Ireland is gobbled down
by the Australian, and has the effect of choking him off from
further inquiry. The Englishmen knew this, hence they
put Captain Shaw and Ireland in the front van.
In this dilemma our friend, Mr. West (Member for
Darlinghurst), came to their assistance by asking what


about the deportment. All this, as reported in the
daily papers. Well, Lord Burnham, I think—any-
how, one of the big guns of the Delegation—quick and lively
answered up; he was a great believer in deportment. If Mr.
West, our much-admired Member of Parliament for Dar-
linghurst, didn’t have book-learning enough to know the
difference between the words deportment and deportation
—well, the English pressmen had and did. See how he had
plenty of English cunning to play into the hands of the
delegates, and thus get over the crisis.
Look at what this deportment question hides. See
w r hat it cloaks—how it clouds the issue. Behold what an
object lesson! Why should we Irish Catholics worry our-
selves so much about the building and blessing of schools?
How needless for Mr. Mutch, the Minister for Education, to
bemoan the shortage of teachers if ignorant men can fill
front places! With all our schools and colleges and our
great anxiety for regular attendance, often giving our last
shilling for school-books, and sending them until they are
fully grown up, yet we weren’t able to raise a man with
pluck enough to take a public platform and speak in
defence of the deportation of Father O’Flannagan and Mr.
J. J. O’Kelly. No, not one! We had to depend on a light-
headed boy from Glasgow—to wit, Donald Grant. There
must be something wrong. “Seek and you shall find.”
It is up to us Irish to find out this hidden something, then
stand up to it.
THE ASTUTE GENTLEMEN WITH S.J. TO THEIR
NAMES.
Our proud boast that Limerick was never taken has
gone bung. The astute gentlemen with S.J. to their names
have Limerick by the wool, and they are now very busy
trying to conquer Killarney. Most assuredly they will suc-
ceed if the Kerrymen stand idle and won’t look into how
these things are worked.
These astute gentlemen were turned out of every
Catholic country under the sun. England took them in,


made a law to protect them, thereby creating a false name
for herself, viz., that she was liberal and non-bigoted, while
all the time using these men as a tool to help her to con-
quer. Now she is trying to conquer America, using the
Irish race and their English Catholicism as tools to this
end. Hitherto she has been using these two weapons for
all they were worth.
CARDINAL O’DONNELL v. CARDINAL LOGUE.
In “Catholic Press” of December 17th, 1925, Arch-
bishop Sheehan speaks of the kind of language that suits
children and simple people. How has it come to pass that
we have such enormous numbers of simple people in Ire-
land? Even the late Dan O’Connell must be classed amongst
the simple. He consented to the people of England holding
the power to name the four Archbishops of Ireland; at a
time, too, when we had eight millions of people and England
had only twelve. This apparently small concession enabled
deep-thinking, far-seeing Englishman like Cardinal Bourne
and Mr. Baldwin to have Bishop O’Donnell proclaimed
Primate of all Ireland, and to get their numerous agencies
to induce poor Cardinal O’Donnell in his speech (as per
newspaper reports) to find fault with Ireland and her
mode of dancing.
Cardinal O’Donnell is not a Logue. An O’Donnell is
always Irish. What a pity this man was ever made a priest!
AVhat a thousand pities he doesn’t know the kind of
dancing that’s done outside of Ireland! If he did, I’d
stake my existence on it he would willingly buy three
pennyworth of rope and hang himself sooner than prepare
the youth of Ireland to be drafted out as a convenience for
every man who treads the earth.
DANGEROUS ENVIRONMENT FOR OUR MEN.
I have also seen in the Press where Father Grogan, dur-
ing his stay in America, with an eternal smile made welcome
350,000 Irish girls to land in that country. Why keep
eternally pandering to this simplicity? Why not encourage
the great fund of natural common sense that’s lying dormant


at the back' of this acquired simplicity. By shutting our
eyes and neglecting this natural grandeur we are con-
stantly encountering obstacles of our own making. Through
this pretentious foolery or dope the Irishman’s nobility of
soul is hidden—yea, it is on the verge of being lost.
The three English-made gods is a dangerous environ-
ment for Ireland. By steadfastly adhering to these three
foreign ideals we are fostering sin and sorrow, and the angel
of death in our land. We are justifying her in her mode of
conquering us. Our spiritual leaders herd together, keep
aloof from the people, and develop a hatred for their own
race and land. Under the treatment most of our men suc-
cumb, as in the case of Father Grogan, who could
contentedly—
Pray and smile, smile and pray,
AVhile coaxing the life-blood of Ireland away,
Even Archbishop Mannix seems to be yielding. “He who
hesitates is lost.”
Why make such a fuss about Lourdes in France and
neglect Knock and the bleeding statues of Templemore?
Sure, all the stones and pebbles of Ireland are brimful of
our sacrificed blood. No such sacrifice in this world or
any other world as the sacrifice of the entire Irish race.
The Jewish victim, so lamented in our Mass, had to be
dragged by the Roman soldiers. Whereas through the three
English-made gods in our land we were induced to willingly
yield ourselves up to the sacrifice. Is the Jewish ideal worth
this great sacrifice?
Why go to Prance? The French don’t run head-
long with pilgrimages into Ireland. They unitedly fly their
own flag. The brave little Frenchman prints his own paper
money. He also defies any big fellow to pull his flag down.
“England’s never-failing friends,” as Father O’Flan-
nagan called the Roman Catholic Archbishops. See how
they disagree, or pretend to disagree, on the Irish question,
yet promptly agreeing to carry the old English weapon
into the heart of the United States.


Why was the little “Irish News’’ allowed to die? It
w T as printed and published in Archbishop Mannix’s strong-
hold, the City of Melbourne. What a mockery to speak of
liberty while we contentedly gaze on this kind of work.
We have caught the disease. We’re as bad as Father
Grogan.
I was in Dublin the morning that that unhappy Irish-
man, Arthur Griffiths, committed suicide. When Bishop
Duhig, of Rockhampton, came back, he told the Australian
people lies about Ireland; so did Professor Mclntyre. A
man telling lies about Ireland would tell lies about God.
The wise men of old held a very poor opinion of the ever-
lasting smiler. They said:
“Take me hence a thousand miles
From the face that always smiles.
He who can act the part,
Is a very demon at the heart.”
JAPANESE AND ENGLISH SIMILARITY OR
AFFINITY.
The more I see of the world and its inhabitants, the
more convinced I am of the great similarity of the English
and Japanese people. They appear the same tribe or
species. These two bipeds resemble each other more than
any other two men on earth. Their aims are alike: they
both grab extra territoriality; they are both cruel when
in power, leech-like, hard to get rid of; their kulturs
are similar; both are fond of titles. It must always be
the English gentleman and the gentleman Jap. Cutaway
coat and tall hat are generally worn by both. They even
walk alike—same gait; exact “deportment,” to use the
language of our learned friend, Mr. West.
Oh, let us think as ne’er before
The dangers great around our shore.
That hatred, strife and wrangling cease,
That man with man may live in peace
And that our numbers may increase.


“So let us thus be wise in time,
E’re negligence become our crime;
So face the facts, and show our grit
That everyone may do their bit
And help to make Australia fit.”
—Jim McDonald, in “The Watchman.”
PRESENT AND FUTURE.
What guarantee have we that these English-made gods
won’t be as bad to us in the next world as they are in this?
1 wouldn’t mind betting but when we get there it will be
chicken and wine for Joe Chamberlain and the Pope of
Rome, “prates” and salt for the Irish.
Australia has no difficulty in raising poets. She has
also raised brave men who did and dared—Chidley and
Darcy, to wit. Still, I’m afraid on account of our slip-
shod treatment of vegetables, we will have to eat sunny
potatoes for a long time before she raises a Burbank.
The chloroformed mother is always complaining about
her sufferings. Teasing little children about any sufferings,
whether of a chloroformed mother or a Jesus, is very in-
jurious. To the grateful, impressionable, sensitive Celtic
mind, it is fatal. A one-time virile and brave race are now
chicken-hearted through the infantile fretting over the
sufferings of a Jesus. The one only Jesus, as the infantile
mind is led to believe. The American, in his honesty, has
told the world at large “That we’re the weakest-hearted
people going to his shores.”
Williams, the Irish poet, put this business in a nut-
shell when he said, “The heart in childhood broken is
pangless evermore.” This remark of Williams’ should be
carefully examined. We may find a clue to the hidden
bully. Get at it! Procrastination in religious matters
breeds cowardice. We carry this broken heart to our
graves, and through it we reach our graves long before our
time. Sure, it’s as plain as the nose on your face, if Jesus
were a God He could neither suffer nor die.


Under the penalty of a thousand pounds to be divided
among the hospitals, I challenge Archbishop Sheehan, Arch-
bishop Wright, Professor Mclntyre, or any other theologian,
to this point. I have lived and travelled in Roman Catholic
countries —powerful, self-contained countries—countries
that wouldn’t bend the knee to any outside power, religious
or secular, and every second man we met his name was
Jesus. Commoner than Paddy in Ireland or Sandy in Scot-
land, and very often mentioned with less respect.
BIBLE, WOMAN, WORLD AND IRELAND.
This good old world of ours was a long time in existence
before any disciple, gospel-preacher, scribe or writer of
any kind ever thought of writing a Bible. When he did,
behold the self-glorification! AYhat a great manifestation
of selfish egoism, whoever he was! He threw all the blame
on the woman. I hear someone saying, “Why drag Ireland
into a small work of this kind?” Well, you can’t get away
from Ireland. Go where you will, no matter how far, you'll
find Ireland to be the standard for the whole world. Even
if a little child only cries, they all holler out, “Don’t get
your Paddy up!”
DR. MORRIS AND THE LADY NEXT DOOR.
I heard a lecture from Dr. Morris in the Royal Colonial
Institute at the monthly meeting of the National Council
of Women on maternity and baby welfare, July 29th, 1926.
To begin with, Dr. Morris knows nothing about mother-
hood. There will be no “ten children” if Dr. Morris, or
men like him, are allowed to attend first confinements. This
is the key to the whole business: Let the people insist on
this confinement going through naturally and Godly. After
this, every decent woman herself will take very good care
there will be no interference whatsoever between her and
the bringing forth of her future family. All the world over
the woman with the large family is the most humane and
best neighbour.
Walter Whitman’s advice to the American “Hobo”:
“You will get help and assistance from the woman who


has four or five little children playing in the garden and
a smaller one crying inside.” I hold with the woman in
the body of the hall who said: ‘‘We must get closer to
Nature.” The chairwoman said she and the Council of
Women ■would give Dr. Morris all the assistance they could.
It didn’t transpire on which point. It will be bad for
Australia if they help Dr. Morris to create a cheap, skittish
environment around the woman (‘‘Lady Next Door versus
Sairy Gamp”) who gives us population, which is sorely
needed.
I also hold with the speaker from the body of the
hall who said: ‘‘One native-born was worth very many
immigrants.” One would think the class of immigrants we
are getting were all enemies. No sooner are they landed
than they begin to find fault, never forgetting to uphold
another country in preference to Australia. Surely Dr.
Morris can’t be native-born when he pokes ridicule on
Australian women.
DIM PAST. WE ARE IN THE SAME FIX WITH THE
RELIGIOUS AS WITH THE SECULAR QUESTION.
THE TURNCOAT TRIBE.
We Christians are only a handful. The ratio as put
down is as four is to sixteen. Even though we are at this
small ratio, we must keep going forward. A murdered or
crucified God was, and is, a bad example for the human
family. In the dim past man imagined the Infinite in an
embodiment of various forms —monarchs, emperors, suns,
moons, bulls, crocodiles, etc. Even the reproductive organs
of man and woman were cast in gold and silver, and in
miniature form worn round the neck as wc now wear the
crucifix, in adoration of what we call the Infinite Being or
Life-giver.
In this particular we have made no improvement on
the dim past. We still hold the deity as expressed in the
personality of a Jew. Mother doubtful, sire unknown. Let


us inculcate a higher, a purer ideal. We Irish Catholics,
we find ourselves in the self-same predicament with the
religious question as with Donald Grant and the secular
question. This Christian doctrine is hammered into us
from the moment we’re able to raise our right hands to our
foreheads and bless ourselves. Yet when it comes to de-
fending it, we haven’t one of our own. We have to fall
back on the Mannings, the Newmans and the (Rev.) A. 6.
Clarks, B.A. (of Saint Mary’s Cathedral notoriety). These
men are not of the tribe of Levi. Oh dear, no! The Levi
tribe are only tools. These are the “real McKay”—the
turncoat tribe who constantly boast of conquering us.
Sixty-eight years ago, after landing in Melbourne, the
first Roman Catholic Englishman I spoke to told me in a
cold, callous English tone of voice: ‘‘Say your prayers and
be thankful. Don’t you know your the daughter of a con-
quered soil?” Nay! nay! Never! never! Not on your
life, old boy! No, not for always. With our own Irish
Jesus we will soon fix all this.
The godhead that always was,
And always will be;
Embodied in our Lord and Saviour Paddy
Murphy;
Heavenly prophecy for me and thee;
Thus saith the Lord, so say I
Even I, Elizabeth McSweeney!
‘‘l bring not peace but a sword,” said
Jesus. Behold our great Almighty Irish
God coming forth, not with a sword, but
with peace everlasting! Amen. Other
nations must follow.


Are the teachers of the Irish language all vampires?
I’m forced to this question when I notice how assiduously
they first hammer the English into us, and wait until the
faculty to learn enunciation is dead before they begin
the Irish. See page 18. Every Irish man and woman worth
their salt, no matter what the creed may be, should stand
up and protest against this.
By treating our own in this way we are working for
England’s most cherished desire—the desire to glorify and
perpetuate her own brogue. There’s no get away from this
question. We must either do this or remain what we are—
wanderers all over the face of the earth, like stray dogs,
everyone having a kick at us, all for the want of our own
language. It doesn’t matter a snap whether a man is a
Roman Catholic Archbishop or a Right Worshipful Grand
Master of an Orange Lodge, or the representative of the
Archbishop of Canterbury in the garrison stronghold. Let
these three gentlemen get together. Introspect themselves.
They’ll see in their own hearts that in this particular we’re
meaner than the dogs. Even the “scabby” dog sticks
tenaciously to its own natural barking sounds. Alas! for
the race that rejects its natural inheritance and is ashamed
of its parentage.
These three great powers in Ireland, through the con-
nivance of an enemy, have been turned into self-destructive
warfare. The unexpected happens. Remember the parable
of the “lying down of the lion and the lamb,” as mentioned
in Scripture. Time is coming when these three will be
hailed as a divine trinity, leading on to a peaceable and
bloodless victory. Two points must be kept in view and
put into practice, namely, our own language and our own
Irish note issue.
“Breathes there a man with soul so dead,
Who never unto himself hath said:
‘ This is my own, my native land. ’
If such there be, go, mark him well,” etc., etc.
[Sir Walter Scott.]


P.S.—Since publishing my little book, “Ireland and
Her Three English-made Gods,” people have asked; What
about the priests? We create them; they must live. Quite
so. I didn’t forget this. It appeared so palpable to me as
not to require mentioning. When they can live as comfort-
ably—as they do—in an impoverished Ireland, they can
surely live equally comfortable in a prosperous, self-
contained Ireland.
Suns may fail, the proverb never
“No breast milk, no mother”!
What we call “the rites of the Church” are the wrongs
of Ireland. Men like Father O’Flannagan, Archbishop
Mannix, and scores upon scores of other clergymen, know
this—though carefully hidden —to be a divine truth. Per-
haps they fear that an honest declaration of this would
injure “the Cause.” Away with such a false theory! I
give it a flat denial. But men—though non-church-goers—
are more religious than women. “The heart in childhood
broken” has a more lasting grip on the boy than on the
girl. It weakens him, it kills him sooner.
I frequently soliloquise and find myself saying: Oh,
Mannix, what art thou thinking of? Cans’t thou not see
the millions of us waiting for thee, or some man of our
race like unto thee, to come along, nail the Republican flag
to our church door, and fix things?
Deaton & Soencer, Printers, I Douglas Street, Sydney.


Some time ago in North America I spoke on
two subjects—first, “WOMAN, CHURCH and
PRESS”; secondly, “JESUS, the JEWS, and the
IRISH.” A report of three hundred words con-
gratulating me on my efforts in trying to fix things
appeared in the “New York Herald,” America’s
leading newspaper.
The following translated from the South
American Spanish:—
Extract from “La Nacion,’
Buenos Ayres.
“The Irish community celebrated yester-
ST. PATRICK’S DAY.
“There was a banquet attended by many
people.
“Mrs. McSweeney also made a speech
that deeply moved all people present. She
was warmly applauded, and the cheers con-
tinued for quite a long time.”


On a Sunday afternoon in 1922 in Hyde Park,
London, I heard an ordained minister of the High
Church of England declare most emphatically
"that the Methodists were not Christians.” I asked,
“Were the Irish Catholics Christians?” He an-
swered; “Yes, yes, certainly.” “Then what about
the Orangemen?” 1 queried. He hesitated and
said: “I’ll answer that later.” I regret not hearing
his opinion—the boat I was travelling by left for
Australia during the week.
Talk about puzzles. It's a great puzzle to me
to .know which of the English schemers coined that
intriguing and deceitful phrase, “The Irish Free
State.”
