

(M v
I ■■■■■■»■■»!
J A 5oUVENif^
w of the Voyage
I H'A'AT'ANemsEs"
ENGLAND TO Ausjmn A
August
i t 19 19'
■ I «■■■■■■
62nd Quota Australian Imperial Forces.


.
Mf J ERGUSON CoLLECTIOI^\W
|| RATIONAL J J]


5 ft
Editor wishes to thank contributors of prose, poetry humorous and serious—and Artist work,
*5? 0 thus enabling the production of this paper. 0 0 4|g
1 f\ci "doing I
| V Home i
» ( MLSB - y 'iL _ H.M.A.T. "ANCHISES'' £
JP_ I, - r 1919. To Australia )jj
•5b
»Sb
%
15b
l?j
•5b
*:■
I
I
Ifc
*-
g The Lost Leaders. g
& g.
N experience ol five years has shown that the Australian is of all
men the most easy to lead. His leaders in war were selected for
him and were trained lor their leadership, they were animated
with one purpose, united in their will to overthrow the common
enemy Spared the necessity of selecting them for himself, the
Australian accepted his leaders with a ready response and
tollowed them eagerly wherever right and glory led. Thus it
was that_ in spite of the least previous training in the art
and practices of war the Australian ranked equally with the best
troops in the Empire.
war * s over an d the war leaders are scattering.
What manner of man will lead the Australian in the art and
practices of citizenship? The peacetime leaders will not be
appointed for us ; they must be selected by us —by those whom
cippoiiueu mi us, mey must be selected by us—by those whom
they are to lead. The Australian is sentimental and impulsive and is an easy prey to
the stump-orator, to the loud-voiced man of fluent speech and plausible argument he
can be moved unduly by appeal to passion; he can be made deaf to the claims of reason
'Page One


jf ■ ■ >■ V-
" #1/ ' •■r '
Going Home
by the clamour of sentiment, and in response to a false chivalry can be blinded to the
light of justice. He is easily led—all too easily. This, however, is the fault of youth,
it may lead to sturdy manhood and dignified age ; but, it is a fault which, exploited by
the rash and intemperate demagogue, will mar the splendour of the grown man. So
where are our leaders now ? Where may we seek them ?
They are with us already, but they are hard to find ; for the moment they are lost
—lost in the cloud of their own diffidence, because we are unable to see them or too
indifferent to seek them. But this legarthy must be purged and banished before the
successful soldier can reap the harvest of his sowing —the matured fruits of peaceful
citizenship. The appeal to passion, the demagogue and his plausable argument, the
catchword—all must be rejected, and our ears attuned to the harmony of reason and
commonsense. Above all, wemust seek the lost leaders !
rg >
.
, Mr
'v , - *
J lIN Ureat hazard.
His face was grim, his figure stood
Alone, though in a multitude
Of savage foes ; each foeman bent
To gain advantage, each eye intent,
Each heart a throbbing monument
Of passion ; the crowd closed round
Before, behind, without a sound.
Silence lends a master touch
To tragedy ; it is in silence such
That morbid acts and dreadful deeds
Are done, and pathos surely feeds
On silence. The climax came at last—
A look of fierce excitement passed
Across the face of each man there
The coins are spun ! They're in the air—two " micks" !
The pugilistic spirit spreads with increasing rapidity. On G and H Decks there
have been some interesting bouts to settle little arguments —some say they totally
eclipse the boxing tournaments.
c Page Two


C?3CM
e
3C^E^C^I^I^C^C^C^C^C^I^Cg3CS33Ug3[53CS3C53Cg3Cg3Cg3Cg3Cg3Cg:
!Cg3Cg3Cj3
9
<&
&
<&
Things we want to know.
9
9
9
Going Home
,[£[&[£[£l^[s![&££c£:£[tl&]c£ls&l3®®c£l^c£c£lst&c£:&[£c£[&t&
HOW much several members of the Concert Party made for " Making-up" the
Saloon passengers for their Fancy Dress Dinner,
And why the members of the Orchestra objected to dine a la carte.
Why a certain Sister objects to night shift. —Oh, that N.M.E.!
How many Juliets' our missing Romeo's whispered "sweet nothings" to at Cape
Town. And how the brethren of the Red Armlet have entertained that strayed flock.
Whether, in writing back to " Blighty" from Africa, a new "tale" has been told by the
amorous aboard this good ship. We offer a prize for a copy of the most original.
Why a digger, in watching the embarkation of troops at Capetown on the 12th inst.,
should refer to our gangway as reminiscent of the entrance to a Casualty Clearing
Station.
If it is possible to have as much reverence for Civilian Hats as the " Digger," who
rescued four from the Bay at Cape Town, as for the Aussie type. He came up sober!
Whether it is true about Lieut. J Did he? Did he! Why Prohibition
has become so odious a term in the Sgts. Mess. But 'tis not the only monument which
Providence has especially preserved against the ravages of time, and the tyranny of
ages, and the mental illustrations of a garrulous few.
If the Chief Officer might not postpone the Ships' inspection for a month—or better
still, arrange for afternoon tea at 3.30 p.m. daily and do it then. We could discuss it
over a quiet cigar.
Whether Durban is a possible rendezvous for all " Diggers " adrift on the African
Continent. If so, why worry?
If the first sight of " Aussie " will really produce a young barrage. But it will
be futile to " duck "—she'll spot you, mister.
Chutney is not necessary with Currie when there's anything " Doohan "
Glaxo well deserved the Prize. That one Act during dinner was worth a V.C.
What will the Major do when we get to Melbourne, perhaps remain faithful and
carry the luggage.
They say that the Convict got quite a good hearing during Topsy's temporary loss
of voice.
The Sweet Beyond.
ONE of the early boats conveying Soldier's Wives reached Melbourne and one
passenger disembarked with two Infants and various packages and impedimenta.
Her hubby was not there to meet her but she was brave and capable and wast-
ino- no time in tears, hailed a Cab. The Cabby after getting his fare aboard inquired,
" Where to, ma'am? " Imagine his amazement when the reply came—" 16 Princess St.,
Adelaide " !
Page Three


Going Home
TIDO Useful Definitions.
W'HAT is an Optimist ? One who does not care a d what happens as long as
it does not happen to himself.
What is a Pessimist ? One who being given the choice of either one
of two evils takes both !
tdu cation
UP to the 12th in t. 250 Students had enrolled with the Educational Classes.
Instruction .will be resumed after leaving Durban and in addition to the former
Curriculum, classes in Conversational French will be taken by Padre Gwynn,
in association with two other instructors. It is the intention of the O.C. Troops to
give each Student a Certificate indicating the instruction he has received during the
voyage.
Troop Deck Teas.
rHE energetic Sub-Committe of Ladies and Gentlemen who are discharging this
voluntarily undertaken task for the pleasure and entertainment of the "Diggers"
have warmed the hearts of the recipients. If there is one characteristic of the
Australian, which generally rises above the others it is profound admiration for such
sporting character. The Committee is composed of Sisters Watt pHon. Sec. and
Treas.), Mcintosh, Greenaway, Mr. Sievers, Lieut. Rutter, Capt. Hamilton, Y.M.C.A.,
Capt. Moy, M.C., and Major Carr, D.S.O.
It is intended that each Deck will have a special Sea wish, the Sisters and Lady
passengers acting as " Mess Orderlies" on the evening of the Sports Day.
The efforts made by D Deck, to get around the dainties handed will be hard to
beat.
Hless Tareipell to South Africans.
ON the nth inst, the South Africans we carried from England were given a fare-
well evening in the Sgts. Mess. The entertainment provided was practicularly
bright and the guests much appreciated it. There is assuredly a good deal of
talent in the Mess. C.S.M. Sullivan delivered a very appropriate farewell speech on
behalf of the Mess, touching the right chord of our relationship, and expressing our
admiration for South Africa's brilliant War achievements. " Auld Lang Syne" and
three ringing cheers followed. R.S.M. Borland replied on behalf of his compatriots,
and the Contingent concluded their expression of appreciation by a lusty delivery of
their War Cry. It was a memorable evening.
Page Four


Going Home
°s> a
| Sports and Amusements. g
e 1
BOXING. —Pte Parrott in the heavy-weights was too active for Pte Study who
could not avoid the straight left, varied with occasional left hooks. Study skied
the towel in the second round. Graham beat Ingram on points in five rounds
both finishing:weakly. With a little better condition these two should be well worth
seeing again. Perkes forfeited to Gleeson on account of no condition, but has chal-
lenged him for £lO to a side. Sandry beat Knight in two rounds, the latter's left
being good, but not up to his opponent's mettle. After this heat Sandry forfeited the
semi-final but gave a three round exhibition bout with Gleeson. Austin and Young,
winners of the blindfold contest, caused much amusement. In the feather-weights
Perkes beat Stanley in a round, but we should see the former to better advantage
against Gleeson.
Wignott's assistance has been very helpful to boxers. Pie has shown us some
interesting points re exhibition rounds with Graham and Taylor. We hope to see
Wignott suitably matched ere we reach Aussie. We hear that Plartney has challengep
him to fifteen rounds for /jio a-side.
WINNERS OF COMPETITIONS.—BRIDGE. —F Deck, C.S.M. Onley and
C.S.M. Rae. R up, Ptes Gray and Porter, C Deck. DRAUGHTS.— Pte Warren, W.
R up, Pte Fields, both of E Deck. EUCHRP2. —Ptes Gray and Porter of C Deck.
Rup Ptes Julius and Tonks, C Deck. CRIBBAGE. —Ptes Tonkin and Cordery, D
Deck. R up, Ptes Woodman and Bassett, E Deck. QUOITS.—Pte Ingram, R up,
Pte Strickland. " Dorky" Ingram created a stir when he beat Hyland (G Deck's firm
favourite) in the first round.
TUG-OF-WAR. D Deck are favourites, but it is rumoured that the Sergeants
have a good team. Where are the Officers going to run ?
AMUSEMENTS.—Impromptu Concerts are still boomed and we appreciate the
efforts of " Jack Risden," who is responsible for promoting their popularity. As for
the artistes, our anticipations have been pleasantly surpassed. R.S.M. Best is heard
to advantage in baritone songs and duets, and in Ind.an love lyrics Sgt. Thomas has
scored. S/Sgt. Bunker, with his Australian bush stories has found an appreciative
audience. C.S.M. Sullivan takes the palm with his " Efficacy of Prayer." Sgt. Fair-
bairn, too, has been a willing entertainer. The songs of Capt. Potts and Lieut. Jones,
together with their innate good humour, have merited the appreciation of all on board.
We should like to hear Dickinson at monologue again.
SOIXANTE DEUX COSTUME COMEDY COMPANY. -"Jack Risden" has
affected a big improvement in his numbers. Allan has come out well; Sherwood has
caught on, likewise Doc. O'B. Duke Wellington can sing as well as draw teeth; in
fact he can do justice to "ether." Les Bennet and Fred Anson, pianists, deserve com-
mendation.
'Page Five


Going Home
| The Padre's Page. I
»& <t
Padre Qwynn's Farewell " Tip."
4 \XT THEN you get back to your friends what do you intend to do ?" I have put
\X/ this question to many a "digger." Very often—too often, the answer has
* * been : " I intend to look round for a while and then, etc., etc."
Now, don't do that. It's only in the majority of cases the way of saying, " 1
mean to get rid of my money—my deferred pay —I mean to join the army of loafers and
drifters eloquent about the ills of their country, etc. No don't look round— or up, or to
the left or right- but look at the job right at your toes. It does not matter what it is,
jump into it at once—the very next day if possible. Take fhe plunge, it is worth it.
Have some ambition, for instance, to improve on that job. Have some objective in life;
for instance so to live —so to do your work, that in a few years you will be in a position
to visit—either alone or with a friend —the scenes you knew as a digger—but this time
in style as a iirst-class passenger. It is all in your own hands, but please remember
you will never achieve anything by looking round for a while."
R.C. SERVICES.
SUNDAYS. —Mass at 7 a.m. in Smoke Room, No. 27, and at 10 a.m. in Music Room.
Instruction and special music.
WEEK DAYS. —Every day without fail Mass is celebrated in Smoke Room, No. 27,
at 7 a.m.
Father Gwynn wishes every Catholic on board to know that he may perform
his duty—Confession and Holy Communion—any day during the voyage.
From the C. cf E. Padre.
A few words of retrospection and anticipation as this number goes to press. Half
our voyage is nearly over and there is every prospect of completing the other
half well up to scheduled time. Many things have contributed to the success
of our trip so far, not the least being the willingness of all ranks to make the best of
existing circumstances. Intellectual and social opportunities have been availed of,
which I am sure have greatly helped to pass the time with profit as well as pleasure.
I am especially gratified at the attendance at Church Service on Sundays, because I
feel that the key to real contentment is to be found here. I hope however that more
will feel disposed to come forward to partake of Holy Communion in accordance with
Our Lord's express command. Opportunity for this is provided every morning of the
week at 6.45 in Music Room. Let us strive to make the last stage of the voyage a time
of real preparation for meeting our home people, by taking hold of ourselves and recti-
fvin<>' anything that needs adjustment in our habits and mode of life. Our loved ones
have been true to us, let us strive to be true to ourselves, so that our re-union with them
may be the happier.
'Page Six


Going Home
e §
| Saloon. a
s s
At the Fancy Dress Ball on the " Anchises
We were treated to heaps of surprises,
But I venture to think
That " Potts " as the " Chink"
Well deserved his small share of the prizes. — W.P.A.
Amusements.
AFTER leaving Devonport it was suggested that a Committee be formed to
arrange a programme of sports for the voyage. A meeting was held and the
following were elected: —Mrs. Murrell, Sister Haggard, Sister Harnott, Major
Sampson, Eng. Lt. Groves (Hon. Sec.), Mr. Hornibrook (Hon. Treas.), Mr. Downing,
Mr. Sievers, and Bg.-Gen. J. H. Cannan, President, ex-officio member of Committee.
Sports were arranged and played off as follows :
Deck Quoits, Gentlemen's Doubles — Deck Quoits, Mixed Doubles: —
Winners, ist, McKay and Peake;
2nd, Green and Sievers.
Deck Quoits, Ladies' Doubles —
ist, Misses Hoddinott and Cooke ;
2nd, Sisters Frost and Doolan.
Whistling Race, Gents' Whistling—
ist, Capt. and Mrs. Adams; 1
2nd, Mr. and Mrs. Green.
Blindfold Driving, Ladies' Driving—
ist, Mrs. Lewis and Maj. Marks ;
2nd, Miss Hoddinott and Lt. Gallon.
Putting the Tail on the Pig—
ist, Lt. Addison; 2nd, Mrs. Tozer.
Potato Race, Ladies' —
ist, Sister Hammond; 2nd, Mrs.
Campbell.
ist, Mr. and Mrs. Campbell ;
2nd, Matron Ross and Deare.
Deck Tennis, Singles, Gents'—
ist, Mr. Thomas ;
2nd, Lt. Jones.
Whistling Race, Ladies' Whistling—
Winners, Mrs. Lewis and Eng. Lt.
Jones.
Blindfold Driving, Gents' Driving—
ist, Mr. and Mrs. Jones;
2nd, Capt. and Mrs. Davies.
Potato Race, Gents' —
ist, Lt. Gallon; 2nd, Lt. Tozer.
Wheelbarrow Race —
Winners, Bg.-Gen. Cannan and
Lt. Frazer.
It is intended to carry on with these sports after leaving Durban.
fancy Dress Evening
ON Tuesday evening (gth inst.) a Fancy Dress Evening was held which turned
out quite a success. Nearly everyone participated and prizes were awarded as
follows, Ladies' Most Original: ist, 86, Glaxo, Sister Keenan ; 2nd, 40, Topsy,
Sister Kellick. Best Fancy Dress : ist, 70, Squaw, Mrs. Murrell. Other prizes : 24,
Naval, Mrs. Clayton ; 100, Elizabethan, Mrs. Kran. Men's Best Fancy Dress: 66,
Eastern Type, Capt. Hamilton. Most Original : 96, Stork, Major Meyers. Others :
7, Pussyfoot, Mr. Thomas ; 109, " Chink," Capt. Potts. CHILDREN: 102, Kathleen
Murchison ; 103, Lizzie Halcrow ; 39, Diana Cumberlege.
'Vcige Seven


Going Home
t3^r?3Cj3C^CS3Cj3l?3t^C!3C^Cj![JCSCS^^^lt3Cj3C?3^^CS3®
| Ship Song. f
£> &
This
L.D.
song (to a popular tune) has been entered in the Ship's Competition by
Air: —" Till the Boys Come Home.
We're returning from Old " Blighty,"
They are calling clear " Come Home,"
And its now we're on the journey
'Cross the ocean's boundless foam.
Here is luck, then, to our good shij
As her way she ploughs along !
And although we strike some rough seas
Here's the burden of our song.
Refrain : —Keep the screws aturning,
Hearts for home are yearning,
Though the folk are far away
Each day nears home ;
So we're far from pining,
There's a sun ashining,
And its light shall show the way
That leads back home.
We will not forget the parting
In the thought of what's ahead,
And we'll pull right well together,
No more swinging of the lead.
We've a bonny ship beneath us
And the Southern Cross above,
So its just one song is needed
As we near the Land we love.
Refrain.
The Ull
Blacks.
WE are right glad to welcome these fellow-countrymen. And we congratulate
them on their splendid record in South Africa. The Australian eleven takes
the place they have vacated—yet another feature to the Common Scroll of
our mutual activities abroad. And we noticed that they left a few members of the fair
sex behind in a somewhat distressed condition —not unique for New Zealanders
unknown but perhaps it s the knack ol victory.
Page Eight


!
'


*
H.M.A.T, "Anchises"
Devonport to Australia
August to October, 1919
