

) '
i “ GOING TO JESUS.” 1
\ •'
/ /
A SHORT ACCOUNT
/
\ •'
) OF ; ;
isvsgis iiitii. i
JOHN MAC DONALD,
( EBENEZER CHAPEL MISSION, RILEY STREET , j
] SURRY HILLS. i
................................................... v ;
J SYDNEY, N.S.W.,
V \
;
\ •
GEO. LOKTON AND CO., PRINTERS, BRIDGE STREET.
1884. )
\




“GOING TO JESUS.”
A SHORT ACCOUNT
JOHN MAC DONALD
EBENEZER CHAPEL MISSION, RILEY STREET,
SURRY HILLS.
SYDNEY, N.S.W.J
GEO. LOXTON AND CO., PRINTERS, BRIDGE STREET,
1884.




“doing to |esns.”
AYE you ever considered the wonderful work
of God in the soul of man ; how, by a mys-
terious and unseen power the inner being is
completely changed—“ turned,” in the language
of the Apostle, “from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God ?”
Have you ever considered your need of
Christ? When exposed to the condemning
power of God’s holy law, conscience pleading guilty, with
nothing to lean on before a righteous and sin-avenging God—
what is it you need in such an hour ? How precious is Christ
then —in the suretyship of His person, and the satisfaction
to God’s justice effected by His spotless life and His
atoning death— to shield you from the threatenings of
the broken Law, and what joy in hearing His glorious voice,
above the storms of conscience, commanding peace to the trou-
bled spirit—“ Son, daughter, thy sins are forgiven thee, go in
peace.” Or, entering the dark valley and shadow of death—
how precious His presence and power to banish the fear of evil,
and how precious His rod and staff to impart comfort and hope.
Yet this is the great work God is carrying on in His spiritual


kingdom ; and Christ, the soul’s great need, is what He sup-
plies. “ Behold I have given Him,” He says. He is a double
gift; He gave Himself. “ Who gave Himself for our sins.”
The following narrative affords a touching illustration of the
work just referred to ; and of the amplitude and suitability of
Christ for the deep spiritual necessities of the soul; and
although that fulness and suitability are sufficient for all the
exigencies of human life, we have here a powerful exemplifica-
tion of their sufficiency in the near prospect of eternity.
Gussie Jerome was a bright, black-eyed little boy of about
fourteen, who lived on Surry Hills, Sydney. He was one of the
first boys to attend the Sabbath School in connection with the
Ebenezer Chapel Mission, at Eiley-street. This Mission was
established at the end of 1879, and the School some months
later.
Gussie was always regular in his attendance ; and besides
being one of the best-behaved boys in the School, he always had
his lessons well learnt, and paid dutiful attention to his Teach-
ers. Gussie also used to attend the Mission services, and was
noticed by many as a quiet and attentive little fellow whenever
he was there, whether by himself, or in company with his
mother, his brother, and sister.
Gussie was well-behaved at home. Many boys and even
grown-up people, when amongst strangers can make themselves
very pleasant and agreeable, and thus those who see them only
under this favourable aspect form high opinions of them, and
think them very good indeed ; but when at home, amongst
their friends and relatives, they come out in their true colours —
they do not care whose feelings they hurt, nor how disagreeable
they make themselves. Now this is very bad, the evil such
persons do is twofold: they both inflict upon themselves the
formation of a most despicable character, and earn the well-
merited contempt of all right-thinking people. Gussie Jerome
was obedient to his widowed mother, he was fond of his little
brother and sister, and was obliging to everybody. When he
thought he could help towards his mother’s support, he took a
situation where he earned a small sum every week, and this he
cheerfully gave her regularly.


Although not in the most favourable circumstances for ac-
quiring a taste for reading, Gussie Jei'ome made the most of those
he possessed. He had received a present of several volumes of
a work on natural history, and these he used to read whenever
he had an opportunity. He became so deeply interested in the
work that he often delighted his mother by relating to her the
habits of animals to be found in far-off countries, the adventures
of travellers with them in those distant regions, and otherwise
going over in his own language the substance of what he had
been”reading. Although it is not judicious to press upon young
people the culture of a literary taste to such an extent as to risk
the more important consideration of health, it surely would
add much to the pleasure of the domestic circle to do so within
reasonable limits. The selection of suitable books for young
people, and the encouragement of conversations regarding their
contents, in order to prove that their reading is intelligent, would
lend additional pleasure to the home evenings, and form associ-
ations that in future years would be cherished among the most
pleasing recollections of early life. lam sure Gussie s mother,
and his brother and sister, if spared for many years, will be
touched by the remembrance of his conversations regarding the
books he had been reading; and the memories will be sure to
afford them a peculiar gratification. They cannot fail to
exercise a refining and elevating effect, whatever sadness they
may awaken, on every occasion they recur.
But Gussie’s health began to give way. He had been sent a
message, some distance from home, and while on his way some
unfeeling and thoughtless boys, in another part of the city,
began to molest him, trying to take from him a parcel he was
carrying. While struggling with them, a buggy drove along
the street, and in the sudden dispersion of the little group thus
caused, he came in contact with the vehicle, and was knocked
down, receiving an internal injury. The little fellow never told
anybody of this until towards the end of his illness, which came
on' weeks after he was hurt, and it was only then the true cause
of his sickness became known.
Gussie had to give up his situation. He became too ill to
work. He grew worse, till at last he could not leave his bed.
Then the doctor said it was very serious, in fact that he could
not recover; and his poor mother became greatly distressed at
the prospect of her son being taken away from her.


It was at this time I was informed of his condition by a lady
for whom he used to work. One Friday evening, just after the
Mission Prayer Meeting, she told me poor Gussie was seriously
ill, and not expected to recover, saying his mother would like
me to see him. I went without delay, and found the little
sufferer pale, thin, and wasted, but his black eyes were, if any-
ihing, brighter than ever.
There, I stood by his bedside, while his mother related the
story of his illness to me, with hope lingering against hope that
her boy might yet be raised up, I then addressed myself to
him, feeling the time for speaking was short. What solemn
and important issues had to be dealt with—and in so short a
time ! The power to impart spiritual life rests with who
alone can enlighten the soul to know its need of Christ. Yet He
is pleased to use poor unworthy instruments in this mighty
work; and oh ! how solemn it is to be engaged with one in the
certainty of a near entrance into eternity, upon the great ques-
tion whereon depends his wellbeing.
I was anxious to learn what his state of mind was —from
himself—before saying much to him: but perhaps the con-
versation. which was as follows, will best describe it.
“Well, Gussie,” I said, getting close beside him, “ I see you
are far from well. Do you suffer much pain ?”
“ Yes, sometimes it is very bad.”
“ And do you think sometimes you may not get better ?”
“ Yes.”
“ Well, Gussie, I suppose you pray sometimes ; do you ?”
“ I can’t get up now,” he said.
“ But, my dear boy, you don’t need to get up to pray. The
Lord Jesus doesn’t want you to do that now. You can pray
as you are lying in your bed just as well as if you got up and
knelt at your bedside : and then, if you are too weak to speak,
He knows the thoughts of your heart, and you can pray
thinking.”
He looked at me quite interested, and I continued :
“You must pray a good deal to the Lord Jesus. Just
you begin to speak to Him. He is here now —you can’t see
Him, but He sees you, and He knows all about you. And then
He is very fond of boys ; He loves young people to go to Him
and speak to Him in prayer, you know.”


“ Yes,” said lie, brightening up, “ Don’t you remember He
said, 4 Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not for of such is the kingdom of Heaven.’ ”
44 Yes, Gussie, so he did. Just you begin to speak to Him,
and ask Him if it is His will, to make you better —and if not,
ask Him to take you to Himself.”
After a short pause .he said, 44 1 would sooner liye.”^
44 Yes, my boy, who wouldn’t ? But if it is His will to take
you away, wouldn’t you like Him to do what seems to Him
best.”
To this he assented.
He remained thoughtful for a ew minutes, and then looking
at me again, he said,
44 They say the streets are gold there.”
44 Oh, yes,” I replied, much affected by this touching remark,
44 the streets are paved with gold, and the gates are pearl. And
there are no sick people there —the inhabitant never says, 44 1
am sick.’ ”
44 No?” he remarked, inquiringly.
44 No,” I added, 44 and there is no night there.”
4 ‘ Isn’t there, how is that ?”
4 ' There is no need of the sun or the moon, for the Lord God
is the glory of that blessed place.”
44 1 think I should like to go there,” he said, 44 then I shall see
my little sister, and my father, and my grandfather.”
His poor mother, who was much affected during this con-
versation, here remarked, 44 Oh, yes, Mr. MacDonald, his grand-
father was a good man, if ever there was one.” v
44 Yes, my boy,” I added, 44 you would see them. But I tell
you who you would see besides. You would see Jesus —with
the print of the crown of thorns on His brow, and of the nails
in His hands and feet, and of the spear in His side ; and oh!
how glorious to see Him now. He is so glorious to look upon;
wouldn’t you like to see Him ?”
His face lit Tip with a beautiful and joyous smile at the
thought of this, and he seemed to realize the prospect as he
answered 44 Yes.”
44 Well, now, Gussie, my boy, I think we had better engage
in prayer for a little, and we’ll speak to the Lord Jesus, Would
you like me to do that ?”


“ Yes.”
“ Well, your mother and I will kneel down, then you will
pray first, never mind how short j after you have done, I will
pray.”
His poor mother, quite overcome in these affecting circum-
stances, and myself unable to resist the tide of feeling they gave
risato, knelt down accordingly to pray.
Little Gussie began. He repeated the Lord’s Prayer slowly
and distinctly from beginning to end ; then came his address to
the Lord Jesus; —
“ Oh, Lord, are you going to take me away, or will you leave
me here a little longer. Amen.”
I then prayed, committing the lad to the tender care of Him
who gathers the lambs in His arms and canies them His
bosom, and the burdened mother with all her cares to Him who
is the great burden-bearer.
The next time I called he seemed like one who had suddenly
grown into manhood. His eyes were brighter, and his face
more radiant, as I entered the room.
“ Good morning, Gussie, how are you to-day ?”
“ Good morning,” said he, “ I have been praying all the time
since you were here before.”
“ Have you ? And do you think the Lord has heard you ?
“Oh yes, I know Hs has. Pm going to Jesus.”
“You must ask Him to take away all your sin, to make you
pure and clean, by washing you in His precious blood. The
blood of Christ, God’s Son, cleanseth us from all sin. It is by
the blood that He cleanses from sin—isn’t it wonderful ?”
“Yes. I can’t make it out.”
“ You see, Gussie, the blood is the life—the life of Jesus, the
Son of God, was pure and holy, there was no sin in Him—and
so when He laid down His life for sinners, it was a pure and
spotless life : He offered Himself without spot unto God ; and
thus when God imputes to a sinner the merit of that great
offering He puts away the sinner’s sinful life, and makes over
to him the benefits of the sinless life of Christ his surety.”
“ Yes, I see,” he said. . . , .
We continued in conversation for some time, and when it was
necessary to leave, I again asked the boy to engage in prayer.
He then began, “ Oh Lord, I want you to take away all my


sins, and to make me pure and holy by the blood of Jesus.
Amen.”
Again we committed the dear boy to the tender care of Him
who careth for such, and took leave of him and his mother
deeply impressed with the solemn circumstances.
My next interview was on Sabbath morning before the Mis-
sion Service. Gussie was as bright and intelligent as ever. He
had been speaking to his mother, his brother and his sister, and
several young conpanions, and exhorted them all to seek the
Lord. He urged the young people to attend the Sabbath School,
and to be diligent in learning the way to Jesus—for he himself,
he said, was going to Jesus, and he wanted them to come there
too. He also left directions for the distribution of his little
collection of books, which consisted principally of religious
works he had received as prizes at the Sabbath School.
It was during one of these intervals he received a visit
from his grandmother, who had come from a distance to
see him. She had heard of the serious nature of his illness,
and was anxious to impart some comfort to her widowed
daughter in the hour of her trial—but her desire to see Gussie
was intensified by all she had heard of his state of mind, in the
near prospect of his being taken away. Upon seeing his grand-
mother, Gussie remembered a circumstance I shall now
describe.
Once, when in the employment of a tradesman, he was sent by
his master to obtain a sum of money from one of the customers.
Having obtained this amount, and while returning with it, he
happened to play carelessly with one of the pieces of money, a
half-crown, by throwing it up into the air and catching it again.
But he did this once too often, for the last time he tossed it up
he failed to catch it, the half-crown fell to the ground, and was
lost. He searched and searched, but could not find it—it was
gone. Whether covered by the dust, or had rolled away into
a crevice out of sight, it could not be recovered ; and after an
anxious search, such as a sensitive boy, without money of his
own to replace the loss, only could make, he gave it up in
despair. What was to be done ? His heart naturally turned
to his home and to his mother, and accordingly he directed his
steps thither. In going to see his mother he had to pass through


a small grocery shop then kept by his grandmother ; but to his
surprise, the first object that met his eyes was a half-crown, lying
on the outside of a glass case on the counter. There was nobody
in the shop—nobody, as he thought, to see him ; and this was
just what he wanted to take him out of his difficulty, kseyer
thinking of any wrongdoing, but in the childlike impulse which
the temptation gave rise to, he quickly took up the half-ciown,
went away to his master, and gave him the sum of money he
had been sent to collect, concealing the mishap he had experi-
enced, and the means to which he had resorted to make it good.
His grandmother lost her half-crown, but never could learn
the cause of its disappearance. ,
But now, Gussie had advanced to an experience in which the
use of a wrong expedient to hide his carelessness and loss
appeared in its true light, and the very sight of the person he
had wronged brought up vividly before his memory all the
circumstances connected with it. He had already had a
dealing with God regarding the matter, before mentioning it
to any creature; he had confessed his sin with deep
sorrow for it, and prayed for forgiveness. But now he had a
further dealing to engage in with the one he had wronged, and,
accordingly, under a new and better impulse, he addressed him-
self to the work.
“ Grandmother,” he said, “ You never knew who took that
half-crown —I took it;” and, handing her the sum of two shil-
lings and sixpence in small coins, which he had been hoarding
up°out of presents given to him on various occasions since the
circumstance took place, he continued, “ Here it is.
Deeply affected, his grandmother replied by saying, “ No, my
dear child, I don’t want it.”
“ Yes, grandmother, here it is—take it—it’s yours. I know
God will forgive me, and I want you to forgive me too.”
Perfection is not to be looked for amongst men, far less
amongst children. Gussie Jerome was no exception to the rule,
but he left on record fewer faults to be deplored than most boys
of his age. What a reflection for boys ! Dear young friends,
who read this, let your parents have the same to say of you.
There was in Gussie’s life only one fault of so serious a nature
that it could be wished it had never occurred; but it is now
described because it was overruled by the hand of God for good


—and in the light of Gussie’s own course of action regarding it,
revealed the power of that inward change in his being, bringing
forth the fruit of holiness which is by Jesus Christ to the praise
and glory of God.
He must have had a wonderful experience of Divine teaching
during that short period. Simple in his faith and strong in its
grasp, he laid hold on the hope set before him—and the settled
and peaceful result of God’s dealing with him was the blessed
and near prospect of going to be with the Lord. Jesus in His
preciousness was revealed to him, and the desire to go to Him
grew so strong as to overcome all others.
His salutation to me that Sabbath morning was, “ I’m going
to Jesus.” No time to speak of his poor wasted body—nor of
the pain and weakness he felt, though these must have been very
trying. After some brief intercourse with him, we approached
the Lord in prayer, and I then proceeded to the duties of the
day.
When the evening service was concluded, I went, in company
with my aged mother, who happened to be at the chapel that
evening, to visit the dying boy. On entering the room the
bright black eyes met us, lighting up the pale face of the young
sufferer. My mother sat close beside him, while I told him
whom I had'brought to see him. “ I’m going to Jesus,” was his
salutation to her. By this time she had taken hold of his hand,
which she was stroking gently, and she said, “ Yes, my boy,
you are going to Jesus. I once had a dear boy about the same
age as you, and he has gone to Jesus long ago. Jesus will
gather you in his arms and carry you in his bosom,” and
continuing in this strain she spoke of the tender love of Christ
for the young of his flock. Deeply affected, save the boy who
was resting not only in peaceful trust, but also in the confident
hope which God gives to his own, we once more approached
the Throne of Grace, and committing the soul of the young one
to God—the mother to His tenderness and care —we came
away, in the expectation that we should come to witness further
manifestations of the Lord’s dealings with His young servant.
On visiting the house on the following evening, I learnt that
about mid-day he had gone to Jesus.
“ Mr. MacDonald,” said his mother, “ I’ve lost my boy—but


oh ! if you’d only heard him speak ! All the pain and grief of
my loss have been taken away ; I couldn’t wish him back again.
He said he was going to Jesus.” “ Lord Jesus,” he “I m
ready, when are you coming—when are you coming ?” then
turning to his mother, “ I’m going to Jesus. Tell Mr. Mac-
Donald, when he comes to-night, that I’ve gone to Jesus ; and
tell that dear old lady, his mother, when you see her, that I’ve
gone to Jesus. She was so kind, and took me by the hand when
she spoke to me about the boy that went to Jesus. I wish she
could have staid with me.” He was full of joyous assurance
realizing the presence of his Saviour, and saying, “ Lord Jesus,
lam waiting, lam ready to go—when are you coming ? His
mother, on asking him if he was sure he was going to be with
the Lord Jesus, received this remarkable reply, “ I am with
Him now; and thus —whilst calling on the Lord, “ Lord Jesus,
I’m ready, I’m all ready now —his ransomed soul left its clay
tabernacle, and went to Jesus, on the 19th February, 1883 —to
be for ever with the Lord, and to take his place among the
redeemed from among men who praise God and say —“ Unto
Him who hath loved us, and washed us from our sins in His
blood, unto Him be the glory.”
Fragrant thy memory, dear boy, of that precious influence
which is as ointment poured forth ; and though thy lips are
now silent in death, thou yet speakest in those words of simple
power, which we listen to in the utterances of memory.
He has gone—to be with Jesus.
“ Lo, this is our God, ice have waited for Him, and He will save
us; this is the Lord, we have ivaited for Him —iveivill be glad and
rejoice in His salvation .”
Geo. Loxton & Co., Printers, Sydney.


j ror
Me
■S


