

Gold Saving Without Water.
THE DRY
GOLD SEPARATING
PROCESS.
PHILLIPS’ PATENT DRY GOLD SEPARATOR
AND ORE PRESSER.


The Phillips’Dry Gold Separating and Ore Dressing
Company of Western Australia, Limited,
Is prepared to Supply and Erect
COMPLETE PLANTS FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
For Price, Terms, and Particulars annlv


PHILLIPS’S PATENT DRY GOLD “ |
* SEPARATOR.
.GOLD SAVING WITHOUT WATER. [
For- Nearly half a century the Cornish stamp hat- £
(err has maintained an undisputed pre-eminence f
for' : he extraction of gold from quartz or cement, j
This is called the wet process, and whilst it has
not as yet been superseded by dry crushing it
iia idmittedly many faults, especially in the loss j
of fine gold, which will always float away in the
slimes and sand produced by the stampers, p
Thc-efore the present percentage of extrac-
tion by the ordinary battery process throughout
Australasia shows, with the exception of a few in- "
stances, a large loss on the actual gold contents of
the ore. To effect and obtain a higher extraction ■
of gold has for many years been the object of the 1
inpsc skilled mining engineers of the century. Mr. -
Charles Phillips has recently had a plant con- 1
structed at Buncle’s Parkside Ironworks, North
Melbourne. This plant has been made to the order !
of a Melbourne gold-mining company, who own a
cement lease in the Coolgardie district. And an-
uth r company has been formed here to supply
similar plants to the Western Australia
g , mines. The method of treatment may be
bi ly described as a system of gradual reduction,
followed by mechanical separation (without water
nercury) by means of endless belt-shaking
tab es, which are in reality dry vanners, and these i
arc fed by a screening and classifying ap- E
paratus. in the treatment of the ore the
material' is first crushed by stone-breakers j
and rollers, thence it passes into a shaking
! screen, which is so constructed as to retain large
pie< es of gold or ore. The tailings from the screen J
j then go back to the rollers for further treatment,
.sf the bulk passes on to the classifiers, off
which there are six in number. In the automatic
classification of the crushed material before con-
cern ration this process is most complete,
and the vanners are also properly regulated
to retain tiie concentrates according to the
richness and nature of the material. Yesterday <
aftcinoott the plant was given a trial, and the
whole of the machinery worked smoothly and
systematically. After running for a short time 1 -
some of the finished concentrates were panned off,
and from the results obtained even the very finest'
float of gold had been saved. From another trial
of Ibis plant, which took place on the previous
day, it is claimed that 95 per cent, of the
' gold in the cement treated had been saved.


The Phillips’ Dry Gold Separating and Ore Dressing
Company of Western Australia, Limited,
Is prepared to Supply and Erect
COMPLETE PLANTS FOR WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
For Price, Terms, and Particulars apply
OFFICES OF THE COMPANY:
98 ELIZABETH STREET (The Block),
MELBOURNE.
J. M‘A. HOWDEN,
Secretary,




GOLD SAVING WITHOUT WATER.
PHILLIPS’ PATENT PHY GOLD SEPARATING AND ORE
PHESSING PROCESS.
PHILLIPS’ Dry Gold Separating and Ore Dressing Process may be shortly
described as a system of gradual reduction, followed by mechanical separa-
tion, without water or mercury, by means of endless belt-shaking tables
or dry vanners, together with a suitable screening and classifying apparatus.
THE ADVANTAGES.
The advantages of the process are —
No water is required in the process.
No mercury is used or amalgamation necessary, and it is free
from the difficulties set up by the gold being coated with
iron rust, or by the presence of antimony or other
substances which make amalgamation defective.
No blanket washers or tye or buddle men are required. There
are, therefore, fewer attendants to pay than in the wet
treatment by the stamper battery.
The light, free condition of the dry material admits of quicker
handling and more perfect separation than can be effected
by any known wet process; while there is ample provision
to prevent escape of dust, and to save and treat it.
As agitation only, without any current of either air or water, is
used to cause the separation and discharge of the waste
mat era I, gold cannot be too fine to be saved.
The machinery required is less costly and not half the weight
of that used in the battery process.
It is less expensive than any other method, gives better results,
and is very simple in its application.
TREATMENT.
The material, after being crushed (preferably by stonebreaker and rolls),
passes into a revolving shaking screen of a somewhat course mesh, which is so
constructed as to retain large pieces of gold or ore. The tailings from the


screen then go hack to the rolls for farther crushing, while the bulk passes on
to the classifiers.
Six vanners and a screening and classifying apparatus are used. The
classifier automatically divides the material into five classes or sizes, four of
which, being sufficiently fine, are discharged on to their respective vanners. The
other, being coarse, is (after having the gold and mineral separated from it)
returned to the crusher.
Four of the vanners work as concentrators, saving the gold and pyrites,
and other valuable mineral. The crushed ore, after being automatically classified,
delivers itself on to these, and the bulk of the gangue, or waste material, runs oft
by reason of the shaking motion at the lower end as exhausted tailings; while a
small proportion of the gangue, carrying with it the whole of the gold and
valuable mineral, is carried upwards by the revolving belt and falls over the
heads of the vanners, which are regulated to retain the concentrates according to
the richness and nature of the material.
Another vanner is used for separating the coarse gold and ore from the
•coarse grade of sand, the tailings from it returning to the crusher, thus making
the loss of coarse gold impossible.
The finishing vanner, slightly differing in construction, separates the free
gold from the concentrates produced by the four concentrating vanners, and
delivers it clean enough for melting, and also dresses up the concentrates clean for
•chemical or metallurgical treatment.
The loss of the finer gold may be rendered practically impossible, even
where the gold is of the most ragged and spongy character, by adjusting the
concentrating vanners so as not to concentrate too closely.
Where there is extremely fine gold or ore, the dust discharged by the
classifier is saved by a dust collector, and treated by a vanner specially
constructed for that purpose.
This plant requires, as attendants, only two men—a feeder and engine
driver—and will treat up to three tons per hour. For larger quantities
additional concentrating and finishing vanners are required, the material being
divided by the classifier into as many classes as there are concentrating tables
used.
Stone from the size of lin. cube upwards may be crushed as it comes from
a wet mine, and can be treated by this process, but fine stuff requires to be dry.
Should the ore require drying, a “ drier” is provided. This consumes only a
small quantity of firewood for each ton of ore dried, this being the only


additional cost, as the attendant then feeds the ore-drier instead of the crushing
machine, all other parts of the plant working automatically. A medium-sized
ore-drier dries two tons per hour.
For treating smaller quantities, or for treating tailings or auriferous sea
beach or river sand, or alluvial gold or tin, the same number of vanners or the
screening or classifying apparatus may not be required. But for these purposes a
specially designed plant and crushing machinery is supplied.
NOTES UPON PHILLIPS’ AND OTHER PROCESSES.
From the earliest days of the present era of gold mining it has been recog-
nised that an effective dry method of gold separating and ore dressing would be
an invaluable desideratum in countries or districts having but a restricted supply
of water. And it is now recognised by the well-informed that methods in which
amalgamation is chiefly relied upon for arresting the gold are never likely to be
anything but defective in treating large quantities when a current of water is
used for carrying away the waste products. The present percentage of extraction
by the ordinary battery process throughout Australia, except in a few instances,
ranges between 40 and 80 per cent.
In view of these facts, both the European and American—and, to some
extent, the Australian—engineers and inventors have given their attention to
the working out of dry processes, expending many thousands of pounds in
their efforts, but they have nearly all been directed to making appliances in
which air is used as a medium of separation instead of water, or in machines in
which it is sought to bring about a separation by centrifugal action. These
sometimes answer fairly well in treating such substances as alluvial wash
containing only coarse gold, but have never achieved anything more than a very
partial success.
There are a certain very limited number of types of processes and apparatus
that may be used for mechanical separation of gold from pulverous earth or for
ore dressing. These are all well known, and it is to the last degree improbable
that anything entirely new in this direction will ever be discovered. All the
appliances that are in use are of these types or modifications of them. But
until now the Endless Belt-shaking Table or “ Yanner ” (as the type of machine
now introduced is called) appears to have been entirely overlooked by those in
search of a mechanical dry method for the concentration of mine products,
although it is the only one under which ore dressing and the separation of gold
from sands can be conducted which will give satisfactory results.


Perhaps the non-success of the processes hitherto tried after so many years
of experiment has confirmed the impression of nearly all those engaged or
interested in mining, or operations connected therewith, that water is a necessity
in the extraction of gold or ore from its matrix; and though many know that
anything like a close extraction is not economically obtained while using water,
it is looked upon, as a matter of course, as indispensable, and that its use cannot
be avoided.
But, be that as it may, this view is a mere habit of thought, as is also the
idea that a medium or current, such as water or air, is necessary to separation,
as with dry material agitation or shaking only is necessary. It is mainly owing
to the use of a medium or current that the existing difficulty in saving fine gold
or ore arises, as the gold or ore is invariably associated with particles of gangue
which are coarser than a portion of the gold or ore. A current of sufficient
power to carry away the coarse particles of gangue must of necessity be used,
and this current is powerful enough to carry away the finer particles of gold or
ore. In all the more advanced methods of ore dressing and gold saving the
material is classified or reduced to a number of different grades of size in the
endeavour to get rid of this difficulty, but the gold is always, without any
exception, no matter under what system of classification, whether wet or dry,
associated with particles of earth which are coarser than itself, and so the current,
either water or air, necessary to carry off the coarsest particles of earth in each
class is sufficient to carry off the finer particles of gold in the class treated.
By Phillips’ method of dry separation by agitation only this difficulty is
overcome, as the coarser particles run off freely as tailings, while the finest and
heaviest rapidly subside, and, on coming in contact with the revolving belt, are
carried by it upwards as concentrates.
A number of wet processes and machines using water have lately been
advertised as semi-wet processes, requiring only a comparatively small supply of
water, etc. It may not be out of place to here point out that the quantity of
water used by any wet process depends upon the dryness of the material at
starting. The quantity absorbed during treatment varies with the fineness to
which the material is crushed, to which is to be added that lost by evaporation,
by soakage and leakage; and this without reference to any particular kind of
process or machinery. Therefore, allowing for unavoidable leakage or evaporation,
or for bad management in saving water for re-use, which is a variable quantity,
all wet processes use precisely the same quantity of water when dealing with the
same material crushed to a similar degree of fineness, the volume of water
used increasing rapidly with the fineness of the crushing. Phillips* process
overcomes all these difficulties, and gives the best results for the
least cost.


NOTE.—The first plant constructed by The Phillips' Dry Gold
Separating & Ore Dressing Company of Western Australia,
Limited, was purchased, while in course of manufacture, by the
Ormuz Gold Mining Company, Limited, subject to its being satisfied
after trial. This plant is capable of treating from 200 tons to 500
tons per week, according to the character of the ore. Under the
superintendence of their Manager, it was tested by putting over a
quantity of their ore brought from their property in Western
Australia, and the following Is a copy of the forma! notification
of satisfaction :
From Ormuz Gold Mining Company, Limited,
31 Queen Street,
Melbourne, 22 nd May, 1896.
To Alfred Ernest Buncle, The Parkside Iron Works, North Melbourne, Iron
Founder, and
The Phillips’ Dry Gold Separating and Ore Dressing Company of
Western Australia, Limited, whose Registered Offiee is The Block,
Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
Pursuant to the power conferred by the ninth article of the Agreement of
the eleventh day of February, 1896, between—you, the said A. E. Buncle, of the
first part, Charles Phillips, of the second part, you, the said Phillips’ Dry Gold
Separating and Ore Dressing Company of Western Australia, Limited, of the
third part, and the Ormuz Gold Mining Company, Limited, whose Registered
Office is 31 Queen Street, Melbourne, of the fourth part. The Ormuz Gold
Mining Company, Limited, hereby notifies to you, respectively, that the
last-named Company is satisfied with the test of the plant in the said
Agreement before referred to; and you, the said A. E. Buncle, are hereby requested
to take down and pack the said plant, and mark on such packages as the said
Charles Phillips may desire, for carriage to Western Australia, and to ship the
same free on board the Gabo vessel, advertised to sail from Port Melbourne to
Western Australia on Saturday, the thirtieth of May instant.
Dated this twenty-second day of May, 1896.
By order of the Board of Directors of the Ormuz Gold Mining Company,
Limited.
A. CURWEN COLLIER,
Secretary.


EXTRACTS FROM REFERENCES TO THE PROCESS.
ARGUS, 21 st May, 1896.
PHILLIPS’ PATENT DRY GOLD SEPARATOR.—GOLD SAYING WITHOUT
WATER.
For nearly half a century the Cornish stamp battery has maintained an undisputed pre-
eminence for the extraction of gold from quartz or cement. This is called the wet process, and
whilst it has not, as yet, been superseded by dry crushing, it has admittedly many faults,
especially in the loss of tine gold, which will always float away in the slimes and sand produced by
the stampers. Therefore, the present percentage of extraction by the ordinary battery process
throughout Australasia shows, with the exception of a few instances, a large loss on the actual
gold contents of the ore. To effect and obtain a higher extraction of gold has for many years
been the object of the most skilled mining engineers of the century. Mr. Charles Phillips has
recently had a plant constructed at Buncle’s Parkside Ironworks, North Melbourne. . . .
The method of treatment may be briefly described as a system of gradual reduction,
followed by mechanical separation (without water or mercury) by means of endless belt-
shaking tables, which are in reality dry winners, and these are fed by a screening and
classifying apparatus. In the treatment of the ore, the material is first crushed by stone-breakers
and rollers, thence it passes into a shaking screen, which is so constructed as to retain large pieces
of gold or ore. The tailings from the sci*een then go back to the rollers for further treatment,
whilst the bulk passes on to the classifiers, of which there are six in number. In the automatic
classification of the crushed material before concentration tins process is most complete, and
the vanners are also properly regulated to retain the concentrates according to the richness
and nature of the material. Yesterday afternoon the plant was given a trial, and the whole of the
machinery worked smoothly and systematically. After running for a short time some of the
finished concentrates were panned off, and, from the results obtained, even the very finest float of
gold had been saved. From another trial of this plant, which took place on the previous day, it is
claimed that 95 per cent, of the gold in the cement treated had been saved.
AGE, 21 st May, 1896.
A NEW GOLD SAYING MACHINE.
A new gold saving machine . . . has just been patented by Mr. Charles Phillips,
engineer, of Melbourne. One of his machines, capable of putting through 500 tons of material
per week, was tested yesterday at the maker’s works, Buncle’s foundry, North Melbourne, with
great success, in the presence of a number of experts. This plant, which is of considerable
dimensions, is a dry separating contrivance. The quartz to be dealt with is put into a receiver
. . . and is there crushed. The pulverised material is then caught up in an elevator and
flung on to 'a mesh, which secures pieces which are still too bulky for treatment, and precipitates
them by a return pipe back into the receiver. In the meanwhile the finely crushed quartz passes,
and is automatically classified. Free gold is at once removed, and, according to the bulk of its
particles, the remainder is dropped at intervals on to several tables, the mere dust being
deposited on the last of them. . . . After treatment of a ton of stuff yesterday under the
superintendence of the manager of the Ormuz mine, Coolgardie, for which enterprise the
plant has been purchased, it was found that 95 per cent, of the gold had been saved. Such
a result is incomparably superior to the best treatment by battery and washing off at Coolgardie,
where, owing to thick water, it is estimated that sometimes half the gold in the quartz dealt with
is lost.


HERALD, mh May, 1896.
GOLD SAYING.—A NEW PROCESS.—NO WATER REQUIRED.
A trial of a patent gold saving process, which will prove of great value, particularly on the
fields where water is scarce, took place at Buncle’s machinery yards, North Melbourne, this after-
noon, in the presence of a large number of gentlemen interested in mining. The process in
question is known as Phillips’ patent dry gold separating and ore dressing process, and, as the
name indicates, it provides a means of separating gold from the ore without the use of water.
Further than this, not only is water not used, hut mercury is also dispensed with. Apart
.altogether from many other advantages, the fact that water is not required is sufficient to indicate
the great value the new process will he on such a field as Coolgardie and others where water is
both scarce and expensive.
Phillips’ process may be shortly described as a system of gradual reduction, followed by
mechanical separation by means of endless belt-shaking tables, together with a suitable screening
and classifying apparatus. The ore, after being crushed, passes into a revolving shaking screen.
What is retained by the screen goes back for further crushing, and the rest passes on to the
classifiers. These automatically divide the material into five classes or sizes, which are dis-
charged into vanners, which work as concentrators, and save the gold, pyrites, and other
valuable minerals, and a finishing vanner separates the free gold from the concentrates and
delivers it clean enough for melting. The process has the additional advantage of requiring but
little manual labour. Only two men —a feeder and an engine-driver —are requisite, and the plant
will treat up to three tons an hour of ore, but the addition of more vanners and classifiers will
increase the quantity which can be treated. Altogether the pi’ocess is one of great promise, and
the trial this afternoon was highly successful.
AUSTRALIAN MINING STANDARD, mh May, 1896.
GOLD SAYING WITHOUT WATER.—A DRY GOLD SEPARATOR.
Last week, at the Parkside Works, North Melbourne, a trial was made of Phillips’ Dry
Gold Separator. Several improvements have of late been made in the machine, and the test
on this occasion was satisfactory, inasmuch as the panning-off showed that a very large per-
centage of the “ float ” gold was saved. The material, after being crushed by stonebreaker,
passes into a revolving shaking screen of a somewhat coarse mesh, which is so constructed
as to retain large pieces of gold or ore. The tailings from the screen then go back to the
rolls for further crushing, while the bulk passes on to the classifiers. The classifier
automatically divides the material into five classes or sizes, four of which, being sufficiently
fine, are discharged on to their respective vanners. The other, being coarse, is (after having
the gold and mineral separated from it) returned to the crusher. Four of the vanners work
as concentrators, saving the gold and pyrites and other valuable mineral. The crushed ore,
after being automatically classified, delivers itself on to these, and the bulk of the gangue
runs off, by reason of the shaking motion at the lower end, as exhausted tailings, while a
small proportion of the gangue, carrying with it the whole of the gold and valuable mineral,
is carried upwards by the revolving belt, and falls over the heads of the vanners, which are
regulated to retain the concentrates according to the richness and nature of the material.
Another vanner is used for separating the coarse gold and ore from the coarse grade of sand,
the tailings from it returning to the crusher. The finishing vanner separates the free gold
from the concentrates produced by the four concentrating vanners, and delivers it clean
•enough for melting, and also dresses up the concentrates for metallurgical treatment. Where
there is extremely fine gold or ore, the dust discharged by the classifier is saved by a dust
collector, and treated by a vanner specially constructed for that purpose. The plant
should be valuable where water is scarce. The Ormuz Company, West Australia, has
ordered a machine on their mine.


Report of J. COSMO NEWBERY, C.M.G., Technological Museum.
I have seen Mr. Charles Phillips’ Dry Gold Separator working, and am
confident that it will separate coarse and fine gold from all dry sands. In the
tests I saw the tailings were free from gold. The machine is simple in
construction, and needs but little power to work it. There are many gold fields
where it would be very useful, as it will save fine gold which escapes from all
ordinary wet machines.
Extract from the Annual Report of A. W. HOWITT, Esq., Secretary for Mines.
“During the year Mr. J. Cosmo Newbery has devoted his .attention, among-
other important matters, to ore concentration, as an important part of the
question of treatment of our lode material, whether auriferous or ore-bearing. He
directs attention to two promising systems of concentration—one a dry process,
invented by Mr. Chas. Phillips, who has carried out his investigations for many
years, and Mr. Newbery considers it to be well worthy of being tried on a large
scale.”
Extract from Report to Secretary for Mines.
By J. C. Newbery, C.M.G., Government Analyst.
“Ore Concentration. —This is still a most important question, for, if we can
profitably concentrate the tailings now on the surface, there are, as has often been
pointed out, millions of tons worth from 10s. to 12s. per ton, and I am pleased to
state there is now a fair prospect of our being able to treat some of this at a
profit. There are two distinct systems —the wet and the dry. Both systems
should receive attention. Mr. Charles Phillips has been continuing his experiments
in dry concentration, and his results are good. I have witnessed many of Mr
Phillips’ experiments, and assayed the material before and after treatment, and I
feel confident that the process is well worth being tried on a larger scale.”
Phillips’ Improved Dry Concentrator.
I have witnessed two test trials of dry crushed auriferous quartz with one
of Phillips’ Endless Revolving Belt-shaking Tables.
The belt consists of canvas, and is an adaption to dry concentration of the
old principle of the green baize belt, and is similar, therefore, to the Frue Vanner
and Triumph Concentrator, which has long been used very successfully for wet
concentration. M
I have no doubt that Phillips’ Tables, fed with properly sized dry crushed
quartz, will prove a remarkably good gold saver, and an excellent substitute for
the ordinary gold amalgamating tables that are attached to all wet crushing
batteries.
For such gold fields as Coolgardie, W.A., I think Phillips’ Dry Concentrating
Tables are eminently adapted.
WILLIAM NICHOLAS, F.G.S., Lon.,
Consulting Mining Engineer.




