

COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS
GOLDEN JUBILEE
1912-1962




Golden Jubilee
of
Commonwealth Railaways
14th September, 1962


His Excellency the Governor-General,
Lord Denman,
turns the first sod.


TRANS-AUSTRALIAN RAILWAY.
The ceremony of turning the first sod of the Trans-Australian Railway
took place at Port Augusta at noon on 14th September, 1912.
The Governor-General said he could assure the gathering that he
esteemed it a great honour, as well as a great pleasure, that he should
have been asked to come to Port Augusta, and perform the ceremony of
turning the first sod of the transcontinental railway. The ceremony itself
was a simple one, but the occasion was most important, and had rightly
been termed historic, because it would find a place not only in the history
of Australia, but in that of the British Empire. An evidence of the im-
portance of this work to the Empire was the fact that he had that morning
received cables from His Majesty King George, and from the Imperial
Government congratulating the Government of Australia and the people
of the Commonwealth upon the event which was about to take place.
The Prime Minister had said that the ceremony had marked the
beginning of the work of building a railway which would link up the
east with the west. But although it might be all that, it was also a
strategic work, because one of its objects was the defence of Australia,
and it would no doubt materially strengthen what was a weak point in
regard to the protection of the Commonwealth. While he hoped and
believed it would contribute to the safety of the country against invasion,
he also hoped it would contribute towards the prosperity of two great
Australian States in South Australia and Western Australia. It would
also bring about a community of interest, which scarcely existed at the
present time, between Western Australia and the southern and eastern
States. It would create a widespread spirit of Australian nationality, and
ultimately it would increase the cordiality and scope of domestic relations
throughout the Commonwealth.


TRANS-AUSTRALIAN RAILWAY
The turning of the first sod for the Trans-Australian Railway at Port
Augusta on 14th September, 1912, by His Excellency Lord Denman,
Governor-General of the Commonwealth, was an event of great national
significance for Australia.
It represented the successful conclusion of long drawn out hopes and
energetic political effort on the part of the people of Western Australia,
and it marked the commencement of the largest public construction work
yet undertaken by the Commonwealth and the entry of the Commonwealth
into the ownership and operation of railways; it was the culminating
factor in adopting 4' gauge as the standard for Australia, but more
important even than these, in establishing the final link required for
connecting the rail services of the five mainland States of Australia, it
more than any public work up to that stage, brought home to the people
of the Commonwealth the realisation that they were a nation with common
aims and a common destiny.
Among the distinguished guests present were His Excellency the
Governor of South Australia (Admiral Sir Day Hort Bosanquet), the
Prime Minister (Rt. Hon. Andrew Fisher), the Attorney-General of the
Commonwealth (Hon. W. M. Hughes), the Minister of Defence (Senator
the Hon. G. F. Pearce), the Minister for Home Affairs (Hon. King
O’Malley), the Premier of South Australia (Hon. A. H. Peake), Rt. Hon.
Sir John Forrest, P.C., G.C.M.G., and a large representation of members
of the Federal Parliament and the Parliaments of South Australia,
Victoria and Western Australia, numbering approximately 100.
The Minister for Home Affairs (Hon. King O’Malley) handed
Lord Denman a full sized shovel with a nickel plated blade and the
shovel full of earth was placed in the wheel barrow alongside. This was
the same barrow used when the first sod was turned for the first section
of the railway from Port Augusta northwards towards Oodnadatta in
1878. At a word from Mr. O’Malley and in time with the music of the
band, the Governor-General pushed the barrow along a plank for about
15 yards and returned it to the starting point. His Excellency found the
plank was useful in the sandy soil where the ceremony took place at a
point above the present cutting just west of the Port Augusta Railway
Station. The proceedings concluded with cheers from the assembled
guests and local inhabitants after which rockets were fired displaying the
Australian flag, the Union Jack and the Stars and Stripes. The Stars and
Stripes owed its recognition to the fact that the Minister for Home Affairs
(Mr. O’Malley) came from the United States. About 250 guests then
went on to a luncheon in the Town Hall.
Since construction was to commence from both the western and
eastern ends of the route, it was intended that a ceremony of turning
the first sod should take place at Kalgoorlie at or near the same time as
the ceremony at Port Augusta. Owing to the illness of Lady Strickland,
wife of Sir Gerald Strickland, Governor of Western Australia, a postpone-
ment of the Kalgoorlie ceremony became necessary although this did not
delay the commencement of earthworks on 16th November, 1912.
On 12th February, 1913, parliamentarians and other distinguished
guests from the Eastern States who had travelled to Fremantle by sea
gathered at Kalgoorlie with distinguished Western Australians to witness
the turning of the first sod ceremonially by the Rt. Hon. Andrew Fisher,
Prime Minister, followed by a luncheon at the Town Hall, a reception
and garden party on the Kalgoorlie racecourse in the afternoon and a
banquet in the evening.
His Excellency the Governor-General,
Lord Denman, receives the gold miniature shovel,
a replica of that used to
turn the first sod.




A YOUNG COMMONWEALTH
It was a young Commonwealth when the first sod was turned at
Port Augusta 11 years after Federation. The population of Australia
was 4\ millions, the Federal consolidated revenue was millions,
compared with £1,642 millions in 1962. New South Wales and Victoria
had been connected by rail (with a break-of-gauge at Albury) in 1883,
Victoria and South Australia in 1887 and New South Wales and
Queensland (with a break-of-gauge at Wallangarra) in 1888.
When the first sod was turned the country to be traversed between
Port Augusta and Kalgoorlie, a distance of 1,051 miles, was waterless
for most of the way and inhabited only by nomadic aboriginal tribes.
For the greater part of its length, the railway was to pass through
country known only to explorers and the parties who made the survey.
EXPLORERS
In 1841, Edward John Eyre, with a black boy Wylie, crossed from
South Australia to King George’s Sound in Western Australia, after
suffering great privations from heat and lack of water, and the murder
of his second in command, Baxter, by two aborigines of the party, who
absconded with the rations. In 1870, John Forrest, who later became
Sir John Forrest and subsequently Ist Baron Forrest of Bunbury, led an
expedition from Perth along the Great Australian Bight to Port Augusta
and Adelaide, and in 1874 he led another expedition on a more northerly
route from Geraldton in Western Australia to the overland telegraph line
in South Australia. Ernest Giles, after an expedition to Lake Amadeus
in 1872 and another in 1873 as far as the Gibson Desert, succeeded in
crossing from South Australia to Western Australia in 1875.
EARLY REPORTS ON THE COUNTRY
In 1872, South Australia had constructed the Overland Telegraph line
connecting with the cable extended from Java to Darwin in the same year,
thus inaugurating through Adelaide, cable communication between
Australia and the rest of the world. The enterprising citizens of Adelaide
later turned their attention to the West to ascertain the mineral and
pastoral prospects for this part of the State. In 1897, Mr. H. Y. L. Brown,
South Australia Government Geologist, was despatched on an expedition
from Fowlers Bay which he reached by sea, thence by camel to the soak
in the sandhills at Ooldea. He then travelled 50 miles to the North West
without finding permanent water and turned East to known water on the
Wilgena pastoral run. At that time the country was suffering from severe
drought and on two occasions the camels travelled without water for
13 days. Some of the camels travelled 234 miles without a drink.
Although it was the month of May and consequently not the hottest time
of the year, this was a remarkable performance indicating how indispens-
able were these patient hardy animals for travelling in this type of country'.
While Mr. Brown’s examination of the country was concerned with
minerals, he was also concerned with the prospects for water so essential
for pastoral purposes. He reported that the Musgrave Ranges, which
formed the watershed to the north, must have an underground drainage
system in the direction of the Great Australian Bight as there was no
drainage on the surface. This proved correct, as it was water from wells
and bores which later on was used for the railway. Mr. Brown also
drew attention to the water bearing Mallee tree, from which water for
human consumption could be drawn from the roots.
In 1884, Mr. Graham Stewart, Superintending Surveyor of South
Australia, made an examination of the country from Port Augusta to
Phillips Ponds (Pimba) for the purpose of selecting the best route for a
railway between those places. He made a further excursion into the
country as far as Tarcoola in 1900, and in 1901 he reported on a route
as far as the Western Australian border. Following the discovery of
gold at Coolgardie in 1892, the population of the Western Australian
goldfields increased rapidly, many of them coming from Victoria and
other Eastern States, and consequently looking forward to a future
railway which would provide more frequent and quicker transit of mails
than the steamships, and provide passenger travel facilities which would
bring them within easier reach of families and friends in the Eastern States.
In 1901, Mr. C. V. O’Connor, Engineer-in-Chief, Western Australia,
submitted a report to the Rt. Hon. Sir John Forrest, Federal Minister for
Defence, giving an estimate of the cost of construction and estimate of
earnings and working expenses for the railway. He estimated the con-
struction cost of a 4' gauge railway as £4,400,000.
In the same year, Mr. John Muir, Inspector of Engineering Surveys
of Western Australia, reported to the Western Australian Parliament
after a preliminary examination of the country from Kalgoorlie to Eucla
“in connection with the proposed Trans-Continental Railway’’.


FEDERATION
In 1899, when there was doubt about Western Australia entering
the Federation of the Australian Colonies, the Premier of South Australia
(Mr. C. C. Kingston) wrote to the Premier of Western Australia “. . . All
the other colonies will, no doubt, be included ... it would be a source
of infinite regret to all if Western Australia were even temporarily omitted
from the closer union so long contemplated ... 1 cannot help thinking
also that it must at no very distant date result in the connection of east
and west by rail ... It is, of course, a work of special interest to Western
Australia and South Australia, and I devoutly hope that the day is not
far distant when the representatives of Western Australia and South
Australia may, in their places in a Federal Parliament, be found working
side by side for the advancement of Australian interests in this and other
matters of national concern”.
On assurances such as these the colony of Western Australia entered
Federation, but as events turned out the Western Australian representatives
in the Federal Parliament did not get support for the railway so freely as
they were led to expect, and a good deal of the resistance came from
South Australia.
The first official mention of the railway in the new Federal Parliament
was made in the inaugural speech of the Governor-General when he
stated —
“The question of the construction of a railway connecting with
these eastern communities the vast and hitherto isolated State of
Western Australia has been under consideration. Examinations of
the country intervening between the railway systems of South and
Western Australia are now in progress together with other inquiries.
It is hoped that they may result in showing that the undertaking is
justifiable.’’
The Commonwealth of course owned no railways at that time, but the
framers of the Constitution made provision under the Commonwealth of
Australia Constitution Act 1900 for the Commonwealth to have certain
powers in regard to railways, among them being “Railway construction and
extension in any State with the consent of the State”.
LORD FORREST OF BUNBURY
It was Sir John Forrest, as he was then, who became the great pro-
tagonist for the construction of the railway. After his explorations he
became Surveyor-General of Western Australia, and later first Premier and
Colonial Treasurer of the Colony. He entered the first Federal Parliament
as member for Swan, held several Ministerial portfolios, including the
Treasureship on three occasions, and Acting Prime Minister in 1907. His
ability as a parliamentarian was put to the test when the survey bill for the
Port Augusta-Kalgoorlie railway came before the Federal Parliament and
it became necessary for him to support the glowing accounts of the
suitability of the intervening country for settlement, against the background
of his published reports on the waterless country he had traversed as an
explorer. Sir John rose to that occasion as he had done on many occasions
before, and at Port Augusta, when the first sod was turned, he recalled
having advocated the railway for 20 years. The explorer John Forrest, in
his journal of 1870, referring to the country north of Eucla, reported not a
tree visible and not a drop of water, but he did say that he passed through
“millions of acres of grassy country” and that he had no doubt that water
would be found underground.
Sir John coined the phrase which became a classic in the Federal
Parliament, a phrase which has often been repeated in the Federal and
State Parliaments and in the press when questions of public expenditure
are under consideration. Sir John was Treasurer at the time, and, while
he was urging the merits of the Trans-Australian Railway, one member
interjected “does the honourable member realise this might cost a million?”.
Sir John put on his spectacles, looked hard at the member and brushed
him off with the remark “What’s a million!”. For Parliament and the
public a million was a million in those distant days, but for Sir John the
railway was worth it whatever it cost.
DEFENCE
On a visit to Australia in 1911, Lord Kitchener had pointed out that the
isolation of Western Australia might at any time become a serious source
of military weakness; that one of the greatest needs of Australia was
systematic, statesmanlike and comprehensive railway extension; that trunk
lines opening up country and developing the fertile districts would stimulate
the growth of population and considerably increase means of defence.


REPORT BY ENGINEERS-IN-CHIEF
OF STATE RAILWAY DEPARTMENTS
In March, 1903, Sir William Lyne, Commonwealth Minister for Home
Affairs, arranged with the State Governments for a Conference of the
Engineers-in-Chief of New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia,
Victoria and Western Australia to consider the question of the proposed
trans-continental railway from Kalgoorlie to Port Augusta, and to report
on the probable cost, revenue and expenditure, the gauge to be adopted,
and other relevant matters. Mr. Henry Deane, Engineer-in-Chief, New
South Wales Railways, was appointed Chairman. The Conference recom-
mended 4' gauge, slating that this had already been adopted by the
Railway Commissioners as the standard for Australia. They recommended
the route via Tarcoola instead of the more direct route towards the Gawler
Ranges. They estimated the cost of construction as £5,090,000. In regard
to the advisability of constructing the railway, they stated that this was
largely a question of “policy and sentiment”, and asked to be excused
from expressing any other opinion than that if the “past progress of
Western Australia is maintained, the line will ultimately be a necessity and
a financial success”.
As a matter of interest, their estimate of earnings and working
expenditure is compared with the actual figures for some typical years:
Working
Revenue Expenses
£ £
1903 Estimates of Engineers-in-Chief:
Initially 205,860 114,400
In 10 years time 411,720 210,000
Actual figures;
First complete year of operation, year
ended 30th June, 1919 .. .. 175,134 243,988
Ten years after opening:
Year ended 30th June, 1927 . . 303,212 271,886
Year ended 30th June, 1957 .. 2,766,099 2,085,916
Year ended 30th June, 1961 . . 3,978,679 3,090,773
4' 8½ GAUGE ADOPTED
The unanimous recommendation of the Engineers-in-Chief for a gauge
of 4' for the Trans-Australian Railway was adopted by the Common-
wealth. Nevertheless, it was not settled politically for, at the ceremony of
turning the first sod, Mr. A. H. Peake, Premier of South Australia, stated—
“ The gauge difficulty was a somewhat contentious question, and
he would not pursue it, except to say that, when the remarks of
the Prime Minister showed that a collision was imminent, with great
skill Mr. Fisher had shunted his engine off to another line. The
question of the gauges in Australia was not yet settled, and it would
have to he settled. The conflicting interests of States’ railways had
yet to he brought into harmony and, although it might be supposed
that the starting of the F.ast-West line on the 4' principle would
force the issue, the matter had still to he settled by the States, which
had greater interests in the railways than even the Commonwealth
Parliament.’’
SURVEY
A bill to authorise a survey of the route for a railway to connect
Kalgoorlie in Western Australia with Port Augusta in South Australia was
introduced into the Commonwealth Parliament by the First Deakin Govern-
ment, afterwards taken up by the Watson Government, and while the
Reid-McLean Government was in office it passed the House of Representa-
tives and was transmitted to the Senate, where it was discussed in 1904
and 1905 and rejected ostensibly because the State of South Australia had
not given parliamentary sanction to the construction of the line through its
territory. Subsequently, the South Australian Government informed the
Commonwealth that no objection was raised by that State to the survey
but it could not consider a bill for formal consent by the State until the
route was made known. South Australia was anxious that the railway, if
constructed, should pass through the gold mining centre at Tarcoola instead
of taking a more direct route through the Gawler Ranges. When the Bill
came before the House of Representatives again in 1906, the Minister
(Mr. Groom) pointed out that the survey was the first step in determining
the route and this time the Bill passed both Houses and received the Royal
Assent on 28th August, 1907.


A surveyor at the South Australia-
Western Australia border.
The survey commenced simultaneously from the western and eastern
ends of the route under the supervision of the Engineers-in-Chief for
Western Australia and South Australia respectively. On the western
section, 91 camels were required, one wagon team of 14 camels, two wagon
teams of 11 camels to each, three strings of pack camels (12 in each
string), four for the buggy and five riding camels for inspection purposes.
The remainder were used for transporting plant and equipment for the
boring party for making trial holes to determine the nature of the ground.
The Surveyor-in-Charge ran the course with a prismatic compass, taking
stellar observations to check each days work, and the route was marked
by a heavy chain drawn by camels. The survey of this section of 455 miles
was commenced on Ist July, 1908, and the held work finished on 27th
September, 1908. On the eastern section, 80 camels were used. Survey
parties left Adelaide on 3rd June, 1908, and completed the survey from
Port Augusta to the Western Australian border on 19th March, 1909, a
distance of 608 miles. The total distance in this preliminary survey was
1,063 miles. The highest point on the route was 1,326 feet above sea
level, 99 miles east of Kalgoorlie, and on the South Australian section it
was 791 feet at a point 85 miles west of Wynbring. The discrepancy
between the levels taken by the Western Australian surveyors from sea
level at Fremantle and the levels taken by the South Australian party from
sea level at Port Augusta was under three feet for the whole distance.
PASTORAL POSSIBILITIES
OF THE COUNTRY
TO BE SERVED BY THE RAILWAY
Edward John Eyre, after traversing the continent, reported that the
value of his journeys lay in the indication to settlers of the type of country
they should not settle in. John Forrest had a different opinion. As already
mentioned, in a despatch to the Western Australian Government from
Eucla in 1870, he stated “the country passed over as a grazing country far
surpasses anything 1 have ever seen; there is nothing in the settled portions
of Western Australia equal to it either in extent or quality, but the absence
of permanent water is a great drawback”. Mr. John Muir, Inspector of
Engineering Surveys of Western Australia, after examining the country
between Kalgoorlie and Eucla in 1901, stated “Taken as a whole, this
stretch of country is one of the finest I have seen in Australia and with
water, which doubtless could be obtained if properly prospected for, it is
admirably adapted for grazing purposes”. Mr. John Gore Stewart, in his
report to the South Australian Government, reported the first section of the


route from Port Augusta towards the Western Australian border was open
undulating fair pastoral country, then some poor desert waterless sandhill
country until the Nullarbor Plain was reached “fair pastoral country in
good seasons but without natural waters”. The millions of acres of good
pastoral country described by the advocates of the railway have not
developed the local traffic to the extent which they predicted in their
enthusiasm for the project. The pastoral industry has developed con-
siderably in the country settled before the railway extending westwards for
approximately 300 miles from Port Augusta, but for the other 750 miles
of the route pastoral development has been negligible so far as railway
revenue is concerned.
The prediction of Mr. King O’Malley, Minister for Home Affairs,
speaking in the House of Representatives when the Kalgoorlie to Port
Augusta railway bill was being debated, has still to be fulfilled. He ventured
to predict that “before many years had rolled by, the country would hold
a very large population, larger than ever crowded within the gates of
Athens, when her fighting men under Miltiades won liberty for humanity
on the field of Marathon; larger than that of Sparta when she ‘bossed’
Greece and sent forth her sons, quickened by the encouragement of their
mothers’ benediction to return with their shields, or on them; larger indeed,
than that which crowded on the seven hills of Rome when, under her
mighty rulers, she commenced that sovereign sway that afterwards
embraced the whole world”. This eloquence seems to have prevailed over
other contrary opinions expressed by some members in regard to the
potentiality of the country for rural development.
The stations along the railway called after former Prime Ministers have
not achieved the eminence of the great Australians from whom the names
were derived. The quietude enjoyed by the residents of Barton, Watson,
Fisher, Cook, Hughes, Deakin, Reid, Lyons, Chifley and Curtin remains
undisturbed by the crowds which Mr. King O’Malley prophesied would
be “larger than ever crowded within the gates of Athens”.
One of the objections was that the railway would traverse worthless and
waterless country, another was based on opposition to the gauge of 4'
and still another was that the States of Western Australia and South
Australia should construct their own connecting railways, just as other
States had done. Some opposition also came from South Australians, who
maintained that Darwin and not Fremantle should be the port of entry to
Australia and that the trans-continental railway should connect Adelaide
with Darwin. Another member advocated a road instead of a railway,
stating that loads of 10 tons could be carried on steam powered road
vehicles at a speed of miles an hour. The representatives from Western
Australia were unanimous in supporting it and maintained that Western
Australia came into the Federation on promises made by leading statesmen
in the Parliaments of the Eastern States that the construction of the railway
would have their support. The people of Western Australia, including the
residents of the goldfields, many of whom had families in the Eastern
States, voted strongly for Federation by referendum on the understanding
that the construction of the railway was part of the bargain. They pointed
out that they were just as far away from the Eastern States as New
Zealand and without the promise of a connecting railway they would
have followed New Zealand’s example and stayed out of the Federation.
In 1904, when difficulty was being experienced in getting the survey
bill through the Federal Parliament, the Premier of Western Australia
sent a telegram to the Prime Minister stating his State would be prepared,
for 10 years after construction, to bear a liberal share of the loss in
working the railway. An Act had already been passed by the Western
Australian Parliament in 1903 undertaking to commence and complete
the construction of a 4' gauge railway between Fremantle and
Kalgoorlie during the time the Commonwealth was constructing the
railway between Kalgoorlie and Port Augusta. Later on, both these
undertakings lapsed, but meanwhile the Federal Parliament passed the
legislation for the construction of the railway from Kalgoorlie to Port
Augusta and the Act was assented to on 12th December, 1911.
KALGOORLIE PORT AUGUSTA
RAILWAY ACT 1911
This legislation which authorised the construction of the railway was
the subject of considerable debate in Parliament, although it had a some-
what easier passage than the survey bill which really had decided the issue.
Camel train hauling sleepers
during construction of the
Trans-Australian Railway.




At Port Augusta, in September, 1912, the first sod was turned with a
shovel, nickel plated but otherwise similar to the “banjo” the navvy used
for moving earth under a relentless sun for 8 hours for 8 shillings pay.
With these and the horsedrawn scoop, the earth was moved for the
formation of more than 1,000 miles of railway. It was not all level going
either for on certain sections cuttings and banks were needed, one 25 miles
section required the moving of 1,000,000 cubic yards of earth. Steam
shovels and motor tractors were used to some extent, but many years
were to pass by before the advent of bulldozers, front end loaders and
other earth moving machines with padded seats for the operators.
Tracklaying machines were used for the first time in Australia, and with
these a record of miles of rails and sleepers were laid in a day. In
one period of six months over 250 miles were laid, but this rate could not
be sustained owing to supply difficulties during the war. Nevertheless,
the rate of construction far exceeded any previous record. Timber for
wells to provide water was carried on camels and several hundreds of
these hardy animals played their part in the building of the railway.
Construction through an isolated and waterless territory required the
establishment of community services, such as living accommodation for
3,500 men, retail stores, mobile hospitals, postal services and banking,
and water trains for supplying water for animals and personnel and for
locomotives hauling construction trains.
RAILWAY CONSTRUCTED
BY DAY-LABOUR
The day-labour system was adopted on the recommendation of the
Engineer-in-Chief, Mr. Henry Deane, who reported that he had had a
great deal of experience in constructing railways by day-labour in New
South Wales, where he had been given a free hand in employing men
and in ordering materials. He further reported that under the day-labour
system, work could be commenced before the whole of the plans and
specifications were completed, thus saving time; and alterations could be
made during the progress of the work without incurring costs for extras.
Further savings would be made in the contingencies the contractor would
include in his price and in his profit.
THE WATER PROBLEM
In the present era of diesel locomotives, it is difficult to realise fully
the difficulties encountered in running material trains for the construction
of a railway through country absolutely devoid of any stream of permanent
water, with a rainfall averaging only 5 to 10 inches a year, and a rate of
evaporation of 9 feet a year. For only a couple of hundreds of miles on
the eastern and western ends of the route was it possible to collect surface
water in dams, the remainder of the route of flat limestone plains and
sand hills providing no run off. Wells were sunk successfully on certain
sections, but water trains were necessary to haul locomotive water for as
much as 200 miles. On the Nullarbor Plain, bores were driven to a
depth of 1,470 feet in one case. Encrustation and corrosion of boilers
was so serious from some of the water that 87% of the locomotive
maintenance expenditure was on boiler repairs due to the presence of
calcium and magnesium chloride. Later on, a good deal of the trouble
was eliminated by the introduction of barium carbonate water treatment
plants.
CONSTRUCTION COMPLETED
Despite these difficulties and the material shortages due to World
War I, construction was completed in 4 years from the time the first
tracklayer was introduced, and, on 17th October, 1917, the rails were
linked and the first passenger train was run on 22nd October, 1917,
5 years after turning the first sod at Port Augusta. The Engineers-in-Chief
under Mr. Henry Deane had estimated 4 years. Their estimate for the
cost of construction, £5,090,183, was not far from the final figure, the
actual cost being £5,815,000. Mr. Henry Deane’s revised estimate before
construction commenced was £4,045,000, but the extra costs arising from
World War I accounted for the increase.


Scoop teams at work
on construction.


RAILWAY WORKSHOPS
During the construction period temporary workshops were established
at Port Augusta, South Australia, and at Parkeston, Western Australia,
for the purpose of assembling locomotives and other rollingstock delivered
by contract and for the construction of timber bodies for passenger and
livestock vehicles. These workshops also dealt with the maintenance of
rollingstock and other mechanical equipment used during the construction
of the railway. Later on the main rollingstock construction and main-
tenance was concentrated at the principal workshops established in steel
framed buildings at Port Augusta.
ROLLINGSTOCK
The principal locomotive power during the construction period was
supplied by G. class locomotives intended for passenger trains but used
for material trains on account of War conditions delaying the delivery
of K. and Ka. class goods locomotives. The through passenger service
was inaugurated with locomotives which had performed heavy work
during the construction period under severe conditions due to improvised
maintenance facilities, insufficient reserves of locomotive power and to
the unsuitability of the water for locomotive boilers, but they performed
a truly remarkable service and continued in use for express trains until
1938 when they were replaced by C. class locomotives.
The rollingstock provided for the inaugural passenger service consisted
of
10 first class sleeping cars;
8 second class sleeping cars;
4 lounge cars;
4 dining cars;
3 bulk mail vans.
The sleeping cars and dining cars were supplied under contract, and
the bodies for the lounge cars and bulk mail vans were constructed at the
Port Augusta workshops. Showers were provided in the first class sleeping
cars in 1918, and were original features in passenger rollingstock at that
time.
ADMINISTRATION
Mr. Henry Deane, Engineer-in-Chief of New South Wales Railways,
who was Chairman of the Committee which reported on the proposed con-
struction of the railway, was recommended by his fellow Engineers-in-Chief
to be appointed Consulting Engineer to the Commonwealth and arising out
of this recommendation he was appointed Engineer-in-Chief in the Com-
monwealth Department of Home Affairs to supervise the survey and later
the construction of the railway. His appointment was approved by the
Minister for Home Affairs on 25th March, 1908, and he continued in that
Office until succeeded by Mr. Norris G. Bell in April, 1914. Mr. Bell later
became the first Commonwealth Railways Commissioner, at the time the
highest paid officer in the service of the Commonwealth.
PAST AND FUTURE
The predictions of Sir John Forrest and others who championed the
cause of the Trans-Australian Railway have not been fulfilled so far as
pastoral and mineral development along the route of the railway is con-
cerned. Nevertheless, with the amazing scientific progress of modern times,
no one can say what the future may hold for this vast and almost
unoccupied land. So far as the through traffic is concerned, the predictions
have been more than fulfilled. The population of Western Australia has
increased from approximately 300,000 in 1912 to nearly 800,000, and will
increase still more rapidly with the progressively increasing industrialisa-
tion of the State. The revenue has increased from
YEAR ENDED
1918 1961
£ £
Passenger 97,700 1,288,317
Goods and Livestock .. .. 77,339 2,690,362
Total 175,039 3,978,679
The loss of £57,429 in 1918 has been converted to a profit of £736,629
in 1961.
This advancement has been achieved in spite of the fact that other
predictions still remain unfulfilled and the railway is hemmed in on both
sides by breaks of gauge, but with the revolutionary changes now taking
place in the railways due to the advent of diesel locomotives the future for
long distance rail transport is brighter than ever before and the indications
are that not many years will elapse before the breaks of gauge, which have
plagued the trans-continental railway service for so many years, will
disappear.


First through passenger train,
Trans-Australian Railway,
22nd October, 1917.


THE TRANS-AUSTRALIAN RAILWAY CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE
14th SEPTEMBER, First sod turned at Port Augusta by His Excellency,
1912: the Governor-General, Lord Denman.
12th FEBRUARY. First sod turned at Kalgoorlie by the Prime Minister,
1913: the Rt. Hon. Andrew Fisher.
Ist MAY, Mr. N. G. Bell appointed Acting Commissioner of
1915: Commonwealth Railways.
22nd SEPTEMBER, Assent given to Commonwealth Railway Act.
1917:
17th OCTOBER, Rails linked at 1.45 p.m. South Australian time at
1917: 621 miles 58 chains 50.5 links from Port Augusta.
22nd OCTOBER, First passenger train left Port Augusta for Kalgoorlie.
1917:
7th NOVEMBER, Mr. N. G. Bell appointed first Commonwealth Rail-
-1917: ways Commissioner.
23rd MARCH, Showers included in sleeping carriages on the Trans-
-1918: Australian Railway. This was the first occasion
showers were available on a train in Australia.
4th JULY, Successful treatment of water at 632 miles by barium
1927: carbonate process, thus overcoming serious problem
of locomotive water supplies.
6th NOVEMBER. Mr. N. G. Bell retired from the position of Corn-
-1929: monwealth Railways Commissioner.
7th NOVEMBER, Mr. G. A. Gahan appointed to succeed Mr. Bell as
1929: Commonwealth Railways Commissioner.
FEBRUARY, Air-conditioned dining and lounge cars brought into
1936: service.
26th JULY, Port Augusta-Port Pirie Railway opened for public
1937: traffic.
JANUARY-APRIL, New “C” Class steam engines for hauling express
1938: passenger trains introduced into service.
1940: Ballasting of the Trans-Australian Railway was
completed in this year.
6th NOVEMBER, Mr. G. A. Gahan retired from the position of
1948: Commonwealth Railways Commissioner.
7th NOVEMBER, Mr. P. J. Hannaberry appointed to succeed Mr.
1948: Gahan as Commonwealth Railways Commissioner.
APRIL, Fast air-conditioned “Budd” rail cars put into
1951: service to cater for local traffic between Port Pirie
Junction, Port Augusta and Woomera.
22nd SEPTEMBER, First main line Clyde GM. type diesel-electric
1951: locomotive (GM.I) to be operated on the Trans-
Australian Railway was received at Port Augusta.
This locomotive had run over 1,500,000 miles by
July, 1962.
NOVEMBER, Two complete air-conditioned passenger trains
1952: manufactured by Wegmann & Company of
Germany were placed in regular service on the
Trans-Australian Railway.
JULY, First set of welded rail track (length 270 feet) laid
1953: on the Trans-Australian Railway between the 822
Miles and 841 Miles.
9th APRIL. Mr. P. J. Hannaberry resigned from the position of
I 960: Commonwealth Railways Commissioner. Mr. K. A.
Smith appointed Acting Commissioner.
1 0th OCTOBER, Mr. K. A. Smith appointed as Commonwealth
I 960: Railways Commissioner.
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY
HUDSON INDUSTRIES PTY. LTD.
CARLTON. VICTORIA.




Issued with the Compliments of the Commonwealth Railways Commissioner
623 Collins Street.
Melbourne.
