

Golden Square
Methodist Church
t£ ini tr nar ij
1852 -1952


CENTENARY OF
GOLDEN SQUARE METHODIST CHURCH
1852 - 1952
The Church, Trustees, in their desire to fittingly celebrate
one hundred years of Methodism at Golden Square, has prepared the
following histox-ical record, and memento of the occasion, for the
information of members and friends.
It will also be a permanent tribute of thanks to Almighty
God for the blessings that have been showered upon us during the
past century, as evidenced by the imposing property which has been
handed on for us to preserve and maintain for those who will follow.
It would be quite impossible, in the space set apart, to com-
pile a complete record of the events connected with our beloved.
Church in its 100 years of history for our purpose it will suffice
to touch on some of the most outstanding in our church life. As a
goldfield, Bendigo dates from October, 1851 when gold was first dis-
covered at Golden Square and the first place at which the gospel
was preached in Bendigo was also at Golden Square for, in March,
1852, attracted by the news of gold in Bendigo, a number of men
came to the district from South Australia, one of whom was James
Jeffrey, a local preacher who was later to be widely known as
“Jimmy” Jeffrey.
Golden Square was then part of the green bush and, con-
sequently he mounted a stump as his pulpit. A tent was used for
some time subsequently a wooden building that had been used as a
store was purchased and when removed, renovated and cleaned,
xnade rather a fine building for those early days in which to conduct
Divine Service. This first church was erected at the end of the
year 1852 on the ground of the present Sunday School buildings.
The first minister who came to this district was the Rev.
Mr, Symons. He was stationed at Forest Creek, Castlemaine, and
paid a visit of inspection about the end of the year 1852 but, owing
to illness, was unable to do any pastoral work on that occasion. He
returned in May 1853, accompanied by the Rev. Mr. Chapman. He
then spent a Sabbath well filled with ministerial labour. Starting
from the hut near Camp Reserve, Castlemaine where he passed the
night, he rode to Kangaroo Flat, thence to Eaglehawk, Long Gully
and Golden Square, where he held open-air services. In August of
the same year, the Rev. Thomas Raston came to take charge and,
at the close of 1853, was able to report that there were five places
of worship in use in Golden Square and district.
The Rev. Mr. Curry, who was also a minister in the same
year, introduced to Methodism that great institution “the tea
meeting” the first being held at Golden Square in June, 1853.
The Rev. Joseph Dare arrived in 1857 and the great event, during
his stay was undoubtedly the building of the new church for, in
in 1859, he and the other church leaders, purchased an allotment
of land for ±'3o, as a site for a now stone church, the foundation
stone of which was laid by the Rev. Daniel J. Draper in April, 1859,


and the church was opened for Divine services on December-11th,
by the Rev. Mr. Drapei’. This church, which was at the time and
for many years after, the cathedral of Methodism, did duty for
years until more room was required.
The foundation stone of the new lax-ge chux-ch was laid on
January sth, 1870 by Mr. Richard Allingham. This part of the
church was opened on Sunday, May 11th, 1870, the preacher being
the Rev. Joseph Dare. The chux-ch was completed in 1873.
The first minister to be stationed at Golden Square was
the Rev. Richard Hart, and fx-om then, onwards to the present day,
a succession of faithful ambassadors for Christ have occupied the
pulpit.
The Diamond Jubilee of our Church was celebi'ated oxx 28th
April, 1912, when the Rev. William Shaw who was our x-esident
minister at the Jubilee celebrations in 1902, conducted the three
services.. It is wox-thy of note that the Rev, William Shaw was
in South Australia at the time and, some 60 years befox-e, “Jimmy”
Jeffrey also of South Australia was our first preacher.
The next and all important event in the histox-y of our
Church is its centenary to be celebrated this year and, at the vei’y
outset we desire to express grateful thanks to Almighty God fox-
bringing us thereto.
To commemorate the beginning .of the spix-itual life in
Golden Square and the District of Bendigo, three special services
will be held on Sunday, 30th Max-ch, 1952 and, in px-eparation for
this outstanding event, structux-al alterations have been carried out
in the church. The pipe organ, which has been in use for over
eighty years, has been rebuilt and brought up to date at considerable
cost and is now one of the best instruments in the Bendigo district.
A Local Preachers’ Fellowship Meeting will also be held. These
services will be proceeded by a banquet and public meeting on
Saturday, 29th March, 1952.
Then, in August, 1952, a series of social events will be
arranged, including a renewal of the well known “Augustonian
Fair” and a “Back to Golden Squax-e Methodist Chux-ch” whex-eby
an oppox-tunity will be given to all those desix-ing to return and
enter into the festivities which will mark such a historic event.
In conclusion we would very much like to mention herein
the names of all those who have served and are at present serving
our Church in spix-itual, financial and social spheres and what a
loyal and faithful number of men and women but, again, space
will not permit and, furthermore, in so doing it is quite possible to
overlook some names and thereby an injustice would be done; there-
fore, we now pay our sincere tribute TO ONE AND ALL.
“Our Father, by whose servants
Our house was built of old,
Whose hand hath crowned her childx-en
With blessings manifold
For thine unfailing mercies
Far strewn along our way ,
With all who passed before us, ■/•>■
V.
WE PRAISE THY NAME TODAY” , >


Golden Square Methodist
Church
Cciitcniir}' Celebrations . . .
Clmreli Anniversary . . .
SOtli MARCH 1933
MINISTER
Rev. Walter Bampton, L.Th.
CHURCH TRUST
J. C, Chamney E. W. Shipp
J. Crothers T. E. Shipp
E. I. Harvey, (Hon. Treasurer) J. W. Swatton
J. S. Henderson W. J. Thomas
C. C, Jorgenson, (Hon. Secretary) N. C. Thirlwell
J. E. Mamouney A. E. Tredinnick
Cr. G. A. Pethard M. Warne
(also Mayor of Bendigo in 1952)
S. Williams
Church Choirmaster: Mr. C. Warne
Church Organist: Mr. H. Jones
Bolton Bros,, Printers, Bendigo
