

GOLD:
A SEQUEL TO MY PAMPHLET ON
“GOLD AND MINING,”
ADELAIDE, 1885.
Marshall,
ANQASTON, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Jl8p«.
ADELAIDE :
Printed by Vardon & Pritchard, Gresham Street.
1896.




Semaphore
MINERAL THEORIES.
• HENRY MARSHALL, Angaston.
THE HISTORY AND PRACTICE OF MINING IN THE BRITISH
ISLES,
IN RELATION TO METALLURGY.
Mr. Robt. Hunt’s Lectures at the London Institution.
Lecture V. — Silver: Ores—Argentiferous Galena—Silver Associ-
ates—Modes for the Separation and Refining of Silver —
Chemical and Physical Properties — Uses.
r Silver, as he had before mentioned, was mostly associated with
copper or lead. In Cornwall, in many instances, it was com-
bined with copper, some of the lodes of which were rich in silver.
The gossans, of which he had before spoken— an ochrey substance
found at the back of the lode, all contained silver, and some were
very rich in this respect. Notwithstanding this, nearly all the
gossans were allowed to be thrown to waste. Not long ago, a
gentleman from Sheffield, a gold and silver refiner, visited Corn-
wall, and purchased a large quantity, sufficient to freight two
ships, at a very low price, and, though the cost was greatly aug-
mented by the expenses of carriage, by the time it was delivered
in Sheffield, he extracted a sufficient quantity of silver from the •
mass as to afford him a large profit. Though the gossan was
found in the vicinity of the lodes, no man at present was em-
ployed in extracting the silver from it.
The talented lecturer then proceeded to describe the numerous
specimens of ore which lay on the table. Among these, was a
beautiful nodular specimen of native silver ore, found at Comb-
martin, in Devonshire. A considerable number of ores from
Mexico showed the condition of the silver as it occured in that
country ; it was there in general as sulphuret of silver. An
interesting specimen of galena had been furnished by the kind-
ness of Mr. P. N. Johnson, in which the formation of the silver
in a most curious manner was developed. The lump of ruby
silver on the table was a very fine ore ; it generally contained its


various constitutents in the following proportions : —Silver, 64 67 ;
arsenic, 15-09; sulphur, 19-51 ; antimony, *73. Another speci-
men exhibited a layer of carbonate of iron, and a layer of native
silver in combination. It had formed part of a side of a copper
lode, which often threw out native silver in the same manner,
that in the copper lodes the gossans appeared to be thrown out.
Some who were present might remember that at the last soiree
held in the Institution, a beautiful specimen from Lake Superior
lay in the library, and that all over it was spread little tufts of
silver, and now he exhibited a specimen in a very similiar con-
dition to that which would be necessary to produce those tufts.
In Sheffield an experiment had been tried with the slag from the
furnace—a large portion of which was known to contain copper,
lead, and silver. It was connected with a galvanic battery, and
placed in water slightly acidulated ; and in the course of three or
four weeks, the iron was thrown out as an oxide, and incrusted
the glass ; this incrustation was found to contain a considerable
portion of silver, and the process being carried on a sufficient
time longer, the whole of the silver was separated by the decom-
posing action of the voltaic pile. It was this sort of action, he
believed, which produced the tufts in the specimen now on the
table, and in the other more beautiful one, which he had
mentioned. Occasionally this precious metal was found as a
muriate in some parts of Cornwall, rarely. There was
one very curious phenomenon peculiar to lead rather than copper
lodes well worthy of notice, and that was the appearance of a
light or lambent vapor over the surface of the lead lodes which
were rich in silver. Some few years ago, when the secretary of the
Cornwall Polytechnic Society, many well-authenticated instances
of this kind came under his notice. On making enquiry, he found
that this appearance was exclusively confined to the lead lodes ;
and he remembered one at Swanpole, near Falmouth, in which,
in nights of ordinary darkness, this luminous appearance was
particularly visible. He had also observed, where two lodes
intersected each other, in the Gwennap district, that the vapour
arranged itself over the lode in two banks, showing the inter-
section in a marked manner. The celebrated mines at Potosi
were discovered, it was traditionally believed, by a luminous
appearance of this kind, which excited curiosity, and occasioned
the making of excavations to discover the cause. At present
nothing was known of this extraordinary appearance, and the
Polytechnic Society had offered premiums to secure a collection
of information which might lead to the discovery of its causes.
Mr. Masey informs me (Mr. Robt. Hunt has observed the same
phenomenon) that the Treburgeth Lead and Silver Mine was dis-
covered by a light appearing over the lode.


As a further illustration of this subject, Mr. Hunt proceeded
to describe an experiment, which he had brought to a conclusion
a short time ago. A large mass of Stourbridge clay, moistened
with a solution of sulphate of copper, was placed in a wooden
box, about two feet square, on the opposite ends of which was a
plate of zinc and a plate of copper. These plates were connected
by a wire; and the whole was left for about 12 months. At the
expiration of that time he cut the clay in two, and found that,
on the side next the zinc, the clay had been converted into clay-
slate, and had assumed a schietose appearance. This was an
appearance he had succeeded in producing in stones as hard as
the Bath oolites. On the copper side, there was a distinct con-
solidation of the clay into nodular masses, as in the formation of
the clay ironstones. This had the effect of withdrawing a portion
of the clay from the centre of the mass, and leaving a large hole,
which the miners would call a vug,” filled in with crystals.
When these curious results were found in connection with such
simple combinations, and were considered in relation to some of
the laws to which Prof. Faraday had adverted, the universality
of magnetic action would seem to be proved. It was now well
known that there was an electric current traversing the earth
from east to west, and that the highest magnetic force was from
north to south ; and it appeared to him exceedingly probable that
these agents were largely concerned in the formation of mineral
veins.
PROFESSOR ANSTED’S LECTURES ON MINING.
The theories he had described were the only ones put forward
with any distinct evidence to support them ; and there had been
no attempt, that he was aware of, to form them into one theory,
which should account for all the phenomena. He would, there-.
fore, in conclusion, give a general idea of his own views on the
subject, which were derived from a consideration of the nature of
polar forces , and in which he endeavored to combine the electrical
theory with the others. By this means, he thought his hearers
would appreciate in some measure the nature and origin of the
various phenomena, in whatever part of the world they might be
met with. He took, then, the imponderable agents—heat,
chemical action, and electricity. Each of these was the cause of
motion, but each in its own particular way. These forces were
probably, in fact, only one force, and all, it must be understood*
produced molecular change. Whether, therefore, these three
agents were applied together, or singly, a change took place in
the atomic condition of the bodies in which they acted—a mole-
cular change, inducing a re-arrangement of the ultimate particles.


In reference to this subject, there were several well-known facts
which had been made out and proved, both by the chemist and
physicist —he meant those which related to the action of terres-
trial magnetism.
It was known that the whole crust of the earth must be
regarded as a film of matter forming the external surface of a
large globe, and that there were certain powerful forces at work,
which were known generally by the term electricity. What it
really was they did not know; but they recognised it in its
effects. It was found to have reference to poles—not the north
and south poles of the earth, but two distinct sets of poles,
neither of which went through the poles of the earth, nor through
its centre. These poles had reference to the condition of the
surface, and not to that of the whole mass of the earth. It was
also now known, that this force had reference only to a moderate
depth below the surface—neither above the surface, nor far below
it ; at least it was not probable that there was any electrical
action below the external film that affected the surface itself.
It was also the case that this force did not act chiefly at the
surface of the earth. This subtle current, traversing the earth’s
crust in this manner, affected every material of which that crust
was made up. If this were the case, it might be easily under-
stood how various materials were associated in the earth’s crust,
as some of the oxides for instance. It .was also easy to imagine,
that crevices having been produced, certainly in relation to the
physical structure of the earth, and having a north and south
direction, should be cut across by transverse fissures. The elec-
trical action would then tend to produce metallic ores, and to
arrange them in the crevices in reference to their different elec-
trical states. Those which were in a native state would occupy
one position, and the salts another; and there could be no doubt
that all this again helped to carry out and explain the various
phenomena in a remarkable manner. No person who has ever
seen mineral veins could, for a moment, doubt that molecular
change had gone on with regard to them. This molecular action
produced segregation, and a consequent re-accumulation of the
particles.
How this could take place in solid matter might at first seem
difficult to comprehend ; but to understand this, we had only to
consider what it was we really understood by solid matter.
There was no matter so solid but it was capable of compression ,
and, if so, it must contain spaces, through which other matter
might pass. They had examples of segregation occurring in
masses and solid bodies, deposited in new places in all parts of
the earth, and in all sorts of ways ; for instance, masses of cre-
taceous matter, or chalk, were found, with a quantity of silex


disseminated in the chalk, and with them a certain quantity of
iron. These substances would be deposited at the bottom of
water, and the silex separated from the chalk by a process of the
nature of segregation. After that the iron would separate itself,
and pass through the particles of the chalk. This was a case
which often presented itself in nature, and in which it was quite
clear that the iron must have been separated, in order to accumu-
late itself in a crystal shape at the back of the other materials.
The theory of polar forces, then must be referred to in any
attempt to explain these phenomena ; and he believed that it
would ultimately be found to account for all the circumstances,
and serve to connect the other theories, which, however, were
each of them true for particular cases.
The theory, then, which he thought might be safely proposed
with regard to the filling of mineral veins would stand as fol-
lows : —Firstly, that the veins themselves are simply mechanical
results, either of subterranean disturbance, opening into great
depths below the surface, or of contraction, sometimes proceeding
to great depths, but generally terminated below. Secondly, that
mechanical and other fissures have reference to the main lines of
dislocation, observable in the direction of mountain chains and
other great world phenomena. Thirdly, that the fissures thus
formed have been like the rest of the earth’s surface, subject to
the action of magnetic currents, and that they have become
receptacles in which re-arrangement might conveniently act, and
particles assume a crystalline form in their natural order.
Fourthly, that the materials abundantly present in the earth’s
crust, or elaborated, according to the action of chemical laws,
have thus arranged themselves in those forms which circumstances
have demanded. Fifthly, that, in many cases this has gone on
during long periods, involving change; and that thus the
phenomena of pseudo-morphism, and the association of metals,
have taken place. And, lastly, that we must look to electro-
chemistry, studied with reference to rock masses and complicated
metallic results, for the means of advancing these investigations;
and that distinct observations in mines must be recorded, in
addition to experiments in the laboratory.
These were the general views, which, in the present state of
things, he held with regard to the filling of mineral veins ; and
he put them forward, not as entirely sufficient, or satisfactory,
but because it was advantageous to have a theory of some kind,
and this he thought was as near the truth as the present amount
of investigation would take them. It was, however, an advan-
tage to have a theory, as it served to collect and hang facts upon,
and also to suggest new methods with regard to the discovery
and working of mineral veins, besides raising discussion, and


suggesting ideas ; and although the theory might not be so nearly
perfect as could be wished, it might still form a foundation upon
which a more elaborate and consistent structure might be raised.
GOLD IN THE SEA.
In seeking to account for the origin of gold Professor Lobely,
in Knowledge, observes :—“Since the sea is the great receptacle
for all solutions it was safe to conclude that it contained the
soluble salts of gold, but the fact is not now a matter of mere
deduction, but of actual knowledge. Sonstadt found, from care-
ful experiments on the sea water of Ramsey Bay, Isle of Man,
that sea water contains a little under a grain of gold per ton.
Estimating the whole of the gold production of the world to the
present time at £8,500,000,000 sterling, and taking the weight
of the sea water of the globe at 560,000,000,000,000,000 tons,
as estimated by Professor Wurtz, of New York, we find that the
present seas of the globe contain upwards of 5,000,000 times as
much gold as has ever been extracted from the rocks ; and conse-
quently we must conclude that the seas of the globe in the past
have been fully able to stock its mineral deposits with all the
gold they contain. From these considerations it seems probable
that gold was originally dissolved in the waters of the ocean,
from which it was deposited, as the results of the decomposition
of soluble salts of gold, by the action of organic matter, and
that it was then eliminated from sedimentary rocks by segre-
gation to other metallic matter, with which it remained associated
until thermal conditions —caused by deep-seated position or not
far distant igneous action—induced a chemical reaction, and
likewise heated sufficiently the subterranean water of the rocks
to make it an effective solvent of the auriferous compound. So
the gold of the massive rocks was carried with silica by perco-
lating water into the accumulating 1 vein stuff’ of rock fissures,
where on cooler conditions supervening the auriferous compound
was deposited in a solid condition, and the gold itself subse-
quently separated, by the segregation of the silica to the vein
quartz, and left disseminated through the vein stufi as metallic
gold in the forms in which it is now found.”
THE GROWTH OF GOLD.
Mr. Frank Weston, remarks in the course of an article in the
Omeo Stnndard :—“ Gold is forming to-day, the same as in the
Devonian period. A close inspection of almost any old and
abandoned drive in our Alps will reveal the fact that quartz is


forming and growing up the walls ; and in the All Nations,
Matlock, on the smooth joints of a tunnel driven across country,
quantities of opaline have been deposited, and it is a noteworthy
fact that this uncrystallized quartz is still forming and growing.
The Sir Henry Barkly and the Welcome, the Berlin and the
Moliagul, famous nuggets in the earlier days, were never shed off
from reefs, but were manifestly generated and deposited in
alluvium. The famous Bankeet formation on the Witwater-
strandt, where Johannesbnrg is situated, is an exemplification of
of gold deposited from the aqueous state, and the total absence of
quartz reefs (except on the Do Kaap fields, 320 miles distant),
and the fact that alluvial gold is an unknown quantity in the
Transvaal, points to the conclusion that the Bankeet gold was
originally generated in alluvial formation, and by the simple but
beautiful process of nature collated and concentrated into one of
the most wonderful and unique formations man has ever worked.
It is within the possibilities that once an auriferous country
always an auriferous country, A Parisian scientific Society
obtained three casks of water from a deep level in an Aus gold
mine, and in the presence of the members of the Society decanted
the water into three new casks, and added a quantity of copper,
silver, and iron. The casks were then closed and sealed, and
three years after, when unsealed and opened, two pennyweights
of gold had deposited in one cask, and lesser quantities in the
other two.”
THE DISTRIBUTION OF GOLD.
A correspondent of the Sydney Daily Telegraph , writing about
the distribution of gold, says : —“ On one and the same field you
find each gully presenting in its produce an individualism in size,
form, and value familiar to gold-miners and gold-buyers. On
the sands of the west coast of New Zealand the product is so
extremely fine as to be termed paint gold, requiring very careful
treatment for its collection. On old Bendigo the alluvial varied
from well-distinguished specks to nuggets ranging upwards of
500 oz. in weight, and it is a singular fact that to the northward
and westward the wash-dirt was of comparatively little value in
the richest gullies after a tolerably careful overhauling and
removal of the coarse pieces, of which the yield was chiefly com-
posed. On the Palmer, where the gold was mostly of a rough
nature, creeks occurred where the produce was extremely fine ;
but instances might indefinitely be multiplied to prove nothing
save eccentricity. As for geologists, their assertions, when thev
have been rash enough to make them, stand for nothing. Take
the Mount Morgan Mine. Some sixteen years ago a gentleman,


whose professional avocations led him to the spot, was struck hy
the mineral characteriseics of the locality—so much so in fact as,
in common with one or two friends, to raise the money requisite
to pay the travelling expenses and fee of a geologist in Victoria
to report on the place. Then and there, standing in the richest
known gold mine in the world, with millions of treasure beneath
his feet, this pundit delivered himself of the opinion that ‘ there
were traces of copper, but not sufficient to justify outlay.’ Some-
times reefs are clearly the matrix of alluvial deposits. Some-
times it seems equally clear they are not. But take gold-bearing
reefs themselves. There is no apparent law either as to the reef
or its coveted product. You may have a north and south lode,
an east and west one, or one running between the intermediate
points of the compass, gold-bearing or barren as the case may be.
The gold may be confined to one wall or run indiscriminately
through the vein from side to side. It may be pure or it may
be so difficult to free from its accompanying impurities as to be
worthless. There are pipe-veins, which shoot down from the
surface or propel themselves towards light from unknown depths.
There are horizontal slabs like tables, which terminate just as
abruptly, so that you fall from apparently assured wealth into
a void of disquietude. There is the stringer, which, like a
coquette, deludes you with hopes of the impossible. There are
the strong persistent reefs of Gyrapie, where you look for wealth
just as they seemingly break oft’ and the kindly black slate comes
on to the scene and seems to fractify and throw out of joint the
heretofore barren lode. There are the reefs at Ravenswood,
where the mundic means failure; and the reefs at Charters
Towers, where the mundic means fortune. There are true
fissure veins and false fissure veins. There are little veins very
rich, and equally small veins very poor, which appear and dis-
appear with equal unexpectedness, and though composed of
friable quartz and soft argillaceous matter, tenaciously thread
their course through hard granite. There are travelling blocks
of quartz seamed with richness, which have wandered from their
parent vein. And gold grows, or forms, or assumes being, which-
ever phrase you prefer. Crystals of the precious ore form them-
selves in undisturbed places at the extremities of crushing-mills
and in the very heart of longstanding props of mines, which
tends to direct enquiry towards the influence of decomposing
organic matter.”
A quartz reef with a hard dark slate casing is good for gold.
Baker’s Creek mine is a good example. In fact, any slate or
shaly casing is favorable. Also a quartz reef, auriferous, having
quartz crystals attached.


THE OCCURRENCE OF GOLD.
Mr. R. M. Sargeant, the well-known manager of the Band and
Albion Consols Mines at Ballarat, has written a letter to Mr.
George Sutherland, M.A., of Adelaide, with reference to the
points raised by him in his letters to the South Australia Register,
in which a theory of electro-deposition by earth currents was
suggested in regard to the occurrence of gold. He says :—“ The
subject is a most interesting and an important one. I shall make
an effort to get it thoroughly ventilated by our Mining Commis-
sion. I have no doubt you are correct in your electro-chemical
hypothesis ; it, however, must be crenitic in its action. The basis
of my idea is this—that the first known alluvial gold is found in
the older pliocene drifts, and that these are of marine origin ;
that the pliocene sea was rich in gold chlorides , and that these
chlorides have been deposited on the soft sea bed (subsequently
hardened and broken up into drifts) either by the electro-chemi-
cal process or by precipitation, or perhaps both, and such is not
detrital. All the big nuggets have been found below the margin
of the old pliocene littoral. If we want to prospect successfully
we must first determine the contours of the old marine shores and
find the debouchure into the present sea, and then we shall know
something about the extent of our goldfields. At Rokewood,
not far from Ballarat, the wash is all marine, very rich in patches,
and not a payable reef in the locality ; and this is not a solitary
instance.”
Specimens of coarse marble forming the summits of hills in
Provence, struck repeatedly by lightning, were covered with a
layer of silver equal in thickness to a five-franc piece.
In electroplating the metallic substance is held in solution,
and an electric current is passed through the liquid mass.
ANDREW CROSSE’S EXPERIMENT.
Place on a board a mass of moist pottery clay, blended with
any species of metallic particles of extreme minuteness, under
the earthy form of a metallic oxide. Divide the clay in two with
a large knife or sabre, then bring together the two portions of
clay by sending an electric current through the whole mass.
There is formed, in the cleft, a metallic deposit, a minature vein.
Becquerel tried with electricity argentiferous soils in France
and other countries, and large ingots of silver were thus drawn
from metallic soils, and the metal was of extreme purity.
Prof. Sage, of the French mint, collected the ashes of vine


branches, and subjected them to chemical processes, gold appeared,
and enough was obtained to coin several 20 franc pieces.
Gold, as far as we know, is only found in the perfect state ;
still, it is a metal, yet can be reduced to a substance called the
salts of gold, which ordinary air will, to a certain extent, and
water completely dissolve, and the water be quite transparent
and apparently contain nothing. Still the metal may be caused
to resume its metallic form.
At some ironworks in England a current of electricity is passed
through the melted iron as it runs from the furnace, and the iron
is developed in a remarkably purer state.
Dr. Ure says—“ That silica and its associated bases, which are
oxidised at the surface of the earth, and thus deprived of their
elementary activity, exist at a moderate depth beneath that sur-
face devoid of oxygen in the state of simple combustibles, there is
little reason to doubt.”
A beautiful experiment bearing on electric agency as connected
with gold. On a slip of glass, put a drop of liquid auric chloride,
or argentic nitrate, with half a grain of metallic zinc in the auric,
and of copper in the argentic (silver), when minature gold and
silver fern-like leaves will be formed; zinc is a galvanic exciter
with other metals. Also, put the auric chloride on a slip of glass,
under a microscope, and apply the two wires of a battery pointed
with platinum to the liquid, and you will see the gold leaf form-
ing under you vision. The analogous action on a large scale goes
on in the earth.
Faraday produced gold films so thin that 350 millions could be
contained in an inch. Anyhow, gold can be beaten into leaves
282-thousandth of an inch in thickness, that is, it would take
282,000 to make a pile one inch high. So one can imagine the
fineness of the atomic particles of invisible gold. I have a piece
of glass perfectly taansparent but full of invisible chloride of gold,
and it can be got out again without diminution.
A gentleman told me that a friend was on the Victorian
diggings, and sunk several holes with very poor returns. He
was successful at another place, and before he left he went to
havealookat the old spot at the foot of a hill. Walking up the hill
he observed a tree which had been struck by lightning, which
had split the quartz at its foot. He tried his old ground and took
two pounds weight of gold to a bucketful of stuff. He said, he
supposed the lightning had something to do with it.
It may seem strange that in the locality where I know gold exists
in abundance at Angaston, should be just where the lightning
pitches down very powerfully, just in a great Sinter district. Mr.


Jack says that where .gold is known to exist in the vicinity of a hot
spring, formation we may look for a repetition of Mount Morgan.
So far, so good. I have a right to my opinion, let who will main-
tain the contrary. The district contains much metamorphic rocks,
and although I do not lay much stress on this, as some geologists
do, the metamorphism may act as a kind of “ fixer.” A celebrated
geologist said there was no metamorphic action in the Barossa
gold diggings, of Spike Gully, but I found a strong metamorphic
slate in the creek, and have the specimen. Remember, also,
that no one in the world knows positively the origin of gold,
platinum, or diamonds, so one man’s word may be as good as
another’s.
ORIGIN OF GOLD.
Adelaide Advertiser , 23rd October, 1895.
Professor Logan Lobley, 'F.G.S., in the August issue of
Knowledge , elaborates another and more recent view, which not
only adopts the theory of aqueous conveyance to the veins but
also assigns an aqueous origin, as it looks to the sea as the source
of the auriferous treasures. There are a good many facts which
contradict the idea of igneous action. Discoveries in California
have, for example, disproved the opinion of Sir Roderick
Murchison that auriferous veins are found only in palaeozoic rocks,
or in the vicinity of igneous eruptions. In that state gold-bear-
ing quartz veins have been found traversing cretaceous and
tertiary strata, even in localities where there are no traces of
recent igneous action. Professor Lobley, however, lays even
more stress on the singularly overlooked fact that gold is absent
to quite a remarkable extent from volcanic products. If the
metal was originally thrown up from the bowels of the earth,
how is it that it so rarely or never occurs among volcanic products
derived from the same deep-seated sources ?
Gold, it must be remembered, is a most widely distributed
mineral. Its absence from volcanic regions, or in such regions its
presence rather in the non-volcanic than the volcanic rocks them-
selves, is accordingly all the more extraordinary, if the igneous
theory be sound. Gold only occurs in non-volcanic districts.
The great volcanic island of Iceland is quite devoid of the metal,
and so is the eminently volcanic area of Sicily. Throughout
Europe the same phenomenon is observed. In this hemisphere
the volcanic islands of the Pacific are strikingly non-auriferous.
On the contrary non-volcanic New South Wales and Queensland
are rich in gold. The metal is found in the volcanic North
Island of New Zealand, but not in the volcanic rocks; while
there is very much more of it in the South Island, which is not


volcanic at all. In India and Africa the distribution of gold tells
precisely the same tale. But the crowning proof is the entire
absence of the metal or any of its salts in the Vesuvian area
which, nevertheless exhibits a greater variety of minerals than
any other area of even a hundred times its extent. The occur-
rence of rich auriferous detritus under lava masses both in
California and Victoria is not to the point in this discussion j for
these deposits were derived from hills a considerable distance
away. The erosion of the rocks forming those elevations led to
the deposit of the beds containing the auriferous veins, which
were afterwards covered over by volcanic outbursts. From these
considerations Professor Lobley concludes that gold cannot have
been originally drawn from plutonic sources, and the theory of
igneous action is therefore out of court. The aqueous hypothesis
both of the origin of gold and its conveyance to quartz veins is
upheld by chemical facts, some of which have been quite recently
elicited. The metal has few chemical affinities—that is to say,
it unites with only a limited number of other elements. Chlorine
is one of the few with which it combines, forming an auric
chloride which readily dissolves in water at ordinary temperatures.
There is also a sulphide of gold, not quite so soluble ; and it is
considered probable that under suitable natural conditions of
heat and pressure, gold will chemically unite with silica, forming
an auric silicate, slightly soluble in hot water. Now the same
conditions that favor the solution of silica, which is slightly soluble
in hot water, and its deposition in the fissures and cavities of
rocks as quartz veins, would similarly favor the formation of
a silicate of gold in siliceous auriferous rocks, and its subsequent
solution and conveyance from the massive rocks into any cavity
or fissure. It would then remain only for time to release the
metal from the chemical embrace of silica, and leave it as free
gold in the quartz veins traversing the rocks. Bischoff, Dr. Sterry
Hunt, and Professor Newberry, all favor the view that gold has
probably found its way into the quartz veins originally as a
silicate.
The question of the origin of gold is now narrowed down to
accounting for its occurrence in sufficient quantity in the marine
sedimentary rocks. All the materials of these rocks—sands,
shales, clays, and limestones—came directly from the seas of the
globe. Could seawater hold gold in solution so that it might be
deposited in the terrestrial rocks where it is now found ? The
answer is in the affirmative. That the sea contains the soluble
salts of gold is no longer a matter of mere speculation. Sonstadt
has demonstrated by careful experiment at Ramsey Bay, in the
Isle of Man, that gold is present in seawater to the amount of a
little under a grain of gold per ton of water. The gold


production of the world to the present time is estimated at
£8,500,000,000 sterling. The estimated weight of the seas of
the globe is 560,000,000,000,000,000 tons, so that it is calculated
they now contain 5,000,000 times as much gold as has ever been
extracted from the rocks; consequently the sufficiency of the
ocean’s store of gold to stock the earth must be allowed. The
next problem is the method of the separation of gold from its
marine solution and deposit in the sedimentary rocks. Here the
enquirer is assisted by the discovery of Mr. Richard Daintree,
of Victoria, who, by the accidental dropping of a piece of cork
into a solution of gold chloride, found that organic matter decom-
poses such a solution and precipitates the gold as free metal. How
there is no doubt that when the materials of the sedimentary
rocks were deposited, the bottom of the sea was rich in organic
matter. The conditions were, therefore, favorable to the con-
temporaneous deposit of gold. Still the amounts deposited by
contact with organic matter would be small—too small to be
detected in the resulting rocks junless there were some assisting
process of aggregation. At this point further light is thrown
upon the question by the discovery of Professor Wilkinson, that
gold precipitated by organic matter tends to aggregate around
metallic nuclei. The Rosicrucians say “ Gold draws and compels
inferior natures in the metals, and intensifying and multiplying
converts into itself.” Gold in this way attracts itself, but it is
also especially attracted by the sulphides of the metals, as pyrites
and galena. With those compounds gold, as is well known, is
frequently associated. Professor Lobley is disposed to think that
in course of time the association of gold with such metallic
companions would terminate on the occurrence of favoring con-
ditions, the metal then chemically combining with another
element, most probably silica. Thus the conclusion is finally
arrived at, that the gold now found in quartz veins was originally
dissolved in the sea, then percipitated from its salts by the action
of organic matter, eliminated from sedimentary rocks by attach-
ment to other metallic substances, associated therewith until
thermal conditions, induced by pressure or neighboring igneous
action induced chemical reaction and raised the temperature of
the subterranean water sufficiently to dissolve the auriferous
compound, and finally carried by water with silica into the fissures
of the rocks, where on cooling it would be thrown down as a
solid silicate, and eventually become separated as free metallic
gold.
Sir R. Murchison says “We are naturally led to favor the
suggestion of Humboldt, that the formation of gold had some
closer relation to or dependence upon the atmosphere than that
of the baser metals—lead, copper, and iron,” and Dr. Percy is


indeed disposed to believe that it may have been thrown down
by deposition from an aqueous medium, and he further says
“ that the gold which occurs in quartz veins in the solid slate
rocks, resulted from an interior agency, in which heat and elec-
tricity were combined with water or vapor seems to be a natural
conclusion, if we judge from the appearance which the strings
and expansion of the metal indicate as they ramify through the
chinks of hard rock, or are diffused in grains in its mass. We may
also suppose that the prevalent matrix of quartz, whether ejected
from beneath, or powdered in from above, was in a soft and
gelatinous state when it filled the cavities, resembling the silicious
sinter which now rises in a fluid spout from Hecla|, and falling
coagulates into a mordern quartz rock around the volcanic
orifices.”
I cannot help thinking that has come nearly to a
correct conclusion, and he must be possessed of collected data
somehow.
Many geologists ignore the action of fire, and maintain gold to
be deposited by electro-chemical decomposition. Mr. Evan
Hopkins, who was no small authority, opposed the red-hot theory,
and says—“ When persons see the large masses of gold obtained
from the surface of the quartz on the edges of the primary slates
they are too apt to think that such productions are caused by
melting, or intense heat. Such ideas (he says) are incorrect, and
from the circumstances of the metal being marked with the most
minute striae of the quartz, which contains the usual proportion
of water.” He maintains that this is a state of things totally in-
consistent with an intense melting action, but identical to that
resulting from a battery and an aqueous solution.
It is an interesting fact that in Cornwall, after stamping tin
and extracting all you can, it often pays, say in 80 to 100 years’
time, to re-work that rubbish, veins of tin, have been formed,
doubtless by the attraction of the atoms or grains gravitating
together.
In “ Cosmos ” a remarkable example of the way in which per-
ceptible changes of mixture are produced in nature by very
minute, but continuous, accumulation is afforded by the presence
of silver in sea-water, discovered by Malagute, and confirmed by
Field. Notwithstanding the immense extent of the ocean, and
the trifling amount of surface presented to it by the ships which
traverse it, yet the trace of silver in the sea-water has in recent
times become observable on the copper sheathing of ships.
Now, what do we know of platinum 1 Only that gold mines
derived from a dioritic formation are favorable.
I do not think that the basaltic formations have much to do
with gold, but that this lava was poured out after the gold was


produced. In South Australia we have much gold without the
presence of true lava.
Edison is said to have invented methods by which he extracts
a greater amount of gold from rejected residuum of auriferous
quartz, called “ tailings,” than is obtained by the present pro-
cesses from virgin stone from crushing mills. The agents em-
ployed are chemistry and electricity. He takes a quantity of
tailings, which, as far as any known process is concerned, have
not a trace of gold, and produces the metal in quantities truly
astonishing.
In the Ural of Russia, when the miners find a biggish lump of
gold, they leave the place, as they do not expect to find any
more.
Prof. Draper says all the metals reach their goal in turning
into gold; but I can’t see this, as gold is found in so many
metallic ores —in copper, galena, iron, and I have a specimen
from Kimberly, W.A., in true marble, or crystaline limestone.
Gold, nickel, and antimony have been found in South Australia
all in one specimen. As to the various processes for gold ex-
traction, some will do for one class of stone but not for others.
M. in a paper read before the Academy of Sciences,
maintains the possibility of producing gold artificially. He says
—“The metals are not simple, but compound, bodies.” Proceed-
ing upon a principle admitted by chemists, “that the properties
of bodies are the result of their molecular constitution,” he ad-
duces numerous examples in chemistry, in which bodies assume
different properties according as they have crystallised in one
form or another, although their composition remains the same.
All that he had to seek was a substance which by its catalytic
forces would act upon the body which it was desired to trans-
mute, and then to place this last under certain conditions in con-
tact with it to effect the change. He believes that there are
very few simple substances in nature, and considers that the 40
metals now assumed to be such are in reality combinations pro-
bably of one radical with some unknown body hitherto not
studied, but which of itself alone modifies the properties of this
radical, and thus presents us apparently with 40 bodies, whilst
in reality there is but dkg. If any one has discovered this body,
which has hitherto escaped the researches of philosophers, and
can cause it to act on any given metal, is there anything supris-
ing that he can change the nature of the metal by giving it with
a different molecular constitution the properties of that metal by
which this constitution naturally exists. He says he has done
this.
The biggest piece of gold free of quartz ever found was from
Beyer & Holterman’s claim, Hill End, N. S. Wales in May, 1872.


Weight, 640 lbs.; four feet nine inches long, three feet two
inches wide, and averaged four inches thick. Value, £29,760.
Imbedded in a thick wall of slate 250 feet from surface.
Slate is a better conductor of electricity than quartz.
The “Welcome Stranger” nugget, 2,302 ozs. smelted gold,
Mount Moliagul, Dunolly, Victoria, in a red clay, which clay
was always associated with Deesan & Oatts’ larger finds, and
■especially so with this large nugget.
The “ Viscount Canterbury” nugget, 1,105 ozs. pure gold, but
no fine gold near it.
I think there are no auriferous iron reefs in Victoria, but
mainly quartz. »
The Moliagul nugget found in clay must have been formed in
the place where it was found, and could not have been torn from
a quartz reef; and the Hill End slab was in the slate, but the
the atomic particles were drawn together by the electric or gal-
vanic agency there and then. Ho large nugget has been ever
found in a quartz reef, but patches of gold have.
I see by a Coolgardie report that there is an “immense
kaolinised formation,” 20 chains wide, assaying gold from 2 to
1,000 ozs. per ton in the quartz therein. Is it a kaolin, or a
silica of alumina, which may look very much like it, and that
gold exists in “ opaline ?” Is it meant opal, or hydrated quartz,
siliceous sinter 1 Also that gold is found in pure quartz crystals ?
Are they quartz crystals, or sinter- prisms ? Are they true
quartz 1 When I saw some specimens in the Melbourne Museum
labelled “ quartz crystals,” containing a liquid (like a spirit level),
I mentioned to Mr. Newbery that they were not quartz crystals,
but three-sided prisms of calcedonic sinter (from Beech worth), and
he said I was right. The water, or steam condensed into water,
was enclosed with the last closure of the material. I had, I said,
an iron kettle much furred, and chipping off part of the fur, left
it, but the accumulation kept on, and on drying, closed up with
the water, which, on putting the kettle on the fire afterwards, the
enclosed water was converted into steam, which blew off the lid
of the kettle, and I thought these prisms were on a similar
principle. He thought it a good exemplification. However,
they were not true quartz crystals, which are generally six-sided,
but these were of a three-sided form. Quartz is often opaque,
like china, and so you could not see any gold in them, but in a
clear one you could. The crystals of gold might be formed as a
matter of course.
I think that gold has been formed chiefly by electric agency ;
that the metal has been in an atomic state, and that the atoms
have been drawn together by this power. It will be found that
it is chiefly connected with iron ores in South Australia, and


perhaps in West Australia. A hydrous iron, an ore having a
percentage of water, would be most favorable, say limonite.
Mr. Crosse says that galvanism, acting through a watery
medium, develops crystalline forms. Acting therefore on quartz
when in a soft or gelatinous state, would produce such. I have
specimens which would seem to illustrate this. One fiom Yil~
garn, of gold quartz, highly stained with iron, as if rust had been
in it,’ and as it was hardened, would show a strong iron stain.
Admitting that sinter, a kind of geyser volcanic siliceous or
flinty mud, has eventually become consolidated into quartz, the
thing is feasible, and I suspect that the phenomena exhibited at
Mount Morgan will do much to forward conclusions I got
into hot water by asserting that the district in which I reside is
a second Mount Morgan, as there is abundance of gold, and
miles of sinter, in the form of opal, calcedony, jasper, &c., and I
still stick to my opinion, let geologists and pedants say what they
will to the contrary, and I do not see why the ipse dixit of these
gentlemen, some of them high-salaried, should take precedence
in everything.
The only way to get at it would be in seeing collections of gold
specimens from every part of the world in one room, and then we
might find out something. This, however, would be almost a
herculean task. Still, it could and ought to be done, for we are
so bewildered by the reports of Government geologists, managers
of mines in various localities that we are more puzzled than ever,
and are just blundering about in the dark. Schools of Mines
seem almost useless, for they give no information practically or
theoretically. We have one in Adelaide, but more attention
seems to be devoted to the making of a jam tart or ladies’ skirts,
and it is next to a moral swindle. There seems no one who can
explain mineral phenomena to a stranger. A man may be a good
chemist, assayer, or analyst, but that may not imply a knowledge
of minerals, and I have to send specimens to Melbourne for
identification. I think there must be some powerful sinter action
in West Australia, for I saw a shirt stud on a gentleman visiting
my museum of as good, precious opal as any from the other
colonies. I have very few specimens from West Australia, and
will be glad to have more ; but I want the rocks, not merely
pretty gold specimens. It is said that the Angipena gold is a
swindle, but I can’t see that exactly. I fancy the fool who was
supposed to have salted the mine has tried to improve a quartz
reef, and missed the vein. I have a specimen from thence of
decomposed iron ore with fine gold, and my next-door neighbor
has two tine nuggets sent from there from a miner to form the
setting of a brooch. The gold at Nillinghoo (Waukaringa) is in
iron ore, none in the quartz; and perhaps Angipena may be
similar.


I see Mr. R. M. Sergeant, of Ballarat, seems from data col-
lated to maintain that gold is formed from the old marine forma-
tions, and this would give color to Lebley’s theory.
I was discussing some matters about gold to a scientific gentle-
man in Adelaide, and he said—“lt’s no use talking about these
matters ; we want the specimens.” Quite true.
Sir J. Herschell says there is no science in which the evils
resulting from a rage for nomenclature have been felt to such an
extent as in mineralogy. The number of simple minerals actually
recognised by mineralogists does not exceed a few hundreds, yet
there is scarcely one which has not four or five names in different
books. The consequence is most unhappy. No name is suffered
to endure long enough to take root, and every new writer on this
interesting science begins, as a matter of course, by making a
tabula rasa of all former nomenclature, and proposing a new one
in its place.
I do not wonder at people investing in West Australian gold
mines, for it is natural when such grand specimens are found;
but I wish more attention and enterprise was devoted to the
South Australian gold formations, which I believe will be found
as profitable as the Victorian; but our colony is not half investi-
gated. The great difficulty is the want of water; and although
I do not think there is a great predominance of alluvial gold, as
the country is not old enough to have admitted of such ; still we
have rich gold reefs, chiefly iron, which would pay well. We
want legitimate mining; but there is too much juggling in the
share market, and people are not content with a good living, but
want to make a fortune—which I suppose is human nature all
the world over. There is also a good deal of swindling, although
a good deal of disappointment is from ignorance, and credulity is
much worked upon by the unprincipled. In fact, we are only
just beginning to investigate our gold districts. If a very big
piece of gold were found, the place w r ould be rushed, although
the locality may be none the better for that. All I maintain is
that our gold is opening a good field for enterprise, and that is a
w'onder to me that men will go one or two thousands of miles,
when they might develop the same resources in places where the
necessaries and comforts of life are more obtainable, and it wrould
seem that there will be a great drain upon our small population,
which will be rather detrimental to us. People say, “ Let them
go, there is nothing for them to do here.” But there ought to
be—-though I suppose that “ distance lends enchantment to the
view.” There is no doubt that the increase of trade caused by
the West Australian mines has been of benefit to South Aus-
tralia, and this is one reason why I am strongly in favor of a
federation, and then there would be less difficulty. Do away


with all “border duties,” and let each district make the most of
its own .resources, instead of being hampered with a lot of un-
natural restrictions. Intercolonial free trade we must have in
fact, I would be glad to see all Custom Houses done away with.
One system of Government, one currency, and one postage, and
as to the Governors, one would do, although, of course, there
would have to be some head in each district, and the Legislature
would be improved in its brain power. People came to these
colonies to better themselves; patriotism is out of the question.
It is perfectly ludicrous the way things are managed, or rather
mismanaged. Hardly a man in our Parliaments fitted for states-
manship by either birth or education. A man should have the
facility of disposing of his produce when, where, and how he
likes, without any restrictions.
Electricity is a main factor in the formation of many metallic
ores, as well as gold ; at the Burra and Kapunda copper mines
especially. Broken Hill silver mine is not a true lode, neither is
Mount Bischoff tin mine, Tasmania. The Kapunda mine is very
illustrative of Hunt’s clay experiment. It is in a great basin,
bounded by a range of hills, in a soft clay, not requiring much
blasting—in fact, a sort of galvanic pot. Thunderstorms are
very violent there, and the telegraphic instruments suffer much
in consequence. The Burra seems more of a concretionary
character; still, electric agency may have played a part there.
I do not think there are any true tin lodes payable south of the
Equator, and without having a gigantic deposit will hardly pay.
There may be in places a fair quantity of stream tin—alluvial, in
fact. It is generally found in a coarse granitic formation, and
with schorl or tourmaline rocks as well.


f I £^Bl
A/ C
ADELAIDE :
PRINTED BY VARDON AND PRITCHARD,
GRESHAM STREET.




