

DICKS’ STANDARD PLAYS.
GOLD.
BY CHARLES READE
ORIGINAL COMPLETE EDITION.
This Play can be Performed Without Risk of Infringing
Ant Rights.
JOHN DICKS PRESS, LTD., 8, TEMPLE AVENUE. LONDON. E.C.
No. 1,053,




GOLD!
A DRAMA, IN FIVE ACTS.
First performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, Monday, January 10,1853.
\ Buamatis tisane. cseep.is.
Oeorge gASDEOfIp (A Young Farmer, Betrothed to Susan Merton) Mr. Davenport.
William Sandford (His Brother) Mr. Moorh’ouse"
y Hen&t Winchester, Esq. ... Mr. Hughes.
Vlsaac Levi (A Jew) ... , Mr. Edward Stirling-
TRobinson (A Thief) Mr. Henry Wallack J
«Slr..Meadowb (A Corn Factor and Money Lender Mr. H. Lee. /
r 0 Raw let (An Attorney’s Clerk) Mr. Oharles Selby. /
I Old Farmer Sandford Mr. Groegli / /
Mr. Merton (A Yeomau) ... Mr! White* / v
l Mr. T ovet (A Magistrate) Mr.’Harold. / Afi
\ .To in Sims (A Waiter) Mr. Yarnold. /k 'Jt
\l'armersßot .. Master dreeaf lAjv I
\ 1,053. Sicks’ Standard Flays. /
BY CHARLES READE.


A NEW ALPHABETICAL AND CLASSIFIED
CATALOGUE,
Giving Full Particulars of Every Number of
DICKS’ STRNDRRD PLftYS
AND FREE ACTING DRAMA.
Will be sent on request, enclosing three-halfpence in stamps, to any
address. It will be found of the greatest convenience to those wht
*aay be selecting plays for Home and Private Theatricals, as i*
contains particulars of upwards of
1,072 Free Acting Plays
so arranged as to show at a glance the various authors whose
works appear in this valuable collection, which, can be procured at
ONE PENNY EACH,
AT ALL BOOKSELLERS IN TOWN OR COUNTRY.
Only Postal Orders or Halfpenny Stamps accepted




CONTIN CATION OF DRAMATIS PERSONIE. &JF
London Policeman Mr. Bromley. .
Constable Mr. King. ' ‘ ?
Ensign Hdlsone Mr. Cavill. .. /,
iJßlack Will (A Robber) Mr., Lickfold.
Jim of the Bush Mr. Anderson.
Nathan (A Younp Jew) Mr. Cooke. • *
Thomas (A Servant) Mr. Sanders. B
("Mr. Kingstone.l
Minxes... < Mr. Bird. up
,1 (.Mr. Brookes. ?
SdsANna Merton ... Miss Fanny Vining.
SA-Rah (A Fatrn Servant) t Miss St. Ciarje.
Mart McDoggherty (An Irish Emipraht) ... Mrs. Griffiths.
Villagers, Miners, Soldiers, &c. ,-■*
Tbe action of the piece passes in England (in the Spring of 1847) during the first, second, flmf’
(in the Autumn of 1848) fifth acts; and in Australia during the third and fourth, in January,
■lB4B.
Time of Representation. —Two Hours and a Quarter.
COSTUME.
Of 18*7, but appropriate to the circumstances and position of the characters*
STAGE DIRECTIONS.
Exits and Entrances.— R. means Right; L. Left; D. F. Door rn Flat; It D. Right Door;
L. D. Left Door; S. E. Second Entrance; U. E. Upper Entrance; M. 1). Middle Door; L. U. E.
I,'eft Upper Entrance; R. U. E. Right Upper Entrance; L. S. E. Left Second Entrance; P. S.
Prompt Side; 0. P. Opposite Prompt.
Relative Positions. —R. means Right; It. Left; C. Centre; R. 0. Right of Centre; L. 0.
Left of Centre. _ rn r
R, RC. 0. LC. It.
*,* The Reader is supposed to le on the Stage, facing the A udience.


GOLD
ACT I.
SCENE.— Space in front of a Farmyard, lying in a
bottom. House, n. H. Barn, L. h. Railings, C.,
and an Acclivity beyond.
Enter MR. WINCHESTER and GEORGE SAND-
FORD.
Geo. Emigrate? Sir! Me leave home, and
England, and the plough, to keep sheep in a
desert ? That will never be!
TFin. You know me, Sandford, and I know you.
Go with me to Australia —stay with me for one
year, and after that I’ll square accounts with
you for saving my life in that thundering mill-
pool.
Geo. Oh! Mr. Winchester, that’s an old story—
haven’t you.forgot that yet ?
(Looks down and smiles.)
Win. Not quite. You shall have five hundred
sheep, and a run for them ; and we will both come
home rich, and consequently respectable.
Geo. It is a handsome offer, sir, and a kind
offer, and like yourself. But tran-planting one of
us ? Dear me, sir, it’s like taking up an oak tree
thirty years in the ground. Besides, did you ever
see my Cousin Susanna, sir ?
Win. See her? Why, what am I looking at all
church time ? Miss Merton is a lovely girl!
Geo. Isn’t she, sir ?
Win. Oho! Well, that is no reason. We don’t
go to Australia to die—we go to make money, and
come home respectable—rich, that is. Honest
industry is the game of glory now. Spades are
trumps! Will you have a cigar, farmer ?
(Strikes a light.)
Geo. I don’t care if I do, sir. I never got beyond
a yard of clay, though, till to-day.
Win. Then I must enlighten you. (Aside.) I
won’t give it up.
Geo. I say, sir, seems to me the fire ia uncommon
near the chimbly here.
(Looks at end of cigar, and draws a
puff. Winchester laughs.)
Win. Will you show me your farming stock?
(George itods.) Then lead the way, farmer.
Geo. Ay, sure, sir. After you, sir, if you
please!
[Exeunt, b. h.
Enter MR. MEADOWS.
Mea. And I have escaped love all these years to
dote upon a woman now! What magic is in this
Susanna Merton that I, who live for money, would
pave the ground she walks upon with my gold it
she would but walk towards mo ? When I think
that she prefers that George Sand ford I could
curse all the world —a dull dog, that could be just
as happy with any other girl—an oaf, that does
not even see his rivals—does not dream that his
own brother loves her—and that I love her, and
will take her from both of them! A few weeks
aud a few mngs of ale would wash her from what
little mind either of them has. But I never loved
a woman before, nor ever shall again! She is my
very breath! I will risK character, money, life
for her! She shall be mine! If I can win her
fairly, so best —if not— I will win her! I will
wind like a serpent—l will spring like a tiger—but
I will have her Ah, the constable 1 What is
up now ?
Enter CONSTABLE and LONDON POLICEMAN
in plain clothes.
Con. Master Meadows, sir, I have news for you.
Your pocket was picked last Martinmas Fair ?
Mea. Yes.
Con. Should you know any of the money P
Mea. I could not swear to any but three notes of
the Farnborough Bank.
Con. (Shows a note.) Is this one of them ?
Mea. It is. Who passed it P
Con. George Saudford’s lodger, Robinson, if
that is his name, but I suspect he is a London
thief, taking au airing.
Mea. (Aside) Here’s luck! (Aloud.) Who is
this?
Con. Gentleman from Bow Street, come to see if
he knows him.
Mea. Is he at home ?
Con. No; ho is out fishing. We’ll hang about
the farm till he comes back, and then we’ll take
him.
Police. You had better be at hand, sir, to identify
the notes.
Mea. I will not leave the premises. Stop—be
cautious! If he is an old hand, he will twig
the
Police. Oh, I am dark, sir! He won’t know me
till I am near enough to put the darbies on.
[Exeunt Policeman and Constable.
Mea. Capital! This will blacken that George
Saudford. He is as fond of this Robinson as a cow
is of a calf. He has been warned a hundred
times against the acquaintance, but ho never
would listen. His friend a thief! Ha, ha! Why,


he’li be ready .So tillage for shame, for .he
is as proud as Lucifer at bottom. I have worked
on Susan’s father, old Merton, and he won’t be
ioug before he puts a spoke in George SaudfordV
wheel. He told me he should to-Say
Ah! who is thibP That old Jew! I know what
he comes for! ‘ V . . ‘
\ JrN ■V' A v
Enter ISAAC LEVI.
Well, Mr. Levi, if it is about that house you are in,
you may keep your breath to cool your porridge.
Levh Mr. Meadows, I have lived there twenty
years. I pay a fair rent; but if you think anyone
would give more, you shall lose nothing by me. I
will pay a little more, and you know your rent is
secure.
Mea. I do.
Levi. Thank you, sir. Well, then
Mea. Well, then, next Lady-day you turn out
bag aud baggage!
Levi. Nay, sir, hear me, for you are younger
thau I. When the hair on this white head was
brown, I travelled in the East—l sojourned in
Madras and Benares, in Bagdad, Ispahan, Mecca,
aud Bassora, and found no rest. When iny hair
began to turn gray, I traded in Petersburgh, and
Rome, and Paris, in Vienna and Lisbon, and other
western cities. I was driven to and fro in Europe,
and like my nation, found no rest. I came to this
little town, where least of all I thought to pitch
my tent for life. But here, sir, the God of my
fathers gave me my wife, and here He took her to
Himself again.
Mea. (Roughly.) What the deuce is all this to
me, man ?
Lent. Much, sir, if you are what men say—for
men speak well of you. Be patient, and hear me.
Iu the house you have bought two children were
born to me, and died from me; and there my Leah
died also—and there, at times, in the silent hours,
I ,£eern to hear their voices and their feet. In
another house I shall never hear them—l shall be
quite alone. Have pity on me, sir, an aged and a
lonely man! Tear me not from the shadows of
my dead! (Pause.) Let me prevail with you P
'Mea. No!
Levi. No ? Then you must be an enemy of Isaac
Levi.
Mea. Yes!
Levi. Ha! What have I done for this ?
Mea. You lend money.
Levi. A little, sir, now and then—a very little.
Mea. A great deal! You have no money in hand
when the security is bad; but when the security
is good, no person has ever found the bottom of
Isaac Levi’s purse. Well, what you do on the sly,
I do on the sly, old sixty per cent.
Levi. The world is wide enough for u 3 both, good
sir.
Mea. It is. Go where you like; for the little
town of Farnborongh is not wide enougli for me
and any man that works my business for his own
pocket.
Levi. This is not enmity, sir; it is but a matter
of profit and loss, trust me.
Mea. I’d trust you as far as I could fling a bull
by the tail 1 You gave me your history—here’s
mine. I have always put my foot on whatever
thing and whatever man has stood in my path. I
was poor, I am rich, and that is my policy.
Levi, It is a frail policy. Some man will be
sure to put his foot on you, sooner or later.
Mea. What! Dd ye thre Aott mo ? *
Laui. No, sir. I but tell you what these bid eyec
, hat * seep i“ every nation, and read in books that
.newir lieV Noinan can defy his kind. , The strong^
, mafrus sure tbfiad one as strong arid mare s'kiif ul
the canninsf man, one as adroit and stronger than
> Jiimself. Be advised, t\mn. Do not trample on
We oj my ¥MfcmJ.jneiutfflfr.onnrB M
us never thrive. bliss yon.
An old man s blessing is gold. See these gray
hairs, my sorrows have been as many as tiiey are
His share of the curse that y is upon his tribe h£L
fallen on Isaac Levi. I have been driven to and
tro like a leaf many years; ahd now I long W
rest. Let me rest in my little ten*-, till I re3t for
ever. Oh! let me die where those I have loved
have died, and th re let me be buried!
Mea. If you like to hang yourself before next
Lady-day, I give you leave; but after La ly-day,
no more Jewish dogs shall die in my house, or be
buried in my garden.
Levi. (Giving way to his pent-up wrath.) Irre-
verent cur! D’ye rail on the afflicted of Heaven ?
I spit upon ye, and I curse ye ? Be accursed!
I (Throws las hands up.) Whatever is the secret
| wish of your black heart, Heaven wither it! Ha
,0.11! yon wince already! AH men have secret
wishes. May all the good lock you have be worm-
i woou foi want of that that —that! May you be
I near it—close to it —upon it—burn for it—and lose
it! May it sport with your soul—
Re-enter GEORGE SANDFORD, with the air of
one attracted by ths speaker.
—till you feel Gehenna upon earth!
Mea. I’ll smash your viper’s tongue!
(Aims a blow at Levi with his stick.)
j Geo. (Coolly parries it.) Not if I know it! You
I are joking, Master Meadows. Why, the man is
, twice ybur age, and nothing in his hand but his
fist. (To Levi.) Who are you, old man, and what
do you want ?
Mea. He insults me because I won’t have him for
a tenant. Who is he P A villainous old Jew !
Levi. Yes, young man, I am Isaac Levi, a jew!
(To Meadows.) D’ye call yourself a heathen ? Ye
lie, ye cur! The heathen were not without their
starlight from heaven, they respected sorrow and
gray hairs.
Mea. You shall smart for this! I’ll show you
what my religion is!
Geo. Now don’t be so aggravating, old man.
And you, Master Meadows, should know how to
make light of an old man’s tongue. It is like a
woman’s—it is all he has got to hit with. Least-
ways, you mu-tn’t lift a hand to him on my
premises, or you’ll have to settle with me first, and
I don’t think that will suit your book.
Levi. He ?—he dares not! See—see !he doesn’t
I look you in the face. Any man that has read men
from East to West can soe in your eye
young man, and “ cowardly wolf ” in his ! ’
Mea. (Trembling with rage.) Lady-day, Master
I Isaac —Lady-day!
[ Geo. Lad.v - day ? Confound Lady - day, and
every day of the sort! There, don’t you be so
spiteful, old man. Why, if he isn’t all of a tremble l
(Calls.) Sarah!
Enter SARAH, meeting him.
Take the old man in, and give him the be3t that U


going, and his mug and his pipe— (whispers)— and
don’t go lumping down the chine under his nose,
like a thoughtless lass as y’are.
Levi. I must not eat with you ; but I thank you,
young man. I will go in and compote myself, for
passion is unseemly at my years. ( Stops suddenly
nt door.) Peace be under this roof, and comfort
and love follow me into this dwelling !
Geo. Thank ye kindly 1 There, go in, and forget
all your troubles awhile by my fireside, my poor
old man.
Levi. (After a struggle, gives him his hand.) Isaac
Levi is your friend !
[He casts a long glance of hatred at
Meadows, and exits into house.
George looks after him.
Mea. (A ide.) One more down to your account,
George Sandford 1
[Exit, L. H.
Geo. Old man’s words seem to knock agaiust my
brain. Master Meadows Gone, eh ? That
man has everyhody’s good word—parson’s and all,
but somehow 1 never thought he was the right
stuff, and now I’m sure. Oh 1 here’s Bill, at last.
Enter WILLIAM SANDFORD.
Better late than never.
Wil. 1 couldn’t get away before. Hero’s the
money for the sheep—thirteen pounds ten. No
offer for the cow—Jem’s driving her home.
Geo. Well, and the money—the eighty pounds ?
Wil. I haven’t got it. Here's your draft—the
bank wouldn’t take it.
Geo. They wouldn’t take it? Ay, our oredit’s
down—the whole town knows our rent is overdue.
What’s to be done? I suppose you know money
must be got some way ?
Wil. Ask a loan of a neighbour.
Geo. Oh, Bill, to ask a loan of a neighbour, and
be denied—it is bitterer than death! You can do
it.
Wil. I ? Am I master here ? The farm is not
farmed my way, nor ever was. Give me the plough
handle, and I’ll cut the furrow, George.
Geo. No doubt—no doubt! You’d like to draw
the land dry with potatoes, and have fourscore
hogs snoring in the farmyard. You want to be
elder brother. Well, kill me, for that is the only
way to it.
Wil. So be it, George! You got us into the mud,
elder brother —you get us out of the mire.
Geo. (In a suhduedtone.) Who shall I ask ?
Wil, Uncle Merton, or Meadows, the corn-factor,
it would not be much to either of them.
Geo. Show my empty pockets to Susanna’s
father? Oh, Will! And I’ve just offended
Meadows a bit; beside', he’s a hard man—a man
that never knew trouble or ill-luck. They are
like flints, all that sort.
Wil. I’ll ask him, if you will try uncle—the first
that meets his man to begin.
Geo. That is fair—l agree. You’re in luck, Bill,
here’s your man.
[Exit hastily.
Wil. Confound it!
Re-enter MEADOWS.
I didn’t know you were here, sir—l wanted to
speak to you.
Mea. I am at yonr service, Mr, William.
Wil. Well, sir, George and I are a little short,
just at present—it is only for a time —and George
says he would take it very kind if you could lend
us a hundred pouuds, just to help ns over the stile.
Mea. My dear boy, I should be delighted—and,
if you had only asked me yesterday, I could have
done it—but my business drinks a deal of money,
and I laid out all my loose cash yesterday, and
sha’u't have any coming in this three months. But,
of course, it is of no cousequeuce another time.
Good morning.
[Barit.
Re-enter GEORGE.
Geo. Well!
Wil. He says he has no money loose.
Geo. He is a liar 1 He paid one thousand five
hundred pounds into the bank last week, and yon
know it—didn’t you tell him so ?
Wil. No-what use ? A man that lies to avoid
lending won’t be driven to lend.
Geo. You don’t play fair—you could have got it
from Meadows, but you want to drive me against
my sweetheart’s father. You are false, mv lad.
Wil. You are the only man that ever said so—
and you dared not, if you weren’t my brother.
Geo. I’d say a deal more if it wasn’t for that bit
of ill-luck.
Wil. Well, show your courage to Uncle Henry,
for here he is.
Enter MR. MERTON.
Uncle, George wants to speak to you.
[Brit.
Merton. That is lucky, for I want to speak to
George.
Geo. (Aside.) Who would have thought of his
being here ?
Merton. George, you are threshing ont new
wheat.
Geo. (Looking down.) Yes,
Merton. That is a bad look-ont—a farmer has no
business to go to his barn door for rent.
Geo. Where is he to go, then ?—to the church-
door, and ask for a miracle ?
Merton. No; to his sheep-fold, to be sure.
Geo. You can do that—you have grass, and water,
and everything to hand.
Merton. And so must you do it, or yon won’t die.
a farmer. Now, George, I must speak to you
seriously. You are a fine lad, and I like you very
well, but I love ray own daughter better. I have
seen a pretty while how things are going here, and
if she marries you she will have to keep you—
instead of you her. You are too much of a man,
I hope, to eat a woman’s bread; and, if yon are
not, I am man enough to keep the girl from it.
Geo. These are hard words to bear. Is this from
Susan, as well as you ?
Merton. Susan’s an obedient daughter, what I
say she ll stand to; and I hope you know better,
George, than tempt her to disobey me—yon won’t
succeed, I can tell you.
Geo. Enough said, enough said—l’ve no need to
tempt any girl.
Merton. (Aside.) That’s off my min?. Good
morning, George.
[Exij.
Geo. Good morning, uncle! My mother took


him out of the dirt, or he’d not have a sheep-fold
to brag of—the ungrateful old thief 1
Re-enter WILLIAM.
—Oh, my heart! my heart!
Wil. Well, will he lend it you ?
Geo, I never asked him.
Wil . You never asked him!
Geo. Bill, he begun upon me at once—he sees
we’re going down-hill—and he as good as bade me
not to speak to Susan any more.
Wil . Well, it whs yonr business to own the truth,
and ask him to help us over the stile.
Geo. (Aside.) They are all against me. (Aloud.)
You want to let me down lower than I would let
that dog Carlo, of yours. You’re up brother of
mine.
Wil. (Sulkily.) A bargain’s a bargain! I asked •
Meadows, and ho said no; you fell talking with
uncle about Susan, and never put the question to
him at all. Who is false—eh ?
Geo. If you call me false I’ll knock your ugly
head oil, Sulky Bill!
Wil. You’re false! and a fool into the bargain,
Bragging George!
Geo. What 1 you will have it, then P
Wil. If you cau give it me.
Geo. Well, if it is to be, I’ll give you something
to put yon on your mettle. The best man shall
farm Bix Bottom, and the second best shall be
a servant on it—for I’m sick of this.
Wil. So am I! and have been this two years.
(They shake hands, and then begin to
spar. After a feint or two, George
suddenly drops his hands, saying
“ Susan!” looks very sheepish. Wil-
liam puts his hands in his pockets,
and looks uneasy also.)
Enter rapidly SUSANNA MERTON. She stand.)
between William and George.
Susan. What is this ? (A pause.)
Geo. William, there, showing me a trick he
learned at the fair —that is all, Susan.
Susan. That is a falsehood, George ! You were
fighting, you two boys, I saw your eyes flash. Oh,
fie 1 fie ! and now you tell me a falsehood to make
me despise as well as dread you. (They both hang
their heads.) Brothers fighting in a Christian
land, within a stone’s throw of a church where
brotherly love is preached as a debt we owe to
strangers, lot alone our own blood ?
Wil. Yes, it is a sin, so I ask your pardon,
Susanna.
Susan. Oh, it wasn’t your fault, I’ll be bound.
(To George.) What a ruffian you must be, to shed
yonr brother’s blood!
Geo. La, Susan, I wasn’t going to shed the beg-
gar’s blood —I was only going to give him a hiding
for liis impudence.
Wtl. (Calmly.) Or take one for your own.
Susan. That is more likely. Take his hand this
instant.
Geo. Well, why not? (Deprecatingly.) Don’t!
be in such a passion, Susan, about nothing.
(They take hands.) |
Susan. Now, you stay so, while I speak a word
to you. You ought both to go on your knees, and 1
thank Providence, that sent me here to prevent so j
great a crime—there. (Pause.) Your character
must change greatly, George Saudford, before I
trust myself to live in a house of yours.
Geo. Ah! —it is always poor George that does all
the wrong.
Susan. Oh! I could scold William, too, if you
think I am as muoh interested iu his conduct as
yonrs.
Geo. No, no ; don’t scold anybody but me,
Susan! I deserve it most. I’ll tell yon, ru=an,
and then, perhaps, you’ll forgive me; and Bill; 1
ask yonr pardon.
Wil. (Sulkily.) No more about it, George, if you
please.
Geo. Susan, you don’t know all I have to
bear—my heart is sore. Uncle twitted me this
morning with my ill-luck, and almost bade me
speak to you no more; and that is why, when
.William came at me, on the top of such a blow, it
was more than I could bear; and, Susan, uncle
said you would stand to whatever he said.
Susan George, I am sorry my father was so
unkind.
Geo. Thank ye, Susan, kindly; that is the first
drop of dew that has fallen on mo to day.
Susan. But obedience to parents is a great duty,
and I hope I shall never disobey my father.
Geo. ( Testily ) Oh, I don’t want any girl to be
kind to me that doesn’t love mel lam so unlucky,
it wouldn’t be worth while, you know.
Susan. (Sharply.) Well, I don’t think it would
be worth any girl’s while till your character and
temper undergo a change.
Geo, Enough said! I have no friend upon earth.
(Turns up stage.) lam in everybody’s way here.
Enter ROBINSON.
Rob. (Entering.) Everybody is in this country.
For the fiftieth time, will you come to California,
young gentleman, and make your fortune ?
Susan. You have been there and did not make
yours.
hob. I beg your pardon, miss, I made it, or how
could I have spent it.
Wil. Ay! They say what comes by the wind
goes by the water.
Rob. Alluding to the dust 1
Susan. Gold dust especially!
Rob. That is not bad for Berkshire; but the
ladies are sharp in every latitude. Miss Merton, a
crop of gold does not come by the wind any more
than a crop of wheat; gold takes harder digging
than ever you knew horses and oxen perspire for
you, Sandford No. 2.
Susan. That is true. Do you hear that, Sand-
ford No. 1? (Aside.) Sulky fellow.
Wil. Did you ever see a horse mow an acre of
grass or oats ?
Rob. Well, don’t brag; he’ll eat all you can
mow, and never say a word about it.
(They all laugh except George, who leans
upon something, thoughtfully and
sorrowfully. Susan glances uneasily
towards him.)
Rob. Well, my lad, you should have seen our
shirts in California af er a day’s digging; if you
had kept them in the river a week they wouldn't
have been half as wet, and never a washerwoman
nearer than two thousand miles.
Wil. Pheugh 1
Rob. Who do you think did our washing, Mias
Merton ?


Susan. I suppose the mountain torrents, Mr.
Robinson.
hob. Ha, ha! No, miss. China!
Wil. China ? Why, that’s
Susan. Pooh! He means he washed them him-
self in a punch bowl.
Rob. Ha, ha —good again! When the ladies do
come out, it’s dazzling. Well, I’ll tell you, miss.
The little boys in California wanted two shillings
a shirt for washing- so we sent them to China in
ships. She did ’em for fourpence. We sent them
Monday morning, just as we do here —only, instead
of Saturday we got ’em back Saturday three
Susan. Two shillings a shirt? Why, they make
them, and wash them, and sell them for that here.
Rob, Very much to their credit—over the left.
Well, you see, miss—l’ll explain to you Are
you attending to me, Sandford No. 1 ?
Geo. Ay ; I hear you, whether I will or no.
Rob. What is the matter with him ?
Susan. Oh, he is cross, that is all! Never mind
him. .
Rob. Well, young lady, work is rewarded m
California—here it is snubbed. This very morning
I heard one of your clodhoppers say, “ The Squire
is a good gentleman—he often gives me a day’s
work.” Gives me a day’s work! I should think
it was the clodhopper gave the gentleman the day’s
work, and the gentleman gave him a shilling, and
made five by it. (William scratches his head.)
Ay ; try and rake that idea into your upper soil,
Sandford No. 2. And that is the reason I invite
my friend George to take his muscle, wind, pluck,
backbone, aud pelf out of this miserable conntry,
and come where the best man has a chance to win.
Susan. It is very interfering of you.
Rob. Oh. I’ll bring him back again! Come,
George. England is the spot if you happen to bo
married to a duke’s daughter—and got fifty thou-
saud a year —and two houses—and a coach—and a
curricle —and a brougham—and ten brace of
pointers—and a telescope so big that the stars
have to move for it, instead of it for the stars—and
no end of pretty housemaids—and a butler, with
a poultice round his neck like a bishop’s, and
whiskers like a mop-head—and green peas all the
year round—and a pew in the church, warmed with
boiling eau-de-Cologne—and a pianoforte in every
blessed room in the house ! But this island is the
Dead Sea to a poor man. Open one eye, George.
This hole you are in is all poor, hungry, arable
land without a blade of grass—you cau’t work it.
(George winces.) Cut it. Steal, beg, or boi-row
five hundred pounds. Carry out a cargo of pea-
jackets and fourpenny-bits to swap for gold dust—
a few tools, a stout heart, and a light pair of—
oh, no! “their name is never heard” —and we’ll
soon fill both pockets with yellow, George, in Cali-
fornia !
Geo. A crust of bread in England before buffalo
beef in California. I could not live among all
those thieves and butchers that are settled on
that land like crows on a dead horse.
Susan. (Smiles triumphantly.) Do you think
because George grumbles all day he would leave
Bix ? You don’t know them. A good growl is
better than a bad dinner to an English farmer—
isn’t it, George ?
Geo. So they say that never farmed.
Susan. (Aside.) Poor George!
Rob. You see, miss, George is an honest lad.
Now, I adore honesty—it’s foolish of me, but I
can’t help it—and that’s why I cau’t bear to go
and make my fortune and leave you breaking your
heart against the worst farm in the worst country
a man can be flung away in.
(Gives George his hand.)
Gf»o. And I like you, my lad, and thank you
kindly for your gocd will. (dside.) Strange that
so many should sing me the same tune.
Enter SARAH, from house.
Sarah. I wish you would come in to dinner, if
you are coming at all.
, , [Exit into house'.'
Susan. I want to speak to George drst. (Exeunt
William and Robinson.) That is a very bad
acquaintance for you, I’m sure.
Geo. Why, what is wrong about him ? He has
been here three months, and never gave any
offence.
Susan. Father says he has no business or trade,
and he is not a gentleman—so he must be a rogue
of some sort.
Geo. Uncle is not my friend. Robinson is my
friend—that is his fault. A rogue ? He is the
only creatnre that has spoken kind words to me
to-day. Oh 1 I saw how bitter you looked at him
for taking my hand.
Susan. You are a fool, George! You don’t know
how to read a woman, nor her words, nor her
looks cither. (Going.)
Geo. Forgive me, Susan! My heart feels like
lead. Something is going to happen you or me. I
hope it is me—not you.
Susan. George! don’t be foolish—you will make
me very angry with you.
Geo. And words have been said to me that will
never go out of ray heart. Your father has turned
my blood to gall! lam all changed ! I begin to
hate the place where I was born ! I lovbd it well
till to-day. And I feel as if everything was turn-
ing cold aud slippery, and gliding from my hand
in spite of me!
ISAAC LEVI appears at kitchen window.
Susan. (Uneasily.) Nonsense, Georgel
Re-enter WILLIAM.
Wil. Did you expect anyone to look at the pigs ?
Geo. No; why ?
Wil. Because there are two strangers making
themselves mighty busy in the yard—poking their
noses into everything.
Geo. See what their business is—l know nothing
about them.
[Frit William.
Re enter MEADOWS, looking back triumphantly.
Mea. (Aside.) If I could bespeak luck to order, it
could not go beyond this. (Aloud.) Good morn-
ing, Miss Merton.
Susan. Good morning, Mr. Meadows, you look so
bright it is quite refreshing. We are all rather
dull here to-day.
Re-enter WILLIAM, very pale.
Wil. ( Hesitating .) George, shall I speak?
Geo. Out with it—l know it is some deadly ill-
luck, I’ve felt it coming all day—out with it.


TFil. There’s a—a distress upon the farm for
rent.
Geo. A distress upon my farm ? Upon my
father’s farm ?
Susan . George, George! never mind—don’t
look so, don’t look so! Can nothing be done ?
Where is my father ? They said he was here.
Susan is running out, but is met by MERTON,
who is re-entering.
Merton. You had better go home, girl.
Susan. Oh, no, no! I have been too unkind to
George already, father.
(Advances towards George, but stops as
Merton speak*.)
Merton. There—l told you how it must end,
George.
(Susan turns deprecatingly on
Merton.)
Geo. (Fiercely.i What, do you come hereto insult
over me ? I must be a loug way lower than I am
before I shall be as low as you were when my
mother took you out of the workhouse and made
a man of yon!
Susan. George, George! stop for pity’s sake,
before you say words that will separate us for
ever ! Father, how can you push poor George so
hard ?
Rnter a SERVANT, l. h. 1 e., with a letter, which
George takes.
Serv. You are to send an answer, if you please.
Geo. From Squire Winchester.
Merton. What, does he write to you ?
Geo. So it seems. (Reads the Utter.) “ George
Sandford, my fine fellow, do think of it again. I
have got two berths in the ship that sail? from
Southampton to-morrow; you will have every
comfort on the voyage—a great point. I’ll do
what I said for you, and, after one year, you will
farm on your own account.” He promised me live
hundred sheep and a run for them. (Reads.) “ I
must have an honest man, and where can I find
as honest a man as George Sandford ?" Thank
you, Mr. Winchester—thank you, sir. (He looks
round on them all — reads.) “ Yon saved my life ; I
can do nothing for you here, and you are doing no
good—everybody says so.” Everybody says so.
(Reads.) “My heart is pretty stout, but home
is home ; and be assured that I wait with some
anxiety to know whether my eyes are to look on
nothing but water for the next four months, or are
to be cheered by the sight of something from
home the face of a thoroughbred English
yeoman, and a friend, and —and ”
(Falters.)
Susan. (Takes letter from him and reads.) “An
upright, downright, honest man.” And so you
are, George! (Embraces him—reads.) “If the
answer is favourable, a word is enough. Meet me
this evening at the Crown, at Reading, and I will
drive yon to-morrow morning in Lord Tewkes-
bury’s trap, which has gone forward for that
purpose.”
Geo. (To Servant.) The answer is, “ Yes!”
(Exit Servant, l. h. 1 e.
Susan. Yes—yes! What do you mean by yes ?
He is asking you to go to Australia with him.
Geo. This gentleman respects me, if worse folk
don’t i bnt it isn’t the great bloodhounds and grey-
hounds that bark at misfortune’s heels, it is only
the village curs when all is done. This is my
path - I'll pack up my clothes and go.
[Exit into house, r. h.
Susan. Ah, father! what have you done?
Merton. No more than my duty, girl, and I hope
you will do no less than yours.
Old Sandford (Without.) Wheel me oat of doors
into the sun.
Re-enter ROBINSON, wheeling out OLD SAND-
FORD in a large chair.
Wil. George will forget her out there, and she
him. Heaven forgive me for being glad my
brother’s going.
Old S. The autumn sun is not so w-w-warm as
she used to be.
Hob. What did I hear George say ? Where is he
going.
Mea. To Australia, he says.
Rob. To Australia ? He's mad! There’s no
good to be done there. I wouldn’t go there—
Re-enter, cautiously, CONSTABLE and OFFICER.
—if ray passage was paid, a new suit of clothes
found me, and a house provided for my reception,
and the governor’s gig to take me from the ship.
Australia!
(Constable and Officer talce him. Susan,
who was following George, looks back
in dismay .)
Rob. (With a look of disgust.) Ugh!
Officer. To Australia you’ll go, Tom Lyon, alias
Scott, alias Robinson; and you’ll have the new
suit of clothes, and voyage paid, and a large house
ashore made ready for your reception.
(Puts handcuffs on.)
Rob. (With dignity.) What am I to understand
by this violence, from gentlemen who are perfect
strangers to me ?
Const. (Taking notes out of his pocket.) Mr.
Meadows, what were the numbers of the notes you
were rohbed of ?
Mea. 381, 2, and 3.
Const. 382 passed by this gentleman at the White
Lion, and the others found upon him. Better
leave them with the officer for the present.
Rob. (Snuffling.) Appearances are against me,
Miss Merton, but my innocence will emerge all the
brighter for this temporary cloud.
busan. Oh! I must go and tell George all this.
[fcxtf.
Rob. (Drily.) Well, Jacobs, you seem pleased,
and I am content. 1 would rather have gone to
California, but any place is better than England.
Let chaps that never saw the world, and tho
heavenly countries there are in it, snivel at leav.
ing this isle of rocks and fogs, and taxes and nobs—
the rich man’s paradise—the poor man’s—l never
swear, it’s vulgar.
Re-enter GEORGE and SUSAN.
Geo. A thief! Have I taken the hand of a
thief ?
Rob. It is a business, like any other.
Const. I’ll go and put the horse to.
Geo. If yon have no shame, I have. I long to be
gone now. Oh! how I long to be gone from this
nest of insults.
Rob. Did ever I take tithe from you, George ?
You have got a silver caudle cup, a heavenly old


coffee pot, no end of spoons, double the weight the
rogues make ’em now. They are in a box, under
your bed—count ’em—they are all right. And,
Miss Merton, your bracelet, the gold one, with the
cameo, I could have had a hundred times. Miss
Merton! ask him to shake hands with me at'part-
ing. I am so fond of him; and, perhaps, I shall
never see him again.
Geo. Shake hands with you? If your hands
were loose I should ram my fist down your throat.
But there, you are not worth a thought at such a
time. You are a man in tronble, and so am I. I
forgive you, and I pray Heaven I may never see
your face again.
(Turns his back on Robinson.)
Rob. Well, Mr. Jacobs, am I to be put in the
pillory here ? You should spare the feelings of an
old friend—l may say a brother —for you were a
thief, you know. I say, do you remember cracking
the silversmith’s shop in Lambeth along with Jem
Salisbury, and
Officer. There, the gig is ready. Now it is time
for us to go.
[He pushes Robinson out. Exeunt
Robinson and Policeman.
Enter a CARTER’S LAD.
Lad. Master George, Farmer Dodd says he’ll
drive you into Reading, if you will walk up as far
as hi?farm. He’s afraid to come down our hill, ho
says, because if he did, his tnare ’ud kick his gig
into toothpicks, he says. Oh, Master George! I
be sorry you bo going.
Geo. I thank 'him. My bag is ready in the
kitchen—take it, boy. I’ll follow you.
(The had is met at the door by SARAH,
who has the bag, and is putting a
bottle into it; she gives it to him,
puts her apron to her eyes, and stands
by Old Sandford. The Lad crosses
scene with bag, and slowly mounts
hill during the following dialogue.)
Susan. Father, I thought it was a dream; but he
is going—he is really going. Oh, have mercy on
us both! Speak him fair—his spirit is so high,
father!
Merton. Susan, the lad thinks me his enemy—
but I am not. My daughter shall not marry a
bankrupt farmer; but y. u briug home a thousand
pounds, George—just one thousand pounds, to
show me you are not a fool —and then you shall
have my daughter, and she shall have my bless-
ing.
Geo. Your hand on that, uncle, before heaven
and earth! ( Takes his hand.) You give me new
life.
Susan. But your words are sending him away
from me, father.
Geo. Susan, I am to go. My path is clear. Itis
my only chance of winning or deserving you. But
don’t forget, it is for your sake I go, my darling
Susnn!
Re-enter ISAAC LEVI, from house.
Levi. Young man, you shall not wander forth
from the home of your fathers. I have sat in your
house, and watched my friend and my enemy; and
these old eyes have seen deeper than yours.
Enough, you are honest—all men say so. Lo, I
will lend you monies for your rent— (sharply)—
upon fair interest; and the maiden who loves you
win bless me!
Susan. It is Mr. Levi, of Farnborough! Heaven
sends him ! Oh yes, I bless you, Mr. Levi good
Mr. Levi!
Me a. (Aside ) Cursed luck! All my web undone
in a moment! (A long pause.)
Qeo. No. Susan—no, old man! I am honest,
though unfortunate; and proud, though you have
seen me put to shame in my own homestead more
than once to-day. To borrow without a chance of
paying is next door to stealing—and I should never
pay you. My eyes are open in spite of my heart.
I can’t farm Bix Bottom Farm with wheat at forty
shillings. I have tried all I know, and I can’t do
it. Bill, there, is dying to try; and he shall try—
and Heaven speed his plough better than it has
poor George’s!
Wil. George! I was not thinking of the farm
at all, just then. I was thinking of when we were
boys—and—played—marbles together—upon
the tombstones! ( Falters a little.)
Geo. Mr. Levi, seems you have a kindness for me,
show it to William.
Levi. I will! A word with yon, Mr. Meadows.
(Hisses in his ear in a fierce whisper.) You have
shown me how a Christian hates his rival in trade—
I’ll show you how a Jew hates his enemy !
Mea. (Withcold malice.) Lady-day—Lady-day!
Wil. (Aside.) George will forget her out there,
and she him!
Geo. Uncle, since your last word there is no ill-
will—(bluntly;—but I can’t speak my heart before
you.
Merton. I’ll go, George. Sha’n’t be said my
sister’s son didn't get leave to open his heart at
such a time. (Goes to Susan. Levi beckons George
who goes up to him —they whisper. Levi casts glances
in the direction of Meadows, and George also, but in
a half-curious, half-contemptuous, manner.) Susan,
be prudent 1
Susan. Yes, father!
Mea. (Aside.) Can the old heathen have
fathomed me ? Yes ; he is blowing me to George
Sandford!
Levi. (Aside.) I will go, I care not to see his
stout young heart give way at parting, as it must.
Ah me! I can pity the wanderer from home !
[Exit up the hill.
Merton. Good-bye, George, and good luck be
with yon!
Mea. (Uneasily.) I’ll go with you, Mr. Merton.
Geo. No, sir—stay, if you please. You are as
good a witness as I could choose of what I am going
to say to my brother William.
Mea. (Aside.) I wish I could sink into the
earth!
[Exit Merton.
Geo. William!
Wil. (Uneasily). George ! (Aside.) It is about
the farm. Oh yes, it must be about the farm !
Gto. I’ve often had it on my mind to speak to
you, but I was ashamed—now that’s the truth.
But now I am going away from her, I must unload
my heart, and I will. (To rustics who have begun
to look in.) Fall back, if you please—this is a
family matter. (Pause.) William!
Wil. George !
Geo. You have taken a fancy to my lass,
William 1
(William looksun suddenly, then covers
hie face with his hands.)


Susan. George—what nonsense 1 I am sure poor
William
(George point « to William. Susan is
silent and looks down ashamed.)
Geo. Oh! it isn’t to reproach you, my poor lad.
Who could be near her, and not warm to her? But
she is my lass, Bill, and no other man’s. It is three
years since she said the word ; and though it was
my hard luck there should be some coolness
between us this bitter day, she will think kindly
of me when the ocean rolls between us, if no villain
nndermines me.
Wil. Villain ! George
Geo. Ay! that is why I speak. It sha’n’t be a
mistake, or a misunderstanding —it shall be villainy,
if it is done. Speak, Susan, before these wit-
nesses.
Susan. Oh! George",you shall not go in doubt of
me. We are betrothed these three years, and I
glory in it! And now I give yon my word again, in
the sight of Heaven, and these men, William and
good Mr. Meadows. So long as yon are true, I live
for you—take my ring and my promise, my own
George. There was no coolness between ns, dear;
you only fancied so. You don’t know what fools
women are—how they delight to tease the man
they love, and to torment themselves. I always
loved yon dearly, bnt never as I do this day. So
honest! so proud! so unfortunate! I love yon, I
honour you, I adore you!
(She clasps him in her arms kmses
him—he kisses her.)
Mea. (Aside.) Hell invents this to torture me!
(Writhes with passion .)
Susan. (Takes out handkerchief.) I hemmed it for
you.
(He wipes her eyes, she his, with the
same handkerchief.)
Geo. Blessed words! Do you hear them, Wil-
liam ?
Wil. I hear them, G'orge.
Geo. (To Susan.) Then, Susan, here’s your
brother. (To William.) Here’s my life, let no
man rob me of it. if one mother really bore us.
Wil. Never! S’help me God! She’s my sister
from this minute —no more, no less; and may the
red blight fall upon my heart and arm if I or any
man rob you of her. A man ? Sooner than a hun-
dred men should take her from yon, while I am
here, I’d die at their feet a hundred times.
Geo. I believe you 1 I trust you 1 I thank you 1
(Throws his arm round William’s neck for a single
moment.) And now I’m strong enough to go, and
I’R go. (Goes up to Old Sandford.)
Mea. (Aside.) Cnrse his cunning to set his rivals
by the ears! Who’d have thought he had the
brains ? Oh, torment me how you will, you must
gc at last 1
(He chuckles ferociously, but he is pale
with jealousy.)
Geo. Grandfather, I am going a long journey,
and mayhap will never see you again—speak a
word to me!
Susan. Grandfather, speak to George—poor
George is going into a far country.
(Old Sandford shakes his head.)
Geo. Not a word 1 I wanted him to say Heaven
bless you, but no 1 Carlo—poor Carlo—you and I
shall never go after the partridges again. The i
dog shows more understanding than the Christian.
Good-bye, Carlo! Good-bye, churchyard, where |
my mother lies 1 Good-bye, little village church, 1
■ where I went to church, man and boy! There
will be no chnrch bells, Susan, where'l am going
5 “o Sunday bells to mind me of my soul and home.
( Bells ring in the distance. Starts.) Are they
mocking me P
; WVI. No, no! It is Tom Clarke and Esther
• Borgher-t married to-day.
1 ® e °. Why, they have only kept company a year,
and they are married to-day; and Susan and I
have kept company three years. And Tom and
Esther are married to-day; and what are George
Susan doing to-day? Oh! what shall I do?
What shall I do?
Susan. (Throwing herself into hit arms.) My
pride is all crone. Oh, George! don’t go*—have
pity on us both, and don’t go.
nr r , (They weep silently.)
Mea. [Aside.) I have made them love one another
ten times more. lam in torture.
(He draws a knife out of his bosom, but
replaces it.)
Geo. Shame upon me; my own Susan, if I don’t
go I lose you or make you a bad daughter.
Heaven s hand is pushing me, I’ve felt it all day.
Im as cold as ice, but I’ll go. William, help me,
you see I have no more manhood than a girl.
IVil. My poor lass, put your hand in mine, and
pray to Heaven as I must.
Geo. Heaven bless you, Will! Oh, you don’t
know what this is to me—may you never know!
[Air, Hom4 f Sweet Home/* played vevy viauo in
orchestra.) Bless all the village, from the oldest
man in it down to William King’s little girl that
was born yesterday! Oh! I must turn my back,
or how can I ever leave you ? Good-bye, good-bye!
(Kisses Susan, runs out, and trudges
stoutly up i he hill, but his handker-
chief is pressed to his eyes.)
Susan. Brother, my heart is broken—my heart
is broken!
Wil. Bob, loose the dog.
(Takes her forehead gently to his bosom.
She sinks gradually. He beckons
Sarah and supports her firmly.)
Mea. ( During the above business. Aside.) Curses
on the creation! lam sick with torture—and
yet—(in a hoarse whisper)— she shall be mine!
( Tableau. Dog runs across the scene
after George, Sarah, with apron to
her eyes, William and Susan, x. h.
Meadows, b. h. Villagers, b. h. and
X. H., waving hats, handkerchiefs, He.
Susan not ullowed to sink to the
ground, but her senses beginning to
fail her as the act drop descends.)
L'K D of act 1.
ACT 11.
SCENE.—A Sma'l Study in the House of Meadows.
Doors, b. and x. Secret door, x. Table, with
Paper, &c„ and two chairs, c.
MEADOWS and CRAWLEY discovered.
Mea. All right, I see. Well, take him to-day.
(Looks over papers.) Judgment and all correct.
Endorse the bill—l must not be suspected in it.
(Crawley goes to table and writes.) Old Merton
been for more money ?


. Craw. Yes; yesterday. I made difficulties, as You see, sir, I was only a little blackguard but
instructed. Is to come to-morrow. ydu'll promote me to be a great villain. ’But,
Men. He snail have another thousand. there—if I was so ungrateful as to desert you
Craw. That makes two thousand five hundred. Men. I’d crush the life out of you, as I would a
Why, his whole stock won't cover it. I can't blind worm or an adder!
understand it—it is too deep for me, Mr. Meadows. Craw. That's about it, I believe, sir. I don't see
" ,„ at is 3 e • K e ? tleman with it? your game, but isn’t Mr. Levi, some way, on the
Mea. Throwing it away in speculations that are other side?
placed before him in bright colours by one who Mea. Ho is, confound him!
means to ruin him Craw. He’ll beat us, sir! I’ve a great respect
„ at<! - An! for Mr. Levi—he is as cunning as a fox.
Mea. And do him no harm Mea. He is; but I have measured cunning with
Craw. How far is it to the bottom of the sea, sir, a fox, Crawlev.
if you please ? lam sure you know Craw. You have, sir? That must have been a
Mea. It is a long way from the bottom of you to tight match,
the bottom of the sea. You always speak of me as Mea. The fox died ! Croton oil is str ng. Doctors
lf W . er ?T e £ einieS ? • *■ • i t 11 ~ ~ pive it to their friends now-a-days ;itis a fashion,
C ~idn.. Make a point, sir. I call you. all the like stays. I keep it for my enemies!
roguej and usurers— Craw. If you give 'em that, you won’t have any
Mea. The world calls me close-fisted, do you find but friends left, sir. One hundred guineas ! Where
me so ? shall we all go to ?
Crow. Liberal as running water! How long is Mea. What, have yon set up a conscience 3
Craw. Yes, sir—it runs at night. I shouldn’t
Mea. How far dare yon go with me ? care if there was no dark; but Ido have such
Craw. As far as your purse extends, sir ; only I frightful dreams at night. If it was only George
should not like to do anything that was too bad. Sandford, instead of Will
Mea. What do vou mean bv too bad? Mea. Why?
Cra.r Punishable by law sir. Crow. That George Sandford put an affront
Mea. Dare you physic a few hogs for me ? upon me.
Crow. Physic hogs? Mea. Ay-did he ? What did he do ?
Mea. Ihis \V ill Sandford lias bought two score Craw. He called me a pettyfogger 1
bogs, and, like a fool, he has paid half rent Mea. Is that all?
and half his hogs—stands upon two weak legs, Craw. No; he discharged me from his
instead of one strong one. I must trip up both premises!
his legs. Hogs must oie! Mea. Oh, is that it ?
Craw. Oh, don’t say so, Mr. Meadows! Where Craw. No; he threatened to horsewhip me next
phall you and I go to, some day, if we are found time I was there l
OU ,V S -o. .., .. . , , _ . , Mea - Oh, is that where the shoe pinches ?
Mea. Price of the job is one hundred guineas ! Craw. No, ’taint, but he altered his mind, and
(Uoes to table, opens drawer, and takes did horsewtiip me, then and there—curse him!
„ _ out a bottle.) Mea. Ah, ah! Crawley, yon can gratify two
One hundred guineas . passions at once. Just now you wanted to see the
mea. This will do their business. Put it m yonr bottom of me—you shall!
pocket. Craw. Oh, Mr. Meadows, that is too far for the
Craw. Mercy on ns! Id rather not. No, no; naked eye to see'
you keep it till the prescription is required for Mea. Not when it suits my book. (Looks down
use-use.! Where shaii we ali go to ? (Whispers.) and hesitates a moment.) Crawley, I love the
wbat 1S • sweetheart of that man who horsewhipped you!
Mea. Oil. Craw. You love a woman ?
C-aw. Oh, if it s only oil—— ~n , Mea. With all my heart, and soul, and brain ! I
(of l etches out hi* hand for the bottle.) love with more force than such as vou can hate
Mea. Croton oil. Craw. The deuce you do, sir?" Well I was in
Crow. (Recoils.) Ugh! that is worse than oil of the dark till now. It is beautiful going down into
vitriol. the deep, deep sea like this.
Mea. (Returning bottle to drawer.) Price of the Mea. Nobody is to suffer but George Sandford
l ob “ o n T e hundred guineas If you don’t do it Will’s hogs must die, and he must lie in prison*
for that I shall do ,t for nothing He shall be paid for’it-monev will balance aU
Craw One hundred guineas! There-there will troubles but those of the heart. I’ll ruin old
be a fall in pork one of these dark nights. Mr. Merton—l’ll set him on his legs Crawlev
Meadows, I admire you, sm-I am grateful to lam worth sixty thousand pounds; what is ten
you-and I respect you; but I wish I had never thousand pounds to me, if it helps me to Susanna
huuwn you. Merton? The day I marry her I return yon your
Mea. Do you tell me that, who have raised you bills, five hundred pounds, and set yon up in any
from a dunghill? honest business you like. No more shuffling. (W
Craw. Not exactly a dunghiU, sir. I was clerk riedly.) Let Heaven consent to mv being happy in
m a small country attorney’s office. this way, and I'll do Heaven’s in everything eUe !
Mea. Are five hundred pounds worth nothing ? (Walks about >
(Showing him bids.) n m .. ~. , v
n ai • ... _ Lravy. That is fair. I knew you were a great
Craw. Ah, sir, you are like the affectionate man, sir, but I had no idea you were such a good
young lady you keep the autographs ot all your one. My conscience is clear, now—it is to be all
friends. Well, sir, you raised me, but now you right iu the end.
are raising my character, and it frightens me. Me a. Of coarse! (Gloomily.) Crawley, lam


trying to oheat the devil—l fear no man can do
that. (IFalfcs thoughtfully.)
Craw. We don’t know till we try, sir. 1 don’t
mind taking charge of the bottle, Mr. Meadows.
A hundred guineas, you said ?
Mea. I did, and do! Go—don’t waste so much
time talking. Here are yonr documents. Have
you got the officer ?
Craw. He is in the public-house close by. Shall
I take him anywhere, or —or follow him to a quiet
place ?
Mea. Follow him to the devil! But take him,
man. Here’s someone coming—quick !
[Exit Crawley by the secret door.
Enter SUSANNA MERTON, b. h.
Ha! (Astonished ) Am I so happy as to receive
you for ouce in my own house, MRs Merton ?
Susan. For a moment, Mr. Meadows. I am
going to Mr. Levi, so I came to you first.
Mea. To Mr. Levi ? What for ? But come into
a better room than this.
Susan. No, no!—it was only to say a few words
that I called. Mr. Meadows, lam sure you are a
good man, so let me persuade you out of this bitter
feoling towards Mr. Levi. You are both my
friends. lam going into the town to speak to
him as well as you. He is worse than you, but
then he has more excuse than you—he has never
been taught that it is wicked not to forgive our
enemies. You know it, bnt don’t practice it.
Mea. Human nature is very revengeful. I wish
I had oftener a lesson from you—you would charm
away that unchristian spirit which I deplore, but
find it so hard to resist. Yonr voice and yonr face
make me feel at peace with all the world, Susanna
Miss Merton!
Susan. Why not Susanna?
Mea. Well, Susanna is a very inviting name.
Susan. It is not reckoned so, Mr. Meadows.
(Smiles.)
Mea. It is a name for everything that is good,
and gentle, and lovely
Enter WILLIAM SANDFORD, speaking as he
enters.
Wil. Susan! I came to look for you; was told
you went in here.
Susan. This is my watch dog—he is always at
my heels.
Wil. The sheep find the shepherd’s dog in their
way, but they are all the safer for him.
Susan Well, I’m sure ! (A»arily.)
Mea. That’s hardly respectful to Miss Merton,
aud in my house.
Wil. Who respects her more than I ? But sheep
are no match for wolves when the dog is away—
so the dog’s here! Susan, you remember poor
George’s last word 3to me ? Well, I keep my eye
upon all schemers, and that man is a schemer—
( they both laugh at him ) —but, sooner than any
harm shall come of it. I’ll twist as good a man’s
neck as ever schemed in Jack Meadows’s shoes!
Susan. Are you mad, William? Exposing me,
and affronting dear, good Mr. Meadows in his own
house!
Mea. I forgive him, because I admire his zeal
for you. Only I’m sorry he has not as good an
opinion of me as his brother had.
Enter a SERVANT, B. H. D.
Serv. Mr. Crawley, sir!
Mea. (Aside.) Good! (Aloud.) Mr. Crawlev ?
What Crawley ?
Enter MB. CRAWLEY and OFFICER.
To what do I owe a visit from you, sir?
Craw. I beg your pardon, sir, but we’ve business
with this gentleman. I arrest yon, sir, on this
judgment. (Officer takes William.)
Susan. Oh, oh! Mr. Meadows
Wil. Take me away, and let me hide my head!
Susan. (Puts her arm round WiUiam’s neck.)
Oh, my poor William !
Mea. And what business have yon, Mr. Crawley,
my known enemy, to come into my house and
arrest my guests ?
ISAAC LEVI glides in, and scats himself behind the
principal group.
Craw I beg yonr pardon, Mr. Meadows—l beg
your pardon, sir; but ask the young man if he
wouldn’t rather be taken here than in the market-
place.
Wil. Oh, yes—here! Thank you for taking me
here!
Levi. (Seated.) Fools! (They all turn and looi
at Levi.) These were stale tricks before England
was a nation. Who is the plaintiff ?
Craw. Hem! Mr. (Meadows looks at him.)
My—myself, sir.
Levi. What is the amount of your debt ?
Craw. Eighty-nine, thirteen, four.
Levi. Here.is the money—give me the bills.
Crate. Would you like' a stamped receipt, Mr
Levi ?
Leri. No, foolish man ! Are not these sufficient
vouchers ?
Mea. And you, sir, who, like this Crawley, are
my enemy
Crtiw. Well, I’m going, sir—l’m going. (Aside.)
Ugh 1
[Exeunt Crawley and Officer.)
Mea, Is it decent to affront me in my own
house ?
Levi. It is not your house! It belongs to
Abraham Lewis, who has bought it by my advice.
I came to demand the title-deeds.
Mea, Ha! And ray mortgage on it ?
Levi. Paid by Abraham into the proper hands,
with the interest. The property is being conveyed
to Lewis. He will let you stay till Lady-day—
then out you go! A tooth for a tooth!
Susan. Oh! Mr. Levi, you have forgot my last
lesson.
Mea. Well, may he enjoy it! (To Susan.) Is
that better ?
Susan. That does you credit, good Mr.
Meadows ?
Mea. (With a cunning smile—to Levi.) And I
suppose I shall have to go into the one yon vacate
at i ady-day ?
Levi. (Aside.) Solomon teach me to outwit this
dog!
Susan. William, go home and mind your
the sheep can take care of herself. Well, is he
going ?
Wil. Yes, Susan, dear—after you.
Susan. Your wife will have her own way—if she
can get it. Good-bye, Mr. Meadows—William and
I have both been less than just to you. Mr. Levi
you must show me this battlefield—this house—
and let me sit at your feet once more, and hear
some more charming tales of the wonderful lands


you have travelled, the sights you have seen, the
perils you have passed, and if you really love
me— —
Levi. I love you, maiden ! Who loves you not ?
Susan. (Tenderly.) Then yon will show me where
Leah used to sit and work, and where Rachel
and Sarah loved to play.
Levi. Ah, me! Yes, sweet-voiced, pure-hearted
maid! I would not show another this, but I will
show thee!
Susan. And you will listen to all that I shall
say ?
Levi. Surely I shall listen, for your voice is to my
ear like the wind that sighs at evening among the
cedars of Lebanon, and the night wave on Galilee’s
shore 1
Susan. 'Tis but a woman’s frail voice, father—
but with it, I can speak you words more beautiful
than Lebanon’s cedars or Galilee’s shore, words
that made the stars brighter, and the sons of the
morning rejoice. I will not tell you whence I had
them, but you will say, surely they never came
from earth—selfish, cruel, vindictive earth surely
they came from heaven, these words that drop on
man’s hot passions like the dew, and speak of
trespasses forgiven, and peace and good-will among
.men.
(Meadows is softened for a moment, and-
puts his hand to his eyes, which Wil-
liam notices. Levi’s fierceness is also
subdued.)
Levi. (Quietly but firmly.) Susanna, I love thee!
Bitterness fades from my heart at thy voice, but
experience remains. When I wander forth at
Lady-day others shall watch over her. I will say
no more to-day.' Come, Susanna - a goodly name,
it comes to thee from the despised people. (To
William.) I am your creditor, be punctual with
tko l.iterest, no more is required till better days,
my son. Come, then, like peace to my dwelling,
Susanna. (Susan waves them adieu.) I had a
sister of thy name, my child.
[Exeunt Levi and Susan.
Wil. (Aside.) A tear in that hard man’s eye.
(Aloud.) Mr. Meadows, if I have done you wrong
' I beg your pardon —there is my hand, anyway.
(Meadows gives his hand mechanically.)
Wil. (Aside.) No! His hand lay in mine like a
stone. He is a villain, and as deep as the ocean ?
(Exit.
Mea. That angel is my only refuge. I must
wade through dirt, and fire, and crime, ere I can
win her. No; I see too many crimes ahead. I
must tear this passion from my heart! I’ll leave
the country. Yes; that will save us all—it will
save us all. (Mores away.)
Re enter SU3AN, hastily.
Susan. Oh, William! What, is he gone? A
letter, Mr. Meadows—a letter from Australia.
George has been ill, poor fellow! And who do you
think nursed him when the rest neglected him ?
That unfortunate man, Robinson. He had a
ticket-of-leave for good conduct, it seems—and he
js so fond of George Ah ! well, we must not be
too hard; we don’t know what we are ourselves
till we are tempted—do we, Mr. Meadows ?
Mea. Mies Merton!
Susan. Do you know where William is! Oh ! I
am so happy.
[Ezit.
Msa, ( Violently .) This is too much—from this
moment I never will look back or falter! Craw-
ley ! I must have a drop of wine—my heart is
staggered.
Re-enter CRAWLEY.
I’ll be with yon in a minute.
[Erit.
Craw. I did not think there was a greater man
on earth than Mr. Meadows; but the world is
wide Mr. Levi is a greater man —a much greater.
He was down upon ns like a hammer —his Jew’s
eye goes through our little schemes like a gimlet.
“Fools!” says he—and he looked it—“these
dodges were used up in our family,” says he,
“ before England was a nation.” He despises me
and Meadows. That makes me respect him, some-
how, I can’t account for it.
Re-enter MEADOWS, in feverish state, with bottle
and glasses.
Mea. Will Sandford and old Levi are in one
boat, Crawley. Drink. Your health, Crawley.
Craw. Same to yon, sir.
Mea. Drink, you dog—a pair against a couple—
you must sail in my boat. The day John aud busan
Meadows walk out of church man and wife, meet
me at the porch, and I’ll put a thousand pound
note into your hand.
Craw. A thousand pound note! This is earnest.
Tell me your whole plan, that I may not cross you
by accident.
Mea. ( Rapidly , with sudden fire and energy.)
Post-office here is under my thumb. So, no more
letters from George to Susan; a letter from
Australia to me, in which, among pork, tallow,
grains, and all that, hint that George Sandford is
making up to a girl with money out there.
Craw. Yon run him down to her.
Mea. (Rapidly.) Hot such a fool —she’d hate me.
I shall always praise him; only the fact will be
drawn out of me. I buy all Will’s engagements—
his hogs die, he can’t pay —Isaac Levi away —Will
goes to the stone jug—course cleai —we stick in
the spurs—drink! I make somebody hang gaol
over old Merton’s head—Susan is piqued with
George, and thinks him false. Her father in tears,
I step in—l ask him for his daughter—offer to pay
my father-in-law’s debts, and start him afresh.
Craw. Beautiful, beautiful!
Mea. I own to Susan that I always loved her,
but hid it for conscience so long as I thought
George was true. She will be mine.
Craw. She will! by George.
Mea. And she will be happy.
Craw. Can’t see it!
Mea. A man that marries a virtuous woman, and
loves her, must be a fool if he can't make her love
him whether she will or no. They can’t resist our
stronger wills, except by flight. Stay here, and
I’ll set you your task in this business.
FEmt rapidly.
Craw. (Pours out himself a glass of wine.) What
a fool I was to think there was as great a man in the
world as Mr. Meadows —a good man —a great
man—a respectable man—an invincible man.
(With enthusiasm.) I’ll follow him to the gal
Ugh! Ho! there I’ll leave him. (Drinks.)
Re-enter MEADOWS, very pale,
Mea. Crawley.
Craw. Ugh ! Sir!


Mea. George Sandford must not come back with
a thousand pounds, or all my plans will fail!
Craw. No! he mustn’t, but suppose he will in-
sist upon coming back with two thousand?
Mea. (Slowly and sternly.) Then he mustn’t
come back at all.
Craw. (Aside.) Ugh! Where shall we all go
to ?
Mea. Take that, it contains your instructions ;
and this—it is a cheque-book.
Craw. No! is it though ?
Mea. You will draw on me fifty pounds at a
time—every month, if necessary
Craw. Shall I though, sir? Well, I will!
Mea. You are going a long journey.
Craw. Am I, sir ?
Mea. Yon are not afraid of the sea, and the
wind, are you?
Craw. (Drinking.) The sea be hanged, and the
wind be blowed. . When I see your talent and
energy before my eyes, sir, and hold your cheque-
book in my hand, there is but one thing on earth I
fear
Mea. And what is that ?
Craw. The law, sir, the law.
Mea. Then don’t get found out.
Craw. Not if I know it. I’m ready—when shall
I start ?
Mea. To-morrow.
Craw. (Putting instructions and cheque-book in
his pocket.) To-day, if you like, sir. (Cheerfully.)
Where am Ito go to, sir ? Where am Itogo to ?
Mea. (With stern meaning.) To Australia!
Craw. Oh!
(Drops wine-glaw and breaks it, looks
up with horror into Meadows’s face.
Music as the drop descends.)
EXD OF ACT 11.
ACT 111.
SCENE.—A rocky and barren Pass in New South
Wales. Bank, L. C. BLACK WILL, JEM, and
TWO MEN discovered on the watch, with wild
countenances.
Black W. Here are two of the six coming back—
they have given their companions the slip.
First Man. Remember our oaths, pals!
Second Man. Nonsense! dozens pass this way
and are none the wiser.
Black W. Yes, with their noses in the air! But
that yellow jacket is a notice-taking fellow; his
eyes are for ever on the ground—on the rocks—
in the gullies. He has been in the same oven with
os.
Second Man. Not likely ! But, if it is so, there
are no two ways ! (Touchesknife.) A secret is no
secret when all the world knows it!
Black W. They are comiug this way. (Sternly.)
You had better have stayed with your pals.
Before they turn the rocks, let us hide and watch
them.
Jem. Ay, ay, that is it ; into the cave behind the
rock.
[They glide off, b. h. 2 e.
Enter GEORGE SANDFORD and ROBINSON,
over rocks, L. h. 2 B.
Bob. Hallo! whore have they slipped off to ?
Geo. They are gone away.
Sob. Vanished, you mean—into the bowels of the
earth. I don’t iike gentlemen that vanish into
the bowels of the earth in that way. Take my
stick.
(Gives him a long stick with large iron
ferrule at the end of it.)
Geo. What, bushrangers again ? You suspect
everybody.
Sob. This is a country where a man owes his
safety to himself, not his neighbour.
Geo. Theu why do you give me your weapon ?
Bob. I haven't! I carry my sting out of sight,
like a bumble bee. (George sits down, and takes out
bread.) George, how far have you got towards
your thousand pounds ?
Geo. Oh, Tom, I shall never make it! No market
withiu reach—that's what beats me. To be forced
to boil down two hundred sheep into tallow, and
sell them for the price of a wild duck! I have left
my Susan, and I’ve lost her!
Sob. So much for the farming lay! Now listen
to me. When I woke this morning I thought I
was in California.
Geo. Dreaming?
Bob. No; wide awake? Yon could not tell
these hills from the golden range of California.
When you look into them the materials are the
very same—granite, mica, and quartz.
Geo. Show me some of these rocks.
Bob. Well, here aro two of them. Here’s granite,
and this is quartz. They are the home of the
gold—and that is where the heavy gold is found;
and the gold oust has all been there one time, long
before a man ever stood upon the earth, but water
has washed and scattered it like seed.
Geo. Drop gold, do, and tell me what this is.
(Gives him a small fossil shell.)
Sob. Where on earth did you find this ?
Geo. Hard by. What is it ?
Bob. It is a pale old joey.
Geo. You don’t say so! Looks like a shell.
Bob. He bids me drop gold, and then goes and
shows me a sign of gold that never failed us.
Geo. How can this thing be a sign of gold ?
Bob. It is so! Where the pale old joeys are
found amongst mica, quartz, and granite, there is
gold. I can’t tell you why. The laws of gold
puzzle all the world. George, we stand upon gold!
Geo. Tom, if there’s as much gold lying on the
ground of Anstralia as would make me a wedding-
ring I’m a Dutchman ! Are you coming home ?
Bob. No, I am not. Here’s an unknown coun-
try, with all the sisrns of gold. Prejudice is for
babies—experience for men. Stay and try down
this gulley.
Geo. No, I sha’n’t.
Bob, I will, then.
Geo. You’ll have all the better chance for not
having unlucky George alongside of you. (Going;
stops, B. c., and makes a cut at something growing
on rock.) Turn your back on me as I did on you in
England.
Bob. Never! I’d rather not find gold than part
with honesty! There—l’m coming.
Geo. You’ll never thrive alongside of me. If I
want rain, comes drought; if I want sun, look for
a deluge; if there's money to be made by a thing,
I’m out of it; to be lost, I’m in it; if I loved a
vixen, she’d drop into my arras like a medlar; I
love an angel, I shall never have her—never!
From a game of marblea to the game of life and


love, x never had a grain of luck like other
people!
(Strikes a large stone violently xn'th his
stick, a piece of quartz flies off.)
Rob. Oh!
Geo. What, have I hurt yon, Tom ?
Rob. Yes! you’ve hurt me!
Geo. My luck again.
(Crosses towards Robinson.)
Rob. No! it’s my luck this time! Don’t you
grumble for all the world, though you are a
farmer. (Hobbles to seat.)
Geo. Why, you’re soft, Tom—it was no bigger
than a bean.
Rob. If I am soft, I know what is hard.
Geo. No! here it is. Oh, la! no wonder it hurt
you, poor fellow; why, it’s as heavy as lead. Is
this quartz, or what ?
Rob. Oh, yes, yes, its quartz ! What did you say ?
No! quartz is not heavy by itself, but it is sharp
though. (Rubs his ankle.)
Geo. Isn’t it heavy ? You try it.
(Throws it, Robinson catches it.)
Rob. It is heavy! (Almost screaming.) Gold!
before I look at it. Gold, gold!
Geo. What makes you think so ?
Rob. I don’t think, I know ! What but the king
of metals could make this rubbish weigh so ?
Gold! (Turns it round and inspects it.) Ah! it
is nearly all gold on this side. See !
Geo. How do you know? ’Tisn’t yellow—looks
like steel.
Distant Voice of One of Their Companions. Gold!
Go-o-ld!
Rob. (In great agitation). D’ye hear that ? The
birds will carry that word I sang out just now—all
mankind will be here next week. How do I know ?
How do you know a sheep from a cow ? How do I
know? Becanse— (takes out stone, and rubbing)
this is the touchstone—the bloodstone —because the
baser metals resist this stone ; but gold comes off
and colours it like that. How do I know?
Re-enter the FOUR MEN, running, with drawn
knives.
Because (udiips out and presents revolver)
because —where there’s gold there’s blood! (Men
hesitate at sight of revolver.) Keep cool, now. No
running in among their knives. Take my hand,
guard-and-guard.
(Men begin to glide round. Robinson,
also moving, keeps them at bay with
revolver. When Jem gets by the
bank, L. c., Men appear on rock, b. h.,
one off whom throw's a spear » Jem
falls wounded in the shoulder, ex-
claiming, “Ah!” Pause.)
Black W. Quarter! give ns quarter!
Rob. I give it ’em boys. {ln a terrible tone.)
Down on your knees, ye scoundrels—down with ye!
(Men fall on their knees.) Throw me your knives!
( They hesitate.) Throw’em, I say! (Men throw
down knives.) Take them up, George. (George
gathers them up.) Spread your wipe, George-
spread it before those men. \ George spreads hand-
kerchief.) Now, my fine fellows, you wanted to
take something from us that didn’t belong to you—
our blood! So we are going to take something
from you that doesn’t belong to us—we’ll all share
it alike, boys. (Men interchange looks.)
Jem. Captain, yon are the best man, and the
justest too. May I work with you ? I
Rob. Ay, yon shall, my lad. Come! out with
the swap—out with it, I say! (Men with rueful
looks and hesitation, give gold an d dust, < ic.) Now,
mind this gully belongs to us! (Men groan.) You
take the other side of the creek, or we'll hang ye
like wild cats!
Geo. (Tying up gold.) I see my Susan’s eyes in
this yellow earth!
(Tableau, Men skulking off slowly, L. h.,
threatened by Robinson. George kneel-
ing, tying up gold. Jem tying up his
arm. Men on rock, R. H., with spears
poised, £c.) f
END OF ACT 111. _ 4^'
- X
ACT IV. r*"
SCENE I.— Summer Hill Creek Diggings by the
River McQnarrie. Time, Night. Moonlight.
White tentsVnaxszinctly visible along the course
of the river and upon the heights. Isaac Levi's
tent, l. B. Robinson’s cart, r. h. Cradles, wheel-
barrows, pails, tubs, pans, pumps, spades, &c.,
seen all over the stage. A crushing machine, c.
Great number of Diggers discovered, lying asleep.
Moon shining upon wet pinnacles of rock.
CRAWLEY and BLACK WILL discovered,
Crawley under an umbrella.
Black W. Well, and what is that ?
Craw. Hush! speak low!
Black W. How can we do business if you won’t
say what yon want done ?
Craw. Ido say; I say they must never see home
again with a thousand pounds.
Black W. Well, and how am I to prevent it ?
C raw. Oh! there must be ways. A man of your
energy—your de-de-cision of character—can’t you
thina of a—a —a —a way ?
Black W. Why don’t you speak out like an
honest man ?
Craw. Because I sometimes think I am not one.
Black W. Why don’t you say you want the man’s
throat cut, and how much you’ll give ?
Craw. Ugh! I admire your character, sir—
and its energy—but I don’t like ysur expressions.
Black W. Well, I’ll tell you the truth. My pals
and I want those two out of the way, for they are
down upon us as hard as nails.
Craw. Do ye? Then we can deal. What will
you take for the job ? Job! Where shall we all go
to? Ugh! I mean, for how much will you swear
that they shall not go home with a lot of gold
dust ?
Black W. For fifty pounds I swear to rob their
tent the first chance, and settle their hash the
second.
Craw. (Aside.) Ugh! he is dreadfully terse!
(Aloud.) There; I’ve nothing to do with ferocious
details—swear they sha’n’t carry their gold dust
home.
Black W. I swear!
Craxc. There’s the money—there’s the fifty
pounds.
Levi. (Front tent, e. h., aside.) I have heard that
voice before ! (Aloud.) Nathan, come here!
Craw. (Aside.) Nathan, come here ! Oh, if you
are awake, good-bye for the present. There’s two
things in the world I’m afraid of—Law and Levi.
[JEjsifc, L. H. U. E.


GEORGE and ROBINSON awake Robinson in
cart, George on a barrel.
Geo. Tom, I hope they are getting more honest.
I haven’t heard a rifle or revolver all night.
Rob. Ah 1 you country lads sleep so sound. My
police report less violence, but more sleight-of-
hand. I’ll put down larceny, George; it is a
despicable trait in a gold-mine. There are some
very artful dodgers come into the camp. Well,
we must have a hanging day!
Geo. You make my flesh creep!
Bob. Cau’t help it; if it wasn’t for my police,
1 call ’em, and the revolvers, you would never
gharry Susan.
• Geo. aSooner than kill a man, I’d rather he
should Kill me.
Rob. I’m of the same opinion, only turned topsy-
turvy. Who’s this ?
Enter JEM, L. H. tt. e., with dark lantern.
Jem. Who’s the cheat that’s oftenest cheated ?
Rob. The nubbing cheat.
Jem. Ohl it’s you, captain, is it? There’s the
police report. And now, captain, for your kind-
ness to me, I want to warn you. Be on yonr
guard against Black Will and his pals. I’m'now
going my round.
[E.rit, L.
Rob. (To George.) What are you going to do
to-day ?
Geo. Well, Tom, an ounce of gold dust a day
won’t take us home quick enough. I’m following
your advico—l’m tracking the gold dust coarser
and coarser, and the nugget larger and larger, till
I find the home of all this gold.
Rob. And I shall wash blue clay. The dust is
the only safe card. Poor George! he looks to find
blocks of gold as big as his hat.
Geo. To work! Here comes the day. No more
robbing and murdering for twelve hours, I hope!
(Exit. The sun begins to rise, and
displays the following scene (which
ought to be a very remarkable
one). A high bank, l. h. A high
bank or cliff, k. c., with rocks run-
ning all round stage. Low ground,
and rocks beyond, c. The River
McQuarrih winding in a valley, along
the banks of which are seen, countless
tents of every colour, size, shape, &c.
The whole extent of stage and also
rocks occupied by the Diggers, &c., who
at the beginning of this change
gradually awake, take up tools, and
■proceed to work in groups. Enter
NATHAN, from tent. He places a
rough table and the paraphernalia of
a gold assayer and purchaser for
LKVI, who enters and seats himself
at table. Music, subdued, but rising
with the opening prospect, at last
breaks into “Hail, hmiling Morn.”)
Enter MARY McDOGGHERTY, s. H., with a
glittering lump.
Mary, There, ould gintlemau, what will ye be
afther giving me for that? Sure the luck’s come
to the right colleen at last!
Levi. (Looting scornfully at it without touching
it.) I deal but iu the precious metals.
Re-enter GEORGE, triumphantly, his handsbchind
him.
Mary, Sure an’ isn’t gould a precious metal?
Levi. Do you offer me this for gold? It is not
even a metal—it is yellow mica.
Geo. (Showing Robinson a glittering mass.) Was
I right or wrong? What becomes of your gold
dust now ?
Levi. Gold is four times the weight of this
trash.
(George puts his specimen in Mary's
hand, she bursts out crying, and
places it on Levi's table, who eyes it
keenly.)
Geo. You see, my poor girl, yours is not heavy
like
Levi. Iron pyrites!
Geo. Iron ? What, mine ? How can it be iron ?
Levi. It is iron, my son. Take this needle. Here
is a scale of gold—take it up on the needle’s
point. Good—you can do so because gold is a soft
metal. Now try a scale of this metal; you can-
not take it up, because it is a hard metal.
(Knocks mica and pyrites off table.
Mary flings mica away with fury.
Robinson pockets pyrites.)
Rob. Now it is my turn. (Brings gold dust on
knife.) I’ve washed this out ot one panful of your
clay. Bring it to the test, Mr. Levi. Is it mica or
iron ?
Levi. I’ll give you a test, young man. You
bring Isaac Levi a hundredweight of it, and he’ll
buy it of you at three pounds and sixpence the
ounce.
Bob. Well, that is a test.
Geo. Well, it isn’t much to brag of.
Rob. He says a pennyweight of gold out of six
gallons of clay isn’t much! I’ll tell you how much
it is. At this rate, a woiking man’s income shall
be just double what the Queen’s Lord Treasurer
gets, and he must work night as well as day!
Geo. (Suddenly.) The day is not ended yet.
[Exit hastily, r. c.
Rob. Well, Mary, what is that in your hand ?
Mary. Sure, an’ it's an illigant lump o’ lead I
found. Ye’re great wid the revolver, captain—
ye’ll be afther givin’ me the laste pinch in life of
the rale stuff for this, maybe.
Rob. (Examines it.) Mr. Levi, she has found a
lump of platinum—a magnificent lump—will you
buy it of her? «
Levi. That will I. This is not like thy mica.
(He weighs it, and pays her two notes.) ’This is
heavier than gold. It has other great qualities
of gold besides. I give you for it eight times the
value of silver. Platinum is the queen of the
metals.
(Nathan gives Levi a letter. He opens
it.)
Rob. There, run and find a hundredweight
of it!
Mary. Platinum, ye’re the boy—seein’ you’re
the queen of the metals! Captain, ye’re a jewil!
May ye live till the 3kirts of your coat knock your
brains out! Here’s wishin’ ye both all sorts of
luck-good, bad, and hindifferent! Platinum for
ever, and gould to the divil 1
(Accompanies these words with a kick,
Exit, jumping and laughing.)


Enter JEM, who gives Levi a handful of dust. He
looks at it a moment.
Levi. Whence had yon this ?
Jem. Uu‘ of the ground!
Levi. False!
Jem. What do you mean by false? I saw a
man lift a lot out o! one hole, gave him thirty
pounds, and washed this out the very first wash-
ing.
Levi. You have been made a scoff and a jest;
this dust is from Birmingham, and neither
Australian or natural
Rob. The man plauted it for you.
Jein. Keep it—keep it—till I come back—l’ll
find him!
[Exit.
Rob. What is it, Mr. Levi ?
Levi. It is prepared by one who knows the
metals. Here is brass ormolu, and, I thin <, some
gilt platinum to give it weight.
Rob. Heigh, lads; here’s a new dodge. Brum-
magen planted on us so far off ? That is hard!
Hen are collecting with angry faces. Noise heard.
Re-enter JEM, dragging in WALKER.
Jem. Justice—jnstice—and Lynch law!
Omnes. You shall have itl To the rock with
him.
Rob. Stay ! don’t let us make a mistake —search
him!
(Walker is searched, and a bag of dust is
found in him.)
Omnes. To the rock with him !
Rob Stay! Don’t let us make a mistake. A
test, Mr. Levi, a-test!
Levi. I wash my hands of you all —ye men of
Belial! (Retiring.)
Black W. (S'opping him.) If you don’t give us a
test we’ll fling you in along with him.
Rob. Yon must, Mr. Levi. This will never do;
we sha’n’t be ‘afe a moment against this dodge.
Levi. This bottle contains an acid which gold
resists, but the baser metals cannot resist it. You
can pour it on this man’s merchandize and judge
for yourselves. I wash my hands of ye all!
[Exit, l h. 1 e. Robinson pours acid
on false dust—smoke arises.
Omnes. Trash, trash ! To the rock with him— j
to the rock!
(They hurry him off stage, ascend rock, |
R. h., and fling him off into the j
waters. Pause. They look at one
another.)
Digger. Can lie swim ?
Voices. Hush! (Pause.)
Jem. He throws his arms np!
Voices. Hush! (Pause.)
Walker. Help! help!
JHgger. He is sinking—he’ll never rise again!
Voices. Hush !
I Valleer. (Faintly.) My children my poor
Jessie!
Jem. Confound you! Are yon going to let the
man drown like a dog before your eyes ?
Digger. What are you doing ?
Jem. Look, and you’ll see. (Jumps.) ■
Crowd. Bravo, Jem! Bravo! hurrah 1 hurrah!
Jem. Quick! a rope! He’s choking me 1
After a pause JEM issues forth from water, carries
AVALKER on his back across stage, and exits.
Rob. That was revenge, not law. If it was right
wjs shouldn’t be so pacer to undo our work. Ah !
I railed at England when I was there, but now I
wish I was safe back. I wish I was iu Thread-
needle-street with my cold dust, and sixteen blue-
bottles within hail, I do !
Re-enter GEORGE, l. h. 1 e„ agitated.
Geo. Follow me out of the camp as quick as you
can. We won’t go together, you’ll see me ahead.
[Exit, l. H.
Rob. Ay, ay—he has found something. Nathan,
loos to my things.
[Exit, l. h. 1 e. The Thicvcf watch
him.
Re-enter CRAWLEY. Ha and Black Will come
forward.
Black W. Now, you find Jack, and slip into
their tent and clean it out. We will follow the
men, and—— You understand !
[Exeunt Bla k Will and Thieves, L. H.
One Thief glides cautiously round
Robinson’s cart, R. H.
Craw. No; I understand nothing. I slia’n’t
wait here. I wash my hands of all this. Mr.
Meadow’s wants me in England. ( Very loud.)
Good-bye, den of thieves—l know where you’ll all
go to 1
[Exit, k. h. 1 E.
Enter LEVI.
Levi. It was Crawley ! Nathan, pack up all our
things.
Nathan. Yes, master. Where are we going,
master ?
Levi. To England ! I shall have business there
before next Lady-day!
(All the Riggers at work as scene closes
in.)
SCENE lI.— A narrow Roclcy Pass. Heap of quarts
stones, L. e.
Enter GEORGE, running, l. h.
Geo. How slow he is ! Come on !
Rob. ( Without.) How much further ?
Geo. No further, here!
Enter ROBINSOI'.X. H.
Rob. Well ?
Geo. D’ye see that broad vein of quartz in the
rock? That is the home of the gold. Those
lumps of quartz have all rolled out from there.
Rob. Did yon bring me here to tell me that ?
Geo. That and something else !
R b. (Whispering.) Found something ?
Geo. Yes!
Rob. Where ?
Geo. In sight. I haven’t moved it from where I
saw it.
Rob. Hold your tongue, and let me find it. It is
not on this heap—too many men have sat down
there,, (Peers about.)
Geo. Tom, ’tis the mind finds things—not the
eye; a hundred black shepherds have sat there,
but They left this for a Berkshire farmer.
Rob. Why, gracious heavens! Can this be ?
You take aw’ay my breath. It can’t be gold—gold
it is! You have found the wonder of the world.


Geo. What is it worth —five hundred pounds?
Rob. Five hundred! Don’t ask me what it is
worth! How shall we get it home ? They’d
murder us like rats, if they saw it. There, there!
Now fling it down—throw stones upon it. Ah!
George, George !it is too great a find —it will get
us into trouble. (Takes out revolver.) Those
thieves are upon us, and my revolver is not loaded.
Enter BLACK WILL, leading Thieves. Robinson
pretends to conceal his revolver hurriedly.
Black IF. (To men.) They are armed. Well,
captain, we watched you and your pal out of the
camp. What luck? We noticed you did not go
for nothing!
Rob. He has found a nugget—l’ll sell it you.
Catch! (Throws iron pyrites.) We’ll take two
ounces of gold dust for it!
(Some of the men inspect it with interest.
Pause.)
Black IF. Well done, captain ! That will do for
greenhorns. Now, will you allow us to turn over
that heap of boulders you were so busy at just
now.
Rob. With all my heart. (Presents revolver )
But not while we are so near it, you treacherous
thief. I know you —you want to settle my hash
because I am against thieving in the mine.
Block W. There’s a little of both. I’ve sworn
you shall die, captain, and I really think you’ve
got something in that heap of boulders. Now,
pals, altogether—slow at first.
(They begin to glide towards Robinson.
George stoops and picks up a quartx
boulder in each hand. Martial music
heard at a distance, very faintly.
Black Will and Thieves hesitate.)
Black W. What is that ?
Rob. Shall I tell you ?
Black IF. Can you ?
Rob. Yes ; but keep your distance, I wrote to
the Governor for soldiers and police. I was to
meet the captain here.
(George waves handkerchief.)
Rob. He sees us; and there are riflemen among
them that will bring you down like squirrels, if
you don’t walk your chalks in good time.
Black W. Curse him! Pals, there’s time—there’s
time! , , ,
First Man. No! Look there—look there!
[Runs off, followed by others, l. h. 1 f.
Black W. Cowards! Another day—another
! . [Exit, l. h. I E.
Rbb. Thank Heaven! for Heaven alone has saved
our gold and our lives this day.
Geo. (Takes off his hat.) Thank Heaven for leav-
ing me the gold that takes me to England! Isn t
it beautiful, Tom? (Kisses gold.) That’s not
because you’re gold, but because you take me to
Susan. It is just for all the world like a honey-
comb. Oh, Tom, can’t we go home now ?
Rob'. We’ll go to-morrow iqorning, George.
George, I deceived you; we’ve got five thousand
pounds’ worth of gold dust in our tent. I couldn t
bear you to run from fortune so soon.
Geo. Five thousand pounds! And this
Rob. Is worth four thousand. It is the wonder
of the world. We’ll show it in Sydney a shilling a
head, and then we’ll sail for England.
Geo. Oh, Tom! pood, kind, honest Tom—shake
hands with me over it this blessed day!
(They each set afoot on the nugget, and
shake hands.)
Music. Enter CAPTAIN and Soldiers marching,
led by CLERK TO GOVERNOR.
Capt. Halt!
Clerk. Can you direct me to Summer Hill
Creek ?
Bob. (Takes of his hat.) You have but to follow
this road bearing to the left, sir ! Sir, lam Thomas
Robinson, who wrote to the Governor for the
soldiers.
Cleric. Well, what can I do for you, Mr. Robin,
son ?
Rob, We have found a hundredweight of pold in
one lump ; if we are seen with it we shall be robbed
and murdered, sir!
Clerk. It is my bnsiness to see you are not. Step
in between the men !
Capt. Forward —quick march !
[Exit Soldiers, George, Soldiers, and
Captain.
.Rob. Now for the short cut into the camp.
[Lashes out, B. K;
SCENE 111. —Same ns Scene T. Diggers all dis-
covered at work. BLACK WILL and Gang dis-
covered.
First Man. I wish we had let Robinson alone.
Black \V. If you had been game, there was time
to stop his pab for ever.
Second Man. We’d better hide..
Black IF. I sha’n’t I we havo done nothing.
Ugh! (They retire up the stage )
Enter ROBINSON, hastily.
Bob. (Calling.) Jem! Mr. Levi! Soldiers com-
ing! Down with your dust. They’ll take it and
us safe to Sydney! [Dashes info tent, r. h.
Enter JEM.
Jem. (Entering.) Did you call, Tom ?
Rob. Hallo! our tent has been bn ken into!
Jem. Mercy on us!
Rob. They have cleared us out!
Jem. I’m sorry for it.
Rob. They have taken my very boots that cost
me fifty shillings!
Re-enter ROBINSON, staggering under Carlo,
stuffed. Buts it down, dashes back, and re-
appears with small iron box, open.
But they left the dog.
Jem. The dog ?
Rob. Yes ; they hadn’t the sense to take Carlo.
Carlo save our lives when he was a dog, and our
gold since he has been furniture. D’ye see this, ye
thieves P (Tapping dog. March, “ God save the
Queen," and tramp of feet heard in the distance.)
And d’ye hear that, ye rascals ? D’ye know the
meaning of that agreeable little melody ? (Men all
listen.) I’ll tell yon. It means God, and the
Queen, and Law. It means justice for the rich—
(taps Carlo)—as well as the poor. It means man
instead of serpent, shark, and tiger—and peace and
comfort instead of knife, and revolver, and lawless
law.


Enter CLERK, CAPTAIN, and Soldiers, marching,
GEORGE between them. Soldiers come down to
front of stage.
Capt. Halt! Front!
Clerk (To George.) You are a digger—read that.
( (Gives him proclamation.)
Geo. (Reads proclamation ,) “In the Queen’s
name!" (Chord.) “Forasmuch as it has been
represented to me, Governor of Sydney, that, by
deeds of rapine and violence, the gains of honest
labour are rendered insecure to her Majesty’s sub-
jects, we have therefore sent a force of soldiers to
maintain order and good rule, according to law.
(Joyous murmur.) All good citizens and honest
men of all nations are invited to co-operate with
the Government, in their own interest, and that of
all human society, to protect person and property —
to guard inviolate the sacred fruits of industry,
and the laws of Great Britain and her Colonies
throughout the world. God save the Queen!’’
(Soldiers present arms. The National
Anthem is played with the whole
power of the band, ecery person
waving caps, &c., and shouting. As
the act drop begins to descend, Robin-
son and Jem touch spring in dog, and
gold dust pours out into box. Robin-
son shakes his fist at Black Will and
Thieves. Tableau.)
' END OF ACT JV.
ACT V.
SCENE.—Outside of Merton’s House, l. H. Door
and Window practicable. Roads, «. and L.
Finger-post, R. C., “To Reading.” Church Porch,
r. h. 2. e. Stone Bench. MEADOWS dis-
covered.
Mea. I am to win her, or why did I stop at the
same inn with those two, who were coming to rob
me of her? Their drink was well drugged They
won’t be here till the wedding is over, and, if they
do come, they will have to go back as they came.
The respectable John Meadows has not turned
villain for nothing! I’ll go and speak to the
clerk—every minute saved is gold !
[Exit through porch. R. h.
Enter SUSANNA MERTON, from house, L. H.
Susan. I must have air! They congratulate me,
and make jests—Heaven forgive them!—and I am
to smile and laugh—l, who am suffocated with
misery 1 Why did I consent ? I never can love
this man. Oh, George! are you really false to
me? The proof is too clear, no letters for eight
months, and this report of his marriage to another!
Put these two things together, and what doubt can
there be? Where is your pride, Susanna Merton?
A man is false to you and insults your love—yet
you cling to him; another man worships you, gives
yon all he has to give, his heart above all —his
whole heart, and you scorn him. Where is your
justice? And then I save my dear father from
ruin. Ah, here comes Mr. Meadows! If he would
but keep out of my sight and let me think of his
goodness and constancy I could almost love him!
But the moment he comes near me
(Shudders.)
Re enter MEADOWS.
Mea. Susan, dear, it is nearly time. I wish you
could look into my heart and see the happiness you
bestow, then you'would understand how grateful
my whole life will be to you.
Susan. No, no, Mr. Meadows, I do not bestow
lasting happiness. Oh ! think better of it! You
deserve to be loved—do not tie an icicle to. your
warm and honest heart! Indeed, we both deserve
a better Mr. Mea.dows, I can never love you!
Me a. Dear Susan, you shall take so many plea-
sures from me that you will feel, at last, the sup-
port of a dear friend. No day shall pass but wet
eyes and uplifted hands shall bless Susan Mea-
dows!
Susan. (Aside.) Susan Meadows! (Aloud.) You
are very kind to me.
Mea. Your father will adore you, friends shall
cluster round you; I will humbly, gratefully
cherish you.
Susan. Yon make me tremble at my own un-
grateful nature. I ought to go on my knees and
bless you, but, Heaven forgive me—l hate you,
John Meadows !
Mea. I shall kill her, or myself!
(Goes a*ioe and hangs his head.)
Susan. (Aside.) Poor fellow! I have stabbed
him to the heart for loving me! (Aloud.) Forgive
me ! this proves the danger I am in. My friend,
you must save me, at once and for ever, from this
mad and misplaced love I
Enter MERTON, from house, l. h.
Merton. Heaven bless you, Snsan, this joyful
day!
Susan. Where are you going, father ?
Merton. Why, to the church, to be sure. I
can’t walk so fast as you—my wedding-day was
thirty years ago.
[Faut info porch, r.
Susan. I shall be ready in an instant.
[Exit into house.
Mea. The woman I love loathes me; in ten years,
if not before, she shall love me. The heart of
John Meadows is often sick and cold, but his will
is unconquerable!
Re-enter SUSAN, with scarf and flowers.
Take my arm. Susan; it shall never fail you. Lean
on it tor life.
Susan. It is a stout arm, and a good heart. I
have full faith in both. Let us go at once. I wish
to be married to you without a moment’s delay.
(Noise and shouts without.)
Mea. ( Looking down.) George Sandford!
Susan. Why do you mention that name to me?
Never let me hear it again! I wish George Sand-
ford stood there that he might see with what scorn
I would pass him, leaning on your faithful arm 1
George. (Without.) Susan!
Enter GEORGE SANDFORD and ROBINSON,
L. H. U. E.
Susan. Ah! George—George!
{Rushes into his arms.)
Meat (Aside.) Perdition!
Susan. How dare you embrace me ? How dare
you look at me ? (Runs to Meadows.) This is my
safety! Let us go. Come—come! Take me out
of sight of him ! Heaven have mercy on me 1


Geo. Susan, what is this ? What have I done ?
Susan. What have you done? You are false to
me! This eight months yon have not written to
me, and you are going to be married to another.
(She ueeps.) Oh, Ghorge!
Rob. That’s news to me. Why, miss, all his cry,
day and night, has been —“ Susan, Susan !*’ When
we found the great nugget of gold, he kisses it,
and says, “ That’s not because you’re gold, but
because you take me to Susan.” May I whisper
something to you, miss ? (Whispers to her.) Take
those white gloves off —and as for letters, I saw
him send two myself, that must have reached
England four and two months ago.
Susan. Oh, if I could believe this!
Geo. Susan, what were you doing on that man’s
arm ?
Susan. They 4 old me you were false, and I felt
myself insulted-and I was iu despair—and I
Mea. Miss Merton and I are going to church to
get married —that is why I offered her my arm.
Geo. She thought me false, and I am true.
Susan (falteringly) I say nothing about the
vows that have passed between us; but blindfold
choice is no choice. Yonr eyes are open now.
Choose between John Meadows and George Sand-
ford.
Susan. What choice can there be ? The moment
I saw you, I forgot there was a John Meadows in
the world! Porgive me, George, if you can.
(Clings to George.)
Geo. If I had found you looking well and happy
beside another man, I would have forgiven you,
and left home for ever. But it is plain to be seen
you have suffered. So there’s nothing to forgive,
Susan dear! We are here to make one another
happy, not torment one another about John Mea-
dows. I don’t think of him, if you don’t.
Re-enter ME RTON, a. h.
Merton. Ah ! I was afraid of this. I heard you
had come home.
Geo. Is that all my welcome ? Is that the way
you keep your promise, uncle ?
Merton. George, I have been an imprudent fool.
lam in debt more than two thousand pounds. I
am a ruined man. We heard you had changed
your mind —and Meadows will pay all for me.
Geo. Your word, uncle ; I crossed the seas on the
faith of it,
Merton Well, I must stand to it, though it ruins
me. John, if he has brought home a thousand
pounds, I must give him Susan ; and I will, too—
it is justice. And then I’ll go to the workhouse,
and you two be as happy as you can be after ruining
me.
Susan. Father!
Geo. And suppose I have brought enough with
me to pay your debt, father-in-law, and a good
lump beside ? Tom, how much is my share ?
Rob. Only six thousand pounds.
Merton. Six thousand pounds!
Geo No, it is not so much as that.
Rob. Yes, it is. You found the great nugget;
and besides, yon have more people to take care of
than I have Here they are, ninety one hundred
pound flimsies, as clean and as crimp as a muslin
gown new from the wash. (Opens large pocl;et-book,
takesout apiece of cotton stuffing, he looks at it.) I
never put this iu.
Geo. Why, Tom ?
Rob. ( Screams.) Robbed!
Mea. (Aside.) Now it is my turn!
Geo . Robbed!
Rol. Robbed! Ob, I saw them all safe at night;
I put the book under my pillow, and there I found
it in the morning.
Merton. A London thief robbed ? I don’t believe
a word of it.
Rob. Robbed ! robbed 1 Kill me, George, I
have ruined you.
Geo. I can’t speak.
Merton. But I can speak! George Sandford, if
yon are a man, leave me and my daughter in peace.
If you had come home with a thousand pounds, I
was ready to give you Snsan, to my own ruin.
Now it is your turn to show yourself the light
stuff. My danghter is going to give her hand to
an honest man, who will make a lady of her, and
set me on my legs again. You will ruin ns both.
Go, leave in peace!
Geo. It is my duty to go, Susan. (Tabes a step,
staggers, Robinson catches him.) There, don’t make
a fuss with me—there’s nothing the matter with
me. Let me sit on this bench and draw my breath,
and then I’ll go.
Merton. Susan, go and get your bonnet, and let
us put an end to this.
Susan. Not unless George bids me.
Merton. Be a man, George; be just—it is your
turn now.
Geo. Susan, I am a beggar—marry whom you
will!
Susan. Very well, George. What does it
matter; I shall be in the churchyard before
another week is out.
Merton. Susan 1
Susan. I shall be in the churchyard before
another week is out. When you bury me, remem-
ber yon killed me with your eyes open.
[Exit into house, I. H. 2 e.
Merton. (In great agitation.) These words turn
my blood, Meadows. I am her father—she has
been an obedient, comforting angel in my house
ever since her mother died. What is farm or
money to me if I lose my child ?
Mea. Father, to-morrow we’ll be in Paris—the
next day among the beautiful mountains of Swit-
zerland ! Something new and b'eautiful shall meet
her every day for the next six months; at the end
of that time she will laugh and say, “Am I the
woman that talked of dying for George Sandford.”
Mert n. I was a fool. ( Tlieu go up.)
Geo. Give me your hand, old companion, we
shall go hack to where we came from! We worked
hard for it, ton, didn’t we ? and risked our lives as
well as our toil. I shall have nothing to work for
now! Where’s William? Where’s my brother?
Has he forgotten me ?
Merten. William is in prison for debt.
Geo. (Resigned.) William is in prison, is he?
Poor William! But I don’t seem to mind—l’m
past sorrow—my heart is dried up.
(Droops his head, Robinson Keeps, they
still keep hands.)
Enter MR. TOOYEY, a Magistrate, and his Clerk,
L. U. E.
Toovey. Mr. Merton, I have come here to make
some inquiries about a robbery at the White Hart,
in Reading.
Mea. iVhy, who told you of it, squire ?
Toovey. (With rather a childish laugh.) That’s


my business, Mr. Meadows. Will you let me have
your black mare for forty pounds? Fetch mea
chair.
Mea. Yes, yes; you shall have her. But who
told you of this robbery, squire?
Toovey. (Smiling.) That is my business, my
good friend. Now, the man who was robbed is
here, is he not ?
Rob. I am here, sir.
Toovey. Do you suspect no one ?
Bob. I have no clue. I should like to examine
the people of the house ; but it’s no use.
Geo. No; it’s no use!
Toovey. I brought the waiter with me. Examine
him. Where is he ? Oh, here he is! Come here.
Enter WAITER, l. h. u. 2.
Rob. Who slept in the house beside us two ?
Waiter. A traveller from London —a strange
gentleman and his wife—let me see—a cousin of
master’s.
Rob. Is that all?
Waiter. Yes; that’s all. And Mr. Meadows—
he always sleeps with us market nights.
Rob. Oh, Mr. Meadows was there, was he ?
Where did he sleep ?
Waiter'. I don’t know ; that’s not my business.
Toovey. Well, don’t trouble about Mr. Meadows.
He didn’t take your money ; the dog has got plenty
of his own—haven’t you, Mr. Meadows? He,
he, he!
Rob. Tell me all you saw this Meadows do last
evening. Where was he whilst we were in the
public room ?
Waiter. Well, sir, he was in the bar ; and I did
see him do something. You mustn’t be angry
with me, Mr. Meadows, but I saw you drop a lump
of sugar into this gentleman’s brandy-and-water.
Toovey. Young man, you are wasting your
time.
Waiter. Yes. But, sir, it was not like any
other lump of sugar—it never got to the bottom of
the- glass at all, sir.
Tooveu. The deuce it didn’t What! did it
float ? You must take out a patent, Mr. Meadows.
He, he, he!
Mea. (Aside.) Perdition!
Waiter. No, sir; it melted like magic, as soon as
it touched the liquor; and if I may be allowed to
speak my mind, gentlemen, I should say that
sugar wasn’t sugar at all 1
Geo. Now, hear me, sir. Tom Robinson is the
lightest sleeper ever I saw, butthis morning I had
to shake him half a dozen times before I could shake
the sleep out of him.
Bob. And my head ached fit to split. I was
drugged, sir, and that is the man who did it 1
Mea. uh, fie! oh, fie! Mr. Toovey, I remember
drugging my brandy-and-water, but the drug is
innoceut; the doctor gives it me. Well, sir, I
looked round for my brandy-and-water, and it was
gone. I remember that, too. No doubt the waiter
had taken it to this person; but if he got drunk,
as he describes, it wasn’t my drug, but the land-
lord’s liquor. (Toovey laughs—aside.) I must
escape! (Aloud.) Mr. Toovey, it is my luck to be
in the way of these people; they are my enemies,
are they not-. Mr. Merton ?
Merton. Well, to own the truth, they are.
Toovey. So I should say. (Aside.) The BOst
respectable mau in the parish.
Mea. I could laugh at this as you do, sir, but
there are reasons why this insult is very painful to
me standiug here. Farmer, explain to the Squire;
I'll put myself out of the way of further insolence.
Merton. Why, you see, Squire
(Whispering. Meantime Meadows
saunters slowly andcarelessly to b. h.,
about to make his exit when he is met
by a man of Jewish physiognomy, who
stops him. After a pause he tries
L. h. Another man, also of Jewish
appearance, stops him there, saying,
“ There is more evidence to be
heard.”)
Mea. (Aside.) There is a way out by the back of
the house.
(About to go out, l. tr. e., when WIL-
LIAM SANDFORD meets him on
the threshold.)
Wil. You can’t pass till his worship hears me!
Sir, I saw this Meadows give a packet to Crawley
at the station, and Orawlev went up by train.
Toovey. Wonderful! Why it’s a conspiracy
against you, Meadows. (The Clerk, who has been
writing, then whispers to Toovey.) Oh, very well.
You must stay, Mr. Meadows, and I will hear this
nonsense to the end.
(He whispers with Clerk, and looks over
what he has been writing. The Clerk,
who is evidently his master, appears
to be influencing his mind. During
this SUSAN re-enttrs from the
house, with colour on her cheeks.
Site sits down by George, and slips
her hand into his. He looks up, and
struck by the expression of her face,
rises. She rises, too. Her expression
is so remarkable that he at once per-
ceives some great change has taken
' place in their fortunes.)
Geo. Why, Susan !
Susan. My own George! (They embrace.)
Mea. (Aside.) Ah! what is this? Another link
to the chain I see weaving. I tremble, the strings
are all round me too fine to see, too many to break.
I’m in some huge spider’s web.
(ISAAC LEVI enters, L. h. rr. E., and
Meadows turning suddenly round,
finds his face almost close to the
Jew’s. He looks stupified at first,
and glares at him, but after a while
recoils, and trembles from head to
foot.)
Geo. Mr. Levi.
Susan. Yes; our friend.
Wil. Cheer up, George, we have been watching
that honest fellow there for the last fortnight;
he’ll find our teeth are as long as his.
[Exit William.
Levi. Th : s is the guilty man! In the silent
watches of the night, when no human eye saw him,
he must have crept to this poor exile’s bedside and
robbed him of his hard earned means. In the
morning, one whom he had wronged saw him give,
with a stealthy air and look, a parcel to an accom-
plice, and doubtless said to him, “ fly! Glide
down the iron road —neither man nor bird shall
overtake you.’’ But know, vain man, that Provi-
dence still favours honesty—even in this uncertain
life. Those discoveries of Nature’s fathomless
secrets that man calls his inventions, are, by the
will of Heaven, limed so as to guard the great
balance of good and evil!


Mea. (Aside.) Ah! what is he coming to?
Levi . Those wondrous iron roads, so favourable
to felony escaping justice, had not been long on
the earth ere, by their side, there rose narrower,
but still more wondrous, paths of iron. The road
subdues the earth, but the path subdues the air.
Let the thief pass the flying birds—the honest man
lays his hand on those magic wires, and justice
meets the evil-doer at his journey's end; and so
the fox falls, like a simple hare, into the wire-gin I
(A pause.) And so have you! Nathan!
( Stamps his foot.)
CRAWLEY is brought on, h. h. tj. e., by NATHAN
and Constable s.
Mea. Ah!
Na than. We found these notes upon Crawley,
s ; r , (Gives them to Toovey.)
Rob. Ours ran from No. 684 to 774.
Toovey. (Looking at them.) They are yours.
(Gives them.)
liob. (Mervously.) George, take care of your
own.
(Gioes George the notes, who gives them
to Susan.)
Craw. Gentlemen, I had them from a pprson of
property; how could I suspect there could be
anything wrong ?
Disposition of the Characters at the Fall of the Curtain.
SUSAN. GEORGE. LEVI. TOOVEY.
WILLIAM. CLERK.
ROBINSON. MERTON,
U
Mea. (Aside.) He’ll ’peach—l’m lost for ever!
Touvey. Wliy, Mr. Meadows, I must give you into
custody. (To Crawley.) Sir, stay. Who did you
have them from —and for what purpose ?
Mea. Don’t ask that poltroon, sir, who would
swear anything to save himself. I will confess all.
Let me go! (With anguish.) Let me go, I say 1
Crau-. Oh, what a fool I was to take ygu for a
great man. Mri, Levi’s worth a hundred of you.
(They are led out by Constables. The
church bells begin to ring. Re-enter
WILLIAM from church porch.
Wil. I’ve set the bells ringing, anyway.
Geo. Good William, good brother! He shall
share our good fortune, shall he not, Susan ?
Susan. That he shall. (Drying her eyes:) The
dear, good, cross thing. He has got a sweetheart,
George.
Levi. Forget all troubles, sorrows, and cares.
Let an old man see his friends happy before he
goes. (Music very piano.) I have seen the lot of
man from east to west; we all pass through
trouble at one hour or another of life’s short day,
and they are the happiest whose sorrows come in
the morning; their noonday is often the brightest,
and their sun sets in peace. So may it be with
you, my children 1 (A pause—to audience.) And
with you, our iriends !
CCBTAIN.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Now Publismng, Price One Penny, Weekly,
DICKS’ STANDARD PLAYa
AND
FREE ACTING DRAMA.
For the Representation op which there is no Legal Charge.
1 Othello
2 School for Scandal
3 Werner
4 She Stoops to Conquer
5 The Game ster
6 King Lear
7 New way to Pay old Debt'i
8 Road to Ruin
9 Merry wives of Windsor
JO The Iron Chest
11 Hamlet
12 The Stranger
13 Merchant of Venice
14 The Honeymoon
15 Pizarro
16 Man of the World
17 Much Ado about Nothing
18 The Rivals
19 Damon and Pythias
20 Macbeth
21 John Bull
22 Fazio
23 Speed the Plough
24 Jane Shore
25 Evadne
26 Antony and Cleopatra
27 The Wonder
28 The miller and his men
29 The Jealous Wife
30 Therese
31 Brutus
32 The Maid of Honour
33 A Winter’s Tale
34 The Poor Gentleman
35 The Castle Spectre
36 The Heir-at-Law
37 Love in a Village
38 A Tale of mystery
39 Douglas
40 The Critic
41 George Barnwell
42 Grecian Daughter
43 As You Like it
44 Cato
45 The Beggars’ Opera
46 Isabella
47 The Revenge
48 Lord of the Manor
49 Romeo and Juliet
50 Sardanapalus
51 The Hypocrite
52 Venice Preserved
53 The Provoked Husband
54 Clandestine marriage
56 Fair Penitent
56 Two Gentlemen of Verona
67 Fatal Curiosity
68 Belle's Stratagem
69 Manfred
60 Rule a Wife, &c.
61 Bertram
62 Wheel of Fortune
63 The Duke of|Milan
64 Good-Natu red Man
65 King John
66 Beaux’ Stratagem
67 Arden of Faversham
68 Trip to Scarborough
C 9 Lady Jane Grey
fO Rob Roy
Jk Roman Father
72 The Provoked wife
73 The Two Foscari
74 Foundling of ths Forest
75 All the World’s a Stage
76 Richard 111
77 Bold Stroke for a wife
78 Castle of Sorrento
79 The Inconstant
80 Guy Mannering
81 The Busy-Body
82 Tom and Jerry
V 2 Alexander the Great
Liar
85 The Brothers
86 Way of the world
87 Cymbeline
£8 She Would, Ac:
89 Deserted Daughter
90 Wives as They Were, and
maids as They Are
SI Every man in his humour
92 Midsummer Night’s Dream
91 Tamerlane
94 Bold Stroke for a husband
95 Julius Caesar
2o All for Love
97 The Tempest
9« Richard Coeur de Lion
99 The Mourning Bride
100 The bashful man
101 Barbarossa
102 The Curfew
103 Merchant of Bruges
104 Giovanni in London
105 Timon of Athens
106 Honest Thieves
107 West Indian
108 The Earl of Essex
109 The Irish Widow
110 The Fanner’s Wife
111 Tancred and Sigismunda
112 The Panel
113 Deformed Transformed
114 The Soldier s Daughter
115 Monsieur Tonson
116 The Black Prince
117 School for Wives
118 Coriolanus
119 The Citizen
120 The First Floor
121 The Foundling
122 Oroonoko
123 Love a-la-Mode
124 Richard II
125 Siege of Belgrade
126 Sainson Agonistea
127 Maid of the mill
128 One o’Clock
129 Who’s the Dupe?
130 Mahomet
131 Duplicity
132 The Devil to Pay
133 Troilus and Cressida
134 Ways and means
135 All in the Wrong
136 Cross Purposes
137 The Orphan
138 Bon Ton
139 Tender Husband
140 El Hyder
141 The Country Girl
142 Midas
143 Castle of Andalusia
144 Two Strings to your Bow
145 Measure for measure
146 The miser
147 Haunted Tower
148 The Tailors
149 Love for Love
150 Robbers of Calabria
151 Zara
152 High Life Below Stairs
153 Marino Faliero
154 The Waterman
155 Vespers of Palermo
156 The Farm-house
157 Comedy of Errors
158 The Romp
159 Distressed mother
160 Atonement [riage
161 Three Weeks after Mar-
-162 Suspicious Husband
163 Dog of Montargis
164 The Heiress
165 The Deserter
166 King Henry VIII
167 ComuS •;*.
168 Recruiting Sergeant
169 Animal magnetism
170 The Confederacy
171 The Carmelite
172 The Chances
173 Follies of a Day
174 Titus Andronicus
175 Paul and Virginia
176 Know your own mind
177 The Padlock
178 Constant ouplo
179 Better Late than Never
180 My Spouse and I
181 Every One has his Fault
182 The Deuce is in him
183 Adopted Child
184 Love rs’ Vows
185 Maid of the Oaks
186 The Duenna
187 Turnpike Gate
188 Lady of Lyons
189 Miss in her Teens
190 Twelfth Night
191 Lodoiska
192 Earl of Warwick
193 Fortune’s Frolics
194 Way to keep him
195 Braganza
196 No Song no Supper
197 Taming of the Shrew
198 Spanish Student
199 Double Dealer
200 Mock Doctor
201 Fashionable lover
202 The Guardian
203 Cain
204 Rosina
205 Love’s Labour Lost
206 The Hunchback
207 The Apprentice
208 Raising the Wind
209 Lovers’ Quarrels
210 Rent Day
211 Cronoholonthologos
212 His first champagne
213 Pericles
214 Robinson Crusoe
215 He’s much to Blame
216 Ella Rosenberg
217 The Quaker
218 School of Reform
219 King Henry IV (1)
220 Fifteen Years of a Drunk-
ard’s Life
221 Thomas and Sally
222 Bombastes Furioso
223 First Love
224-Somnambulist
225 All’s Well that Ends Well
226 Lottery Ticket
227 Gustavus Vasa
228 Sweethearts and Wives
229 Miller of Mansfield
230 Black-Eyed Snsan
231 King Henry IV (2)
232 The Station-House
233 Recruiting Officer
234 The Tower of Nesle
235 Kin? Henry V
236 The Rendezvous
237 Appearance is Against
Them
238 William Tell
239 Tom Thumb
240 The Rake’s Progress
241 King Henry VI (1.)
242 Blue Devils
243 Cheats of Scapin
244 Charles the Second
245 Love makes the man
246 Virglnius
247 Sbhool for Arrogance
248 The Two Gregories
249 King Henry VI. (2)
250 Mrs. Wiggins
251 Mysterious husband
252 Heart of Midlothian
253 King Henry VI. (3)
254 Illustrious Stranger
255 Register Office
256 Domiuique
257 Chapter of Accidents
258 Descarte
259 Hero and Leander
260 Cure for Heartache
261 Siege of Damascus
262 The Secret
263 Deaf and Dumb
264 Banks of the Hudsoo
265 The Wedding Day
266 Laugh when you can
267 What Next ?
268 Raymond and Agnes
269 Lionel and Clarissa
270 Red crow
271 The Contrivance
272 Broken Sword
273 Polly Honeycomb
274 Nell Gwynue
275 Cymon
276 Perfection
277 Count of Narbonno
278 Of Age To-inorre^r
279 Orphan of China
280 Pedlar’s Acre
281 Mogul’s Tale
282 Othello Travectie
2*3 Law Of Lombardy
284 Day after the wedding
285 The Jew
286 Irish Tutor
287 Such Things Are
288 The Wife
289 Dragon of Wuntley
290 Suil Dhuv
2511 Lying Valet
292 Lily of Bt. Leonards
293 Oliver Twist
294 The Housekeeper
295 Child of Nature
296 Home, Sweet Home
297 Which is the man ?
298 Caius Gracchus
299 Mayor of Garratt
300 Woodman
301 Midnight our
302 Woman’s Wit
303 The Purse
304 Votary of Wealth
305 Life Buoy
306 Wild Oats
307 Rook wood
308 Gambler’s Fate
309 Herne the unter
310 Yes!” and “Not**
311 The Sea-captain
312 Eugene Aram
313 Wrecker’s Daughter
314 Alfred the Great
« ir /Virginia mummy
V Intrigue
/ My Neighbour’s wife
v Married Bachelor
317 Richelieu
318 Money
319 lon
320 The Bridal
321 Paul Pry
322 Love •chase
323 Glencoe
/Spitalfields weaver
vstage Struck
32;# Robert Macaire
326 Country Squire
32? Athenian Captive
«?oa ( Barney the BaroP,
\ Happy man
329 Der Freischtaffll


f\
AD VERTISEMI
343
330 Hush money
331 East Lrnne
332 The Robbers
333 The Bottle
334 Kenilworth
335 The inountuineer
336 Simpson and Co.
337 A Roland for an Oliver
/Siamese Twins
VTurned Head
339 Maid of Croissey
340 Rip Van Winkle
341 Court Fool
342 Undo Tom’s Cabin
/Deaf as a Post
\ Soldier's Courtship
344 Bride of Lainmennoor
345 Gwynneth Vaughan
346 Esmeralda
347 The Pilot
34S Town and Country
<>4Q /Middy Ashore
\Matteo Falcone
350 Duchess of Malfi
351 Naval Engagements
352 Victorine
353 Spectre Bridegroom
354 Alice Gray
/Fish Out of water
**** \Family Jars
356 Rory O'More
357 Zarah
/ Love in humble Life
\l5 Years of Labour Lost
359 Dream of the Future
ofiA /Mrs. White
vCherry Bounce
351 Elder Brother
262 Robber’s wife
/Sleeping Draught
' w \Smoked miser
364 Love
365 Fatal Dowry
366 / Bengal Tiger
~ob \Kill or cure
367 Paul Clifford
3fiS Dumb man of Manchester
3 : 9 Sergeant’s Wife
370 Jonathan Bradford
371 Gilderoy
/Diamond cut Diamond
* \Philippe
373 Legend of Florence
371 David Copperfield
375 Dombey and Son
376 Wardock Keunilson
-.77 Night and morning
378 Lucretia Borgia
379 Ernest Maltravers
*»in /Dancing Barber
\Turning the Tables
381 Poor of New York
382 St. Mary’s Eve
383 Secrets worth Knowing
584 Carpenter of Rouen
385 Ivan hoe
.‘lB6 Ladies’ club
'W7 / Hercules
' V Bears not Beasts
388 Bleak House
:W9 Colleen Bawn
390 The Shaughraun
39A The Octoroon
392 Sixteen String Jack
393 Barnaby Rudge
394 Cricket on the Hearth
‘195 Susan Hopley
396 Way to get married
397 Wandering Jew
398 Old Curiosity Shoy
399 Under the G
400 Jane Eyre
401 Raffaelle
40 - /Hunting a Turtle
\Catching a Heiress
403 /Oood Night’s Rest
\ Lodgings far Gen tier.: eo
404 The Wren Boys
405
AOfiCUuti
*
Kent
Scots
408 Wary
09 (bonrdingl
410 Lucille
... / Four Sisters
1 \Nothing to Nurse
412 My Unknown Friend
~« / Vouug widow
\More Blunders than One
414 Woman's Love
4,c /A Widow’s Victim
410 VDay after the Fair
416 The Jewess
Ayj /Unfinished Gentleman
w V. Captain is not A-miss
4iB Media
xio /The Twins
41J V Uncle’s Card
420 Martha Willis
/ Love’s lubyrinth
\ Ladder of love
422 White Boys
/Mistress of the mill
° \ Frederick of Prussia
424 Mubel’B curse
ao\ /Perplexing Predicament
VA Bay in Paris
426 Kye-liouse Plot
427 Little Jockey Imasked
428 Tobacconist A Virgin Uu-
-420 Dumb Conscript
; 430 Heart of London
431 Frankenstein
432 Fuiry Circle
A oo /Sea-bathing at home
VWrong man
434 Farmer’s otory
435 Lady and the Devil
436 Vanderdecken
437 A poor young matt
xuq /Under which king ?
VTobit’s Dog
439 His last legs
440 Life of an Actress
441 White horse of the Peppers
442 Artist’s Wife
443 Black Domino
444 Village Outcast
4*5 Ten Thousand a-Year
446 Beulah Spa
447 Perils of Pippins
448 Barrack Kooin
449 Richard Plantagenet
450 Red Rover
451 Idiot of Heidelberg
452 The Assignation
453 Groves of Blarney
454 Ask no Questions
455 Ireland r t s it is
456 Jonathan in England
457 Inkle and Yarico
458 Nervous man
459 Message from the Sea
460 Black Doctor
461 King O’Neil
x«‘> /Forty and Fifty
\Tom Noddy’s Secret
463 Irish Attorney
464 The Camp
465 St. Patrick’s Day
466 Strange Gentleman
467 Village Coquettes
468 Life of a woman
469 Nicholas Nickleby
/Is she his wife?
47U ie Lamplighter
471 Fernando
472 Scamps of London
473 Jessie Brow*.
474 Oscar, the half-blood
475 Mary Ducange
476 Nurcisse
477 Little Gerty
478 Obi
479 Austerlitz
480 Grandfather’s will
481 Hidden Treasure
482 True os Steel
483 Sell-Accusation
r4*s lew
48ti Chart
’Malley
VThe snow' helped
498 ( J&rpoueUo
\A marriage noose
400 / Lost Pocket-book
VTwenty and Forty
490 ( 8 * air iu Love
) \ VVonian will be a womar
4.qi / Captain's Ghost
4yi \Hat-box
492 (uvelJ “
493 (»V l vltelI(e)s
V Mistaken
/ Locksmith
V Portmanteau
495 Kuth
49 » Maid of Mariendorpt
497 The Turf
498 Harlequin hoax
499 Sweeney Todd
50J My Poll & Partner Joe
501 The King's wager
502 Tower of London
/Monsieur Jacques
\ Plot and counterplot
594 The Hirthduy
605 Grandfather Whitehead
500 The Stone Jug
607 Jacob Faithful
608 JacK Ketch
509 Hold Dragoons
510 Kemorso
611 Old house at home
612 Jersey Girl
613 llaroun Alraschid
514 Beggar's Petition
tie /Own Blue Bell
010 VGrimalkin
516 Paulina
t I7 /Affair of honour
‘ \The Lancers
518 St. Patrick's Eve
619 Mr. Greenfinch
520 The hall porier
521 Prisoner of War
v>9 /Matching-making
\The Dumb Belle
523 Lucky horse-shoe
r . 94 /My wife’s dentist
“ VEnilroad Station
525 The Schoolfellow
/Woman-Hater
VComfortable Service
527 You can't marry your
Grandmother
528 Rochester
529 Golden calf
639 Bride of Ludgate
r,»i /Twice Killed
VA Day well spent
532 Tam O'Shanter
533 Woodstock
534 Jack Brag
*oe / New Footman
** \ King's Gardener
536 Woman’s Faith
537 Caret#** liusbaud
538 Joconde
539 The Steward
540 Evil Eye
541 Sam Weller
542 Tekeli
543 Abroad and At Home
544 The Roebuck
mc /Little Adopted
V Gentleman in Difficulties
546 Wish-ton wish
547 Nick of the w’oods
548 Faith and Falsehood
549 Lalla Rookh
550 soapafroai * The Sulla a
551 One Fault
552 / Jacket of Blue
VCousin Peter
553 Bubbles of the Day
554 Beau Nash
555 Pauvrette
526
556 Andy Blake
657 Blanche of Jersey
- / / Doctor Dilwortti
\ Fellow clerk
650 Tascal Bruno
560 Wicklow mountains
*;£i /The Pic-nic
\ Kail wav Hotel
662 Fashionable Arrivals
665 Water-Party
1 564 /Boots at the Swan
VLucky Stars
555 Walter Tyrrel
566 Izaak Walton
567 Wife’s Stratagem
e«-a /Marcelinc
m VThe Daughter
569 Field o f Forty Footstep®
570 The wigwam
571 Cramoud Brig
572 /Lifant Phenomenon
VCaptain Cuttle
573 Faust
674 Jack in the water
575 Man and wife
576 A House Divided
677 John Smith
/Long and Short
V Lydia’s Lover’s lodging
579 I and my double
sso Sons and Systems
581 My old woman
582 Life of an Actor
583 Chancery Suit
584 Bequeathed heart
585 My wife—what wife?
5 W 6 Blanche Heriot
587 Lady of the Lake
588 Hill Jones
589 Americans Abroad
cQA ( Pleasant dreams
V Advice Gratis
591 The Wedding Gown
692 Dice of death
093 The Bottle Imp
594 Lost and won
525 Marriage
596 The Three Secrets
5.*7 Frederick the Great
598 A libertine’s lesson
599 Jacques Strop
< 00 The Charming Polly
601 Life's a lotteiy
rtno /Antony and Cleopatra
J VThe Party wall
603 A cure for love
604 Gissipus
605 Helen Oakleigh
'n/. / Blue-Faced Baboon
VOurang-Outang
607 Tlie White Milliner
608 Perourou
609 The Greek Boy
610 Robespierre
611 The Red Farm
612 Miser's daughter
/Wanted, a Brigand
° 6 VCiaude Duval
614 Camille
615 The Pride of Birth /
616 Mothers and daugherb
617 Belford castle
/ Duchess of
V Punch out of town
619 Thomas A’Beckett
620 Mazeppa
621 Temptation
622 Mary Melvin
623 A Night in the Bastille
coi ( Biliks, the Bagman
V Dobson and Co.
625 The Blind Barguin
62tiJ«ne, the Licensed
Victualler’s daughter
/Bamboos*'gg
\The Sergeant's Weddinf
628 Tho Game of Love
629 Old Maids
630 Gustavus the Third
631 The Weathercock
632 Turpin's Ride to York


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Now Ready, Price Sixpence, with Portrait and Eight Illustrations,
Post Free, Sevenpence,
* THE DRAMATIC WORKS OP
RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN,
With a Biographical and Critical Sketch by Leigh Hunt.
CONTEXTS
SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL.
THE RIVALS.
ST. PATRICK’S DAY.
THE CAMP.
THE DUENNA.
THE CRITIC.
TRIP TO SCARBOROUGH.
PIZAKKO.
Can also be bad Separately, price One Penny each
Xow lieatiy, Price Sixpence, Sixteen Illustrations.
Post Free, Sevenpence.
DICKS’ STANDARD
eHRRRDHS SND COMEDIES
FOR HOME REPRESENTATION.
CONTENTS:-
THE CAPTAIN’S GHOST.
BANDIT.
THE SNOW HELPED.
HAT-BOX
JARGONELLE.
NUMBER 157 B.
A MARRIAGE NOOSE.
LOVELY.
LOST POCKEr-BOOK.
BOW BELL(E)S.
TWENTY AND FORTY.
MISTAKEN.
ALL’S FAIR IN T LOVE.
LOCKSMITH.
A WOMAN will BE A WOMAN.
PORTMANTEAU,
May l«e had Separately, price One Penny each.
ONLY POSTAL ORDERS OR HALFPENNY STAMPS ACCEPTS


ADVERTISEMENTS.
Now Ready, Price Threepence ; Post Free, One Penny extra,
THE ACTORS HANDBOOK
AND
SUIDE TO THE STAGE FOR AMATEURS
BY THE OLD STAGER.
Guide Book contains Important Hints upon the following Subjects
i. How to Manage the Hands
How to Study,
How to Express the Various
Passions and Emotions.
How to Read.
How to Declaim.
How to do Bye-Play.
Haw to Improve the Voice.
How to Comport Yourself as
a Lady or Gentleman.
How to Memorize.
How to Make up the Figure
Mow to Make up the Face.,
How to Obtain an Engage
ment.
"<ow to Tread the Stage.
Extract from the Preface of the Work.—" There are certain difficulties that *«•
inseparable from the earliest phases of the dramatic art. There a*e others that aris*
chiefly if mot solely, from the want of practical information, arranged in proper order,
vn<4 conveyed with due simplicity aud clearness of definition. Such difficulties necessarily
result in a greater or less degree of disappointment to those who are candidates fo’
dramatic honours; and not unfrequently lead to the abandonment, almost without actual
trial, of the profession of the stage by those who might, if properly directed, have come
ta be reckoned among its chief ornaments.
y« It is the purpose of the following pages to remove, where possible, and in all cas.
to lessen, just such difficulties, by furnishing a ready reference to information which shal;
smooth the way for the more resolute, and, at the same time, encourage the despondi’ - u*
pessewre.”
