

1887.
QUEENSLAND.
GOLD FIELDS ACT OF 1874,
TOGETHER WITH
REGULATIONS FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF THE
GOLD FIELDS OF THE COLONY.
[PRICE, ONE SHILLING.]
BRISBANE:
JAMES C. BEAL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
1887.




1887.
QUEENSLAN D.
GOLD FIELDS ACT OF 1874,
TOGETHER WITH
REGULATIONS FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF THE
GOLD FIELDS OF THE COLONY.
[PRICE, ONE SHILL[?]G.]
BRISBANE:
JAMES C. BEAL, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET
1887.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Page.
Gold Fields Act of 1874 5
Elgulations undeb Act of 1874 ... 30




Queensland.
ANNO TRICESIMO OCTAVO.
VICTORIA REGINÆ.
No. 11.
An Act for the Management of Gold Fields.
[Assented to 21st Jult, 1874.
EE it enacted by the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty by
and with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council
and Legislative Assembly of Queensland in Parliament assembled
and by the authority of the same as follows —
1. This Act shall be called and may be cited as “ The Gold
Fields Act 1874 ” and shall come into force on the first day of
October one thousand eight hundred and seventy-four.
2. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires the
following terms in inverted commas shall have the respective
meanings hereby assigned to them (that is to say) —
“Business” —The selling or disposition of any chattels by
hawking or in any other manner except the hawking of
farm or garden produce
“Claim” —The portion of Crown land which any person or
number of persons shall lawfully have taken possession
of and be enabled to occupy for mining purposes or any
number of such portions lawfully amalgamated by the
holders Provided that no land comprised in any lease
granted for mining purposes shall be deemed to be a
claim
“ Alining Purposes” —The purpose of searching for or obtain-
ing gold from earth by any mode or method of mining
and of stacking or otherwise storing any auriferous
earth
“ Crown Lands” —All lands vested in Her Majesty which
have not been dedicated to any public purpose or which
have not been granted in fee or lawfully contracted to be
so granted or which are not under lease for purposes
other than pastoral purposes
Preamble.
Title ol Act.
Interpretation
clause.


Repeal of Act
and regula-
tions. —
Abolition of
local court.
Saying of Royal
prerogatire.
Officers to be
appointed.
Miner’s right to
issue.
Consolidated
Kiser's right
ma/ also he
issued.
“ Earth”—Any rock stone quartz clay sand soil or mineral
“ Gold”—As well any gold as any earth containing gold or
having gold mixed in the substance thereof or set apart
for the purpose of extracting gold therefrom
“ Gold Eield” —Crown lands proclaimed or which may be
proclaimed a gold field as hereinafter provided
“Mine” Any place pit shaft drive level or other excavation
drift gutter lead vein lode or reef wherein or whereby
any operation for or in connection with mining purposes
is or shall be carried on upon Crown land
Miner s Eight” A miner’s right issued under the provisions
of this Act or the Act hereby repealed
“ The Regulations ’’—The Regulations made under this Act
To Aline To disturb remove cart carry wash sift smelt
refine crush or otherwise to deal with any earth by any
mode or method whatsoever for the purpose of obtaining
gold therefrom.
3. The local mining court established at Gympie is hereby
abolished The regulations of the said court “ The Gold Fields
Act " twenty Victoria number twenty-nine and all existing
regulations made thereunder and clause seventy-seven of “ The
Crown Lands Alienation Act of 1868 ” shall be and the same are
hereby repealed Provided that nothing in this Act contained
shall prejudice any proceedings taken or any right or interest
held or enjoyed at the time of the passing of this Act under the
first Act hereby repealed or under the regulations made by the
authority of its provisions including the regulations of the Gympie
Local Alining Court but such proceedings may be continued and
such rights and interests may hereafter be enjoyed as if this Act
had not passed.
4. Nothing in this Act contained except so far as is herein
expressly enacted shall be deemed to abridge or control the
prerogative rights and powers of Her Majesty in respect of gold
mines.
5. The Governor in Council shall have power to appoint all
officers necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this Act
and assign to such officers such duties and remuneration as he
may think proper.
. Miners' Lights.
6. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to cause
documents to be issued each of which shall be called a “ Miner’s
Right ” and which shall be in force for any number of years not
exceeding ten and any such document shall be granted to any
person applying for the same upon payment of a sum at the rate of
ten shillings for every year for which the same is to be in force.
7. It shall also be lawful for the Governor in Council to
cause other documents to be issued each of which shall be called
a “Consolidated Miner’s Right” and which shall be in force


for an v number of years not exceeding ten and any such docu-
ment shall on the application of the manager or any trustee or
trustees of any company or co-operative body of persons who
shall have agreed to work in co-ownership or co-partnership any
claim or claims registered under the provisions hereof be granted
to such manager trustee or trustees on behalf of the persons
who shall from time to time be members of such company or
co-operative body and shall during its continuance be held by
the manager trustee or trustees for the time being of any claim
or claims belonging to any such company or co-operative body
on behalf of the persons forming such company or co-operative
body.
8. The said consolidated miner’s right shall be in lieu of ’
and represent and be of the same force and effect as a number of i
miners’ rights granted for the same period of time equal to the
number of the miners’ rights by virtue of which the said claim
or claims shall have originally been taken possession of and the
same shall be granted to any such person as aforesaid so applying
on payment of a sum at the rate aforesaid multiplied by the
number of miners’ rights which the same is to represent.
9. Any person who shall be the holder of a miner’s right
and any number of persons in conjunction who shall be the
holders of any such consolidated miner’s right shall subject to
the provisions of this Act and to the regulations be entitled
(except as against Her Majesty)
To take possession of mine and occupy Crown lands for mining
purposes
To cut construct and use races dams and reservoirs roads and
tramways which may be required for gold mining purposes
through and upon any Crown lands
To take or divert water from any spring lake pool or
stream situate in or flowing through Ciown lands on a
proclaimed gold field and to use such water for mining
purposes and for his own domestic purposes and to use
by way of an easement any unoccupied Crown lands
To take possession of and occupy Crown lands for the purpose
of residence on a proclaimed gold field but not for
business purposes except as hereinafter otherwise pro-
vided
To put up and at any time to remove any building or other
erection upon such land so taken up and occupied
To cut timber on and to remove the same to strip and remove
the bark from any such timber and to remove any stone
clay or gravel from any Crown lands for the purpose of
building for himself or themselves any place of residence
or for mining purposes
And any person or persons so taking up and occupying Crown
land as aforesaid shall subject as aforesaid be deemed in law to
be possessed, except as against Her Majesty) 01 sues anus so
Conditions ol
issuing con-
solidated
miners’ rights
Privileges
conferred by a
miner’s right.


Leaaefe may be
granted for
mining &c.
Laud occupied
buaiuess e may°be
leased on com-
peaMOar. bemg
special
condition.
Application
afl^iand^o/ 0
appUoftnt, held
r-stat" m!n " r
taken up and occupied and the property therein and every share
or interest which may he created therein under this Act or the
regulations shall be deemed a chattel interest And all gold
then being in and upon any such land taken up and occupied for
mining purposes shall (except as against Her Majesty) be the
absolute property of the person or persons in lawful occupation
of the same And the holder or holders of any such land taken
up and occupied as aforesaid for mining purposes or for the pur-
pose of residence may assign and encumber the same or any undi-
vided share or interest therein' Provided that no person or persons
shall obtain any interest under any such assignment or en-
cumbrance except he or they be the holder of a miner’s right.
Gold Mining Leases.
10. It shall be lawful for the Governor to grant to any
person subject to the provisions of this Act and the Regulations
a lease of any Crown land not occupied by the holder of a miner’s
right or business license unless with the consent of such holder
for mining purposes or for cutting and constructing thereon
races drains darns reservoirs roads or tramways to be used in
connection with any such mining or for erecting thereon any
buildings or machinery to be used for mining purposes for
pumping or raising water from any land mined or intended to be
mined upon or for any or all of those purposes and also for
residence in connection with any of such purposes for any term
not exceeding twenty-one years and to renew the same for
any such term at the 3 r early rental of one pound per acre and
upon the terms and conditions prescribed by the regulations.
11. Any such mining lease may be made of any land occupied
.for the purpose of residence or business by the holder of a
miner’s right or business license under the provisions aforesaid
if the person applying for the lease shall make compensation to
such holder for any building erected or other improvements
made by him or any prior holder on such land No such lease
shall embrace an area exceeding twenty-five acres Provided
always that no such lease shall be granted upon any gold field
until two years after the date of the proclamation of such
gold field.
12. Every mining lease issued under this Act or the
Regulations shall contain a condition that if the lessee his
executors administrators and assigns fail at any time during the
term to fulfil the conditions or terms therein contained or to use
the land bond fide for the purpose for which it shall be demised
the lease shall for any such failure be voidable at the will of the
Governor.
13. When any land a mining lease of which shall be applied
for shall be or shall comprise the whole or part of land held by
the applicant under a miner’s right the interest of such applicant
under such right shall in nowise be affected by such application


or the refusal or abandonment or failure in any other way
thereof and if such lease shall be granted the interest held
under the miner’s right shall merge in the interest held under
the lease.
14. The entry upon occupation of or interference with any
ground so applied for as aforesaid by any person who shall not
prior to such application have been in the lawful occupation of
such ground shall at any time after the lodging of such applica-
tion and until and unless such application shall be refused or
such entry occupation or interference shall have been authorised
by the Governor be deemed to be a trespass or encroachment
And the applicant for the said ground may proceed for such
trespass or encroachment and for any damages in respect thereof
and tor the recovery of any gold taken by such first-mentioned
person from the said ground or for the value thereof before any
Warden’s Court.
Provided always that no such applicant shall recover or
succeed under the said procedure who shall not prove to the
satisfactiou of the said court that he has complied with the Regu-
lations in force and applicable for the time-being to the class of
lease applied for so far as such Regulations shall have been at
the time of such entry occupation or interference capable of
being complied with.
15. In case any lease granted under the authority of this
portion of this Act or the Regulations or of any Act authorising
the granting of leases for mining purposes shall be or be
liable to be forfeited or determined by any breach of condition
or otherwise or in case the term thereby granted shall have
expired possession of the land demised shall and may be
taken on behalf of Her Majesty in such manner as may be
provided by any of the conditions of the lease or (if there
be no such condition) it shall be lawful for the Governor
in Council to direct any person on behalf of Her Majesty to
take possession of the land demised immediately and without
suit or process of any kind A certificate purporting to be
signed by the Under Secretary or chief clerk of the Department
of Mines or the warden of the gold field within which such
lease is s’tuated shall be sufficient primd facie proof in every
court of justice and for all purposes that such direction has
been duly given.
16. Any lease may be surrendered at any time wdth the ;
consent of the Governor in Council provided that at the time of !
the surrender the conditions thereof on the part of the leasee
shall have been fulfilled as far as the time wdiich may have
elapsed shall permit and that all payments due in respect
thereof up to date shall have been made The holder or holders
of any lease may in manner provided by the Regulations assign
and encumber the same or any share or interest therein.
Re-entering
upon forfeited
or expired
leases.
Protection of
ground applied
for.
Leases may Le
surrendered.


Business license
to issue.
Privileges of a
business
licensee.
Business
license may be
transferred.
Miner’s right
and business
license may be
post-dated in
certain cases.
Business License.
17. It shall he lawful for the Governor to cause documents
to be issued each of which shall be called a “business license”
which shall be in force for a period not greater than ten years
and which shall be granted to any person applying for the same
upon payment of the sum at the rate of four pounds for every
year for which the same is to be in force.
18. Every business license shall subject to the provisions
of this Act and to the Regulations entitle the owner thereof
during the continuance of such license to occupy on any gold
field for the purpose of residence and carrying on his business
so much of the Crown lands not exceeding one quarter of an
acre in extent as may be prescribed by the Regulations and for
either of the purposes aforesaid to put up any building or other
erection and at any time to remove the same and every such
holder shall during the continuance of such business license be
deemed in law to be possessed (except as against Her Majesty)
of the surface of the land which he shall occupy by virtue
of such license and the property in such land shall be
deemed a chattel interest and no person shall be entitled by
virtue of one business license to occupy more than one such
portion of land.
19. The holder of any such business license shall be
entitled to transfer the same to any other person and provided
he shall express his desire to do so in writing under his hand
endorsed on the said license and signed by him in the presence
of and attested by a witness another business license shall be
granted to the person named in such endorsement upon pro-
duction and surrender of such license and endorsement and upon
payment of the sum of five shillings and every such last-mentioned
business license shall be dated of the day and at the place of the
issuing thereof and shall be in force for the then unexpired
period of the license first endorsed as aforesaid the day when
such unexpired period is to end being stated in every such
endorsement and shall contain the Christian name and surname
and the occupation and residence af the person in whose favour
the same shall be issued.
20. If any person who shall be the holder of a miner’s
right consolidated miner’s right or business license shall within
one month before the expiration of the current miner’s right or
license make application to the proper officer to take out a new
right or license as the case may be the authorised officer shall
issue to the applicant a new right or license as the case may be
dated of the day of such expiration and which shall have the
same force and efficacy as if it had been issued on that day upon
production of such expiring right and upon payment of tl'ie sum
ordinarily payable for a miner’s right consolidated miner’s right
or business license.


Proclamation of Gold Fields.
21. It shall be lawful for the Governor to proclaim an
portion of Crown land to be a gold field.
22. Such proclamation shall describe bj name and boun
daries every gold field proclaimed thereby which may from tim
to time be altered or cancelled by the Governor by proclamatioi
23. Every so proclaimed gold field may be mined in usee
and occupied according to the provisions of this Act and th
Regulations.
24. Whensoever the discovery of payable gold on Crown
land shall have been reported in writing under the hand of anc
signed (or if such person shall be unable to write by a
attested by some justice of the peace or warden) by the persoi
claiming to have made such discovery to the warden of the golc
field nearest the situation of such discovery or to the Ministe
in charge of gold fields the notification of such discovery by
such warden posted outside his office or by such Minister in the
Gazette shall operate to proclaim the portion or portions o:
Crown lands to be a gold field within the meaning and for the
purposes of this Act which shall be contained in a square the
boundary lines of which shall be directed to the cardinal points
and the central point in each boundary line whereof shall be
distant half a mile from such place of discovery. And such
notification as aforesaid shall have the effect of a provisional
proclamation of the said area as a gold field to be in force untij
the same or any enlarged or diminished area shall be proclaimed
under the provisions of this A ct.
Provided that no such notification shall be posted until the
Warden or Minister shall have satisfied himself that payable gold
has been actually discovered on such land and provided further
that such notification shall be taken to refer back to and to
operate from the day upon which the said discovery shall have
been so reported as aforesaid.
And provided also that if the warden of the mining district
to whom such discovery as aforesaid shall have been reported or
if any officer authorised in that behalf by such Minister shall at
any time during the continuance of such provisional proclamation
report to such Minister that the alleged discovery of payable
gold does not in his opinion warrant the proclamation as a gold
field of the said area then it shall be lawful for such Minister
by notice in the Gazette to revoke and cancel the provisional
proclamation of such area and the lands comprised therein shall
thereupon resume the same character and incidents as -were
attached to them before the notification of such discovery as
aforesaid.
25. When any gold field shall have been proclaimed upon
any Crown lands then under lease or license for pastoral purposes
the Governor may suspend or cancel such lease or license in
Proclamation of
gold fields.
Description of
gold fields.
Gold fields
subject to this
Act.
Provisional
proclamation
of gold fields.
Provisional
proclamation
may be
cancelled.
Partial
suspension of
pastoral leases
on proclamation
of gold field.


Certain lands
exempted.
Other lands
may be
excepted.
Common may
be proclaimed.
Appointment
of wardens and
other officers.
Extent of
jurisdiction of
Wardens.
respect of the land comprised in such proclamation and shall
thereupon remit to the lessee or licensee such portion of the
rent of such land as may be reasonable and just.
26. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary all
Crown land which shall have been applied to or reserved for any
public use or purpose or which shall be lawfully and bona fide
used as a yard garden cultivated field or orchard or upon which
any house out-house shed or other building shall have been
erected provided the same be in actual use and occupation or any
artificial dam or reservoir which shall have been made shall be
and the same are hereby exempted from occupation for mining
purposes and for residence or business under any miner’s right
or business license. _
Provided that such exemption shall cease upon payment of
compensation such compensa+ion to be determined by arbitration
in manner prescribed by the Eegulations.
Provided also that Crown lands in any gold fields reserve
which have been or shall be proclaimed as a common shall not be
deemed to have been or to be applied to any public purpose
within the meaning'of this Act. ... .
27. The Governor may at any time either by proclamation
in the Gazette except from occupation for mining purposes or
for residence or business under any miner’s right or business
license any specific portion of Crown land or any class of Crown
lands. . ~ ,
28. The Governor may by proclamation as aforesaid, set
aside any portion of any gold field as a common.
Administration of Justice.
20. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to appoint
officers to be called Wardens who shall have and exercise the
jurisdiction conferred upon them herein or by the Eegulations
and also to appoint such and so many Eegistrars Mining Sur-
veyors Mining Engineers Clerks Officers Bailiffs and Assistants
and for such° places respectively as the Governor in Council
shall think necessary for the efficient performance of the duties
of inspection surveying and registration of claims and mines and
of all other duties in connection with mining and with the
administration of this Act which the said Governor may think
fit to impose and the said Governor may by regulations define
the powers and duties of such ivarden officers clerks and assistants
and the mode of exercising and performing the same in all cases
where such powers and duties have not been defined by this Act
and also the amount of and mode of providing the remuneration
of such warden officers clerks and assistants and the time for
which the same shall be paid.
30. Every Warden appointed under the provisions of this
Act shall have and exercise jurisdiction in respect of the matters


hereinafter contained throughout the colony with power to issue
summonses warrants or other process which shall have legal
effect and operation throughout the said colony.
31. It shall be lawful for the Governor by proclamation in
the Gazette to establish on any gold field one or more courts to
be presided over and holden by a warden or warden and assessors
and which shall be a court of record and shall have jurisdiction
to hear and determine all actions suits claims demands disputes
and questions which may arise in relation to mining.
32. The several wardens’ courts shall have jurisdiction
when the defendants or one of two or more defendants as the 1
case may be shall be resident within the gold field to which such
courts respectively shall belong Provided that when the hearing
of any complaint shall involve the trial of a right to any claim
residence business or machinery area or other mining tenement
or share therein or any money due in respect thereof or in any
way connected therewith the same shall take place in the
wardens’ court appointed for the gold field in which such claim
or mining tenement is situate.
33. Every warden sitting alone shall have power to hear
and determine all such cases of complaint of breach of any of
the regulations under this Act and of alleged forfeiture and to
inflict any fine or penalty to be imposed thereby as shall by the
said regulations be declared to be within his jurisdiction sitting
alone The warden shall carry into effect the orders or awards
of the warden’s court and except where herein otherwise
specially provided for shall have the same power to carry out
such orders or aw r ards as justices in petty session now have.
34. Whenever a gold field shall have been proclaimed under
this Act and a warden’s court shall not have been established it
shall be lawful for the Governor to appoint some fit and proper
person who shall be a justice of the peace to discharge the
duties of a warden and such officer shall have the same juris-
diction and all the powers and authorities conferred upon a
warden by this Act Provided that in such case and notwith-
standing anything in this Act contained such officer shall sitting
alone hear and determine all questions in a summary manner as
cases are at present heard and determined by justices in petty
sessions assembled.
35. The warden or warden and assessors shall hear and
determine all cases within the jurisdiction of the warden’s court
and proceedings taken forms used and manner and time of
hearing and determining the same except when otherwise
specially provided shall be in accordance with this Act and the
Regulations.
36. It shall be lawful for the defendant in any case in the
said court at any time before the hearing thereof to pay into
court the amount claimed together with the costs incurred by
Warden’s Cour t’
Its jurisdiction
generally.
Its jurisdiction
as to place.
Power of warde a
sitting alone.
When no
warden’s court
power to appoint
officer.
Manner of
hearing oases
in warden’s
court.
Payment into
court.


Payment to
warden of less
than the
demand.
No privilege
to attorney.
Appointment of
assessors by
wardens.
Assessors to be
summoned by
warden.
Notice when
assessors
required.
the complainant up to the time of such payment into court and
*to give notice thereof to the complainant or his attorney and
the same shall be paid to the complainant and after such pay-
ment no other proceedings shall be brought in any court in
respect of the demand in satisfaction of which such amount
shall have been so paid.
37. Any defendant in any case in the said court whereby a
debt or money demand is sought to be recovered may at any
time before the hearing thereof pay into court such sum of
money as he shall think a full satisfaction for such demand
together with the costs incurred by the complainant up to the
time of such payment and shall cause notice of such payment
to be given to the complainant and the said sum of money and
costs shall be paid to the complainant or his attorney but if the
complainant shall elect to proceed and shall recover no further
sum in respect of such money demand than shall have been so
paid to the warden he shall pay to such defendant the costs
incurred by him in the said proceeding after such payment and
the warden may decree the same accordingly.
38. No privilege shall be allowed to any attorney solicitor
or other person to exempt him from the provisions of this Act.
39. The warden shall in every year make or cause to be
made a list of persons not less than two hundred in number or
of such a number under and as near two hundred as the popula-
tion of the neighbourhood will permit of good repute and who
shall be registered claim-holders machine owners lease-holders
or holders of business licenses resident within such gold field
From such list the warden shall select by ballot in open court a
list of one hundred persons which shall form the roll of assessors
for the current year. In all gold fields whereon sittings of a dis-
trict court are held the warden shall forthwith forward a true
copy of the said roll of assessors to the registrar of the said dis-
trict court who shall file the same in his office.
40. It shall be lawful for either of the parties previous to
the hearing of any such complaint to require or for the warden
either before or during such hearing to require that such com-
plaint shall be heard before such warden and two assessors and
thereupon such warden shall summon before him either orally or
in writing not less than six nor more than eight persons who-
shall be selected by ballot in open court from the names upon such
roll as aforesaid or if there shall be no such roll or if two persons
whose names shall be on such roll cannot be found then of two
indifferent persons to act as assessors who shall form the
panel of assessors.
41. Upon the requisition of either party to any cause that
the complaint should be heard by the warden and assessors the
warden or his clerk shall appoint a time and place at which the
ballot for the panel of assessors shall take place and notice


thereof shall be given by the party making such requisition to
the opposite party and each party shall be entitled to be present
at such ballot Provided that the warden shall not summon to
attend at any one sitting of the court more than one panel of
assessors which shall be the panel of assessors for all cases to be
heard on such day before the warden and assessors.
42. Before any assessors shall be summoned by any warden
such warden shall demand and receive the sum of one pound ten
shillings from the person demanding assessors and in case the
hearing of any complaint shall be adjourned to any future day
the warden shall demand and receive the further sum of one
pound ten shillings for every such adjournment and the said
sums together with the amount of all fines on assessors shall
form a fund for paying the expenses of assessors to be dealt with
and accounted for as the Governor in Council may direct.
43. Every assessor summoned as aforesaid who shall attend
a warden’s court in pursuance of such summons shall for every
day of such attendance be paid at the rate of seven shillings and
sixpence a day.
44. Either party shall be admitted to challenge any number
of persons called as assessors not exceeding two without assign-
ing cause and any additional number provided he assigns of his
challenge a cause' certain and the truth of such challenges shall
be inquired of by the warden.
45. Any person so summoned who without lawful excuse
shall neglect or refuse to attend or to be sworn or serve as such
assessor shall be fined such sum of money not exceeding five
pounds as such warden shall think fit.
46. Before such warden’s court shall proceed to hear any
such complaint such warden shall administer to each of such
assessors an oath in the form in the following form—
I A.B. do swear well and truly to iry and determine the matters which
shall be brought before me and a true judgment to give according to the
evidence without fear or favour.
So help my Glod.
And on such oath being administered such warden’s court shall
proceed to hear such complaint and the decision of the majority
of the said warden’s court shall have the same force and effect
as the decision of such warden if acting alone would have had
Provided that in the ease of any assessor who may by law make
an affirmation in lieu of swearing the warden shall in lieu of the
oath hereinbefore mentioned administer the following declara-
tion—
I A.B. do solemnly sincerely and truly affirm and declare that the taking
of an oath is according to my religious belief unlawful and I do also solemnly
sincerely and truly affirm and declare that I will well and truly try and
determine the matters which shall be brought before me and a true judgment
give according to the evidence without fear or favour.
Fee for assessors.
Fees to assessors.
Challenges.
Fines for non-
attendance.
Oath or affir-
mation to be
administered
and warden
and assessor.


Warden may
decide sum-
marily by
consent.
Who may take
affidavits.
Inspection may
be demanded.
• ( 47. It shall nevertheless be lawful for the warden upon oral
or f written complaint of any party and with the consent of
both parties immediately on the making of such complaint or at
any time agreed on by the parties and at any place within the
gold field to investigate the matter of such complaint and to
inquire into the case and on his own view or the oath of any
witness to determine the same in a summary way and thereupon
to exercise all and every the powers and authorities vested in
him in the same manner in every respect as if the cause had been
heard upon plaint and notice of defence in the usual way Pro-
vided always that the warden shall in every such case make an
entry of the grounds of complaint and defence or cross relief
and of the decision Every such ease may be heard before the
warden and assessors who shall be selected by ballot by the
warden who shall prepare a list of ten or as near ten of
indifferent bystanders as the number present will permit and
shall then select by ballot two assessors who shall be the assessors
to hear the case with the warden Provided that each party shall
have the same rights ot challenge as in ordinary cases.
48. Any affidavit to be used in any warden’s or mining
appeal court or before a judge or warden thereof may be sworn
before any judge of the Supreme Court or any commissioner of
that court for taking affidavits or before the judge of any dis-
trict court or any warden or justice of the peace.
Special Powers and Duties.
49. Either of the parties shall be at liberty previous to or
during the hearing of any complaint to apply to a warden for
inspection to be made by such warden’s court of any land claim
water race drain dam or easement in dispute and if the party so
applying shall satisfy such warden as to the propriety and
reasonableness of his application such warden if the case be
heard before him alone shall make such inspection but if heard
before him and assessors shall make such inspection with the
assessors upon payment to the warden by the party so applying
of such sum (if any) and upon such terms as to the said warden’s
court' shall seem reasonable and any sum so paid shall be
appropriated towards defraying the expenses of the assessors by
reason of such inspection as such warden’s court may direct or if
such warden shall himself think that any such inspection would
be proper he shall if the case be heard before him alone make
such inspection or if heard before him and assessors may and if
required by either of the assessors shall make an order therefor
and (in case of inspection by assessors) for payment of the
expenses thereof by such of the parties as he shall think right
and the money paid for such expenses shall eventually be paid
as part of the costs of the proceedings by such of the parlies as
the warden shall in that behalf direct.


50. If before or during the hearing of any complaint it shall
appear to the warden that it will be necessary for a survey to be
made of any land or water in dispute such warden may order
either party to cause such survey and a plan thereof to he made
and the costs thereof shall be deemed to be a part of the cost of
the hearing.
51. Notwithstanding any of the provisions hereinbefore
contained it shall be lawful for such warden’s court if it shall
think fit at the time of the making of any decision under this
Act or the Regulations to- order that any gold in the possession
of and belonging to the party by whom payment of any sum in
respect of any such debt damages or costs shall he ordered to the
extent in value of such sum (such value to be fixed by such
■court) shall be delivered up to the party entitled to such sum by
way of satisfaction or in part satisfaction thereof Provided that
as to the balance the procedure herein otherwise provided shall
apply.
52. It shall he lawful for any warden upon the application
of any person claiming to be legally or equitably interested in
any claim or in any land comprised in any lease (granted under
this Act) or in any other land adjoining any claim or land com-
prised as. aforesaid by writing under the hand of such warden
to authorise the applicant together with a mining surveyor his
assistants or some experienced miner to enter upon any claim or
land (whether at the time of such application alienated from the
Crown or not if any mining operations shall be then carried on
on such land) adjoining such first-mentioned claim or land or
other land for the purpose of ascertaining whether the owner or
occupier of the claim or land so to be entered upon is encroach-
ing on said first-mentioned claim or land or other land.
53. It shall be lawful for the persons so authorised to enter
upon the claim or land described in such order as last aforesaid
and to descend any shaft or mine and to make the necessary
surveys and for such purpose to use the engines and other
machinery ordinarily employed for that purpose by the persons
whose shaft or mine shall be descended and to make such plans
and sections of the claim or land entered upon of any drives
or other works therein as shall be necessary for the purpose
aforesaid.
54. It shall be lawful for any warden upon the application
of any person claiming to be legally or equitably interested in any
land claim water race drain dam reservoir or easement such appli-
cation to he made on notice served twenty-four hours at least
before the time for the making thereof on the parties interested
in opposing the same or such of them as shall appear to such
warden sufficiently to represent the parties so interested or upon
such of them as such appllicant can by using reasonable diligence
or means in the opinion of such warden serve with such notice
Warden may
order survey to
tie made.
Gold may be
seized.
Warden may
authorise entry
on adjacent
claim.
Powers given to
carry out order
in last section.
Warden may
grant injunction
on notice.


The notice hy
the last section
required.
Warden may
grant injunction
for seven days
within notice.
Warden may
order deposit of
gold &c.
in the presence of such parties or such of them as aforesaid or in
the absence of any of them upon whom service of such notice
shall be proved to the satisfaction of the warden to hear receive
and examine evidence and thereupon if he in his discretion shall
think fit and upon such terms (if any) as he may consider just
by order under his hand to enjoin any person named in such
order from encroaching upon occupying using or working such
land claim water race drain dam reservoir or easement or from
seeking for washing out winning extracting or removing any
earth of gold taken from such land or from selling or disposing
of or damaging or otherwise interfering with such land claim
water race drain dam reservoir easement or earth or gold or any
share or interest therein respectively or from doing any act
whereby the right title or interest of such applicant in or to the
same might be affected.
55. If endeavours reasonable in the opinion of the warden
to serve such notice shall be proved to the satisfaction of such
warden to have failed it shall be sufficient service of such notice
if the same shall be advertised in some newspaper published in
the district in which the subject matter of the application shall be
situated and which shall be published twenty-four hours at least
before the time for the making of the application and if there
shall be no newspaper published in the district then by causing
such notice to be affixed to the door of the court house and on
every such application the said warden shall make such order as
to costs as to him shall seem just.
56. If by reason of the pressing emergency of any particular
case it shall seem proper to the warder so to do he may on the
application of any such person as aforesaid but without any
notice by order under his hand grant such injunction as aforesaid
but to be in force for a period of seven days only inclusive of
the day upon which such order shall have been made or until
the same shall by the said warden be discharged And no second
order for an injunction shall be made for the same cause under
this section but any person at whose instance any injunction
shall have been granted under this section shall be at liberty at
any time before the expiration of the said period of seven dayt
as well as thereafter to apply under the provisions of this Act
for an injunction for any longer period.
57. It shall be lawful for any warden upon the application
of any party to any cause by order under his hand to direct any
person party to or interested in such proceeding to deposit
within the time or times mentioned in such order with any person
or at any place named in such order in the name of such warden
or of any other person mentioned in such order to abide the
decision of the warden’s court any earth or gold or any money
or other chattel described in such order which may then be or
which at any time before the final termination of such proceeding


may come into the possession power or control of such person
party to or interested in such proceeding and the right to the
possession whereof shall be claimed by such applicant Provided
that no such order shall be made except upon proof to the satis-
faction of the warden that twelve hours’ notice at the least of the
application has been served on the parties interested in opposing
the same or such of them as shall appear to such warden
sufficiently to represent the whole Provided also that the pro-
visions of the last preceding section but one shall apply to such
notices and the service thereof respectively.
58. No complaint shall be dismissed by any warden’s court<
because of any informality either in the plaint or summons itself j
or in the entry thereof nor shall any objection be taken or
allowed to any such summons or complaint for any alleged defect
or misnomer or inaccurate description of any person or place or
on the ground that the complainant shall appear at the hearing
of the summons to be entitled to different relief from that which
is sought thereby or therein or for any variance between such
summons and the evidence adduced on the part of the com-
plainant but such summons shall be amended by the warden so
that the subject matter in dispute between the parties shall
plainly appear and the warden’s court shall proceed to adjudicate
according to the rights of the parties.
Provided always that if it shall appear to the warden’s court •
upon the hearing of the case that the defendant has been thereby
deceived or misled and that injustice would be done by proceed-
ing at once with the case it shall be lawful for such warden’s
court on such terms as to costs or otherwise as he shall think fit
to adjourn the further hearing of the case to some future day.
59. On any proceeding before a warden’s court it shall be
lawful for such court (if it shall think fit) to reserve any ques-1
tion in the form of a special case for the opinion of the district
court judge and in such case no final order shall be made in
respect of any matter on which such question shall have been
reserved until such opinion shall have been given.
60. And every such special case shall after it shall have been
prepared by such warden’s court be transmitted to the registrar
of the district court who shall cause the same to be set down for
argument before the said judge whose opinion when given shall
be drawn up and transmitted by said registrar to the said
warden’s court who shall make its order in accordance with such
opinion.
61. And whenever any such special case shall have been
reserved it shall be lawful for the warden who shall have reserved
the same on the application of any of the parties interested in
such case to make such order for an injunction or payment of
money into court and upon such terms as such warden shall
think proper.
Complaints not
to be dismissed
for informality.
Adjournment.
Warden may
state special
case.
Warden to
transmit special
case to district
court.
In case of a
special case an
injunction &c.
may be bad.


Duty of'warden’s
court when
proceeding is for i
recovery of land ,
&c.
Duty of warden
and assessors
when proceeding
is as to right to
divert water &c.
Duty of warden
and assessors
when proceeding
is in respect of
encroachment.
62. In case any such proceeding before a warden’s court
shall be for the recovery and possession of any gold earth land
water race drain dam or reservoir or any share therein such
warden or assessors shall determine the right to the same and fix
the boundaries thereof or the limits and quantity to be taken by
either of the parties of such water if necessary so to do for the
purpose of terminating the dispute and if the complainant shall
succeed shall determine whether any and what sum in the nature
of mesne profits should be paid to the complainant and in the
event of the complainant so succeeding the court shall order
possession of such gold earth land race drain dam reservoir or
water or share to be delivered to the complainant and any such
sum to be paid to him and shall or any other warden may cause
such complainant to be put into possession of any such gold earth
land race drain dam reservoir or water or share as aforesaid and
(if necessary) cause or order any defendant his servants build-
ings fixtures implements goods and chattels to be removed
therefrom or from such of them as such share or interest shall
be held in or from the using of such water.
63. In case any such proceeding before a warden’s court
shall be in respect of the right to divert any water or to
remove anv reservoir race drain or dam such warden s court
• shall determine such right and if the complainant shall succeed
such court shall declare him at liberty to divert or remove
the same and may make an order enjoining any defendant his
servants agents and workmen from preventing such diversion or
removal.
64. In case any such proceeding shall be in respect of any
r encroachment or trespass upon or injury to any such land race
' drain dam reservoir or water such warden’s court shall determine
the right to the same and fix the boundaries of any such land or
the limits or quantity to be taken by either of the parties of such
water if necessary so to do for the purpose of terminating t e
dispute and at the same time assess the amount to be paid to the
complainant by way of damages (if any) by reason of any such
encroachment trespass or injury found to have been committed
whether the same shall exceed the sum of one hundred pounds oi
not and the warden’s court shall order such damages to be paid
accordingly and that the person found to have encroached tres-
passed or injured as aforesaid his servants agents and workmen
do cease from such encroachment trespass or injury and it sia i
be lawful for the same or any other warden to cause the person
so found to have encroached trespassed or injured his servants
implements goods and chattels to be removed from the land race
drain dam reservoir or water so encroached or trespassed upon or
injured or from the using of such water and to cause such com-
plainant to be put into possession thereof.


G 5. In case any such proceeding shall be in relation to any
debt or contract or to money due in respect of any such land or
rater or any share or interest therein or in respect of any gold
o earth or to the amount of any contribution or other sum of
money the court shall order any money or damages or gold or
earth which it shall find due or payable or deliverable by either
of the parties to the other of them to be paid or delivered.
G 6. And in case such proceeding shall be in respect of
money due or gold or earth deliverable upon a mining partner-
ship account or accruing to the complainant from any mining
partnership adventure or interest the court shall take the
account of such partnership adventure or interest so far as shall
be necessary to ascertain what sum or amount of gold or earth
(if any) shall be so due or accruing and the court shall order
any such sum or gold to be paid or delivered and may make an
order for the dissolution of such partnership if it shall deem fit
upon such terms as to the sale or division of the partnership pro-
perty and the payment of the partnership debts as it may con-
sider equitable and just.
67. All lands held under a miner’s right consolidated
miner’s right business license or mining lease shall on the death
or insolvency of the holder or holders thereof devolve on his or
their personal representative or representatives or assignee or
trustee in insolvency and shall be liable to seizure and sale under
any execution issued from tbe Supreme Court district court small
debts court warden’s court, or any other competent court in the
said colony The proper officer appointed to sell the same shall
have full power to give an effectual transfer of the interest sold
by him.
68. When any sum of money shall be awarded in a warden s
court by way of debt damages or costs or otherwise and the same
shall not be'forthwith paid the warden on the application of the
person entitled to receive such sum or of any attorney on his
behalf shall grant to the party so applying a writ of execution
under his hand and any bailiff of a warden’s or district court or
petty debts court to whom such writ shall be delivered for execu-
tion and all constables and other peace officers within their
several jurisdictions shall do and perform all things in respect of
; uch writ which such bailiff constables and peace officeis are
required to do and perform in respect of a warrant or writ of
execution issued out of a district court in the case of the non-
payment of money under a judgment of such court and every
such bailiff may by virtue of such writ seize and take such pro-
perty as and dispose thereof in the manner he could seize take
and dispose thereof by virtue of a writ issuing out of a district
court and shall have the same powers in respect of the sale and
disposal of such property and do and execute all duties in respect
thereof as are by law conferred and imposed on the bailiff of a
Duty of warden
and assessors!
when proceeding
is in respect of
money due on a
contract.
Or in respect of
a partnership.
Lands held
under miner’s
right.
Enforcing'
decision in
case of debt
&o.


Incapacity to
sue &c. without
miner’s right.
Mode of
enforcing
warden’s order
where not
specially pro-
vided for.
Appeal.
district court upon a writ ot fieri fictcias issued "by a icgistrar
thereof Provided that no such writ shall except upon special
cause shown to the satisfaction of the warden he issued until
after the expiration of seven days from the day in which the
decision under which such sum of money was awarded shall have
been made.
69. ISTo person shall be entitled to institute proceedings m
any court whatsoever to recover possession of any claim or of
any share therein or to recover damages for or to retain the
occupation of or encroachment upon such claim or any part
thereof or to obtain any relief as tenant in common joint tenant
co-partner or co-adventurer against his tennant in common joint
tenant co-partner or co-adventurer or to recover any interest or
part interest in any water-race dam or reservoir used or to be
used for or in connection with gold-mining unless such person
shall have been the holder of a miner’s right at the time when
his alleged title to recover such possession or damages or interest
or to obtain sucb relief first arose or accrued.
70. Whenever any warden’s court or warden is empowered
or required by this Act to cause any act to be performed and the
mode of performing such Act is not otherwise expressly provided
for it shall be lawful for any person verbally authorised by the
warden and in his presence or for any constable or peace officer
authorised in writing under the hand of such warden to perform
such act and all constables and peace officers shall if thereunto
required aid and assist any w-arden or authorised as
aforesaid in the performance of his duty under this Act.
Appeals.
71. Any person who shall be desirous of appealing from the
decision of a warden upon any hearing of a case before him or
before him and assessors in’cases where such decision is not
hereby declared to be final may appeal from the same to the
district court which shall be held at or nearest to the gold
field -within which such decision shall have been pronounced at
that silting of such court which shall be held next after the
expiration of fifteen days from the day of the pronouncing of
such decision Provided that the warden may in his discretion
give leave to appeal to any subsequent sitting of such district
court if such leave be applied for within three days after the
decision appealed against Provided that the party so appealing
shall give the warden and the opposite party notice of such
appeal within seven days from the date of the decision appealed
against and he shall give security to the satisfaction ot the
warden for the sum of fifty pounds or any such lesser sum as to
the warden may seem reasonable to cover the cost of such appeal
within seven davs of the date of such decision.


72. Such appeal shall he heard at the sitting named or
appointed as abovementioned and such court shall proceed to
make an order reversing or varying such decision or dismissing
such appeal and all such orders shall be final and conclusive on
the parties except as hereinafter mentioned and the judge shall
(if necessary) order payment of money or the delivery of the
possession of any claim land race drain dam reservoir or water
or gold or other property to the person who was the complainant
before the warden’s court or restitution of any claim land or
water or gold or other property as, the case may require and the
said court may make such order with respect to the costs of the
appeal and of the proceeding appealed from as such court shad
think fit.
73. No such appeal shall be heard unless at the hearing of
such appeal a copy of the plaint and notice of defence and of the
minute of such decision and of the order thereon signed and
certified under the hand of the warden or his clerk shall be pro-
duced to such court and the warden is hereby required to lodge
or cause to be lodged such copy.
74. An appeal on all questions of law raised at the time of
the hearing of such appeal by either of the parties shall lie to
the Supreme Court and shall be in the shape of a special case
settled by the judge of the district court before whom such
appeal shall be heard and every such judge shall have power in
a special case himself to submit to the said Supreme Court for
its decision every point of law he may choose to reserve at such
hearing aforesaid and the said Supreme Court shall entertain
and adjudicate upon such special case.
75. Previously to the hearing of any complaint the parties
thereto may agree to accept the decision of the warden or warden
and assessors as the case may be as final and a memorandum of
every such agreement shall be entered by the warden in the
register to be kept by him as hereinbefore provided and no
appeal shall in such case be made from the decision of the warden
or of the warden and assessors as the case mav be.
76. If upon the hearing of such appeal the subject matter
of the dispute shall appear to the court before which the appeal
shall be heard not to exceed in value twenty pounds the appellant
shall not although he succeeds be entitled to receive any costs of
such appeal from the opposite party unless the court shall be of
opinion that the interests involved directly or indirectly in the
decision exceeded that amount or that the special circumstances
of the case entitle the appellant to costs in wdtich cases the
question of costs shall be in the discretion of the District Court.
7/. Every such appeal shall (unless a trial by assessors be
required as hereinafter mentioned) be heard and determined by
the judge alone and shall be in the nature of a rehearing or upon
such points oply as the parties thereto may by consent deter-
mine at any time before the said appeal.
Court to make
order on appeal.
How appeals to
be heard.
Appeal to
Supreme Court,
Agreement to
bar appeal.
Kb costs on
appeal where
less than
twenty pounds
recovered
unless judge
under special
circumstances
shall allow
them.
Appeal to be
beard by judge
alone unless
assessors
required.


Appeal may be
tried before
assessors.
District Court
assessors.
Provisions as to
issues in original
proceedings in
district courts
applicable to
issues on appeals.
In cases of
appeal an
injunction &c.
and stay of
proceedings
may be had.
Jurisdiction of
district covirt s
enlarged for
gold fields.
78. When such appeal is to a District Court sitting on a
gold field if either of the parties to any such appeal shall so
require it shall be tried before such court and three assessors
provided that the verdict of the majority of such assessors shall
be received Provided that at least five days prior to the day
fixed for the hearing of such appeal notice in writing shall have
been given to ihe registrar of such court of their intention
accompanied by the fee of three pounds.
79. The assessors required under the last section shall be
taken from the roll of assessors prepared by the warden of. the
gold field whereon the district court shall sit and filed with the
registrar of such district court and six shall form the panel and
shall be summoned in the same way as jurors are now by “ The
District Courts Act of 1807” and in the event of there not being
a sufficient number of assessors present then from the jurors
(if any) then present and if none such then from the bystanders
who may be there present. Every assessor summoned as afore-
said who shall attend a district court shall receive the sum of
seven shillings and sixpence for his services for every day of
such attendance. Either party shall be at liberty to challenge
one without cause and any number for cause certain to be shown
to the judge.
, 80. The mode of proceeding in regard to the trial of issues
and of questions of fact in original proceedings in the district
court under this Act shall be applicable to the trial of such
issues and questions of fact in the case of appeals to the district
court.
81. Whenever any such appeal shall have been brought or
be about to be brought it shall be lawful for the warden from
■whose decision the appeal shall be or be about to be brought on
the application of any of the parties interested in such appeal to
make such order for an injunction or manager or payment of
money into the hands of the warden to abide the event of the
appeal or for stay of proceedings or otherwise and upon such
terms as he shall think proper but without such order or an
order to the same effect by the judge of the court in which the
appeal shall be brought no appeal shall operate as a stay of
proceedings and such order the said warden may at any time
thereafter if he think fit discharge.
82. In addition to the present jurisdiction of district courts
under “ The District Courts Act 18(i7” every District Court
holding its sittings on any gold field shall have original jurisdic-
tion to hear and determine all questions which are within the
jurisdiction of the warden’s court, and shall have the like
jurisdiction to hear and determine questions involving title to
land which may arise as aforesaid under this Act and shall also
have an equitable jurisdiction to the extent possessed by the


primary judge in equity in respect of all questions matters and
things arising under this Act as aforesaid which may require to
be determined by a court of equity.
83. No district court holding its sittings on any gold field
shall have any jurisdiction to try hear and determine except by
way of appeal any case in debt or on contract arising out of or
relating to mining matters in which the amount claimed does
not exceed fifty pounds.
Miscellaneous Provisions.
84. It shall be lawful for any person in custody under any
order of commitment made under this Act or the Regulations
upon giving reasonable notice to the person (or to one of such
persons if more than one) on whose application such order was
granted or if such person or none of such persons can be found
to the judge or warden by whom such order was made to apply
in a summary way on affidavit to the District Court or a judge
of the Supreme Court for his discharge and it shall be lawful
for such District Court judge or judge of the Supreme Court in
his discretion and on such terms (if any) as he shall think fit by
order under his hand directed to the gaoler or other person in
whose custody such applicant may be to direct that such appli-
cant shall be discharged end such applicant shall be discharged
accordingly Provided that when such order of commitment
shall have been founded on any previous decree or order it shall
not be lawful for such District Court judge or judge of the
Supreme Court upon such application to inquire into the merits
of such previous decree or order.
85. It shall be lawful for the judge of any District Couid 1
upon the application of any person who shall have employed any ,
attorney or barrister in any suit appeal or other proceeding in (
such court or before such judge or for a warden upon the appli-
cation of any person who shall have employed any at torney or
barrister in any proceeding before him or before him and assessors
to issue a summons requiring any attorney or any barrister
(who in the opinion of such judge or warden shall not have been
honajide instructed by an attorney) to appear before such judge
or warden at a time and place named in such summons and at
such time and place upon the appearance of such attorney or
barrister or upon proof of due service of such summons such
judge or -warden shall proceed to tax the charges and fees of
such attorney or barrister for any such proceedings in such
court or before such judge or warden If upon such taxation
as in the last section mentioned in the opinion of such judge or
warden the charges or fees of such attorney or barrister are
unreasonable it shall he lawful for such judge or warden not-
withstanding any contract between the parties by order under
his hand to direct such attorney or barrister to repay any part
.Turisdiction in
debt contract
restricted.
Partylmprisoned
may be
discharged by
District Court
judge or judge of
Supreme Court.
Clients may
procure taxation
of bills and]
counsel’s fees.


Allowance and
taxation of
costs.
Penalty for
certain
offences.
Penalty on
warden holding
mining interest
or acting if
interested.
Penalty for
extortion.
of such charges or fees and such order if made hy a judge may
he filed with the clerk of any court holden under this Act
within the district to which such judge shall belong and the
same and also any such order made hy a warden may he enforced
in the same manner as any decree of the court or order of the
warden for payment of money.
86. It shall be lawful for the judge of the District Court
in cases of suits and all other proceedings before the court of
which he shall be judge or before himself or for the warden in
all proceedings before him or him and assessors in his discretion
to give or refuse to either party the costs of the suit hearing
re-hearing appeal or other proceeding before such court judge
or warden or any part thereof and in case of giving them to give
them in his discretion as between party and party or as between
solicitor and client as those phrases are understood in a court of
equity The judge shall either at the hearing or re-hearing of
any such suit appeal or other proceeding or at the time of pro-
nouncing his decision or of making any order under this Act
and the warden shall at the time when the decision of him or of
him and assessors shall be pronounced or any order made by
him under this Act tax the costs of such suit hearing re-hearing
appeal or proceedings to be paid by the plaintiff or defendant
and the amount of costs to be paid by either or any of the parties
shall form part of the decree or order of the court or judge or
warden’s court and in default of any special direction each party
shall pay his own costs.
87. If any person shall forge any miner’s right or any
lease license or permit issued or purporting to be issued under
the authority of this Act or fraudulently use utter or exhibit
any such forged miner’s right lease license or permit knowing
the same to be forged such person shall be guilty of a mis-
demeanor and shall on conviction thereof be sentenced to
imprisonment either with or without hard labour at the dis-
cretion of the court for any period not exceeding twelve
months.
88. If any warden appointed under this Act shall at any
time during his appointment hold any interest or share in any
claim gold mining or mineral lease or mining adventure or shall
adjudicate in any matter in which he shall have any pecuniary
interest he shall be guilty of a misdmeanour and be liable to
fine and imprisonment or both in the discretion of the court.
89. Any person who shall wilfully and corruptly exact take
or accept any fee sum or reward whatsoever other than and
except such fees or sums as are or shall be lawfully appointed
or allowed for or on account of anything done under the
authority of this Act shall on conviction thereof before two
justices of the peace forfeit and pay any sum not exceeding


fifty pounds and in default of immediate payment thereof to
imprisonment with or without hard labor not exceeding six
calendar months.
90. Any person who shall assault obstruct or resist an
warden or any person duly authorised by any warden in lawfull
entering upon any claim or land or in performing any other ac
authorised hereby or any bailiff or other officer or aiiy clerk o
assistant of such bailiff or officer or any inspector or othe
person in the performance of his duty or in the exercise of hi
powers under this Act or any person who after being removed
by any warden under the provisions of this Act from°any clain
or other place shall forcibly or clandestinely retake or retain o
endeavor to retake or retain possession thereof or of any
portion thereof or of any share therein or who after an*
decision of a warden that any complainant is entitled to use fo*
mining purposes or to divert any water (such decision no
having been reversed on appeal) shall resist such complainan
or his agents in such use or diversion or who upon or in conse
quence of the decision of any warden’s court against him shal
assault or threaten to assault any person in whose favor such
decision shall have been made shall on conviction thereof before
an y t J' r ° i ustices forfeit any sum not exceeding fifty pounds anc
in default of payment shall be liable to be imprisoned for ani
period not exceeding six months.
91. If any claim shall be made to or in respect of any
goods or chattels taken in execution under anv process issued by
a warden or in respect of the proceeds or value thereof by any
person not being the party against whom such process shall have
issued it shall be lawful for such warden upon application of the
officer charged with the execution of such process as well before
as after action brought against such officer to issue a
summons calling before such warden as well the party issuing
such process as the party making such claim and thereupon any
ac ion which shall have been brought in any court in respect
(it such claim shall be stayed and the court in which such action
»r ulJ 1 haye be en brought or any judge thereof on proof of the
rssue of such summons and that the goods and chattels were so
taken in execution may order the party bringing such action to
pay the costs of all proceedings had upon such action after the
se j Vlce u P or * him °f such summons issued out by the warden
and the warden shall adjudicate upon such claim and make such
order between the parties in respect thereof and of the costs of
e proceedings as to it or him shall seem fit and such order
may e enforced in like manner as any order made in any suit
rought or any proceedings before such warden as the case
may be.
ari y person shall be found by the warden to be
engaged m mining on any gold field without being able on
demand to produce his miner’s right or without being able
Assault on
warden and
other offences.
Interpleader.
Power to warden
to flue persons
found mining
without miner’s
right


Penalty on
witness
neglecting
appear.
Fees penalties
&c. how
recoverable and
applied.
satisfactorily to account to the warden for not having a miner’s
right the warden is hereby empowered to demand the payment i
on the spot of the miner’s right fee and in addition thereto then
and there in his discretion to impose a fine on any such offender
of a sum not exceeding forty shillings and unless the amount of
such miner’s right fee and'fine be thereupon immediately paid
to the said warden he may cause the said offender to be arrested
and to be imprisoned in ihe nearest lock-up for any period not
exceeding one calendar month unless in the meantime the whole
amount shall have been paid and the order in writing of the
said warden shall be sufficient authority to the keeper of the
said lock-up for the detention of the offender If any person
shall occupy any waste lands of the Crown within any pro-
claimed gold field and carry on business thereon without having
a business license empowering him in that behalf he shall be
liable to be fined by the warden a sum not exceeding ten
pounds and in default of immediate payment to be imprisoned
in the nearest lock-up for any period not exceeding one calendar
month unless in the meantime the whole amount shall have
been paid and the order in writing of the said warden shall be
sufficient authority to the keeper of the said lock-up for the
detention of the offender. . •
93. Any person on whom any summons issued out by any
warden requiring such person to appear as a witness in such
court or before such warden shall have been served personally
or in such other manner as shall be directed by the rules to be
framed as aforesaid and to whom at the same time payment or
tender of his expenses shall have been made on the fixed scale
and who shall refuse or neglect without sufficient cause _to
appear according to the tenor of such summons or who having
so appeared shall refuse to be sworn or answer any lawful
question shall on conviction thereof before any two justices
forfeit and pay any sum not exceeding ten pounds and in
default of immediate payment thereof he shall be liable to
imprisonment in the nearest lock-up for any period not
exceeding one calendar month unless in the meantime the
whole amount shall have been paid and the order in writing of
the said warden shall be sufficent authority to the keeper of the
said lock-up for the detention of the offender but no such
conviction shall exempt such person from any action for dis-
obeying such summons.
94. All fees charges and sums of money which shall or may
be imposed or made payable under this Act and all penalties
incurred thereunder or "under the Regulations for which no
other mode of recovery is provided herein or by the Regulations
mav be recovered carried out or enforced by any warden in the
manner in which justices of the peace are now by law authorised,
to enforce any order or award made in any court of petty
sessions.


95. No proceedings under this Act shall he removed or
removable into the Supreme Court save and except as herein-
before provided.
96. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to pay
the liabilities of the Gympie Local Mining Court and thereupon
to take possession of all the books papers records building and
other property belonging to the said local court.
97. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council from
timeto time to make such regulations not being contrary to the
provisions of this Act as may be necessary for the purpose of
giving effect to this Act and for the management of the gold
fields generally.
Such regulations may be made for the whole colony or for
any particular part thereof.
Such regulations shall be published in the Gazette and
after publication therein shall have the force and effect of law
and shall be judicially noticed in any court of justice provided
that nothing herein contained shall affect the rights of Her
Majesty or prevent the operation of any municipal bye-law or
regulation of the Board of Health.
It shall be lawful by such regulations to impose for any
breach thereof or for any disobedience of a lawful order of the
warden’s court a fine not exceeding ten pounds and in default
of payment imprisonment with or without hard labor for any
period not exceeding three months.
Copies of all regulations made under this Act shall be laid
before Parliament within fourteen days from the making
thereof if the Parliament shall be then in session and if not
then within fourteen days after the commencement of the next
session thereof.
It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to cause to
be paid a sum of money not exceeding one thousand pounds to
the actual discoverers of any new gold field such sum to be paid
under the terms and conditions to be prescribed by the
regulations. J
Proceedings not
to be removed
into Supremo
Court.
bocal Mining
Court.
Power to make
regulations.
Regulations may
be partial or
general
Regulations to
be published.
Reward for the
discoverers of
gold fields.


PROCLAMATION.
By His Excellency the Honourable Joshua Peter Bell, President
J r L s i of the Legislative Council of the Colony ot
Joshua P.' Bell, Queensland, and Administrator of the Government
Administrator. thereof.
TN nursuance of the authority in me vested, and accordance■with, the
T too visions of “ The Gold Fields Act of 1874, 38 ictona, No. ILL
rf: TTnnmirfiblp Joshua Peter Bell, the Administrator aforesaid, with
the advice of the Executive Council, do, by this my Proclamation, notify
and proclaim, that all Gold Fields Rations
those nublished in the Government Gazette of 26th July, 1879, and in or
? wirur IJiisli Gold Field only) stall, on and after the first day of
Nolembrilw be Cby rescind and the following Eegulatmns
established for the management of the Gold Fields of the whole of
colony in lieu thereof. ,
Given under my Hand and Seal, at Government House, Brisbane,
Given of october> in the year of our Lord one thousand
eicrht hundred and eighty, and in the forty-fourth year of Her
Majesty’s reign.
JOHN M. MACROSSAN.
God Save the Queen !
GENERAL REGULATIONS.
Size of protection area.
1. A miner desirous of prospecting may mark off and hold a protection
area of the following dimensions viz. :
Beyond the limits of a proclaimed gold field, 400 yards by 400 yards.
Within the limits of a proclaimed gold field and more than three (3>
miles from the nearest gold workings, 800 yards by 300 yards; not \
more than three miles, and more than one mile from such workings
200 yards by 200 yards ; not more tnan one mile, and more than 400
yards, 150 yards by 150 yards. .
The foregoing part of this rule refers to prospecting for alluvial of any
kind or quartz reefs, but a miner searching for a new reef at any
distance not more than 400 yards from any reef being worked may
mark off and hold a protection area of 150 yards by 150 yards.
Must be marked and registered.
2 All nrotection areas must be marked at each corner with a post
otanßmr three°feet above ground, and four inches in diameter, such posts to
be utoTeLd end trenches three leet kngend six rnehes deep,
and such marking shall be deemed a sufficient title lor seven clear days,


subject to the labour conditions ; after which all protection areas within the
limits of a proclaimed gold field must be registered. Such registration
must be renewed monthly, but the Warden may, by a certificat e g exempt
or a specified period any prospecting area from the necessity' of such
ramwah and a notice shall be posted on some conspicuous part of the area
v -V , t , I | i nan ? es of the holders, the numbers and dates of their miner’s
ughts, the date on which the area was taken up, and the date of registration
Si&SSS? *' lereof ’ i£ ” o exemption tm~al
Labour conditions.
3. Every protection area must be worked continuously every ordinarv
working day within two clear working days after marking with at' least half
the number of miners whose names appear on the notice Is holders of
the area. Shares not so worked shall I be liable to forfeiture Any work
forfehurT *** shall render such protection area liable to
Prospector must report finding gold.
4 Within seven clear days after the finding of gold in apparentlv
SfJ fi Ua r tltie l ™ tlu n an 7 protection area, the holders shaH report
the saidfindmgat the Warden’s office under pain of forfeiture of smeb
area. The Warden shall then proceed to the ground, and if sufficient gold
has been found to warrant it, he shall allot the prospectors cfafm
be entitled! nUmber ° f claim * to which they would otherwise
Mode of talcing up a claim.
elainf ’ht fl l ? er “ a 7 take , u P and work any unoccupied Crown land as a
cla mby fixing firmly in the ground, at each corner thereof a post four
inches in diameter standing at least three feet above the surfaced in L
trenches three feet long and six inches deep along each line such
posts to be kept at all times uncovered. Provided that when registration is
required such miner shall, within two days after siX maE Zk
C f lon m (° rm D Pereto annexed, to the Warden. The Warden
pnnivS ere y P °n deliye I r . to tlie applicant a certificate in the form E hereto
it d ’ wbo , slm ll, 'Whin twenty-four hours from the receipt thereof cause
it to be posted on some conspicuous part of the ground applied for 'and a
copy thereof at the Warden’s office, for a periocf of six dear days' If *
objection be lodged against such application within such period,
shall be entitled to be registered tor the claim by the should
-ds^raLn 1 unmThe 011 be f , lod f d ™ tbin . the time specified, he shall defer
affpr Si •?!? f 7 1 natter bas been heard and determined, and there-
Warderds Court 7 evidence submitted to him or the order of the
Non-registration, fa not to be deemed a breach of Regulations if caused by
neglect of Mining Registrar, Sfc. y
which rMisfJS'k 0 ! aII - C !f” S . or “‘f" authorised mining tenements for
flm same within 1 ten’(?ni re f mus * a ,RP Warden for regist, ation of
ssSSn sss “a; s:i
- -ss es


any penalty be inflicted for the non-performance within the prescribed time
of an P y act required by these Regulations to be done by the holder of any such
tenement, if such holder can prove that the non-performance
aiToriaO «sca3 by the neglect or def n.lt of the Mining Eegtstrar or
Warden, or from any circumstances over which he had no control.
Mode of application for an occupied claim or share liable to forfeiture.
7 Whenever under these Regulations an unoccupied claim or share in
an occupied claim is liable to forfeiture, any miner may apply for possession
of such Claim or share therein by , dating a notice in writing in the form G
hereto annexed at, or as near as possible to the then working shaft of such
claim and at the Warden’s office, and serving a copy thereof on the holder of
such claim or share, or his agent.
If no objection be lodged within six (6) clear days of the posting and
service of such notices, the Warden shall, if requested, register the claim or
sharefor registration must within clear days
hereinbefore mentioned lodge a written notice of objection with the Warden
stating the grounds of such objec ion, upon receipt of which the Warden
sliab defer regisiration until the matter has been heard and determined, and
Sail thereafter be guided by the evidence submitted to him, or by the order
of the Waroen s Court.
liules and agreements to be binding.
8 All ru’es and agreements entered into by a majority of at least two-
thirds'in number and fnterest of the shareholders of any claim or leasehold
for the management and working thereof shall be binding on the shaie-
holders ot such claim or leasehold, and on any person becoming a share-
holder therein, provided such rules and agreements are not contiary to the
Gold Fields Act or these Regulations AH such rules and agreements shall
be registered by filing a copy signed by the parties or their agents at the
Warden’s office, and payment of the fee required by schedule A 1 he e o
annexe.! ; and such rules or agreements may be abolished or amend, dat any
time by a line majority of the shareholders in any such claim or leasehold.
Talcing forcible possession a forfeiture of rights.
9 Any miner taking forcible possession of any claim or share therein
or commencing to work the same after h,s right to take p ssession thereof
has been disputed, shall forfeit all right and title which he may have
acquired to the possession of such claim or share.
Claims continuously worked—-Exceptions.
10 Claims must be continuously worked by the requisite number of
_ .ritliin two clear working days after they have been marked off,
otherwise the share or shares unworked shall be liable to forfeiture, and there-
•ifler anv share in a claim remaining unworked lor three clear working days
i 11 K.able to forfeiture- Provided that no miner s interest in any claim
diall be liable to tcrieiiure under this regulation if he be employed at any
necessary work in connection with it, or it his absence be caused through
sickne^s^attendance at a court of justice, a general cessation from work
through floods S ram. or on any public holiday, or on holidays proclaimed
by the Warden.


Marking too murk ground,
11. Any miner marking off more ground that he is entitled to shall be
liable to have the surplus ground pegged off at either end of the claim, at
the option of any other miner appljing to the Warden for the surplus.
Boundary posts and marks.
12. Claims, leaseholds, business, residence, and machine areas, and all
authorised holdings, must be marked at each corner with a post four (4)
inches in diameter, fixed firmly in and standing at least three (3) feet above
the ground; and the owner or any shareholder thereof shall point out the
corner posts and boundary lines of any such claim or other authorised
holding to any person requiring to know the same, and no person shall
remove, injure, or obliterate any boundary posts or marks of any claim or
other authorised holding, or any posted notice relating thereto.
Exemptiom from work,
13. The owners of any registered claim may apply to the Warden,
after having posted a copy of the application in tlxe form marked H hereto
annexed, at the Warden’s office and on the claim, six clear working days
prior to the day of hearing the application by the Warden, to have the claim
registered as exempt from work for a period not exceeding six months;
and provided it has been duly registered and continuously worked for the
preceding six months and is not then payable, the Warden may grant the
exemption applied for upon receipt of the fee required. Provided that the
Warden may grant the exemption work on any claim for a period not
exceeding thirty days upon application by the owners thereof, of which
notice must be given by posting a copy of the application at the Warden’s
office and on the claim three clear working days prior to the hearing of the
application by the Warden.
The Warden shall hear and determine in open court all applications for
exemption from work, and objections thereto, and may grant the exemption
applied for, upon terms as to bailing or any other conditions he may deem
necessary. Any failure to comply with such terms or conditions shall be
deemed a forfeiture of the exemption.
False representation.
14. Any person who shall by false representation or fraudulent
concealment of facts obtain registration of any mining or other interest, or
who shall by such means obtain a certificate of exemption from work, or
occupation of business or residence areas, shall be liable to forfeit his share
of the property in respect of which such registration or certificate of
exemption has been so obtained.
One miner’s right sufficient.
15. A miner may himself or by his agent take up and hold any number
of claims, or shares in claims, provided such claims or shares in claims are
worked by miners in accordance with these regulations.
Title.
16. Possession of a claim by any miner shall be primd facie evidence
of title.
Eoads across claims, Sfc.
17. When requisite for the efficient working of any claim, leasehold, or
machine, or for the public interest, the Warden may authorise the making
of a road over any gully, creek, claim, or leasehold, residence, business,
B


machine, or market-garden area, or site for stacking tailings, within any
gold fields, in such manner and under such conditions as he may determine.
Provided that compensation be paid for the removal of, or injury caused to,
any improvements thereon.
Shafts and holes near roads to be secured.
18. Any miner having a shaft within twenty (20) feet of a public road,
in ordinary use, shall securely fence or log the same, and any miner
abandoning any such shaft or hole shall first either fill up or securely fence
or log the same, or in some other way make it safe in a permanent manner ;
and no person shall throw down or remove therefrona any fence or timber,
or other marerial placed for such purpose, or at any time wilfully injure or
destroy any shaft, drive, or other workings in any mine so as to prevent or
impede the further working of such mine or any adjacent ground.
Transfers.
19. The holder of any registered claim, or share therein, any registered
business, residence, machine, or market-garden area, or any other registered
holding under “ The Gold Fields A.ct of 1874 or these Regulations, or any
interest therein, or the registered holder of any lien thereon, may transfer
the same after having posted a notice of his intention \so to do at the
Warden’s office, and on the area or other registered holding aforesaid, for
three (3) clear working days, and upon production at the Warden’s office of
his certificate of registration, transfer certificate, or lien ticket (or declara-
tion of loss thereof), and upon payment of the fee required; and the
Warden shall issue to the transferree a transfer certificate; and. the
transferee shall be liable for all encumbrances, agreements, and conditions
registered against the property so transferred.
Declaration of loss of miner s riaht, certificate of registration, lien ticket,
or transfer certificate.
20. When any miner has lost his miner’s right, certificate of registra-
tion, transfer certificate, or lien ticket, he may make a declaration of such
loss in the form marked K hereto annexed before a Warden or Jushce or
the Peace, and such declaration shall be received at the Warden s office in
lieu thereof for all the purposes required in making a transfer, on payment
of the fee required for filing the same.
Claim not to he forfeited through absence of hired men without due notice to
owner.
21. If any miner who is employed to represent a share in a registered
claim absents himself from such claim, or otherwise neglects to represent
such share, unknown to the owner thereof, the same shall not be forfeited
unless it remains unrepresented for seven (7) clear working days after notice
of such absence or neglect has been served on the owner or his agent.
Stacking quartz, earth, Sfc.
22. Any miner having forfeited or abandoned his claim, or share in a
claim, shall be at liberty to retain possession of any stone, or earth, or other
substance containing gold—the produce of such claim or share in a claim
that may have been raised at the time of the forfeiture or abandonment,
provided such stone, earth, or other substance, shall be stacked on ground
not interfering with the working of the claim. And the Warden shall,
upon application being made to him, and upon receipt of the fee required,
register the same as the property of such miner for any period not exceeding


twelve months. A copy of such registration, in the form marked M. shall
be affixed on the stack ; and no person during the period of such registration
shall remove the said stack of stone, earth, or other substance, or any ot it,
without the permission of the owner thereof.
JVb injury 'permitted to claims or roads.
23 No person shall cause or permit sludge, tailings, or water to
accumulate in or flow from his claim, leasehold, reservoir, dam, machine
area or other authorised holding, so as to cause danger, injury or obstruc-
tion to any public road, or any danger, inconvenience, or damage to any
public or private interest.
Liability to penalty for allowing work in insecure shafts, etc.
24. Whenever the Warden has reason to believe, or upon report being
made to him, that the shaft or underground workings of any claim or lease-
hold are unsafe through insufficient timbering or any other cause, so that
loss of life or bodily injury may be occasioned thereby, he shall cause an
examination of such shaft or workings to be made by two competent miners,
and upon their report the Warden may order the owner of such claim or
leasehold to do within a specified time whatever may be considered neces-
sary to remove the cause of danger, and may prohibit any other work being
done in such claim or leasehold until the same has been made sate as
ordered. This regulation shall apply only to such claims or leaseholds as do
not come within the provisions of any .Mining Act that may hereafter be in
force for the regulation of mines.
Accidents to he reported.
25. In the case of any accident in connection with mining, whereby
loss of life or serious bodily injury has been occasioned, the mining manager
or other person in charge of the mine or other works, or some one of the
shareholders, shall immediately report at the Warden s office the nature ot
the accident, and the Warden shall cause an inspection to be made ot the
mine or other works where the accident occurred by two competent persons,
and proceed to hold an injury into the nature and cause of the accident,
and shall forward a copy of the evidence taken at such inquiry, with his
report thereon, to the Mines Department.
Props or timber not to be removed or ventilation obstructed without consent.
26. The owners of any claim or leasehold shall not remove any pi ops or
timber in their claim or leasehold, the removal of which ma,y en anger le
workings of any other claims or leaseholds, and whenever the un ergroun
workings of two or more claims or leaseholds, or of a claim and leaseho d,
communicate with each other so as to afford the means of venti a ion, sue x
ventilation shall not be obstructed by the owner of any claim or leaseho
without the consent of the owner of any claim or leasehold affected there oy.
Bailing compulsory.
27. The owners of any claim or leasehold in which water has accumu-
lated to the injury of any adjoining claim or leasehold shall, on receipt o
complaint to that effect from the party injured, or his agent, bad their claim
or leasehold, or in some other manner effectually remedy the injury ; or
party injured may at once lodge a complaint with the Warden, who shall
have power to order the owners of such claim or leasehold causing the
injury to bail their claim or leasehold and keep it continuously tree from
any b j irious accumulation of water whilst occupied by them.


And the Warden shall further hare power to assess and determine the
amount of damage or injury suffered from such accumulation of water by
any person complaining, and to make or order that the owner of such claim
or leasehold causing the damage or injury shall pay the amount thereof.
Drainage.
28. When the owner of any claim or leasehold, by the erection and
working of any appliance for drainage, can prove that a saving of labour
has been effected thereby in the working of adjoining claims or leaseholds,
the owner of such claims or leaseholds in which such saving has been
effected shall be liable to pay in respect thereof such reasonable sum of
money, and at such times, as may be ordered by the Warden. Provided
that the Warden may subsequently, on application being made by either
party and a re-hearing of the case, cancel or vary such order so as to meet
any altered circumstances.
Mining plant not to be forfeited with claim or leasehold.
29. The tools, appliances, and mining plant on or in connection with
any forfeited claim or leasehold shall not be forfeited therewith; provided
always they are removed from the claim or leasehold within one week from
the declaration of the forfeiture, or within such reasonable time as the
Warden may direct.
At the time of the declaration oft he forfeiture of a share in a claim or
leasehold, or within three (3) clear days thereafter, the Warden, or the
Warden and assessors who tried the case, shall assess and declare the value
of the forfeiting shareholder’s interest in the tools, mining plant, and
appliances used in or in connection vith the said claim or leasehold, and
within six (6) clear working days after the declaration of such forfeiture the
incoming shareholder shall pay into the Warden’s court the full amount of
such value for the use of the owner of such share ; in default thereof, the
share may be granted to any other miner applying for the same, and paying
into the Warden’s court the assessed value of the forfeiting shareholder’s
interest in the tools, &c.
Compensation.
30. Any business, residence, or machine area or site occupied by any
dam, water-race, reservoir, tramway, and for stacking tailings, or any other
authorised holding in actual occupation, may be mined upon; provided the
miners intended to mine thereon shall, before commencing work, compen-
sate the owner thereof for any loss, damage, or injury to the improvements
thereon that may be sustained by him in consequence thereof. The amount
of such compensation may be determined by the Warden, or Warden and
assessors.
Machine area.
31. Applications for machine areas, with particulars of machinery pro-
posed to be erected, must be made in writing to the Warden after the
ground has been marked, accompanied with a sketch plan thereof; and a
copy of such application must be posted on the ground on which it is pro-
posed to erect the machinery, as well as at the Warden’s office, for seven (7)
clear working days before the hearing of the application. If no valid
objection be lodged, the Warden may grant permission to occupy an area
not exceeding five acres and register the same. Provided the Warden may
before doing so demand a plan and description of the ground as actually
surveyed and marked. Any such permission to occupy may be cancelled


should the holder thereof fall to commence the erection of machinery thereon
within four (4) months from the date of permission to occupy, or should the
machinery thereon be entirely removed.
Business and residence area.
32. The holder of a business license or miner’s right shall, with the
consent of the Warden as to the locality, be entitled to occupy on any gold
field, for the purpose of business or residence, an area of land not exceeding
one quarter of an acre, the frontage of which to any main thoroughfare,
creek, or waterhole shall not exceed sixty-six (66) feet, by a depth not
exceeding one hundred and sixty-five (165) feet, and every such area must
be registered at the Warden’s office. Provided such registration may be
cancelled should the holder cease to occupy such area without first register-
ing the same as exempt from the condition of occupation.
Business and residence areas may he registered as exempt from occupation.
33. The holder of any business or residence area upon which there are
substantial improvements of the value of five pounds (£5) may, upon appli-
cation to the Warden, and upon payment of the fee required, have such area
registered as exempt from the condition of occupation for any period not
exceed ng twelve months. Such registration may be renewed upon payment
of a like fee. The holder of a miner’s right shall be allowed to hold only
one residence area on any one gold field.
Area for stacking tailings.
34. Application may be made to the Warden, after the ground has been
marked, for an area not exceeding five (5) acres, for the purpose of stacking
tailings, by posting a notice of application on the ground and at the
Warden’s office, with a description of the ground applied for, seven clear
working days before the hearing. The Warden may, if no valid objection
be lodged, grant the application and register the same upon receipt of
twelve months’ rent in advance. Provided that the Warden may cancel
such registration should the holder not use the area in a bund fide manner
for stacking tailings for six months, or the annual rent not be paid yearly
in advance.
Market gardens area.
35. Any person requiring land on any proclaimed gold field for the
purpose of growing fruit, vegetables, fodder, or other garden produce, may
apply to the Warden for an area not exceeding five acres for such purpose,
by posting an application, with a description of the ground, at the Warden’s
office, and on some conspicuous part of the ground, fourteen days before the
hearing by the Warden. Should no valid ‘objection be lodged, and no
public interest be likely to suffer thereby, the Warden may grant permission
to the applicant to occupy the land, and register him therfor on receipt of
twelve months’ rent in advance. The Warden may, before such registra-
tion, demand from the applicant a proper survey and plan of the ground.
Provided that the applicant, or some other person to whom he may transfer,
shall reside on the area and keep constantly in cultivation at least one-half
thereof, such cultivated portion to be securely fenced, and any garden area
not so cultivated and fenced, and on which the registered holder does not
reside, or for which the rent is not paid yearly in advance, shall be liable
to forfeiture.
Extended claims—Quartz or Alluvial.
36. Where the expense of erecting mining machinery or works is
likely to be great, or the poverty of the ground warrants it, or the ground


has been previously worked and abandoned, the Warden may, on applica*
tion, allot to each miner an extended claim not to exceed area four
ordinary claims. And only half the number of miners applying for the
ground need be employed on the claim until the preliminary work is done,
such as sinking a deep shaft, cutting a race, or erecting machinery, after
which the full number must be employed. Every such applicant for an
extended claim must comply with the conditions of application as mentioned
in regulation numbered 5 (five).
What considered a sufficient working,
37. A claim, or leasehold, shall be considered as effectively worked
when eight (8) hours’ bond fide work is performed thereon by the comple-
ment of men required by these Regulations, on every working day except
Saturday, when four hours’ work shall be considered sufficient.
Liens, Sfc., how effected
38. The holder of any claim, leasehold, business, residence, or machin®
area, or any authorised holding whatsoever, or share, or interest therein, held
under “ The Gold Fields Act of 1874 ” or these Regulations, may give a
lien upon the same as security for the due payment of any debt; and upon
the production to the Warden of the miner’s rights of the lienor and lienee,
and upon the execution by the lienor of a lien duly attested in the
form marked IN’ hereto annexed, the Warden shall register a lien upon the
claim, or other authorised holding or share or interest therein, and shall
then issue to the lienee a duplicate of the lien ticket; and every such lien
registered as aforesaid shall be a specific charge upon such claim, or other
authorised holding or share or interest therein, until the debt has been paid
in full; and if more than one lien has been effected on any claim, or othei
authorised holding or share or interest therein, such liens shall take
precedence according to the date of their respective registrations. Provided
that, upon the delivery to the Warden by the lienor of a certificate duly
signed by the lienee, and attested, that the debt or liability for which sue
lien was held has been fully discharged, the Warden shall forthwith cancel
such lien. In the event of such lienor failing to redeem such claim or otner
authorised holding or share, or interest therein, at the time appointed, the
lienee may cause the same to be sold by auction, after having advertised his
intention of so doing in a local newspaper and posted a copy of such adver-
tisement on a conspicuous part of the claim, not less than seven days before
the day of sale. And the lienee shall stand possessed of the proceeds ot
such sale, upon trust, to pay all costs consequent on such default, then to
pay the debt secured by the lien, and to pay the balance, it any, to the
lienor. The lienor shall be entitled to redeem at any time before sale, upon
payment of debt and expense incurred; but in case of any sale under the
powers herein contained, the Warden shall, upon production or the lien
ticket, accompanied by a statutory declaration of default having been made
of the money secured thereby, and the miner’s right of the purchaser,
register such purchaser as the holder of such claim or other authorise
holding or share or interest therein, in lieu of the lienor. A lienee shall not,
by virtue of the lien, be held to be a co-partner in any claim, leasehold, or
other authorised holding, on any share in which he holds a lien, ihe lee
for registration of any lien shall be as required by schedule Ai hereto
annexed, exclusive of stamp duty, if any.


Union of claims,
89. Two or more contiguous claims may, upon application being made
to the Warden with the consent of a two-thirds majority in number and
interest of the shareholders of each such claim, respectively be united. ± ro-
vided that the conditions of the separate claims shall, in the aggregate, apply
to the amalgamated claim; and the Warden shall grant a certificate of
union, and shall register the same upon receipt of the fee required.
Abandonment of shares in claims.
40. Any shareholder in a registered claim wishing to abandon his share
therein may do so by serving on one of the remaining shareholders, or is
agent, a notice to that effect (and if there be a lien on such share, then
serving a like notice on the lienee), and posting a copy thereof at the
Warden’s office and on the claim; in such case the Warden, after satisfying
himself that the notices have been served and posted in manner aforesaid, shall
forthwith cancel the registration by which such share has been held, and the
said shareholder shall thereupon be released from any further liability in
respect of such share thereafter incurred, and any applicant lor such aban-
doned share may at once be registered for the same without process ot any
kind beyond his written application. Provided that the lienee, if any, shall
have for three days after abandonment a preferent right to be so registered
for the abandoned share. On failure by the lienee to avail himself of such
preferent right the lien shall be cancelled and the remaining shareholders
shall thereupon have jointly a preferent right for three days to be registeied
for the abandoned share.
Examination of registers by owners and others.
41. Any registered shareholder of a claim, leasehold, or other authorised
holding, or any registered lienee or any such holding, may, upon application
at the Warden’s office, examine the register so far as it relates thereto>; and
any person may examine the registers, at the TV arden s office, ot any cia ~
leaseholds, or other holdings, upon payment of the fee require .
Agents to be appointed.
42. Any person holding any share in any mining tenement or other
authorised holding under “ The Gold Fields Act of 1874 or these. Regul-
ations shall, in the event of being absent for a longer period than
days from the gold field on which such share is held appoint an agent in the
form marked Q hereto annexed, whose acts shall be held as ose ,
principal, and the name and address of such agent shall be registere a
Warden’s office. In the event of such registration not being so made, any
notice, legal process, or document required by these Regulations to be serve
shall be deemed to have been sufficiently served upon such absent person,
provided a copy of such notice, process, or document be posted tor the period
required by these Regulations at the Warden s office, an on s some c
spicuous part of the mining tenement or other holding to which the sam
refers.
Absentee shareholder s interest may be represented by hired miner.
48. When a shareholder in a claim or leasehold absents himself fiom is
work without being duly exempted by the Warden or these Regulations, an
fails to provide an efficient substitute, his partners may, it ™ , ,j
hire a competent miner to fill his place; and such absent shareholder sdali
be responsible for any reasonable wages due to the person so employ ,
in the event of non-payment of such wages the person so employed s


deemed to have a lien on the share o£ the absentee in the claim or leasehold
in which he has been employed to the amount of wages at the current rate
due to him.
Interest of a defaulting shareholder to he sold by auction.
44. The non-payment by any shareholder in a claim or leasehold (when
no deed of partnership exists) of calls made on him for the purpose of de-
fraying the working expenses of such claim or leasehold shall entitle the
other shareholders to a prefcrent lien upon the defaulting shareholder’s
interest in the claim or leasehold in which such expenses are owing until the
calls are paid.
Whenever any calls remain unpaid upon any share in a claim or lease-
hold (when no deed of partnership exists) for a period of three months
from the call being due, a majority, in number and interest, of the share-
holders who have paid their calls may request the Warden to inquire into
the matter, and if he is satisfied that such sum is legally due on such share,
he shall cause it to be sold by auction, of which sale due notice shall be
given by advertisement in any local newspaper, and the proceeds shall be
applied to the payment of all legal expenses incurred by the process and the
calls due on such share ; and the residue, if any, shall be paid to the late
owner of the share, and the Warden shall register such share without
further process, in the name of the purchaser thereof.
Unauthorised shafts, Sfc.
45. Ho person shall sink any shaft, or disturb the surface of the ground,
or erect works, or deposit earth, stone, or other material in any place so as to
interfere with the supply of w r ater used by the public, or so as to obstruct
a public thoroughfare; and no person shall undermine any road in such a
manner as to endanger the public safety.
Unauthorised [occupation of Crown Lands.
46. Any person being in unauthorised occupation of Crown lands on
any proclaimed gold field may be summarily removed therefrom by order of
the Warden, and any person resisting or obstructing the carrying out of any
such order shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten (10) pounds.
In absence of WardenffMining Registrar may grant and register claims,
exemptions, Sfc.
.47. In the absence of the Warden from any gold field the Mining
Registrar may, if no objection be lodged, grant and register protection areas,
claims, or shares therein, business and residence areas, exemptions from
work or occupation, in the same manner as the Warden.
Penalties for breach of Regulations.
48. Any person committing a breach of these Regulations, or disobeying
a lawful order of the Warden or Warden’s court, shall for every such offence
for which a penalty is not otherwise specially provided by “ The Gold Fields
Act of 1874” or these Regulations, be liable to a penalty not exceeding ten
pounds, and in default of payment may be imprisoned by order of the
Warden for any period not exceeding one month.


ALLUVIAL CLAIMS.
Reward claims.
49. Tlie size of reward claims which shall he given for the discovery of
payable gold in any creek, river, or ordinary alluvial ground, shall be in
proportion to the distance from the nearest occupied gold workings of the
same description, and as follows ;
If distant over 400 yards Two claims of one
man’s ground.
„ one-half mile Three ditto.
„ one mile Four ditto.
„ two miles Six ditto.
„ three miles Ten ditto.
If beyond the limits of a gold field ... Twenty ditto.
The above reward shall be in addition to the number of claims to which
the party would be otherwise entitled in ordinary alluvial claims, and may
be marked off in one block in any rectangular shape at the option of the
prospectors. Provided that no side of the block shall be less than fifty feet.
Ordinary alluvial claims.
50. Ordinary alluvial claims shall be—
For one man 50 feet by 50 feet
For two men ... ... 100 „ 50 ~
For three men ... 150 „ 50 „
For fonr men ... ... 200 ~ 50 „
And so on for any number of men without restriction as to the number of
party or shape of the claim. Provided that the claim of each party shall be
a rectangular block no side of which shall be less than fifty feet.
.I Vet alluvial claims.
51. In wet ground, when water other than surface water exists, and
necessitates slabbing throughout, or in rocky ground requiring blasting
for tlnrty feet in tlie sinking of the shaft, the size of claim shall be as
follows:
One miner 50 feet by 100 feet
Two miners 100 „ * 100 „
Three miners ... 150 ~ 100 ~
Four miners ... 200 „ 100 ~
And so on in the same proportion for any number of miners. Provid >d
that no side of the claim of more than one miner shall be less than one
hundred feet. All claims taken up under this regulation to be registered.
QUARTZ REEFS.
Definition.
52. The term “reef” shall be taken to mean gold seam or quartz or any
substance containing gold other than alluvial.
Reward claims.
53. The reward claim which shall be given for the discovery of gold in
apparently payable quantities on any new reef, or the re-discovery of the
same on any reef previously occupied and abandoned, shall be in proportion
to the distance from any reef being worked, and as follows :
If distant less than 400 yards : 100 feet along the line of reef.
If distant more than 400 yards and less than one mile : 150 feet
along the line of reef.


If distant more than one mile and less than two ; 200 feet along the
line of roof.
If distant more than two miles and less than ten : 300 feet along the
lino of roof. -■.B
If distant ten miles or more : 500 feet along the line of reef.
With a width of 400 feet. The above reward shall be in addition to
the number of claims the party would be otherwise entitled to in ordinary
ouartz claims. The measurements of distance to he on the surface ot tl e
ground by the nearest practicable route. Claims to be measured on t e
horizontal plane. .
Oridinary quartz claims.
54. The extent allowed for each miner in any ordinary quartz claim shall
be fifty feet along the supposed line of reef by a width of (400) four hundrec
feet The width of all quartz claims must be marked off at right angles to the
base line, but the whole or any part of such width may be marked on either
side of such line at the option of the shareholders.
To he registered.
55 In all quartz claims the names of the shareholders, together with
the dates and numbers of their miners’ rights under with the claim is held,
as also the name of the reef upon which it is situated, and the number of the
claim, must be registered in a hook to be kept by the Warden, and a copy
of the entry must always be kept posted at or as near as possible to tiie
working shaft, . 7 ,
Number of miners to be employed.
56 Only one-half the number of miners to whom any quartz claim ha»
been allotted need be employed thereon until it has been proved payable-
When ray able the whole number must be employed ; when it ceases to be
payable again only one-half the number of miners need be employed, ike
onus of proof that the claim is not payable shall rest upon the shareholders.
When payable.
57 A claim on a quartz reef shall be deerred to be payable when tie
quantity of gold obtained, from it shall be equal in value to the sum which
has been paid, or at current rates would have been payable, for wages, to alt
the miners actually employed thereon, during the time occupied in extracting
and crushing quartz, together with the other necessary working expenses.
Provided that no quartz claim shall be deemed payable until a crushing has
been obtained.
EIYEE AND CEEEK CLAIMS.
Size of claim.
58 Fifty feet frontage in the general direction in the course of the
stream will be allowed each miner in the creek or river, with a width from
bank to bank, unless such width shall exceed one hundred yards, in which
case the excess may be claimed by any other miner. All claims taken up
under this Eegulation must be registered.
Nam may he constructed.
59. Any holder of a river or creek claim may construct dams within his
claim for the purpose of turning water into his flood-race, on the condition
that his dams are only of such a height and at such a distance, according
to the natural fall of the water, from his upper boundary as in no way to
interfere with the natural level of the stream above his claim, and he may


extend such flood-race for such distance beyond his claim as may be necessary
for the effectual working of the same, provided that no other claim be
injured thereby. In cases of disputes in all running streams the level of
running water at the upper boundary to be considered the natural level, and
the Warden may order any dam to be lowered or altogether removed if he
deem it necessary far the purposes of this clause.
WATER EIGHTS.
Mode of application.
60. Any miners intending to divert and use water for mining or general
purposes, or to cut a race, or construct dams or reservoirs in connection
therewith, shall give notice in writing thereof to the Warden, and such
notice shall set forth the source from which the water is to be obtained, and
describe with sufficient accuracy the point at which it is to be or
used, the quantity in sluice-heads required, the number of dams (if any; in
which such water is to be stored and their situation, the probable length of
the race, its intended course and termination, and the names of the appli-
cants, and copies of such notice shall be kept posted for seven clear working
days at the Warden’s office, at the source from which the water is to be
obtained, at the proposed termination of the race, and on the site of any
proposed dam or reservoir; and if no valid objection be lodged at’ the
expiration of seven clear working days, the Warden shall grant the required
permission.
j Heads of water —how gauged.
61. A box sluice-head shall be a body of water one inch by twelve
inches ; a ground sluice-head shall be a body of water three inches by twelve
inches, and shall be gauged in the following manner: —A box six feet long
and twelve inches in width, with a scale of inches marked on the inner side
at the lower end, shall be placed at the head of the race, hoving a fall not
exceeding six inches in the entire length of it, and the gauge of water shall
be taken at the n outh of the box where the water is discharged. When the
length of the race exceeds one mile, the width of the box may be increased
half-an-inch for each mile.
Quantity of water taken and left running.
62. The quantity of water to which any party shall be entitled unde r
one water-right for sluicing purposes on any claim shall not exceed two
ground sluice-heads ; and in all river beds and running creeks from which
water is diverted for mining purposes, there shall be left running at least on©
ground sluice-head for general use when required.
Priority of water-rights.
63. The priority of water-rights derived from a common source shall be
determined by the date of grant and registration : and in case of failure of
water supply, the person last registered shall forego his rights during such
failure of water as against the person previously registered, and so on in
rotation as the supply diminishes Provided always that the holder of a
water-right in the bed of a stream shall have a preference over the holder of
a water-right whereby the water of such stream is diverted from its natural
course.


Right to cut race anywhere.
64. Any party of miners may cut any race or drain for gold-mining
purposes through any claim, or over or under any race or drain belonging to
any other party .of miners, provided that no injury he done to such claim,
race, or drain, through or over or under which the first-mentioned race may
he cut; and the original line of any race may he altered or deviated from by
the consent of the Warden, if no prior right he injured thereby.
Right of original owner to hired water.
65. The holder of any water-right, when not using the water held under
such right, shall, if required hy the Warden so to do, turn off the water at
the head of his race into its natural channel. No person hiring water from
the owner of any water-right shall have any claim to such water after it has
passed his worts, but such water shall revert to the original owner.
Warden may compel repair of race.
66. When from imperfect construction or neglect any race is in such an
inefficient state as to cause a waste of water, or to become a nuisance to the
public, the Warden may order the water at the head of such race to be
turned off until the defective portion is made good.
Protection to race.
67. No miner shall be permitted to sink, drive, or cut timber within ten
feet of any occupied race, without the consent of the owner, or as otherwise
provided for by these Regulations.
Exemption from use of race
68. The holder of any water-right, or race, dam, or reservoir in con-
nection therewith, desirous of retaining the same unused for any longer
period than fourteen days, must post notices to that effect, in writing, on
the said race, dam, or reservoir, and at the Warden’s office, for seven clear
working days ; and on good cause shown, and if no valid objection be lodged,
the Warden may issue a certificate of exemption from use for a period not
longer than six months, and register the same on receipt of the fee required'
Water diverted for sale or hire.
69. Any miners who may construct a race for the conveyance of water to
any gold-field for sale or hire, for gold-mining purposes or general use, shall
not be restricted in the quantity of water they may divert. Provided that
no prior right be prejudiced, or any injury of a private or public nature be
caused thereby ; and provided that the entire quantity of water so diverted
is being actually sold and disposed of in a bond fide manner; and any water
conveyed in excess of the quantity that is being so sold and disposed of shall,
when the Warden directs, be allowed to flow in its natural channel.
Right to sell water.
70. The holder of a water-right may sell or dispose of the right to the
whole or any portion of such water, or let the use of such water for a stated
period ; and the property and interest in any race, dam, or reservoir, and in
the water contained therein, or flowing therein or through any race, shall be
deemed to be a chattel interest, and the owner may recover in a summary
way any sum of money due in respect of any water supplied from any such
race, dam, or reservoir.


Water not to he taken or ‘polluted.
71. No person shall take water from any race, dam, or reservoir, without
the consent of the owner, nor shall permit sludge or other noxious matter to
flow into or otherwise pollute the water in any dam, race, or reservoir, nor
shall injure the hanks of any dam, reservoir, or race, or the works connected
therewith ; but the right to any water under any water-right shall terminate
whenever the water so held shall be discharged into any natural stream or
watercourse.
Dams or reservoirs.
72. Any miner intending to construct a dam or reservoir to collect and
store water therein for mining or general purposes may apply, by notice in
writing, to the Warden, describing with sufficient accuracy the site and
capacity in gallons of the proposed dam or reservoir, and the watersheds
from which the water is to be collected. Copies of such notices must be
posted at the Warden’s office and on the site of the proposed dam or reservoir
for seven clear days. If no valid objection be lodged during that period,
the Warden may grant to the applicants authority to occupy the site applied
for, and a right to cut drains on the watersheds described, or such portions
thereof as he may think fit, for the purpose of collecting the water there-
from; and the applicant shall thereupon be deemed to have an exclusive
right to such water, provided no public interest or prior right is injured
thereby.
TUNNELLING CLAIMS.
Protection area.
73. “ Tunnelling ground ” shall mean any portion of Crown lands con-
taining hills or plateaux in which the superincumbent stratum shall be at
least one hundred feet above the roof in any part of the tunnel. The pro-
tection area allowed on such ground shall be 800 feet on each side of the
tunnel, with a length of half-a-mile across the hill or plateau.
Poundary lines.
74. The boundary lines of such protection area must be parallel with
each other, and marked with posts four inches in diameter, standing three
feet above ground, each post to be within view of the other.
Reward claim.
75. The reward claim allowed for finding a payable quartz reef in any
such tunnel shall be double the area prescribed by clause 63 of these
Regulations, and in addition fifty feet along the line of reef for every
hundred feet beyond two hundred feet comprised in the length of the tunnel.
Ordinary claim.
76. The size of ordinary quartz claims in tunnelling ground shall be
double the area prescribed by clause 54 of these Regulations : provided that
the reef in the prospector’s claim shall be at least 200 feet from the mouth
of the tunnel, otherwise the size shall be the same as ordinary quartz claims.
Protection to tunnels.
77. Each party shall drive their tunnels within their own parallels as
defined on the surface, but two or more parties may, by agreement registered
by the Warden, use the same tunnel or any portion thereof. Twenty feet of
ground on each side of any tunnel or portion of a tunnel which may be
outside of any claim held in connection therewith shall be protected from
occupation.


Space for depositing quartz , rubbish, Spc.
78. A space of two hundred feet square will be allowed at the mouth of
every tunnel, or for every claim using a common tunnel, for the purpose of
depositing quartz or rubbish.
PUDDLING CLAIMS.
Claims.
79. A puddling claim may be taken up on alluvial ground which ha s
been previously worked and abandoned, or on ground which has been tested
and found to be too poor to pay for the ordinary method of working such
ground, to be worked in connection with a puddling machine, and must be
registered.
Size.
80. The size of claims allowed shall be one hundred feet by one hundred
feet for every man employed on the claim, or at the puddling machine, or in
connection therewith.
GOLD-MINING LEASES.
How applied for.
81. Persons desirous of obtaining leases for gold-mining purposes under
“ The Gold Fields Act of 1874 ” shall apply for the same in the form con-
tained in sbhedule No. 1 hereto annexed, and subject to the following
regulations:—
(1.) The area applied for shall not exceed twenty-five acres.
(2.) The term shall not exceed twenty-one years.
(3.) The rental shall be at the rate of £1 per acre per annum, or for
any part of an acre.
(4.) The applicants shall, thirty days prior to their application baing
heard by the Warden, post a notice in the form of the schedule
No. 2 hereto annexed, on a conspicuous part of the ground
applied for, and at the Warden’s office, and advertise the same
in any local newspaper.
(5.) Each application must be signed by the party or parties apply-
ing for the lease, or by accredited agents, and must be accom-
panied with a sketch plan defining the position of the land
applied for.
(6.) On gold fields where a mining surveyor has been appointed by
the Government, the applicant shall, within three months after
lodgipg the application, furnish to the Warden a plan in
duplicate and description showing the boundaries of the land
as actually surveyed and marked by the mining surveyor;
where no mining surveyor has been appointed such plan and
description shall be lodged within six months after application ;
but in either case the Warden shall have power to recommend
further necessary extensions of time. The plan and description
of a gold-mining lease shall be executed in accordance with
the general directions issued by the Government.


/h \r n caS es where the Government have appointed a fining
{ ) surveyor to act within the limits of any proclaimed gold field
or district all surveys for gold-mining leases shall be executed
onlv hy such mining surveyor, and the fees, according to the
following schedule, shall he deposited with the applications for
leases: —
Schedule.
Survey of land applied for as auriferous lease.
For 1 acre and under 3 po
„ 5 acres „ ••• ;;; 5 0
„ 1° » » 6 10
„ 15 „ » 7 10
„20 „ „ ■’ ' ... 810
~ 25 „ » "■ ~ ■“ 1 15
For traverse connection lines, at per mile ...
For survey of underground workings, at per diem ... 5 5
For travelling expenses of mining surveyor, for every mi
or part of a mile from the mining surveyor s office,
after the first three miles, at per mile one way ... U 4
to \ Tn ~11 cases w here the land is so available the area applied for
( 0 Sail be rectangular, and its length shall not exceed twice
its breadth ■ but when owing to the position of adjoining
boundaries or natural features regular rectanplar areas are
MtTradable, any intervening or irrcgu arly-shaped pieces of
land Zy be applied for, and leases of such pieces may be
granted by the Government. ~ -,,
/q 1 Fach application must be accompanied with a deposit ot the
( first year’s rent, together with the survey fees when required
uCder sub-s Son seven (7) of this clause, which deposit of
reM and sureev fees shall be forfeited should the lease, when
approved, not be taken out. In the event of the application
Sg ref used after survey, the deposit of rent only will be
returned.
Warden to record application.
82 The Warden shall record each application for a gold-mining lease,
licensed or mining surveyor, and correct plans ana aesonpi
lodged in his office.
Warden to report.
82 The Warden shall report on each application whether the* lease
» ss ar-MSEftsssiEffif AM
with the report.
To he worked half-handed pending decision.
asx Z“ffirtgtfth will
entail forfeiture whether the lease has been issued or not.


Labour conditions.
85. All ground held under a mining lease shall be worked by not less
than one man for every acre or fraction of an acre, unless exemption or
partial exemption from work has been granted.
Goid-mining leases conditionally surrendered to he worked full-handed until
surrender accepted.
86. When the holders of a gold-mining lease surrender such lease con-
ditionally upon an application for a new lease being granted, they shall, until
such surrender has been accepted, continue to fulfil the working conditions
of the lease surrendered, and put on such additional men as may be required
to hold any other ground included in the application for new lease.
Exemption from work for one month.
87. Lessees may apply to the Warden, after having posted a notice on
the leasehold and at the Warden’s office of their intention three clear work-
ing days before the hearing, to have their leasehold exempted or partially
exempted from work for a period not exceeding one month; and provided no
valid objection be lodged, the Warden may, upon good cause being shown,
grant such exemption or partial exemption from work upon payment of the
fee required, and upon such conditions as to bailing as the Warden may
deem necessary, and any failure on the part of the lessees to fulfil such
conditions shall be deemed to be a forfeiture of such exemption.
Exemption from work for six months.
88. Lessees may apply through the Warden to the Minister for Mines,
after having posted a notice on the leasehold and at the Warden’s office,
stating the grounds on which such application is made; seven clear working
days before the hearing thereof by the Warden, for exemption or partial
exemption from work for a period not exceeding six momths. If any objec-
tions are lodged against the granting of the exemption, the Warden shall
take evidence thereof in writing, and shall forward the same, together with
his report recommending the Minister to grant, or grant on conditions as to
bailing, or refuse the exemption applied for, such report to be read in open
court to the applicants and objectors, if any; and the Minister may grant the
exemption upon such conditions as to bailing as he may deem necessary, and
upon payment of the fee required. Any failure on the part of the lessees
to comply with the conditions of the exemption shall be deemed to be a
forfeiture of such exemption.
Miner giving notice, leasehold liable to forfeiture to have preferent right.
89. Any miner giving notice to the Warden of a gold field that a lease-
hold or ground held under application for lease is not bang worked in accord-
ance with these Eegulations, and applying for the forfeiture thereof, shall,
in the event of such leasehold being forfeited, have a preferent right for
seven days after such forfeiture to take possession of the ground so forfeited,
or any portion thereof, as a claim, or to apply for the same as a leasehold.
Transfer.
90. Leases, or shares therein, or any interest in applications for leases»
may be transferred in the form in the schedule numbered 3, which must be
deposited at the Warden’s office with the instrument of lease if issued, and
the fee required for registration.
Date.
91. All gold-mining leases granted under these Eegulations shall com-
mence from the day of the hearing of the application by the Warden.


(1.) A book shall be kept at the Warden’s office on all gold fields where
ground is held under lease, to be called a Register of Gold Mining Lease-
holds ; in which book shall be entered the names of all lessees, the share
each lessee holds, all transfers made, and all liens upon lessees’ shares.
REWARDS FOR DISCOVERIES OF HEW GOLD FIELDS.
92. Rewards will be paid to the discovers of new gold fields in accord-
ance with the following regulation
(1.) That person or those persons will be deemed to be the discoverer
or discoverers who shall first find gold, mark out a claim, and give
information of the same in writing to the nearest Gold Fields
Warden or Police Magistrate, together with particulars of the
locality and route thereto, the quantity of gold obtained, the
nature of the workings, and the distance from tne nearest gold
workings on which miners are then actually employed.
(2.) If two or more parties simultaneously discover a new gold field
in localities immediately adjacent, and severally comply with
these Regulations, the sum to be awarded will be divided amongst
the persons composing'the several parties who have made the dis-
coveries in such manner as the Government may deem just.
(3.) Rewards shall be given in accordance with the following scale,'
viz.;—
For the discovery of a gold field distant more than twenty
(20) milesfrom any place where payable gold has previously
been obtained, and on which there shall be employed four
months after the report of the discovery, not less than 200
miners, a sum not exceeding five hundred pounds (£500).
For the discovery of a gold field distant more than twenty (20)
miles from the nearest place where payable gold has pre-
viously been obtained, and on which there shall be employed
six (6) months after the report of the discovery has been
made, not less than five hundred (500) miners, a sum not
exceeding one thousand pounds (£1,000).
Interpretation.
93. The following terms in inverted commas shall for the purposes o
these Regulations, unless the context otherwise indicate, bear the meanings
set against them respectively:—
“Miners,” “Miner.”—Any person being the holder of a miner’s right
or any number of persons each being the holder of a miner’s right. The
singular to include the plural and the plural the singular.
“Owners,” “ Owner.”—Any owner, whether jointly or in severalty, and
the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular.
SCHEDULE Al.
Scale of Eees and Rents.
The following shall be the scale of Fees and Rents payable under “ The Gold
Fields Act of 1874” and these regulations :
Under “ The Gold Fields Act,” foi — -g „ a
Miner’s Right ... 0 10 6
Business License ... ... ... ... . 4 0 0
Rent of Gold Mining Leasehold, per acre 1 0 0


Under these Regulations for — * '
Eer ts—Area to stack Tailings per acre inn
Market Garden Area, per acre 1 0 U
Exemptions of— i i n
Gold Mining Leaseholds from labour —one month 1 1 O
Gold Mining Leaseholds from labour —exceeding one month ... 3 3 0
Claim from labour—exceeding one month 0 10 0
Business Area from occupation
Eesidence Area from occupation , n t a
Kenewal of Business or Eesidence Area from occupation ... 0
Eace from use
Transfers of—
Gold Mining Leaseholds or Shares therein n k n
Claims or Shares therein 05 0
Business Areas ... ... ••• ••• ••• 0 5 0
Eesidence Areas ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 0 5 0
Machine Areas ... ... ... ••• ••• n O
Market Garden Areas 0^0
Tailings 4reas * 0 5 0
Water Eace ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 0 5 0
Dam or Eeservoir
All other authorised holdings u 0
Registration of—
Union of Claims ... ••• ••• ••• ••• a k n
x- . ... ... 0 5 U
Lien ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 0 5 0
Eules and Agreements
Stacked Q.uartz ... ... ••• ••• •••
Declaration of Loss of —
Miner’s Eight
Certificate of Eegistration
Transfer Certificate - „
Lien Ticket U 0
Registers— 0 2 6
Examination of (for each entry) ••• u
FOEMS.
Proceedings under the Act and these Eegulations shall be in the following forms
hereinafter set forth, or as near thereto as circumstances will permit
A.
Fee —Ten shillingr.
Queensland.
Date:
District in which issued :
Miner's Right.
Issued to under the provisions of the Act 38 Yictona,
No. 11, to be in force until Warden.
[Not Transferable.]
Eights issued to Asiatic or African aliens, which cannot he made available for new gold nei


B.
Ten shillings per annum for each person.
No.
Queensland.
Date of issue:
District in which issued:
Consolidated Miner's Right.
(For persons for years.)
Issued to under the provisions of the
Act 38 Victoria, No. 11, to be in force until
Warden.
[Not Transferable. |
C.
Fee—£4 per annum.
Queensland.
No.
Rutiness License.
(For year.)
, having duly paid the stipulated fee
in that behalf, is authorised to occupy waste lands for the purpose of residence and
carrying on business upon any gold field in the colony, subject to the provisions of
“ i he Gold Fields Act of 1874,” 38 Vic., No. 11, and to all regulations issued or to
be issued in pursuance thereof.
This license will be in force year from the date hereof and no longer.
Warden.
Place of issue:
Date of issue:
Date of expiration:
D.
Form of Applications for Claims , Areas, etc.
We, the undersigned, hereby give notice to the Warden for the
that we did, on the day of at the hour of o’clock
m., mark off a piece of ground situated or thereabouts ; and we
hereby make application to the said Warden, and request the said warden to grant
us registration thereof as a
Dated at this day of 18 .
E.
No.
Certificate of Application.
This is to certify that the undermentioned person did this day
of ,at the hour of o’clock m., make application for a piece
of ground measuring situated at to be held under the
provisions oi clause of the regulations as a , and should no
valid objection be lodged on or before the day of
the said person will be granted registration for the said ground, to be held as a
Given under my hand, at this
day 18
Warden,
Gold Field.
Note. —This form to be posted on the ground applied for, and at the Warden’s office.


F,
Certificate of Registration.
This is to certify that I hare this day registered as the
holder of subject to
Dated at this day of 18
Warden.
Note. —This certificate is to be issi ed to each shareholder, and must specify the interest or
share held, and must he produced at the Warden’s office when a transfer of the interest is required.
a.
No.
Notice of Application for Abandoned Shares.
I, of , do hereby make application to the
Warden of the to be registered for share in the claim
the said share being abandoned by who
is now the registered holder thereof.
Dated at this day of 18
(Signature.)
Miner's Right.
Signature : No.: Date:
Warden’s 'Office,
18
I hereby giye notice that, in pursuance of the above application, I intend to
register as the first applicant for the share alleged to have been
abandoned by . Provided that no valid objection be lodged with
me within six clear days from the posting and due service of this notice.
Warden.
Note.— This notice must he posted on the claim, and serred on the registered holder and the
liensee, if any.
H.
Application for Exemption from Worlc.
We, the undersigned, shareholders in the do hereby give notice
that, after the expiration of six clear days from this date, we intend to apply for
exemption from work of the above for the period of calendar
months on the grounds following, viz. :
. (Signature.)
Dated this day of A.r>. 18
Objections against the above application must be lodged at the Warden’s office
on or before the day of 18
Note— This application must he posted on the ground and at the Warden’s office for six clear
days. '• •
I.
Form of Objection.
I, the undersigned, do hereby give notice that I object to the registration of
for the following reasons :
And I hereby require the saii Warden to withhold the registration of the said
pending the hearing of any objection by the Warden,
(Signature.)
Received at the Warden’s office, this day
of 18 , at the hour of .m.
Mining Registrar.


J.
No. Fee —Fire shillings.
Form of Transfer.
I, of for valuable consideration, do
hereby transfer to of my
situated subject to all and singular the terms and
conditions under which the said has been held by me ;
and I, of , do hereby accept the said
subject to terms and conditions aforesaid.
Dated at this day of 18 .
* Signature of Transferror.
Signature of Transferree.
K.
Form of Declaration in lieu cf Certificate.
I, , of in the Colony of Queensland
do solemnly and sincerely declare that I have lost my No. ,
by virtue of which I hold , and I make this solemn declaration,
conscientiously believing the same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions
of “ The Oaths Act of 1867,” I request that for the purposes of transfer of
the said this declaration may be received in lieu of the said
lost
Declared before roe at this day of 18 .
Warden (or J.P.)
L.
Transfer Certificate.
This is to certify that I have this day registered a transfer from
to of and the said is
now the registered holder thereof subject to
Dated at this day of 18 .
Warden.
Note. —This Certificate must be produced at the Warden’s office when this interest is
to be again transferred.
M.
No. Fee —Ten shillings.
. Certificate of Registration of Stack of Auriferous Quartz, Sfc.
Under the provisions of the Cold Fields Regulation No. 22, I have this
day registered as the property of the stack of
on the claim known as situated at , and,
provided the conditions of the said regulations are complied with, no person
shall remove the said or any part thereof, for a period of
months from the date hereof, without the permission in
writing of the said
Warden.
Dated at this day of 18 .
Note. —This Certificate must be kept posted on the stack.
N.
No. Fee —Five shillings.
Form of Lien Ticket.
I, , of , do hereby grant to
of a lien upon my share in a
numbered situated as security for the


payment on or before the day of of the
sum of £ , being the amount due and owing by me to the said
; and until the sum aforesaid shall have been paid in full,
I hereby engage and bind myself not to transfer or assign the said share, or
any portion thereof, without the written consent of the said ;
and I, the said hereby accept the said lien upon the said
share as security for the payment within the time specified
of the aforesaid sum of £ ; and upon such payment being
made to me, I hereby engage and bind myself to release the said
Dated at * this day of 18 •
Miners’ Eights.
Lienor No. Date
Lienee No. Date
Witness
The within lien was registered by me this day of
18 ,at the hour of o'clock, .m.
Warden.
0.
Application for Union of Claims.
the day of 18 .
We, the undersigned, being the registered holders of three-fourths of
the interests in the claims numbered respectively , and situated
hereby request the Warden of the to unite the claims aforesaid
as one claim, under the style of
Miners' Rights.
Name No. Date
Share in United Claim.
P.
Certificate of Union.
This is to certify that I have this day of at
the hour of * o’clock .m., united as one claim, under the style of
the undermentioned claims, that is to say :
Given under my hand at this day of 18 .
Warden.
Name of shareholder share in United Claim.
Q.
Rower oj Attorney.
T, , of , do hereby authorise of
,to act as my agent. And I [hereby declare this authority to
be irrevocable, and] agree that all and whosoever the shall
lawfully do under this power I will at all times ratify and confirm as good
and valid.
Dated at this day of A.n. 18 .
(Signature.)
Note.— This power of attorney will tie considered cancelled at the Warden’s
office by the Principal.
E.
Notice and Application for Water-right.
We, the undersigned, hereby give notice that it is our intention to take
and divert sluice heads of water, and to cut a race for the
purpose of leading such water to , and to construct


Schedule to accompany Application for Auriferous Lease.
Situation and boundaries of
the ground applied for.
Area.
The term or period for which
the ground is required.
Information on the following head to be subjoined.
for the purpose of storing such water. The length of the
oOWsnid will he or thereabouts; and it is our intention
race aforesaid will be the Warden
to make application on the day or . . ~
for the , for registration of the water-right aforesaid.
Dated at , this day of
Mihees’ Eight.
Signatures: No. Date,
S.
Certificate of Application for Water-right.
This is to certify that the undermentioned persons did, on the ,
day of , 18 at the hour of o clock
m notify to me their intention to take and divert 8 uice „
heads ot water i. > »"f the P”P° se °*
. W o+ P r to > and to construct at
® for the purpose of storing such water, and did at the same
time produce to me the undermentioned miners’ rights, and I have received no
notice or objection thereto. ,
Given under my hand, at > 11S
°f ,18 . Warden.
Schedule No. 1.
Application for Auriferous Lease.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act 38 Tie., No. 11. and of the regulations
L ,' * do hereby apply for a lease of
established thereunder fields (which is
more particularly described in the annexed schedule, and the [surveyor s] plan and
description herewith), for the purpose of mining for gold; and
hereby tender the sum of as deposit, in accordance with the
existing regulations. . . » n 1 s
Given under hand, this day.of
t
To the Warden,
Gold field. . ~
Eeceived from the sum of ein g 1
amount of deposit on application for auriferous lease. Warden.
Not*' —lf the application is made by an association or company, the constitution 011 the
association or company hy which the ground will he worked, the number of shares, and the na ne
of the shareholders.
;Here°!oll(WS a SSSS” Stations should always be signed by the applicant
or applicants, or by bis or tbeir accredited agents.


Schedule No. 2.
Notice of Application.
Notice is hereby given, that the undersigned, have made
application this day for a lease under the Glold Fields Eegulations of ground known
as containing acres roods
perches, commencing
As witness hand and seal at this
day of 18
Schedule No. 3.
Transfer of Auriferous Lease.
Know all men by these presents that proprietors
of auriferous lease No. known as on the
gold field, commencing at and containing
acres roods . perches, do hereby transfer
and assign all right, title, and interest in the said lease to
j arid hereby request that this transfer
may be registered at the office of the Minister for Mine's, and at the office of the
Warden for the gold fields accordingly.
In witness whereof have hereto set hand and seal this
day of 18
Signature of Transferror.
Signed, sealed, and delivered by the said in my
presence.
JUDICIAL EEGULATIONS.
1. In all civil cases the proceedings shall be commenced by a plaint in
the form No. 1 in the schedule, or as near thereto as circumstances will
permit.
2. The plaint shall be filed in the Warden’s office five clear days before
the return day of the summons.
3. The plaint shall set forth the name and address of the plaintiff, and
also of the defendant, so far as the same are known to the plaintiff. It must
set forth a sufficient cause of action or complaint, and conclude with a prayer
for the relief to which the plaintiff’ shall conceive himself entitled.
4. The items or particulars of demand (if any) shall be annexed to or
contained in the plaint.
5. In all cases where particulars of demand are required to be annexed
the plaintiff shall deliver to the Warden or his clerk, at the time of filing the
plaint, as many copies of the particulars of demand as there are defendants
to be served, and an additional copy to be attached to the summons.
6- Where the plaintiff sues for a debt or damages, but desires to abandon
a portion, or to admit a set-off, and sue for the residue, the abandonment or
the admission of a set-off shall be entered on the particulars and copies.
7. Upon the filing of the plaint, the Warden or his clerk shall issue a
summons in the form No. 2 in the schedule.
8. Such summons may be made returnable at any time fixed by the
Warden.


9. Where a summons has not been served, successive summonses
may be issued without entering a fresh plaint, provided that no
successive summonses shall be issued on a plaint that has been filed
more than six (6) months.
10. Every summons shall be served at least four clear days before
the return day thereof, unless the defendant resides beyond fifty miles
from the court, when it must be served at least ten clear days.
11. The service of the summons, except in the cases hereinafter
specially provided for, shall be either personal on the defendant or
his registered agents, or by delivering the same to some, person
apparently fourteen years old, at the place of abode or business of
the defendant or his agents. If such service be found impossible by
reason of the defendant being absent from the gold field for more
than fourteen days without having appointed and registered some
person on the gold field as his agent, then it shall be deemed sufficient
service if a copy thereof be posted at the Warden’s office; and if the
cause of action relates to any mining tenement, then also on a
conspicuous part of such tenement.
12. Where the defendant is working in any mine or other works
under ground, it shall be sufficient service to deliver the summons at
the mine or works to the engineman, banksman, or other person
apparently in charge of the mine or works.
13. Service of a summons may be effected on a mining company,
or other corporation, by delivering the summons to a secretary,
manager, or clerk of the defendant, at any office within the gold field
or jurisdiction of the court.
14. Wffiere a defendant avoids service, or keeps his house or place
of business closed in order to avoid service, it shall be sufficient
service to affix the summons on the door of such house or place of
business, or leave the summons as near thereto as possible.
15. The above rules as to the mode of service of a summons shall
apply to the mode of service of all summonses, subpoenas, processes,
orders, or notices whatsoever, except where otherwise directed by the
Act or Regulations.
16. Wo summons, subpoena, process, or notice shall be served on
a Sunday, Good Friday, or Christmas Day, but such days shall be
counted in the computation of time required in respect of service.
17. Wherever it is the intention of the defendant to dispute the
right of the plaintiff; to the relief sought for, or any part thereof, the
defendant shall, at least two clear days before the return day of the
summons, serve the Warden or his clerk with a notice of defence, in
the form No. 3 in the schedule, containing a statement of the grounds
upon which he relies. But whenever a defendant intends to plead
that he is not indebted by reason of his not being a shareholer in
any mining venture, he shall specify the same in his plea.
18. Each party shall be entitled to procure the attendance of
witnesses by means of subpoena in the form No. 4 in the schedule, or
as near thereto as circumstances will permit. Every witness so
summoned shall be entitled to require payment of all necessary
expenses of attendance at the hearing.
19. In all actions for recovery of a debt or money demand the
defendant shall be at liberty to include in the grounds of defence all
matters of set-off.


20. In all other cases the defendant may pray for any cross relief
to which he may conceive himself entitled as against the plaintiff in
respeet of the same subject-matter.
21. The items or particulars of such set-off, or the grounds upon
which the cross relief is prayed, shall be set forth in the defendant’s
notice of defer ce.
22. Notices of demand of a trial by assessors shall be made in
writing to the warden or his clerk two clear days before the day of
hearing, and the summonses to the intended assessors shall be delivered
forthwith for service.
23. If at the return day of the summons, or at any adjournment of
the court at which it is returnable, the plaintiff does not appear, and the
defendant does appear and does not admit the plaintiff’s demand, the
Warden may in his discretion award the costs in the same manner and to
the same amount as if the case had been tried.
24. The Warden shall in each case direct what number of witness are
to be allowed on taxation of costs between party and*party, and their allow-
ance shall in no case exceed the rates mentioned in the scale in the schedule.
25. All warrants of execution shall bear date on the day on which they
are issued, and shall continue in force for twelve calendar months from such
date and no longer, but may be renewed before the expiration of twelve
months for a further like period, upon affidavit being filed that the debt has
not been paid, and shall be in the form in the schedule applicable to the par-
ticular case, or as near thereto as circumstances will permit.
26. When a defendant has made default in payment of the whole
amount awarded by the judgment, or of an instalment thereof, a warrant of
execution may issue for the whole amount of judgment and costs then re-
maining unsatisfied.
27. All goods sold in execution shall be sold publicly, and for ready
money, by the bailiff or his deputy, to the highest bidder, at or near the
place where the same were levied upon, as may be convenient for the sale
thereof. .
28. Notice of sale under execution shall be giveu by the bailiff or his
deputy, by affixing notice thereof upon or near the door of the house or place
where the sale is to be made, four days at least before the day appointed for
such sale, which shall not be earlier than the sixth day from the day of levy-
ing upon the goods.
29. If before notice of appeal is served upon the Warden execution shall
have issued, and the amount of the judgment and costs of execution shall
have been paid into the hands of the bailiff, or levied and not paid over to
the successful party, the same shall remain in court to abide the result of
the appeal.
30. Within the time specified by the 71st clause of “ The G-old Fields
Act of 1874,” the appealing party shall give security to the satisfaction of
the Warden, by bond with one or two sureties, or by deposit, to answer the
costs of appeal, in the event of the judgment being upheld wholly cr partially;
and such bond or deposit shall be available to the opposite party as a security
for the payment of any moneys which may be payable under the order made
on appeal.
31. When the court of appeal has pronounced judgment, either party
may deposit the original order of the court of appeal, or an office copy thereof,
with the Warden, who shall thereupon enter judgment, or otherwise act
according to the direction of the court of appeal.


82. In all cases where a notice or thing is required to he given or done
within a period of twenty-four hours or forty-eight hours, no part of a
Sunday, Christmas Day, or Good Friday shall he included in the computation
83. All notices required by the Act or these Regulations may be given
to the attorney or agent in lieu of the party.
34. The judgment in detinue, if for the plaintiff, shall be tor the value
of the goods detained, together with a sum to be stated in the judgment by
wav of damages for the detention and costs ; but it may be made part of the
order that on payment of damages for the detention and costs, and return of
the goods on or before a day named, satisfaction shall be entered.
35. The forms in the schedule shall be adopted, so far as circumstances
will permit, in all cases to which they are applicable.
36 In all cases where the practice or procedure of the W arden s court
is not sufficiently defined by these Regulations, the practice and procedure
of the District Courts shall, as far as possible, be adopted.
37. The scale of fees to be charged for processes issued out of the
Warden’s courts shall be according to the schedule No. 13 hereto annexed,
and all such fees shall be entered in a book to be kept for that purpose and
be remitted monthly to the credit of the General Revenue.
38. In cases in which the value of the matter in dispute does not exceed
£lO the Warden shall be guided in taxation of costs by the scale of fees in
like s cases in Small Debts Courts. In cases in which the subject-matter is of
greater value than £lO he shall be guided by the scale of fees in the District
Courts in cases of like amount. In all cases when there is no money demand
the Warden or Warden’s court shall determine what is the value of the
matter in dispute. , . . ~ , 3 ,
39. Witnesses’ expenses shall be allowed at the rate in the schedule
No. 14.’
SCHEDULES.
No. 1.
Form of Flaint.
In the Warden’s Court at [Oympie].
A.B. of [Gympie] complains of C.D. of for that [here state
qrounds on which 'plaintiff proceeds, e.g.: the said C.D. is indebted to the said A.B,
in the sum of £ for goods sold and delivered, items and particulars
whereof are hereto annexed ; or the said C.D. has not for the space of three days
worked or registered a certain claim known as whereof he was
lately in possession; or the said C.D. is indebted to the said A.B. m the sum of
£ J upon the balance of accounts of a partnership between the said A.B.
and 0.D., a statement of which accounts is hereto annexed]. .
The said A.B. therefore prays that [here state relief sought by plaintiff, e.g. :
the said C.D. may he ordered to pay the same; or the said C.D. may he declared to
have forfeited the said claim.
No. 2.
Form of Summons.
In the Warden’s Court at [Gympie].
T ° 'SSS'ZI'S' the.Warden’, Court at
iouaie J rx ten o’cloCk 0 ’ c l 0C k in the forenoon, to answer
Z Mowing complaint of A.B. of * <“• **
out a copy of plaint].


If you desire to have the said complaint heard before assessors, you are entitled
to have it so heard upon payment of the necessary fees.
You may have a summons to compel the attendance of any witness, or for the
production of any books, plans, or documents, on applying at my office.
If you intend to dispute the plaintiff’s claim, you must file in this office a notice
of defence containing the grounds of your defence at least two clear days before the
day appointed for hearing.
Dated this day of
Warden or Registrar.
Ho. 3.
Notice of Defence.
In the Warden’s Court at [Oympie].
A.B. v. C.D,
To the abovenamed plaintiff.
Take notice that I intend to defend the plaintiff’s claim in this action on the
following grounds, viz. [here set forth the different grounds on which the defendant
rests his defence. If the defendant prays for cross relief proceed as follows
And the defendant complains of the plaintiff for that the plaintiff [proceed as
in plaint]. The defendant therefore prays that [proceed as in plaint].
Dated this day of
Defendant.
Ho. 4.
Form of Subpoena.
In the Warden’s Court at [Oympie],
Between A. 8., plaintiff, and C.D., defendant.
To E.F., of
You are hereby required to attend before this court on the
day of at ten o’clock in the forenoon, and at
every adjournment of this case, to give evidence on behalf of the [plaintiff'or
defendant']. And you are hereby required to produce to the court [here state the
particular things required to be produced]. And also all other books, papers,
documents, plans, or things in your custody, possession, or power, relating to the
subject-matter of this case.
If you neglect to comply with this summons you will be liable to a fine of £lO,
or in default of payment to imprisonment for one calendar month.
Dated this day of
Warden or Registrar.
Ho. 5.
Summons to Assessors.
In the Warden’s Court at f Gi/mpie].
A.B. v. C.D.
You are hereby summoned to appear and serve as an assessor in this court at
on , the day of ,
18 ,at the hour of ,in the noon, upon the trial of the above cause,
and in default of your attendance you will be a liable to a fine of £ .
Given under the seal of the court, this day of , 18 .
Warden or Registrar.
To ) of


No. 6.
Order fining Assessor for Non-aitendence.
In the Warden’s Court at [Gympie}.
A.B. v. C.D.
Whereas of was duly summoned
to appear and serve this day as an assessor in this court upon the trial of the above
cause; and whereas he has neglected without sufficient cause shown to appear and
serve as an assessor at this court: It is hereby ordered that he shall forthwith pay
to the Warden of this court a fine of £5 for such neglect.
Given under the seal of the court this day of A.D. 18 .
By the Court,
Warden or Registrar.
No. 7.
Form of Judgment.
In the Warden’s Court at [Gympie}.
A.B. v. C.D.
The court finds upon the verdict of* thatf
and the court orders^
Dated this day of 18
Warden.
No. 8.
Order authorising Fntry on adjacent Claim.
Whereas P.Q. of [Gympie] claims to be interested in a claim [or in certain land
comprised in a lease dated 18 ,in favour of the said
granted under “ The Gold Fields Act of 1874”], which
claim [or land! 'adjoins the claim [or land] hereinafter mentioned, and the said P.Q.
has applied to me for authority to enter upon and inspect the claim [or land] herein-
after mentioned for the purpose of ascertaining whether the owner or occupier thereof
is encroaching upon the claim [or land] of the said P.Q.: Now therefore I hereby
authorise the said P.Q., together with xMr. a mining surreyor, and
G.H. and I.K. his assistants [or with Mr. an experienced miner],
to enter upon the claim [or land] known as for the purpose
of ascertaining whether the owner or occupier thereof is encroaching on the said
claim [or land] of the said P.Q.
Dated this day of 18
Warden.
No. 9.
Notice of Application for Injunction.
To C.D. [of Gympie'].
Take notice that I intend to apply to the Warden’s Court at [Gympie] on
the day of 18 , at ten o’clock
in the forenoon, that an injunction may be granted by the Warden, restraining you
from [here state acts required to be prevented, as, for instance, “ working the
claim known as ”J upon the following grounds namely —[here
state the grounds in separate paragraphs ].
Dated at [ Gympie} , this day of 18
A.B.
* The Warden, or Wardens and Assessors (as the case may be),
t Insert decision.
} Set forth the order in full.


No. 10.
Form for Injunction.
In the Warden’s Court at [Gympie].
Upon the application of A.B. of [Gympie], whereof due notice has been given
by the parties interested in opposing the same [or to such of the parties interested
in opposing the same as appear to me sufficient to represent the parties so interested],
and upon hearing C.D. and E.E., interested parties, and the evidence adduced by
them, in opposition to the said application, I do hereby order and enjoin that the
said C.D. and E.F., and each of them, their and each of their servants, workmen, and
agents, be restrained from [here state terms of injunction granted ] until the
’ q a y 0 f 18 [ln cases of appeal if manager to be appointed
add and I app’oint J.K. of [Gympie] as manager of the said claim [or lease, fyc.] to
carry on the works thereonand to pay the expenses thereof out of the receipts there-
from, and to pay unexpended balance on such receipts into this court weekly].
Dated this day of 18 .
No. 11.
In the Warden’s Court at [Gympie].
Affidavit of Service of Summons or Subpoena.
Between A. 8., plaintiff, and 0.D., defendant,
j of in the Colony of Queensland,
make oath and say that I did on the day of 18 ,
duly serve the defendant C.D. with a summons [or subpoena], a true copy whereof
is hereto annexed marked A, at by deliTering the same personally to
the said defendant [or as the case may be].
Signed and sworn at
aforesaid, this (
day of C
a.d. 18 , before me )
0.P., Bailiff.
[ Indorse the copy summons as subpoena with the following certificate, to be signed
by the person before whom the affidavit is sworn. ] This is the paper •writing
marked “A” referred to in the annexed affidavit of O.P. Sworn before me at
this day of A.P. 18
No. 12.
In the Warden’s Court at [Gympie].
Warrant of Execution on a Judgment.
Between A. 8., plaintiff, and C.D., defendant.
To of l ailiff of the Warden’s Court and to the
Deputy Bailiffs duly authorised to execute the processes of this court.
Whereas, on the day of 18 the plaintiff obtained a judgment of
this court against the defendant for the sum of £ for debt [or damages]
and costs [or it was ordered by the court that judgment should be entered for the
defendant, or that judgment of nonsuit should be entered and that the sum of £
for costs be paid by the plaintiff to the defendant; and whereas default has been
made in the payment thereof: These are therefore to require and order you forth-
with to levy of the lands, tenements, and hereditaments, goods, chattels, credits,
and effects of the defendant [or plaintiff] wheresoever they may be found, the
sum of pounds shillings pence, besides the costs of this
execution, and also to seize and take any money or bank rotes, and any cheques,
bills of exchange, promissory notes, or securities for money of the defendant [or
plaintiff], or such part or so much thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy this execution
and the costs of making and executing the same, and forthwith to return the same
to me, to be paid over to the plaintiff [or defendant] together with this warrant.
Dated this day of 18
By the Court,
Warden or Registrar.


£ s. d.
Judgment
Costs
... ... ...
Execution ... ... ••• •••
Alias...
£
No. 13.
s.
d.
For every information or plaint
1
1
0
A
For every summons ...
JL
A
U
c*
For every copy
u
D
A
For every notice of defence ...
i
u
For every order of Warden ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••
1
0
A
For every execution ...
2
U
For every declaration filed ... ... ■ • • • • • • ■ •
2
e
0
For every injunction ...
D
0
Bailitt’s Fees.
For every service of summons or subpoena ... ...
2
6
Possession of money per diem, if in actual possession
7
0
Mileage one way on all processes served by bailiff (exclusive of
first mile) per mile
1
0
For every levy
5
0
No. U-
Witnesses’ Expenses.
£
s.
d.
Professional men per diem ... ... ... ...
... 1
1
0
All others per diem ...
... 0
7
6
Mileage for every mile after first two miles, one way only
... o
1
0
By Authority: James 0. Beal, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane.






