

GOLD
MINING
HENRY MARSHALL,
-A-IN" Q'-A-STOHSr -
Author of “ Psychology and Evolution.”
■» ♦ ♦
gibclaibf:
CAREY, PAGE & CO., PRINTERS, WAY.MOUTH STREET.




GOLD
MINING
HENRY MARSHALL,
A-asra-ASTON - .
Author of “ Psychology and Evolution
gibrlaiit*:
CAREY, PAGE & CO., PRINTERS, WAYMOUTH STREET.




GOLD AND MINING.
Murchison’s opinion was that Silurian rocks, especially that
portion lying below the Llandovery beds, were those in which
gold appears more generally abundant than any other. In
ancient and modern times this seems to hold good. The Romans
extracted gold in Wales, near Llandovery, from white quartzose
veins traversing slaty rocks. In Wales gold can now be
extracted from the same strata, the older Silurians. The great
geologist predicted the discovery of gold in Australia, by com-
paring the rocks with the auriferous region of the Ural. Gold
appears in every part of the world along veins of igneous
origin, traversing veins of crystallised rocks of the lower Silurian
group. Where these beds are only slightly solidified, with no
igneous action, is no trace of gold; nor in igneous rocks of the
same kind which pierce them when traversing any other stratum.
The two conditions seem to be necessary. These remarks may not
be within the comprehension of some persons, still, such are the
facts, according to the high authority quoted, although recent
facts have rather modified this.
Now another later, and also great authority, Mr. R. B. Smyth,
of Victoria, says, “ Contrary to expectation, flat bands of
auriferous quartz have been found in dykes of diorite, which inter- -
sect the upper Silurian or lower Devonian rocks. Quartz of extra-
ordinary richness has been obtained from these bands, and the new
experience of the miner is leading him to look for gold in places
hitherto neglected.”
Then comes a third exponent. Phillips’ Metallurgy states :
“ The gold of California and Australia is derived from the three
following sources:—
First. —Auriferous veins, most frequently enclosed in metamorphic
slates.
Second.—Deposits of alluvial gold occupying ancient river courses.
Third. —Deposits in which the gold of ancient river systems has
been redistributed by modern streams. This last seems to
apply to the Humbug Scrub.


Then (Booth) comes the fact that the original position of gold
is in iron and arsenical pyrites. This is important to note in
South Australian investigations. Now, after all these premises,
which may be correct, what guide are they to any ordinary mind
wishing to enter upon a gold venture 1 Perhaps you might say,
none, for the simple reason that many may never have heard of
them.
Geology can map out the positions and boundaries of the for-
mations, and there, as regards gold, and may be other metals, its
province ends. The mineralogical details of gold mining are
another affair. Those who read the articles some time back in
the Observer on Ballarat past and present, will see this.
There is no occasion for me to repeat what I have been so
pertinaciously urging in the numerous articles I have passed
through the press for the last twenty years, viz., that we must
have a complete geological survey, an ordnance survey, in short, as
this is one of the few countries without one, and an organised
mining museum. We must know the conditions of gold develop-
ment, and if these .exist within our territory —from here to
Carpentaria. This can only be done by an extensive staff, as in
Victoria, at some expense, and in some years. No practical
deductions can be had until this is done. We know neither
localities nor boundaries; in fact, we know nothing but the con-
jectures of this geologist, that mining agent, or some one foisted
forth and called an expert. This term “ expert ” has been so
dragged about that lam sick of it. I doubt if there is a reliable
expert in the colony. We should know whether our gold is likely
to be deeper seated than in Victoria, in consequence of our
denudation being less. Not disparaging the talent _of any one,
but the system, I must remark that when our attention was first
directed to Echunga, which I well remember, as I went to the
Victoria diggings at that time, Mr. Babbage, certainly a highly
talented man in many things, was selected to report upon our
supposed gold districts, though neither he nor any one else knew
much about such at that time. He told us what rocks were in various
places, and so forth; and that was about all that could be done
then. When I produced the rock specimens from Forest Creek
and Angaston, he disputed the existence of volcanic rocks at
Angaston and of the enormous quantity of basalt in Melbourne,
although he had not been to either locality; but in his after
printed report from Angaston he said “ he found himself in such an
interesting volcanic country, that he spent another day in examining
it.” When he went to Melbourne he found the city built of basalt,
called bluestone. A thousand or two pounds sterling were
thrown away, and we were no wiser.


Then. Mr. Selwyn was sent for. He had only six months to
scuffle over the country, from Cape Jervis to Mount Serle.
Having been government geologist in Victoria, he certainly did
know something, and was pretty correct, yet he said he could not
find any felspar at Angaston, although he must have walked over
a reef or two, and from which, at surface, I took a splendid rhomb
crystal 41bs. in weight. Another large sum was expended here,
and still we were no wiser.
Next came Hargraves, who, it is said, first found gold on the
other side, and because he did so was supposed to know all about
it. His report was ludicrous. £BOO went there \ still we were
no wiser, and geologists kept on raving.
Last scene of all that ends this strange but uneventful history,
Mr. Brown arrives, as land others presumed, to make a survey of
the colony, from the black border to the white elephant; but
he seemed to be ordered here and there by the government, which
created some dissatisfaction. Mr. Brown is a highly talented
man, and in every way fitted for the task he was supposed to
undertake, only the powers that be won’t let him do it in a proper
manner. This is actually an injury to Mr. Brown’s reputation;
it is not right, and almost had the appearance of making a mere
tool of him for serving the interests of certain parties. Instead
of dictating to such a man what to do, it should be his province
to tell them what to do. Besides, generally speaking, it may not
follow that even a most accomplished geologist is perforce a good
and experienced mineralogist, or knows anything of mining, or
even of pure mineralogy in regard to that; and it is no discredit
to such, although it is absurd to suppose that because a man may
be well versed in one or two particular branches of science or
natural history, and may have credentials for such, perhaps
backed with B.A. to his name, he must know everything, from
the anatomy of a cockroach, to the formation of a quartz crystal,
but it would be a discredit if he were to say that a metallic ore
must be iron pyrites before assay has proved whether it is pure silver,
copper, or even gold. This is presuming on his position, and mislead-
ing the public. A highly talented geologist was shown a specimen
of rich nickel ore from New Caledonia, and was sure it was green
carbonate of copper, even declaring the percentage. It is very
deceiving-looking stuff, I must say. I have the fellow half.
It was a discredit to Mr. Hargraves, on being shown two speci-
mens of quartz, to say that such quartz could not contain gold ; for
when turned over, gold was seen on both. One was from Sand-
hurst, the other from surface on Barossa Ranges. I have these.
There are not a dozen men in England who can, by merely look-
ing at a stone, say with certainty what metal is in it, and if
not perhaps two or three.


Some people think a mine must be a gold, silver or copper mine,
without anything else. This may do for such as the Burra and
Kapunda, or even Wallaroo, but when you come to Mexico, the
Hartz, or even such a place as Angaston, the case is altered.
Here is an instance. The silver mine of Zmeof, in Siberia, opened
on a great vein containing argentiferous native gold, auriferous
native silver, sulphuret of silver, horn silver, gray copper,
sulphide of copper, green and blue carbonates of copper, red
oxide of copper, copper pyrites, sulphide of lead, and great masses
of arsenic, slightly silver bearing; also zinc, and arsenical pyrites.
Mackay’s silver mine, in which he obtained £90,000,000 worth
of silver in six years, contained forty-seven parts gold, and fifty-
three silver, so the chief value was gold. All the steam and man
power he could have put on could scarcely have raised stuff enough
to produce such an enormous amount of sterling silver, but as the
predominant figure goes for silver, it was called a silver mine.
Gold is a precarious metal to work for, and you may have, you
think, a very clear idea in your own mind from limited observation,
and hearof aspecimen in someother locality which will upset all your
theories, and the laws of its development being so little under-
stood, renders it especially desirable to collect all possible data,
even from all parts of the world. I found this the case in
Melbourne, and also on seeing some extraordinary combinations
from the Lady Alice and Moonta. What I want to see is collec-
tions of the rocks and ores of every mine in the colony, arranged
as the specimens were at Melbourne Exhibition, so that the whole
formation can be seen at a glance, and notes of all compass bear-
ings and changes and water levels (very important) along with
them. We have no end of professors in all sorts of branches,
some not at all required, at high salaries and little practical out-
come for the general good; but with regard to our most important
and risky industry—mining, not a single step seems to be taken
to collect and diffuse information for guidance, and I say, most
unreservedly, that it is a disgrace that something is not done \ the
Victorian Government disburses large sums for mineral explora-
tion purposes, and almost all we know of ours has been from
accidental surface discoveries. South Australia is a great copper
producing country, but there is such an enormous quantity of this
metal in other parts of the world, where labour is cheaper and
the appliances of a much more advanced nature, that it will not
pay here unless some discovery in science creates an immense
demand. There is copper enough in Australia to supply the
world at present, and I have good authority for saying that in
the north of Australia, somewhere about the head of the Clon-
curry river, 300 miles S.E. of Gulf of Carpentaria, there are whole


hills of native copper, but at present useless on account of
transit difficulties. Our lead ought to pay, and if a little silver
was in, let it remain if not payable for extraction. I strongly
suspect we have mercurial deposits in the north. Queensland, I
hear, has them without having to import. We have some rich
manganese, but there is an enormous deposit in America, fifteen
miles long and three wide, and meanwhile ours is useless. Why
is not our nickel in the north investigated 1 A most valuable
affair. Even Tasmania is ahead of us in technical information
re mining. The Bischoff tin mines were only found in 1875, and
this notice was in a Tasmanian paper :
Emit Bay, Jan. 27, 1883.
It is understood that several large ships will shortly sail from London
to Emu Bay direct, bringing nearly 4,000 tons of railway material for the
railway to Bischoff. One ship is believed to be on her way out.
There are no means of getting an ore or rock analysed here but
at great expense ; and I often, have to refer to Melbourne for
information, and have received great assistance from gentlemen
there. Here, if you bring forward any new idea, or wish to do
any good, you are exceptioned by parties who know little of
these matters practically, sent out here at high salaries, who of
course do not think it convenient to be put at a discount, and they
are glad enough to make a tool of you for their self-glorification
and prestige.
The expenses and salaries connected with our so-called Univer-
sity are enormous; some of the professorships are next door to
sinecures. Professors of law, English literature and classics are
not wanted.
This, from a Hew Zealand paper, is in place here ;
Wellington, Dec. 27, 1883.
We imported a great geologist —I mention no names—who had to learn
what the strata of this curious country was composed of from men who
knew more than himself, and whose scientific attainments were equally high-.
What we essentially want, is a School of Mines, as at Ballarat.
This fine institution is doing good at about the salaries of three
of our professors, about £3,000 a year, £2,000 of which is paid by
the Yictorian Government.
Some time ago, owing, I believe, to a communication from me,
passed through our Royal Society, an appointment was decided
on of a public analyst; I think it is mixed up with the chemical
professorship. It cannot be expected that any person can or
should be expected to pay from three to twenty guineas for the
analysis of a mineral, (simple assay is not enough.) One or two
rich mines might be of immense benefit to this little colony. As
to being guided by the ipse dixit of mining captains and
such like, it is ludicrous. One sent me auriferous pyrites in


baryta, and labelled the barite, “ galena” (silver lead); did not
know what jasper was, and was in doubt about the yellow
copper ore, thinking it was nickel. Silver ores are very perplex-
ing, silver lead is not a silver ore proper, but galena containing
silver. Silver is often alloyed with gold, as gold is with silver,
so you call it auriferous silver, if silver predominates, or argenti-
ferous gold, if the gold predominates. I have seen large nuggets
from the Northern Territory as much like the handle of a tea-
spoon as a sovereign. Some silver mines cannot be worked to
great depth, the ores generating so much heat, and they often
get rapidly poorer from surface ; so to keep a good supply it is
desirable to open up fresh mines.
Showing how deceptive silver ores are, a noted mineralogist
many years ago visited a friend in Devonshire, and noticed a
great quantity of dirty-looking stones stuck round the garden
beds. Taking one up, he asked his friend if he had any more.
“ Two or three shiploads, and would be glad to get rid of it any
how; for the Government would not have it even for road metal.”
So the mineralogist offered him a good price for it, although the
other would gladly have given it for the removal. However, a
bargain was made, and he was then asked how he got it. His
father or grandfather was privateering, and got hold of some
Spanish ships, which were brought home and destroyed, and this
was the ballast; only it was rich silver ore for Spain.
If something is not done to render our mining operations more
knowledgeable, we shall get in a mess, for if our mines do not
well hold their own, our credit will suffer at home, as wheat and
copper are at a discount, and mining will be one of our chief
staples. If 5 dwts. a ton keeps a gold mine paying dividends in
Victoria, and we get four times as much, there is a fault some-
where. We know nothing of our rich mineral resources. I
would not be surprised if we should find platinum very likely
thrown away as iron, just as silver ore has been thrown away as
gossan, though it assayed 60 ozs. per ton, or as the country of a
copper lode, formerly at the Almanda.
Every iron reef is supposed to be an iron mine, whereas scarcely
one in a dozen is such, but only a rich iron hat over other metal.
The late Mr. Wyatt melted a lot of iron, and was going to do all
sorts of things; couldn’t get it to set as he wanted, and gave up.
I asked him to let me see the ores and the stuff he produced.
After examining it, and filing it, I said, “ did you get this ore
analysed T “No !” I said, “ Next time you put a black stone
in the pot, do so, as for all any one knows, it might be a
Cornish pasty.” I said, “There is likely silver here.” “Why, I
never thought of that,” he said. We should have had some nice
coroners’ inquests, if he had made railway axles of it.


But I most earnestly hope that something will be done to
diffuse practical information respecting our mineral resources, for
mining will be one of our main resources to keep the colony going.
Our capitalists invest in Tasmania, Queensland, and N. S. Wales.
It can be done here, as well as in other parts, and the sooner the
better. Half the so-called mining swindling is no such thing, but
failure caused by want of reliable data to work upon, and it is
vexing to see capital invested in good faith, and then lost because
things do not turn out as expected, besides being deceived in many
cases by unprincipled individuals.
It was reported in print that a gold reef at Blumberg was rated
at 18,000 ozs. of gold per ton of quartz. Of course, if you get a
patch of gold in a quartz lump, and trim away the quartz, you can
estimate that particular specimen anyhow. The thing is
preposterous. You may also have a lot of gold in a yard block in
a reef, and not a particle in the next dozen; if people are led
away by such assertions they must suffer. There was also the
Union Reef in Queensland, shown here, with 600 ozs. per ton,
and the large specimens certainly showed it; but what is it now 1
I have a specimen of quartzite from Tasmania, showing nothing,
but assayed 16 ozs. per ton. We have much gold, but it may be
under different conditions to what obtain in other countries.
The pacos of Peru are iron and copper oxides, containing a great
quantity of gold. What will hold in one country may not in
others. The German iron hat is similar to these pacos, and we
may, and I suspect have, the same here ; and if we find one, there
may be many such.
Years ago I sent some very various and beautiful specimens
of rocks and copper ores to the Rev. W. B. Clarke, at Sydney,
from the Crinnis works at Angaston, and he and others said they
knew nothing of the value of the mine commercially, but it must
be one of the most wonderful places in the world. The Crinnis is
a drift or slide from lodes missed, and the Lady Alice is in a
similar position. The Crinnis lodes originate on Mr. Sibley’s
land, where the beautiful Angaston marble is, and from surface
in one hole I had twenty samples tried, well analysed by Mr.
Trewenack, who took great pains with them, as I told him to
spare neither time nor expense. There were irons of 70 per cent.,
marbles, and opal, all containing bright metallic veins, looking
like pure copper, silver, or gold, different colours, and different
cuts. Mr. Trewenack was rather astounded at the combination,
and was afraid I was disappointed, but I said, “You’re a hero,
and have told me what I wanted to know, viz., what was not in
them,” and I knew then it was a most valuable iron hat; a little
gold, however, in one specimen of sinter, where it ought to be.
If any or all of the suspected metals obtained, as appeared to the


eye, I should have been utterly bewildered. It is strange that
our geologists have never examined this wonderful district. The
metamorphic rocks and action are very powerful and extra-
ordinary. The Alice is a confusion, but Malcolm’s Barossa con-
fusion worse confounded. Mind, no deception of a wilful nature,
but simple ignorance of the parties concerned. In 1880 I passed
a number of articles through the Observer, from March to June,
respecting ore development, in which were some remarkable facts
not generally known. Perhaps some persons may have retained
copies. I have heard Cornish captains call marble, granite, and
the Melbourne basalt, black irony spar. Our rocks are, many of
them, very unique, and would puzzle many a good mineralogist,
and this shows still more the want of a mining museum and
analyst. I generally take the representative action, say basalt, a
trap, admitted to be volcanic, will cause certain changes in rocks
from heat, and perhaps pressure. Diorite, analogous, a still more
important rock to note, as connected with mineral formations,
presumed to have been in same state, volcanic ; if so, analogous
effects may be expected. Hornblende also very important. Then
there is schistoze diorite, apparently stratified, but terribly
hardened, hornblendic diorite, porphyritic diorite, and diorite
porphyry. It is really awful, and we have to compass all these
matters. However, I think I have said enough to prove that it
is time some measures were taken t<s render us a little more
enlightened as to the phenomena of our mineral development, and
thus to induce more confidence in our applications of capital, and
I maintain that the Government is morally responsible for much
of the swindling connected with mining operations. It is more
their duty to see that our minerals are collected, classified, and
named, than our animals, birds, and insects, which is carried on at
great expense. It is all very well for us naturalists to know the
difference between a beetle and a bug, but far more important to
the interests of the community that the difference between a
quartz crystal and a diamond should be understood, or if a slate
or iron casing is best in a gold reef.
With respect to gold and the theories respecting its develop-
ment, I may as well make a few remarks, as they may be interest-
ing to others than the commercial community. From the
investigations I have pursued in connection with gold and other
matters, I am nearly certain that some electric agency has to
do with it; also, that it is more than probable that gold may be
now evolving from its atomic state, which will admit of its being
collected from such atomic or elementary state by means of the
same agency. It was suggested by Humboldt that the formation
of gold had some closer relation to or dependence upon the
atmosphere than that of the baser metals, and this seems to have


colour given to it by some remarks in “ Cosmos ” in speaking of the
great magnetic mountain near the laik. Gmelin says; “ The
sides which are exposed to the open air exhibit the most intense
magnetism, while those which lie underground are much weaker.”
And Werner says of the magnetic iron in Sweden: “The influence
which contact with the atmosphere might have, although not by
means of increased oxidation, in rendering the polar and attract-
ing force more intense.” In the magnetic iron mines in New
Jersey, “the ore raised from the bottom of the mine has no
magnetism at first, but acquires it after it has been some time
exposed to the influence of the atmosphere.” And there may be
some truth in the idea of Professor Draper, that the ordinary
me tals—as lead and tin —are slowly on their way to perfection.
They reach their goal on turning into gold. To an ordinary
business man, who it cannot be expected has had inclination or
opportunity to investigate the hidden secrets of nature, but seeing
an auriferous reef as such, and nothing more, I would say that
there are more things in earth “ than are dreamt of in our
philosophyand though I take no credit for having thought and
searched deeply into branches of science which many perhaps
never heard of, and if so, might not comprehend or believe in, still
I have done so, and find in the words of a great philosopher —
“we may progress in science as far as we will, we shall always
stumble upon something that seems incomprehensible and I
know of no problem more interesting and important than that of
gold evolution. Should we be able to evolve gold from its atomic
state by means, say, of electricity, what revolution might not occur
in our commercial, social and political conditions! There are
men, and even women, working in quiet seclusion from this
work-a day world, investigating natural phenomena which few of
the general population of the world could comprehend, are scarcely
fitted to receive, and will not be for generations. If gold can be
proved not to be an evolution from another ore or metal, I can
see no other way of accounting for its presence but from an
aqueous medium.
I think Mr. Newbery holds this opinion. Showing how
infinitesimal gold may be found in nature, Sonstadt estimates that
seawater contains in solution, besides silver, an appreciable
amount of gold, about one grain to a ton of water; this is separ-
ated by addition of chloride of barium to the water, apparently
as an aurate of baryta, adhering to the precipitated sulphate,
yielding by assay 6 parts gold to 1 silver. According to Pro-
fessor Wurtz, of New York, the total amount of gold hitherto
extracted from the earth, and estimated at two thousand million
dollars’ worth, would give only one dollar for 280 million tons of
seawater, while Sonstadt’s estimate would give the same quantity


from 25 tons of water. Gold has also been extracted from the
petals of the blue violet.
In “ Cosmos” is this, in place here :
A remarkable example of the way in which perceptible changes of mix-
ture are produced in nature by very minute, but continuous accumulation,
is afforded by the presence of silver in seawater, which was discovered by
Malagute and confirmed by Field. Notwithstanding the immense extent of
the ocean, and the trifling amount of surface presented to it by the ships
which traverse it, yet the trace of silver in the seawater has in recent times
become observable on the copper sheeting of ships.
Also Faraday produced gold films so thin that three hundred
and fifty millions could be contained in an inch! Any how, gold
can be beaten into leaves one two hundred and eighty two thou-
sandth of an inch in thickness, that is, it would take 282,000 to
make a pile one inch high.
Many geologists ignore the action of fire, and maintain gold to
be deposited by electro-chemical decomposition. Mr. Evan Hop-
kins, who was no small authority, opposed the red-hot theory, and
said in his work on gold-bearing rocks, —“ When persons see the
large masses of gold obtained from the surface of the quartz, or
the edges of the primary states, they are too apt to think that
such productions are caused by melting or intense heat.” Such
ideas, he says, are incorrect, and from the circumstance of the
metal being marked with the most minute striae of the quartz,
which contains the usual proportion of water, he maintains that
this is a state of things totally inconsistent with an intense melting
action, but identical to that resulting from a battery and an
aqueous solution.
In some cases gold is so minutely disseminated in the quartz
as only to be here and there visible, yet yielding 16 ozs. per ton.
A beautiful experiment bearing on electric agency as connected
with gold may be performed thus : —“ On a slip of glass, put a
drop of liquid auric chloride, or argentic nitrate, with half a grain of
metallic zinc in the auric, and of copper in the argentic (silver,)
when miniature gold and silver fern-like leaves will be formed.
Zinc, of course, we know is a galvanic exciter with other metals.
Also put the auric chloride on slip of glass under a microscope,
and apply the two wires of a battery pointed with platinum to the
liquid, and you will see the gold leaf forming under your vision.
The analogous action on a large scale goes on in the earth.
And while I think of it, although for reasons which would take
me too long to explain properly upon paper, it is important to
cognizate the “ quartzites,” in preference to true quartz. If gold
and silver are eliminated from an aqueous medium, the theory of
Draper would hardly hold, one would think, but perhaps both
may be right.


Dr. Lucas, of Melbourne, writes me :—“ It is an interesting
fact that in Cornwall, after stamping tin and extracting all you
can, it often pays, say in 80 to 100 years’ time, to re-work that
rubbish, veins of tin having been formed, doubtless by the
attraction of the atoms or grains gravitating together. ’
This account of a new process of gold saving throws some light
on the idea of electricity having to do with gold :
Gold Saving.—Two inventions have just been described before one of
the scientific societies by Dr. Atcherley, a London engineer, which seemed
destined to revolutionize the operations of the gold-finder. In the first, the
doctor’s own invention, that old servant of the miner, mercury, is made to do
a far greater amount of duty in amalgamating the gold in washing operations.
The second invention, which is by Mr. Henry R. Cassel, of New York, is,
however, of an importance that fairly takes one’s breath away. He
demonstrates the possibility, at the cost of a few shillings per ton of ore
treated, of obtaining more than 95 per cent, of all the gold out of the most
refractory quantity ever thrown away by the Californian, Australian or
Indian miner, the total value of which on the various goldfields of the world
is calculated at more than 200 millions sterling. The process only requires
the decomposition of water, common salt, and lime by electrical means, in
presence of the rebellious gas in a state of trituration. The gold is, in fact,
separated exactly by the process adopted by nature to impregnate the water
of the ocean, every ton of which, according to chemists, contains so many
grains of gold. A powerful syndicate has already acquired the rights of the
invention.
“ And now,” you may say, “ after all this, how are we to find
the conditions of gold in South Australia T Of course by explor-
ing and sinking in presumed likely-looking localities, but aided
much by scientific investigation and collections of specimens and
data, or, in plain language, by a School of Mines, and not to
suppose that gold will be found in quartz only—as reefs but
perhaps in iron, iron pyrites, lead, bismuth, talc slate, serpentine,
baryta, and even in pure carbonate of lime or marble. And though
you may find fine gold, payable and not payable, in the first struck
alluvial bottom, perhaps a false bottom, you are not to conclude
that there are not other and more payable bottoms below this.
Note especially the positions of trap and all rocks connected
with a reef, and see if any metamorphic action is visible, and if
you know not these rocks, have a museum so arranged that you
can know them \ and above all, make it a sine qua, non to have a
diamond drill, for this will do wonders, both in saving time and
labour. Till something is done in the way I have pointed out,
we shall go on blundering for ever, and the more blundering work
is done, the more confusion will accumulate. It may be as
to note that some of our coppers in the North contain 1 to 2
ozs. gold per ton, and many of our lead ores as much. One
Queensland copper mine has 4 ozs. gold per ton, but want of rail
transit impedes progress. The Burra and Kapunda mines are


derived ores from sulphides, and if worked down to them would yet
be enormously rich, though it is useless attempting that now.
And now I have one more remark respecting gold, viz., that
Mr. Selwyn made the discovery that two distinct classes of reefs
exist. Those formed during the miocene period were
comparatively barren in gold, while those formed during the
pliocene, or at a later period, were productive. Now, in absence
of a geological survey, it is impossible to define them ; examina-
tion of any fossils with them is the chief guide. _ Here purely
«eolo"ical data is valuable, no further ; the rest is a practical
affair” In support of this discovery of Selwyn’s, is this extract
from a Melbourne paper: —
Reefs of all sizes, under two feet, are being constantly discovered, con-
taining gold, and the miners seem to have hit upon a theory that has often
been spoken of, but of which no explanation has been attempted by scientific
men, viz., that there are among quartz reefs, as among all animals and
vegetables in nature, barren and prolific, or male and female lodes. There
are big reefs at Elaine as well as little ones, the former seldom carrying any
gold These the miners call “ buck ” reefs ; the small prolific ones “ does,
and very prolific some of the latter are, judging from the crushmgs taken
from them.
Now on the iron hats. Some late information on the forma-
tion and decomposition of iron pyrites in the Scientific American
of July, 1882, gives this Miners call these deposits of porous
haematite, that consists of pyrites down below, “ iron hats,” and
prize them highly. The old miners’ saying, that no vein is so
crood as an iron hat, is founded on this, for in the haematite are
found concentrated all those metals like gold, silver, and platinum,
which were mixed with the pyrites in small quantity, but which
cannot oxidise any further, and when separated from their sulphur
compounds appear native or free. The richness of these iron hats
or pacos is frequently extraordinary, and increases rapidly with
the depth. Yauquelin said he found nearly 10 per cent, of
platinum in an ore of argentiferous copper from Spain, which
would be the only example of platinum existing in a rock and in a
vein. As the same thing has not again been met with, even in
other specimens from the same place, we delay drawing
conclusions till a new example has confirmed the first. Platinum
and gold are found together in alluvial; it is found in small
grains, flattened, from size of linseed to a bean, but a very few
specimens have been found from 2 ozs. to 16 or 18 lbs. A model
of the biggest nugget is in the Melbourne University Museum .
28 lbs. Beudant mentions grains of platinum in auriferous veins
connected with diorite rocks.
Mr. Masey informed me when here of enormous quantities of
spathose iron at the North ; this is very valuable. Mr. Larnach


wanted information about our irons, as they might be required in
Sydney to mix with theirs, but he could not obtain it. It has
been for some time a general opinion that all alluvial gold has
been abstracted from quartz reefs, but this is quite erroneous.
Gold has been segregated by electro-molecular attraction, both in
quartz, when not quite solidified, and also in clays, etc. Of course
much gold has been rolled about when the conditions so admitted.
As to the rounded, nuggetty aspect of many specimens, that is no
criterion any more than the nuggets of native copper so often
found in clayey or soft ground. No large nugget of gold has been
found in a quartz reef, say 501bs. to 2001bs. weight; neither could
the delicate, spider-legged gold have been rolled about.
It will be very interesting when the district of Angaston is
explored for minerals, for it is a most extraordinary place, being
for a great part of it an extinct geyser formation, and there will
be found a great quantity of gold, silver, and copper. It was
reported in the London Minwig Journal as a diamond district,
but how they got hold of it I don’t know, unless some had been
found. The marbles are superb, in fact rather superior, and differ-
ent from ordinary marble ; and it also contains enormous quantities
of a beautiful pinkish granite, very preferable to the coarse,
though handsome granite of Port Elliot, etc. Diorite in abun-
dance, with its allied rocks.
I append copy of a memorial I sent to Parliament last year,
through Mr. Basedow, M.P. for Barossa; and it is time we had
liberty to work minerals on private land. To my knowledge
there is much gold alone on such.
Since penning this essay I have seen an article in the
Australasian , of Melbourne, dated 15th August, giving the
various theories of gold formation, the latest of which seems to be
that the contents of a reef are derived mainly from the enclosing
casings by a process seemingly called “ lateral secretion,” and
showing that the diorite rock is very important in connection
therewith. It will however take an immense number of recorded
data to make this out, or in fact any other theory \ still the ideas
are worth following up, and to my mind it does not militate
against an electric agency being in action. Our South Australian
gold formations appear to me so unique that it is impossible to
apply any theory, and this alone shows the necessity of having a
system of mining records. Our press seems to have no space
available for discussion on any subjects but puritanical and
sporting matters; and having no technological museum, we are
more behindhand than any other country in such matters. There
is actually no public collection of minerals to draw from to send
home to the Exhibition.


Memorial sent to House of Assembly 1884 by Henry Marshall,
Angaston, through Mr. Basedow , M.P. for Bar ossa.
As the development of the mining industry is of great importance, and
much undue speculation is constantly occurring, chiefly from want of
reliable information respecting the mode of occurrence of our metallic ores,
this colony being rather exceptional in this respect, your petitioner humbly
prays your honourable House to cause measures to be taken in order that
information may be so collected and diffused that intending investors may be
better able to form conclusions which will serve as a guide to operations ;
and he would suggest that a complete geological survey be made of the whole
colony in order to define our formations and their respective extent; that a
mining museum be formed, taking cognizance specially of mining operations,
with specimens and data collected for general information. And this will
necessitate the appointment of a highly competent public analyst, for without
such it is impossible to properly define our ores. The absence of officially-
recorded data has prevented foreign capital from being directed to this
colony, the opinions of merely agents and mine captains, in many cases being
self-interested, not being reliable. Your petitioner therefore humbly prays
that a Government analyst be appointed in connection with a museum as
aforesaid, and your petitioner, as in duty bound, &c.
Carey, Page & Co., Printers, Adelaide.




