









GOLF COURSES OF
VICTORIA
Published by
THE, £UN NEV/S-PICTORIAL
Melbourne
ONE SHILLING


the
LONGEST Championship
BALL IN THE WORLD!
I
■
M
m
I
II
m
J
i
w
i
§
I
1
toURH
1
★ PROVED by the SPALDING Golf Robot
Tournament Golf Balls travel many more yards in actual play ... are
truer in flight than any other local or are easily
controlled in the short game. Scientific fi\a'<Ja verse as
on automatic driving machines have deft-nite+y proved of the
Tournament and also its extraordinary^/’ability i , f^ s a..Champioi«hlp Ball.
Care taken in each process of . . Hrfjtgjuse of grade
materials ... the skill of highly trained-AustrltHaii_coitsm€n .
painstaking inspections, weight and c^K^ressjoare the
secrets which have helped to make the new Tout 1 nafftefit Golf Ball the
LONGEST CHAMPIONSHIP BALL IN THE WORLD.
You can prove the great length and durability of the Tournament also.
Try one on your next round.
Obtainable from all Professionals and Sports Stores ... 3 -
SPALDING GOLF BALL
DRIVING MACHINE
/
✓
MADE IN
AUSTRALIA BY,


A
C
;§L
_baffh n & anc^
Ob
GOL?
WEAR
othetwis^
OV'
sign O/f
You don’t have nlus-
opponent when V»“ 7 V et the
° pp like these. c ro m
fours Wf® , fte them tr °
poor fellow * get him
uneasy-
* a i M .. - V oU tfvour coat he s
an gles , o ft you* (( 0 p
When y°« ta r pullover l
so baffled he ca „ t
illustrator.) " neiy endsand^
r HeI Sliced ball* end
'SS.
that will not *►
want Golt orient • • *
opponent
•w i
11
tm-
give tn>*‘ your presence-
ptesston o y find the
\ n either case, . difhcu' 1 to
«nse at Henry Budt .n, we
be happy to show y° ’
sh , Plus Fours
Golf Suib-- G “ lf s( 1 ; r “ s Asporls
G-Slacfct- Co!f C „U Jackets - Golf
'*c E ub* c Hose «>•“ " ’
twiBEH
cw _
Golf Caps-


■z&m?
mmmmm
m
■
i
SsfeslSs?
m
.
m
%
hs^
i&
■ : :
S 2
(888
Mm
As English
As England
With its many years of
honoured service to the
travelling public, “The
George ,” Norton St.
Philip, Somerset has
observed the changes from
carriage to coach, and
from coach to the swift,
comfortable motor trans-
port of to-day.
1936 Vauxhall 7-Passenger Saloon.
To those whose position calls for the
luxury and roominess of an English
seven-passenger saloon, Vauxhall offers
a model of 130 inches wheelbase that is
ihe most advantageously-priced English
car in Australia. £585 (plus Sales Tax).
Vauxhall Light Six for 1936.
The most popular English car in Australia
the Vauxhall Light Six is the complet
medium-sized car . . . with Knee-Action
Safety Body by Holden, Inbuilt Luggag
Trunk, No-draught Ventilation in closed
models, Super Synchro-mesh Gears, etc
From £299 (plus Tax).
On all3Vauxhalls
... less than \the increase
over English cost than on
any other English car
Do one thing before you buy your ear.
Spend a few pence that will save you
pounds : buy a copy of any English
motoring magazine. Compare prices in
England and Australia. You’ll find that
the increase over and above the English
cost of the Vauxhall light Six and Big
Six is little more than half the percentage
of increase in the case of the next most
favourably priced English car. Vauxhall’s
volume means value to you (Vauxhall
exports a bigger proportion of cars than
any other English manufacturer). And
it means that final assurance of satisfac-
tion . . . widespread service facilities
. . . together with an availability of
spare parts unmatched by any other
English car.
Or 4. -tr
Illustrated is the 1936 Vauxhall 27 h.p.
Big Six —a car that lives up to Vauxhall’s
tradition of brilliant performance and
staunch dependability. Its features in-
clude special rapid vaporising combustion
chamber, thermostatically controlled cool-
ing, economy adjustment ignition (Octane
Selector), pedomatic starter, synchro-
mesh gears and automatic chassis lubrica-
tion. An unusually roomy inbuilt trunk
is optional—£ll extra, plus tax.
GENERAL MOTORS - HOLDEN’S LIMITED
1936 Vauxhall 27 h.p. Big Six Prices:
Roadster £365 Tourer £375
Coupe - £4lO Saloon £425
All Prices plus Sales Tax i
LIGHT SIX .. . BIG SIX ... 7-PASSENGER
Ask about the new Two-unit “Air Chief’’ Car Radio. 9 Valve performance with only
6 valves. Price, £27 (plus Taxb Any Vauxhall dealer can install.
R 14438
Metropolitan Q A Hln XTF V PTY * 22 Flinders St., Melbourne, C.i
Distributors: O# £ V* X X m2j JIN F, X LTD. Phone: Central 8991 (8 lines).
Sold and Serviced by Vauxhall Dealers all over Australia


Golf Courses of Victoria
DESCRIPTIONS BY KITTY McEWAN
AERIALS BY JOHN HARRISON AND AIRSPY
PANORAMIC VIEWS BY OSWALD ZEIGLER
INTERIORS BY COMMERCIAL PHOTO COY.
ARRANGED AND EDITED BY W. A. SHUM
INTRODUCTION:
THE purpose of this book is not only to record
the beauties of the splendid championship
links of Victoria, but to provide a compre-
hensive directory of the courses of the State. The
collection of the details has involved a great deal
of correspondence and research, for nothing like
a complete list existed anywhere. Thanks are
tendered therefore to the officials of the Victorian
Golf Association, the Victorian Golf League, and
the secretaries of some hundreds of clubs and
courses who have assisted in the task.
The most striking fact revealed in the com-
pilation is the amazing development of the game
in very recent years, and the extraordinary grip
it is taking of the country, from one end to the
other. Golf, for long the game of the rich/idle, as
the legal documents have it, has almost sud-
denly become a popular sport. Once a pastime
for a leisure afternoon, it has made such demands
for expansion that courses have sprung into ex-
METROPOLITAN COURSES:
Page
Royal Melbourne 7
Metropolitan 8
Yarra Yarra 16
Commonwealth 14
Victoria 18
Kingston Heath 22
Woodlands 24
Riversdale 1 .. 25
Kew 26
Albert Park 27
Eastern 27
Heidelberg 28
Croydon 28
Kingswood 35
Map of 50 Courses Near Melbourne 29
WEEK-END AND HOLIDAY GOLF:
Emerald 30
Peninsula 33
CONTENTS:
PUBLISHED BY THE SUN NEWS-PICTORIAL
istence everywhere, to provide opportunities for
people who cannot afford the cost, in time and
money, of club membership. From the first tees
at some of these courses, on Saturdays and Sun-
days, the early birds hit off almost at dawn, and
the stragglers do not come in till dusk.
Private clubs are raising their green fees to
steady the flow of visitors, and at one or two of
the larger public courses it is not an unusual
thing for the long week-end takings to run into
three figures.
One effect of this book may be to even up
the distribution, and relieve the pressure on
over-crowded courses by showing the large num-
ber of other links that may be visited. It also
offers a useful service to readers who wish to go
further afield, or to whom the prospect of good
golf is a factor in deciding on the spot in which
to spend their holidays.
Page
Barwon Heads
Flinders 4^
St. Andrew’s 73
Healesville
Glimpses of Some Country Courses 34
PUBLIC COURSES:
Sandringham
Elsternwick Park
Patterson River 4 ®
Ivanhoe
Park Orchards 47
Malvern 4 ®
Amstel Park
Altona
Directory to Victorian Courses! 55
Course Design and Construction 63
Supplementary to the Directory 73
Visitors’ Impressions 73


How Golf Came To Victoria
Finishing a round on the 18th green at Royal Melbourne (West Course) close to the clubhouse. The 18th east green is also shown,
JUST as Melbourne’s suburban gardens and
public parks are noted from one end of Aus-
tralia to the other, so are her splendid cham-
pionship golf links, the finest collection in the
Southern Hemisphere. And the noblest of them
all are developed from an area that was once
known as the “cabbage patch,” lying to the south-
east of the city. It was not, however, a case of
the desert blossoming as the rose; for the sandy
soil that favors vegetables is the best possible
substance from which —grassed and well-turfed —
the perfect divot may be lifted—and replaced,
please!
It goes without saying that the transformation
involved an immense amount of work in clear-
ing and eradicating roots from acres of tea tree,
and rougher scrub; then planting and sowing.
Climatic conditions, however, favored the men
who visualised Melbourne’s greatest golfing belt.
That the results are appreciated, no one doubts.
To Caulfield, Melbourne’s popular suburb of
red-roofed villas, belongs the distinction of hav-
ing owned Victoria’s first important course. It
is, however, a matter of history that golf was
played in Victoria before
gold was discovered, the
pioneer of the game
being one of the well-
known golfing Graham
family, whose property
had a frontage to the
Moonee Ponds Creek,
near Travancore. It is
also on record that games were played in Gee-
long more than half a century ago.
In 1891, a club was formed by J. M. Bruce,
father of Australia’s High Commissioner. A site
near the corner of Burke and Wattletree Roads
was chosen, and a brick villa was rented
as a clubhouse. This band of earnest men
were leaders in many spheres. Norfolk jacketed,
and wearing the tight plus fours of the period,
with boxer hats and drooping moustaches, they
went about the business of golf accompanied by
some red-coated devotees of the fair sex, armed
with a collection of golf clubs, most of which had
seen use in Scotland.
At first they were known as the Melbourne
Golf Club. Later they acquired the right to use
the Royal insignia, through the good offices of
Lord Linlithgow. Ten years went by, and with
Melbourne’s recovery after the land boom, came
the development of Caulfield as a desirable resi-
dential suburb. The new era of suburban en-
croachment was gentle, but decisive, and so, as
the young golf club did not own its own land,
it was decided to acquire a property elsewhere.
This was done, and to
fffHl Sandringham went half
’ Bmp* the club. Those who
lived in Malvern decided
" against following the
I -*'<« club to Sandringham,
f _ tjnmr*fr. feeling that the round-
about methods of train
JagO and cab were irksome.
ifpPp . 35* Therefore, while the
IBM 1 1.... 181 i new club was building
- ** its two-story wooden
> Ilk * clubhouse on the corner
‘ Sfili Victoria Street and
"' w ' Fernhill Road, those
who were left behind
(Continued on page 71)
Late golf and early settlement
join hands in some -of the
historic homes now adapted to
clubhouse purposes. This re-
modelled home of James Mc-
Culloch (of carrying fame), is
occupied by the Metropolitan
Club. Eastern’s clubhouse was
Sir Thomas Fitzgerald’s home
and Riversdale’s was built by
Sir Redmond Barry.


Courses in the Metropolitan Area
ROYAL MELBOURNE
7
Ist tee of the West Course (T) can be seen through the belt of tea-tree. At the right is a typical sand trap guarding the 18th gree^.
The first hole of the West Course and the last hole of
the East Course are close to the clubhouse, while the first
hole of the East Course commanding a glorious view across
the sunlit waters of Port Phillip is on a rise, and is not
far from the last hole of the West Course.
Royal Melbourne’s West Course has also many crescent-
shaped holes, and plateau greens. Although it bears that
imprint of modern construction, the beautiful turf of some
of the holes included in the old Sandringham lay-out re-
minds one of the age of this club.
In the change over from Sandringham to Black Rock
the club was faced with the necessity of making a metalled
road almost a mile long, from Bluff Road. It tackled this
expensive problem with characteristic thoroughness.
Although plans for a really palatial clubhouse on a high
site overlooking Port Phillip were considered (and may
yet be carried out), it was decided that for the present,
and perhaps some time to come, a modest clubhouse with
all modern facilities would serve the purpose—a wise de-
cision in view of the fact that two full championship
courses were in the making. In putting course construc-
tion before clubhouse luxury, the club has provided its
members with a commodious timber and fibrous plaster
bungalow clubhouse, with ample space for lounges and
locker rooms as well as the privilege of playing over two
championship courses —to say nothing of three beautifully
kept grass tennis courts.
The roof plan of the buildings is defined in the bird’s
eye view on page 39. Of its floor plan it is enough to
say that the large dining room occupies a central posi-
tion with the women’s quarters on the righthand side
and the men’s rooms on the left. The furnishing like
the building is unpretentious but good, and the decora-
tions include many mementos of the old days at Sandring-
ham and even further back.
match As the older members drive
~ S A ? T J c Co , l i R c SE nc STROKE bogey along Sandringham Streets
Standard Scratch Score 76 that bear such names as
PIA ,~ i 1 SEIf Kirkwood and Lo Fevrc^-
§ yards jTifjT g §|so,,|i w «" „ aw- Streets thalt divide rows of
!i£;R<S </ ’i °to H°,f •"lotfflr suburban homes where once
10 466 2 4 5 divots flew and balls sped—
-11 360 12 12 4 they must bless those wise-
„ „ _ _ heads who saw the flood com-
-12 440 8 8 5 i n g and forestalled it.
Royal Melbourne club, by virtue of its age
and the dignity of its royal insignia, takes first
place in this record. Its course is situated in
Cheltenham, a comfortable thirteen miles by road from
Melbourne or a mile from the Black Rock tram.
The oldest of the Melbourne clubs, it is now occupying
its third clubhouse and provides its members with two
complete 18 hole courses laid out as shown in the centre
pages of this book.
It began by sharing with Metropolitan the first clubhouse
on Burke Road, Caulfield, then, moving to Sandringham, it
built a very imposing two-story residential clubhouse, the
exterior of which was of the plain pavilion type that was in
vogue in the early years of the century. Before long a tram
from Sandringham to Black Rock passed the gates of Royal
Melbourne, which was a property divided by several roads.
Although this was a great boon before the automobile
era it brought its inevitable result. Gradually but surely
the residential area spread out and, as land values rose,
taxation became so heavy that it was thought wise to move
out on to the land that the club, with foresight, acquired
beyond its boundaries. Before transferring the committee
commissioned Dr. McKenzie, the golf architect to lay out
a course that would include several of the existing
holes. This formed what is known as the West Course.
At the same time an entirely new 18-hole links was de-
signed and is known as the East Course. It was
on this course that the most important associates’ match
in Australian golf history was played against the British
touring team in 1935 after the
Australian Ladies’ Champion- Rnval M RIR „,,n m m. c r.i
ship had been decided—with Royal Melbourne Golf Cli
honors to Great Britain- p u y „
The East Course is perhaps ‘taken' -g 2! PLAYER I SELF
the most modern in Austra- o yards |js r 1 8 s U+w~,„„|+w,
lia, crescent shaped holes the ,° H,lf —
rule rather than the excep- 1 325 15 13 4
tion. Parts of the course are 2 422 3 3 5
covered with native scrub
and swamp bushes and in J ' syj j ' *
other parts are delightful 4 210 13 15 4
glades of gum trees. The _ t « 11 a
Royal Melbourne East Course 0 H
is a particularly testing one 6 160 17 17 3
owing to the fact that there 7 52 0 5 5 5
is a premium on accurate 0 A _ n
placement. At the most dis- ® 470 1 1 0
tant corner the land was once 9 353 9 9 4
the garden of some pioneer ,„ ftl 00
nurseryman, for instead of OUTI
native flowers, daffodils and MARKER . S ,
narcissi rear their heads in signature r
the rough. The East course DATE
is separated only by a road REPLACE DIVOTS
from the Victoria Club’s links.
TYPICAL, SCORE CARD
(54 size)
Score cards are generally six
inches wide, making a con-
venient measure for decid-
ing whether a ball is
stymied. Most cards include
columns showing where
strokes are taken in bogey
and (match play. Other
cards show the match play
table on the reverse side.


METROPOLITAN
AWAY back in 1906 the growing Caulfield Club, with 102
members, purchased the Jersey stud farm of Mr
James McCullouch in North Road, Oakleigh. Judg-
ing from early photos, of that now beautiful course,
which belongs to the Metropolitan Club, there appears to
be a great deal of truth in the children’s saying “If you’re
ugly when you are little you will be' pretty when you
grow up.” Men of vision turned that very unattractive
stretch of scrubby country, dotted with a few manna
trees, into a thing of beauty.
At a special meeting held a year after taking possession
£lOO was raised for tree planting and Bogue Luffmann, of
the Burnley Horticultural College—a noted botanist and
an artist in his line—-was consulted. His scheme for
beautifying with tree plantations was closely followed.
It included the big pine trees that mark the club’s boun-
daries even along Centre Road, also the magnificent red
flowering gum that annually becomes the target of the
press photographers.
When one views the early photographs of Metropolitan
one is amazed at the growth of shrubs and trees. Nowhere
today is there a bleak view, yet when the club moved
there the landscape was dismal in the extreme. Today
only in one or two places is one even permitted to
realise that this beautifully turfed course adjoins flat
market gardens. Everywhere banks of huge wattle trees,
acacias and flowering gums tower above bush wattles
and acacias, while the quaint scarlet bottle-brush, with its
danger signals in the rough, and thriptomenia from the
Grampians separate every green carpeted fairway from
its neighbor. Although beautiful, these plantations offer
trouble real tiger country for those who do not keep the
right direction. Very few courses in Scotland and just a
few in England have gone in for this plantation of the rough
and segregation of fairways.
Metropolitan having led the way, other clubs were in-
spired and, though none of the plantations at the other
courses have yet reached such a stage of perfection as
Metropolitan, many are already well advanced in this
direction.
A very wide practice fairway, conveniently placed be-
tween clubhouse and first tee, offers excellent oppor-
tunities for loosening up before a round. The overhanging
pine trees which meet across the drive form one of the
most natural and commodious parking areas to be met
with at any club.
Everywhere a mellow, old world golfing atmosphere is
dominant. While some of the newer clubs encourage social
life, the game is of foremost importance at the Metropolitan
Club, which, since 1908, transformed a private house into a
serviceable clubhouse. Considerable alterations were
necessary when this club entered into possession of
the property at North Road. At that time there was
no top story to the original farmhouse building. This was
added in 1909 and still serves as a men’s locker room.
It was during the past ten years that the final altera-
tions were made and a fifteen-foot verandah with massive
cement columns was built.
A side verandah was added and the dining room was
modernised to seat 60. In addition extra locker room
space has been provided for associates and members. A
nine-foot hall divides the men’s lounge from the women’s.
Both contain many valuable cups and records won by
their members, amongst whom are the leading players
in Australia.
The richly turfed level fairways and greens of modern
construction make a strong appeal to players all over
Australia, and although it has been suggested that its four-
shot holes are responsible for a lack of total length,
they stand alone as extraordinarily severe tests of iron
play. Its last three holes measure almost a straight mile
and finish in a picturesque grove of ornamental trees.
There is nothing stereotyped about the bunkering system,
which affords an excellent example of trapping along the
lines of nature. This club has a very long waiting list.
It enjoys reciprocal rights with the Australian Club at
Kensington, Sydney, and with the leading clubs in other
States.
The card showing lengths of holes also indicates the
manner in which strokes are arranged for bogey and
match play events.
Bird’s eye view of the Metropolitan course, showing all the
greens except the second and the eighth. The club-house is
9een through the pine trees in the lower right-hand comer.




YARRA YARRA
DESIGNED in strict contrast to home or
office environment, the massive two-
storey brick clubhouse belonging to the
Yarra Club at Bentleigh achieves its purpose
in no uncertain manner. The spirit of the
game of golf is carried into the comforts and
conveniences provided for its members and
an essentially clubhouse atmosphere prevails.
Drawing room and suburban villa effects have
been studiously avoided, and although the
furnishings strike a note of modern antiquity,
plus fours and heavy tweeds do not strike an
incongruous note in this handsome clubhouse.
The warmth and beauty of the Mediterranean
influence in architecture has been introduced,
yet the most serviceable features of the mod-
ern golf clubhouses of America are incorpor-
ated in the design. The perfected detail of
the artistry of the Italian, Spanish and Moor-
ish architecture charm the eye. A handsome
Romeo balcony, supported by concrete pillars
shelters the main doorway, above which rises
the imposing clock tower. Inside, cloister
doors and the timbered ceiling, a Spanish Oriel
window on the staircase, guarded by wrought
iron supports and many similar features add a
Continental note.
Built in the opulent days this handsome club-
house was built to the design of Mr G. G. Alsop
who had just returned from, a tour of America
and the Continent and had made a special study
of the palatial clubhouses overseas. It cost
something like £20,000, and was originally
painted white, but the weather has removed
most of the paint and given it a mellow tone
that is far more pleasing, particularly in the
rear elevation, which is shown on the opposite
page.
Yarra, always a club inclined towards social
activities at the massive clubhouse at the old
Rosanna site (where so many members of what
was originally the Eaglemont Club were old
friends and neighbors before they took to the
game) still leads the golfing feet along the social
highway, for monthly dances at the clubhouse
are a regular feature. In the imposing dining room
(43 x 33) adzed cross beams and trusses in the
open timber ceiling give a remarkable effect of
age, harmonising with the dining room furniture
carried out in dull brown with antique finish, the
tall wooden chairs having concave saddle seats.
The famous crimson flowering gum in front of the
Metropolitan clubhouse is shown below. At
Metropolitan the British amateurs and visiting
Americans took part in the Melbourne Centenary
Championship Meeting, the most important match
ever played in Australia.
Yarra’s diningroom is carried out in the grand
Spanish manner that was the vogue when the club-
house was built. In the photograph above is seen
the Musicians’ Gallery a Florentine touch that
is romantic rather than practical.


Here is presented an interesting contrast in clubhouses. Above is the present Rosanna clubhouse
near the Rosanna railway station. Built over 20 years ago by the Yarra Yarra Club, it represented
at that time a bold venture in clubhouse accommodation. Later the Yarra Club transferred to the
sand belt area, and their new clubhouse, a striking two-storey creamy building with red Cordova tiles
(the rear portion of which is shown below), illustrates a further advance in clubhouse architecture.
Overlooking the Yarra links, situated two miles south of the Oakleigh station, this clubhouse is a
striking landmark on Warrigal Road, a road commonly referred to as the “Golf Road,” as it is the
leading thoroughfare to so many of the courses in the sand country.


An arcade motif in the windows which allow light on
both north and south sides of the dining room, and a pleas-
ing canopied fireplace make the dining room, above which
is the minstrel gallery, a delightful spot at any hour of
the day or night. Spacious locker rooms with steel
lockers for both men and women give every golfing com-
fort, and a luxuriously furnished smoke room, as well as
an associates’ lounge, both having access to the common
room at the head of the staircase, provide a haven
from the elements should the day be too wet or too
hot to indulge in a game.
A flat roof over the professionals shop allows a wide
view of the course and the surroundings, including ad-
jacent clubs and right away south to Arthur’s Seat at
Dromana. , _ .
Fairways of couch and greens of fine creeping bent pro-
vide even surfaces. This course, constructed by Alec
Russell, a disciple of the late Dr. McKenzie, is trapped in
The prospect from the flat roof and through the colonnaded
balcony that leads to the dining room is expansive and
interesting.
modern style. An unorthodox hazard is a line of flax
bushes at the 13th hole reminiscent of a time when the
country was used for purposes other than golf. Storage
tanks highly placed at the tenth hole provide a watering
system for both fairways and greens.
This club was at the time of the change over from
Rosanna presided over by Mr. H. Mcßoberts, who is now
president of the Victorian Golf Association, a man of
vision who has done a vast amount for the game in Vic-
toria. Golfers old and. new owe him a debt of gratitude,
for it was through him that the older clubs and the new
were welded into the strong organisation that is now
the Victorian Golf Association —a body that directs the
fortunes of even the smallest affiliated club in the State.
Many of the Heidelberg and Ivanhoe residents found
the distance from their homes across country to the new
club at Bentleigh too great and looked for another property
in their own locality. The Rosanna property close to the
railway station was sold to a financial syndicate who, in
the days before the depression, had planned to turn it into
residential building blocks. As that plan did not eventuate
(and as the local players had acquired a property of their
own at Lower Plenty with frontages to the Yarra which
became known as the Heidelberg Club) the Rosanna
property became a public course golf club. The Yarra Club
proceeded apace at Bentleigh and left no stone (or should
one say grain of sand?) unturned to give its club mem-
bers a golfing home equal to the best. Now this club
numbers amongst its members many players recruited from
the southern suburbs.
Looking from the aeroplane over the Yarra clubhouse from the
rear the well-kept practice putting-green and half of the play-
ing greens are seen.




Kjsswt Easts '’sssssnss. «
COMMONWEALTH
UNLIMITED visibility, because of the liberal use of
plate glass, literally leaves no one in the dark at the
Commonwealth clubhouse on Warrigal Road, Oakleigh,
two miles south of the station. Visitors arriving at the
dignified entrance —a characteristically English bit of archi-
tecture marks the facade of the building can visualise
the whole layout. A clear view across a blue carpeted re-
ception hall, through the walls of the lounge, which are
practically constructed of glass, past the blue chenille cur-
tains to the course beyond, is entrancing.
This, however, is Commonwealth’s second clubhouse. on
its present property. In point of history, it is the third,
but that is going back fourteen or fifteen years to the days
when, as the Waverley Club, its original members played
on the eastern side of the Darling railway station and owned
a neat little dressing pavilion.
The first clubhouse was a two-storied brick building on
the Centre Road boundary of the present course, and when
this was outgrown a great deal of thought and time was
expended on planning quarters that would meet every re-
quirement of a rapidly growing club. In response to. a
call for competitive designs upwards of a score of entries
were received and the present handsome building is the
outcome. It is a happy association of the best features
of English and Italian architecture adapted to Australian
conditions. Its erection and equipment cost something like
£16,000. When the building was planned a garden scheme
was outlined and its careful development has given the
dignified building a setting that enables it to hold its
own for beauty as well as for all practical purposes with
any golf clubhouse in Australia.
The interior is luxuriously appointed. The blue expanse
of carpet with gold design was specially made in England
for the reception rooms. It harmonises with the buff sand
textured walls. Access to both men’s and women’s locker
rooms can be obtained direct from the links, the former


being below the lounge and the diningroom. When the
tall accordion doors dividing these two rooms are opened
a lordly expanse of 72 by 30 feet is available for social
intercourse, for meetings or for dancing a dance floor
having been laid down. What is virtually a wall of
windows opens on to the colonaded balcony-verandah.
The manager’s office and reception desk at the end of the
entrance hall are close to the staircase leading down to
the men’s locker room, which has access to the profes-
sional’s quarters and the drying room.
Because of the big gatherings, many of a social character,
that occur weekly at all clubs, the kitchen and service ar-
rangements form an important section of all modern club-
houses. Apart from the convenience, no game in the
register of outdoor sport gives such an edge to the ap-
petite and such relish to a meal as a trek of three or four
miles on a diversified golf links. And even if Common-
wealth possessed no other claims to fame, it would be noted
for owning the finest of club kitchens. Splendidly planned
and equipped, it caters easily for functions at any hour of
the day or night. Its range is outsize. It has a
monstrous griller, that can accommodate at once a regi-
ment of chops for a rush order, and an electric oven that
can cook a tenderloin or more for small and special oc-
casions. Its light-and-air qualities are shown in the photo-
graph below, and its spacious shelves and cupboards are
invariably well stocked.
Beyond the kitchen are the store rooms and pantries,
supplied by stairs leading from the service entrance
court. Upstairs, near the side balcony, are the staff
quarters, including a common room, staff diningroom,
housekeeper’s flat, with two double rooms and bath-
room, and five single rooms are below, with bath-
room and showers. On this ground floor level is the
drying room, nearby which is the furnace supplying the
house with hot and cold water. Close at hand is the
men’s enormous locker room, with its many bays of
showers, lockers and so on; its east wall being well light-
ed through frosted glass windows. Access between this
locker room and the professionals’ apartments is supplied.
House telephones are installed throughout. And, by
the way, the clubhouse has a capital system of electric
timekeeping, the clock on the western front being an orna-
mental feature as well as an inexorable reminder that
one is due on the tee!
Originally the Commonwealth Club grew out of the old
Waverley Club, at Darling, and from that layout came the
little pavilion clubhouse where the associates made their own
afternoon tea, and, what is more, scrubbed out their “nine-
teenth hole” after a busy Saturday, when they had to sacri-
fice their golf to play the game of hostesses to the
members. Such a thing as a game on any of the leading
clubs on a Saturday afternoon is now unheard of, except
for occasional mixed foursomes, but in those days there
was little difference between the rights of a member and
Even if one sits with his back to this pleasant prospect he is
not robbed of the pleasure, for he finds it vividly reflected
in the mirror-like surface of the landscape windows.
Of this light, well ventilated, and fully equipped kitchen, the Commonwealth Club is justifiably proud. It is typical of the
service quarters in many of the leading metropolitan clubs.


an associate at any club. The ladies’ fees were. cer-
tainly about half those paid by the men, and yet they enjoyed
the right to vote. But those days are gone for ever, and
knowing the vast amount of time which has voluntarily
to be given to golf course and club management, and the
huge amounts of money involved in building courses, few
women wish to have the responsibility of these things on
their shoulders. They are permitted certain playing
privileges, for which smaller fees are charged, and they
enjoy very excellent accommodation and the right to ar-
range their own programmes and other club details, but
they have no further hand in the management of their
clubs.
But to return to the growth of the Commonwealth Club.
It has really gone ahead by leaps and bounds during the past
10 years. There are many officials in office today who, as far
as the women folk are concerned, remember the time
when almost nothing at all was known of the capable
working of the Victorian Ladies’ Golf Union, and it was
rather difficult to get together even 10 players to take part
in the monthly medal competition. Now each week, in
the season, over 100 associates are despatched from the first
tee, and the weekly competition has more the appearance
of an Open Day, than of a club event; often it is neces-
sary to start players at 10 o’clock at four-minute intervals,
and as officials have to be there to take charge at that time,
it will be realised to what extent the game has grown. Al-
though the Commonwealth Club is particularly virile in
its growth, it is fitting to say here that it reflects to a
large extent the growth of women’s golf at all the clubs.
Needless to say, this fine stretch of golfing country, con-
structed along lines laid down by the leading English golf
In the lower aerial vi'ew we see Commonwealth’s stately club-
house at the end of the plantation of pines that leads up from
the entrance gate on Warrigal Road almost opposite Yarra Yarra.


And in this view is shown almost the whole of the Commonwealth course with the club-house in the centre. This course, like
most of the other championship layouts, is constructed in two loops, so that both 9th and 18th holes are close to the club-house.
CARTOONS IN STAINED GLASS
In the photograph on page 14, two pictures are seen at the far
end of the diningroom. They are in reality, leaded glass win-
dows presented to the club by an enthusiastic member. One is
reproduced here with its legend. In the other one King Charles
is seen chatting wi’th a veteran, which explains the lines
beneath it:—
It is a Royal and Ancient Game,
Played oft in days of yore,
To test the skill and worth of man,
And harass his mind most sore.
architects, fairly bristles with members during the week-
ends. The first hole has been constructed on the two-
way design, and those not possessing sufficient length to
essay the carry over the traps, may keep on the fairway,
with the idea of playing their second, or chip shot to the
green. A sliced drive at the third and a pulled one at
the sixteenth will find watery graves in the lake, a stretch
of water which many members visualise as some day pro-
viding a picturesque bathing pool, bordered with water
lilies.
Couch grass has flourished extremely well to give a first-
rate turf on the fairways. Within the past year many of
the greens have been remodelled and returfed with brown
top and fescue. The one-shot seventh hole is an example
of this remodelling, and it provides a good example of
modified trapping.


VICTORIA
VISITORS to Victoria Club are at once
impressed. Here is golf de luxe! It is
only ten minutes from the Cheltenham
station railway, but an open air garage for 30
cars and a parking area for a hundred more
suggest a complete independence of Mr
Harold Clapp. The club has obviously done
things on the grand scale. Its residential club-
house is 3 very Gibrultur of clubhouses. There
is a satisfying richness about its carpeting and
its furnishing. The architect who planned,
placed and equipped this building realised
that it was the committee’s dream to possess
the most beautiful of all clubhouses and he
strove to materialise it. Perhaps when he
founded this structure upon a rock-like base
he had in mind the windy spaces from which
Victoria had transferred its headquarters
and the bleakness of prospect offered
from the old clubhouse there. Here every-
thing speaks of comfort and spacious out-
look. The long, wide verandah hardly gives
shelter from every keen-edged breeze, but the
bedroom balcony is protected from wind, rain
and winged insects. Members lounging in the
capacious armchairs of the smoke room have
not even to go outside to test the direction of
the wind, for the weathervane, high up on
the roof ridge, registers its movements on a
metal indicator on the inside wall. As for the
associates, their large 28-feet square sitting-
room, furnished with great taste and judg-
ment, is the essence of rest and refreshment.
Victoria has its history, of course. One
might say that the growth of Melbourne itself
during the past 30 years is reflected in its pro-
gress. It was founded in the early days of
this century when time and money were the
two factors most considered by golfers. A
group of Melbourne’s commercial men leased
an area at Fishermen’s Bend near enough to
the city for even a quick game during a
slightly exaggerated lunch hour. It was purely
This remarkable aerial view shows not only the
course at Victoria (except the sth and 12th
greens), but the entire layout of the Cheltenham
links at the top. The entrances are side by side
at A, and the Victoria property is included in the
area below a line running from A to B. Upon
the substantial clubhouse and course, more than
£95,000 has been spent in ten years.




a men’s club, but its members were always courteous to
lady players and even generous. In addition to permit-
ting play on off days, the clubhouse and links were once
lent for an entire week to the Victorian Ladies’ Golf Union
for a championship meeting.
The weatherboard clubhouse was big enough for mem-
ber and visitors, who enjoyed fine natural fairways, ex-
cellent greens and a level layout, discounted only by the
bitter winds that earned it the nickname of Siberia. How-
ever, the day came when the Government refused a long
lease, and 10 years ago the club purchased its present site.
The palatial concrete clubhouse measures 193 ft. by 78ft.
wide, with a staff wing, in addition, 51ft. by 29ft. It has
a fifteen foot verandah, 270 feet long, and colonnaded on
the south side, to which the diningroom and mens
lounges give access by glass doors. .
Opening from the diningroom, at the west end, is the
service hall and kitchen, which is a joy to behold, with
its refrigerating plant, electric stoves and tiled benches,
Doors lead from it to the tea loggia on the verandah, to tfie
diningroom and to the associates’ lounge,
Victoria’s greens are mostly surfaced with fescue. The
The dininghall is a handsome room, seating 100 guests or accommodating, say, 250 dancers; leather medallions on the
blackwood framed chairs bear the club’s crest, which is repeated above the fine Gothic fireplace.
The move coincided with another change, in the admit-
tance of women, and the committee embarked on a
scheme of development that has been followed up so
consistently that a sum not far short of £lOO,OOO has been
expended on this magnificent property. The land itself
cost £26,700. The building ran into approximately £24,000,
with another £4OOO for furniture and furnishings, while the
construction of the course involved an expenditure of
between £7OOO and £BOOO. These, of course, were initial
expenses, to which must be added 10 years’ maintenance.
fairways are constructed on a couch grass foundation,
with fescue bent and poa annua.
Players not versed in the craft of extracting wayward
balls from sandy lies in bunkers sometimes feel that
the committee of 10 years ago also had dreams of
making Victoria outstanding in difficulties. As will
be seen from the aerial view, shots that stray find sand
traps for them at every hole. But for the enthusiast
man or woman the Victoria course leaves little to be
desired.


There are more than a
dozen bedrooms at Victoria
comfortably if not luxuri-
ously furnished and of
course equipped with such
modem convenience as hot
and cold water. This ac-
commodation for holiday
use is available to mem-
bers and, by the usual
channel, to their friends.
An atmosphere of restfulness pervades the associates’ lounge at
Victoria. Inset is the corner of the room in which is the tapestry
brick fireplace and the ladies’ honor board.


KINGSTON HEATH
ON the Kingston Road, 3 miles from the Cheltenham
station, and almost next door to the Melbourne Bene-
volent Society’s Homes, is the delightful Kingston
Heath club. This club was originally known as the Els-
ternwick Club, and until about 10 years ago was located
at what is now known as Elsternwick Park, at the corner
of New Street and Glenhuntly Road, Elsternwick. The
club owned its own pavilion in the park, and when it was
decided that the club was substantial enough to acquire
land of its own, and to take upon its shoulders the re-
sponsibilities of laying out a new course, various proper-
ties were purchased and. Kingston Heath, to the plan pre-
pared by the Sydney professional, Dan. Souter, came into
being. Its slightly undulating layout, although longer than
the majority of links, is intriguing 'both to those who know
the secrets of combining good length and right direction,
and to those who have not yet acquired the knack of con-
trolling the ball.
In spite of their troubles in the rough, they never fail
to want to make further attempts to try out their luck
once again on what, at first glance, appears to be a fairly
simple proposition. To the uninitiated the undulations
on fairways and greens are not at all conspicuous, for Mr
M. A. Morcom, Royal Melbourne’s famous curator, has of
all green keepers, remembered the words of the late Dr.
McKenzie, and has made everything look natural. There-
fore, although players have no hills to climb, they are
often called upon to produce a shot from an uphill or
downhill lie or stance, and this aspect of Kingston Heath
has proved a valuable asset when its players have visited
other courses. They are not handicapped by being con-
fronted with something they have not seen before.
They are at home with almost every example
of stance or lie, but all the time their game is
being played in surroundings so level and so attractive
that no wonder this course is the Mecca of many interstate
and country players. Kingston Heath is another club which
displays the double advantages of bent holes. With a
basis of couch grass, Kingston Heath’s fairways also show
evidence of those other excellent golf course grasses, creep-
ing bent and fescue, also a native grass, self sown, poa
annua . thus ensuring an excellent texture of turf.
This clubhouse is essentially Australian in character, with
its wide-sheltering verandah extending almost right across
the whole length of the clubhouse, which this year has
been enlarged to accommodate extra lockers. Only recent-
ly larger accommodation for the staff became necessary.
Another story was added to the rear and increases to
the large expanse of green tiles, which is one of
the most attractive features of this clubhouse, for
the lighter shades of the tiles blends harmoniously with
the darker green background of the serrated pine hedge
immediately at the rear. The clubhouse faces east, and
the long blue range of the Dandenongs is always an inspir-
ing sight for arriving or departing players.
The simplicity of the interior of the Kingston Heath club-
house is suggestive of the Georgian era, yet in this club-
house, so economically planned, has an air of spaciousness,
and the fact that 300 dancers have been accommodated in
the lounge rooms testifies to its capacity to meet big oc-
casions. In this lounge is a very imposing chimney piece,
handsomely built of tapestry bricks, and carrying the club’s
honor board, a lovely example of matched blackwood.
Thereby hangs a tale. When the old pavilion was moved
from Elsternwick Park a few additions were made, and this
clubhouse was used for the first few years of the club’s
existence on the Kingston Road. After having spent all
available income in constructing a very fine course, it was
decided to build a better clubhouse. In the meantime the
associates had worked together to make the old pavilion
as cosy as possible, and had arranged bridge and golf days
to procure the funds to build a handsome fireplace and
chimney breast, which was so impressive that it dominated
everything else. When the new clubhouse was decided
upon the chimney, needless to say, influenced the design to
a considerable extent. A name that repeats itself an ex-
traordinary number of times as champion of the club is that
of M. J. Ryan, a former Australian and Victorian cham-
pion, whose skill has shed lustre on this club.
A typical scorecard, quarter size. Distances are always cal-
culated from back of the tee to centre of the green.


Kingston Heath Clubhouse from the ground and the sky.


WOODLANDS
JUST before the Point Nepean Road curves under the
railway bridge at Mordialloc, a notice board points the
way to the Woodlands club, a club that undoubtedly
lives up to its picturesque name, for nowhere near Mel-
bourne is there another course where fairways are bounded
by such a wealth of natural woodlands.
With their gnarled trunks and quaint spreading boughs,
the eucalypts offer a delightful sanctuary to the thousands
of native birds that add to the charm of Woodlands, while
golden wattles add their striking color note to the varied
banks of green.
This clubhouse, a photograph of which appears below,
set in its rustic beauty, is a mile from the Mordialloc
station and is close to the Epsom Racecourse. Just
as the executive of this club has preserved the parklike
course in its natural beauty, so have they designed a club-
house which fits perfectly in its rustic setting. “This is
my ideal of what a clubhouse should be, a true Australian
bungalow,” said the then Prime Minister, Mr. Stanley
Bruce, at the official opening of the clubhouse in 1929.
Painted green, with a green tiled roof, this clubhouse
belongs to its background. There is not a jarring note.
But this is Woodlands’ second clubhouse. Its first was a
very plain pavilion consisting mainly of a wide veranda
with locker rooms at each end, while meals could be
obtained at a nearby cottage. While this sufficed to cater
for the local residents, the advent of cars soon brought
Woodlands into the metropolitan area, and even then, in-
stead of building a larger clubhouse, the committee very
wisely concentrated on going ahead with the construction of
extra holes to bring it up to an 18-hole layout. Then Fate
took a hand in things. Early in the season of 1927 a fire
gutted the clubhouse, so immediate action was compulsory.
As soon as the club arranged a secure tenure of the pro-
perty, which was held by the Master-in-Equity in the inter-
ests of a member of the Spanish nobility, the present club-
house was built. The architect decided on four-foot over-
hanging eaves, rather than extra verandahs, allowing for
shade in the summer, and 1 the sun in the winter when the
orbit is lower. From the wide entrance hall the visitor
passes across a beautifully furnished lounge to the dining-
room, which has a jarrah floor suitable for dancing. A
separate lounge also furnished by the architect, with furni-
ture that harmonises with the architecture, has been pro-
vided for the use of the associates. They have
added a spacious veranda to their enlarged locker room,
which contains steel lockers, a necessary precaution after
so many sets of clubs were lost in the fire. A secretary’s
office, members’ bar. locker rooms, and a well-equipped
kitchen complete the clubhouse.
Wall tablets in the lounges commemorate the services
of the members of this club, which came into being the
year before the war. The furniture is built of Manchurian
oak, peak arched in keeping with the timbered ceilings.
Upholstered in chintz, the lounge chairs are blocked out
to the shape of the harmonising motif. In the initial cost
of £6OOO for this clubhouse £6OO was allowed for furnish-
ing and £6OO for lockers, but with the growth of the club
extra money has necessarily been spent.
The distances are:—l, 393 (325); 2, 446 (415); 3, 321 (284);
4, 281 (271); 5, 190 (145); 6, 540 (480); 7, 367 (341); 8, 257
(243); 9, 450 (387). Out, 3245 (2891). 10, 432 (334); 11, 385
(371); 12, 330 (321); 13, 420 (375); 14, 480 (444); 15, 360 (300);
16, 164 (124); 17, 520 (487); 18, 133 (118). In 3202 (2874).
Total 6447 (5765). Scr. Sc. 75 (76). Associates’ figures in
parenthesis.


RIVERSDALE
The
Clubhouse
THE Riversdale Club dates back 40 years when,
as the Surrey Hills Club, it played the other
“original” clubs near the present Mont Albert 1
station. (The Mont Albert Cup, relic of those days,
is still played for annually by the associates and is
one of the club’s cherished possessions).
Five shillings per month was the rental for their
first clubhouse, a railway shed, which served the purpose
of a dressing-room and tea house. Then a cottage was
obta'ned close to the station, and later the pioneering
band moved to a property of about 100 acres at East
Camberwell, less than five minutes from the Cam-
berwell Town Hall. That site, too, is now covered with
villa homes. When unimproved rating came in at
Camberwell municipal taxes soared, so 10 years ago an-
other move became compulsory. The pretty little club-
house, with its lovely garden, where Harry Lauder, after a
round with some of the club’s “Scotchest” members, en-
joyed a wee deoch and dor is, was sold, and the club moved
out to its new layout at Burwood, on High Street Road.
This property, St. John’s Wood, was originally owned by
Victoria’s first judge, Sir Redmond Barry, whose sword,
now hanging in the secretary’s office, is another trea-
sured possession of the club. One of the first gatherings
at Burwood happened when players met with gardening
tools instead, of clubs, and turned a Saturday afternoon
into an Arbor Day. Many of the old trees, planted nearly
a hundred years ago, still remain to add a mellow atmos-
phere to the landscape on which, during the past 10 years,
several thousand young trees have been planted. The pre-
sent land, which, at the time of possession, was seemingly
free from suburban enroachment, was again threatened
with the hammer of the builder when the railway line to
Glen Waverley was constructed, dividing the property, and
a station (Jordanville) built on the links. The land cut
off by the railway is, however, used as a practice fairway,
its specially marked targets at 50-yard distances making
it the most up-to-date round Melbourne. The fairways have
been cleverly graduated around the hills of this un-
dulating course. What Riversdale lacks in level stances
it makes up in panoramic views, the terraced slope of three
levels of greens (13th, 14th, 15th and 16th), as viewed from
the high 12th hole, presenting an unusual feature of golfing
landscape. The clubhouse, originally a commodious old
homestead, has little to remind one of the days of Judge
Barry, but his racing stables are now used as the profes-
sional’s shop and a storehouse for implements. In the aerial
view is shown the dam which was at first
used as a water supply for the course, and also the turf
plot, which supplies extra turf when alterations are plan-
ned or greens need patching. Another plot laid down by
the Greens Research Committee of Victoria near the first
tee contains experimental grasses suitable for the develop-
ment of turf for inland clubs.


THE Kew Club, with its picturesque white clubhouse,
is near the High Street tram and is bounded on the
north by the winding Yarra.
It was one of the six “originals” and below are shown
two of the greens and fairways of the old Royal Mel-
bourne, also an “original.” (Sandringham Council still
retains six of these holes and will shortly add three new
ones, hoping eventually to develop an 18-hole course.)
Kew’s first site was on Willsmere Road, not far from the
present course, which was selected after the war.
Looking from the balcony across the links to the Yarra
Bridge in Burke Road, one is reminded of a chess board,
for the fairways are divided by plantations of young trees
that, when grown, will add greatly to the attractiveness of
the layout.
Kew, at the present time one of the strongest of the
Kew and Sandringham
men’s clubs, owes a great deal to the womenfolk, who, in
the early days, assisted in painting the first clubhouse and
weeding the new greens.
The Dana Gibson type of sports girl built well, for from
clubs such as Kew emerged the wonderful organisation
known as the Ladies’ Golf Union.
Features of Kew are the Billabong which forms a
dreaded boundary for several holes, and the River, which
forms a desperate hazard for shots off the line.
The two-story clubhouse, a landmark from Kew and
Ivanhoe, contains a big diningroom with balcony and an-
nexes with landscape windows, from which glorious views
across die links may be obtained, while extra locker room
accommodation has recently been added.
The course length is 6105 yards and the S.S.S. is 73; asso-
ciates, 5159, S.S.S. 73.


Albert Park and Eastern
GOLF with an unusual view of the city’s skyline is
provided at the Albert Park club, 2% miles from the
G.P.0., on Queen’s Road, Melbourne. Its well turfed
fairways and velvety greens provide an excellent example
of what can be done in the way of park improvement by
a golf committee. The recently completed clubhouse, with
the latest improvements, has a flat roof, which commands
a fine view of course, park lands and lake. The club
has a full membership and a long waiting list. The total
length of the course is 6036 yards and the S.S.S. is 71;
associates 5670 yards, S.S.S. 73.
SET amidst well-kept orchards, the Eastern Club, famous
for its A.I.F. Annual Cup Competition, is 2% miles
from the Box Hill station, via Station Street, along which
Melbourne’s first electric tram travelled, way back in the
“eighties,” a “boom time” venture, which was short-
lived. Now a bus passes the clubhouse direct from Mel-
bourne, along Doncaster Road. Eastern’s commanding
clubhouse was originally the country home of one of Mel-
bourne’s first surgeons, Sir Thomas Fitzgerald. The course
length is 6095 yards, S.S.S. 72; associates, 5432, S.S.S. 75.


The Heidelberg
Club, 31/2 miles
from the station,
at the junction of
the Yarra and
Plenty Rivers, is
an offshoot of the
original Yarra
Yarra Club. Parts
of the building
attached to the
modem colonial
type of clubhouse
have a history
dating back nearly
100 years.
The bent tree on
the Croydon Links
is but one of the
■many deligjhtful
features of this
course, almost in
the foothills of the
D andenong
Ranges.


1—ALBERT PARK
GOLF COURSES
14—ELSTERNWICK
IN AND AROUND MELBOURNE
27—METROPOLITAN
40—ROSANNA
2—ALTON A
15—EMERALD
28—MONT ALBERT
41—ROYAL MELBOURNE (West Course)
3—AMSTEL PARK
16—FAIR VIEW
29—MONTUNA
42—ROYAL MELBOURNE (East Course)
4—ASHBURTON FOREST
17—FRANKSTON
30—MORNINGTON
43—ROYAL PARK
5—AUSTRALASIAN
18—GLEN WAVERLEY
31—MOUNT MARTHA
44—SANDRINGHAM
6—BATMAN
19—HEALESVILLE
32—NORTHERN
45— SUNSHINE
46— VICTORIA
47— WARBURTON
7— BOX HILL
8— BRIGHTON
9— CHELTENHAM
20— HEIDELBERG
21— IVANHOE
22— KEW
33— PARK ORCHARDS
34— PATTERSON RIVER
35— PENINSULA
10—COMMONWEALTH
23—KINGSTON HEATH
36—RANELAGH
48—WARBURTON —“St. Andrew’s”
11—CROYDON
24—KINGSWOOD
37—RANFURLIE
49—WOODLANDS
12—DONCASTER
25—MALVERN
38—RESERVOIR
50—YARRA BEND
13—EASTERN
26—MEDWAY
39—RIVERSDALE
51—YARRA YARRA
For Details of
Situations, see Directory Pages, 55 onwards.


WEEK-END AND HOLIDAY GOLF
UP to this point we have described the principal
private courses in and around the metropolis.
Distributed around the same districts are several
public courses, some of which are dealt with on later pages.
But outside this area there is a great and rapidly increas-
ing number of links, ranging from sumptuous and exclusive
country clubs to bare stretches of fiat land, where red
and white flags mark the “tins” in sand scrapes.
It may be doubted, indeed, if any country in the world
offers to its residents facilities so many and varied for en-
joying the game that fascinates kings and caddies alike.
Lack of space debars any detailed description of more
than one or two examples of the clubs that provide sport
and entertainment for the week-end and holiday golfer.
Holidays are responsible for changes in the lives of most
people, and so it is that holiday golf, taken in recurring
doses, has been responsible for the crowded membership
and long waiting lists of so many of Melbourne’s biggest
clubs. That “something” which poets tell us “is in the
seaside air” (or is it the country air?) must surely be the
germ of golf, judging by the increasing numbers of people
who suddenly contract the golfing fever, though previously
they had not given the game a single friendly thought.
The Peninsula Country Club at Frankston which, with
its glorious beaches and tracts of wooded country, is now
the fashionable playing ground of Victoria Barwon
Heads Country Club, 15 miles out of Geelong, offering sand-
country golf to Western District players, and the Emerald
Country Club, an hour’s run from Melbourne into the love-
ly Dandenong Ranges, are Victoria’s three Country Clubs
where membership has, until a recent date, been conditional
upon the taking up of debentures or the purchase of a
home site adjacent to the links.
People desiring holiday golf, however, may, after intro-
duction to the secretary and payment of green fees, enjoy
the game at Mornington, Sorrento, Portsea, Flinders Altona
and Cowes, also at Queenscliff, Torquay and Clifton Springs,
while even Lome residents have discovered a site, about
seven miles out, on which a good 9-hole course is being
constructed.
Among the excellent holiday courses in the mountains
are Woodend, 50 miles from Melbourne; Hepburn Springs,
near Daylesford; Healesville and Macedon, where very fine
golf houses on the links offer first-class accommodation
to patrons, also St. Andrew’s at Warburton, offering delight-
ful scenery and good interesting holes; Lockwood, at Bel-
grave, about 2 miles south of the town, and two at Beacons-
field—Montuna and the Lakes.
The Emerald Country Club offers delightful holiday golf
to those who enjoy mountain air and scenery. The artistic
modern clubhouse, placed in a truly emerald setting, is in
complete harmony with the homes built by members, whose
plans and designs are wisely pre-viewed by a discriminating
committee of architects. The successive committees’ fore-
sight in developing this rare property has rendered it one
of the show places of the State. There are two fine grass
tennis courts and a wonderful swimming pool, so that
residents or visitors staying at the clubhouse can,
after a round or two, enjoy further exercise 'before partak-
ing of the evening meal.
The property was originally one of the biggest nurseries
in the State, hence the many examples of English trees
and others from foreign countries, which make such charm-
ing contrasts with the eucalypts and gums of the forest
beyond.
At Healesville, the local golf club, attached to the Golf
House, is built on partly level areas, divided by hills, from
which glorious views of Mt. Ridley and Mt. Juliet are ob-
tained.
For those who wish to spend their week-ends nearer
Melbourne, Patterson River offers the most ample boarding
accommodation of all the public courses and the well-kept
Park Orchards Country Club, at Ringwood, offers splendid
golfing facilities on turf greens at a most reasonable figure.
The same may be said of both the Montuna links and the
Lakes Club at Beaconsfield, which are available to the
public without any introductions.
At Mornington the level 9-hole course is designed
around and across the racecourse, and the big pavilion
belonging to the Mornington Race Club is used by golfers
for changing purposes and refreshments.
Visitors to Sorrento enjoy golf on one of
the most popular out-of-town links. This
private club is supported by local players
and many Melbourne residents who possess
The road into and
through the Emerald
Country Club’s pro-
perty is one of the
loveliest in the
State. It passes by
charming houses,
skirts the pool and
tennis courts, and
allows the driver to
drop his companions
at the clubhouse
steps before parking.
In the photograph,
the Ist tee, the 4th
green and the 9th
green are shown,
also the practise
putting green that
adjoins the parking
area.
homes along the foreshore, that contains
some of Victoria’s oldest historic relics.
Well-watered greens and fast fairways
over sharply undulating country make
golf at Sorrento interesting all the
time, the Billabong Hole (2nd), the Bird-Nest (6th),
Razonback (7th) and Mt. Misery (13th) offering features
of special interest. The clubhouse, built high above the
first tee, contains refreshment room and locker rooms. This
club is one of the oldest in the State. Of recent date, a
neighboring course has been constructed at Portsea, a 12-
hole course, complete with clubhouse facilities which vies
in interest with the bathing beaches that have made
Portsea famous over the past half century.
At Torquay, recent improvements to the 9-hole course
give promise of greater golfing facilities for Geelong resi-
dents in the future. Although close to the beach, sand
dunes shelter this course from the worst winds. A small
clubhouse does duty for picnic meals, The Woodend
Links, 45 miles from Melbourne, always attract a large
number of holiday golfers, who enjoy the mountain air and
the changing scenes of mist and sunshine at close range
on Mt. Macedon. The clubhouse is situated on a hill
facing the third fairway and overlooking the town. After
a sharp rise several holes are played along the plateau,
while several fascinating one-shot holes to greens over 100
feet below the tees, are part of the charm that belongs to
Woodend.




This aerial view of the clubhouse
and the glimpses below give
some idea of the beauty and
convenience of the Peninsula
Country Club.
At right is the lounge, with
dining room beyond.


PENINSULA
A Typical Country Club
THE Peninsula Country Club at Frankston, a bare
mile and a half from the township or the beach, is
easily found. As one approaches the township a road
turns sharply to the left, crosses the railway line near the
station, and after a mile runs into the avenue. Its two-
story residential clubhouse, with its tower, which is a land-
mark for many miles, was first known as the Tower House
Club.
Very many delightful social events have marked the pro-
gress of this club, which, in addition to accommodating
members in its comfortable quarters, has become the “Draw-
ing Room of the Peninsula,” so many of its members having
fallen in love with Frankston, although' they have acquired
homes in the locality, they continue to do their entertaining
in the clubhouse, where a well-proportioned lounge opens
to wings containing dining service departments, as well as
bedrooms, smoke rooms, billiard room and locker rooms,
and last, but not least, a palm courtyard. This clubhouse
is always full in summer and many business men and
their families make it their headquarters, enjoying their
daily rounds in the late afternoon or early evening, with
dinner served in the clubhouse to suit the hours of golfers.
The first tee is famous. From the summit of a series
of terraces one surveys a considerable portion of the
woodland country through which the eighteen-hole course
winds, its pleasant way, and in case one might become
over-exhilarated with the view, a long wide, smooth fair-
way offers its surface for the initial drive.
Big greens, which are not so guarded as to make the game
a nightmare to the beginner, are true if fast, and the course
is sufficiently intriguing to attract the States’ best players
for all important events, the biggest yet held being the Cen-
tenary Gold Cup. This course measures 6126 yards.
Its big timber and lovely undergrowth of ferns and
bracken gains the highest points for offering “rough” in
the true meaning of the word to all who stray from the
well-tufted fairways. It is a delightful sanctuary for birds
and native fauna. The quaint “lovers’ walk” cut
through a bank of tea-tree, the sunken flower garden and
the turf tennis courts add to the country club atmosphere,
which charms both the youngest and oldest members.
This secluded lay-out also offers golf plus relaxation to
the jaded business man who, midst the big timber, finds
peace and contentment with life, if not with his score.
A rustic shelter pavilion, situated on the rise at the
sth green, commands a view of the fifth, sixth, eleventh
and twelfth holes, a delightful half-way house, at which
the non-golfer may await his friends and incidentally add
to his golfing vocabulary. Women’s team from all clubs
compete each year for the Peninsula Challenge Bowl, the
annual curtain-raiser for the women’s golfing season. Be-
yond the eighth hole is high rising ground, from which a
view right through Port Phillip Heads, 40 miles distant,
can be obtained, as well as views of the Dandenong Ranges,
Macedon and the You Yangs.
The distances at Peninsula are —1, 426 (400); 2, 464 (405);
3, 233 (188); 4, 466 (438); 5, 172 (148); 6, 436 (392); 7, 175
(113); 8, 412 (376); 9, 140 (125). Out, 2924 (2585). 10, 378
(378); 11, 434 (390); 12, 144 (126); 13, 366 (327); 14, 290 (290;
15, 354 (317); 16, 375 (343); 17, 439 (400); 18, 422 (366). In,
3202 (2937). Bogey 73 (79). Total distance, 6126 (5522).
Not far from the Peninsula Club is another course
being constructed on sand country and which should be
available for play within a year, while just off the Hastings
Road, at Frankston, about a mile from the town, is a
notice directing to the Frankston Golf Club Ltd., a lovely
9-hole course, commonly known as “The Millionaires’ Club,”
owing to the fact that the membership is restricted to a
very small number who are prepared to pay big fees for
the excellent upkeep of the course for the pleasure of
always being able to enjoy a game minus a crowd. The
home of the Right Hon. Stanley Bruce at Frankston ad-
joins this lovely well-kept area, where, by the way, only
a rustic pavilion serves as a clubhouse.


Maryborough has a nice
club house, a strong
club membership, and
a good eighteen-hole
course well laid out.
Glimpses
of Some
Country
Courses
A Riverside (near Mildura) sand green
A creek hazard at Heathcote.
Lockwood (near Bel-
grave) has a nine-hole
course with sand greens
and sporting fairways.
Nowhere in Victoria is
golf played under more
picturesque surround-
ings than among the
Warburton hills.


BARWON HEADS
BARWON HEADS was one of the first seaside resorts
to possess a course. It was a pleasant round even
though its greens were of finely shredded wattle bark
and one of its hazards was a clump of bushes in which
beehives were embowered, offering the player a choice
between a dog’s leg and a bee’s sting.
But a little more than fifteen years ago, supported by a
large section of Western District pastoralists as well as
many prominent Melbourne and Geelong players, Barwon
Heads Club made the first venture into the realms of
Country Club life in Victoria. Since then this attractive
clubhouse, overlooking the very fine 18-hole championship
layout, has taken a definite place in the community of
golfers who, after games, may enjoy from the roomy
verandahs, or the cosy many-windowed lounges, a unique
view of the Rip from outside the Heads, while beyond
rises Arthur’s Seat in hazy blue tones at Dromana, with
the lighthouse at Point Lonsdale in bold relief.
Barwon Heads differs from the ordinary guest houses
which offer patrons golf on the links surrounding their
establishments, for its links are available only to those who
are members of the club, which is governed by a com-
mittee selected from among the several hundred players
who pay their annual dues, and also pay for their accom-
modation while they are using the clubhouse. Friends of
members wishing to stay at the clubhouse may do so,
provided the necessary introduction from a member (or
secretary from an overseas or interstate club) is forth-
coming, but during vacation periods, or for special golf
meetings, members naturally have prior right to clubhouse
accommodation.
Situated on a knoll, the big timber building, three stories
in parts, with many sheltered verandahs, is innocent of
any background of trees or shrubs, for in the windswept
area so close to the ocean, vegetation does not flourish,
but good golfing country does, and that to the golfers is
the all important fact. This hardwood building with iron
roof is a landmark for miles around. Cement sheets inter-
spersed with hardwood panelling give a decorative touch
to the exterior, the severity of the outline being broken
by several large windows and balcony enclosures. Arched
doorways above the steps and a brick facade of tapestry
bricks with cement facings lend dignity to the entrance.
From the spacious veranda, double doors lead to a well-
proportioned lounge, where large open fireplaces and
capacious leather furniture suggest cosy, not to say lux-
urious relaxation. 'Cups belonging to members and
associates, and trophies won for the club (which has many
brilliant players) adorn the massive mantelshelves at each
end of the room.
On the left are the dining rooms, with windows guarded
with netting in case of wild shots from the seventh tee,
while on the right of the lounge is a daintily furnished
drawing room, rendezvous of many social gatherings—in
fact the heart of the “Drawing Room of the Heads,” as
this clubhouse is often termed. There are smoke rooms,
and a billiard room downstairs, with, of course, men’s and
women’s locker rooms. The second story is reserved for
bedroom accommodation. The professional’s shop is at the
tee. The recently-constructed ocean highway along the
coastline is within a few minutes of the clubhouse, nearby
which are several private homes with gardens adjoining the
fairways.
KINGSWOOD
KINGSWOOD, at present situated a mile out of Dande-
nong, is one of Melbourne’s younger clubs, which has
increased its membership so considerably during the
past few years that members decided on purchasing land
more suitable than the present site for growing good golf
turf. The new course is situate;! on Centre Dandenrng
Road, near the old ivy-colored historic church at Dingley
Dell.


ELSTERNWICK PARK
A Remarkable Example of Golf Plus . . .
HERE is an interesting aerial picture. It is safe to say,
indeed, that nowhere else in Australia could such a
diversity of sporting activity be revealed in a single
photograph.
The unbuilt-on area is Elstemwick Park. It covers no
more than 90 acres, yet at the moment the photographer
flew over, not only was the golf course fully occupied, but
alongside it an Association football match, with 7000 specta-
tors, a second grade game, and six tennis matches were
in progress; while in the southern half of the park an Aus-
tralian football game, a Rugby match, and two games
of hockey were being played, to say nothing of a second
group of tennis matches. Fitted somewhere into this
checkerboard of adult sports are two well-equipped child-
ren’s playgrounds in full swing, and the golf clubhouse,
with its gardens and putting green.
The Park, bounded by New Street, Glenhuntly Road,
St. Kilda Street and Head Street, is thus within the City
of Brighton. It is not controlled by the municipal authori-
ties, however, but is governed by a trust consisting of the
Brighton Council, the Board of Band >and Works.
A managing committee, consisting of three members ap-
pointed by the council and three by the board, carries out
the regulations framed by the unanimous vote of the
trustees. The committee controls the sports and conducts
the finances.
Under its administration the grounds have developed
steadily, and, in recent years, with almost amazing rapidity.
The portion not included in the golf course is now the
headquarters of the Brighton and Elstemwick (Amateur)
Football Clubs, the Elstemwick Tennis and cricket Clubs,
the Victorian Amateur Hockey Association, with its af-
filiated clubs, the Elwood Tennis Club and the Brighton
Lacrosse Club.
This clear, open-skied space in the midst of a forest
of suburban houses is itself of historic sporting interest.
Fifty years ago a section of what was then town common
was leased as a racecourse, but after some years of popu-
larity the lessees were forced out of business. Some years
later the area outlined by the streets mentioned ap-
proximately 90 acres was permanently reserved as a
Public Recreation Park.’
The golf course has its own interesting chapter. Origin-
ally it was leased for £75 a year by the Elstemwick Golf
Club, and an 18-hole course was laid out, players crossing
St. Kilda Street to play several holes in the longish empty
space shown in the photograph, and known as the old
Elwood Rifle Butts.
This section, however, was transferred to the St. Kilda
Council and the Elstemwick links were re-formed as a
nine-holer on the northern half of the Park. This has
lately been remodelled and continues to show a most satis-
factory return on, the outlay. It is a fairly short, but by
no means uninteresting, course, owing to the hazards of
the Elwood Creek, that bisects it from east to west.
A charge of 1/ per round is made, with an extra three-
pence per round on Sundays (from 1 to 6 p.m.), Saturdays
and holidays.
One great advantage of the Park is its accessibility. Two
electric tram lines have stopping places at its main gate
and another passes it, close to the southern entrance. A
Melbourne-Brighton bus runs along New Street, and the
Elstemwick Station is only a stone’s throw from it.
Members of the present committee of management are:—
Councillors J. A. Kennedy (chairman), G. A. Giles and R.
Eustace Tracey and Messrs- L. L. Chapman, C. J- Pollock
and Ralph Tyner. Mr. C. E. Tuxen is the honorary engi-
neer and Mr. J. H. Taylor (the Town Clerk of Brighton)
acts as its honorary secretary and treasurer.
The neat clubhouse erected in 1928 has a telephone and
supplies light refreshments to golfers.






/royalX
/melbourneX
I Showing Club House \
and I
1 Greens 2,4,5,6,7 &18 I
\ of WEST COURSE,- j
\ 2 & 18 of EAST /
, X COURSE y.


PATTERSON RIVER
THE first venture into the realm of privately-owned
golf links was made at Carrum, on the Patterson
River, 45 minutes from Melbourne by road. Ten years
ago the now thriving Patterson River Golf Links was virgin
bush land, that had to be cleared, drained and turned into
a modern golf course. The greens and fairways have
been magnificently “bunkered and hazarded;” and a
cottage clubhouse has given place to a fine, sub-
stantial brick edifice, so that present day players
at Patterson River have accommodation for dining
and changing much above the standard of many private
clubs. The well-turfed fairways are of splendid length,
calling for good direction, and thousands of golfers who
have improved their game can thank the management for
the well-guarded and perfectly-surfaced greens, which de-
mand an accurate short game.
The course is of championship length, 6230 yards, and
there are a full 18-hole practice putting green, and a clock
putting green. In addition to the comfortably furnished
lounge (used also for social gatherings) there are two
splendidly-equipped billiard rooms and everything that can
be provided for the comfort of resident guests is to be
found, including a hot and cold water service in every
room. There is an up-to-date sewerage system throughout.
Electric and fire stoves are installed in the kitchen and all
appliances are right up to the moment. There are twelve
lock-up garages. The nearest station is Carrum, and
a car will meet any train at Bonbeach free of charge.
Ladies have the same rights as men on the course.
The tariff is £4/4/ per week, inclusive of golf billiards
and garaging. Week-end tariff, from Saturday after lunch
to, and including tea on Sundays, with golf, garage and
billiards, is £l. Extra days 12/6 per day.
Fees are:—Golf and lunch, per day, 5/6. Golf only, all
day, 3/6; 18 holes, 2/6. Telephone, Chelsea 109. (Chelsea
is under country section in telephone book).


v:
1
A* *
m.
* 1
•m
*
■
.. i
S'
J>J*
mimm
m
We too,
smoke Turf
lV
Three reasons ensure
Turf being a consis-
tent, satisfying
smoke for every oc-
casion: first, careful
selection of healthy
leaf; second, expert
blending; and third,
Turfs custom of age-
ing the leaf for at
least three years, to
eliminate harshness
and render the
tobacco 100% pure.
MBS’
m
■
■
■
■
TURF
10for6d.; 20 fori/-
also boxes of 50 and 100
Cork Tipped and Plain
Curl Cigarettes are guaranteed 100% Pure
G 597


FLINDERS First of the Holiday Golf Links
WHAT delightful memories will be recalled to thou-
sands of golfers and near-golfers by this strip of
lovely coast, along which runs the Flinders golf
course! And what direful ones will be brought back by
the reproduction below of Niagara (3) and Spion Kop (4)!
Flinders, 55 miles south of Melbourne, has many attrac-
tions, chief of which is undoubtedly its magnificent 5050
yard golf course. Picturesquely situated on the West Head
Promontory, overlooking Bass Strait on the one side and
Westernport Bay on the other, the fine sea and land scapes
are reminiscent of the earlier traditions of the game. The
course is full of “features” (notably the well-known Niagara
and Spion Kop holes on one boundary and “the Coffin” on
the other), providing for every variety of shot, while the
well-turfed and well-kept fairways and greens lend an
irresistible charm to a golfing holiday.
So varied is the nature of the layout that while many
holes are intriguing to champions in search of “birdies”
or par figures, other holes have few difficulties to present
to the beginner. Because of the flattering distance obtain-
ed in the summer, indeed. Flinders has to its credit a very
large number of class golfers, who regard the sea-girt
course as the nursery of their game. Flinders might
well be called the cradle of holiday golf, for it is the
oldest of all the holiday links in Victoria.
The scratch score of the course is 68. Harry Williams
(63) holds the amateur record and Walter Hagen (64) the
professional record.
Although no clubhouse,
other than a rustic shelter-
shed, adorns the first tee (see
1), the greenkeeper*’s cottage
at the Tenth Hole in Lovers’ Walk supplies refreshments,
and the enjoyable experience of being permitted to break
a round and partake of both refreshments and the most
glorious views.
Flinders is reached in two hours from Melbourne by
service car, following a first-class motor road through coun-
try of scenic beauty; or alternatively by rail and car.
Those who wish to combine a beautiful drive with a day’s
golf should leave Frankston by the Hastings Road, travel-
ling via Shoreham.
The return journey via the Red Hill Road will charm
with delightful views along the winding road, which de-
scends to the Point Nepean Road at a point a few miles
on the Melbourne side of Dromana. The run home is
through Momington and back to Frankston.
A professional is in attendance during summer.
The course is open to visitors at the following rat°s:—
Good accommodation is available for visitors at the
following guest houses and hotel, some of which abut
the links: —“St. Andrews” (Tel. 2); “Katoomba” (Tel. 7);
“Flinders House” (Tel. 10); “The Bungalow” (Tel. 6);
“H’awatha” (Tel. 16); “Flinders Hotel” (Tel. 3).
Hon. Secretary: George Smith, Flinders Golf Club. Tel. 8.
Oct. to
May to
April
Sept.
s. d.
s. d.
Per round
2 6
1 6
Day
3 6
2 6
.. Week-end (3 days)
10 0
6 0
„ Week
„ Week (each additional member of
15 0
10 0
family)
10 0
7 0
„ Year (ending 30th Sept.)
„ Year (each additional member of
42 0
42 0
family)
(Under 16, half rates)
30 0
30 0


O
1
;sss
No golfer can play his best if his clubs fall short
of his ability—and that goes for Henry Cotton as
well as for me and you. Now you can take as
much trouble as you like choosing the right heads
and the most comfortable grips, but your clubs
will still only be as good as their shafts; because
it is the shafts that do the work. There is no life
in a piece of wood or iron at one end, or in the
piece of leather at the other —all the life is in the
shaft. The shaft gives the drive, the snap, the
distance. So when you choose your clubs see that
they are fitted with TRUE TEMPER SHAFTS —
the shafts with the steps—your steps to better golf.
THIS IS DU L L-B U T IMPORTANT
The filleted shoulders forming steps reinforce the shaft, at the same time
absorbing all the jar on its way up to your hands. By adjusting the
position of the steps on the shaft, we can put the whip exactly where
required. By thickening the steel walls as the outside diameter decreases,
we can taper the shaft, and still throw the weight low down behind the
ball. The.e are different degrees of whip in the True Temper range to
suit every tyre of player, including one particularly suited to ladies, while
players who prefer extra whip should ask for True Temper Limbershaft.
True Temper shafts are made in a variety of finishes, including Chromium.
Black, Light or Dark grained enamel, Light or Dark Sheath.
Ask your Sports Dealer for Free
Booklet, "Hints on Play with
Steel Shafts," by Henry Cotton.
British Steel Golf Shafts Ltd., England. Australasian Representativess Messrs. Kemsley & Co. Pty. Ltd.
OBTAINABLE EVERY W- HERE




PART of the charm of the beautifully
groomed Ivanhoe Golf Links, situated
between the Boulevard and the north
bank of the Yarra, near the Burke Road
bridge, is the atmosphere of early his-
toric asociations, which are evident in
the two wings of the present clubhouse.
This was originally the country seat of
one of Melbourne’s leading citizens,
Captain George Brunswick Smyth, after
whom the suburb of Brunswick, near Melbourne was named.
Ninety-eight years ago this property, known as Chelsworth
Estate, was purchased at Melbourne’s first sale of country
land by Thomas Walker, of Sydney, who, two years later,
sold the portion now used by the Ivanhoe Club to Captain
Smyth, an officer in Her Majesty’s 50th Regiment, who
stocked it with pedigreed Shorthorns. His neighbors in-
cluded Judge Willis, the apoplectic judge, who was finally
recalled to Sydney, owing to the many broils in which he
became involved in the young city, and Captain Sylvester
(Paddy) Browne, father of Rolf Boldrewood, author of
the famous novel “Robbery Under Arms.” Records show
that they, with Dr. Martin and Archibald Thom, used to
go shooting ducks and quail along the flats where golfers
enjoy sport of another description. The Chelsworth stables,
built of hand-made bricks, now undergoing repair, had the
honor of stabling the first donkey in Victoria. A story is
told of a number of blacks who were bringing lyre birds’
tails to the homestead, knowing a good sale always
existed for them. Suddenly spying the strange animal
in sportive mood, tail and mane flying and braying
loudly, the blacks dropped their treasures and ran for
cover. Remains of the original two-roomed stone cot-
tage, which was used until the original house was built, are
still evident, while an olive tree dating back to these early
days shelters those who play patience at the first tee, for
over 750 players per week leave that attractive spot, only
to return and try thair skill again and again.
IVANHOE
Public Links
The course, held on a 10 years’ lease,
with option of another 10 years, consists
of 18 holes, with a playing length of 5510
yards, and, like many links in the Old
Country, Ivanhoe’s holes are named: —
i.e., The First, Boundary Avenue, Siberia, Paradise Comer,
Billabong, Dog Leg, Look Out, Grand View, Half-way
Avenue, Centre Avenue, The Long Avenue, The Short
Avenue, Spion Kop, The Boulevard, The River, Wind Mill
Hill, Deception and Home. The Yarra, forming a
natural hazard to several holes, is a happy cruising resort
for motor-boat parties, and has a natural swimming pool,
with sandy bottom, on a bend adjoining the 15th green and
16th tee.
The clubhouse, with a fine central diningroom and
lounge, has been modernised with additions of lockers, hot
and cold showers and electric light. One of the original
rooms, which, no doubt, was used for many social func-
tions in the years gone by, is now used as a ladies’ lounge.
There is a fine verandah overlooking the velvety green
fairways stretching below.
The course is easily accessible by rail to Ivanhoe, while
buses from Melbourne and Heidelberg pass along Heidel-
berg Road and turn into Lower Heidelberg Road, which
is only three minutes’ walk from the Golf _ Links. The
Camberwell bus crosses over Burke Road bridge and also
turns into Lower Heidelberg Road, the course being on
left, as indicated by notice board. Fees for members who
have formed a club and who are arranging weekly competi-
tions, are:— .
Subscription Fees (Members): Yearly, £5/5/; half-yearly,
£3/3/; weekly, 3/. (Associates): Yearly, £3/3/; half-yearly,
£2/2/; weekly, 2/. No entrance fee.
Green fees, 2/- per round (or 2/- per day from Monday
to Friday); 3/- per day on Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays.
Times may be booked by ringing Ivanhoe 710.


LEARN IN THE HEART OF THE CITY
FROM VICTORIA'S BRILLIANT CHAMPION
LONDON STORES
GOLF SCHOOL
mmm
'
j.
mm
« • 1
„ ' ' ' W--<V
yVNSPECT our Daylight Golf School
W where State Champion Ted Nai-
C/ smith is at your service either
for tuition, or to advise you regarding
your club selection. See the new “Ted
Naismith” International Model Woods
and Irons, incorporating the latest
ideas in Golf Club construction de-
veloped during the Victorian Cham-
pion’s recent American tour. These
new designs fittingly reflect both his
reputation as one of Australia’s Great-
est Golfers, and also his knowledge
of correct club construction. “In-
ternational” Woods and Irons were
used by Ted Naismith himself, in his
recent American tour, and also in put-
ting up new records at Yarra Yarra
and Kingston Heath Open Meetings
this season.
"INTERNATIONAL" MODEL IRONS
Made by Spalding’s for London Stores Ltd., these clubs are a re- 3
velation in “sweetness” and “feel.” Specially designed stainless S // Q
steel heads, giving maximum results, all fitted English Steel ** W
Shafts with mahogany sheath finish. Opp. G.P.0., 37/6;
Graded set of five ’ 175/1
"INTERNATIONAL" MODEL WOODS
Selected Persimmon heads, fitted graded “True Temper” Shafts —J / f
with new type “non-slip” Grip. Opp. G.P.0., 37/6 per club. “S // fo
Graded set of 3 .. 105/- 1 W
LONDON STORES LTD
opp. G.P.0., BOURKE STREET
MELBOURNE, C.l.


Park Orchards
A Picnic Golf Course
These casual snapshots indicate the entertainment offered at the cafe and the careful preparation of the greens and fairways,
ONE of the most delightful nine-hole courses in the hills is
known as Park Orchards Country Club. For the stranger-
in-the-land it has the great advantage of being liberally
and intelligently finger-posted. You drive out to Ringwood and
turning to the left by the Soldiers’ Memorial Clock
Tower, follow the Warrandyte road till you are warned
to turn to the left at Park Road, and a mile or so along you
find the entrance to the lovely grounds which cover more than
550 acres of choice hill country. There are other interesting
approaches from the northern suburbs —through Doncaster, for
example. A picnic or golfing party can be provided with golf
and tennis out of doors, and. dancing, music, or table games in
the Chalet where meals are also served. The property is so
extensive that the Park, the Orchard, and the Golf Course are
inter-dependant.
Golfers play over undulating country and some of the holes
are particularly interesting. The longest is 382 yards and four
of the others are about 300 yards or more, the total distance
being 2235 yards. The charges are extremely moderate, and the
Manager, Mr. W. L. Domeney, is on the telephone (Ringwood
120).


>
m
*,
v
/
✓ "
/
::'' W
%
r
4l
asp**
J
##
-
fj
/JR*
ii
f/ "'
. 4 ®H'§S
M'
:
;
-
JflHfmHHiMn
<: ■■V'-S ' l .*\ '} >■ x -W >*
m
: :
HI ■ p
;/ •'-:,>* ! sJ ’. X” 'J-j''*-,!
.
-
■ .
■
J
J
g g| t
• lis id -
'
GOLF COURSES OF VICTORIA.—Page 48.


MALVERN
MUNICIPAL
LINKS
THE game at their front door is the golfing service sup-
plied by the Malvern City Council to its ratepayers.
No other municipality is so fortunate in possessing an
18-hole championship course in such a convenient loca-
tion, for it adjoins the East Malvern Railway Station, and
is within easy walking distance of several ’bus and tram
routes. Its entrance is on Winton Road, within two
minutes’ walk of the Lower Malvern Road, near Waverley
Road. The Council is to be congratulated on its foresight
in turning the “No Man’s Land” adjacent to both Gardiner s
and Scotchman’s Creeks into such a fine playing ground
for a big section of the community, who want golf without
the extra cost of club amenities. The value of the East
Malvern links has been adequately proved during the past
year, when it has provided the venue for two Public Golf
Championships, the first to be staged in Victoria. The long
strip of land, bounded on one side by the railway line and
on the other by Gardiner’s Creek and Scotchman’s Creek
at the east end, is practically free of rough. The holes
furthest from the clubhouse adjoin the Holmsglen station
and the Boundary Road, between Burwood and Oakleigh
Crossing the course at right angles, but not affecting play,
is the old railway trestle bridge, which, in the boom years
of the “eighties,” served a suburb not far from Carnegie,
called Rosstown. That same railway line in a cutting a
few hundred yards north, provided a rather desperate
type of hazard on the old Waverley links, for in the days
before that club acquired _
land on the Warrigal Road.
Oakleigh, and became the - .
Commonwealth Club, mem- ,
bers were expected to carry
the gaping walls of the cut- PJjJrTI
ting. When balls buried
themselves in a niche be- ,
tween metal and sleepers
no local rules permitted || "' PTI
unplayable lie.” Now a beneficently-minded council,
realising that time is the essence of the contract on public
links, have made local rules to meet the crowded con-
ditions. Among the local rules printed on the back of
the card are some which no doubt many private clubs,
worried over congested conditions, would like to adopt,
but club competition golf, run under the strict rules of
St. Andrew’s, and private rounds on a municipal course,
where exercise is one of the first thoughts, are worlds
apart. One rule of outstanding interest states: “If a player
fails to hit his ball over Scotchman’s Creek, or Gardiner’s
Creek, in two attempts when within three club lengths of
the fence guarding the creek, the ball MUST BE carried
to the side of the creek, nearest the green, with an addi-
tional penalty of one stroke.” What a saving of time and
temper for those waiting behind!
A comfortable club house where meals may be obtained,
shelter sheds at the first hole, and a professional’s shop
are available for use of players.
Golf to suit the slimmest income is provided at East
Malvern. An annual subscription is available at £3/15/
while for those who do not desire week-end or holiday
golf, a concession subscription of £2/15/ is charged. Start-
ing on January 1 and October 1, a quarterly ticket can be
cbta'ned at £l/5/ full subscription or 17/6 concession rates.
DAILY GREEN FEES
Week days, 18 holes 2/,
day 3/; Sats. and Holidays,
18 holes 3/, day 4/6. (In
Dec. Jan. and Feb. each
charge is 6d. less.)
Further particulars from
Malvern City Hall or
Greenkeeper (U.L.2052).
their removal without pen-
alty. Consequently, many
clubs were broken by those
who did not avail them-
selves of the provisions of
the rule for “a ball in an


Hk __
0
o.
I
O
V WJIUQ
000
> }
/!
A QUALITY PRODUCT OF BEAU MONDE (AUST.) LTD.


AMSTEL PARK-A Handy Suburban Course
MANY roads lead to Femtree Gully. On one of them,
just 11% miles by the speedometer from the Mel-
bourne G.P.0., and a mile and a half beyond the
Soldiers’ Memorial at Oakleigh, lies Amstel Park, a choice
bit of grazing country, that has been converted into a capi-
tal 18-hole links.
One need not start from the G.P.0., however, nor own
a private car, for buses run at regular intervals via St.
Kilda Road, Wellington Street, Dandenong Road, through
Oakleigh to Femtree Gully. Moreover, a sixpenny bus
leaves Oakleigh Station seven days a week, at 9.50, 12 and 2,
and returns at 1, 4 and 6.30.
Parties of six or more will be
picked up from any train by
arrangement at half-a-crown a
load and taken to Amstel Park.
THE 18-hole course is over picturesque, undulating coun-
try, as shown in these panoramic views, and the greens
are being improved week by week. The holes are
nicely spaced and the fairways provide a good deal of
diversity. In addition to ample parking space and accom-
modation for players, there are facilities for picnicking
parties, for whose convenience afternoon tea, soft drinks
and confectionery (alternatively, free hot water and milk
for those who prefer to bring their own provisions) are
obtainable, as well as the use of the lounge. Golfers’
requisites tees, balls, etc., are available at the club-
house.
Green fees of 1/6 for a full day are charged, and a club
is being formed, for which the fee at the moment is £1
per quarter.
The manager is Mr Alie Burton, and his telephone num-
ber is U.M. 1372.


GOLF WEAR —at its best
in THE MAN'S SHOP
It would be difficult to imagine a finer range of sports
wear than that now showing in The Man's Shop at
Ball Cr Welch Ltd. All the very newest designs and
colors in English, Scotch, Irish and Australian
materials. Prices, you
will find, are extremely
moderate for the vari-
ous qualities.
PLUS FOURS from 35/-
Plus Fours in the finest quality
Australian Tweeds are priced
from 35/-.
PLUS FOURS from 45/-
Plus Fours finished perfectly
from English Tweeds are priced
from 45/-.
PLUS FOURS from 55/-
Plus Fours tailored in London
cost from 55/-.
2 Pee. Plus Four
SUITS .... 75/-
In fine quality Australian
Tweed and made in our
own workrooms, cost from
75/.
Plus Four Suits
made from
English Materials
Correct in ££“ /I /
every way— T" 1 / 111/
both for ap-
pearance and play.
English Model
Plus Four Suits
■
<{?~
In a magni-
ficent vari-
ety.
FROM
£6/15/
\
* «%
NT
t
Men. When sending Mail Orders, please state
height, chest and waist measures.
The finest Golf Jacket ever designed-*
The 'Keith Dalby'
Golfer
Reg'd Patent
No. 428833
Exclusive in Victoria
to BALL & WELCH Ltd.
By a unique design of a one-piece front —
with open end zip fastener at the left side,
pouching over the chest and waist is en-
tirely eliminated. Freedom of movement
is assured with a pivot under sleeve and
a full cut back. The most practical collar
ever designed is a special feature of this
coat and is quickly fastened with a single
button. A waistband which grips when
worn at full length or around waist (as
photograph) completes the ideal Golfer’s
Jacket. A coat of this character would be
wasted on an inferior cloth,
therefore the highest grade
Egyptian cotton has been
used.
79/6
BALL & WELCH
"Where The Good Clothes Come From" - Flinders Street, MELBOURNE
JhO


ALTONA PUBLIC GOLF COURSE
Telephone Altona 8
The only sandy Public course in the Metropolitan Area
GREEN FEES
Mon. to Fri. Round Daily.
Men 2/ 2/6
Women 1/6 2/
Sat., Sun. and Hoi.
Men 2/6 3/6
Women 2/ 3/
YEARLY TICKETS ( expiring Feb. 28)
Men £5/5/
Women £3/3 /
PRO R-dT-d —Prom /w/;y 1.
Men £4/4/
Women £2/2/
Lockers—7/6 per annum.
This Course is ideally situated close
to the Western Beach at Altona, and
at present comprises 15 holes, with a
further 3 holes in course of construc-
tion, having a total length of over 6000
yards. The greens and tees are in perfect condition, and the fairways are clearly defined. A first-class putting links
front the Club House, which, with men’s and women’s rooms, lockers, showers and dining room, provides golfers with
all reasonable requirements. A cold luncheon and/or afternoon tea is available any day at the Club House at a.
reasonable charge. The Course can be reached by train to Altona (change at Newport). The Links motor conveys
golfers to and from the Course. Fare 1/- return. Motorists can reach the Course through Footscray, on to Geelong
Road, thence along Miller Street to Cherry Avenue to Altona; or over the Short Road Ferry to Williamstown,
through the N. Williamstown gates, past the Rifle Butts and Racecourse to Cherry Avenue. Signboards have been
erected on the Williamstown route and at the Miller Street and Geelong Road corner. The Course, which is well
patronised, is affiliated with the Victorian Golf League.
Head Greenkeeper:
HARRY ALEXANDER
(late of Yarra Yarra and Metropolitan
Golf Links).
Professional: ANDY BLAIR.
Hon. Sec.: C. C. JACKSON.
Proprietors:
WESTERN BEACH (Altona)
GOLF LINKS PTY. LTD.
527 Collins Street, Melbourne.
Telephone: C. 7413.


t« ; i®
\
n
DESIGNED, after years of championship experience, by one of the world’s
finest players ..... made to the exact model by the skilled craftsmen
in Slazengers modern factory, the 1936 range of Gene Sarazen Golf Clubs
possess that unusual accuracy of balance.
Swing a Slazenger-Sarazen Club yourself. Feel the confidence-build-
ing “Reminder” grip (the planed piece of handle that MAKES you hold
the club correctly for every stroke) the perfection of “whip” in
the resilient “True Temper” steel shaft. Yes .... you’ll play a better
game with Slazenger-Sarazen Clubs. Ask your professional or golf dealer
to show you the many features of the Slazenger-Sarazen range.
Jigja
—THE CHOICE OF THE CHAMPIONS
Complete the double with
SILVER KING Golf Balls.
Remarkably true in flight,
unfailingly accurate on the
green, you will find that
these golf balls (available
in mesh or recess) are
consistent all-round per-
formers and are obtainable
from your professional or
golf dealer at ,1/6 to 3/
each.


A Directory of the Golf Courses of Victoria
IN this and the alternate pages that follow is
as complete a directory of the golf courses of
the State as it has been possible to compile.
The names of some courses that are under con-
struction, and a few about which it was im-
possible to obtain necessary details before going
to press, will be found at the end of the directory.
Where two sets of figures are given, the first
applies to the distances from the men’s tees, and
the second to those from the women’s tees. In
the fourth column figures accompanied by (x)
indicate bogey and not standard scratch score.
The number of holes at different courses varies,
but the figures given as bogey or standard
scratch score are for 18 holes in all cases.
In the leading clubs, the rule that visitors must
be introduced by a member is strictly adhered
to, but at other courses application to the secre-
tary is sufficient. Green fees sometimes change,
and they range from sixpence a round in the
smaller clubs (some, indeed, are available to
visitors without charge) to an average of 5/- per
round in the majority of clubs in the metropoli-
tan area.
Name
A
Holes
Dis-
tance
S.S.S.
Situation
General Remarks
A
Albert Park . .
■
18
6036
5670
71
73
On Queen’s Rd., 10 mins, from city
bv tram. (See page 22).
Large membership. Nearest links to Melbourne. Visitors;
3/ week days; 5/ Sun. and holidays. Clubhouse, Win. 1456.
Alexandra . . .
18
5849
73
Adjoins station, 7 mins, from town.
Sand greens, natural clover fairways. Accommodation in
town. Season; April-October. 1/ a day.
Altona ....
" 1
5913
73x
iy 4 miles from Altona. Station service
car 1/ return.
Grass greens and fairways. (See page 53 for fares, fees,
etc.). Central 7413.
Amstel Park .
18
5110
| l>/ 4 miles from Soldier’s Memorial,
Oake'gh. Bus from Oakleigh station.
Undulating country. Picnic facilities. 2/ day. UM1372.
(See page 51).
Apollo Bay . .
•
1782
68x
At foot of Otway Ranges, on Great
Ocean Rd., 29 miles from Lome.
In sandy country on coast. Beautiful views. Grass greens
and fairways. 2/6 day.
Apsley ....
9,
2280
72x
i/ 2 mile from township. Carpolac (26
mis.) nearest Victorian station.
Sand greens; grass and sand fairways. Course on private
ground. Free play.
Ashburton Forest
9
2095
66
In High St., Ashburton; close station.
1
Combination of golf course and picnic grounds. 9 holes, 1/;
18 holes, 1/6.
Australasian . .
.
18
6066
72
15 mins, from Aspendale station.
Gra;s greens, pavilion clubhouse. Visitors, 3/6 per day.
Avene! ....
18
6130
72
1 3 mins, from station, one mile from
Hume Highway.
Flat course, but well bunkered. Sandy loam turf. 1/ round
(Melb., 72 miles).
Avoca . . . .
18
4931
69
1 In township.
| Good playing course. Accommodation nearby. Scenic sur-
roundings.
B
B
Bacchus Marsh .
18
5279
69
1 2 miles from Bacchus Marsh station.
1
Sand scrapes, grass fairways, water hazards Clubhouse
I available. 1/ round.
Bairnsdale . .
•
18
6035
74x
| IV2 miles from station.
Ideal surroundings, grass greens and fairways, well bunkered.
2/6 day.
Ballan ....
18
4555
66x
1 \\ mile from station.
P.cturesque course, well kept. Ample accommodation close.
Fees, 2/ day.
Ballaarat . . .
18
5720
5213
72
75
| At the top of Sturt St., Ballarat.
1 116 acres. Excellent bunkering system. Well-laid course.
| Fees, 2/6 day. Ballarat 457.
Balmoral . . .
9
2553
70
j 2 miles from Balmoral.
Well-kept fairways. Course in undulating country. Natural
creeks.
Bannockburn . .
9
2450
68x
I y 4 mile west of station.
1 Sandv soil. Open course, but in good order. 1/ day.
Barwon Heads .
-
5972
5820
71
74
| Car service from Geelong (15 miles)
| Weil-turfed fairways and greens. Fees, 5/ round; ladies, 3/.
(Introductions necessary). (See page 35).
Batman . . .
9
3223
74
I Bus to door from Queen’s Bridge, 3d.
1 (2 miles).
| Good grass greens, well-turfed fairways. Clubhouse avail-
1 able. M1836.
Bealiba ....
9
2432
68x
1 Vi mile from station.
| In undulating country. Scenic surroundings very beautiful.
Beaufort . . .
18
5300
69
| 1/2 mile from Beaufort station.
I Large sand greens, heavily bunkered fairways. Picturesque
1 country. 1/ round.
Beechworth . .
18
5312
70
| y 2 mile from the town.
1 Season: April-October. Laid out on Interesting undulating
1 country. Sand greens. Well bunkered. 1/ round.
Benalla . . .
18
5241
69
| Adjoining township.
I Well-grassed fairways. Picturesque and sporty course. 2/
I day.
Benambra . . .
9
2160
64x
1 Round the Benambra township.
| Practically level course with sand on greens.
Bendigo ....
18
6040
5420
75
75
I At Epsom, off main road, 4 miles from
1 Bendigo.
| Good sand scrapes and fairways. Fees, 2/6 day. Clubhouse
1 to be reconstructed. Bendigo 263.
Bengeroop . .
9
—
| 8 miles from station (Mystic Park.)
1 Well laid-out course. Sand greens.
Berwick ....
9
2356
70x
j Vt mile from Berwick station.
| Grass fairways, sand greens. Course in fair condition. 1/6
' day.
Beulah . . .
9
3000
70x
I On local' racecourse, 5 mins, from Post
I Office.
j 2/6 week .
Birchip . . .
I 18
6008
71x
| 1 W miles from station.
1 Course recently altered and improved. Afternoon tea avall-
1 able in small clubhouse.
Birregurra . .
9
2310
66x
| On Barwon River, close town.
I Fairways and greens kept in good order. 1/ for 18 holes.
Boolarra . . .
9
64
J V* mile from station.
I Sand greens, grass fairways in good order. Flat, yet in-
| teresting course. Hotel accommodation.
Boort ....
I 18
5600
70
j Vs mile from station.
I Sanded greens and natural fairways. Clubhouse. Visitors,
1 1/ day.
Box Hill . .
1 9
2430
72
1 lVi miles south of Box Hill station on
I Station St.
I Sand greens, undulating country. Clubhouse available. Fees,
1 1/6 round. WX2572.
Boyeo ....
1 9
| 1929
—
1 Boyeo Hall, 9 miles from Nhill.
| Sand greens. No fees to visitors.
Bridgewater on
Loddon .
1
1 18
| 4332
64
1 Vi mile from town on main Calder
1 Highway.
I Sand greens. Fairways in good order. Very pretty place.
! 1/ round.
Bright . . .
2373
| 2041
68
68
| 1/2 mile from station.
I Sand greens, good undulating fairways. A winter course.
| Most picturesque. 1/ day. 2/6 week.
Brighton . . .
I 13
| 4201
—
I South Rd. to Dendy St. Bus from
1 Brighton Beach, Moorabbin & M. Btn.
| Another five holes to be added later. 1/6 per round.
Brim ....
1 9
2650
68x
j Adjoining township.
] Ideal situation. Sporty little course. Visitors welcomed.
1 No fee.
Broadford
1 12
1 4911
66
I 5 mins, from station.
1 Sand greens, grass fairways. 1/ for 18 holes.


Ski the Continental Way
with Franz Skardarasy. .. /
GOLFERS! YOUR NEXT BEST SPORT IS SKI-ING !
©
Specially engaged to de-
monstrate the celebrated
Arlberg ski-ing technique,
Franz Skardarasy will fulfil a
six months' engagement at
Mts. Buffalo, Hotham and
Feathertop
VICTORIAS GLITTERING ALPINE RESORTS
A highly qualified skier who has passed with honors through the
famous Hannes Schneider School of Ski-ing ....
Franz's advice and tuition will make your winter snow sports
holiday a memorable one ....
BUT HURRY ON - AND BOOK NOW!
FOR FULL DETAILS OF TOURS, CONSULT THE VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU,
QUEEN’S WALK, MELBOURNE (BRANCH OFFICE, SPENCER STREET STATION). TELEPHONE
CENTRAL 2042.
L


c/3 | d) t A
<D 73 a •
Name o n ~ « Situation General Remarks
Buninyong . . . 18 4555 69 f~7 miles by bus (good service) from Natural grass fairways cover old racecourse. Gravel greens,
| Ballarat. creek hazards. Excellent clubhouse. Fee, 1/.
Bunyip .... 9 2628 I 500 yards from station. I Grass greens. Small clubhouse. Accmn. in town. Fee, 1/
i I day.
C C
Callawadda ' Ti 9 I 2655 | —| 16 miles from Stawell. | Undulating ground. Surface natural grass. Newly registered
I [ | course. 1/ for 18 holes.
Camperdown . . .1 18 I 4594 | 68 I 3 miles from station. 1 Excellent fairways, grass greens, in beautiful surroundings.
I I | Roomy clubhouse. 2/6 round.
Casterton . . .ilB I 6040 | 76x )On main Mt. Gambier Rd., 2 miles I Large greens with good mat of grass. Ideal soil for golf.
| 1 | [ from station. ( Accommodation nearby.
Castle Creek . .|lB I 5768 | 71x | 3 miles from Euroa. lln picturesque hilly country with creek through. Heavily
I I | I bunkered course with good pavilion. 2/ round.
Castlemaine . . .1 18 | 6009 |74 iOn Maryborough Rd., 3 miles from I Sand scrapes, good fairways, interesting bunkers. Good
I I I 1 town. 1 clubhouse. Fees, 2/ day. __
Cavendish ... .1 9 | 3060 | 72 | iy 2 miles from station. | Sand greens. Fairways, sandy soil with coat of clover.
I j l Clubhouse. Fees, 1/ round.
Central . . . .118 1 5480 | 70x i % mile from Merbein station. 1 Oiled sanded greens, claypan and sandy fairways. Interesting
I [ j 1 course. Roomy clubhouse. 18 holes, 2/.
Chalambar I I .|lB | 5785 |73 | 2 miles from Ararat station. I Raised sand scrapes, mown fairways. Most picturesque.
| | | ] Good clubhouse. 2/6 day.
Charlton . . . .1 18 | 4877 | 67x | bO yards from station. I Sand greens, natural turf fairways. Winter play only. Pic-
I | | | [ turesque. Accommodation nearby.
Cheltenham . . .| 9 1 3160 | 70 | 8 mins, from Cheltenham station, ad- | Grass greens, sand foundation. Clubhouse available. 2/6 week
[ j 1 | joins Victoria Club in Park Road. days, 3/6 other days. Greatly improved course. Chelt. 567.
Chinkapook . . .112) ) | Close to township. I Fairways of sandy nature. Good greens. Accommodation
I I I I in township. No visitors’ fees.
Clunes | 9 | 2900 136 | 1 mile from station. | Sand greens, grass fairways. 1/6 day.
Cobden I 9 I 2376 ) | y 4 mile from Cobden station. I Grass greens and well-kept fairways, with creek hazard.
I | i I Clubhouse available. 1/ for 18 holes.
Colac . . . .1 18 | 5790 | 71x | 2 miles from Colac station (92 miles I Large well-grassed greens. Mown fairways, nicely bunkered.
|| || from Melbourne). I Clubhouse. 2/6 day. Colac 576.
Coleraine . . . ,| 9 | 2222 | 66x I 6 mins, from station. | Sand greens, undulating fairways. Short and hilly course.
| | j | I 1/ day; 2/6 week. _
Commonwealth .|lB | 6635 |77 | 2 miles south of Oakleigh station on I Luxurious clubhouse, with fine colonaded verandah overlook-
| | 5690 j 76 I Warrigal Rd. | ing the course. Tel., UMIOII. (See page 12). j
Condah . . . .j 9 | 2369 |66 | Beside the main Hamilton-Portland I Swamps and ferns make course difficult. Fairways and greens
| ] || Rd. I well grassed.
Cowwarr . . . . [ 9 | 2229 j 66x | In township. j
Cowes i ! I ! J 9~i I I % mile from P.O. I Good golfing country, sandy soil'. Kept in good order. Free
| | I transport for cars on Stony Pt. ferry in winter.
Creek Club . ,| | | | (See Terang). j
Creighton’s Creek I 9~1 i I 9 miles from Euroa. j Beautifully turfed course with natural hazards. Very sporty.
I I | | I 6d. round.
Cressy and District) 9 | 2484 i 66x j 1 mile from- station. | Sand scrapes and mown grass fairways. Slightly undulating
[ | 2349 j 66x | f course. Clubhouse. 1/ day.
Creswick . . . .1 9 | 2379 I 68x | iy 2 miles from station. | Grass fairways and sanded scrapes. Extra 9 holes in course
|| | | I of preparation. Visitors, 1/ day.
Croydon District | 18 | 5792 | 71 | 1 mile from station. 1 Grass greens, undulating course, with pavilion clubhouse)
j | 5267 | 72 1 I 2/6 round.
D D
Dalyston ! ! 1 Ti 9 | 2484 | 58 | 1 mile from station. | Sand greens and fine turf. Undulating course, very pretty.
I | I j | 1/6 for 18 holes.
Daylesford ■ . . -| 9 | I I In Victoria Park, 1 mile from Daylesford. | Good practice course in very fair condition.
Dimboola . ! ! .|lB | 5970 171 | 1 mile from station, on the Wimmera I Kept in excellent condition. Sand scrapes, good fairways.
III | River. | U round.
Donald . . . . .]lB | 6565 176 | % mile from station. I Good fairways, sand greens. Slightly undulating course.
| | ( Clubhouse.
Doncaster . . -I 9 I 2881 |72 | Few minutes from Doncaster station. | Good course. Meals available. 3/ day. Grass greens.
II || Bus to door (1/) from Box Hill. I WX1936.
Dooen ! ! ! ! .) 18 I 5790 | 71 I 6 miles from Horsham, y 2 mile from | Sandy, undulating country, grassed fairways, sand scrapes.
| | j I Dooen station. I
Dookie I 9 | 2370 | 70x I Almost adjoining railway station. I Tricky course with natural bunkers. Fairways grass with
| | j | rough. No charge visitors.
bookie (Agrie. | 9 I 2409 | 66x | 6 m.les from Dookie. | Undulating country. Greens and fairways in splendid order.
College) ... .| I I I I
Dunkeld . . . . | 12 | 4672 | 68x I >/ 4 mile from station. ) Enthusiastic club, improvements being made. Natural turf
j | | | course, very pretty.
Dunolly . . . .1 18 | 4566 |67 I y 2 mile from Dunolly station. | Sand scrapes and good grass fairways. Interesting course
| I | with natural bunkers. Several creek hazards.
E . E
Eaglehawk .. -I I I I " I See Neangar Park,
Eastern ! ! ! .) 18 I 6095 | 72 I At Doncaster, 2y 2 miles from Box Hill, | Two-story brick clubhouse, lounges, dining-room. WX1867.
| | 5432 | 75 | Melbourne bus passes gate. | (See page 27).
East Geelong .. .1 9 | 2691 |7O ) 5 mins, from Eastern Park tram. ] Course being lengthened. Professional in attendance. In
l— j 2436 170 I | excellent condition. Tel. Geelong 3545.
Echuca ! ! ! .118 1 5249 | 68x | 1 mile from station. lOn banks of Campaspe River (10 holes on one side, 8 on
I | | | other). New clubhouse. 3/ day.
Eddington ... .1 9 I 2348 | 66x I Close township. ) Sand scrapes, fairways in good order. Numerous bunkers on
| | j I course.
Elmore . ■ ■ . | 18 | 4982 | 67x I \\ mile from township. I Vis tors welcome. No fees,
Elstemwick . . .| 9 | 2342 | 66 | 4 mins, from station on Glenhuntly I Municipal links. Refreshments pavilion. L 2334. (See page
| I j ) Rd. Tram corner New St. I 36).
Emerald Country | 9 | 2623 |7O | >/ 2 mile from Emerald station. I Undulating course. Modern clubhouse locker rooms and
Club I I I I I dining-room. Emerald 12. (See page 30).
Ensay ■ ■ ■ .1 9 I 1894 | 66x lAt Ensay, via Bruthen, Balrnsdale. I Plenty of variety. Grass greens. Hotel accommodation close.
Euroa . . . .112 1 4603 I 64x | 200 yds. from P.O. along Seven Creeks | Prettily situated course, negotiating for 18 holes. Good greens
I I | banks. | and fairways. 1/ day.
F F
Flinders , . . ,| 18 [ | | Few mins townsh’p. 53 miles Melb. i Overlooking Westernport Bay. Telephone FLB. (See page 42)
Poster I 9 l 2981 | 72x | \' 2 mile from station. ) Grass and sand greens and fairways. Grey loam soil. Ao-
| I j | | commodation in town. 1/ day.
Frnnkston . . . .| 9 | 2799 | 74x | 2‘/ 2 miles from town. I Private club with accommodation for members.


momm
FILSX
r
f
W :
n ■
....
■
m
s
ST . :' s i
■
5
s-
i_n
GOLDINGS Pty. Ltd
Canterbury, Vic.
in
Obtainable at a
Shoe Stores.


Name
| Holes
Dis-
tance
S.S.S.
Situation
General Remarks
G
G
Gala
9
2737
70
3 miles from Lismore township.
Turf greens and excellent fairways. Well equipped with
office, refreshment rooms, etc.
Garfield . . . .
9
2727
72
iy 2 miles from Garfield station.
Fairways and greens kept in good condition. Play is in-
teresting. 2/6 day.
Geelong ....
18
6115
5535
73
74
2 miles from P.O. by tram or bus.
Championship course at “Bell Park,” Ballarat Rd., Geelong
West. Tel.: Geelong 1095.
Girgarre ....
—
—
—
Near Nanneela and Timmering.
Amateur club formed this season. No details yet available.
Gisborne ....
9
1838 |
66x
On main Calder Highway, y 2 mile from
station.
Attractive course with creek through. Good greens and fair-
ways (grass). 2/ for 18 holes.
Glenthompson . .
9
2428
68
South of township.
| Hilly course amid rather heavily timbered country.
Glen Waver ley .
23 73 j
2193 |
66x
70x
On Waverley Rd., \' 2 mile from Glen
Waverley station.
| Interesting course in bushy surroundings. 12 miles city. 3-
1 roomed clubhouse.
Goroke ....
9
2360
66x
y 2 mile from station.
Sandy soil, natural turf fairways, sand scrapes. 1/ for 18
holes.
Greensborough . .
9
2503 |
74x
V2 mile from Greensborough station.
First-class sand greens. Grassed fairways. Hot water pro-
vided. Visitors, 2/ day.
H
H
Hamilton ....
18
5106 |
1
68x
1 mile from station.
Undulated country. Greens well grassed, guarded by good
bunkers. Open, April-October. 2/ day.
Hampton . . . .
9 | 2030
1
64
In South Rd., opposite Brighton Muni-
cipal course (q.v.).
Mainly short holes, but interesting course. Clubhouse avail-
able.
Hawkesdale . . .
1
3 miles from station.
| Fiat course, good greens and fairways. 3/ for 18 holes.
Healesville . . .
5088
Close town, below railway station.
Grass greens, nicely trimmed fairways. Professional in
residence. Tel.: Healesville 99. (See page 68).
Heathcote .
18
5444
69
iy 2 miles from station.
| Prettily situated at the foot of Mt. Ida. Sand greens. 1/6
| round.
Heidelberg ....
6088 !
5427 |
73 | At Lower Plenty. 3\' 2 miles from
75 | Heidelberg station.
Grass greens and well-turfed fairways. Substantial clubhouse.
5/ day. Grnsbro. 74. (See page 28).
Hepburn Springs .
18
4522 1
1
65
3 miles from Daylesford station.
Course well kept, grass greens, mown fairways. Meals at
clubhouse. Visitors, 3/ day. Accommodation close.
Heyfield ....
9
2575 |
70x
y 4 mile N.E. of station.
Situated in timbered country. Sand greens, natural grass
fairways. Small shed as clubhouse.
Heywood ....
9
2126
66x
iy 2 miles from Heywood on Mt. Gam-
bier Rd.
Set in undulating country. Few trees. Natural hazards.
Hopetoun ....
9
2732 '
68x
10 mins, from station.
Sand scrapes. Good course. Visitors, 2/6 week.
Horsham ....
18
5236 |
I
67
1 mile from P.O.
Picturesquely situated on Wimmera River. Kept in good
order. 1/ round, or 5/ week.
I I
Inglewood . . . .
18
5224 |
69
On southern approach to town, at the
public park.
| A good country course offering excellent golfing facilities to
| members and visitors. 1/ round.
Ivanhoe ....
18 |
5452 |
1
74
Between the Boulevard and the north
bank of the Yarra near Burke Rd. Bdg.
1
Modernised clubhouse with conveniences for golfers. 2/
round. Ivanhoe 710. (See page 45).
J
J
Jeparit . . . .j
9 i
2611 1
1
66x
1 mile from town and station.
| Open May to September. Sand greens, natural grass fair-
I ways. Good views. Accommodation nearby.
K
K
Kangaroo Flat .
9
1
2138 j
66
1 mile east of Kangaroo Flat township.
1
Undulating fairways generally in good condition. Easily
reached from Bendigo. Fees, 1/ round.
Kaniva . . . . j
9 1
2577 1
1
72x
1 mile from station.
Greens and sand scrapes. Undulating and loamy course.
Scenic views. Visitors, 6 weeks free.
Karramomus . . . j
9
2709 |
74
17 miles from Euroa.
!
This year the club has added another 3 holes and is now a
12-hole course. In undulating country.
Katamatite . . . j
9 !
2707 I
1
70x
y 2 mile from station.
1
1
Fairways of loamy soil, good grass. Sand scrapes. Accom-
modation 1 mile from course. 1/ for 18 holes.
Kerang . . . . j
18 !
i
6007 j
70x
Adjoins railway yards and is 3 mins,
from station.
1
1
In flat country. Sand greens, well-grassed fairways. Accom-
modation close. Fees, 3/6 week.
Kerang East . . j
9 1
— 1
—
9 miles from Terang station.
Sand greens. Interesting course, well bunkered.
Kew j
18-|
6105 I
5159 I
73
73
Cr. Belford and Rigby Rds., Kew, 10
mins. High St. tram.
1
1
Particularly interesting holes by the river. Well-equipped
clubhouse. Haw. 2672. (See page 26).
Kilanore . . . . j
18 |
5782 |
74
5 mins walk from centre of town.
36 miles from Melbourne.
1
Undulating, natural golf country. Sand greens, good grass
tees. 2/ for 18 holes.
King Island . . j
9 1
!
2700 |
1
72x
y 4 mile from town of Currie on King
Island, en route to Tasmania.
1
Turf greens, grass fairways. Interesting course, always
playable. 1/ day. Accommodation close.
Kinglake . . . . j
9 i
2120 |
66x
13 miles from Whittlesea.
1
Greens and fairways well kept between June and January.
Interesting course. 2/ day.
Kingston Heath . |
i?l
6761 j
5761 !
77
76 |
On Kingston Rd., Cheltenham, 3 miles
from station.
I Level couch grass fairways. Modern brick bungalow club-
I house. Cheltenham 327. (See page 23).
Kingswood . . . .|
1
18 |
— 1
6030 |
- 1
72 |
74 1
1 mile from Dandenong station.
|
Pavilion clubhouse. Club is constructing new course at Ding-
ley Dell, near Cheltenham. (See page 35).
Kirkstall .... I
9 !
2331 |
72x
1
3 miles from station.
Level course, good greens and fairways. No charge to visi-
1 tors.
Kitchbrook . . . j 18 j
- 1
~ 1
In Strathbogie West (see Strathbogie).
|
In undulating mountainous country. Many sloping greens,
some grass, some sand. Ideally situated.
Koondrook . . . . |
9 i
3016 |
72x 1
1
y 2 mile from station.
1
Sand greens, good fairways. Level course. Accommodation
\' 2 mile distant.
Koroit . . . I
9 I
2643 j
70x j
2 miles from station.
1
Good greens and average fairways. Rather level course. 2/
for 18 holes.
Korong Vale . . j
9 i
2554 j
70x j
1 mile from Korong Vale town.
1
Nice country type of course. Visitors, 1/ day.
Korumburra . . j
il
2994 |
2612 |
74 1
74 |
2 miles from Korumburra, on main
Melbourne Rd.
|
Prettily situated. Another 9 holes soon to be added. Fees
now 2/6 day.
Kyabram .... I
1
9 I
2943 |
70x |
1
1 mile from station.
Sand greens, mown fairways. Level country. Small club-
house. 1/6 day.
Kyalite . . . . |
9 I
2798 |
68x |
12 miles from Piangil, nearest station.
Clear fairways and sand greens. Accommodation close.
Kyneton . . . . j
— 1
5670 I
4873 |
71x 1
80x |
On Calder Highway, 2 miles south of
station.
Interesting course amid beautiful surroundings. Well-turfed
fairways. 3/ day.


r-~
K-l
ajj
2
*
1
/> U A
28
/ //7^
THE MAN WHO ARRIVED AT THE COUNTRY CLUB WITH A MIXED BAG.
Don’t make an unforgivable faux pas—match up with
Players who prefer a greater
amount of whip in their shafts
can now obtain
TRUE TEMPER LIMBERSHAFT
True Temper
Steel Shafts
All True Temper Shafts are made in a large variety of
attractive finishes Chromium, Black, light and dark grained
enamel, light and dark sheath. Your Pro. will gladly let you
try them.
Made for British Steel Golf Shafts Ltd., England
Australian Representatives: Messrs Kemsley & Co. Pty. Ltd.


Name
Holes
Dis-
tance
s.s.s.
Situation
General Remarks
L
L
Lake Bolac . . .
9
2228 |
1
64x
N.W. side of township. Close.
l Fairways very good, sand scrapes. Hamilton-Bendigo bus
j service twice daily.
Lake Charm . . .
9
—
2426 |
2054
—
1 mile from station on edge of lake.
Course to be further bunkered. Rather short, but pic-
| turesque.
Lakes Entrance .
9
2359
-
1 mile from Esplanade, Lakes Entrance.
i In undulating country, panoramic views. Grass greens,
I moderate fairways.
Lakeside ....
9
3231 |
76x
1 mile from Lake Boga township, on
lake banks.
i Well-defined fairways, good sand greens. Accommodation
nearby. 1/ round.
Lai Lai
9
2386
72x
iy 2 miles from station.
, Course nicely situated, sand greens. Hotel in township.
Fees, 1/ for 18 holes.
Lancefield ....
18
5431 |
4907
72
72
On Laneefield-Bendigo Rd., 2 1 / 2 miles
from station.
Sand greens, loam fairways. Natural hazards create pic-
| turesque course. Golf house. Fees, 1/ day.
Leitchville ....
9
2624 |
72x
y 2 mile from station.
| Sand greens and good fairways. Undulating course with
i some good water hazards. 1/ for 18 holes.
Leongatha ....
9
—
2770 |
2456 !
72x
72x
y 2 mile from station.
1 Slightly hilly course with good fairways, sand greens. Fairly
1 easy. 2/6 day.
Lexton
18
5490
—
1 mile from Lexton, 15 miles from
Avoca.
j Fair course in country surroundings.
Linton ....
9
2371 i
72x
y 2 mile from Linton station.
Sand scrapes and turf fairways. Undulating course. Ac-
commodation close. Fees, 1/ day.
Lismore . . . .
9
2402
68
In Lismore township.
1 Sand greens, average fairways. Creek as hazard. Pavilion
and general conveniences.
Little River . .
9
1742 |
60x
Near station, adjoining Little River
Hotel.
1 Sand scrapes, improving fairway. Small club. Visitors, 1/
1 day.
Loch
9
1885
72x
On border of town.
| Undulating country. Natural hazards, rather interesting.
| 2/6 week.
Lockwood . . . .
9
1570
64x
2y 2 miles south of Belgrave station,
good road.
1 Pavilion clubhouse. Accommodation and refreshments near-
| by. (See page 34).
Longwood . . . .
9
—
-
Close township.
1 After lapsing three years, re-formed this year. On old
1 racecourse.
Lubeck
9
2200
66x
y 2 mile north of township.
| Level country, slightly timbered. Fees, 1/ day.
M
M
Macarthur . . . .
1
1 mile from township on racecourse.
| Ample clubhouse accommodation for members.
Macorna ...•■.
-
—
Adjoins railway station.
1 Newly formed club making progress. Sand greens, flat
] country. No charge to visitors.
Maflra
I"
5666
69
2\' 2 miles from Maflra station, on main
Melbourne Rd.
1 At Mewburn Park. Fairways well grassed and mown. Very
1 interesting course with little rough. 1/ round, 2/6 week.
Maldon . . . .
12
5021
67
% mile from Maldon town.
| Very interesting links. 1/ round, 2/6 week.
Mallacoota . . .
1 9
2224
70
In township.
| Sand greens. Fairways well grassed. Beautiful surroundings.
Malvern . . . .
| 18 | 6070 I 72
— | 5386 | 72
Adjoins East Malvern station on Win-
ton Rd.
| Refreshment pavilion, good clubhouse, meals and refresh-
1 ments, shelter sheds. UL2052. (See page 49).
Mansfield . . . .
i 12
-
-
y 2 mile from station.
1 Grass greens and fairways. Gently undulating course. 1/
1 day.
Marnoo . . . .
9
2725
74x
y 4 mile east of railway, on main Rup-
anyup Rd.
j Natural grass course. Visitors welcomed. No fee.
Maryborough . .
18
5376
69
1 mile north from station and P.O.
1 Straight game essential as fairways are lined with trees.
| Fairways mown. Sand greens. 2/ day.
Medway . . . .
1
6143
76x
On bus route, Footscray to Sunshine.
1 Undulating country bounded by Maribyrnong River. Grass
| greens, mown fairways. 2/ round. Footscray 184.
Melton Valley .
9
2693
68
East of town.
| Sand scrapes, numerous creek hazards. 2/6 day.
Merbein . . . .
! —
5914
5542
71
72
3 miles from station. Bus passes links.
1 Greens and fairways natural Mallee grasses. Flat but in-
| teresting. Fees, 1/.
Merrlgum . . . .
9
5670 | 70x
1 mile east of Merrigum.
| Sand scrapes, fairly flat. Natural hazards. 1/ round.
Merton . . . .
1 9
—
—
| Private links. Public links may soon be made.
Metropolitan . . .
!-
6504
5833
77
78
1 mile Oakleigh station on North Rd.
1 Noted for the flowering shrubs which border the fairways.
| Spacious clubhouse. (See page 8). UM2019.
Midlands . . . .
1 18
1
5310
70
\\\ miles from Ballarat P.O. (Bus ser-
vice).
1 Formerly named Ballarat North. Some interesting holes.
1 Modern clubhouse. Fees, 2/6 day.
Milawa . . . .
j 9
—
11 miles from Wangaratta station on
Wangaratta-Bright Rd.
| Course level, recently constructed. Sand greens.
Mildura . . . .
I"
2949
72x
Close to town.
I Heavily grassed greens and well-kept fairways. Roomy
1 clubhouse.
Minyip . . . .
18
—
5190
4774
69x
70x
5 mins, from Minyip station.
j Good grass fairways, sand scrapes. 1/ for 18 holes.
Mirboo North . .
1 9
2429
68
3 mins, from station.
1 Good accommodation. Sand greens, good fairways. Visitors
1 welcome.
Mitiamo Central
| 12
4571
66
I mile from township.
I Natural grass fairways, sand greens. Undulating. (Distances
1 given for 18 holes).
Mont Albert . .
|i
2260
2125
74x
78x
Union Rd. North, Mont Albert. Tram
and bus.
j Interesting course. Sand greens. 9 holes 1/, 18 1/6.
Mont Park . .
I 9
| 2240 | 70
Mental Hospital grounds, Mont Park.
1 Fairly level course with few hazards.
Montuna . . . .
9
I
2620
74x
On main Up. Beaconsfield Rd., 2 miles
from Prince’s Highway, at Beaconsfield.
| Picturesquely situated. Plenty of variety. 2/ day.
Moondai ....
I 9
—
—
Between Marysville and Buxton.
| Glorious scenery. Little Pagerty River forms water hazard.
Mooralla . . . .
1 9
j 1947
_
13 miles from station.
I Undulating course with sand greens and sandy fairways. No
1 clubhouse.
Mooroopna . . .
1 9
3035
70
In township.
1 Well bunkered and evenly mown fairways. Sand scrapes.
1 5/ week, 2/ round.
Moor Park . .
1 9
1
| 2586
64
1 10 miles from Murtoa stn., on main
Warracknabeal-Murtoa Rd.
J Good' greens and fairways. Sandy soil, well grassed. Undu-
| lating. 18 holes. Fee, 1/.
Mornington . . .
I-!
j 2686
68
70
On racecourse, Racecourse Rd., 2 miles
from town.
1 Course available to visitors and open all year. Annual
1 tournament in November.
Mortlake . . .
I 9
2611
70x
j y 2 mile from station.
I Fairways short, cut grass with natural hazards. Sand greens.
1 Clubhouse. 2/ day.
Morwell
1 9
2455
70x
% mile from Morwell station.
1 Natural fairways and sanded greens. Undulating country,
1 splendid views. No charge to visitors.
Mt. Alexander
1 18
1
5011
69x
At Milkmaid Flat, North Castlemaine,
1 mile from station.
1 Sand scrapes. Beautiful surroundings. 1/ round, 2/6 week-
| end.
Moyhu ....
! 9
| -
—
15 mil'-s from Wangaratta, on Wanga-
ratta-Whitfield Rd.
| Course recently completed.
Murchison . . .
1 9
1 2517
66
iy 2 miles from Murchison.
| Sand greens, good course. 2/ week.
Murrabit . . .
1 12
I —
1
—
3 miles from Murrabit station.
I
| Level fairways through timbered country, course on N.S.W.
| side of Murray.


X*
9m
• i
2tULtt!
D nwpr to swing your cold engine
to a split-second start
—and keep it revving.
2. Power
to flash from 5 to 50
m.p.h; in a matter of
moments.
P OWer f° sustain your highest
speed with a cooler engine.
A P r- wor to take stee P hills on top
and without a knock.
El *o travel further miles
further on less petrol.
Super Plume, by itself —a Super Spirit, has in
addition, the anti-knock advantages of ETHYL
—famed throughout the world for its ability
to stop knocks and set free more POWER than
ever. Buy 5 gallons this week-end and PROVE
it yourself.
n Super Plume Ethyl
are 5 Types of Power
that mean
SUPER PERFORMANCE
THE DRIVE
By Fergus W. McMahon
Open Champion of Australia
To DRIVE consistently well
is the ambition of every golfer
regardless of his class. To get
a long straight drive, perfect
timing and balance throughout
the swing are essential. Bal-
ance is maintained only by com-
bining the movements of the
body and the swing of the club.
Beginners especially, should
avoid thoughts of 'hitting’ the
ball; think rather of 'sweeping ’
it from the tee. Endeavor to acquire the 'knack! of
timing the swing so that the ctubhead is travelling at its
maximum speed just at the instant of impact. When
this is mastered your worries about sending the ball 200
yards are over.
THE 5-POWER PETROL


Name
Holes
Dis-
tance
to
w?
to
Situation
General Remarks
Murtoa
18
4593
64
65
1/2 mile from station.
1 Natural grass fairways and sanded scrapes. Level course
with good clubhouse. 18 holes. Fee, 1/.
Myrtleford . . . .
18
5168
67
iy 4 miles from station.
Very beautifully situated. Day’s trip to Mt. Buffalo. Sand
greens, natural fairways. 2/6 day.
N
N
Nathalia ....
9
2691
70x
\\ mile from station.
| Natural fairways with sand scrapes. Weil bunkered with
| creek hazards. Clubhouse. Fee, 1/6.
Natimuk . . . .
9
2262
66
I Close Natimuk station.
| Course with good hazards, creek frontage, large sand scrapes.
Neangar Park .
.1 18
5210
67
V2 mile east of Eaglehawk.
| Undulating tree-lined fairways. Good sand greens. 3/ day.
Nhill ....
18
—
72
iy 2 miles from station.
I Good country course; in Wimmera Golf Association.
Noorat (Terang)
19
1
2670
72
1
4 V2 miles from Terang station.
| Grass greens and well-kept fairways. 1/6 day. Terang
Club plays here. (See Terang.)
Northern ....
18
6114
74x
y 4 mile from Glenroy station. Half
an hour’s journey from city.
I Natural country provides sufficient hazards with few artificial
I formations. Comfortable clubhouse. Tel., FU6071.
Numurkah . . .
9
2888
70
1/2 mile from station, adjoining town.
I Fine white sand greens, natural grass fairways. Picturesque
[ surroundings. Roomy clubhouse.
Nyah and District! 9
2924 1 70x | l l ,2 miles from Nyah West station.
| Sand greens. 1/ round.
o
0
Oraeo ....
9
2065
66x
| 85 miles from Bairnsdale.
I Grass greens, golf house, accommodation in town, 1 mile
| distant.
Ouyen ....
I"
5090
1 68
| y 4 mile from station.
I Sand greens, grassed fairways. Clubhouse. Visitors, 5/
[ month.
P
P
Park Orchards .
9
2235
68x
In Park Rd., Mitcham.
I In delightful hill country; interesting holes. Picnic grounds
I available. (See page 53). Ringwood 120.
Patterson River
—
6295
5703
77
| 79
% mile from Carrum station.
1 Level couch grass course with modern bunkering. Residential
1 clubhouse open to visitors. (See page 40). Chelsea 109.
Pen. Cnty. Club.
18
6126
5522
73
74
iy 2 miles inland from Frankston beach.
| Private residential clubhouse. Well-turfed fairways and
1 greens. Tennis courts. (See page 33). Frankston 123.
Penshurst . . .
9
2507
| 68
i At Penshurst racecourse.
1
I Open May-November. Grass greens. Pavilion. Visitors, 2/
( day.
Peterborough . .
1 14
4123
| 66
I On Ocean Rd., 12y 2 miles from Tim-
! boon station.
I Grass greens and fairways. Accommodation nearby. 2/ day.
1 (Distances given for 18 holes).
Piangil . . . .
• 91 —
|
I 5 mins, walk from station and town.
1 Fairways and greens in good condition. Good river sana
Point Lonsdale .
9
2582
1 68x
1 3y 2 miles from Queenscliff. Motor ser-
1 vice direct from Geelong.
| Couch grass greens and fairways. Good sandy soil. Visitors,
| 1/6 round.
Poowong . . .
9
2179
66x
| In township. Nearest station at Nyora
| (6 miles).
| Natural fairways, sand greens. Beautiful views from couise.
1 1/ 18 holes.
Portarlington . .
9
2866
72x
| 18 miles from Geelong station. Bay
1 steamer in summer from Melbourne.
I Good course with grass fairways and sand scrapes. Club-
I house. 1/ day.
Port Fairy . . .
9
2570
, 68x
j y 4 mile from station.
1 Fairways and greens good, grasses sown. Natural hazards.
| Clubhouse. 2/ day.
Portsea ....
1 12
—
1 —
| 5 minutes from Pier.
| One of the best seaside links. 2/6 round, 3/6 day.
Portland . . .
1 9
2301
(64
| y 4 mile from Portland station.
1 Well-grassed turf greens and fairways. Seaside course. Fees,
I 1/6 day.
Prairie ....
1 9
2359
| 68
| 3 miles east from Prairie station.
| Sand scrapes in good order. Tussocks on fairways as hazards.
Pyalong . . .
I"
4781
1 66
1
1 On main Kilmore-Bendigo Road.
1
| Natural golf country. Sand greens. (Distances given for 18
1 holes). Fees, 1/6 18 holes.
Pyramid Hill . .
! 18
5313
| 69
1
| 1 mile from station.
| Sand greens, natural grass fairways. Most picturesque
| course. 2/6 week.
Golf Course Design and Construction
GOLF course design has changed almost as much as
golf clothes during the past 30 years. In the days be-
fore sand-pit trapping, enthusiastic green committees
simply selected the site for a tee, left an area of rough
country about a 100 yards Or so in length, then mowed the
natural grass (or put sheep on it to eat it down), for an-
other 100 or 150 yards, left another patch of rough and
made a putting green. These early courses had little stra-
tegic value, depending upon natural hazards to impose
penalties. Neither fairways nor greens could compare
with the exquisitely proportioned layouts of today.
The second period of golf course construction is what is
known as the “bad period.” Uninteresting straight fairways
had square cut deep traps intersecting them to catch drives
and second shots. There was nothing scientific about them.
Lack of length was a golfing crime, but no penalties lay in
wait for the pulled or sliced shot. Sharp-edged bunkers
trapped the flat greens. Then came a new era. Better
balls and equipment made it necessary to alter the design
and many committees who set about the job of modernising
courses scattered potholes with a prodigal hand. The pen-
dulum swung too far.
Greens developed mump-like mounds, which committees
were pleased to call undulations, and very severe green
side bunkers were placed beside and around all the putting
surfaces. Then came the idea to build courses for two-way
traffic, so that the brilliant players could take hazardous
short cuts to obviate par figures, while the mediocre band
could take extra strokes by dodging hazards, but were not
penalised all the way.
The trend is now to leave bays of uncut grass biting into
fairways and to make greens into pear shapes. The exag-
gerated and difficult layouts, which were an extraordinary
test even for the scratch players and professionals, no doubt
represented the day dreams of the greens committee who
designed them, tout to the members who paid for them,
they were productive of nightmares.
Happily, these ideas have given place to methods
of commonsense construction since the realisation has come
in both America and England that golf is mainly played
by men between the ages of 35 and 60, whose daily oc-
cupation leaves them little time for practice. Many of the
holes at our leading clubs have been altered to follow
the symmetry of some hole at a world-famous course, and
the introduction of the crescent shaped holes put the seal
of the most modern course construction on Victorian links.
Greenkeeping, like architecture, is highly specialised
work, and the advance in the outlook of committees _ is
rapidly making itself manifest in the steadily improving
quality of the turf on greens.
The use of trees of the right variety has enhanced the
beauty of many layouts, shade in the summer and affording
sanctuary for birds. Teatree is used under all sorts of con-
ditions. Trees showing dark backgrounds have been planted
behind greens to make the flags easily discernible. Pinus
insignis and Cupressus lambertiana horizontalis are excel-
lent for this and for break-winds at tees. Deciduous trees
near greens should be avoided, but evergreens, such as
Cupressus torulosa, a very shapely tree,. has been used to
advantage in afforestation clumps, planted in irregular shapes.
Lemon scented gums and the other varieties of eucalypti add
to the attractiveness of these clumps. Wattles provide hand-
some foliage, but are short lived. However, they may be
used to shelter trees that take longer to grow. Trees that
have been used successfully to beautify parts of courses
that dominate the horizon, but are not part of the play-
ing area include Indian cedar and silver cedar, also tama-
risk. Berry plants and flowering gums add joyous notes
to the landscape.


GEORGE NICOLL
OF LEVEN, SCOTLAND
Makers of
World Famous
‘Hand’ Brand
Irons
Advise that
75 %
of the professionals competing in the last
British Open Championship including
the winner - used NICOLLS Clubs.
Perfectly finished sets of these magnificent clubs, Nos. 1-9 and chippers
hand-forged stainless steel heads, are obtainable from all leading Profes-
sionals and Sports Stores.
ASK FOR "HAND" BRAND IRONS!
NOW
Nicoll Introduces
POWER PLUS Self Balancing Drivers, Brassies, Spoons and
Cleeks, METAL HEADS. Instantaneous weight adjusting device.
Acclaimed by the critics as the longest driving clubs known.
Arthur Lacey, English Professional, won the Roehampton tourna-
ment with these clubs, and English Press reports state that his
drives were COLOSSAL.
Advance Samples on view at leading Sports Stores and Profes-
sionals! Ask to see them!
GOLLIN & CO. PTY. LTD.
Sole Agents for Australia. Trade Only Supplied.


Name
Holes
Dis-
tance
S.S.S.
Situation
General Remarks
0
0
Quambatook . . .
9
2529
66x
Public Park, Quambatook.
Quarry Hill . . .
9
5000
66
Houston St., Bendigo.
Additional 9 holes now under construction. Green fees, 1/.
Queenscliff . . . .
12
4855
66
V 2 mile from town and station.
Picturesque good grass greens and fairways. Natural sand
hazards. Cars to course. 3/ and 2/ day.
R
R
Rainbow ....
9
2687
74x
Close township.
Sand greens, grass fairways. Undulating country. 1/ round
or 5/ fortnight.
Ranfurlie
9
3030
—
On Prince’s Highway, Springvale. By
Picturesque course, fine gum trees, creek through. Fees, 2/
bus, 4 miles from Oakleigh station.
18 holes.
Redbank ....
9
1780
1 1 mile east of township.
Small creek through and other bunkers make course rather
interesting.
Red Cliffs . .
18
5284
73
3 miles from Redcliffs station.
Flat Mallee course, well-sanded greens, good grass fairways.
2/6 day.
Riversdale . . .
18
6101
75
Bay View Rd., Burwood. Frontage to
On fine property, St. John’s Wood, formerly Sir Redmond
5641
74
High St.
Barry. Very progressive club. UM1051. (See page 25).
Riverside . . . .
18
5600
71x
3V 2 miles from Mildura P.O.
In beautiful surroundings. Water to fairways and greens.
On the Murray. (See page 34).
Robin vale . . . .
9
2950
66x
1 minute walk from station.
Undulating ground, well-kept sand greens. Visitors free.
Rochester . . . .
18
6000
73
On racecourse, 1 mile north of town.
Extensive planting (2000 trees and shrubs) to beautify eourse.
Green fees, 2/6 week.
Rokewood . . . .
9
2677
68
y 2 mile from P.O.
Large sand scrapes. Fairly well-bunkered course. 1/ day.
2427
70
Romsey . . . .
12
4976
67x
i/ 4 mile from station and township.
I All grass greens and fairways. Well-bunkered course. Visi-
1
I
1 tors free. (Distance is for 18 holes).
Rosanna . . . .
18
6095
75
Opposite Rosanna station, 9 miles from
I Championship course, with fine clubhouse. (See page 11).
G.P.O.
| Picnic parties catered for. Fees, 2/ day.
18
6390
75
11 miles by road from G.P.O.; in Chel-
This course includes some of the holes of the original Royal
5614
74
tenham Rd., Black Rock.
) Melbourne at Sandringham. On it the new clubhouse was
[ built. (See pages 7, 38-39). XW2323.
18
6473
76
1 mile from Black Rock tram on Chel-
1 A complete new course adjoining the west course and inter-
East Course .
5830
76
tenham Rd.
| locked as shovyn in aerial view, pages 38-39.
Royal Park . . .
9
2645
70
| Near Zoological gardens. Tram from
I Pavilion clubhouse.
Elizabeth or William Sts., Melbourne.
I
Ruffy
9
2838
72x
20 miles from Euroa.
1 In hilly country. Only a few years old. Good golfing.
Rupanyup . . . ,
18
5491
68
1 mile from Rupanyup station.
I Sand greens and natural turf fairways. Flat country. Fees:
1 1/- day.
Rutherglen . . .
9
2350
70x
V2 mile from station.
Links sown with grass, and well mown. In picturesque sur-
roundings. New clubhouse.
*
mm
w
The Campbell "HAWK
n
The Campbell “Hawk” is the most
accurately constructed, tough covered,
long-carrying medium grade golf ball
on the market. High tension wound,
it putts truer and flys straighter. It is
fully guaranteed against all faults.
13
The Campbell "AIRFLOW
//
This is a ball which combines tough-
ness, pace and distance. You will never
have reason to regret using a Campbell
“Airflow” ball and you will save money.
1/9
Ask also to see the Campbell “Trueshot Trainer,’
the finest golf practice set ever made.
GREAT-CIRCLE" WINDING
AND "PERMA-SPHERE" CORES
You get them both in the Campbell “Comet.” A new better ball guar-
anteed for 72 holes. The new “Perma-Sphere” core overcomes all the dis-
advantages of ordinary liquid centres. It is resilient yet it retains its
shape permanently even under the strain of high tension winding on the
latest American great circle winding machines. At no time is the centre
of the ball pulled out of shape the result is that the
Comet combines accuracy, length, life and toughness. Try a
Comet —hear that Comet click. Remember, it’s guaranteed for
72 holes, and you buy it for
VICTORIAN DISTRIBUTORS:
CASHMORE AND RUSSELL PTY. LTD., 360 POST OFFICE PLACE,
MELBOURNE.
Advertisement of the Campbell Golf Ball Company.
xne cenxre
2/6


m
m
Wk
-
g > ■
sxsxmmm
The 'PAR' CARS of the YEAR!
A screaming wood off the tee —a beautifully pitched
second—a well-placed short approach and down for four
—well that's another par hole!
Nice play sound golf you're pleased, and quite
rightly so.
But let us leave the Royal and Ancient for a moment—
let's talk cars.
Does your car always please you as much as does playing
par golf? It will if it's a Morris! For Morris is the
"par" car of the year. Economical in petrol consump-
tion and in maintenance costs, Morris cars are distinc-
tive in appearance and their performance is of a vary
high order. The Morris range includes the famous
8/40; the 12/4 (illustrated) and the Big Sixes the
18" and the "25." A car for every need at a price
range to meet every pocket.
MORRIS
Distributors for Victoria
and Southern Riverina
MORRIS 12/4
ADVANTAGES
include :—
• Built-in 4-wheel hydraulic
jacks. #Synchro-mesh gears.
• Improved 4-wheel hydraulic
brakes and shock absorbers.
• Equipoise high compression
rubber mounted engine.
• Spacious inbuilt luggage com-
partment. • All seats within
the wheelbase of 8 feet 4 inches.
• Pressed steel wheels. • Solid
leather upholstery. • 30-35
m.p.g., etc.
PRICES FROM
LANE’S MOTORS
PTY. LTD.
89 EXHIBITION STREET, MELBOURNE
• C. 10490 •
£289
Morris 8/40 priced from £232
(Wheelbase 7ft. 6in.).
Morris 18 Saloon £ 430
(Wheelbase 9ft. 9in.).
Morris 25 £445
(Wheelbase 10ft. iy£in.).


Name
Holes
Dis-
tance
S.S.S.
Situation
• General Remarks
s
s
Sale
18
5558
70
Within 1 mile of station, by Lake Guth-
ridge.
Scientifically bunkered course. Excellent greens and fair-
ways. Comparatively level. 2/6 day.
Sandringham . .
9
2500 I 70
1
Royal Ave., Sandringham. Black Rock
tram passes gate.
6 holes (1770 yds.) in use. 3 holes under construction
Additional 9 proposed. (See page 26). XW1566.
Sea Lake .
9
2468
—
1 2 mile west of town.
Oiled sand greens. Visitors’ fees: 1/ day.
Serpentine . . .
12
5150
65
On Loddon Val. Highway, 13 miles from
Bridgewater and Inglewood. Bendigo 32.
Sand greens, natural herbage fairways. No clubhouse but
accommodation handy.
Serviceton . . .
9
2341
66
| On recreation reserve, y 2 mile from
town.
Not a difficult course. On rising ground. Easily access-
ible.
Shepparton . . .
18
5117
67x
2 miles from station.
Sand greens and grass fairways. Undulating course. Pine
clubhouse. 2/- day.
Skipton . . . .
9
2950
74x
In township. Bus from Hamilton or
Ballarat.
Sand scrapes and fairways kept in good order. 1/- day.
Snowy River . .
18
6047
74
1 mile from township, on Orbost- Bo-
I gong Highway.
Good fairways and sanded scrapes. In hilly country, making
good use of nearby creek. 1/- round, 5/- week.
Sorrento . . . .
18
5269
4636
68
68
‘/ 2 mile from town, and pier. Bay
steamer in summer.
On sand foundation. Bungalow clubhouse. Sorrento 26.
St. Andrews . .
9
4600
66
Main Rd. between Warburton and Mill-
grove. y 2 mile Melb. side of Warburton.
Glorious hill surroundings. Warburton Club plays on St.
Andrew’s links. Phone Warburton 44. (See page 72.)
St. Arnaud . . .
9
2280
66x
1 mile from station.
Sand scrapes. Fairways natural grasses. Creek through.
Clubhouse. Fees: 1/- 18 holes.
Stawell
5767 | 72
5016 | 71
iy 2 miles from station on Campbell’s
Bridge Rd.
Fine natural golfing country, with many attractive holes.
1/- day.
Stratford . . .
9
2621
70x
\' 4 mile from station.
Sand greens and natural fairways. Level course. 1/-
for 18 holes.
Strathbogie . . .
18 | 4851
1
70
j 15 miles from Euroa (main station).
Fairways grass, sand greens. Quite a sporting course though
short. Good direction is necessary.
Strathmerton . .
9
2812
79
j Two-thirds of mile from station.
Sand scrapes, fairways mainly sandy. Undulating open
country. Fees 1/- day.
Streatham . . . .
9
2365 | 68
1
On Shire common land, east of town-
ship, 5 miles from Westmere station.
Good fairways and sand scrapes. Tricky course, well bun-
kered.
Summerland . . .
9
2677
74x
7 miles from Cowes, Phillip Island, on
Nobbies Rd.
Grass greens and fairways. 2/6 day.
Sunshine . . . .
9
2363 | 70x
5 mins, from Sunshine.
Well bunkered. Scrapes and sanded greens. Mown fair-
ways. Dressing rooms. 2/- day.
Swan Hill . . .
18
6104
72
3 miles S.W. of Swan Hill.
Undulating pine ridge country.
Swan Hill Race-
course . . . .
»
1
5376 1 71
In Gray St., Swan Hill.
Open rolling country. Course well bunkered with water
hazards, etc. 1/- round.
T
T
Talbot
12
6143
| 74
1
| iy 2 miles from station.
Sand scrapes and well grassed fairways. Greek through.
1/- round. (Lengths given for 18 holes.)
Tallangatta . . .
9
1760
62x
| 1 mile from station.
Greens and fairways, mown grass. Hilly course. Accom-
modation in township. Fees: 1/- day.
Tamagulla and
District . . .
9
2368
66x
About % mile north of town.
Average type of course. Tends towards roughness. 1/-
round.
Tatura . . . .
9
2926
72x | V2 mile from station.
1 1
Turf fairways, sand greens. Generally flat course. Roomy
clubhouse. 1/- round.
Terang
9
—
—
2 miles from Terang station.
Well grassed greens and fairways. Known as Racecourse
links. Increased to 18 holes soon. (See Noorat.)
Terip Terip . . .
9
2697
70x
5 miles from Ruffy (see Ruffy).
Good golfing country. Pretty course.
The Pines . . .
9
1970
1 62
1
I On Mental Hospital Grounds, The Hill,
i Sunbury.
Picturesque situation. Grass greens.
Timberoo ....
9
2550
70x
5 miles from Galah station, 10 from
Ouyen.
Sand greens, glass fairways. Tricky and well bunkered.
Accommodation at Ouyen.
Tomara . . . .
9 | 2510
64x I 15 miles from Echuca.
It is a figure of 8 course amid red gums and billabongs.
Toolondo ....
9
2519
68x
In township.
A good country course.
Tongala ....
2024
2414
70x
70x
Adjoins railway station.
Sand greens, natural grass fairways. Easy course. Visitors
free.
Torquay ....
9
2777
72x
14 miles by service car from Geelong.
Course close main street.
Level course, soon to be lengthened. Small clubhouse. Ideal
holiday spot. 2/- round.
Traralgon . . . .
18
5504
4939
73
72
1 mile from Traralgon station.
Sand scrapes and thickly grassed fairways. One of hardest
courses in Gippsland. Good clubhouse. 2/- day.
u
u
Undera
12
5557
71
4 miles north of Undera, 15 miles from
Tatura.
Fairways well defined, sand greens. Neat clubhouse. (Dis-
tances given for 18 holes.)
Union Jack . . .
-
—
—
Ararat.
Upper Murray . .
12 | 5062
1
70
At Corryong, 9 miles from Cudgerra
station.
Very good fairways, and sand greens kept in order. Well
bunkered. 1/- day.
V
V
Vasey
9
2772
68X
y 4 mile from Vasey station.
Compact course with natural bunkers and fairways sown
with clover.
Victoria . . .
—
6605
5747
76
76
10 mins, from Cheltenham station on
Park Rd.
Magnificent residential clubhouse open to visitors with intro-
duction. Adjoins Royal Melbourne East Course. Cheltenham
57. (See page 18.)
Violet Town . .
18
4699
65x
y 4 mile from station.
Sand greens. Slightly undulating country. 1/- round.
w
w
Wahgunyah . . .
-
_
No course in Wahgunyah, but two courses within 10 minutes’
walk, across the River Murray.
Waitchie . . . .
9
-
-
1 3 miles from station.
Level country.
Walpeup ....
9
2551
70x
y 4 mile from station.
Ordinary grass country in good order. Pretty surroundings.
Walwa
9
2423
68
3 / 4 mile from township.
Sand greens, good fairways crossed by creek.
Wangaratta . . .
18
5410
70
'
Wangaratta Borough Park, 1 mile out
of town.
Grass greens, fairways in good condition. Roomy club-
house. 2/6 day.
Warburton . . .
9
3225
78x
y 2 mile from station.
In beautiful mountain surroundings. Accommodation nearby.
1/6 round. (See page 72.)


Healesville Golf House
OPEN TO ALL. Established over 15 years.
13 excellent holes, with water laid on to Greens. Fairways maintained by
use of Motor Traction, as used on some of the leading Metropolitan Courses.
Absolute minimum of rough.
Championship Standard “En-Tout-Cas” and Grass Tennis Courts. Full
size Croquet Lawn. Modern Concrete Bathing Pool. Dancing and
Recreation Hall.
Hot and Cold Water in Rooms. Central Heating.
AERIAL VIEW SHOWING GOLF HOUSE, BATHING POOL, “EN-TOUT-CAS” TENNIS COURT,
AND SOME OF THE GOLF FAIRWAYS.
fr*
I®:* -
sfV ri&t'
LOCATION.—CIose to the Town below Railway
Station. Motorists follow Yarra Glen Road at
Healesville and turn left over Railway Line. Ser-
vice Car direct to House from Melbourne.
GREEN FEES.—Guests staying at House, 2/6 daily.
5/- week-end. Weekly charge, 10/- Ist week and
5/- thereafter. Public Charge, 3/6 daily, Weekly
GREENS & FAIRWAYS.—Grass Greens with water
laid on. Fairways cut and trimmed. Distance
for 13 holes, 3797 yards, play Ist five to complete
18 holes. Total 5088 yards.
RESIDENT GOLF PROFESSIONAL. W. H.
McGlashan.
TARIFF.—£4/4/- Weekly, 15/- daily Special terms
for club parties.
Booking and Enquiries
Manageresses. Healesville 99.
Melbourne Office. —Daniel A. White, 397-399 Lit. Collins St., Melb. Phone Cent. 3608.
Private, L. 1655.


Name
Holes
Dis-
tance
S.S.S.
Situation
General Remarks
Warracknabeal . .
18
5534
5026
72
71
l‘,2 miles north of station.
Course through excellent growth, only 2 years old. Fair-
ways sand and clover. 18 holes, 1/-.
Warragul . . . .
18 | 6183
1
78x
1 mile from station.
Ideal position, interesting course. Grass greens and fair-
ways. 3/- day.
Warranbayne . . .
9
2000
68x
Central Warranbayne, 1 mile from sta-
tion.
Undulating hill country. No green fees for visitors.
Warmambool
18
5738
72
1 mile from station.
Well cut grass greens, fairways good, fine scenery. 2/6 day.
Wedderburn .
18
5411
70x
In Wedderburn township.
Fairways well grassed. Sand greens. 1/- round, 5/- week.
Wentworth .
. .| 9
2848
—
Junction of Murray and Darling
Rivers.
Practically surrounded by a billabong. Natural course.
Werribee . .
9
1532
60
3 ,i rn.le from Werribee station.
On Werribee B ver. Short but rather difficult course.
West Cliffs
■ •
18
5209
69
4 miles from Redcliffs station.
New club with good sanded greens. Average type fairways.
Western . .
—
—
—
(See Altona).
Also page 53.
Wickliffe . .
• •
9
2257 |
80x
8 miles from Glenthompson stn.
ton-Ballarat bus passes.
Hamil-
Good playing but very hilly. Sand scrapes. Visitors free.
Willaura . .
9
1838
64
Quite close to township.
Short course but with plenty of obstacles.
Winchelsea .
9
4404
62
y 2 mile from Winchelsea.
Course over natural turf country.
Wonthaggi . .
9
2730
72
y 2 mile from stat'on.
Natural grass fairways in good order. Clubhouse. 2/6 day.
Woodend . .
18
4510
65x
\\ mile from Woodend station.
Well turfed greens, good fairways. Hilly country. 3/- day.
Woodlands . .
18
6447
5765
75
76
1 mile Mord alloc station, near
Racecourse.
Epsom
Bungalow clubhouse with every accommodation for members
and visitors. Mordialloc 17. (See page 24.)
Woomelang . .
9
2252
64
Within town boundary.
| Undulating. Sandy loam course. Sand greens.
Wycheproof .
9 | 2530
1
66x
\\ mile from station.
Sand greens, grass fairways, on side of Mt Wycheproof
clubhouse.
Y
Y
Yackandandah
9
3474
60
i/ 2 mile from station.
Sand greens, grass fairways. Variety in the course. Very
picturesque. 2/6 week.
Yallourn . .
9
2900
72
y 2 mile from Yallourn.
Excellent fairways, first-class sand greens. Well bunkered
course. 12 holes next season, 18 soon. 2/6, 1/3 day.
Yanac . . .
9
2176
66
South side of Yanac. Close to township.
Very clean and interesting course.
Yarra Bend .
. .
18
6200
5050
71x
76x
l>/ 2 miles from Clifton Hill
near Fairfield Hosp tal.
station,
Rustic modern clubhouse.
Yarram . . .
9
3150
_
2 l / 2 miles N.E. of town.
Good fairways and sand greens. 1/- half-day.
Yarra wonga
Border . .
and
18
5763
72
1 mile from station.
Undulating sandy country. Excellent clubhouse. Good
greens and fairways. Fees: 2/- round.
Yarra Yarra .
. •
18
6506 1
5636 t
74x 1 In Warrigal Rd., Oakleigh,
74x 1" Commonwealth.
opposite
Fine clubhouse in Spanish style with clock tower. (See page
12.) UM1007.
Yea . ...
18
—
5714
5124
72
71
r mile from Yea station.
Sand greens and well grassed fairways. Picturesque coun-
try with creek. Visitors 1/6 day.
r
RIG
* ->
GOLF JACKETS
for the all-weather man
Made in Tricoline—the wonder fabric
—non-rubber, but giving complete
protection from heavy rain. This is
the ideal Golf Jacket —light, com-
fortable, well-fitting, yet cut to al-
low full, free movement for an easy
swing. Warm in Winter—cool in
Summer! Recommended by leading
golfers throughout Australia ask
the man who wears one! PRICE 45/
TRICOLINE
JACKETS
For Ladies too!
You’ll like their
smartness, their
lightness, and their
complete protection
from rain! In bust
measurements —32 to
40 inch. Price, 45/-.
Sold by all leading Stores —
Wholesale Only
71017


p*c«
,v
c
%k
cm-
WERNER'S
PTY. ■»*!“ D.
si
THE BEST OF CLUBS CAN BE YOURS
GOLF CLUBS ON EASY TERMS
3 Hickory Shafted Irons
I Hickory Shafted Wood
sin. Bag
4 Hickory Shafted Irons
2 Hickory Shafted Woods
sin. Bag
3 Steel Shafted Irons
1 Steel Shafted Wood
sin. Bag
4 Steel Shafted Irons
2 Steel Shafted Woods
sin. Bag
5 Steel Shafted Irons
3 Steel Shafted Woods
sin. Bag
£3/3/'
£4/10/'
£4/19/6
£6/6/'
£9/15/'
Cash or Terms
Arranged.
Cash or Terms
Arranged.
Cash or Terms
Arranged.
Cash or Terms
Arranged.
Cash or Terms
Arranged.
Clubs or Bags can be purchased separately. We have a complete range
of golf equipment from which you can select your own personal
requirements.
1
it
IS\
St
181-197 CHAPEL STREET, PRAHRAN, S.l.
Page 70. GOLF COURSES OF VICTORIA.


How Golf Came To Victoria
(Continued from page 6)
decided to call themselves the Caulfield Club. Its mem-
bers included many figures whose names are honored by
the golfers of today, including the late Chancellor of the
University, Sir John Macfarland. Simple golf and lots
of amusement were offered in the Caulfield paddocks for
the next five years, but stories of balls through villa
windows, and mashie shots that holed out in prams, be-
came too frequent. It became imperative to find fresh
pastures, so the club moved to its new house at Oak-
leigh, and changed its name to the Metropolitan Club.
Next came the Riversdale Club, now situated in Burwood,
but in 1894, when it was started by a group of well-known
city men, it functioned at Mont Albert, and was known as
the Surrey Hills Club, the shed at the Mont Albert station
serving as an impromptu clubhouse, while the wife of the
Station Master came to the rescue of weary golfers with
hot scones for afternoon tea.
The Northern Club at Glenroy was another which played
its part in the golf of those early days; but it was known
as the Essendon Club in the days when the game was
played over the lovely undulating hills and dales of the
property of David Elder, opposite the big two-storied
house of Colyer McCracken, the Club’s president.
Kew, on a site not far from where the present flourishing
club now plays, was the sixth of those “original” clubs
whose members did so much to make the game what it
has grown into today.
In the early years of this century came the Victoria Club,
which, until 1926. played on a fine lay-out at Fishermen’s
Bend, at Port Melbourne. After they acquired land at
Cheltenham and built a magnificent clubhouse, the Fisher-
men’s Bend site became the playing ground of the Batman
Club. Royal Park is another of the older clubs, but now
has only 9 holes. Albert Park came later and has grown
into a very fine 18-hole lay-out, with new clubhouse, on
Queen’s Road.
After that, and just prior to the war, came the next
group of clubs which today are among the most advanced
in the State. Woodlands, at Mordialloc, served the Bayside
suburbs; the Elsternwick Club, an 18-hole course, part now
being the present Elsternwick Public Links, catered for
players in the St. Kilda-Briehton area. The original Els-
ternwick Club is now the Kingston Heath Club, at Chel-
tenham. Yarra, first a coterie of enthusiasts at Eaglemont.
then at Rosanna, and finally at Bentleigh. was another of
the younger clubs. The Commonwealth Club, with a tent
for a clubhouse in the war years, was at Darling, but it
later acquired land at Oakleigh. Out in the higher lands
the game was also making progress and there came the
Eastern Club at Doncaster (banded together by the remnants
of the two disbanded Box Hill clubs), the Heidelberg Club,
at Plenty (an off-shoot of the Yarra Club) as well
as the Croydon and Kingswood clubs, the latter being at
Dandenong. In the prosperous years following the war
there also came into being the lovely country clubs, the
Peninsula Countrv Club at Frankston, the Barwon Heads
Club, at Barwon Heads, and the Emerald Country Club, in
the Dandenong Ranges.
If space permitted one might wander further afield and
discover in the history of clubs in the country some divert-
ing records. For example, the Charlton Club, which was
at its heyday thirty years ago. and still flourishes, had for
its foundation members Frank Tate then District In-
spector of State schools, Ben Green, the tennis champion
and Aeneas Gilchrist, now Citv Engineer of Brisbane. In
its 18-hole course members played over (and not always
over) the Avoca River, no fewer than four times. (Was
a rivor so thoroughly dammed roe wonders.) More-
over, so mischievous were the crows that the club adopted
as its coat-of-arms a black crow with a ball in its
beak on a field argent (with players rampant, understood),
and this still remains the membership badge.
And what stories might be told by Jim Irvine, of Wes-
tern District matches at Peterborough, or of Jack Evans,
the “character” of the Princetown. who used to advertise
“golf” as one of the attractions to “Rivernook,” and would
explain to guests that his links consisted of two jam tins
embedded at either end of a 200-yard clearing.
But a real history of Golf in Victoria must await another
occasion and another historian. —K.M.
Additions
to the Range of
“BROMFORD”
English-made
GOLF BALLS
The “12” and “Autograph” Balls now added to the
BROMFORD range, and the reduced prices for
“Gordon” and “Tee Mee” Balls, bring BROMFORD
quality within the reach of every player.
See the complete range at your Professional’s or
Sports Store.
Fli es an exceptional
distance, yet its
cover is sufficiently tough to
give very many rounds.
“GORDON”
Re c o m-
mended for
use by beginners. Tough, yet plays
remarkably true. Gives excellent
distance with every shot.
“tee mee” er “rur-
ers find this ball to their com-
plete satisfaction; it is quite out-
standing in its price-class.
1(1 A Ball for the ad-
vanced player, fly-
ing straight and true. One hit
and you will appreciate its
superiority.
(( T T ”F# (( J T ” The “L.L.” is
n.n. J. . recomm end e^d
for championship play on well-grassed
courses, and where the player does not
top the Ball. Otherwise “L.T.” is rec-
ommended, as it has a harder cover; it
gives approximately the same distance.
“AUTOGRAPH”
For absolute limit of length, play
the “AUTOGRAPH.” It is a Cham-
pionship Ball without an equal.
m
13
16
36
4-
“MILNECRAFT”
GOLF CLUBS
are unsurpassed for Finish and Balance


u Ct. Golf House
WARBURTON
GOLF CLUB
Regd.
The Coif House is splendidly situated on a high bank
above the Yarra River. Self contained and offering
every sport possible, “St. Andrews ” fills the holiday
needs of all ages and inclinations. H. & C. Water
service to bedrooms, etc. Sewered and Electric Light.
9 ZHole Qolf £inks (NO HILLS)
Crass greens, sportingly bunkered. Asphalt Tennis
Court, Full Size Billiard Table, Pianola, Panatrope
Wireless, Swimming Pool, etc. Write for illustrated
leaflets.
TELEPHONE: WARBURTON 44
D. C. F. McCALLUM
Here is the new
14-inch model,
which mows and
rolls 4500 sq. ft.
at a fuel cost of
Id.
ATCO Motor Mowers
Stocked in sizes from 12in. to 36in. blade sizes. Roll as
they mow, giving greens and fairways a velvety surface
no horse or hand mower can equal. Free service and
warranty. Prices from £39/10/.
ATCO
Autoscythe
The new, cheap and
quick way of cutting
rough grass, weeds,
bracken, brush and
undergrowth, etc. Cuts
right up to trees, fences,
etc. Mobile as a hand
scythe, faster than a horse
mower. Saves its cost in
one season. Full particu-
lars and demonstration
with pleasure.
STOKOE MOTORS
Pty. Ltd.
265 Exhibition St., Melb.,
C.l. F4lBl.
k
The World's Best
Typewriter is British!
m
m
It's the
New British
Illustrated —
Imperial Portable
Good Companion’
IMPERIAL
Standard and Portable Models
lAID you know that Britain built a typewriter not
only equal but definitely superior to any
machine in the world? Here it is . • . the new British
Imperial, available in Melbourne, with full service
facilities, from Geo. Raitt & Co.! If you want to
know more about the Imperial we’ll be glad to tell
you, or post you literature.
GEO. RAITT Cr CO. PTY. LTD.
40 QUEEN ST. (Cr. Flinders Lane), MELBOURNE, C.l.
Telephone Cent. 3330.


SUPPLEMENTARY TO THE DIRECTORY
It was inevitable that some replies to our questionnaire should come to hand too late for classi-
fication in the directory. But it is useful to know that courses do exist at:—
Alpine (Beechworth)
Bessiebelle
Blantyre
Buln Buln
Bushy Park
Caniambo
Carisbrook
Chiltern
Clear Lake
Clifton Springs
Clunes
Cohuna
Corryong
Cranbourne
Crowlands
Culgoa
Ebden Weir
Edenhope
Elmhurst
Fairview
Glenaroua
Glenelg
Glenrowan
Golden Vale
Gringegalg'ona
Harrow
Highland Park
Jubilee
Jung
Lang Lang
Leichardt
Melville Forest
Merino
Metung
Minimay
Mirranatwa
Murrayville
Mysia
Nagambie
Norad juha
Orbost
Pimpinio
Pine Grove
Ranelagh
Reservoir
Rushworth
Sea Lake
Seymour
Sorrento
Swift’s Creek
Tallarook
Tennyson
Toongabbie
Toora
Trafalgar
Tungamah
Wendouree
Wodonga
Woorinen
WE ALSO LEARN THAT:
The Bruthen, course is not functioning at present, but
may come into action again shortly.
The course at Cathkin, with its 9 holes, situated Vz mile
from the station, is under reconstruction, and will soon be
ready for play again.
A new course is being laid down at Gobur, 15 miles
from Merton, the details of which are not yet available.
A recently formed club, Long Island, is having a course
laid out on land adjoining Peninsula, at Frankston.
The finishing touches are at present being made to the
Great Ocean Road Links, a new course at Eastern View, 8
miles from Lome and 4 miles from Airey’s Inlet. The course
consists of 9 holes and covers a total of 2581 yards. It has
been carved out of the forest at the foot of the Little Otway
Ranges, and with the ocean on one side and mountainous
bush on the other, magnificent views may be obtained from
almost every tee and green. Much trouble has been
taken in the construction work on the course, and grasses
have been sown at some expense. It is expected that the
course will be completed by the end of the year.
POSSIBLE CHANGES
It seems worth adding a note here that committees
invariably keen on improvements, and progress is being
made all round. For example, minor alterations to the
bunkering at Commonwealth and Victoria have been made
even while this book has been going through the press.
Therefore, it is possible that the distances, and even the
bogey and S.S.S. may vary slightly in some cases, particu-
larly at those of the newer clubs. It should also be noted
that fees on any course are liable to be changed as im-
provements are made or demand increases.
Here is the Club every Golfer
Must Have!
THE FAMOUS "CHIPPER" that solves all your
approach troubles about the green, bunkers, rough,
in fact any shot from 3to 100 yards.
Call and see this club demonstrated.
For more holes and better
play, use T. R. Balfour Golf
Balls, either mesh or recess
2/ value for 1/6
BALFOUR S.S.S., 25% bet-
ter than most 2/- balls, a
high compression tough
cover ball, only . . . . 1/3
Repaints, 6d., 9d., 1/-
Krotlite Repaints, 1/3, 1/6,
and 1/9.
CHIPPER
w, 21/-
TH
Hand Forged
Apollo Steel Shaft
LEATHER GOLF BAGS with lockfast hood, either protects your clubs or can be used
for carrying sweater, etc. Made of willow hide, oval shape, four cane zip pockets, wear
for years. Size 6in., 32/6. Size, 7in., 39/6.
CANVAS BAGS, size 4in., 7/6, 11/6. Oval Waterproof, 6in., 16/6.
“cV/r EVANS &> BALFOUR SS2S
STREET Golf Specialists


Many well turfed golf
links have been laid out
in the Gippsland art\a.
Teams from that district
have won honors during
the Annual Country
Week when matches are
decided on the leading
championship courses in
the metropolitan area.
The Korumburra li'nks
shown above is typical
of the hillside country
of the courses in Gipps-
land.
Photo by E. Williams.
VICTORIAN GOLF THROUGH VISITORS' EYES
IN Lord Northcliffe’s Memoirs the following paragraph ap-
pears: “Golf in Australia is far better than I expected.
At Metropolitan, Oakleigh, one plays through mimosa and
tea-tree, which makes it one of the most beautiful courses I
have ever seen.”
Ten years ago the late Dr. Alister McKenzie expressed
amazement at the number and type of courses he found here.
“What a wealth of really fine golf courses Melbourne possesses!”
he said. “No city of similar size and population has as many
courses of such high standard as you have in the capital city
If your keenness for the game increases, there must be a great
golfing future ahead of Australia. You have wonderful con-
MELBOURNE
ditions for golf here —a fine climate ail the year round and
unlimited areas of eminently suitable country. Make the most
of them.”
Late last year we had a visit from another eminent authority,
Dr. C. M. Murray, golf expert from South Africa. Although he
spoke in a general way of the game in Australia, he said: ‘‘The
opinion in golf club management is very much ahead of that
in South Africa, and, for that matter, the greater part of the
British Isles. It is no exaggeration to say that no finer or
better run golf clubs will be found anywhere in the world to-
day than are to be seen around the principal towns of Aus-
tralia.”
w
The Clubs of a Champion
WOODS
n
IRONS
IMPORTANT NEWS
for all GOLFERS
TWO BRAND
NEW MODELS
Designed by “Champs,” . . .
built by master craftsmen
with “the precision of a fine
clock.”
Pacemaker Woods
Less Drag or Friction of Turf
Resistance, owing to the elim-
ination of Excess or Unused
Wood from the narrow sole
and bevelling at toe and heel
of Club.
Model 22—Irons
Weight concentrated at
corrugated sole for
more resultful use in
the rough . . . Sockets
that throw face of club
slightly behind shaft.
To apply backspin and
give player greater
control.
SUPER .
C O/,FCLIi^
the
J. HIGSON & SONS, Agents. EAST BROS.
125 FLINDERS LANE
MELBOURNE
WHY
NOT
OWN
YOUR
OWN
LINKS
?
■4 •, X,
"Eloera"
Glenfern Road,
Upwey
Was planned as a 9-hole course
by the late Dick Banks in
1 922, but the roads were then
unmade, and so the develop-
ment of this course was stopped.
There is now a metalled road,
with electric light and tele-
phone available. Thirty-three
acres of loveiy undulating
land, with long creek frontage
and roomy old farmhouse.
All to be bought for the price
of a cheap outer-suburban
house.
Only 25 miles from the city.
JOHN BUCHAN & CO.
(ESTATE AGENTS)
43 Queen Street,
MELBOURNE, C.l.
Telephone: Central 196


BMM
SfS&
*
]
m m
"mm
mil
SsK
4
:
-
»v- -« 4, ~
ihh
Printed and published by LAWRENCE KAY, of 100 BaNdy St
St. Kilcj&rTor Newspapers, at its offices, 62 to 74 Flinders Street,
ourne.


.
i siisil
.
ifwsissseia
•■MssbW - 1
Iwlf'" ■
:*■ —*>;■
Hi:?
It’
GOLF COURSES
OF VICTORIA
76
Swinging Thru by
Craig Wood — Ask your
professional for free copy
FREE TO YOU, with compliments of
Dunlop-Psrdri*u . . . this inst.uctive
booklet by a long-hitting master of the
grand game of golf—Craig Wood. Full
of practical suggestions and information
on how to improve your own game.
Obtain a copy from your Pro.
i
CRAIG WOOD
says
This is the New Ball
they’re hitting a mile’
It consistently gives yards further off the tee . .
longer, more accurate approaches . . . and dead-
true putting. Craig Wood—a long hitter him-
self, helped perfect its construction to ensure
utmost distance.
TOUGHER COVER NOW. The new “Sixty
Five” cover stands up to hard hits and even
miss-hits. Fused right into the winding it's
tough enough to “stay new” round after round
What a ball!—lt goes further, and lasts longer.
PRODUCT
PERDRIAU
DUNLOP
OF
WIIY iT IS
CALLED
“SIXTY FIVE”
In cummemora-
tion of Henry
Cotton’s feat,
when in 1834 he
broke the world's •
record score with
a total of 63, |S
using a new and
unnamed Dunlop
ball.
t #
: 1
4
“
fi
IXTY-FIVE
f- f 11
? f
4
s
■m
/
known
tv ell
TUF-FLI
obtainable
ano WARWICK an <»
from Professionals and
Wmm,








