

Price, One Penny »


Australian Catholic Truth Society*
i *
‘ ‘ Cognoscttis veritatem et veritas liberabit vos
44 You shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.”
—St. John viii. 32.
Patron:
His Eminence Cardinal Moran.
President:
Most Rev. T. J. Carr, D.D., Archbishop of Melbourne.
Joint Hon. Secretaries:
Rev, John Norris and Mr. W. L. Bowditch, M.A.
REASONS Wfa y You should Support the
Australian Catholic Truth Society.
1. Because it is started as a crusade for God against irre-
ligion, immorality, and ignorance.
2. Because it will supply bright, healthy reading matter
for all classes, Catholic or non-Catholic, at a price
within the reach of all.
3. Because nothing of real human interest in the wide
field of truth is beyond its scope, whether in
religion, science, history, philosophy, or fiction.
4. Because it will, from time to time, refute current
? popular errors about the Faith or the Church, and
will defend religion from the attacks of its foes.


GORDON;
THE AUSTRALIAN POET.
REV. J. J. MALONE.
Melbourne:
THE AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC TRUTH SOCIETY,
309 & 311 LITTLE COLLINS STREET,




ADAM LINDSAY GORDON,
THE AUSTRALIAN POET.
Oj | bTART with the assumption that Adam Lindsay Gor-
! don is the most popular of the poets of Australia,
and, if I interpret aright the general spirit of these
__ colonies, I feel sure that the public are not going
to quarrel with that assertion. It may be difficult to estab-
lish the fact statistically. An ingenious statistician, by
dexterous manipulation of figures, can make them prove or
disprove anything, and when they are consulted to deter-
mine the nature and extent of such a. subtle and evanescent
thing as literary popularity they are apt to go particularly
wrong in their calculations. The range of my own personal
experience is so narrow and the sources of information are
so limited and so uncertain, and the popular taste is so fugi-
tive, and there are so many local and accidental causes,
such as the price of the book, size-, clearness of type, colony
where printed or composed, to be taken into consideration
that there must be, even with the fullest information, an
extreme difficulty in the way of arriving at a popular ver-
dict. The most a man can do legitimately under the
circumstances is to register his own experience, and the
experience which I have gathered from the authorities in the
Public Library, and from the leading booksellers in the
city, from the friends with whom I have come in contact,
from the various societies with which I have been familiar,
and the many entertainments of all kinds at which I have
been present, is that Adam Lindsay Gordon is far and away
the most popular of ail the poets of our island continent.
That was the impression I brought into this country a few
years ago, and unless the muse of this Avild land is “ mewing
its mighty youth ’’ somewhere amongst its immemorial gums,


it is very likely to be the impression I shall carry out of
it.
Long before I touched these southern shores, far away
amongst the green valleys of Erin, I heard of the fame
of the new Australian poet and had fallen under the spell
of his genius. Weary of the soft syrens of my own roman-
tic land, heart-sick of the metaphysical and transcendental
seers of England, I turned with avidity to the young and
dashing muse that had put spurs into Pegasus, and was lead-
ing her such a break-neck pace as she never ran outside those
southern stars. By the banks of one of the brightest rivers
that ever answered back to the music of a poet’s soul, with
all the wild birds singing in the fresh meadows around me,
amidst the bloom of the spring, I read and revelled in the
poetry of Adam Lindsay Gordon. And I remember as I
read how the lonely bush of Australia, with all its weird'
melancholy, its grotesque and gloomy vegetation, its ghastly
and oppressive stillness, rose up and appalled me like the
spectre of some veiled Isis in a ruined temple of the wilder-
ness—and how man the adventurer, with desperate courage,
dared to lift the mysterious veil of silence from her face,
penetrating its untra,veiled solitudes, clearing with pick and
axe a pathway through its impenetrable scrub, battling with
beasts and blacks and bushrangers and all the primeval
forces of the untamed forest, and settling down at last in
the digger’s hut and the splitter’s tent, and the squatting
station, to the free, wild, roving, reckless life of the bush-
man, and how, too, the aboriginal passion of man’s nature
asserted- itself in the fierce Nimrod of the wilderness, and
carried me aw r ay on its rushing wings, till the very turf
seemed to spring under my feet in the flight of his rapid
and irresistible genius. That is how I came in contact with
the vivid and vigorous muse of Adam Lindsay Gordon.
They came in all guises, some vivid,
To clasp and to keep,
Some , sudden and swift as the livid
Blue thunder-flames leap;
This swept through the first breath of clover
With memories renewed to the rover
That flashed while the black horse turned over,
Before the long sleep.
Since then I have read Btrunton Stephens and Kendall,
and Harpur and Gordon M’Crae, but Adam Lindsay Gordon


is the poet whom I have ever carried into the bush in my
midsummer rambles.
And this brings me to another point, the secret of his
popularity. What is there in the man or his muse to
attract our special sympathies'? He has left behind him a
pathetic memory.
How beautiful if sorrow had not made
Sorrow more beautiful than beauty’s self.
His tragic death, coming so unexpectedly in. the very
springtime of his life and the unfolding of hisi faculties, has
thrown a melancholy glory around his genius. The broken
column that stands above his grave, fit symbol of an un-
finished life, shows how deeply his fate has appealed to the
poetry of our nature; Turning over the back numbers of
the “ Age” and “ Argus ” and “ Australasian,” I came across
the heading “ Suicide of Adam Lindsay Gordon.”
That death, inglorious as it is in itself, has given a touch
of romance to his memory. The public recognises in it
the work of a brain that had been unhinged by physical
accident or mental sorrow. The fact that he took away
his life on the very eve of publishing some of his best poems,
and with the knowledge so dear to the sensitive heart of a
poet that they were to- receive a favourable review from the
press, would tend to show the act had not been premeditated.
That there was such a fatal propensity to suicide in his
nature is certain, and without a knowledge of that fact
it is difficult to understand, in a nature so full of animal life
and vigour, what Kendall calls—
The mournful meaning of the undersong
Which runs through all he wrote, and often takes
The deep autumnal, half-prophetic tone
Of forest winds in March.
The shadow of that fatal propensity seems to have brooded
over his pathway and clouded even his gayest hours with
its haunting melancholy.
I seem to have a load to bear,
A heavy, choking grief;
Gould I have forced a single tear
I might have felt relief.
I think my hot and restless heart
Has scorched the channels dry
From which those signs of sorrow" start
To moisten cheek and eye.


. ; the second place, we must remember that he was in
his time the most popular steeplechase rider in the colony,
and with a people to whom the love of the chase is a ruling
passion, that must always count for something in the popular
favour. Then, again, his life was essentially romantic,
and the Australian bush was the background of all its reck-
less adventure. It has been said that to writ© a poem
well a man must make his own life a poem, and there is
a deep, a tender, and a tragic poetry surely in the life of this
fugitive from, the Cots wold Mountains. The son of an English
officer, the pride of a fond father, brought up amidst the
culture and tender associations of a beautiful English home
high-spirited, haughty, and impressionable—sick of the
conventionality of an artificial society, and smarting under
what his, sensitive nature shrank from as a disgrace, he flings
himself with all the desperate fearlessness, of an outcast, in
the frenzy of the early fifties, upon the shores of this land;
becomes a mounted trooper, a horse breaker, a livery ser-
vant, a gardener, a steward, a member of Parliament; tries
many things and fails in all, and blows out his brains at
last in a fit of despondency. There, is something of romance
in the stages of a life between the daring and die fascinating
young huntsman of the Cotswold Mountains and the bronzed
sundowner sullenly camping outside a station hut in the
savage bush of Australia,. There is a. poetry in that as deep
and as pathetic as anything in the story of the prodigal, and
Adam Lindsay Gordon has given it expression. This is
the real and the only justifiable cause of his popularity
amongst Australians, that he reflects the spirit and the
scenery of their native land. He seems to have cut him-
self off completely from all home associations. It was
something - more than the mere extravagance of poetic
hyperbole which inspired the closing stanza of his pathetic
leave-taking with his beloved sister.
Sister, farewell, farewell once more
To every youthful tie—
Friends, parents, kinsmen, native shore.
To each and all good-bye;
And thoughts which for the moment seem
To bind mo with a spell,
Ambitious hope, love’s boyish dream,
To you a last farewell.


The fact that he isolated himself so completely from all
the associations of the old country enabled him to enter
more fully into the spirit of Australian life and scenery. And
he did enter into it with all the energy of a flexible and
vigorous nature, as though "to the manner born.” He
grew to love the ]onely bush in all its weird and pathetic
melancholy, delighted to take long rambles and lonely rides
through it, spent all the years of his life by choice amongst
its solitudes rather than in the heart of the peopled cities,
was captivated by the glorious unconventionalities of its free
and easy life, its rugged toils and romantic pastimes, loved
the sturdy independence and robust human character of its
hardy pioneers, and made it the happy hunting ground of
his wild colt of a Muse. So it is he has come to be loved
by bushmen as a brother who could sympathise with his
struggles and share his experiences, and turn the very rhythm
of his own strong heart at last into vigorous and exuberant
song.
He has a distinct note of his own that is neither English
nor American, but Australian. He is unquestionably what
his poet friend Kendall sang of him—
A shining soul, with syllables of fire,
Who sang the first great songs these lands can claim.
Marcus Clarke in the preface to his poems —the briefest,
the best, and the most sympathetic criticism I have seen —
says : “ The student of these unpretending volumes will be
repaid for his labour. He will find in them something very
like the beginnings of a national school of Australian
poetry.” Fitly does the wattle-blossom above his grave
grow, for
The fragrance rare that the bushman knows,
The scent of the wattle bloom.
has gone into his heart, and breathes in his poetry.
His originality is bis great attraction to tbe foreigner
because of its novelty, and to the Australian because of its
fidelity. The old world, tired of its old singers, turns to
the new for inspiration. No matter how delightful the
music of the nightingale in her groves at midnight, or the
lark in the blue skies of morning, or the blackbird amidst
the evening shadows of the dell, the heart of man is so con-
stituted, so greedy of new sensations and new scenes, that
it turns in its satiety to enjoy the shriek of a cockatoo, or


the chirp of a locust; or the mimic laughter of a mopoke or
a jackass. I select these feathered friends out of no spirit
of disparagement to our Australian poets, but merely because'
these gloomy Australian forests have no more tuneful voices
to sing their savage loves in immemorial song. A passion
loi novelty in the line of literature is one of the predomin-
ant passions of the age. Men have resuscitated old authors
to , minister to it, have ransacked the archives of dead
religions, dead literatures, and dead philosophies to discover
it, have travelled the world, like Faust, in search of it to
India, Central Africa, Russia, Norway.
could §ive the P° etl T of a Walt Whitman or Ralph
Waldo Emerson a popularity except that they minister to
that passionate aspiration after something incomprehensibly
hew modes of thought, new methods of composition, new
ideas of literary and artistic excellence, these are the obiects
owards which the over-refined and surfeited imaginations of
men vainly turn. _ The poet of the future must be no
Misha (nothing himself with another’s mantle. He must
drop, like Lucifer, from Heaven, or spring, like Aphrodite,
fiom the sea, and the accents of the song he sings must
never have been gathered from the familiar lips of mortals.
In the meantime, whilst we are waiting for this new Apollo
the country in which we are can go very near towards
furnishing us with the requisite materials for his song We
are literally stranded her© on the Paleozoic rocks, where
pre-histone man in other lands left the savage footprints
of his presence, and the whole embroidery of human life is
so ravelled and thrown together in inextricable confusion
that it becomes necessary to pick up the many-coloured
threads and knit them together again on an entirely new
pa tern. , New social conditions of life amidst new surround-
ings in a new country must inevitably develop new habits
of thought, new types of character, new ideals of literary and
artistic beauty, and as a consequence create a new school o f
poetry.
_ There are traces in the poetry of Adam Lindsay Gordon 0 f
the_ dawn of that new national literature. Thou oh not a
native of the country, brought up, like Kendall, from his
childhood amidst its grotesque and peculiar scenery, drink-
ing m the strange music of its forests and its waters, absorbs


ing into his blood the tropical heat of its long, hot summer,
he had, nevertheless, the susceptive temperament of the poet
that can throw self into harmony with all environments,
and make him a contemporary of all times and a citizen of
the world. He has been called by his admirers the poet
of the Australian bush, and though he may not reflect its
natural features as fully or as faithfully as the rugged Har-
pur or the polished Kendall, he has infused into it far more
of the genuine spirit of the bushman, and painted a
firmer and more vivid pen the elemental character of its
robust human life.
“He has contributed what we believe,” says the Aus-
tralasian,” “to be a durable addition to the treasures of the
English language, and one that will be talked of long after
this unquiet, unsettled generation has passed away.
S : o far we have been dealing in platitudes.; let us come
down to details. A poet is. to be judged and allotted his
niche in the temple of fame according to his relations with
God, nature, and humanity. These are the three great
themes.—the trinity of his muse.. All poetry, which in its
essence is religious, grows up around that primal mystery.
The point of view from which he surveys them, the attitude
of mind with which he contemplates them, determines the
specific character of' his poetry, and allots him his specia_-
place in the hierarchy of song. Now, with what eyes did
Gordon look upon this world? How did he interpret the
open secret of the universe?” Well, he gave it up as prac-
tically insoluble. His creed was the creed of the agnostic.
God was to him the unknowable. The name of God is not
often on his lips, nor the thought of Him as a persona,
bein'* with a superintending providence hardly present to
his mind at all. How much happier had been his life, how
different might have been his pathway, how far more salutary
his sons’, had he turned the luminous eye of a glorifying
faith out on that vast, songless, and solitary bush! Then
would it be in truth to him as to the Hebrew wanderer of
old a burning bush in the wilderness, and awe him into
reverence. We cannot help regretting that Gordon should
have failed to bring the heart of the devout Christian into
those trackless and unbroken solitudes, where a. St. Antony
mio-ht have found such a congenial bourn But it is to be
feared that his very irreligion is part of his. bush experience,


the complexion of its reckless life. There is something in
the savage stillness and the rayless gloom of those primeval
forests locked in immemorial slumber, which oppresses
rather than exalts the heart of man. The savage element
of mans nature finds here, amidst its ghastly, stern, and
uncouth loveliness, a native home. Man sees nowhere the
footprints of Cxod s presence in the thought or the worship of
his brother man—no temple, no altar, no creed, nothing in
the shape of man but the lowest type of the savage. It
seems a God-forsaken land, on which the light of His coun-
tenance has never shone since He called it out of its orioinal
nothingness. This is the heavy sense of desolation which
oppresses the traveller in the silent bush, and it seems to
have lam down, like a cloud on the mountain, over the
naturally joyous and vigorous temperament of Gordon, crush-
ing out of his heart the glorious sense of spiritual' exalta-
tion. You look in vain through his work for anything of
that love and rapture which thrills the .soul almost
into ecstasy in the beatific visions of a Wordsworth. There
is nothing of the visionary about Gordon. It is all “ sea
spray and smokedrift/’ light, vapoury, and evanescent. He
has a depth of manly feeling in his nature which saves him
from the puling of a mawkish sentimentalism, but he has
none of that exalted spiritual sense of wonder, worship and
love._ He never tries to put the syllables of things, together-
and interpret the bible of nature.
The truth is, he looked out on nature with a healthy
amma, love, and revelled in its “ glorious oxygen ” Hi
one of the most sparkling and graceful of all Ids’poems
he gives us a knowledge of the sources of his inspiration. ’ ■
!n the spring, when the wattle-gold trembles
iwixt shadow and shine;
When each dew-laden air draught resembles
f- long draught of wine;
When the sky-lme’s blue burnished resistance
Makes deeper the dreamiest distance,
borne song in all hearts hath existence—
buch songs have been mine.
That is as far as I have been able to gather from a per-
usal of his poems the use be makes of nature, He loves, it,
especially m its weird and wild aspects, in the aboriginal
bush, he rejoices in it as a salutary and. refreshing tonic
but never attempts to read it. It is an element to him in


which he may revel as in an ocean, a feast on which he may
indulge to repletion, a picture on which he may gaze even
with rapture 1 , but never a bock written without and within
in mysterious symbols like the leaves outside the Sybil’s
Cave. There is nothing whatever of the seer or modern
transcendentalism about Adam Lindsay Gordon. He was no
subtle metaphysician to sit at sundown under the shadow
of a wattle-tree and spin gossamer theories of nature and
gorgeous philosophies of man. Unlike Wordsworth, he was
content to enjoy the perfume of the flower without caring
to extract the delicious secret. He lacks almost altogether
the “ imaginative reason ” of Coleridge, the “ vision and the
faculty divine ” of Wordsworth, to which everything seems
“ apparelled in celestial light, the glory and the freshness
of a dream.” That is a great want in his poetry, a want
of faith, of reverence, of awestruck wonder and love. It
does not shut him out from the kingdom of poetry alto-
gether, but it puts him on a back seat among the minor
divinities. One result of this want of vision is a lack of
depth, of human interest, and of symbolism in his poetry.
There are passages here and there powerfully descriptive
in that sharp, short, rapid style of Byron, but the heart of
man, with its passionate hopes and longings, is not throbbing
through them, and they lose as a consequence their interests
for man.
“ The Swimmer ” is a poem superb in its vigour, its dic-
tion, and even in its conception. It shows us the poet in
his favourite mood gazing out on his favourite element, the
sea. The sense of a spoiled life, of squandered time, of
lost opportunities, of aimless toil, of vain hope and vanished
joy crowd in upon him and crush him with an insufferable
weariness till the overmastering desire seizes him to lie l down
and fall asleep on its untroubled bosom, or fling himself in
utter recklessness upon the foaming waves and ride away
into the silence and the darkness.
7. would that with sleepy soft embraces
The sea would fold me—would find me rest,
In luminous shades of her secret places,
In depths where her marvels are manifest;
So the earth beneath her shall not discover,
My hidden couch, nor the heaven above her.
As a strong love shielding a weary lover,
I would have her shield me with shining breast,


One or two passages may be selected out of that poem to
illustrate the strong, sharp character of his descriptive
power—-the highest feature of his poetry. There is an
energy in that poem which show r s that it was struck out in
a white heat from his blazing soul, and is the' best illustra-
tion I can find in his poetry of that blank and cheerless des-
pondency which drove him at last to despair.
A little season of love and laughter,
Of light and life, and pleasure and pain
And a horror of outer darkness after.
And dust returneth to dust again.
Then the lesser life shall be as the greater,
And the lover of life shall join the hater,
And the one thing cometh sooner or later,
And no one knoweth the loss or gain.
Love of my life! we had lights in season-
al! ard to part from, harder to keep—
TV e had strength to labour and souls to reason,
t And seed to scatter and fruits to reap.
Though time estranges and fate disperses,
We have had our loves and our loving mercies.
Though the gifts of the light in the end are curses.
Yet bides the gift of darkness—sleep!
I come now to the consideration of another element in all
genuine poetry, viz., its insight and philosophy of human
life. The poet is not expected to be a dogmatic theologian
nor a scholastic philosopher, but he must have a creed. It
may be very defective, may be incomplete', may be false, but
a creed of some kind he must have, and a philosophy. One
definition of poetry is that it is “ a longing after a lost ideal.”
The poet must give expression to that vague and indefinable
longing, must turn all the phenomena and forces of nature
into his service, must climb heaven like Prometheus, and
go down like Orpheus into Hell to find adequate utterance
for that unappeasable yearning. Edgar Allan Poe, in “ his
poetic principle,” says truly: “He who shall simply sing
with however glowing enthusiasm or with however vivid a
truth of description of the sights and sounds and odours and
colours and sentiments which greet him in common with
all mankind, he, I say, has yet failed to prove his divine
title. There is still a something which he has been unable
to attain, and it is this effort to apprehend supernal love-
liness, this desire of the moth for the star, this wild effort
to reach the beauty above, that constitutes the inspiration of


all true poetry.” Now Adam Lindsay Gordon fails in the
apprehension of that great truth. He has a keen sense of
dissatisfaction with things present, but turns no wistful
eyes to things to come. His poetry is the poetry of a blank
and cheerless agnosticism. It is always looking into the
mouth of the open grave, not to pry into the secrets of its
mysterious silence, and extract out of it some lesson of con-
solation, but to shriek into its hollowness his despair.
See! girt with tempest and wing’d with thunder,
And clad with lightning and shod with sleet,
The strong winds treading the swift waves sunder
The flying rollers with frothy feet.
One gleam like a bloodshot sword-blade swims on
The skyline, staining the green gulf crimson,
A death stroke fiercely dealt by a dim sun,
That strikes through his stormy winding sheet.
Oh! brave white horses! you gather and gallop,
The storm sprite loosens the gusty reins ;
Now the stoutest ship were the frailest shallop
In your hollow backs, on your high arch’d manes.
I would ride as never a man has ridden,
In your sleepy, swirling surges hidden,
To gulfs foreshadowed, through straits forbidden,
Where no light wearies and no love wanes.
There is an unlawful sense of unredeemed and hopeless
wretchedness about all his musings. In early life the poet
seems to have had the spirit of Christian faith, and to> have
lost it. The love of his sister, which abided with him as
a pure and refreshing memory amidst the rougher experi-
enceg of his bush life, with all its strange and startling
vicissitudes, and the love of home, which always had a
melting influence over him, touch now and then that lost
chord of his being, and “ the still small voice seems to
awaken.”
There is a spot not far away,
Where my young sister sleeps,
Who seems alive but yesterday,
So fresh her memory keens;
For we have played in childhood there,
Beneath the hawthorn’s bough,
Ard bent our knees in childish prayer
I cannot utter now.
“ I cannot utter now ” sounds like, the confession of one
to whom the loss of faith was rather the result of wilful
neglect than of honest philosophic doubt. Browning and


Swinburne, we know, were two of his favourite authors-, and
one at least was the avowed enemy of Christianity. Oscar
Wilde says the glory of Swinburne is to have’ discrowned
Christ and restored the worship of the Grecian divinities.
And he hath kissed the lips of Prosperine,
And sung the Galilsean’s requiem.
That wounded forehead, dashed with blood and wine,
He hath discrowned: the ancient gods in him
Have found their last, most ardent worshipper.
The influence of Swinburne on Gordon’s mind is; as plain
as it is on his verse. If he has helped to tune his ear to
the swinging rhythm of his marvellous word music, he has
helped to draw the curtains of a gloomy and horrible form
of agnosticism over the eyee of his soul. The only phil-
osophy that runs through the poems of Gordon is the phil-
osophy of despair. The question of man’s immortality,
without which man becomes merely a machine, and life a
creature of inexorable destiny, he dismisses as- beyond his
comprehension. To him it is literally the great perhaps-
Le grand peut-etre.
No man may shirk the allotted work,
The deed to do, the death to die;
At least I think so—neither Turk,
Nor Jew, nor Infidel am I.
And yet I wonder when I try
To solve one question may or must;
And shall I solve it by and by,
Beyond the dark, beyond the dust ?
I trust so, and I only trust.
In the meantime, however, we are above ground, and our
duty is to drink the “ glorious oxygen ” and sit out- in the
sunshine and laugh over our wane in heedless merriment,
even though the grinning skeleton be carried, as in Egypt
of old, into the feasting chamber.
Though our future lot is a sable blot.
Though the wise ones of earth will blame us.
Though our saddles will rot, and our rides be forgot,
Dum Vivimus Vivavvus.
Once as he was riding along through the bush, striving to
unravel the- riddle of life, he hears- the laughter -of the jays
overhead, and is roused from his melancholy.
14
Gordon: The Australian Poet.


Are they glad that they are living?
Are they right or wrong?
Right y ? tis joy that makes them call so ;
Why should they he sad?
Certcs! we are living also;
Shall not we be glad?
The glorious sense of existence, the simple delight of liv-
ing so characteristic of Browning, ■ thrills him at times and
rushes through his veins into his verses with a vitality
which infuses itself into the reader.
Oh, the vigour with which the air is rife,
The spirit of joyous motion,
The fever, the fulness of animal We
Can be drained from no earthly potion;
The lungs with the living gas grow light,
And the limbs feel the strength or ten, _
While the chest expands with its maddening rnignt
God’s glorious oxygen.
That is what I called above a. healthy animal love of
nature. But man is something more than a mere animal,
and there are deeper wants in his nature than those which
the bright sun or the fresh breezes can, ever satisfy. -No
one felt that more keenly than Gordon, and the fact that
he could find nothing within his own heart, nothing in his
relic-ion to appease these insatiate longings, threw him back
by = a kind of desperation into the philosophy of despair.
His whole work is marred by that, mischievous despondency,
the sorrow of the world unto death. In the poem ‘ bunlignt
on the Sea, or the Philosophy of a Feast,” he gives, ns a
vivid and very effective picture, of that morbid and pessi-
mistic philosophy. He sit® with his comrade® at evening
at a feast, and as the sunlight fades it reminds them tnat
others have gone from their ranks —that the sun is sinking
rapidly for them, too, and that they must hurry on with
their revels and push the wine flask merrily.
Make merry, comrades, eat and drink
(The sunlight flickers on the sea),
. The garlands gleam, the glasses clink,
The grape juice mantles tair and iiee 3
The lamps are trimmed, although the light
Of day still lingers on the sky,
We sit between the day and night.
And push the wine flask merrily.
I see you feasting round me still.
All gay of heart and strong ot brab ;


Make merry, friends, your glasses fill.
The lights are growing dim.
I miss the voice of one I’ve heard
(The sunlight sinks upon the sea).
He sang as blythe as any bird.
And shook the rafters with his glee;
But times have changed with him, I wot.
By fickle fortune cross’d and flung;
Bar stouter heart than mine he’s got
t If now he sings as then he sung.
Yet some must swim when others sink;
And some must sink when others swim;
Make merry, comrades, eat and drink,
The lights are growing dim.
I miss the face of one I loved
(The _ sunlight settles on the sea) —
Long since to distant climes he roved,
He had his faults, and so have we;
His name was mentioned here this day.
And it was coupled with a sneer;
I heard, nor had I aught to say,
Though once I held his memory dear.
Who cares, ’mid wines and fruits and flowers,
Though death or danger compass him ;
He his faults, and we have ours.
The lights are growing dim.
This is the materialist's philosophy of carve diem , the
substitute of Agnosticism for Christian hope and resigna-
tion. Gordon rushed into the race of life and rode for a
fall. It is that which give® him a popularity with a cer-
tain class of readers. They mistake for independence of
thought what is merely shortsightedness', and call that a
strong and manly sentiment which is only the refuge of a
defiant and stolid despair. It is said that the bravest
generals tremble before they enter the field of battle. Their
real courage as their glory consists in this, that, tiiough
they valued the gift of life as the best gift of heaven, they
had the heroism to part with it or put it in peril in defence
of a righteous cause or a noble country. The courage of
Gordon was rather foolhardiness, and sprang, like his con-
tempt of life, from an overmastering sense of fatality. A
terrible fatalism, superstitious in its extravagance, oppressed
him. _ It is said that he would always, be the last out of the
saddling paddock in running a race. It is a quotation of
his, “A life, like a shuttlecock, may be tossed with the tend
of fate for a battledore.”


In the story of “The Wolf and the Hound,” the,horse
rushes down to the carve where the murderer lay hiding, and
the sense of fatality comes over him.
Or by instinct urged, or impelled by fate,
I care not to solve these things ;
Certain it is that she took me straight
To the Warragul water-springs.
The beams and plots that heaven allots
To every life with life begin;
Fool! would you change the leopard spots,
Or black the Ethiopian’s skin?
What more could we have hoped to win.
What better things have thought to gain?
So shapen, so convinced in sin,
No life so wholly void and vain,
Just and unjust shares sun and rain.
There is a Calvinislic tendency in his poetry, a freezing
sense of predestination.
This has been and this still shall be
Here as there, in sun and star,
These things are to be, and will be;
These things were to be and are.
So dark and irresistible seems to be the iron hand of
destiny that it is difficult not to attribute his conception of
it to some mental aberration. His. father, we are told,
was a man of reckless courage, who had faced death boldly
on many a battlefield, and grappled, as, Gordon loved to
tell, singlehanded, with tigers in the jungles, of India.
Gordon inherited that recklessness, and from the moment
he severed himself from home and home ties and home'
associations, as he did so effectually, lie seems to have felt
that there was nothing more to live for in this world, and
flung himself into its vortex with a, desperate indifference to
its fortunes. He was the slave of destiny, and became* its
martvr.
Gordon’s own estimate of his abilities, though slightly
affected by the native modesty of - genius, has. a touch of
truth in it.
Alas! neither poet nor prophet
Am I, but a jingler of rhymes ;
’Tis a hobby of mine, and I’m off it
At times, and I’m on it at times.
The same thought occurs in his dedication.
They are rhymes rudely strung with intent less
Of sound than of words


In lands where bright blossoms are scentless
And songless bright birds; 1
"Where, with fire and fierce drought on her tresses,
Insatiable summer oppresses
Sere woodlands and sad wildernesses.
And faint flocks and herds.
That Gordon had an ear for rhythm not inferior in some
of his happier moments to the sweeping music of his master,
Swinburne, is only saying what is equally true of Kendall
and Brunt-on Stephens. They are all masters of language,
and can pour it out in torrents or sprinkle it in showers
with indescribable ease and rapidity. That is a remark-
able characteristic of thoSei Australian poets, the perfection
to which they have carried the art of mere word-music and
word-painting. There are passages in Brunton Stephens
and Kendall which are not surpassed by Tennyson, Keats,
or Shelley for their pioturesqueness of phrase or the rolling
music of their rhythm. Adam Lindsay Gordon, though far
less imitative than the older po<ets' in style and conception,
has a sweeping music of his own that carries on© away
upon its snrgesi. See how in “ Podas Okus ”we seem to
hear the rush and the clash of battle—
Swift assault and sudden sally
Underneath the Trojan wall;
Charge, and countercharge, and rally,
War-cry loud and trumpet call;
Doubtful strain of desp’rate battle,
Cut and thrust and grapple fierce,
Swords that ring on shields that rattle,
Blades that gash and darts that pierce.
In the sombre poem of “ De Te ” how terribly realistic is
the picture of the: dead man lying amongst the heath with
his face turned to the sky.
We heard the hound beneath the mound.
We scared the swamp hawk hovering nigh,
We had not sought for that we found—
He lay as dead men only lie.
With wan cheek whitening in the sky.
Through the wild heath flowers, white and red,
The dumb brute that had seen him die,
Close crouching, howl’d beside his head,
Brute burial service o’er the dead.
I could multiply passages to illustrate that easy grace and
energy, that curiosa felicitas of diction. In fact, he owes-


much of his popularity to his mere word-music and word-
painting. The human interest in his poetry, though
stronger than in Kendall, is so insignificant that many of
even his best poems must inevitably perish, except for that
warm Titian-tinted colouring in which he can trick out the
most commonplace ideas. But though he has an eye for
the picturesque, he has not an ear for the melodious, and
especially for the subtler melodies of such old masters as
Keats or Shelley, or Tennyson. There is a monotony in his
music; his muse has a great deal of the stock-horse in her
nature, and is always in a canter. Carlyle has said in a
phrase pregnant with meaning that “ poetry is musical
thought. All inmost things are melodious : naturally utter
themselves in song.” Buffon has said “Le style Test
Vhomme,” and if we take the two ideas together, we can
account for this defective sense of melody in Gordon. He
has no depth. You find, indeed, a savage intensity of love
as of hatred in such poems as “ The Rhyme of the Joyous
Guard,” “ The Wolf and Hound,” “ The Three Friends,” “ No
Name,”' but it is rather the energy of a rushing flood swept
by a sudden hurricane than the slow heaving of the un-
fathomable sea. His thought is always on the surface, and
ripples and rushes along with the current. For that very
reason he is more at home and more natural in those tender
lyrics scattered here' and there through his> longer and more
ambitious poems, such as “Thora’s Song,” or the “ Song of
Autumn,” or that most touching and tenderest, because
truest of them all, “Whisperings in Wattle Boughs,” where
he catches up the voices and the memories of home. It
is a pity the poet did not set that chord vibrating more fre-
quently ; there is a genuine music in it,, a ringing pathos.
He had a deep and sincere love of home, and felt all the
haunting tenderness of sweet home memories. But like
the poor exile whose hand trembles as he opens the letter
that brings news from home, Gordon seems to have shunned
the recollection of bygone loves and hope® and dreams and
longings. “Whisperings in Wattle-boughs” is one of the
few sighs that escape out of the aching heart of the exile,
and it is as pathetic and beautiful as anything that
ever sung by the waters of Babylon,


WHISPERINGS IN WATTLE-BOUGHS.
Oh, gaily sings the bird, and the wattle-boughs are stined
And rustled by the scented breath of spring;
Oh, the dreary wistful longing! Oh, the faces that are throng-
-0 Ip'the voices that are vaguely whispering!
Oh, tell me, father mine, ere the good ship cross’d the brine,
On the gangway one mute handgrip we exchang d,
Do you, past the grave, employ, for your stubborn, reckless
hoy, _
Those petitions that in life were ne er estranged.
Oh, tell me, sister dear, parting word and parting tear
Never pass’d between us; —let me bear the blame
Are you living, girl, or dead? Bitter tears since then ive
shed ~ ,
For the lips, that lisp’d with mine a mother’s name.
Oh, tell me, ancient friend, ever ready to defend,
In our boyhood, at the base of life’s long hill,
Are you waking yet, or sleeping? have you lert this vale of
weeping?
Or do you, like your comrade, linger still?
Oh, whisper, buried love, is there rest and peace above?
There is little hope or comfort here below
On your sweet face lies the mould, and your bed is strait ana
cold—•
Near the harbour where the sea-tides ebb and flow.
*******
All silent—they are dumb—and the breezes go and come
With an apathy that mocks at man’s distress ;
Laugh, scoffer, while you may! I could bow me down and pray
For an answer that might stay my bitterness.
Oh, harshly screams the bird! and the wattle-bloom is stirr’d:
There’s a sullen, weird-like whisper in the bough:
“ Aye, kneel, and pray, and weep, but his beloved sleep
Can never be disturb’d by such as thou! !”
And now I come to the real field of his genius, and you
will surmise at once that it is the sporting field. That
is the happy hunting ground of his muse. He has been
called most aptly “the poet laureate of the Centaurs,” and
I believe in that capacity there is not a poet in the language
to dispute his title. “ The ring of a rowel and stirrup ”is
in all his poetry. The joys of the chase, which he ever
defended so vigorously, -were to him the only delights, of
life. His free and hounding spirit on the back of a noble
steed felt all the wild rush of life that stirred the' stormy
soul of Byron amidst the foam and thunder of the ocean.


lake Antaeus of old, who gathered new energy in the combat
each time ho touched his mother earth, he seems to have
thought that the horse was necessary to keep alive and
foster the enduring strength of that strong and fearless, man-
hood which he valued as the best of all virtues, and that to
give up the fierce excitement of the chase was practically to
lose “ the wrestling thews that throw the world.”
Yet if once we efface the joys of the chase
From the land, and outroot the stud,
Good-bye to the Anglo-Saxon race,
Farewell to the Norman blood.
In his eyes, he tells us himself, the horse came second in
the order of creation.
Yet if man, of all the Creator planned,
His noblest work is reckoned,
Of the work of His hand by sea or by land
The horse may at least rank second.
The companionship of the wild Indian with his dog was
not so close as that of the horse with Gordon. You can
read “The Roll of the Kettledrum” to test the truth of
this assertion.
True to his ruling passion, the vast majority of his poems
are inspired by the love of the chase, and there is such a
spring and elasticity about them that they seem all to have
been written in the saddle. As a horseman he was a dash-
ing, fearless, reckless, and phenomenally successful steeple-
chase rider. His motto was, and he put it in, practice with
a veno-eiance:
No game was ever yet worth a rap
For a rational man to play
Into which no accident, no mishap,
Could possibly find its way.
And the advice he gave the rider, which has passed into
a household phrase in the colonies, and may be turned to
some good account even in the race of life, where pluck and
precision so often carry off the victory, is this :
All hurry is, worse than useless: think
On the adage, “His pace that kills,”
Shun bad tobacco, avoid strong drink,
Abstain from Holloway’s Pills.
Wear woollen socks, they’re the best you’ll find.
Beware how you leave off flannel,
And, whatever you do, don’t change your mind
When once you have picked your panel.


The real poetic power of Gordon, consists in the power
by which he is able to inoculate the reader with the passion
that rushes) through his own fiery veins. When he is in
his true element there is a vigour 1 in his language which
is unsurpassed, which seems unsurpassable.
“ How We Beat the Favourite,” as a turf ballad, has never
been equalled. It is unquestionably the most popular and
universally known of all Gordon’s poems, and as long as
the Anglo-Saxon race endures, and the love of the chase
remains a ruling passion, it is a poem that must carry the
name of the poet down to immortality. In reality it can
hardly be called poetry at all, except in so far as it trans-
lates into vivid and animated verse the winged speed and
intense excitement of the steeplechase. As a word picture,
or, rather, a sound picture, of such a race it is inimitable,
and we need not be told that the writer of the poem rod©
in the race which he describes with such living and impetu-
ous energy.
Of dramatic power Gordon had comparatively little. His
Ashtaroth ”is a pitiable failure! His admirers; must re-
gret that he ever wrote it. It is painful even to read it,
so utterly and so unredeemably weak and worthless is it.
Posterity will pick out its faults soon enough, and find
a place for it among its literary lumber. All the defects
of Gordon, his carelessness of style, his crudeness of concep-
tion, his -want of finish and refinement, are to be: met with
in it. His genius was essentially lyrical, like that of Robert
Burns, and should have been content to utter itself in short
snatches of unpremeditated song. One cannot help think-
ing that this poem must have cost the poet many a weary
hour, and been a depressing memory. It wants vigour,
spontaneity, incident, character, passion, plot, everything.
“ Thora’s Song ”is the only flower in it; all else is scrub.
A beautiful and tender lyric it is, which seems to have
floated up out of some old memory, like one of those deli-
cate flowers that rise to the surface at times in the blue
unfathomable sea.
THORA’S SONG
(“ Ashtaeoth.”)
We severed in autumn early,
Ere the earth was won by the plough ;
The wheat and the oats and the barley
Are ripe for the harvest now.


We sunder'd one misty morning,
Ere the hills were dimm’d by the rain.
Through the flowers, those hills adorning—
Thou comest not back again.
My heart is heavy and weary
With the weight of a weary soul;
The midday glare groweth dreary.
And dreary the midnight scroll.
The corn-stalks sigh for the sickle
’Neath the load of the golden grain;
I sigh for a mate more fickle—
Thou comest not back again.
The warm sun riseth and setteth,
The night bringing moist’ ning dew,
But the soul that longeth, forgetteth
The warmth and the moisture too;
In the hot sun rising and setting
There is naught save feverish pain:
There are tears in the night dews wetting—
Thou comest not back again.
Thy voice in mine ear still mingles
With the voices of whisp’ring trees;
Thy kiss on my cheek still tingles
At each kiss of the summer breeze;
While dreams of the past are thronging
For substance of shades in vain,
I am waiting, watching, longing—
Thou comest not back again.
Waiting and watching ever,
Longing and lingering yet,
Leaves rustle and corn-stalks quiver,
Winds murmur and waters fret;
No answer they bring, no greeting,
t No speech, save that sad refrain,
No voice save an echo repeating—
He cometh not back again.
There is a truth, a spontaneity, a naturalness, what Carlyle
would call a “ sincerity,” in that which betrays the native
sensibilities of his heart. The rude life he adopted—the
hard lessons of a harsh and bitter experience, the disen-
chan tin .emits and disillusions of life, the heroic attempts he-
rn ade to profess a philosophy of indifference—helped to
check the play of these delicate and tremulous sensibili-
ties in the undercurrent of his soul. There were times,
however, when the ice thawed away at the touch of some: old
melting memory, and a light glanced upon the stream, and
it trembled into a strange, sad music, like the wail of the


evening breeze upon the water. One of the charms of
Gordon’s poetry is the play of that gentle melancholy
through the harsher cadences of his song.
Under the rude garb of the busimian mem recognised in
Gordon the culture of the scholar and the gentleman ; and
the reader can detect, just as easily under the rough fibre of
his verses the delicate sensibilities of a woman.
The summer brook flows in the bed
The winter torrent tore asunder;
The skylark’s gentle wings are spread
Where walks the lightning and the thunder.
And thus you’ll, find the sternest_ soul
The gayest tenderness concealing,
And minds that seem to mock control
Are ordered by some fairy feeling.
I have said that Gordon shows little dramatic insight and
dramatic power of conception. He possesses, however,
dramatic energy enough for a great tragedian.
“ Prom the Wreck ” is a splendid illustration of that
dramatic vigour. The scene recalls an incident of his life
as a mounted trooper. It is a poem in. Gordon’s best style
and character. The sudden call before daybreak, the hurry
of saddling, the gallop over the bush fences through swamp
and marsh and wattle ranges, with the beautifully descrip-
tive rising of the morning, and all the time the conscious-
ness upon you of thei vessel stranded on the reef, and the
fatal wind threatening to rise and sweep it beyond the hope
of safety, is a grand picture palpitating with life and passion
and movement. It is impossible to read it without feeling
the heart pause in intense anxiety and the blood rush to the
temples. It is far more wonderful, and displays much more
poetic skill than the' more popular ballad, “ How We Beat
the Favourite,” and it has, moreover, the advantage of
being a real bush experience, instinct with bush life and
coloured with bush scenery.
We cross’d a low range sickly scented with musk
Prom wattle-tree blossom—we skirted a marsh—
Then the dawn faintly dappled with orange the dusk,
And peal’d overhead the jay’s laughter-note harsh.
And shot the first sunstreak behind us, and soon
The dim dewy uplands were dreamy with light;
And full on our left flashed “ The Reedy Lagoon,”
And sharply “ The Sugarloaf ” rear’d on our right.


A smothered curse broke through the bush man’s brown beard
He turned in his saddle, his brick-colour’d cheek
Flush’d feebly with sundawn, said, “Just what I fear d;
Last fortnight’s late rainfall has flooded the creek.”
Black Bolingbroke snorted, and stood on the brink
One instant, then deep in the dark, sluggish swirl
Plunged headlong. I saw the horse suddenly sink,
Till round the man’s armpits the waves seemed to curl.
We follow’d—one cold shock, and deeper we sank
Than they did, and twice tried the landing in vain;
The third struggle Won it; straight _up the steep bank
We stagger’d, then out on the skirts of the plain.
The stockrider, Alec, at starting had got
The lead, and had kept it throughout ; ’twas his boast
That through thickest of scrub he could steer like a shot,
And the black horse was counted the best on the coast.
The mare had been awkward enough in the dark,
She was eager and headstrong, and barely half broke;
She had had me too close to a big stringybark,
And had made a near thing of a crooked sheoak;
And now on the open, lit up by the morn,
She flung the white foam-flakes from nostril to neck.
And chased him—l, hatless, with shirt sleeves all torn—
(For he may ride ragged who rides from a wreck) —
And faster and faster across the wide heath
We rode till we raced. Then I gave her her head,
And she—stretching out with the bit in her teeth—
She caught him, outpaced him, and passed him, and led.
We neared the new fence, we were wide of the track;
I look’d right and left—she had never been tried
At a stiff leap; ’twas little he cared on the black.
“’You’re more than a mile from the gateway,” he cried.
I hung to her head, touched her flank with the spurs
(In the red streak of rail not the ghost of a gap);
She shortened, her long stroke, she pricked her sharp ears.
She flung it behind her with hardly a rap—
I saw the post quiver where Bolingbroke struck,
And guessed that the pace we had come the last mile
Had blown him a bit (he could jump like a buck).
We galloped more steadily then for a while
The heath was soon pass’d, in the dim distance lay _
The mountain. The sun was just clearing the tips
Of the ranges to eastward. The mare—could she stay ?
She was bred very nearly as clean as Eclipse;
She led, and as oft as he came to her side
She took the bit free and untiring as yet;
Her neck was arched double, her nostrils were wide,
And the tips of her tapering ears nearly met.
“You’re lighter than I am,” said Alec at last;
fC The horse is dead beat and the mare isn’t blown.


She must be a good one—ride on and ride fast.
You know your way now.” So I rode on alone.
Still galloping forward we pass’d the two flocks
( At M’lntyre’s hut and McAllister’s hill—
She was galloping strong at the Warrigal Rocks—
On the Wallaby Range she was galloping still—
And over the wasteland and under the wood,
By down and by dale, and by fell and by flat.
She gallop’d, and here in the stirrups I stood
To ease her, and there in the saddle I sat
lo steer her. We suddenly struck the red loam
Of the track near the troughs—then she reeled on the rise—
r rom her crest to her croup covered over with foam,
And blood-red her nostrils, and blodshot her eyes,;
A dip in the dell where the wattle fir bloomed—
A bend round a bank that had shut out the view—
Large framed in the mild light the mountain had loomed,
With a tall, purple peak bursting out from the blue.
_ The Sick Stockrider ” is another class, of composition
which is distinctly Australian, and in which Gordon has
never been surpassed. It is in this ■poem, perhaps, more
than in any other that the critic sees.- the beginning of a
new school of Australian poetry. Only that there is such
a. strong flavour of the Bret Hart© sentiment pervading it,
we would be inclined to class it apart as a kind of pioneer-
ing poem, which opens up to a new poetical region for the
muse of the virgin forest to dream in and wander over.
There have been many imitators of Gordon in this field, but
none, so far, his equal. From time to time we come across,
especially in the “ Australasian ” and the u Bulletin,” poems
indigenous to the soil as the gum tree or the wattle-blossom,
flavoured with the native, breezes and coloured by the native
skies, and worthy to take their place of pre-eminence in the
native literature. The true anthology of Australian poetry
is to be gathered yet, and from such sources, and when it
is gathered “ The Sick Stock-rider ” is likely to be the most
finely-flavoured and fairest flower of the garland. It is
thoroughly Gordonesque in style and spirit. The easy
lilt of the metre, the manly strength of affection, the pathos
that feels a pang and wears a smile so characteristic of the
poet, the roving memories of a bushmam’s careless life, the
reckless, resolute, unrepining spirit with which he takes his
leave of it all constitutes it one of the truest and most death-
less of all our Australian poems. ' The closing stanzas furnish
ps with the philosophy of the poet and the hushman.


In these hours when life is ebbing, how those days when life
was young
Come back to us; how clearly I recall
Even the yarns Jack Hall invented, and the songs Jem Roper
And where are now Jem Roper and Jack Hall?
Aye! nearly all our comrades of the old colonial school,
Our ancient boon companions, Med, are gone ;
Hard livers for the most part, somewhat reckless as a rule,
It seems that you and I are left alone.
There was Hughes, who got in trouble through that business
with the cards,
It matters little what became of him;
But a steer ripp’d up MacPherson in the Cooraminta yards,
And Sullivan, was drowned at. Sink-or-Swim ;
' And Mostyn—poor Frank Mostyn—died at last a fearful wreck,
In “ the horrors,” at the Upper Wandinong,
And Carisbrooke, the rider, at the Horsfall broke his neck,
Faith! the wonder was he saved his neck so long!
Ah! those days and nights we squandered at the Logans’ in the
glen—
The Logans—man and wife—have long been dead.
Elsie’s tallest girl seems taller than your little Elsie then;
And Ethel is a woman grown and wed.
I’ve had my share of pastime, and I’ve done my share of toil,
And life is short—the longest life a span;
I care not now to tarry for the corn or for the oil,
Or for the wine that maketh glad the heart of man.
For good undone, and gifts misspent, and resolutions vain,
’Tis somewhat late to trouble. This I know—-
I should live the same life over if I had to live again;
And the chances are I go where most men go.
The deep blue skies wax dusky, and the tall green trees grow
dim,
The sward beneath me seems to heave and fall;
And sickly, smoky shadows through the sleepy sunlight swim,
And on the very sun’s face weave their pall.
Let me slumber in the hollow where the wattle blossoms wave,
With never stone or rail to fence my bed;
Should the sturdy station children pull the bush flowers on my
grave,
I may chance to hear them romping overhead.
There is one verse in it -which, when it gets, into the
memory j can never leave it—-
’Twas merry in the glowing morn, among the gleaming grass,
To wander as we’ve wandered many a mile.
And blow the cool tobacco cloud, and watch the white -wreaths
pass,
Sitting loosely in the saddle all the while.


Twas merry ’mid the blackwoods, when we spied the station
roots,
To wheel the wild scrub cattle at the yard,
"rvu i a il run i n i n S fii'e of stockwhips and a fiery run of hoofs'
UP . the hardest day was never then too hard!
I have left the Ballads' of Gordon to the last. The metre
and the movement of the ballad ought to fit his thought
exactly, and the few he has written show that in that par-
ticular form of composition he could be a master.
To those who might feel inclined to deny a place to
Gordon amongst the great ballad writers of other lands, we
might invite a patient and unprejudiced study of “ Faucon-
shawe,” “The Rhyme of the Joyous Guard,” and “The
Romance of Britomarte.” Few men possessed so much of
the bold adventurous spirit of the knights of the. Middle
Age®, or could throw themselves with such dashing energy
into their desperate deeds of chivalry. These ballads throw
a new light around the fame of Gordon, and give us a new
aspect of his genius. They prove to us that he was. some-
thing more than a mere jingler of bush ballads and gallop-
ing rhymes 1 . They show us that whilst galloping through
the Australian bush he was able to go back into other lands,
be impregnated with the spirit, and give expression to the
passion and the thought of the life, long quenched, of by-
gone ages.
“ Fauconshawe ” is a magnificent ballad, breathing 1 the
very spirit of the knightly days of chivalry, told with great
dramatic vigour. The incident is one of those dark, roman-
tic incidents of the middle ages, when great crime© and great
virtues alternated so strangely in the same character, and
the knight’s castle was hallowed by the noblest chivalry and
debased by the foulest treachery. It is a complete poem,
perhaps the most finished composition, be ever wrote. The
picture of the knight sitting by the midnight fire, his face
buried in his hands whilst the storm wails in the turrets
of the castle, and the rain and bail beat against the window
panes, and of little Margaret appearing so. dramatically on
the scene with such a dramatic message, is a splendid picture
worthy of a place in any literature. And when Sir Hugh
realised at last the terrible truth, with what dramatic in-
sight and vigour he expresses it.


And he muttered, “ Densely those shadows fall
In the copse where the alders thicken:
There she bade him come to her, once for all—
Now, I well may shudder and sicken;
Gramercyi that hand so white and small,
How strongly it must have stricken!”
The whole tragic story is told, as the story of Francesca
Da Rimini of Dante, with such dramatic abruptness, its
situations are so sudden and so unexpected, there is such
a vividness and a vigour about its every movement, and the
interest is so well sustained to the very end, and the spirit
of it so true to the genius of the period, the swift treachery,
the late repentance, the defiant scorn of despair in the
Lady Mabel, and the subdued passion and chivalrous deter-
mination of the stern and unbending knight, that the whole
poem is worthy of the pen of a master. If Gordon had
written nothing more than that ballad of “ Fauconshawe,”
it Avould entitle him to rank high as a poet. Had h©
written more in the same vein, had he: turned his. muse
like Schiller to record in stirring verse the thrilling inci-
dents of the bushranger’s desperate career in the gloomy
mountain gorges and gullies of this land, he might have
immortalised his name as the robber bard of Australia.
And now I have come to. the end of this rambling and
incoherent criticism. The impression left upon my mind
by the poet is, that where he is original, as in his bush
ballads, and where he is spontaneous, as in his fresh and
sparkling lyrics, where, in a, word, he is working in his true
vein, and you can feel the pulse of inspiration throbbing in
his verse, he is a genuine poet, scarcely surpassed in fresh-
ness, in grace, and energy of expression. There is. truth in
his song—the cry of his own heart, the piercing pain, the
ringing laughter, the doubt, the desperate courage, the
despair. His galloping rhymes show him to- us in his
maddest, merriest mood. He has transfused the spirit of
that mood into his verse, with a vigour and a versatility of
phrase which must earn for him an immortality. I have
endeavoured to give you some definite: idea, of the nature
and the worth of his poetry, and to fix his position, as far as
my limited acquaintance with the poets will allow me, ill
the hierarchy of song. I have no. doubt that the. impression
left upon the mind of the reader is vague and unsatisfactory.


It could not be otherwise. Poetry is not an exact science,
where you can arrive at conclusions with rigid mathematical
certainty. Nothing could be more odious or more unprofit-
able than speculations on the relative merits of the poets
and the respective values of their song. It is largely a
question of individual taste, that you can no more account
for than the fascination of personal beauty. Like 1 the
various voices of nature in the vast temple of this universe,
they are all welcome, from the grasshopper to the lark, from
the locust to the nightingale, and help to fill in the har-
monies of creation to the glory of the living God. Gordon
is one of these immortal voices, and there is a tone of
eternal melody in his song. That he has caught up a note
in the heart of these immemorial forests and set it into the
universal harmony of the great choir gathered from all ages
and all lands, is saying as much for him as ought to satisfy
the zeal of his most enthusiastic admirers. If that note
is not the fullest or the most majestic or the most thrilling,
what matter so that it is true to nature and fits into the
grand Hosannah? I feel that few who read his poetry will
deny that he has a distinctly Australian note of his own
and that it has a true musical value. Of the exact quality
of that note it is not very easy h> form a definite and
accurate idea. Thepe is a great deal of mere verbiage in
much of his poetry, a- versatility of phrase rather than a
variety of ideas, which shows that he wrote much outside his
inspiration. Nearly the whole of “ Ashtaroth ” and some of
his galloping rhymes are of that nature. Gordon himself
would probably, in his cooler judgment, bequeath about a
fourth of the present volume to posterity as his contribu-
tion to the literature of the mother country; and to pluck
out the tares from the wheat is a duty his admirers owe
and ought to pay to his memory. So much for the value
of his poetry as a strain of music, as a cry out of the heart
of man.
As a lesson of wisdom, a gospel of truth, to guide, en-
lighten and console, it fails lamentably. The only philo-
sophy he professes to teach is the philosophy of a defiant
and resolute despair. “To grin and bear it” is the highest
lesson of resignation he can preach to soothe the ills that
flesh is heir to, and the woes that wring with anguish the
heart of our poor humanity, and, when death comes, to go


down to the grave at last without a, hope and without regret,
in the spirit of genuine agnostic resignation. Such is the
philosophical spirit with which the sick stockrider looks
death, the king of terrors, in the face. It may not he a
very wise or soothing philosophy, but it is the best agnos-
ticism can offer to the rational spirit in that supreme hour
when it stands under the shadow of death at the dark portal
of eternity : and if there is a kind of savage heroism in it,
let the savage embrace and enjoy it. The poetry of Gordon
exercises no chastening and no ennobling influence on the
mind or heart of its readers. It has no voice of hope for
“Ye Wearie Wayfarer,” it does not even appeal tioi the
aesthetic sense with anything like the bewitching beauty of
the Pantheistic school of poetry. It stirs the blood, but
never thrills the soul. It is not, therefore, a very high-
olass poetry, nor is Gordon within a “ cooee ” of the great
High Priests of song. There is nothing in it of the high
imagination, the lofty spirituality, the subtle introspection
of this inquisitive, restless and aspiring age, but it is what
it was meant to be—the reflection of the rugged, careless,
defiant, adventurous life of the bush. It is no fault of the
poet if that life was not fashioned after a fairer model nor
aimed at a higher ideal. His merit is to have reflected it
as he found it. And when under the wizard hand of man
the wilderness shall blossom as the lily, it will hand down
to posterity the inner history of the sturdy pioneers of its
early culture and colonisation. That he did not employ the
glorious gift of song which God had given him to. glorify its
hopes, to ennoble its toil, to purify its ideals, to expand its
sympathies, to exalt its aims, to spiritualise its thought,
to make its human life a little brighter, better and more
fruitful, is a thing for which he shall have to answer, not
at the bar of human criticism, but at the tribunal of God.
He left the wild life of the bushmau just as he found it,
without seeking to purify or ennoble it. A stubborn self-
reliance, a stern and manly independence, a strong sense of
the dignity and duty of cheerful toil, a healthy love of life
and nature, and the ruder pastimes of the field and forest;
these were the rugged virtues he found in the rude children
of the wilderness, and he has nothing better to bequeath
to their posterity. But he has thrown an interest and a
romance into that solitary life, has given an insight into its


joys and sorrows, has kindled a sympathy with its pursuits
and pastimes which is awakening’ the effeminate and the
indolent to forsake the fetid atmosphere of the City, and
dare its toil and its adventure. It is the poetry of a life
spent amidst the thrilling vicissitudes of the Australian
bush, inspired by its strange experiences, coloured with, its
unaccustomed scenery, vigorous with its robust human life,
stamped by the virtues of a strong, proud, pure, reckless,
independent, wayward, self-reliant nature, stricken with the
curse of scepticism. Such is the poetry of Adam Lindsay
Gordon, and we may venture to prophesy, as it is the faith-
ful transcript of the bushman’s life into picturesque and
impaissiionate verse, that in long years to come, when Kendall
and Brunton Stephens, and the host of minor singers as
inadequate and untruthful, may be forgotten, the “ sturdy
station children ’ mustered around the log fire in the winter’s
evening will delight in the music of his ringing verses; ; and
the lonely settler, in the little patch of earth he- has cleared
out of the illimitable forest, will sit down by the light of his
slush lamp to refresh his stubborn manhood with, its healthy
animal philosophy ; and the w'eary sundowner camped under
the shadow of the wattle, amidst the wild and melancholy
scenery where he. passed his buoyant and reckless youth,
and to which he returns by an irresistible fascination in the
decrepitude of his old age, will unroll that volume from the
swag which is his cushion and his pillow, and while the fire
kindling for his evening meal, go back in imagination
with the poet to the varied and eventful scenes of the stock-
horse days of his bold and adventurous boyhood; and from
afar out of other lands kindred spirits will come to the
broken column in “ the grave-yard hearsed with pines ” and
lay their sprays of northern blossom on his grave, and in
the literature of his own land, his name shall be remembered
as the one who first struck from her mute immemorial lips
the first authentic accents of its sturdy southern song.
PRINTED AT THE ADVOCATE PRESS, LONSDALE ST. 5 MELBOURNE.


The Australian Catholic Truth Society.
1. To set forth. Catholic truth, as it is taught by the
Church, in a clear and simple way, and to remove
certain common misconceptions concerning it from
candid minds.
2. To use the printing press and the platform, as far aa
practicable, as potent means for combating the pre-
vailing disbelief in revelation, for protecting the
Catholic people from the attacks of heresy and
infidelity, and for fostering an attitude of reverent
faith towards God’s holy Word.
3. To carry on a crusade against the license of the age,
against luxury and self-indulgence, and those false
standards of life which undermine the moral teach-
ing of the Church.
4. To provide and circulate (more especially among the
poor) bright, healthy, cheap literature, suitable for
Christian homes. The publications will embrace
subjects of current interest in the varied fields of
truth, and will include short stories of a wholesome
and elevating character.


Issued t y
The Australian Catholic Truth Society*
FIRST LIST.
I. The Priests and People of Ireland. A Vindication.
By His Eminence Cardinal Moran, Archbishop op
Sydney.
11. Rise and Progress of the Church in Australia, By
the Most Rev. the Archbishop op Melbourne.
111. Mary Immaculate and Democracy. By the Most
I Rev. John Keane, D.D., Archbishop op Dubuque, U.S.A.
IV. Radium. By Monsignor Molloy.
V. The Drunkard. A Temperance Sermon j first
preached in Australia in 1833. By Archbishop TTt.t.a.
THORNE.
VI. The Lamp of the Sanctuary, A Story. By Car-
dinal Wiseman.
VII. The Catholic Church and Temperance. By the
Very Rev. F, C. Hays.
VIII. God’s Masterpiece Marred by Drink. By W. L.
Bowditch, M.A.
IX. Modern Astronomy. By Arthur Wadsworth.
X. Gordon, the Australian Poet. By the Rev. J. J.
Malone.
XI. Kendall, the Australian Poet. By the Rev. J. J,
Malone.
XII. Xmas Crib, and A Sprig of Holly. A Story.
Others in Preparation.
Central Wholesale Agent,
WILLIAM P. LINEMAN, 309-311 Little Collins St., Melb,
Printed at the Advocatb Press, 2&4 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne,
