

"Goulburn Mary."
An
Australian
Tale
BY
J. R. LOCKEYEAR.
AUTHOR
OF
“M r . Bunyip;
OR
Mary
Sommernille's
Ramble."
RIDER & MERCER, BALLARAT.
TYRRELLS BOOKSHOP GAWLER PLACE.


'"Goulburn Mary” is the title of a pathetic little
story by J. R. Lockeyear, told in the pleasing style
which has made his “Mr. Bunyip ”so popular”’—
Ballarat Courier.
‘ “ Goulburn Mary.” “ The writer has a facile
pen ; can quote poetry freely; describe scenery • and
tell a pretty little story very effectively.” ’ —Geelong
Times.


“Goulburn Mary."
AN AUSTRALIAN TALE.
B Y
J. R. LOCKEYEAR,
Author of “ Mr . Bunyip ; or Mary Somerville’s Ramble.”
11 The Bush Wedding.” “ Little Mother.” &c., &c.
Dedicated by Permission to
HIS EXCELLENCY LORD HOPETOUN.
:
RIDER & MERCER, PRINTERS & LITHOGRAPHERS, LYDIARD STREET.
1894.




"GOULBURN MARY.”
SPON the banks of the Goulburn River are to be found as
pretty picturesque spots as eye of painter could desire, or
poet’s fancy well conceive; portions here and there
-- ■. being clothed at certain seasons of the year with vegeta-
'"tT tion of the most varied and pleasing character. My first
visit to the neighbourhood was in the spring, when the
wattles, which are here to be found in their finest forms,
thickly studding the river’s banks, stand prominently out from
their more soberly-clad brethren, by reason of the brilliancy of
their golden-hued, odour-laden blossom. This they were now
shedding upon the river, down the centre of which it was being
gently borne, following the stream’s many tortuous windings, far
as eye could reach, in the form of a bright, broad, golden Land, its
grateful, pungent perfume blending with, though in a great mea-
sure overpowering, the odours of the many other forms of vegetable
existence impregnating the balmy spring air in all directions
around. Adding to the picturesqueness of the scene, as they sat
upon the river’s bank, were the last remaining five of the Goulburn
tribe of aborigines, once a powerful one, and whose camping place
lay a few hundred yards back from the river, and the burden of
whose sad, silent song, as they thus sat there with blankets
wrapped around them, and spear and boomerang by their sides,
listlessly gazing upon the gentle flowing river—meet emblem of
the stream of time flowing on towards the limitless ocean of
eternity—was " passing away,” for not one of all that tribe now
remains to narrate the legends of his forefathers. Around the
lubras, and being lovingly caressed by them, were some three or
four mangy, emaciated, mongrel specimens of the canine species,
which in their earlier puppyhood days had derived their sustenance
from the self-same ebon fount as had those lubra’s piccaninnies.


side by side with whom, upon their foster mother’s breasts, they
had oft-times slumbering lain.
Upon this particular afternoon, the bright blue sky, with here
and there a light, fleecy mountain-and-valley-like cloud floating
gracefully and calmly across it, together with the seemingly in-
numerable illustrations of vegetable life growing upon the river’s
banks flowers of various shapes and hues, shrubs and trees, some
of the latter well-formed, stately, and wide-spreading; others again
of stunted growth, with bodies and branches knarled, knotted and
distorted, with huge wen-like excrescences in some cases thereupon,
whose existence indeed appeared to have been one severe struggle
from their birth—all serving, however, to lend variety to the scene,
were being reflected upon the stream’s calm surface as in a mirror,
the stillness around prevailing (some mile or so intervening between
myself and the nearest township, that of M ), intensifying to a
degree the many and merry-toned hum of the tiny, bright-winged
insects disporting themselves in the sunbeams, imparting alto-
gether a feeling of such calm delight as to make one quite loth to
leave the soul-tranquilising spot. Here and there birds in loving
couples flitted from spray to spray, or bounded about in the grass,
conveying to each other tbs while their connubial endearments in
voices “ low and sweet,” whilst warning each other, it may be, of
my close proximity.
But it was not pleasure alone which had prompted my visit to
that particular locality, and as life’s prose must be attended to, or
its poetry soon takes to itself wings, 1 was preparing, after having
remained a considerable while dreamily drinking in the beauties of
the scene outspread before me, to return to the “ busy haunts of
men, when chancing to take a farewell glance at one particular
portion of the river’s bank, in the beautifying of which nature
appeared to have put forth more than ordinary efforts, my eye
lighted upon a younggirl of apparently some fifteen summers, with
a youth by her side, her junior by a year or so, and who had pre-
vious to this escaped my notice, sitting in the shade of a high,
wide-spreading willow, the taper leaves of whose gracefully-curving,
far-extending, sun-lit branches, dancing in the breeze, seemed to
embrace upon the stream’s calm bosom the blue reflected sky. He
was engaged in angling, she with some form of fancy needlework.
Happy youth ! thought I, as I gazed upon them thus sitting there.


Your young lives are, doubtless, free from cankering care—bright
and joyous as the azure sky above you—flowing peacefully along as
the gentle river at your feet. May it ever be thus with you, your
lives as one long, happy summer’s day; and then, "in the silent
session of sweet thought,” my mind reverted to a period in the
“ long ago,” when, I, in a sister’s company, had wandered oft in
childhood’s days along the pebbly southern shore of dear old
England, in search of marine treasures in which that southern
strand was rich, returning home at eventide, worn out with our
wanderings, laden with our wealth of shells, seaweed, and glittering
sea-washed stones, to us precious as gems in a monarch’s diadem,
to our home by the seashore, where the moaning of the “ sad sea
waves” served us for a lullaby.
With these and other kindred thoughts passing through my mind
I was preparing to take my departure, when the youth rose to his
feet, took his basket, which I judged from his mode of carrying it to
be all-innocent of finny captives, from the ground, threw his rod
across his shoulder, and with her whom I had rightly judged—l
afterwards discovered—to be his sister, proceeded to leave the spot,
directing their steps towards where I was standing. As they passed
me, the appearance of the young girl powerfully arrested my
attention, her form having been cast, I could plainly see, in no
ordinary mould, whilst giving promise of even greater beauty in
the future. A blonde, early developing into womanhood, with a
profusion of bright, golden hair falling in wavy masses over her
shoulders, light blue eyes, sparkling with intelligence; finely
chiselled features, and the fairest and clearest of complexions, the
patent of health displaying itself in her cheeks ruddy glow.
“ Beauty truly blent, whose red and white nature’s own sweet and cunning
hand laid on,”
she stood before me one of the highest types of girlish loveliness, it
had ever been my lot to meet. The youthful couples’ retreating
forms as they followed a bridle-track leading off at an angle from
the river were soon hidden by the vegetation from my view, and
prompted now by curiosity to ascertain where the track could lead,
and it answering as well as any other, as I judged by its direction,
to take me to the township, I resolved upon following it; a few
minutes’ walk suddenly bringing me to a cleared piece of land, with


cottage thereon, well-nigh buried in creeping plants, shrubs, and
flowers, the front garden tastefully laid out and well stocked, a
kitchen one behind, with paddock adjoining, in which were ahorse,
cow, and a few sheep, the happy family being completed by poultry
of different kinds, which were fearlessly moving about the feet of
the quadrupeds, apparently quite indifferent as to the risk they ran
of being crushed to death beneath the hoofs of their bulky com-
panions, or probably knowing from long experience that their four-
footed friends would take every care to avert such catastrophe.
The princely peacock was there amongst others, vain of his
personal charms, which he haughtily flaunted in one's face,
materially marring the affect his had produced, how-
ever—like many a grandly-attired member of the human family—
the moment he opened his mouth. The lordly rooster was also
there, with his extensive family, issuing from time to time from
garden gate, fence, or other " coign of vantage” his challenge to all
and sundry whom it might concern of his own sex'and species to
enter the lists and try conclusions with him if this they dared to do ;
though, as no house or settlement of any kind intervened between
the cottage and M , his challenge was likely, I imagined, to
remain unanswered. Yet even here, with every provision made for
creature comfort, all was not harmony ; couples of fledglings, in
some eases, but a few days escaped from the prison-like confinement
of the shell, being engaged here and there in fierce encounters, the
bone of contention a diminutive worm, crisp grasshopper, or
other toothsome morsel, and to which each combatant of these
various pairs of little callow creatures considered ne or she possessed
a prior and exclusive right, and which, during the progress of the
encounter, would probably be disposed of by some veteran hen upon
a claim-jumping expedition, casting furtive glances in all directions
whilst strolling leisurely around as she proceeded on her erratic
way with a view to the securing of spoil of any kind, and whose
motto evidently was:
“ Let him get who best knows how,
And let him keep who can.”
In other cases enmity between the little creatures had been aroused
by the rapid flight past them of a piece of paper, straw, or other
similar object borne on the wings of the wind (like evil-tongued


rumor, ever setting the world by the ears), and for which mind and
spleen-disturbing cause each held his antagonist responsible; their
anger, however,, after a brief hut severe contest being no less hastily
ended than begun, as their attention would be diverted from the
cause of quarrel to some other no less insignificant subject, after
which their ground scratching, upon the usual primitive principles,
would be once more resumed. The general surroundings of the
cottage indicated quiet, respectable comfort, such a place as one
tired of the world’s turmoil might retire to, and find that repose for
which his soul should pant.
“ And I said if there’s peace to be found in this world,
The heart that is humble might hope for it here ”
An avenue of poplars led up from the garden gate to the door of the
cottage. In the garden, walking amongst her flower beds, stooping
down from time to time to examine—it almost seemed to me—
caress, one or more of her floral favorites, was an elderly, lady-like
personage, still retaining in her attire some of the sable symbols of
sorrow, and with her, similarly were the young girl and
youth I had seen so recently upon the river’s bank, their
physiognomical resemblance, plainly indicating their relationship
The lingering traces of beauty were still visible in the lady’s sad
thought-worn features. Like one, appeared she, who had realised
the fact that—
'• This world is all a fleeting show,
For man’s illusion given.”
Continuing on my way, I at length reached M , and upon giving
the landlord of the hotel at which I was staying an outline of my
afternoon’s adventures, learned from him the following particulars
of the history of the tenants of the cottage :
The husband of the lady had died twelve months previously,
having been at one time engaged in an extensive way of business in
town, but feeling himself unfortunately compelled, owingto business
reverses, to materially reduce his establishment, and thinking at
jength that an opening more suited to his diminished means might
be found in the country, he resolved upon coming to M , where
he re-commenced business, but had not been many months in the
new home before being overtaken by sickness—the result, doubt-
less, of his business anxieties—and eventually death. His widow


at once disposed of the business, and with the proceeds of the sale,
together with some little private means of her own, purchased the
property upon which I have seen her and her children, resolving
there to pass the remainder of her days, and there she had been
living ever since, visiting and receiving visits from one or two
families alone.
My business taking me from time to time into the district, and
the particular spot from which I had first seen the youthful couple
having for me special charms—it being one of the most attractive
upon the river’s banks—l invariably made for it after my day’s
labours had been completed, to feast my eyes upon its beauties,
which seemed to serve me as a mental tonic after the business
anxieties of the day, and on my way thereto, or returning therefrom
would generally see one or the other of the members of the family
walking about the grounds or garden, whilst the strains of the
piano, blending with the voice of mother or daughter, occasionally
those of both, usually in some sacred or pathetic vein, would at
times be borne upon the evening breeze towards me. Upon one
occasion I remember well—never indeed is it likely to be effaced
from my memory—when footsore, weary, and depressed from
business and other disappointments, and therefore, in an exception-
ally fit frame of mind for realising its soothing influence, I heard
from the open window, from the lips of the two fair singers—the
one just entering upon life, the other approaching its close —the
beautiful hymn beginning—
“My God, my Father, while I stray
Far from my home on life’s rough way
Oh ! teach me from my heart to say—
Thy will be done.”
Many a time had I taken part in places of worship in town in
rendering it, but never before had felt its soul-solacing influence as
upon this particular evening.
Thus time ran on, visit after visit being paid by me to the district,
some two years having elapsed since my first visit, and now I could
not help remarking whenever I had an opportunity of seeing the
young girl how more than amply had the promise of unusual
beauty given in her earlier days been fulfilled ; whilst others no less
than myself had discovered this as well, so that the charms of the
“ buried-alive-beauty”—the title some had conferred upon her—


were fast being bruited abroad, whilst many were the comments
made upon the mother's unwise policy—as some considered it —of
keeping the daughter, so well fitted to grace any circle of society, the
close prisoner she was doing, thus marring her prospects of securing
a suitable alliance. Often did Mary S form the subject of
conversation in the “Commercial” room of the R , and many
were the schemes formed by the young “ commercials” and others
staying there from time to time, and who in certain instances
considered their charms irresistible, to obtain an introduction to the
inmates of the cottage, but all in vain.
The widow, who previous to her marriage had occupied the
position of governess, performed herself the duties of instructress to
her children, and from all that could be gleaned, right well qualified
was she for the task she had undertaken. Thus smoothly and
undisturbedly did the lives of those at the cottage glide along, they
all unconscious of the interest they were creating; the only varia-
tion the even tenor of their lives had known consisting in the son
having been articled to a solicitor at C , some thirty miles
distant.
More than one of the frequenters of the R , who would boast
of their successes over feminine hearts, felt not a little irritated at
their want of an opportunity to essay their powers in the direction
of the cottage. One there was, however, representing an important
town house, and who travelled the district with his carriage and
pair, who seemed about the only one indifferent to the subject of
the “ buried-alive-beauty.” Seemed ! I say, for he was by no means
so unconcerned as he might appear ; for though apparently taking
not the slightest interest in the matter, he was nevertheless drinking
in with avidity every word falling from the lips of those con-
versing upon the subject, which might furnish him with a clue to
their mode of life at the cottage, so that whether poising his cue
in the billiard room, or reading his journal in the “ commercial,”
his ears were ever open to glean any information which might be of
service to him in his purposed undertaking, for he was now fully
resolved upon effecting, if possible, aconquestinthat direction. And
nature had been unusually lavish of both mental and physical
attractions in his case, whilst those she had bestowed he had lost no
opportunity of improving, and in addition to this again he possessed
the most winning of manners.


His plans being at length matured, after leaving the hotel upon
one particular occasion, ostensibly for the purpose of continuing his
usual business journey, he proceeds some distance on the way in
order to avoid arousing suspicion, then takes a short cut across
country, returning after a while in the direction of the widow’s
residence, and then—remarkable to relate —when within a short
distance of the spot where the thoughts of so many have of late been
centred, one of the traces of the harness chances to break. Those
prone to be suspicious may possibly attribute design rather than
accident to this mishap ; let each form his or her own conclusion
thereupon. This peculiar dilemma leads to his seeking assistance
at the cottage, the garden gate of which he opens and enters, and
seeing no one about walks up to the cottage door and knocks, his
summons being answered by the lady herself, to whom he explains
his mishap, begging of her a piece of cord wherewith to effect a
temporary repair of the harness. This having been procured and
handed to him he at once sets to work to re-unite the severed
portions, both mother and daughter standing by the while. The
repair effected, a few moments conversation ensues, and then, after
expressing his thanks for the service rendered, he mounts to his seat,
raises his hat to the ladies, and is again upon his way ; those few
moments, brief as they were, having enabled him to achieve his
desired object, that of seeing the young girl. Fully convinced is he
now that rumor has by no means exaggerated her charms.
This somewhat romantic incident furnished the inmates of the
cottage, as the reader may readily imagine, with material for
conversation for some portion of that day at least; topics, in that
retired locality, being by no means “ plenty as blackberries,” the
young man’s manner and appearance being, as may be supposed,
favorably commented upon, though the impressions created in the
minds of mother and daughter differed naturally somewhat in
character. And he was a skilled actor, possessing the art of
concealing art.
At the usual time, our “commercial” pays his customary visit to
M , though keeping his own counsel at the hotel in the matter
of the broken trace and his visit to the cottage, and as soon as his
business is completed pursues his former tactics, again making for
the widow’s, and this time, favored by circumstances, finds both


mother and daughter in the garden. Alighting, he walks up to the
gate, salutes them and enquires after their health, humorously
alluding to the incident which had furnished him with the oppor-
tunity of making their acquaintance. His attention appears to be
particularly taken with some of the widow’s flowers, and he speaks
of the pleasure the study of botany has ever afforded him ; and as
enthusiasts are pretty sure to feel a regard for those whose tastes lie
in a similar direction to their own, what more natural than he
should be invited to inspect the treasures of the garden and
conservatory, she, especially priding herself upon the possession of
some choice bulbs. Again he makes his stay a brief one, and
increases the favorable impression his first visit has created, telling
the widow, in a semi-facetious way on leaving, that he shall take
the liberty of calling to enquire after the family, when again pass-
ing that way, to which she readily assents.
Upon his third visit, some six months from the first, he finds the
young girl engaged at her music, and upon expressing the charm
the divine art possesses for him, is invited into the parlor, and
listens to her singing and playing, relieving her after awhile at the
piano, clearly convincing them, before he had been many moments
there, that they are listening to a player of no mean skill, whilst
one or two ballads of a tender, love-inspiring strain he sings, awake
a responsive chord in young Mary’s bosom, to leave a lingering-
sad—sweet echo there. On referring at length to his watch, he
finds to his surprise that an hour has flown, evidently most agree-
ably to all parties concerned, and now rising from his seat, he
warmly thanks them for their courtesy, and although pressed to
take some refreshment courteously declines, proceeds towards his
conveyance, bows a farewell to them as they stand watching his
departure from the garden gates, and is once more upon his way.
He is anxious to avoid all appearance of obtrusiveness, his policy
being the Fabian one of biding one’s time, although his quick per-
ception has told him that he has created a favorable impression in
the desired quarter; the seed is sown which needs only time and
tact on his part to germinate and bring forth fruit. Nor had he
over-rated his success, for a feeling had been aroused in young
Mary’s bosom which her young unsophisticated heart would have
been unable to define, but which she well knew had never before
existed there, so that now upon this his third visit to the cottage.


the fading away in the distance of the sound of his carriage wheels
had left a void in her susceptible girlish heart which henceforth
music, flowers, drawing, needlework, were each and all powerless
to fill, whilst each recurring visit would now be looked forward to
with that intensity of eagerness which comes of love and love alone.
How ill able was she, struggle as she would, to conceal the plea-
surable emotions which agitated her bosom and illumined each
feature, whenever the young brother would come bounding into
the cottage with all the impetuosity of youth to announce to her
mother and herself that Mr. S ’s carriage was coming up the
road.
Thus matters continued, visit after visit to the township finding
him in due course at the cottage, where his stay upon each suc-
cessive occasion became more and more prolonged, whilst latterly
he had been in the habit of leaving his conveyance at M ,
keeping the matter of his acquaintance with the family no longer
a secret from the “ Eoyal,” the gauntlet of the raillery of the fre-
quenters of which he had for a while to run, owing -to the secrecy
with which he had conducted his operations. Never before had
time run on with such speed as now with him for a guest. Music,
literature, the fine arts, every subject his fertile brain seemed to
have exhausted, as though the mantle of the admirable Chrichten
had at length found worthy shoulders on which to fall, whilst he
appeared to entertain the belief that
“That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man,
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman."
Never before surely had so versatile a being visited the neighbour-
hood of the Goulburn; young Mary, especially, being at times held
spell-bound with the wonderful resources of his mind, as she would
drink in with avidity every word falling from his lips.
“ And still they gazed, and still the wonder grew,
That one small head should carry all he knew.”
Thus matters ran on, until the widow unable of late to shut her
eyes to the fact of the influence our “ commercial ” was exercising
over her daughter’s heart, began plainly to see that matters must
not be permitted to remain much longer as they were, either their
acquaintance must end, or he and her daughter occupy a position
towards each other of a nearer and dearer character than that of
mere friendship alone, and therefore resolved upon shaping her
course accordingly.


Twelve months have now elapsed since the affair of the broken
trace, and as if divining the thoughts of the mother, and seeing
that his opportunity has at length arrived, our “ commercial ” now
asks her consent to his paying his addresses to her daughter. At
an early stage of their acquaintance he had furnished them with
an outline of his history, which, from his representation, has been
a somewhat sad one; and, as pity is nigh akin to love, his narra-
tive has the effect of at once intensifying the feeling entertained
from the first by young Mary towards him. He had been left, he
told them, an orphan at a tender age, in New South Wales, the
place of his birth, and where he was adopted by a maiden aunt in
whom he had found an almost second mother. After completing
his education, his aunt had placed him in a mercantile house in
Sydney, in which he had remained until his twenty-fourth year—
he was now in his twenty-seventh—when he had left to undertake
the duties upon which he was now engaged. In a short time he
purposed, with his aunt’s kindly promised assistance, commencing
business on his own account, and then, did the mother offer no op-
position and the daughter listen to his suit, he hoped, ere long, to
take her to such a home as she was, he knew, by every right entitled.
This explanation of affairs, together with the seeming transparent
honesty of his nature, appeared in the widow’s opinion to fully
justify herself in yielding her consent, and from this time forward
he was received at the cottage upon the footing of Mary’s lover.
A new world seemed to have opened up to her; the hitherto calm
delights of the cottage having become intensified upon the magic
influence of the beautifying, all-absorbing passion. Never before
had the flowers in their garden seemed so bright and beautiful, or
to yield such fragrance as now with him by her side; never had
music, that “ food of love,” fed a flame burning more brightly than
that within young Mary’s tender bosom. Seated beneath the wide-
spreading willow, where first I had seen her and her brother, she
and her companion would now watch the wattle blossoms course
down the gentle-flowing stream, he pouring into her eager ear those
honied words which young susceptible hearts like hers drink in
with such avidity. Sitting there, or strolling along the river’s
banks, he would depict to her in glowing graphic language the far-
famed beauties of Port Jackson, his boyhood’s home, whose pleasant


shores he loved so well, and hoped ere long, he said, to tread again
with her as his companion. Need I say that he was successful in his
suit, her young confiding heart having yielded itself up a willing
prisoner from the first. Thus “ merry as a marriage bell ” ran the
happy hours along, as the time at length approached for his paying
his final visit to M , previous to claiming Mary as his bride,
Avhen an event occurred which fell as a thunderbolt upon the
devoted cottage, and which took the form of an anonymous letter
couched thus —
“ Madam,
“ I deem it my duty to warn you against permitting further
visits from an individual travelling under an assumed name, and
who is planning your daughter’s destruction. I have it upon un-
deniable authority that he is a married man with a wife and child
whom he has cruelly deserted, living at present in New South Wales.
With the profoundest sympathy for you in your misplaced con-
fidence, I beg to subscribe myself. Madam, very sincerely yours,
“A Friend.”
The letter bore the Melbourne post-mark, and carried upon the
face of it the evidence of truthfulness. The cruel blow fairly
prostrated the poor widow, whilst the task of breaking the intelli-
gence to her unhappy deluded daughter was one from which she
shrank appalled. Agonising, however, as was the task, it never-
theless had to be performed, though before undertaking it she
resolved upon waiting until he should return, should he ever do
this, and receiving from his own lips a refutation or otherwise of
the anonymous writer's charge. But return he never did- A month,
two, and still no appearance, when the trying task was at length
undertaken by the poor widow with all the tact and tenderness a
mother’s loving heart could suggest. The scene which ensued
would have moved a heart of stone ; even that base deceivers,
black as is was, could not altogether have resisted its harrowing
influence. A sudden exclamation of pain, as though a poniard had
pierced her bosom ; a pallor as of death accompanied by a nervous
quivering of the lips; a wild, bewildered look into her mother’s
face, as if unable to understand the purport of her intelligence—
that her reason was about to desert her—and but for the widow’s
prompt succour the poor girl would have fallen swooning to the
ground. Her heart in its dull, deep despair felt —
•• Like a shattered lute, whose tones are flown,
And broken each bright string.”


She was borne by her mother to her bed, to which, fever super-
vening, she was for many days confined, and when she at length
arose therefrom the once bright light of her eye had for ever fled,
whilst never again from the fatal hour the secret of his treachery
had been revealed to her did his name once escape her lips.
Passing again upon another occasion by the cottage, as the young
girl lay upon her sick bed, I recalled to memory the evening to
which I have previously referred, when from the blended voices of
her and her mother I heard—
“ Should pining sickness waste away
My strength in premature decay,
My Father still I’ll strive to say—
Thy will be done.”
Little did they think, I said to myself, in how short a time those
words would have their, at that moment, sad personal application_
Upon their medical attendant recommending change of air and
scene, she was taken by her mother to Tasmania, but Tasmania’s
picturesque scenery and health-restoring air proved all powerless in
her case to effect any improvement, for who or what—
“ Can minister to a mind diseased,
Pluck from the breast a rooted sorrow,”
Experiencing after a brief residence there a presentiment that her
end was fast approaching, the poor girl begged of her mother to
take her back to their old, once happy home by the Goulburn, a
lingering feeling of affection retaining still a place in her heart for
the once cherished spot with all its sad-sweet memories, where the
bright, fleeting morning of her life had been passed, and yielding to
her entreaty, the widow did this, resuming possession of the cottage,
where, a few short weeks after their return, upon one calm summer's
eve, when the setting sun was flooding with crimson the western
sky, and gilding with his brilliant beams the gently-flowing river,
and the birds were “ homing” their various way, poor Mary S
breathed her last in her mother’s arms, her deeply-sorrowing
brother at her bedside, receiving the sweet solace that religion alone
can give, at the hands of the Rev. Mr T , who had been most
assiduous in his attentions from the time of their return from
Tasmania. Thus fled her pure, gentle spirit from a world of
cankering care to a brighter and a better above, —
Where the wicked cease from troubling,
And the weary are at rest.”


A marble slab in a secluded portion of the cemetery of M ,
adjoining her father’s grave, o’ershadowed by a weeping willow,
from which “ Maggie’s” rich, deep note may be heard, as he pours
forth a requiem for the deceived one beneath, marks the spot where
lies all that is mortal of “ Goulburn Mary,” the name by which she
is known to those acquainted with her short, sad history. The poor
widow, unable longer to remain upon a spot fraught with such sad
memories, feeling
“ Like one who treads alone some banquet hall deserted,
Whose lights are fled, whose garlands dead, and all but he departed,”
disposed of her property, and joined some relatives in one of the
adjacent colonies, whilst no intelligence was ever obtained of the
ruthless destroyer of the family’s happiness, who perhaps still
finds a fiendish pleasure in pursuing his fell purpose of breaking
young, confiding hearts.
Still flows the Goulburn calmly on, as when
‘‘ Growing in beauty day by day,
They filled one home with glee.”
Mary and her brother played in childhood’s days upon its verdant,
flower-bestudded banks.
Still flows the gentle river on, bearing upon its bosom each
returning spring the wattles’ golden blossom, murmuring as it
pursues its tranquil course —
“ Men may come, and men may go,
But I go on for ever.
-FINIS.


v j
Lithographers, Bookbinders,
ACCOUNT BOOK MANUFACTURERS, RUBBER
STAMP MAKERS, BRASS PLATE
ENGRAVERS, SC.,
EYPI45P street NOEm
Ballarat.
Estimates Given fob all Kinds op Wobk


