

GOULD'S
BIRD’S OF
AUSTRALIA
PUBLISHED IN
MONTHLY PARTS
PRICE
2/6


GOULD'S
BIRDS OF AUSTRALIA
A FAC-SIMILE REPRODUCTION IN A REDUCED FORM
COMPRISING
OVER 1,000 FIGURES IN COLOUR, REPRESENTING 694 DISTINCT SPECIES
RE-PRODUCED BY
G. J. B ROINOWSKI,
Author of
“THE BIRDS OF AUSTRALIA,’' “BIRDS & MAMMALS OF AUSTRALIA
(School Series), “PIGEONS OF AUSTRALIA,” &c., &c.
PUBLISHED IN 30 PARTS
BY
PRINTED IN COLOURS BY
SIMMONS-BLOXHAM PRINTING COMPANY, LTD.
Tri-Chromatic Blocks by Bacon & Co.
SYDNEY, igio.


INTRODUCTION
THERE can be no doubt that popular ignorance of the true natural charac-
teristics of our native birds is the chief cause of their wholesale destruction ;
otherwise it would be inconceivable that any sane man would make it his
business to destroy every bird in his neighbourhood, if he was aware that
by so doing he was conserving the locust, the caterpillar, and other pests which
sooner or later are sure to compass his own ruin. Ignorance, however, is no crime
if the right medium of acquiring knowledge is wanting. Unlike other civilized
countries, Australia has no popularly recognised natural history in any shape.
What there is, is so much above the popular reach that they might just as well
have been non-existent.
Gould’s Birds of Australia, known to all, though seen by few, was published at
£l2B a copy —a startling price for a book ! It must be remembered, however, that
Gould’s incomparable work is not the result of fireside studies of skins and feathers.
Every bird portrayed upon his pages has been studied and drawn from the living
subject in its natural haunt. What it must have cost in suffering and endurance
to traverse the wilds of Australia for five weary years upon such a quest, would
be difficult to imagine—especially if it be also remembered that out of the four who
started upon this expedition, Gould alone survived. Gilbert, Strong, and another
were treacherously murdered by the “ blacks ” in different parts of the continent.
Add to this the enormous cost of building such a monumental work —a work which
will ever remain the standard of Australian Ornithology —and the wonder at its
price—now more than quadrupled —will cease.
My own publication The Birds of Australia, issued twenty years ago, although
at less than a fifth the price of Gould’s work, was nevertheless too much of an
edition de luxe to meet the popular requirement.
But “it is never too late to mend.” Even at the eleventh hour —thanks to
opportunity and much experience—l am enabled to make reparation by issuing,
in a reduced form, a fac simile of Gould’s magnifiecnt work, at a publishing price,
which the mere saving of a penny a day, for a while, will meet.
Of course there is risk as well as labour in the task. But there is also hope —
hope that this faithful representation of Gould’s infinitely greater effort may reach
the eyes and minds of the rising generation, which will enable them to see for them-
selves the utter folly and wickedness of wantonly destroying what Providence
had designed to adorn their native land and safeguard its fertility.
The work will comprise upwards of 1000 figures in colour, representing 694
distinct species, all fully, if briefly, described as far as possible up to date. It will
be published in 30 parts of 24 subjects each, at 2/6, payable on delivery. The last
part will contain an Introduction, Indexes, Classification Tables, and every other
requisite to make the whole into one complete volume.
Subscribers are requested to sign the annexed order form, otherwise successive
parts cannot be guaranteed.
G. J. BROINOWSKI.


Order RAPTORES (Birds of prey)
FAMILY FALCONIDAE.
GENUS AQUILA (Briss).
Species I (No. 1, Plate 1)
EAGLE HAWK—Aquila Fueosa ( Gould ), Audax (Gray),
The range of this noble bird is universally spread all over Australia and Tas-
mania, where it fulfils the same offices in the great scheme of Nature that the Golden
Eagle does in the Northern Hemisphere. In size, strength, courage and rapacity
both are analogous. The Audax, however, is the more graceful of the two. It
preys indiscriminately on all smaller mammals and birds. “ One of those that I
shot weighed nine pounds, and measured 6 feet 8 inches from tip to tip of its pinions,
but far larger individuals have come under my notice.”
GENUS HIERAETUS (Kaup).
Sp. 2 (No 2, Plate t) -
LITTLE EAGLE —Hieraetus Morphoides [Gould).
The Little Australian Eagle, which is about the size of the common Rough-
legged Buzzard, forms a beautiful representative of the Hieraetus penatus of Europe.
The specimen obtained was shot on the Hunter River, where its nest was found
near the bole of a very high gum tree. The nest was large, and contained one egg,
bluish-white with faint traces of brown blotchings.
Sp. 3 (No. 3, Plate 1)
WHITE BELLIED SEA EAGLE —Ichthyiaetus Leucogaster [Gould).
The peculiar province of this bird is the sea-shore, where it especially delights
to take up its abode on the borders of small bays and inlets of the sea, it may also
be met with occasionally on the borders of lakes and rivers, where it seeks its favorite
diet, such as dead Cetacea, fish, etc., that may be left by receding tides. They
seem to be permanently mated, and build their nests mostly upon high rocks ;
these are of such enormous size that Captain Cook mistook them for the nests of
the extinct Diornis. The eggs are invariably two in number, of a dull white, stained
with reddish brown.


GENUS HIERAETUS [Kan V \
Sp, 4 (No. 4, Plate 1) —
WHITE BREASTED SEA EAGLE —Heliastur Leueosternus [Gould).
The White Breasted Sea Eagle is very common on the Northern and Eastern
portions of Australia, where it takes up its abode in the most secluded and retired
parts of bays and inlets of the sea. The chief food of this species is fish and crus-
taceans, which it captures either by plunging down or by dexterously throwing
out its foot while flying close to the water. It breeds from the beginning of July
to the end of August. The sexes are alike in colour.
Sp, 5 (No. 5, Plate 1)
WHISTLING EAGLE—Haliastur Sphenurus [Gould).
This species, although a terror to poultry yards, effects more good during the
frequent visitations of the destructive caterpillars than almost any other bird in
the bush. Not only does it follow the scourge and feed upon it voraciously, but is
constantly on the hunt for the larvae. But, like many other beneficial birds,
ignorantly regarded as pests are destroyed wherever seen ; their total extermination
therefore is not far off. They breed in November and December, generally pro-
ducing two young.
Sp 6 (No. 6, Plate D—
WHITE-HEADED OSPREY —Pandion Leueocephalus [Gould).
This somewhat rare bird is not confined to particular localities ; it wanders
wherever fish is plentiful, which it catches alive by diving. Gilbert found one of
its nests on Rottnest Island, which measured fifteen feet in circumference.


GENUS FALCO*
Sp 7 (No. 7, Plate 1)
“ GREY FALCON ” —Faleo Hypoleueus [Gould).
This rare and beautiful Falcon adds another species to the typical falcons,
and affords another proof of the analogies existing between certain groups of the
Southern and Northern Hemispheres. Its habitat is chiefly confined to South and
West Australia.
Sp 8 (No. 8, Plate 1)
BLACK-CHEEKED FALCON—FaIeo Melanogenys [Gould).
Gilbert states that he has seen this bird carry off a white-eyed duck —a species
at least as heavy again as itself. No difficulty, therefore, to estimate its character.
It is to be found on the rocky coasts in almost every part of Australia. It builds
its nest upon high rocks and lays two eggs resembling coloured marble.
Sp. 9 (No 9, Plate 1
BLACK FALCON—FaIeo Subniger [Gray).
Is to be found in the interior of South and West Australia. Mr. Gurney states
that it is also found in New Zealand. Like all its congeners, it lives by rapacity.


GENUS FALCCX
Sp 10 (No. 10, Plate 1) —
WHITE-FRONTED FALCON—FaIco Lunulatus {Lath.).
I his, the smallest of the true falcons, found in Australia is a stationary species
m all the colonies. “ I succeeded in finding several of its nests both in Tasmania
and the continent . the\ were all placed near the tops of lofty trees ; the eggs were
either two or three in number, of a light buff, blotched with dark buff, one inch and
ten lines long by one inch and four lines broad/’
GENUS HIERACIDEA.
Sp. 11 (No. 11, Plate 1)
BROWN HAWK —leracidea Berigora [Gould).
Ihis is another species which the farmer, to avenge the loss of a chicken, destroys
with gusto : ignorant of the fact that were it not for these birds, which congregate
in large flocks in pursuit of the caterpillars, his crops would be ruined. The many
varieties and changes of plumage that are to be found among these birds has given
rise to the fancied discoveries of new species, which, however, as in manv other
instances, are only freaks of Nature. The eggs found in the nests of these birds are
very beautiful and like their plumage, no two are alike.
Sp. 12 (No. 12, Plate I) —
WESTERN BROWN HAWK—leracidea Occidentalis {Gould).
Ihis is another victim to popular error. It not only follows and devours
destructive pests, but its favourite resorts being in swamps and low-lying country,
it deals with the lar\ ae of injurious insects by millions. It builds its nest near the
ground, where as many as four eggs are hatched. Its habitat is generally spread
over Western and Southern Australia.


PIRATE I.


GENUS TINNUNCULUS*
Sp. 13 (No. 1, Plate 2)—
NANKEEN KESTREL —Tinnunculus Cenchroides [Gould).
Gilbert, in the journal kept by him during Dr. Leichhardt’s Expedition, says :
“ October 2. Found for the first time the eggs of Tinnunculus Cenchroides, four in
number, deposited in a hollow spout of a gum-tree overhanging a creek. They are
freckled all over with blotches and minute dots of reddish chestnut on a paler ground,
and are one inch and five-eighths in lengths by one inch and a quarter in breadth.
Similar nests belonging to the same bird were found on the Namoi in N.S.W. in the
month of May, which shows the wide range of this species. It subsists almost
entirely upon the larger kinds of insects, lizards, &c., and caterpillars.
GENUS LEUCOSPIZA,
Sp. 14 (No. 2, Plate 2)—
NEW HOLLAND GOSHAWK —Astur Novae-Hollandiae [Gould).
Is chiefly confined to the dense scrubs of the Northern parts of New South
Wales, where it finds its favorite diet, such as lizards, frogs, &c. The mature
young differ but slightly from the adults, except that the breast-markings become
darker with age.
Sp. 15 (No. 3, Plate 2)
WHITE GOSHAWK —Astur Novae-Hollandiae Albino [Gould).
Mr. Gould and the Rev. T. J. Ewing, of Tasmania, expressed decidedly different
opinions as regards the distinctness of this species. The fact, however, that the
White Goshawk once existed in the Northern parts of Europe, notably in Poland,
where it was raised to the dignity of its national emblem, Professor Kaup was fully
justified in assigning a distinct generic title to this form. The White Goshawk is
peculiar to Tasmania, where it is by no means very rare. The sexes vary consider-
ably in size, the female being very much larger than the male.


GENUS ASTUR ( Lacepede).
Sp. 16 (No. 4, Plate 2)
RADIATED GOSHAWK—Astur Radiatus [Gould).
Inhabits the dense brushes bordering the Manning and Clarence Rivers, though
its range sometimes extends much further southwards. It is the largest of the Gos-
hawks in Australia, and like the White Goshawk, the female is considerably larger
than the male.
Sp 17 (No 5, Plate 2) —
AUSTRALIAN GOSHAWK —Astur Approximans [Gould).
This bird furnishes a lucid example of the multiplication of species which do
not exist. There are such striking differences in the plumage of the adult male
and female, and also in the young of both sexes of the Australian Goshawk, that no
less than four distinct species have been recorded. And although this mistake has
been clearly demonstrated, yet there are some Ornithologists who persist in per-
petuating the error. The Australian Goshawk is a bold, powerful, and most
sanguinary species, feeding upon birds, reptiles and small mammals. Its stationary
habitat lies between South Australia and Moreton Bay. The nesting season extends
from August till November.
Sp. 18 (No 6, Plate 2)
WEST AUSTRALIAN GOSHAWK—Astur Cruentus [Gould).
This is a common species in Western Australia, Like its congener, it is a
remarkably bold and sanguinary species. It breeds in October, and the two fol-
lowing months, making its nest of dried sticks on the horizontal fork of a gum tree.


GENUS ACCIPITER (. Brisson ).
Sp. 19 (No. 7, Plate 2) —
COLLARED SPARROW-HAWK—Accipiter Torquatus [Gould).
1 his species is especially abundant in Tasmania, as well as all over Australia,
this bird is a plague which ought to be outlawed. Its incessant raids upon quail,
honey-eaters, and other harmless birds are simply fiendish, and as its redeeming
qualities are microscopical, it ought to be shot down mercilessly. It
breeds from August to November.
GENUS BUTEO (Cavier).
Sp. 20 (No. 8, Plate 2)—
Gypoictinia Melanosternon ( Gould ).
BLACK-BREASTED BUZZARD —Buteo Melanosternon [Gould).
This fine species differs but slightly from the typical buzzard of the Northern
Hemisphere. Gilbert tells a singular story about this bird, which if it were not
vouched for by eye-witnesses would be almost impossible to believe. The story is
that this bird is so bold that upon discovering an Emu sitting on her eggs it will
attack her with great ferocity, until it succeeds in driving her from the nest, when,
the eggs being the attraction, it takes up a stone with its feet, and while hovering
over the nest, lets it fall and crush them, and then descends and devours their
contents. It is, however, perfectly true that this bird does attack emus on their
nests, but whether the eggs are broken by the struggle for possession, or by the
means described by Gilbert, the present writer is unable to say.
GENUS MILVUS (CW).
Sp. 21 (No. 9, Plate 2)—
ALLIED KITE —Milvus Affinis [Gould).
This species is gregarious in habit. They may often be seen descending in
large flocks upon freshly ploughed fields, where they remain for a considerable time
before taking their departure. It is a fair presumption, therefore, that they are
attracted by swarms of grasshoppers in the early stages. If so, then they fully
compensate the farmer for occasional losses of his chickens. The sexes are nearly
alike in size and colouring.


GENUS MILVUS Cav).
Sp. 22 (No. 10, Plate 2)—
SQUARE-TAILED KITE —Milvus Isurus (Gould).
This species is easily distinguishable by the squareness of its tail. It is one of
the greatest benefactors to rural industry, as its whole life is spent in the destruction
of caterpillars and inimical pests. It is fairly distributed all over the continent.
The breeding season does not begin till nearly the end of the year. Building its
nest upon high trees, two young are hatched.
GENUS ELANUS (Savigny).
Sp. 23 (No. 11, Plate 2;-
BLACK-SHOULDERED KITE —Elanus Axilaris (Gould).
The Black-Shouldered Kite is a summer visitant to the Southern portions of the
Australian continent, over which it is very widely but thinly dispersed. In its
disposition it is much less courageous than the other members of the Australian
Falconidice, and as its feeble bill and legs would indicate, lives more on insetcs
and reptiles than on birds and mammals. The sexes closely assimilate to each other
in colouring. The young differ in having the feathers of the upper surface tipped
with buffy brown.
Sp. 24 (No. 12, Plate 2)—
LETTER-WINGED KITE —Elanus Scriptus (Gould).
The principal character by which the Better-Winged Kite differs from
E. Axilaris is the great extent of the black mark on the under surface of the wing,
which assumes, when the wing is spread, the form of the letter V, or, if both wings
are seen from beneath at the same time, that of a W, divided in the centre by the
body. It nests in companies of thirty or more. It lays from four to five eggs, of
a white ground blotched with reddish brown.


PIRATE II.


