

GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES
AND THB
POSTAL SERVICES
INDIA, CHINA, AND AUSTRALIA.
Being the Report of a Committee of Investigation acting at the request of
Messrs. Anderson, Anderson, & Co., 5, Fenchurch Avenue, London,
E.C., and Messrs. F. Green & Co., 112, Fenchurch, Street, London,
E.G., Joint Managers of the Orient Steam Navigation Company,
Limited.
Specially commended to the attention of Members of Parliament.
LONDON:
EDWARD STANFORD, 55, CHARING CROSS, S.W.
1879.
Price One Shilling-.


&
"• i- ■■ '(%%?■ 'v t ’'"VC. >•&:■ ■-.■>'■■■>■.■>. ■.■ ■■w v .. ,■ > : \;v. ;
,
'
:
&':x>n*Wi. >■■&£ ®s|e -iii-w -JHfidk Vjl v?l% •ugvw
V- $ &*,
'.,• '•' .^v-- ijT.' c • ,o .V .•' >•s i■ 7.; vi.- ■
v-, i
j-.v.ft;
■




d
«3
co
LU
\~
D
O
O'
<
Z
£
LU
. H*
(O
<
LU
Q
LU
CO
o
CL
o
a:
n
IL
o
CL
<
5
X
o
h
tu
*:
CO


GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES
AND THE
POSTAL SERVICES
INDIA, CHINA, AND ADSTEALIA.
Being the Report of a Committee of Investigation acting at the request of
Messrs. Anderson, Anderson, & Co., 5, Fenchurch Avenue, London,
E.C., and Messrs. F. Green & Co., 112, Fenchurch Street, London,
E.G., Joint Managers of the Orient Steam Navigation Company,
Limited.
Specially commended to the attention of Members of Parliament.
LONDON:
EDWARD STANFORD, 55, CHARING CROSS, SAY.
1879.




GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES
AND THE
POSTAL SERVICES
INDIA, CHINA, AND AUSTRALIA
The contract with the Peninsular and Oriental
Steam Navigation Company for the conveyance of
the India and China mails, dated 19th November,
1867 (modified in 1874), expires on Ist February,
1880, and there is now awaiting discussion by the
House of Commons a fresh contract, which, so far
from securing to the public the benefit accruing
from the opening up of the East by means of the
Suez Canal, is more disadvantageous to the public
than any of its predecessors.
So long as the Isthmus of Suez presented an
insuperable barrier to direct communication with
the East, it was necessary for postal purposes to
have two distinct fleets—one on this side of Egypt,
the other in the Indian Ocean. This involved the
maintenance of separate dockyards, engineering
shops, store depots, &c., in Eastern seas. These
are no longer necessary. Supplies can now be


sent from home as required, and steamers can be
periodically overhauled in England.
Before 1869, in which year the Canal was opened,
the P. and 0. Company was the only English com-
pany having regular communication with the East
by way of the Mediterranean, and was in con-
sequence practically without competitors for the
postal service.
There is now a large fleet of steamers engaged
in the trade. According to the latest Parlia-
mentary Report, 1494 vessels, representing
2,940,708 gross register tons, passed through the
Canal in 1875. The traffic has since increased,
and may now be estimated at nearly 3,500,000
tons per annum. Many of these ships are among
the finest afloat.
These changed economic conditions, and this
marvellous development of steam communication
with the East, constitute a new standpoint from
which the fresh postal arrangements now proposed
ought to be regarded.
It will be found instructive to trace the history
of our postal arrangements with the East,
I. —The India and China Mail Services,
1837-1880.
It is now nearly forty years since a Royal
Charter of Incorporation authorized the raising of
the capital of the P. and O. Company. The


original sum to be raised was one million sterling,
with power to increase to one and a half million
under Treasury sanction. The Company obtained
subsequently supplementary Charters, dated 23rd
December, 1845, 13th April, 1854, 7th February,
1867, and 17th March, 1876, under which the
share capital and borrowing powers of the Com-
pany were from time to time augmented to their
present amounts, viz. 3,500,0007 share capital,
and 800,0007 debenture loans. The Company’s
published balance sheet for 30th September, 1878,
represents the paid-up capital as 2,900,000/., and
the debenture bonds as amounting to 284,0007
From the modest beginnings of a service be-
tween Falmouth and Gibraltar (1837), the Company
gradually extended the field of its operations. In
1840 the Company’s vessels superseded the old
Admiralty packets, and conveyed the mails as far
as Alexandria. Two years later the steamship
‘ Hindostan ’ was despatched to open the new line
between Calcutta, Madras, Ceylon, and Suez. It
was reasonable, in view of the efforts made by the
P. and O. Company to establish a regular postal
service in the Indian seas, that a contract for five
years should have been given to them in 1844, with
a subsidy of 160,0007 per annum for the combined
India and China services. Under this contract
the mails were conveyed at a cost of twenty
shillings per mile to Madras and Calcutta, and of
twelve shillings'per mile to Singapore and China,


as compared with forty shillings per mile, the cost
of the Admiralty packets. The Company paid to
its shareholders at this period a dividend of about
9 per cent, per annum.
In 1848 the contract, which was to expire in
the following year, was, after much delay and
hesitation, renewed for three years; but that there
was already some feeling of dissatisfaction either at
the cost of the mail service or at the manner in
which it was performed may be gathered from the
fact that in the Session of 1849 a Select Committee
was appointed to inquire into the contract packet
service.
The resolutions agreed to by the Committee
were as follows :
“ 1. That so far as the Committee are able to
judge from the evidence they have taken, it appears
that the mails are conveyed at a less cost by hired
packets than by Her Majesty’s vessels.
“ 2. That some of the existing contracts have
been put up to public tender and some arranged
by private negotiation, and that a very large sum
beyond what is received from postage is paid on
some of the lines ; but considering that at the time
these contracts were arranged the success of these
large undertakings was uncertain, your Committee
see no reason to think better terms could have
been obtained for the public.
“ 3. Your Committee recommend great caution
either in renewing the existing or forming new


arrangements. They suggest that.... the most
strict and searching inquiry should he instituted
. . . . into the cost of the execution, into the
manner in which the service has been performed,
and into the profits resulting from the several
transactions to the companies by which they have
been respectively carried on; and if it should be
decided to put up the several contracts to public
tender, ample notice and full particulars of the
terms and conditions of the service required should
be given to the public, as being the means most
likely to secure a real competition by responsible
parties.”
In the Session of 1851 a second Parliamentary
Committee was appointed, “to inquire into the
existing steam communication with India and
China, and into the practicability of effecting any
improvement therein ; and also into the best means
of establishing steam communications between
England, India, China, Australia, New Zealand,
or any of them.”
The Committee, whilst recognizing the services
rendered by the P. and 0. Company, considered
that “ a higher rate of speed should be insisted on
in the new contract, that penalties for failure in
speed should be fixed and rigidly enforced, and
that the only mode by which the public could be
benefited in the matter of freight and passage
charges was by the establishment of wholesome
competition .”


a. 1853 Contract.
In January, 1853, the P. and 0. Company ob-
tained the whole of the Peninsular and Eastern
service, at an average mileage rate of 6s. 2d. A
fortnightly communication with India and China
was then established, at a cost per mile about fifty
per cent, cheaper than had previously been paid
for a monthly one.
At this period the communications between
England and the East were as follows:
1. A bi-monthly service between Southampton
and Alexandria, with a branch from Malta to
Marseilles, for the conveyance of the mails coming
through France.
2. A bi-monthly service between Suez, Cal-
cutta, and Hong Kong—the separation of the
Madras and Calcutta from the China mails taking
place at Point de Galle.
3. A service every two months between Singa-
pore and Sydney, touching at Batavia, Swan River,
Adelaide, and Port Philip.
On 7th July, 1854, a supplementary contract
provided for the conveyance of mails to Bombay,
the effect being the reduction of the mileage rate
under the combined contracts to 4s. 2d. per mile.
The total amount of subsidy paid for these ser-
vices to the P. and 0. Company was 224,300/, per
annum, but in a few months the service between
Singapore and Sydney was given up, and the


annual paymentconsequently reduced by 17,475/. 2s.
The Australian mail service was revived in 1859,
with an increased subsidy.
The Admiralty required that the vessels em-
ployed should attain a speed of 12 knots on the
measured mile, in order to assure a contract speed
of 10 knots per hour. The contract of January,
1853, provided that (with the exception of the
Australian mail packets) the speed throughout
should be 10 knots per hour.
As regards the India and China services, the
1853 contract remained in force, with very few
modifications, down to 1865, in which year Govern-
ment consented to a system of premiums and
penalties on each voyage, in lieu of the trial for
speed of 12 knots on the measured mile.
During the period of the 1853 contract the
P. and 0. Company continued to pay high divi-
dends (averaging upwards of 9 per cent, per
annum) to its shareholders, and when the need
for increased transport service arose during the
Crimean war and Indian mutiny, was able to
furnish the Government with powerful and com-
modious ships on charter for the conveyance of
men and materiel.
The 1853 contract was, by mutual consent of
the Government and the P. and 0. Company, con-
tinued from 1865 until the contract of 19th
November, 1867, came into operation.


b. 1867 Contract.
In 1867 the construction of the Suez Canal was
far advanced, but neither the politicians nor the
masses of this country had learned to look upon
the scheme as a practical one. The fleets of steam-
ships which proved to be ready to use the canal
as soon as it was opened were not then built. The
P. and 0. Company continued therefore, in 1867,
to be practically the only available contractor.
Under these circumstances, the prudent course for
the Government to follow would have been to have
made a contract for as short a period as possible,
with definite stipulations securing to the public
the advantages which would result if the Canal
scheme should prove a success during the continu-
ance of the contract.
What actually happened was this. The P. and
0. Company offered to make a six years’ contract,
with an annual subsidy of 500,000/. The Grovern-
ment preferred a twelve years’ contract, with an
annual minimum subsidy of 400,000/., and a
clause agreeing to increase the subsidy to 500,000/,,
if required to raise the available annual profits of
the P. and O. Company to 160,000/., equal to
6 per cent, on their capital. The Company was
not then paying any dividend. The contract was
closed on these terms. The prospective opening
of the Canal was not referred to. By an arrange-
ment made on 6th August, 1870, the partnership


clause was cancelled, and the annual subsidy raised
to a fixed sum of 450,000/. (equal to a mileage rate
of 6s. 10c/.). This modification was made at the
instance of the Government, who had found by
experience that the clause involved the payment
of the full sum of 500,000/. per annum. The
service required by the 1867 contract was mainly
the same as under that of 1853. Among the
changes were the following:—The intervals be-
tween despatches of steamers were to be regulated
by weeks instead of by calendar months, and a
service from Hong Kong to Japan was added.
Whereas the 1853 contract stipulated for a
minimum of 10 knots throughout, the contract of
1867 reduced the minimum speed to 9i knots on
the routes east of Suez. At least this is the
stipulation in the contract, but there are considera-
tions, unnecessary to be detailed here, which would
support the view that the speed required under
the 1853 and 1867 contracts was practically the
same.
The mileage rate under the 1867 contract was
raised to 6s. 10c/., as compared with 4s. 2d. under
the 1853 contract.
As the Australian mail service was provided for
by a separate and distinct contract overlapping the
India and China contracts of 1853 and 1867, it
has been eliminated from consideration in the
present review of these contracts, and will be dealt
with further on.


Within two years of the signing of the contract
the Suez Canal was opened.
The advantages at once accruing to the Company
were immense. It appears from the Blue Book of
20th July, 1866, that the Company maintained
large dockyard establishments at Bombay, Cal-
cutta, and Hong Kong. These are now practically
discontinued. It further appears from the Blue
Book that coals at Suez cost the Company then
85s. 10(/. per ton into bunkers. The present price
of coals at Suez is 41s. 6 d. per ton, hut vessels
passing through the Canal coal at Port Said, where
the price of coals is 275. 6c/. per ton. From the
P. and 0. Company’s published reports, we learn
that in the year 1868, in which the contract of
1867 came into force, the value of stores, including
coals in the Company’s depots, chiefly in the East,
was 636,677/., while in the year 1878 the value
of such stores was only 87,428/. This reduction
of stores has enabled the Company to reduce its
debenture bonds, which in 1868 amounted to
800,000/., to 147,000/., according to the Directors’
Report dated 30th May, 1879. Before the Canal
was opened, the Company’s steamers had to be
sent round the Cape of Good Hope on their way
to or from the Indian stations. This cost from
5000/. to 10,000/. each vessel. The total amount
expended by the Company on this account up to
1866 was 320,000/. Since the Canal opened, ex-
penditure under this head has, of course, ceased.


The contract being for twelve years absolute,
Government was precluded from raising a claim to
a reduction in the subsidy. The Government had
still, however, one hold upon the Company. The
contract, which in no way recognized the Canal,
stipulated that the mails from Southampton should
be sent across the Isthmus by land, and forwarded
from Suez by a fresh steamer. Government, on
being applied to by the Company to waive this
stipulation, and permit the Southampton steamers
to run through with the mails, asked a reduction
of 100,000/. a year off the subsidy as the price of
the concession. Government had only to remain
firm, and the Company must have given what
they asked, or submitted to a revision of the con-
tract in view of the altered conditions, it having
become necessary for the Company to run their
steamers through the Canal to enable them to
compete in the open freight market with their
unsubsidized rivals. But in 1874, Government,
for what reason does not appear, surrendered at
discretion, granted the favour asked, and accepted
a nominal concession of 20,000/. per annum.
During the term of the contract of 1867,
namely, from Ist February, 1868, to Ist February,
1880, the amount paid and payable by the Imperial
Government to the P. and O. Company in respect
of subsidy is 5,350,000/. This does not include
subsidies for the Australian service and from other
quarters, amounting to upwards of one million and


a half sterling. Notwithstanding these enormous
subsidies, and in spite of the improved economic
conditions of the service, the dividends, including
insurance bonus paid by the P. and 0. Company
to its shareholders since 1867 have averaged only
5 per cent, per annum, as compared with upwards
of 9 per cent, during the precedin g twenty-five years.
Nor has it been found during later years that
the fleet of the P. and Q. Company has been of the
same national importance on occasions of great
emergency as previously. Out of 200 vessels
hired by Government in connection with the
Abyssinian Expedition, only six were P, and 0.
ships. Out of about twenty-five vessels hired for
the transport of the Indian contingent to Malta,
only one, the ‘ Bangalore,’ belonged to the P. and
O. Company, and she was the first vessel to be
paid off, the reason being her high rate of hire.
And later still, we find that on the arrival of
the news of the Natal disaster, when there was
need of immediate reinforcements at the Cape, not
a single ship of the P. and 0. fleet was forth-
coming. It is thus revealed that from the time of
the Crimean war down to the time of the South
African war, the value of the P. and 0. Company
for transport purposes has gradually diminished,
until the service has quite ceased to be of special
public importance from this point of view.
The Suez Canal was opened in November, 1869,
and there passed through it—


In 1870 ..
.. 489 vessels of 654,914 gross register tons
„ 1871
.. 763
9)
1,142,200
99
„ 1872 ..
.. 1082
99
1,744,481
99
„ 1873 ..
.. 1173
99
2,085,421
99
„ 1874 ..
.. 1264
if
2,421,803
99
„ 1875 ..
.. 1494
a
2,940,708
99
„ 1876 ..
.. 1457
a
3,072,107
99
„ 1877 ..
.. 1663
a
3,418,949
99
„ 1878
.. 1593
99
3,291,535
99
Of the vessels using the Canal in 1878, 1268
were under the British flag, with a gross register
tonnage of 2,630,285. There is no return available
to show the amount of the tonnage belonging to
the P. and O. Company passing through the Canal;
but it is estimated that it amounts to one-tenth of
the whole. Of the remaining unsubsidized nine-
tenths, a considerable proportion is eminently
fitted for the carrying of mails. The despatch
and arrival of steamers belonging to many of the
lines are maintained with a regularity hardly
surpassed by the mail steamers. In some cases a
higher rate of speed is attained. It thus appears
that the importance of the P. and O. Company
for mail purposes also is very considerably reduced
since 1867.
This shrinkage of the absolute prosperity of the
P. and O. Company, and of its relative national
importance, both for transport and for mail pur-
poses, which has been traced as accompanying
an increased subsidy and improved economic
conditions, suggests—
that the P. and 0. Company’s subsidy is


largely used for covering losses on mercantile
business, while competing steamers are run profit-
ably on mercantile revenue alone ;
that the time has arrived for the careful re-
consideration of mail routes ; and
for the subdivision of the service, probably
resulting in its distribution among various com-
peting companies.
The present system is at once costly to the tax-
payer, unremunerative to the shareholders in the
favoured company, and unfair to the competing
companies.
II. —The India and China Mail Service.
The Proposed Contract.
By the contract which has been laid upon the
table of the House of Commons, and is now await-
ing discussion, not only is the whole and un-
divided mail service with the Bast, proposed to be
awarded to the P. and 0. Company for a term of
eight years from February 1880, to be carried on by
routes, which, as will be shown, are antiquated and
expensive; but the price named, 370,000?., although
apparently cheaper, is actually 40 per cent, higher
than the previous contract —tested by the only
true test —the mileage rate. The price now pro-
posed is equal to 9s. 6c?. per mile, the mileage
being 776,724 miles per annum, as compared with
6s. B%d. per mile for 1,278,940 miles under the
contract now about to expire.


N.B. According to the Treasury Minute of
12 th February, 1879, the P. and 0. Company are
to run special steamers for the China Service, only
between Suez and Shanghai. According to the contract
and the P. and 0. Company’s letter of 25th July,
1878, to the Post Office, giving a total mileage of
797,836 miles, it would seem as if it were meant to
run a special steamer for the China service between
Brindisi and Alexandria. It is assumed, however,
in this pamphlet that the India steamer will carry
the China mails between Brindisi and Alexandria.
This will explain the discrepancy between the mileage
and rate per mile given above and the figures given
by the P. and 0. Company.
This reduction in mileage arises from the discon-
tinuance of the lines between China and Japan, and
Calcutta and Galle, and from the service between
Southampton and Alexandria being either aban-
doned or reserved as matter for separate contract.
The speed proposed is 9- to 11 knots an hour
for the Bombay service, and to knots for
the China service, according to monsoon —a slight
increase in speed which falls short of representing
the advance in marine engineering.
The action of the Government in the negotiation
of this contract is even more inexplicable than the
course pursued in 1867. Then, although there
were no competitors in the field, the advertise-
ment calling for tenders was issued six months
before the date fixed for receiving them. In 1878,


when there were many possible competitors, to all
of whom time to make the necessary arrangements
for undertaking the service was indispensable,
only twenty-nine days’ notice was given by ad-
vertisement. In 1867 the Government advertise-
ment for tenders contemplated the breaking up of
the service into sections ; now, in 1878, despite their
having invited offers for sectional service, the
Government have rejected such offers when made,
assigning the reason that they do not provide a
complete service.
It is in connection with the proposal to break
up the service into sections that we touch the
kernel of the question.
By what route ought letters to be conveyed to
China and Australia ? Let us deal first with
China. Before the Indian Railway system was
developed, the route to Shanghai, as to Calcutta,
was via Galle. It is not so now. Railways con-
structed at great expense, and guaranteed by the
Indian Government, traverse the peninsula. Rail-
ways determine postal routes. Southampton long
ago yielded to Marseilles, which in turn has given
place to Brindisi. The same forces are at work
in the East. The most direct route to China is now
via Bombay, thence by rail to Calcutta, thence per
steamer to Singapore, Hong Kong, and Shanghai.
Yet the Government insist upon complicating
the Eastern service by sending the mails for
China vid Galle, an arrangement which involves


the absurdity of two steamers carrying mails
running almost parallel to each other for nearly
3000 miles each way every fortnight. If the
direct route were adopted, the delivery of mails
in China would be accelerated, and about 180,000
miles of sea voyage would be saved annually, as
is shown by the following calculation.
The whole distance covered by steamer carrying China mails
now is:—
From Suez to Galle 3442 miles
Galle to Shanghai .. 3901
Total .. 7343
Whereas
from Suez to Calcutta is pro-
vided for by the Indian service
of steamers to Bombay and
thence by special trains to Cal-
cutta, and the distance from
Calcutta to Shanghai is only.. 3887 „
miles.
Difference ..3456x52=179,712,
This difference gives at 9s. Qd. per mile (the
mileage rate of the proposed contract) an amount
of which it is proposed to pay away
unnecessarily. But the cost of the China mail
service ought, for reasons which will presently
appear, to be reduced by much more than the sum
just stated.
The adoption of the route via Calcutta for the
China mails would involve a subdivision of the ser-
vice. One section would be the service to Bombay.
With reference to this, the Indian Government


wrote to the Secretary of State for India, under
date Ist November, 1877, as follows:
“ It should also be stated that the Indian Post-
Office does not want the lines to Galle, the Straits,
or China, or, indeed, any line except that between
Bombay and Brindisi, and if such lines are included
in the contract, the Indian Post-Office is not dis-
posed to pay any share of their cost.”
A second section would be between Calcutta and
China. With reference to this, the Indian Govern-
ment wrote further under same date: —
“India has already other means of communica-
tion with Ceylon and the Straits, and even with
China. The steamers of Messrs. Jardine, Matheson
and Co., of Hong Kong, and Apcar, of Calcutta,
although not timed to start on fixed dates, form
by far the quickest, and consequently most ap-
preciated, means of conveyance.”
If therefore the testimony of the Indian Govern-
ment is to be accepted as to the sufficiency of
the unsubsidized opportunities already existing,
it would seem as if everything relating to the
China service, including the full proportion thereto
attaching of the munificent subsidy, might be
expunged from the proposed contract without any
detriment to the public interest.
The proportion of the subsidy under the pro-
posed contract attaching to the China service is
upwards of 180,000/. per annum, say :


Total Mileage fkom Suez via Galle to Shanghai.
7,343 miles
52 voyages
381,836 miles
9s. 6 d. mileage rate
181,3727.
It must, however, be conceded, that in order to
secure the continuity of the mail service as a whole,
it might be necessary to subsidize a line whose
departures and arrivals from and at Calcutta would
fit in with the arrivals and departures of European
mails. With the commercial relations subsisting:
between Calcutta and China this could easily be
arranged at a sum which would be a mere frac-
tional part of 180,000^.
There would remain to be considered the general
postal requirements- of Ceylon, which could he
sufficiently met by local arrangements between the
Island and Tuticorin, the terminus of the railway
on the mainland. Besides, many of the steam lines
trading to the East call at Ceylon regularly.
In deciding to adopt the costly route to China vid
Galle, the Government seem to have been influ-
enced mainly by considerations connected with
the Australian Colonies, urged upon them by Sir
Michael Hicks Beach in a minute (hereinafter
referred to) in which the Secretary of State very
strongly recommended the acceptance of the P. and
0. Company’s offer. It is important to state that
Australia contributes nothin // to the subsidy.


If the principle of subdivision were frankly ac-
cepted, the number of possible competitors would be
vastly increased, inasmuch as there might be not
only sectional contracts, but the same sections might
be worked by two or more companies sailing alter-
nately. It is indeed difficult to see why this
principle, if unreservedly extended to the Eastern
services, should not produce in greater degree the
results which its partial application to the Atlantic
and Cape mail services has already yielded. These
are —smaller subsidies, reduction of postages, and
development of private enterprise. It is now un-
necessary to give subsidies in order to secure
transports when required. Recent experience has
shown that the most efficient and economical trans-
ports are not supplied from the fleets of subsidized
companies.
lll.— The Australian Mail Service.
This service, although hitherto intimately asso-
ciated with the Eastern services, can be more
satisfactorily dealt with as a separate question.
The development of independent steam com-
munication with Australia has, on account of the
great distance, and from other causes, been slow.
The unsubsidized steam tonnage which left London
for Australia in 1876 was 27,363 register tons;
in 1877, 34,366 register tons; and in 1878,46,553
register tons.


Service from Suez via Mauritius ..
180,000 .
*
From November, 1859, to February, 1866, for
Service via Galle
134,672 .
. 1 1 5i
From February, 1866, to 1868, for 12 Ser-
vices annually
120,000 )
From 1868, to February, 1873, for 13 Ser-
J.
. 0 19 li
vices annually
130,000 J
For many years the freight charged on goods
carried to Australia by the P. and 0. Company
was 18Z. per ton. It was reduced in 1878 to 91.
per ton, and as soon as the Company were assured
of the continuance of the Eastern mail service in
February last, they announced their readiness to carry
goods to Australia vid Bombay at 3 1, per ton, the
rate by unsubsidized steamers being at the time 90s.
per ton. This is an appropriate illustration of
the use to which excessive subsidies are applied.
Regular mail communication has been main-
tained with the Australian colonies by means of
the P. and 0. Company’s steamers since February,
1859. The route followed has been vid Galle —
with the exception of a short period in 1859, when
the steamers went vid Mauritius. The subsidies
granted to this Company have been —
Per Annum. Mileage Rate.
From February, 1859, to November, 1859, for t. £ t. a.
These complete the contracts for which the Impe-
rial Government is responsible. The share of
expense undertaken by the colonies varied, but
under the latest of the above arrangements the
Colonial Governments paid towards the cost of the
* The mileage rate of this contract would be misleading, as there was
a subsidy from Mauritius also.


conveyance of the mails between this country
and Point de dalle a sum varying from 25,000/.
to 35,000/,, according to the amount of correspon-
dence carried, in addition to a moiety of the expense
of the service between Point de dalle and Sydney.
The total amount thus contributed by the Australian
colonies fell but little short of 100,000/. per
annum.
Since February, 1873, the Home dovernment
has only undertaken to deliver the mails for the
Australasian Colonies at dalle, Singapore, and San
Francisco, leaving the various colonies to make
their own arrangements for transmission beyond
these points. For this service, and for collection and
distribution in England, the English dovernment
has charged the colonies the British inland rate of
Id. per letter only on the correspondence sent from
the United Kingdom, and the foreign transit rates
actually paid on correspondence sent or received
vid Brindisi, charging nothing for inward inland
postage, and nothing for the sea carriage between
this country and dalle. The arrangements made
by the Colonial dovernments were as follow: —
a. Victoria (South Australia and Western Aus-
tralia co-operating) contracted, on 31st December,
1873, with the P. and O. Company for convey-
ance of mails from dalle to Melbourne (calling at
King deorge’s Sound and Adelaide), for a term
ending Ist February, 1880, with an annual sub-
sidy of 00,000/. (mileage rate 14s* 4-4).


b. New South Wales and New Zealand contracted
with an American Company for conveyance of
mails to and from San Francisco, paying an annual
subsidy finally fixed at (mileage rate,
7s. 9 d.) .
c. Queensland entered into a separate contract
with the Eastern and Australian Company to carry
their mails to and from Singapore, for an annual
subsidy of 20,000 Z. (mileage rate, 3s. 5 d.). This
contract has nearly expired, and tenders are now
being invited for a continuance of the service.
Each of these services is four-weekly.
In view of the expiration of the existing con-
tract in February next, the Victoria Government
advertised for tenders for a fortnightly service,
returnable early in 1878, but owing no doubt to
the stringency of the conditions imposed, and to
the uncertainty as to the disposal of the Eastern
contract, no tenders were received. The same
Government advertised again in the end of 1878
for tenders returnable on 12th February, 1879, on
two forms:—
Form A being for a through service from
Southampton or Plymouth to Melbourne
and back, via Suez Canal, Melbourne to
be the terminus, and mail steamers not to
call at or proceed to any other Australian
port. Service to be four-weekly.
Form B being for a hooking-on service from
Aden or Colombo to Melbourne, calling at


Western Australia and South Australia,
and with liberty to proceed to any other
Australian port after delivering mails at
Melbourne. Service to be fortnightly or
four-weekly, at tenderer’s option.
In response to this advertisement, it is under-
stood that three communications were received.
First—One, under Form A, being a letter from the
Orient Steam Navigation Company expressing
readiness to contract for the service on less strin-
gent conditions than those advertised, especially
with regard to ports of call in Australia. Second
—One, under Form B, being a tender from the P.
and O. Company for a fortnightly service between
Galle and Australia for 80,000 Z. per annum.*
Also, a communication from a third party, parti-
culars of which have not become publicly known.
A comparison of dates is necessary to a right
understanding of the significance of these responses
to the Victorian advertisement. The tenders, as has
been said, were lodged on 12th February, 1879. The
contract with the Imperial Government for Eastern
mail services was signed by Lord John Manners
on 7th February. The P. and 0. Company were
therefore aware that the Eastern services would
be continued in their hands, and were consequently
placed in an advantageous position for contracting
with the Victorian Government. That they should
be so placed seems to have been designed by the
* Mileage rate, 5«. BJ(i.


Imperial Government, as it appears from a minute
(see Blue Book) sent to the Post-Office from the
Colonial Office that the route via Galle was pre-
ferred on purpose to further this arrangement in
favour of the Australian colonies and the P. and 0.
Company.
In the minute referred to, Sir Michael Hicks
Beach expressed himself in favour of the P. and 0.
offer, adding that the P. and 0. Company’s system
“supplies communication not only with the East,
but also with the Australian colonies, and that
when their contract with the Australian colonies
terminates there will be no guarantee that either
Mr, Holt or any other firm would be ready or able
to take it up, in which case these colonies would
again be exposed to the great inconvenience of an
imperfect connection with Europe, as well as with
India, China, and the East.” These remarks of
the Secretary of State for the Colonies completely
ignore the existence of the communications with
Australia via, San Francisco and Singapore already
mentioned, as well as the existence of the Orient
line of steamers, which for eighteen months had
been regularly running between Plymouth and
Australia at a higher rate of speed than the steamers
of the P. and 0. Company, and had during all that
time been carrying H.M. mails both ways without
a subsidy. The sailings of the Orient line were
at intervals of about six weeks in 1877, of about
a month in 1878, and are now four-weekly.


Reference ought also to be made to the Circular
Letter of 17th January last from the Colonial
Secretary to the various Australian Governments,
copy of which is hereto appended ( see Appendix /,).
The purport of this circular (which was handed
to the Agents-General of the Colonies in London)
was transmitted by telegraph to the Colonies,
and was known in London prior to the 12th
February. There is no doubt that the knowledge
of the contents of this circular had an important
bearing on the action of the Colonial Governments,
and on the action of probable competitors for the
Australian mail service. In so far as the circular
foreshadowed a new basis of agreement between the
Home and Colonial Governments, to be settled at a
conference, to be held some three or four months
later, as suggested in the closing paragraph, it
was calculated to deter probable competitors from
making definite offers at the date named by the
Victorian Government.
[ Copy of a correspondence between the managers
of the Orient Steam Navigation Company and the
Colonial Office on this subject will be found in
Appendix //.]
On the other hand, its effect was to deter separate
action on the part of Colonial Governments. In
the circular, reference is made to a contemplated
additional line under the auspices of the South
Australian Government. It was well known that
the South Australian Government was negotiating


with the Orient Company, and it is evident that
the circular was likely—indeed, it seems to have
been intended—to put an end to all such inde-
pendent negotiation. Nor does the matter end
here. When united action between the Yictorian
and South Australian Governments was secured,
and the P. and O. Company’s tender was placed
firmly in the hands of the colonial negotiators, the
Imperial Government departed from the terms of
the Colonial Office Circular of 17th January, in
which it was proposed to charge the Colonies 4 d.
per letter, and consented to the Post-Office collecting
and distributing Australian letters, charging only
the inland postage (say Id. per letter), and con-
veying them to and from Galle, free of further
charge to the Colonies. Upon this understanding
the contract was finally closed between the Yic-
torian and South Australian Governments and
the P. and 0. Company for a fortnightly service
between Galle and Australia at an annual subsidy
of 80,000£. When to this is added the cost of
diverting the China mail service to Galle (see
page it becomes evident that under the pro-
posed contract less than half the cost of the Aus-
tralian mail service will be borne by Australia.
This statement takes no account of the carriage of
Australian mails over seas which must necessarily
be traversed by steamers carrying Indian mails,
but deals only with the cost of sending Australian
mails via Galle, an unnecessary detour. The point


at which India and Australia should connect for
mail purposes is not Galle, but Aden, (See map.)
The most important part of Australian corre-
spondence is with England, not India, and the
adoption of Aden or preferably Suez as the port
to which the contractors for the Australian mail
service should receive the Anglo-Australian mails
from and deliver them over to the representative
of H.M. Postmaster-General, would expedite the
delivery of English letters by two days. The
following extract, from the ‘ Times ’ of 24th May
last, has a direct bearing on this point, as the
‘John Elder’ came direct from Adelaide to Suez
vid Aden, avoiding Galle :
Steam Communication with Australia. —A remarkable instance
of the development of steam communication was given yesterday
morning in the delivery of advices from Australia bearing date Adelaide,
April 19. These were brought by the Orient Line steamer ‘ John Elder,’
and forwarded overland from Suez vid Brindisi, thus making the time
of transit of letters 34 days. The acceleration thus effected will be
better illustrated by the fact that the regular Peninsular and Oriental
Company’s mail, which left Adelaide also on the 19th of last month, is
not due in London until the 2nd prox., or a difference of ten days. The
latter company's mails have, however, been delivered on some occasions
lately two days before the contract time.
Nor would the delay of Indian correspondence
be important. There is telegraphic communication
between India and Australia, the trade between the
two countries is not great, and financial arrange-
ments are chiefly made through the medium of
English correspondents. The trade with China
is more important, but direct steamers and mail
packets to Singapore supply sufficient facilities.


Sir Michael Hicks Beach was then mistaken in
thinking that Australian interests would be served
by the adoption of the costly route to China vid
Galle. These interests would be better promoted
by the adoption of the sectional arrangements
advocated in this pamphlet. These may be sum-
marized as follows: —
(1). The Mediterranean service, viz. that be-
tween Brindisi or Naples and Alexandria. This
ought to be a section by itself.
(2). The service between Suez and Bombay.
(3) That between Calcutta and Shanghai.
(4) That between Suez and Australia.
It would be found that there would be great
competition for these sectional services, if tenders
for each section were called for separately, and if
the system of alternate sailings, as practised in the
Atlantic and Cape mail services, were adopted, as
it is recommended should be done.
The detachment of the Mediterranean service
from the services eastward of Suez would alone
cause a great increase of competition, as owners of
steamers running between England and the East
vid Suez could undertake conveyance of mails
without being compelled to embark in a new and
totally distinct trade, namely that between Italy
and Egypt.
Conclusion.
In connection with India ami Australia alike, it
has been shown that the policy of the Government


favours one particular Company out of many;
that by insisting upon the whole area being
covered by one contract it restricts the number of
possible competitors; that there have grown up
vigorous independent steamship companies, with
which the favoured Company can compete only by
receiving ever increasing—instead of gradually
decreasing—subsidies, and applying the public
money to the covering of commercial losses. The
time may or may not yet have arrived when sub-
sidies can be dispensed with. The cost of main-
taining a regular service, with the necessary over-
lapping of steamers and impossibility of deviations
on the voyage, may or may not warrant the con-
tinuation of subsidies for the carrying of mails.
These are points which can be settled only by free
and open competition. Our contention is that the
opening of the Canal has wholly changed the
character of the trade with the East; that the con-
ditions for ample competition now exist; that the
Government have failed to recognise these facts;
that they cling to antiquated routes; allot the
contract on irrelevant and erroneous considera-
tions ; and grant a subsidy which presses heavily
on the taxpayer. The sacrifice of the public
interest involved in the 1867 contract, and left
unredressed in the 1874 modification, will be
again imposed on the country by the 1879 con-
tract, and that for another long period of years,
unless Parliament interfere.


Circular Despatch from H.M. Secretary of State for the
Colonies to the Governors of the Australian Colonies.
APPENDIX I.
Downing Street,
January 17 th, 1879.
Sik, —Referring to my Circular Despatch of the Ist July
last respecting the proportion to be retained by H.M.
Government in England of the postage receipts on cor-
respondence passing between this country and the Aus-
tralasian Colonies, I have now the honour to inform you
that the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury have, at
my suggestion, consented to allow the existing arrange-
ments to continue until the Ist February, 1880, when the
Imperial contract with the P. and O. Company expires,
so that during the interval the whole question of the
mail service between this country and the Colonies may
be fully discussed, and arrangements made as to the terms
upon which it is to be conducted in future. The con-
cession which is thus made in the interest of the Colonies
will, I feel satisfied, be fully appreciated by your Govern-
ment, and I trust that they will readily co-operate with
H.M. Government in the endeavour to arrive at a
satisfactory and permanent settlement of the whole
question.
I should remind you that before 1873 the cost of the
Australian service was divided equally between the
Colonies and the mother country, the Colonies, in con-
junction with India, paying their share of the service as


far as Point de Galle, and half of the cost of the service
between Ceylon and Sydney, which port was the terminus
of the P. and 0. Company’s steamers conveying the mails.
The various Colonies being dissatisfied with the manner in
which the P. and 0. Company performed the service
between Point de Galle and Sydney, the Imperial Post
Office, in deference to their representations, gave notice to
the Company to terminate the contract for such service,
and the contract consequently expired at the end of the
year 1872.
By a letter from the Treasury, dated 14th August,
1872, an offer was made through this office on the part
of the Imperial Government to convey the Australian
mails between this country and Point de Galle free of all
cost to the Colonies, and to contribute one-half of the
expense of a service once every four weeks between Point
de Galle and any port in the Colonies they themselves
might select, such contribution, however, to be limited
to 40,0007 a year, the Colonies in combination providing
their own packet service between Point de Galle and
Australia. It was also represented that the Imperial
Government would be disposed to contribute towards a
second service, provided it was alternative with the other,
i.e. that there should be sufficient interval between the
arrival or departure of the steamers for the purpose of
correspondence, and as the Treasury had been informed
that it was the intention of Queensland to establish a
line of packets between Brisbane and Singapore, vid
Torres Straits, the Treasury letters also contained an
offer to convey the Queensland mails between England
and Singapore free of all charge, but expressly declined
on the part of the Imperial Government to contribute
towards the expense of the service between Singapore


and Queensland. This offer was followed by a conference
held at Melbourne between delegates from the different
Colonies, and the result of such conference was that,
owing to the rivalry of Victoria and New 7 South Wales,
particularly with reference to the question as to whether
Melbourne or Sydney should be the post for the arrival
and departure of the mails, the Colonies were unable to
come to any unanimous conclusion. The offer made by
the Treasury, on the part of the Imperial Government,
therefore fell to the ground. Victoria, therefore, made a
contract itself with the P. and 0. for the conveyance of
mails between Point de Galle and Melbourne; Queens-
land, a contract for a service between Brisbane and Sin-
gapore; New South Wales and New Zealand, for one
with San Francisco; and the Treasury, on behalf of the
Imperial Government, agreed to carry the mails w'hich
might go by the Galle and Melbourne route free of charge
between this country and Galle, those that might be sent
by the Singapore and Brisbane route free of charge
between England and Singapore, and those mails which
might be sent by the New South Wales, New Zealand, and
San Francisco route, free of charge between England and
San Francisco. The Treasury likewise agreed that, besides
having these mails carried free of charge between this
country and Point de Galle, Singapore, and San Fran-
cisco, the Colonies should, in consideration of their pro-
viding their own packet service between those ports and
Australia, &c., receive the whole of the postage on the
mails conveyed, excepting only the British inland rate
on the correspondence sent from the United Kingdom,
and the foreign transit rates paid by the Imperial Post
Office on such portion of the correspondence as might be
sent or received in the mails via Brindisi. It was, how-


to the Imperial Government is as follows,
viz.:—-
Eastern sea service
.. £58,000
Egyptian land transit
.. 1,700
Atlantic sea service ..
.. 9,600
United States land transit ..
.. 15,700
Total
.. £85,000
ever, distinctly stipulated that so far as the Imperial
Government was concerned the arrangement above ad-
verted to should only last for a period of five years, which
has now expired.
The Treasury, in 1873, decidedly refused to entertain
the question of the extension of such arrangements beyond
such period, and it was clearly the intention of H.M.
Government at that time that the question of the division
of postage between the Imperial and Colonial Post Offices
should be considered before any fresh arrangements were
come to at the end of such five years. The offer made by
H.M. Government in 1872 contemplated only a service to
the Australian Colonies via Point de Galle, towards which
the Imperial Post Office would contribute; but that offer
fell through, owing to the differences of opinion as to the
terminal port entertained by Victoria and New South
Wales; and H.M. Government, in again approaching the
subject, are compelled to look upon the postal services
with the Australian Colonies, &c., as a whole ; for I have
to draw your attention to the fact that the Colonies, by
adopting separate services, have entailed upon the Imperial
Government a cost greatly in excess of what it would
otherwise have been called upon to provide. It appears,
from calculations made by direction of the Postmaster-
General, that under the present arrangement the charge
The Lords of the Treasury are unable to approve of so
large an expenditure in future, feeling that it is more


than is required for the conveyance of the mails in an
efficient and adequate manner, and that this multiplicity
of services, and the consequently enhanced cost, does in
fact result from the inability of the Colonies to agree
amongst themselves upon any one route for the carriage
of these mails, and the time being at hand when the
existing arrangements would expire, their lordships did
not find themselves in a position to prolong those arrange-
ments, as desired by the Colony of Victoria, except upon
terms which would tend to relieve the Imperial Exchequer;
and they resolved, as a simple and fair proposal, that the
General Post Office should receive 4 d. on each letter
instead of the present inland postage. The proposal will
not be insisted on during the current year; but in opening
fresh negotiations on the mail service I must point out to
you that it is the duty of H.M. Government to deal
with the subject with due regard to the interests of the
British public, who are not concerned in the maintenance
of separate services for the convenience or pleasure of the
several colonies; and if it be desired to continue the
three services now in existence, viz. Melbourne, Galle;
Brisbane, Singapore; and Sydney, San Francisco; or even
to start an additional line, as appears to be contemplated
in South Australia, it is only reasonable that the cost of
maintaining them should be borne by the colonies and
not by the mother country, which has no voice in the
selection of these routes or in the contracts under which
they are worked. I have, therefore, to request you to lay
this despatch without delay before your ministers, and to
inform me whether any negotiations are in progress or
any arrangements made for the carriage of mails after the
Ist February, 1880, from the colony under your Govern-
ment, to any place on the homeward route; and I shall


be glad if the Agent-General for your colony, or some
other person, can be instructed and fully empowered to
conduct the subsequent negotiations upon the subject
with H.M. Government, and to conclude whatever agree-
ment may be arrived at.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed)
M. E. HICKS BEACH.


Copy of Correspondence between the Orient Steam Navigation
Company, Limited, and H.M. Secretary of State for the
Colonies.
APPENDIX 11.
Fenohubch Avenue, London,
\lth March, 1879.
Sir, —We beg to inform you that the Orient Steam
Navigation Company, Limited, was formed twelve months
ago, * specially to meet the demand which was believed to
exist for a through service of full-powered steamships, to
place Australia, relatively to this country, on the same
footing of advantage as regards means of conveyance for
passengers of all classes, and mails, as 'is enjoyed, for
instance, by the United States of America.
The Orient Company refrained from tendering in abso-
lute terms in reply to a recent advertisement of the
Government of Victoria for a through service to Mel-
bourne only, because they knew that the amount of
subsidy which would be necessary to maintain the service
advertised for would be more Than there was any chance
of the colony agreeing to pay; and because they understood
that until certain questions pending between the Imperial
Government and the colonies of Australia generally were
adjusted, no mail contract would be entered into.
Disquieting rumours have, however, lately reached some
of our proprietary, to the effect that notwithstanding all
their preparations and their sacrifices to maintain their
line in the face of much discouragement from depression of
trade, there is a likelihood of their being passed over in
favour of some other company which has made no such
preparations or sacrifices.
Under these circumstances we shall feel obliged if you
* The steamers had been running regularly for eight months when the
Company was formed.


will authorize us to assure our proprietary at our Annual
General Meeting, which will shortly be held, that so far
as rests with H.M. Colonial Office, and the Postmaster-
General’s Department, the Orient Steam Navigation
Company, Limited, shall have a fair and equal chance
with all other companies of securing the Australian mail
contract and subsidy.
Begging the favour of a reply,
We are, Sir,
Your most obedient servants.
(Signed) ANDERSON, ANDERSON, & Co.,
F. GREEN & Co.,
Joint Managers Orient Steam Navigation Company, Limited.
To H.M. Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Downing Street,
14 th March, 1879.
Gentlemen, —I am directed by the Secretary of State
for the Colonies to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of the 11th inst., with reference to which a further com-
munication will be addressed to you as soon as practicable.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant.
(Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
The Managers of the Orient Steam
Navigation Company, Limited.
Downing Street,
Srd April, 1879.
Gentlemen, —With reference to your letter of the
11th of March, the receipt of which was acknowledged
on the 14th of that month, requesting that you might
receive an assurance that certain rumours which had
reached you to the effect that some other company had a


preferable chance of securing the Australian mail contract
and subsidy were unfounded, I am directed by the Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies to inform you that H.M.
Government have no knowledge of the rumours to which
you refer, and that they do not propose to come to any
decision with respect to the part to be taken by them in
connection with a new Australian mail service until
replies shall have been received from the Australian
colonies to a despatch which was addressed to them on
the 17th of January last, inviting them to appoint
representatives to consider the whole question with H.M.
Government.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) JOHN BRAMSTON,
The Managers op the Orient Steam
Navigation Company, Limited.
5, Fenchubch Avenue, London, E. 0.,
sth April, 1879.
Sir,—We have received your letter of the 3rd iust,, and
are glad to learn that H.M. Government do not propose
to come to any decision with respect to the part to be
taken by them in connection with a new Australian mail
contract until replies are received to the despatch of
17th January.
We trust that when that time comes H.M. Govern-
ment will not overlook the claims of the Orient Company
to have a fair and equal opportunity of offering for the
service.
We are, Sir,
Your most obedient servants,
(Signed) ANDERSON, ANDERSON, & Co.,
For selves and F. GREEN & Co.,
Joint Managers of the Orient Steam Navigation Compang.
To H.M. Secretary op State por the Colonies.


Downing Stbeet,
14(A May, 1879.
Gentlemen, —With reference to previous correspon-
dence respecting the wish of the Orient Steam Navigation
Company to tender for the conveyance of the Australian
mails, I am directed by the Secretary of State for the
Colonies to inform you that since that correspondence
took place Sir Michael Hicks Beach has learnt that Mr.
Graham Berry, the Premier of Victoria, who has been
recently in this country, has come to an arrangement to
accept a tender from the Peninsular and Oriental Steam
Navigation Company for a service via Galle, or Colombo,
to Melbourne. H.M. Government are not parties to this
contract, which, however, they deem a satisfactory one.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) ROBERT G. W. HERBERT.
The Managers of the Orient Steam
Navigation Company, Limited.
5, Fenchuhch Avenue, London, E.C.,
4th June, 1879.
Sir, —We duly received your letter of the 14th ultimo,
in which you say, with reference to the contract negotiated
between Mr. Graham Berry, on behalf of the Government
of Victoria, and the Peninsular and Oriental Company,
that “ H.M. Government are not parties to that contract,
but that they deem it a satisfactory one.”
We do not know what the point of view is from which
H.M. Government regard Mr. Berry’s contract with satis-
faction.
It is to be remembered that under that contract barely
one half of the sea distance between Australia and this
country is bridged over for postal purposes, the other half
of the service being provided for under the India and
China contract.
Mr. Berry’s contract can therefore, we submit, be pro-


perly judged only as part of the whole provision for the
carriage of Australian mails, whether at the cost of the
colonies or of the mother country.
Since we received your letter of the 14th ultimo, we
have devoted some time and trouble to an investigation
of the subject as a whole, and have arrived at the con-
clusion that the arrangements for the Australian mail
service, and the price contemplated to be paid, are not,
when regarded in this way, such as H.M. Government
could possibly deem satisfactory if all the facts and con-
siderations bearing upon the matter were present to their
minds.
Seeing that the subject is one which the nature of our
daily business specially qualifies us, in some respects, for
considering, we venture to think that you might be willing
to receive from us a statement, in as concise a form as
possible, showing the result of our investigation. We
shall be obliged by your saying whether we may send
you this.
We have only to add now that, however it may have
como about, we have had no real opportunity of com-
peting, although anxious to do so, and ready and able to
undertake the Australian service if allotted to us.
We are, Sir,
Your most obedient Servants,
(Signed) ANDERSON, ANDERSON, & Co.,
For selves and F. GREEN & Co.,
Managers of the Orient Steam Navigation Company, Limited.
To Sin Michael Edward Hicks Beach, Bart., M.P.,
H.M. Secretary of State for the Colonies,
&c., &c., &c.


India, China, and Australia Mails.
• 1853-4.
1854-5.
1855-6.
1856-7.
£
£
£
£
Southampton and Gibraltar
20,500
20,500
20,500
20,500
Suez and Calcutta
115,000
..
..
..
Ceylon and Hong Kong ..
45,000
..
..
• •
England, Mauritius, Calcutta,!
47,650
21,950
via Cape ot Good Hope ..
England, Alexandria, Calcutta,
182,125
and Sydney * (branch to Mar-
199,000
199,000
182,125
seilles)
24,700
24,700
6,175
6,000
Transit through Egypt
Payable to East India Company!
..
6,000
6,000
50,000
37,500
..
Mails to and from Australia
••
10,000
12,000
14,000
APPENDIX 111
A. I.—Amounts Voted
PaBLIAMENT FOE THE CONVEYANCE
of THE
India,
China, and Australia Mails.
Southampton, Vigo, Oporto,\
&c., Gibraltar .. .. /
20.500
22.500
England to Alexandria ..
Additional mail to ditto ..
Suez to Calcutta *
,360 28,500 24,000 23,500 23,000 22
15 525
’575 115,000 1151000 115,000115,000115
,525 45,000 45,000 45,000 45,000 45
91,575 91,575
15,52515,525
Ceylon to Hong Kong * ..
Singapore and Sidney
Towards defraying the ex-,
pense of steam communi-l
cation to India by the)
Ked Sea, payable to East!
India Company .. ..)
England and Australia, by)
way of Capo of Good)
Hope )
repayable by Indian Government.
by Parliament foe the Conveyance of the
hina, and Australia Mails.
A. II. —Amounts Voted
* Repayable by Indian Government, £42,711.


1864-5.
1865-6.
1866-7.
1867-8.
Alexandria, Ceylon, Calcutta, Hong Kong, and)
£
£
£
£
j In part repayable by
England (including branch from Marseilles!
147,125
147,125
143,125
143,125
< Indian and Austra-
to Malta )
( lian Goyerments.
Aden and Bombay
22,000
22,000
22,000
22,000
Additional Tenders—
4
M-auritius and Alexandria
21,000
21,000
21,000
90 500
21,000
Southampton and Alexandria
20,500
24,000
20,500
24,000
Bombay and China
24,000
24,000
Point do Galle and Sydney
134,672
135,600
119,500
119,500
(Moiety repaid by
\ Australia.
Melbourne and Launceston
800
800
800
King George’s Sound and Adelaide
2,475
12,000
2,475
12,000
2,475
12,000
Transit through Egypt
12,000
(£3250 repaid by
\ Australia.
t/A ++
OO O CM
!M O O O CM
f-H .00 • >0 CO
t
CO
i
*o
00
i> c<j -h iti
r* <M (M r* CO
rH r-*
e/» +4
O lO O o O 04
o 04 o o o r-*
»0 r—( .OO • O CO •
O l> 04 rH 05
04 r* 04 04 04 CO
1— ( r-i
t//» ++
O ‘O O O O <M
o cm o o or?
IO rH -OO • o CO
o' l> I-T
(M <M (M i-l CO
++
O id o o o o
O 04 O O O o
rH 000 . • .
o' (N 04 04H »d
04 CO rH 04 04 CO
rH 1— (
* j—
o >o o »o o o
O CM Ohio O
lO i—( ©COIN • • O
cT <m~ c<T of -+i
(M CO rH (M (M O
r-l CM
I
v
1
m
3
H
* 4
O Id 000 O
O 04 Id O O O
Id rH rH t"- O • • O •
O 04 OHO -f
04 CO rH 04 04 O
rH 04
«
O Id O O O CD O
O 04 (M O O CD O
Id rH rH |H • 60 ; 1-H O
O 04" <xT TtT oT rH CO
04 CO 04 id id
rH rH
ss s 2«i
O 03 03 d M
■WC3. . . . rf- • B • •
• .f • ’ • ‘.I - ‘
cS cS ’-H fl*rj S
• S . . .43 "d .043 a . .
Ms ' ' || 'i|| ‘ '
: <S-S : * =6" : S|| : :
. tf g .. .-§£ .§jo . .
•dfH.• . S O • •
a-° 03 a „
So a : : : J'S • - :a
l | „ a I -g§2 B
|.s| : g :|
|p 00 4
§g§ flit §
g-g| a“a goS
rd 5C3 ® d dr-x:-d >%-H OJ
ceH EhHHw w w


A. IY.—Amounts Provided by Parliament foe the Conveyance of the India, China, and
Australia Mails.
1868-69.
1869-70.
1870-1.
1871-2.
1872-3.
1873-4.
1874-5.
1876-7.
1877-8.
1878-9.
187^-80.
East Indies, China, and
Japan*
£
400,000
£
404,000
£
402,000
£
450,000
£
449,000
£
449,005
£
430,000
£
430,000
£
430.000
£
430,000
£
430,000
Point de Galle and Sydneyf
129,500
129,500
129,500
129,500
129,000
104,550
(ceased
31st Deo.,
1873)
••
••
••
Australia and New Zea-
land J
6,500
••
••
2,500
2,500
••
••
••
••
••
Melbourne and Launceston^
800
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
- ..
..
..
..
.*
Sydney and Queensland {
2,056
2,000
2,000
2,056
2,056
2,056
..
..
..
..
..
King George’s Sound and
Adelaide J
2,475
2,475
2,681
2,681
2,681
2,681
••
••
••
••
Supplementary payment to
P. and 0. Co.
117,000
100,000 1 ..
(The amount
recoverable from
India reduced
in 1871-2)
10,000
(to Aus-
tralian
colonies)
'
f ransit through Egypt, and to Brindisi additional. Also from New York to San Francisco, and to Point de Galle subsequent to 1873.
* One-third repayable by India.
+ Moiety repayable by Australia.
X Imperial Grant in aid.


B. — Specimen op Total Charges and Eepatments on Account
op the Conveyance op Eastern Mails, 1870-71.
Asia and Australasia.
East Indies, China, and Japan—
Between Southampton and Alexandria, calling at Gibraltar'
and Malta
Marseilles and Alexandria, via, the Straits of
Messina
Suez and Bombay, calling at Aden
Suez and Calcutta, calling at Aden, Point de £402,000
Galle, and Madras
„ Bombay and Hong Kong, calling at Point de
Galle, Penang, and Singapore
Hong Kong and Shanghai
Hong Kong and Yokohama
Point de Galle and Sydney 129,500
Melbourne and Launceston *l2OO
Sydney and Queensland * 2000
King George’s Sound and Adelaide *2681
Supplementary 100,000
Dover and Calais •• +B5OO
t, 3 +4^oo
Dover and Ostend .. .. .. +4500
South-Eastern Kailway +24,200
Conveyance of Mails through Egypt .. 12,000
Charge of Indian Mails in France .. .. 1400
Naval Agents 7947
Repayments.
Miscellaneous charges—
Conveyance through Egypt—lndia £4900
Australia 3250
Cost of Mail Bags, &c., Salaries, &c 1900
Naval Agents, &o.—lndia 537
Australia 322
On account of Mail Subsidies —
Indian Government 113,000
Australia, proportion of carriage to Point de Galle, one-half.. 25,316
„ one-half of conveyance from Point de Galle .. .. 64,750
* Grants in aid of local lines.
f Portions only of these charges are on account of the conveyance of the Eastern Mails.


Receipts—
£
s.
d.
£
8. d.
From Great Britain (postages surren-
dered)
15,062
9
4
„ New South Wales (share of cost)
10,062
17
2
„ South Australia „
17,906 17
8
„ Tasmania „
3,709
2
10
„ Queensland „
1,452
18
2
„ Western Australia „
2,227
3
8
„ New Zealand „
8,000
0
0
Fiji
6
13
8
From French Government (New Gale-
„ donia, &o.)
1000
0
0
„ Sale of postage stamps .. .. ..
17,227
4
6
—
76,605
7 0
Payments to P. and O. Company—
Subsidy
£90,000
0
0
Premiums, &c
1,679
0
0
91,679
0 0
AUSTRALIAN MAIL SERVICE.
C. —Table showing the Amounts received by the Government
of Victoria for the Tear ended 31st December, 1877, from
various sources, in repayment of sura paid by it under con-
tract with the P. and O. Co,
Net Coat to Victorian Government .. .,£15,073 13 0
N.B. —As the subsidy is now reduced to 80,0007, and as there will be
an increase of correspondence consequent on a fortnightly service instead
of a four-weekly one as at present, the Victorian Government will make a
profit on their mail service, the Imperial Government contributing thereto.


D. —Postal Subsidies of the P. and O. Company fob the
Twelve Yeaes ending Ist February, 1880.
The following are particulars of the subsidies earned under the Postal
Contract with the Imperial Government and the Australian Colonies.
The total amount for the twelve years is 6,665,833 b, showing an annual
average of 555,486 b, equal to 19 (nineteen) per cent, per annum on the
paid-up capital of the Company.
Eastern Mails ( India , China , and Japan).
Yrs. Months.
1860, April 1.. 1 2 .. To date at £500,000, say £583,333
1874, Aug. 15 .. 5 ii .. „ ~ 450,000,,, 2,418,750
1880, Feb. 1.. 5 5£ .. „ „ 430,000, ~ 2,347,083
12 0 1 Feb. 1868, to 1 Feb. 1880 .. .. £5,349,166
Australian Senice.
1876, Dec. 31 .. 5 11 .. To date at £1.30,000, say £769,167
1880, Feb. 1.. 6 1 .. „ „ 90,000, „ 547,500
12 0 1 Feb. 1868, to 1 Feb. 1880 .. • .. 1,316,667
£6,665,833
(Averaging per annum 555,486 b, or 1 per cent, on 2,900,000 b, which is
the capital of the Company.)
The P. and O. Co. receive a subsidy from Italy also, the amount of which
is believed to be about 20,000 b per annum.
This total does not include the supplementary payments in respect of
1867-8, 1868-9, 1869-70, amounting to 217,000 b in addition to the sums
originally provided in the Estimates for those yeaih.
Memorandum showing Mileage Eun and Subsidies peb Annum
and pee Mile fob Eastern Mails.
Mileage per Subsidy per Subsidy per
Dates of Contracts.
Annum. Annum. j Mile.
£ s. d.
1866, February 27 .. .. 1,027,152 230,124 4 6f
1867, November 19 .. .. 1,341,678 500,000 7 5J
1874, August 1 1,278,940 430,000 6 8J
1879, February 7 .. .. 797,836 370,000 9 3*
Memorandum respecting Australian Hates. —Prior to 1874 the Australian
Mail subsidy was at the rate of 19s. IJtb per mile. From 1874 to Ist Feb.
1880, the rate is 14s. 4J<b
The P. and O. Co. has lately tendered for a doubled Australian mail
service at 80,000 b per annum, viz. for a fortnightly service between Galle
and Australia ; and their tender has been accepted by the Government of
Victoria, that of South Australia concurring. The mileage rate under this
contract is ss. BJd. per mile.


APPENDIX IV.
Copy op Advertisement in ‘Times’ of Ist July, 1878, for
Tenders for East India and China Mail Service.
CONTRACTS for the CONVEYANCE by STEAM VESSELS of th®
EAST INDIA and CHINA MAILS.
General Post Office, 26<7i June, 1878.
The Contract now in force between Her Majesty’s Postmaster-General
and the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company, for the
conveyance of the East India and China Mails, will terminate on the
31st January, 1880, and notice is hereby given that on Thursday, the
25th July next, at 1 o’clock, the Postmaster-General will be ready to receive
TENDERS from such pdf-sons as may be willing to enter into a CON-
TRACT for the performance of ail or any of ’ the following SERVICES
by STEAM VESSELS:—
1. A Weekly'Service from the port of Brindisi (Italy) to Alexandria
(Egypt) and from Suez to Bombay, calling at Aden; and back from Bom-
bay to Suez, calling at Aden, and from Alexandria to Brindisi. Or, from
Brindisi, through the Suez Canal, to Bombay, calling at Port Said, Suez,
and Aden; and back from Bombay to Brindisi, calling at the same ports.
Or, persons may tender only for a weekly service 'between Brindisi and
Alexandria, or only for a weekly service between Suez and Bombay.
2. A Fortnightly Service from Suez to Shanghai, calling at Aden, Point
de Galle (or, at the option of the Postmaster-General at Colombo), Penang,
Singapore, and Hongkong; and back from Shanghai to Suez, calling at
Hongkong, Singapore, Penang, Point do Galle (or, at the like option at
Colombo) and Aden. In the event of the service between Suez and Shang-
hai not being performed by the same parties with whom a contract may be
made for the Indian Mail Service, an additional fortnightly line between
Brindisi and Alexandria will bo required specially for the Straits and
China Mails, and the tenders should provide for such a service.
Or, a fortnightly service from Brindisi, through the Suez Canal, to
Shanghai, calling at Port Said, Suez, Aden, Point de Galle (or, at the
option of the Postmaster-General at Colombo), Penang, Singapore, and
Hongkong, and back from Shanghai to Brindisi, calling at the same ports.
The foregoing services are those which are at present contemplated.
But it is open to persons tendering to make an offer for the whole c»r for
any part of the services enumerated, or to serve the several places men-
tioned by other lines or routes.
No contract will be entered into for a period exceeding eight years.
Printed forms of tender may be obtained on application, personal or
written, at the Secretary’s office, General Post Office, on or after Saturday
next. _ , . , _
Every tender must be addressed to the Secretary of the Post Office, and
must bear, in the left-hand corner of the envelope, the words “ Tender for tho
Conveyance of the Mails.”
No tender will be received after X o’clock on the day above mentioned.
LONDON : PBIKXBD BY EDWARD STANFORD, 55, CHARING CROSS, S.W.




- , ■■'*;> 'L7.S V;:.••;•■■■■ -•-...> '.
•
■
■
' &■
■
,v ;■:■■ ■ • -& # V.- ft.-'-v. Sf;,-
.
•v • - ■• - -:. ■ ••. . ;: • '.. - ‘
&*•-: " <fS! •" x - , r ' ■'• S. ' a' ' -;5 V rr c " ' . )•*•';•''' . -- V ■ u~A '■■' 7/ '-•£$ ‘’■'A 7' iv •* •
T V . r ' a# <-/' % v >; *r
-v.'*; : ,•'.■■*'*' ■'•; • i- ■■ : *v .■■ , -..777 >■ v •■• ■%' v‘.> </:$& 1 ■'• r'&'fiy si
- -• 7747 > 7,7 ''■ ■ 4 - •' - -v'7‘
V •'■ V’-- ,7V ,* , -i ■ ■ , 7 ■ \< ■.■" V - 77
■
- ;■:•■■■■■ : >•" .• ; ■. -■" v-’r' v ■.• . \, v , -V. ,, ,- •*,,?■.
.
>x-- " : i Mmc: ;
: : v" ' ■ ' . %•*'.
x.*tLw
v/ : 7 k . v ■ i& 770: .
«t . ;4'V,. , fg:§
•;■■ - ,
> : a,'; ■■;■ ir ; ■& ; -■;*;>, a**#
.
>'v '? V ■ v. ¥~- *V v;,„V ■*■&■■. . :!»$>’ ' ■ : V ;, „'
-'■•■■■■
< - v ' * r /\ '7 ' 7 .•> , ,. 7, vi ,; 1 ;V > '
■.> . ■ ,, ;v .• ••> i- ;• ' , • ,*V ...... . . '-7- >. • '.-*•■ ■
.
■VtT'.l ■ 'JW.'
■ •. ■ -t fS- , Sg&fcL st|K■•;'.>
■ ; *;.v
■■ V :
•• v.'” ,-i .- 'f > r *■’'
. ■ -■ .■
, ■ ' - ■ .■ ■ ■• ■■
.X Y.'fc ;^tV-
