

Grace Preserving and Crowning.
JUDE 24:
A
FAREWELL SERMON,
PREACHED IN THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, TYER STREET,
PORTLAND,
On Sabbath Evening, November 21, 1858.
BY WILLIAM BIDLEY, B. A.
1858.




FAEEWELL SERMON.
It is a solemn thought that we come this night to the
end of that work which has brought us face to face in
this house of prayer so many times during the last
eighteen months. Here have we, creatures of yesterday,
whose past and future paths have been and may yet be
widely varied, met from week to week to unite in calling
upon the King Eternal before whom a thousand years
are but as one day. Here have we meditated on Truth
that has a momentous bearing on the eternal ages that
lie before us in the future. Here opportunities have
been given me, amid silence and attention, of declaring
unto you that Gospel which is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believeth : and now that the
last of these opportunities has come, I cannot look back
upon them without a deep and painful sense of responsi-
bility. For most certainly the ministry of the Gospel
cannot be without indelible effects on the souls of both
preacher and hearers. The word of God returns not
void to Him. The minister who has spoken again and
again of Christ, of eternity, of salvation, if in handling
such themes he has not had his own understanding
enlightened, his own heart softened, purified and con-
firmed in love and allegiance to Jesus, must be fearfully
blinded and hardened by familiarity with these topics.
His official position has required of him to speak of the
infinite holiness and love of Immanuel, of the dangers
that encompass the souls of his hearers, and of the
A


May the blessing of the Eternal Spirit render this parting
efl'ort effectual for the good of souls, and especially for the
salvation and edification of those to whom it w r as addressed.
And may the name of our Lord Jesus Christ be glorified in
them, and they in Him, according to the grace of out God
and the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.




unspeakable blessedness in store for tbe faithful. And
surely he who can ponder the sad question, “ “Who among
us shall dwell with everlasting burnings ?” he who can
think of the possibility of one of his hearers being lost
for ever, without deep feeling and earnest prayer for
their salvation, must be far more hard-hearted than the
thoughtless worldling. He who has described the suf-
ferings of Christ as the great proof of His unfathomable
pity for guilty souls, and remains himself unmoved by
the Eedeemer’s love, is of all men the most wretched.
Those, also, who have heard the Gospel can never be
as if they had not heard it. Every warning to forsake
their sins, every appeal to the dying love of Christ, every
invitation to the gospel feast, every entreaty to be
reconciled to God, which has been slighted, has left the
soul more hardened and deceived by sin than before.
On the other hand the minister who has preached to
his own soul as well as to his congregation, who has
come more and more under the constraining influence of
the Truth he proclaims, whose testimony has been sealed
by the Spirit of God on the consciences and hearts of
men, is warranted to rejoice in the prospect of the day
when those who have received spiritual blessings through
his ministry will be his crown of rejoicing. And every
one who has listened in faith to the word of the living
God will be found to have entered on a path of blessing
that shall never end.
At such a time as this, therefore, when with more than
usual vividness the thought of the boundless difference
between the issues of gospel services is forced on the
mind, I cannot but look forward with trembling eager-
ness to the day when the actual results of the ministry
of the word will be fully known; and can find no rest
of heart in bidding you farewell, save in commending you
“to Him that is able to keep you from falling,
AND TO PRESENT YOU FAULTLESS BEFORE THE PRESENCE
OF HIS GLORY WITH EXCEEDING JOY, TO THE ONLY WISE
God our Saviour.”


This thought, this hope, has suggested a text for our
meditation this evening ; you will find the words in the
epistle of Jude, 24th verse.
To unfold all the riches of divine truth comprehended
in these glowing words of praise, we will not now
attempt. There are two thoughts presented by them to
which we will now confine our attention, —the Christian
kept from falling—and the Christian presented faultless
before the presence of the glory of God with exceeding
joy. My parting desire and prayer for you is that every
one of you may be thus kept by the power of God, and
presented faultless before Him. Consider then
I. The Christian kept from falling. And remember
every Christian once lay prostrate under the degrading
dominion of sin. It was then no question of keeping
from falling, but of raising the fallen, for all mankind
have fallen under condemnation and have been bound in
chains of sin.
Some sins bring with them a sense of shame and self-
contempt ; others often dwell with most firm and
exorbitant self-esteem. But though sensuality be more
closely followed by degradation in the eyes of men ;
pride, deceit, and violence, are as truly chains of the
evil one, wherewith he leads captive the souls of sinners
to their shame and misery. And whatever were the
personal sins of the Christian, it may be unhesitatingly
affirmed of every one that he was a fallen and ruined
creature.
But “the only wise God our Saviour has brought
him up out of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and
set his feet upon a rock, and established his goings, and
put a new song in his mouth, even praise unto our
God."
Awakened through Divine Mercy to a sense of his sin
and danger, he cried unto the Lord in his trouble ; the
Lord heard him, and saved him from all his transgres-
sions and from all his distresses.
Now examine his standing. The foundation on which


his soul rests is this, “ herein is love ; not that we loved
God, but that He loved us, and sent His Son to be a
propitiation for our sins.” From the eternal and bound-
less love of God springs all the Christian’s safety, peace,
and joy. The display of that love at Calvary is the
source, the means, the pledge of his everlasting blessed-
ness. For He who is the brightness of the glory of
God, the eternal Word who was made flesh and dwelt
among men, “ suffered for sins, the just for the unjust,
that He might bring us to God.” He died for our sins.
However great then our sins have been, though more
numerous than the hairs of our head; though red as
crimson, though dark as hell ; yet when we consider the
infinite dignity of Him who suffered for us, the depth of
His shame and anguish, and the acceptance of Hi&
sacrifice proclaimed by the Eternal Father when He
raised him from the dead; all who look to Him, all who
rely on him may know, assuredly, that He has put away
our sin by the sacrifice of Himself. On this rock, then,
the Christian stands secure, Jesus the Christ, the Son of
the living God, made sin for us. There “ God our
Saviour ” has set our feet.
The apostle has just before ascribed Saving Grace
to the Holy Spirit, to the Father, and to the Lord Jesus
Christ. And in these concluding words he speaks of the
one “ only God,” to remind us, while we trust in the
Eternal Spirit to help our infirmities and dictate our
prayers, while we abide joyfully in the love of God the
Father, and look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus unto
eternal life, that “ these Three are One,” the Lord our
God is One Jehovah.
The only God provided an all-sufficient atoning sacri-
fice before the world was ; God came and was manifested
in the flesh that He might put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself. God sends His word to the ears of the
children of. men, and with saving power applies it to
their hearts, making them to know “ Christ crucified” as
the power and wisdom of God unto salvation. And


God only can keep from falling those whom he has
lifted up from their fallen and abject state of sin.
Believers are “ kept by the power of God through faith
unto salvation.” He keeps them from falling into
perdition. Were it not for the defence of Almighty
power and infinite mercy we should all perish in iniquity.
Every Christian, the holiest and most experienced as
well as the novice, has need to pray continually “ hold
Thou me up and I shall be safe.”
And none pray thus in vain. Jehovah hears the cry
for help, and upholds all that trust in Him. This He
does by means of faith j He gives faith, and afterwards
constantly preserves and cherishes that faith. Chris-
tian ! “ thou standest by faith !” and the faith that
enables a Christian to stand confident and peaceful
amid trials and temptations must be distinct and stead-
fast. It is not mere general reliance on Divine Mercy,
but “ faith in the blood of Jesus Christ,” that precious
blood poured out at Calvary from the pierced side of
the Redeemer, which proclaims to the soul of man, yea
and to all adoring creatures, more clearly than aught
beside, the everlasting righteousness and infinite mercy
of God ; ever showing forth that divine Justice will not
pass by sin unavenged, that the man who is God’s
fellow must die the cursed death rather than the sins
laid upon Him, though not His own, should escape the
righteous indignation of the Most High ; ever showing
forth, also, that divine Mercy gave up the beloved Son
of God, in whom was all His delight throughout a past
eternity, to be betrayed, forsaken, tortured and slain,
with all the shame and anguish which human and
Satanic cruelty could devise, rather than give up us con-
demned sinners to the punishment we have incurred.
With what a mighty voice the blood of Christ Jesus
appeals to heaven and earth, presenting to divine justice
an all-sufficient atonement, proclaiming to sinful man
redemption, even the forgiveness of sins. Hot in vain
is the appeal to God ; He forgives, He accepts, He
a 2


crowns with everlasting blessings all that come unto
Him through Christ. Not in vain is appeal to the soul
of man ; he hears the glad tidings “ there is forgiveness
with Jehovah,” “the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanseth us from all sin;” and here he rests, having
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Through this faith are believers kept. If their faith
in the blood of Christ were to decay, if while still
acknowledging Him as the great prophet of God and
head of the Church, they should with heart and lip
deny that His death was the sin-offering for us, that He
was wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our
iniquities, and that by his stripes we are healed; they
would again be separated from God by an impassable
barrier of sin, and would hear conscience, if the voice of
conscience were not silenced by reckless apathy, bidding
them despair with this overwhelming charge “ your
iniquities have separated between you and your God,
and your sins have hid His face from you that He will
not hear.”
Remember, Christian, “ thou standest by faith,” faith
in the blood and righteousness of Jesus as your only
prevailing plea before God, your only defence against
the arrows of despair. Thy salvation depends on thy
faith, “he that endureth to the end shall be saved.” If
you make shipwreck of faith, then peace, hope and all is
lost. Yet be not dismayed as if the preservation of thy
faith depended on thyself. Ye are kept through faith ;
and that faith is kept by the power of Go'd. He has
made “an everlasting covenant” with his people, saying
“ I will not turn away from them to do them good; and
I will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not
depart from me.” He giveth more grace. Then trust
ye in the Lord for ever. Look to Him to uphold you
in your way, to defend you from the tempter, to keep
you from falling. “Commit the keeping of your souls
to Him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.” He
has given no promise that He will keep off all trouble


from you ; on the contrary He has faithfully warned us
that “ we must through much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God.” But he has promised that He will
keep you from falling, that He will cleanse you from all
unrighteousness, heal your backslidings and guide you in
the way in which you should go. Consider
11. The Christian presented faultless before the
presence of the glory of God.
It is the design of God our Saviour not only to keep
His people from destruction and from shame, but to
deliver them from all sin, to adorn them with all grace,
that He may present them to Himself as a glorious
Church not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing.
“ This is the will of God, your sanctification.” Grace
in the very beginning of its dominion in the soul over-
throws the reign of sin. Those who receive Christ as
He is set before us in the Gospel receive in Him grace
that must eventually triumph over all sin. “ They that
are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections
and lusts.” Sin is in them a crucified foe ; not dead ;
not expelled from the soul; not disabled from sorely
harassing the believer all his days. Hay, generally one
discovers far more of sin in his heart after sin has been
dethroned than before. Yet from the moment the
sinner looks up to Jesus sin is put down from the place
of an honored despot in his soul. It is thenceforth a
hated and a conquered enemy. “ Where sin abounded,
grace doth much more abound;” where “ sin reigned unto
death, grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal
life.”
The object of the Christian warfare is nothing less
than the bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. And the first entrance of gospel
light and grace into the soul may be no more in relation
to this great end than was the conquest of Jericho by
the Israelites to the possession of all the promised land.
Many years after the fall of Jericho, the first success of
Israel in the land of Canaan, the Lord said unto Joshua


when he was old and stricken in years, “there remaineth
yet very much land to be possessed.” And so also to
those who have been for many years in Christ, who look
back over a long Christian life to their deliverance from
the power of darkness and translation into the kingdom
of God’s dear Son, may it often be truly said “ there
remains yet very much land to be possessedmany a
region of thought and feeling in your heart not yet
brought into harmony with the will of Christ your king.
But be not discouraged, struggling Christian soul,
though the fact stares you in the face that there is so
much yet to be accomplished before your thoughts and
wishes are brought into complete subjection to the
benign authority of your Lord. For
“ Grace will complete wliat grace begins
To save from sorrows and from sins;
The work that Wisdom undertakes,
Eternal Mercy ne’er forsakes.”
God is faithful; by whom ye were called into the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. He has distinctly
declared his gracious purpose concerning all his children,
that they shall be conformed unto the image of his
Son ; and what He has already wrought in you by His
Spirit in awakening you to a sense of your guilt and
danger, and leading you to the rock of ages for refuge,
is a pledge that He will also accomplish all that is in-
cluded in being conformed to the image of Jesus.
“ May the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly;
and I pray God, your whole spirit, and soul, and body
be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Faithful is He that calleth you , who also
will do it.
Then yield yourselves unto Him ; and in His strength
follow Jesus ; resist temptation, press onward.. And if
in following Him, you become every day more conscious
of indwelling sin ; be sure of this, He discovers your
sin that He may subdue it; He shows it to you that
you may loathe it. Only, let every fresh discovery of


the sinfulness of your heart make you more earnest in
prayer for sanctifying grace.
Remember the chief instrument for carrying on the
work of grace in the heart, is Truth —inspired Truth.
All the providential dealings of God with his people
have this great design in view ; but it«is His word that
He has magnified, above all His name, as the great
means of fitting his people for the inheritance of saints
in light. Jesus prayed “ sanctify them through thy
truth ; “ Thy Word is truth.” Then diligently search
the Scriptures ; and forsake not the assembling of your-
selves together to the public preaching of the Word of
God. I trust, through the goodness of God, you will
have constant opportunities of attending on the ordi-
nances of His house. And remember our souls need
the stimulus of united worship and the public ministry
of the Word. Be often at the throne of grace in secret,
let your families be called together morning and evening,
to listen to the Divine "Word and unite in prayer ; and
be regular in your attendance at the House of
God.
What an animating motive to faithfulness and dili-
gence in these things is set before us in the text! to be
“ presented faultless before the presence of His glory; ”
to be at last perfectly and forever delivered from sin ; to
draw near and behold the glory of our Redeemer with
the joyful consciousness that there is no longer anything
in us offensive to His holy and all-piercing eyes, but
that we are made by His abounding grace all glorious
within. And will it not greatly enhance the joy of that
day to meet fellow-pilgrims whom we knew and loved
on earth, made faultless and perfect 1 Oh, how much
might this hope sweeten the fellowship of Christians
here! If at any time we are grieved at the faults of
those whose faith and love are shown forth in a Chris-
tian life, let us anticipate the time when we shall see
them again, presented faultless before the presence of
Immanuel.


In thus speaking, I have been all along addressing
those who are, as were they to whom this epistle of Jude
was sent, “ sanctified by God the Father, and preserved
in Jesus Christ, and called.”
Would it be right in the prospect of meeting you no
more until our eternal state is fixed, and all space for
warning and repentance gone by for ever, to stop here
and assure myself that all who now hear me already
bear this character ? Would that it were possible to
entertain this joyful confidence, that ye are all passed
from death unto life, through faith in Jesus. But I
fear some of you are still far from God, dead in sin,
near to perishing. How can I bid you farewell ? What
account can I render of my ministry in reference to
your souls ? Will you appear to bear witness against
me in the day of judgment, to allege that I gave you no
warning to flee from the wrath to come ? Will you then
accuse me before the Judge of all that I did not tell you
of the Saviour’s love, or beseech you to be reconciled to
God ? Will you say that I flattered you with delusive
hopes, or that I left you writhing under the condemna-
tion of the Law, without presenting the healing balm
of the Gospel ?
Let me then speak for the last time to you that love
sin, and forsake it not; to you that cleave to the world
and make light of Christ; to you that are strangers to
that “ repentance toward God, and faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ,” without which you cannot be saved.
Why have ye not repented ? Why do ye not believe on
the name of the only begotten Son of God ? Has not
God, by his kindness and long suffering, been pleading
with you to repent and turn unto Him? Has He not
in his blessed word set forth before you Jesus Christ as
the propitiation through faith in His blood ? Do you
despise His mercy ? Do you brave His almighty wrath ?
Is it nothing to you, O sinner, that Jesus, the Son of
God, died on the cross for our sins, and that God,
having raised Him from the dead, sent him to bless you,


in turning away every one of you from his iniquities ?
In the face of the Divine entreaty “ Turn ye, turn ye,
why will ye die 1 ” do you resolve to hold fast your
iniquity ? Then iniquity will be your ruin. Destruction
and misery lie before you. While you sport with sin,
its chains are made faster about your soul; while you
waste, in rebellion against God, the precious hours, and
days, and years He has allotted to you —judgment lingers
not —damnation tarries not. Time is short ; death is
at hand ; and after death —judgment. Every hour
your position becomes more perilous. Unless you
repent, devils will soon rejoice over your everlasting
ruin. Awake ! and flee from the wrath to come !
That mighty One who is able to keep from falling
all that trust in Him, and to present them faultless be-
fore the presence of His glory with exceeding joy, is also
able to save you from your sins and all their disastrous
results. He knows all your transgressions ; He
knows your slavery to sinful habits and passions )
He knows the misery that awaits you in the
path you are pursuing ; and He saith in His boundless
pity ££ Let the wicked forsake his way and the unright-
eous man his thoughts ; and let him return unto the
Lord, for He will have mercy upon him ; and to our
God, for He will abundantly pardon.”
There is, then, forgiveness for you ; the way of sal-
vation lies open before you ; for ££ whosoever shall call
upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved.”
Steam Press of W. Fairfax and Co., Collins-street, Melbourne.






