

r*fi99
GRACE AND GLORY;
A SERMON,
PREACHED IN THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, PITT STREET,
SYDNEY, JANUARY 9, 185,%
3Y THE
REV. ROBERT ROSS, M. 1).,
ON THE OCCASION OF THE DEATH
MRS. LOUISA FOSS.
SYTOTSY:
PRINTED BY DANIEL LOVETT WELCH, ATLAS OFFICE, GEORGE STREET.
MDCCCLIII.




SERMON.
JJJ S/F9
The Lord will give Grace and Glory.— Psai.m Ixxxiv, 11.
Grace and Glory include in them every blessing which man
needs, both in time and in eternity. He upon whom the one
has been bestowed, and to whom the other is promised, is
prepared for duty and enjoyment in both worlds: the former
securing his piety on earth, the latter his happiness in heaven.
In the first place, with regard to Grace , I would observe that
it generally signifies in Scripture, God’s unmerited favour
flowing to sinners through the mediation of Jesus Christ his
beloved Son; as well as the moral and spiritual energy
imparted to the sinner’s heart by the communication of that
favour. Upon all genuine Christians this grace has been
bestowed, and therefore of each it may be said, that he lives
under a gracious influence from God, communicated to him
through Jesus Christ by the Holy Ghost. It will be at once
perceived that this grace is of incalculable value—of infinite
importance ; among all God’s gifts, next to that of his only
begotten Son, it is the greatest —the most precious. By
means of it he secures
1. The conversion of the sinner— and what is a man if he is
not converted ? His sins are unpardoned, his soul continues
in a state of spiritual death, the sentence of condemnation by
the divine law has been pronounced against him, and if in this
state he should die, the mansions of woe must become the
place of his eternal residence; he must remain a guilty, con-
demned, degraded, and wretched being for ever. If then there
be one thing more necessary for man than another, it is that he
should be converted; and the grace, by which alone this can


be accomplished, ought to be above all things desired by him.
That it is by the exercise of this gracious influence that God
secures the conversion of the sinner, is placed beyond all
dispute by the numerous references that are made to the fact
in the Sacred Writings. Thus, the Apostle Paul, when
referring to his own conversion, and all its train of happy
consequences, says —“ By the grace of God lam what I am.”
(1 Cor., xv, 10.) On another occasion, when writing to the
Church at Ephesus, he reminds them “ By grace are ye
saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift
of God.” (Ephes. ii, 8.) In his Epistle to Titus he repeats
the same great truth in different language—“ But after that
the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man
appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Eloly Ghost.” (Tit. iii,
4,5.)
This change is so great that there is no power in existence
by which it can be effected but that of God; it requires the
exercise of attributes which none but he possesses. Were it
a mere physical change, the case would be very different;
were it only a material substance which required to be altered
in its form or colour, or some of its component parts, the
application of force or of chemical power might be sufficient;
or, were all that is required in conversion, to consist merely in
making men religious puppets, to cloth them with a religious
dress, to make them expert in the observance of religious festi-
vals and the performance of religious ceremonies, this might ea-
sily be accomplished without the importation of divine influence;
enough for this purpose that religious ignorance be encouraged,
that the Scriptures be withheld, that the senses be regaled
with gorgeous dresses and fragrant incense and inspiring
music; enough that superstition and priestly domination
establish themselves firmly in authority over the people: but
in conversion it is mind that is to be operated upon—all the
faculties of the soul, the intellect, the heart—so as to produce
such a change in them as shall ultimately result in the purifi-


cation of their moral nature, and the perfection of their being.
This change is to be effected in perfect harmony with the
freedom of their own will, without disturbing the voluntary
movements of their own minds, in accordance with their own
determinations, and in the absence of all compulsion. He
who is the subject of it must be brought to will, to desire, to
take delight in objects and pursuits and pleasures which he
formerly detested or was indifferent to, and to consecrate him-
self to services which he formerly loathed. A change of this
kind can only be effected by mind operating upon mind; by
pure, omniscient, Almighty Mind, operating upon the per-
verse, rebellious, darkened mind of the sinner; so that until
the divine mind exercises a special influence upon the human,
no saving change is produced; whatever may be the amount of
agency, in the shape of preaching, reading, counsel, appeal,
exhortation, entreaty, that is brought to bear upon it—not that
that agency is unnecessary or unimportant; on the contrary,
it is the will of God that it should be carefully employed—but
that the great result is not produced until divine grace
gives efficiency to the whole: just as the application of
fire is necessary to produce the motive power by which the
machinery is set in action, in order to convert the raw
materials upon which it is to operate, into fabrics of the finest
texture and of the most beautiful colours.
2. By this grace, God secures not only the conversion of
sinners, but their continuance in the divine life , their perse-
verance in the path of holiness until they die. Without this
grace spiritual life can neither be communicated nor perpetu-
ated. The same divine influence which turns a man from
darkness unto light, which makes him a new creature in Christ
Jesus, which introduces him into the family of the redeemed,
must be daily communicated in order to preserve the new cha-
racter he sustains, and to urge him onward on the new path on
which he has entered. While the Christian continues in this
world he has duties to perform to which he is naturally averse*
evils to avoid which he has been accustomed to love, tempta-
tions adapted to his peculiar position and temperament which he


must habitually resist, and enemies far more powerful than
himself to light with and to conquer : and who is sufficient for
these things? Left to his own native strength, trusting to hi#
own powers, he will soon fail in his conflict with the god of
this world, will speedily become the victim of his own passions,
and instead of ascending upward, as he seemed to do at the
outset of his career, will turn his back upon heaven, and
descend more rapidly than he rose, along the path which con-
ducts to darkness and death. Oh, “It is not in man that
wafketh to direct his steps.” “We are not sufficient of our-
selves to think anything as of ourselves, our sufficiency is of
Clod.”
Do you see a man not only making a profession of religion,
but embodying his principles in action ?—there the grace of
God is at work. Do you behold the proud man now humble,
the intemperate man now sober, the profane man now devout,
the ungodly man now pious, the worldly-minded man now
spiritual, the hard-hearted man now kind and charitable ?
Grace has done it all. Do you observe how the weak have
become strong, and the timid courageous, and the indolent
active; and how difficulties apparently insurmountable have
given way before self-denial and perseverance ? There you
see the grace of God in operation. Have you noticed how
the poor and the diseased, the tried and the afflicted, the
persecuted and oppressed disciple bears up under all the evils
with which he is visited—still trusts in God, still rejoices in
Christ; and when the darkness of death closes around him?
and the pangs of dissolution lay hold upon him—how he can
rejoice with a joy unspeakable and full of glory ? Learn from
all this the value and importance of the grace of God, for by
that grace alone it has been accomplished. Oh, happy they
who are the subjects of this grace —how infinitely indebted to
that compassionate Being by whom it has been bestowed.
But in the second place, the Lord not only gives grace, he
also will give Glory ; Grace is more especially needful for this
world, Glory for the next. By glory, we here understand


that state of exalted blessedness in heaven which is prepared
for the redeemed. There is no one word so descriptive of
that state as this word, or which conveys to the mind a more
pleasing idea of its character, or which is more generally
understood. In its simplest and most literal sense it is expres-
sive of lustre, brightness, splendour, magnificence. We apply
it to various objects in nature ; we speak of the glory of the
sun, of the glory of the moon, of the glory of the stars, and
of that bright firmament in which they move and shine. We
apply it to individuals —to the successful warrior, to the emi-
nent scholar, to the profound philosopher, to the eloquent
orator, to the immortal poet. These are represented in history
and in song as surrounded with a halo of glory, whose praise
many tongues celebrate, and to whom multitudes gladly pay
the homage of their grateful admiration. The word glory is
frequently applied to actions, to character, to employment, to
exhibitions of mental or moral excellence, such as heroic
courage, self-denying philanthropy, inventive genius, the cul-
tivation of virtue under most disadvantageous circumstances.
When, therefore, heaven or the heavenly state is called glory ,
we are led to associate with it all these ideas, and to anticipate
from it the highest amount of dignified enjoyment and
unmingled felicity.
The scenery of heaven is glorious, every object that there
meets the eye is beautiful, its air is pure and balmy, its sky is
cloudless, its streams clear as crystal, its mansions are palaces,
its sounds are music, its odours fragrance, its fruits immortal;
there is nothing to disgust, nothing to offend, nothing to
inspire terror. Glorious as this world is, in much of its scenery,
in its landscapes and broad flowing rivers, in its fields and
forests, in its mountains aud cataracts and mighty oceans, it is
not for one moment to be compared with the Garden of Para-
dise, the seats of the redeemed, the pearly gates and golden
streets of the Celestial City.
The inhabitants of heaven are glorious; need we mention
them? There is God —the Great Author of being, the


Monarch of the Universe, who although the heaven of heavensr
cannot contain him, has been pleased in an especial manner to
establish his throne there, and to display his glorious perfee-
tions in a manner in which he does not display them in any
other part of his vast empire. There is Jesus Christ , the only
begotten son of God, the brightness of his glory and the
express image of his person seated on his mediatorial throne,
radiating from his glorified person all the attributes of the
Godhead, exalted above principalities and powers and every
name that is named, and receiving from all the homage of
their adoration and their praise. There are the Angels and
Archangels , the Cherubim and Seraphim, who have retained
their allegiance and stood firm in their fidelity, hymning day
and night the praises of the Eternal. And there are the souls
of redeemed sinners, each clothed in fine linen, pure and white,
each wearing the unfading diadem, each having in his hand
the harp of gold and sending forth from it strains of enrap-
turing melody. Among them all there is not one tainted with
sin, not one unholy or unclean, not one disagreeable in manner
or offensive in conduct. O, what a blessed, exalted, glorious-
society in which to spend eternity !
The actions, the employments, the pursuits of heaven are
glorious. Those who dwell there study the character of God,
and are constantly making new discoveries in it; they traverse
the dominions of his large empire, and thereby increase their
knowledge. All the pure and holy powers of their nature are
called into perpetual and ennobling exercise; they are ever
glorifying their Redeemer and performing acts of benevolence
and kindness to their fellow saints. Deeds of heroic virtue
performed on earth are nothing when compared with those
performed by them. Discoveries made by the most gifted
minds here, sink into nothing before those which are made
there. Oh, heaven is a glorious place, he who is admitted into
it is admitted into glory; and not only so, he becomes glorious,
he becomes one of its glorious inhabitants, shining “as the
brightness of the firmament and as the stars for ever and ever.”
“ Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be


with me where I am, that they may behold my glory. ”
“ Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet
appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall
appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.”
Allow me in the third place, to direct your attention to the
connection that exists between these two gifts —grace and
glory. They are so united that it is impossible to separate
them from each othor: grace is glory begun, glory is grace
finished; grace is glory in the bud, glory is grace in the full
blown flower; where there is not grace, glory will never be
reached; where the one is possessed the other is absolutely
certain. Multitudes are expecting glory who have no grace ;
they cherish the hope that heaven will be their everlasting
home, even although their hearts have undergone no saving
change, and the process of sanctification by the spirit of God
has never been commenced within them. Others, again, who
possess grace, are sometimes agitated by the fear that they
never shall reach glory; that with all their professions of
attachment *to the Saviour, and their earnest desire to honor
and serve him, they shall at last be cast away. With regard
to the first of these classes, we would remark that never did
mortal man labour under a more fatal delusion than that which
they practice upon themselves. The fact is, that grace is the
preparation for glory ; it is not merely the gift of God, but it
is essentially necessary as the means of fitting man for enter-
ing upon that glory. What would an enemy of God do among
his friends, his admirers, his attached and devoted worshippers in
the heavenly world ? How would the man who had trampled
upon the blood of Christ, had despised his Gospel, had rejected
his offers, how would he feel if suddenly transported to those
bright regions, where he reigns the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, and where all the inhabitants unite in offering up to
him their homage, and their love ? How could an unpardoned,
a guilty and polluted soul breathe the pure atmosphere of
heaven, or associate with the holy and the blessed who dwell
there. Would not every object that met his eyes, would not
every exercise of the redeemed, would not the very music of


heaven, fill his soul with torture; and shunned and despised by-
all, a stranger and an alien amid the bowers of Paradise, would
he not be glad to make his escape to scenes and to society
more congenial with his tastes and feelings ? With regard to
the second class of persons referred to, those who with the pos-
session of grace are afraid that they shall never be crowned
with glory. 1 would remind them that glory is the consum-
mation of grace, the end, the object for which grace has been
bestowed. Grace never prepares a man for taking up his
abode in the land of darkness; it cannot furnish him with a
character which could be fully developed in the society of the
devil and his angels, he who possesses it can no more sink into
the depths of degradation and of woe, than the fowls of heaven
could dwell beneath the waves of the ocean. Oh, no; grace
puts the Christian on the road, and enables him to travel
upward and onward, along the heavenly path, until at last he
reaches Mount Zion, and stands among the unnumbered mul-
titudes of the redeemed, who are assembled there. No man
whom grace guides can fail of arriving at glory; and all who
are conscious that they possess it, may even now, whatever
their outward circumstances, “ rejoice in hope of the glory of
God.” My brethren, if such be the necessary termination of
divine grace in the soul, if such its connection with glory—
how infinitely valuable must it be, how desirable to possess it!
True, it is a gift; but it is a gift which may be asked without
presumption, and which by the use of proper means may be
obtained. It is the gift of God through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Lay hold on Christ, and the gift will be yours, and
once in possession of it all things will be yours, whether “ the
world, or life or death, or things present or things to come.”
All will be yours, “For ye are Christ’s, and Christ is
God’s.”
Into this train of remark I have been led by the recent
removal from among us, of one who, for many years, had been
a partaker of divine grace; and who, we doubt not now’ dwells
amid the heavenly glory. I allude to the late Mrs. Foss.
She was a member of this Church for nearly twenty years,


'fieing one of the first who joined it after its formation. Daring*
that period she was enabled to maintain great consistency of
character, and to exhibit many of the excellencies of the
Christian faith. She was a woman of meek and quiet spirit,
modest and unassuming in manner, and yet possessed of con-
siderable energy and mental vigour, when occasion demanded
its exercise. Her voice was seldom heard but'in the retire-
ment of the family, or in converse with intimate and confi-
dential friends: with the censoriousness of the spiteful, with
the backbiting and calumny of the slanderer she had no sym-
pathy, and under the influence of strict religious principles she
seemed habitually to live.
The commencement of the work of divine grace in her soul,
took place before her marriage with him who now mourns over
the loss he has sustained by her death. She then attended the min-
istrations of a pious Episcopalian minister in England, by whose
preaching her mind was often deeply and seriously impressed.
These impressions were strengthened by the illness and death
of a relative to whom she was much attached, and to whom she
performed the part of a tender nurse. He died in the love of
Christ, and in the hope of glory. While waiting for the final
summons, his conversation, the piety he exhibited, the happi-
ness he realized in the prospect of his removal, so powerfully
affected her mind, that by the grace of God she was brought
to a final decision; she became a new creature in Christ,
partook of the Lord’s Supper in the Church which she
attended, and afterwards in connection with the same Church
was enrolled as a Sabbath School Teacher. About this time,
he who afterwards became the partner of her life, was igno-
rant of the truth, and lived without God; through her conver-
sations with him, he desires thankfully to acknowledge, that
his eyes were opened; his heart, he trusts, was changed; and
soon after he was induced to become the member of a Christian
Church. Thus were the ministrations of a faithful servant of
Christ combined with the death-bed scenes of a beloved and
pious relative, rendered effectual by divine grace, for the con-
version of one soul; and thus were the impressions produced


oil one mind, transferred by the spirit of God to another, who
still lives to ascribe to him all the praise and all the glory.
Not having been the member of a Congregational Church
at home, she was received, into this, as soon as it was formed
here. As a Church member, as a Christian wife and mother,
there were several features of character exhibited by her wor-
thy of remark and observation.
1. She was in an especial manner remarkable for her love
of the public services of religion, and the regularity of her
attendance upon them. Never was she absent either on the
Lords Day or the week day, when it was possible for her'to
be present; no ordinary excuse, no trifling ailment, no domes-
tic inconvenience could keep ber away. She did, indeed, love
the habitation of his house, and the place where his honor
dwelleth. In all weathers and at all seasons, whoever might
be absent, she was found in her place; until at last the hand
of God fell heavily upon her, and she became the prisoner of
divine providence, and then she waited patiently until she was-
called to join in nobler worship, with a nobler assembly, in a.
nobler temple.
2. Nor was she satisfied with merely attending the public
services of religion, and listening to the Gospel preached ; 1
am informed that when she returned from the Sabbath Day
services, she frequently retired to her closet, and like the
Bereans of old, searched the Scriptures to be satisfied whether
the things she heard were so or not. This was the case espe-
cially when the more difficult portions of Scripture had been
discussed in the pulpit. Often has she been discovered in this
exercise—unexpectedly discovered—to the regret of those who
had inadvertently distuibed her in her meditations. Oh, that
all would imitate her example in this respect.
3. I need not say that she felt deeply interested in the
spiritual welfare of her children. She took considerable pains
to impart to them the knowledge of the Scriptures; for many


years she formed them into a Bible class, and devoted the
Sabbath afternoon to the most interesting of all exercises in
which a Christian parent can engage; nor did she give it
up until the delicate state of her health forbade its continuance,
and the occupation of some of them as teachers in the Sunday
School, rendered it impossible for them to be present. May
their mother’s instructions never be forgotten by them! May
they never cease to praise God for having had such a mother!
And, Oh, may it be their highest wish and their constant
endeavour to follow her to the skies !
4. Although a person of few words, she was deeply interested
in everything connected with the prosperity of this Church,
and in the progress of religion generally. She was never
backward to take her part in any exertions that were neces-
sary to be made for the promotion of the one or the other. She
was the reverse of an idle, selfish, indolent Christian. When
a good cause was to be supported she gave her aid, when
distress was to be relieved, when wants were to be supplied,
when cases of wretchedness were to be visited, she cheerfully
performed her duty.
And now she must die: For the last two years her health
had been visibly declining. God had no more work for her to
do: she must die, and she died as she lived, quietly, peacefully}
saying little, but what she did say, expressive of hope, of holy
confidence: all fear was taken away, no doubt seemed to
disturb her mind; again and again, in reply to affectionate
enquiry, she said that she was happy. One friend having
asked her how she felt in reference to Jesus, her reply was
“He is myall salvation and all my desire.” On another occasion
I began to repeat the verse, “ To me to live is Christ,” when
to my surprise, she took up the remainder, and with all the
emphasis of which she was capable, finished it, saying “To die
is gain.” About a week before her death, one of her
daughters asked her if she could trust in Jesus, her answer
was, “Heis my only hope.” When the same daughter
repeated the beautiful language of the Apostle, “I have


fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith j” to her surprise and joy her mamma raised her
voice more than usual, and added, “ Henceforth there is laid
up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give me at that day.” She seemed
sweetly to repose upon the bosom of her Saviour to the last,
the sting of death was taken away, and she calmly fell asleep
in Jesus.
There can be no doubt that our departed sister was a subject
of divine grace while she lived, and there can be as little doubt
that she is now in glory . The Lord gave her grace, he has
given her glory. We leave her there in the presence of her
Saviour, associated with angels, mingling with the redeemed,
singing the song of Moses and the Lamb, How sweet her
voice, how bright her crown, how splendid her robes, how
rapturous her joy! We leave her there, in the hope that we
shall ere long meet her, ere long rejoice with her, ere long
worship with her in the same glorious assembly, and mingle
our voices with hers in celebrating the praises of redeeming
love. In this hope let us be more than ever stimulated to run
with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the author and finisher of our faith—to fight the good fight of
faith, however fierce the enemies with whom we may have to
contend, however long the conflict may last—to continue faith-
ful unto death, that we too may, like her, at last receive the
crown of life.
Christians; ye who have obtained grace, rejoice in the hope
of future glory, live as the children of such mercy, let your
light shine before men, so that by tracking the path along
which you move in your journey to the skies, they may be
induced to imitate your example, and glorify your Father who
is in heaven. Soon will all your difficulties, and trials, and
sorrows cease; and in the presence of your God, and under
the smiles of your Saviour will you commence the services and
the enjoyments of that happy state, in which there will be no
interruption, and to which there will be no end.


Men and Brethren: Ye who have not obtained grace—
rejoice ! In what ?—that your sins are unpardoned, that your
hearts are unchanged, that your souls are unsanctified, that
you have no promise of glory after death ! Rejoice, I say, in
the character you sustain towards God, and in the dark and
gloomy prospects that lie before you: you cannot you
feel you cannot; and yet you are satisfied to live without
grace ! without a saving interest in the atoning sacrifice of
the Son of God! without reconciliation with your Maker !
without a title to the felicity of the heavenly world ? If you
are not satisfied, why live a day longer in the position you
now occupy ! Why boast of that in which you cannot rejoice?
Oh, if your spiritual condition were scriptural and safe; if
your religious character were such as would open up before
you bright and glorious prospects, you would be happy, your
hearts would be glad, and death would bring with it no terrors.
But no; whatever may be the transient gleams of pleasure
which at present pass over you, all is dark and alarming in the
future; without grace, for you there will be no glory, and in
the regions of darkness will the place of your residence be
eternally fixed. “ Seek then the Lord, while he may be
found; call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him ; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.”


„ Vital spark of heavenly flame I
A / £** A* Quit, oh quit this mortal frame,
7 Trembling, hoping, lingering, flying,
Oh the pain, the bliss of dying !
Cease, fond nature, cease thy strife
And let me languish into life.
Hark! they whisper : angels say,
“ Sister spirit, come away.”
—What is this absorbs me quite,—
Steals my senses, shuts my sight,—
Drowns my spirit, draws my breath ?
Tell me, my soul, can this he death ?
The world recedes : it disappears !
Heaven opens on my eyes ; my ears
With sounds seraphic ring.
O Death! where is thy sting ?
HEAVEN.
We speak of the realms of the blest,
Of that country so bright and so fair;
And oft are its glories confest —
But what must it be to be there ?
Of its wonders and pleasures untold,
But what must it be to be there ?
We speak of its freedom from sin,
From sorrow, temptation, and care;
From trials without and within,
But what must it be to be there ?
Do thou, Lord, ’midst pleasures or woes,
Still for Heaven our spirits prepare;
And shortly we also shall know
And feel what it is, to be there.
WELCH, PRINTER, ATLAS OFFICE.
Lend, lend your wings ! I mount! I fly !
0 Grave ! where is thy victory ?
We speak of its pathway of gold,
Of its walls deck’d with jewels so rare;
