

GRAMMAR
AUSTRALIAN YOUTH,
SECOND PART.
JAMES BONWICK, F.K.G.S.
glclbonrne: |jpk_
'PpJ PRINTED BY FERGUSSON & MOORE,
/y) 48 FLINDERS LANE EAST. (y'gL
l868 '
iS' .
vr-rn ¥Pm




GRAMMAR
AUSTRALIAN YOUTH.
SECOND PART.
JAMES BONWICK, F.R.G.S.
lUtlbotmte;
PRINTED BY FERGUSSON & MOORE,
48 FLINDERS LANE EAST.


■


(jRAMMAR
AUSTRALIAN YOUTH.
Syntax teaches us how to make correct
sentences.
A Sentence consists of a number of words
placed together to make a statement.
A Compound sentence consists of two or
more simple sentences joined together to make
sense.
James is happy —is a simple sentence:
Alexander conquered many kingdoms, hut he could
not master himself —is a compound sentence.
Every sentence must have a Subject, which
is the thing spoken of; and a Peedicate,
which is what is said of it.
The wombat burrows: here the Subject is the
noun, wombat, and the Predicate is the verb
burrows.
Sentences in most instances have, also, an
Object. “The English conquered India;” Eng-
lish is the Subject, conquered the Predicate, and
India the Object.


The Adjective is the Attribute to the Subject.
The Adverb is the modifying or extending
word to the Predicate.
Concord is the agreement which one word
has with another.
One word governs another in a sentence when
it causes it to be in some particular case or
mood.
There are certain rules in Syntax by which
we may be guided as to the correct speaking
or writing of sentences.
RULES OF SYNTAX.
Eule I. The Subject of a verb is placed in
the Nominative Case: as, I live here: not Me
live here. Live is the verb, and its subject lis
nominative.
Remark. —The verb to which the Subject
belongs is sometimes not expressed, but under-
stood. You are as clever as he; that is, as he is;
the verb is is understood.
A Noun after the interjection 0 is Nomin-
ative.
EXERCISES.
Correct the following exercises, and put a line
under the subject, and a cross under the verb.
Us came to him. Adams said him discovered the
planet Neptune. Who is there? Me. Sir T. Mitchell


and them saw the monster fossil kangaroo. Who
went home? Her. Did Newton first think of gravi-
tation? Yes, hisself. We should not hate those
whom hate us. Them that strive will win. Him,
being away, escaped the danger. If as clever, you
are not so kind as her. Who saw the waterfall? Not
us. You and us can go to school. He is nearly as
rich as me.
Eule 11. A verb agrees with its Subject or
Nominative in number and person: as Solomon
was wise.
Solomon is the Subject or Nominative, and
is in the third person, singular number; the
verb was is in the same person and the same
number.
Remark. — A noun or pronoun is said to be
Absolute when it neither governs a word nor
is governed by a word.
The Nominative Absolute occurs when the
imperfect particle follows the noun or pro-
noun ; as, The cart being upset, the crockery was
smashed; He, having repented, we pardoned him;
cart and he are Nominatives Absolute, neither
governing nor being governed.
EXERCISE.
Thou was very wrong. The suffering of the early
Christians were great. Veins of granite runs often
through other rocks. The number of people in Aus-
tralia are above a million. The third ring of Saturn


have been discovered. The islanders of Torres
wears wigs. The caverns of Mount Gambier
is in limestone. Not one of the mighty conquerors
have left a blessing behind them. In slate is found
no fossils of animals or trees. What bounds Victoria
to the East ? The Australian Alps. Formerly there
were living on the Australian plains the Marsupial
Lion. The first letters in Asia was in the form of
wedges.
Rule 111. The verb is Plural if its nomina-
tives are connected by and; as, The Murray and
the Darling are large rivers.
_ The verb is Singular if its Nominatives are
Singular, and of the third person, and are
separated by or or nor; as, The Emu or the
Kangaroo was shot, —not were shot. Neither he
nor she was ready, —not were ready.
EXEECISES.
Gilbert and Barker was murdered by the natives.
Lake Torrens and the Coorong is salt. Milton or
Shakespeare are the best English poet. From the
thoughtless proceedeth folly and mischief. In the
playground of the bower-bird is found the delicate
shell and the pretty pebble. The native with his boom-
erang knock down the laughing-jackass. Neither
the philosopher nor the poet have been so honoured
as the soldier. The enterprising merchant, the in-
trepid discoverer, or the prudent mechanic, are
more valuable than the miser or the idler. Neither
Nelson at Trafalgar, nor Wellington at Waterloo,
appear to us so noble as Paul before Agrippa. Either
he or you was there. Neither Burke nor Wills sur-
vive the crossing of the continent.


Rule IY. The verb is Singular or Plural
when used with a Collective Noun, or Noun of
Multitude, according to the idea of number
that noun is meant to convey.
We say, The army is beaten, not are beaten; as
unity or oneness is associated with the word
army. But we do not say, The people is wise,
but are ivise; because the word people conveys a
plural idea to our minds, and, therefore,
requires a plural verb.
EXERCISES.
' The navy are large. All the clergy was present.
The public is not to govern our opinion. The com-
mittee was sitting. The regiment go to the barracks.
The Persian multitude falls before the Grecian sword.
The flock of geese pass here. Never were any nation
more cruel than Carthage. The crew of the French
flagship was blown up in the battle of the Nile. The
Council of the Vatican consists of the Pope and the
Cardinals. The New Zealand tribe sharpens their
greenstone axes.
Rule Y. The Object of a Transitive or
Active Yerb is put in the Objective case; as,
I love him; not, I love he.
Remarks. —Neuter verbs sometimes take an
Objective after them lb complete the meaning
of the verb, though not as an object of the
verb ; as, Pharaoh dreamed a dream.
Some Passive verbs have an Objective after
them; as, He was struck that blow. Some Active


Verbs have two Objects; as, James gave Jane his
hoop.
In expressing Time and Distance we some-
times use the Objective Absolute ; as, He swam
two miles; he rode twelve hours. Miles and hours
are objectives absolute, as they cannot be
governed by the neuter verbs swam and rode.
No English verb governs two objectives,
unless both are names of the same object. I
teach you grammar, means, I teach grammar to
you.
EXERCISES.
The cat scratches she. Homer gave they songs for
bread. The good will pity we when we are heedless
of them. Most people like theirselves better than
others. Let thou and I read together.
Rule VI. The verb To be has the same
case after it as before it; as, lam he. After am,
which is a part of the verb to be, the Nomina-
tive he is used, because the Nominative I is
before that verb.
Bemarlc. When two nouns, or a noun and a
pronoun are related by 8. Passive or a Neuter
verb coming between them, they a,re in the
same case j and are then said to be in Apposi-
tion, because they refer to the same thing.
My dog is called Lion; dog and Lion being re-


lated, and having the passive verb is called
between them, are of the same case. They
became my pupils ; they and pupils are in the same
case.
EXERCISE.
It is her who is kind. Scipio was him who burnt
Carthage. It is us who should live for the future.
Was it them whom you know? Elizabeth Fry was
her who was the prisoners’ friend. It is me who
ought to study. Do you believe it to have been they
or their friends ? Whom do you consider to be the
person ? It may be either her or her brother.
Eule VII. The Past or Perfect Participle is
used after the verbs have and be ; as, You have
written, not have wrote ; it was given, not was gave.
Remark. —The participle is sometimes em-
ployed Absolutely; as, Generally speaking, the
Chinese live on rice. Generally speaking is here a
Participle Absolute.
EXERCISE.
Mercury is froze frequently in Canada. We were
showed into Fingal’s cave. The Hungarians have
rose against the Austrians. The fossil iguanodon was
first saw in an English quarry. To be well spoke of
“we must act nobly. The Governor’s health was
drank with applause. Cold has been knowed 90
degrees below the freezing point. The huge Cornish
rocking stones might be shook with the finger. Let
the truths of our religion be engraved uponour hearts.


Rule VIII. The Imperfect or Present Parti-
ciple, when used as a noun, generally has
the before it, and of after it; as, The hallooing
of the hoys was heard.
Remark. —This Participle governs an objective;
as. His seeing me made me go, and is used with
a possessive; as, The hoy's chasing the fowls
caused their death.
EXERCISE.
Getting of knowledge is useful. Trading of Sydney
with Polynesia increases. Franklin became famous
by the drawing lightning from the clouds. Sinking
of Artesian wells is of great service. The maintain-
ing tx-uth requires courage and constancy. The
exploring York Peninsula cost Kennedy his life.
Rule IX. When two verbs come together,
the latter one is in the Infinitive mood; as, I
go to repeat my lesson. The verb to repeat is Infi-
nitive after the verb go.
To, the sign of the Infinitive, is not used
after the verbs bid, dare, need, make, see,
hear, feel, let, know, norafter the auxiliaries
may, can, must, and shall: as. We saw him do
it, not to do it. You may go, not to go.
When these words, bid, dare, &c.,are passive,
the to is used ; as, The Condor has been known to
fly over the Andes. The passive verb been known
requires the to after it.


Remark. —A noun or an adjective, as well as
a verb, will govern the Infinitive mood; as, It
was Howard’s happiness to visit homes of misery.
It is easier to promise than to perform. The noun
happiness and the adjective easier govern the
Infinitive mood.
Some verbs, being independent of the rest
of the sentence, are used absolutely; as, To
speak my mind, I do not like it.
Caution. —Never use for before the Infinitive ;
He wished to see me; not, for to see me.
EXERCISE.
Most people like have their own way. William Tell
dared to rebel. His mother bid him to return early.
The natives have been known devour human flesh.
Some stars appear approach us, and then recede.
William the Norman saw the English to submit.
Sumbawa volcano was heard roar one thousand miles
off. Odin’s watchman heard the wool to grow on the
sheep’s back. Slaves are now no longer made groan
in the United States.
Rule X. The following words, when they
denote uncertainty, put the verb in the Con-
ditional mood: Although, ere, except, if,
HOWEVER, LEST, SO, THAT, THOUGH, TILL, UNLESS,
whatever, whether : thus, — Except Ihe there
he cannot he happy. Ere he arrive we shall he
gone.
When these words do not express uncertainty
they do not alter the verb from the Indicative ;


as, Although he is here, we will go on with our work.
If he calls it hot in Hobart Town, what would he
call it in Adelaide ?
EXERCISE,
If he is well enough he will call to-morrow. Till
he comes keep the kettle on the fire. If thou he
master, act with decision. Whatever Macaulay write
is beautifully written. Whatever course he takes he
may not succeed. Though the American boasts of
freedom, yet will the stain of slavery rest on him.
Oh! that the settler was more thoughtful of the
aborigine! Though he come, Ido not fear him.
That a man prospers, he must labour and be prudent.
Lest he drinks, take away the cup. Unless the field
were ploughed, the corn would not grow. Though the
Poles be fallen, yet they may rise.
Rule XI. The Order of Time is to be
observed in the use of the different tenses.
Thus, — When £ ate my dinner I went to school,
should be— when I had eaten my dinner. The
pluperfect tense, and not the past, should be
employed, as the one action was finished before
the other began.
Caution. —Use the Present and not the Per-
fect infinitive after the past tense. He wished
to have sent to me, should be he wished to send.
Caution. —Never confound the Active verb to
lay, with the Neuter to lie; or the Active to set.


with the Neuter to sit. We lay the cloth, and
lie on the sofa. We set potatoes, but we sit
upon a chair.
EXERCISE.
When Alexander took Tyre, he followed after Darius.
A< Christmas I shall he at school four years. Prince
Alfred will be happy to have reflected upon his visit to
Australia. Napoleon expected to have conquered the
world. I thought of him these many years. You
were in the house all this day. They have done no
more than they ought to have done. Mamma has
giren me a ball, but to-day she took it from me. He
sets up till midnight, and lays in bed till noon.
Rule XII. When one noun is put with another
noun to explain something about it, it is of the
same case ; as, Cromwell the Protector died in
peace. Cromwell and Protector are both nomi-
natives, and in apposition.
When two nouns meaning different things
come together, one is governed by the other in
the Possessive case; as. The hoy's hat; boy is in
the possessive case.
Remarks. —The Possessive is sometimes ex-
pressed without the noun following; as, Nelson’s
body was carried to St. Paul's; meaning St. Paul’s
Church. The sense of the Possessive may be
expressed in the Objective by the word of ; as,
The body of Nelson.


When the Possessive is described by several
nouns, forming a complex noun, the last only
has the sign of the Possessive case ; as, Alston
and Brown's shop .• When the thing belongs to
two or more, the sign is applied to each; as,
John's, Joseph's, and George's copybooks are finished.
EXERCISE.
Miltons genius brightened with his troubles.
Eichard the Third character was not so bad as is repre-
sented. Day’s and Martin’s blacking manufactory.
Three day’s time will determine. Bunyans Pilgrims
Progress. Parises conduct ruined Troy. The lasses
bonnet is new. The planets orbits are irregular.
The work is Scott, the novelist’s. The Duke’s of
Wellington success. He got not only the Prince, but
the Queen’s favour. Stuarts and Landsboroughs ex-
plorations were useful. The aborigines remains in
post tertiary rocks prove the high antiquity of man.
Rule XIII. When two nouns are compared,
the Comparative degree of the adjective is used;
when more than two, the Superlative is used.
Bern arks. —An Adjective follows a Neuter verb
when it qualifies the noun which goes before it;
as, The house looks clean; clean qualifies house.
Caution.— Do not employ double comparatives
or double superlatives; as, more fairer; most
loveliest.
EXERCISE.
You are best than I. The right hand is the strongest.
The Athenians were the more polished of all the


Greeks. Solon was wise, but Solomon was wisest.
Newcastle coal is most bituminous than that of Port
Irthur, but not cheap than it. My ball is rounder
tlan yours. It is more untrue to say that piety de-
stroys happiness. Cicero was the chiefest orator of
Pane. The waratah is the most beautifullest flower
of Australia. In Queensland are the most perfect
fosiils of huge Cretaceous Saurians.
Eule XIV. The Distributive Articles, each,
EV2RY, either, neither, refer to nouns of the
Siigular number, and, therefore, require the
verb to be singular; as, Each man was at his
posi
The Article the is put before an adjective
used absolutely ; as, The Good are scarce. Good
is ibsolute, and has the power of a noun.
Remark. —The Article is often omitted before
abstract nouns ; before those standing for a
whole species of kind; before names of arts,
sciences, titles, &c.; as, Beauty belongs to flowers.
Foxes are cunning. Geology is useful. Barons are
numerous.
Caution. —Use not the demonstrative plural
for singular; as, These sort of apples, for this sort
of apples.
EXERCISE.
Either of the persons are sure to be within. Every
nation look out for themselves. They admire those
kind of books most. The pneumatics teaches us the


principles of the air-pump. Benevolent enjoy peace.
Neither of the parties oppress the other. These selfish
sort of people are avoided. The Astronomy was culti-
vated by the ancient Chaldeans and Egyptians. Eacl
tribe of the Indians were driven back by the settlers.
Sincere are respected, deceitful are despised.
Eule XV. Pronouns agree with the nouis
for which they stand in gender, number aid
person; as, Moodlong is a native; he is an intelli-
gent lad; not it is. Moodlong is masculine,
third person singular, and so is the pronoun le.
Remarks. —ln the position of pronouns in a
sentence, the second person should go befoie
the others, and the third person before tie
first; excepting in the plural, when we shou.d
he placed first; as, He and I will go. We, yoi,
and they are right.
The pronoun it stands for nouns of all gen-
ders and numbers; as, It is I. It was the Lady.
It was the boys.
EXERCISE.
James had the book but lost them. They and we
love to gather flowers. The mind can do much, but
we must not overwork him. I and you were ready.
Mary had a sweeter temper than her sister. I and
the boy read together. The Swedes lost the whole
of its army in Lapland by cold. Is there any man
who can be sure they will live long ? They were they
who did the mischief.


Eule XVI. If no Nominative come between
the relative and the verb, the relative is the
nominative to the verb; as, Queen Dido, who
was obliged to leave Tyre, founded the colony of
Carthage. Who is nominative to the verb was
obliged.
If a Nominative come between the relative
and the verb, the relative is objective when
' governed by a verb or pi’eposition, and posses-
sive when governed by a noun following; as,
The boy whom you saw is away. The man whose
apples tve took is near. The verb saw governs
whom, and the noun apples governs whose.
Caution. —Place the relative as near as possi-
ble to the Antecedent. Instead of saying,
Deter the Great was opposed to Charles the Swede,
who so improved the Russian people, we should
say, Peter the Great, who so improved the Russian
people, was opposed to Charles the Swede; because
who relates properly to Peter not to Charles.
EXERCISE.
Correct the sentences, and underline the
antecedents.
The hunter whom came caught a native devil.
Geology, who teaches the nature of rocks, is useful to
miners. Macquarie favoured the prisoners,'who was
Governor of New South Wales. The asteroids have
been recently discovered by astronomers, who are
between Jupiter and Mars. Flinders, whom boat’s


crew was lost near Port Lincoln, named places after
the men. The Dutch sailors, who the New Zea-
landers killed, belonged to Tasman. Marco Polo,
whom travels are so pleasing, lived 500 years ago.
The donkey was beaten by the boys, who loves a
sweet thistle.
Rule XVII. Prepositions should be placed
before the relatives who and which, and after
the relative that ; as, To whom do you go. In
which house were they. The hook that she went
for.
EXEEGISB.
The poems of Mackay, which I have a great esteem
for. We saw Mount Kosciusko, which Strzelecki
gave name too. The Seiks of India against that we
fought. The fossil kangaroo of that we spake was as
high as an elephant. Leichhardt and Mitchell, than
whom were no greater travellers in North Australia.
The noble Maories whose gradual decrease we mourn
on account of. The object after that Eoss went was
the South Magnetic Pole, and which he came near.
Rule XYIII. Adverbs are generally placed
near the words they qualify; being before adjec-
tives, after active and neuter verbs, and between
the auxiliary and the participle; thus, A very
great while. Tom eats and sleeps well. You were
completely shaken.
The Adverb is before the Adjective great,
after the verb eats and sleeps, and between the
auxiliary were and the participle shalten.


Remark. —Two negatives have sometimes the
meaning of an affirmative: He is not unjust,
means, he is just.
Caution. —Do not use adverbs for adjectives,
nor adjectives for adverbs: as, The sweetly rose,
for sweet rose. She plays delightful, for plays
delightfully. In poetry, however, this rule is
occasionally broken.
EXERCISE.
The ladies of Turkey are hidden thoroughly from
the view of strangers. Many have been willing
always to die for truth. Eyre in his overland route
showed wonderful his courage. Strzelecki in the
dense bush of the Australian Alps lost nearly his life.
Kindly act to those who have hastened never to
favour you. Some ancient exceedingly manuscripts
have been found now in the strongly record room of
Nineveh. I must not play no more. I cannot nor
will not consent.
Rule XIX. Prepositions govern a noun or
pronoun in the Objective case; as, The horse
fell on him, —not on he.
Remark.—ln is generally used before coun-
tries and chief towns ; at before smaller places
and after the verb to he. Thus, He lived in
Hobart Town and at Glenorchy, in Tasmania, and
was afterwards in Melbourne.
The preposition is sometimes understood,


though not expressed; as, Tell me his name, that
is, tell to me.
EXERCISE.
This was sent to thou. He gave more to her
brother than to she. Get information from whoever
you can. Sir John Franklin discovered much at the
Polar Regions before he resided at Van Diemen’s
Land. The Romans of theirselves submitted to
Caesar. For who has so much been done as he? Wil-
liam thought he could do nothing of hisself. Fellen-
berg taught in Hofwyl at Switzerland. William
Penn deserved honour for his system of colonising at
America.
Rule XX. Certain words require to be fol-
lowed by certain prepositions; we do not say,
Frown to him, but on him, or, at him.
The following are instances of this rule: —
Abound in
Accused of, by
Adapt to
Agreeable to
Antipathy to, against
Call on, upon
Clear of, from
Confer on, upon
Devolve on, upon
Dissent from, assent to
Endowed with
Fawn upon, on
Greedy after, of
Grieve at
Ignorant of
Independent of
Indifferent to
Inseparable from
Overwhelmed with, by
Prejudice against
Reflect upon, on
Rejoice at
Smile at, upon, on
Sympathise with
Thirst for, after
Wait upon, on, at, for


Rule XXI. Conjunctions connect the same
Cases of nouns and pronouns, and the same
Moods and Tenses of verbs; as, He and she are
at home; Mary smiles and frowns. He and she
are of the same case, and smiles and frowns of
the same mood and tense.
Remark. —Some conjunctions answer to one
another; as, Though — yet; either — or: neither —
nor; so—as or that; whether — or. Thus, Though
I go, yet trill I remember thee. Whether at school or
at home, he obedient.
Caution. —Never use as for that. Do not say,
Not as I recollect; say, Not that I recollect.
EXERCISE.
William and me came. Read your book or may write
your exercise. You read to him and I. The English
should be so mindful of the aborigines to consult their
good. Professing one thing and to act another is dis-
honourable. Paul was as courageous as to face death
by going up to Jerusalem. Neither Leipsic or Water-
loo ruined Napoleon; the French saw that his army
and him were opposed to their real welfare. Though
the Duke of Edinburgh was shot at in Sydney, so the
heart of Australia is loyal.
SYNTACTICAL PARSING.
Australia is destined to become distinguished for
wealth and power
Australia —proper noun, neuter, singular,
nom. to verb is destined.


Is destined —regular passive verb, Indica-
tive, present, third person, sing., agreeing with
its nom. Australia, according to the rule that
“ A verb agrees with its subject,” &c.
To become —an irregular neuter verb, infin-
itive, governed in that mood by the verb is
destined; as “ One verb governs,” &c.
Distinguished —adjective, positive, qualify-
ing country (understood.)
For —preposition, governing wealth. Wealth
—common neuter noun, singular, objec-
tive of preposition for; as, “ Prepositions
govern,” &c.
And —conjunction, connecting wealth with
power in the objective.
Power —common neuter noun, sing., ob-
jective of for, and also objective by the rule,
“Conjunctions connect the same cases of
nouns.”
DEEIYATION OF LANGUAGE.
The notion that all languages are derived from the
Hebrew is not admitted. The known languages have
been traced to three classes, apparently essentially
different from each other. The first has Monosyllabic
roots, but these are incapable of being united. The
second has Monosyllabic roots which are capable of
being united. The third has Dissyllabic roots. The
Chinese is an instance of the first; the ancient Sanscrit
of India of the second; and the Arabic and Hebrew of
the third.


It is certainly remarkable that the Sanscrit and the
Chinese have been known as distinct, and very distinct
languages for nearly four thousand years. The same
may be said of the Hebrew and other Semetie tongues,
which are equally dissimilar from the two before men-
tioned. This proves the antiquity of our race.
The Primitive roots of the Chinese are 400 in num-
ber, though the written characters are many thousands.
The language most opposed in nature to the Chinese is
that of the American Indians; the words of which are
often of extraordinary length, yet the syllables in their
separated state have no meaning. The grammatical
forms of the Indian dialects are most complicated and
artificial. In Japan are two languages, the Monosyllabic
and the Polysyllabic.
It is from the Sanscrit form of language that the
English is derived. The Zend or Ancient Persian was
allied to the Sanscrit. The German is similar to the
Persian. The Celtic of Ireland and Scotland, the
Gothic of the Ancient Germans, the Greek, and the
Latin, are all of the Sanscrit family. The Russian is
like the oldest Greek. The Latin is more ancient than
the Greek. As these various nations extend from India
to Ireland, this particular group of languages is known
by the name of Indo-European. If this family of
tongues be derived from one source, there would still
be a great dissimilarity with other groups of languages,
both ancient and modern.
The German or Teutonic branch of the Indo-
European tribe is divided into the High and Low.
The High consists of the Frank and Mceso-Gothic, and
the Low of Anglo-Saxon and Old Saxon, —the parent
languages of the English. The Low German is older
than the High German.
The Celtic is of two branches—the Cambrian or
Welsh, and the Gaelic or Erse of Ireland and Scotland.
The early inhabitants of Italy and Greece were pro-


bably Erse or Low Celtic. The Lowland Scotch is a
sister language to the Anglo-Saxon. The Manx of the
Isle of Man spoke a Celtic dialect with many Norse
words.
The aborigines of Europe, that is, those before the
Goths and other Indo-European tribes came, were
driven chiefly to the North or to the Pyrenees; the
former are the Lapps and Eins, the latter are the
Basques of Spain. The language of the Basques
wholly differs from any in Europe or Asia. The
Russian, Polish, Servian, and other kindred tongues
are called Sclavonian.
The languages of Europe are, therefore, of three
families: —the Teutonic, the Sclavonic, and the
Celtic.
As an illustration of the identity of languages
called the Indo-European, the following is given:—
Sanscrit, bhrater; Greek, phrater; Latin, frater; Gothic,
brothar; Old High German, pruoder; Celtic, brathair;
English, brother.
The English language is now very different from that
spoken by the Anglo-Saxon conquerors of our Father-
land. Not only have the original words been corrupted,
but there has been a great acquisition of words from
other languages. The Danes and Normans brought
fresh words when they came.
Many French and other foreign words were gradually
introduced. But a greater number are of Latin
and Greek derivation, being introduced by writers who
studied these ancient languages at a time, about 300 or
400 years ago, when philosophy was only to be learnt
from books written in those tongues.
Many terms employed in military affairs, in cooking,
and in dress, are of French origin; appellations of arts
and sciences are usually of Greek; those relating to
the fine arts, of Italian. A few Celtic words yet remain
among us; as Basket, cradle, Ben Lomond. There are
some Danish; as, Girl , Earl, flail.


From the German and Dutch, we have technical
terms employed in naval affairs; as. Boom, ship, canvas,
cable, yacht. There are Norman words in damsel, baron,
bailiff; Spanish in cigar, admiral; Portuguese in alli-
gator; Arabian in coffee, alcohol, cotton; Persian in
rhubarb, bazaar, shrub; Hindoo in sofa, bamboo.
There are about 40,000 words in the English lan-
guage; although, if all the proper names be included,
the number would, probably, amount to 70,000.
The following prefixes are of Saxon origin:— A, in;
as, a-bed; — be, about; as, besprinkle; mis, wrong;
as, mistaken; — un, not; as, untrue.
The following are of Latin origin:— Ad, to; as, ad-
joining;—co, con, com, cor, together; as, co-partner;—
de, from; as, depart;— ex, out of; as, express;— extra,
beyond; as, extraordinary;— im, in, ig, il, ir, not; as,
ignoble, irreligious;— post , after; as, postscript;— pro,
for; as, pronoun;— re, again; as, return; — super, above;
as, superfine.
The following are of Greek origin;— A, without; as,
apathy; — anti, against; as, antichristian; — hyper, over:
para, near to; — syn, with; as, synagogue.
The affixes ant, ard, art, ist, ive, er, ir, ster, denote the
doer of any thing; as, teacher, songster. Some affixes,
as let, kin, ock, mean little. Thus, stream, streamlet;
hill, hillock.
The principal affixes of verbs are, Ate, ite, ize, ify, ish,
ble, le, en, er; they signify do or make.
Most regular verbs are from the Latin. We have
words to signify the same thing, both of Latin and of
Saxon origin, as Saxon, building; Latin, edifice; Saxon,
to see; Latin, to perceive.


ANALYSIS.—(After the Morrell Method.)
A Phrase, or incomplete sentence, is used
often for a noun, adjective, or adverb. For,
Study is a duty, we may say, To he studious, or,
Being studious, is a duty. For, Generous hoys are
admired, we may say, Boys of generosity, or, Boys
exhibiting generosity. For, He runs quickly, we
may say, He runs with quickness. To be studious
is an infinitive phrase; being studious, a parti-
cipial phrase; with quickness, a prepositional
phrase.
A Subject may be a Noun ; as, John reads;
a Pronoun, as, He reads ; an Infinitive phrase,
as, To read is pleasing; or a Participial phrase,
as, Beading is pleasing.
A Subject is enlarged by its Attributes,
which may be Adjectives, Nouns in Apposition,
or Nouns or Pronouns in the Possessive case.
The Predicate is generally a verb; as , James
runs. It may be formed by the help of a
Copula (or joining word, as is, or was,) with an
Adjective; as, The Girl is gentle: with an
Adverb; as, She is here: with a Noun; as, il tars
is a planet: with a Phrase; as, Peter was always
in trouble. Peter would be the Subject, and,
was always in trouble, the Predicate, or what is
told us of Peter.
The Predicate is extended in meaning by an
Adverb; as, Monkeys chatter continually: by


a Prepositional phrase; as, Monkeys chatter
without stopping: by an Adverbial phrase; as,
Monkeys chatter very often indeed: by a Noun
phrase; as, Monkeys chatter every hour: by a
Participial phrase; as, Monkeys chatter scream-
ing aloud.
A Direct Object may be a Noun; as, The
dentist draws a tooth: a Pronoun; as, I read it:
an Adjective; as, Follow the true: an Infini-
tive phrase; as, Tom likes to eat: or, a Parti-
cipial phrase; as, All boys like having a holiday.
An Indirect Object is sometimes necessary
to complete the Sentence. This may be an
Objective Noun or Pronoun; as, We consider
him a blockhead. Him is the Direct, and block-
head the Indirect object. We can use the
Noun or Pronoun with a Preposition, and say,
John took the bat from his brother; the latter
phrase is the Indirect Object. The Phrase
may be an Indirect Object; as, Pipe fruit
tempts boys to eat; or, Brutus beheld Caesar
dying by his hand.
The Noun-Sentence is an expansion of the
Noun-idea. Thus, “ Benevolence is attractive,”
may be rendered, “ That a person be benevolent is
attractive.” The Adjective-Sentence—“ A good
boy thinks of his mother,” can be changed to,
“A boy ivho is good thinks of his mother.”
To analyse a sentence is to take it to pieces,
so as to understand the relation of its several
parts.


EXAMPLE.
The brave boy generously forgives the humbled
foe.
GENERAL ANALYSIS.
Subject with p. Object with Extension of
Attribute. P recLlcate - Attribute, the Predicate.
The brave For S ives Th 6 Generousl y-
DETAILED ANALYSIS.
The brave
Boy
Generously
Forgives
The humbled
Foe.
Attribute to Subject.
Subject of Sentence.
Extension of Predicate.
Predicate of Sentence.
Attribute to Object.
Object of the Sentence.
PROSODY.
Prosody has relation to Poetry, which is
bound by certain rules, forming Metre.
Verses of poetry are made not only of
syllables, but combinations of syllables called
Feet. A foot, having the first syllable long
and the second short, is called a Trochee; as,
perfect. If the first he short and _ the second
long, the foot is an lambus; as, reject.
The Dactyl, of three syllables, has the first


syllable long, and the others short; as, regular.
The Anapest has two short and one long; as,
overcome; or, as in the line
“ From the centre all round to the sea.”
The Change of sound from long to short
syllables is called Ehythm.
The lambic Ehythm is most common; as,
Too well I see, and rue the dire event.
In Blank Yerse, as the above, the line is of
five lambic feet.
The Spondee has two long syllables; as.
Of Man’s first disobedience, and the fruit.
The Trochaic rhythm is rarely used. The
Dactyl occurs in hexameters; as, One more
unfortunate.
Some words of two syllables have the accent
on the Ultimate or last syllable; as, preserve.
Others are accented on the first, or Penultimate;
as, fortune. In three syllable words the accent
may he on the Antepenult, or last but two; as,
fortunate. With longer words, as communication,
the accent is mostly on the Penultimate.
Besides rhythm, poetry has Ehyme, to pro-
duce which the syllables must be accented.
Two lines rhyme when their last words are
similarly accented; as, glory and story.


GEAMMAE OF NATIVE LANGUAGE.
There are many dialects or languages of the
aborigines, but the grammar, or construction,
is about the same in all.
Instead of our twenty-six letters, they have
much less, wanting the c, f, j, q, s, v, x, c, z,
though they have the additional sounds of ng
and soft ch. In South Australia, particularly,
most woi’ds end in vowels.
Adjectives are- composed differently in dif-
ferent tribes. In Adelaide they say karra, high;
karraintyerla, higher. The River Murray blacks
say worpippi, great; worpippinnni, greater. Ad-
verbs and Conjunctions are not numerous.
Instead of Prepositions, they have postfixes;
as, ityarnungo, from; in taiapparnalityarnungo,
from lips.
There are two Nominatives: —one inactive,
the other active; ngatoa kuttan, I am, hang
buntan, I strike; ngatoa, being one nominative,
and hang, second. There are three Numbers
in nouns, pronouns, and adjectives; viz.:—singu-
lar, dual and plural; and there are five cases.
They have no relative pronouns, no articles, no
auxiliary verbs, no distinction in gender, and
no distinct passive voice.
The Verb is inflected by the prefixed pro-
noun; as, ngape terrin,! stand; ngurru terrin,


thou standest; ninni terrin, he stands. In New
South Wales the natives use two futures,
definite and indefinite. Instead of the pas-
sive form, 1 am struck with a stone, they would
say, a stone struck me.
To cry is ngurrunborhurrilliko; to court is
kakkababandi; and to sneeze , moolyanyetteyogou.
THE END.
Fergusson and Moore, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.


.
r
* *


*


/
X , ■
