

GRAMMAR
OF THE
NARRINYERI TRIBE
OF
AUSSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
By the late REV.
G. TAPLIN
Aborigines’ Missionary, Point MeLeay.
Adelaide:
PRINTED BY E. SPILLER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH-TERRACE.
1880.




CONTENTS.
PAGES.
Introductory Remarks .. .. .. tm ..5 6
Letters Used in the Language .. ~ ~ 7
Nouns .. .. 7^
Pronouns .. .. ~ ~ 11-13
Verbs 14-20
Adjectives .. .. .. ~ m 2i
Adverbs .. .. .. i( 22 9 3
Syntactical Notes .. .. ~ ~ it 23 24




THE GRAMMAR
OF THE
Language of the "Aarrinyeri" Tribe.
• ?- IS - an § ua S e is spoken by the tribe of aborigines in South Australia
inhabiting the country on the shores of Encounter Bay and the Lakes
Alexandrina, Albert, and Coorong, and twenty miles up the River
Murray. There are some trifling variations of dialect between the clans
that compose the tribe, but I do not perceive such a difference as would
be an impediment to a stranger learning the language.
My object in Committing to writing the information which I have
gathered respecting the grammar of this tongue has been to present it
in such a form as to enable students of Comparative Philology to use it
or the purpose of rendering a modicum of help towards arriving at
correct conclusions respecting the Philosophy of Language. The com-
parison of the grammatical structure of different languages is of the
greatest importance, and the surest guide to the real relationships of
language and nations. In saying this, lam almost quoting the remarks
of that lamented and eminent laborer in this department of Anthropo-
logical science, the late Dr. Bleek, of Cape Town.
Any one who has ever undertaken to gather up the grammar of
ai t-Tl ntten and bartarous language, will appreciate the difficulties
which have to be encountered. Inquiries are useless when addressed
to minds upon whom the idea of grammar never dawned. Expressions
are heard having a certain force, and it is only after years of careful
observation that those expressions can be analyzed, and their true
character discerned; and this difficulty is increased when, as in the
language of the Narrinyeri, ellipsis and abbreviations abound. The
Rev. H. A. E. Meyer, a Lutheran Missionary, made a brave attempt
to master the grammar of this language in 1843, and with some success;
but yet his attempt presents a great number of ludicrous mistakes
to one better acquainted with it. I found I had to rely on my own
observations if I was to gain any correct knowledge of the language.


It is necessary in pursuing such an inquiry to avoid falling into the
mistake of supposing and concluding that there are complications and
difficulties of structure where there are none, and refinements and nice
distinctions of signification existing when there is nothing of the kind.
Sentences and expressions, which appear at first to have this character,
afterwards resolve themselves into simple and understood phrases. It
has several times been my experience to have what appeared strange and
unintelligible conglomerations of words resolve themselves into plain and
forcible expressions.
I do not presume that in preparing this grammer I have never fallen
into any mistakes. I know that I am always discovering something in
the language which I did not know before. And, indeed, it is the case
with every observant speaker of his native tongue that he is continually
finding out new capabilities and powers and beauties of expression ; it is
then much more certain that such will be the case in learning a strange
and hitherto unwritten language.
The aborigines speak their language very correctly, that is, they
dislike to hear what they consider irregular expressions. Although they
do not understand systematic grammar, they know when one phrase is
wrong and another right. The principal cause of changes in the
language is the custom of dropping the use of words which may be
contained in the name of some person who dies. This often produces
awkward changes, but more of words than of grammar.
In giving names to animals I observe that the name often resembles
the voice or note of the animal; but Ido not see any traces of imitation
of the sounds made by beasts or birds beyond this.
The language of the Narrinyeri is lexically very different from the
languages of the neighboring tribes.
It is remarkable that the Narrinyeri (like all other nations) in speaking
English speak it according to the idiom of their own language; the
English words are arranged according to the aboriginal vernacular.


LETTERS.
In writing native, I have used the “ vowels” according to the following
table of their sounds :
a as a in father. o as o in hope.
e as a in hate. u as oo in moon.
i as e in mete [to measure.] ai as i in mine.
" i” at the end of words with u over it [i] asi and y in pity and city.
The “ consonants” are sounded as follows :
h as in bed. p as in pet.
d as in dead. r as in rope.
dh as in though. t as in top.
g as in good [always hard]. th as in think.
h aspirate. w as in wit [always conso-
le as in king. nantal].
„ 1 as in long. y as in yet [ditto].
m as in mat. ng nasal [use as if at the end of a
n as in new. word, only dropping the vowel].
The language is without the letters f, v, s, and z.
NOUNS.
There is only one declension of nouns in the Narrinyeri language.
There is no distinction of gender in the use of them. They usually end
in a vowel, commonly short i (pronounced like short e) in the nominative
case. The stem of the noun is got by casting away this terminal vowel,
and the cases are formed by adding to the termination of the stem
affixes which form the different cases. The only instances where there is a
difference of declension is where the words express human relationships.
This we will notice afterwards. In this language the nouns, adjectives,
and pronouns are declined in the singular, dual, and plural numbers.
The declension of adjectives is, however, uncommon, defective, and
irregular.
The genitive case of nouns is formed by the affix aid. This not only
means of, but also, in the case of places, at; as, Kornald menake —A
man’s beard. Lewin itye Tipald —He lives at Tip. Ngape tantir mantald
—I slept in the wurley.
The aid is often used by itself, but always with the sense of belonging
to, or connection with ; as, Pinyatowe tyilyi aldamb —Sugar belonging to
or for or connected with rice.


The dative case is formed by the affixes in the singular of angle and
ungai. The former as the signification of to and by, the latter of on, or
by; yet the terminations are used so interchangeably we can only say
that both are forms of the dative; as, Loru el ap mantangk —l will go
to the hut, house, or wurley. Tangulun itye ngurlungai —Stands he on
a hill ? Potungai —On a horse.
The causative is formed in the singular by the affix il —evidently an
abbreviation of the pronoun Icili (by him); as, Kornil mempir napangk, or
inangk nap —The man struck his wife.
The ablative is formed by the affix anmant; as, Nguk (water), perk
(well), anmant (from) —Water from the well. This form of the ablative
is almost confined to places. When it relates to things or persons it is
formed by nend ; as, Ngungkura (first), ityan (it), pintamin (take away),
ngarrari ( \\oo(f),umanyirinend(ixom. your), pelinend (eye)—First cast the
wood out of thine eye. Kinanyirienend (from his), prewirrenend (side),
yaralin (flows), kreive (blood), barekar (water) —From his side there flows
blood and water.
It is really difficult to say how many cases the nouns have, because all
prepositions are joined as affixes to the nouns to which they relate, but
only some of them change their form, according as the noun is in the
singular, dual, or plural number.
The following is a list of prepositional affixes and prepositions, shewing
where they change in the dual and plural, and where they do not:
Singular. DuAl. Plural.
aid enggal an = of, at, upon.
, I to, on, in, by, at; sometimes used
ungaz ungengul ungar = { % lltrumentally.
angk
, ( by, through, because of; instru-
eftgga ar { mentally, or causatively.
nend nend nend = from, out of.
nenggulund f
. _ fof the form of the genitive; in
an W \ pronominal adjectives, with.
anmant = from a place.
No difference from number :
ungunai ) tunti —in the middle.
ungunel > in front of. loru— up.
ungul ) moru — down.
maremuntunt— beneath. ambe — for.
tarangk — between. ngurukwar— outside, without.
tepangk —close to. ngungkura— before.
tuntangk —between two.
I have given these prepositions here because of their close, and, indeed,
peculiarly inseparable relationship to nouns and pronouns.


After much consideration, I have come to the conclusion that the fol-
lowing is the declension of a noun:—
Porle— (A. Child).
Singular.
Nominative .. .. .. porle, a child.
Genitive .. .. .. porlald, of a child.
Dative . .. . . .. porlangk j to, with, or on
“ •• •• .. porlungai ] a child.
Causative .. .. ~ porlil, by a child.
Ablative .. porlenend , from a child.
Vocative .. .. .. porlinda, 0! child.
Dual.
Nominative .. ~ .. porlengk, two children.
Genitive .. .. ~ porlengal, of two children.
Dative .. .. .. porlungengun, to two children.
Causative ~ .. ~ porlengul, by two children.
Ablative .. .. .. porlengulund, from two children.
“ • • • • .. porlenengulund.
vocative ~ .. .. porlula, 0 ! two children.
Plural.
Nominative .. .. .. po rlar, children.
Genitive .. ~ .. porlan, of children.
Dative . .. .. .. porlungar, to with, by, or on
children.
Causative ~ .. ~ porlar, by children.
Ablative .. .. ~ porlenend, from children.
porlannand.
vocative .. .. .. porluna, 0 ! children.
Sometimes compound substantives are formed out of simple nouns by
the addition of inyeri (belonging to or of), a verb stem or an adjective.
To such words belong peculiar laws of declension. For instance :
Kurlinyeri , from Icurle (head), inyeri (belonging to); i.e. a hat or head-
dress. Turninyeri , from turne (foot), and inyeri (belonging to); i.e. a
boot. Kurinyinyerengk , from kurrengk (the two shins;, inyerengk
(belonging to two); i.e. a pair of trousers. Now, in such words as these,
the prepositional sign would be affixed to the end of the word, as
Kurlinyerald, of a hat— Kurrinyerenggal, of a pair of trousers.
Then, again, we have yande orn, from yande (old or useless) and
korn' (a man) —i.e. an old man; yanae imin, from yande (old) and
mimmey a woman) —i.e. an old woman In these cases the sign of the
declension comes between; as yant aid orn—oi an old man; yant aid
imin —of an old woman.
The particle urmi is added to some stems of verbs to make it mean an
instrument to do the verb with; as, kalt urmi —a spade—a digging
thing ; drek urmi (a tomahawk), from drekm (cutting or chipping) and
urmi (an instrument). In such words the case endings are added to the
end of the whole word.


The word amalde is added to the stems of some verbs to make them
signify a person who does that action; as, pelt amalde, from pettin (steal)
and amalde (an agent)—i.e. a thief; yelpul amalde, from yelpulun (lying)
and amalde (an agent)—i.e. a liar. These words take also the affix at
the end.
Watyeri is a particle used in the same way, and signifies “ full ofas,
plonggewatyeri —full of, or possessed by sorcery; tuniwatyeri —full of
sand; merkewatyeri —full of holes.
The particle urumi means something used for a purpose; as, tyetyurumi
from tyetyin (anoint) and urumi (a means) —i.e. oil, ointment; muturumi
(a drink), from muttun (drinking); kunkurumi, from kunkun (swallowing),
things to swallow—i.e. pills.
The declension of words signifying human relationships is peculiar.
There are different forms of the word meaning a relationship, in order
to express whether it is mine, yours, or his. For instance :
nanghai— my father. narkowalli— his mother.
ngaiowe— your father. gelanowe— my elder brother.
yikowalle— his father. gelauwe— your elder brother.
nainkowa— my mother. gelauwalle— his elder brother.
ninkuwe— your mother.
This word nanghai (my father) is declined thus :
Nominative ~ .. .. nanghai— my father.
Accusative .. ~ nanghaiyin— in my father.
Genitive .. .. nanghaiyin— of my father.
Dative ~ .. .. nanghaiyinangk— to my father.
Causative .. .. .. nanghaiyininda— by my father.
Ablative .. .. .. nanghaiyinanyir— from my father.
For—nan ghaiyinambe—/or my father.
Now, in all the words signifying relationships, this form of declension
is the same. The accusative and the genitive are alike, and are formed
by adding in or an to the nominative; and every other case is formed by
affixing a case particle or case ending to the accusative or genitive case.
This is the method, whether the word he of my, your, or his relations.
But where the case ending is affixed to the genitive case it is sometimes
put between the stem of the word and the case ending ; as, Tartaldan—
of my younger brother.


PRONOUNS.
The personal pronouns are declined in three numbers —singular, dual,
and plural. After each pronoun in its full form I shall put the abbrevia-
ted, or euphonized form, commonly used in speaking.
Ist Person. Ngape (I).
Singular.
Nominative .. .. ngape —ap .. .. I.
Accusative .. .. ngan —an .. .. ~ me.
Causative ngate at, atte .. by me.
Dual.
Nominative .. ~ ngel—angel (pronounced ang'eij we two.
Accusative .. .. lam alam .. ..us two.
Causative ~ ngel—angel (pronounced ang'ei) by us two.
Plural.
Nominative ~ ~ ngum we.
Accusative .. .. nam anam .. .. us.
Causative .. .. .. ngurn .. .. .. by us.
2nd Person. Nginte (Thou).
Singular.
Nominative .. .. nginte ind, inde .. thou.
Accusative .. .. ngum um, m .. thee.
Causative .. .. ~ nginte, ind .. .. ..by thee.
Vocative .. .. nginta inda .. .. 0 thou !
Dual.
Nominative ~ .. ngurl ung-url ~ ~ you two.
Accusative .. .. lorn olom .. ~ you two.
Causative .. .. .. ngurl ung-url ~ ..by you two.
Vocative .. .. ngurla ula .. 0 you two!
Plural.
Nominative .. .. ngun ung'-un .. .. you.
Accusative .. .. nom onom .. .. you.
Causative .. .. .. ngun ung'-un .. ..by you.
Vocative .. .. nguna una .. .. 0 you !
3rd Person. Kitye (He).
Singular.
Nominative .. kitye itye .. .. he, she, it.
Accusative .. .. kin, in • him, her, it.
I by him.
Causative kil il j by her.
t by it.
Dual.
Nominative ~ ~ kengk engk .. .. they two.
Accusative .. ~ kenggun eng'gun ~ them two.
Causative .. .. kenggul eng'gul .. by them two.
Plural.
Nominative ~ .. kar —ar .. .. .. they.
Accusative ~ ~ kan —an .. .. them.
Causative .. .. ~ kar —ar ~ ~ ..by them.


The other cases of pronouns are formed by adding proper case endings
to the accusative. The following are the case endings :
auwe \ Genitive.
auwurle )
anyir .. becomes Genitive in the case of pronominal adjectives,
angk .. Dative to, at, in, into, with, on.
anyir .. from —as a result.
ambe .. for, instead of, for an object (as “ kak in oura, nak
“ ambour ityan ” put it here that I may see it.
Literally, foresee it nak amb).
The following is a declension of the word Utye (he): —
Singular.
Nominative .. .. kitye .. .. he-
Accusative .. kin.. .. .. him.
Genitive .. .. kanauwe .. of him.
Dative .. .. kinangk .. .. to him.
Causative .. .. kil .. .. by him.
From kinanyir, from him. | For kinambe, for him.
Dual.
Nominative .. kengk .. .. they two.
Accusative .. .. keng'gun .. them two.
Genitive .. .. keng'gunauwe .. of them two.
Dative .. .. keng'gunangk.. to them two.
Causative .. keng'gul .. .. by them two.
From —keng'gunanyir, from them two. For —keng'gunambe, for them two.
Plural.
Nominative .. .. kar .. .. they.
Accusative .. kan .. .. them.
Genitive .. .. kanauwe .. of them.
Dative .. .. kanangk .. ..to them.
Causative .. .. kar .. .. by them.
From kananyir, from them. | For kanambe, for them.
The possessive or adjective pronouns, my, his, your, &c., change their
terminations in forming their cases ; the auwe becomes anyir before the
termination expressing the case. Thus we say kinanyerald, not lcinau-
weald. This will be best illustrated by the declension of the possessive
pronouns kinauwe (his), keng'gunanwe (theirs —two), kanauwe (their) : -
Kin auwe (Sis).
Singular.
Nominative .. .. kinauwe .. his (sometimes “ kinauwurle”).
Accusative .. .. kinauwe.
Genitive .. .. .. kinanyerald .. of his.
Dative .. ~ .. kinanyerangk .. to his.
Causative .. .. .. kinanveril.. ..by his.
From—kinanyirenend, from his.
Dual.
Nominative .. .. keng'gunauwe.. theirs (two).
Accusative .. .. keng'gunauwe.
Genitive .. .. keng'gunanyirald of theirs (two).
Dative keng'gunanyirangk to theirs (two).
Causative .. .. keng'gunanyeril .. by theirs (two).
From —keng'gunanvirenend, from theirs (two).


Plural.
Nominative .. .. kanauwe ~ .. their.
Accusative ~ kanauwe.
Genitive .. .. kananyirald .. of their.
Dative .. .. kananyirangk .. to their.
Causative .. .. kananyiril .. by their.
Fhom —kananyirenend, from their.
The pronoun following a transitive verb would be in the dative or
genitive case ; as, Ngate mempir kinanyirangk kurl —l struck his head ;
not kinauioe kurle. At the same time there are many instances in which
the auwe would be used in an objective sense; as, Kil pleppin
kenggunauwe pillar —He touched the eyes of these two.
The demonstrative pronouns are hikke (this), hityekatye (this one),
and naiye (that).
The following are the forms of the demonstrative pronoun hik :—
Singular. Dual. Plural.
Nominative hikkai henggengk harar.
Accusative .. .. hin henggun haran.
Ablative hll henggul harar.
Also —Hityekatye (this onej [emphatic].
Singular. Dual. Plural.
Nominative hityekatye hengenekengk hamakar.
Accusative .. .. hityenekatye.
The pronoun naiye (that) has the following forms:
Singular. Dual. Plural.
Nominative naiye nakak narar.
Accusative .. .. orne narar.
Genitive omauwe.
Dative omangk.
The interrogative pronouns nganggi (who?) and minye (what?) are
used in the following forms in the various cases :
Nganggi (Who?)
Nominative .. .. nganggi— who.
y. ( nak — to whom.
Dative | nak an angk —to whom (plural).
Genitive j |]auwurli } w^ose or whom.
Causative .. .. ngandi— by whom.
Ablative .. .. .. nambi — for whom.
Minye (What ?)
Nominative .. .. minyi— what.
Dative mek — to what.
Genitive ~ .. mek — of what.
Ablative mekimbe — for what (what for).
f mengye by what (huiv).
] minyandai —what times (how often).
! minyurti— what sort.
j minyai munyarai— what number.
| minde — what reason , why.
(.murel — with what intention.
Causative


VERBS.
The verb in native has a close relationship to the adjective, and a
tendency to assume the form of a participle. Thus, Kaikundun il ityan
is more nearly expressed by the English “ Calling by him to him” than
by “He calls him.” Lewin itye is better expressed by “He is sitting”
than by “ He sits.”
The Narrinyeri language possesses the property of being able to form
words out of itself with much facility. Names are generally invented by
natives for European objects, and words are formed to express actions
introduced by the colonists. For instance : Taminyun is “to shoot;”
and it is compounded of the words tamin (to point) and yun (the sound
of a gun).
But we see this tendency to build up words in the language itself in
words built up to express native ideas ; as :
Pilgeru wallin —“ Being greedy ’ from pulkcri (greedy) and wallin (being).
Konkuwarrin —“ Sending away ;” from Iconic (apart), u (expressive of impera-
tive), and warrin (to make).
Lamatyeri— “ Wood for a fire ;” from laminin (carrying on the back) and atycri
(belonging to—i.e., that which is carried on the back).
Anangkwarrin —“Preparing,” “getting ready;” from anangk, or kanangk, or
ityanungk (the dative of the accusative form of the third personal
pronoun kityan, kin, or kan), and warrin (making); literally—making
towards it.
The four principal classes of verbs are:—(l) The simple verbs; as,
mempin (striking), takkin (eating), ngoppun (walking), lulun (breaking),
nampulun (hiding). (2) Verbs with the termination wallin, signifying
“ existing;” as tunkutcallin (playing), yunfuwallin (crowding). (3) Verbs
with the termination warrin , meaning “causing, making;” as nunku-
warrin (doing right), wirrangwarrin (doing wrong), ivurtuwarrin (satura-
ting with water). (4) Verbs ending in mindin, as kldeimindin (fetching).
I will now proceed to give the conjugation of the aboriginal native
transitive verb—
Lak— (To Steam).
indicative mood —Present Tense.
Singular.
Ngate yan lakkin—l spear him
Npinto yan lakkin—Thou spearest him
Kile yan lakkin—lie spears him.
Dual,
Ngel yan lakkin—We two spear him
Ngurl yan lakkin —Ye two spear him
Kenggul yan lakkin—They two spear him.
Plural.
Ngurn yan lakkin —We spear him
Ngan yan lakkin —Ye spear him
Kar yan lakkin—They spear him.


Past Tense.
Singular.
Ngati yan lakkir—l speared him
Ngmti yan lakkir—Thou spearedst him
iiile yan lakkir—He speared him.
Dual.
Ngel yan lakkir—We two speared him
.Ngurl yan lakkir—You two speared him
Kenggul yan lakkir-They two speared him
Plural.
Ngum yan lakkir We speared him
Ngun yan lakkir You two speared him
Kar yan lakkir They two speared him.
Remote Past Tense.
Singular.
rfgati yan lak emb—l did spear him
Aginte yan lak emb—Thou didst spear
him
Kile yan lak emb—He did spear him.
Dual.
Ngel yan lak emh—We two did spear him
IVguil yan lak emb-You two did spear him
lienggul yan lak emh—They two did spear
him.
Plural.
Ngurn yan lak emb We did spear him
.N gun yan lak emb You did spear him
•h.ar yan lak emb They did spear him.
First Future (Simple Future).
Singular.
Ngati yan lakkani—l will spear him
Ngmte yanJakkani-Thou wilt spear
Kile yan lakkani-He wiU spear him.
Dual.
yan lakkani— W e two will spear him
Agurl yan lakkani—Ye two will spear him
iienggul yan lakkani-They two will spear
him.
Plural.
Ngum yan lakkani We will spear him
Ngun yan lakkani You will spear him
Kar yan lakkani They will spear him.
Second Future (Intentional).
Singular.
Ngate lak el ityan—l will [i.e., intend tol
spear him
ityan—Thou wilt spear him
-K-ile lak el ityan—He will spear him.
Dual.
Hgeli lak el ityan—We two will spear him
JNgurle lak el ityan—You two will spear
him _ [him,
Kenggul lak el ityan—They two will spear
Plural.
ISgurn lak el ityan He will spear him
hlgun lak el ityan You will spear him
-har lak el ityan They will spear him.
Third Future (Predictive),
Singular.
Lakkin el atte ityan—l will spear him
Lakkin el inde ityan You will spear
him
Lakkin el il ityan—He will spear him.
Dual.
Lakkin eU-ngdityan— We two will spear
Lakkin el ungurl ityan—Ye two wiffapear
Lakkm el engul ityan—They two will
spear him.
Plural.
Lakkin el ungum ityan - We will spear him
Lakkm el ungun ityan You will spear him
Lakkm el ar ityan They will spear him.


Other Forms of the Future.
Nginte el our ityan lak Thou must spear him.
Lak amh el ityan P Shall I spear him ?
Tarno lak amh ityan ? Shall I not spear him ?
Repetitive Tense.
Singular.
Ngati lak unganyi—l spear again
Nginte lak unganyi—Thou spearest again
Kile lak unganyi—He spears again.
Dual.
Ngel lak unganyi—We two spear again
Ngurl lak unganyi—You two spear again
Kenggul lak unganye —They two spear
again.
Plural.
Ngurn lak unganye We spear again
Ngun lak unganye You spear again
Kar lak unganye They spear again.
REFLECTIVE MOOD.
Singular.
Ngap an angk laggelir—l speared myself
Nginte jjmangk laggelir—Thou spearedst
thyself
Kitye nangk laggelir —He speared him-
self.
Dual.
Ngele nangk laggelir —We two speared
ourselves
Ngurle nangk laggelir—Ye two speared
yourselves
Kenggenangk laggelir —They two speared
themselves.
Plural.
Ngurn an angk laggelir We speared ourselves
Ngun en angk laggelir Ye speared yourselves
Kan enjangk laggelir They speared themselves.
RECIPROCAL MOOD.
Ngele nangk laggel amh Let us two spear each other.
IMPERATIVE MOOD.
Singular.
Lak our inde—Do thou spear
II oura lak —Let him spear
Dual.
Ngel oura lakkin—Let us two spear
Ngurl our lakkin —Let you two spear
Kenggul our lakkin —Let them two spear.
Plural.
Ngurn our lakkin Let us spear
Ngun our lakkin Do you spear
Kar our lakkin Let them spear.
OPTATIVE MOOD (“ MAY”).
Singular.
Ngati in anyura lakkin —I may spear him
Nginte in anyura lakkin Thou mayest
spear him
Kile in anyura lakkin —He may spear him.
Dual.
Ngel in anyura lakkin —We two may spear
him
Ngurl in anyura lakkin—Ye two may spear
him
Kenggul in anyura lakkin—They two may
spear him.
Plural.
Ngurn in anyura lakkin We may spear him
Ngun in anyura lakking Ye may spear him .
Kur in anyura lakkin They may spear him.


OPTATIVE (“COULD” OR “ WOULD ”).
Singular.
Lak ilde atte ityan—l would spear him
Lak ild inde ityan—Thou wouldest spear
him
Lak ild ile ityan—He would spear him.
Eual.
Lak ilde ngel ityan—We two would spear
him
Lak ilde ngurl ityan—Ye two would
spear him [spear him.
Lak ilde engul ityan—They two would
Plural.
Lak ilde ngurn ityan—We would spear him
Lak ilde ungun ityan—Ye would spear him
Lak ilde ar ityan—They would spear him.
PROHIBITIVE MOOD.
Lak e—Spear not. Tauo ityan lak ityan—Don’t spear him.
(“must ”).
Laggel el our ap—l must spear
Laggel el our ind—Thou must spear
Laggel el our itye—He must spear.
&c., &e.
INFINITIVE MOOD (PRESENT).
Lak—Spear [the idea absolute]
Lak uramb For the purpose of spearing [of an instrument or weapon].
PARTICIPLES.
Laggelin Spearing.
Laggelir—Speared.
PASSIVE.
Singular.
Kgan lakkir—l am speared
Ngum lakkir—Thou art speared
Kin lakkir—He is speared.
Dual.
Lam lakkir—two are speared
Lom lakkir—You two are speared
Kenggun lakkir—They two are speared.
Plural.
Nam lakkir—We are speared
Nom lakkir—Ye are speared
Kan lakkir—They are speared.
NOTES.
I.—l chose the word lakkin for the paradigm of a native verb because-
-1 contains all the inflections which I know of. The word lakkin means,
primarily, “ piercing as, Ngate lakkin itye koye —I pierce a basket
(i.e., make a basket by the piercing through and through of the rushes
as it is woven or sewn together). But the word is mostly used for casting
a spear darting ; and, from that, aiming any missile or throwing a stone
at any person is lakkin.
1 have given an “ indicative mood,” yet the peculiarity
or the participial character of the native verb must not be lost sight of.
Ihere must necessarily be in every language a form of expressing the
verb, equivalent to our indicative form—and this I have endeavored to
3 that is, the inflection of the verb, with the accompanying pronouns
both causative and objective—which conveys the indicative thought.


But yet it must not be supposed that the words Ngate ityan lakkin , for
instance, mean “By him it spearing;” although that is the nearest to it
in English. Yet the word lakkin does not mean “ spearing,” but, as the
aborigines say in broken English, “ spear em.” They say, “ I spear em
it kangaroo this is the native idiom. In exhibiting the indicative mood
I have supposed the speaker to say, “ I spear him but of course I
might have put it, “I spear thee,” or “ I spear you,” and so on. In that
case the objective form of the second personal pronoun would have to be
used—as Ngate um lakkin, “ I spear thee or, Ngate onom lakkin, “ I
spear you;”—and so on, through all the tenses.
3. —The transitive verbs are distinguished from the intransitive by the
former using the causative case of the pronoun; whereas the latter uses
the simple nominative. This will be seen in the following conjugation
of the verb :
Ngai (T Come.)
indicative mood —Present Tense.
Singular.
Ngaiin ap—l come
Ngaiin inda—Thou comest
Ngaiin itye—He comes.
Dual.
Ngaiin ngel—We two come
Ngaiin ung'url—Ye two come
Ngaiin engk —They two come.
Plural.
Ngaiin ung'um—We come
Ngaiin ung'une—You come
Ngaiin ar—They come.
Past Tense.
Singular.
Puntir ap—l came
Puntir inde—Thou earnest
Puntir itye—He came.
Dual.
Puntir ang'el—We two came
Puntir ung'url—You two came
Puntir engk—They two came.
Plural.
Puntir am —We came
Puntir ung'une—You came
Puntir ar—They came.
Future Tense.
Singular.
Ngai el ap—l will come
Ngai el inda—Thou wilt come
Ngai el itye—He will come.
Dual.
Ngai el ang'el—We two will come
Ngai el ung'url—You two will come
Ngai el engk—They two will come.
Plural.
Ngai el am—We will come
Ngai el ung'une—You will come
Ngai el ar—They will come.
IMPERATIVE MOOD.
Koh Come
Ngai war.. Do come
Ngai akhi .. Come here.


OPTATIVE OR POTENTIAL MOOD.
Singular.
Ngap inanye ngai—l may come
Ngint inanye ngai—Thou mayest come
Kity inanye ngai—He may come.
Dual.
Ngel inanye ngai—We two may come
Ngurl inanye ngai—Ye two may come
Kengk inanye ngai—They two may come.
Plural.
Ngum inonye ngai—We may come
Ngune inanye ngai—Ye may come
Kar inanye ngai—They may come.
INFINITIVE MOOD.
Ngai To come.
PARTICIPLES.
Puntin .. .. Coming
Puntani .. About to come.
4. There appears to he different classes of verhs in the Narrinyeri
language. They are distinguished by the variation or non-variation of
the word which expresses the indicative mood when it expresses the
present participle. For instance— Ngati yan merippin signifies “I cut
itln this case the word merippin expresses the indicative present, first
person. It is also merippin for “ cutting”—that is the present participle.
Then Ngati yan dreltin is “I chip it;” but it is not drekin in the present
participle, but dretulun. So that we thus have two classes of verbs—the
first does not change in assuming the participial form, as mempin (strike),
pempin (give), morokkun (seize); the second does change in assuming
the participial form, as pornun (die), pornelin, (dying) ; nampulun (hide),
nampundelm (hiding); nyrippin (wash), nyribbelin (washing); milipulun
(speak a foreign language), milipundun (speaking a foreign language).
Possibly a more exact knowledge of the language might reveal subdivi-
sions of these classes.
5. —Some verbs change from the intransitive to the transitive form by
the addition of undun to the root, instead of ulun —or a“ g” sound instead
of a “k” sound; as, nampulun ap (I hide), nampundun atte ityan (I hide
it) ; yelkulun ap (I move), yelkundun atte ityan (I move it) ; pingkin ap (I
fall), pinggen atte ityan (I throw it down).
The meaning “ cause to be” is given to adjectives of verbal form by
the addition of mindin; as, nguldammulun (tired), nquldammulimindin
(making tired).
6-—The two auxiliary verbs in most common use are wallin (being),
and warrin (making, or causing). They are affixed to adjectives; as,
nunkeri (good), nunkowullin (being good), nunkowarrin (making good);
piltengi (strong), piltengivallm (being strong), piltengwarrin (making
strong) ; wirrangwallin (being bad), wirrangwarrin (making bad).
7 —The word ellin also means “ being— state of being,” and sometimes
“ doing.” It is very irregular in its use. It is the nearest word in the
language to our verb “to be,” It is scarcely to be expected that such an


abstract verb should be found perfectly developed in a barborous tongue.
The use of this word ellin, and also of ennin, is very difficult to under-
stand. El appears to mean “ intention, for or towards,” whether that in-
tention be for doing, ivishing for, or being : ellin expresses the intention
satisfied. For instance, take the following table of the words :
El—l wish to do
1 Ellin—Doing
| Ellir—Done
( Ellani—About to do
El—l wish for Ellin—Having
El—l shall be
( Ellin —Being
( Ellir—Has been
En—Do
/ Ennin—Doing
< Ennani—Will do
( Ennir —Done.
The following native sentences furnish instances of this :—En al yan,
“ Do with it”—i.e., “do it.’ ’ Luk ap atye ellir, “ Thus I it did,” “ I did
so.” Ngati yan ennani, “ I will do it.” Ngate yan ellani, “ / will doit,”
“Byme it will be done.” Kunyitye ellir, “ Enough, he has been” —i.e.,
“ He is dead.
8. —The stem of the word warrin is commonly used as the sign of the
imperative and interrogative. The stem war is used and pronounced
nearly like the English word “ our.” The following are specimens of its
use :—Rung war, “Do hear.” Nak our, “Do see.” Ngai war, “Do
come.” Nginta ivara, or ngint oura, “Do thou” (a phrase meaning
“ Get out of the way”). Ngint our, or war, “Do thou”—i.e., “Do thou
do it.” Mant our, “Do slowly.” Murrumil our, and murrunmour,
“ Make haste —Do hasten.” Yel/cul tear, or our, “Do wove.” Mint
oura, “Doto me thou” (it is equivalent to “ Give me a bit”). Kahk in
oura, “ Put it here.” Yang ouri ? “ Where do you go ?”
9. —ln expressions which mean going and coming , it is very common
for the words “ go” and “ come” to be omitted. The following are in-
stances of this practice ,
} Vp will he ; Lfc, “He will go.”
Mareelitye .. Down -will he; i.e., “He will come.”
UUueZt, } rpTdUI; i.e., I win go.”
Laldan an .. Up it; i.e., “ Fetch it.”
Lare itye .. Down he; i.e., “He has come.”
Moru an .. Down him; i.e., “He has gone down.”
Moru el ap .. Down will I; i.e., I will go dow r n.”
Loru means up, moru means down ; lolclu also means up, and mare
down.
10. —The stem or root of verbs very often consist of one or two vowel
sounds and two or three consonantal sounds. Thus is the stem of
the word pettin (to steal); morok is the stem of the verb morokkun (to
fetch). I have said “ very often”—l might have said “ always,” hut
that Ido not feel quite certain; but this rule is very common.


ADJECTIVES.
Some adjectives in the native language are declined like nouns ; and
some of them have such a verbal form as to show they are closely related
to verbs. Nunkeri (good)'and ivirrangi (bad) are examples of the former
class; talin (heavy), balpin (white), ldnemin (dirty), kinpin (sweet),prit-
ym (strong), are examples of the latter class. Sometimes an adjective is
used in both forms—as balpe and balpin , both of which signify “ white.”
The following is the declension of the word—
Nunkeri (Good).
Singular.
Nominative .. .. .. nunkeri, good [noun understood!
Genitive .. .. .. nunggurald, of good.
Dative .. .. .. nunggurungai, to good.
Causative .. .. .. nungguril, by good.
Dual.
Nominative .. .. .. nunggerengk, two good.
Genitive .. .. .. nunggerengul, of two good.
Dative .. .. .. nunggerungengul, to two good.
Causative .. .. .. nunggerengul, by good.
Plural.
Nominative .. .. .. nunkerar, good.
Genitive .. .. .. nungeran, of good.
Dative .. .. .. nunggerungar, to good.
Causative .. .. • nunggerar, by good.
The following is the declension of the adjective—
Ngruwar (All).
Nominative ~ .. .. ~ ngruwar, all.
Genitive .. .. .. .. ngruntungar , of all.
JJative .. .. .. .. .. ngruntungar, to all.
Accusative ngruwar, all.
Vocative .. .. .. .. .. ngruwun, 0 all!
Causative ■ • • • • • • • ngruntar, by all.
-bitOM ngruntenend, from all | With— ngruntungar, with all.
Adjectives have no degrees of comparison : the only approach to such
is found in the word muralappi (small), muralappeol (very small). 01 is
the common diminutive particle for adjectives and substantives.
, -th e na tives only count to three —Yammalai or yammalaitye, “ one • ”
ninggengk or ningkaiengk , “two;” neppaldar, “three.” Ngunkur’ is
“ firstth ere are no words for “ second ” or “ third.” All numbers
above three are expressed by Ngruwar (many). Some adjectives are
formed from adverbs; as Jcarloinyem , or lcarloanyeri —from /carlo (to-day)
and inyeri (belonging), and meaning “now f klauoanyeri, or kaldow-
anyeri from kaldow (a long time) and inyeri (belonging to), and meaning
‘ old; ” and konkinyeri (by itself, alone).


ADVERBS.
The various adverbs will be found in a vocabulary of the language. I
only wish here to refer to some words of this class in which a nice dis-
tinction in meaning is observed.
Adverbs of Time.
Karlo—To-day.
(Karloanyeri—New.)
Hik—Now.
Watanggrau—Yesterday.
N grekkald—To-morrow.
Yun—By-and-by.
Palli—While, by-and-by.
ltauwul—A long time ago.
Kaldau—A long time.
Ngurintand—Often.
Adverbs of Negation.
Tamo—No, not.
Tamalo —No more.
Tamalo—Never.
Tauo—Don’t (imperative).
Tarno el—Don’t do.
Tarnalin—Not yet.
Nowaiy—None.
Nowaiy ellin —No more (i.e., of
anything).
Adverbs of Place.
Yangi—Where? (interrogative).
Yarnd—Of where ? Whence ?
Yauo—Yak —Where to ?
Yangalli—Where is he ?
Kiuau—Where (relative).
Aiau—By where.
[lnstances — Manti kiuau tantani ap, “ The wurley where I shall sleep.”
Yak al inda tantani ? “ Where will you sleep ?”
Ngurlung aiau, “ By where the hill is.”]
Ku-un—Far off. [As, Ngap tangulun ku-un, “ I stand far off.” Nginte
tangulun ku-un, “Thou standest far off.” Kitye tangulun Jcu-u,
“He stands far off.” Kengk tangulun ku-u, “ They two stand
far off.” Kar tangulun kuar-un, “ They stand far off.”]
Akhe —Here.
Alyikke—Here.
Alyenik—This here place.
Alye —Here.
Ondu— Over there.
Yamd inde ?—Whence thou ?
Yauo ande ?—Whither thou ?
Adverbs of Time.
Yaral?—When? (Interrogative).
Ungunuk—When. (Relative).
The word wunye (then) is commonly joined, as an affix, to pronouns,
as —
Wunyap —Then I.
Wunyatte —Then by me, i.e., Then
I (casuative).
Wunyil—Then by him, i.e., Then
he (casuative).
Wunyitve Then he.
Wunyinde—Then thou.
Wunyungune—Then you.
Wunyar—Then they.
Wunyel—Then will.
The words uk, ukke, luk, and lun, which have the meaning of similarity
—“ so,” “ thus,” “ way ” may he illustrated by the following examples —
Luk, “So.” Lun, “Thus.” Ukke, “Way.”
Luk it, or lun u —“ So, thus ” —“ He did it thus.” Luk itye yarnin —“ Thus
he speaks.”
Lun ellin —“ So being, Like.” Luk ugge —“ Like this one.”
JBikkai ukke — lt This way.” “ This road.”
.HU amb uk —“ For this way” (equivalent to ”).
Lun uk —“ Thus.” Ngo uk ap —“ Igo so.”


The word ambe has the force both of a conjunction and preposition;
it may be rendered both “ instead of” and “ because —as, Kaldowamp
or amb, “ For a long time:” Hil amb uk , “ For this way, because:” In
amb at, “ Only for it:” Aid amb anai, “ For my”—as Pinyatowe aid amb
anai pelberri, Sugar for my tea.”
The conjunction “ and ” is not known in the language.
SYNTACTICAL NOTES
X.
The form of the verb remains unchanged, whatever be the number and
person of nominative, in intransitive verb, and causative in transitive
verbs—as, Ngap lewin, “ I sit Kar lewin, “They sit Kil ityn pettin
“ He steals it;” Kar ityanpettin, “ They steal it.”
11.
The prepositional particle in pronouns is always an affix to the accusa-
tive case—as, Inangk, “To him Kanangk ,“ To them Pempir il
umanglt, “He gave to thee.” In all these angk signifies the preposition
“ to.”
111.
Transitive verbs are followed by an accusative pronoun—as kil (by
him); Ityan “ him,” ngolkir “ was bitten,” i.e., “He bit him.”
IV.
Pronominal adjectives are always in the same number and case as the
nouns with which they are connected —as, Kinanyirangk taldumandangk,
“ To his house.”
V.
The diminutive of nouns is always placed after the case-ending of the
noun—as, Porlaldol, “Of a little child;” Porlarol, “Of little children.”
VI.
Very often, when an adjective and noun come together, the case-ending
will be attached to the adjpctive, but omitted from the noun—as, Nung-
garald korn, “Of a good man:” here aid, signifying the genitive, is only
attached to the adjective, and not to the noun korn (a man).


VII.
The sign of a transitive verb is a noun or pronoun in the causative ;
and of an intransitive verb a noun or pronoun in the nominative Kil
ityan drekin, “ He cuts it Kitye tangulun, “ He stands.”
VIII.
Demonstrative pronouns agree with the nouns which they point to in
number and case —as, PLikkai korn, “ This man; ” Harnakar kornar,
« These men Ornangk nunkungai, “In that day Ornangk koyungai,
“ In that basket.”
IX.
The distinction between transitive and intransitive verbs, where the
same English word expresses both, must be carefully observed. Thus—
lulun (breaking) is intransitive, luwun (breaking) is transitive ; nyrangkin
(burning) is intransitive, kulkun (burning) is transitive.
X.
The word “where” (kiuau), which is only used relatively, must be
carefully distinguished from yangi (where), which is only used interroga-
tively. Also the word ungunuk, or ungun, which mean “when” —used
relatively—must be distinguished from yaral, which means “ when” in
the interrogative sense.
XI
Although the stem of the verb may be said to be the infinitive present,
yet the particle uramb (meaning “for the purpose of”) is always used
when a verb is governed in the infinitive by another verb;—as, Kil pem-
pir inangk kaltumi kalturarnb an tuni, “ By him was a giving to him a
spade for the purpose of digging the ground ”—i.e., He gave him a spade
to dig the ground. Pempir il an angle nakkari takuramb, “He gave me
a duck to eat.”
