

yf ' GRAMMAR^;
nv.fJfN XKK’S 11/
Is., CLOTH, J








GRAMMAR
3 5 I<] G I X N E R S:
AN INTRODUCTION TO A CORRECT
KNOWLEDGE
OP THE
ENGLISH LANGUAGE.
FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS.
SYDNEY:
J. J. MOOEE, GEORGE STREET
OPPOSITE ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
MDCCCLXY.
Price Ninepmce. Bound in cloth, One Shilling.


BTDNET!
P. OCNNINOHAME, PRINTER,
PITT STREET.


PREFACE,
This little work is meant for young chil-
dren, when first beginning to learn English
Grammar. The things which they first and
most want to knew, are here taught them one
by one. One thing is taught at one time. No-
thing is given but what suck beginners need.
Every difficulty is explained as it arises. The
Rules or Definitions are in all cases inductions
from given examples. Whatever is taught,
the pupil is exercised on afterwards.
Part I. teaches the child to distinguish the
Parts of Speech accurately.
Part 11. teaches some of the most impor-
tant particulars respecting these parts of
speech severally.
Part 111. teaches some of the most impor-
tant Rules of Construction or Syntax.
Questions are added for examination on the
whole.
Every subject is treated on the same plan;
namely,
b 2


First :—Clear and pointed Examples.
Secondly : — An Explanation of these Ex-
amples.
Thirdly :—A Exile or Definition, which
is an induction from the examples.
Fourthly :—An Exercise on what has been
thus taught.
The pupil first has a number of facts given
him; then he is directed to the points of re-
semblance in these several facts, in other words
the facts are explained; then he is led to form
or verify a Eule or Definition from these re-
semblances ; and lastly, he is practised on what
he has learnt.
Of the Parts of Speech, the Nouns have
been taken first, Pronouns have been placed
after Verbs and Adverbs, and so in other
cases. All this is done advisedly ; as being,
practically, more simple in teaching very
young children. The teacher, therefore, need
not be at any trouble in selecting the lessons,
as these are all arranged in the order in which
they should be learnt.
Throughout, the object has been, not to aim
at anything like completeness or minute detail,
but to imprint on the child’s mind a strong,
clear type of the leading essentials of English
Grammar,
It is recommended, that the Examples and


Explanations should be read over by the Pupils,
(in class, if there are many or several together,)
and questioned on by the Teacher, before they
are set to learn the Pule or Definition which,
follows, or to do the Exercise. The portions,
which are meant to be learnt ly heart , are the
paragraphs which have the numbers at the be-
ginning, as 1,2, 25, &c,, and only these. The
Exercises, it will be seen, can be done, either
orally, or, if the pupils have learnt to write, in
writing ; or (better still) in both ways.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
1 1 A RT X.
Parts of Speech. page
Nouns 9
Articles 10
Adjectives 11
Verbs .. 12
Adverbs 13
Pronouns 14
Prepositions Id
Conjunctions 10
Inteijections < • 17
Parsing Exercises 18
PAET IX.
Particulars op Parts op Speech.
Nouns: Proper and Common .. .. 19
Number 20
Gender 21
Case 23
Articles: Definite and Indefinite 26
Adjectives: Degrees .. 26
Pronouns: Personal 27
Relative 29
Adjective 30
Recapitulatory Exercise 32
Verbs : Moods 33
Tenses 37
To love 41


To be 42
Active and Passive .. 43
To Love, Passive . • .. 45
Active and Neuter 47
Parsing Exercises 48
PAET XIX.
Syntax.
Eules: Nominative Case 49
Singular Nominatives with and .. .. 53
Singular Nominatives with or 53
Objective Case with Active Verb .. .. 54
Objective Case with Prepositions .. .. 55
Same Case after as before the Verb to he 56
Possessive Case 58
Pronouns 59
Infinitive Mood •• •• 60
Cautions ; Adjectives and Adverbs 61
Past Participle and Past Tense 62
Parsing Exercises 64
Questions 68




GEAMIAE FOE BE6IMEES.
PART I.
1. Grammar is the science of words.
Explanation. —When we speak, we utter
words. Grammar teaches us what words we
ought to use, and how we should use them.
2. Words are of different sorts. The dif-
ferent sorts of words are called Parts of Speech.
3. There are nine sorts of words, or Parts of
Speech: Article, Noun, Adjective, Pronoun,
verb, Adverb, Preposition, Conjunction, Inter-
jection.
NOUNS.
Examples.— Man, hoy, servant, Charles.
Explanation. These are names of per-
sons ; all names of Persons are called nouns.
Examples.— Hog, horse, cat, cow, antelope.
Explanation. —These are names of ani-
mals ; all names of Animals are called nouns.
Examples.— Town, street, city, church.
Explanation. —These are names of places ;
and all names of places are called nouns.


Examples. — Chair, form, desk, carpet, fire.
Explanation. —These are names of things ;
and all names of Things are called nouns.
4. Nouns are the names of Persons, Ani-
mals, Places, or Things; as man, cow , town,
lox.
EXERCISE T.
(a) Mention other names of persons whom you
know:—
(h) Mention other names of animals you have seen
(c) Mention other names of places you know ;
(d) Mention other names of things which you often
see:—
(e) Point out the Nouns in the following sentences :
The bee is on the flower. The bird was in the tree.
The cat will he in the kitchen. The dog was in his
kennel. The horses are in the stable. The hear roared
in his den. Where are the hooks P Henry ran up the
mountain. The goat butted the child into a ditch.
The oak hears acorns. The church is on the hill.
There is a bridge over the river.
ARTICLES.
Examples. — An oak, a loy ; the oak, the
hoy.
Explanation. These little words, an, a,
and the are called articles. They are used
to shew what oak, or what boy is meant; whe-
ther any one is meant, an oak or a boy, or
whether some particular one is meant, the oak,
the boy.
5. An Article is a word put before a Noun


to mark the extent of its signification; as, an
apple, a battledore; the man.
EXERCISE 11.
lUf (a) Which are the articles in the following sen-
tences ?
,The boy is on the wall The girl is in the garden.
A man is on the roof. A Bear was roaring. The lion
devoured a man. The smoke was rising from a
chimney. A fire heats the room. Put a candle in the
bedroom. The ink is thick. The eagle can carry
away a lamb. The wind blew an apple down. Mary is
reading under an oak.
(b) Put articles before the following Nouns ;
( ) box. ( ) man. ( ) candles. ( ) pen.
( ) ink. ( ) sun. ( ) hat. ( ) skipping rope.
( ) ink-stand. ( ) cat. ( ) dog. ( ) ox. ( )
boat. ( ) church, ( ) bridge. ( ) eye. ( )
stone. ( ) hank. ( ) watch. ( ) ear. ( )
thrush. ( ) bird.
(c) Which are the Nouns in the above sentences ?
ADJECTIVES.
Examples.—A great hoy , a good horse,
a large garden, a strong man.
Explanation. —These three words, great,
good, large, are called Adjectives. They show
what sort of a thing we mean. The word
great shews what sort of a boy we mean ; the
word good shews what sort of a horse we mean;
the word large shows what sort of a garden
wo mean.
6. An Adjective is a word which expresses
the quality of a Noun; as, great, good, large.


EXERCISE 111
Ijgf 3 (a) Which, are the Adjectives in these phrases P
A rich pudding. The big table. The handsome
picture. Clean boys. A high mountain. A green
field. An old oak. Pretty flowers. The good father.
Obedient pupils. Clear water. An old tower. A
surly child. White paper. A rich man. A pretty
puppy. A large lion and a little mouse. A high house
and low cottage. A playful kitten.
(b) Which are the Nouns in the above phrases P
(c) Go over each phrase, telling the parts of speech
of each word : Thus ; a, Article; rich, Adjective ;
pudding , Noun.
(d) Think of some Adjectives to put with these
words:—
A ( ) towel. The ( ) flower pot. The ( ) river.
A ( ) chimney. A ( ) stick. The ( ) tree. The
( ) leaf. The ( ) sun. A ( ) star. A( ) boy.
The ( ) lion. A ( ) box. A ( ) apple. The ( )
well. A ( ) stone. The ( ) ice. The ( ) snow.
YEEBS.
Examples. —The hoy strikes the dog. The
dog barks. The child sings a song. The cat
runs. The bird flies.
Explanation. —These words, strikes , harks,
sings, runs, jiies, are called Verbs. They are
all words which mean doing something. The
word strikes shews what the hoy does; the word
harks shews what the dog does; the word
sings shews what the child does; the word
runs shews what the cat does; the word Jiies
shews what the bird does.
7, A Verb is a word which denotes being


or doing ; as, The boy beats his brother; The
hoy is beaten by his brother ; The boy sleeps.
EXERCISE IV.
Point out the Verbs in the following sentences: —
The sun shines. The air is fresh. The wind blows.
The horse neighs. Tho crows fly. Tho child walks
into the garden. He cuts a twig from the tree. They
eat up the pudding. Charles writes a copy. It thun-
dered yesterday. Tho carpenter planed the table.
The cow lows. Tho sheep bleats. The pig grunts.
The donkey brays. The lion roars. Tho cat mews.
The mouse squeaks. The monkey screams. The dog
barks. The fire burns. The thunder roars. Tho
lightning flashes. The wind blows and howls. Tho
sun shines. The river flows. The ship sails. The
water freezes. The snow falls.
ADYEEBS.
Examples. —The boy walks badly. He rides
quickly. The bird sings beautifully. She
came directly.
Explanation. —These words badly , quickly ,
beautifully , are called Adverbs. They shew
the how or the when. The word badly shews
us how the boy walks; the word quickly shews
how he rides; the word beautifully shews how
the bird sings; the word directly shews when
rhe came.
8. An Adverb is a word joined to a Verb,
an Adjective, or an Adverb, to qualify it, or to
specify some circumstance about it; as, A


most clever loy. He walks fast. He runs
VERY well.
EXERCISE Y.
l|gr (a) Mention the Adverbs in the following sen-
tences :
The wind blew terribly. The sun shines mildly.
The stars are very bright. The world is very large.
The snow is exceedingly deep. The grass is quite
green. The hoys swim badly. The eagle flies exceed-
ingly high. The larks sing beautifully. I am rather
tired. Ann writes well. James reads carelessly. The
girls walked slowly. The peasant boys work cheerfully.
John went willingly for his brother. The soldier was
wounded dreadfully. The man eats heartily.
(h) Add some Adverbs to the following sentences :
The snail creeps ( ). The ice is ( ) slippery.
The swallow flies ( ). The hoy runs ( ). My
brother swims ( ). The pen writes ( ). The candle
bums ( ). The soldier fought ( ). Your sister
eats ( ).
PRONOUNS.
Examples —Mary is well, and she is in the
country. I know Frederick, and I like him. I
saw the hoys; they were in the field.
Explanation. —These words, she, him, they,
are called Pronouns. They are put instead of
repeating the Nouns. The Pronoun she stands
for the Noun Mary. Instead of saying Mary
is well, and Mary is in the country, we say,
Mary is well, and she is in the country. —The
Pronoun him stands for Frederick. Instead of
saying I know Frederick, and I like Frederick,


we say, I know Frederick , and I like him. —
The Pronoun they stands for hoys. Instead of
saying I saw the hoys; the boys were in the
field, we say, I saw the hoys ; they were in the
held.
9. A Pronoun is a word used instead of a
Noun; as, James was tired, and he sat down.
The word Pronoun means foe a noun.
EXERCISE VI.
(a) Point out the Pronouns :
That girl is clever and she is industrious. This boy
is clever and he is diligent. The child had seen the
Cathedral, hut had not been into it. Frank loves John,
because he is so kind to him, Henry saw the boys ; he
said they were going to the forest. Papa ordered the
men some refreshment, and they thanked him. Does
that lady often see those persons P No, she sees them
very seldom. The house is large, but it is not conve-
nient. The dog is very happy ; he is frisking about.
PREPOSITIONS.
Examples. The hoy was neae the field.
The deer are in the park. The church is on
the hill.
Explanation. The words near, in, on,
are called Prepositions. The word near shews
us the place of the boy with regard to the
field; the word in shews us the place of the
deer with regard to the park; the word on
shews us the place of the church with regard to
the hill.


10. A Preposition is a -word put before
Nouns or Pronouns, to shew their relation to
some other Nouns or Pronouns ; as, The loy is
on the wall.
EXERCISE YU.
(a) Point out the Prepositions :
The gardener was in the garden. Jane is not in the
house; she is in the town. We are in a great city.
He lives in Edinburgh. Oxford is in England. Caris-
brook is in the Isle of Wight. Loughton is in Essex.
The fruit is on the trees. The horse ran across the
field. Thomas jumped over the ditch. Henry almost
fell into it. The bird flew over the house. The man
lives near the church. She lives with her sister. The
dog hid himself among the bushes. He went from
London yesterday. The coach goes through Leicester.
(b) Put in some preposition which will make
sense;—
The books are ( )my box. Send John ( ) the
garden. My cousin lives ( ) George-street. The
pigeon is ( ) the house. The boat went ( ) the
bridge. The dogs swam ( ) the river. Do not walk
( ) the mud.
CONJUNCTIONS
Examples. — He and I. Hot William , but
Thomas. 1 hope that he is well. I will remain,
ip you go.
Explanation. —These words, and , lut, that,
if, are called Conjunctions. They join toge-
ther words which are wanted to be connected.
The word and joins he and I; the word lut
joins William and Thomas ; the word that


joins the sentence he is well to the sentence I
hope.
11. A Conjunction is a word which joins
words, clauses, or sentences together; as, James
and George. He will go, if I remain.
EXERCISE VIII.
(a) Point out the Conjunctions :
_ John and James have gone out. Anne and Ellen are
sitting on the grass. You are tired and we are not.
Where are the hoy and girl P He is in the garden, hut
she is in the school. You cannot know, if you do not
learn your lesson. Do it, because I wish. Ido not
know that person, nor do I wish to know him, The
lion killed his keeper, because he took away his food.
He has not heard whether your doll is brought. I will
soon come to you, if you will go away.
INTERJECTIONS.
Examples. —Oh no ! An ! it was sad !
Hush ! he silent. Hoy ! come hack.
Explanation. —These words, Oh, ah, hush,
hoy, are called Interjections.
12. An Interjection is a word which ex-
presses some feeling or wish; as, Ah ! it was
very unfortunate.
EXERCISE IX.
Point out the interjections :
Fie ! how could_ you do so ? Ah me! it is all over.
Hey-day ! what is the matter ? Bravo ! my boys.
Hush! do not make a noise. Alas! what have you
done ? Heigho ! lam very tired. Hurrah ! we are to
have a holiday.


PAUSING EXERCISES.
The good child obeys readily, and he listens
to instruction.
The
Article.
And Conjunction,
He Pronoun.
Good Adjective.
Child Noun.
Listens Yerh.
To Preposition.
Obeys Yerh.
Readily Adverb.
Instruction Noun.
Oh! how beautifully the little birds sang in
the groves and fields.
Oh Interjection.
Sang Yerh.
In Preposition.
The Article.
How Adverb.
Beautifully Adverb.
The Article.
Groves Noun.
And Coni in
Little Adjective.
Birds Noun.
And Conjunction.
Fields Noun,
She said,
how very lovely the
colour of the
grass and the leaves is
year.
in the spring of the
She Pronoun.
And Conjunction.
The Article.
Said Yerh.
How Interjection.
Yery Adverb.
Lovely Adjective.
The Article.
Leaves Noun.
Is Yerh.
In Preposition.
The Article.
Colour Noun.
Of Prepos
Spring Noun.
Of Preposition.
Of Preposition.
The Article.
The Article.
Grass Noun.
Year Noun.


A strong horse jumped fearlessly over the
high hedge; hut, alas! he almost broke his
A Article,
Strong Adjective.
Horse Noun.
Jumped Verb.
Fearlessly Adverb.
Over Preposition.
The Article.
High Adjective.
Hedge Noun.
But Conjunction.
Alas Interjection.
He Pronoun.
Almost Adverb.
Broke Verb.
His Prono
Pronoun.
Leg Noun.
EXERCISE
Parse the sentences in Exercises iv., v., vi., vii.,
viii., and ix,, in the same way as the above: —
PART 11.
NOUNS—PEOPEE AND COMMON.
Examples.— John, London, Thames.
Explanation.— John is the name of some
particular person, John is, therefore, called a
proper noun ; London is the name of a par-
ticular city, London is therefore a Proper Noun.
Examples.— Boy, woman, house, river.
Explanation.— Boy is a name belonging to
all male children, hoy is called a common noun ;


woman is a name given to all grown females,
woman is a Common Norm.
13. Nouns are of two kinds, Common and
Proper.
14. A Common Noun stands for the whole
kind; as boy, town.
15, A Proper Noun distinguishes one indi-
vidual or thing from all the rest of the same,
kind ; as John, London.
16. Proper Nouns begin with a capital letter..
EXERCISE XL
t£|r Tell the Nouns, and say if Common or Proper
The hook is on the box. The town is on the river.
Manchester is a large town. James may have my hat.
There is a fine tree in the park. Windsor is on the,
Thames. There are many ships in the river now. My
hat was not bought in London. Eliza is in the garden,
hut her brothers are in the field. A hill covered with
trees is a pretty sight.
NUMBER.
Examples. — Tree, trees; pin, pins.
Explanation. — Tree means one single tree;
tree is a Noun in the Singular Number : trees
mean more than one tree ; trees is a Noun in the
Plural Number. Pin means one pin; pin is,
in the. Singular Number : pins mean more than
one pin ; pins is in the Plural Number.
17. There are two Numbers, Singular and
Plural.


18. The Singular is used in speaking of one :
as horse, pen.
19. The Plural is used in speaking of more
than one ; as horses, pens,
. The Plural is generally formed hy add-
ing sto the Singular; as, Singular, hook : Plural,
hooks.
21. These Plurals must he learnt.
Singular. Plural. Singular, Plural.
Ox Oxen. Foot Feet.
Brother Brethren. Tooth Teeth.
Child Children. Goose Geese.
Man Men. Mouse Mice.
EXEECISE XII.
iSgT Name the Nouns, and tell what number they
are:— J
That is our house. Which of the houses? That
with the large garden full of flowers. Our baby has
blue eyes. Where are the boxes P The glasses are on
the table. John is fond of raspberries and cream ; are
you ? I like strawberries better. My shoe pinches my
foot. My shoes pinch my feet. The men drove the
oxen into the meadows. My teeth ache.
GENDER.
Examples. Man, woman, hoy, girl, horse ,
mare.
Explanation. — Man means he, and is of the
Masculine Gender; woman means she, and is
of the Feminine Gender. Boy means he, and
is Masculine ; girl means she, and is Feminine.


Horse means he , and is Masculine; mare means
she, and is Feminine.
22. There are two Genders, the Masculine
and the Feminine.
23. The Masculine denotes the he; the Fe-
minine denotes the she; a man , Masculine ;
woman, Feminine.
EXEECISE HE
Tell the Gender of the following Nouns :
A king. A queen. The master. The mistress. My
sister. Your brother. His mother. Their father.
Thomas went to see his aunt. The little girl’s uncle
called on Mary. My sister’s husband spoke to his
nephew. A good husband is kind to his wife. Queen
Mary was the daughter of King Henry. A son should
love his mother.
Examples. — Desk, candle, glass, watch.
Explanation. —Desk is neither he nor she ;
so it is neither Masculine nor Feminine : desk
is, therefore, said to he Neuter, for Neuter
means neither. Candle, too, is neither he nor
she ; so it is neither Masculine nor Feminine ;
candle, therefore, is Neuter.
Examples. — Bird, child, animal, friend.
Explanation. — The Noun bird stands for
either a cock-hird or a hen-bird ] so it is either
Masculine or Feminine : bird is, therefore, said
to be Common as to Gender. Child, too, means
either a boy or a girl, and is so either Mascu-
line or Feminine: child is cononon as to Gender.


24. Names of things without life are of no
Gender, and are therefore called Neuter Nouns;
as, table, pen.
25. Some Nouns are common to both Genders,
being either Masculine or Feminine ; as parent,
friend, bird.
EXERCISE XIY.
Say whether the Nouns in the following sentences
are Neuter or Common as to Gender:—
My friend has a large house. Parents love their
children. That garden belongs to my cousin. The
bird was caught in a trap. The enemy threw down
their arms and ran away. Animals know that they
live; hut vegetables and minerals do not. Our relations
live in the country. Cattle eat grass.
EXERCISE XV.
_ Tell whether the Nouns are Masculine or Femi-
nine, Neuter or Common, as to Gender:—
The boy loves his mother. The child was held by the
nurse. My cousin is my friend. My brother has no
enemy. The bird saw the snake in the grass. A
parent loves his child. A mother loves her boys and
girls. The son and daughter of King Henry were
drowned in the sea, A ship sank near Portsmouth with
a thousand men in it.
CASE.
Examples. —The boy struck the girl. The wind
blew the trees. Ann drank the milk.
Explanation.—Wbo struck the girl? The
boy. Boy is the Nominative Case, for it goes


before the verb, and answers a question begin-
ning with who. What blew the trees ? The
wind. Wind is the Nominative Case, for it
goes before the verb, and answers a question
beginning with what. Who drank the milk ?
Ann. Ann is in the Nominative Case, for it
goes before the verb, and answers a question
beginning with who.
Whom did the boy strike ? The girl. Girl
is the Objective Case, for it comes after the
verb, and answers a question beginning with
whom. What did the wind blow? The tree.
Tree is in the Objective Case, for it comes
after the verb, and answers a question begin-
ning with what. What did Ann drink ? The
milk. Milk is Objective for the same reason.
Examples.— John's hat was lost. The child's
finger was hurt.
Explanation.—Whose hat was lost ? John's.
John is the Possessive Case, for it answers a
question beginning with whose. Whose finger
was hurt ? The child's. Child's is in the Pos-
sessive Case, for it answers a question begin-
ning with whose.
26. There are three cases: the Nominative,
the Objective, and the Possessive.
27. The Nominative generally comes before
the verb ; as, The girl cut the paper.
28. The Objective generally cornea after the
Verb; as, The girl cut the paper.


29. Tlie Possessive shows possession ; as
The box’s marhle is here.
Explanation. —ln the sentence, The girl cut
the paper , cut is the verb. Girl , therefore, which
is the Noun coming before cut, is in the Nom-
inative Case ; and the Noun paper, coming
after cut, is in the Objective Case. In the
sentence, The hoy's marhle is here, the word hoy's
shews to whom the marble belongs; hoy's is,
therefore in the Possessive Case,
30. The Singular Possessive is made by
adding s with an apostrophe (’s); as Nominative
man ; Possessive man's.
31. The Plural Possessive is made like the
Singular by adding s with an apostrophe (’«);
as, Nominative men ; Possessive men's.
32. But when the Plural ends in s the Posses-
sive s is omitted, and only the apostrophe (’) re-
mains ; as horses' teeth.
Explanation.— Horses' teeth means the teeth
of many horses; horse's teeth means the teeth of
only one horse.
EXERCISE XVI.
Tell the Case of the following Nouns :
The Frenchman saw the dog. Charles hurt the horse.
The horse’s hoof is hard. The cat purrs. The dog harks.
The wolf howls. The wolf killed a lamb. The man
shot the wolf. The soldier’s gun is loaded. The candle
burnt the moth. The lion’s roar is terrible. John’s
kindness pleased the lady. The rivers overflowed the
meadow. My father’s fields produce com. The ele-
B 3


phant’s sagacity pleased my cousins. My sister’s writing-
desk holds paper. Henry’s box holds money.
ARTICLES.
Examples. —Give me an apple. She ate the
apple. A cat likes milk.
Explanation. —ln the first sentence, the
■words an apple means any apple. It does not
define or point out some particular apple; it
means any one at all. An is called an Indefinite
Article ; for Indefinite means not defining. But
the words the apple do mean some particular
apple, not any apple, hut the (or that) apple.
The is called the Definite Article.
32 a. The is called the Definite Article; an or
a, the Indefinite.
ADJECTIVES.
Examples. —lhe apple is sweet, the pear is
sweeter, hut the greengage is the sweetest. The
pond is deep, the canal is deeper, hut the river is
deepest.
Explanation. —ln the first sentence, it is
said that the apple is sweet, that is, has the
quality of sweetness; sweet is called the Posi-
tive Degree ; the pear is said to be sweeter,
that is, to have more of the quality of sweetness;
sweeter is the Comparative Degree : the green-
gage is said to be sweetest, that is, to have most
of the quality of sweetness; sweetest is the


Superlative Degree. So the pond has the
quality of depth, deep is the Positive Degree ;
the canal has more of depth ; deeper is the Com-
parative Degree ; the river has most of depth,
deepest is the Superlative Degree.
33. Adjectives have three Degrees; the
Positive, the Comparative, and Superlative.
34. The Positive Degree is the Adjective in
its simplest form, as high , low.
35. The Comparative is formed by adding er
to the Positive ; as, higher , lower.
36. The Superlative is formed by adding est
to the Positive; as, highest, lowest.
EXERCISE XVII.
Egg” (a) Tell the Adjectives in the following sentences
and their degrees of Comparison :
The wall is high, the tree is higher, hut the house is
highest. The oak has a thicker trunk than the poplar.
The whale is the largest of animals. The nightingale
is the sweetest songster. Give me a large apple. Larger
than that. Yes, the largest of all. London is the
largest and richest city in the world. The stars are
bright, the moon is brighter, and the sun is brightest.
My watch is smaller than that large ring. A strong
man can do harder work than a weak man.
fb) Tell which articles are Definite and which In-
definite.
PRONOUNS.
37. Pronouns are of three kinds; Personal,
Relative, and Adjective.


PERSONAL PRONOUNS.
Examples. —l saw Charles ; he was in the
garden , but he did not see me; Mary is gone, she
went an hour ago.
Explanation. —The first sentence means, I
saw Charles; Charles was in the garden, but
Charles did not see me. Saying Charles, how-
ever, over and over again sounds disagreeable;
we, therefore, use he instead of Charles. The
word he, standing for Charles, is called a
Personal Pronoun. So, she is used for Mary.
We say, Mary is gone ; she went an hour ago :
not, Mary is gone ; Mary went an hour ago. She
is a Personal Pronoun.
38. A Personal Pronoun stands for the Noun
itself; as, The boy is not here ; he has gone
away.
PERSONS.
Examples. —l tell you he is away. You must
tell her to come to me.
Explanation. —ln the first sentence I stands
for the person speaking’, I is called the first
person : you stands for the person spoken to;
you is the second person : he stands for the
person spolcen of ; he is the third person. In
the second sentence, you stands for the person
spoken to, and is the second person; her stands
for the person spoken of, and is the third per-
son ; me stands for the person speaking, and is
th q first person.


39. Pronouns are of the first, second, or
third person.
40. The person speaking is the first person.
41. The person spoken to is the second.
42. The person spoken oe is the third.
Singular. Plural.
Cases. Isf Per. 2nd Per. 3rd Per. Ist Per. 2nd Per. 3rd Per
Mas. Fem. Neu.
Kom. I Thou He She It AYe You, Ye They
Poss. Mine Thine His Hers Its Ours Yours Theirs
Obj. Me Thee Him Her It Us You Them
EXERCISE XYIII.
Point out the Personal Pronouns, and state what
person they are: —
Send him to me. Ton told her the truth. Thou art
kind to him. I told thee she would come. They cut
down the trees because they shaded the garden too
much. If the parcel he too heaAry, let them carry it in
turns. I assure you the hook is mine. He did not
think it was yours. We picked some fine blackberries
in the forest; they were quite ripe. Is that house
yours ? No, it is theirs. Shall the girl go with him
to carry the hook ? Yes. You may let them both go
with it. John has snuffed the candle out; may he
light it again ? The Queen is in Ireland; she seems tc
have enjoyed her visit to it. SendiHeury.to his[mother
she wants him.
BELATIYE PBONOUNS.
Examples, —The man who was here has gone
away. He has lost the ball which you gone him.
He whom thou lovest is sick.
Explanation. —The word who is a Pronoun
which relates to the Noun mari; who is, there-
fore, called a Eelatiye Pbonoun. Man goes


lefore the Relative who ; man is therefore called
its Antecedent, for Antecedent means that
which goes lefore. In the second sentence the
Pronoun which, relates to the Noun Ball;
which is, therefore, a Relative Pronoun, and
ball is its Antecedent. In the third sen-
tence, whom relates to he; whom is a Rela-
tive, and he is its Antecedent.
43. A Relative Pronoun relates to some
Noun or Pronoun going before it, called its
Antecedent; as, I have lost the look which I
lougfit.
44. The Relatives are, who, whose, whom ,
which, and sometimes that.
EXEECISE XIX.
Tell the Eelative Pronouns and their Antece-
dents :
I know the lady who visited you. The horse which
my brother rides is brown. He was a brave man who
stopped the horse which ran away. The friend whom
thou lovest is sick. I do not know whose map it is.
The house which was burnt down has been re-built.
The gentleman whom you met gave my sister the skip-
ping rope you broke. I do not know the gentleman
whom you mean.
ADJECTIVE PRONOUNS.
Examples. —His hat. Her fan. That desk.
Explanation. — His stands before the Noun
hat, and so distinguishes it from other hats;
His is, therefore, called an Adjective Pronoun.


So that stands before the Noun desk, and dis-
tinguishes it from other desks. That is, there-
fore, an Adjective Peonoun.
45. The principal sorts of Adjective Pro-
nouns are the Possessive and the Demonstra-
tive.
POSSESSIVE ADJECTIVE PBONOIJNS.
Examples.— My doll. His hox. Theie
spades.
Explanation.— The word my shews that the
doll belongs to me. My is, therefore, called
a Possessive Adjective Peonodn. The word
his shews that the box belongs to him. His is,
therefore, a Possessive Adjective Peonoijn.
46. The Possessive Adjective Pronouns are ;
Singular. Plural.
Ist Peeson My Our
2nd Peeson Thy Your
3rd Peeson His, Her, Its Their.
47. Obseevation. These are Adjective
Pronouns when they are followed by Nouns;
when they are without Nouns they are Per-
sonal Pronouns in the Possessive Case. (See
42.)
EXERCISE XX.
l|gr Point out the Possessive Adjective Pronouns,
and tell what person and number they are ;
Her grammar is in his hox. Look at my parrot; its
wings are very beautiful. They told me that their house


is to let. Have you seen our dog Caesar ? His name
is engraved on his collar. Your paper is not so good
as mine. Her doll cost as much as his hat and my hall
put together. Our letters were brought by your bro-
ther. Ido not like their house. Your kitten is very
playful. Where is my cat ?
DEMONSTKATIYE PRONOUNS.
Examples.—This pen. That knife.
Explanation.— The word this points out one
particular pen, distinguished from all others.
This is, therefore, called a Demonstrative
Adjective Pronoun, for Demonstrative means
pointing out. So that is a Demonstrative
Adjective Pronoun, for it points out one knife ,
distinguished from all others.
48. The Demonstrative Pronouns are :
Singular, this, that; Plural, these, those.
EXERCISE XXL
Tell the Demonstratives and their number :
Ido not know that lady. These pens are not worth
much. Give me those wafers if you please. These
pears are too ripe. Will you take this ? It is not so
ripe. I think that ice is not strong enough to bear
that gentleman.
RECAPITULATORY EXERCISE (XXII).
Parse the sentences in Exercises xii., xv., xvi.,
xvii., xviii., xix„ xx., andxxi., in the following way :
Sentence.— That little hoy in the field held his f
mamma's hand.
That .. Pronoun, Demonstrative Adjective.
Little.. Adjective, Positive Degree.


Boy ~ Noun. Common. Masculine Gen-
der. Singular Number. Third
Person. Nominative Case; be-
cause it comes before the Yerb
held, and answers a question be-
ginning with who. (27.)
In .. Preposition.
The .. Article.
Pield.. Noun. Common. Neuter. Singu-
lar Number. Third Person.
Held... YerbA*
His .. Pronoun. Possessive Adjective.
Mamma’s. .Noun. Common. Feminine Gender.
Singular Number. Third Person.
Possessive Case ; because it shews
possession, and answers a question
beginning with whose. (29.)
Hand, .Noun. Common. Neuter. Singu-
lar Number. Third Person. Ob
jective Case; because it comes
after the Verb held, and answers
a question beginning with what.
(28.)
YEBBS.
MOODS.
49. The word mood means Manxes.
Examples. —The lutcher sells meat. Henry
plays at marldes.
* Particulars of the Verb should be deferred.


Explanation.— The Verb sells in the first
sentence asserts what the butcher does; sells
is, therefore, said to be in the Indicative
mood, for Indicative means declaring. So the
Verb plays just asserts what Henry does.
Plays is in the Indicative Mood too.
Examples.— l shall he angry if he sell my
hex. If he plat fairly I shall like him.
Explanation. —ln the first sentence the
Verb sell with the Conjunction if Jbefore it, ex-
presses doult as to whether he will sell my
box; Sell is, therefore, in the Subjunctive
Mood. So it is doubtful whether he will play
fairly or not; play is, therefore, in the Sub-
junctive Mood.
Examples.— l can sell my own box. I
may play now.
Explanation.— The Verb can sell shews
my power to sell my own box; can sell, is,
therefore, in the Potential Mood, for potential
means having power. So I may play , shews
the power or permission I have to play; may
play is, therefore, in the Potential Mood.
50. The Indicative either asserts or denies,
or is used in asking a question ; as, I praise ;
Ido not praise; do I praise ?
51. The Subjunctive denotes a condition or
supposition, and generally has some Conjunc-
tion before it; as, If it rain.
52. The Subjunctive Mood has generally if
before it.


53. The Potential denotes possibility, power,
or inclination; as, He may come. He can go.
54. The Potential Mood has one of these
words before it:— May , can , must, might , could ,
should , would.
EXERCISE XXIII.
Tell the mood of the following Verbs, whether
Indicative, Subjunctive, or Potential: —
A good child loves his parents. James mended his
sister’s doll. My brother can swim. Bonaparte was
born in Corsica. I may pick that flower. If he send
a letter, it may go. If a child tell tales, everybody
dislikes him. I must leave soon to-night, for my father
expects me. I should like that book. I told my father
that he could fetch the ball for me. If we waste our
time we act foolishly. Frederick said that he might go
The fir-tree grows in cold countries. Ido not know
whether I can visit Norway next summer. If your
friend travel there, you should do so too.
Examples. —Go out of the room, play with
me , Henry.
Explanation. — The Verb go expresses a
command; go, is therefore a Verb in the Im-
pekative Mood, for imperative means command-
ing. So in the second sentence the Verb
play expresses a command or request to Henry ;
play is, therefore, in the Imperative Mood.
Examples. —To play is pleasant. He
wishes to go to-morrow.
Explanation. The Verb to play ex-
presses the action of playing in the widest pos-


sihle sense. It does not say, I 'play, or you
play, but simply to play. To play is, there-
fore, called the Infinitive Mood, for Infinitive
means unlimited. So to go is taken in the
widest sense; to go is, therefore, in the Infi-
nitive.
Examples. — The picture torn by the girl was
pretty. I believed the story told ly her.
Explanation. —The word torn shews what
the girl did ; she tore the picture ; so far it is,
therefore, a Yerb. But it also gives a descrip-
tion of the picture; it was a torn picture;
torn is, therefore, called a Participle ; or Par-
ticipial Mood, for participle means having
vart of one thing and part of another. So
told partakes of the nature of a Verb, because
it shews what she did ; but it also partakes of
the nature of an Adjective, for it describes the
story—a told story. Told is, therefore, a
Participle.
55. The Imperative Mood commands or en-
treats ; as, Praise thou ; Bless thou us.
56. The Infinitive expresses the meaning of
tne Yerb in a general and indefinite way; as,
To play is pleasant.
57. The Infinitive has the sign to before it.
68. The Participle, or Participial Mood, ex-
presses the meaning of the Yerb after the
manner of an Adjective; as, Thus the children
lived,loved by each other.


EXERCISE XXIV,
cUfTell whether the following Yerbs be of the Im-
perative, Infinitive, or Participial Moods :
Go into the garden. Fetch my hat, Charles. Tell
Mary to get dinner ready coon. Ask Henry to bring
my gloves. Send him *o fetch the inkstand bought
by William. Pick up those apples fallen from the tree.
Snuff tho candle. Why? To give more light. Bring
tho picture painted by that artist. Lend mo your box.
Try to master the lesson appointed.
RECAPITULATORY EXERCISE (XXV. a).
Jgjg' Tell the Mood of the following Verbs :
Ho lives in Sackville-stroet. Ho may go tr - norrow.
Send the man away. My father wished me to toll you
that ho would be glad to see you. If your sister come,
ask her to wait for me. Henry may go out to amuse
himself. Then the boys went homo fairly tired out.
Bring a basket to hold tho fruit. The fruit is ripe.
Those pears may ripen on tbo Avail. If the postman
bring a letter, take it in. I expect to hear from home.
Then tho children Avent along the road. The servant
broke a window. Toll her to fetch a glazier at once.
TENSES.
59. Tense means time.
Examples.— You write well. John wrote
well. He will write well. Yjou live at
Hackney. They lived at York. I shall live
in London.
Explanation.—The Verb write means pre-
sent time ; You ivrite well now. write is called
Ike Present Tense. Wrote means past time;
it does not say that John writes well now , but


that John wrote well some time ago. Wrote is
called the Past Tense. Will write refers to a
future time; He will write well at a time to
come. Will write is called a Future Tense.
So the Yerb live is Present Tense; lived is
Past Tense ; shall live is Future Tense.
60. There are three main Tenses Present
l ast, and Future.
EXERCISE XXY.
igaT Tell whether the Verbs are Past, Present, or
Future: —
The soldier ran away. The knife cuts well. The
knife cut the boy’s finger. The knife will cut the wood.
My mother sent me a plum-cake. I will send you some.
My mamma thinks I read better. The candle burns
dim. When I went down a coal-pit the candle burnt
dim. A candle will burn dim in damp places. I shall
always love my parents because they always love me.
They will go into the country soon. I see your brother
every day. He saw you yesterday. We shall both see
him to-morrow, I hope.
present and present complete.
Examples.— You write well. You have
written the letters.
Explanation.— ln the first sentence nothing
is shewn about the Yerb write, but that it
refers to the present time. Write is, therefore,
called simply the Present Tense. But in the
sentence, You have written the letters, the Yerb,
have written, shews two things: (1) that the
action of writing is completed-, (2) that it is but


just now completed. It is therefore present as
regards time, and complete because the action
is finished. Have written is, therefore, called
the Present Complete Tense.
61. Have is the sign of the present Complete
Tense. Present, 1 write ; Present Complete,
I have written.
PAST AND PAST COMPLETE.
Examples. John wrote well. John had
written the letter lefore I came.
Explanation.— Nothing is expressed about
' the Verb wrote , but that it refers to the past
time. Wrote is, therefore, called simply the
Past Tense. But had written shews two
circumstances about the writing : ( 1) that it is
completed , John had (quite) written the letter ;
(2) that it was completed at a past time lefore
I came. It is, therefore, Past as referring to a
past time, and complete inasmuch as the
writing is quite finished. Had written is,
therefore, the Past Complete Tense.
62. Had is the sign of the Past Complete
Tense,*
ptjthre and future complete.
Examples.— Ue will write well. He will
have written the letter ly dinner-time.
* This applies only to the Indicative Mood ; hut it is
not desirable, at this stage, to puzzle [the child with the
whole form of the Verb,


Explanation. — In the sentence, He tv ill
write well, nothing is expressed about the
Yerb, will write, but that it refers to a time
yet to come; a future time. Will write is,
therefore, called simply the Future Tense.
But in the sentence, He will have written
the letter ly dinner-time, two circumstances are
stated with regard to the writing; (1) that it
will be completed, He will have (quite) written
the letter ; (2) that it will be completed at a
time yet to come, future time. The Yerb is,
therefore, Future, as referring to a future time,
and Complete, as shewing that the action will
then be quite finished. Will have written
is, therefore, the Future Complete Tense.
63. Shall and will are the signs of the Future
Tense, shall have and will have of the Future
Complete. Future, I shall write; Future
Complete, I shall have written.
64. Each of the main Tenses has a complete
Form ; viz. Present Complete, Past Complete,
Future Complete.*
65. The Present Complete shews an action
finished at the present time ; as, You have written
the letter.
66. The Past Complete shews an action
* The other forms of the main Tenses, Incomplete,
&c., should not be introduced at this stage of the child’s
progress.


finished at a past time ; as, John had written the
letter before I came.
67. The Future Complete shews an action
that will be finished at a future time; as, lie
will have written the letter by dinner-time.
EXERCISE XXYJ.
tS-gr Toll the Tense of the following Verbs
The plough tears up tho ground. The plough loro
up the field. I have read the lesson. They will see
you at Christmas. I had sent off the parcel before I
heard from my sister, Your cousin will have left our
house by six o’clock. Tho soldiers have just returned
from the West Indies. The ship had sailed before she
reached Liverpool, In ten minutes you will have been
out two hours. The news had reached London before
I left. We shall visit the rocks again I hope. That
ship sails fast. We shah sail next week. The frigate
sailed last week. The vessel has sailed. The captain
had sailed before he received tho letter. We shall
have sailed before that time.
68, THE VERB TO LOVE.
INDICATIVE MOOD —PRESENT TENSE.
Person. Singular Number. Plural Number,
Ist I love We love
2nd Thou lovost You love
3rd lie loves They love
PRESENT COMPLETE TENSE,
Ist I have loved
2nd Thou hast loved
3rd He has loved
Ist I loved
2nd Thou lovedst
3rd He loved
We have loved
You have loved
They have loved
PAST TENSE,
We loved
You loved
They loved,


PAST COMPLETE TENSE.
Ist I had loved
2nd Thou hadst loved
3rd He had loved
We had loved
You had loved
They had loved.
FDTURE TENSE.
Ist I shall love We shall love
2nd Thou wilt love You will love
3rd He will love They will love.
FDTURE COMPLETE TENSE.
Ist I shall have loved.
We shall have loved
2nd Thou wilt have loved You will have loved
3rd He will have loved They will have lov<
They will have loved,
XMPEEATIYE MOOD.
Ist Let me love
Let us love
2nd Love or love thou
3rd Let him love
Love or love ye
Let them love.
INFINITIVE MOOD.
Present Tense. Present Complete Tense.
To love. To have loved.
PARTICIPIAL MOOD.
Past or Indefinite Participle. Loved.
Presen tor Incomplete Participle. Loving.
Complete Participle. Having Loved.
69, THE YEEB TO BE,
INDICATIVE MOOD —PRESENT TENSE.
Per. Singular Number. Plural Number.
Ist lam We are
2nd Thou art You are
3rd He is They are.
PRESENT COMPLETE TENSE.
Ist I have been We have been
2nd Thou hast been You have been
3rd He has been They have been.


PAST TENSE.
Ist I was
We were
2nd Thouwast
3rd He was
You were
They were.
PAST COMPLETE TENSE.
Ist I had been
2nd Thou hadst been
3rd He had been
We had been
You had been
They had been.
PUTURE TENSE.
Ist I shall be
2nd Thou wilt be
3rd He will be
We shall be
You will be
They will be.
PUTURE COMPLETE TENSE.
Ist I shall have been We shall have been
2nd Thou wilt have been You will have been
3rd He will have been They will have been.
v TNTfmTTTVR Mnfll).
INFINITIVE MOOD.
Present Tense. Present Complete Tense.
To be. To have been.
PARTICIPIAL MOOD.
Past or Indefinite Participle,
Been.
Present or Incomplete Participle.
Being.
Complete Participle.
Having been.
KIND OF VERBS.
ACTIVE AND PASSIVE.
Examples. —John struck - the dog. The dog
is struck ly John. She held my hand. My
hand was held ly her. Jane snuffed the candle.
The candle was snuffed ly Jane.


Explanation. — In the first sentence, the
word struck is a Verb, for it means doing some-
thing (see section 7) ; but the action of striking
passes over from John to the dog: struck is,
therefore, called an Active Yerb. In an
Active Verb the doer of the action is placed
before the Verb, and the sufferer of it after it.
In the next sentence, dog , which is the Noun
before the Yerb struck , is not the doer but the
sufferer of the action, the action is done to the
dog. Is struck is, therefore, called a Passive
Yerb. In a Passive Yerb the sufferer of the
action is placed before the Yerb, and the doer
of it after it.
In the sentence, She held mg hand; she , the
doer of the action, is placed before the Yerb
held; held is, therefore, Active, But in the
sentence, My hand teas held bg her ; hand, which
is not the doer of the action, but the endurer
of it, is put before the Yerb; was held is,
therefore, Passive.
And so also in the fifth sentence, Jane snuffed
the candle; Jane , the doer of the action, comes
before the Yerb ; snufeed is, therefore, an
Active Yerb. But in the sentence, The candle
ivas snuffed by Jane , candle, which comes before
the Yerb, is not the doer of the action, but the
endurer of it; was snuffed is, therefore, a
Passive Yerb.
70. An Active Yerb expresses an action


that must have an agent and an object; as, 1
■praise James.
71. A Passive Verb expresses an action
done to a person or thing, and must have an
object and an agent; as, James is praised hy me.
72. A Passive Verb is known by the Parti-
ciple Indefinite being after any part of the
Verb to he; as, lam — loved.
EXERCISE XXYIT.
iggf Tell winch Verbs are Active and which Pas-
sive : .
The wind blew the house down. The house
blown down hy the wind. The hoy broke a window.
The window was broken hy the boy. The doll was
found hy Mary. Mary found her doll. Henry saw his
sister; she was dressed very neatly. I wrote the
letter. That letter was written by mo. Your cousin
sold his horse. The grass is mown by the man, but it
is turned over by the woman. Wc are loved by our
friends. She is praised for her industry. I send a
parcel every day. A parcel is sent by me twice a day.
lam told that story very often. The door was burst
open. They burst open the door. I was told that the
ink was spilt by Harriet. X like cherries, but they
sometimes hurt me. I have been injured by eating
unripe fruit. The ship was tossed about by the winds.
The winds dashed the waves about.
73. THE VERB TO LOVE. PASSIVE.
INDICATIVE MOOD —PRESENT TENSE.
Ter. Singular Number,
Ist I am loved
2nd Thou art loved
3rd He is loved
Plural Number,
"VVo are loved
You are loved.
They are loved.


PRESENT COMPLETE TENSE.
Ist I have been loved We have been loved.
2nd Thou hast been loved You. have been loved
3rd He has been loved They have been loved.
PAST TENSE.
Ist I was loved
2nd Thou wast loved
We were loved
You were loved
3rd He was loved They were loved.
PAST COMPLETE TENSE.
Ist I had been loved We had been loved
2nd Thou hadst been loved You had been loved
3rd He had been loved They had been loved.
FUTURE TENSE.
Ist I shall be loved We shall be loved
2nd Thou wilt he loved You will he loved
3rd He will be loved They will he loved.
FUTURE COMPLETE TENSE.
Ist I shall have been loved We shall have been loved
2nd Thou wilt have been loved You will have been loved
3rd He will have been loved They will have been loved.
IMPERATIVE MOOD
Ist Let me he loved Let us be loved
2nd Bo loved, or be thou loved Be loved, or be ye loved
3rd Let him be loved Let them be loved.
INFINITIVE MOOD.
Present Tense. Present Complete Tense.
To be loved To have been loved.
PARTICIPIAL MOOD.
Past Indefinite or Participle.
Loved.
Present or Incomplete Participle,
Being loved.
Complete Participle,
Having been loved.


ACTIVE AND NEUTER.
Examples. James touched the chair. I
often sit on the chair. Jane runs into the field
every day. The hoy sometimes sleeps upon the
grass. The man cuts the grass.
Explanation. —ln the first sentence, the
action of touching passes over from James to the
chair; touched is an Active Verb.
But in the second sentence, the Verb sit does
not pass over to any object. We cannot say,
I sit the chair, but I sit on the chair. A Pre-
position on, comes between the Verb sit and
the Noun chair which comes after the Verb.
Sit is called a Neuter Verb. So in the next
sentence, Jane runs into the field every day,
runs is a Neuter Verb, for the action of run-
ning does not pass over from Jane to anything
else. We cannot say Jane runs the field, but
must, put a Preposition, into, between the Verb
and the Noun field following it. So in the sen-
tence, The hoy sometimes sleeps on the grass,
sleeps is a Neuter Verb, for no action passes
over from the hoy to anything else. You can-
not say, he sleeps the grass, but he sleeps on the
grass.
But in the last sentence, cuts is Active, for
the action of cutting passes over from the man
to the grass. No Preposition comes between
the Verb and the Noun following it.
74. A Neuter Verb expresses the being, or


slate of "being, of something ; or an action not
passing over to an object; as, I sleep, He runs.
EXERCISE XXYIIT.
lUr Tell whether the following Verbs are active or
Neuter :
Pam into the garden. Hold that paper. The dog
will bite a stranger. That horse kicked the groom.
The ccachman lives over the stable. 1 swam over tire
river. The soldier fell from his horse. My little
brother burnt his finger. Will you step into the library ?
The boy stood on the wall. The cat leaped through the
window. Write a letter. Thomas painted his wheel-
barrow. The man bent the bow. I feed my
every morning. Will you come with me? Lotus go
into the meadow. Hon sinks in the water, but it will
float in quicksilver. Tea grows in China,
EXERCISE XXIX.
l|g)“Tell whether the following Verbs are Active,
Passive, or Neuter, and also their Mood and Tense:—
The bee stung the lady. She was hurt very much.
The boy has driven the cow into the lane. That book
was given to my brother. I had lent my bat to him,
before you asked me. The sun rose with great splen-
dour. The reapers will bind the corn in sheaves. The
bird will fly away. A stone has been thrown into the
canal. The prisoners will be bound. The doors will
be shut. The serpent had crept near the child before
his father saw it. This desk has been made by a car-
penter, His horse will be sold to-morrow. A 'good
child is loved by everybody.
EXERCISE XXX.
iglT Parse the sentences in Exercises xxvi., xxvii.,
xxviii., xxix., in the following manner


Sentence. —The lee stung the lady.
The . . Article.
13eo . . Noun. Common. Common as to Gen-
der. Singular Number. Third Per-
son. Nominative Case; coming
before the Yerb, stung, and answer-
ing a question beginning with what.
Stung. .Yerb. Active. Indicative Mood. Past
Tense.
The , . Article.
Lady . . Noun. Common. Feminine Gender.
Singular Number. Third Person.
Objective Case ; coming after the
Verb stung, and answering a ques-
tion beginning with whom.
Sentence. —A log has been stung.
A . . Article.
Boy .. Noun. Common. Masculine Gender.
Singular Number. Third Person.
Nominative Case ; as it comes before
the Yerb, and answers a question
beginning with icho.
Has been stung .. Yerb. Passive. Indicative
Mood. Present Complete Tense.
rule i.
Examples. —lie runs. They run. Thou
RUNNE 3T. /am loved. He is loved. We are
loved.
Explanation. — Runs is the Singular Num-
ber, Third Person, and therefore, agrees with


its Nominative he, which, is Singular Number,
Third Person. No other Number and Person
of the Verb would be correct, as he run, or he
runnest ; for then the Yerb would not be of the
same Number and Person as its Nominative.
So we say they run ; the Yerb run being Plural
Number, Third Person, and so agreeing with
its Nominative they which is Plural Number and
Third Person. In the same way runnest, which
is Singular Number and Second Person, agrees
with its Nominative thou, which is Singular
Number, Second Person.
/being Singular Number, First Person, re-
quires am loved, which is the Singular Number,
First Person of the Passive Yerb ; he which is
Third Singular, requires is loved, which is the
Third Singular of the Yerb. We could not
say lis loved, nor he am loved, for then the Verb
would not be of the same person as its Nomi-
native. We should be using with aNominative
of the First Person, the Third Person of the
Yerb, and with a Nominative of the Third
Person, the First Person of the Yerb.
75. Rule. —The verb agrees with its Nomi-
native in Number and Person ; as, lam ; He is.
EXERCISE XXXI.
cJST (a) Point out the Verbs ; tell their number and
person, and say why they are in that number and
person:—


We are here. They speak well. He walks badly.
The bird flies fast. You learn correctly. Are you
tired? We live in London. They have sent us some
grapes. You write better than I; hut he writes better
than you. lam in a hurry. Thou sleepest soundly,
Rome is in Italy. The fir is an evergreen.
The pine-apple grows wild in America. The lion lives
in hot countries. The polar bear is found only in cold
countries. The monument of London was. built to
commemorate the great fire. Bats are called hand-
winged animals. Coal is found in the north and west
of England. The herring fisheries are valuable to this
country. The eagle flies very high. The Queen has
gone to Scotland,
(b) Supply nropcr verbs: —
The hook ( )in the box. The hooks ( )in
the box. I ( )in the garden every morning. Thou
( )in the garden every morning. He ( )in the
garden every morning. We ( )in the garden every
morning. He ( ) good. They ( ) not good. I
( ) tall, hut you ( ) short. We ( ) fond of
fish; ( ) thou ? In hot countries the inhabitants
( ) for an hour or two in the middle of the day. Wo
( )at Bristol; ( ) thou visit us there P He
)at five every morning, and ( )at ten at night,
You ( ) better than I; hut I ( ) better than he.
We ( ) not rich ; hut ( ) is.
RULE 11.
Examples. —He and I are friends. James
and George run. Ccesar and Pompey were great
generals.
Explanation. —ln these sentences the verbs
are, run, were, are Plural, because they refer to
more than one Nominative. In the first sen-


tence, he and I both are friends. In the second,
James and George both run ; James runs and
George runs ; but, instead of saying so, we put
both together, and say James and George run.
So not Caesar only was a great general, nor
Pompey only ; but both were : the Plural Verb,
ivere, must, therefore, be used.
76. Pule. —Singular Nominatives, connected
by and , require the Yerb and Pronoun to be in
the Plural: as, England , Scotland, and Wales
form Great Britain.
EXERCISE XXXII.
(a) Point out the Verbs in the following sen-
tences, and in each say why the Verb is Plural: —
The boy and the girl laugh. Where are James and
his sister? Charlotte and Mary are here. James and
his friend travel together. He and I live in the same
house. My father and mother have been to Ramsgate,
(b) Supply appropriate Verbs :
My uncle and aunt ( ) at home. Your broth el-
and his wife ( )in Russel-sqnare. The pen and ink
( ) not to he found. The cat and the dog ( )
with each other. The lion and the lioness ( )
separated. The sailor and the monkey ( ) running
up the rigging.
RULE 111.
Examples. —He or his brother is wrong. James
or his sister is there. Elizabeth or her cousin
lives at Upton.
Explanation. —ln these sentences, the
Yerb is is Singular, because it refers to one


only. In the first sentence, He, or his brother
is wrong ; that is one of the two, either ho or
his brother is wrong. In the second sentence,
James or his sister, one of the two, is there;
they are not both there, only one of them;
therefore the Verb is singular. So not both
•persons live at Tipton, but only one ; the Yerb,
therefore, is lives, which is singular.
77. Rule. Singular Nominatives of the
Third Person, separated by or or nor, require
the Yerb and Pronoun to be in the Singular ;
as, Hither John or his brother has the booh.
EXERCISE XXXIII.
CaT (a) Point out the Verba; and say why Sin-
gular :
Ellon or her sister has your box. Either tho dog or
cat is in the room. Tho house in Liverpool or tho
house in London has been given up. Tho cottage or
the house is to let. The pen or tho paper was bad.
John or Henry lives there.
(b) Supply the proper Verbs
lam told the cherry-tree or tho apple-tree ( )to
be cut down. Harry or his cousin ( ) a boat. Tho
yacht or tho barge ( )to be got ready. This pen
or this ink ( ) very bad. Either the horse or tho
ass ( ) into the garden sometimes. Neither tho
river nor the canal ( ) frozen over.
RULE IV.
Examples. —l struck him. He hurt me. They
love us.
Explanation.—lu these sentences the words


him, me, us, are in the Objective, because they
follow the Active Verbs. Him, is Objective,
governed by the Verb, struck. I struck—
whom ? Him. Him is governed by struck.
So, He hurt —whom ? Me. Me is Objective,
governed by hurt. They love —whom ? Us.
Us is Objective, governed by love. The Nomi-
natives he, I, we, would of course be incorrect.
78. Rule.— Active Verbs govern the Ob-
jective Case ; as, He held me.
EXERCISE XXXIY.
llgf (a) Point out the Objectives in the following
sentences, and say why each one is in that case:—
I touched him. The wheel crushed my doll. He
shot a partridge. I saw your cousin. He said that I
hurt you.
“ How doth the little busy bee
Improve each shining hour !”
You should help her. My sister wore a beautiful
dress. Yes! and I almost tore it. The horse kicked
the child. Thomas has spoilt his pen and blotted his
paper. You may fetch me a hook.
(h) Supply Pronouns in the Objective Case :
Our friends love ( ). I saw John ; I saw ( )
on the lawn. I havo not heard of Jane for a long
time; hut I hope I shall see ( ) at Christmas. We
love ( ) because they love ( ). The bee stung
( ). You should love your mamma, Ido love ( )
very much. Do not hurt ( ) for we would not
hurt ( ).
RULE V.
Examples. —He came to me. He ran with
us.


Explanation. —The words me, us, are in the
Objective Case, governed by the Prepositions
to and with. In the first sentence, we say, he
came to me, not to I, because me is the Objec-
tive Case of 1, and to, which is a Preposition,
always has the Objective Case after it. In the
second sentence, we say, with us, not with we,
for us is the Objective Case of we, and with,
which is a Preposition, always has the Objec-
tive Case after it.
79. Rule.—Prepositions govern the Objec-
tive Case ; as, I sent a looh to him.
EXERCISE XXXV.
igg* (a) Point out the Objectives in the following
sentences, and say why the words are in that Case :
Diogenes lived in a tub. Saint Simon lived on a
pillar. Charles the Fifth retired into a monastery.
Mahomet pretended to see his visions in a cave away
from all mankind. Charles the Twelfth of Sweden fled
from Russia into Turkey, and was besieged in his house
at Bender. York is on the Ouse, which is a river that
runs into the Humber. The fir-tree grows in cold
countries and on high mountains.
(b) Supply Pronouns in the Objective Case: —
Give the penknife to ( ). My mamma told me
to fetch a hook for ( ). The hook was not lost by
( ), hut by ( ). You must go with ( )if
you can. The property belongs to ( ) and not to
( )•
RULE VI.
Examples. — l am he. That lady is she.
Who was the minister ? That gentleman was
he. The abbey is a fine ruin.


Explanation.— ln tlio first sentence, am,
which is a part of the Yerb to he, (see G 9,)
comes between the Pronouns I and he, which
means the same Person. Therefore he, which
comes after am, must be in the same case as I,
which comes before it. As lis in the Nomina'
tive Case, he is in the Nominative Case too.
In the sentence, That lady is she, is, which is a
part of the Yerb to he, comes between lady and
she. Both these words mean the same person.
Therefore she, which comes after the Yerb to
he, is the same Case as lady, which comes
before it. Both of them are Nominative. In
the sentence, IF ho teas the Minister ? the inter-
rogative who, before mas, which is a part of the
Yerb to he, is Nominative ; and minister, which
comes after was, is Nominative as well. So in
the next sentence, That gentleman is he ; he
comes after was, a part of the Yerb to he, and
gentleman comes before it. As gentleman and he
both mean the same person, they are in the
same Case. The last sentence, abbey and ruin,
both mean the same thing, and have is, which
is a part of the Yerb to be, between them. As
abbey, which comes before is, is Nominative,
ruin coming after, is Nominative too.
80. Rule. The Yerb to he has the same
case after it as before it when the Nouns or
Pronouns signify the same person ov thing; as,
I am he.


EXERCISE XXXYI.
(a) Point out the Nouns or Pronouns which
follow the Yerb to be, and say what Case they are :
lam he. She is a good girl. You are the teacher of
the class. No! that gentleman is he. Napoleon was an
Emperor, His father had been an officer. Cromwell
was Protector of England. Great Britain is an island.
The Queen of England is not an absolute monarch.
Henry is a good boy. Edinburgh is a handsome
city, Buonaparte said that England was a nation of
shopkeepers. Louis the XIY. said that the Hutch
were gentlemen pedlars. Babylon is now a waste. I
know that Socrates was a wise man, Homer was
the author of the Iliad. Emma has been a naughty
girl. Iceland is a very cold country. Sahara is the
great desert of Africa. Rome was once the most
powerful city in the world. The oak is a noble tree.
Men are animals, but all animals are not men. Gold
and silver are Ihe precious metals. The whale is the
largest animal in the world. Tin is a metal; coal is
only a mineral.
(b) Supply proper Pronouns: —
Is that man the carpenter ? No ! I am ( ),
Indeed! I thought it had been ( ). Who is the
artist ? This lady is ( ). Is that gentleman with
the blue coat your cousin ? No ! it is ( •) who is
dressed in black. Are you the porter ? Yes ! lam
( ). Which is your sister? That is ( ). Are
you sure F I believe it to be ( ). Where is the
gardener ? That red-faced man is ( ).
RULE yn.
Examples. Henry’s apple. My uncle’s
house. The boy’s playthings.
Explanation.— ln the phrase Henry's apple,
the last Noun apple belongs to the first Noun


Henry; henry’s is, therefore, the Possessive
Case. So in the phrase, My Uncle's house , the
last Noun house belongs to the first Noun
unde; uncle’s is, therefore, in the Possessive
Case. In the phrase, The boy's playthings ,
the last Noun playthings belongs to the first
Noun boy's; boy’s is Possessive.
81. Rule. —When two Nouns so come to-
gether, that the latter is considered to belong
to the former, the former is put in the Pos-
sessive Oase; as, Richard's apple.
EXERCISE XXXVII.
igtT Point out the Nouns in the Possessive Case, and
say whether they are Singular or Plural: —
My friend’s orchard. The dog’s kennel. The child’s
toy. Our baby’s coral. The soldier’s arms. Eliza’s
doll was in Jane’s box. The children’s food was on the
nurse’s table. I ran through my cousin’s grounds.
Washington’s hatchet chopped his father’s cherry-tree.
England’s navy is the largest in the world. The boy’s
good conduct makes his parent’s happiness. Your
sister’s house is next my father’s garden. The Queen’s
crown is kept at the Tower. Milton is buried in the
Poet’s Corner. King Alfred’s bracelet was found in
Somersetshire. Pompey’s pillar is in Egypt. _ Thomas’s
letter was found in Charles’s desk. The ship’s anchor
was let down at the captain’s command. The ship’s
provisions are spoilt.
Rule viii.
Examples. —The sailor is hurt: he fell down.
I know that lady; she lives near us.
Explanation. — In tbe first sentence the


Noun sailor is Masculine Gender, Singular
Number, and Third Person; he, therefore, is
the only Pronoun that can be used for it, for he
is Masculine Gender, Singular Number, and
Third Person. He, therefore, agrees with the
Noun which it represents (sailor) in Gender,
Number, and Person. In the next sentence,
the Noun lady is Feminine Gender, Singular
Number, and Third Person; the Pronoun,
which stands for lady, is she, which is Femi-
nine Gender, Singular Number, and Third
Person.
82. Pule, —Pronouns must agree with the
Nouns they represent in Gender, Number, and
Person ; as, Your sister has been here , but she
is now gone.
EXERCISE XXXYIII.
CST Supply the proper Pronouns :
The gardener rolled the paths ; ( ) did it by
himself. Tell Emma ( ) is wanted. The boys will
play at cricket till ( ) tire themselves. Did you
send the parcel ? Yes, ( ) went by railway. Your
sisters have gone to ( ) own room. The hoys were
looking about for ( ) hats; but ( ) could not find
( ). A man loves ( ) own children better than
( ) loves another’s. The Duke of Marlborough was
a great English general: ( ) fought ( ) great
battles in the reign of Queen Anne; hut towards the
end of ( ) reign ( ) was offended with ( ).
RULE IX.
Examples. —The baby loves to look at the


light. It is pleasant to see one’s friends. It is
our duty to help the unfortunate.
Explanation.— ln tho first sentence, to 100/c
is in the Infinitive Mood; and it is put in the
Infinitive Mood by tho Verb Loves; loses to
look. This is an instance of one Yorb being
put in tho Infinitive by another Yee.il In tho
second sentence, to see is in tho Infinitive
Mood governed by tho Adjective pleasant:
pleasant to see. Here is an instance of a Yerb
being put in tho Infinitive by an Adjective.
In the third sentence, to help is Infinitive; and
it is put in the Infinitive by the Noun, duty ;
duty to help. Here is an instance of a Verb
put in the Infinitive by a Noun.
80. Hole. —A Yerb is governed in tho Infi-
nitive by a Yerb, a Noun, or an Adjective ; as,
He delights to please you; It is delightful to
please you ; It is his delight to please you.
EXERCISE XXXIX.
Eggp Toll the Infinitives, and the words governing
them:
The boys try to please their teacher. Wo love to be
in your company. Buonaparte tried to conquer Eng-
land. We eat to support life. It is my friend's in-
tention to come to-morrow. Do you intend to sec
him ? Oil yes! lam anxious to make his acquaintance.
The cat‘is afraid to come too near, for she has been
trying to steal some meat. Let us strive to assist the
wretched. He v ill make an effort to succeed. Try to
overcome difficulties. You vail be better able to go
than I.


CAUTION I.
Examples. — The hoy writes carefully. That
letter is folded properly. The child speaks
DISTINCTLY.
Explanation.— ln the first sentence, the word
carefully shews how the hoy tcrttes : he writes
carefully.' Careful would ho wrong-, for careful
is an Adjective and can only qualify a Noun,
and we want an Adverb, carefully to qualify the
Verb, writes.— So, in the second sentence, the
w ord properly shews how the letter is folded.
Proper would be wrong, for proper is an Adjec-
tive and cannot qualify a Verb, but only a
Noun.—ln the third sentence, the Adverb,
distinctly , shews how the child speaks : distinct
would be wrong for distinct is an Adjective
and cannot be used with Verbs, but only with
Nouns.
84. Caution.—Never use Adjectives as
Adverbs; say, The yirl speaks distinctly; not
distinct.
EXERCISE XL.
dr-iT Supply proper Adverbs ending in ly :
The nightingale sings ( ). Try to speak ( ).
Do not write ( ). The soldiers fought ( ). Do
you love me ( ) ? Ho ( ) promised to come.
He has conducted his business ( ), Does she not
act very ( )? He sees ( ) now. The plough-
boy whistles ( ). We ( ) together. An in-
dustrious man works ( ). Our old horse travels ( ).
C 1


CAUTION 11,
Examples. —The horse has fallen into the
ditch. The has broken his leg. He is taken out
Explanation,— ln the first sentence the
word fallen, which comes after has, is the Past
Participle of the Verb to fall. It would be
improper to use the Past Tense after has, and
say, has fell. —So in the next sentence, broken,
the Past Participle, comes after has: the Past
Tense, broke, would be improper. We must
then use the Past Participle after the verb have.
—ln the third sentence, taken, which is the
Past Participle, comes after is: took the Past
Tense, would be wrong. But is, is part of
the Verb to be; therefore the Past Participle
must be used after the Yerb to be.
85. Caution. —Never use the Past Tense
instead of the Past Participle. The Participle
is used after be and have. Say, the river is
frozen over; not froze.
86. PRESENT TENSE. PAST TENSE. PAST PARTICIPLE.
Break Broke Broken.
Shake Shook Shaken.
Take Took Taken.
Tear Tore Torn.
Wear Wore Worn.
Pall Eell Fallen.
Beat Beat Beaten.
Eat Eat or Ate Eaten.


Froze
Frozen.
Spoke or
Spake Spoken.
Stole
Stolen.
Saw
Seen.
Began
Begun.
Drank
Drunk.
Rang
Rung.
Sang
Sung
Drove
Driven.
Gave
Given.
Lay
Lain.
Rode
Ridden.
Rose
Risen.
Wrote
Written,
Flew
Flown.
Knew
Known.
Threw
Thrown
Chose
Chosen.
Ran
Run.
Came
Come.
PRESENT TENSE.
Freeze
Speak
Steal
See
Begin
Drink
PAST TENSE. PAST PARTICIPLE.
Ring
Sing
Drive
Give
Lie
Ride
Rise
Write
Fly
Know
Throw
Choose
Run
Come
EXEECISE XLV.
Supply the appropriate words :
The basin was ( ), The child was ( ). The
stone has been ( ), He ( ) his lesson, but he
did not finish it. The lesson was ( ). The bird
has ( ) over the house. I have ( ) ten miles
on my brother’s horse. He ( ) away. He has ( )
me a letter: but I have not ( )to him. The wind
has ( ) the fruit from the trees. Some of the apples
are ( ) but I did not steal them. My dress has not
been ( ) for several weeks.


EARBING EXERCISES.
EXERCISE XLIT.
*Sir Parse the sentences in Exercise xxxi to xli,, in
the following manner :
Sentence I. — That gentleman's gardener ivas
ordered to fell the tree , because it had been loosened
hy the tvind.
That .. Pronoun. Demonstrate e.
Gentle- ] Noun. Common. Masculine Gen-
man’s j der. Singular Number. Third
der. Singular Number. Third
Person. Possessive Case, by Pule
7.*
Gardener Noun. Common. Masculine Gender.
Singular Number. Third Person.
Nominative Case ; as it comes before
the Verb was ordered , and answers
a question beginning with who.
Was | Verb. Passive. Indicative Mood,
ordered j Past Tense. Singular Number.
Third Person, by Pule I.*
To fell .. Yerb. Active. Infinitive Mood ;
governed by the Verb was ordered,
according to Pule 9.* Present
Tense.
The .. Article. Definite.
Tree .. Noun. Common. Neuter. Singular
Number. Third Person. Objec-
tive Case, by Pule 4.*
Because. .Conjunction.
* The Rule should he repeated by the Pupil.


It ~ Pronoun. Personal. Neuter. Sin-
gular Number. Third Person, by
Pule B.* Nominative Case, as it
comes before the Yerb had been
loosened, and answers a question
beginning with who.
Had I Verb. Passive. Indicative Mood,
been >■ Past Complete Tense. Singular
loosened ) Number. Third Person, by Pule I.*
By .. Preposition.
The .. Article. Definite.
Wind ~ Noun. Common. Neuter. Singular
Number. Third Person. Objec-
tive Case, by Pule 5*
Sentence 2. —John or his sister has opened the
door of the library.
John ,« Noun. Proper. Masculine Gender.
Singular Number, Third Person.
Nominative Case; coming before the
Yerb has opened , and answering a
question beginning with who.
Or .. Conjunction.
His .. Pronoun. Possessive Adjective. Mas-
culine Gender. Singular Number.
Third Person, by Pule B.*
Sister .. Noun. Common. Feminine Gender.
Singular Number. Third Person.
Nominative Case; coming before the
Yerb has opened, and answering a
question beginning with who.


Has I Verb. Active. Indicative Mood,
opened j Present Complete Tense. Singular
Number. Third Person, by Eule 3.*
The .. Article. Definite.
Door ~ Noun. Common. Neuter, Singular
Number, Third Person. Objective
Case, by Eule 4.*
Of .. Preposition.
The ~ Article.
Library,. Noun. Common. Neuter. Singular
Number. Third Person. Objective
Case, by Eule 5.*
Sentence 3. Our grape-vine is trained
against the wall: it hears the finest grapes.
Our ~ Pronoun. Possessive Adjective.
Grape-vine Noun. Common. Neuter. Singular
Number. Third Person. Nomina-
tive Case, coming before the Verb
hears , and answering a question be-
ginning with who.
Is trained Verb. Passive. Indicative Mood.
Present Tense. Singular Number.
Third Person. Agreeing with its
Nominative grape-vine , by Eule I.*
Against.. Preposition.
The .. Article,
Cottage,. Noun. Common. Neuter. Singular
Number. Third Person, Objective
Case. Governed by the Preposi-
tion against , by Eule 5.*


Bears ..
Finest
Grapes
Pronoun. Personal. Neuter. Sin-
gular Number. Third Person.
Agreeing with the Noun grape-vine,
by Eule B.*
Verb. Active. Indicative Mood.
Present Tense. Singular Number.
Third Person. Agreeing with its
Nominative it, by Eule I.*
Article.
Adjective. Superlative Degree.
Noun. Common. Neuter. Plural
Number. Third Person. Objective
Case; governed by the Active
Verb bears, Eule 4.*


QUESTIONS ON PART I.
1. What is Grammar ? (I.)*
2. How many sorts of words arc there ? Name
them. (3.)
3. What is a Noun ? (4.)
4. What part of speech is John ? And why ?
5. What part of speech is cat P And why ?
6. What part of speech is village ? And why ?
7. What part of speech is table ? And why ?
8. What is an Article ? (5,)
9. How many Articles are there ? Name them.
10. What is an Adjective ? (6.)
11. Which is the Adjective in the phrase, A tall man?
12. What is a Verb P (7.)
13. Which is the Verb in the sentence.' The boy rides
well ? And why ?
11. What is an Adverb (8.)
15. Which is the Adverb in the sentence, He learns
quickly ? And why ?
16. What is a Pronoun ? (9.)
17. Which is the Pronoun in the sentence, The work-
men are not here ; they have gone to dinner ?
And why ?
18. What is a Preposition ? (10.)
19. Which is the Preposition in the sentence, Our house
is on a hill ? And why ?
20. What is a Conjunction ? (11.)
21. Which is the Conjunction in the sentence, John
docs not know much and he will not try ? And why ?
22. What is an Interjection ? (12)
23. Which is the Interjection in the sentence, Oh I I
am so sorry for you ? And why ?
* These numbers refer to the sections in which the
answers to the questions may be found.


QUESTIONS ON PART 11.
24. What is a Proper Noun ? (14.)
25. What is a common Noun ? (15.)
26. Are John, James, Common or Proper? And why ?
27. Are house, child, Common or Proper? And why ?
28. How many Numbers have Nouns ? Tell them. (17.;
29. What is the common way of making the Plural ?
(20.)
30. How many Genders are there ? (22.1
31. What does the Masculine Gender denote? What
does the Feminine ? (23.)
32. What is the term used for a Noun of no Gender ? (24)
33. What is the term used for a Noun that stands for
both Genders ? (25.)
34. What Gender are hoy, girl, horse, mare ? And why ?
35. What would you call, friend, bird, house, wafer, as to
Gender ? And why ?
36. How many Cases have Nouns and Pronouns? (26.)
37. Where is the Nominative in a sentence ? (27.)
38. What question is put to find out the Nominative ?
39. Where is the Objective in a sentence? (28.)
40. What question is put to find out the Objective ?
41. What does the Possessive Case shew ? (29.)
42. W r hat question is put to find out the Possessive ?
43. In what Case are the Nouns in the sentence, Wil-
liam fetched his sister’s doll ? And why ?
44. How many Degrees of Comparison have Adjectives ?
Name them. (33.)
45. What does the Positive mean ? (34.)
46. What does the Comparative mean ? (35.)
47. What does the Superlative mean P (36.)
48. Name the Articles, Definite and Indefinite.
49. How many kinds of Pronouns are there ? (37.)
50. What is a Personal Pronoun ? (38.)
61. How many Persons have Pronouns ? (39.)
52. What does the first person stand for ? (40.)


What does the second Person stand for'? (41.)
What does the third Person stand for ? (42.)
What are the Persons of the Pronouns in [the sen-
tence, I fear he tells you a falsehood ? And why ?
What is a Relative Pronoun ? (43.)
Name the Relative Pronouns. (44.)
In the sentence, The man who was here , is gone.
What is man to who ?
What is an Adjective Pronoun ?
What are the two chief kinds of Adjective Pro-
nouns ?
Name the Possessive Adjective Pronouns. (46.)
How is a Possessive Adjective Pronoun known from
a Personal Pronoun in the Possessive Case? (47.)
In the sentence, Is that your glove ? No; it is yours ,
which is the Adjective Pronoun, and which the
Personal ? And why ?
Tell the Demonstrative Adjective Pronouns. (48.)
How many Moods have Verbs ? (50, 51, 53,55,56,58.)
What does the word Mood mean ? (49.)
What is the Indicative Mood ? (50.)
What is the Subjunctive Mood? (51.)
What word often goes before the Subjunctive ? (52.)
What is the Potential Mood ? (53.)
What does the word Potential mean ?
What words always go before the Potential ? (54.)
What is the Imperative Mood ? (55.)
What is the Infinitive Mood ? (56.)
What is the sign of the Infinitive Mood ? (57.)
What is the Participle Mood ? (58.)
What does the word Participle mean P
What is the Mood of the Verbs in the sentence, My
father said , “ You may go if your cousin come'' ? And
why ?
What is the Mood of the Verbs in the sentence,
Tell the man to drive away the cattle, now almost
scorched by the heat of the un ? And why P


80. How many Main Tenses are there ? Tell them.
(60.)
81. What important form has each of the Main Tenses ?
Name the form for each of the Tenses. (64 )
82. What sign has the Present Complete Tense ? (61.)
83. What sign has the Past Complete Tense ? (62.)
84. What sign has the Future Complete Tense ? (63.)
85. What are the Tenses of the Verbs in these sen-
tences ? And why ? Be says he shall go to-morrow.
I told her that I had sent to her brother. I shall have
heard from our friend by that time. So you have come
to town.
86. How many kinds of Verbs are there? Name
them.
87. What is an Active Verb ? (70.)
88. What is a Passive Verb ? (71.)
89. How may a Passive Verb be known ? (72.)
90. What is a Neuter Verb ? (74.)
91. Tell the kinds of Verbs in the sentence, I told him
that our house was burnt down, and he unfeelingly
walked away.
QUESTIONS ON PART 111.
92. What must the Verb agree with, and in what
points? Give an instance. (75.)
93. If Singular Nominatives are connected by and, what
must be the Number of the Verb? And why?
Give an instance.
94. If Singular Nominatives are connected by or, what
must be the Number of the Verb? And why?
Give an instance. (77.)
95. What case do Active Verbs govern? Give an
instance. (78.)
96. What case do Prepositions govern? Give an in-
stance. (79.)
97. What case does the Verb to be require after it?
Give an instance, (80,)


When is a Noun put in the Possessive Case?
Give an instance. (81.)
What do Pronouns agree with, and in what points ?
Give an instance. (82.)
How are the Verbs put in the Infinitive Mood ?
Give an instance of each. (83.)
What caution is to be observed in the use of the
Adjective and Adverb ?
What caution is to be observed in the use of the
Past Tense, and the Past Participle ? (85.) .
When must the Past Participle be used ? (85.)




. .
■ *


♦
;
■
■
.
*


