

-
, otiw.
ncjUcYS IISTCR
'Jfer a AkW“'-


* y-
; -Jn
"jC Jr ‘ V>
* ,fv "
Kelvin Grove College of Advanced Education
- Presented by
P Mr. Monty Morris
-d-
R v
% iVi
"y , ’'Ly ■
V_-*u> .i (nSSsf~ m
fe ‘ ,>r-J
3r -
‘iM _ - > *
Xlyff
nU
Iff 3
■ X X. 4


/ ik
I tA; \v r iiA) MB 11 4?
JK’' •■%>'" ,^BLAv^f
■"/ 1 jhp ■#
(I k •* §
: '. 'i .l''j^fjl^^f.
* a-«Aw$*vHaw ■ »
■ ' ’ ‘
x ~ i £
fK /SnrOJu


4 Soldier Daddy
To her Excellency
The Lady Qowrie
and to every child with a
First Impression - - - 1942
Second Impression - - - 1943




-«t *


0# 4-,®i"4S
«e “°-’3SI
Wholly Set up, Printed and Published in Australia by
MARCHANT & CO. PTY. LTD., Sydney. N.S.W.
Registered at the G.P.0., Sydney, for transmission by Post as a Book.


l l and I’ll blow your house down.”
promised.
GRANDPUFF AND LEAFY
was to
that Leafy
away and
could not be found.
fy heard him in
night and was
sure he said: “I’ll
and I’ll puff,
“Is that you, Grandpuff?” Leafy whispered; “you
can huff, and you can puff and you can blow this
house down, ’cos it isn’t my house, it’s only a hotel
and I don’t like it.’’
Leafy had come with all the family, Ann, Hugh, David,
Mummie and Soldier Daddy to live in the hotel,
and she had been disappointed because nothing was


“Tt will be like living in a palace, and there will
be people to wait on us and do everything that
we tell them to do,” Ann had promised.
And Leafy told the waiter not to bring certain vegetables for
her dinner, but he brought them just the same, and the housemaid
not to bring tea to her bedroom at night, but it always arrived
on a tray, and no one did what she told them to.
Hugh had said that living in an hotel would be fun, but Leafy
did not find it so. And
David said: “It’s as big as'
” and although this
was true and it was a great
big place, there was not
enough room in it for Leafy.
In her own home she had a
room all to herself and plenty
of space for everything.


;■ i
But in the hotel she shared a room with
Ann and there were not enough places
for both their belongings. This often
made Leafy cross in the mornings,
because her clothes kept getting lost,
and no one helped her to find them.
Then there was the bath, and although it was deep and warm,
great drops.of icy water dropped from the shower on to her back.
And when she was dressed David teased and would not play
the way he used to at home, where he always called her his own
“Precious little sister” and played any game. Now he only played
soldiers and said “hands up” and held a toy pistol too close to
her face. Every night they had “bored eggs” for tea in the
bedroom. Even then he teased.
Leafy liked “bored eggs” but she
specially wanted tea in the dining-
room and not on a tray, because
Soldier Daddy had his dinner there
and so did Ann, Hugh and Mummie.


■
iSlil : ' X ' ''


| EAFY had known Soldier Daddy for only a short
"""time. She had known about him and seen
pictures of him, but she thought he was a story-book person.
None of the people in story book pictures were real, so when
Soldier Daddy quite suddenly became a real live person, instead
of a picture, and Leafy and all the family went to live in the
hotel, instead of at home, everything seemed topsy-turvy.
When Leafy first found real Soldier Daddy instead of picture
Soldier Daddy, she was quite sure that he belonged to her, but
very soon she found that she had to share him with many others,
among these being the people at the hotel who were always
stopping him to say: “Hullo, Colonel! Glad you’re back,’’ and
to talk about stupid things instead of the things that Leafy liked
to hear.
At first Leafy was lost in the big hotel and someone had to show
her the way about. This “some one’’ was nearly always
Mummie.




LEAFY was shy too, because there were so many
people. When she came to know all the right
turnings and halls, and doorways, and could find her way by
herself, these people said : “Hullo, Leafy!” and Leafy did
not want to say “Hullo!” so down went her curly head.
It was because of all this that she told Grandpuff Wind that she
did not mind if he huffed, and he puffed and blew the hotel down.
However, when morning came and nothing had happened, she
was Grosser than cross, and when Soldier Daddy disappeared
directly after breakfast, she was Grosser still and decided to follow
him, although she knew that she should not do so. Hugh often
went with him to a golf place, and she would go instead of Hugh.
She knew fhe way. There was a door at the end of the long
passage, some steps to walk down, a little path to run along, a
road to walk upon, a fence to go through.
Leafy found the passageway and the door was easy to open,
and she walked out on to a landing. She hesitated a moment
because she saw Ann skipping along the pathway. She knew that
Ann was going to walk beside the tall flowers in the garden on
the other side of the hotel, so she waited until Ann was out of
sight.




walked down the steps along the path
and out on to the road. Turning towards some
tall poplars, all golden in the sunlight, she ran beside a hedge
of bright-colored berries, and, coming to a low fence, found a
gate that led into grassy fields. She ran through the gate
and looked about for Soldier Daddy. He was nowhere to be seen,
so she started away over the hills to look for him.
At first she walked along a little path that ran beside bushes,
some covered with red berries, others with orange. Peeping
through the branches she discovered a river. There was a steep
bank down to the river. When she tried to push her way through
the bushes she found that they were scratchy and caught her
dress. So she kept on by the pathway, and by and bye came to
a bridge. Near the bridge the bank sloped gently and there were
no bushes, and Leafy was able to get close to the water.


'Sx-y I %
1




—^
SHE looked at the river, all shining and bright
in the sunlight and saw it flow under the bridge
and far away. The trees on either bank were reflected in the
still water, and little black ducks swam in and out under the
overhanging trees.
After a while she decided to walk on to the bridge. She walked
up the steps and had a great surprise. The bridge moved. This
frightened her. She ran. The bridge jumped up and down.
She stood still. The bridge swung from side to side.
Expecting at any moment to fall into the river, she clung to the
railings and the bridge ceased moving. Leafy stared into the
water. The river was very deep. She would not like to fall
in, and was too nervous to walk for fear of the bridge moving
again
She stood quietly, looking over the side




SUDDENLY two strange little creatures popped
their heads out of the water.
At first Leafy wondered if they were ‘water kittens.’ She had
heard of water babies. She had also heard of platypus and seen
pictures of them, and very soon she realised that she was looking
at baby platypus; not knowing that in one way they were a little
like herself, —She was far away from home, and so were they.
And again Grandpuff was to blame.
Grandpuff had blown about, looking for something for the
Princess who lived in the castle, not far away.
There was a lovely garden surrounding the castle, and a river
ran through the garden, and the Princess often walked on the
river bank, and Grandpuff heard her say:
“I wish there were platypus in my river.”
Grandpuff liked the Princess because she was the kind of princess
who always thought of others. She hardly ever wished for
anything for herself. So when he heard her wish to have
platypuses in the river, Grandpuff decided she should have some.


I WILL tell the Oldest Platypus about the Princess
and her beautiful garden,” Grandpuff said, and
blew off to the Long Glow River.
He did not at once find the Oldest Platypus, so he told, first one
platypus, then another about the river in the beautiful garden,
and about the Princess in the castle. But none wished to leave
the Long Glow River.
At last he found the Oldest Platypus and said to him: “You
should Travel
“I’ve lived here all my life, and my father before me, and my
father's father,” the Oldest Platypus said, “And I do not wish
to travel.”
i|M “But your children and your children’s children
ill jjlr may like to travel, and travel would be good for
'o (> 'V ■)'
them ”
IMlOr “ We got on very well without travel, and so
dIIAM , fi f cVinnlrl nnv nViilrlvcm ntnrl r>nv nViilrlvan’c nVn’lrlvan
our children, and our children’s children,”
est Platypus said sharply, and disappeared
j ( | beneath the water. Grandpuff blew about for a
’/ long time, waiting to see if he would come up
J t£
again, but he did not return.


places in the world the garden.”
GRANDPUFF knew of two platypuses who
lived in a garden beside a brook. The brook
loved to chatter, and had often told Grandpuff about Flash and
Splash, the platypuses who had travelled a long way to see the
garden, and, liking it, had stayed. They had built their nest,
and swam and played in the waters at the brookside, and had
also reared a family.
“Perhaps the children will take after their parents and like to
travel,” Grandpuff said, and blew off to the garden. “I will tell
them about the strange fish they will see, and the wonderful


4 tip 1
RANDPUFF found Plat and Kit, the platy-
kittens, playing in the shallow waters of the
Brook. He talked to them about travel.
The Brook heard Grandpuff and was very angry. “How dare
you come here to disturb this happy family,” he chattered.
Now there was only one way that Plat and Kit could leave the
garden, and that way was through a deep tunnel under the
roots of tall bamboos growing at the brookside in the water.
Hastily the Brook gathered leaves and spread them around the
roots of the bamboos to hide
the way, but old Grandpuff blew
hard and tore at the leaves.
The Brook became ruffled and
swirled this way and that, fight-
ing with old Grandpuff, and the
leaves floated here and there.
While this was happening, Plat
and Kit swam about and found
the tunnel.




HOW often had father and mother platypus told
the baby platypuses how they themselves had
come to the garden through this tunnel. Plat and Kit decided
to go out into the world; they were excited as they swam away
into the dark tunnel. They kept their eyes closed and swam
very. ’fast,, because they would drown if they stayed under
water too long. They kept close together and the Brook was
so busy arguing with Grandpuff that he did not notice that Plat
and Kit had run away.
Faster and faster the naughty platykittens swam. It was
exciting, but they were a little scared, and although they were
free to do as they wished, they missed Mother Flash, who so
often took them riding on her back, and Father Splash who
rolled them over and over in the water and made kiss-popping
sounds. By and bye they swam out of the tunnel into a wide
stream.
“I feel sunlight!" Kit said. “Let's go to the top. We are
surely through the tunnel.”
They rose cautiously to the water’s surface, put the tips of their
bills out of the water, then their furry heads. Warm sunshine
shone down upon them. They opened their eyes.
Wonder of wonders! How far had they come? This was surely
a bigger world than Flash and Splash had ever told them about.
They were in a wide river. Willows hung over the water on
either side, and as far as they could see these willows made
dark, cool, green reflections in shiny waters.






c*
0
r
Sv.2
I WONDER what that great thing is,” Plat said,
looking at the bridge. “It stretches from one
bank to the other and looks like a bridge.”
“I don’t know what it is. It makes a great shadow in the
water. Let us swim close to it and find out. We must find
out about everything—that is what travel is for.”
Just as the Platykittens arrived under the bridge, Leafy ran
on to it. The platykittens were frightened as well as Leafy, and
they quickly disappeared under the water.
“I wonder what it is,” Kit said. “It’s alive! It moves about
as if it wanted to catch us.”
“What nonsense you talk. That's only a bridge,” said the Oldest
platypus, who swam near the platykittens, looking curiously at
them.
“But it moved. It jumped about. It jumped right at us,” Plat
and Kit said.
“That shows how little you know! That is a suspension bridge.”


“Sus . . . sus . . . what did you call it?”
“A suspension bridge.”
“A sus-pen-sion bridge,” Plat repeated. “What’s that?”
“A swinging bridge. It moves about when people walk on it.
Haven’t you seen it before? Where do you come from I’d like
to know!”
“We come from a beautiful garden; we are out to see what the
world is like.”
“Travel is a great mistake!” the Oldest Platypus said. “Why
not settle down here; this is a flourishing platypus town.’
“Where?” Kit asked.
“In the banks of course, under the willows. If you care to come
with me, I will introduce you to all my relations.”
“Thank you,” Kit said and whispered to Plat: “Let’s swim away,
we’ll have more fun by ourselves”; and then aloud: “Perhaps we
could meet you to-morrow, or the next day.”
“To-morrow say? Meet me near the bridge when the sun has
lengthened its shadow.”
“We’ll be here, if possible,” Kit said, and the two naughty platy-
kittens swam quickly away, with no intention of meeting the
Oldest platypus the next day.




—-
PLAT and Kit were anxious to look more closely
at the sus-suspension bridge: and it was when
they put their beaks out of the water again that Leafy saw them.
Plat and Kit swam up and down in the shadow of the bridge
waiting for it to move again; they were anxious to see how it
worked. Leafy was standing as quiet as a little mouse, and the
bridge did not move.
Plat and Kit swam about for awhile: then they decided to see
the bridge from the bank, so they swam to the riverbank and
climbed up. The sun was warm and tempting, and, tired after
their long journey, they decided to rest before going further.
First they combed their coats with their claws, and brushed and
polished with their beaks; then they rolled themselves into balls
—the platypus way—and went to sleep.
Leafy forgot about being nervous and walked carefully from
the sus-suspension bridge, and tiptoed to
the bank where Plat and Kit slept peace-
fully. She was a little tired after her long
walk, and imitating the platypuses, she
rolled herself into a ball and went fast
c —j:a. asleep.


go?” came
foot. w</
SOMETHING awakened her. It was a huff and
a puff! The platykittens awakened too, and
before they had time to get away Leafy jumped to her feet and
picked them up and held them in her arms, and the Oldest
platypus climbed the bank and scolded the Platykittens.
“I told you two that travel was dangerous. Get away as quickly
as you can.”
A great big huff came and frightened Leafy. Plat and Kit
struggled. She put the little creatures down and quickly they
walked backwards and into the river.
“Bother the wind! It frightened the little platykittens,” Leafy
whispered.
“Why did you let the
platypus go?” came
a panting puffing voice, and
Leafy’s dress blew over her
head.
“It was your fault!”
said, stamping her
“Where are you?”
“Here I am!”


/ / I)


ANOTHER puff of wind came and nearly
took Leafy off her feet, and looking up she saw
a great, great, great big Grandpuff.
“Oh!” she said. “I thought it was you; but how did you come
so quietly?”
“I was a little tired after a long journey. I have been looking
for something.”
“What were you looking for?”
“Platypus who like to travel.”
“I found the platykittens,” Leafy said.
“I know you did. They are Plat and Kit. I found them first.”
“And you let them get in the river again?”
“I didn’t! You did!”
“Did I indeed!” Grandpuff gavt a great puff. “Then you must
get them out of the river. And I won’t take you to see a princess
who lives in a beautiful castle until you do.”
“Tell me about the castle first.”
“Around the castle there is a lovely garden with a river running
through it. A wonderful place for the platykittens to live. The
Princess wants them to live there.


“How do you know?”
“I heard her say: ‘I would like a platypus family to live in my
river. They are such strange little animals and it would be very
interesting to have the quaint little creatures in my garden.’ ”
“And is it a real palace where everyone does what you tell them
to do?”
“Of course!”
“And would the Princess let us live in her castle instead of the
hotel?”
“We will ask her.”
“Can we go now?”
“As soon as you get the platykittens out of the water,” Grandpuff
said.
“I’ll call them. Platy, Plat! Kit, Kit!” Leafy called softly.
There was not a sign of the platykittens, not a ripple in the
water. She went to the river bank and, leaning over, stared
into the water. She held a branch of berries she had picked,
and, leaning further over still, she brushed the water with it.
Now you know that Plat and Kit were out to see all they could,


■
%* »*•*' -ff' 11 fl "" jjijte
x * yft v <**[
-K . '& \
i #« I I 5 1-. , . --—-
• liMfenHMMK - ■. m miTiiirMl»«M - A " s — ; -


.


/ N \^\
1 S/oih
" ' 'N\IV
so when they saw
bright berries, they
wondered what they
were and cautiously
swam to the surface to find out.
“They might be good to eat,” Kit said, and grabbed the branch
with his back claw; and Plat grabbed the other end.
Leafy pulled the branch gently towards
her while Plat and Kit held on tight,
and she became excited, and leaning too
far over, her dress trailed in the water,
and then she nearly overbalanced.
Puff!” Grandpuff gave a great big huff
and blew Leafy backwards on to the
bank. Leafy held the branch tightly,
and Plat and Kit held on, too, and they
all fell backwards on to the bank.


Jplr^
/
“What on earth is happening?” Plat said,
curling himself into a ball as he fell to the
ground; and Kit fell after him.
“Look what you've done now, Grandpuff!”
Leafy cried, holding out her wet dress.
' Huff! You did that yourself. You
have fallen into the river, too, if I
hadn’t blown you back on to the bank. Take your frock off and
hang it on a bush to dry.”
Leafy pulled her frock over her head and hung it on a bush.
She was a little cold,, dressed-only in her pants and singlet. The
wind blew about her. She shivered. jstStX?'
“I can’t go to see the princess like
this,” she said and tears came to
her eyes and dropped in big drops
down her nose, and splash, splash, .
on to the ground.
“Don’t do that,” Grandpuff
“I’ll soon dress you; I’ve got some -JPfe
leaves in one of my air-pockets.”


«r
J.A
THE next moment Leafy was
twirling about with big golden
leaves fluttering about her.
“Standstill! Standstill! How can i
dress you?” Grandpuff whistled. “Puff!
Puff!” More leaves. Leafy tried to
stand still, but Grandpuff blew too
hard.
“I can’t keep still!” she cried.
More and more leaves blew about Leafy and she whirled here
and twirled there, and twisted and turned this way and that.
Leaves, and still more leaves scattered and blew about her. She
laughed as she ran here and there.
“Keep still! Keep still! As fast as I dress you the faster you
come undressed,” Grandpuff whistled.
At last a few large leaves clung to Leafy.
“I am dressed now,” she cried.
“Well you may get into my pocket and we’ll go to the princess.
Bring your frock and the platykittens.”
“How can I carry them, and how can I get in your pocket?”
“I’ll soon show you. First wrap the platykittens in your
frock.”
Leafy took her damp frock off the tree, wrapped it round Plat
and Kit, who were on the bank, rolled into tight little balls, and
before they had time to know what was happening, they were all
in Grandpuff’s pocket.


how did that happen?” Leafy gasped.
“What will happen next, I’d like to know?”
Plat said.
“If this is travel, 1 don’t think much of it.
I wonder where we are,” Kit said.
“We are moving very fast,” Plat said, “and it is dark.”
“It was dark in the tunnel,” Kit whispered, “but we at least knew
that we were swimming. Do you think we will drown?”
“This doesn’t seem like swimming, but we seem to be getting
along very fast without swimming. We are sure to get there
very soon.”
“Get where?” Kit wailed.
“Wherever we’re going.”
“Well, I don’t want to go! And it’s all your fault for being so
curious about things. You would hold on to that branch.”
“You hung on, too. And why did we travel if it wasn’t to find
out about things?”
“We are not finding out much. We don’t know whether we are
swimming or flying.”


/// V 1 )
( 'A \^j
1 1 1 / \ guess.”
Leaf’
A We’ll soon know. It has some-
thing to do with the monster we
saw on the sus-suspension bridge,
Leafy was far too excited to be worried about
the platykittens.
“Grandpuff!” she shouted. “I like going along
this way to the Princess.” Something knocked
her hand, and looking, she saw a fairy!
“Grandpuff! Grandpuff!” she cried.
“Where did the fairy come from?”
“Out of my pocket,”
Grandpuff whistled.


/„■
can’t
have one. They are on their
“Where are they going?”
found them on their way home
“Back to fairyland. I
and gave them a lift.”
“0, oh! They are flying away too quickly. They’ve all
gone. I’d like some more.” Leafy was excited.
“How about something else?” Grandpuff whistled, “I’ve plenty
of other things in my pockets; frogs, for instance.”
“No, no! I want a fairy!” Leafy stamped her foot, but it did
not stamp very well in Grandpuff’s air-pocket; so tears came to
her eyes and fell in big drops.
“/ want a fairy to take home."
But there was not a fairy to be seen; they had all disappeared,
and more and more tears of disappointment rained from Leafy’s
eyes.
“Be careful!” Grandpuff puffed. “You never know where those
tears will drop. Stop crying and I’ll get something else from
my pocket. Look!”


\ \
frogs. \
“I want a little greeny V ' \ \
frog!” Leafy shrieked, \ \
but the frogs hopped \ \
and jumped and \
disappeared. \ \
“Where did they go?” Leafy " j f/jjj \
shouted. " / j\ |
Grandpuff chuckled. “It’s raining little i j I WW
green frogs somewhere down there. What \ J I
a surprise the people will get. And while j £ /
I think of it; I have another surprise.”
OH —o-o-ooh!” Leafy’s tears disappeared in a
second and she stared, for out of another of
Grandpuff’s pockets
came little \
frog!” Leafy shrieked,
but the frogs hopped
and jumped and
disappeared.
“Where did they go?” Leafy
shouted.


A/^/y
jpC// “For me!” Leafy called.
4- U,,4- TTT^I
“Not this time, but watch carefully!”
Out of another pocket came little fish.
They flashed like silver and were gone
in a second.
A moment later Leafy thought that
she was looking at butterflies and gnats,
and little puff balls. Then she stared and stared while Grandpuff
sang this song :
I keep in my pockets all manner of things,
Such as thistledown puff-balls and butterfly wings ;
Fluttering leaves and the pollen of flowers
Come floating about me in great golden showers.
Then iiito these pockets come elves full of fun,
To dress themselves up, and to dance in the sun ;
They steal all my treasures, collected with care,
Without Fen the conscience to leave me my share.
They dance, and they sing, and are so full of glee
That often Vm tempted to join in the spree ;
But they steal all my treasures, and scamper and shout,
So I huff, and I puff, till I blow them all out.


1
% m
(|lk r ■. ,.
■
I | | | -, ,
V .''Tl /*■ ' -f
% Mi!C


I


\
\\
\\\ “Will we come to the castle soon?”
\\\ are nearly there,” Grandpuff whistled
! the butterflies.”
CjRANDPUFF laughed a great laugh as out of
his pocket fluttered stray little elves, all
laughing and shouting and dancing, and not seeming to mind
in the least that they were being thrown away.
“I want one!” Leafy called
“You can have me.”
Leafy was surprised by a little voice close to her ear, and
whispered: “Where are you?”
“Don’t say anything to Grandpuff, or he’ll throw me out. I’m
sitting on the leaf on your head.”
Leafy kept very still. She was happy about the little elf and
wished to keep him, and did not ask Grandpuff for anything else
from his pockets. She said instead:
Leafy watched for the castle, but instead she saw
birds fly past, whirling and twirling in lone lines.
“Are they out of your pocket, too, Grand
puff?” she shouted.


MYRIADS of little blue butterflies fluttered in
patterns against the sky.
“They are all travelling, just like we are,” Grandpuff called.
“Why, here we are!”
Leafy held her breath. She saw a beautiful castle through an
opening between tall trees; then quite suddenly she found herself
on her feet, and huff! puff! the leaves she was dressed in, blew
away. This made Leafy laugh, and her laughter rang away to
the castle and people looked from the windows and wondered.
And the Princess, who was in the garden talking to someone,
heard Leafy’s laughter and said:
“I wonder who that can be?”
Leafy stopped laughing and remembering about the Elf, put
her hand to her head, but the leal had blown away and the elf
with it. Then she remembered the platykittens. She held her
frock by the sleeves knotted together; unrolling her dress she let
the platykittens on to the ground. She found that her frock was
dry so she decided to put it on, and while putting it over her
head, Plat and Kit said to one
irSfeliSk l ___ ' „ another:
“Let’s run away!” And they
started off.
“This is a beautiful garden,”
Kit said.
C“And I can see a river,” Plat
answered. inis is
P v*""' thing like travel. . . .
answered. “This is some-


'r.'r_Advs LiirrK
. I 11-; ;>r_- V
J cuDysi(irfK_


1 \/
(LjvW
IW'i
Ip 1
\i.
Just as he got to “travel,” Leafy ran after
the two little creatures and picking them
up, tucked one under each arm, and said:
“I’m going to take you to the Princess.”
“We’re off again,” Plat said.
It was a long way to the Princess. Leafy
walked around paths and in and out among
gardens overgrown with flowers, then on to
a smooth green lawn. The Princess
stood talking to someone at the far end
of the garden, and there was a great
deal for Leafy to look at as she walked across the lawn. There
were many beds with bright coloured borders, and even a fountain,
and far away beyond these, the river shone.
When half way across the lawn she stood still and gasped with
surprise, because she had found Soldier
Daddy. He was talking to the Princess,
and Leafy wondered how he had heard
about the castle and the Princess.
“Soldier Daddy!” Leafy shouted.
“Leafy! What are you doing here?”
Soldier Daddy exclaimed. He was
just as surprised to see Leafy as
Leafy was to see him.


Wm *0j ipf- t,*fc» j# ,/y
r" - a \ #*w^(
If /W
«PW ■§ -. - \| L\J .IMwf ZjOT 1 * ,€flRHV /I
H yL . J
Bov
i A ft||^;' v I»' £ •< /
iVf a t''i •**" "*'" %l - Jf " \^r


_ •
<
I
.


I BROUGHT some platykittens for the Princess.”
This surprised the Princess.
“Platykittens!” the Princess said. “What are they?”
Leafy put Plat and Kit on the grass.
The Princess laughed and walked towards Leafy, holding out
her hand and exclaiming: “Baby Platypus. What strange little
creatures.” The Princess stood looking at Plat and Kit. And
Plat and Kit were glad they had come, because the Princess had
a lovely voice—and it made them feel happy.
“How did you know I wanted some platypuses for my river,
and that I like them so much?”
“Grandpuff told me.”
“Grandpuff! Who is Grandpuff?”
“He is Grandfather Wind and he took me for a ride in his air-
pocket and he said that if we live in your palace, people will
do as we tell them.”
“You have granted a Princess her dearest wish, therefore, you
should have a wish granted, too. What do
you want most of anything in the world,
Leafy?”
Leafy hung her head. She had noticed
that the castle was very big, and 4 ■
she was shy of big places, so she
said: “I would like a little house \
for all of us to live in because ...£
there’s more room for Leafy than
in big places.”


.♦ HAT wish is granted already by someone else.
The Princess laughed again, and so did Soldier
Daddy, and this made Leafy laugh and feel so happy that she
decided to ask for something else.
“Please, can I see the castle, and the people who do everything
they are told to do?”
“Of course, you may. Come, I will take you now.” The
Princess held Leafy’s hand and Soldier Daddy took Leafy’s other
hand, and they all went to the castle together.
There were wide marble steps leading up to the palace, and
there were great halls leading into rooms that were so long,
Leafy could not see to the other end; and there were people who
did everything she wanted them to do, and they showed her all
the wonderful things in the palace.
In the meantime, Plat and Kit were walking fast across the
long, smooth, green lawn, anxious to look about them.
“This is what I call travel. We are certainly seeing things,”
Plat said.


V>~' * : . ' * • * . \
iilliill


i iy\ £z
■ v
“I saw the water shining through the trees a little while ago,”
Kit said longingly.
“But I can’t see it now.”
“We’ll get there soon, and it is fine to know that there are trees
near the river, because that means some wonderful places to build
a nest, should we decide to settle down and live here.”
Plat and Kit did not know that this very thing had been decided
for them and that they would be living in the river for a long
time to come. But certain it is that they would find so much
to interest them that they would be able to believe that they
were still travelling, although they would really be living in the
castle’s garden. | /i


Soldier Daddy took
Leafy back to the
hotel with him, and
the family had a
great deal to talk
about.
Ann told of her
adventures. She had
gone along the river
bank, looking for
Leafy and had found
a great deal to
interest her; and
Hugh told how he had
walked miles along
road after road, and
had made many new
discoveries, but did not find Leafy. David had scoured the
bushes near Soldier Daddy’s camp, and had asked if any had
seen his “Precious little Sister,’’ but none had. (!((''
Then Leafy told her story and everyone was sur-
prised to hear about Grandpuff. And Mummie had
a story to tell, too. She told how she had gone with
Daddy to look at a dear little house; and 11 )\
when Daddy had to leave, to go and see j\ ,4 /
the Princess (who, it appeared, was to
grant him a wish,
wish was something to do with
sick soldiers), Mummie had
stayed at the little house
because she had fallen in love
with it. She had peeped here
and there, plotting and plan-
ning, and had been late in




,1
getting back to the hotel. She did not hear anything about Leafy
being lost, until she was found again.
When everyone had listened to everyone else’s story, Mummie
said: “It is time to pack.”
“Are we going to-day?” everyone asked.
“Of course, we are. lam taking Leafy now, and you can all
follow when you have finished your packing.”
Leafy went with Mummie and she thought that she had never
seen a little house she liked so much, and it was surprising to
find that there were enough rooms in it for Leafy to have a
bedroom all to herself. There were lace curtains hanging inside
the windows and window boxes outside with bright red geraniums
peeping in, and a fireplace with a chimney. Later, when all
the family had arrived and Leafy was tired and had gone to bed,
she heard Grandpuff whispering down the chimney, and she
whispered back:
“Please, Grandpuff, don’t throw all the elves out of your pocket.
I would like to take one to the Princess next time you take me
to the castle.”
Printed in Australia by MARCHANT & CO PTY, LTD


BOOKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR
"THE LITTLE ROUND HOUSE”
Mr Disney has asked me to express his thanks for another of your
charming fairy tales, and we have enjoyed reading “The Little Round
House” and are happy to have this inscribed copy of the book in our
Studio Library.
Walt Disney Productions.
"THE LITTLE ROUND GARDEN”
The authoress has a charming appreciation of the flowering minds
of little boys and girls, and is not afraid to introduce them to the sort
of fairies in whom they more than half believe.
“Sydney Morning Herald ”
We expressed our belief that “The Little Round Garden” had come to
stay. Its sequel, “The Little Round House,” has confirmed that belief.
These books are exceptional for their imaginative conception.
“Education Gazette.”
"THE HOUSE THAT BECKONS”
A charming blend of fantasy and fact, and written in a manner to
appeal both to adults and Juveniles.
“Brisbane Telegraph.”
"JENNIFER STANDS BY”
Mrs. Lister, whose stories for children are so charming and popular,
uses in this novel what may be called a larger canvas. The lights of
romance, adventure, the mysterious and the thrilling play through
this most readable novel.
Books and Bookmen “Advocate Magazine .”
"THE SONG GOES ON”
Gladys Lister has a gift for simple story telling. All profits from this
work go to the British Children’s Comforts Fund.
“Melbourne Sun.”
"DAWN MOTHER”
The romantic story of a little English refugee, searching for a great-
uncle of fabulous wealth, and finding him on the borderline of magic.
A book in which the terrors of war are seen as powerless against that
deep humanity and brightness of spirit which are the secret of
England’s—and of Australia’s —strength.
Angus and Rooertson.
.BMP


u
s f '■<'<
\ v x ' C$3
fa
Brisbane College of Advanced Education
RESOURCE CENTRE KELVIN GROVE CAMPUS
DUE DATE SLIP
Fines apply if this item is not returned or renewed
on or before the most recent date indicated below.
Renewals may be requested by telephone.


-
■
.
/ * I 'i
. ■ w ’ 8
§\ \
‘i v ' fter. I • ft
f m ' *1 " ’ j f M
ip ■■ I . * .
. V&fc‘- ; |f I
Kk r I
I ■ ll
I* .-1% s . Uf
t' w£ - .■ p
\i ". A i, f W» I Z**** |f
S mil
‘ 1 : V 1
Jl L77J
>mm- m 6 1
» .
„■ , . jg. :
