

: - - - - - — --
“Granny Smith’s”
Book
LO
ln
o
c/}
SECOND EDITION
oc
rsj
oo
<
VERSE and LEGENDS OF THE BUSH


jiWilJJ


iotci
r ?3o^




f" C ,I 1 /v I) 1
Uranny oimths JDook
Verse and Legends of the Bush
SONGS —WORDS and MUSIC
Bv M. SMITH
Illustrations by
Margaret Korner, Evelyn and Judith
DEDICATED TO MY GRANDCHILDREN
SECOND EDITION
Printed and Published by
IMPERIAL PRINTING COY. LTD.
397 Hay Street, Perth
Western Australia
copyright
PRICE: FOUR SHILLINGS




AM L 4 7 I Ji<££
CONTENTS
PAGE
Verse The Wildflower Chorus 5
Legend The Legend of the Wildflowers 6
Verse The Rainbow
Verse The Dance of the Gum-Nuts 8
Music The Dance of the Gum-Nuts 9
Verse The Kookaburras 10
Verse The Alarum Clock 11
Legend The Legend of the Bird-Flower 12
Verse The Birds of Bushy-Land 13
Legend “Balga” the Bushman’s Compass 14
Verse The Wildflower Band 17
Verse Springtime in the Hills 18
Legend ... The Carnival of Spring and
The Legend of the Kangaroo Paw 20
Music The Song of the Winter-Fiend 22
Song The Fairy's Song
Music The Five’s Lament
Verse The March of the
Music The March of the
Verse The Kangaroo-Hop
Music The Kangaroo-Hop
Black' Boys” 28
Black' Boys” 29
Music The Bush-Birds' Love-Song 42
Verse The Bush-Birds’ Love-Song 47
Verse The Robbers
Verse Funny-Bunny
Verse Jewels of the Bush
Legend "Katta-Mooro”: A
Legend of King’s Park 50
Verse Cock-a-doodle-a-doo
Verse Past Days
Verse Modern Ways
Verse Gum-Leaves
Glossary
Illustrations:
Cover Design and Wildflowers in Black and White
by Judith (Mrs. R. N. Grigg)
Others by Margaret Korner and Evelyn (Mrs. E. S. Harrison)




Wildflower Chorus
Oh!—
We are a few of a brilliant band
Of flowers, that grow in this sunny land;
At Spring of the year, we bloom for you all,
Deep in the bush among gum-trees tall.
Treasure our roots, leave them deep in the soil,
Come! see us each year, and rest from your toil.
If among us you roam, all trouble will flee,
And you'll be as happy as happy can be.
fiSfSS


The Legend of the Wildflowers
At the beginning of time, when the World was being made round, the Fairies,
who lived above the clouds, peeped down at the Earth and saw it was dark and
dreary; so they called to the little Elves, who were working hard inside the Earth
making it go round.
Down through the caves and caverns went the call of the Fairies, bidding the
Elves to gather a pot of gold.
Quickly they ran to obey the order, and then the Fairies told them to take it
out of the pot, roll it into a ball, and send it spinning up into the air, where it was
to go round and round forever, and around the Earth to give it light.
This the little Elves did, and there was glorious sunshine everywhere; but,
away in the North was a StormyTiend, who was always shrieking and blowing up
black clouds; so, when he saw the brilliant sunshine, down he came rolling and
growling, trying to shut off the golden light.
He poured down showers of rain to try and put it out, but the Fairies pulled
out the sunbeams from the Sun, and they pierced the ram and made a beautiful
Rainbow.
Then the Fairies picked up the Rainbow and started to carry it across the sky,
away from the big dark cloud.
The Fiend was in a terrible rage, and he blew and blew with a big strong wind,
until he had torn it from the hands of the Fairies.
Down it fell, all spoiled and broken, on to the Earth, where it then smashed
into thousands of pieces on the western side of Australia.
Now, every year at Springtime, in the western bushlands, there blooms the
most lovely wild flowers, all colours of the Rainbow, some of the flowers to be seen
then do not grow in any other part of the World.
The prettiest of all is the Blue Leschenaultia; it is called the Queen of the
Flowers; so each year at Springtime there is a Carnival, and the Queen holds
her Court.
All the flowers, birds, and animals who dwell in the bushlands, gather in the
hills and valleys to greet the Spring.
If you love the bush and all that dwell and bloom there, then you must always
step most carefully, so that nothing is ever crushed or hurt.
You will then be a friend of the Fairies and Elves, the birds and all the little
animal folk who frolic among the gums.
Perhaps one day, when you are in a leafy glade at Springtime, the Fairy-Folk
may guide you to their Fairy' Ring, and there, enter with them into the Spirit of Spring.


The RAINBOW
“Where does the Rainbow end, Ma-Ma?"
Said my five'year'old to me.
“Will you take me there one nice fine day,
Does it go down in the sea?”
“To the Rainbow's end we cannot go,”
I, to my darling said,
“For it's the Fairies’ pathway
'Mid the storm-clouds overhead
“Now when you see a great big cloud,
As black as black can be,
Just turn and look the other way.
The Sun, perhaps you'll see.
That's when the Sunbeams build a bridge,
Between the Sun and cloud.
And paint it from their colour-box,
Of which they arc so proud.
There —if you watch most carefully,
Perchance, some day you’ll see,
On the brilliant coloured Rainbow
The Fairies, gay and free.
For only when it’s raining,
Upon a sunny day,
Will you ever see a Rainbow,
The place where Fairies play.


CGum Nuts w
little Gum'nuts,
*
Our Home's in a big Gum-tree.
>
g/&
TP
V.
We live in a big Gum-tree.
And when the mortals are asleep
We come down on the spree.
We dance and prance so happy,
And the Moon-Man laughs with glee
We are nobby little Gum-nuts,


j wMiidit&ipw££B } J- ' ))y)
# Jtt J ir r r' r .(r r /jr r r
4 ><? — V i V
I Cf T~T
j-* -U- 1 3 1 r v i r i'
('jft j J T r/lf f i N
ikifTrrrfpf l.piffijf f ■ i
l&rr- r sJ\J' : I
S V" "i 1, -r- ’-2
lea f-.f f f ■■ r


The
KOOKABURRAS
There’s a laughing in the hush
Such a laughing in the hush,
In the hanksias, in the gums
From the Wattle gold it comes,
Ha-Ha, Haw-Haw, He-Cah-Haw.
Every morn at break of day
And eventide, comes laughter gay;
You merry ’'Jacks" so full of glee,
Why do you laugh so loud and free?
Ha'Ha, Haw' Haw, He-Cah-Haw.
To my door I swiftly go.
And watch you flying to and fro;
I wonder what the joke's about,
You make me laugh, the children shout
Ha-Ha, Haw-Haw, Hc-Cah-Haw.
We love you “Jack,” you saucy fellow,
Tho’ your voice is loud not mellow;
On lofty perch you laugh and gush,
You liven up our lonely bush.
Ha-Ha, Haw-Haw, Hc-Cah-Haw.


The ALARUM CLOCK
Beside their little tribal fires, the Piccaninnies sleep,
The sounds of night can ne'er disturb their slumbers, long and deep;
They dream of happy hunting, of corroborees and feasts,
Good Spirits guard them thro' the night, they fear not men nor beasts.
The Morning Star comes winking in the sky at break of day,
To warn them of the rising Sun, with light and warming ray.
But lazy little Piccanin’s still slumber deep and long,
So the Spirits send a bushland bird, to sound a noisy gong.
The kookaburras gather round in every shrub and tree.
And laugh, and laugh, and laugh, and laugh. It's such a sight to see
The Piccaninnies waken, as startled as can be.
They dare not disobey the call, or mock the kooka s glee.
For if they mocked his laughter and offended he should be,
He would not herald in the morn, no more the light they'd see,
The Spirits then would punish them, the Morning Star grown dim,
The sun s warm rays would vanish, on the far horizon rim.
Now if these things should come to pass, the Sun would cease to shine,
If darkness come, then men would die, and Piccaninnies pine,
So that is why they waken, when from gum-trees thick and tall,
At Sunrise in the bushlands, the Kookaburras call.


The Legend of the Bird-flowers
Long, long ago, a flock of tiny birds were migrating from Java, and just as they
arrived at the coast of Australia, the Storm Fiend met them.
The little birds took shelter in some shrubs, hanging on to the bushes with their
beaks, so they would not be blown out to sea.
The Storm Fiend flashed his lightning
this way and that way, striking everything
before him, and the shrubs were split and
blackened for miles around.
He thundered and shrieked, making a
terrible din, and at last disappeared over
the sea, whipping up the waves as he went.
Then the Spring Fairy floated down
from the clouds, and seeing the plight of
the bushes and birds, she called on the Sun
to warm them.
Old Sol was on the other side of the
World, but he heard her call, and turned
himself round and cast his rays like search-
lights, until he at last found the West-
ern coast.
When he saw all the destruction left
by the Storm Fiend, he quickly switched
on the heat down his rays, through the
ground to the roots of the shrubs, and as
they got warmer and warmer, up they
came with their young green shoots, pop-
ping through the ground with their folded
leaves, and as they felt the gaze of Old
Sol beaming down to them, so they ex-
panded until they were nice green shrubs
again.
These shrubs had never before had
flowers, but now there appeared little pods,
and out of each pod came a small flower,
the shape of a tiny bird clinging to the
stems by its beak, pale green and yellow
in colour, and that is how the North-West
got its Bird Flowers.


v
The Birds of Bushyland
There's a warbling in the Wattles,
There's a twittering in the breeze,
A screeching in the Blue-Gums,
Cah! Cah! in all the trees.
The feathered folk are wide awake,
At first faint streak of dawn,
They preen and clean on tall tree-top,
To hail the smiling morn.
It’s breakfast time in Bushyland,
The birds are on the wing,
They're darting here and swooping there,
With song the Bushlands ring.
They chase the flying insects,
O'er brook and glade and stream.
They pick, and peck, and gather
The worms where waters gleam.
Hiding 'midst the shrub'ry,
The rushes and the reeds,
Catching tiny gnats and flies,
To satisfy their needs.
All day long they’re busy,
A-darting to and fro.
Flashing in the sunlight,
Bright colours all aglow'.
Evening dews are falling,
The Sun has gone to rest,
Sleepy birds are twit’ring.
In each tiny nest.
Wings are all a'weary,
Night deepens, shadows creep.
There’s quietness in the Bushlands,
The birds are all asleep.


“BALGA” The Bushman s
Compass
A LEGEND
Once upon a time, a tribe of aborigines had their camp on the bank o’f a creek.
The headman and his lubra (wife) had a little piccaninny (Babe) a son, and
they loved him very much.
From the bole of a tree they made a little cradle, and lined it with soft bark
from the paperTark tree, and into this cosy nest they placed their little piccaninny;
on his arm was a tribal mark to show he was a member of this tribe.
In another part of the country there had been some big storms and the water
was teeming down all the creeks and rivers, and one day the father and mother left
their babe asleep in his crib, while they went into the bush to hunt, and before they
returned, the stornvwaters came rolling down the creek to the camp.
The water tore along, gathering everything in its way, reached the tiny cradle
with the sleeping child, and floated it away on the rolling stream. The creek flowed
into a mighty river, and still the cradle floated on, until it arrived at a part of the
country that belonged to another tribe.
A blackfellow, sitting on the bank of the river, saw the little crib, and hearing
a cry coming from it, thought an animal might be trapped in there, so he swam out
to bring it to land.
Imagine his surprise when he saw the babe. He dragged the crib ashore and
took the baby to his camp, then he and his lubra kept it as their own piccaninny.
Years went by, the babe had grown into a youth. He had been told the story
of the flood, and often wished to try and find his own tribe.
One day he was out hunting, and was quietly creeping through the bush, when
he saw a mother kangaroo resting, her joey (baby) tucked in her pouch.
The kangaroo alarmed, jumped up so suddenly that the wee joey was frightened,
and it sprang out of the pouch. The mother had bounded quite a long way before
she noticed her babe had gone; but by that time the young blackfellow had picked
it up.


‘balga” the bushman's compass
He looked at the tiny thing, and thought it was not big enough to take back
to camp for the family dinner; so as there was a wateuhole near by, where the mother
kangaroo would go to drink, he put it gently down near the pool for the mother
to find, and went on his way.
Later on he saw a big boomer (father kangaroo) hopping through the bush. He
went after it, killed it with his spear, and walked proudly back to camp.
The mother kangaroo had been hiding, watching him. She waited until he was
out of sight, then quickly snatched her babe, thankful that the boy had not killed it.
That night the youth went to sleep by his fire; he was very tired after his day's
hunting, and wonderful things happened while he slept.
He thought a Spirit came to him and told him that, now was the time for him
to try and find his tribe. (The Spirit was really the mother kangaroo whispering to
him in his sleep.)
She had crept through the bush to tell him what she knew, and what she had
seen further North, when she had been near his own people.


As though in a dream these words came to him: “In a few weeks Spring will
be here, all the trees and hushes will put on their new leaves, flowers will bloom
through the bushlands, and it will then be the time for you to travel.
“On you way you will see the Balga trees, with their round black boles made of
little shutters, and in the Spring-time their bushy top-knots have long flowery spikes.
“The flowers always start to bloom on one side of the spike first, the side facing
the North, so start early on your journey, before the flowers come out all around the
spike, and the Balga trees will guide you to your people in the North.”
A few weeks later the trees began to shoot, the grass to spring up, and the boy
remembered his dream; so he gathered his spears and his boomerang and started on
his journey, and sure enough, there were the Balga trees, with their spikes just coming
into flower, all on one side.
He kept going in the direction they were facing, and at last found himself in
strange country, surrounded by a strange tribe, who were watching him, first in won-
derment, and then with excitement and joy ... he could not understand it.
They pointed to the tribal mark on his arm and beckoned him to go along with
them. Their wongi (talk) was a little different to what he had been used to using,
but he understood enough to do what they wanted.
They took him to the head man of the tribe, who was now much older, and when
he saw the mark on the strange boy's arm he was overjoyed to know that at last
he had found his son, who had been lost in the flood many years before.
Ever since this happened, the natives and white men who are in the bush at
Spring-time, guide themselves by the Balga's flowery spike.
Note.—The Balga tree is commonly known as the “Blackboy-Tree.


I
The Wildflower Band
To the hills we will go,
To plunder? Oh! No!
Just to rest a-while
And enjoy the smile.
Of each small flower
In Gum-tree bower.
And dream we are in Fairy-Land,
Listening to a wildflower band.
The “Blue Bells ' ring,
The “Bird-Flowers" sing,
“Kangaroo Paws“ beat the "Thyme."
“Leschenaultia" chants in rhyme.
Sings sweetly “Purple Hovea,"
In tone is "Templetonia. ’
And every “Orchid" has a part,
With collection box, the bees all dart.
Not all can join this band,
And sing so loud and grand.
There's “Granny (in her) Bonnet,"
Listening to the wildflower sonnet.
Now the day is at an end,
All the "Rainbows" colours blend.
Among the “Heath" the “Black Boys" play,
With "Sturt Pea" and "Wattle" gay.
On "Eggs and Bacon" they will dine,
And "Pepper and Salt" they'll sprinkle fine.
Then the “Flame Bush" lamps light up,
"Star" flowers twinkle as they sup,
With “Banksias" and "Boronia,"
While Kookaburras laugh Ha-Ha.
The evening dews are falling fast,
To our homes, we go at last.


Spring-time in the Hills
It was Spring-time in the hills,
All the flower pods nature fills,
“Purple-Hovea” op’ed her peepers
And looked round for “Scarlet-Creepers.”
“Queen Leschenaultia” in robes of blue
Throned in the sun thought the time was due
To summon loyal minions,
To hail Spring in her dominions
“Call all the flowers, said the Queen,
“Tell them to waken, 'tis Spring.
Winds waft your breeze on the 'Blue-bells’
Bid them rise up and ring."
The messengers went as they were hidden,
Blew zephyrs soft where they were hidden,
They shook the tiny little “Bells’
Who wak’ed the flowers in all the dells.
They raised their heads and op'ed bright pods,
And greeted the Winds with smiles and nods;
Tis Spring once again, we 11 don our best bloom,
E'en tho’ so doing we go to our doom.
Under God's canopy in golden sunlight,
They dressed in their best with the greatest delight,
Until the vast hillside in gorgeous array.
Cried "Hail to our Queen this Spring birthday."
“Kangaroo-Paws' and pale “Flannel-flowers
Bowed and curtsied in cool shady bowers;
The Winds played songs thro' tall leafy Gums,
While the bees dart about with loud noisy hums.
The “Orchids” gracefully dance on the sward,
The “Donkey," the “Spider," "Cowslip, Leopard,
Above them the spike of the "Black-boy’ in bloom,
Helped the “Gums” and the "Banksia" cast off Winter s gloom.


“Gum-trees" stood like guards at their posts,
Watching the revels of gay floral hosts,
When, in the far distance, down on the plains
They spied a vast army, bent upon gains.
The Swan River wended it's way to the sea,
Beside its hanks stood a grassy lea.
Across its width leaped the long Causeway,
O’er it speeded an army this bright Spring day.
Making their way in swift gliding car,
Over the smooth roads, they've come from afar,
Away from the City, left its worries and ills,
Till they reached the heights and sweet smelling hills.
Have they come for an hour to enjoy our gay band?
And then go and leave them to brighten our land.
No! They are bent on destruction and pillage,
Just to adorn hall or house in a village.
They swarm o'er the hills. Tread down with their boots
Our beautiful flowers, pull them up by the roots;
Some they leave drooping, crushed, broken, mangled.
The ring of the “Blue-Bell' 'is tuneless and jangled.
Then return to their cars, all laden with spoil,
The pretty flowers fade plucked out of the soil,
Our gay floral dancers, whose festive array
Is shattered and spoiled. The Queen brought to bay.
Every year this vast army invades their domain,
Destroying and tearing, till not much remain;
We then look forward a few years hence,
No flowers do we see, and our hearts grow tense.
Oh! mortals, right here is a gift from your God,
Seen nowhere else, but your hills own sod,
Will you not keep it and treasure each root?
Stop! think 'ere you pull, don't crush with your foot.
Our Wildflowers are precious, leave roots in the soil,
Let them blossom next year, their beauty don’t spoil.
As Spring succeeds Spring, we’ll still have our flowers,
Beaming and blooming in cool shady bowers.
Parents and teachers, all children should know.
That destroying the roots there’s less seed to sow.
Tell them to handle our Wildflowers with care,
Then our hillsides in future will not be left bare.


THE
Carniva 1 of S pnng
and the
Legend of the Kangaroo Paw
Many, many years ago, before white people came to this large Continent which
is now Australia, there were only aborigines (black people) living on this big island,
and they hunted through the bush with spears and boomerangs.
One day a blackfellow was out hunting, and he saw a kangaroo; so he crept
stealthily among the trees and threw his spear, which hit the kangaroo on a paw and
tore it off, and the poor thing ran away into the bush in terrible pain.
It was one of the fore paws, and it fell among green
foliage which was creeping over the ground like a carpet; so
in pity for the poor little bleeding paw, the creeper quickly
covered it up, hiding it from the blackfellow, who continued
on his way after the kangaroo, killed it, and took it to his
camp, and cooked it for his dinner.
The little paw sank into the earth, deep down among the
roots of the creeper and other plants, and lay there all through
the long Winter.
Down where it came to rest, were the pieces of the Ram'
bow, which the Storm' Fiend had destroyed, and they were
scattered all over this part of the country, and the little Elves
that work under the ground, keeping the roots of flowers and
plants warm and snug during the Winter, were all beginning
to get very busy with their paint'pots and brushes.
It, was nearly Spring-time, and the Sun and the Spring Fairy would be making
their call for all plants and flowers, trees and birds and animals to gather together
for a Carnival.


Each year, just before Springtime, the Elves gathered feathers that had fallen from
bnghtly-hued parrots, and made nice little paint brushes. Their paintpots were made
from the Gurmnuts, and these they filled from the Rainbow.
Each little Elve would pick up a root, dip his brush in his
paint'pot, and on each root paint a design of a wildflower, and
then tenderly put it back in its place to await the call of Spring.
At last one of the Elves found the paw lying among the roots,
and thinking it was a new one, he painted the little fingers green
and the short leg he painted red, and stood it up against the roots
of a Gum-tree to dry.
By the time all the roots were painted. Spring was not far away; everything was
now ready for the Fairy's call; hut a strange thing happened.
The little paw started to turn somersaults, and each time he did this he left the
imprint of himself, and then these did the same, and they all seemed to be standing
the wrong way up. (So the Elves thought.)
While this was taking place, the Storm-Fiend was rushing round on top of the
ground, singing at the top of his voice, and with an icy breath:—
THE SONG OF THE WINTER-FIEND
All the Winter Eve held my sway,
I've rained and I've stormed all day;
How happy I've been, when the thunder has rolled,
The lightning has flashed, and the wind has been cold.
I’ve called on my strong mighty forces,
To tear thro’ space like wild horses.
Come ye roaring winds blow,
Bend the trees down low,
Let them choke up the great water-courses
Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho! He! He!
Ho! Ho!


22
■ - ■ -~- ~
fyU> ,
0-SI V3m- 'W -
(-?• *; - 4_
>fo*v™iX. *33. > — vt
j^~x j
- i f f f f- - i F~ |


—r r’ r. f-f - r j r r r
■ U> o&i-, ' j «'
i-4j
fe f r c i.. =>J J -f.. f f
fet i|i ilj i.J| J
fe ? f f - j ' F P
[i f m i jJ, } i r
* - V>=> , Oftwc K ' '' VO vv^>
JN J >1)
&


~ f t ' ' f g! j f f * f f :f . f £
'WX*^!*
i- J il J Ji J
H J -i ¥¥ i ii i i tf
r 4—r r i-g-..i
’ . i£o, - ”%«. %o.
4J" J | i J | J. J i J J
1 C j — 5= -.-■/ j c ' : ‘ • * —_-e_c
X p § ' * % B
|K
If fit" n 1
l|p p —
Just as the StornvFiend was roaring
down the valley.
his last notes, the Spring' Fairy came floating
As she approached, the winds died down, the thunder and lightning rumbled
away in the distance, and all was calm and still.
The Fiend quailed before the Fairy, and as she waved her wand and lightly
danced, she sang this song;—


'feT i i ffl 11 w j J J J J iJZliJj
I55f ? i ■' : ? ? ::
ffr i ; r f |
ifr f UJ J 1.
lb J M n Sg
Begone-—you wicked one;
You've had your day, and now I pray
Depart to your icy regions,
My time has come, I call the Sun
To bring out all Spring-time's legions.


Then from behind a cloud came the lovely warm Sun, and as his rays shone
down, all the trees stopped crying with the cold, their eyes and noses turned off the
running water, and their boughs stopped creaking at the joints.
The Fairy waved her wand over the gravelled hills, and the Sun pierced the
Earth with his golden rods, and as the warmth circled down amongst the roots of
the flowers, they began to waken from their Winter sleep.
Below the ground there was much excitement, the little Elves were rushing about
arranging the roots in growing order.
Templetonia is the first flower to appear, she is the early one; then Purple Hovea,
so royal looking; now they were quite ready for the Fairy's call to precede the lovely
Queen Leschenaultia.
The Elves were now beginning to get very worried, and all because of the Kaiv
garoO'Paw it would not keep still, nor would the imprints it had made of itself.
Every time the Elves stood them ready (as they thought) the Paws turned them'
selves the other way up, until the Elves were nearly distracted.
At last came the call of the Fairy.
All the roots began to move, their leaves and flowers folded to a point, ready
to pierce the top of the Earth like spears.
The Elves then got a surprise what they had thought were the roots of the
KangaroO'Paw, was a bunch of folded spears, and what they had thought was the
stem, was spreading out into roots.
They had made a great mistake; had painted it the wrong way, and now they
all began to chant in chorus: —
THE ELVES LAMENT
Dear! Dear! My! My!
It’s enough to make one cry;
They’ve gone upstairs all upside down,
Our lovely Queen will surely frown.
What will the Fairies say?
What will the Fairies say?


xnflrkj
-"Wv«X U 9- k™f«
[fei 1 (j j j -- - J - ,j ■ I il 3-.-j
jf-J M j f j J l f
f j ll'
Ff r If i H Ui}f wm
: pf i
r' ~
a - ' 1 |±
While this was going on down below the Earth, the Spnng'Fairy had been very
busy up above.
All the big Gum-trees had been put on guard through! the bush, as they had to
keep watch to see that no robbers approached to disturb this Spring-Carnival.


I
/
c ' / i 11,1 ' ,' lt . 1 '' ‘ ■
...
u
the “Blackboys”
The March of
It is Spring-time in the Bushland,
All the Flowers their pods unfold.
Petals painted from the Rainbow,
Sol is sprinkling showers of gold.
Each and all have donned their best bloom,
With delight they greet the day.
For the Flower-Queen has called her
minions,
To her court in bright array
HORUS:
All the “Boys’ are turning Northward,
O’er the hills and far away,
In lonely valley, and mountain ranges,
They are blossoming today.
For it’s Spnng'time in the Bushlands,
’Mid the Wattle and the Gums,
Blue-Bells are ringing, the birds are singing,
And the bees play noisy hums.
The “Blackboy” trees opened their shutters, and put up their flag-poles, and then
they were quite ready.


a| y
fmrwrjsti~l .1 jdfi r<rrnm
j w l,> b i j~f~ j f Tj- : j T g f j T
" /1fA/wvu«v ———-—.
%V)i
"i 11 1 i 1 i i 1 i j 11
l^^jbp^T^rij 1 1 j, ji j.|
< 4 -A ' —11 m Sr *. 1
fj u j tj sj »j -fj , n
i^frjTri


yj J J J IJ ' ■■ .11IJ7TJ I J J
j V J jJ p iM jJ - J. % J i) i) l) s - -==
1 ijf If IjtT IjfJTIjTj
/'"N
i \ f ~n* th i f
i|i!' )l 'ii-iTj l r|: , ri ll f | ' 1 1 r i' Jl mlr 3^
j ff j —^f
Vlt j —y — w
m-i j J rr f r
j ji |J r inr /r p-^rP"
iFvjfifl jlf 1 lj f J 11j'ff- ,


if r f r * | r ~=n?; j
y r if
] r ■' j i f±4~i J4^
T ' ': f h il! \ ' J -- (Jj z
j-4 f t r
hghfr * — *-. —*—— — r —a — F == g f r:
— J 0 1JI1 .J. ’ -*—
■ j-m
-J jf j: J; : | iil


u j r f i r ' 1
jp j i) *r v ir ij I
1k j f-j4 lj j j ? I j
The Banksia-trees brought out their new red and pink brushes, and the Fairy
told the wallabys to sweep the Bushland paths.
The Zamia-Palms spread out their fronds about the hills; the Woolly-Bushes,
with their cone-shape branches tipped with pink and red pom-poms took their place
among the Peppermint-trees, who had on their new green gowns, and the golden
Wattle was lighting up the dim recesses of the glade, with her golden balls of fluff
waving like fans in the breeze.
The Fairy waved her wand once more, and up from the Earth came Templetonia,
her vivid red colour warming up the Bush like a glowing fire.
Purple-Hovea in her satin gown came next, and was followed by Purple-Sarsa-
parilla creeper, ready to drape herself anywhere to please.
The Queen Leschenaultia then arrived!
The Queen's gown was of the most heavenly blue, as though she had reached
up and cut off a few yards of the sky on a cloudless day; but there —it was the
blue of the Rainbow.
The Fairy placed her on her throne of gravel, where she mostly blooms, and
other flowers did not venture too close, so her beauty stood out alone.
The Queen then spoke to the Spring-Zephyrs: -
“Call all the flowers," said the Queen,
“Tell them to 'waken, 'tis Spring.
Winds waft your breeze on the Blue-Bells,
Bid them arise and ring."
The messengers went as they were bidden,
Blew zephyrs soft where they were hidden,
They shook the tiny little bells
Who wak’ed the flowers in all the dells.


When the flowers heard the Blue-bells ringing, they knew the Fairy had called,
then out from the Earth came the little shoots, which then unfolded themselves, and
took their places in the Bush.
The Scarlet-Runner creeper spread herself out before the Queen's throne like
a carpet; this was the creeper that had hidden the little Paw from the blackfellow.
Then came the Sturt-Desert-Pea, and wove himself into the pattern; he was
a very handsome fellow, dressed in scarlet and black satin, and he had come all the
way from the North to make his bow to the Queen.
Another visitor from the North was the shrub, Geraldton-Wax, with its white
red, and pink flowers; she too had come to the Carnival.
White Clematis and the Coral-Vine next trailed past in their dainty draperies
then the pink and yellow Feather-Flowers, and from the Stirling Ranges
there arrived the lovely Monderup Bells, in cream and red.
All the ordinary ones like the Oxlylobium in yellow and brown
looking for all the world like the tints of Autumn
Sturt Pea
The Native Fuchsias came next; some in woolly white, and
some in scarlet. They looked very beautiful; then came Gre-
villia, with its flame-coloured flowers; also the grey woolly
Smoke-Bush, the soft white Flannel-Flowers and the Lavender-
Pink Petrophila, so soft and dainty.
We creep o'er the ground, black and scarlet our flower,
' ' ' We make a gay carpet, in every bower.
The Myrtle sisters came next in pale pink and peach colour, and from
the South, smelling so sweet, the delicate Crowea, in her pure white, and
also from the same place, that little brown fellow, Boronia, with his exotic
perfume.
From the swamps came the Trigger-plant and the Red Astroloma, and
from the banks of the Swan River the Native-Cranberry in scarlet.
They were all coming up and in blossom so fast now that Spring
was here, that the Fairy had hard work to remember all their names.
The Lilac-Ffibiscus looked handsome with its red centres, and the
Native Red Rose with its double row of green petal-bracts forming a cloak.


)
//
The Rose Cone Flower was looking very stately on its shrub, also the Red Bugle,
and the Blue Tinsel Lily, and Violet Fringed Lily.
Stepping very gracefully and daintily, with light dancing steps, came all the
Orchids, the Blue Lady, the Leopard, the Vanilla, the Shell, the Donkey, the Bird,
The Fairy introduced the new arrivals to the Bush in flower
form to the Queen, who made them very welcome, and scattered
them through the various glades to get acquainted with the other
flowers; then she called the little Elves up from the bowels of the
Earth.
thinking they were
They appeared looking very crestfallen,
going to be scolded by the Fairy.
Orchids
Dainty our shapes, of every hue,
We try to bloom, but our chances are few.
The hunters are out, they spy out the land,
We are getting so scarce, a very small band.
the Potato, White Spider, Primrose, Blue Silky, and Rose Enamelled,
all so very lovely.
Crowds and crowds of beautiful wildflowers.
Surely there can't be any more?
Wait! What is this?
A new flower —so bright —so bold, tall and stately looking.
Something quite different from anything ever seen in the Bush
before; it looks wrong somehow, and yet so right and beautiful.
It is like a Kangaroo-Paw, but the flower is emerald green and
the stalk is red and hairy; the flower looks like a hand and fingers,
and the fingers are green.
The little Elves made a mistake when they painted it, but it
was a very wonderful mistake, for nowhere else in the world is
there another flower like it, unless a robber-mortal grabbed a root
and tried hard to transplant it.
Oh! There was some excitement a marvellous thing had hap
pened.


fw pm
Such a mistake to make a green flower; but the
as the Elves bowed before them, too frightened to 1
: Queen
look up
and the Fairy both smiled
The Fairy said, as she touched each one with her wand:
“Look up! Look up! My little sprite,
Don't look to glum, so pale with fright.
A better job was never done
Unique, and fadeless in the Sun."
The little Elves then raised their heads, and seeing the smiles
around them, were very relieved; but when they saw the Kangaroo'
Paw Flowers, they were astounded to see such a wonderful sight,
they could hardly believe their eyes; so they caught hold of one
another and danced and sang through the Bush in great glee.
Another Spring had come and the Fairy was pleased with
their work.
Kangaroo Paws
Black and green or red and green,
KangaroO'Paws are always seen,
In bushland dense, they take their place
Tall stems waving, full of grace.


The Carnival of Spring
PART II
All the flowers had arrived at the Carnival, hundreds of them. Too many to
name, and now the birds of the Bush came hurrying, winging their way over the hills.
Spingtime is the time to mate, and each little bird was looking for his sweetheart,
darting among the trees, calling softly, and the little lady of his choice would hide and
peep and flutter up on to a high bough, where he would follow and tell her about
the lovely little nest he was going to build.
Willy-Wagtail was very busy as usual, his tail wagging as he twittered, and
Polly-Wagtail listened to the tale he had to tell.
Then Mr. Kookaburra started to laugh, and he laughed and laughed; he was
so very happy, for he had found just the right Miss Kookaburra, so they laughed
in chorus.
Down from the North came the Budgerigars, already paired off; they were
looking very loving, cooing and kissing all the time.
The green and red Parrots made a bright spot of colour flying among the new
green leaves of the trees, and' the Magpies kept calling to all the birds as they arrived,
"Who are you! Who are you!” in such, a cheeky way.
Mr. Dov:
A'rackety'coo, a'rackety'coo.
Is that you Loo, is that you Loo,
I’ve come to woo you, I’ve come to woo,
It’s up to you, It’s up to you.
Miss Dove
A'rackety'coo, a'rackety'coo,
I’m little Loo' Loo, I’m little Loo-Loo
I don’t like you, I don’t like you,
Fly away do. Oh! fly away do
The Wood' Doves were mournfully droning. Mr. Dove was very doleful, and
didn’t sound a hit cheerful when he called, “I want to woo-oo you'oo. I want to
woo'oo you'oo" to Miss Dove, who was sitting on a branch of a Wattle tree near him.
Miss Dove listened very intently, and thought he was too dreary and sad for
Springtime, so she declined his offer like this: "I don’t want you'oo, I don’t want
you'oo.”
The Crows had shined their feathers until they glistened, and they sat about
watching, and every little while they said, "Ah! Cah! Cah! in such a sarcastic tone,
that it was quite delightful when the White Cockatoos flew along and greeted every'
one with their cheery "Hallo! Hallo!”. . . they started all the birds of the Bush
a’warbling.


The Watler warbled to his lady, telling her that he knew where there was a
nice bee'hive in a near-by tree, and invited her to go with him and share the honey.
Mr. Blue' Wren came in his new blue coat; he looked so handsome and proud,
his plain little wife came with him in her drab gray dress, and she just adored him.
Mr. and Mrs. Owl got up rather early, and although they could not see very
well in the strong sunlight, they would not miss this wonderful day.
The Herons and Cranes came stalking along with their
stately walk, and then down the babbling brook glided the
majestic Black Swans, turning their heads this way and chat,
bowing to all they knew.
Naughty little Greeny the Finch had to behave. He is
a terrible pecker; always got his beak into something, and he
fluttered here and there, just wishing he could have a peck
The Emus came running through the Bush, they thought they were late, and they
would not miss this outing for anything.
Grey and pink Galahs also came from the North, and by this time the Bush
was full o'f birds too numerous to mention.
They all sang so sweetly in the trees, and as they sang the bees hummed and the
wind whistled softly, making a lovely choir.
THE KANGAROO HOP
Spring is here, and o’er the air a call comes ringing,
Calling all to join the band,
Of Bushy folk in Bushydand.
All the flowers are blooming, and the birds are singing,
And the ’Roos are on their way.
Chorus;
Hop'Hop'Hop Hop, the 'Roos are on the go,
Hop'Hop'Hop'Hop, they must be at the show.
The Emus and the Laughing Jacks,
The ’Possums, Cockatoos,
Will all be there, but can’t compare
With the hopping Kangaroo . . . Hop.
Through the Bush the Kangaroos go Hop-Hop'Hopping,
O’er the hills and far away.
They heard the call, they must obey.
As they bound, you hear the sound of thump'thump'thumping,
Springing o’er the ground they go.
[Chorus


p J .1 J j J J J J J~J J J J J J J--) J J jj J^J
fj rjnjffr,
i&lainnu\
iijf j F 'if ff \)Tjf\j}lj$
imnjii ij=g=
The Kangaroos hopped about with their Joeys. Sometimes a little Joey got very
tired, so Mother Kangaroo would put him in her pouch for a rest.


V--^V' ■
Possums ran about in the trees, and the Goannas crawled on the ground among
the undergrowth.
For many years this Carnival had been held at Springtime, and nothing had
ever happened to disturb its brightness and joy.
Flowers, birds and the few wild animals that live in this lovely country, had all
joined in the festival, but now things were different.
Many mortals had come to live here, and they found their way to the flowers’
retreat; also some other visitors made their appearance, and this is what happened.
One day at the yearly Carnival, a GunvTree guard came to report that they
had sighted a big band of robbers coming from the East; so the Fairy ordered Purple
Sarsaparilla, White Clematis and the Coral Vine to go to the Eastern boundary
and there build a fence with their creepers to keep the robbers out.
Away they went, creeping and twining around the bush, until they had made a
gorgeous coloured fence.


They could see all these longmosed, long'eared robbers coming in thousands, and
could also see the destruction they were causing as they teemed through the country.
They nibbled at the Everlastings; they ate all the young shoots and the plants
were not able to grow so high and strong or have such big flowers.
Again the guards came to report the robbers were digging under the fence,
and popping their heads up out of holes everywhere, so the Fairy ordered them to be
brought before the Queen Leschenaultia.
Just then the Kangaroos came hopping into the valley to join in the fun, so the
Queen called on them to help keep these strangers from the East in order.
They hopped through the Bush to the fence, and as each stranger appeared they
picked him up by his little white tail and brought him to the Queen.
The Queen gazed on these strange little fellows, who looked so demure in their
soft grey coats, but who were so destructive, and then she said;
"Little strangers, you have entered our valley uninvited. We are celebrating
our Spring Carnival and all the Bush'folk of the West are gathered here who are
you! and what are you called?”
A big grey fellow stepped forward to the Queen, and bowing very low said:
“Your Majesty, we are migrants from the East, many mortals have told wonderful tales
of the Western Bushland; so as we were looking for pastures new, we have run all
the way here. Our name is Bunny, and we now pay our homage to you this day
of days.”
Then the Queen said: “Mr. Bunny, I cannot accept your homage. I do not
think you will make a good Bush' Dweller. You are too fond of pulling things to
pieces, and our beautiful Wildflowers are not for you. You must pass on from our
valley and seek other fields, out of our hills you must go."
The Kangaroos drove them from the Queen’s presence out of the valleys and
hills, and down to the plains, where they have been eating and burrowing and annoy'
ing the mortals ever since.


The Carnival ol Spring
PART 111
After all this excitement with the rabbits, the flowers once again felt safe and
lifted their faces to the Sun, and bloomed their best.
The bush folk flew or scampered about to their heart's content; it was a lovely
Spring-time and there was joy all round.
Once again the guards came to report: “Mortals were teeming up the trails,
hundreds of them, coming in their noisy chariots, fast ever so fast."
The bush folk scattered, the Kangaroos bounded out of sight in fear that the
mortals might have a gun.
The birds hid among the branches of the trees; the flowers were at bay, and
they could not hide.
The Fairy was helpless against these robbers, so she faded away behind a cloud
that had dipped low to cover her.
There were robbers pulling at the beautiful Wildflowers, pulling them up by
the roots, and then casting the roots aside so carelessly.
Oh, can't they see beautiful things without destroying them?
These Wildflowers are not like other flowers,they do not live in water very long
after they are picked.
They want the bush air around them, the shelter and perfume of the trees, and
the Earth to give them life.
They droop and die so quickly when plucked, and their Carnival is over for
the year.
All is over now, the Queen is always pounced upon first and taken away, and so
are all the brightest ones.
Then the robbers went to their homes with their spoil, leaving destruction behind
them in the Bush, and then the birds came out of their hiding places, and started to
twitter and make their nests for their brides to be, and as the day is drawing to a
close, they are all on the tree'tops singing their Love' Song; and so we steal quietly
away and leave the Bush to them.


w'H.' -p~ ~~~v
|li- ; T f ! f I ! f i :
J f njr fljHi^M;
VE R$e
'0 ~ II J i IJ J l ; J
T o rv I J ,5
if i .= T j= i r i : -
r j i r g U r =^=^
I? j : J J J-
Ik j I j f jIj j j j rm


y J i y i J J J ;
f J g |
i 4 J J J— —4=^
yi 1 r j j i } 3-4 ! I 1 ; J
r>j j j If f iLXJJj-J-4-^
J J-44T **
mi *—=1 f J I j J J I f J =
r j. j — J 2 T * 1 J —


44 GRANNY SMITH S BOOK
¥ J r-.1 J -4 j r IJ-
f-j Ij j ~j Lj-,.r._.j.i
4jJ Iff 4 |iz4zj^
(Hi »j v \ ft Jj J 1) I
J ’-> j-i 1 ■!■ J- J- -?•
I i 1 J' 33##^
& .-I -H iJ -j I 1J J=*=
4 ji Dj J]j |4 i jj
r> j. ij ; i ij -I ‘ ~ ~


C^VO*WV*5
i t j ■ rTrtrJ i J--i
It V J * J *
kT-I r :l
J; U I ,
TmTT'j!fMTtlfff^
N J « f -0-
.1 \' i ' -ly-


46 GRANNY SMITH'S BOOK
J | J J J |J J-J |J- '^1-
i't i
r J TT
■Jp-J-J-y I J J 7 I j J J I J-
iifl f?iT f ■’[ r!l : f4-ffprr
I i • ~ •' y \ y 5 9— p- * — 9 —
j — f * — 4 1 *— —» 9 f —* —- » • a — * —
fit j f f 13 i r i jr i
l-tt, J J J IT! - 1 I J Jj
ik j f f I j j fTj mimiL


1 f i*f j tMFsf if if f i! pE <f f"-
THE BUSH BIRDS’ LOVE SONG
Winter has gone, the Earth sings a song,
And the music of Spring fills the air;
In shady nook, runs the rippling brook,
The blossoms have burst trees so bare.
The Sun gives a sheen, to new leaves so green,
And happiness with each bright day,
Flowers unfold, for busy bees bold,
While birds twitter softly iheir lay.
CHORUS:
Spring-time is Love-time, my darling,
Come nestle closer to me.
You I will woo, so we’ll bill and coo,
How happy we both then shall he.
I’ll build a nest for you, darling,
In tree-top where we'll be so free,
Spring-time is here. We’ll wed, my dear,
So come, nestle closer to me.


The Robbers
The Wildflowers are out.
And there's robbers about.
From the bush they are stealing,
Destruction they’re dealing.
Must they always destroy?
Why not come and enjoy?
It’s everyone's duty
To save all their beauty.
If the roots we preserve,
We'll all then deserve
The picture they'll make,
When they're all wide awake.
Funny Bunny
Naughty little cotton tails,
Through the bush aTobbing,
Eating all the tender leaves,
Always out a-robbing.
Every morn at break'O'day,
Out of burrows popping,
Scamp'ring to the babbling brook,
With your long ears flopping.
Dodging here and dodging there,
A'snippmg and a-nipping,
Until one day you'll find yourselves
Into a trap a-tripping.


Jewels of the Bush
When we've strolled neath the gums in the bushlands,
Every hue in the rainbow we've met.
There's the pink of a bright rosy morning.
And the gold of a brilliant sunset.
The blue of the sky that is cloudless,
The green of a sea smooth and calm,
There is purple and mauve and crimson,
Each flower has a nectar and halm.
For tired eyes and sad hearts they've a message,
Their colours and shapes, us, they charm,
Weary souls find a peace in their beauty,
But each year we are filled with alarm.
Where we once saw the flowers in profusion,
There are only a few here and there.
Every year they grow less, and we miss them,
We've a duty, must all have a care.
A slogan we'll have —“Pick less Wildflowers,"
Let them blosson and seed and increase.
No more rob the bush of its glory,
Such destruction and havoc will cease.
In the Spring of the years that are coming,
'Mid the gums they will flourish and bloom,
Our sweet and beautiful wildflowers,
WelLsave even- season from doom.


“Katta-Mooro”
A Legend of King’s Park
Beenan, a young buck of the Bibbulmum tribe, stepped from his wurley (hut) on
the small goorda (island) which was hidden among the tall reeds and grasses of the
beenja (swamp).
The little goorda was known to the aborigines as Yoonderup, and was Beenan's
camping ground whenever he was in that part of his Kalleep (home country).
Spear in hand, he forded the Beenja where the cranes and black swans were so
plentiful, and gaining solid ground he turned toward the West, where the Beela
(river) flowed down to the sea, and the heights of "Katta-Mooro" (big hill) were
forever calling him.
Around the goorda the water trickled slowly in small streamlets, to merge further
along into one slowly-moving current, curving in a semi-circle, until it opened into a
vast expanse of water like a huge lake.
At the western end, it narrowed again into a bottle-neck, at' the foot of "Katta-
Mooro,” and then spread out once more into such a large area that it was like an
inland sea, set amidst the forest of Mung-gaitch (banksia), Balga (blackboy) and
Gum-trees.
It was now a tidal river, and sometimes when the westerly winds came tearing
over its surface, the waves rolled in with feathery crests, roaring almost like the
ocean itself, beating heavily into each little bay and storming round every point.
Quietly, Beenan wended his way through the bush, stepping lightly in his native
fashion, his face uplifted to the heights, which stood outlined against the sky like the
top of the world.
The sun was high in the heavens, the wind was cool and gentle, and Beenan s
thoughts were of the future. He had gone through the ceremonies of initiation, and
was now waiting for the woman who had been chosen for him, to be brought up
from the South.
There would soon be much fishing, hunting, and feasting, after which he would
settle down to his own Kal (fires) and Jangger-Yongar (spirit-kangaroo) to watch
over his totem (male kangaroo) and keep, him and his from harm..


He at last reached “Katta-Mooro's” highest point, and stood gazing at the panor-
ama before him one of scenic beauty, not quite comprehending it as beautiful, but
proud and pleased because it was his Kalleep and the home of his fathers before him,
and here he liked to look out over the waters and dream.
His eyes followed the flow of the waters as they went by in long lazy rolls where
close into shore were many piccaninnies splashing and yelling as they caught the
luscious crabs in the dexterous way the natives have.
Near them on the shore was “Goonin'in'nup (fresh water spring), and there
was situated the camp of Yalgunga, their father. An ideal home for the native,
with food on the right and drink on the left, without much effort.
Beenan knew that later on in the day when he would be hungry, he too could
descend from his lofty perch and catch his meal at the edge of the water. There was
plenty of food and sport to be had without much seeking; but he was not in the
mood for either, as he was on the brow of his Kalleep and it was good to be alive.
His heart was pounding with the joy and zest of living, his feet felt as light
as air, everything seemed bright, and the blood was leaping in his veins in unison.
It was good to be young and free, to feel his trusty spear in his hand, to kill
when he wanted to eat, to fish for the flounder and the Kingfish. From the bfush
and the beela he took his choice.
There he stood, silhouetted against the sky, looking proudly over the bushy
plains and flowing waters, like a king viewing his realm.
Of what could be he dreaming?
Was it of the kangaroo hunt, the lubra (woman) or the corroborees? Or was
he just watching the deep cool pool across the narrow strip of \\att,r at Klinderup
(south shore), where the black swans bred their young?
Here and there could be seen a mother bird gliding along gracefully, proudly
and peacefully, at the water's edge, surrounded by her brood, and the big fat frogs
could be heard croaking in their hoarse, lazy way.
The bees were humming near him, as they gathered the honey from Balga’s flowery
spike, and the Mungaitch pinky blossom. The leaves of the tall Gum-trees were
rustling in the gentle breeze with a silken sound, and the green and red parrots were
chattering in the branches. Everything was as it should be, as it had always been
time and again, whenever Beenan had come to the heights to dream.
Suddenly he was alert the piccaninnies down below were fleeing in all direc'
tions, making their way into the bush. Something had frightened them. Men of his
tribe' were creeping up the paths to the top. With much jabber and gesture, and
fear and alarm in their eyes, they took cover among the trees and undergrowth, and
watched a strange sight, for rounding a distant point of the Beela was something quite
different to anything that had ever floated on its sui face before.


A strange craft, filled with pale-faced people, was making its way up the Beela
toward “Katta-Mooro." The pale faces' bodies were strangely clothed, and the
sound of their voices floated up to the heights to the listening watchers, hut not one
word could they understand.
The pale faces paddled on through the narrows and proceeded half way up the
lake before drawing their boat to the shore.
Beenan and his tribesmen crept through the bush and watched them land, saw
them hasten to erect a totem of bright colours, and then all make signs of deep respect
and reverence before it.
Breathlessly the blackmen watched every movement; something had entered their
Kalleep that was disturbing, a different atmosphere was felt, they were not so happy
as a few short hours ago. Did they sense things would never be the same again?
Never more to have the, freedom of the bushland, never again feel free to ascend
the hill to dream. Alien eyes were ever watching, commanding gestures bidding
them begone.
Frightened of these people and their ways, the tribesmen gathered their families
together, took their spears, clubs and kangaroo'skin cloaks and wandered South among
their own kind, spreading the news of the invasion as they went.
No more would they camp in the Kalleep of their fathers; and so onward they
rambled, farther and farther way, as boat after boat filled with white people came to
their shores from across the Western Sea.
Years passed away and Beenan had his family and wurley in the South. The
white settlers had followed and were friendly, and he could now understand their
talk, and many a good day’s fishing and hunting they had together.
One day, in a farmhouse near his camp, a son was born to a settler. He was
not an only son, but was destined to do great deeds.
As the years went slowly by, "Son of the South" (as we will call this white
child) spent his boyhood days among the black folk, and from them he gained a love of
the bush and a store of bushlore that was to stand by him in later years, when he, too,
took to wandering great distances across the continent.
He would sit and listen to Beenan s version of kangaroo hunts, tribal fights and
the big cprroborees and of "Katta-Mooro in his Kalleep on top of the world.
Son of the South knew how Beenan loved this place, how he longed to roam
again to its heights; but too many people were near, so he promised the native that
one day he would go there too.


The years rolled on, and “Son of the South," grown to manhood, had chosen as
his profession, the life of the bush, surveying it for the good of his fellow men.
WelMiked by all, many of his compatriots chose him for their leader in the
“House of Laws," which was not far from “Katta'Mooro,” and at times, after many
worrying days, and he was very tired, he would quietly slip away through the bush
to the top of the world.
There he found a tall Gunvtree, and up amongst its branches he had a hiding
place and lookout, and, like Beenan years before, he would gaze out over the waters
of the Beela and dream of the future of the City below in the distance.
Where the first white settlers had come ashore years ago, a City arose, and its
buildings slowly crept nearer to “Katta'Mooro."
One day came the news of the death of Beenan. He had slept his last sleep by
his “Kal” and had followed his totem to the haven of the Bibbulmun, away beyond
the sea, but he had not lived and talked in vain.
“Son of the South" had been watching the approach of the City towards his
retreat, and one day whilst resting and dreaming there, he had a vision. It was as
though Beenan stood before him and pointed with his spear to the City below, and
then made a sweeping gesture over “Katta'Mooro, and like a flash came the message
—“Kalleep!! Kalleep!”
With a start he was on his feet, the vision had gone, but the message remained.
And he then and there made a vow that he would do all in his power to save Katta-
Mooro" from being desecrated.
Down in the “House of Laws,” with all the fervour and eloquence he could use,
he put it to the people: “Would they have this beautiful place for a bushland retreat
and reserve it for all time never to be built on for living purposes. A place where
tired weary people could rest and refresh their bodies and souls away from the noise
and bustle of the City?
Through “Son of the South" Beenan had spoken to the white people to keep this
part of the "Kalleep” of the Bibbulmun. free, and in its natural state; and today it
is a joy to all who climb its heights.
“Son of the South” lived for many years, did many good deeds for his countrv,
and received from the King the highest honour ever bestowed oh anyone in the land.
He, too, has now passed on, but his name still lives, and his form in bronze
stands on a pedestal on the crest of “Katta'Mooro, overlooking the waters of the Beela.
Perhaps one day a similar one will be placed there too of Beenan, spear in hand.
Men of different hue, but one in spirit —“For there is a spirit in man, and the
inspiration of the Almighty giveth him understanding.
*Job xxxii, verse 8.


Cock-a-Doodle-a-doo
Into the Bush one bright sunny day,
Went a farmer and family all in a big dray;
He chopped down the trees, and dug up the stumps,
He ploughed the Earth over and over in clumps.
He fenced an*d he wired and put up some pens,
And in them he placed a large rooster and hens;
The rooster so proud of his yard clean and new,
Strutted out and crowed loudly, "Cock-a-doodle-a-doo.”
The Bush-birds came flocking to trees all around.
To see who was making this noise on the ground.
So they set up a chorus with vigor and zest,
To drown his loud voice they each did their best.
The Magpies and Parrots all yelled, "Who are you,
“Disturbing our Bushlands with such a to do?”
The “Kookas” all laughed, “Ha-Ha Ha-Ha-Ha”
And the Warblers warbled “Tradada —Tradada.”
The Wood Doves kept cooing, “Coo-00-00, Coo-00-oo,”
But the rooster just answered, “Cock-a-doodle-a-doo,
I am King of the farmyard with news to tell you,
An egg has been laid, Cock-a-doodle-doo.”


FOR THE NOT SO YOUNG
Past Day s
AN EPISODE OF 1915
Noon and a lethargy lay o'er the town,
No wind stirred the spinifex grasses,
The sun shot his rays, they came blazing down
Gleaming housetops, like freshly rubbed brasses.
‘Twas siesta-time, in a tropical clime,
From the heat and the glare people rested,
Wooing sleep; from dull care oblivion sublime,
Even birds from “Old Sol hid and nested.
A quietness reigned in the shimmering heat,
When a sound startled all from their slumbers,
List! A clip and a clop. Then a fast rhythmic beat
Of hooves. Was it one horse or numbers?
Fast! Fast! came the sound striking faster,
It’s a horseman, he's urging his steed;
From out of the East horse and master
Came rushing for help in their need.
To their doors came the folk of the small scattered town.
Faces startled, pale, anxious with fear;
To the “Post" the horse galloped, the rider slid down.
As he hurried inside, they drew near.
“It’s Mat from the Mulga! Oh! What can it be?"
Hear him shouting, “Call Doc'! Telephone!
Billy’s hurt —hurry man, it’s urgent you see,
He’s in pain, from a horse he was thrown.
“He was dragged by the reins, past the statiomhouse door,
While breaking a freshly' Caught brumby.
His wife saw it all, then collapsed on the floor;
I’ve left them in charge of “Black Jumby.
Bill’s wrist, it has snapped, the sinews all strained,
Broken rib, his face scratched and torn.
Get the engine out, Doc’, much time will be gained,
I’ll go back, and to town they’ll be borne."


Then he called to the men, ‘'Another horse boys,
My nag he has served me right well;
Forty miles he has sped like a lightning flash, boys,
Rub him down, he deserves a good spell.
Who will ride out with me to the station-house, boys?
Who will help to bring Billy-boy in?
The time is so slow, and the way is Jong, boys,
And Billy is all of my kin.”
Away they all galloped, while far to the West,
At the coast stood the engine all ready.
The Doc’ wide awake from his short noontide rest,
Took his seat in the train, calm and steady.
Before him the miles just one hundred and ten,
Narrow gauge hot dusty and dreary.
He thought of the patient in agony then
Of the long hours of suffering, so weary.
Driving slowly but carefully, mile after mile,
Bill was brought to the head of the line.
The Doc' there before him, was waiting to guile
All the pain, and the shock undermine.
The torture the agony hours of despair
Awaiting the freedom from pain;
Thrice-fold are they blest, with endurance to bear,
Stout hearts and a strong will they gain.
Twas the only resource in the far-flung outback,
With the terrible distance divided,
And a dread ghastly phantom ever haunting the track,
Against it they fought - unprovided.
They could weather the storms, the pests and the drought,
High taxes low prices hard toil;
But sickness - it gripped all with fear and with doubt.
And they're tossed into instant turmoil.


M odern W ays
1941
In a small coastal town of the far, far. Nor-West,
Stands a product of science and skill;
Many brains and hands laboured and gave of their best,
Planned and shaped all their thoughts with a will.
Thro’ years of long research, a wonder evolved,
A miracle - modern and grand,
It has spanned the great spaces, long distance dissolved,
To the outposts has shortened the strand.
Again has a master brain spread joy and aid,
Vast knowledge thro’ ether did cleave,
Solved the secret of space, a network is laid,
Round the World all our messages weave.
Thro’ the air goes a call for help in distress,
Like a flash "Wings of Mercy” draw near,
Brings “Ministering Angels” the pain to suppress,
Gladdening hearts, casting out all the fear.
No more on the track does the grim spectre' lurk
On the edge of beyond they’ve no fear;
No more do they suffer in pain, heat and murk,
"Wings of Mercy” are hovering near.
Like Mercury fast speeding over the land.
Bringing succour, so swift and so sure,
They have brightened the life of the far outback band,
Made the station and shack less obscure.
They call thro' the ether whilst winging their way
Over desert, crag, river, and sea;
Have shortened the miles, long hours set at hay,
To the outback at last found the key.
The science and skill of a wonderful mind
Has brought comfort and aid in their need.
Thro’ the air they go flying to help all their kind,
God bless them! . . . they do their good deed.
A tribute to our Flying Doctors.


Guin-1 e a v e s
THE “SWAGGIE” RESTS
I've trudged the dusty road, so long and dreary,
My staff a bough, a “swag" upon my back;
The Sun is high and I am feeling weary.
I seek the shade of trees beside the track.
The Gumdeaves make a carpet for my treading,
And crackle loudly 'neath my ■'Billy’’ black;
They scent the air like balm, or incense spreading.
Surrounding me with peace, the joy I lack.
I’ve sailed the seas, and in far countries wandered,
I ve slept beneath the pines, the oaks and beech,
In forests deep I’ve travelled and I've pondered,
Seeking something, sweet, elusive, out of reach.
In far off lands I met vou in a garden,
0 5
On avenues, so upright, tall and grand;
I plucked a twig, and almost asked a pardon;
An exile, you - in foreign soil you stand.
Your precious leaves I've treasured in my roaming,
Kept green, then watched them slowly fade and die
And sometimes by my fireside in the gloaming
I’ve held you in my hands, so pale and dry.
Upon the flames your dust Tve quickly sprinkled,
To make the perfume rise, and bring to me
A dream of Spring, young, green, unwrinkled
Gurmtips • a smell of home • beyond the sea.
And now I've reached the eventide of living.
I'm old and tired, my working days now close;
I look for rest, and come where Gums are giving
Their scented breath, their leaves for sweet repose.
Deep in their leafy shade I end my tramping,
No more the dusty road, the stoney grail;
I've found the place for my last camping,
Mid Gumdeaves green, the end of my last trail.


GLOSSARY
Glossary
Balga. —Blackboy'tree.
Beenja. —Swamp.
Beela. —River.
Billy. —Tin Pot.
Boomer. —A large male Kangaroo.
Corroboree. —Native Dance.
' Eggs-and'Bacon. —Common name of wildflower, bot.
name, Oxlylobium.
Goorda. —Small Island.
Cooni'-ninriup. —Spring at foot of King s Park.
“ Crannx- Bonnet .’’—Common name of wildflower; bot.
name, Istropis striata.
joey. —Baby Kangaroo.
Jangger'Tongar. —Spirit Kangaroo.
Kookaburra. —Known as the Laughing Jackass.
“Kattd'Mooro”. —Big Hill, now known as King's Park.
Kal.'Fires. —(Natives make a small fire between each one,
to keep them warm while sleeping, and sometimes
get their backs burnt.)
Kalleep. —Home or Home^Country.
Lubra.— Wife of Australian Aborigine (a black gin)
Mung'gaitch, —Banksia^tree.
M inderup. —South Perth.
“Pepper and Salt.’’- —Common name of wildflower; bot.
name, Eriostemon spicata.
Piccaninny. —Black Baby.
Swaggie. —Tramp carrying a blanket. Called a swag.
Totem. —A tribal symbol of worship.
Wongi. —Aboriginal talk.
Wurley.—Native hut.






?r— -2
1 508
1 0872


oc - •
' . •-
■ . / •
*
v s
.
» ✓ *
. *' % _ *'
V . • — . «
* * <* *
' -'• • /
v
- - »
•*»
i -. i
• ; _ , ' ? ' . - ■
• /
■' >
* ' 1
\ ' \
• * * v r
- r
' 0
- - ' *
✓
' k «
-r*
- f.
•v • - ■
~ •■>
s
-
-
■ * ■ X
? *■ _
- - ; .
f
%. '
N , <.-
- >
.
. • ' *
(
\
' -
♦
. ' -
■ . -
.
,
'v «
v .... s 7
■ ' • . ■ -


« i I ’ ■ * . •
*
4
