

GRASS,
Sheep-Farming.
A. PAPEE:
SPECULATIVE AND SUGGESTIVE:.
WILLIAM FARRER, 8.A.,
LATE SCHOLAR OF PEMBROKE COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.
SYDNEY:
William Maddock, Bookseller and Stationer,
383 GEORGE STREET.
1873.
[Price, S/0.




GRASS,
Sheep- Fa rming.
A PAPEE:
SPECULATIVE AND SUGGESTIVE.
WILLIAM FARRER, 8.A.,
LATE SCHOLAR OF PEMBROKE COLLEGE. CAMBRIDGE.
SYDNEY:
William Maddock, Bookseller and Stationer,
383 GEORGE STREET.
1©73.


■


(Contents.
Chapter I—lntroduction
Chapter ll—The Chemical Physiology of Grasses : their organic
constituents
Chapter lll—The Chemical Physiology of Grasses—their inorganic
constituents—the relation between grasses and the soil they
grow in
Chapter IV—Relation of Natural Grasses to the rock-formation of
the country they grown on, as regards their mineral con-
stituents : application to the pastures of the colony .. .. 25
Chapter V—Health of the Sheep as influenced by the character of
his run .. .. ~ mm # # t
Chapter Vl—Ring-barking .. .. .. ..36
Chapter Vll—The Use of Salt for Sheep .. .. ..43
Chapter Vlll—Suggestions for a good and cheap ‘ Sheep-salt ’ .. 52
Chapter IX—The Growth of Wool .. .. -s
Chapter X—The Land Law, &c.
Appendix A
Appendix B
Appendix C
Appendix D
Appendix E
Appendix F
Appendix G
• • 73
v"' ’• "9
•• 83
M3355/P- 95 5G
/9 3




Y REFACE,
The following Paper is in great part theoretical; but, as far as
possible, theory has been made dependent upon practice, and
E R RATA.
Page 27, in Table—for ‘ Magnesis ’ read ‘ Magnesia.’
Page 69, line 19 —for ‘ stateman in ’ read ‘ ‘statesman’ on.’
Page 69, line 20—for ‘ yetread ‘; yet.’
Page 85, line 32 —for ‘ two parts ’ read ‘ nearly two parts.’
N. 8.—1 see that in the English Edition of ‘How Crops Grow,’ the per-
centage of sulphur in hair and horn is given as being from 1 i to 2|, instead of
from 3 to 5, as in the American Edition. This will necessitate various
modifications in the text, as in pp. 85 and 86.
considered an easy matter to bring forward speculations instead
of ascertained facts ; but I shall be thankful to any one that may
take the trouble to overthrow any speculation of mine that is
unsound, for it would be shewing me a faulty link in my chain of
knowledge of the subject; and a chain is only as strong as the
weakest link in it. I have, however, restrained to within due
bounds the inclination to indulge in speculations, and have un-
sparingly culled out all but a very few, of what I consider, the
soundest of them ; and these, accompanied by arguments, I
have mostly given in the Appendix.




J REFACE,
The following Paper is in great part theoretical; but, as far as
possible, theory has been made dependent upon practice, and
has been guided by it into what, it is hoped, may prove useful
channels. Those who affect to despise theory, will do well to
recollect that a function of theory is to examine the foundations
of practice, and by this means to modify it and extend it advan-
tageously.
This paper does not pretend to give much information that is
immediately valuable for practical purposes; if, however, it
proves suggestive, and sets intelligent, practical men, thinking,
it will have served its purpose : it will do better still, if it provokes
useful discussion.
The statement of individual observations and conclusions,
which have by no means been as yet accepted as facts, necessi-
tates the somewhat frequent use of the first person pronoun : a
fearless use has, accordingly, been made of it.
Speculations have been brought forward, because books of
reference and means of establishing facts are not accessible, at
any rate, to me out here. Some of the statements which I have
brought forward as speculations, may possibly have been estab-
lished as facts long ago. I am well aware that it will be
considered an easy matter to bring forward speculations instead
of ascertained facts ; but I shall be thankful to any one that may
take the trouble to overthrow' any speculation of mine that is
unsound, for it would be shewing me a faulty link in my chain of
knowledge of the subject; and a chain is only as strong as the
weakest link in it. I have, however, restrained to within due
bounds the inclination to indulge in speculations, and have un-
sparingly culled out all but a very few, of what I consider, the
soundest of them ; and these, accompanied by arguments, I
have mostly given in the Appendix.


The political opinions which are advanced in the last chapter,
I simply look upon, the most of them at any rate, as necessary
and logical deductions from the subject-matter of the paper.
Any speculations or suggestions that this paper may contain, I
will compare to young seedling fruit-trees; and I hand them over
to the sheep-farmers of the colony with the hope and expecta-
tion that some of them may prove valuable, and bear good fruit
after a time, and when they have grown to a decent size; the best
of them, however, will need to be pruned into good shape, before
they are allowed to grow; others, no doubt, will need to be cut
down, and have different and better wood grafted on them :
while some, doubtless, will turn out worthless and have to be
dug up altogether, and thrown aside.
The following paper is written in much the same spirit as that
with which Montaigne says he wrote his Essays; the opinions,
however, that are advanced in it are not, I hope, what Montaigne
says his ideas were —formless and undetermined fancies. But I
am sanguine enough to expect that they are of a more substantial
character.
Montaigne begins his Essay on Prayers thus :
‘ I propose formless and undetermined fancies, like those who
‘ propose subtle questions to be disputed upon in the schools, not
‘to establish truth, but to seek it; and I submit them to the
‘ better judgment of those whose office it is to regulate, not my
‘ writings and actions only, but my opinions. Let what I here
‘ set down meet with correction or applause, it will be alike
‘ welcome or useful to me * * * * * *’
# *
W, F.
March 10, 1873.


GRASS AND SHEEP-FARMING.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTION.
The following Paper was originally suggested about eighteen
months ago, during a time of enforced leisure, by the fact that
the sheep were then dying in vast numbers in the Southern
table-land district of this colony, about which I was then
wandering. I then began to make enquiries, in order to see if
anything could be done, either to stop or to trace out the real
cause of the parasitic diseases which were causing the sheep to
die ; of course it was the wet weather that we had then been
having that was the immediate cause—but I thought that if we
could find out why it was that the wet weather produced such
disastrous results, we might perhaps be in a position to prevent
a recurrence of the disasters that arise from such seasons. In
thinking over the subject, various causes occurred to me, and
various theories were formed, all of which had to be rejected
one after another ; and it was only after rejecting a great number
of hypotheses which I had formed in the absence of all books
connected with the subject, and after weeding out objectionable
parts from later theories, and greatly modifying them, that the
subject has assumed in my mind a consistency such as, it is
hoped, it shews in the present paper.
Two or three months ago, I had written a paper that was
almost entirely speculative, and in substance almost the same as
this. The hypotheses on which it was founded had all been
derived from indirect evidence which phenomena, as they are
actually found to exist in dealing with sheep, had supplied:


these hypotheses had therefore na immediate scientific value,
for they were not data, but only speculative hypotheses. After
that paper, however, had been written, a book —‘ How Crops
Grow,’ by Professor Johnson, of Yale College, U.S., America,
was sent to me by mistake in the place of another book : the
book that was sent was, however, soon recognized to be the very
book that was wanted, and was probably the only book in the
English language that would have served my purpose. -The
disadvantage attached to it is, that it gives very little attention
to grasses, and that they are only included among the crop-
plants which are examined in the book : the principles, however,
that are established in the book also apply, with slight modifi-
cations, to grasses ; in this Paper, they are applied to grasses,
with the necessary modifications.
I would, of course, have liked to be able to furnish original
data which had been obtained in this country : for this purpose,
I did provide myself a year ago with some salt-bush and
specimens of grasses from soils lying on different rocks : and
these I placed in the hands of a chemist for analysis : the
pressure arising from the mineral excitement, however, came,
and the analyses could not be made, for these sorts of analyses
are, unlike simple mineral assays, very tedious ; the specimens,
also, were misplaced and lost. I see, also, that the subject is
such an extensive one, as to embrace a life’s work, if it is to be
treated anything like exhaustively; and as numerous analyses
will have to be made in order to establish any certain fact in
connexion with it, it would be a hopeless matter for me to
undertake the expense of the analyses that will be required. I
would gladly undertake to do them for myself, but the obstacles
that now appear to be in the way, render it out of the question
for me to expect that I shall ever be allowed this privilege.
Professor Liversidge has been kind enough to offer his valuable
help and sympathy: but the work is so great, that it is
impossible to dream of ever giving him so much trouble: in
fact, he never could possibly find the time to do it, engaged, as
I can see he is, in trying to make his work in the University of
practical use to the colony. He has already some very in-
teresting specimens in hand to analyze—specimens of various
salt-bush country grasses and herbs from near Hay, but it is very
doubtful if he can do anything with them, as there is too small
a quantity of each specimen (Appendix A.) Any analyses that


I may succeed in getting made from time to time, 1 shall hope
to make public, and to give remarks on them in the Agri-
cultural Society’s Journal, if I am allowed to make use of
that medium. It reflects little credit on the colony that no
analysis of even a salt-bush plant from the interior has yet been
made; the indirect evidence, however, is too conclusive ever to
doubt that the salt-bushes contain a large quantity of the sodic-
chloride (common salt), for they all belong to the natural Order
of the Chenopodiacea , and it is from salsolaceous plants of this
Order that soda and sodic-salts are made in Spain. I entertain,
however, a sanguine hope that at some future day, even pastoral
science will be taught in the colony, and then these valuable
researches will probably be made; for I can see well enough
how pastoral science has an interest as great, and a sphere
as important as that which agricultural science already possesses.
It remains, of course, to be seen how long it will be before
technical education becomes properly appreciated in the colony.
That it will be established here at some not very distant day, I
have not the slightest doubt; for the spirit of the age has during
the last four years shewn us too plainly, ever to doubt it, what
direction education is to take in the future all the world over. I
am afraid that the charge of excessive slowness, and the
character that this colony has earned for itself of being behind-
hand in every advance that the world makes, has some truth in
it. America has colleges in almost every State, in which not
only Agricultural Chemistry and the principles of scientific
agriculture are taught, but at many of her colleges practical
instruction is also given. In this way, agriculture has made
immense strides there since the war ceased. This instruction is
largely supported by the Government: but out here, a morbid,
overstrained, and generally misdirected policy of economy seems
to be paralyzing all true progress.
It may, no doubt, appear injudicious of me to bring out in a
popular form a paper of a scientific character, which contains so
much of thought that is original. But a strictly scientific paper
would have possessed little value, on account of the want of original
data; whereas the data which are not original, the greater part
of which have been supplied by ‘ How Crops Grow,’ have shewn
me that the speculative hypotheses that I had formed were correct,
and that, therefore, I have been erecting my buildings on a firm
foundation. It would be an empty satisfaction for me to wait
till I could supply myself with original data in order to try to


achieve an intellectual triumph, —the more so as the appliances
and opportunities for making experiments and investigations are
not to be had out here, —and for that purpose, to withold in-
formation and suggestions that I believe may prove useful to
those who will consider them carefully, and endeavour to make
use of them. The whole matter has been conceived in an
earnest spirit, and with a sanguine hope that it may prove in
some degree useful to the colony. The hope is a daring one,
but I confess to it. Clearness and copiousness of explanation and
illustration are all that have been aimed at: to these have been
sacrificed all attempt at anything but very plain writing, compact-
ness of argument, and technicalities, and with them much
power: wherever technicalities have been introduced, ample
explanation has accompanied them.
The subject of fluke, and the action of salt with respect to its
prevention or cure, was the first matter that was attacked in
connexion with this paper; it has been the last to be satisfactorily
cleared up. I am, at length, satisfied with the results that have
been arrived at: but it is only after great perplexity and per-
severance that they have been arrived at at all.
The arrangement that has been attempted in the following
pages, in order to make the paper one connected whole, has
been first to discuss the structure and physiological characteristics
of grasses, and the various causes which modify their character ;
this has led me into a discussion of the causes of country being
good or bad sheep-country, and by what means bad country may
be made good ; this subject has again led me into a discussion
of the properties of salt, and of the reasons of the phenomena
in sheep-farming that the salt-bush country affords. Unfor-
tunately, the data that I am in possession of in regard to the
salt-bush country, have not been obtained by personal observa-
tion, but are only second-hand : and I feel sure that I have very
much that is interesting to learn in connexion with the phenomena
that sheep-farming presents in the interior. An attempt has been
made to discuss the growth of wool, by the aid of simple scientific
principles, and common sense. In the last chapter, I have been
led into a discussion of the Land Laws. It might, perhaps, have
been in better taste to have left that chapter out, but I find it hard
to restrain myself, when I find a policy of land legislation that
paralyzes the finest industry and the best resource of the colony :
and the very men through whom so much harm has been done
to the colony, senselessly belauded and bespattered with praise.


CHAPTER 11.
THE CHEMICAL PHYSIOLOGY OF GRASSES : THEIR ORGANIC
CONSTITUENTS.
This chapter will be devoted to the discussion of the chemical
composition and the physiology of grasses—what parts of them
serve to nourish the animals that consume them, and how they
do it.
It will be well to begin by examining a grass-plant sys-
tematically. If we take it out of the ground, we shall find that
it consists of the stem or part that grows above the ground, and
the root. Our discussion will be confined to the part which grows
above the ground ; and we will simply mention that the root
serves to absorb from the ground water, and with it nourishment
for the stem.
If we now examine the grass-stem while it is still young, we
shall find that it consists of a comparatively solid framework,
which contains a soft, watery, mucilaginous substance; this
framework, as far as its organic part is concerned, is composed
of cellulose, a substance having the same chemical composition
as starch, which it also contains, hut differing from starch in the
way in which the carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen contained in it
are put together. The difference between cellulose and starch
may be described as somewhat analogous to the difference between
two fabrics each containing the same substances in the same
proportions, but which are destined for different uses: the
difference being, that the fabrics are mere mechanical mixtures
of the substances they are made of, whereas the chemical union
of two different substances is far more intimate; still, this
analogy will serve well enough to illustrate what is meant.
Suppose that a workman is set to make a fabric out of silk
and wool in certain proportions : if he is a skilful workman, and
has the requisite appliances at hand, it is probable that he will
be able to make more than one fabric consisting of silk and wool
in these proportions, and fabrics which are fitted for different
uses; in our case, Nature is the workman (although Dame
Nature is a workman, yet she is a lady, and so we will speak of
her as one) —and a splendid workman she is—who makes up


different substances out of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen in
certain proportions, and numbers the sun among the most
important of her appliances : the different substances that she
makes are destined for different uses; of the substances that she
can make out of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, cellulose and
starch are two which contain these ingredients in the same pro-
portion ; the cellulose is made for the purpose of forming the
framework of the plant, and this framework is to hold the other
substances that she makes; but the starch, which is made within
the framework, is a substance that is not immediately useful, but
requires further change before it can perform its function of
nourishing the animal which consumes it.
We can thus understand how and why it is, that two different
substances, having the same composition, can exist at the same
time in grass. The cellulose forms the greater part, at any rate,
of the organic portion of the framework of the grass ; strength
is given to it by the deposition within its substance of the mineral
substance, silicia or flint, and the woody, organic substance,
lignin. This cellulose is comparatively innutritious, and its
immediate function is not to afford nourishment; while starch is
formed for purposes of nutrition, and is contained in the soft,
mucilaginous substance, which is found within the framework.
To revert to our systematic examination of the grass-plant.
If we lay aside the stem in a place where it can dry freely, and
weigh it before, and again after it has become dry, we shall
probably find that it has lost about 73 per cent, of its weight :
this loss of weight arises from the evaporation of water that it
contained. All the water will not have gone, for about 14 per
cent, of what remains will be found to be water.
If the dried stem be now burnt, the remaining water that it
contains will, of course, be dissipated in the form of steam, and
the organic part of the grass will be burnt, and go off in the
form of gases : a small quantity of ash will remain ; and this ash
contains the mineral salts which the plant contained : so that the
grass-stem has shewn itself to have the following chemical
composition :
FIRST ROUGH AND GENERAL ANALYSIS OF A GRASS-STEM
Water
Organic matter (volatilized by burning)
Ash (mineral salts the grass contained)


The organic matter which is volatilized by burning, consists (not
to descend to unnecessary niceties) of starchy or amylaceous
substances, which contain carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, but no
nitrogen ; and of the more elaborate and complex, proteid, or
albuminoid substances, all of which contain nitrogen as well,
and some of them a small proportion of phosphorus or sulphur.
Crude fibre, and a small amount of fatty substance are also con-
tained in the organic portion of the grass-stem. The crude fibre
(cellulose, with lignin deposited within it) is, however, compara-
tively useless for purposes of nutrition ; it may, therefore, be
dismissed at once; also, the quantity of fatty matter contained in
grass is so small, as hardly to deserve notice.
The 20.6 percent, of organic matter which the dried grass-stem
contained, has approximately the following composition :
ORGANIC MATTER : APPROXIMATE AVERAGE COMPOSITION.
Albuminoids
Amyloids
Crude Fibre
Fats, See.
We have mentioned that the albuminoids are made up of carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, with sometimes a little sulphur
or phosphorus; while the constituents of the amyloids consist of
carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen alone. Of these constituents of
the organic portions of grass, the carbon is derived from the
carbonic acid gas (CO 2 ) which is always contained in the air, and
which is decomposed by the leaf and, it is supposed, within the
stomata or pores of the grass leaf and stem, by means of the
green colouring matter (chlorophyll) contained in their substance,
under the action of the sun’s rays. When the carbonic acid of
the air is decomposed, the carbon is retained by the plant, and
is used by it in making up its various organic constituents : while
the oxygen is given off into the air again, and there has its
appointed use, and is again ready to be made up into carbonic
acid gas. Both oxygen and hydrogen are derived from the water
(H 2 O) taken up by the roots : some oxygen is probably taken in
by the leaves as well. •
The nitrogen is, almost all of it, derived from the ammonia
(NH 3 ) which is given to the ground by decaying animal and


vegetable matter, and which is brought down in solution from
the air by the rain as it falls through it: for a small quantity of
ammonia gas is always contained in the air. Some nitrogen is
probably obtained from the salts (nitrates and nitrites) which the
soil may contain. As far as is yet known, none of the free
nitrogen, which the air contains, is made immediate use of by
plants.
The phosphorus and sulphur are derived from the salts
(phosphates and sulphates) which are taken in by the roots
dissolved in water; these phosphates and sulphates are either
derived from the disintegration of rocks which furnish the
mineral part of the soil—for all rocks in general contain a small
quantity of phosphates and sulphates ; —or they are derived from
the decomposition of albuminoid substances, many of which
contain either sulphur or phosphorus.
The humus (produced by the decay of vegetable matter) and
clay, more or less of both of which exists in every soil, are
valuable, because they possess the property of absorbing and
retaining the ammoniacal and other salts which are valuable as
food for the grass. If no means of retaining these substances
were provided, they would be washed out of the soil and carried
away by rains.
The Proteids or Albuminoids. —There will be certain advantages
of arrangement in discussing these substances first.
These compounds are complex and elaborate in their com-
position ; and since almost identically the same substances enter
into the composition of the tissues of the animal body, and form
its most essential parts, they may with reason be regarded as
among the highest efforts of Nature in the creation of vegetable
substances.
These substances, as was mentioned before, all contain the
four elements—carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen ; and
some of them small proportions of sulphur or phosphorus ;
whereas the starchy compounds are less complex, and contain
only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
Since the albuminoids contain all the elements which enter
into the composition of the substance of the essential working
parts of the brain, nerve substances, and muscle-fibres of the body,
they thus form essential food stuffs. These albuminoids, which
are found having almost identically the same chemical com-
positions in the substance of the animal body, are all formed by


the agency of vegetable life ; and after being consumed, are
merely assimilated with very little change in their chemical com-
position; and in a modified form, appropriated by the tissues of
the animal that consumes them. So far as we know, no particle
of albuminoid substance is manufactured within the animal body,
but it is all of vegetable origin. From this fact, it will be seen
how important it is that a sufficiency of these albuminoid sub-
stances should be found in grass ; and as, moreover, albuminoids
are very complex in their composition, and as Nature is the agent
that makes them, and acts principally through the sun, we can
see how vitally important it is that grass should be well exposed
to the action of the sun ; and how wanting in the essentials of
nourishment grass may be which receives only enough of the
sun to manufacture its framework, and little albuminoid sub-
stance or sugar within it. This matter will be further discussed
in the chapter on “ Ring-barking.”
Clovers and leguminous plants generally contain a larger pro-
portion of the albuminoids than grasses do, and for that reason
are valuable in pastures.
The Amyloids or Starchy Substances. —These substances are less
complex in their composition than the albuminoids,’ since they
contain no nitrogen, but only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
The substances which will be discussed under this head are
cellulose, starch, and mucilage—all of which have the same
chemical composition,—and glucose, a form of sugar, which can
be formed from starch.
Of these, cellulose has already been discussed as performing
the function of constituting the framework of the grass : the only
thing that remains to be said about it is, that as the grass grows
old, the cellulose becomes tougher and less nutritious, by having
the indigestible substance, lignin, deposited within it: this fact
points out a reason why oats should be cut for hay while they are
still young : also, why any excess of useless and old grass, that
holds captive valuable vegetable-food salts, should be burnt off,
and the salts freed to supply food for new grass.
Starch has been mentioned as a form of vegetable organized
substance, which requires further change and elaboration before
it can be absorbed by the body and assimilated.
This process of further elaboration can be performed by either
of two agencies : and the change that is required in it is, that
the starch should be formed into glucose, which is the commonest
form of sugar in vegetation.


The two agencies that are able to perform this change, are the
sun’s rays and the digestive fluids of the animal which consumes
the starch : but in order that this change may be effected by the
latter agency, the animal has to do work in digestion ; and work
of this sort is to be avoided; for the working power of the diges-
tive organs is to be economized. It is, therefore, quite correct to
speak of the sun as sweetening the grass ; for when it matures
and mellows it, sugar (glucose) is actually formed within it.
Mucilage is also changed into sugar in the digestive process,
before it is absorbed into the animal system.
After the starch has been changed into glucose, it is absorbed
into the body, and there undergoes further changes which, as yet,
are hardly understood ; and the fatty substances of the body are
eventually formed out of it. It is from the combustion of these
amyloids after they have been absorbed into the system, or of
the fats to which they have been assimilated, that is to say, from
the union with them of the oxygen that is received into the body
through the lungs, that almost all the heat of the body is derived :
hence the amyloids constitute the fuel of the body. And from the
fact that they contain no nitrogen—and that therefore the sub-
stance of the essential tissues of the body could not be formed
out of them, and that they perform the subsidiary function of
acting as fuel to provide warmth and energy for the work-doing
portions of the body—Professor Huxley terms them the
‘accessory’ food stuffs.
The proteids or albuminoids, since they contain all the in-
gredients that the amyloids do, viz.: —carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen in their composition, could, by changes being made in
them —which the body is able to make, when the nitrogen is
rejected, and carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen retained in the
requisite proportions —also be made to act as fuel for the tissues
that are formed out of themselves : and for this reason, the body
could be sustained by the albuminoids alone ; they alone, there-
fore, and without the amyloids, are ‘ essential ’ food stuffs, and
for this reason receive that name from Professor Huxley. But
to change albuminoids into fats, the body has to do much diges-
tive work ; and such work, as was pointed out before, is to be
avoided. It is to avoid this work, that the amyloids are provided
for food as well as the albuminoids.
The albuminoids and amyloids may, perhaps, be more concisely
contrasted by means of the substances which they build up in


the body. The albuminoids are the food-stuffs from which the
lean-flesh is formed; while the fatty portion of the flesh is formed
out of the amyloid food stuffs. The albuminoid food stuffs are
also especially valuable for sheep, as the substance of the wool-
fibre is an albuminoid substance, and must therefore be derived
from albuminoid food stuffs. There are many different sorts of
vegetable albuminoids, but as ‘there is every reason for believing
that the different albuminous compounds are capable of changing
into one another, just as starch and sugar are mutually con-
vertible,’* it is enough for our purpose to speak of the
albuminoids generally that grass contains.
The quantity of fatty matter contained in grass is so small, as
hardly to deserve notice.
Besides these albuminoid or proteid, and amyloid substances,
grass also contains a quantity of mineral salts ; these are left
behind in the ash when the grass is burnt. The function of
these mineral ingredients, without a certain quantity of which
the grass could never come to perfection, is principally to serve
in the digestion and assimilation of the albuminoid and amyloid
food stuffs : for although the albuminoids and amyloids are the
sources from which all the soft substances of the body are
derived, and although the lean-flesh tissues are almost identically
the same in chemical composition with some of the vegetable
albuminoid substances, yet these vegetable albuminoids
could not be assimilated to the form in which they appear
in the fleshy tissues, nor could the amyloids be digested and
undergo in the body the changes, by means of which they become
the heat-giving and fatty substances, without the aid of these
mineral salts. These salts are, therefore, essential as food stuffs ;
and in the presence of the life of the animal that consumes the
vegetable amyloids and albuminoids, and aided by it, they complete
their digestion and assimilation. I will, therefore, in order to be
in harmony with Professor Huxley’s division of the albuminoids
and amyloids into ‘ essential ’ and ‘ accessory’ food-stuffs re-
spectively, venture to call these salts the ‘ complementary’ food
stuffs.f
It very often happens that a particular herb or shrub, or class
of herbs or shrubs, contains an organized vegetable principle
* From Article on Agricultural Chemistry in the Encyclopedia Britannica.
t See Appendix D.


peculiar to itself, and possessing, perhaps, valuable properties.
The salt-bushes, therefore, may possess some valuable unascer-
tained principle, which acts as a vermifuge, and so renders the
sheep of the salt-bush country not liable to be afflicted by
parasitic entozoa : but as any vegetable principle which acts as a
vermifuge is commonly destructive of only one sort of the
entozoa, and as, moreover, the sheep of the salt-bush country
are free from all sorts of intestinal worms, I venture to think that
they owe this immunity to some other cause. This matter will
be discussed in a following chapter, which will be devoted to the
consideration of the inorganic constituents of grasses, &c., and
their effects on the sheep’s health : this will form a very important
part of our subject.


CHAPTER 111.
THE CHEMICAL PHYSIOLOGY OF GRASSES —THEIR INORGANIC
CONSTITUENTS —THE RELATION BETWEEN GRASSES AND
THE SOIL THEY GROW IN.
In the former chapter, we saw that ordinary grass contains about
2.6 per cent, of mineral salts (ash-ingredients) in its composition:
this proportion will, very likely, at first appear inconsiderable;
but when it is remembered that grass in its ordinary state as it
grows, contains about 78 per cent, of water, it will be seen that
the 2.6 per cent, of salts is not so small, and that it represents
about 11 per cent, or nearly one-ninth of the actual substance of
the plant.
Very little attention is usually paid to these inorganic or
mineral constituents, but I have great reason to think that much
of the difference between good and bad country lies in the com-
parative abundance or deficiency of certain of these mineral
salts in the grasses growing on that country, inasmuch as each of
these salts has its value as a ‘ complementary’ food stuff, and
exercises its own influence on the sheep’s health.
The substances which are invariably present in all grasses, and
in nearly all parts of them, are the following, viz.:—
Potash
Chlorine
Sulphuric Aeid
Soda
Bases. { Lime
Acids. { Phosphoric Acid
Magnesia
Silicic Acid
Oxide of Iron
Carbonic Acid
These substances are all invariably found in grasses, and are
generally variously combined as salts; and it will be seen that to
a certain extent the comparative abundance or deficiency of these
various salts in grasses and herbs depends on the composition of
the soil they grow in. To what extent this is the case is un-
fortunately a scientific enquiry which has not yet received the
attention it deserves; we are, therefore, obliged to be satisfied
with mere indications of results, and with indirect evidence.
That these salts are found in grasses in different proportions,
will be seen from the following table: but this table is by no
means satisfactory, for no mention is made of the characters of


the soils in which the various grasses were grown, or whether
they were all grown in one soil; so that it is not known whether
the differences in the proportions of the various salts in the grasses
mentioned arise from the fact that the sorts of grasses are
different, or because the soils differed in their composition. I
suspect that each of these causes had its influence, but to what
extent it cannot be determined
The following table gives the proportions in one hundred
parts of the inorganic constituents of the ashes of different sorts
of grasses ; it is taken from the Article on Agricultural Chemistry
in the Encyclopoedia Britannica.
TABLE
Name of Grass.
a
Ti
o
Ph
o o
'c/2
Ph o
CD
O'C
O
m o
CD
P
S)
C 3
a
O
o
rP
.
©s
rP «
PH<I
O
CQ
o
’S
o .
S‘j3
Bromus erectus
Bromus mollis
Cynosurus cristatus
(Dog’s tail)
Dactylis glomerata
(Cook’s foot)
Festuca duriuscula
(Fescue)
Holcus lanatus
Rye Grass, English
Rye Grass, Italian
*Poa annua
*Poa pratensis
•Poa trivialis
Phleum pratense...
(Timothy)
This table, amongst others, gives us analyses of the English and
Italian rye grasses ; and as these grasses are only varieties of the
same species of grass, it is reasonable to suppose that any
marked differences that there may be in the proportions of the
various salts contained in them will, in all probability, arise from
differences in the composition of the soils in which they grew.
composition of the soils in wdiich they grew
* Meadow Grasses.


Of potash (the potash given ip the above table, probably existed
in the plant, in combination with some acid, as a salt; this salt
was doubtless decomposed by the combustion of the grass), the
Italian rye grass contains 4 per cent, more than the English / this
difference is inconsiderable. Of soda, the Italian contains nearly
1 per cent., while the English contains none, or more probably,
a quantity so small as to be unweighable. Of potassic-chloride,
the English contains nearly 14 per cent., while the Italian contains
none (or a mere trace, probably)—a most amazing difference ;
in fact, the English contains more than any of the other grasses,
with one exception, while the Italian contains the least of all!
This great difference must surely have arisen from differences in
the compositions of the soils the two plants grew in. Of common
salt and lime, the English contains one half as much again as
the Italian. Of magnesia and iron, both grasses contain about
the same, —probably little more than as little of each as they
could do with, because neither of these salts existed in the soil
they grew in in greater quantities than the plants absolutely
needed. Of phosphoric and sulphuric acids, the Italian contains
considerably more than the English. Of carbonic acid, the
English contains about i per cent., while the Italian contains
none, or more probably, a mere trace : and of silica, the English
only contains 27 per cent., and the Italian nearly 42 per cent.—
a difference in the percentage of nearly 15. Many of these
differences are so great, that we can hardly suppose them to arise
from the mere fact that the two grasses differed in sort, for they
are only varieties of the same species; these differences must, at
any rate in a great measure, arise from differences in the com-
positions of the soils the two grasses grew in.
The part of our- enquiry which is unfortunately most of all
enveloped in obscurity, is to what extent a plant will take up any
particular salt which is abundant in the soil that it grows in.
Professor Johnson— in his book, ‘ How Crops Grow,’—gives as
an ascertained fact that
(a) ‘ The soil, or the supplies of food, manures included, have
‘the greatest influence in varying the proportions of the ash-
‘ ingredients of (the salts contained in) the plant. It is to a great
‘extent the character of the soil which determines the vigour of
‘ the plant.’
After giving the results of some investigations on the influence


of different sorts of mineral manures on the composition of the
ash of buck-wheat straw, he remarks, as a deduction from them,
that
(£) ‘lt is seen from these figures that all the applications em-
‘ ployed in this experiment, exerted a manifest influence;
‘ and in general the substance added, or, at least, one of its in-
gredients, is found in the plant in increased quantity’ (p. 163.)
Of course, a soil that only differs from another in being richer
than the other is in any particular ingredient, is only the same as
the soil produced by manuring the latter soil with a suitable
quantity of that ingredient.
Soils vary very much in their composition, and the composition
of any particular soil is so difficult to ascertain accurately (by the
way, I fancy that there are very few of our Practical Assayers,
that have sprung up at Sydney during the last year like mush-
rooms, that could determine the mineral composition of a soil),
or in anything but a very rough and general way, that the inves-
tigation of the relations between the composition of a soil and
the mineral salts contained in the grass growing on it, will be an
investigation of the greatest possible difficulty to follow up.
The difficulty is increased by the fact that the proportions of the
ash-ingredients are different in different parts of the plant; as, for
instance, in the seeds and stem ; and at different stages of the
plant’s growth. It is a research that will hardly be carried through
in our time ; and what has been done already, in the way of
throwing light on the subject, has mostly been done by the
Germans, who will most likely do the greater part of what will
be done. If the pastures of this country had fallen into the
hands of the Germans, there is little doubt that Pastoral Chemistry
would, by this time, have been recognized and cultivated as a
distinct branch of science ; and as for Agricultural Chemistry,
there would be colleges for teaching that in various parts of the
colony. The Americans seem to be the only people who have
had the enlightenment to follow the example of the Germans
heartily; and consequently, instead of the ruinous system of
agriculture which used to be carried on in the United States some
twenty years ago, we are not surprised that eminent English
agriculturists, who have been travelling in the United States,
speak in glowing terms of the ‘ high ’ farming carried on in that
country everywhere—even in California. Mr. Parkes has caused
his name to be identified with education : perhaps he will let us


see that his enlightenment has kept up with the times, and that
he has appreciated the vast strides that both scientific and tech-
nical education have lately been advancing with all over the
civilized world. If he has thought the matter over at all, and
appreciated its importance, he must see how especially valuable
such education must be in a new country, with such resources as
ours has. At some future day, no doubt, but not before Victoria
has first taken the credit of having led the way for us
brilliantly, New South Wales will realize the want of a School of
Mines, and of a college where agricultural, and may-be even,
pastoral science will be taught: as it is, the ignorance of agri-
cultural science—even the want of appreciation of the value of
the most ordinary manures, and that amongst the better educated
out here—is great-but all this is parenthetical; and a long and
useless parenthesis it, doubtless, is.
Hitherto we have been discussing the fact that the proportions
of the different mineral salts in the plant depends on the com-
parative abundance or deficiency of that salt in the soil in which
the plant is grown. It must be recollected that principles of this
sort that apply to other not widely dissimilar forms of vegetation
(such as agricultural plants and fruit-trees), will also apply with
the requisite modifications to grasses. I will now give an instance
drawn from practical life out here, that the abundant presence of
a particular mineral plant-food ingredient in the soil, gives rise
to the comparative abundance of that salt in the plant growing
in that soil.
A gentleman in this colony, who is celebrated as a wine-grower,
tells me that wine made from grapes that have been grown in a
soil which has been formed by the disintegration of either
granite or slate rocks —in both of which, potash is particularly
abundant —throws down, in the process of making it, a greater
quantity of ‘tartar’ (the acid tartrate of potash) than when the
grapes are grown on any other kind of soil.
It remains now to see if the whole percentage of salts (or of
ash-ingredients) that a plant contains, is also dependent on the
nature of the soil ; this is clearly shewn to be the case by the
results that are given in the following table, which is taken from
the Article on Agricltural Chemistry in the Encyclopcedia
Britannica.
(c) ‘ The quantity of ash (salts) contained in a plant, is also
‘ dependent on the nature of the soil on which it grows. Of


Speci-
men.
Seed.
Straw.
Speci-
men.
Seed.
Straw.
i
2.30
8
2.27
6.59
2
3-25
343
9
2.69
349
3
4.27
3.62
10
1.61
3-91
4
3-4°
3-39
11
3- 11
5,28
5
2.99
3-90
12
3-34
7 57
6
3-19
6.80
13
2.78
3-76
7
2.53
3-9°
14
3.01
3-38
In the above table it will be noticed that the percentage of ash
(salts) in the seed of No. 3 specimen is 4.27, while that in the
seed of No. 10 is only 1.61 : or the seed of No. 3 contains
nearly three times the percentage of salts that No. 10 does ; also
the straw of No. 12 contains per cent, of salts, while the
‘ this, an interesting illustration is given in the following table
‘of the quantities found in the grain and straw of the same
‘ variety of pea grown on fourteen different soils.’
TABLE
In the above table it will be noticed that the percentage of ash
(salts) in the seed of No. 3 specimen is 4.27, while that in the
seed of No. 10 is only 1.61 : or the seed of No. 3 contains
nearly three times the percentage of salts that No. 10 does ; also
the straw of No. 12 contains 7.57 per cent, of salts, while the
straw of No. 14 contains only 3.38 per cent. —that is to say, the
straw of No. 12 contains more than twice the percentage of salts
that No. 14’s straw does. This Table shews at any rate that in
both the seed and straw of the same sort of pea, the proportion of
ash-ingredients is variable within somewhat wide limits ; and, as
all the specimens were of the same variety of pea, and as the soils
alone were different in this investigation, these variations must
have been caused, at any rate, to a very great extent, by the
soils alone.
Professor Johnson also says (How Crops Grow r , p. 162,
American Edition) that ‘ It is well known that oats have a great
‘ range of weight per bushel, being nearly twice as heavy when
‘ grown on rich land, as when gathered from a sandy, inferior
‘ soil.’
Of course, this increase of weight does not consist entirely
of salts; but that they have a great deal to do with it, will be
shewn in Appendix B.


This matter, which is treated most unsatisfactorily, and in the
most general way here, will be entered into somewhat more
minutely and systematically in Appendix B.
After detailing a number of experiments, Professor Johnson is
led to conclude that the following mineral plant-foods are essential
to the life of agricultural plants (grasses are, of course, included),
viz.:—potash, lime, iron, phosphoric acid and sulphuric acid,
and probably soda in minute and unweighable quantity.
Some experiments made by Sachs, and some other German
naturalists, tended to shew that maize plants—in the ash of which
silica is normally found in large proportion—were fully developed
in media, from which silica was absent. Silica is, probably, not
essential for the full development of the plant and for its life, and
the well-cared-for plants of the German philosopher matured
well enough without it; but out in the open air, in fields, in the
rough-and-ready circumstances in which such plants are naturally
grown, the silica is doubtless so universally contained in the soil,
and from it is taken up by the plant, for the wise purpose of
strengthening the stem, and enabling itlo support the seed, and
to exist in the circumstances, in which it is ordinarily placed.
Prince Salm-Horstmar, however, in his researches, came to the
conclusion that silica in small quantity is necessary. I shall,
therefore, reckon silica among the essential mineral plant-foods
of grass; although it is not known to be of any use to the animal
that eats the grass.
The enquiry concerning the salts that are essential to plants—
what salts they are, and in what quantity they are essential—has
as yet had very little light thrown upon it. For the present, it
will be on the safe side to consider that all the salts, that are in-
variably found in plants, are essential to them ; as far as the
enquiries have been pursued, we are led to think that only a small
quantity of each salt, compared with what the plant usually
contains, is necessary for its growth.
After discussing the results of a number of experiments, the
conclusion that Professor Johnson arrives at, is expressed in the
following words : — (d) ‘ The proportion of ash-ingredients
* (salts.) in the plant is variable within a narrow range, but cannot
‘ fall below or exceed certain limits.’
From his data, many of which are contained in this chapter,
Professor Johnson arrives at no general comprehensive principle


with respect to the salts contained in a plant, and the soil it
grows in ; a few subsidiary principles, however, he regards as
established, such as those marked (a), {b), {d) in this chapter :
while (c) is established in the Encyclopoedia Britannica ; the
principle marked {d) in this chapter, which Professor Johnson
enunciates, is the one which I object to as it is worded, and that
mainly because he and I look at the same data from quite dif-
ferent points of view. For the word ‘narrow’ in that principle,
I would wish to substitute the word ‘ considerable.’ Professor
Johnson takes the average amount of the various salts that are
usually found in any sort of plant, as his point of reference in
considering that plant; this appears to me not to be sufficiently
absolute for a point of reference : and the least amount of salts
that a plant can come to perfection with, appears to me to be a
more absolute point of reference, though it is very probable that
it is one that is never found in Nature, —and it would require a
number of careful experiments to ascertain what is the least quan-
tity of each salt that a plant can come to perfection with. By
means of experiments on two or three different sorts of grasses,
however, laws might probably be arrived at, which would apply
to all grasses.
A general principle which will include and reconcile the various
apparently disconnected and contradictory results obtained from
the experiments detailed in ‘ How Crops Grow,’ would appear
to me to be the following :
(A.) A certain comparatively small quantity of all the salts
that are invariably found in grasses, is necessary for their perfect
growth and development. (This small quantity of the different
salts that is essential to the life of a plant, will be called the
‘ necessary’*' quantity of that salt.) Besides this small necessary
quantity, there is usually found in the plant a variable additional
quantity of such salts as happen to be present in the soil in
in greater quantity than the plant actually needs, and are available
for its use; and this variable quantity is often considerable, and
depends in its constitution on the nature of the superabundant
plant-food salts that the soil contains. (These salts which are
present in a plant, and are over and above what the plant
actually needs, will be called the ‘ accidental ’f salts.)
* The word ‘ necessary’ is used, because ‘ essential ’ is applied to the albuminoid food
stuffs.
+ This is a term used by Professor Johnson.


This- principle is given by me speculatively ; the data which
point to it will be given and discussed in Appendix B. A direct
proof of it could, of course, only be effected by means of special
experiments.
Inasmuch as from the analyses of the ashes of different kinds
of grass given in Table 1., it will be seen that the ash-ingredients
of (salts contained in) different grasses differ greatly in the
proportions of their various constituents, it is reasonable to
suppose that different sorts of grasses require for their perfect
growth different proportions* of the various salts, lime, potash,
magnesia, &c., a certain amount of all of which all grasses need :
it is therefore reasonable to suppose that the grasses which have
become indigenous to certain soils, have become so by the
exercise of that law of ‘ selection ’ which prevails so universally
throughout Nature. We, therefore, have a reason additional to
the one that I have enunciated above—and which is marked (A)
—for thinking that if any particular one of the mineral salts
which form necessary food for grasses, abounds in a certain soil,
the natural grass which grows on that soil will contain a corres-
pondingly large proportion of that ingredient. This law of
‘ selection,’ as applied to natural grasses, may be expressed as
follows :
(B.) If any of the mineral salts which form a part of the
necessary food of grasses, is especially abundant in any soil, a
particular sort of grass which needs a large proportion of that
ingredient in its food, and which, therefore, has a partiality for
that kind of food, will have become indigenous to that soil.*
We will take an example to shew the application of the
reasoning which has just been pursued. Suppose that we have
a soil lying in the ordinary granite rock, and formed, as far as its
mineral part is concerned, by the disintegration of the granite.
That soil will be characterized by the large proportion of potash
that it contains amongst its other mineral plant-food ingredients.
In virtue of the principle (B), the grass which is indigenous to
that soil will be one which requires a great proportion of potassic-
salts in its food ; and by principle (A), that indigenous grass may
contain an additional quantity of potassic salts. The natural
* The above law is only a particular application of a law which has long been recognized
by naturalists as prevailing throughout Nature. The law, as enunciated many years ago, by
kiiOHENMEisTER is—‘ The choice of the locality depends upon the peculiar properties of the
soil sought for or avoided by the various species of plants.’ A further application of this
law will be noticed in Appendix 0.


grasses, therefore, which grow on a soil produced by the de-
composition of the ordinary granite, may be expected to contain
a very large proportion of potassic salts.
It will be well to mention here that certain salts can replace in
plants other salts, to which they are nearly related in chemical
and other properties, under certain circumstances, in the absence
of the latter from the soil, and in the presence of the former in it.
It has been satisfactorily ascertained that under these circum-
stances, soda can replace potash (How Crops Grow, p. 176);
but it has also been ascertained that soda cannot replace potash
altogether in plants, and that a certain quantity of potash, that
appears to be absolutely essential, always appears in plants.
From this circumstance, we must suppose that the ‘ necessary’
quantity of potash cannot be replaced by soda, but that any
potash that is ‘ accidental ’ can.
I conceive, therefore, that in the salt-bush country, in the soil
of which sodic salts are abundant, and potassic salts—in very
many places, probably—only in small quantity, the sodic salts
are often largely present in the grass, which, probably, contains
comparatively little more than its ‘necessary’ quantity of potassic
salts. If such is the case, many of the phenomena which are met
with in sheep-farming in the salt-bush country, may be explained
by means of it. In such country, potassic salts w r ou!d often
appear to exist in the herbage in too small quantity to supply
the wool with yolk enough.
The further application of the reasoning of this chapter, will
be reserved for the next, which will discuss the leading charac-
teristics as regards their principal mineral constituents, of the
natural grasses which are found on different kinds of country.


CHAPTER IV.
RELATION OF NATURAL GRASSES TO THE ROCK-FORMATION
OF THE COUNTRY THEY GROW ON, AS REGARDS THEIR
MINERAL CONSTITUENTS : APPLICATION TO THE PASTURES
OF THIS COLONY.
In the former chapter, it was mentioned that this would be a
most difficult subject to treat in anything but a most general way.
Luckily, however, our table-land pastures, lying, as they mostly
do, on the older formations, hardly present such difficulties as
would have to be encountered, if we had to discuss the newer
formations ; for we can divide the table-land country, generally,
into the portions that lie on the trap, limestone, granite, and
slate rocks ; and each of these rocks has, in general, some
leading characteristics in its composition, in the way of mineral
plant-food, which separates it pretty widely from the others.
dhe greatest difficulty, perhaps, will be met with in the case
of the granites, as they are so various in their composition ; but
this difficulty will be spoken of when we speak of the granite
country.
It is here assumed that the soil lying on any particular kind of
rock is in general, as regards its mineral part, formed by the
disintegration of the rock it lies on.
In the last chapter, it was shewn that the natural grasses that
are found in any paiticular kind of soil, may be expected to
contain among their salt-ingredients, in large proportion, any
plant-food salt that is also contained in large proportion in that
soil.
It must be clearly understood that as regards their chemical
composition, the traps and granites are not altogether distinct
groups, always separated by wide and definite characteristics, but
that they gradually pass into one another; although the
commonest granite, which will be taken as the type of its group,
differs widely from the ordinary trap, which will be taken as
the type of its group. f l he limestone group is, however,
quite distinct from the other groups, from the fact that the lime-
stone rocks alone contain a large proportion of the calcic-
carbonate (carbonate of lime).


The Traps. —The traps may be distinguished as in general
containing very largely in their composition, the two minerals—
hornblende and felspar. Taking the commonest varieties of
each, their composition is somewhat as follows :
TABLE I.
Hornblende
Felspar.
Basaltic,
Alumina
Peroxide oi Iron..
Protoxide of Iron
Lime
Traces.
Magnesia
Potash. ..
From this Table it will be seen that, as a trap-rock is made up in
general of minerals, amongst which both hornblende and felspar
are found largely, a soil that is yielded by the disintegration of
trap-rocks, will contain in abundance all the mineral ingredients
that are necessary for grass food ; for phosphates, sulphates, and
chlorides occur in these rocks in appreciable and sufficient
quantity —as, indeed, they do in general in all rocks. It will also
be noticed that iron is an ingredient which is well represented in
trap through the hornblende.
The potash that is derived from the felspar is not allowed to
exist in trap-soils in undue proportion, for the hornblende
supplies lime and magnesia in abundance ; and these are also
important mineral plant-food salts. We may, therefore, expect
the natural grasses that are found in trap country to contain
plenty of the salts of lime, potash, and magnesia, and none of
them in undue proportion. Iron salts will also be liberally
represented in the grass. The trap country grasses may, there-
fore, be expected to contain in the ‘ accidental ’ portion of their
salts, potash, lime, magnesia, and iron ; in fact, as most of the
grass-food mineral ingredients are abundantly contained in fair
proportions in the rich soils yielded by trap-rocks, we may


TABLE II.
Potash-mica.
Magnesia-mica.
Silica
46.36
42.65
Alumina
36.80
12.96
Peroxide of Iron
4-53
Protoxide of Iron
7.11
Oxide of Manganese
0.02
1.06
Magnesis
25-75
Potash
9.22
6.03
Lime
reasonably expect the ‘accidental’ portion of the salts taken up by
the indigenous grasses growing in these soils to be large, and
that no particular ingredient will preponderate.
The Granites. —The common or typical granite is made up of
quartz, felspar, and mica: while some granites, as for instance,
the syenitic, contain hornblende as well. The Rev. W. B.
Clarke mentions that the syenitic granite is found on the
Monaro Plains. Syenite is the name of the rock when the
mica of the ordinary granite is replaced by hornblende.
But to recur to the ordinary granite. The soil that is yielded
by the disintegration of this rock, takes its character in the main
from the felspar that it contains, which is disintegrated with
great facility.
The quartz is only silica ; and that is one of the plant-food
ingredients which seems to be only important for mechanical
purposes, as was pointed out in the former chapter. Mica is
difficult of disintegration ; and for that reason will have little to
do with the character of the soil that the ordinary granite rock
yields. The composition of the common sorts of mica (potash-
mica and magnesia-mica) is given in the annexed table.
If, then, we take into account the disintegration of mica in the
soil yielded by the common granite, we shall still find that the
only constituent of plant-food (with the exception of magnesia,
which the magnesia-mica yields) that is at all abundant in the
product of the disintegration of mica, is potash.
We may, therefore, say that the indigenous grasses that are


found on the ordinary granite soils will be characterized by the
preponderance of potash salts (potassic salts) amongst their
mineral ingredients, and by the comparative absence of the other
salts; in fact, the ‘accidental’ portion of the salts that the natural
grasses contain, which grow on soil yielded by the ordinary
granite rocks, may be expected to contain a preponderance of
potassic salts.
The soils that the syenite and syenitic granites yield, will be in
the main of the same character as the trap-yielded soils ; ac-
cordingly, the indigenous grasses that are found on them, will
contain much the same proportions of salts as those on trap-
country.
Limestones. —All limestones contain a large percentage of
calcic-carbonate, mixed with various impurities. All that can
be said df the soils which they yield is, that they are light, porous,
and well drained, and that they contain in their composition a
preponderance of lime-salts ; as a natural consequence of this,
we might expect the ‘ accidental ’ portion of the salts that the
natural grasses, which grow on limestone country contain, will
consist to a great extent of lime salts, with probably a fair
proportion of other plant-food salts, which are derived from the
impurities that are contained in the limestone-rock.
The soils yielded by magnesian limestone are, in general, poor
and inferior; for magnesia salts, when they are present in a soil
in excessive quantity, are found to be prejudicial to vegetation.
Slate Country. —The slates vary much in their composition :
but we shall probably be better able to understand their com-
position, if we consider their origin. The substance of these
rocks is yielded by the decomposition of the felspar of granite :
the part of the felspar which we mainly see in slate, is the
alumina with silica: and the differences in the composition of
slate-rocks arise from the variable quantity of potash that exists in
their substance, and remained undissolved out of the felspar,
before it was deposited by water as a sediment. The substance
of the slate is of course thrown down by water in the form of a
sediment, and is aftewards hardened and otherwise changed by
pressure, heat, and other metamorphic agents. Practically, how-
ever, it is found that of the plant-food ingredients, potash is the
one that usually predominates in slates; and from this circum-
stance, the indigenous grasses that grow on slate-country may be
expected to contain in their ‘ accidental ’ salts (it is probable


that the quantity of ‘ accidental ’ salts in slate-country grasses is
often small) a preponderance of potassic salts. If, however,
the slate contains lime, as some slates do, lime-salts may be
expected to appear as well as potassic salts in the ‘ accidental ’
portion of the salts ; and in that case, potassic salts may not pre-
ponderate.
Before closing this chapter, a few words may be said about the
physical characteristics of the countries that lie on the trap,
granite, limestone, and slate rocks.
The trap and limestone rocks often contain cracks or fissures :
this circumstance generally causes the country that lies on these
rocks to be well drained naturally: the limestone, also, is itself
porous: and for this reason alone, the limestone country is
generally dry, and the soil light and free. Water, also, under
certain circumstances, is able to dissolve out the calcic-carbonate
from the soil; and this, while it makes it free and open, causes
it at the same time to be poor and thin : the grass, however, on
such soils, is invariably sweet.
The sandstone rocks are composed of particles of silica,
joined together by means of a cement. This cement may be
rich in the mineral plant-food stuffs, or very poor : it is fre-
quently found to be poor. The only ingredient, then, that can
be depended upon to exist largely in sandstone-yielded soils, is
silica : and silica may be expected to enter into the grasses that
grow on these soils the more largely, because the fine state of
subdivision that it is found in in these soils, causes a large
quantity of it to be dissolved by water, and thus to be taken up by
the roots of the grass. The natural grasses, therefore, of sandstone
country can be depended upon to contain in their ‘ accidental ’
salts, none of the mineral ingredients in particular abundance,
with the exception of silica ; and the presence in them of silica,
may probably account for the harsh appearance that the grasses
of this country often present.
It has been already mentioned, that in many parts of the salt-
bush country, where sodic salts are abundant in the soil, and
where, probably, neither potassic salts nor any of the other plant-
food salts are particularly abundant, a great portion of the
‘ accidental ’ salts of the grasses may be expected to consist of
sodic salts. Near-the edge of the salt-bush plains, however, and
wherever in fact the rains have caused potassic salts in solution to be


carried down from the table-land and deposited, the grasses and
vegetation may be expected to contain more potash, and probably
take up potassic as well as sodic salts in their ‘ accidental ’ salts.
From the fact that the soil of these places contains both potassic
and sodic salts, we may expect a greater variety in the vegetation
than elsewhere ; for both the potash-loving and the soda-loving
plants will be able to flourish equally well. This might also be
expected to be the case, wherever on the salt-bush plains volcanic
disturbance has caused potash-bearing rocks to be exposed at
the surface. It is not unlikely that the above exceptions may
include a large portion of the salt-bush country, and that it is
only in few parts of it that the vegetation is more than slightly
deficient in potassic-salts.


CHAPTER V
THE HEALTH OF THE SHEEP, AS INFLUENCED BY THE
CHARACTER OF HIS RUN.
In our examination of the grass-stem, we found that its substance
after it had been dried, consisted of two different parts ; of the
organic portion, or that which is formed by the agency of plant-
life; and of the inorganic, or the mineral salts which it contained.
We also discussed the organic part; and in conformity with
Professor Huxley’s division of it, we discussed separately the
portions which form the albuminoids or ‘ essential,’ and the
amyloids or ‘accessory’ food stuffs: we saw that the albuminoids
contain all that is necessary for the nutrition of the animal
that lives on the grass, but that they are advantageously assisted
by the amyloids, which form useful, but not positively necessary
food-stuff's: we also pointed out that changes take place, and
especially in the amyloids, during the process of digestion and
assimilation.
We are now come to the discussion of those substances which
are valuable mainly for the assistance they afford in the digestion
and assimilation of ‘ essential ’ and ‘ accessory’ food-stuffs:
these are the salts that the grasses contain ; and we have called
them the ‘ complementary’ food-stuff's.*
In the third chapter, it was pointed out that the salts which
are essential to the perfect growth of grasses, and form comple-
mentary food-stuffs, are salts of potash, lime, magnesia, iron, and
probably soda, mostly in the form of phosphates, sulphates, and
chlorides : it was also pointed out that, under certain circum-
stances, sodic salts can, to a certain extent, replace potassic
salts in vegetation. From what we already know of the scheme
of Nature, we may safely assume that, although the above salts
are all necessary to the life of the grass-plant, yet that they are
necessary to it, at any rate in part, because of their use as com-
plementary food-stuffs to the health of the animal that the grass
provides food for. It behoves us, therefore, to enquire as well
as we can, what the uses of these various salts to the animal
* See Appendix D.


economy are ; but this can only be done in a most general way:
and unfortunately the action of many of the salts in the animal
economy has not been ascertained by direct experiment; so that,
to a certain extent, we are obliged to have recourse to conjecture
alone.
The potassic salts seem to be absolutely necessary to the
perfect development of plant-life In the animal economy,
potassic salts in small quantity are necessary to the blood, to the
various fluids of the body, and especially to the juices of the
muscles : if, however, the small proportion,’ that is needed, is
exceeded, potassic salts in general, and potash itself in particular,
seem to exercise an influence that is prejudicial to the health.
Their effect in that case seems to be to reduce the animal vigour,
and to make the tissues soft and relaxed, and wanting in tone :
they also appear to make the body liable to morbid changes;
and in these respects, to have an effect the opposite to
that which common salt possesses. Potassic salts, are, however,
especially necessary in their food for sheep ; for the yolk of the
wool consists mainly of a natural animal potash or soft soap,
mixed with a small proportion of various salts, mostly potassic
salts. The potash that the yolk contains can only be obtained
through the food.
Salts of lime are also present in the digestive fluids of the
animal body. The lime of the bones must all of it be derived
from the food ; and without the presence of lime in the food,
the young animal could not form bone. Salts of lime are also
supposed to be greatly concerned in the final process of assimi-
lation —in the formation of cells of animal substance; when the
vegetable albuminoids assume their modified form in the cells of
the tissues and substances of the animal frame. This is, probably,
a reason why leguminous plants contain lime-salts so abundantly;
they are probably required, and supplied by Nature for the
purpose of completing the assimilation of the albuminoid
substances, which are especially abundant in leguminous plants.
Salts of magnesia are required in the digestive processes, and
perhaps exercise the function of antacids, to correct any acidity
that may arise in the chemical changes which the food undergoes
in the digestion. Magnesia salts, also, are contained in the
bones, the blood, and, in small quantity, in almost all the sub-
stances of the body: they are, therefore, valuable salts.


The haematin, which is the red colouring matter of the blood,
contains iron ; it is supposed to be from this hasmatin that the
blood derives much of its power of absorbing the oxygen of the
inspired air, and giving it up to the fats and other substances,
the combustion of which it causes within the body.
Like salts of potash, salts of soda are necessary to the fluids
of the body generally, and more especially to the blood and
digestive fluids. It is the sodic-chloride or common salt that
supplies the gastric juice with hydrochloric acid: this alone
would point out the importance of common salt to the digestion.
Unlike potassic salts, however, a plentiful supply of sodic salts
would appear to exercise a beneficial effect on the bodv, in giving
increased firmness, and vigour, and tone to the tissues, and in
preventing in them the occurrence of morbid changes : in these
respects, sodic salts would counteract the ill effects of any excess
of potassic salts. The abundant presence of common salt in
the juices of the body also appears to be prejudicial to the
existence of worms in it, by producing a state of health that is
too vigorous to be favourable for their existence ; and if salt
comes into immediate contact with worms in the intestinal
canal, it destroys many kinds of them.
Phosphoric acid, which is contained in the phosphates, ap-
parently fulfils some very important functions in the various
fluids and secretions of the body, as it is found in almost all of
them. It enters largely into the composition of the bones, in
the form of phosphate of lime; and is found in some of the
most important of the albuminoid substances of the body, and
in the brain and nerve substances.
Sulphur is contained in many of the albuminoids ; but as the
vegetable albuminoids contain a less proportion of sulphur than
tLey do in the form in which they appear in animal substance,
the sulphates which are present in the grass as complementary
food-stutfs, would seem to be provided for the purpose of
supplying the sulphur which is wanted for the assimilation of the
vegetable albuminoids into their animal form. The horny matter
that forms the substance of wool-fibre is of an albuminoid
character, and contains a much larger proportion of sulphur than
the flesh and blood albuminoids, so that a larger supply of it is
needed to enable the vegetable albuminoids to be assimilated
to the substance of wool.
Hydrochloric acid, mainly derived from the common salt, is


a most important constituent of the gastric juice, and is there
principally for the purpose of dissolving and preparing for ab-
sorption, the albuminoid food-stuffs: this acid is contained in
chlorides which the plant contains.
Before beginning the discussion of the salts that are especially
abundant in the grasses which are found on any particular kind
of country, and the influence that they exercise on the sheep’s
health, it will be well to point out again clearly that the function
of these salts is only to act as ‘ complementary’ food-stuff's ; that
they are necessary for the purpose of assisting in the digestion
and assimilation of the various albuminoid and amyloid food-
stuffs ; but that by themselves they are useless for purposes of
nutrition. The consequence of this is, that whatever the
mineral constitution of the soil may be, the abundant presence
of these salts in the grass growing in it, is comparatively value-
less, if the sun cannot reach the grass freely, and elaborate in it
the organic food-stuffs which constitute the real elements of
nutrition.
In the case of the grass of the trap-country, we saw that it is
likely to contain all the most essential grass-food salts in fair
proportion, and none of them in excess. We may also expect in
it an ample share of potassic salts, but that it will not contain any
excess of these salts. The trap-country, therefore, except where
it is swampy, which is seldom the case, ought to afford good,
sound, healthy pasturage to sheep ; and with the exception of
sodic-salts, all the other complementary food stuffs ought to be
contained in the grass in abundance : it would be well, therefore,
to supply the sheep occasionally with a sodic salt in the shape of
common salt.
On country that lies on the ordinary granite rock, the grass
may be expected to contain potassic salts in more than a fair pro-
portion ; and as these salts exercise a reducing effect on the frame,
when more of them than is necessary for the health is supplied,
it will be advantageous to counteract the ill effects of this excess.
Fortunately, we have an agent which will have this beneficial
effect, and which ought, therefore, to be abundantly supplied to
the sheep on these pastures: this agent is common salt: but as the
ordinary granite rocks are often deficient in iron, —and as iron,
although it is only needed in small quantity, is of such import-
ance to the vigour of the blood, —it will be well to mix a small
proportion of an iron salt with the salt that is given to sheep


on granite country. The felspar, which mainly supplies the
grass-food salts of the ordinary granite country, contains but little
lime, and lime is a very valuable complementary food-stuff.
Under these circumstances, the salt that will be recommended
in a future chapter, as a good form of a ‘ sheep-salt,’ought to be
very valuable on granite country.
The grasses of the slate country may be expected to be in
every way similar to the ordinary granite country grasses :
accordingly, what has been said about the use of salt on granite
country, will apply with equal force to the slate country ; if, how-
ever, the slate contains much lime or iron, or both, the grass may
be expected to be more wholesome; but still salt will be needed.
In the grasses of limestone country, no excess of potassic salts
may be expected to exist: while the more wholesome lime salts
will, in all likelihood, be found abundantly. From the warm, dry,
and open character of the soils of the limestone country, the
grass is generally sweet, and the country sound. The limestone
country may, therefore, be classed with the healthy sheep
countries. It is probable that the sheep on this country will
need very little salt; but still they will be better for some.
The poorer sandstone countries may be expected to be the
opposite of the best trap countries, as regards the mineral con-
stituents of their natural grasses ; except, that like the traps, the
sandstones are likely to be deficient in sodic salts : the grass,
therefore, of sandstone country, may be expected to be sadly
wanting in all the complementary food stuffs (for silica, which
these grasses are likely to contain in abundance, is not known to
be of any value as a food stuff), and will hardly be likely to
afford good pasturage. Salt will decidedly be needed ; but a
salt which contains other complementary food stuffs, in addition
to common salt, will be the best to .supply, a salt which will
fulfil these conditions to a certain extent, will be the one that is
recommended in the chapter on ‘ Sheep-saltthe Bombay salt,
with about 3 per cent, of iron-sulphate in it, would be likely to
form a better sheep-salt than the Liverpool salt on this kind of
country.


CHAPTER VI.
RING-BARKING,
The second and third chapters of this paper ought to have
prepared the way for a discussion of the advantages which arise
from ring-barking. In the third chapter, it was shewn that
grasses derive a great part of their nourishment, and more
especially all the salts which they contain, from the soil in which
they grow. In the same chapter, it was also pointed out that
the quantity of the different salt-ingredients of grass will, to a
certain extent, depend upon the salts which the soil in which it
grows, contains ; and that a sufficient supply to the grass of certain
salts is necessary for its vigour and perfect development.
The obvious advantages of ring-barking may be arranged
under three heads; and these will be discussed separately.
These advantages are :
I. That the ring-barked tree ceases to make any further
demands on the soil for its sustenance.
ii. That after a year or two, it begins to restore to the ground
the salt-ingredients which it had abstracted from the soil during
past years.
in. '1 hat after the foliage has fallen to the ground, the sun’s
rays are enabled to reach the grass, and so to mature and
sweeten it.
i. When the tree is ring-barked, it ceases to make any further
demands on the soil for its sustenance.
Under this head, it will be well to confine our attention to the
salt-ingredients that the tree abstracts from the soil.
To shew what the salts are, that trees abstract from the soil,
it will be enough for our purpose to give the average of a great
number of trustwoithy analyses of the leaves, bark, and wood of
different trees, made by Professor Emil Wolff, of the Royal
Academy of Agriculture at Hohenheim, Wirtemberg. The
results from which these averages have been taken, are given in
the Appendix of Professor Johnson’s ‘How Crops Grow.’ Of
course, the analyses made were of various European trees ; and
although the analyses of trees of this country might perhaps
give somewhat different results, yet I expect that it would


not be in the ingredients themselves, but rather in their propor-
tions ; so that the results, which are given here, will indicate well
enough the nature of the salts which trees abstract from the soil,
and approximately the proportions of the different salts.
TABLE 1.
AVERAGES DERIVED FROM ANALYSES OF THE
PARTS OF TREES,
MADE BY PROFESSOR WOLFF
o i i-i
a’i’ °
£3 2SP
20 5-57
12 3-74
41 1.27
rd
I
(S
d
b 0
ci
%
o
&
ft .
S.'S
O
o
*C
in A
.9
o
3
o
Leaves
Bark .
19-9
9-9
16.2
6.g
4.8
8.8
34-6
60.5
s°-5
U. 3
4-4
8.6
3-i
i.o
2.7
Wood j 41
TABLE
AVERAGES FROM ANALYSES OF
GRASSES,
MADE BY
PROFESSOR
WOLFF
o •
O
S "cS
s q
Young Grass
I
4
3
39
Rye Grass, in flower
Timothy
Other Sweet Grasses
O «+H
o
O
® tc
r—l cj
9-32
7 ii
7.0
9- 2 7
rg
s
o
-OS
O
a
oS
a
.2
O 1
3
CJ j
56.2
249
28.8
33-0
2.8
2.1
3-7
2 6
io 7
7 5
94
55
lo.s
7.8
10.8
7.8
The salts given in Table I. are the ones, which the tree that
has been killed, ceases to abstract from the soil : on comparing
this Table with the analyses of grasses given in Table 11., it will
be seen how important to the grass these salts are : and what is
more, that those which are among the most valuable of the
complementary food-stuffs, are taken by the tree in large pro-
portion.
11. After a year or two, the ring-barked tree begins to restore
to the soil the salt ingredients which it had abstracted from it
during past years.


The first thing that happens after a tree has been killed, is,
that the leaves and twigs begin to fall. This usually happens
about a year after the tree is ‘ rung ’: the bark falls two or three
years afterwards.
If we refer to Table I given above, it Mull be seen that, taking
the quantity of salts, that are obtained by burning a certain
weight of the dried M'ood as unity, an equal weight of dried bark
will yield three times as much ash, and an equal M r eight of dried
leaves four-and-a-half times as much : so that a great portion of
the salts that the tree contained is speedily restored to the
ground M r ith the leaves and bark.
On comparing the analyses given in Table I with those of
grasses given in Table 11, it will be seen that the proportions of
magnesia, lime, and phosphoric acid in the leaves of trees —and
more especially of lime —are large as compared with the propor-
tions of these ingredients in grasses ; and these, moreover, are
complementary food-stuffs M'hich are particularly valuable
to the animal economy : M’hile the leaves contain a far less pro-
portion of the less healthy ingredient, potash, than grasses in
general do.
In the bark, as compared with the leaves, the proportion of
lime is still further increased, and of potash, still further
diminished ; while the proportion of phosphoric acid is dimin-
ished to below what grasses contain : the proportion of magnesia
is also diminished; and, appears in much the same proportion as
in grasses.
The immediate effect, then, of ring-barking the trees on a
piece of country is, that they cease at once to make further
demands on the soil: after a short time, the leaves and bark fall
to the ground, and restore to it a large quantity of lime, magnesia
and phosphoric acid, with the other grass-foods.
In so great quantity is lime restored to the ground around the
tree, that I have frequently seen an effect produced by it after the
leaves and bark had fallen, that reminded me very much of the
effect of manuring Math lime the sour grass of reclaimed moor-
land in the north of England, when all the sour and inferior vege-
table growth is destroyed, and the grass rendered sweet and
kind-looking, and so relished by stock as to kept continually
eaten doMm to the ground; and not only is the grass sweetened,
but the supply of lime-manure to the soil, as I have repeatedly
seen on ring-barked country, often causes the spread and


vigorous growth of clovers and other leguminous plants, which
are all lime-lovers, in places where they almost refused to exist,
so long as the trees continued to grow.
Trees appear to be such consumers of lime that, doubtless, if
the soil only contains a small proportion of this substance (and
all soils do contain some lime,) their roots will be sure to seek
it out and monopolize it; but, when a tree is ‘ rung,’ a very
great part of the lime which it had been storing up, during,
probably, a great number of years, is speedily given back to the
ground with the leaves and bark.
With the leaves and bark, also, a large quantity of organic
matter is restored to the soil; this organic matter, by its decay,
forms humus, which has already been noticed as being valuable.
Albuminoids are also present in the organic portion of the leaves ;
and these by their decay give rise to ammoniacal and other salts,
which are most valuable as manures for grass, by supplying it
with materials out of which albuminoid substances can be formed
within it.
hi. After the foliage of the ‘ barked ’ tree has fallen, the sun’s
rays are allowed to reach the grass, and to mature and sweeten it.
This is, perhaps, the greatest advantage of all that is attached
to ring-barking : for, in the second chapter it was mentioned
that the sun’s rays are necessary for elaborating and producing
within the grass those proximate organic substances, which in
reality render it nutritious for stock ; and these organic substances
were there shewn to be the albuminoids or ‘ essential ’ food stuffs,
and the glucose of the ‘ accessory’ food stuffs.
It is indeed possible for grass to grow with very little of the
sun’s light; that is to say, it is possible for the framework of the
grass, with probably a small quantity of starch and albuminoid
substance within it, to be produced in places which receive little
of the sun’s light; but such grass is worth next to nothing; for
it is little more than mere framework—cellulose, and silica, and
starch, —and may just serve to keep stock alive, but no amount
of it could fatten; whereas the same grass would fatten freely if
the sun could only reach it.
The consequence, therefore, of ring-barking thickly-timbered
country is, that, from the fact that the trees not only cease to
abstract nourishment from the soil, but also very soon restore to
it much of what they have taken during former years, such an
additional quantity of grass-food is provided, as is far greater


than the trees would have required for their nourishment, if they
had been allowed to live ; so that, if we ring-bark our heavily
timbered country, we are likely to have a large additional
quantity of grass, —not merely two blades where one grew before ;
but, in very many cases, and especially where the soil is rich and
deep, four, and even more. And now that the sun is no longer
intercepted by foliage, but is allowed to reach the ground, each
of these four blades will be worth four times as much as the one
blade was, that did not receive enongh of the sun’s light.
A piece of country, that has been ‘ rung,’ may be expected to be
in some respects, and for a number of years, better than it would
be, if it had always been plain. For, after the trees have restored
to the ground the food, that they have been taking away
during past years, the grass makes up by vigorous growth, and
by the abundance of the food that is provided for it, for the
deprivation it has suffered during that time : a large portion,
also, of the salts, that the dead tree restores to the surface of the
ground, was taken up by its roots from far greater depths
than the roots of grass could ever reach ; so that in country that
has been ring-barked there is on the surface of the ground a
larger quantity of grass-food salts, than there would be if it had
always been plain.
A little judgment will even be required in the matter of ring-
barking. It must be recollected, that it is the light, and not the
heat, of the sun that is so valuable to grass. This has been
ascertained by separating the luminous rays of the sun from the
heating rays by means of a prism, and trying the effect of each
on vegetation. If the soil, therefore, is shallow and lies
on rock, it will be better to leave the country in the condition
of a moderately open forest, so that the grass may receive
enough of the sun to sweeten it, and yet not so much as to
scorch it. On deep rich land, on the contrary, it will be well to
leave very few trees standing;—a few are always good for the
purpose of providing shelter for the stock, and for other uses.
It often happens that shoots make their appearance below
the ring after the tree has been ‘ barked ’ ; these, doubtless, arise
from the development of ‘latent’ buds—that is to say, of buds
which would have remained dormant as long as there were leaves
and foliage above to make use of the sap ; but as soon as the
communication between the fluid taken in by the roots and the
foliage is cut off, this fluid is made use of by, and developes,


those buds which otherwise would have remained dormant. If,
then, these shoots are allowed to grow for a year or two, and are
then cut off, there will be little danger of their coming again, or
of fresh ones appearing; for all the latent buds will probably
have been developed.
\ oung trees, in particular, when they are ring-barked, are
liable to throw out latent buds: in the old trees the latent buds
would appear to have remained dormant so long, that they have
died a natural death from not having been called into existence.
With regard to the best time of the yeaf for ring-barking, the
experience of practical men seems to lead them to widely dif-
ferent conclusions; but, for theoretical reasons, the summer or
early autumn—that is to say—from the middle of November till
the end of February in this country would appear to be the most
favourable time; for the wood which is exposed by ‘girdling,’—a
very good term, which seems to be applied to ‘ ring-barking’ in
America, —is then dried up by the heat of the sun, and com-
munication between the fluids above and below the ring is thus
less likely to be kept up : by the middle of November, also, the
rise of the sap which happens in spring has already taken place,
and the sap is no longer concentrated in the roots, so as to be
available for the development of latent buds below the ring after
the communication with the foliage has been cut off.
I have, as yet, omitted all mention of a very substantial advan-
tage that arises from ring-barking in this dry climate. It must
be understood that the action of the tree is to take in water by
the roots ; this water, when it is taken in, ascends to the leaves,
where it is evaporated ; for the stomata or pores in the leaves
and green parts of the trees allow evaporation of the water
to go on with the greatest freedom ; and the surface for
evaporation, that is presented by the foliage of the tree,
must be something immense; so that the drying action of the
tree on the soil must also be very great.
After the tree has died, the roots by their decay cause the
ground to become more open ; and by this means, the carbonic
acid of the air is allowed to get at the roots of the grass ; and,
for this reason, it grows better ; by the decay, also, of the roots,
the ground is often broken up, and the beginnings of water-
courses made ; this is of no slight consequence in swampy places
where the surface of the ground is caked and hard.
I believe that it has been found that the excessive ring-barking


that has taken place in some parts of Victoria, has caused
those districts to suffer from want of rain to an alarming extent:
the trees without doubt do attract rain-clouds : to prevent any
harm from happening on this account, it would be well not to
‘ ring’ all the trees, but here and there to leave for ornament any
well-shaped trees, or any trees that are valuable for their timber —
to leave the country, in fact, wooded like an English park. It
would, also, be well to leave clumps of timber in any prominent
orbarren places, orwhere they would be likely toattractrain clouds,
in order to afford shelter for the stock. The timber, that is left,
would also be available for future use; and for that reason alone it
would be advisable to leave plenty of timber standing. It would
be on the safe side if we had some legislative measure to prevent
the abuse of ring-barking ; for the advantages that attend it are
sure to become better and better appreciated : small and frequent
reserves of timber might be made with advantage.
There are some who maintain that certain sorts of trees poison
the grass, which grows in their neighbourhood, by means of some
exudation from their roots : but 1 am not aware that it has been
satisfactorily ascertained that such is ever the case. It does,
indeed, seem possible that the rain may carry down gums and
other organic substances from their foliage, and that by this
means the grass may become tainted : but the fact probably
is, that such trees are always found on these soils which only
provide food for inferior grasses.


CHAPTER VII.
THE USE OF SALT FOR SHEEP.
It will be better to consider first the effect of salt in the sheep’s
general health ; and we shall then be better able to appreciate its
value as a preventative against fluke, and against parasites
generally.
Common salt (sodic-chloride) is perhaps one of the most
valuable of the complementary food stuffs. Its presence is needed
in almost all the most valuable of the fluids of the body, which
are concerned in digestion : it furnishes the hydrochloric acid of
the gastric juice and the soda of the bile; *it is needed for the
conservation of the organic compounds of the blood in their
normal condition and in this way is most valuable in prevent-
ing morbid changes which give rise to disease: it hardens, and
renders the muscular and other tissues tense, and gives vigorous
tone to the health and system ; in this way it counteracts any ill
effects, that may arise from an excess of potash salts in the
sheep’s food.
As common salt is so essential to the digestive fluids generally,
we may see how valuable it is in enabling the sheep to make the
greatest possible use of his food, and to thrive and fatten freely;
that by giving vigour to the powers of assimilation, it promotes
the generous growth of all the animal substances, and among
them, of wool; and that it helps the sheep to ward off the
inroads of parasitic entozoa, by keeping him in a state of vigo-
rous health which is altogether hostile to their existence ; for it
is only on weakly and unhealthy growths (whether animal or
vegetable) that parasites flourish.
We will now proceed to discuss the use of salt for fluke and
other sorts of parasitic worms.
This is a subject that is difficult to discuss ; partly on account
of the mistaken ideas which have so long existed about it; and
partly because the natural history of the fluke has, as yet, been
so unsatisfactorily investigated : it is, in fact, a subject that seems
to have been misunderstood altogether, or rather not to have been
understood at all. It is only lately that I have been able to
Carpenter’s Comparative Physiology ; page 391.


reconcile all the data with regard to it, that I had become possessed
of, and to arrive at conclusions that are at all satisfactory to my-
self. In order that my readers may judge for themselves of the
value of the conclusions which are given below, I will put them
in possession of the data on which they are founded.
I will, first of all, give the data which were obtained from the
sheep farmers themselves: I may mention that I found very
great difficulty in getting reliable information from them at all,
from the fact that in the majority of instances, curative properties
were expected from salt, which it does not possess, at any rate, for
fluke; and strong conclusions adverse to the use of it were
formed because it did not succeed in effecting a cure. It was
only by sifting these conclusions by means of questions, that I
have succeeded in satisfying myself of the truth of these data.
Enquiries among sheep farmers have led me to the following
conclusions :
fa) Salt possesses no property of curing fluke after it has once
reached the liver; the use of it may, indeed, prove beneficial to
the sheep’s general health and strength, and by that means may
prevent the fluke from going ahead ; but if the fluke has once
reached the liver, the salt never succeeds in reaching it, or, by
that means, in killing it.
I am told that when sheep, that have fluke, are taken to the
salt-bush country, some of them die perhaps more quickly than they
would have done if they had remained on their old run : this, in all
probability arises from the fact that the saline vegetation causes
an increased secretion of bile by supplying it with soda; but the
flukes have so injured or stopped up the bile ducts, that the bile
cannot escape into the intestine, and the sheep’s death is the
result:—while numbers of them improve in health and become
fat; this would arise from the improvement to their general
health that the saline vegetation will affect, if the fluke has not
gone too far, and which enables them to keep the fluke under ;
but I have not learnt that sheep that have once contracted fluke,
get completely rid of it in the salt-bush country.
(b) Whenever the sheep has been kept constantly supplied with
salt from the day when he first began to eat grass, he has been
virtually exempt from fluke. Ido not say that those who have
given salt in this way never have a single sheep affected with
fluke ; but, from what I can learn, their losses from fluke have
become merely nominal.


I his is shewn to be the case in the salt-bush country, where
there are often swampy places in abundance that would serve as
fluke-harbours, since the sheep that have been bred there never
suffer from fluke ; the only reason for this state of things, that
we can see, is, that the presence of salt in the vegetation causes
the sheep to have salt enough from the day when he first begins
to eat grass.
In all the instances in which I have heard the use of salt
pronounced a failure, I have satisfied myself that the failure has
arisen from one of two causes, —either that a curative property
w'as expected from it, which it does not possess ; or that it was
given in insufficient quantity, or very incgularly—a supply of it,
m fact, once every month or two; from what will be said
hereafter about the natural history of the fluke, it will be at once
seen why this system must fail. I have, however, succeeded in
learning of cases in which the liberal and constant use of salt
has been attended with the best possible results, and that on
very unsound country.
The next datum, that we possess, exhibits a well-known pro-
perty of salt.
. That common salt is unfavourable to the presence of, and
destructive of fluke and many sorts of worms in places where it
can immediately reach them : the presence of salt in the in-
testinal canal does not, however, affect the fluke-embryo, as
long as it ds enclosed in the cyst or shell in which it first
enters the intestine ; neither can salt reach or effect (except
indirectly) fluke or worms which are not in the intestinal canal;
on this account the only use of salt for the lung worm would be
to promote the sheep’s genera] health, and by this means to
enable him to withstand its attacks. We need not, therefore, be
surprised to learn that the salt-bush sheep did suffer to a slight
extent from lung-worm; but as their general health was so
vigorous, they only suffered from it slightly.
Ihe natural history of the fluke, as far as it is known, and as
far as it practically concerns sheep-farmers, is substantially as
follows. The substance of this is taken from Kiichenmeister’s
Manual of Parasites, Sydenham Society’s translation.
The eggs of the fluke are voided with his dung by a sheep (or
other animal) that contains fluke ; after passing through various
stages, the fluke-embryo enters a stage in which it is called a
Cercaria. This Cercaria either finds its way into the shell of a


small mollusca, or, if it does not find a suitable shell, secretes a
substance out of which it forms a cyst, in which it encloses
itself; within this shell or cyst it passes into the final stage of a
fluke or Distoma hepaticum ; while it is still enclosed in this minute
shell or cyst, it is consumed by the sheep (or other animal) with
grass that grows in wet or swampy places ; or is, perhaps,
sometimes taken in by the sheep when they drink out of stagnant
pools. ‘According to De la Villette’s experiments, it is
‘ certain that the Cercaria echinifera* is converted very rapidly
‘in the intestine of warm-blooded animals, and more slowly in
‘ cold-blooded species into Dist. echiniferum (Kiichenmeister,
‘vol. i, p. 270).’ Also, ‘the further development of such
‘ enclosed Cercaria, when they have reached the stomach of an
‘ animal, takes place in the following way: —The Cercaria, which
‘ has become converted into ayoung Distoma, escapes from the cyst
‘ with either the head or the tail foremost. (Kiichenmeister,
vol. 1, p. 269.) ’ ■
The above quotations are given because there are many who
have affirmed to me that the fluke enters the sheep’s liver while
it is still in its embryo state, and enclosed in its shell or cyst; in
which case salt would be powerless to reach it: if, however, it
emerges from its cyst as a fluke in the intestinal canal, it is born
at once into a medium that is hostile to its existence, if the fluids
of the intestine only contain plenty of salt; in that case it either
dies at once or is rendered so feeble, as to be unable to make its
way to the liver, and is either digested or carried out with the
excreta : the increased vigour of the excretory functions, when the
sheep is well supplied with salt, might perhaps even cause
the fluke to be expelled before it could leave its cyst.
It also appears to me to be impossible that the embryo, while
it is still enclosed in a case or in a diminutive snail’s shell,
should ever be able to make its way into the liver; I cannot see
what means it has of doing so ; while, on the other hand, the
fluke that has emerged from its cyst is provided with suckers, by
means of which it can attach itself to the intestine, as well
as with organs of locomotion, which would enable it to
find its way into the liver through the bile ducts. By this means
we can see from the natural history of the fluke, how salt can
* The Cercaria of the D echiniferum , which is a species of Distoma very nearly
related'to the D. hepaticum (fluke), aud from observations on which, the greater part of
what is supposed to bo known of ’.he natural history of the fluke has been learnt.


act as a preventative against it; for the young fluke is caught by
the salt directly it emerges from its shell or cyst, and before it
has had time to enter the liver, and to get out of its reach.
In order, therefore, that we may make sure that salt can act as
a pieventative against fluke, it is clearly necessary that the fluids
of the intestinal canal should always contain plenty of it, and
that it is not enough that the sheep should get a supply of it, and
then have to go without more for another month : it is only to
be expected that during the last three weeks of that month, any
fluke-embryos that he may consume, will find their way
to his liver ; and the next supply of salt will be given after
the mischief has been done. To make sure, therefore, that salt
vill act as a preventative against fluke, it is necessary that the
sheep should be supplied with it from the day when he first
begins to eat grass, and that he should be able to take as much
of it as he likes, and every day, if he wants it. We may trust
that his instinct will not allow him to take so much, as will do
him harm, any more than we are likely to take more than is gocd
for ourselves, because the salt-cellar is always placed on the table.
I he abundant presence of salt in the intestinal canal is hostile
to almost all intestinal parasites ; but it is only hostile to parasitic
worms which it cannot immediately reach, because it gives a
vigour to the health, that is unfavourable to their development
and existence within the body.
I am led to think that country is often unsound, not from
mere swampiness, (though, of course, that renders country
radically unsound) but from the sour and innutritious character of
its grass. I believe that dry, heavily timbered country may often
be regarded as unsound for the following reason. It appears that
therearemany (thousands upon thousands) of our table-land sheep
which are afflicted with fluke during almost all their lives; and
yet those sheep, as far as we can see, may never shew that they
have it. As long as a sheep that has fluke in this way can
get good nutritious food, to keep his strength and condition up,
he is able to stand the presence of a few flukes in him without
much apparent harm : it would be absurd to suppose that in
this case even, the presence of fluke does him no harm : but still,
as long as he can get good nutritious food, he is able, for all
practical purposes, to keep up his strength : out put the sheep
that is aftected with this ‘ latent’ fluke, on thickly timbered
country, where the sun is not able to get at the grass, and where


the grass is consequently wanting in nutrition—and although
that country may be dry, and he may contract on it no
fresh fluke, yet the innutritious character of his food will put him
into low condition, and cause the ‘latent’ flukes to go ahead, and to
get the better of him. In this way, dry country is unsound, if
it is so heavily timbered that the sun cannot reach the grass. In
this case salt would be of little use, beyonds its effect of acting
as a most valuable complementary food stuff, and of helping the
sheep to digest and assimilate to the utmost extent any nutritious
substance that there may be in the grass; it will have no effect
in destroying the fluke after it has once passed from the intestinal
canal to the liver.
Much mischief, doubtless, arose during the wet seasons that
we had two and three years ago, from latent fluke being
developed : for the excessive rain gave rise to a superabundant
growth of grass that was, most probably, very deficient in
complementary salts ; while the sunless character of the weather
caused it also to be sour and innutritious.
To keep fluke from going ahead, if it has once been allowed
to get into them, the sheep must be kept as clear as possible
from foot-rot; for this disease very soon causes their strength to
give way, by keeping their bodies in a low febrile stale ; and, if
they are once allowed to fall into a low state of health, the fluke
soon goes ahead, and gets the better of them.
As long as sheep are kept constantly supplied with salt at
which they can get whenever they like (I am assuming that they
are paddocked —for, surely, by this time, every one has realized
the immense advantages that are attached to paddocking), and
are provided with plenty of grass which the sun can get at freely,
I think that a few swampy places in his pastures need give anxiety
to no sheep-farmer; though it would, of course, be better to banish
swamps by draining, when it can be done without too much
expense. A great deal of good may often be done by means of
plough furrows; for they may often be made to form the
beginnings of water-courses, if they are so arranged that a rush
of water is guided down them at times of heavy rains.
It will now be well to consider what sort of salt would appear
to be the best for sheep, and what is the best way of giving it.
It has already been pointed out that it is desirable that the
sheep should have as much salt as he likes, and be able to take
it whenever he likes. This would, of course, necessitate his being


turned loose in a paddock, so that he can betake himself to it
whenever he feels inclined. But, as yet, the nature of our land
legislation has been such as to prevent our table-land sheep-
farmers from fencing-in their land ; so that the shepherds must
be trusted to see that the sheep can take salt enough. It generally
happens that the salt is placed either outside of, or in their
yards ; and in either case, the excessive crowding of the sheep,
and very probably the shepherd’s impatience if the salt is placed
outside the yards, will prevent a sheep from ever getting one
quarter as much of it as he ought to; and matters are made
worse, if he has to lick a piece of rock-salt in order to
get all the salt that he ever has. If, instead of getting food
seasoned with salt, as well as having the salt-cellar at table, to
take as much salt from as we may wish for, we had to get all our
salt by licking a piece of rock-salt; and if, moreover, there
were several others behind us, who were impatiently pushing us
out of the way in order to have their turn at the piece of rock-
salt, I think that it is very likely that we should not get salt
enough for our health, and that many more of us would suffer
from worms then do now 7 , —some of us might, perhaps, even
suffer from fluke.
Ordinary rock-salt, also, usually contains a considerable per-
centage of impurities ; and these impurities are quite useless, as
they are usually in the form of sand or dirt. The present price
of rock-salt is also far beyond its true value as a ‘ sheep salt.’
The great reason, no doubt, why rock-salt has always been in
such favour, is the ease vith which it is given to the sheep : of
course it does save trouble, if you only have to throw pieces of
it on the ground for the sheep to come to and lick ; but I
maintain that it is a very wasteful way of giving it : an hour’s
rain will cause more salt to be washed from a good-sized lump,
than would do for a great many sheep.
For these reasons, I will dismiss rock-salt as an unfavourable
form of ‘ sheep-salt.’
Liverpool salt is the sodic-chloride rendered pretty free from
impurities : but it is only made as pure, as it is, at great cost: the
impurities also, which it costs so much to get rid of (especially
if it is made from sea-salt) are in no way practically objectionable
in a sheep salt, as long as they are not present in excessive
quantity. The present duty on salt, has, of course, added to the
price of Liverpool salt; so that 1 shall dismiss it at once as a


form of salt that is too expensive to give to sheep, especially as
salt is of so little use to them, unless they get plenty of it.
The ordinary Bombay salt, though it only contains about 76
per cent, of salt, and about 24 per cent, of impurities, and some
of those impurities objectionable, because they are present in
such large quantity, was worth the price it could be got at, before
the present duty virtually drove it out of the market. At any
rate, it is not worth what it costs now: on these accounts I will
take upon myself to recommend a ‘ sheep-salt,’ which ought to
serve its purpose better than either the rock-salt, Liverpool or
Bombay salts, and which might be made in the colony and sold
at a price per ton even less than what the present impost adds
to the price of our different kinds of salt.
The best way of giving salt appears to me to be in cheap
water-tight troughs; some complain that if a small crystal salt,
such as the Liverpool or Bombay, is given, the sheep take too
much of it; the only reasonable cause for anxiety is, I think,
that they should not get enough ; and the greater the facilities
they have, for taking as much as they like, the better. The
troughs might be put under some sort of shed to keep the rain
out, and by that means a good deal of waste would be avoided; for
they are apt to be filled with water during heavy rain, and to over-
flow ; and this causes great waste: it is also better that they
should always be in the same place, in order that the sheep
may always know where to find the salt. 1 have seen very good
troughs made by hollowing out logs, and nailing saplings across
underneath, so as to prevent the sheep from rolling them over :
of course it is necessary for them to be quite water-tight, unless
they are placed under cover from the rain.
If the use of salt had been properly understood, it is probable
that hundreds of thousands of the sheep that died during the
last three years, would have been saved. It is hardly likely
that there would have been no loss whatever; but it is not
unlikely that in any case and on the worst country, the loss
might have been kept to within 5 per cent., instead of being
50 or even 80 per cent., as it was in some instances.


Sodic-chloride (common salt) ..
•• 75-79
Magnesia-chloride ..
.. 9.16
Potassic-chloride
.. 3-63
Sodic-brornide
1.18
Calcic-sulphate (gypsum)
Magnesic-sulphate (Epsom salts)..
S-6i
99.99
CHAPTER VIII.
SUGGESTIONS FOR A GOOD AND CHEAP ‘SHEEP-SALT.’
As it has been shewn in a former chapter that in order to be
able to depend on salt to keep sheep free from disease arising
from parasitic entozoa and from fluke in particular, it is necessary
that they should be kept constantly supplied with it, and that
they should be allowed to take as much of it as ever they
like, it becomes necessary to consider what is the best kind of
salt to give, great regard being paid to its cost.
Now that the imposition of a most shameful duty* on all
kinds of salts that are imported into the colony, has made a
cheap imported salt impossible, and has well nigh stopped the
importation of the only cheap form of salt that we have been
accustomed to receive, viz.: the Bombay salt; and as, moreover,
the increased price of labour in England has added to the price of
salt there, it is clearly time for us to begin to think if we cannot
manufacture in the colony a salt for ourselves, which shall fulfil
the requirements of a good sheep-salt, and at the same time be
produced at a small cost. And I think that I shall succeed in
pointing out a salt which ought to fulfil all the required condi-
tions, both as regards cost of production and efficiency.
The composition of the mixture of salts contained in sea-water
is nearly the same all the world over: and the following Table
will give a pretty true expression of the chemical composition of
sea-salt generally: —
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF SEA-SALT
Of these ingredients, the sodic-chloride is the Liverpool salt
* ‘ The impost on saltof all taxes on the Continent, that which is the most odious,
‘ the most unnatural, and the most disgraceful to human reason. ’■ Ltkbig.


which we me at table: this Liverpool salt is, however, obtained
pure only at great cost; so that in order to obtain a cheap sheep-
salt, it will be necessary to see if an impure salt can be obtained
which will do equally as well as the Liverpool salt, and which
will cost far less to produce. It is necessary to get the sodic-
chloride pure for a household salt, —not so much because a
cheaper and less pure salt would be unwholesome and fail to
serve its purposes in digestion, as because a salt that contains
more than a very minute trace of magnesic-salts, is useless for
such household purposes as curing meat.
The magnesic-chloride is perhaps the most objectionable of all
the ingredients of sea-salt: it is exceedingly bitter: but, luckily,
it is a very soluble salt; and that property will be made use of
to separate it pretty completely, or, at any rate, completely
enough for our purpose, from the salt for sheep that we shall
suggest.
The potassic-chloride is a salt which is contained plentifully
in our table-land vegetation. When it is not in excessive
quantity it is not injurious ; and a small quantity of it is even
necessary to the animal economy; but as the table-land vege-
tation always contains at least this necessary supply of it, and as
the sheep-salt is often required to counteract the excess of
potassic salts that the grass on certain parts of the table-land is
apt to contain, this salt will be better omitted from our sheep-
salt.
The sodic-bromide is only found in sea water in small quantity ;
it would have no value as an ingredient of a sheep-salt; and it
will, therefore, be as well to dispense with its presence.
The calcic-sulphate, or gypsum, is a salt of lime that is found
in sea-water in considerable quantity, considering that it is so
insoluble a salt: on account of its insolubility it would be
difficult to get rid of it from the sheep-salt that will be suggested.
Inasmuch as it is a lime-salt, it might be inferred from what has
already been said of the lime-salts, that its presence in our
sheep-salt would not be objectionable, unless it happened to be
so for exceptional reasons. As it happens, however, any
exceptional reasons that there may be for or against its use,
appear to be in its favour. Klichenmcister gives the results of
experiments on sheep for the cure of fluke by means of trials of
a number of substances ; and, strange to say, of all the remedies
which were tried, gypsum was the only one which appeared to


do any good. He says:— ‘ By the administration of gypsum it
‘ was thought that the disorder was cured ; at least, the sheep
‘ became less chlorotic, more vigorous, fresher in appearance, and
‘ better in appetite.’ He then goes on to say that gypsum
probably does little towards effecting a radical cure, because he
does not see how it can reach the fluke in the liver; just as I
have pointed out that salt cannot reach fluke, if it has once passed
out of the intestinal canal into the liver. He rather thinks that
the good, that the gypsum did, arose from the improvement
which it effected in the secondary symptons, and in the sheep’s
general health and strength.*' It has already been pointed out
that any advantage, that is likely to be attached to the use of
common salt under similar circumstances, will only arise from a
like cause. It therefore appears to be - fortunate that its
insolubility allows the gypsum to be so easily retained in our
sheep-salt.
The magnesic-sulphate or Epsom salts, though not positively
harmful, is a salt which it would be well not to include in a
sheep-salt: as one of the salts of magnesia, its presence in large
quantity is objectionable for many reasons. We shall, therefore,
aim to get rid of it from our sheep-salt. It is, if anything, a
little more soluble than the sodic-chloride.
If then we take sea-water as the most convenient source to
derive our sheep-salt from, of the different salts that it contains,
it will be well to get rid of all except the sodic-chloride (common
salt) and the calcic-sulphate (gypsum).
It is a circumstance that is in our favour, that these two salts'
go together in being the least soluble of all the salts that sea-
water contains : the sodic-chloride, also, preponderates greatly
in quantity over all the other salts ; while the gypsum is by far
the least soluble of any: these circumstances will prove to be of
the greatest use to us in making our sheep-salt cheaply.
When we evaporate sea water, gypsum and common salt are
the first salts to be deposited as crystals: and the first of the
salts, which we wish to reject, that begins to be deposited, is the
magnesic-sulphate ; and this salt, as we mentioned above, is a
little more soluble than the sodic-chloride.
If then in evaporating sea-water we notice what its volume is
when crystals of common salt first begin to be deposited, which
* Appendix E,


Crystals deposited <
j" Sodic-chloride (common salt) .. .
[ Calcic-sulphate (gypsum)
69.96
.. 4.58
1
1 Magnesic-chloride
Salts contained in solution in re- J
Potassic-chloride
mainine mother-liquor ]
Sodic-bromide
Calcic-sulphate
1
is the time when the water first becomes saturated with sodic-
chloride, by the time when that volume has been evaporated
down to one-thirteenth part, twelve-thirteenths of the sodic-
chloride that it contained will have been deposited as crystals, and
only one-thirteenth will remain in solution in the mother liquor that
remains. Now sodic-chloride originally formed 75.79 per cent, of
the salts that the sea-water contained, so that when twelve-thirteenths
of this have been deposited as crystals, only one-thirteenth or
5.8 out of the 75.79 percent, of the sodic-chloride, that the sea-
water contained, will remain in solution in the mother liquor ;
that mother liquor will also contain all the magnesic-sulphate ; for
the quantity of it, that sea-water contains, is only 5.6 percent, of its
salts ; and as magnesic-sulphate is even more soluble than sodic-
chloride, as long as the 5.8 of the sodic-chloride remains to be
deposited, none of the 5.6 of the more soluble magnesic-
sulphate will have begun to be deposited. The salt, therefore,
which is obtained by evaporating sea-water down to one-
thirteenth of its bulk, reckoning from the time when crystals of
common salt first begin to be deposited, will consist of common
salt and gypsum alone ; and any impurities, that it contains, will
owe their presence to the fact, that when the crystals that have
been deposited, are removed, they will be wet with the mother-
liquor which contains the impurities in solution.*
The following table will account tolerably correctly, for all the
salts that the sea-water contained {vide the first table of this
chapter), if we suppose the mother-liquor to have been evapor-
ated down to one-thirteenth of the volume that it hail when
crystals of common salt first began to be deposited.
So that the mother-liquor that now remains will contain all
100.00
* The process of manufacturing this salt would be much simplified by the use of a
Beaumd’s Hydrometer—ride Appendix F. "


the impurities that are of any consequence ; and if the evapor-
ation is continued any longer, crystals of magnesic-sulphate will
soon begin to be deposited with the salts that we wish to retain.
It will, therefore, be well to reject the mother-liquor at this stage,
and to retain the salts which have been deposited.
There is, however, another ingredient besides common salt
and gypsum, which is very important to the sheep’s health, and
which promotes his vigour in a wonderful degree; and that is
iron.
Iron is known to enter largely into the composition of the
hccmaiin, or red colouring matter, of the blood ; and the blood is
supposed to owe, at any rate to a very great extent, that wonder-
ful and most valuable property that it possesses, of absorbing the
oxygen from the inspired air, to the iron which it contains ; in
what form iron exists in the haematin is hardly known ; but its
presence in sufficient quantity is of the highest importance, if the
blood is to perform its functions efficiently. It is, therefore,
most essential to take great care that the sheep’s blood should
be kept well supplied with iron ; this is done naturally by the
grass, which always contains iron ; so essential, indeed, has
Nature recognised the presence of iron in the sheep’s food to be,
that the chlorophyll or green colouring matter of grass, which
is quite essential to its perfect growth, is made to contain iron.
But still, it is likely enough that the grass may not contain iron
enough to keep the blood up to the highest pitch of vigour;
just as it is often deficient in sodic salts, which we have on
that account to supply artificially. For the same reason, it is
well to supply an iron salt artificially with common salt.
The quantity of iron, however, that the sheep needs is very
trifling, for the whole quantity that the blood can contain is only
small: a mere trace of it in our sheep-salt will be enough. If,
then, of iron-sulphate be added to every 97-J-lbs. of the
salt given above (iron-sulphate is the most accessible, and,
perhaps, the best of the iron salts ; it is also very cheap), we
shall have a salt which ought to form an excellent sheep-salt.
The chemical composition of our £ sheep-salt ’ will be as
follows ; if we take 2 per cent, to cover all the impurities that it
contains.


Sheep-salt No. i *
Common salt (sodic-chloride)..
VO
Cv
CO
Gypsum (calcic-sulphate) ..
5-9
Iron-sulphate
25
Impurities (mostly magnesic-salts)
, 2 0
This salt I will suggest as being better to my mind than either
the Liverpool salt (which would probably cost six times as much)
or the rock-salt: the rock-salt will probably contain as large, or
even a larger percentage of actual impurities, in the shape of sand,
earth, &c., than the above ‘ sheep-salt’ does ; while in the sheep-
salt, the impurities up to within 2 per cent, consist of ingredients
which are valuable to the sheep’s health, and are purposely
contained in it: the 2 per cent., moreover, of actual impurities
will consist mostly of ingredients which are rather valuable than
otherwise, so long as they are only present in small quantity.
The sulphates (iron-sulphate and calcic-sulphate) which are
contained in my sheep-salt, I regard as forming very valuable
ingredients of a sheep-salt for some sorts of country, in helping to
produce flesh and the growth of wool fibre. (Appendix E.)
For the manufacture of this sheep-salt, nothing more than the
ordinary salt-pans will be required ; and it is difficult to imagine
a more favourable place for the manufacture of it, than Sydney
Harbour would be ; the water might be made to evaporate more
quickly by pumping it up, and causing it to trickle over bundles of
fagots, that are so placed as to be well exposed to the drying in-
fluence of the wind : in this way, I am told, sea-salt is made in
large quantity on the north-west coast of France, and sold at 5/ a
ton : but with the greater heat of the sun in Sydney Harbour,
the more complicated machinery of the fagot system would be
unnecessary, and it would be enough to expose the sea-water to
evaporation in a system of shallow pans.f I see no reason why
such a sheep-salt as I have indicated, might not be made at
Sydney and sold at under £ 1 a ton —for a less price, in fact,
than what the present duty adds to the price of all imported
salts. It would appear more reasonable for the Government to
■ This sheep-salt Ao. 1, contains a larger proportion of the calcic-sulphate, than is
necessary, or, perhaps, good, m a general sheep-salt; but this sheep-salt ought to be very
. v Ui N le on vei 7 countr - v > or to S ive to sheep that are suspected to contain fluke
A better general sheep-salt will be given in Appendix F.
+ Appendix F.


a tax on it f ““ 77 / rai ' WayS f ° r nothin B. th “ put
‘ j" 1 ' f ° r eVCTy ton of salt tha ‘ goes up the country for the
and the ro eP ’ “ '?*” qUantit ? ° f w ° ol t 0 bc do™ :
and the Government might more reasonably look for increase of
revenue from the additional wealth, which is brought into .he
impost on sa7r nS *““" ° f SaU f ° r sh “P- “tan from an


CHAPTER IX.
THE GROWTH OF WOOI .
The consideration of the growth of the wool will now engage
our attention : it will be necessary first to describe its structure
and composition : and we shall then be in a position to discuss
its growth; and what influences, as far as we can tell, can regulate
and modify its growth and character.
A wool-fibre may be described as being somewhat like a
miniature horn ; that is to say, it is composed of a very delicate
sheath of horny matter ; and this sheath, like a horn, encloses a
hollow tube: it is this tube that contains the yolk or grease.
The yolk may be described as a natural lubricating fluid which
makes the wool soft and kind, —just as the synovial fluid of our
joints is provided as a natural oil to enable the bones of the
joints to play smoothly and softly on one another. The grease
or lubricating fluid of the wool consists almost entirely of a
natural animal potash or soft soap.
Now, the sheath of the wool-fibre, composed as it is of horny
matter, which is as purely an animal substance as flesh is, like
flesh is influenced in its growth by the sheep’s health : —its
growth being vigorous when his health is vigorous, and the
reverse if his health is from any cause enfeebled. This will
account for the fact that a fibre of wool is often many times
thicker in one part than in another : the thin part is, as it were,
a record of a period of enfeebled health, and a thick part of the
reverse: just as such records of our health are often kept by our
nails, which like a wool-fibre are also composed of horny matter.
The fleece being a covering provided by nature for the pro-
tection of the sheep against cold, we ought naturally to expect
that its growth will be influenced by the climate in which he
is placed. Accordingly, we may expect the fleece to be
so modified in a cold climate, as to afford greater protection
against cold. But in what way would this be done ? The most
obvious answer is, by giving it greater density, and by giving the
individual fibres a greater length, so as to thicken it. And this
is, I believe, what is recognised as in general happening in a
cold climate.


In a hot climate, the fleece might be dispensed with ; and so
Nature tries to dispense with it, by causing it to be short and open.
The character of the sheep’s food will also have an effect in
determining the character of his fleece ; for, as it has already
been pointed out, the growth of the wool-fibre is affected by his
health and vigour. In country, therefore, where the sheep’s health
is vigorous, we might naturally expect the growth of wool to be
more generous than on less healthy country. We ought, there-
fore, to expect that, in general, the wool grown on a trap or
limestone country will be somewhat stronger and perhaps longer,
than granite or slate-country grown wool. Also, as common
salt is supposed to act as a corrective to the reducing tendency
of the excess of potassic salts, which the natural grasses of the
granite and slate countries are likely to contain, it would be
reasonable to conclude that if sheep on these kinds of country
are kept well supplied with salt, the growth of the fleece will
be made more generous ; and that the extra weight of wool will
be very likely to do more than to pay for the salt consumed.
As regards the production of clothing and combing wools, it
seems to be difficult to give a reason why any particular climate,
or kind of country should produce, or favour the production of
either the one or the other. From what I can learn, the
truth seems to be that combing and clothing wools are pro-
duced by two widely distinct varieties of the Merino breed of
sheep—varieties, in certain respects, as widely distinct as the
Chinaman with his straight hair, is from the Negro with his
curly pate. If this analogy is a correct one, the force of sticking
either to the one sort of sheep or the other, and not tolerating a
mongrel breed, and the advantage of close culling for this
purpose, will be evident, if uniformity in the character of his wool
is desired by the sheep farmer. Of course, differences of climate
and of country will affect both clothing and combing wools,
though, perhaps, in different ways ; but climate will have to act
though many generations before it can effect any permanent
modifications.
To what extent the potassic salts of the grass and herbage of
the salt-bush country are replaced by sodic salts is a matter
which remains to be ascertained : but there is strong indirect
evidence that this replacement does sometimes take place to a
considerable extent. A gentleman who has a station well within
the salt-bush country tells me, that the wool of the sheep on his


station is greatly wanting in yolk, and that the sheep in their
appearance present a great contrast to the table-land sheep, from
the fact that they have no dark crust of yolk on the outside of
their fleeces: the same gentleman also informs me, that if sheep,
which have been shorn on the table-land, are not taken to the
salt bush country till a month or two after they have been shorn,
the fleeces of those sheep retain their dark appearance on the
outside, and the wool much of its softness till the following shear-
ing : this would appear to indicate that a month or two on the
table-land suffices for the sheep to lay up a store of yolk in
their wool, which lasts till the following shearing; that wool
grown in the presence of yolk is always soft; and that, moreover,
the heat of the salt-bush plains does not melt the grease out of
the wool, if it once gets there.
As it has been satisfactorily ascertained (‘ How Crops Grow,’
page 176) that sodic-salts can partially replace potassic salts in
vegetation, and as, moreover, the normal yolk of wool consists
of a natural animal potash soap, we may with good reason sus-
pect that the salt-bush grown wool owes at any rate, some of its
dry character and want of grease to the fact that, in the salt-bush
country the potassic salts of the grass and herbage having been in
some measure replaced by sodic salts, the sheep does not consume
as great a supply of potassic salts with his food, as suffices to
afford him grease enough for his wool. Of course it would be
idle to ignore the fact that heat does tend to dry the wool; for it
has been found that in India, where, I believe, the salt bushes
are not found, and where the vegetation is not saline, the great
heat causes the wool grown there to be dry and harsh and un-
profitable.
As, of course, the presence of sodic salts in it causes the food
of the salt-bush country to be stimulating, and renders the sheep
free from many forms of disease, that the table-land sheep are
liable to, we may naturally expect it to increase the growth of
wool-fibre; but in doing this it has the absence of the necessity
of a natural increase of the fleece to contend against: and thus
we may expect that any increase of wool, which may arise from
the stimulating nature of the salt-bush country food, will be ab-
normal, and not directed in its manner of growth by the
requirements of nature.
The heat of the salt-bush plains will, with regard to the growth of
the fleece, of course have an effect just the opposite to that which


cold has : that is to say, it will cause the fleece to be more open,
shorter, and, as has already been pointed out, drier : the abnor-
mal increase of growth of the wool, caused by the stimulating
food, would appear to be likely to shew itself in increase of the
substance of the fibre ; and thus the fibres would lose their fine-
ness and become coarser ; and from what I can learn, this is what
does actually happen.
If, as I have suggested, part of the dryness of the salt-bush
grown wool results from a want of sufficient potassic salts in the
sheep’s food, this deficiency might under certain circumstances be
supplied artificially; that is to say, a potassic salt might be
given to the sheep to make up for the deficiency of these salts in the
food : but inasmuch as he will have no craving for a potassic salt, as
he has on the table-land for the sodic salt from considerations of
health, there will be difficulty in inducing him to take it. Thepotassic-
chloride is the salt of potash which corresponds to the sodic-chlo-
ride or common salt: and like common salt, it is a saltwhich may be
produced cheaply. It might be made in a rough manner on the
table-land, by burning the leaves and branches of trees or scrub,
or ferns, dissolving out the soluble part of the ashes with water,
passing this water through a rough filtering arrangement, adding
to it common muriatic acid till it has an acid reaction, and then
evaporating: the crystals that are deposited will contain a large pro-
portion of the potassic-chloride. This salt might be given to the
sheep in their water, when they are watered from wells by means of
troughs : just enough might be put into the water to make it barely
brackish. Perhaps some salt-bush sheep farmer might think it
sufficiently interesting to try the experiment on a few sheep in a
small paddock. If it be the case —as lam told it is—that sheep
coming from the table-land to the salt-bush country, with a
supply of yolk in their wool, retain that yolk till they are shorn,
it would probably be enough to give the potassic salt for a month
or two only after shearing, so as to secure a supply of grease
for the growing fleece.
The potassic-chloride could be made purer by treating the
common commercial pearlash with muriatic acid and evaporating ;
or the pearlash itself might be given, if the water in which it is
dissolved is only diluted enough not to shew an alkaline reaction.
It would be a matter of great interest, from a scientific point
of view, to ascertain if the potash of the yolk of the salt-bush
grown wool is in any degree replaced by soda; and if the re-


placement of potash by soda extends in this matter from the
vegetable to the animal kingdom: this might very possibly
happen (Appendix G.); and if it does, the hard soda soap would
not lubricate the wool, and perform the functions of a yolk, as
well as a soft soap ; and this would account for much of the
dryness and harshness of the salt-bush country wool.
Wherever in the salt-bush country, potassic salts are likely to
be present in the vegetation in tolerable abundance, we may
expect the wool not to be deficient in grease ; and that any
dryness that there may be in its character, will arise from the
heat of the climate alone ; and, for reasons that have been
already mentioned, this remark may be expected to apply to a
considerable portion of the salt-bush country.


CHAPTER X.
THE LAND LAW, &C.
This last chapter will be devoted to the consideration and
discussion of the conditions of a Land Law under which a
general system of sheep-farming, that would be most profitable
to the colony, could be carried on successfully ; for assuredly
we cannot look for attention being paid to details, so long as
such numbers of sheep have to be managed, as are kept on most
of our stations. If the late Messrs. Bakewell, Ellman, and
Jonas Webb had owned large stations carrying tens of thousands,
or even thousands of sheep, instead of sheep-farms, it is hardly
likely that they would ever have made those improvements, the
two latter in the Southdown, and the former in the Leicester
sheep, that have made those breeds of sheep and their own
names so famous, and which have done so much good for their
country. Neither can we look for any great improvement in our
Merinos, so long as large stations with shepherds, or even with
such large paddocks, continue to be the rule. As it is now, the
sheep-farms of Tasmania, in spite of its less favourable climate,
are the places where the most substantial improvements in the
Merino have been made in Australia.
As long as such an unsatisfactory tenure as the present Land
Law holds out, is allowed to continue, it is hardly likely that we
can expect the lessees of Crown Lands to go to the expense of
ring-barking and fencing-in their land ; and without these
improvements no real advance in sheep-farming can be made.
I am sure that the opinion of the present Land Law, which any
thoughtful man, who has watched things carefully, must have
arrived at, is that we have great cause for sorrow that the framers
of the 1861 Land Bill were ever allowed to undertake such an
important task, as to deal with the Lands. In the spirit in which
the Bill seems to have been passed, no consideration whatever
appears to have been given to the true welfare of the colony, and
the only aim of its framers to bid for the favour of the many
voters at any cost, and with an utter disregard for the welfare of
the colony. They have also tried to establish a state of affairs for
which the nature of the colony is totally unsuited, and which
must, sooner or later, break down.


Under the tenure which the present Land Law affords to the
Crown tenant, no real inducements whatever are held out to him
to improve his country ; he is, indeed, under certain vexatious
conditions allowed to buy land which is very likely worth barely
five shillings an acre, at / 1 an acre, if he first spends on it / 1
an acre in improvents ; when, in all likelihood, all the improve-
ments he needs could be completed at five shillings an acre.
Also, if he goes to the expense of fencing-in ground without
first purchasing it, he only offers an inducement to some (may-be,
sheep-stealing) selector to settle down in his paddock; and on
the strength of his pre-emptive right, which he is not obliged to
fence-in, to use another man’s paddock to keep together as
many head of stock as he can afford to procure —to feed his
stock on land which another man has already improved, very
likely to the amount of five shillings an acre. So that, practically,
the only inducements which the present Land Law holds out,
are such as to make it to the interest of the Crown tenant to
leave his country unimproved.
The improvements which do practical good, are not useless
slab buildings, which in very many cases are only put up in order
to fulfil the requirements of the Act, and not because they are
wanted, and are probably taken down as soon as they have
served to secure the land. The improvements which really do
good are fencing-in, (and why is it that our legislators shirk a
good bill which shall give proper encouragement to fencing-in ?)
and, as has already been pointed out, ring-barking.
I will take an instance —and there are millions of acres of
country on our table-land, to which this instance will apply,—of
the good that could be done by a law giving proper encourage-
ment to these improvements, and holding out reasonable
inducements in the shape of more secure tenure to the Crown
tenant who will make them.
The instance that will be taken is that of a tract of ordinary
bush land that is barely good enough for sheep, and which is
capable of carrying 1000 sheep, if they are shepherded; and in
estimating the good done by improvements, I will keep well
within recognised limits.
The quantity of land that will carry 1000 sheep shepherded,
after it has been fenced-in, will carry 1500, and at a far less
expense; also, each of these 1500 sheep will yield more wool
than it would if it was shepherded —instead of, say lbs. of
washed wool, it will now yield lbs.


By ring-barking, the grazing capability of that piece of
country will be at least doubled (I believe that it is more likely
to be fully quadrupled), so that 3000 sheep may now be kept
on it; and each of these sheep will again grow an increased
weight of wool ; for, not only will ring-barking have allowed
more grass to grow, but as the sun will now be able to get at it
freely, it will be made nourishing, and will contain more
of the wool-forming nutriment; and where, in all likelihood, a
less quantity of poor sour grass grew, there will now be a larger
supply of good, sweet, nourishing pasturage. If the sheep are
properly supplied with salt, as they can now get it when they
want it, and take as much of it as they need, we may reasonably
expect that the weight of each fleece will be still further
increased, and that each sheep will now yield 3 lbs. of wool. The
sheep will also be able to fatten now where only one-third of the
number could be kept before in poor condition, and at a far
greater expense.
So that this piece of country, which under the present Land
Law is only allowed to carry in unsatisfactory health probably,
in poor condition and a great expense, 1000 sheep, which yield
2500 lbs. of washed wool, under a wiser Land Law would carry
at a far less expense, in better health and condition, 3000 sheep
which would yield 9000 lbs. of wool. I must again remind my
readers that there are on our table-land millions of acres of coun-
try which is of this character. The consequence, therefore, of the
present Land Law which consults, not for the welfare of the
colony at large, but for one class of the community alone, is to
prevent immense wealth from being brought into the colony, by
causing on a great portion of our table-land country only one
third as many sheep to be kept, and little more than one fourth
as much wool to be produced, as might be grown on it.
There is, moreover, much—many million acres of—bush
land, on which a sheep is never seen, because the bush is too
thick to shepherd them in ; and this land, if it was only fenced-
in and ring-barked (much of it is well worth ring-barking, for
the soil is often very rich, and it is also generally well-watered,)
would prove well adapted for grazing a large number of sheep ;
of such a character is much of the ‘ back-run ’ belonging to
many of our table-land stations. I believe, therefore, that lam
keeping well within the mark when I say that, as far as the table-
land is concerned, the want of a fair Land Law giving a


reasonably good tenure to Crown tenants in the condition of
their fencing-in their country, causes that country to support
only one-third as many sheep, and to produce only one fourth
as much wool as it is capable of doing : so that if New South
Wales made a full and proper use of her grass, there
would be some chance of her doing her full share towards
helping Australia to put mutton and woollen clothes within
the reach of the poor at home; and how sorely they often need
them, any one who has lived at home must recollect only
too well, and with sorrow. But such a consideration as that, I
am afraid, is but little likely to influence our legislature. Wool
would fall : and that alone would be enough to check all further
thought —except, no doubt, among a few of the better and more
thorough thinkers.
And after all, ignore it as much as our legislature may try to
do, Nature has plainly enacted that the strength of the colony
shall lie in her pastures : there is comparatively little of the
table-land of this colony fhat is suited for agriculture; for the
geological conditions alone would prevent it from ever becoming
permanently agricultural, while they cause almost the whole of
it to be well suited for pasture, and for the production of wool
—the finest and best wool in the whole world. And not
only do the geological conditions render so much of it totally
unsuited for the growth of crops ; but the uncertain character of
the seasons that we have out here, and the dryness of the
climate, all conspire to render this essentially a pastoral country.
It would have been well if those legislators of ours, who were
so active in agitating for the passing of the present Land Law,
and who evidently regarded it as their mission to force this
colony by means of legislation to become an agricultural country —
it would have been well, I say, if they had recollected and applied
that well-known line of Horace’s :
‘ Naturam expellas furca, tamen usque recurret’
‘You may drive out Nature with a pitchfork, yet she’ll always
come back with a run.’*
As it is, much of the land that the poor selectors have in their
ignorance taken up, will be found to be totally unsuited for more
than three or four crops of wheat: this has already been found
• This line would, as regards this colony at any rate, in most cases have equal truth,
if instead of translating ‘Naturam furca’ by ‘Nature with a pitchfork,’ we were to translate
it by ‘ the natural grass with a plough.’


to be the case on very many of the older selections; for the soil
does not contain within it enough of some of the mineral wheat-
food ingredients that are essential for continuous cropping; and
the consequence is, that after four or five crops have been taken
off, the growth of the wheat plant becomes weak from want of food
enough ; consequently, like weak growths of all kinds, animal and
vegetable, it is particularly liable to the attacks of parasites, and
has not vigour enough to resist them. By this means it is not
hard to account for the fact that rust is so general in the colony ;
and to make matters worse, the rust is infectious; and by this
means, the attempting to grow wheat on unsuitable land causes
that on new and good land to be made to suffer. The conse-
quence will be that most of the table-land selectors, after they
have wasted long years of labour and paid for dearly bought
experience, will have to abandon their selections on account of
the rust and scanty crops ; and their land will in the end return
to the use which nature intended it for; but this will not happen,
until much labour has been needlessly wasted, and the develop-
ment of the resources of the colony has been most seriously
hampered and retarded.
It would surely have been much better for the colony at large,
and especially for the poor man, if the matter had been boldly
and intelligently looked in the face at once, and if the poor man
had had his ignorance helped by the use of the knowledge of
others ; and if competent men—men possessing the requisite
knowledge of geology and agricultural chemistry-had been
appointed, to mark out and reserve for bond fide agricultural
selection those portions of land which were suited for agri-
culture ; and if the remaining country which is only fit for
grazing purposes had been sold at a reasonable price, or let out
at a fail (not at an unreasonably low) rent to Crown tenants,
and a secure tenure given on the condition of their fencing it in,
and making other improvements which would practically increase
its value both to them and to the country.
As it is now, much of the grazing land is more or less spoilt
by ignorant or designing selectors ; while great numbers of the
best agricultural patches have been secured by squatters in self-
defence ; so that the real tendency of the present Land Law has
been to damage the true prosperity of the colony by diverting
much of the land from the use which Nature has best fitted it
for : while the pastoral production of the table-land has been
paralyzed to the extent of at least two thirds of its capability.


Although the matter of this paper concerns sheep-farming
most, yet the object of it is by no means to advocate that the
poor man should be anything but fairly dealt with, or not have
his best interests consulted for : but what I do protest against is,
that the unsound and dangerous principles which the present
Land Law seems to have initiated, should be persevered in ; for
I hold, that the principle is essentially an unsound one, that the
welfare and advancement of the poor man should be sought for
in any other way, then through the prosperity of the whole
colony, provided of course, that he is always fairly dealt with : to
seek to advance the poor man, as is being done now by means
of the present Land Law, at the expense of the prosperity of the
colony, will simply end in disaster to the colony, and to
him with it. So unjust, moreover, is the present Land
Law, that no gentleman could, except under peculiar circum-
stances, care to make use of free-selection as it now exists ; and
so immoral is its tendency, that, on account of its unfair and
class-against-class spirit, dummies and shady declarations seem
to be rather approved than disapproved of, nay, they appear to
be almost necessary, and even to be encouraged.
On these accounts, any one who has examined the present Land
Law thoughtfully, must have come to the conclusion that it is a com-
plete failure, that it has done incalculable mischief to the
prosperity of the colony, and that it is radically unsound both in
theory and practice. On these accounts, I cannot congratulate
the ‘ statesman’whose name is so intimately identified viih it,
on the success of his statesmanship. lam quite ready to agree
with him that it is high time that the system of large runs, which
served their purpose well enough in the early days of the colony,
should be done away with everywhere except far in the interior.
But I think that the lands would have been caused to yield the
greatest wealth to the colony, and in that way have best pro-
moted its prosperity, if the areas that were suitable for agricul-
ture had been marked out and reserved for agricultuial selection,
and if the law had been such as to encourage the establishment
of sheep-farms of from 1000 to 10,000 acres in extent; and if
for that purpose land had been allowed to be alienated at a fair
price, and fencing-in made a condition of the alienation. By
this 'means the lands would have been assigned to the
best uses they are fitted for, and so have been disposed of to
the greatest advantage of the colony; a temperate re-action


from what was confessedly too conservative a state of affairs
would have been made; and the poor man fairly and considerately
dealt with. As it is, the present Land Law has discouraged
fencing and other improvements, has encouraged the preserva-
tion of large runs by making it to the immediate interest
of the squatters, and by affording them facilities for securing
the water, and the best pieces of land (many of which
would be most valuable for agriculture) on their runs (for
two or three judiciously chosen 40-acre blocks will often
secure the water for three or four thousand acres of land, and
thus for the future render it unsaleable); and by causing
the agricultural selector in his ignorance to pitch upon places
which he will only find too soon to be quite useless for
permanent agriculture; but, most likely, not before he has been
ruined and has wasted years of labour. As it is now, it would
be a matter of great interest to learn how large a percentage of
the selectors are already hopelessly in the hands of the store-
keepers—and that from no fault of their own.
Although I cannot congratulate the above ‘statcman dn either
the wisdom or the morality of his statesmanship;yet| there is one
thing that I can congratulate him on, and that is, the measure of
success that has attended his efforts to make the squatters
‘smell hell’ (N.B. —These are not my words). There is one thing,
however, to fear, and it is that at some not very distant day, if
the present imbecile policy (does it deserve to be called a policy
at all ?) of land-legislation is persevered in, he will have caused
his country to have become conscious of its closer proximity to
that delightful place than it approves of. It is hardly to be
expected, however, that any measure that is conceived and
carried through in a spirit, such, as it appears, the present Land
Law was, can in the end be otherwise than unsuccessful;
accordingly, those who look carefully at the working of the
present Land Law, and watch its influence on the welfare of the
colony, and consider thoughtfully what it must lead to eventually,
cannot fail to look forward with alarm.
It would assuredly be well for a new country like this, to
profit by the experience of older countries, in the matter of the
disposal of her lands ; older countries have, without doubt, paid
very dearly for this experience, unassisted, as they were, by
scientific data to guide them ; but of what use would the
collection of these data be if they are not to be made use of by
new countries ?


If we look at the geological map of Europe, we shall at once
see that none of what are recognised as the wheat-producing
districts, lie on unstratified formations, or on stratified forma-
tions of a greater age than the coal-measures; while practically
the whole of our table-land lies on unstratified rocks, or on the
oldest of the stratified rock-formations ;* so that the only parts
that are suitable for agriculture are the alluvial areas, and
flats that are here and there to be found ; the great wheat-
growing districts of Europe A lie on the newer formations—that
granary, for instance, of Continental Europe which aft lies on the
north and east of Germany, the outlets of which are Danzig and
Odessa, and the wheat-growing district of the East of England,
both lie on very recent (Tertiary) formations; and wherever, in
England, for instance, we find the same rock-formations as
occupy by far the greatest part of our table-land, we also find
grazing, and not agricultural farms ; but it has only been by paying
dearly for it in experience, that old countries have found out this
law which regulates the natural capabilities of the land ; and
now in this new country when all these data have already been
collected for us, when we have science to give us the reasons for
them, is ill-directed land legislation to be allowed to prevent us
from making use of this knowledge in the disposal of our lands
to the greatest advantage of the country? and are we, like old
countries in dark ages had, to buy this experience over again
at the cost of, perhaps, hundreds of years of delay in the
development of our resources, and of endless misdirected energy ?
and are we to look on and see unnecessary obstacles put in the
way of its ultimate progress ? It is not too late now to stop
matters from becoming worse.
It may, perhaps, be noticed that in this paper, all allusion to
the treatment of disease amongst sheep has been omitted ; but
that the paper has rather discussed the prevention of disease :
in this respect, the spirit of the age has no doubt been followed,
which is rather to seek out the origin and causes of diseases,
and by this means to endeavour to ward them ofif; for instance,
perhaps what are at present the great questions of the day at
Sydney are, how to promote the health of the city by providing it
* The parts of Australia which geological and climatic conditions would point to as likely
to become permanent wheat producing districts, are situated along the south coast, and
include parts of South Australia, many parts of Victoria, and especially along the coast of
the western districts and a considerable distance inland, and parts of Tasmania,


with plenty of good, wholesome water, and by carrying away
the sewage altogether, and not polluting the harbour with it.
But I am well aware that there are many people who take
great delight in their success in curing (or killing—but they
generally say nothing about that) their diseased sheep by pouring
down their throats kerosene (for some mysterious reason or other
pitched upon by common consent as the ‘cure-all’), or their
favourite veterinary’s medicines ; but I would by no means wish to
interfere with their innocent amusement.
There is one disease, however, Tor which I will venture to
suggest a cure ; and that because there appears to be no way of
keeping it off, except by keeping the sheep on dry country;
and that cannot always be done. A good remedy for foot-rot
ought to be, to dress the foot with a mixture of tar and the
common commercial carbolic acid (which can be bought in
Sydney for about five shillings a gallon); the mixture being
made in the proportion of one part of carbolic acid to seven
parts of tar: the foot, however, should first be pared, so as to
lay bare the sore to the very bottom ; and this is, perhaps, the
most important point of all.


DIX.
APPENDIX A.
The specimens that it would be most interesting to get analyzed, would be the
grass generally which sheep are known to be fond of, that grows on the fol-
lowing sorts of country, viz. :—on the common granite, the ordinary trap, slate
and limestone countries : also specimens of various grasses and herbs, which
stock are known to be fond of, from the salt-bush country; but care should be
taken that the specimens are from a country where the wool, that is grown on
it, exhibits all the characteristics that are peculiar to the salt-bush country, —
such as want of grease, harshness, &c. The salt-bush country specimens that
would be needed, would be of the ordinary grass that sheep are fond of—that
would be the most interesting specimen of all to have analyzed, in order to see
to what extent sodic salts have replaced the quantity of potassic salts that is
ordinarily present in grasses,—of barley grass, wild oats, and specimens of
some of the common herbs that sheep are particularly fond of; also of cotton-
bush and, of course, of the salt-bush. Not less than 8 lbs. of dried specimens
of each sort would be requisite, for the percentage of ash that they yield, is
small: care should be taken to prevent mineral impurities, such as earth,
iron-rust, salt, &c., from getting mixed with them : the specimen for analysis
could be more easily transmitted if it was first burnt, and the ash sent: but
great care would be required to prevent impurities from getting mixed with
the ash : a sort of grating might be made by crossing long clay tobacco pipes
over an earthern vessel, and burning the specimens on the top of this. At
least half-a-pound of the ash of each specimen would be required to analyze
successfully.
I believe that there is or was a Scientific Committee attached to the Agri-
cultural Society: I have not yet noticed that it has ever taken in hand anything
scientific; but I would suggest that it should take this matter in hand: the
Agricultural Society might grant some money for these analyses, if it has any
idea of doing any good beyond holding shows : there is just a possibility that
Government might be induced to make a grant for this purpose.
With regard to the salt-bushes, the percentage of soda and potash in two
salsolaceous plants of the Natural Order of the Chenopo diace os, which are nearly
allied to our salt-bushes and have been analysed, are given (How Crops Grow,
page 177). These plants grew on the Caspian Steppes ; they are the Salsola
brachiata, which contained 4.8 per cent, of potash and 30.3 per cent, of soda ;
and the Salicornia herbacea which contained 2.6 per cent, of potash and 36 4
per cent, of soda: it will be observed that the plant, that contained the least
potash, also contained the most soda.


Baron \ on Mueller has analysed one of the salsolaceous plants of our
coast—one of the glass-worts—the Salicornia Australis : his analysis gave
26.37 per cent, of common salt to 31 per cent, of potassic-chloride, 3.86 per-
cent. ofsodic-carbonate and 9.28 percent, of sodic-sulphate.
With regard to the salt-bushes of our interior, I expect that analyses of
them would shew that they contain a greater proportion of potassic salts as
compared with sodic salts, than the above plants from the Casp an Steppes ;
we ought to expect, however, that the results of analyses of plants of the same
species of the salt-bush will vary considerably with the locality in which they
are grown ; and that those salt-bushes, which are grown in gardens away from
the salt-bush country, will be likely to contain only a small proportion of
sodic salts.
APPENDIX B.
COMPOSITION OF THE ASH OF SOME SEEDS AND STRAWS OF
PLANTS (gRAMINEJe).
ARRANGED TO EXHIBIT
EXTENT OF VARIATIONS.
WHEAT
KERNEL,
o .
.o 3
0)
& %
o
o
,d
ft .
S.'S
rd O
Ph<!
'S*
J
o
Pd
o
3
A-
_ft^
02
-n
o
3
o
3'2 | 12.3
0.0 6.3
15 9 i 16.3
Average of 79 Analyses
Lowest per cent in 79
Analyses
Highest per cent in 79
Analyses
KERNEL.
4-3
0.0 101
20.8 ■ 14.4
Average of 21 Analyses
13 0.5
15 3 2.2
Lowest per cent in 21
Analyses
Highest per cent in 21
Analyses
BARLEY KERNEL,
WITH
HUSK,
3-S 82 2.3 ... 32.8 20 28.4
06 4.3 0,7 0.1 260 02 22.1
8.9 14.7 4.2 2 4 39.8 4.0 36.7
Average of 43 Analyses
0.2 Lowest per cent in 43
Analyses
5.2 Highest per cent in 43
Analyses


74 APPENDIX.
OAT KERNEL, WITH HUSK.
Per cent, of
Ash.
A
Jl
o
Ph
o3
•B
O
m
2.5
03
8,2
-C3 j
<s
d
OIJ
o3
2
<i3
.1
Hi
Oxide of
Iron.
Phosphoric
Acid.
Sulphuric
Acid.
i
r3
m
6
d
3
0
2-5
4° j
156
9.8
24.3
7 2
4-9
9-7]
3-7
13
84
05
0.1
2.1
21.3
97
32 3
i-5
0 1
40
464
380
56.5
0.4
0.0
1.6
Average of 21 Analyses
Lowest per cent in 21
Analyses
Highest per cent in 21
Analyses
MAIZE KERNEL.
13
2 I
27.8
23-7
30 8
3-9
0.0
13.2
150
u-3
17.0
2-5
0.6
6-3
0.8
0.5
9.6
46.8
35-o
537
1-5
00
5.5
1.6
0.8
3-9
0.0
4-5
Average of 8 Analyses
Lowest per cent in 11
Analyses
Highest per cent in 11
Analyses
RICE KERNEL, WITHOUT HUSK.
0-5
0,2
1.0
21.7
185
,25-4
5-5
2-5
10.7
11.2
42
14-3
3 2
0.8
7,2
...
53 7
46-3
62 3
27
1.4
34
Average of 5 Analyses
Lowest per cent in 5
Analyses
Highest per cent in 5
Analyses
WHEAT, STRAW, AND CHAFF.
3-8
6.9
xi.5
i 3
16,7
1.6
O’O
7.8
2.5
0.0
5-2
58
2.7
8.8
0.7
0.1
1.8
5 3
2.2
8.9
2-5
0.7
5-6
69.1
60.6
73-6
1.1
0.0
9-4
Average of 15 Analyses
Lowest per cent of 15
Analyses
Highest per cent of 15
Analyses
RYE STRAW.
S-2
4-9
6.3
13 4
9.8
30.8
2,6
0.0
6.3
2.9
2 3
34
7-9
5-5
9.6
0.8
0.2
1.9
5-3
38
74
1.9
0.8
2.5
58.8
46.5
65.2
14
0.0
3-2
Average of 5 Analyses
Lowest per cent in 5
Analyses
Highest per cent in 5
Analyses
BARLEY STRAW.
3-2
5-9
21.6
10.8
20.9
41
1 1
57
24
i-7
3-i
77
5-3
13 i
0.2
2 0
45
2.2
7.2
3-7
1.1
33
54-x
49,9
68.5
x-3
3-9
Average of 17 Analyses
Lowest per cent in 9
Analyses
Highest per cent in 9
Analyses
OAT STRAW.
5°
5-4
! 20,5
12.2
26.1
6.4
2.8
14.7
j 3-8
2.3
55
74
4-9
8.8
1.6
0.7
2-7
4.1
i-9
7 3
3-3
2,2
44
49-5
42.6
54-3
3-6
x-5
7.0
Average of 5 Analyses
Lowest per cent in 5
Analyses
Highest per cent in 5
Analyses


When the quantity of a salt is given in the above Tables as nothing at all,
it is probable that a small, but unweighable quantity existed. It is probable
that soda and potash did not exist as such in the plant, but that the soda and
potash that are recorded, existed as organic and other salts of soda and potash,
which were decomposed by the combustion of the specimens.
The above Tables are taken from ‘How Crops Grow,’ p. 150.
‘A certain comparatively small quantity of all the salts that are invariably
found in grasses (the 'necessary' portion) is necessary for their perfect growth
‘ and development: besides this small necessary quantity , there is usually found
‘ in the plant a variable additional quantity of such salts as happen to be
I present in the soil in greater quantity than the plant actually needs, and are
‘ available for its use / and this variable quantity (the 'accidental' portion) is
' often considerable ; and depends in its constitution a* the nature of the super-
' abundint plant-foods that the soil contains.'
We will begin by discussing the first part of this principle, that—
(l) ‘A certain comparatively small quantity of all the salts that are invari-
‘ ably found in grasses is necessary for their perfect growth and development.'
Piofessor Johnson in his book, page 172, says— ‘ that potash, lime, phos-
phoric acid and sulphuric acid are absolutely necessary for the life of Agricul-
tural plants as is demonstrated by all the experiments hitherto made for
studying their influence.’ This is all that he says about these salts; and he
gives us no idea in what quantity they are absolutely neeessary. In the Tables,
however, that are given at the head of this Appendix, which contain records of
analyses of the seeds and straws of various Graminece (to which Natural Order
grasses, also, belong) and where, of course, all the plants that were analyzed
were perfect plants, we shall see that in every case, the difference between the
lowest percentage of each of these ash-ingredients and the highest is consider-
able ; and in some cases very large : we may, also, notice that the difference
between the lowest and highest percentages of the aggregate ash-ingredients,
that the dry matter of the plant contained, is often very great. In any case we
have no right to assume that it is even probable that the plant contained the
least quantity of any of these salts that it could come to perfection with.
When, therefore, we take into account all these 'considerations, it must appear
exceedingly probable that a plant could come to maturity with a quantity of
any of these salts, that is very small compared with what it usually contains.
Professor Johnson next speaks of the presence of sodic salts ; and with
reference to these salts, the conclusions that he arrives at are as follows;
(1) ‘ That soda is never totally absent from the plant, but that
(2) ‘lf indispensable, only a minute amount of it is requisite.
(3) ‘ That the foliage and succulent portion of the plant may include a con-
‘ siderable amount of soda that is not necessary to the plant, that is, in other
words, ‘ accidental , Oxide of Iron is then shown to be a necessary ingre-
dient of plants, but only in minute quantity—in quantity much smaller than is
usually found.
Very much the same conclusions are arrived at with respect to chlorine, as
apply to sodic-salts.


The conclusions, then, which seem to be indicated with respect to all the
ash-ingredients, are, that a small quantity of each is absolutely necessary for
the vigour and perfect development of agricultural plants, and among them
of Graminece ; but that the quantity of each that is absolutely necessary is
comparatively small.
(n) ‘ln addition to this small necessary quantity, there is usually found in
‘ the plant a variable additional quantity of such salts as happen to he present
‘ in the soil in greater quantity than the plant actually needs, and are available
for its use; and this variable quantity (the ‘ accidental ' portion) is often
‘ considerable.'
Professor Johnson, in * How Crops Grow,’ p. 187, says :
‘The ash-ingredients which are indispensable to crops maybe taken up in
‘ larger quantity than is essential.'
‘ More than sixty years ago, Saussure described a simple experiment
‘ which is conclusive on this point. He gathered a number of peppermint
‘ plants, and in some determined the amount of dry matter, which was 40.3 per
‘ cent. The roots of others were then immersed in pure water, and the plants
‘ were allowed to vegetate for two-and-a-half months in a place exposed to
< air and light, but sheltered from rain.'
< At the termination of the experiment, the plants, which originally weighed
* 100, had increased to 216 parts, and the dry matter of these plants, which at
* first was 40.3, had become 62 parts. The plants could have acquired from
‘ the glass vessels and pure water no considerable amount of mineral matter.
‘ It is plain then that the ash-ingredients, which were contained in two parts
‘ of the peppermint, were sufficient for the production and existence of 3 parts.
< We may assume, therefore, that at least one third of the ash of the original
* plants was in excess and accidental.’
The meaning of this is, that the amount of salts, which originally served for
two parts of organic matter in the plants, was found to be enough to serve for
three ; and that, therefore, the two parts of organic matter contained a greater
share of salts than was necessary, and enough for at least three parts. There
is nothing recorded in the experiment to lead us to think that the two parts did
not contain salts enough for far more than three parts of organic substance.
That this variable (‘ accidental’) quantity is often considerable, may be seen
by noticing the differences between the highest and lowest proportions of the
various salts which the seeds and straws of the various Graminece contained,
as recorded in the Tables, that are at the head of this Appendix; if at the same
time we take into consideration how low and how high a percentage of ash-
ingredients the plant may contain.
(in) ‘And this variable (‘accidental') quantity depends in its constitution
‘ on the nature of the super-abundant plant-food salts that the soil contains.'
The only experiments bearing on this part of the problem, which are given,
are unsatisfactory : for in the results that are recorded, which were obtained
from manuring a poor soil with various mineral manures, and noticing the
effect in each instance on the ash of buckwheat straw, only the proportions of
the various salts in the ash are given, without the effect of the individual
manures on the whole percentage of ash: so that although the proportion of a


I.
2.
3.
4-
5-
6.
Un-
manured.
Chloride
of
Sodium.
Nitrate
of
Potash.
Carbonate
of
Potash.
Sulphate
of
Magnesia.
Carbonate
of
Uime.
3i-7
7-4
21.6
39- 6
40.5
28.2
2 3-9
Chloride of Potassium
26.9
0.8
3-1
69
97
Chloride of Sodium
4.6
3-o
3-2
3 8
3-4
i.7
IS-?
I.?
14 O
12 8
it.6
14.1
18.6
1.9
3-3
1.4
47
4.2
47
2,8
2 7
4-3
7.i
3-5
Phosphoric Acid
10.3
95
6-5
8.9
10.9
10.0
20.4
l6.1
27.1
22,2
20.0
23.2
3 6
4.2
4,2
4.2
4.8
5-2
100.0
100.0
100,0
100.0
100.0
100.0
‘ It is seen from these figures that all the applications employed in this experi-
‘ ment exercised a manifest influence, and, in general, the substance added, or
< at least one of its ingredients, is found in the plant in increased quantity.
‘In (2) chlorine, but not sodium ; in (3) and (4) potash; in (5) sulphuric
< acid and magnesia, and in (6) lime ; are present in larger proportion than in
< the ash from the unmanured soil.’
It must be recollected that the roots of plants, like the digestive powers of
animals, possess in some cases a certain property of selecting any ingredients,
that they may wish for, from the food that is presented to them, and to a certain
extent of rejecting what they do not want. For that purpose they are able in
certain cases, like the digestive powers of animals, to decompose salts, and to
cause such fresh combinations, as they may wish for, of the constituents of
salts that they have decomposed, to be made.
certain salt in 100 parts of the ash, may appear to be increased or diminished
by the application of a particular manure, yet, if the whole percentage of ash
is not given, we cannot tell if the absolute quantity of that particular salt in
100 parts of the dry matter of the plant was increased or diminished : nor can
we tell to what extent the aggregate percentage of ash might be increased.
I will, however, give the results of the experiments in Professor Johnson’s
own words, and merely remark that the experiments are deprived of very much
of their value by the omission of the absolute percentage of ash in each case.
‘ Wolff has analyzed the ashes of several plants, cultivated in a poor soil,
‘ with the addition of various mineral fertilizers. The influence of the added
‘substances on the composition of the ash is very striking. The following
‘ figures comprise the results on the ash of buckwheat straw, which grew on
‘ the unmanured soil, and on the same, after application of the substances
‘ specified below :
This seems to have been the case in Wolff’s application of various mine-
ral manures, as lecorded above. In (2) the plant does not appear to have


wanted the sodium, but to have decomposed the salt, selected the chlorine,
and combined it with the potassium, which it derived from some less accept-
able potassic salt, which was present in the soil, and which it decomposed for
that purpose ; for we find a great increase in the percentage of the potassic-
chloride. In the case of (3) we know (Plow Crops Grow, p. 364) that the salt
applied, is decomposed by the roots, the nitrogen going to supply food for
albuminoid substances within the plant; and in this case the potash has gone
to increase the percentage of potash in the plant. Much the same appears to
have taken place in (4) with the carbonate of potash: the salt applied seems to
have been decomposed; the carbon probably being appropriated by the
organic portion of the plant, and the potassium used to increase the percentage
of potash in the plant. In (5) the sulphate of magnesia would appear to have
been immediately absorbed, for the percentage of both sulphuric acid and
magnesia in the plant was increased by the application of this salt. In (6) the
carbonate of lime seems to have been decomposed,—the carbon probably
being appropriated by the organic portion of the plant; while the lime appears
in the plant in the increased percentage of this substance, that the plant
contained.
It is needless to say that the above cannot be regarded as a proof of the
theory which is enunciated above, but thatjs rather intended to shew that the
investigations, that have been made, appear to point to the truth of it. To
prove it satisfactorily, special investigations would, of course, have to be made.
I regard this theory as important, because it appears to me]to lie at the root of
many of the phenomena, which separate good from bad sheep country. Its
soundness can be tested by examining whether the results that have been
deduced from its application in this paper, agree with the experience of
practical men.
With regard to the fact which Professor Johnson records, that ‘it is well
‘ known that oats have a great range of weight per bushel, being nearly twice
‘ as heavy when grown on rich land, as when gathered from a sandy inferior
‘ soil, ’ it must be recollected that the seed of oats consists of two parts—the
husk and the kernel; and that these two parts give quite different ash-analyses.
The principal ash-ingredient of the husk is silica; and, as a sandy soil supplies
an abundance of silicia, the husk of the oat that is grown on such a soil is likely
to be very fully developed, and therefore to be light, thick and bulky; the kernel
of the oat, on the contrary, contains little silica, but much magnesia and phos-
phoric acid; we have, also, reason to believe that, in order that the seeds may
be developed at all, the substance of the kernel must contain a certain high
percentage of these substances, and particularly of phosphoric acid. If, there-
fore, a poor soil, like the sandy soil that we are considering, fails to provide a
sufficient quantity of these particular kernel-salts, there will be a deficient
development of the kernel; and as Nature seems to refuse to allow the kernel
to sacrifice its high standard as regards its quality , the deficiency of kernel-
salts in the soil must cause it to suffer in quantity. The consequence,
then, is, that on a poor sandy soil, there is a very poor development of the
kernel as regards its size, but a very full development of the husk : so that the
oats are light and bulky. The deficiency in the poor soil of food for the
albuminoid substances, which constitute a considerable portion of the organic


substances of the kernel, would of course account for the poor development
of the kernel; but I cannot but think that the deficiency of valuable kernel -
salts in the soil had also a great deal to do with it, and more than is generally
supposed to be the case.
The following analyses will afford some ground for the line of argument,
that I have been using. The analyses numbered x and 2 are of the light and
heavy oats, that I have just been discussing; these analyses were made by
Herapath. Analysis No. 3is of a specimen of oats, from which the skin
had been removed, and was made by Fb. Schulze :
* The choice of a locality depends upon the peculiar properties of the soil
sought for or avoided by the various species of plants ’ (KiiCHENMEiSTER).
[With reference to the above law, I had hoped to be able to give a good
extract from some Standard Work bearing on it with reference to the condi-
tions which are favourable to the vigour and existence of parasites in their host.
For this purpose, I have consulted ‘ Cobbold on Worms,’ ‘ Von Siebold on
Worms,’ Carpenter’s three Works on Physiology, ‘Marshall’s Human
and Comparative Physiology,’ and the ‘Handbook of Physiology,’ by Kirkes :
but in none of these Works have I been fortunate enough to find anything
bearing on the subject. KiiCHENMEiSTER enters upon the subject of the
conditions with regard to the health of the host, that are favourable to the
existence in it of Vegetable Parasites; but he only makes two or three casual
allusions to Animal Parasites in his discussion. I will, therefore, make what
use I can of these allusions, and for the rest must fall back on my own general
knowledge of the subject.
* With regard to the absence of magnesia from the oats that Herapath analyzed, I
think that some mistake must have been made in the analyses, and that, by some means,
the magnesia was overlooked ; for if we examine the records of reliable analyses of oats
with husks, that are given in the Tables at the head of this Appendix, we shall see that out
of twenty-one analyses, 4.9 is the lowest percentage of magnesia that is recorded.


I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. Morris for the use of Kuchenmeis-
ter’s Manual of Parasites (I believe that Dr. Morris possesses the only copy
of this valuable work, that there is in the Colony), and of Cobbold's Work on
Worms. W. F.]
In pointing out the characteristic differences of conditions, with regard to
the host, that are favourable to the existence in it of animal and vegetable
parasites, Kuchenmeister says—‘that the former (animal parasites) live upon
‘ the fresh juices and supplies of their host, which they first decompose or
* assimilate; the latter (vegetable parasites) live on and take up their food from
‘substances already in a state of decomposition.’ I will say a few words
about vegetable parasites first, and then discuss its extension to animal
parasites,
They live on and take up their food from substances already in a state of
‘ decomposition ’ The vegetable parasites are lower organisms than the
animal parasites ; and thus they have to find already done for them, what the
animal parasite can do for himself; —they have to find the fresh juices and
supplies already decomposed for them. Just as a rock, the surface of which has
already been decomposed, provides a soil for the growth of vegetation in it, so
the host, in whose frame disease or weakness has caused the decomposition of
or morbid changes in the substance or juices of its tissues offers a soil that is
favourable to the existence in it of vegetable parasites.
When, therefore, we see vegetable parasites attacking wheat and fruit trees,
we must look for some cause of weakness in the plants themselves, which
renders them favourable soil for the existence in or on them of these parasites.
With reference to the circumstances that are favourable to the existence in
their host of animal parasites, KiiCHENMEISTER says : —‘They live upon the
‘ fresh juices and supplies of their host, which they first decompose or
‘ assimilate.’
The conditions, then, with regard to the health of ‘the host, that are favour-
able to the existence in it of animal parasites are that ‘ its fresh juices and
supplies ’ should be easily decomposed or assimilated.
Weakness and want of vigour in the juices and tissues themselves would
favour their decomposition; and if they are already decomposed, so as to
afford a fit soil for vegetable parasites, they will only need to be assimilated by
animal parasites
Parasites occur ‘in tedious diseases which are followed by weakness, 01 a
‘ retarded and slower reproduction when the molecules of the tissue appear to
‘have been retained too long’ (KiiCHENMEISTER) : that is to say, a general
want of vigour in the functions of circulation and excretion is favourable to the
presence of parasites.
Now Dr. Carpenter mentions that a great use of common salt is that ‘it
‘ is needed for the conservation of the organic compounds of the blood in their
‘ normal condition which means that the abundant presence of common salt
prevents the decomposition of the organic constituents of the blood and the
occurrence of morbid changes in them ; and in that way puts the body of the
host at once into a condition that is unfavourable to the existence in it of
animal parasites. Dr. Carpenter also mentions that common salt is useful
for the vigorous excretion of the morbid substances, and of the products of


the combustion that has been going on within the body; in this way, also,
common salt is antagonistic to the existence of animal parasites; for this
vigorous excretion of morbid substances at once prevents ‘ a retarded or
4 slower reproduction, when the molecules of the tissue appear to have been
4 retained too long.’
A most important excretory process, for which the presence of common
salt in the food is absolutely necessary, may be pointed out. It has been
already mentioned, that the greater part of the common salt (sodic-chloride
Na. Cl.) that is consumed, is decomposed, and that the chlorine (Cl.) goes to
supply the gastric juice with Hydrochloric acid (H. CL), while the greater
part of the soda is taken by the bile. Part of the soda, however, is combined
with phosphoric acid which the food contains, and enters the blood as sodic-
phosphate. The presence of the sodic-phosphate in the blood is quite as
important to its vigour and efficiency as the presence of iron; for the iron
acts as a vehicle for carrying the oxygen from the air to the tissues
for their combustion; whereas the sodic-phosphate helps the oxygen to
do its work effectively, and absorbs and carries back from the tissues
to the lungs, and there gives up to the air, the carbonic acid into which
the oxygen has been changed by their combustion: as long, therefore,
as there is plenty of salt given with the food, so that there is enough of the sodic-
phosphate supplied to the blood, the carbonic acid which is among the most un-
healthy of the products of the combustion of the tissues, is excreted effectively;
and the perfect excretion of the carbonic acid from the blood is as important
to its health and vigour, as its efficient oxidation, by means of the abundant
presence of iron, is.
A third reason why an abundant supply of common salt to animals is
hostile to the presence in them of animal parasites is, that the mere presence
of plenty of salt in the juices of the body renders them distasteful as food to
these parasites.
A vigorous state of the body—when the processes of circulation, digestion,
assimilation, and excretion are going on vigorously—is, in short, unfavourable
to the presence in it of all sorts of parasites. And, as it has already been
pointed out, that common salt promotes the vigour of the digestive and excretory
functions, that lime salts and sulphur are necessary or advantageous in the diges-
tive and assimilative processes, and that the abundant presence of iron in the
blood is necessary for it to perform its function of carrying oxygen to the tissues,
we may conclude that any salt that contains all these 4 complementary’ food
stuffs, ought to put the body into a state that is unfavourable to the existence
within it of animal parasites.
A salt which, I believe, will fulfil this purpose, and wall, also, be likely to
act as a manure for promoting the growth of a crop of wool, will be given in
Appendix F.
So much has been said about the advantages that attend the supplying of
common salt with the food, that I cannot refrain from quoting Lifbig’s words
in reference to an experiment made on stock, by giving some beasts salt with
their fodder, and leaving others without it:—‘l cannot here omit to mention
4 that agriculturists have endeavoured to solve the question as to the necessity


‘or the profit of adding salt to the fodder of live stock in their own way. The
‘ result of the excellent experiments of Boussxngault is, in this respect,
‘ decisive, clear, and intelligible. The addition of salt to the fodder had no
‘ influence on the quantity of flesh, fat, or milk obtained from the animal;
‘ but,’ says Boussxngault, ‘ the salt appeared to have a favourable effect on
‘ the appearance and quality of the stock. After the first fourteen days, we
‘ observed no perceptible difference between the two lots (each of three oxen);
‘ but in the course of the month following, the difference was visible even to
‘ the unpractised eye. In the beasts of both lots, the skin to the feel was fine
‘ and sound, but the hair in the oxen that had got salt was smooth and shining;
* that of the others was dull and erect. On prolonging this experiment, these
‘ signs became still more prominent. In the animals of the second lot, after
‘ they had had no salt for a year, the hair was matted, and the skin here and
‘ there devoid of hair. Those of the first lot on the contrary, retained the look
‘ of stall-kept beasts ; their liveliness and frequent indications of the tendency
‘to leap, contrasted strikingly with the heavy gait and cold temperament
‘ observed in those of the second lot. There is no doubt,’ continues
‘ Boussxngault, ‘ that a higher price would have been obtained in the market
‘ for the oxen reared under the influence of salt.’
‘ These experiments are most instructive. In the oxen which only had as
‘ much salt as was contained in their fodder, the quantity of salt was insufficient
‘ for the secretory process. There was wanting the means of transport for a
‘ number of substances which, out of the body, excite disgust; their whole
‘ frame, the blood, flesh, and all the juices were loaded with these; for the
‘ external surface of the skin is a mirror of the state of the interior. The
‘ other oxen, which daily had salt added to their food, remained healthy, even
‘ in the mode of life to which they were confined, which corresponded but
‘ little to their nature, and with excess of food and deficient exercise. Their
‘ blood remained pure, and well fitted for all the purposes of nutrition. In the
‘ salt, they had a powerful means of resistance to external causes of disturbance
‘to health, which, in the actual circumstances, was indispensable to them.
< The body of the others was, in regard to disease, like a fire-place, heaped
‘ with the most inflammable fuel, whicn only requires a spark in order to burst
‘ into flame and to be consumed.
‘ Salt does not act as a producer of flesh, but it neutralises the injurious
‘action of the conditions which must be united in the unnatural state of
< animals fed or fattened in order to produce flesh ; the advantages attending
‘ its use can hardly be appreciated too highly.’
If salt, then, is so valuable a complementary food-stuff, and if it is
abundantly contained in the grass and herbage of the salt-bush country; and
if, also, the grass of the salt-bush plains is well exposed to the sun, so as to be
rendered sweet and nutritious, can we wonder any longer that the stock of the
salt-bush country are proverbially so healthy ? I think that when ring-barking
hasbecome properly appreciated, and the use of salt for stock is rightly understood
and valued, the table-land country can be made almost equally as good as, if
not, in some respects, at any rate for sheep, better than the salt-bush country.
But we must first of all have a reasonably intelligent Land Law, and get the
present duty on salt removed, or manufacture it cheaply for ourselves.


Addendum— ln the last chapter, I attributed much of the rust (which is a
vegetable parasite;, that the wheat crops suffer from so generally in this
country, to the fact that the soils are not suitable for the continuous growth of
wheat, and that, after two or three crops have been taken off, they become
exhausted, and cease to supply some one or more wheat-kernel salts in sufficient
abundance ; the presence of a sufficient quantity of its various salts in the
wheat-seed seems to be necessary to hold its constituents firmly together, and
to prevent them from undergoingasortof partial decomposition, the precise nature
of which is as yet, I believe, but imperfectly understood. Inland which does not
contain a sufficient supply of all the kernel-salts of wheat, the seed does not
receive enough of them to prevent this decomposition from taking place ; and
it is, in consequence, liable to be attacked by rust.
Until lately, I have been unable to make use of this hypothesis to account
for the face that late-sown wheat is more liable to be attacked by rust, than that
which is sown early : but I have now met with an explanation, which removes the
difficulty. Professor Miller mentions in his Chemistry, vol. iii., p, 917, that
‘ wheat sown in autumn makes root all the winter, and is enabled to extract
saline matters from the soil to a great depth,’ and by means of the large develop-
ment of its roots, can get the requisite amount of saline matters from a soil, that
contains but little of them.
This winter root-making would seem to be especially requisite in this country,
where the growth of vegetation is so much more rapid than it is in colder
climates.
APPENDIX D.
Since the former chapter, in which an account was given of the functions of
complementary food stuffs, went to press, I have been so fortunate as to see
their use described in Liebig’s Letters: his description is so comprehensive
and so forcibly worded, that I will give it in full ; —he begins Letter 28, as
follows :
‘ In the two preceding letters there has been ascribed to certain constituents
‘ (albuminoids and amyloids) of seeds, roots, tubers, herbs, fruits, and flesh, the
‘ the power of supporting the processes of nutrition and respiration; and it will
‘ appear as a very striking contradiction, when it is stated that no one of these
‘ substances, by itself, neither caseine alone, nor the substance of muscular fibre,
* the albumen of eggs or of the blood, nor the corresponding vegetable products,
< are able to support the plastic or formative processes; that neither starch,
* sugar, nor fat can sustain the process of respiration. Nay, it may excite still
‘ greater astonishment, to add, that these substances, even when mixed, no
< matter in what proportions, are destitute of the property of digestibility, without
‘ the presence of certain other substances ; so much so, that if these other con-
* ditions be excluded, the above-named compounds are utterly unable to effect
e the continuance of life, and of the vital phenomena.


<i n the numerous experiments of physiologists and chemists, in which the
< attempt was made to feed animals with these substances, alone or mixed toge-
< ther, all the animals died, after a shorter or longer time, with the appearances
‘ which accompany starvation. Even after a few days, the utmost tortures of
4 hunger were found insufficient to induce these animals to take the food offeied
‘to them ; since the experience of these few days, and their instinct, at first
4 deceived, told them that the introduction of this food into their stomachs was
4 as truly indifferent or useless, for the purposes of nutrition, as the eating of
‘ stones.
4 On the other hand, it is a fact, confirmed by the experience of thousands of
4 years, that flesh and bread, either separately or mixed together, as well as the
4 milk of animals, suffice to support life in full vigour, without the necessity of
4 adding any other substance whatever. And hence it follows, necessarily, that
4 these articles of food-flesh, bread, and milk—and likewise the plants, or parts
4 of plants, consumed by the herbiverous animal, must contain, in the due pro-
-4 portion, those other conditions, the presence and co-operation of which is indis-
-4 pensably necessary for the processes of digestion and nutrition.
4 These necessary matters, essential to the organic processes, by the presence
4 of which the plastic constituents of food and the respiratory materials acquire
4 those properties which render them fit and proper for the support of life, are
4 the incombustible constituents , or the salts of the blood.
‘ The incombustible parts of the blood of all animals are of the same nature
4 and quality. Leaving out such as are accidental, or variable, the blood at all
4 times, and under all circumstances, contains certain quantities of phosphoric
4 add, of alkalies (potash and soda), alkaline earths [lime, magnesia ), iron
4 ( oxidised) and common salt (chloride of sodium).
4 All these matters, before they became parts of the blood, were constituents
4 of the food of man or of the fodder of animals. If, then, it be true that these
4 substances take, or have taken, a necessary and determinate part in converting
4 the constituents of food into the constituents of the body, it follows that no kind
4 of food can sustain life, in which these substances are wanting ; that all kinds
4 of food for man or animals, which possess full nutritive power, must contain
4 these bodies in the proportions adapted for the formation of blood ; and that
4 we can deprive the food of its sanguific properties, if we deprive it of these con-
-4 ditions, indispensable to those peculiar properties.’
APPENDIX E.
It was mentioned in Appendix B. that ‘the roots of plants, like the digestive
‘powers of animals, possess, in some cases, a certain property of selecting any
4 ingredients, that they may wish for, from the food that is presented to them,
4 and to a certain extent, of rejecting what they do not want.’ For this
purpose the digestive powers, like the roots of plants, possess a power of de-
composing certain salts, and either using or building up new salts with the con-
stituents that are released by the decomposition. For instance, we know that


m the case of the sodic-chloride (Na. Cl.) or common salt, the chlorine is
separated from the sodium, and combined with hydrogen as hydrochloric acid
(H. Cl.) which is used in the gastric juice in large quantity; while the sodium
appears in the bile as soda. If the sodium had not been wanted for the bile,
or by the body, at all, it would have been rejected in some form or other with
the excreta : and this, doubtless, is what does actually happen, when some salts
are decomposed, and only one of the constituents is wanted.
In the case of iron-sulphate, we know that the administration of this salt
serves to enrich the blood with iron ; we also know that the iron does not enter
the blood as iron-sulphate; so that this salt must be decomposed before the iron
reaches the blood: the sulphur which the iron-sulphate contains is doubtless
used, if it is wanted, for the same purpose, as that for which the sulphates would
seem to be provided among the complementary food-stuffs; and that is, in order
to provide sulphur to enable the vegetable albuminoids to be assimilated to the
form which they take in animal substance. If sulphur was not provided for
this purpose with the complementary food stuffs, there would be great waste of
albuminoids in their assimilation. And it would happen in this way;—vegetable
albumin contains about 0.9 per cent, of sulphur, while the substance into
which albumin is assimilated in wool-fibre contains somewhere about 3.6 per
cent. (‘How Crops Grow,’ p. 43): that is to say, the substance of wool,
which is of albuminoid origin, contains four times as much sulphur as vegetable
albumin does. In order, then, that one part of wool-substance may be formed
by the assimilation of vegetable albumin without the aid of complementary
sulphur, four parts of vegetable albumin would have to be used to provide
sulphur enough for one part of wool-fibre ; that is to say, three parts of the
vegetable albumin would have to be decomposed and give up their sulphur to
the remaining one part, in order to enable it to reach the sulphur-standard of
wool-fibre. This, of course, would involve a waste of three parts of albumin, if
the complementary food-stuffs provided no additional sulphur: it would also
entail much undesirable work in the body.
In order, also, that vegetable albumin may be assimilated to animal albumin,
which contains 1.6 per cent of sulphur (‘ How Crops Grow,’ p. 102), two parts
of vegetable albumin would have to be used to form one part of animal albumin,
if no complementary sulphur was contained in the food. It is in this way that
iron-sulphate may be expected to be particularly valuable in a sheep-salt, and
especially in country where, from the nature of the soil, the grasses do not
contain enough of iron, or of sulphates.
From the nature of Kuchb'.nmeister’s experiment, which is alluded to in
this paper, we may be led to think that a similar decomposition takes place in
the case of gypsum (Ca.SO 4 ., —calcic-sulphate): the lime is valuable in the
gastric juice, and for other purposes in the body : while the sulphur is probably
available for the assimilation of vegetable albuminoids.
Any excess, however, that is not wanted, will undergo no change, and will be
lejected with the excreta, if too much of any of these salts is given, as is
doubtless the case when one part of the iron-sulphate to nine parts of salt is
given to sheep: the iron-sulphate in this case makes the salt too nauseous for
the sheep to take in sufficient quantity ; and it they do happen to take enough,
owing to its astringency, it rather tends to do them harm. I have, also, quite
failed to learn that iron-sulphate acts as a vermifuge at all.


On these accounts, and on account of the decidedly beneficial effect that
gypsum had when KUchenmeister gave it to sheep for fluke, I look upon
the iron and calcic sulphates in my ‘ sheep-salt ’ as forming most valuable
ingredients : for not only would they be likely to favour the production of
an increase of wool-fibre, but also of more flesh, and of a vigorous state of
health, which would be altogether unfavourable to the existence in the sheep
of worms of any sort whatever.
It is a remarkable fact that those nations of Continentrl Europe, which
consume little animal food, but receive the bulk of the albuminoids of their
food in the vegetable form, are remarkable for the great use that they make of
garlic and onions. Now both garlic and onions contain a considerable quantity
of sulphur in the oils, to which they owe their peculiar flavour and smell: and
this sulphur is, doubtless, made use of in the body to bring the vegetable
albuminoids in their assimilation up to the sulphur standard of animal albumi-
noids ; and, in this way, as I have already pointed out, the vegetable
albuminoids are economized, and made to go much further. This value, that
garlic and onions possess, has doubtless been found out by experience, without
the reason of it being known ; just as the value of Irish stew, as forming a
most nutritious mixture of amyloid, albuminoid, fatty and complementary food-
stuffs, was found out long before chemistry could point out its recommendations.
The natives of India, who are for the most part dependent on rice for their
food, also make great use of garlic and onions.
Garlic and onions ought to be of great value to vegetarians; as well as
turnips, mustard, cress and horse-radish, each of which also contains a sul-
phurized oil.
Many of the plants, that belong to the Natural Order of the Cruciferce, such as
turnips, rape, mustard, the various species of cress, &c., contain sulphurized
oils. Dr. Woolls tells me that different kinds of cress, both indigenous and
introduced, are abundant in some parts of the countiy; these plants might be
encouraged in sheep-pastures with advantage, if the sheep are known to be
fond of them.
The following percentages of sulphur are contained in some of the albu-
minoids :—animal albumin, 1.6; vegetable albumin, 0.9; blood fibrin, 1.2;
flesh fibrin, 1.1 ; wheat fibrin, 1.0; animal casein, 1.0 ; vegetable casein, 0.5.
In hair and horn (of which the substance of wool-fibre is also composed) it
occurs to the amount of from 3 to 5 per cent. (‘ How Crops Grow’) ; so that a
fleece of washed wool, that weighs 3 lbs., will contain about 2 ozs. of sulphur.
APPENDIX F.
The following is taken from the ‘ Dictionary of Chemistry,’ by Watts.
‘ In the salt-works of the Mediterranean, the greater part of the surface is
‘ below the main level of the sea. The ponds are divided by small banks of
‘ earth, two feet high, and from one to two feet thick. The water is admitted
< by a small flood-gate, and circulates by means of openings in the banks. It
‘enters with a density of 1.025, and continues to increase in density by


Common Salt
92-3
Gypsum
2.7
Iron-sulphate
3-0
* evaporation, under the influence of the dry winds, until it attains a density
‘of 1.143. Its volume is then reduced to one-sixth of its first proportions. It
‘ now begins to deposit calcic-sulphate (gypsum) till the density reaches 1.210.
‘ It is then conveyed by means of pumps, worked by horse or steam power, to
‘ reservoirs slightly more elevated, the bottoms of which are generally composed
‘of hard clay, well beaten in, where the precipitation of the salt takes place.
‘ The volume is by this time reduced to one-tenth of its original bulk. From
‘ the density of 1.210, representing 250 on Beaume’s Hydrometer, up to 1.286,
‘equal to 320 on the same scale, the evaporation takes place in the open air,
‘ the liquid constantly depositing almost pure salt, which goes into the market
‘ without further preparation. In order to obtain it, care is taken to run off the
‘liquor, marking 32 0 B, which covers the lied of salt about two inches thick.
‘ It is then collected by means of shovels, and thrown into heaps, called in the
‘ south of France Caniells, and in Italy, Cumuli. It is then allowed to drain,
‘ after which it is ready for sale. The salt thus obtained is called ‘Bay-salt.’ ’
In the sheep-salt, No. 1, which is given in Chapter VIII., the process of
manufacture might be much simplified by merely evaporating the sea-water till
its density reaches 32 0 of Beaume’s Hydrometer, and then rejecting the
remaining mother liquor, and retaining the salt that has been deposited; if
2\ lbs. of iron-sulphate are added to 97 1 lbs. of this salt, the ‘sheep-salt No. I,’
or one very nearly the same in composition, will be obtained.
A salt, which would, in some respects, be better than the ‘ Sheep-salt No. 1,
and one that ought not to be substantially more expensive, might be made by
making the ‘ bay-salt ’in the manner described above; and if, instead of
throwing away the gypsum, which was deposited before the deposition of the
‘ bay-salt ’ began, 2 lbs. of it, together with 3 lbs. of iron-sulphate, be added
to every 95 lbs. of the ‘bay-salt,’ we shall have ‘ Sheep salt No. 2 ’: its com-
position Avill be somewhat as follows :
Composition of 1 Sheep-salt No. 2.
Impurities (mostly Magnesic Salts)
This ‘ Sheep-salt No. 2 ’ will be likely to form a better general sheep-salt than
‘No. 1’; for ‘ No. 1’ contains too large a percentage of gypsum, and that at
the expense of the common salt: while ‘ No. 2’ contains a full supply of
sulphates.
I believe that there are extraordinary facilities for making a sheep-salt cheaply
at Bulli; for lam told that the coal mine is close to the sea, and that there are
thousands of tons of slack coal wasted every year, because they have no use for
it: by using this slack coal, the sea-water might be evaporated very quickly,
and the process of salt making would be rendered independent of the weather :
the only thing against Bulli would be the cost of the carriage of the salt to
Sydney; but that, I believe, would not be more than a few shillings a ton.


APPENDIX G.
Replacement of one salt by another nearly related to it in certain properties.
(i). In the Mineral Kingdom,
It often happens that salts, that are nearly related to one another in crystalline
and certain chemical properties, can replace each other in minerals without alter-
ing their form or mineralogical characters.
The substarces that can replace one another in minerals in this way are said
to be isomorphous : and this property that they possess gives rise to isomorphism
in minerals which are the same in appearance, but have a different chemical
composition.
(2) In the Vegetable Kingdom.
The alkalies soda and potash are nearly related to one another in chemical
properties ; and it is shown (‘ How Crops Grow,’ p. 176) that soda can replace
any potash that is ‘ accidental ’ in plants.
In an instance that is recorded in £ How Crops Grow,’ p. 202, potash, lime,
and magnesia also seem to be able to replace one another in fir and pine trees.
(3.) In the Animal Kingdom.
I am not aware of any instance of this, that is known to occur in the Animal
Kingdom : it seems not unlikely, however, from the analogous replacements
that take place in the Mineral and Vegetable Kingdoms, and for other reasons,
that such a replacement does take place in the yolk of wool that is grown in
that part of the salt-bush country, where sodic salts have to a great extent re-
placed potassic salts in vegetation; and that the potash, which is the constituent
of the normal wool-yolk, is, to a certain extent, replaced by soda.
This is a speculation that Professor Liversidge expresses great interest in ;
and in order to see if there is any truth in it, he has expressed his willingness
to examine the yolk of such wool to see if a soda-soap does exist in it: perhaps
some one, who takes an interest in this question, will be kind enough to send
him a fleece of salt-bush country grown wool: it is necessary that it should
exhibit all the peculiarities of harshness, dryness, Sec., which characterize
the wool of the regular salt-bush country.
If it is found that the normal potash-soap is replaced by soda-soap in the
yolk of salt-bush country wool, it is very possible that the knowledge of the
fact might suggest to the wool-scourer some advantageous modification in the
treatment of such woof or prove useful in some other way.
Note. -The theory respecting the circulation of the sap in trees, which I
have made use of in the chapter on Ring-barking, has, as I consider, been com-
pletely overthrown, and a sounder one substituted for it: but this new theory
has not yet been so generally accepted, as to justify my abandoning the old one.
and making use of it: the results, however, that are deduced in that chapter
from the old theory, are true enough to be made practical use of; although
the reasoning, by means of which they have been arrived at, is hardly sound.
F. Cunninghams Co., Steam Machine Printers, IS6 Pitt-street.




