

fcdiXChrf '
COMPULSION IN AUSTRALIA.
The National Review.
Feb. 1917.


THE
NATIONAL REVIEW
No. 408. FEBRUARY 1917
GREATER BRITAIN
COMPULSION IN AUSTRALIA
B Y AN AUSTRALIAN CORRESPONDENT
By the time this sees the light several months will have passed
since the failure of the Conscription referendum in Australia ; but
the causes of that failure and the social and political movements
connected with it have by no means exhausted their power, so
that some account of them may not be without interest even if
belated. For that matter, there are perennially useful lessons to
be drawn from them, both as to the handling of a modern demo-
cracy and as to the proper understanding of Australians by their
kinsmen in the United Kingdom.
The failure was a bitter disappointment, and the British Press
has taken great pains to be nice to us about it and to find excuses
for it. We, for our part, have no excuses to offer. It was a
grave dereliction of duty, and was caused by our entire inability
to make our fellow-citizens comprehend that they had any duty
to fulfil. Excuses in plenty were forthcoming at the time to salve
the consciences of men who did not want to go to the front or to
let their sons go. Of these a little will be said later on. But the
central fact of the situation was that more than half the population
have not yet grasped what the war means. They err in good
company, no doubt: in a recent issue of the Fortnightly Review
an English politician baldly calls the w T ar “ this great episode ”
and expresses his belief that when it is over we can go back to
the old Party quarrels and the old class divisions and patched-up
compromises. That is almost exactly what was in the mind of
the voters who said NO on October 28. The war was an episode,
something going on at the other end of the world wdiich affected
life at this end disagreeably; to insist that any one from this end
should be sent there against his will, and to the detriment of their
relations with him, seemed preposterous. Their minds enter-
tained no idea of the war’s all-importance. They judged the
question by its effects on themselves personally. Conscription
would deprive them of children, customers, labourers, and so


forth ; therefore it was undesirable. Essentially, that is what
the NO vote meant.
It is all the more important to understand the truth of this
view of the matter, because so much stress has been laid by
certain people on a very different view. A section of the Australian
Press, still in the grip of the Party devil, attempted from the
first to make the Conscription campaign a matter of Liberal
against Labour views, and denounced the result as a symptom
of the vileness of Labour influence. Correspondingly, a section
of the Labour extremists used Conscription as a weapon against
the moderate Labour men whom they hoped to displace, and
welcomed the NO majority as a proof that the country was with
them. Nothing could be more misleading. The mere distribu-
tion of votes shows how vain were the hopes and false the assump-
tions of both these sections. It is quite true that Labour
extremists —both the anarchic I.W.W. group and the doctrinaire
Syndicalists —voted and orated against Conscription, partly as
the sinister device of the hated Mr. Hughes, partly as a mechanism
which would take out of Australia the young bachelor unionists
who backed them in fomenting strikes and leave the unions in
the control of the soberer married elders. It is quite true, also,
that the (mostly) Liberal Press supported Conscription, and nearly
all the Labour newspapers —always extremist —opposed it. But
the voters, as usual, ignored on the whole both Press and politicians,
and voted in their own private interests. Thus in Victoria,
where nearly every Labour representative was an anti-Conscrip-
tionist, Labour constituencies provided a large part of the YES
majority, while in South Australia things went exactly the
opposite way. Thus, too, the big NO majority in New South
Wales was largely contributed to by the farming constituencies,
which return Liberal members to the Federal Parliament, but
whose electors dreaded the loss of the few harvesters and farm-
labourers still left to them. It is believed that a declaration
made at the last moment by the Prime Minister, to the effect
that hona fide farm labour would not be called up till the harvest
was in, might well have turned fifty thousand votes from NO to
YES if it had been made a few weeks earlier. And the selfishness
of the farmers was matched by that of small shopkeepers and
boarding-house keepers in the cities.
It is, as has been already said, very important to get this
point clear. The NO majority is in no sense a Labour majority
or an extremist majority. It is merely a majority of narrow-
minded, half-educated people, swollen by a certain number of
female sentimentalists and (mainly) immigrant anarchists. At a
general election the anarchists would no doubt vote for Labour
candidates, but quite half of the rest —and probably more than


half—would vote as eagerly against Labour as they did against
Conscription. The victory is a triumph for ignorance, not for
any active or aggressive policy or quality.
It is true, of course, that the Labour “ machines ” (except in
Western Australia) declared themselves openly against Conscrip-
tion, and expelled from their coteries the Prime Minister himself
as well as most of the Labour Members who followed him. This
needs brief explanation. It was due to a mistake in tactics on
the part of Mr. Hughes. Just when he was leaving for England
he took occasion to make some bitter but accurate remarks
descriptive of the anarchist and syndicalist parasites who had
fastened on the Australian Labour movement. By attacking
these enemies, few but vindictive and intensely hard working, just
when he was about to give them six months’ opportunity for
counter-attack, he practically left the Labour machines at their
mercy. They remembered that he was their avowed opponent;
they knew that his return would be the signal for an attempt to
expel them from the organizations ; and they naturally seized
their chance of packing the organizations in advance with a view
of expelling him. That they also fought against Conscription
was an accident. They would certainly have fought against it
whether he advocated it or no ; but they would, equally certainly,
have found some excuse for expelling him if Conscription had
never been in question. As far as they and their like were
concerned, the vote of October 28 was merely a vote against
Hughes. Like the farmers and the little Liberals, they were
thinking of themselves only, not of the war at all; they were
indulging a personal hate, just as the others were indulging a
personal covetousness. They are indulging it still. More than
one member of the Federal Parliament has quite recently refused
to take part in the new recruiting campaign because they will
not work with Mr. Hughes, and the wish to deprive Mr. Hughes
of the credit of settling the coal strike has had a great deal to do
with its prolongation.
So the whole trouble, as aforesaid, can be traced back to the
original sin of ignoring the war. It is a sin not peculiar to
Australia, but that makes it none the less heinous. And the
sinfulness lies at the door of those who should have been leaders
and teachers. It is not to be expected, in this or any other
country, that the ordinary hard-working citizen, with his mind
inevitably full of his private concerns and uninstructed —except
for a partisan and itself only half-instructed Press—should of
himself comprehend the greatness and overwhelming importance
of this war. He feels it as a disturbance oi normal conditions.
His vague if creditable patriotism displays itself in a belief that
the disturbance cannot possibly end in the defeat of his country.


If lie has imagination, he may conceive that it is his duty to take
some part in ending the trouble ; if he has none, he will probably
content himself with trying to minimize the effects of the dis-
turbance on himself and his immediate surroundings. Anything
more must be drummed into him by his normal leaders, with
consistent example as well as persistent precept. If his normal
leaders fail him, what wonder if he views even a world-war with
indifference ?
In this case the normal leaders have unmistakably failed to
do their part. They have talked patriotism without ceasing;
but they have done little to enforce their own sermons. Mr.
Hughes is of course excepted, but he was away at the really
critical moment —the anti-Conscription campaign was three-
quarters won before he returned. Senator Pearce, excellent
patriot as he is, was overweighted with the care of the military
machine, and had little time for anything outside his Depart-
mental duties. Add to these names one more—that of Sir William
Irvine, who has done everything a Member in Opposition can do
to obliterate Party, rouse his rather sluggish fellows, and con-
centrate all political effort on the winning of the war—and you
have a complete list of leaders who have made any real attempt
to lead. The rest have been as parochial in their way as the
farmers have in theirs. As for the State politicians, who are
more within the ordinary man’s sphere because they deal oftener
with the local and minor matters that concern him so nearly,
their speeches have been overfull of the war and their actions
have practically ignored it. How is a plain man to believe in
the war’s all-importance when one Premier insists on borrowing
millions for city railways and another increases his expenditure
on the trimmings of education ? When the sad old Party fight for
office and the sad old business fight for undue profits continue
m full swing, and are even extended into the area of war-service ?
If trade-unionists have seen in the war mainly an opportunity
of securing higher wages—and some of them have, although
many others have sacrificed themselves nobly for their country
none of them have been more unscrupulous than some employers
and merchants, who might have been expected to set a better
example. As for the Press, it has on the whole maintained its
usual standard of unreality and inconsistency. It has told us in
the same breath that the war will be over to-morrow and that
every available man must be at the front before it can be ended.
It has called the Prime Minister a charlatan for six months, and
then wondered why people distrusted him in the seventh. It has
ascribed disloyalty and greed to every one who did not suit its
politics, and so alienated from the few good causes it advocated
large number of people who objected to its general programme.


There have been exceptions, of course, as there have been to all
the general statements made above —common-sense patriotism is
probably as often found among editors as among politicians ; but
the rule is otherwise.
Reviewing such a past, one may be excused for being pessi-
mistic about the future. But there are signs of betterment.
The shock of the NO vote —for it was a shock all round : every
one expected the rest to be unselfish, and even the wildest
extremists had looked forward to a small YES majority —is
bringing Press, politicians, and public to their senses together.
The most extravagant of the Premiers is not only preaching but
practising economy for the first time in his political career. The
most selfish of the employers have had their private shock, too,
in the sudden and universal strike of coal-miners which has left
the whole of Australia without power to work any but the most
essential industries. The true story of that strike and the
personality of the men ultimately responsible for it will surprise
students of history some years hence ; at the moment it can only
be said that its results work for good, in singling out the vital
industries of the Commonwealth, in stressing the fact that war
necessities really do override all private or minor needs and
conveniences, in making the ordinary man sit up and think for
himself about the relations between State and citizen and the
manner in which they have been affected by the war, probably
for all time.
One point about the coal strike is worth noting in England.
Like nearly all the important Australian strikes for ten years,
and like the recent anti-social demonstrations of the Industrial
Workers of the World (which included murder, forgery, and arson
within two months or so), this one has been run by immigrants.
As an immigrant, Peter Bowling, engineered and for some time
governed the coal strike of 1909, so another immigrant, A. C.
Willis, has been the moving spirit of this strike. Similarly, out
of twelve I.W.W. criminals just sentenced to fifteen years or so
for conspiracy against society —that of course was not the legal
formula, but it was the real crime—nine are immigrants, and most
of them immigrants from Britain. It is the social conditions of
Britain that disturb labour out here. Incontestably the Australian
workers who listen to these imported demagogues are fools to
believe in them ; but it is equally incontestable that, where the
importees are absent, Australian labour is undisturbed. In the
Conscription campaign just over, one of the arguments most
frequently used by its opponents was the old one that Conscription
placed the worker “ under the heel of the capitalist ” by making
him liable to do any work he was set to under military conditions
and for soldier’s pay. Such an assertion is hopelessly absurd in


a countey where adult suffrage is the law, and no Australian
would use it; it was an imported argument from European
countries with a limited franchise, probably quite invalid there,
but certainly irrelevant in the Commonwealth.
To revert to the general situation in Australia, although one
struggles against pessimism and endeavours to see light through
_ ! C f °p ds a i - ( ;f d / but tbe most tempered optimism
cannot be justified. It will take all the energy of Mr. Hughes at
ms best, all the efforts of all the intelligent patriots in the Common-
wealth to make the mass of Australians realize what they did
on October 28 and what they must do to annul that. It will
take even more Exhortation and example may do their utmost
here, but they fail, and will continue to fail, against one very
powerful influence—that of the example of the Mother Country 7
Every man who denounces in Australia the disloyalty of selfish-
ness, the disgrace of keeping back from war service one atom of
personal effort, is confronted with messages cabled from England •
i in England, men say, with the war at its doors and in its skies'
private companies are allowed great war-profits, private citizens
are allowed the utmost luxury of food and dress and pleasure
why need Australia strain after a higher standard ? We hear
that these things are denounced in England also ; but we do not
near that they are to any considerable extent put down We get
the impression that all along the fighting fronts there is virtue
m excelsis— courage, patience, genius, great-heartedness beyond
prais . e b-S nd beiun<i tJ jat, as far as Britain is concerned, weakness
and mdifference and fatal attempts at compromise. And while
that is the example which England seems to set us, what can
ngxand expect of a country out of the track of war, bereft of
the best and bravest of her sons, and beset with doubts about
her own future in the farthest corner of the Empire ? *
*™ l \ aTtlcle left Australia before the great change in Downing Street which ha«
Mother country with * Go —‘ -
