

GREAT BRITAIN AND ITS
COLONIES.
THE OBSTACLES TO IMPERIAL FEDERATION
P. McM. GLYNN, BA., LL.B.
REPRINTED FROM THE “ SOUTH AUSTRALIAN REGISTER .”
.Adelaide:
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.




t,-7J
GREAT BRITAIN AND ITS COLONIES.
THE OBSTACLES TO IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
To Turgot is assigned the saying that
colonies, like fruit, drop off the parent
tree when ripe. The statement is cer-
tainly supported by experience. The
severance from the mother country
or central authority of .the colonies of
the old world was only a question of time.
The dominions of Greece and Rome,
Venice and Genoa, in more remote, and
of Spain and Holland in more recent
times fell to pieces as local diversities in-
creased and the sense of independence
grew. In the case of the American colo-
nies of England the tie of common alle-
giance proved too weak for the strain of
opposite interests. It may have been
the accident of the tea duties that led to
the loss of America, but these accidents
will arise in history, and precipitate
events that would have come sooner or
later without them. Revolutions are not
caused by the occasions on which the
signs of them become first apparent. It
would, however, be a mistake to imagine
that what has been is the unfailing test of
what will be, or that history invariably
repeats its great phases. There may
have been something in the conditions
of the scattered dominions of the past
that made disruption inevitable —some-
thing which either modern conditions do
not contain or new relations can counte-
ract. On this account the demand for
Imperial federation is not to be met with
a mere epigram. The question is too im-
portant to be shelved without considera-
tion. If Imperial federation be the only
alternative to the separation of England
and the colonies, it calls for a little more
attention than, from colonials at all
events, it has hitherto received.
The term “Imperial federation,” as
the late Professor Freeman pointed oqt,
is misleading. Imperialism has no place
in a system of Federal Government,
which excludes all ideas of sovereignty
inconsistent with the theory of equal
rights among the members of the federa-
ration. Under a federation sovereignty
for the purposes of the union resides in a
central body, to which all the States and
citizens stand in the same relation. Fede-
ration means the union for certain pur-
poses of States, which for all other pur-
poses retain their independence. It does
not matter whether the central or federal
body takes, as in the case of the United
States of America, only certain delegated
powers, or, as in the case of Canada, all
powers not expressly reserved to the
component members. In either case
the central and local authorities are com-
pletely distinct ; both are supreme
within their respective spheres, and
claim direct allegiance from the citizens.
In this respect a federation is very
different from a confederacy or alliance
of several States. Under a confederacy
the central body—it would be a mis-
nomer to call it power—has not direct
authority over the citizens, and can only
act through the State Governments.
Having no Executive its requisitions, if
disregarded, cannot be enforced ; and the
history of the American Confederation,
which preceded the present Federal
Union, shows that requisitions are seldom
respected by States that find them
disagreeable. It may be regarded as
absolutely certain that no Act of the
present Federal Council of Australia
would receive the least respect from a
colony by which it was considered to any
extent onerous. An Alliance is nothing
more than an agreement to act together
in certain contingencies. Neither a Con-
federacy nor an Alliance would attain the
ends sought through Imperial federation.
The latter system, therefore, involves the
establishment of a central body, with
absolute power for certain purposes over
the citizens of the Empire, if the use of
the term may for convenience be con-
tinued. It means a diminution, by sur-
render or delegation of some of them
to a new body, of the powers of the


various Legislatures of the United King- lessened by the fact that the Federal
loin and the colonies. The Imperial
Parliament is theoretically omnipotent
now in all matters, and effectively omni-
potent in regard to the internal affairs of
the United Kingdom and the external
relations of the Empire. It created
colonial Constitutions by Act of Parlia-
ment, and in thaory can by Act of
Parliament abolish them. The foreign
policy of the Empire is controlled from
Westminster. As the Imperial Parlia-
ment is representative only of the people
of the United Kingdom, the latter must,
if they want Imperial federation, con-
sent to, in theory at all events, a con-
siderable curtailment of their powers.
The omnipotence of the Imperial Parlia-
ment is now practically absolute. It is
only qualified by the fact, to which Locke
refers, “ that the Legislature cannot trans-
fer the power of making laws into other
hands, for it ie merely a delegated power
from the people.” But the implied
delegation is for all purposes of govern-
ment complete. Some of the powers
thus, by necessary implication, received
from the people have, contrary to the
maxim, delegatus not potest delegare , been
transferred to colonial Legislatures, and,
as a matter of strict right, can be
diminished or resumed.
A federation of England and the
colonies would necessitate a redistribu-
tion of powers among the Legislatures of
the Empire, and probably involve the
creation of a new legislative body to deal
with federal affairs. The Imperial Parlia-
ment would no longer be supreme. If it
were not transformed into the Federal
Legislature it would become a subordi-
nate Legislature dealing only with the
internal affairs of the United Kingdom.
If it became the Federal Legislature its
powers would extend only to purely federal
affairs, and would be incapable of enlarge-
ment or diminution without the consent
of the various members of the federa-
tion. It would no longer be representa-
tive only of or controlled only by the
people of the United Kingdom. The
Constitutions of the colonies would be
beyond recall or variation at the fiat of
any paramount Legislature. The colonies,
on the other hand, would become in some
respects more and in other respects
less independent. They would have an
absolute right to legislate within certain
limits, and the Acts of Parliament within
those limits could be repealed or amended
only by the Legislature that passed them.
Their independence would, however, be
Legislature would deal with all questions
not purely local, and that the Federal
Executive could enforce the federal laws
directly against persons and property in
the colonies.
Whether the proposed members of the
federation are prepared for such a re-
distribution of powers is a matter of
rather loose conjecture. Proposals are
often tolerated when general which when
specific arouse considerable opposition.
The colonies are as yet profoundly in-
different on the question. They regard
Imperial federation as a policy too far
removed from the lines of the probable to
be worth the trouble of serious attention.
It is not likely that the people of the
United Kingdom will adopt the federal
arrangement, with its consequent dimi-
nution of power and prestige, with-
out being convinced of its substantial
advantages. The constitutional change
would be greater than the considerations
mentioned suggest. It would involve the
substitution of a fixed for an unwritten con-
stitution, and thus diminish or destroy that
special quality of flexibility which con-
stitutes the essential merit of the British
Constitution. There would be no longer
any automatic 'adjustment of constitu-
tional relations to new conditions as they
arise. The cumbersome method of con-
stitutional conventions, or some method
analogous to it, would have to be adopted
to effect any proposed changes, for there
would be no longer any paramount body
occupying a relationship similar to that
in which the Imperial Parliament now
stands to the Canadian Dominion, capable
of enacting what is required ; and to vest
Legislative sovereignty in the Legislature
itself would, as Mr. A. Y. Dicey says, “ be
inconsistent with the aim of federalism,
namely, the permanent division between
the spheres of the national government and
the several States.” Federalism, which
at best is but a compromise rather than
an absolute good, must, if adopted, be
accepted with its disadvantages.
These considerations have, of course,
reference only to a real federation. That
is what the Imperial Federalists aim at,
unless the title of their League is doubly
deceptive. The objects of the League
were at its formation in 1884 declared in
the following resolutions :—“ 1. That in
order to secure the permanent unity of
the Empire some form of federation is
essential. 2. That no scheme of federa-
tion should interfere with the existing
rights of local Parliaments as regards


local affairs. 3. That any scheme of colonies to the mother country is, there-
Imperial Federation should combine on fore, an anomalous one. By its closeness
• a ii 1 • i 1 _ C _ * nvid Ktt il-o 1 AAoannoo i n
an equitable basis the resources of the
Empire for the maintenance of common
interests, and adequately provide for an
organized defence of common rights.”
The policy of the League has, indeed,
become, if anything, less specific in time.
In the course of an inaugural address de-
livered by him as President of the Leeds
Branch of the Imperial Federation League
on April 1, 1802, Sir Lyon Playfair,
M.P., said that the idea of an Imperial
Parliament as a grand Council of the
whole Empire was not at the present
time, though it might be in the future,
within the range of practical politics.
He, however, thought that a grand
Council of Imperial defence with colonial
representation and power to influence
the issues of peace and war was possible
of realization. Such a Council, if without
an executive, could not, except by an
abuse of language, be called federal.
Respect springs from power, and without
power an advisory body might in vain
express its wisdom in resolutions. The
body that controls the Cabinet controls
the issues of peace and war. The sense
of responsibility makes Ministers decide
according to their interpretation of Par-
liamentary opinion. It is this that makes
the House of Commons the supreme
power in the Empire, and would continue
to keep it such notwithstanding the
creation of any Council, however repre-
sentative its character, capable of issuing
mandates without sanctions. To give the
Council an executive would mean to
federate the members of the Empire, for
the arrangement could not work without
that co-ordination of parts and organic
unity which federalism, to be effective,
should always display.
“Federalism,” says Freeman, “is out
of place if it attempts either to break
asunder what is already more closely
united, or to unite what is wholly incap-
able of union. ” In some respects England
and her colonies are more closely united
than any federal arrangement could make
them ; in others they are practically sepa-
rate. The theoretical supremacy over colo-
nial Legislatures of the Imperial Parliament
is characteristic of a consolidation which
means unity, the absence of colonial
representation or control of external
relations implies subordination, while the
practical freedom enjoyed by the colonies,
and deference to their requisition!? paid
by the Imperial Government, suggest
independence. The relation of the
in one respect, and by its looseness in
another, it renders the application of
Freeman’s test difficult. Does Imperial
federation mean an attempt “ to unite
what is wholly incapable of union.”
The history of federalism seems to
prove that the union sought by a federal
arrangement has been suggested, and
for some purposes necessitated, by geo-
graphical proximity. The Swiss Cantons
united to enable them the better to resist
the aggressions of Austria, the Nether-
lands united to strike the harder against
Spain, the American colonies to shake
off England, while in each case con-
tiguity rendered the maintenance, in
warlike times, of peace difficult, and
political union its best preservative. In
each of these cases separation was the
real alternative to federal union. The
necessity of union between the three
original Swiss Cantons in 1291 was quite
as great as between the twenty-two which
in this century were welded into the
present confederation. The racial, reli-
gious, and political diversities were too
great to admit of consolidation, and
without that degree of mutual union for
which federalism provides the individual
cantons would have been crushed to
pieces between the militant despotisms
of France and Austria. Geographical
proximity emphasized the necessity and
suggested the remedy. The case of the
American States was similar. Ten years
before the revolution Otis said that “ were
the colonies left to themselves to morrow
America would be a mere shambles of
blood and confusion before little petty
States could be settled,” When they cut
the connection with England and were
left to themselves the colonies had really
no alternative to federation. Mutual
separation would have meant increase of
divergencies, and comparative incapacity
against external aggression. The Union
was, in fact, as Adams says, “extorted
from the grinding necessity of a reluctant
people.” It was, as in the case of the
Swiss cantons, their juxtaposition that
rendered their mutual isolation danger-
ous and made federation possible. But
the conditions of Great Britain and her
colonies are essentially different.
It has been said, as Professor Seeley
reminds us in his “ Expansion of Eng-
land,” that the British Empire is one “ on
which the sun never sets,” and “whose
morning drum-beat, following the sun and
keeping company with the hours, en-


circles the globe with an unbroken chain British subjects enjoying representative
of martial airs.” The population of and responsible government,
about 350,000,000 is scattered all over the It is said that “ the chief forces which
globe, being in some places, as in Aus- hold a community together and cause it to
tralia, very small, and in others, as in
the United Kingdom, very large in pro-
portion to territorial area. It contains
types of almost all the races that sprang
from Adam’s loins, whose diversities of
language and social institutions exemplify
the various stages of civilization. The
forms of government exhibit polar
differences, from the sovereign and
responsible system of the United
Kingdom, the federal and responsible
system of Canada, the responsible systems
of Australia and the Cape of Good Hope,
the representative systems of the West
Indies, to the Imperial system of India
and the Crown Governments of Ceylon,
Mauritius, the Straits Settlements, &c.
The Roman Empire itself was not
composed of more heterogeneous
elements. This very heterogeneity
would, if the territorial area was
unbroken, render the confedera-
tion of some of the members at
least, if not a necessity, a consummation
to be desired, but make it, under the
actual conditions of local separation, an
impossibility. This fact is partly admitted
by the advocates of Imperial federation
when they propose to limit the applica-
tion of their system to the United King-
dom and colonies enjoying representative
government. To extend representative
institutions to India would probably mean
to put an end to British rule there, but
with its present system of government
India could not be admitted to represen-
tation in the Federal Parliament of the
Empire. The question of want of uni-
formity of the franchise is one of the
chief obstacles to Australian federation.
Had Western Australia not acquired
responsible government she would not
have been admitted to representation in
the National Australasian Convention of
1891. But the idea of allowing the half-
civilized masses of India to govern them-
selves as Australians do cannot be
tolerated for many generations. India,
therefore, cannot become a member of an
Imperial Federal system. It must, like
the many minor dependencies of the
United Kingdom, continue to be governed
as a dependency, a fact which ren-
ders the complete federation of
the Empire for the present impossible.
Imperial federation thus appears to be a
misnomer for the admission to the abso-
lute sovereignty of the Empire of all
constitute one State are three—common
nationality, common religion, and common
interest.” Both Canada and South Africa
contain mixed nationalities, and the
German element in Australia is by no
means insignificant. The first of the three
forces is really community of language,
and to that there is a nearer approach
than to ethnological unity. Common
religion does not exist. Burke’s remark
about the American colonists displaying
“ the dissidence of dissent and the Pro-
testantism of the Protestant religion” must
not be forgotten. The bitterest differences
have been sectarian—between those pro-
fessing different forms of the same funda-
mental belief, not, to use generic terms,
between Christian and infidel. Professor
Seeley, the champion of Imperial federa-
tion, unconsciously weakens rather than
strengthens his own case when he finds
in religious schisms the spirit that
drove America into separation from Eng-
land and turned offended colonists into a
new nation. Community of interest,
except as an accident of commerce and
the political connection, does not exist to
any great extent. In commercial matters,
notwithstanding the platitude that trade
follows the flag, it is independent of the
political bond. The trade between Eng-
land and America increased after the War
of Independence. “As soon as the con-
nection was severed,” asks Herman Meri-
vale in his work on “Colonization,”
“what was the consequence? Did the
industrious colonists become ‘ sluggish
foreigners’ and cease to supply goods fast
enough to meet the cravings of the Liver-
pool and London markets ? Was our
profitable colonial trade turned into a
losing foreign trade ? All the world
knows, on the contrary, • that the com-
merce between the mother country and
the colonies was but a peddling traffic
compared to the vast international inter-
course, the greatest the world has ever
known, which grew up between them
when they exchanged the tie of subjec-
tion for that of equality,” If the history
of the trade relations of England and her
colonies and dependencies be examined
it will be found that if trade follows the
flag it is chiefly because the force of the
mother country has made it.
To say that trade follows the flag is to
admit that there is no necessity for a
Customs Union between Great Britain


and the colonies. The Customs Union is British possessions has increased ; with
one of the planks of the Federal platform.
Neither the platitude nor the policy will
stand examination.
The value of the total external trade of
the United Kingdom in 1890 was
£748,944,115 ; of this £190,683,683 was
with British possessions, more than a
third of which, or £67,898,805, was with
India. About 75 per cent., therefore, of
the external trade is with foreign
countries. The trade with Australasia is
71 per cent., and with the North Ameri-
can colonies not quite 3 per cent, of the
whole. The trade with her colonies thus
appears not to be of supreme importance
to the mother country. That it does not
depend on the flag is evident. Com-
munity of language, the political connec-
tion, and protective tariffs, have their
respective slight effects upon trade,
but on the whole the commerce of nations
is regulated by the law of supply and
demand. Canada trades more largely
with the United States than with
the United Kingdom, simply because
it pays her better to do so. The
trade with Canada is only 10 86,
while the trade with Australasia is
28 75 per cent, of the total trade of the
United Kingdom with British posses-
sions, a disproportion which is incon-
sistent with the flag theory, and is
explained by the principle that trade
when unaffected by navigation laws fol-
lows the easiest and most profitable
courses. Comparisons of the increases of
trade with foreign countries and British
possessions lead to the same conclusion.
Between 1876 and 1890 the trade of the
United Kingdom with the United
States increased from £96,125,035 to
£143,623,361, while in the same period
the trade of the United Kingdom with the
North American Colonies only increased
from £19,048,699 to £20,717,232. The
increase of the trade with Australasia
was from £42,431,992 to £54,821,038,
and the difference in favour of the
increase with the United States is the
more significant when it is remembered
that the Australasian trade of the United
Kingdom has since 1876 been greatly
swollen by loans, while the redemption of
American bonds held in the United
Kingdom, which previously must have
swollen the English trade with the States,
has recently been checked by the fact
that there are now none overdue and so
capable of being redeemed.
Between the years 1876 and 1890 the
trade of the United Kingdom with some
others it has diminished. It appears to
have followed the law of supply and
demand. During the same period the
trade of some of the British possessions
with some foreign countries has, under
the operation of the same law of commer-
cial convenience and profit, very largely
increased. The imports of India from
Germany, for instance, increased from
£9,079 to £564,145, and the exports
from £198,738 to £2,782,311. The ex-
pansion of the Australasian trade also
shows that the foreigner is becoming
favoured.
By far the greater part of the external
trade of Australasia is with the United
Kingdom. Notwithstanding the opera-
tion of protective tariffs trade with the
mother country has been found the most
convenient and profitable. As a per-
centage of the total external trade of
Australasia, however, it is declining. It
was 77’4 per cent, in 1881 and 74'9 in
1890. The Australasian trade with
foreign countries increased in the same
period from 11 ‘2 per cent, to 17’8
per cent, of the total external trade.
“ Prior to the year 1883,” says Mr.
Coglan, Government Statistician of New
South Wales, in his “Statistical Account
of the Seven Colonies of Australasia,”
published in 1892, “the trade between
Australasia and the United Kingdom had
been growing steadily, both absolutely
and as compared with the whole volume
of trade. Since then, however, direct
commercial relations have been established
with the leading European Continental
countries, and though the trade with the
United Kingdom is still large in 1890 it
showed a falling-off to the extent of nearly
£3,000,000 as compared with the previous
year, while the share obtained by
Belgium, France, and Germany, had con-
siderably increased. During the past
nine years trade with the United King-
dom had increased by £6,359,304, equal
to nearly 13 per cent.; the trade of
Australasia with foreign countries had
increased during the same period
£6,169,497, or 86 per cent. The trade
with the British possessions outside Aus-
tralasia had never been of much value,
and is now less than formerly, having
fallen from £7,336,156 in 1881 to
£5,476,404 in 1890.”
That the trade of the United Kingdom
and the colonies is affected by patriotic
considerations is a fallacy. Trade goes
where it pays best. The capital of
England was what Australia wanted


or its speedy development, and in the United Kingdom. As protective tariffs
natter of commodities England was the
customer that gave the best terms.
Trade shifts as conditions change, and
now that it suits Australians to do so
they increase their commercial relations
with foreign countries. The total trade
of Australasia with British possessions
was in 1881 £57,340,763 and in 1890
£61,840,315. With foreign countries
the figures were respectively £7,213,915
and £13,383,412. That Australasia
borrows largely from England renders the
comparison more striking. The fact that
the Canadian Dominion is to be credited
with 10'86 per cent., and Australasia
with 28*75 per cent, of the total trade of
the United Kingdom with British pos-
sessions is scarcely reconcilable with the
theory that trade follows the flag. The
Canadian trade, notwithstanding heavy
protective tariffs, is now greater with the
United States than with the United
Kingdom. Since the introduction of
direct steam communication between
Australasia and the Continent of Europe
the Australasian trade with Europe has
greatly increased. The North German
line of steamers began to run in 1887,
and other direct lines have since been
established. Between 1881 and 1890 the
Australasian trade with Germany in-
creased from £296,094 to £2,406,603,
and with Belgium from £127,150 io
£2.034,282. The greater part of the
Australian wool shipped for the Conti-
nent now gees by way of Antwerp instead
of London.
It is, therefore, exceedingly improbable
that the severance of the political tie
between England and the colonies would
result in a diminution of their mutual
trade. The diminution would require to
be very great, and that it would involve
an absolute loss to each should be shown,
before, and when the occasion for a change
arises. Imperial federation can be ac-
cepted as an alternative to cutting
the connection. A Customs union of
the British Empire would probably
be the beginning of the end
of British commercial supremacy.
A protective tariff to exclude the
foreigner is contemplated, and how in-
jurious such a tariff would be to the
United Kingdom, 75 per cent, of whose
external trade is with foreign countries,
may easily be imagined. Australasia
would probably gain by the change, as,
according to the 1890 statistics,
£56,363,911 of its total external
trade of £75,223,727 is with the
already exist in the Australasian Colonies,
the increase of the Australasian foreign
trade would only be affected by the pos-
sible shifting of some of the foreign trade
to some of the British possessions within
the free-trade ring. No new fiscal barrier
would be erected between Australasia and
foreign countries, but one between Aus-
tralasia and British possessions would be
removed.
The incidental advantages to the Cana-
dian Dominion would be similar. For
these advantages to the colonies the
United Kingdom would have to pay.
India also would suffer. In 1890
£65,115,115 of her total imports of
£86,656,990 were from the United
Kingdom, and £9,817,229 from British
possessions, but her exports to the
United Kingdom amounted to only
£39,592,020, and to other British pos-
sessions £22,883,608 of a total of
£105,366,720. In the case of India,
therefore, there would be a considerable
export trade to foreign countries to be
affected by a protective tariff, and as her
export trade to British colonies with pro-
tective tariff is at present only about one
and a half millions the incidental advan-
tages to her of the Britannic free-trade
ring would be next to nothing.
Commercial union on the free-trade
principle may be regarded as out of the
question. The colonies have adopted
protection, and protection is a vice that is
not easily shaken off. Even a free-trade
tariff, applicable to so many communities,
would have its difficulties, as, owing to
the fact that the principal commodities on
which a revenue tariff falls are produced
in some British possessions, free trade in
one part of the Empire would mean pro-
tection in another. The burden of the
Customs revenue, therefore, would be
very unequally distributed. The difficul-
ties of framing a protective tariff would,
of course, be vastly greater. Both a
free-trade and a protective tariff would in
different degrees be open to the great
objection that they could not easily
be modified. To readjust the fiscal
burdens of such an Empire as the
British would exhaust the resources
of political compromise. In addition a
Fiscal Onion on the protective principle
would place the Empire in commercial
antagonism to the rest of the world, and
probably involve the loss of such posses-
sions as the West Indies and Guiana, the
greater part of whose trade is with
foreign countries.


It is in relation to the question of
Imperial defence that the best case can be
made out for the federation of the Empire.
Whether the British Empire is to become
a series of independent States, or the
military unity, which is at present rather
a sentiment than a practical institution,
is to become a reality, is, as Sir Charles
Dilke says in his recent work on “ Im-
perial Defence,” “the greatest question
that has to be be answered by the present
generation of Englishmen.” The United
Kingdom may soon ask the colonies to
make up their minds one way or
the other on this point. Until it
is known whether the colonies are
willing to co-operate with the mother
country for the purpose of mutual defence
no fixed plan for the defences of the
Empire can be settled. The position of
the colonies is at present somewhat
similar to that of the American colonies
upon the same question before the revo-
lutionary war. The burden of colonial
defence then fell on Great Britain. The
colonies objected to contribute to their
own defence, and would neither tax them-
selves nor allow Great Britain to tax
them for the purpose. The United King-
dom has now to protect a commerce of
£748,000,000. Of this £100,000,000 is with
British possessions, and to the extent of
that trade the British possessions are mu-
tually interested with the mother country
in Imperial defences. Besides this, British
possessions have a trade of about
£275,000,000 with foreign countries, which
trade is also protected by the British fleet.
The protection of the mutual trade of the
United Kingdom and the colonies is a mat-
ter of far greater moment to the Austra-
lian Colonies than to the United Kingdom.
While only 71 per cent, of the trade of
the United Kingdom is with Austral-
asia 74'9 per cent, of the trade of Aus-
tralia is with the United Kingdom.
For the support of the navy en-
gaged in protecting the Empire and
its commerce the United Kingdom con-
tributes over £14,000,000, and the rest of
the Empire under £400,000. As Sir
John Colomb puts it, the United
Kingdom contributes 19s. s|d., and the
colonies and dependencies 6jd. of
every £1 of naval expenditure. The
contribution of the Australian Colonies is
£126,000, made up of £91,000, the sum
payable for maintenance, and £35,000, the
amount of interest at 5 per cent, on the
cost of construction, of the Australian
Naval Squadron. The colonies also, of
course, harbour defences.
The taxpayers of the United Kingdom
may reasonably object to having to bear
nearly the whole burden of the naval
defences of the Empire, They also have
to pay the interest on a rational debt that
was incurred for Imperial purposes. The
debt was really contracted in building up
the Empire, and it is, therefore, not
without some reason that the advocates
of Imperial Federation urge that the
colonies and dependencies should bear
some portion of its burdens. That the
colonies have their own local debts is no
answer to the claim. These debts
were chiefly contracted for purposes
of development, and are repre-
sented by tangible assets. The
colonies and dependencies may be said
to have been part of the assets
representing the Imperial national debt,
but they are no longer a source of either
profit or revenue to the United Kingdom.
They, however, enjoy the protection of
the mother country. The Newfoundland
and the Behring Sea fisheries disputes
are purely colonial questions, yet within
the last two years they considerably em-
barrassed England in her relations with
France and the United States respec-
tively. Had England been involved in
war with France over the Newfoundland
fisheries dispute it would have been for
an object of no direct interest to herself,
and for a people that contribute nothing
to the Imperial expenditure.
Under present conditions it has been
well said that the United Kingdom has
too much of the burden and the colonies
too little of the power. But the colonies
will not pay for the power. That is really
what the supporters of the federal policy
ask them to do. The Federalists say that
the present arrangements cannot con-
tinue indefinitely, and that the colonies
must either be represented and taxed or
drift towards separation. They will
probably drift. The colonies will
pay as little as they can towards
Imperial burdens, and are not likely to
look for a status that can only be acquired
by a practical limitation of their local
independence. This position, however
unsound it may be considered, is almost
of a certainty the one they will assume.
They will hesitate a long time before
recognising any force in the claim that
they should bear some of the burden
of the English national debt and con-
tribute io the maintenance of the navy in
proportion to the protection afforded by
the flag.
Separated from the United Kingdom


the individual colonies would for some days of militancy are numbered, fand
years to come have very little weight in
international affairs. At present they
have the prestige and power of the Empire
at their back. They now enjoy a com-
parative immunity from attack, which to
a great extent depends upon the very fact
that the forces of the Empire are scat-
tered. “It is not alone,” says Sir John
Colomb, “the few ships on the Australian
station . . . that render Australia
safe from attack. It is also the ships
in the European waters, in the North
Pacific waters, and elsewhere through-
out the world which, by closing up
hostile ports of issue at the
commencement of a war, would prevent
the dispatch of an expedition in force too
great to be resisted by the squadron of
local defence.” Such considerations
should prevent the colonies from under-
rating the advantages of the connection.
These advantages might after separation
be obtained by an alliance, but an alliance
of such scattered communities would be
an arrangement much more difficult
than a federation. It would bind
a community on one side of the
globe to support another in its quarrels
on the other side without the first having
the least voice in either preventing or
stopping hostilities. As long as the mili-
tant spirit exists the odds would be in
favour of some member of the alliance
every few years suspending its diplomatic
relations with some foreign State. Alli-
ances answer well when they are either
very small or very large. In the one case
they are based upon the solid foundation
of unity of interest and geographical com-
pactness ; in the other they really amount
to a treaty of peace between possible bel-
ligerents. But an alliance between the
separated members of the Empire
would not fulfil the conditions of
either of the effective forms. The casus
belli would affect one or two commu-
nities, but could scarcely be expected to
affect them all, though all would be
obliged to take part in hostilities. The
great European alliances did not long
outlive the occasions of mutual interest
that called them into existence.
The colonies, in considering the alter-
natives of federation or separation
between which they will eventually have
f o choose, cannot leave out of account
the probable decadence of the military
spirit. All systems have their day,
and sooner or later reach the limits of
their effectiveness. The industrial is
undoubtedly the spirit of the future. The
though a generation or two may pass
away yet before “the battle flags are
furled” the time must come when inter-
national opinion will force nations to
adjust their differences with some other
arbiter than the sword. Notwithstand-
ing the armed peace of Europe and the
pettishness and bluster in which the
party politicians of the United States
occasionally indulge towards the mother
country, the tendency is to extend
the arbitration principle. International
law had practically no existence a
hundred years ago, but during the last
half-century the moral sanctions through
which it secures obedience are becoming
more and more respected. This change
in the international spirit cannot be over-
looked, It is a factor which must
influence the colonies in deciding whether
they will enter into a permanent federa-
tion with the United Kingdom for objects
which may be better obtained without
any political arrangement before another
generation has passed away. Institutions
that survive their objects are invariably a
source of evil.
The machinery of Imperial federation
must necessarily be complex and difficult
to work. No recognised scheme of fede-
ration has yet been published, but such
as have been suggested indicate the diffi-
culties of applying the principle. It has
been suggested by a Canadian lecturer on
the subject that the Imperial Federal
Parliament should consist of the entire
English House of Commons, and of
members of the colonial Legislatures in
numbers bearing the same proportion to
the populations of the several colonies
that the number of members in the
House of Commons does to the
population of the United Kingdom.
This would mean at the outset a
House of about 850 members. As
the basis of representation becomes
more democratic, representatives become
more self-assertive, and colonial members
in particular would probably seek to
justify the trust reposed in them by con-
tinually keeping themselves in evidence.
Would the existence of such a Parliament
lead to more good than evil I It is
questionable. The functions of this
legislative body, too unmanageable from
its constitution and size, would neces-
sarily be very few, and would only extend
to such questions as Imperial de-
fences, commerce, and diplomatic rela-
tions. If not soon exhausted the Federal
Parliament would acquire even a greater


notoriety than other Legislatures for con- George H’s. reign the first country
tinually mischievously meddling with
great affairs. A legislative body of about
a thousand members might be expected to
degenerate into a mob. As the popula-
tion of the colonies increased the number
of members would be much greater than a
thousand. The representation of India,
which cannot for ever remain in tutelage,
would swell the membership to propor-
tions that must render effectiveness
impossible.
The advocates of Imperial Federation
should seriously consider what their policy
means. The change suggested is no light
one, and may if realized do incalculable
injury to the United Kingdom. The
Federal arrangement, if a failure, cannot
last, and must lead to severance of the
connection under circumstances that may
result in a few generations of mutual ill-
feeling. That failure is probable the con-
ditions of the case most forcibly suggest.
The federation advocated is against all
precedent ; a federation of communities
scattered all over the globe, some of them
already united by the federal tie,
some of them isolated, with antago-
nistic tariffs and interests that by
consequence are assumed by the
governing bodies to be mutually opposed.
It would mean what appears on the face
of it to be impossible, an attempt to
govern a great Empire through a Parlia-
ment, the largest since the institution of
representative government, and composed
of members not likely to express their in-
dividualities, and thoroughly democratic in
their methods. An Empire such as the
British cannot be governed by a single
debating Society. It has become a
reality only through the active wisdom
of a few and the passive sympathy
of the many. Had William Pitt been
hampered by a self-assertive mob of
clever debaters, pulling their various
ways according to the importunate in-
terests they represented, he would never
have jnade England towards the close of
world. It was when the nation, m
Parliament it’s reflex, became convulsj
by faction that the great Minister fe
and, as Macaulay says, “the spectac
was seen of English blood shed 1
English bayonets, our armies caf
tulating, our conquests wrested fro
us, our enemies hastening to tal
vengeance for past humiliation, our fls
scarcely able to maintain itself in oi
seas.” For Empire the dominam
of a few energetic and powerful mint
seems necessary. For industrial develo
ment and civil freedom democratic ru
is, or at least will be when Democra
learn to leave their own limbs unfettem
the best. It was men like Clive, not tl
East India Company, that made Indii
Militancy and Empire go together. Tl
past is for Empire, the future for indu
trialism. The military basis of tl
federal union would not las
while the commercial basis is real!
impracticable, and would be aime
at the destruction of three-fourtl
of the trade of England. If separatio
be, as it appears to be, the alternate
when the hour arrives the inevitable muf
be faced. The gradual changes of th
last few years in the relations of th
mother country and the colonies indicat
clearly enough the direction in whic;
events are tending. If, as the natura
development of existing conditions, th
political connection must eventually b
severed, the parting will take plac
in friendship, and the old tie
of blood, language, and history wil
be found more powerful than th
now practically useless political bond
There need be no fear' forJ the oi
country. In making the Empire Englam
alone sustained the burden of the strife
and with concentrated energies and dimi
nished responsibilities she will continu
with stout heart to face the chances of th
future.
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.


