

GREAT BRITAIN
AND HER
COLONIES.
BY
JULIUS VOGEL, ESQ.,
MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, NEW ZEALAND.
LONDON:
SMITH, ELDER AND CO., 65, CORNHILL.
1865.




GREAT BRITAIN AND HER COLONIES.
There are not wanting signs to indicate that Great
Britain will soon have to consider as a serious ques-
tion the relations that exist beween her and her
colonies. At present these relations are vague,
shadowy, and undefined. They are scarcely based
on mutual interest. They depend more upon senti-
ment —sentiment that very trifling circumstances
may upset. The material benefit of the connection
as yet is on the side of the colonies; and on their
side, perhaps, the sentiment is least to be relied on.
As fresh generations spring up the personal feeling
of attachment to the mother country weakens.
The words “at home ” no longer mean Great
Britain ; in course of time only a very small pro-
portion of a colonial population will be able to
boast of having even visited the mother country.
On the other hand, the pride that England natu-
rally feels in the children of her creation —her
colonies—is constantly liable to the harshest of all
tests —the cui hono. Hitherto, when the question
has been asked, what good England derives from
Relations un-
defined.
English
feeling in the
colonies
weakened.
Doubtful
whether Great
Britain de-
rives any
1


I cnefit from
her colonies
under present
relations.
If colonies se-
parated from
the mother
country, they
would still
welcome her
surplus popu-
lation.
her colonies, it has been customary to answer by a
justification of the past. Owing to her active
spirit of colonization the trade of England has
been immensely increased ; in making the colonies
England has made the trade. Granted; but this
amounts only to a justification of the past. When
some statesman comes forward to question England’s
present relation to her colonies, he may make a
present to his opponents of the past. He may
admit that the vast sums hitherto spent have met
with adequate return; but he may still ask, is it
worth spending more or continuing a relation from
which the party most benefited may withdraw
whenever it suits his convenience. He will ask,
does the mere fact of England’s political relation
to her colonies cause the latter to consume more of
her goods —in other words, suppose the colonies
were set free, would the trade between them and
the mother country diminish in consequence, and if
so, would the extent of the diminution he worth
purchasing by a prolongation of the relations ?
It is to be remembered that the arguments of
those who uphold the present colonial system are
mainly addressed to the points, that the colonies
afford an outlet for England’s surplus population
and for her manufactures. These reasons are very
weak. In regard to the first, there can be no
question that if the colonies were cut adrift, they
would still eagerly welcome immigrants from all
parts of the world. The United States have long
since severed their connection with Great Britain,


but they have never refused to receive her surplus
population.
The second argument is, if possible, weaker.
The colonies simply consume those manufactures
of Great Britain that suit them. They do not
show, nor do they feel there is any claim on them
to show, the least preference for the manufactures
of Great Britain. They are as unsparing in taxing
her goods through the customs as those of any other
country. Nay, in this respect the mother country
occupies a worse position in relation to her colonies
than she does to foreign countries. With these
she enters into treaties of reciprocal free-trade, but
the colonies feel themselves at liberty to espouse
protection to any extent that suits the crotchets of
their public men. If Victoria and New Zealand
were foreign countries, Great Britain might
probably respond to their protection tariffs by
reminding them that some of their exports are
admitted duty free. We shall have again to refer
to the tariff question, but in the meanwhile it is
hardly necessary to enlarge on the argument, that
whatever the past commercial advantages Great
Britain may have derived from her colonies, she
derives them no longer because they are colonies—
she would derive as much, if not more, if they were
independent countries.
The colonial idea of free trade is simply the
putting of Great Britain on an exact equality with
other countries. Neither her ships, her goods, nor
her people are treated with especial favour. Her
I—2
Because of
Great Bri-
tain’s connec-
tion with her
colonies, she
derives no
commercial
advantages.
Colonies show
her no favour,
and do not
adopt her
treaties.


On the other
hand, colonies
sources of
weakness to
her.
They even, to
some extent,
constrain her.
treaties are not considered binding on the colonies,
as for instance, though Great Britain has been
fighting in China for the right of ingress to that
country, a capitation tax has been imposed in
Victoria on the Chinese. If some outlying pro-
vince of the vast Chinese empire attempted to
treat Englishmen as the Chinese were some time
ago treated in Victoria, Great Britain would feel
herself justified in ravaging it with fire and sword.
But if England derives no advantages from her
colonies, much may be said on the other side.
They are so far sources of weakness to her, that
in times of peace they absorb a considerable portion
of her army, and in times of war they would be
so much more territory requiring her protection.
Again, they draw a great deal of money from the
mother country in other ways than for their ordi-
nary military protection ; and whenever they chose
to make it, they deem they have a sort of claim on
Great Britain for assistance. They give no return.
They consider they have the right either to assume
on their weakness, or to rely on their strength and
threaten secession.
The transportation of two or three hundred
convicts yearly to West Australia has brought on
Great Britain the scarcely veiled threat from
Victoria of secession. New Zealand trades, to
some extent, on her weakness —she complains of
not having sufficient power, and tells England to
take away the troops if otherwise she be not
allowed to do as she likes. But this is a threat in a


form that apes humility. If Great Britain moved
the troops from New Zealand, the latter would
plead her weakness as a cause for violating the
treaty obligations which England has entered into
with the natives. The colonists would sooner or
later wage a war of extermination. The Maories
would be driven from their lands ; and when Great
Britain, scandalized by this result of her philan-
thropic colonizing, would ask the reason, the
answer would be, you have forced it on us. Then
in Northern America the steps which are being
taken to form a Federal Union, have as one con-
tingent, though veiled object, the right to demand
of England a large amount of assistance as an
alternative to secession.
That very question of customs’ duties is a
looming cause of danger to the relations that exist
between Great Britain and her colonies. On all
sides it has become the fashion to make com-
mercial treaties between different countries. The
colonies will not be allowed for long to remain that
sort of no-man’s-land which they are at present in
regard to their relations with the rest of the world.
It is some years since one of the judges in South
Australia strongly asserted that the Colonial
Customs’ Acts should he reserved for the royal
pleasure, as they involved questions of national
policy. The opinion was overruled simply because
the colonies would not submit to allow Great
Britain to regulate their tariffs, she, with a singular
want of foresight, not having retained that power
Difficulties
that may arise
owing to
Great Britain
having
allowed her
colonies to
fix their own
tariffs.


Practically
excluded from
of commercial
when she made them quasi-independent entities.
But there can be no doubt the South Australian
judge was right. It is true the commercial treaties
into which Great Britain enters are mostly, if not
always, limited to the United Kingdom. But is
it likely it will escape the attention of foreign
countries that the colonies are becoming large
consumers of some classes of their goods, and that
it would be desirable to bring them within the
range of the reciprocal obligations that have been
found to work well elsewhere. Then the question
will be addressed to Great Britain, is she prepared
to enter into engagements on behalf of her colonies
or to allow them to enter into engagements with
foreign countries on their own behalf? The answer
in each case must be, No. She cannot allow them
to enter into engagements with foreign countries,
because in doing so they would be pledging the
empire to responsibilities. The contraction of such
engagements would argue the possibility of dis-
putes, and the very nature of the relations between
England and her colonies would convert their
disputes into her own.
Then she could not assume the right to enter
into engagements on their behalf. She has told
them protection tariffs are very stupid, very
impolitic, but has allowed them to impose them.
And if she now attempted to forbid them, she
would be told she was interfering with vested
interests. She would have then to reply to a foreign
country that desired to include her colonies in its


commercial polity, that such a thing was impos-
sible. She could neither sanction a direct nego-
tiation, nor undertake an indirect one, with any
chance of success. Then would come the answer
—you are practically evading your treaty obliga-
tions in shutting out from the operation of com-
mercial treaties so large a portion of your dominions
as the colonies comprise. The French include
Algiers in their commercial treaty obligations;
might they not ask why in New Zealand the duty
on wine is four shillings a gallon, whilst the treaty
stipulates for its admission into the United Kingdom
for one shilling; on brandy twelve shillings, whilst
the treaty stipulates for eight and twopence.
We have already incidentally referred to the
differences that have arisen between Great Britain
and Victoria and New Zealand. But without going
into specific instances, it seems that one can almost
regard differences of the kind to be the inevitable
consequence of the mother country having given
to her colonies discretionary powers, with limita-
tions ill defined, if defined at all. It is not in the
nature of things that colonies legislating indepen-
dently should altogether adhere to imperial ideas.
There is a constant tendency towards an encroach-
ment upon imperial rights, and against this tendency
there is no adequate check. The Australian
colonies, for instance, are drifting into protective
tariffs —are doing their best to cripple the trade to
create which Great Britain has spent such vast
sums, and to continue which she still undertakes
Not in the na-
ture of things
that, with the
discretion
they possess,
colonies will
always con-
form to im-
perial policy.


Great Britain
legislates only
for the
present.
a far-seeing
policy not
natural to a
tionai Govern-
Eesponsibie
Ministries
her colonial responsibilities. Nay, the colonies
may even venture to put a pressure on Great Britain,
which she in return would not dare to put on them.
It is difficult to conceive anything more defiant than
the pressure put by Victoria on Great Britain to
stop transportation to Western Australia. But the
very success the colony has met with, will incline
other colonies, when differences of opinion arise, to
a like course.
It is almost an essential part of the policy of
Great Britain to legislate only for the present —not
to anticipate possible difficulties, to wait till they
arise. Perhaps this is a policy'inseparable to a
great extent from the nature of her Government.
It can frame no laws, or follow no policy requiring
the sanction of laws, without a full and open dis-
cussion. A despotic monarch can work for years
for a secret object. To have to ask sanction for his
operations would be to disclose their object, and
frequently therefore to defeat it. But the British
public are introduced behind the scenes at every
meeting of Parliament; Ministers are allowed to
leave little undisclosed. No doubt this has operated
to prevent the passing of an imperial measure regu-
lating the relations between Great Britain and her
colonies. In proposing it, it might have been
necessary to point out and discuss the cause that
dictated it —the possible future contingency of the
colonies desiring to secede, and the hare mention of
the possibility might have suggested its realisation.
But this is an explanation, not a plea in justifi-


cation. The avoidance of disagreeable subjects is
a distinguishing trait of constitutional Governments.
Not to tread on unnecessary debateable ground is
one of the instincts of preservation of responsible
ministries. Dare any one expect English ministers
to enter into the question of the relations between
the mother country and her colonies in a pure spirit
of far-seeing philanthropy ? To perhaps risk their
position merely to provide for ills to come —their
supporters would deem them mad. And yet men
removed from the strife of politics may well come to
the conclusion that the relations between the
mother country and the colonies should be defined
and understood.
When a question of dispute arises it will he too
late to calmly discuss the subject in its broad
bearings. There will be bitter humiliation in store
for the mother country if she do not either draw
her colonies closer to her or else define the conditions
upon which she is prepared to relinquish them.
Under their present relations it is inevitable that
sooner or later the demand for secession will be
urged by some of the colonies. What happened in
America will happen again. As long as the colonies
do not understand the limits of their powers they
will be likely to overstep them, and the moment
England makes a stand they will threaten secession.
What the writer asks is that Great Britain
should again draw her colonies towards her. She
has alienated them for the last few years. Separate
interests have grown up. Let a community of
hesitate to in-
terfere with
subjects of not
immediate
moment.
When diffi-
culties arise
between Great
Britain and
her colonies
too late to dis-
cuss subject
calmly.
The time has
come for Great
Britain to con-
solidate her
Empire, and
strengthen the
ties between


her and her
colonies by
supplying
them with
capital.
The money
her subjects
supply to
foreign coun-
tries fetters
dencefand 1
upon a her Check
foreign policy,
interests be once more established. The colonies
languish for want of capital, and Great Britain
assists them not. Millions of money are forth-
coming for the enterprises of foreign countries.
The colonies get money at great disadvantage.
Why has California advanced more than Victoria?
because California is a part of the United States,
Victoria only a dependency of Great Britain. With
a few strokes of the pen Great Britain could give
to investments in the colonies a security that would
attract to them the gold and enterprise of her
subjects, now so sparingly and so doubtfully directed
towards them.
The money which Great Britain invests in
foreign countries becomes, to some extent, a source
of weakness to her. It operates more or less as a
check upon her foreign policy. The individual
interests of a portion of her subjects are at stake.
The holders of foreign stock, as a rule, represent an
influential portion of the community. War with a
country of which they are creditors they know
means the depreciation of the securities they hold.
There is thus always an internal pressure exercised
which fetters the foreign policy of Great Britain.
It may be argued that if foreign loans keep the
United Kingdom from war, they act as a safeguard.
But they do not so much keep her from war as destroy
her independence. Their pressure is brought to
bear before war is imminent; it is exerted to arrest
that bold and outspoken tone that might lead in the
direction of war.


It is an old tale, old, as history, old as nations,
—a plethora of wealth creates undue anxiety for
peace. Undue anxiety for peace encourages an
aggressive policy on the part of other states. Then
comes the decline in the scale of nations, then the
decline in the nation itself. The undue accumu-
lation of wealth is bad enough when it excites only
fears within the country in which it is invested.
But when to those motives of fear are added the
widening ramifications of alarm for the country that
threatens hostilities, the threatened nation has an
enemy within the gates —a section of its community
is the ally of its opponent. It is Great Britain’s
own wealth in alien hands that is now compelling
her to keep up the war expenditure that is her
sorest burden.
But if she encouraged, by simply affording
reasonable security, the flow of her subjects’ wealth
to her colonies, she would be creating nations to act
as her allies in times of danger —to afford her that
security from aggression that indisputable strength
supplies. Amongst England’s colonies are countries
that only want capital to convert them into great
nations. Where capital exists, there labour is sure
to follow. The surplus population of Great Britain
that now presses on her resources would in the
colonies reproduce her greatness. Her non-con-
suming starving sons and daughters would become
consumers in the colonies and increase her trade.
She would in fact be recurring to her old ideas of
colonization —opening up the outlets ot an enlarged
Undue accu-
mulation of
wealth leads
to decline of
nations.
Great
Britain’s
colonies
should be the
receptacle of
her surplus
capital.


Instead of
leaving them
to a slow-
process of
development,
she should
lend them the
whole weight
of her power.
Colonial
creditors have
no ostensible
security.
commerce. There would be an end to the protection
doctrines of struggling colonies, if the flow of
wealth to their shores enabled them to develop the
natural resources with which Providence has gifted
them. Under a judicious system of supervision
there are some of the colonies which it would be
impossible to feed with too much capital. The case
as between the plan proposed and the one in
operation, is this —should Great Britain allow her
colonies to develop themselves, assisted only by a
small amount of speculative capital provided at a
high rate of interest? Should she allow them to
toil their way to ultimate success through a strug-
gling period of vicissitudes and difficulties, or
should she lend the whole weight of her might, her
power, her wealth, to rear them as rapidly as
possible into great nations—should she allow them
to grow up stranger communities, or make them
breath of her breath, life of her life ? There is no
danger of the colonies becoming estranged, if the
colonists owe to the great body of the people at
home the capital on which they are working their
way to wealth.
What plan would we propose ? it will be asked.
Before detailing it, let us first consider how very
undefined is the nature of the securities that the
colonies offer to their public creditors. In the
event of a colony repudiating, what could the
creditors do ? If a foreign country owes British
subjects money, they can appeal to the Foreign
Office, and if the nation be not over strong, they


may reasonably expect that a menacing attitude
will be adopted to enforce their claims. But if a
colony is their debtor their only ostensible recourse
is the ordinary courts of law, —a recourse which is
no remedy, for to recover from a Government by
legal process is a plan few would be bold enough to
attempt. But if we look a little beneath the
surface we shall see that a real remedy underlies the
ostensible one.
Substantially | Great Britain does guarantee
colonial indebtedness, for, if necessary, her power
would be at the command of the creditors. But
because she is an undisclosed guarantor she
reaps no benefit, whilst the colonies have to pay
an exorbitant price for the little money they
obtain.
The term “undisclosed guarantor” is not a
figurative expression. The colonies derive their
power from the Imperial Parliament, and although
they borrow on their own responsibility there is
room to conclude that, at the bottom of the little
credit they command, lies the conviction that in case
of need the assistance of the Imperial Government
would be available to those who had to complain of
their failing to keep their engagements. In reality
this places the mother country in the position of an
undisclosed guarantor. She gets nothing for this
responsibility, nor do the colonies derive any direct
benefit from it, further than its possible operation
in support of the limited amount of credit they
enjoy.
In reality
Great Britain
guarantees
colonial in-
debtedness.
Neither she
nor her colo-
nies derive the
advantages
they should
from the gua-
rantee, be-
cause it is
undisclosed.


Colonies
ought to sub-
scribe towards
the expenses
of the Impe-
rial Govern-
ment,
Could do so if
Great Britain
guaranteed
their loans.
By a small
annual per-
centage could
in time pay
off the
national debt.
The colonies ought to subscribe to the machi-
nery of government of the United Kingdom, if it
were laid down in law as it is in fact, that that
machinery would be available for colonial pur-
poses. It must be remembered if the colonies be
regarded as forming, with England, one grand
federation, that the action taken with any one
colony, even though it were of an antagonistic
nature, in so far as compelling it to meet its
engagement, would be for the benefit of the others.
If Great Britain proclaimed itself liable for the
indebtedness of the colonies by undertaking to
make them meet their engagements, they could
obtain money at the same rate of interest' that the
Imperial Government could,* and would be able to
atford to pay a small per-centage as a guarantee.
That would be their contribution to the expenses
of the imperial country ; and astonishing as the
assertion may seem, it could be made to swell up
in the course of a hundred years without pressing
upon the colonies to an amount sufficient to pay off
the national debt. Let not our readers start in
amazement or refuse to examine into the possibility
of the suggestion. We repeat, a small guarantee
per-centage would accumulate in a hundred years
sufficiently to pay off the national debt of Great
* We must not be understood to mean that loans on deben-
tures can be obtained as cheaply as are funded. There
is greater room for fraud, and therefore less security when the
debt depends upon the possession of a paper acknowledgment
that when it rests upon the admission of direct liability to the
creditor.


Britain, whilst the colonies would be converted
into nations sufficiently powerful and wealthy not
to feel the pressure of the debt which would have
become divided amongst themselves.
This is no hastily stated conviction. It is one
which will stand the test of precise figures, and
more by way of illustration than with the desire to
enter into details (for the object of the writer is
rather to suggest than to create), we propose to
subject it to a close examination. To do so it will
be necessary to fix upon amounts as a basis upon
which to work out results. It may be found that
the amounts and dates fixed are not the most judi-
cious, but if the principle be correct, it will work
in the same direction, though its practice be modi -
fied. The following, then, are the elements of our
calculation. The normal rate of interest at which
we suppose the Imperial Government can raise
money we set down as three and a-half per cent.,
and the guarantee to be charged the colonies we
put down as a-half per cent, annually. This would
give the colonies money at the rate of four per
cent., or fully one per cent, under the price at
which their most favourable loans have been nego-
tiated —or about one and a-half per cent, under the
ruling price of the majority of their loans.
The colonies might be well satisfied with
arrangements that promised them money for the
next one hundred years at four per cent.; or sup-
posing the Imperial Government could obtain it
for less than three and a-half per cent., at a rate
Illustration
by way of
proving the
principle laid
down.
Colonies be
content to
borrow money
during the
next 100
years, at four
per cent.


35,000,000/. to
be advanced
every five
years.
Half per cent,
guarantee
annually
would amount
in 100 years to
855,253,059/.
of only one-half per cent, more than the Imperial
Government had to pay. To secure uniformity it
would be necessary the advances should bear one
rate of interest; the premium and discount would
be the profit or gain of the colonies. Well, then,
the rate of interest, we suppose, is three and a-half
per cent., and of the guarantee one-half per cent.
The money to be advanced we propose should be
thirty-five millions sterling every five years for one
hundred years. Now, we want to ascertain what
the half per cent, guarantee would amount to at
compound interest during the time mentioned. We
suppose it to be re-invested of course at the same
rate of interest —three and a-half per .cent. It
would, in fact, as it accumulated, be available for
the periodical advances. It is simple, though some-
what tedious, to work out the result. On the first
thirty-five millions, the half per cent, guarantee
would accumulate at compound interest for the
whole term of one hundred years —on the second
thirty-five millions, it would accumulate for ninety-
five years ; on the third, for ninety years; on the
fourth, for eighty-five • years; and so on till the
twentieth instalment would have only a five years
currency of compound interest. A table of the
results will be found in the appendix. The amount
to which the half per cent, will accumulate is cal-
culated on each separate instalment, and the result
shows that, at the end of one hundred and twenty
years, Great Britain will be the gainer by
855,253,059/.


It will be asked what will have become of the
money, what will Great Britain have to show for
' '
the amount which we contend it will have gained,
Its position will be this—it will have become the
colonial creditor for the whole amount of the
twenty instalments of thirty-five millions, or of
700,000,000/., and the balance of 155,253,059/.
will be waiting investment. The process that will
be going on will be this. The first seven instal-
ments Great Britain will have to find—will have to
raise by her direct guarantee. The next instal-
ment will be more than met by the accumulated
interest of the half per cent, guarantee. Gradually
decreasing portions of the next five she will have to
find. But for the rest of the time she will not only
out of the interest be able to meet the instalments,
but a surplus will accumulate, out of which she will
be enabled to redeem the first instalments, and so
convert the colonies into debtors for these amounts to
herself, instead of to those who originally advanced
them.* Precise calculations can be made, so as to
Process by
which the re-
sult would be
brought
about.
2
* By adding up the different amounts in the table it can
readily he ascertained how much interest has accumulated at any
given period. Thus at the end of thirty-five years when the eighth
instalment would be due, 38,833,900?. would have accumulated,
leaving, besides the payment of the eighth instalment, 3,833,900?.
available for the ninth instalment, to be added to the 14,796,250?.
which would have accumulated between the two dates. For the
tenth there would be 18,511,500?. available. For the eleventh,
22,924,800?. For the twelfth, 28,165,550?. For the thirteenth,
84,390,300?. For the fourteenth and following instalments there
would be always a surplus on the 35,000,000?. It may be con-
tended that the calculation covers an inconsistency—that the


Data selected
by way of
illustration.
Principle the
same, if found
preferable to
select other
figures.
ensure that the times of repayment of the first
instalments should suit the accumulations of the
guarantor. It would stand thus then —for the first
seven instalments and for part of the ninth and four
following ones the imperial country would become
the guarantor to the third parties advancing,
thenceforth she would be able to meet the instal-
ments herself, and gradually to pay off the third
parties who advanced the first instalments —stand-
ing herself in their place-still charging the half
per cent, guarantee, but in reality guaranteeing
only herself.
Let us again remark that these results are
approximate. We do not profess to lay dt)wn that
the advances should really amount to 35,000,0 00/.
quinquennially, or that one hundred years should
be the exact limit of the transactions. We have
used these figures as an illustration of a principle,
to show that the mother country by feeding the
colonies with capital, making a charge of only half
per cent, for guarantee, would in a short time make
a sufficient profit to pay off her own national debt.
Accepting our illustration, it will be seen that at
the end of the hundred years England would be a
creditor of her colonies to the extent of 700,000,000/.
money which was left uninvested would not be fructifying at com-
pound interest. But the 155,253,059 Z. which, at the end of the
100 years we suppose to remain uninvested, would have accumu-
lated nearly all during the last five years. After ninety-five years,
therefore, Great Britain would either have to increase her advances
to her colonies or employ the money partly for her own purposes.


with waiting investment. Her own
national debt would still exist, but the Chancellor
of the Exchequer instead of having to provide the
interest for it from home resources, would be able
to meet it from the interest derived from the
colonies.
It will be as well to meet some of the objections
that will possibly be raised. It will be said that
our calculation pre-supposes the investment of the
half per cent, guarantee the moment it falls due.
The answer to this is, that it supposes its invest-
ment only annually; that the interest will be paid
in the colonies, and that the representatives of the
mother country who will receive it, will have no
difficulty in obtaining some interest on it at call,
until they are prepared to advance it on colonial
indebtedness. As the interest will be payable
quarterly, and according to the calculations, be
invested annually, there will be an average of a half
a year’s interest gained, which may be considered a
margin to cover expenses. Then it will be asked,
may not some losses be incurred, and might not
one loss swamp the whole profit. The reply is, the
money will be so widely distributed, and so many
colonies will compete for it, that the mother country
will be enabled to exercise a considerable amount
of discretion in the selection of her investments.
Large as the amount we suppose her to lend, she
will not have to search for investments. She will
have to select from those offered to her. We shall
see this when we come to consider directly how the
2—2
As calculation
provides only
for annual
investment, a
margin is left
to cover ex-
penses.
Bisks so
largely dif-
fused, that
practically
profit safely
secured.


The discre-
tion the
mother coun-
try would
exercise
would be a
hold on the
good be-
haviour of the
colonies.
There would
be an end to
the mischie
colonies will employ the money. But, before we
turn to the colonial aspect of the case, let us first
answer a question that will be raised —how will the
plan suggested operate to*prevent the conflicting
interests between England and her colonies, the
growth of which we made the starting point of our
argument, that the relations between them required
readjustment ?
If the whole of the money were to be given to
one colony, we should have to allow that Great
Britain would he putting herself into a position
from which she might have to pray for rather than
to concede terms. But the money would be divided
amongst forty or fifty colonies. .These would be
the competitors, and the strongest guarantee of
their good behaviour would consist in the fact that
on it would depend the response to their demands
for capital. In the very number of the nations
Great Britain would be creating would lie her
security against the aggressive tendencies of any
particular one. Again, in the prosperity that would
inevitably attend the employment of so much capi-
tal, would be found a guarantee against the indul-
gence of pernicious political crotchets. As we will
see directly, there will also be so much private
capital invested from home, that there will be a
constant revival of the personal relations between
the inhabitants of the mother country and those of
her colonies.
The tendency in the colonies now is to separate
from the imperial country, because she has thrown


them on their own resources. But then the ten-
dency would be to rely on the mother country for
the supply of the means whereby to develope their
resources. Besides, it would be a mistake to sup-
pose that political pursuits have taken a firm hold
on colonial communities generally. Public men are
not, as a rule, the leading men of a colony. A very
large section of the people look down with indiffer-
ence approaching to contempt upon those who make
political life their object. They neither interfere
for nor against. They see no inducements to enter
political life, and no inducements to restrain those
to whom public life becomes a professional pursuit.
All who have been in the colonies will bear out
what w'e say. A large number of those whose posi-
tion and intelligence would entitle them to take a
lead in political life abstain from entering into it.
And to a great extent they are the thoughtful men
of the community. They watch, but interfere not.
But if a new order of things were established; if a
community of interests were to grow up between
Great Britain and her colonies, and between her
colonies themselves, there would not be wanting
men who would have the power, as they would
have the will, to control the mischievous action of
political incendiaries. In short, conservatism would
be of very speedy growth in the colonies if the
mother country would allow the colonists to feel
they had something to conserve.
Let us now turn to the colonial aspect of the
case. It will first be urged that low as the rate of
vous action of
colonial
public men.
Conservatism
would grow
up.
Plan sug-
gested would
suit the
colonics.


Practically
the colonies
would be
manufac-
turing their
own capital.
interest four per cent, may be, it will not pay tbe
colonies to be forced to borrow for a hundred years.
Our answer is, our plan requires nothing of tbe
kind. For convenience sake we suppose a con-
tinuous investment; but there is nothing to prevent
the loans being of short dates, and their renewal
in some other form. There might be a constant
repayment and constant reinvestment going on.
At the same time we may conjecture that possibly
the colonies may soon come to think that the repay-
ment of loans by sinking funds is a miserable finan-
cial policy, and that for really reproductive works
there could be no possible objection to perpetually
funding the cost. This is, however, a collateral
question. It is sufficient to say our plan would
chime in with the present system of colonial finance,
should a more enlightened one not take its place.
It will also be said that though we have claimed
our plan will feed the colonies with capital from
the mother country, in reality it only amounts to
feeding them with their own. That, in fact, at the
end of the one hundred years, the whole amount
of their debt will be represented by the interest
they will have paid. Such in reality is the logical
rationale of the process. All that we ask for the
colonies is the use of the capital they reproduce.
But we call it capital from the mother country
because at present that reproduction does pass into
that form. As an instance, there is a three million
loan authorized in New Zealand to run for fifty
years, bearing partly a five and partly a six per


cent, rate of interest. The money that will be paid
by the colony in the shape of simple not compound
interest during the currency of the loan will amount
to 8,500,000/. If calculated at compound interest,
it w T ould multiply to an enormously larger extent.
That represents the interest paid by the colony for
the three millions of home capital advanced. What
we ask for is simply a constant reinvestment of only
a small portion of the interest —the half per cent,
guarantee —wdthin the colonies.
Let us now briefly allude to the purposes to
which the money can be put. They must be
essentially reproductive. That must be an inva-
riable condition, in other words the expenditure of
the money borrowed must afford security to the
lender. Keeping this stipulation in mind, there
should he no objection to colonial Governments
undertaking many enterprises, or finding the money
for them that are now left to private energy. In
every case the colony borrowing would have to
become directly liable, not only for the debt, but
also for the faithful employment of the money on
the purposes for which it was lent. It would be a
matter for the colony’s own consideration whether
the local Government itself should direct the expen-
diture, or whether the same should be deputed to
municipal bodies, or to legally constituted trusts,
or commissions. In every case the Government
would have to exercise that amount of supervision
necessary to ensure the legitimate employment of
the borrowed money, and would be liable for repay-
Purposes to
which the
loans should
be put.


Colonial Go-
vernments in
fostering
public enter-
prise not out-
stripping
their func-
tions.
ment. There is scarcely any limit to the repro-
ductive works that might be constructed under the
conditions named. Roads, railways, water and irri-
gation works, gas works, plantations, improvements
of harbours, river clearings, and embankments,
canals, telegraph lines, fish breeding ponds, patent
slips, bridges, and a host of others that will readily
suggest themselves to people who only consider this
that as yet the colonies are almost deficient in large
reproductive works. It is by no means suggested
the Colonial Governments should compete with
private enterprise, but rather that they should
stimulate and lead it. The tea plant was accli-
matized in India through Government enterprise,
but when once its cultivation was found to be pro-
fitable the Government plantations were offered for
sale, and the further development of the pursuit
was thrown as much as possible upon private energy
and skill.
If it be admitted that every colony possesses
peculiar resources and peculiar adaptabilities for
particular branches of enterprise it cannot be denied
that a Government that simply seeks to teach to
the people the means which Providence has placed
at their does not outstep its functions.
We do not advocate the employment by Govern-
ments of any large amounts of capital in mere
experiments. The security against a tendency of
this kind will be found in the discretion that the
local Parliament will exercise, and which will again
be subjected to the discretion of the Imperial


authorities. It is not intended that every applica-
tion for a loan guarantee made by a colony should
be granted by the Imperial Government. On the
contrary, each application should be narrowly scru-
tinized, and her Majesty’s Commissioners, on whom
would devolve the granting or refusing the request,
should, before acceding to any demand, satisfy
themselves that the purposes for which the money
was asked were legitimate, and that the colony
borrowing was justified in doing so. If what we
have before said be borne in mind, that large as
would be the capital supplied by the Imperial
Government, there would be a yet larger demand
for it from the colonies, it will be seen that the
Colonial Loan Commissioners would have the exer-
cise of discretion forced on them.
The profits the colonies would reap may, in fact,
be represented by the difference in the interest
which they would pay for their money, and the
amount of interest which the reproductive works
constructed with it, would yield. But the expen-
diture of the money would also draw population,
and every head of population represents so much
customs’ revenue. If capital be supplied to employ
additional labour, that additional labour becomes
a contributor to the expenses of Government, and
to the gradual repayment of the borrowed money.
Colonial populations are highly taxed because of
their thinness. The machinery of a government
that is available for half a million of people
requires few additions to serve a population of
Profits of the
colonies would
be difference
between rate
of interest
paid and that
yielded by
reproductive
works.


indirect
advantages
arising from
reproductive
works also to
be taken into
consideration,
®*P e "f dl '
double that number. A million people would
therefore have to contribute little more than half
a million ; in other words, every addition to the
population lightens the taxation to the existing
population. Again there is an indirect source of
profit not to be lost sight of. A railway may not
the first few years pay more than its expenses, and
leave the interest on the cost a charge to the
colony. But if, owing to the cheapened rate of
transit, a large proportion of the population
procure their supplies cheaper, and obtain an
import market for their produce, a government
may feel it is deriving an indirect profit sufficient
to justify it in bearing the cost of the interest for
a limited period. It may be said the benefit is
confined to only a portion of, whilst the cost falls
on the entire community. To some extent this
may be the case; but as a rule an advantage
gained by a large section of a community means
an advantage to the whole. If, for example, the
settlers in the interior prosper, trade near the
coast improves. Again, w T hen governments are
large landed proprietors, it must not be forgotten
that improvements which benefit the settlers in-
crease the value of property. It really seems
almost unnecessary to pursue the argument further.
For who will be found to deny, looking at the
matter from a broad point of view, and not from
one dictated by a doubt as to the value of particular
local works—who will be found to deny that the
expenditure of seven hundred millions sterling in


the colonies during the next hundred years would
convert them into grand and powerful nations
worthy of the source from which they have
sprung —worthy of being joined in federate equality
with the parent country ?
The developing her territory to suit the wants
of her population is the great object a nation must
propose to herself which thinks she has a destiny
to fulfil. A nation which stands still retrogrades,
because other nations pass her. It has been well
observed of China, “ Stationary for ages, she has
sensibly declined because she has not advanced.”
If Great Britain, in the pursuance of her quieta
non movere policy, forget that the development of
her colonies is a sacred mission entrusted to her,
those nations whose one dream of the future is to
increase the countries peopled by their people, will
pass her in the race. Nor has she long to decide,
for with the years there is growing up in the
colonies a feeling that will make them disinclined
to accept Great Britain’s aid. The son driven too
early from his father’s home, forms other ties, to
the exclusion of family associations.
There is another branch of the subject to which
we must turn. We have dwelt on the manner
in which Great Britain can supply capital to
Colonial Governments. We may now ask if there
is no way in which she can encourage private
investments ? Unquestionably she will do so to
some extent when she aids the progress of the
colonies, because she will make her subjects feel
700,000,000/.
on public
works in 100
years must
make colonies
great nations
Consolidation
and develop-
ment of her
empire Great
Britain’s mis-
sion.
Great Britain
should en-
courage her
subjects to
employ their
capital in the
colonies.


Trust funds
practically
prevented
from being
invested in the
colonies.
Productive-
ness of invest-
ments in
colonial lands.
that greater security is afforded for their invest-
ments. But it must not be forgotten that at
present she absolutely interposes a barrier to such
investments ; as far as she can do she forbids
them. To a person who for the first time studied
the polity of Great Britain, it must be something
astounding to learn that the investment of trust
funds in the colonies is practically prohibited, and
this too whilst these funds are accumulating by
millions annually, and no channel can be found
for employing them. Public companies in like
way are not allowed to invest their reserve funds
in colonial lands, although in many cases their
principal income is derived from the colonies.
Take, for instance, some of the insurance companies
whose business is mainly colonial, but whose Acts
of Parliament preclude them from colonial invest-
ments. We do not know whether the subject has
ever been agitated, but we venture to assert the
disqualification is precisely one of those absurdities
into which an ultra-conservatism occasionally falls.
Before the colonies attained to a defined position
there may have been sufficient reason for preclud-
ing them as fields for the investment of trust
funds ; but the continuation of the inhibition is
simply ridiculous.
Of course we do not ask that trustees should
be compelled to seek colonial investments, but
simply that they be allowed to do so. We know
of a case in which a person claiming an interest
of some five thousand pounds in a trust estate,


offered undoubted security to the extent of 10,000/.
to the trustees, if they would invest the money
in colonial property, but they were compelled to
refuse. It is notorious, too, that colonial invest-
ments increase in value immensely. Hundreds of
instances can be cited of persons who have sent out
money to their friends to invest for them, and who
have found themselves the owners of property
which after the lapse of a few years yielded them
annually as much money as they originally
expended.
It is difficult to find language adequate to
describing the beneficial results that would accrue
to the colonies if the disability were removed.
Millions on millions would flow in, property would
rise in value, and a community of interests would
grow up between the colonists and the people of
the mother country, which, as we have seen, there
is too much reason to fear is wanting now. To
those trustees who preferred home investments, the
money withdrawn for the purpose of colonial invest-
ment would leave the market more open ; and this,
too, without sensibly impairing the value of home
property, for the accumulations of trust funds have
become so enormous that practically it will be
impossible to exhaust them.
In closing his remarks the writer disclaims the
assumption that he has dealt exhaustively with his
subject. He has simply jotted down the bare
outlines, leaving to others the task of filling them
in. His English feeling unimpaired after a resi-
Enormous ,
results that
would follow
the permitting
the invest-
ment of trust
funds in the
colonies.
Author has
merely sug-
gested outline
of a policy.


Leaves task of
filling it in to
others.
Opportunity
afforded to
English
statesmen to
create a vast
and grand
empire.
deuce of many years in the colonies, he sees with
dismay the growth around him of an anti-English
feeling. He sees that in an increasing disparity of
interests, Great Britain is forcing alienation on her
colonies. He asks that she again should take
them to her bosom ; that she should look upon
them as the seeds of nations to which it has fallen
to her lot to give vitality. He pretends not to the
power to work out the details of the problem; he
asserts only the conviction that those details can he
worked out. He has seen enough of the colonies
to assure him they only want capital to develope
them. This is the very vitality which Great
Britain most readily has it in her power to bestow.
Unhappily, since the deaths of Labouchere, Moles-
worth, and others who could he named, few of
England’s public men have made colonial policy
their speciality. Are there none to come forward
now —are there none with the ambition to leave
behind them the undying fame that through all
time will wait on those who have the far-sighted-
ness to conceive, and the courage to create, an
empire more vast and imperishable than any which
ever inspired the dreams of the wildest heroes of
the past —by peaceful means to construct that for
which the blood of countless thousands of human
creatures has been wasted ?


| per cent, on at
3| per cent, compound
interest for 5
years
£
938,350
10
99
2,052,750
15
99
8,376,450
20
99
4,948,650
25
99
6,815,900
30
99
9,033,850
35
99
11,667,950
40
99
14,796,250
45
99
18,511,500
50
99
22,924,300
55
99
28,165,550
60
99
34,390,300
65
99
41,783,350
70
99
50,563,800
75
99
60,991,963
80
99
73,377,540
85
9 9
88,089,007
90
99
105,559,487
95
99
126,310,294
99
100
99
150,955,818
Total
.£855,253,059
APPENDIX.
Table showing the Increase at per cent. Compound
Interest of a Half per Cent. Guarantee on Thirty -
fve Millions supplied every Five Years for a
Hundred Years.
Each thirty-five millions is calculated separately.
Properly the table should be inverted. The first
thirty-five millions would bear an accumulating
i per cent, interest for 100 years, the second for
95 years, and so on, until the last instalment would
only have five years to run.






