

| ! } II
' / I J \. ( f M7 ? Sappaba \ ' G CT 0Coffs Harbour
© ; /> / \ y | \| \ :>'
. O white CUffs , g \ r V- X •■ Vv 1 ’’" /? ) M»f*to. oS N ? mb V, cca rr<
,-, J?? 11 \ V V \ / /K^' 1 * X
1 V \ \S VS \ Gur ' n, ' ,iah { *5©Walcha tfjh Cq
1 f Lj \ U \% Vc^^5 rabr ' U ' N. am'rorth C*J
C| ! V—** B^0 C *
__ | \ r-V V '' TtePea-
k ONymagee ,, ( y/
1 [ ""- /- a V»-4\ /^ ngo g?
1 t4 ■••••... . M ,„ ope |j / \|f A'l'rakii.il Vs /T
• J-J ijm Ma\k,i:,,, o &5"> M4rrundlc| \ I £ -. J?§3 p C' rr STSPnenS >>N
I <k ‘* ""'feoto x x *'“ ' ° y'^Newcastle
i | \*~
(§Jjg£ Jv^ i[w o rIh V; oajhup- WEUloet
r.n,fnC'‘“^yBaraiIari 788fl / p ? .* Plrtontflyr^i^r
ll«r fr *wn s» X^f You "| I] crookweii J r/ /N hC. sN
VjLi W / // /9 ,'V
gfl \\j^yzgr^ Balranald $ Kialna 4
i 1 ; •• / - ... - .,/-J.‘ u"\p-^
'^L^Hn nmbi v \}hIM°H HwSwm^ils^
L Horshaju'gf \ \ / v -feftem)lgoiS/ VoTat«n S \| W ( I i\g7 n „ ’ I a-< t
\v Bartons Canal Scheme
r | e Ig den Existing .— ... Kgnwoys unaer construction .........
].?*** f '- . / ( ~ xjaff*” Hf r^,^ t ..X JCCTg^.l
Great Water Conservation Scheme.
This map shows the Great Water which are the Darling tributaries, the
Canal Scheme, suggested by Mr. E, D. Barwon or at Boggabilla,
Barton —one of the foremost pioneer the Gwydir, near Moree, the Namoi,
graziers of this State. Writing in sup- near Baan Baa, the Castlereagh, near
port of the scheme, Mr. Barton says:— Armatree, the Macquarie, near Narro-
Some eighteen months ago I pub- mine, and the Bogan, near its source,
lished a scheme for conserving the It would also intersect the Lachlan,
flood waters of all the rivers 'and wa- near Forbes," the Murrumbidgee, near
ter courses that make the Murray Wagga, ending at the Hume or Murray,
Eiver at Wentworth, and in August due south of Holbrook. Locks, or
last I gave evidence before the Agri- sluice gates, would, of course, have to
cultural Committee of the Legislative be provided at these junctions, and
Council. also those of the other and less impor-
My object is to enable Australia to tant waterways crossed, to keep a suf-
carry prosperously her fair share of ficieut amount of water in the rivers
population, which will never be ef- to serve the graziers holding country
feoted until there is a sufficiency of along their banks. The altitudes shown
water for domestic purposes, which in various places along the route reveal
the present settlers in the interior are the fact that, to all intents and pur-
lamentably short of. poses, the canal would be level at abou
The whole of the interior of Aus- . 800 feet above the sea. If there is a\J
tralia is drained by the tributaries of rise or fall, it is very, very slight, so
the one river that reaches the sea, the the question.raised by many critics of
Murray. The western waters of the scheme, friendly and otherwise, as
Queensland, the inland waters of the to the impractibility of running water
Northern Territory, West Australia up hill, does' not come into consideration
and South' Australia run-into Lake -t all. In a few places it may be ne-
Eyre, if they run long enough. If cessary to make the cutting deeper than
you look at the Japanese map of Aus- feet, as, for instance, in the stretch
tralia, showing the countries of Eu- letween Narromine and Bogan Gate, to
rope round the coast and space in the cut through the slight rise beyond Peak
centre big enough to contain Russia, Hill, but otherwise no great difficulty
it only shows the areas of land are would present itself,
sufficient, or ought to be sufficient, to As to the utility of the project, this
contain the millions of people, but it may be considered in a three-fold as-
says nothing about water, which is an pect.
absolute necessity. What would hap First, it would, as already pointed
pen to the forty million of people out, prevent the destruction and waste
settled on an area round Sydney as caused by floods. In support of the
large as Great Britain? contention that the great bulk of this
If ‘ 1 The Speck, ’ ’ Tasmania, could flood water really gets nowhere, atten-
be transplanted just as it is, climate tion is drawn to the water
and all, and put down on top of Lake that still remains from the June
Eyre, the empty space in the centre flood in the north-west. It
might go near to holding the quota of may be argued and is certainly
people; as "The Speclk” contains more true, that the Darling provides a natural
available and permanent water than outlet for this, but in this river the fall
the centre of Australia. is so gradual that the water seldom runs
economically served by pipe-lines on the On the south side of the Lachlan, as
hydro-electric pump' system from Barren far as Hillston, the country is best suit-
duck. This service would be a consid- ed for agriculture, and this remark ap'
erable drain on the water available for plies to all as far as the Murray or
the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area, but Hume, though it is lamentably short of
such be replaced by pipe lines water for domestic use. A stream of
from the canal at Barmedman. permanent water would settle more far-
Then, there is that plains country mers * n this land than any amount of
bounded by the Bogan, Darling and railways. , ' ,
Lachlan rivers. This has practically no rough calculation shows that the
surface water, and is too far south of amount of earth to be removed in cut-
the artesian water bearing basin to make ting the proposed canal would be
boring profitable. It contains much good 8,900,000,000 cubic feet, which figure
pastoral land, interspersed with useless would also approximate the amount of
clay pan country. It is not, nor will it water contained when the canal was
ever be, agricultural land, for its rain- f u fl to ground level. Black and red
fall is too meagre, and its soil too shal- s( fli s predominate along the proposed
low to respond to irrigation. Given a ro ute, and there would be little or no
comprehensive water supply system by roe k. It would be ratller diffieult to
means of pipe lines, tanks and trough- estimate the cost of the undertaking,
ing, it will be the home of millions of as we have nothing of a like nature for
merino sheep. Hitherto, great-hearted comparison. Of course, before the
men who have attempted to take up land sc heme could be finally accepted and
on this plain, have spent fortunes in p U t into being, some agreement would
sinking ground tanks to conserve rain have t 0 be made with the States of Vio-
lator, but owing to the greater preval- t olda and Queensland regarding the
ence of the ‘ ‘ Darling Storms ’ ’ these tapping of the Hume and Barwon.
ground tanks arc more often Allied with WMle spea king of Queensland, it is as
red sand, to the squatter’s detriment weli for me to point out that tll9
and loss, - than with water to his relief scheme i s capable of being extended
and gam. into that gtate, still at the 800 feet
Thirdly, the scheme would provide a level, for 300 miles to the
great highway through the State along Warrego* Eiver, betwteen Ounnamulla
which the raw and manufactured pro- and Charleville. Such an extension
ducts could be cheaply transported to would be a valuable addition to the
and from the north and south. Bogan canal, for it would then drain the north-
Gate, 229 miles from Sydney, would ern catchment area of the Darling,
be the nearest railway point on the pro- The Moonbi Eiver, Narran Creek, the
posed canal, and, therefore, the natural Bokhara, the Birrie, the Culgoa, and the
terminal for goods passing in and out Warrego rivers do not run directly
of the capital. Built with a gradual into the Darling, despite the fact that
batter of six to one, the canal would be they are marked as so doing on most
able to stand motor boat traffic without maps. On the few occasions when they
having is banks seriously eroded. Fur- do run they mostly find their way into
ther than this, from figures gleaned of Talyawalka creek, a wide, shallow
the -data collected by the late Mr. Eus- branch or billabong of the Darling,
sell (Government meteorologist), Bro- running .parallel with, and about 30
'feasor Gregory, and others, I believe miles apart, from that river. But, as
A glance at the map should give the at a greater rate than a mile an hour,
reader a general idea of my proposal, though, as in the case of the recoiC
It will be noticed that the canal has flood, it probably exceeds - a width of
been sketchel in just where the foot- 2PO miles. The cause of this slow rate
hills of the Blue Mountains converge 11 ' A° w * s easily understood when a com-
into the western plains. Contour maps P arison is . made of the altitude of the
, it, i , various railway towns along its course—.
show that the average decline in ele-. ■ J s
„ ~ „ , „i, , . Mungindi 528 feet above sea level, Po
vation from the foot of the mountains , , „ T , , ’
, , ~, . ~ . , ~ nataroo 477, Walgett 437, Brewarrma
to the marked line is 14 feet to the 392 j Bourke 350; Menindie 204< M<srbein
mile, whilst, west of the line, the fall (near Wentworth, Victoria) 185.
averages 2 feet all the way to where Tlie distance from Mungindi to
the Darling joins the Murray at Went- Wentworth is fully 1000 miles around
worth. In flood time, at present, the Gic river, whereas the drop in round
rain falling on the western watershed! figures is only 350 feet, or a rough ave-
causes great mortality ,in stock, bring- rage of two in every mile. Also, as
ing epidemics of fluke and worms, de- touching the prevention of waste, it is
stroying valuable grazing country by apparent that when confined to the
killing the natural grasses and spread- comparatively narrow deep canal, the
ing rank useless flood grasses, and da- loss of water through, evaporation and
maging railroads. To obviate this loss soakage would be much less than when
and waste, I propose that a canal and spread broadcast over the land, with far
earthbank toe built on the fringe of greater surface exposure to the sun.
these plains to confine the surplus wa- The second important aspect of the
ters in a channel about 600 miles long, Scheme is that the canal would run
and running right through the State, through what is generally recognised as
As proposed, the canal would be an ex- the finest sheep and wheat country in
cavation 20 feet deep by 20 feet wide New South Wales, which would
at the bottom, with sides sloping at grow sufficient fodder to maintain stock
an average of one foot in every six. il; any drought-stricken or dry area—
The earth taken from the excavation a service that, so far, the Yanco scheme
would be banked up to a height of 20 las failed to render. Pipe
feet on the western side of the canal, l* nes could also be laid to serve
would mean the impounding of a strip le country about and between Rankin’s
of water about 2 miles wide and an Springs, Wyalong, and Lake Cargelligo.
average of 7 feet deep, while an in- dn good; and even in only fair seasons,
crease to the full capacity of the bank This district has proved itself splendid
would mean an increase of the width v ' ljeat countr y> and - S™ an efficient
of from 5 to 10 miles, and an average irri B ution system, it would continue pro-
, ~ „„ , .... . . , lifie even in dry spells. However, dur-
depth of 16 feet, quite independent of , ,
. ~ , mg last year’s drought, the railway was
the water in the canal proper. ~ , „ ,
the sole source of water supply to the
My proposal in brief, therefore, is settlers and town there. In dry sea-
to give the State another river, which, SCIIS; or practically more or less every
running through good grazing and year, the towns of Temora, Grenfell and
wheat land, 1 would have a greater eco- Young are also waterless, and depen-
nomic value than the Darling. The fleet upon the railways. These towns
canal, as will be readily seen, would would, of course, be too high to be fed
intersect many rivers, chief among from the canal, and would be more
that that there would be a sufficient it is also the case with the eastern and
amount of water in the canal to make southern tributaries (sic) of the Dar-
the Darling permanently navigable. The ling, this feat is accomplished only by
catchment area feeding this river has an exceptionally heavy flood, or a quick
been described as the largest of any in succession of lighter floods, otherwise
the world by the Mr. Bussell. The the water gets nowhere, but squanders
rain falling on higher lands, comprising itself on the surro unding flat and (at
at least half of this catchment area p resen t) comparatively useless plains,
averages from 20 to 30 inches per an- The extension of t he canal into
num, while, on the lower lands of the Q ueensland would open a large area of
other half, the average is from 10 to In good wheat growing country, similar to
inches. It has been computed that only that p , asaed through in Vew South
li per cent, of this enormous volume Wa ] es _ p<3r ha ps with a little more
of water reaches the Darling, and also pear
that if only two inches of it were to In conclusion, W e in Australia, and
reach that river at Bourke, it would more partieal i arl y in New South Wales,
form a watercourse 100 feet deep, 200 are progressing towards a point beyond
feet wide, flowing at the rate of a mile whioh it w ill be impossible to go with-
an, hour. Thus it will be seen that, out a deflnite an a comprehensive water
given a proper conservation scheme, the consei . va ti on scheme, a scheme that will
permanent navigability of the Darling embrace the whole of the State, or more
is not such an impossibility as it would egpef .; a ]iy the central and western divi-
at first appear. sions, and not pick at selected portions
I should advise a sufficient supply of of it> )ike the Bm . ren Jllck and Pera
water to pass down the Lachlan to en- Bore schemes. The Carruthers settle-
able the settlers on either side to irri- rael ,t scheme, proposed to establish
gate the river flats in all seasons as far some 0 f its "million farms for a mil-
as Condobolin, and I think it might be bon people’’ on the spasmodically
made navigable by a small outlay which watered type of country round about
would be borne locally, if desirable. the junction of the Darling and Mur-
Below Con dobolinthe country on the xaj, but now, one may reasonably ask,
north side of the river is purely a dry are small holdings to succeed when
grazing proposition. No water can be large holdings have irrevocably failed,
had by sinking or boring between ths The late Mr. Russell’s figures dealing
Lachlan and Darling, a distance of 150 with the annual rainfall on the enor-
miles. If a sufficient supply of wate- mous catchment area of the Darling,
passed Condobolin to keep the river clearly show that it is more a failure
channel running, as well as the Wol- to make efficient nse of what is provid-
landra billabong, a very large quantity ed by nature, than an actual lack of
of stock could be raised very profitably; water, that is the cause of the steril-
the balance, some 3000 square miles, ity of our western plains. The question,
could only be utilised for stock by run- then, of an adequate conservation
ning a pipe drain from dhe canal near scheme, such as this, should be oecupy-
Bogan Gate, passing Cobar and going 2ng the minds, not only of those di-
tow&rds Wileannia. Without a canal rectly concerned —but also of every
this immense block of land must be left citizen, to whom the future prosperity
to the rabbit and bushflres, which have of the State would mean an increase of
just passed over a considerable portion, comfort and happiness.
