

ROYAL COLONIAL INSTITUTE,
On the Evenimj of the 16th of March , 1875.
THE DUKE OF MANCHESTER IN THE CHAIR.
ARCHIBALD MICHIE, Q.C.
Agent- General of Victoria.
UNWIN BROTHERS, PRINTERS,
LONDON, 109 A, CANNON STREET, AND AT CHILWORTH.
fh. JT6*7
.1 vAT Ell read at
1875.


UVitt / 7
GREAT BRITAIN AND NEW GUINEA.
Bv ABCHIBALB MIOHIE, Q.C.,
Agent •General of Victoria,
To the statesmen, the merchant, and the Colonist, and even to the
geographer and the naturalist, I cannot but think that the present
position and future possibilities of New Guinea ought to prove
peculiarly interesting. Stretching away as it does athwart that
vast Indian Archipelago, almost from the equator on the north to
the 10th degree of latitude on the south, and extending nearly
from the 130th to beyond the 148th degree of east longitude, we
find it to be the next but one in magnitude to the island continent,
which already contains so many thriving English communities.
There is something perplexing in the thought that this very
remarkable island, lying as it does at the very door of Australia,
should not at the present time be as well known to us as the
interior of Africa, And yet I think we may very reasonably pre-
sume that if it were judiciously brought under the rule of Great
Britain, it would prove at no very remote period to be as important
to the interests of millions of the mother-country, as to the hundreds
of thousands of souls who are now, as rapidly as surely, laying the
foundations of a second British Empire in the great south land.
It is with this conviction that I venture, at the suggestion of
some of my friends of the Royal Colonial Institute, to lay before
you my views on this not less interesting than important sub-
ject ; and if at the outset anyone may be mentally demanding,
why now, more than at any former period, we are called upon to
turn our special attention to New Guinea, I reply, that it is
only within the last few years that New Guinea has been brought
as close to our Colonists as she now is. Cast your eyes over the
latest map of Australasia, and what do you behold ? The vast and
until very recently the mysterious interior of this island continent,
•so long supposed to be an arid and unimprovable desert, unfit for
human occupation, is now spanned by the electric telegraph, and
is settled by a continuous and scarcely interrupted succession of
if Cs\\
IV O “ NOV 1992 <A
V " \&


sheep and cattle stations. The farmer, the sugar grower, the
cotton planter, the gold digger, the storekeeper, even the doctor,
the clergyman, and the lawyer, are now found in an established
and well-organised civilization within a few miles of the scarcely
explored shores of New Guinea. These settlers are told, as the
fact is, that the geological formation of the one country is identical
in character with that of the southern portion of the other. In
effect therefore the two islands, by reason of their near neighbour-
hood and their evidently possessing so many natural resources in
common, are one territory; and Nature herself seems to have
suggested that the power which already holds sovereignty over the
one should also have some dominion over the other.
At this point, however, I think I hear an objector striking in
with, “Ah ! we have heard this sort of thing before; and although
it would have done very well in ‘ the dark ages,’ when such foolish
phrases as ‘ ships, colonies, and commerce,’ captivated the obtuse
intellects of our benighted forefathers; we now live in an age of
better lights, and are of opinion that these once so much lauded
‘ gems of the British Crown/ as they are called, are costly and
delusive incumbrances, already numerous enough, without our
adding New Guinea to the list.” Speeches like this, notwithstand-
ing the recent Fijian heresy in the opposite direction, we shall
have inevitably to deal with in discussing this question, and there-
fore, before proceeding further, I may as well, with your permis-
sion, try and get this preliminary objection out of my way at once.
Paradoxical as it may sound, I venture to say at the outset, and
trust to make the position good as I proceed, that we may grant
much for which Mr. Goldwin Smith—for whom, in passing, I
desire to express the sincerest respect—and his school contend, and
yet consistently affirm that it would materially conduce to the best
interests both of the mother-country and of the Australian Colonies
to incorporate, if we could, New Guinea with the British Empire.
The object of the separationists, as we know, is to get rid of the
political connection, and so relieve the parent country, as they
consider, of the anxiety, the trouble, and expense of managing a
large number of unprofitable, yet frequently, fractions, exacting,
and impracticable children. That this object could be effected by
a stroke of the pen cannot be doubted; and that Great Britain
might save, or appear to save, a round sum by the process—not
that the Australian Colonies cost her anything—may be at once
conceded. She would, however, on the other hand, as a necessary
consequence of the operation, as it appears to me, put her Colonies
in such a position towards her in the future, that in the ev.ent of a


war, she would have no more or further right than any ordinary
foreign power to refit her armaments in Colonial ports, thenceforth
neutral at least for their own security under the changed relations.
All this seems plain enough.
But, further, there is one great and dominating fact, which
neither Parliament nor any other earthly power can ever abolish
or control, and that is the absolute dependence of millions of
England’s lives on England’s commerce with her Colonies in every
part of the world. That commerce, as you well know, is at least
as essential to the support of many thousands of English house-
holds, as if it were a commerce carried on between any two ports
on our own coast. There is not a day in the year in which there
are not millions of pounds’ worth of British property, in the shape
of British shipping, lying in the various harbours of our remotest
dependencies. In these ships are carried many other millions’
worth of British manufacture—the products of Manchester, Bir-
mingham, Leeds, and all the great centres of industry throughout
this country. If all this commerce is to continue, and to grow in the
future as in the past, is isolation possible to the England of our
day ? Can England, however averse from the cost of defending
her Colonies, escape, even if she would, from the necessity of de-
fending her own property in the harbours of these Colonies ?
When Lord Granville a few years ago, in repelling an imputation
brought against the Government to which he belonged, came out
with that fine after-dinner burst—delivered I am sure in perfect
sincerity—to the effect that, if it became necessary, England’s last
ship and last shilling should be spent in defence of her colonies,
was the speech really as extravagant and after-dinnerish as it
sounded ? Did it after all amount to much more than this, that if
it became necessary England’s last ship and last shilling should
be expended in defence of herself, whether that self were found in
Hobson’s Bay or in Sydney, in Adelaide or in Brisbane, or in a
score or so of other ports in which this remarkably distributed, yet
connected, self of hers is constantly to be found ? The tax-payers
of England, we are told, ought not to be burdened with the
defence of Colonies which can so well afford to defend themselves ;
a proposition which, assuming it to be assented to on the part of
the colonists, must surely entitle them to a reciprocal concession
from the tax-payers of England, viz. that the tax-payers of a
colony ought not to be burdened with the care and cost of pro-
tecting the property of British merchants, shipowners, and
manufacturers, because they happen to find it more profitable to
send their property to Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, or Brisbane,


rather than to keep it at home. This is a very interesting point
in the Colonial relations with the mother-country, a point which
some day may demand to be practically dealt with. A few years
ago, Admiral Popoff, one of the most experienced and trusted
officers of the Russian navy, whilst with his ship in Hobson’s Bay,
made himself quite at home by surveying and taking careful sound-
ings of our extensive harbour in every direction. Many of us
were rather puzzled by this delicate attention. Was it to be set
down to abstract devotion, to hydrographic science, or might it
mean business ? We had not many years before been at war with
Russia, and might be at war again, either with her or with other
powers. In such an event your gold and wool ships might be
seized in our port, or arrested by hostile cruisers on putting to sea.
We have been so long familiar with the reports in the Times , of
how half a million of gold on such a day, or a million on such
another day, was proceeding from stage to stage—its travels being
recorded with all the circumstantiality of a royal progress—until
it reaches its honourable, though temporary, destination in the
vaults of the Bank of England, that it requires quite an effort of
the mind to imagine Admiral Popoff laying hold of it on the way.
Such events as this, however, being possible, it is only natural to
inquire who would have to bear, or who ought to bear, the loss, or
should either mother country or colony alone bear the loss?
Here we find ourselves inter apices juris , plunged into a question of
disputed obligation. The British merchant might say, “Whilst
your harbour has got our property, your harbour, if the property is
seized, ought to be at the cost of defending it or accounting for it.”
The colonist, on the other hand, might say, “What have we, or
what has our harbour to fear, but for your property ? It is the
fact of your property being in our harbour at a time when you
have some quarrel in hand, with which we have nothing whatever
to do, which alone exposes either our harbour or your goods to the
rapacity of an enemy ; and therefore you, the mother country, are,
or ought to be, mainly responsible for both.” The delicately com-
plicated equities arising out of the situation remind me some-
what of the little suit which once arose between the owner of a
Newfoundland dog and a fishmonger. Whilst the Newfoundland
dog was unguardedly wagging his fine tail over a box of live
lobsters outside a fishmonger’s shop, one of the uneasy Crustacea
closed its large claw on the tail of the dog, and the latter in very
natural fright at the altogether new sensation, bolted down the
street, carrying his tenacious and painful appendage along with
him. The fishmonger, who, for the purpose of the illustration,


shall be called the British merchant, aroused by this novel and
extraordinary evanishment of his property, roared out to the
owner of the dog, “ Hallo, I say, you sir, call back your dog, will
you ; he’s running away with my lobster at his tail.” “Oh, non-
sense,” replied the dog’s master, “ you call back your lobster.”
Whether the British merchant or the fishmonger may be con-
sidered effectually or satisfactorily answered by so embarrassing a
counter-requisition, a court of equity must determine, which court
of equity for this evening you are.
Decide, however, as you may, for lobster or dog, or for neither or
both, I think you will find that the familiar illustration I have
employed Scarcely exaggerates the complication of interests which
insensibly, in the course of years, has arisen between the mother
country and her Colonies. A fair review, and the very necessities
of the situation, then, entitle us to say, upon the mere statement
of the case, that British commerce must be protected by British
force, wherever that commerce may be found; and if this be so, I
cannot very clearly see how, with any substantial result in the way
of saving money, Great Britain should declare for what must after
all prove to her but an unprofitable political separation, so far as
her self-supporting colonies are concerned; and therefore is is that
I have said we may grant much that the Separationists contend
for, without prejudicing our present contention in the direction of
New Guinea. And if Britain’s commerce must be protected by
herself, it follows, as a necessary corollary, that it is for her best
and permanent interest that all reasonable and effectual means
should be employed for securing that protection. And here I may
ask, can such means be at all adequate in time of war, whilst one
side of Torres Straits is under the control of some powerful enemy ?
Whether England be at peace or war, indeed, it is all-important
that we should have the command of these straits. Our enormous
trade with China, Japan, India, Singapore, and Australasia—
large as it is, yet only in its infancy—demands, as an indispensable
condition of its further successful prosecution, carefully surveyed
coasts and straits and harbours, seas well protected from pirates,
and friendly neighbours on every side. How might it faro with our
merchants, in a time of war, were New Guinea and her fine har-
bours in the possession of some great European power hostile to
this country ? How could North Australia brook, within seventy or
eighty miles of her own coast, an enemy alike to herself and the
parent country ? And should this be derided as an imaginary
danger, it must be borne in mind that it may at any moment be
turned into a real danger. The waste places of the earth are as


open to other nations as to us. Whilst New Guinea is wholly un-
occupied by ourselves, it may, without offence to England, be at
any time appropriated by some other power, which, in the ever-
changing course of the world’s fortunes, might, either in time of
peace or war, very disastrously, in those regions, disturb both
Imperial and Australian interests.
And now, turning aside for a moment to these Australian in-
terests more particularly, allow me to call your attention to
another possibility which might, even in a time of peace, accrue
from our continued disregard of New Guinea. Suppose—
unpleasant as the supposition may be to the minds of our fellow-
countrymen in Australia—that a penal settlement were established
in the island. We know that were such an enterprise attempted
by the British Government, all Australia, from Melbourne in the
south to Palmerston in the extreme north, would be aflame with
indignation and resistance. And yet such a contingency may at
any moment come upon the Australian colonists at the hands of a
foreign power, which would be under no obligation whatsoever to
heed our remonstrances, and indeed, could not in reason be ex-
pected to consult our interests or convenience in preference to their
own. Not to speak of any other consideration, is this a risk to
which our Australian Colonies should any longer be exposed ? You
all remember the resolute, and ultimately successful, opposition •
which the Colonists made many years back to the attempted re-
sumption of transportation, even to Western Australia; yet what
would transportation to that Colony be compared with transporta-
tion to New Guinea ? The Western Australian Port of King
George’s Sound is many hundreds of miles, whether by sea or land,
from North Australia; but, as we have seen, the distance of the
nearest point of North Australia to New Guinea does not exceed
eighty miles. Transportation to New Guinea, therefore, would in
effect be transportation to Queensland, which, I need hardly say,
would prove a calamity both to her and to her neighbours, com-
pared with which an ordinary invasion—as being merely a transi-
tory affair—would be a mild visitation. J)o not scout these
suggestions as imaginary terrors. We are reminded by events
every day, “ that the unforeseen always happens.” France has her
convenient penal settlement in New Qaledonia. Nobody expected
that till it came. Why may not some other great power desire to
establish such a form of outdoor relief in New Guinea ? We may
rely on it that a regard for the interests or feelings of our Colonists
would be no hindrance, and in these happy and amiable times of
Geneva arbitrations, even strong representations of the parent


country, if made at all, would probably prove equally effloa’
cious.
In all such matters as the passing on of national nuisances from
our own doors to those of our neighbours, we do not love our neigh’
hours as ourselves. Selfishness becomes, under such circumstances,
a sort of privileged sentiment all round. I sadly proved this years
ago, when once quietly discussing this question of transportation
with the late Charles Kean, in Melbourne. He was as sensible and
fair-minded a man in most matters as you would desire to meet
with ; and therefore I was for a moment a little surprised to find
him vigorously denouncing our late unreasonable, not to say
treasonable, conduct in having not only meditated, but even set
about preparing to reship from Melbourne a cargo of England’s
convicts of the strongest flavour, to be landed at some convenient
point in Cornwall or Devon, as an acknowledgment in kind of the
repeated favours of the same nature which had been vouchsafed to
Australians from the prisons and hulks of England. Mr. Kean had
of course satisfactorily absorbed all that certain portions of the
English press had served up to him respecting our absurd and un-
reasonable prejudices in favour of our own throats, and hefavoured
me with a reproduction of all the stock English arguments for my
conversion. I succeeded, however, at last in extracting from him
a sort of reluctant half-admission, that the feeling which induced us
to resist the importation of English convicts was, at least, as res-
pectable and disinterested as the motives of the exporters ; and so,
finally abandoning his original position, he said, with a heavy sigh,
“ Well, perhaps you’re right; but I’m sure I don’t care where they go,
so long as ive get rid of them.” This blunt and honestly selfish
little speech, delivered with the air of a man making a rather
handsome and liberal concession, in fact contained the whole es-
sence and marrow of whatever had come from pro-transportation
writers or speakers in the mother country. And this feeling is
neither dead nor rare, nor confined to England. It may be displayed
at any time to our cost by a foreign power, and therefore I humbly
submit that Great Britain, whether she retains her Colonies or not,
is morally bound—inextricably identified with Australian fortunes
as she is—to contribute whatever prevision or prompt action the
situation may demand, for the purpose of saving the Colonies from
a possible calamity, which, should it come to pass, would, by
diminishing the attractiveness of the Colonies as fields for respect-
able emigration, ultimately recoil on herself.
But, as I cannot expect such a principally local consideration as
this to be a very potent one for my purpose with any Government,


Liberal or Conservative, let me go to other arguments which may
have greater weight, as savouring more of what are sometimes
called “ breeches-pocket arguments.” I have already, as I venture
to hope, shown the important bearing which our possession of New
Guinea may have on the safety of our commerce in those eastern
seas ; let me now call your attention to the effect which the pos-
session of some portion of this fine island would have in extending
the commerce of this country.
Supposing the island to be settled by our countrymen, as are
Queensland and Port Darwin on the opposite shore, you have at
once a large, new, and as it would certainly prove, a rapidly grow-
ing market for British manufactures and merchandise of every
land. Only those who have witnessed, as some of us have, the
rapidity with which new settlements spring up and prosper under
favourable conditions, can have any adequate conception of the
nature of the operation. I made a visit to Graham’s Town, in
the Auckland district of New Zealand, about three years after the
discovery of the Thames River diggings, and the consequent estab-
lishment of the township itself. Only three years before my
arrival at this place the spot was mere bush, untrodden by the
foot of the white man ; and yet within this short period had sprung
into existence many hundreds of respectably built houses, nume-
rous, commodious, and well-managed hotels, churches, chapels,
and court houses. Omnibuses and cabs were running for moderate
fares along properly laid-out and well-made streets, thronged by
streams of well-behaved wayfarers of every class, who would
favourably compare with any urban population whatsoever in this
country. Upon the hill-sides behind the town, and in every
suburb, were scores of steam-engines and every kind of machinery
both for quartz-crushing and agriculture—more especially for the
preparation of New Zealand flax for the English market—all of
which machinery had of course come from England ; and I think
I should have forgotten that I was merely in a New Zealand town-
ship of only three years’ standing, had I not met—pacing along
the footpath of the principal street —a young Maori lady, very
handsomely attired in a rich silk dress, and with a coquettish-look-
ing little Parisian bonnet on her head, the effect of which, however,
was, to my prejudiced eye, somewhat marred by the fact that she
had in her mouth a short black pipe, at which, with the judicious
intervals of an experienced smoker, she took good long pulls, with
very evident appreciation of the soothing effects of the weed. Now
be it observed that the growth of this settlement had taken place
amongst large numbers of this lady’s countrymen, all of whom took


kindly to the new state of things, and some of whom were deriving
very handsome ground-rents from the Colonists occupying the land
of these natives. “ The celebrated ” chief Tipari—for thus he was
called in those parts —was, as one of these ground landlords, in re-
ceipt of a large income ; had built himself a handsome house in
the English style, and had recently gone into heavy expenses for
the purpose of entertaining the Duke of Edinburgh whilst his
Royal Highness was in Auckland, in the course of his tour a few
years ago. Greatly disappointed was poor Tipari that the sou of
Queen Victoria could not, amidst his many other engagements,
avail himself of the great chief’s hospitality. The only consolation
left to Tipari was with renewed energy to collect his ground-rents,
which, from all reports that reached me, he levied with most
civilized punctuality.
Now, I would ask here, what reason have we to doubt that just
as Graham’s Town, and its continuation Shortland, and other
such places came into existence, waxed strong, and prospered, so a
similar career would attend a plantation of our people in New
Guinea ? The resources of the island are great ; the climate,
although tropical, healthy; the people tractable, and fond of
barter. And moreover, quite irrespective of the recent valuable dis-
coveries by Captain Moresby, to which I shall presently make more
particular reference, it cannot be doubted that there are in New
Guinea extensive deposits of gold identical in character with-those
which are already being so profitably worked in Northern Queensland.
If we turn to the able and elaborate report by Mr, Richard Daintree
(the present Agent-General of the Colony), furnished by him to the
Minister of Public Works of Queensland, on the 2nd of February,
1870, and printed among the Parliamentary papers of that Colony,
we shall see curious promise of what has been so recently verified
by Captain Moresby. At the time of Mr. Daintree’s survey, of
which the report I refer to was the record, he held the office of
Government Geologist of Northern Queensland. After showing as
he does how his prognostications that gold would be found to ex-
tend from the heads of the Gilbert river, by way of Kirchner’s
range, towards the Endeavour river, had been already fulfilled, he
points out, from citations of passages from the narrative of the
voyage of the Rattlesnake, how the rock formation of the three
largest northern diggings of Queensland, viz. the Peak Downs, the
Cape, and a portion of the Gilbert, is largely represented at the
south-eastern extremity of New Guinea, with an authenticated
trend or strike which, if continuous, would give such rocks a largo
development in the interior, and so afford a fair promise of gold


fields in New Guinea. The continuity here referred to as merely
hypothetical, has since, as we have seen, been brought to proof by
Captain Moresby, in the year 1873, and therefore that there are
extensive gold fields in New Guinea cannot now be doubted by any
one examining the evidence.
Now, in thus referring to New Guinea as a probable future new
customer to the manufacturing industry of Great Britain, I am
aware that I am in for a collision at another point with the Separa-
tionists. Our commerce, we shall be told, in no wise depends on
our political connection with our Colonies, although so many of
our best customers are Colonial communities. “ Whether that
connection continue or not, or whether New Guinea shall be colo-
nized by us or by a foreign power, will make,” we are told, “no
difference to British commerce, inasmuch as the Colonies, British
or foreign, will only come to England for their goods as long as,
and no longer than, England is the best, i.e. the cheapest, market
to buy in.” And politico-economically speaking, this, as a general
proposition, may be true enough. But for the purpose of dealing
with this truth practically, it is not immaterial to ask “ whether
other considerations besides cheapness, do not occasionally in-
fluence the minds and movements of men of business.” The mere
cost of production of an article is not always, and under all circum-
stances, the only consideration merchants have to regard. All other
things being equal, or nearly equal, there is always—as I conceive
—a manifest and substantial advantage in merchants dealing with
their own countrymen rather than with foreigners. There is a
saving of time, trouble, office expenses, and there is an avoidance
of some risk in consigning your goods for sale and return to an
agent of an English-speaking community, acting under the same
mercantile system, and subject to the same laws and jurisdictions
as yourself ; and this consideration alone, independent of any other,
supplies a strong motive for ‘‘commerce following the flag,” as the
phrase goes—an expression which in the main I take to be as true
in fact as it is figurative in form. When I look into our trade re-
turns, I find how vastly more extensive are our dealings with our
own Colonies, as compared with those we have with Batavia, Cuba,
Algeria, New Caledonia, Java, or with any of the other foreign
possessions.
Whether attributable to national feeling or to any other cause,
it is not necessary to inquire, but experience must convince us that
just as we prefer to deal with our own countrymen, there is an
indisposition more or less strong—only to be overcome by suffi-
ciently potent counter-considerations—in foreigners to deal with


us. We all know liow long it took us to educate the Chinese, — ;
an education in which we certainly did not spoil the child by
sparing the rod, —we all know how long it took us to make these
Celestials properly appreciate the merits of those “ grey shirtings ”
of ours, that highly respectable British export, which so regularly
in the Times enjoys a prominent telegram all to itself. Bearing
this in mind, I think it is certain that New Guinea could never be
the same profitable customer to us under a foreign power as she
would prove under our own. Establish relations with New Guinea,
and English mercantile agencies would spring up there at once, as
readily, and probably as numerously, as in Queensland. Leave
the work to foreigners, and English merchants will not be much
more numerous in New Guinea than in New Caledonia. In one
word, the foreigner will have gained the new customer, and England
will have lost him. Nor, as Manchester is not England, will the
loss be only that of merchants, manufacturers, ship-owners, and
British artisans. Every great English Colony largely relieves the
crowded ranks of the professions in the mother-country. How
many young Templars—l do not mean “ Good Templars,”—how
many doctors, lawyers, engineers, architects, journalists, artists of
various kinds, and even clergymen, have found a fair field for their
faculties in a new country, the natural home of the self-reliant
among these as among men of more mechanical pursuits.
And now, whilst -contemplating the making a settlement in a
new country, as it will not do to reckon without our hosts—viz.
the dwellers already in that country—let me invite your attention
to Captain Moresby’s recent description of them, as furnished by
his accounts already published. Describing the natives of the
island and coast of New Guinea, in Torres Strait—l pass over
those few vegetating Dutchmen to the westward of the 141st degree
of east longitude, and who make no pretensions to territory beyond
that point—from Bristow Islands to Talbot Islands, he informs us
that the men average in height about five feet six inches, and that
they live on the produce of their gardens, which are well kept, and
contain yams and potatoes. From 146°-20 to 148° east longitude,
the subject of the second section of the survey extending from
Yule Island for 120 miles to Hood Point, Captain Moresby reports
upon as follows: Finding a large quantity of drift wood off Yule
Island, he hoped to discover a large river leading to the interior.
The island, however, was found to be at the entrance of a well-
sheltered sheet of water, which he named “ Robert Hall Sound.”
The island is about 550 feet high, and is well cultivated and fertile.
After giving a not very attractive account of the main-land in this


part, as being a succession of low ranges, culminating in the
magnificent “Owen Stanley Mountains,” 12,000 or 14,000 feet
high, he tells us that the natives of this part are a copper-coloured
race, of different shades; that they are decently clothed; that here
and there ill-made native huts were on the hanks, and cultivation
patches of higher ground, carefully cleared and planted with yams,
taro, and bananas. The men frizzle their hair like mops ; the
women wear theirs close cut. The women tattoo their bodies
extensively, but the men do not. They paint themselves with
black, white, and red pigments, and wear plumes of feathers as
ornaments. Their weapons are bows, arrows, spears, stone and
wooden clubs. No signs of cannibalism were seen here, and the
people are described as “friendly and intelligent.”
To the east of Eedscar Bay, Captain Moresby informs us, the
Barrier reef rises to the surface at a distance of a few miles from
the shore, and protects the coast as far as Hood’s Point. From
this reef the entire features of the country change. Whilst from
Torres Strait to Eedscar Head the land is low and swampy, east-
ward of this head the shore is precipitous, and round-topped
grassy hills are seen, openly timbered and backed by higher ranges
inland, while fertile valleys lie between. The coast here is strewn
with villages, always marked by a grove of cocoa-nut trees. The
houses are built on poles, after the Malay fashion, some standing
far out on the shore reefs in quiet water, others clustering amongst
plantations on the hill-sides. The Basilisk passed through the
Barrier reef by one of these narrow bottomless openings, which,
Captain Moresby states, are peculiar to those seas, and anchored in
a fine roomy harbour, now named “ Port Moresby ” and “ Fairfax
harbour.” The ship remained here several days, while running
surveys were made, and the coasts explored. In the neighbour-
hood of Port Moresby the valleys are covered with rich vegetation,
and the hills are Australian in appearance. The natives are very
inoffensive. Captain Moresby frequently examined their canoes
which were trading up and down the coast, and calling at distant
villages, but never found any weapons. The officers of the Basilisk
roamed over the country, and visited their villages as freely as if
they were English people. If any of the English sailors got lost
in the bush, the natives took them to their villages, and offered
them every hospitality before bringing them back to the ship—
politeness to strangers which could not be exceeded in our own
Lancashire.
After describing and correcting the previously published geo-
graphy of that part of the coast which was the third section of the


survey, commencing at Heath Point, Captain Moresby gives us the
important information that the route in future for steam-ships
between Australia and China will be shortened by some 300 miles,
by rounding Moresby Island, which fact, together with his having
ascertained that there is a strait —named by him China Strait —
hitherto supposed to be a continuation of the land, raises his
labours above the level of mere surveying into the dignity of mari-
time discovery—an important consideration which surely should
be appreciated and acknowledged accordingly. He examined the
northern shores of New Guinea for many miles in his boat, and
found that beyond East Cape it was washed by a clear reefless sea,
and that a ship might sail with her sides touching the coral wall
which binds the shore, and find good anchorage in any of the bays
where beach is seen. He speaks warmly of the beauty and fertility
of this part of New Guinea.
The precipitous wooded mountains are, to a considerable extent,
cleared and terraced to their very summits with taro and yam
plantations, whilst the valleys produce cocoa-nuts, sago, palm,
bananas, sugar-cane, guava, mammy apple, pumpkins, and other
valuable products. The natives were of a lighter copper colour
than those to the westward, slight-limbed and active, with bright
intelligent features The men do all the canoe work, leav-
ing the field labour to the women. But the latter have their say,
and make the men do as they please in the matters of barter.
“On one occasion,” he says, “ a husband was heartily be-
laboured by his wife with a paddle on the head and shoulders,
because he did not barter satisfactorily; and his friends, instead of
interfering for his relief, only shouted with merriment.” He did
not retaliate, but looked foolish. This lady’s application of the
paddle, upon commercial grounds, upon the person of the gentle-
man who can hardly with accuracy be called her lord and master,
seems to be the nearest approach the natives have as yet made to a
“ Board of Trade.”
The men were frequently seen nursing little children with much
affection. One striking evidence of the superior civilization of the
light-coloured race over the black New Guinea men, is the acquaint-
ance of the former with the art of making pottery. The inter-
course of the Basilisk with these people was of a most satisfactory
and pleasant nature. On all possible occasions Captain Moresby
gave his ship’s company leave to go on shore, and mix freely with
the natives ; and there was always perfect good feeling and con-
fidence on both sides. “ They are as pleasant and genial a race of
savages as could well be met with.”


Thus far Captain Moresby. Since the delivery of the above
account of the island and people, your zealous and indefatigable
honorary secretary, Mr. Frederick Young, has been favoured with
some curiously corroborative evidence of its correctness, from the
pen of Mr. E. H. Minton, who some years ago spent several months
in different parts of New Guinea. His testimony, both as to the
character of the country and its people, is important. He speaks
of a “ magnificent harbour ”in latitude 9 0, 30 south, and longitude
147°*10 east, as affording safe anchorage, and not unlike Sydney
harbour—the ground behind it rising gradually to a great height
above the sea, and affording an excellent site for a city. The
country, as far as he penetrated the interior—a distance of about
thirty or forty miles —he describes as picturesque and undulating,
and the climate, to use his own words, as “ magnificent.” He saw
plenty of tomatoes, yams, toro, pineapples, breadfruit, cocoanut,
and wild pigs and fowls. The natives he reports as friendly, and
that he had a large trade with them. The women he found often
very good-looking; some of them of a Jewish cast, and singularly
handsome. He naively adds, that he was sorry to leave the island.
One other witness I will call before commenting on the evidence.
The statement made by Captain Evans, the hydrographer to the
Admiralty, at the Geographical Society, on the evening of Captain
Moresby’s later deliverance, was as graphic as it was instructive.
Eeferring to an opening observation of Sir Henry Kawlinson’s,
Captain Evans said, “He did not think our present knowledge ot
New Guinea was sufficient to warrant the expression used by Sir
Henry, ‘that as an unknown land, it was fast fading from our
grasp; ’ for literally nothing was yet known about its interior.
He himself was engaged some thirty years ago, for two or three
seasons, in Torres Straits. At that time the Gulf of Papua was
not laid down upon the charts. The coast he visited was for one
hundred miles evidently the delta of some great river, with many
fresh-water openings, from two to five miles wide. The fresh
water was observable twelve miles from the land. On several oc-
casions the boats attempted to penetrate some little distance up
these channels; but the natives were so numerous and hostile that
it was impossible to get past them. One of the native houses
was measured, and found to be three hundred feet long, and
seventy feet wide. Such houses were very numerous, and the
population must therefore have been very great, and the country
very fertile to feed such a number. They were entirely different in
character and appearance from those whom Captain Moresby had
described. They were the true Papuans ; black, fierce in appear-


ance, still fiercer in manners, and all efforts to get near them were
perfectly useless. The large body of fresh water which he saw
must be the drainage of a great part of New Guinea ; and there
was room enough in the interior for a river three hundred and fifty
miles in length in a straight line to the north-west. It must drain
all that immense mass of mountains, 16,000 feet high, on the
north-west; and the only way to learn anything about the country
would be to ascend that great water highway. It was of no use
merely skirting the shores ; because the forest prevented any ex-
ploration more than a few miles inland. This was a case in which
the Colonies of Australia might well unite in a common effort to
send a small expedition to ascertain what New Guinea really is
like. It would never be known from Eussian and Italian tra-
vellers, although these had done wonders. A couple of well-armed
steamboats could very readily venture into the interior, and really
ascertain something about the country.” Now here is valuable
evidence, accompanied by still more valuable suggestions, from a
witness who brings to the question, not only actual observation and
experience, but also that official position which entitles him to
speak as one- having authority, and not merely as one of the
scribes. I have only to add to what he has said, that he has left
out—l think it must be accidental—the mother-country as entitled,
equally with the Colonies, to contribute to the cost of that most
desirable expedition.
From these various versions, then, derived from separate sources,
independent of each other, the first thing that strikes us is the at
first apparent discrepancy between Captain Moresby’s and Captain
Evans’s account of the natives. But the inconsistency disappears
when we are told, as is the case, that there are two races of men
—possibly more—on this island, and that Captain Evans saw the
tine Papuans, the frizzle-haired (papuas in the Malay dialect
meaning frizzle-haired), while Captain Moresby saw the race
with whom alone we should be likely to come in contact.
Taking Captain Moresby’s account, then, in connection with that
of the experiences of Mr. Minton, I think we can hardly refuse to
subscribe to Captain Moresby’s description of these natives, as
being indeed a very genial race of savages, even if we are
quite justified in applying to them that not altogether pleasant-
sounding term. Their politeness and hospitality to strangers, and
the kindly little touch of nature shown in the nursing of the chil-
dren by the men, very favourably distinguish them from the abori-
gines of New Holland or Tasmania. Then mark that significant
bit of evidence, “ the women have their say, and make the men do


as they please in matters of barter.” We all know how much is
implied by the expression, “ a woman having her say,”—a New
Guinea woman, too, who can not only paddle her own canoe, but
who, at the call of commerce, can paddle her own husband. Here
have we the most essential part of the rights of women in full play,
derived from the light of nature alone, and amongst a people who
could never have heard of John Stuart Mill. And if you should be
inclined to think that the “ doing a little cannibalism ” is some-
thing of a drawback to this pleasant picture, we must still re-
member that this—as Captain Moresby tells us—is only “ among
themselves,” showing that they are too considerate to obtrude their
tastes either on the minds or bodies of their visitors.
I have extracted from the published account of Captain Moresby’s
exploration the above particulars respecting the natives of New
Guinea, in order that we might have before us some distinct idea of
the sort of people with whom we should have to deal, in proceeding
to plant a permanent settlement upon the island. That these
natives would present any obstacle to such settlement, I think
other undertakings of a like nature forbid us to fear. Judging
from our experience in Ceylon—an island in many of its features
not unlike New Guinea—we may reasonably infer that a native
population, in its tastes, temper, and habits, prepared, as were the
population of Ceylon, and as are the people described by Captain
Moresby, to appreciate and welcome the introduction of a higher
civilisation, wmuld prove a help instead of a hindrance to European
settlement. Anyone who has travelled, as I have recently done,
by coach from Galle to Colombo, the capital of Ceylon, must have
been struck by the fact that at intervals of about every two or
three miles he came upon a populous and apparently comfortable
and prosperous native village, displaying in its little shops any
quantity of British manufactures, which I think we should hardly
have met with, had this beautiful and productive island remained
under that paralyzing Dutch rule from which, in the year 1796, it
was rescued by our own country.
I do not think then, that, so far as moral or social hindrances go,
we should meet with any serious difficulty in effecting a settlement
in New Guinea; and ag to physical obstacles, they would appear to
be even less than those which, so late as the year 1835, stood in
the way of our settlement of Port Phillip, now the Colony of Vic-
toria. Down to the time of the expedition, overland, of Hume
and Hovell, in the year 1824, the district of Port Phillip itself was
actually as much a terra incognita to our countrymen as New
Guinea now is. A second expedition by Major Mitchell, and his


subsequently published account of it, made us for the first time
acquainted with the great capabilities of the country; and at once
some of the most enterprising of the settlers of New South Wales
began to move stock to the new land. We know the result. And
just as Port Phillip, from its accessibility to New South Wales,
received its first impulse thence, may New Guinea be stocked, and
settled even, in a much shorter time from the opposite shore of
Northern Australia. And lam inclined also to think that in like
manner as the affairs of Port Phillip at the outset, and for many
years afterwards, were very cheaply administered by a Superinten-
dent under the Government of New South Wales, so might such
portion of New Guinea as may be selected for our settlement be
advantageously provided for, and even self-supported, in the same
manner.
As it is now time, however, that I should draw rein, so as to
allow some reasonable portion of the evening for the usual general
discussion, I hasten in conclusion shortly to address myself to one
or two objections which may possibly be made here, as they were
recently submitted at the Geographical Society, by our friend Sir
Charles Nicholson. Requested by the President of the night, Sir
Henry Eawlinson, to offer some observations on New Guinea, in
its political aspect in relation to this country, Sir Charles depre-
cated the idea of our settling down upon any part of the country
already occupied by a native population, who moreover had not
invited us to take such a proceeding; Casting a melancholy glance
on those fine specimens of auriferous quartz which were, amongst
many other objects of interest, brought by Captain Moresby from
New Guinea, and were lying on the table, Sir Charles expressed
his deep regret, and augured the worst prospects for the poor
natives from this discovery and its announcement. He evidently
anticipated that evil times were in store for the Papuans, destined
to be favoured with such forms of civilization as a rush of truly
British diggers were likely to bring with them into this
beautiful and, as it appeared to be at present, tolerably happy
island.
Such apprehensions, I admit, are natural to any thoughtful
and conscientious mind, and therefore doubtless we can all sympa-
thise with Sir Charles’s misgivings. But, at the same time, I fail
to see, even if they were oetter founded than I take them to be,
how we could, even if we desired to do so, give any practical effect
to them. More reasonably might we contend that Blue Beard’s
unfortunate wives ought to have conquered their woman’s nature
sufficiently to restrain them from looking into that forbidden


chamber, than to expect, after Captain Moresby’s announcement of
the discovery of gold reefs in New Guinea, to keep our country-
men out of that island. We all know what “a gold rush is.
As well attempt to stay an Australian mountain torrent in mid-
winter, as a stream of excited human creatures, strong, healthy,
and sanguine, on their way to a new gold-field. English ima-
ginations, familiar only with more conventional forms of life, are
apt to exaggerate the apparent anarchy of such a scene, and forget
the great qualifying circumstance that the majority of adventurers
are bent upon hard work, of a nature which will not consist with
much dissipation. But even were the thing a greater evil than it
is, if it be unavoidable, it seems to me that all that is left to us is to
deal with it as we deal with any other evil—manage, and keep it in
hand, as well as we can; we do not stand listlessly by and let it
take any course chance may give to it. When it comes to a case
of “ fighting with our broken weapons, rather than our bare
arms,” there is no time for sentiment. Captain Moresby s discovery
of gold in the island gives an aspect of urgency to the political
situation ; and imposes, I think, on the Government the necessity
of taking timely precautions against our being confronted with
another Fijian difficulty, but of larger proportions, and possibly in
a still more embarrassing form. Even a small element of lawless-
ness can, when uncontrolled by authority, work much evil in any
community, although the great bulk of that community may be
anxious—as in every Australian gold-field I have known, and there
are few of them with which lam not more or less acquainted to
preserve the law and order essential to the protection of their in-
dustry and homes.
Then as to the objection that there are already people in New
Guinea, I conceive that it can derive no support either from pre-
cedent or reason. That a country is in some sort inhabited, has
never, that I am aware of, from the earliest colonisers down to the
present time, been regarded as a bar to a more civilized nation
taking lodgings there, if there was room. From the Phoenicians
down to the Fijis, this has always been so, and a moment’s re-
flection will satisfy us that it must always be so. Impelled by that
great law of nature, from which there is no appeal, omnes eodetn
cogimur, as old populations become redundant, they must throw oft
their swarms into less peopled regions. Lastly, the argument that
we ought not to go to New Guinea until we are invited, to my mind
has as little claim on our consideration as the one just disposed of.
It savours too much of the ill-timed and superfluous fastidiousness
of that Oxonian, an excellent swimmer, who, when once implored


“ For by the Politician’s scheme,
Whoe’er arrives at power supreme,
Those arts by which at first they gain it,
They still must practise to maintain it.”
in wo
pi SE(o T
by a lady to save a man who was drowning before their eyes, ex-
pressed the great gratification it would give him to comply with
the request, but for the unfortunate fact that “ he had not been in-
troduced to the gentleman.” I suspect that by far the best intro-
duction we could take with us to New Guinea would be a judicious
assortment of those grey shirtings, and plenty of good Birmingham
“ dry goods”—l think that’s the correct expression. And, if “ ’tis
to be done, then ’twere well done if done quickly,” for the case
presses. As Sir Henry Eawliuson said a few nights back, “ Rus-
sians, Germans, and Italians are all now nibbling at New Guinea.”
Captain Moresby has well paved the way for ourselves, and can
suggest for a first station an unexceptionable spot, to which for
obvious reasons I do not think it expedient here to make more
particular reference. And whether this work shall come to pass or
not, I trust that the old colonizing spirit of this once pre-eminently
colonizing country is not dying out amongst us ; for I am -weak
enough to think that Colonies have made no mean contribution to
that proud eminence which Great Britain holds among the nations.
And although it is true that, by a marvellous concurrence of causes
—with which, by the by, statemanship has had little to do—this
country has become almost the workship of the world, and has
acquired a commerce which has distanced all competition, it is
equally true that the rest of the world is not standing still. It
may perhaps be as well for those who scoff at our Colonial customers
to bear in mind that coal and iron, and human skill and enterprise
are not confined to England; that over confidence has before now
been found as disastrous for nations as for individuals; and that
there is reason in the rhyme with which I will bid you good
night:—
