

Greene County,
Georgia
The Story of One Southern County
U. S. Department of Agriculture
Farm Security Administration
Washington, D. C




Greene County,
Georgia
The Story of One Southern County
About 160 years ago Greene County, Ga., was a fertile
county covered with pines and oak trees, crisscrossed with
clear streams, and inhabited by Cherokee and Creek Indians.
It had been given the name of General Nathaniel Greene,
the military leader who delivered the Carolinas and Georgia
from British rule. What follows is the story of that county’s
decline —its slow march through two wars and countless dis-
asters to the impoverishment of its people and the ruin of
its land. It is also the story of renewed hope, for since 1938
Greene County has been the scene of a unified public effort to
rebuild its broken-down economy.
Greene County marks a dividing line between the fertile
“red lands” of northern Georgia and the poorer “grey lands”
of the middle section. Situated in the lower part of the
Piedmont Plateau, about midway between Augusta and
Atlanta, it has an area of 416 square miles. The Negro
population is slightly more than 50 percent. It has always
been a predominantly rural county, with only two of its cities,
Greensboro and Union Point, now having a population of
more than 500. Greensboro, with 2,500 people, is the largest
town.
Decline of Greene County
The “Golden Age” for Greene County came soon after the
earliest settlers moved in during the first part of the nineteenth
century, and continued up to the outbreak of the War between
the States. This was an era of prosperity built on self-sufficient
agriculture. The growing of corn, and later cotton, as a
296226°—41 1
3


cash crop, did not keep the farmers from raising vegetables
in their own gardens. People were able to live off their own
land to a large extent, and had enough other resources to
meet such living expenses as required cash outlay. In 1860,
Greene was one of the most prosperous counties in Georgia.
The War between the States drained from the county many
of its resources and most of its cash. Consequently, at the
end of the war the impoverished farmers were able to raise
only those crops which they could grow on credit. That
meant cotton. Greene became a cotton county. Cotton —
and a little corn —but not much of anything else. The “Golden
Age” of diversified farming and home-grown vegetables was
gone. Intensive, soil-depleting farming, and the continual
planting of cotton in the same fields year after year, took their
usual toll in eroded gullies and vanished topsoil.
The development of a considerable dairy industry in the
early 1900’s made Greene County one of the most important
dairy sections in Georgia, and for a time there appeared to
be hope for at least a two-way diversification in cash crops.
Then came the World War, and with the war came 40-cent
cotton. One tract of pasture after another was turned back
to cotton in order to reap the passing benefits of wartime
prices; and the young dairy industry was practically wiped out.
The war came to an end. Deflation and the boll weevil
marched through Georgia, and cotton production in Greene
County dropped from 20,030 bales in 1919 to 333 bales in
1922. Only one small bank in the poorer “grey land” section
escaped the plunge into bankruptcy. By this time the pre-war
dairy industry was no more than the bitter memory of a lost
investment. There was no turning back to dairying; it takes
a large investment to start in the dairy business and nearly
everybody in Greene was broke.
It is almost impossible to indicate with words or figures the
full extent of the decline during the next 10 years. Every-
thing dropped to about one-sixth of its former value. The
value of all farm property collapsed from $12,311,391 in 1929
to $2,914,492 in 1939. The bottom dropped out of land


values; in 1920 Greene County land was worth $8,189,205;
10 years later the same land would have brought only $1,263,-
633. The value of all crops fell from nearly $6,000,000 to
about $1,000,000 during the 10-year period. In 1930, only
11.000 acres were planted in cotton out of the 56,000 acres
which had grown cotton 10 years before.
The people on the land tried every expedient they could
think of, in a desperate attempt to stem the tide of complete
bankruptcy. Plantation owners had sawmills moved onto their
land and cut away thousands of acres of timber in order to
get ready cash. The sawmills moved out again, leaving
scattered cut-over areas all over the county, their value
depreciated and their fine forests gone.
By 1927, about 16,000 acres of land had been sold for taxes,
and another 12,000 had been forfeited to mortgage companies.
Three years later 50 percent of the land in the county had
been abandoned. For a short period rabbits flourished on
the abandoned fields, and in one year Greene County exported
more rabbits than any other county in the United States.
The rabbit “industry,” however, was never more than a
flourish. When the rabbits became diseased and died by
the thousands, the abandoned land again reverted to use-
lessness.
The many streams, which once had been clear and filled
with fish, were by this time so obstructed by logs and weeds
that drainage was seriously slowed up. Dredging work on
the smaller streams came to a standstill. Natural dams
formed, in some cases piling up so high that local floods were
caused and fertile bottom lands had to be abandoned. Slowly-
moving or stagnant ponds formed ideal breeding places for
mosquitoes, and malarial fever was a constant threat.
Hundreds of landlords lost their land. In 1920 there were
3.000 farms in the county; but by 1930 there were only 1,761
farms left. Of 2,377 owners listed by the census of 1920, only
416 were still owners when the census taker came around after
10 years. The number of tenant-operated farms showed a
corresponding increase, from 512 in 1920 to 1,296 in 1930.


Many landlords who retained nominal title to their land pulled
out and allowed the tenants to remain on the land if they
could make a living. Many of them could not, and between
1920 and 1930 the county lost more than a third of its popula-
tion. Young people saw no hope of anything but lifelong
destitution if they stayed in Greene County. So they migrated,
traveling to other sections of Georgia or to other States —not
because they hoped for something better, but because they
were convinced that the situation elsewhere could not possibly
be worse than it was in their native county.
Those who remained had little to look forward to. The
whites in the county had an average annual cash income of only
$301.26, and the Negroes had to get along on half that much.
The depression years, in fact, had halved the Negroes’ average
cash income from $302.06 in 1927 to $150.74 in 1934. Belated
attempts were made to go back to the system of growing one’s
own food at home. When the cotton market hit rock bottom
at 5 and 6 cents a pound, the planters “first encouraged and
then instructed their tenants to raise foodstuffs; garden plots
were set aside, wire and paling fences were put up; pig pens
and cows on chains were more in evidence.” Between 1927
and 1934, the Negroes in Greene County raised the proportion
of their home-grown provisions from 25 to 53 percent of their
gross income.
Low cash income made it impossible for the farmers to keep
up the repairs on their houses and other buildings. By 1938 it
was estimated that fully 50 percent of the houses in the county
were unoccupied, and unfit for human occupancy. Moreover,
half of the houses still used as dwellings were badly run down
and dilapidated.
A Start Toward Recovery
Back in 1928, a graduate student in the University of North
Carolina named Arthur Raper wrote a doctor’s thesis on
Greene and Macon Counties, Ga. It was here that the recon-
struction really began for Greene County. In 1934, Raper was
given a Rosenwald Fund Fellowship to make a further study


of these same two Georgia counties. The result was a book,
“Preface to Peasantry.” Dr. Will W. Alexander, then director
of the Commission on Interracial Cooperation, and a director
of the Rosenwald Fund, was interested in the county. When
he became Administrator of the Farm Security Administration
in 1937, he was anxious to make a concerted effort to rebuild
Greene County, as a demonstration of what could be done for
really low-income farm people with the help of the Government
rehabilitation program.
FSA already had two supervisors in the county, aided by
voluntary advisory committees on rehabilitation loans and
farm debt adjustment. The Soil Conservation Service had six
supervisors on the scene. Greene was also one of the first
counties designated for tenant-purchase loans under the Bank-
head-Jones Act of 1937, and an advisory committee had been
set up to deal with the loan applications under this FSA
program. The county was, therefore, a logical choice for
undertaking a unified agricultural program.
The State Extension Service, in cooperation with the Bureau
of Agricultural Economics, intended to set up a countv planning
organization in the fall of 1938 but lack of funds postponed
this activity until 1939. The task of coordination of all efforts
in Greene County was finally undertaken by a county program
planning committee composed of 21 local people from every
section of the county. Field representatives of every interested
Government agency served as advisory members. These mem-
bers were the following:
County agent.
Assistant county agent.
Home demonstration agent.
District farm supervisor, FSA.
Five farm supervisors, FSA.
Five home supervisors, FSA.
Two vocational agricultural teachers.
Junior soil conservationist, CCC.
Junior Soil conservationist, SCS.


This committee was backed up by the State land-use planning
committee, whose executive committee is composed of repre-
sentatives of the five agencies most directly involved:
Director of extension (chairman).
State director, FSA.
Administrative officer in charge, State AAA office.
State coordinator, SCS.
State BAE representative (secretary).
The first thing to be done was to make an accurate and com-
prehensive survey of Greene County, to determine the extent
and direction of the coordinated effort which would be neces-
sary. For this purpose a county land-use planning committee
was created, with a local farmer as chairman and the county
agent as secretary. This committee was to be responsible to
the county program planning committee for the preparation
of a county report on land use.
Farmers Appraise Their Own County
The committee’s task was not confined to taking inventory
of the agricultural land resources in the county. It was to
make recommendations, based on experience and all available
information, regarding necessary adjustments in the use of the
land. Further than this, the committee was to “provide a basis
for correlating the thinking of farm people with that of county,
State, and Federal agencies which have responsibilities in the
development and execution of programs concerned with the
use of the land.” The committee began its final report with
this statement of aims: “The ultimate objective of this work is
the development of a county agricultural program which will
contribute to better standards of living for farm people and to
conservation and improvement of agricultural resources.”
The procedure followed by the land-use planning committees
was something like this: First the entire county committee took
a trip around the county, accompanied by the county agent
and the assistant project leader. This trip was simply for
observation and study of the present use of the land as a basis
for working out areas with closely related problems, so that


they could be divided up for more intensive study. Areas were
set off on the basis of (1) physical features, such as soil and
topography; (2) present land uses or types of farming (for ex-
ample, timber areas contrasted with areas of open pasture); and
(3) land-use problems (for example, areas with very little erosion,
and others with severe erosion).
Then, to perform the actual work of surveying and mapping
the land-use areas, three subcommittees of the county land-use
planning committee were set up. Each of these was composed
of those members of the county committee who lived in the
community to be surveyed, plus certain other local farmers
chosen because of their familiarity with local conditions. The
technical field personnel of the various Government agencies
stood ready to advise and assist the local committees in their
work. When the preliminary survey was finished, the com-
munity committees went to work, checking the areas mapped
out, writing accurate descriptions of these areas, classifying the
land within each area, and drawing up recommendations as
to the adjustments needed in land-use and farm practices on
each class of land.
The county land-use planning committee did a thorough
job, and wrote up a report setting forth its recommendations
for action by Federal, State, and local authorities. The report
detailed also the facts about the land and the people which
justified its recommendations. What exactly did the com-
mittee discover about Greene County?
First, the committee found 266,240 acres, of which about
198,000 acres were classed as farm land. Of these, only 20,000
acres could be cultivated without special precautions against
erosion, and 20,000 additional acres could be used if simple
erosion-control measures were placed in effect. All the rest of
the land, the committee concluded, needed intensive erosion-
control treatment if it was to be cultivated.
Two very different types of land were found. About two-
thirds of the county is composed of the “red lands,” chiefly
Davidson and heavy Cecil clay. The red-land section is hilly,
with rolling divides sloping steeply to the larger streams.


These divides are cut by countless lateral streams and ravines,
usually narrow and deep, with steeply sloping sides. Thus the
“red lands” are peculiarly liable to erosion, and parts of this
section were found to be “so rough and broken that agriculture
is carried on only with great difficulty.” There is one gully 40
feet deep and over a mile long. The topography of the “grey
lands”, on the other hand, is less in danger of erosion. The land
is more gently rolling, the stream valleys not so deep. How-
ever, the soil types in the southern grey-land section, predomi-
nantly Appling coarse sandy loam, are more susceptible to
erosion than those in the north.
The committee found the severe erosion to be largely due to
lack of proper care of the land. Terracing was inadequate and
improper. Although there was terracing of a sort on a large
percentage of the farms, correct terracing was found on only
10 percent of the land. Row crops had been planted in the
same fields year after year, and in many sections there had
been a complete lack of either winter or summer cover corps.
Farmers Prescribe Their Own Medicine
After the sick land had been examined and its various diseases
diagnosed, the committee wrote a prescription for control of
erosion and improvement of the soil. For all the cropland,
contour planting, proper terracing, and crop rotation were
prescribed. Strip-cropping, winter and summer legumes, and
the application of limestone and phosphate were recommended
for various areas. Existing pastures were to be improved
through fertilization with lime and phosphate, reseeding or
resodding, removal of brush, and weed control. New pastures
were to be developed on present cropland unsuited for cultiva-
tion and on present woodlands which are well adapted for
pasture. In line with this policy, 15,000 acres of submarginal
land were soon set aside to be purchased by the Government
for development as pasture or woodland.
The 1935 census showed the average size of Greene County
farms to be 113 acres, with 40.5 acres in cropland. The cora


mittee attacked the problem of the “family-type farm,” and
came out with the estimate that the minimum size farm for the
county should be 150 acres, with 50 acres in cultivation, 50
acres in open improved permanent pasture, and 50 acres in
timber. “The committee believes that this size is practical
throughout the county, but good results can be obtained with
smaller farms in some areas.” The committee emphasized
that the 150-acre farm was a minimum, and that the most
efficient unit would be a farm of 300 acres or more, on which
machinery could be used to lower costs and increase production.
In 1934, tenants and sharecroppers represented 74 percent
of the 1,761 farm operators. Of this nonowning group, only
38 percent were sharecroppers, the other 62 percent being
tenants operating farms largely under their own management.
However, the committee found that most of the tenants had
insufficient equipment to do proper farm work and that their
past experience had in most cases poorly qualified them as
independent farm operators. “Only about 20 percent of the
white tenants and sharecroppers and 10 percent of the Negro
tenants and sharecroppers,” read the report, “are now qualified
to operate successfully as owners.”
Tenancy, then, would remain a large and serious problem in
Greene County for some time. This indicated a twofold
approach —the improvement of landlord-tenant relationships
and the development of the abilities of the tenants to operate
their own farms. Six methods of accomplishing these ends
were recommended:
(1) Long-term lease with provision for termination by either
party for cause.
(2) Provision of better homes for tenants.
(3) Closer cooperation between landlord and tenant in soil-
improvement work.
(4) Compensation of tenants for soil improvement and corre-
sponding penalties for wasteful land-use practices.
(5) Provision by the landlord of more winter employment
for sharecroppers.


(6) Education ol tenants to increase interest in farm owner-
ship and soil improvement.
Beginnings of a Unified Program
Meetings had already been held, both in Atlanta and in
Greene County, by representatives of various agencies within
the Department of Agriculture, to discuss the proposed unified
program for the county. At first, only the Farm Security
Administration, the Agricultural Adjustment Administration,
and the Extension Service were represented. Later, the Bureau
of Agricultural Economics, the Soil Conservation Service, the
Forest Service, and the Office of Land-LTse Coordination also
participated in the discussions. The report of the county land-
use planning committee, published in 1939, served as a “go”
signal for the activities of all these agencies.
Not that some of them had been inactive even before the
light turned green. The Agricultural Adjustment Administra-
tion distributed some SIOO,OOO in benefits in Greene County
during 1938. Research agencies of the Department of Agri-
culture had made a survey in 1937 with a view to the purchase
of submarginal land under Title 111 of the Bankhead-Jones Act,
and had included four counties, Greene among them, in a
land-purchase project. In 1938, purchases had been largely
confined to Greene County, in anticipation of the unified
program there, and already funds had been set aside for the
purchase of 8,500 acres of land in the northern part of the
county during 1939. The farmers of Greene and four neigh-
boring counties had set up a soil conservation district with the
assistance of the Soil Conservation Service. In line with the
unified program, most of the survey work undertaken by the
district was assigned to Greene County, and by the beginning
of 1939 there were 18 or 20 employees of the Soil Conservation
Service working in the county.
We have seen that the Farm Security Administration had a
rehabilitation program and a tenant-purchase program in Greene
County before that county was singled out for unified planning.
By 1938, 150 families in the county had received rehabilitation


loans, to enable them to buy the livestock and equipment
necessary for a sound and permanent system of farming.
Under the stimulus of the unified county program, 520 loans
were made in 1939. In 1940, 535 farm families received loans,
45 of which were new borrowers. By June 30, 1940, the total
case load was 586. In addition, there were 10 tenants who
had been set up on their own land with tenant-purchase loans.
The rehabilitation loans run for 5 years in all but 22 cases.
A few longer-term loans have been made, where it was neces-
sary to make an especially large number of repairs and improve-
ments on the farm, and where full cooperation was forthcoming
from the landlord.
A particularly interesting development in Greene County
has been the building of improvements in lieu of cash rent.
In these cases the Farm Security Administration would
“advance” rent to the landlords, by building barns and other
outbuildings, repairing the house, or developing the land.
A typical agreement of this kind might work as follows: The
Government agrees to lease the landlord’s farm for a period of
5 years, at SIOO a year. The landlord agrees that $250 of the
rent be advanced for stipulated improvements. The improve-
ments may be done either by the landlord, or by the Farm
Security Administration and the tenant together. Thus the
landlord, in return for the use of his land, receives SSO a year
in cash, plus $250 worth of improvements.
The Farm Security Administration has advanced rent in this
way on 161 of the farms on which it has taken 5-year leases as
part of its rehabilitation loan program. A total of $31,900 has
been advanced, $13,470 for land development and $18,430
for house repairs and construction of new barns and other
outbuildings. Two thousand acres of land have been terraced
under these rent agreements, and the terracing of 4,000 acres
more is called for under agreements now in effect. In some
cases the landlord is able to finance his own building program
without having rent advanced to him for the purpose. In all,
218 houses and 178 barns had been built or repaired by
June 1940.


Rehabilitation loans in Greene County, as in the rest of the
country, are accompanied by sound advice in farm and home
management from experts paid by the FSA. The farm
management supervisor for Greene County has five assistants —
one of them a Negro college graduate in agriculture. In addi-
tion, there are five home management supervisors, one of them
a Negro woman.
Planning for Better Farms and Houses
The supervisors visit the farmers and their wives in the farm
homes, and sometimes meetings are held in the local school
building or in the house of one of the borrower families. Before
a loan is made, a farm management plan is worked out by the
farmer, in consultation with the FSA supervisor. In this plan
are set out the estimated costs and returns of crops and live-
stock. Emphasis is placed on growing food for home consump-
tion, with a variety of cash crops so that cash income will not
depend entirely upon the uncertain price of a single product.
The importance of erosion control and soil-building practices
is also stressed.
Under the stimulus of these plans and the activity by all the
agencies concerned, there has been a noticeable increase in the
number of farms planting winter cover and soil-building crops.
In the fall of 1939, between 40 and 50 percent of the county’s
farms were planting Austrian winter peas, vetch, crimson
clover, and other winter legumes for soil-building purposes.
From 70 to 80 percent of the farms are planted to summer
legumes, principally after small grains or interplanted with
corn.
Crop rotation is also being widely practiced, in line with the
county land-use planning committee’s recommendation that
every farm in the county rotate all its cropland. One of two
systems of rotation is generally used, and both have the blessing
of the committee:
(A) First year: Cotton followed by small grain.
Second year: Small grain followed by summer legumes, and
these followed by winter legumes.


Third vear: Corn following winter legumes.
(B) First year; Small grain followed by summer legumes.
Second year: Cotton followed by winter legumes.
Third year: Corn followed by small grain.
The development of livestock on a commercial scale has been
held up in the past by a lack of winter feed and a lack of
capital for fencing grazing areas. However, there are large
areas of native grasses which could furnish excellent summer
grazing. Much of the woodland is also suitable for pasturage —
indeed, it is useful for little else, since practically all of the
marketable timber in the county has been cut. At the present
time, therefore, the efforts of the farm management experts
are directed toward getting sufficient livestock on each farm
to supply home needs for livestock products. For the average
family, this means 2 milk cows, 4 meat hogs, and about 25
hens. As the winter feed supply is built up and capital becomes
available through FSA loans for fencing off grazing areas, it is
expected that commercial livestock can become an important
income-producing activity in the county.
Closely related to the farm plan is the home management
plan, which is made out by the farmer’s wife with the help of
the home management supervisor. Here again, the emphasis
is on production of food for home consumption —more hogs
for meat and for breeding, more cows for home-used milk,
more chickens and eggs, more syrup, more potatoes, more
dried peas and beans, more nuts, more corn and wheat.
Economy in raising a garden is stressed; the families are taught
to save their home-grown seed, to save all fertilizer, and to
increase it by the addition of hay or leaves. Home orchards
are encouraged. By 1939, all families receiving loans from
FSA had agreed to improve their present orchard, if they had
one, or to start a new one. Finally, emphasis is placed on the
preservation in cans or jars of enough food to tide the family
over the unproductive winter months. For this purpose the
borrower families are urged to buy pressure cookers and
enough jars to preserve food for the whole family, and to have
adequate storage space in their cellars. Sometimes, when


these facilities are inadequate, provision is made for them in a
supplementary loan.
New Schools, New Teachers
The poverty and hopelessness which has been the lot of
Greene County was, of course, reflected in the county’s educa-
tional set-up. Education in rural areas is generally below the
national average, measured by expenditure per child, by
number and quality of teachers, by number of school days per
year, or by almost any other yardstick. Education in the rural
South is below the national average for rural areas. And
education in Greene County was below the average for the rural
South. Most of the schools were tumbledown one-room shacks.
The 40 Negro schools were run by jteachers with only high-
school degrees and county licenses. Although farming had
always been the means of livelihood for almost everybody in
the county, vocational agriculture was not taught in any of
the county’s schools.
At the beginning of 1939, the county board of education
employed 17 college graduates with State teaching licenses to
replace some of the county-licensed teachers. Since then, as
additional vacancies occur in the teaching staff, they are filled
with trained and competent teachers.
In July 1938 the county board of education, State vocational
department, and FSA combined their resources to employ five
vocational teachers. The two white teachers each serve two
of the four existing white schools at Siloan, White Plains,
Woodville, and Penfield. The three Negro vocational teachers
at first had to take care of three or four schools apiece, pending
construction of new consolidated schools for the Negro school
population.
Plans were soon made to construct new buildings and
renovate those existing facilities which were not beyond repair.
Work was begun in 1939 on 4 vocational buildings, 1 home
economics building, 2 four-room schools for Negro children, and
repairs to 2 of the white school buildings. Additional work


approved included 2 other vocational buildings, 5 vocational
shops, 10 new 4-room schools for Negroes, and repairs to other
Negro schools throughout the county. The total cost of this
work was estimated at $166,000. The county board of educa-
tion acted as sponsor of the building project, and agreed to
put up $43,500 as its contribution toward the work. The
Work Projects Administration supplies the rest.
New Health for a County
In health, as in education, poverty leads to neglect. In
Greene County malnutrition was widespread. The sources of
drinking water were inadequately protected, sanitary facilities
were improper and inadequate, and the uncontrolled silting
and damming of streams were a constant menace to health.
Hospital facilities were inadequate, and dental and hygiene
instruction were almost nonexistent.
In May 1938 a medical care program, similar to those in use
among FSA borrowers in other parts of the country, was
started in Greene County. At the outset, the medical associa-
tion drew into its membership 130 of the 150 borrower families;
and by the end of June 1940, 515 families, including 2,710
persons, had joined. Each family pays in advance for medical
attention during the month; dues for a family average sl2, or
a little more, per year. Membership in the association provides
for hospital expenses and medical supplies, as well as attention
by local physicians. The members have free choice of partic-
ipating doctors, and at the end of each month the doctors
submit their bills to the association. If there is not enough
money in the association’s fund to go around, the doctors’ bills
are pared down pro rata until they are within the association’s
ability to pay. From March through June of 1940, for exam-
ple, charges for hospitalization, drugs, and physicians’ services
totaled $6,720.75, of which $3,055.71 was paid by the associa-
tion. Hospital fees were paid to the extent of 96 percent, but
only 41 percent of the fees for doctors and drugs were met.
Low as this percentage is, it is as much as, or more than, these


same doctors were getting from their low-income rural patients
before the program was started.
A dental service has recently been placed in operation on
the same basis as the medical association. During the first
few months the participating families, many of whom had
never before been in a dentist’s office, were able to pay 76
percent of the fees charged for dental work.
Two nurses and a social worker were employed by FSA at
an early stage in the Greene County program. With so small
a staff, emphasis must necessarily be on prevention of disease,
although at the same time, the nurses try to do what they can
for those already in bad health. The county health officer and
a sanitary engineer are also cooperating in Greene County’s
health program. Periodic visits are made to each family, and
the nurses discuss with them immunization and preventable
diseases, such as diphtheria, typhoid, and dysentery. Diet is
always discussed; in every home is placed a drawing with a
description of a balanced diet and sample diets are mimeo-
graphed and sent around to the families.
Particular attention is paid to prenatal mothers. Each
prenatal case is visited once a month for the first 6 months, and
twice each month of the last 3 months. Each mother gets a
prenatal book, and letters stressing the importance of periodic
visits to the doctor and proper diet are sent out each month to
every expectant mother.
Cooperation between the nurses and the home management
supervisors is essential if health conditions are to be improved.
The nurses work with both the farm and home supervisors in
calling attention to insanitary privies and dilapidated and
unscreened homes. The supervisors, in turn, explain the
medical cooperative to the families, emphasize the importance
of better and more food, and check carefully on the condition
of toilets, wells, and screens in the homes they visit. As home
plans are made and health problems are discovered, they are
reported immediately to the nurse.
During 1939, and the first half of 1940, 225 houses were
screened, and pumps were installed or improved in 240 wells. A


total of 340 sanitary units have been installed on farms operated
by FSA clients.
The County Gets Together
Economic rehabilitation could not afford to neglect the social
needs of the county. After the first few months of home man-
agement work, supervisors found that the families craved
get-togethers. There was no organized recreation in the
county, and it was made difficult by poor transportation and
bad roads. The few church services developed into real social
gatherings; the people remained all day and talked for weeks
about the good time they had.
The first step was taken when community “sings” were
organized at the school buildings in the various communities.
When the first “sing” was held, a notice of it appeared in the
county newspaper. It was followed by a flood of letters to
FSA officials, urging them to have more “sings.” Leaders in
the various communities wrote in; “Please don’t forget us when
you are organizing those sings,” they said in effect. More
“sings” were held in local school buildings, and school busses
were used for free transportation.
The success of these get-togethers encouraged the idea of a
county get-together. With the help of the WPA Recreation
Division, a singing pageant was put on, sponsored by the local
Lions Club and two leading citizens from each community.
A large chorus was organized, composed of singers from every
community in which a “sing” had been held. The affair was
a huge success; 3,000 people came to the pageant, in school
busses, in wagons and buggies, on mules and horses, in cars and
on foot. The crowd was so great that a third of the people
could not get inside the building where the pageant was being
held. A full-time WPA recreational leader has now been
appointed for Greene County, and organized recreation is
now a permanent part of the unified county program.
* * *
Greene County is making progress. At the end of 1939, the
Farm Security Administration made a survey to see how its


rehabilitation borrowers were getting along. In Greene
County FSA’s field workers found that the average family’s
annual net income had risen from sl3l, before it received an
FSA loan, to $246 in the 1939 crop year —an increase of 88
percent. An average increase of 47 percent in net worth also
was made by the Greene County borrowers. But perhaps
most impressive of all were the figures on the value of food
produced at home. The survey showed that in the year before
coming on the FSA program, the average borrower family had
produced only S9B worth of food on his own land. By 1939
this same family had more than doubled its home production
to S2OB.
Greene County is on its way out of the economic swamp in
which poor land and poorer people have long been struggling.
It is only one of 3,070 counties in the United States, but it has
been one of the hardest hit by natural and man-made disasters.
Thousands of people have literally been brought back to life
through the help of local Federal agencies, and these same
activities have, at long last, stopped the progressive ruin of
the soil.
But more than this, Greene County is a sort of test-tube
demonstration of what can be done with the very bottom income
groups in the way of permanent rehabilitation. The program
in Greene County has not been going long enough to make a
final evaluation of its economic success, but it has been going
long enough to indicate that coordinated planning and coop-
erative work by all interested governmental agencies can mean
more rehabilitation and better rehabilitation than any single
agency could hope to accomplish alone. Greene County is a
picture on a small scale of what a unified social and economic
program can do for destitute farm people.


