

GREEK PLACE NAMES
Parishes On The Clarence
SURVEYOR WILSON’S INFLUENCE
HOW CALLIOPE GOT ITS NAME
On the occasion of the Grafton Muni-
cipal Jubilee in July, 1909, the late W. A.
B. Greaves contributed a historical sketch
which was published in the “Examiner.”
In it he referred to Surveyor W. 0. B.
Wilson, of Wilson’s Hill, and continued
as follows: —■
“Mr. Wilson received his education at
the Military College, England, and enter-
ed the 80th Regiment when quite a young
man and was sent to Greece to fight in a
war. Captain Marsh, who in 1856 owned
Camira Station, was captain of the 80th
Regiment. Mr. Wilson retired with a
medal and came to Now South Wales.
Mr. Wilson was a great linguist. He
could speak French, Italian, Greek, Indian
and the German languages. He dis-
played his Greek in the names he gave
to the parishes of his surveys, viz.,
Lanitza, Ulmarra, Clarenza. Lavadia,
Latykia, etc.”
Levadia (with an e) is a town in Greece
and was the scene of an important inci-
dent in the early part of the Greek War
of Independence in 1822.
Lanitza is not shown in the new ‘ ‘ Times”
atlas, but several Greek place names have
the termination *’ ‘ itza.” Lanista is an
Etruscan (Italy) word meaning butcher or
executioner.
Latikiyeh or Latakia (variously spelt)
is a seaport in Syria, noted for a choice
flavored tobacco exported from there, but
the name cannot, be found in any modern
map of the Clarence 'River district.
GREEK VERSION OF NAME
CLARENCE.
Mr. Anthony Notaras says that Clar-
enza is merely a Greek version of the
name Clarence and Mr. A. E. Niland, of
Ulmarra, has quoted the late Archie Mea-
ton to the effect that Ulmarra is an abor-
iginal name. This is under investigation
and may be the subject of an article.
The only Greek place resembling the
name is Almyra.
Other names apparently bestowed by
W. C. B. Wilson are Tucabia, Calamia and
Mount Kremnos (“the bluff” between the
Coramba road and the railway near Kun-
gala).
Kremnos is the Greek word for a
cliff or precipice.
The only Tucabia in the “Times” atlas
is our Tucabia on the Coldstream. It is an
excellent atlas.
Lamia is an important place near
Almyra in Greece, but no Calamia is
shown. The termination “ia” is very
common in Greek place names.
As Captain Francis Marsh also fought
in the Greek War of Independence, it is
not surprising to find that the name which
ho gave to his station of Camira is
Greek. Mr. Notaras translates the word
as meaning a house with a domed roof.
CALLIOPE.
Calliope in Greek mythology was one
of nine Muses who presided over the arts
and sciences. She was the muse of epic
poetry and is represented in her statues
with wax tablets and a stylus or writing
instrument' In her hands.
A place name so distinctively Greek
within the area of Mr. Wilson’s survey
has naturally suggested that he might
have been the author of it, but Mr.
Niland finds on inquiry from old residents
that the locality was never known by
that name till the school was opened,
which was when the old brick school on
the Coldstream road was closed. He says
that the Calliope school was held in the
Baptist church until' the present school
was erected in 1897. Pupils who attend-
ed that temporary school under Mr. Mur-
ray, Miss Maekney and Miss Parry say
that they had it impressed upon them that
the school was named after H.M.S, Cal-
liope, which a short time previously had
thrilled the world by her dramatic escape
during the Apia hurricane. Mr. Niland
concludes: —
So the sum total of it all seems to be
that the British Admiralty christened a
man-o’-war after the Grecian Calliope,
and the N.S.W. Education Department
named a school after that famous ship.
Lifelong residents in the neighborhood
of the school called Calliope, some ot
whom attended as pupils when it was
first opened, affirm that there was never
any ceremonious bestowal of the name on
the school; neither is there any evidence,
recorded or otherwise, that any person
official or unofficial bestowed the name
Calliope on any territory, defined or un-
defined. The residents referred to are all
positive about this, and all are unani-
mous that the name Calliope as applied
to their district seemed to grow in their
minds, like an echo as it were, some
years after the opening of the school.
SURVEYOR-GENERAL’S OPINION.
Inquiries made of the Surveyor-General
i to the date of the earliest map on
which the name appeared- brought the
following kindly and courteous reply:—
“Department of Lands,
■ • Sydney,
“9th July, 1934.
“‘The Hon. Secretary,
‘ ‘ Clarence River Historical Society,
‘ ‘ Grafton.
“Dear Sir, —Referring to your letter of
the 28th ultimo regarding tne name Cal-
liope, parish Ulmarra, sounty Clarence, I
have to state that the first appearance of
this name on parish and county maps
followed the establishment of the Calliope
Public School in 1890. In the first instance
the application by the residents, "was made
in January, 1890, for a school at Calliope,
but there are no records here to indicate
that such a locality existed at the time,
but it appears more likely that the name
was chosen prior to the application for
the school being lodged. The inspector
intimated that he would recommend the
opening of a school providing the settlers
would provide a building. It was sub-
sequently opened in a Baptist church
somewhere in the vicinity. Strange to
say, on the opening day not one child
attended owing to a big flood in this
area.
In May, 1891, a now site of four acres
was provided being part of the south-
eastern corner of a reserve for refuge
from flood, but used also as the IHmarra
racecoursie—the race track and grand-
stand being near the northern boundary
of the school site.
As there appears to be no record of
the name in question prior to the school
establishment in January, 1890, it is
thought that the name might have
originated through the Samoan hurricane
catastrophe of 1889, Briefly it is as
follows: —
On account of trouble in Samoa in the
year just mentioned three German and
three American warships lay in the har-
bor of Apia, capital of Samoa, when the
British gunboat, Calliope, arrived on
March 14, 1889. On the following two
days a terrible cyclone swept over the
island causing the loss of many lives,
and every warship except the Calliope,
which under the command of Captain
Kane ran out to sea in the teeth of the
hurricane and escaped.
If this happening has not some bearing
on the origin of the adoption of the
name, it is a remarkable coincidence.
Perhaps some of the old residents may be
able to throw some light on this.
Yours faithfully,
H. B. MATHEWS,
Surveyor-General.
Mr. D. J. Lobban remembers his ( father,
the late Alex Lobban, telling him that
when the residents’ application was re-
ferred to him as district inspector of
schools, he drove out to make inquiries
and to report upon it. He took with
him the late Surveyor James Ogle Bur-
gess, father of Mr. Arthur Burgess,
A.E.A., the marine painter, and it was
he who suggested this beautiful and ap-
propriate name.
Mr. Burgess was himself a talented
amateur artist, and made a spirited pen
I and ink drawing of the Calliope fighting
her way out of Apia, which he presented
to the school. It would be interesting to
know whether the picture is still in
existence.
Mr. Niland remarks that the like prob-
lems as to the origin of place names are
exercising the minds of people in other
parts. In its issue of May 12, 1934, the
“Northern Daily Leader” reported that
the Tenterfield Council, lamenting the
thoughtlessness of early ancestors, in fail-
ing to preserve historical documents, etc.,
passed a resolution for submission to the
Minister for Local Government, which, in
effect, would constitute all L.G. councils
as official historical societies, for the pre-
servation of local records.
“THE OLD ERICK SCHOOL.”
Ulmarra natives, Mr. Niland continues,
all know what is meant by “the old
brick school.” Within its portals, the late
Judge J. J. Cohen, formerly Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly, received his
early tuition. The late Or. E. E. Small
(one time president of Orara shire) has
often told me that he sat beside Jack
Cohen at the same desk in “the old brick
school.”
The school was demolished aoout four
years ago, but the residence still remains,
as sturdy looking and as serviceable as
it was 50 years ago.
At one period, Mr. Dennis was the
teacher in charge, and is still remembered
by the old hands, whom he taught as hoys,
—he left his mark upon them. He was
afterwards an inspector.
Besides the late J. J. Cohen, the old
school produced two other members of the
Legislative Assembly, the late Archie
Meston, and the late John McFarlane.
In the school residence was born En-
gineer Dennis, of H.M.A.S. Sydney, who
was wounded in her action with the
Emden. He died last year.
