

*
<
lYY — /SJ f
C *~^-
•* '1
ne^J^HTr 1 VfTutf-'*
c <
/
V
\
i
!
r
»
v
1
'Wi
f
LA)
f j
I
I i --t Tim in


KS .
r \
Wk
■ 1 -A
■:
5 s
I m
K
sh
th
Fc
ta;
co
D
St(
an
th;
cir
Un
sh(
it
on
.vli
m
•to
c;e
flo
th
to
at
ch
of
th>
Ri
Tl
be
Wc
FI
T


paratory to embarking them the following day. Went on board
the Monarch.
July 31.—Embarked the 50 horses and 100 sheep on board the
Monarch. Mr. 11. Gregory returned to Brisbane to close accounts
for forage, &c.
August 1. —Embarked the remainder of the sheep, 100 in
number. At 4*20 p.m. the steamer Bremer took the Monarch in
♦tow; but the tide ebbing fast, the tow-line broke, and the vessel
grounded on a bank about a mile below the flats, the steamer pro-
ceeding to the Blackfriars with cargo. At 8'45 the Monarch
floated, and at 10'45 the Bremer returned and towed us towards
the bar; but at 12*45 the vessel anchored and the steamer re-
turned to Brisbane, the pilot asserting that it was not safe to
attempt to cross the bar, as he could not be certain of finding the
channel. Wrote to the Colonial Secretary, acknowledging receipt
of his letter of the 17th July, transmitting instructions relative to
the North Australian expedition,
August 2. —Remained at anchor inside the bar of the Brisbane
River. At sunset the Tom Tough moved to the same anchorage.
The steamer did not come down from Brisbane, and the wind
being unfavourable, we could not cross the bar, although there
was ft. water, and the vessel only drew 9 ft. 10 in. Mr.
Flood, overseer Humphery, and H. Richards, removed to the Tom
Tough.
August 3.—Brought the Tom Tough alongside the , and
shifted 30 trusses of hay on board the schooner, which lightened
the barque about 2 inches astern. Sent Mr. H. Gregory to Eagle
Farm to purchase hay for the stock, as it was necessary to main-
tain a full supply for the voyage, and there is every prospect of
considerable delay, as the tides are approaching the neaps. Mr.
Dibbs proceeded to Brisbane, and returned in the evening and
stated that he had been unable to engage the services of any of the
steamers, as both the Ballarat and Bremer were under repair,
and the Hawk at Ipswich. The wind being n.n.w., the pilot stated
that the vessel could not be moved over the bar under existing
circumstances.
August 4. —During the night the Tom Tough crossed the bar
under sail, and the master reported that he found lift, at the
shoalest part. The harbour-master came on board and stated that
it would not be practicable to cross the bar till the 9th, and that
it was not safe to move the vessel nearer to it. Landed on the
outer island to cut grass for the horses. The aboriginal stockmen,
who had been partially engaged at Brisbane, having absconded
when the vessel entered the river, it was determined to obtain others
*om the, Moreton Island tribe, among which there are several
uitable aborigines.
b 2


August 5, Sunday. —Remained at anchor in the Brisbane River.
August 6. —Weighed with the flood-tide and ran in to the
3-fathom hole, inside the bar. Landed with a party to cut grass
for the horses. Sent Mr. H. Gregory to Brisbane to procure hay
for the stock, as the forage on board the vessel was insufficient to
meet the extra consumption caused by the protracted delay of the
vessel after the horses were shipped.
August 7. —At 5 a.m. weighed and ran for the bar; but the-
night-tide not being so high as usual, the vessel grounded about
im. inside the middle beacon. In the evening warped the vessel
up to the middle beacon. I observed that though the Monarch
only drew 9 ft. 9 in. by the marks on the stem and stern, yet the
actual draught of water was 10 ft. 6 in. Received a letter from
Mr. Dibbs, the agent for the owner of the Monarch , requesting
that the certificates of the performance of the charter party, to the
present date, should be transmitted by post to Mr. bayers, the
owner. Received a letter from D. Gourlay, the master of the
Tom Tough, requesting a certificate of the performance of the
charter party of the Tom Tough to the present time.
August 8. —Wrote to Captain Gourlay, in reply to his letter of
yesterday. At 3 p.m. the tide rose to 104 ft. on the bar, and the
Monarch was warped out of the river and at 6'30 anchored in the
outer anchorage near the Tom Tough.
August 9, —At 3 a.m. Mr. Dibbs, the supercargo of the Mo-
narch, proceeded to Brisbane, and shortly after the vessel weighed
and stood over for Moreton Island with a light breeze, and at
9-30 anchored off the watering-place between Cowan Point
and the Pilot station. Commenced taking in water, and got
about 3 tons on board. The water at this place is excellent, and
flows in a small stream from an extensive swamp at the foot of the
sand hills, which occupy the greater portion of the island. The
best spot for the purpose of watering is about m. s. from the
Pilot station, i m. from the shore, where the water deepens sud-
denly from 3to 10 fathoms. The Tom Tough remained at the
anchorage oft* the bar of the Brisbane River, to take in hay for the
stock on board the Monarch.
August 10. —The Tom Tough came over from the anchorage at
the Brisbane River, Mr. H. Gregory having obtained 4 tons of
hay which was brought down by the Bremer steamer and tran-
shipped to the Tom Tough , and brought over to Moreton Island
and embarked in the Monarch. Continued to take in water, but
only procured 4j tons during the day.
August 11. —Completed the water on board the Monarch and
Tom Tough. Wrote to the master of the Tom Tough, trans-
mitting instructions with reference to the voyage to the Victoria
River, &c.


August 12. —Wrote to Captain Wickham transmitting certifi-
cates of the performance of the charter party of the Monarch, to
the period of sailing from Moreton Bay. Wrote to the Colonial
Secretary, reporting proceedings to date. At 10 a.m. weighed
and stood out of Moreton Bay in company with the Tom Tough.
At 11 the pilot left the vessel, as she was clear of the banks; she
then continued a northerly course.
August 13. —At 2 p.m. passed Breaksea Spit and continued along
the coast, with a fine s.e. breeze.
August 14. —At daylight off Port Curtis, and at 5 , 30 p.m. passed
Port Bowen, and stood off and on till daylight.
August 15. —At daybreak the Tom Tough was off the High
Peak, or No. 1, Northumberland Island. Passed to the e. of
No. 1 Island, and at noon passed to the w. of the 2nd Percy
Island, the Tom Tough in company. At sunset off (k I) of the
Cumberland. At 11 p.m. passed about 2m. n.e. of (1 2) and con-
tinued a n.w. course, under very easy sail till daylight. Two sheep
died in the night.
August 16. —At sunrise off Pentecost Island, and made all
sail; passed close to n.e. of the Northern Cumberland Island.
At 11 off the Great Island. Moderate breeze from s.e., light
clouds and slight showers of rain. At sunset sighted Cape
Upstart, and continued course under easy sail during the night,
the wind being very light from the s.e.
August 17. —At daylight off Cape Bowling Green, and at noon
passed Cape Cleveland; light easterly winds. At midnight
anchored off the n.w. side of Magnetical Island in 8 fathoms m.
from the beach.
August 18. —At sunrise weighed with a light variable breeze,
with showers of rain ; and passing to the w. of Palm Island sought
an anchorage under the Northern Island, but finding 14 to 20
fathoms f m. from the shore lay to till 2 a.m. the next morning.
The Tom Tough ran close into the second Northern Island, and
anchored in 9J fathoms, \m. from the shore in a small bay. At
10 p.m. lowered the boat and went on board the Tom Tough to
arrange for sailing in the morning. Returned to the Monarch at
midnight. Vessels should anchor to the w. of the largest of the
three Northern Palm Islands, as the water off the other two is
much deeper than shown on the charts, the depth varying from 14
to 20 fathoms.
August 19, Sunday. —At 2 a.m. made sail, and with light
variable breeze (with showers); at daylight Point Hillock oppo-
site Mt. Hinchinbroke. The breeze freshened till noon from e.n.e.
when we passed Rockingham Bay, the Tom Tough 4m. astern. At
7 p.m. anchored under the Northern Island of the Barnard group,
and at 8 p.m. the Tom Tough anchored \m.w. in fathoms.
j
■<
• Ty


August 20. —At 5 a.m. weighed, and at 11 passed 2 m. to the
w. of the Frankland Islands. Light variable breeze, with showers
of rain. At 2 p.m. passed between Cape Grafton and Fitzroy
Island. At 3 off Green Island, and continued course toward
Cape Tribulation, the Tom Tough 8 in. a-head ;at 6'30 hauled
to the w., and gradually shoaled from 16 to 12 fathoms, and
anchored at 7*25 p.m., it being unsafe to pass the low islands in
the night. Moderate breeze from s.; cloudy.
August 21. —Weighed at 6*30, and at 8 a.m. passed 2 m. e. of
Low Island, and at I*3o p.m. Hope Island. At 6 anchored on
the w. side of Low Island. Landed in the boat. The island was
well grassed, and partially wooded on the n.w. side ; but the s.e. side
(as in most of the low islands on this coast) is covered with man-
grove. The Tom Tough had reached Snapper Island last night,
and this anchorage several hours before the Monarch.
August 22. —At 5*45 weighed, and steered for Lizard Island
(the Tom Tough taking the inner passage); passed between
Lizard and Eagle Islands, and then steered for No. 1 of Howick
group, passing between No. 2 and No. 3at 12*45. The passage
between these islands is somewhat incorrectly laid down on the
chart, as the passage is quite open when steering direct for Noble
Island. At 2*30 p.m. anchored, off the n.w. side of No. 6, along
with the schooner, in 9|r fathoms. Landed on the island, which is
coral and sand with a wide belt of mangrove, except to the n.w.,
which has a rocky beach. Great quantities of pumice stone exist
on the island.
August 23. —At 6*30 a.m. weighed, and passed Cape Melville at
9. At 10*40 passed about 50 fathoms to the s. of what appeared to
be a small rock with about 1 fathom on it, Cape Flinders bearing w.
by s., and the e. point of Flinders Island s. \w. The water here-
abouts was much discoloured, but no bottom at 6 fathoms. There
is also a shoal patch im. to the n. of this rock. At 11 a.m. Im.
from Cape Flinders. At 3 passed between Pelican Island and
No. 1 Clermont Island. 6*15 anchored fm.w. of No. 6 Island,
the Tom Tough in company.
August 24. —At 6 a.m. weighed ; at 1 p.m. passed Cape Direc-
tion, at 6 off Weymouth Bay, and at 7 anchored in 13 fathoms,
the Tom Tough being at anchor 1 m. n.
August 25. —At 6 a.m. weighed, at 7*20 £ m. e. from Piper
Island shoals, the Tom Tough passing between the two groups of
islands. At 9*40 passed to the e. of the Home Islands, the Tom
Tough passing between the islands and Cape Grenville. At
6 p.m. anchored at Cairncross Island, and landed. The island
is low and sandy, but densely covered with brush. There were
marks of some person having visited the island about a week
before. One of the sheep died. Capt. Gourlay reported the


passage inside the Horae Islands to be clear of dangers. This is
important to vessels following the Inner Route, as it is a close-haul
to pass outside the islands with an easterly breeze.
August 26.—Weighed at 5 a.m. and steered for Port Albany.
Off Newcastle Bay a canoe came alongside with seven natives,
who spoke a few words of English. They bartered some tortoise-
shell and mother-of-pearl shells for tobacco and biscuit. At noon
anchored in Port Albany, the Tom Tough f m. n.w. Landed
and examined the island, which is partially covered with dense
brush or wooded, but about one-third is open and thinly grassed.
The principal rock is a dark ironsand-stone, which produces a poor
soil by its decomposition. The only fresh water found was a
small spring at the bottom of a cove on the beach, about
100 yards to the n.w. of the landing place at the n. end of the
sandy beach, but the supply is very small and quite unavailable
for watering vessels. Fuel is abundant, but the beach being
fronted by a ledge of coral, there is great difficulty in loading
boats. Several natives were seen, and two men came down to the
party, and behaved in a very quiet manner : they spoke a few words
of English. The anchorage in Port Albany, at first sight, appears
excellent: being safe and easy of entrance and egress, it is prefer-
able to most of the other ports on this coast. The tide, however,
runs through between the island and the main from 5 to 6 knots,
and the time of slack-water does not exceed 15 minutes. The
Monarch anchored out of the full strength of the tide under the
shelter of a rocky point, but the eddy of the current caused the
vessel to sheer about, and the chain fouled the anchor.
August 27.—At 3'30 a.m. the chain fouled the flue of the
anchor, and the Monarch was swept into the centre of the channel;
set the jib and with some difficulty weighed the anchor, and then
ran up to the Tom Tough and anchored at 6‘30. Hauled the
schooner alongside and shifted the hay into the barque. At 12’30
weighed and stood out of Port Albany, by the n.w. entrance, with
a fresh breeze from s.e. ; and at 3 p.m. anchored in Endeavour
Strait, and soon after the schooner also anchored near us. While
in Port Albany several natives were seen on-the mainland, and a
canoe came alongside, but was swept past by the tide. Wrote to
the master of the Tom Tough a letter of instructions. Issued
general order No. 3, establishing the order of seniority among the
officers of the Expedition. -
August 28.—At b’dO a.m. weighed and sailed in company with
the Tom Tough for the Victoria River. A canoe came off from
Prince of Wales Island, and bartered several articles wdth the
schooner, and came alongside the Monarch. The blacks spoke a
few words of English and were anxious to obtain tobacco, which
they smoked in a pipe of bamboo 2 ft. in length, and 2 in. in
it
4 '


diameter, the bowl being inserted in the side. Moderate breeze
from s.e.
August 29. Continued voyage, with a moderate easterly
breeze.
August 30. —As before.
August 31.—As before.
September I.—At 6 a.m. altered the course to s.w., and at 8
sighted the coast near Port Essington; moderate breeze from e.
Passed through Dundas Strait, observed strong tide-ripplings, and
at IP4O p.m. anchored about 3 m. off Point Keith, the Tom Tough
lying to during the night. There was a strong ebb tide to the
n.e. till two hours after midnight. At sunset the thermometer
was 84° in the cabin and 88° in the hold.
Sept. 2. —At 6 a.m. weighed and steered s.w. with a light
easterly breeze, and at 1 p.m. passed to the n.w. of Vernon
Island. The wind being light, went on board the schooner. At
9 ’5O, the Tom Tough being 4 m. astern, the Monarch grounded
on a coral bank. Tacked the schooner in 2f fathoms, and ran
n.e. m., and deepened water to 2f and anchored, and then went
in the boat with Capt. Gourlay to the , which lay m. w.
of the schooner; the depth of water gradually decreased to 8 ft.
alongside the barque, and only 5 ft. ahead and 9 astern of the
vessel, the tide ebbing fast. A kedge was got out, and the warp hove
tight, but without any effect. Captain Gourlay returned to the
schooner about midnight.
Sept. 3.—At 3 a.m. the tide left the vessel quite dry, and I ex-
amined the bottom as well as the imperfect light would admit.
She did not appear to have sustained any injury, though several
sheets of copper had been torn off near the quarter ; but this
seemed to have occurred at some previous time. At daylight got
bearings of the islands and other landmarks as follows :
N. 94° E. mag. .. Point Charles.
. 152° Raft Point.
1 GA° 1
2020 1 Point in Port Patterson.
] 634° W. extreme of point.
227°1
220® |* * • • .. Quail Island.
232°
213° i
228° j Island eight miles distant.
12° Line of shoal part of reef.
340° North Point of extension of reef.
At 9*30 a.m. the tide was at its greatest height, and there was
94 ft aft and 74 forward. There was very little wind, and the
water quite smooth. Hove on the warp, but without any effect.


It would appear that a strong current setting in towards the land
had carried the vessels out of the course, this current being
caused by the indraught of Port Patterson during flood tide, and
for which no allowance had been made. By observation of meri-
dian altitude of the sun the lat. was 12° 25' 27". The night tide
did not float the vessel. Wrote to Colonial Secretary, reporting on
Port Albany, &c.
Sept. 4. —Light breeze from the northward; low water at
6 a.m., and high water at 11, but only 8 ft. astern. The tides are
decreasing each day, though the moon has passed the quarter. Got
out the stream anchor and chain astern.
Sept. 5. —The tide rose to 7 ft. astern at midnight and 6 ft. at
noon, but the vessel did not even rise off her bilge. Cleared some
of the coral from the keel forward, as the surface of the rock was
not quite level. Another sheep died, and some of the horses show
signs of weakness. In the evening went on board the Tom
Tough.
Sept. 6.—At 6 a.m. weighed, and the schooner stood to the s.
with 34 to 15 fathoms, and at noon anchored 1 m. e. of Quail
Island. Landed to examine the island, and ascertain whether
sufficient water and grass existed for the horses, should it be re-
quisite to land the stock from the Monarch. The island is sandy
with low ridges, but based on sandstone ; the well mentioned by
Capt. Stokes is near the w. side of the island, and is marked by a
clump of pandanus. It was choked with sand. The grass was of
a very coarse description, and very much dried up. A few acacias,
pandanus, and figs are scattered over the ridges, which are very
open. There were no recent traces of natives on the island, and
the well had not been used for several months. Returned to the
schooner.
Sept. 7. —Landed on the island and cleared out the well, obtain-
ing a moderate supply of water 8 ft. from the surface, in sand,
shells, and thin layers of mud. Owing to the distance which the
water had to be carried, we only took off about 60 gallons to the
schooner. The tide rose higher to-day, but the Monarch did not
alter her position on the reef. The tide at 5 a.m. rose 9 ft. above
the low water of the last evening, but the Monarch did not float.
Moderate breeze from n. By meridian altitude of the sun the
lat. of the north end of Quail Island is 12° 32' 17" s. Obtained
sufficient water for the use of the schooner, and the men landed
and washed their clothes. At 3 p.m. the tide rose 10 ft., and the
marks on the beach show a rise of 5 ft. more at spring tides.
Sept. 9. —At 7 a.m. weighed, and steered e.n.e., pass-
ing close to the south end of the “ Monarch ” Reef; least
water 24 fathoms at half-tide. At 8’45 a.m. anchored in 34
fathoms.


Monarch on the reef.
Quail Island.
N. 332° E. mag.
242° \
247°)
Point Charles.
Raft Point.
33° ..
167° ..
Landed on the reef, and walked over to the , it being
low water. Mr. H. Gregory reported that one of the horses had
died that morning, and also that a sheep had died (this was the
sixth sheep lost). The Monarch had shifted about 10 ft. last tide,
but had not floated: about 30 ft. of the false keel was torn oft.
At 6 p.m. returned to the schooner, and at 10 o’clock brought
over extra men to assist in heaving the vessel off next tide, which
we expected would be sufficiently high to float her. At 11 p.m.
the tide began to make from the n.w.
Sept. 10. —At 4*15 the vessel floated, and was warped
off the reef, and, with a light northerly breeze, worked to the
eastward, and anchored in 4£ fathoms f m. n. from the schooner.
Besides the loss of a portion of the false keel, and a few sheets of
copper, the Monarch does not appear to have received any mate-
rial injury. At 9‘40 a.m., having returned with Messrs. Wilson
and Flood and the men to the Tom , the two vessels got
under weigh, the Monarch taking the northern and the schooner
the southern passage out of Port Patterson, the least water in the
latter being 2 fathoms at low water. Light breeze from the n.
and N.w. Having cleared the reefs, lay to for the Monarch, which
was several miles to the north, and at dark anchored in 18 fathoms,
about 10 m. n.w. from Quail Island.
Sept. 11. —At 6 a.m. weighed and stood to the s.w., the
Monarch about 7 ra. to the east. Very light breeze n. and n.n.w.
At 6 p.m. the w. extreme of Cape Ford bore south sm. Tacked
and stood to the n. and n.n.w. till 30 min. after midnight, the
breeze being westerly, and very light and variable.
Sept. 1 2. —Steered s.s.w. with light airs till 6 p.m. ; lat. at
noon, 12° 36' 37". At sunset the peak of Peron Island bore
s.e. by s, Bm. Strong tides set to the northward. About 8 p.m.
the Monarch either tacked or anchored, and we lost sight of her
light, and did not rej’oin her till she reached Point Pearce.
Sept. 13. —At 6 a.m. Cape Ford bore e. by s. 2j m. 15 fathoms,
no bottom. Steered s.w. with very light airs, the sky cloudy.
At 6 p.m. Tree Point e. Im. 2\ fathoms. Tide setting strong into
Port Keats. At 6*30 tacked and stood to the n.n.e., and at
8 p.m. anchored about w. from Tree Point.
Sept. 14.—At 5*45 weighed and stood towards Cape Hay
with a light breeze from n.n.w. ; least water 4g fathoms. At
7 a.m. Cape Hay w.s.w. 1 m., tacked and steered e. by n. 1 hour,
and then tacked to the s.w., cleared the shoals off the cape, and


steered for Point Pearce. By merid. alt. noon, lat. 14° 10' 52".
At 5 p.m. passed 14 m. w. from Point Pearce ; least water
6 fathoms; saw slight indications of the Mermaid reef, but there
was no break on it. At 6*30 p.m. anchored in 6 fathoms h.w. ;
m. n.w, from Fossil Head. Hoisted lights during the night.
Sept . 15. —As it appeared from the time which had elapsed
since parting from the Monarch , that she had probably gone on
to Blunder Bay, we weighed at 11*30, and steered s. by w. with a
moderate breeze from w. by n., the tide ebbing strong. At
3 p.m. passed between the sandbanks at the entrance of the
Victoria River, and at 6 were abreast of Observation Island,
having 8 fathoms to this point, but off the island it shoaled to
2 fathoms, and again deepened to 8 and 9 to the point of
Entrance Island, which we reached at sunset. Continuing our
course up the river to Blunder Bay, with a strong flood tide, and
at 8*45 p.m. anchored in 44 fathoms, close to the south shore.
Sept. 16.—At 4*45 a.m. the tide fell, and the schooner
grounded on the mud-bank, which was nearly dry at 6 a.m.,
and the flood commenced at 6*30. Landed at 9 to search
for water arid grass for the stock. The landing was bad, the
current running very strong at the only rocky point which was
accessible, the rest of the south shore being muddy and covered
with mangrove. Found one small pool of brackish water, and
also a small quantity of fresh water in a deep fissure in the rocks,
but quite inaccessible for the stock. Richards, who was one of
the party, had a sunstroke, and we had to return with him to the
vessel at I*3o. The country near Blunder Bay appears very
rocky and unfit for the purpose of landing the horses, there being
very little water, and only coarse dry grass, besides which the
landing is only practicable for about one hour each tide, as the
current runs with great rapidity, and the rocky point at which
alone the horses could be landed is especially exposed; the other
parts of the shore are muddy, and covered by a dense brush of
mangrove, and intersected by muddy creeks. At 2*45 weighed
and beat down the river with the ebb-tide. At 5*20 grounded
on the bank on the w. side of the river, a short distance below
the “ High water Inlet,” but the tide soon flowing, we floated off
and anchored.
Sept. 17. —At 3 a.m. hove short, but, as there was no wind,
and the flood was still running, remained at anchor till the tide
turned at 4 a.m., when we weighed and ran down with the ebb
till 7, when we anchored till 10*30, and again commenced
beating down the river till 7 p.m., when we anchored in 5 fathoms,
between the entrance sand-banks, as we could not stem the flood-
tide.
Sept. 18. —At 5 a.m. hove short, and at 8, when the tide


turned, weighed, and at noon cleared the entrance hanks, steering
close-hauled on the starboard tack for Point Pearce, the breeze
being light from the n.w. At 2 p.m. saw the Monarch at
anchor in Treachery Bay, and at 5 anchored near her. Went on
board the Monarch. In consequence of the small quantity of
water remaining on board, Mr. H. Gregory had deemed it
advisable to land the horses without waiting the return of the
schooner from Blunder Bay, he having found water at the foot
of Providence Hill. Fourteen horses and fifty sheep had been
landed, but one of the horses had got so completely entangled in
the mangroves and deep mud that he could not be extricated.
Such of the horses as could travel had been driven to the swamp
at Providence Hill, where there was abundance of both grass and
water. Having established a party on shore, I returned to the
schooner, and procured some water for the horses on board the
Monarch.
Sept. 19. —Landed 14 horses, and removed 13 to the swamp
at Providence Hill. The great distance the horses have to swim
in landing (lv m.), and the strength of the tide, which is so great
that it is only during the ebb that landing is practicable,
render the work of disembarcation very tedious and laborious.
Removed the sheep from the Monarch to the Tom Tough , and
procured a supply of water from the schooner for the horses.
Several of the sheep landed died from drinking salt water, as the
boat could not reach the shore, and they had to be driven through
the shallow water to the beach.
Sept. 20, —Continued to land the horses, but owing to the
strong tide, and some of the horses being extremely weak, three
were drowned ; sixteen, however, were landed alive. Brought
some water from the swamp for the sheep which had been landed,
but could not travel to the water ; several sheep died.
Sept. 21. —Landed the last of the horses, and removed the
remainder of the bran and maize to the Tom Tough.
Sept. 22, —Moved the party on shore to the swamp at Provi-
dence Hill, and formed a camp. Completed the removal of the
stores from the Monarch to the schooner. Proceeded to the
camp with the whole party except Shewell and Richards, who
remained to attend to the sheep on board the schooner.
Sept. 23, Sunday. —Wrote to the Governor-General of Aus-
tralia detailing the proceedings of the North Australian Expe-
dition to date ; also to Captain Fremantle, the senior Naval
officer on the Australian station, on the same subject; also to
the Secretary of State, forwarding a copy of letter to the Governor-
General. Returned to the vessels with Messrs. H. Gregory,
Elsey, and Baines. Wrote to Captain Robinson, the master of
the Monarch , stating that the services of the vessel were no longer
r
%


required. Gave Mr. Dibbs (Mr. Sayers’s agent) duplicate certi-
ficates of the performance of the charter-party of the Monarch.
Wrote to the Accountant-General of the Navy advising him of
the same, and forwarding a triplicate of the certificate. Pur-
chased of Mr. Dibbs 1000 lbs. of biscuit, at 30.s\ per 100 lbs.
Sept. 24.—Mr. H. Gregory proceeded to the camp, and Mr.
Flood returned to the schooner. Wrote to the master of the
Tom Tough , instructing him to proceed up the Victoria River,
and there await the land-party. Wrote to Mr. Wilson, instruct-
ing him to proceed in the schooner in charge of the party on
board, and establish a camp on the upper part of the Victoria.
Embarked the remainder of the sheep which had been landed,
with the exception of four, which were retained for the use of the
party on shore. Landed and proceeded to the camp. The
Monarch sailed for Singapore at 7 a.m. Mr. Wilson returned to
the schooner with Dawson, and the Tom Tough sailed for the
Victoria river, the party on board consisting of the following
persons: Messrs. Wilson, Baines, Elsey, Hood, Overseer Hum-
phery, W. Shewell, W. Selby, W. Dawson. The land party
consisted of the following persons, ten in number: Messrs.
A. C. Gregory and Mr. H. C. Gregory, Dr. Mueller, Overseer
Phibbs, R. Bowman, C. Dean, H. Richards, J. Melville, J.
Fahey, S. Macdonald. At 10 a.m. started with Mr. H. Gregory
from the camp, to examine the country to the eastward. Found
it generally level and wooded with Eucalypti, Cypress, Banksia,
Pandanus, and Cycas. A few sandstone hills were observed to
the northward, from which small running streams trended towards
the coast; on their banks some small patches of grassy land
were seen. Four of these brooks were crossed in the first 5 m.,
after which we travelled for 7 m. without finding any water-
courses. Returned to the camp at 6T5 p.m.
Sept. 26. —Several of the horses were still so much exhausted
by the sea voyage that they could not travel. I therefore selected
two of the strongest, and accompanied by Mr. H. Gregory, pro-
ceeded to explore the country to the east to ascertain the best
route towards the Victoria river. After crossing the running
brooks seen yesterday, we kept to the north of the previous track.
The country was timbered with Eucalypti and Cypress, Pandanus
and Cycas frequent; the soil was sand and ironstone gravel pro-
ducing coarse grass in the wet season, but which was now dried
up or burnt by the bush fires. After following a native path for
three hours, at 11 a.m. came to a deep pool in the rocky bed of a
small watercourse, in which we first observed the Nymphsea. At
noon entered a large plain extending south to “Fossil Summit.”
Crossing the plain, we passed a shallow swamp in which a flock
of ibis were feeding, and at 12’30 crossed a mangrove creek,


with a small stream of fresh water, the tide being at the ebb; we
then traversed a level forest till I*ls, when we halted at a dry
watercourse, in which was a native w r ell 4 feet deep. At 3
again proceeded, and traversed the forest for one hour, and then
emerged into a level plain destitute of trees, and apparently ex-
tending to “Table Hill.” At 4’40 halted at a small swamp,
supplied by a spring. The soil of the plain was stiff clay, and at
this season of the year very little grass remained. Large flocks
of white cockatoos came to drink at the swamp, and we shot two,
but had great difficulty in finding them, as they fell into the dense
thicket of reeds and melaleuca with which the swamp was over-
grown.
Sept. 27. —Our horses having strayed about a mile, we did
not start till 6’20 a.m., and then steered e. by n. to a swamp at
the edge of the plain, and reached it at 7. Here we found a fine
mound spring, with abundance of green grass around. A dry
tea-tree swamp bounded this portion of the plain to the north.
Having found a suitable spot to which the camp could be advanced,
we returned towards Providence Hill. As we approached the
mangrove creek we observed about ten blacks following our out-
ward track, but on seeing us approach they hastily retreated into
the swamp. The water in the creek was now salt, the tide being
high, and our horses had some difficulty in crossing, as the bottom
was very soft and boggy. At 11 a.m. halted at the rocky pool
to rest the horses. At P3O resumed our route, and reached the
camp at 5 p.m. One of the horses, “Sykes,” had become so weak
that he could not stand, and there was no hope that he could
recover. Bowman had followed the track of “ Logan ” several
miles, but the horse had gone into a dense brush, where the track
was lost. This horse had been landed on the 18th, and had
escaped into the bush, and though seen several times afterwards,
we were unable to secure him, or even drive him to the water;
nor would he follow the other horses, and from the frantic way in
which he moved about it was evident that the horse was suffering
from a species of madness.
r
i
Sept. 28. —Collecting the horses and saddling them for the
first start occupied so much time, that we did not leave our camp
till 11 a.m. We then followed the line of route examined yester-
day. After travelling 2m. the sheep could go no farther, and they
were carried on horseback to the first brook and there left, as they
were not worth carriage. Many of the horses were so weak that
they fell down and had to be lifted up, as they had not strength
to rise. Continued our route till 5 p.m. and encamped in a grassy
fiat, 1 m. beyond the rocky water hole, where we halted yesterday
at noon. The original number of horses embarked at Moreton
Bay was 50; they are now reduced to 41, 3of which are so much


A 4
i-
i
5
(
r
At
u
T
reduced in strength that there is little hope that they will be
capable of crossing the ranges of hills which intervene between
this place and the Victoria River, above Sea Range. The follow-
ing is a list of the casualties :
1. Polly .. .. Died on the voyage.
2. Saxon .. .. Ditto.
3. Nancy .. .. Drowned in landing.
4. Barney .. .. Ditto.
5. Toby .. ~ Ditto.
6. Peter .. .. Lost in the mud in landing,
7. Belt Died on shore of exhaustion.
8. Logan ~ .. Escaped into the hush.
9. Sykes .. .. Left in a dying state at last camp.
Sept. 29. —Started from the camp at 8 a.m. and reached the
Mangrove Creek at 9 ; but being high water, could not cross the
horses till 12‘30, when we bridged over the muddy channel with
branches. We then followed the edge of the plain, avoided
the forest before traversed, and reached the swamp, where we had
bivouacked on the 26th, and having watered the horses, went on
to the Mound Spring and encamped at 4 p.m. I then, with Mr.
H. Gregory, rode to the e.n.e. for an hour, and found a fine creek
with large water holes and good grassy flats on its banks. Re-
turned to the camp, which we reached after sunset.
Sept. 30.—Started at 8 a.m. and followed a native path to the
creek, from which we steered an easterly course. At noon crossed
a small salt-water creek, in which some of the horses got bogged.
This creek was in the centre of a wide grassy plain ; the grass had,
however, been burnt off. At I*s passed a dry native well at the
edge of the plain, and then entered a sandy forest. At 1 ’so' came
to a reedy swamp, of several acres in extent, and shortly after
reached the foot of the MacAdam Range, when it was ascertained
that Dr. Mueller, whose botanical researches often detained him
in the rear of the party, had missed the track of the horses near
the reedy swamp, I therefore ordered the party to return to that
place and commence a search for the Doctor, who fortunately was
met about half a mile from the spot; but having lost so much
time that we could not continue the journey, we encamped at the
swamp at 3 p.m.
October I.—Accompanied by Mr. H. Gregory, left the camp to
search for a practicable line of route by which the party could
cross the MacAdam Range ; but after proceeding about a mile
we shot an emu, with which we returned to the camp, and again
started at 7TO a.m. Pursuing a s.e. course, crossed a stony
ridge, and at 8 came to a creek 20 yards wide, with good pools of
water and grassy banks, but the country generally barren and
stony. After several unsuccessful attempts, we ascended the hills
to the s.e. of the creek, and traversed a very broken country of


sandstone formation till 11, when we reached the head of a creek
trending southwards. This was followed down till 1, when we
halted for an hour and again proceeded till 4*30, the country being
very poor and rising into rocky hills on both banks of the creek.
We then entered a wide grassy flat destitute of trees, extending
6m.n.to s. and 15 m. e. to w. On the s. side there appeared
to be a creek or river, which we supposed to be the Fitzmaurice
River. This plain was bounded on all sides by steep rocky hills
of sandstone, of barren aspect. Returned up the creek till 6 p.m.
and halted for the night. The day was hot and sultry, though a
thunder shower at 2 p.m. somewhat reduced the temperature.
The MacAdam Range is of sandstone formation, the strata dipping
30° to the s., in which direction, as we advanced, the rock was
more slaty and broke into rhomboidal fragments. AVater is abun-
dant in the creeks, but grass is scanty, and the rough surface of
the sandstone and deep rocky ravines render the country difficult
to traverse. Timber is scarce, consisting chiefly of small-
sized eucalypti. The cotton-tree was observed in some of the
valleys.
Oct. 2. —Returning to the camp we attempted to follow one of
the creeks down to the plain on the n. side of the range, but
found the ravine too steep and rocky for the horses to pass, and
were, therefore, compelled to retrace our steps and several
steep and rocky hills, reaching the camp at 2 p.m., at which time
the thermometer stood at 94° in the shade and 114° in the sun.
Oct. 3. —Three of the horses had strayed, and this delayed us
till 11 A.M., when I started with the party, leaving Mr. H. Gregory
and Bowman to search for the missing animals. Proceeding in a
s.e. direction to the crossing of the first creek, ascended the
MacAdam Range and steered e.s.e. to the second creek ; the
course was then n.e. and e. to the head of the creek tributary to
the Fitzmaurice, and at 3*45 encamped. —(Camp, lat. 14° 33' 35".)
At the highest point on this day’s journey the aneroid stood at
29*45 and at the camp 29*55, thermometer 88°. The highest
part of the range did not rise 100 ft. above the ridge crossed.
Oct. 4. —At 10 a.m. Mr. H. Gregory and Bowman reached the
camp with one of the missing horses, and having obtained some
provisions, returned to search for the other two horses. At noon
started with the party and followed down the creek in a s.s.e.
direction till 4 p.m., and encamped at the termination of the hilly
country. —(Camp, lat. 14° 39' 35".) One of the horses, Madman,
showed signs of illness shortly before we started, and in crossing
the dry creek, about a mile above the camp, fell down, and in less
than three minutes w r as dead. This was a serious loss, as it was
one of the most serviceable of our horses, having suffered but little
from the effect of the sea voyage. The cause of death could not


mmm i
smhmh
■*** . . -
North Australian Exploring Expedition. 17
be ascertained ; but it is probable that some poisonous plant exists
at the place where we encamped last night.
Oct. 5. This morning I started with Dean to examine the
country to the e. After traversing the plain for 2 hours, came to
a running stream 10 yards wide, but the current very slow. The
vegetation on its banks was very luxuriant, presenting a striking
contrast to the surrounding country. Followed this brook to the
e. and s. for 14 m., when it changed to a salt creek, joining the
litzmaurice River. We then steered s.e. to a remarkable detached
lull, which consisted of the same hard fine-grained sandstone as
the ranges near the camp. The course was then n.e. and e. for
o m. along a salt-water creek. At the termination of the salt water,
M e saw four natives digging roots ; on observing us they decamped.
\V e now steeied s.e. to a range of rocky hills, which we could not
ascend with the horses, from their steep and rocky character; then
steered n.w. to a patch of green bushes in the plain, and at 2 m.
leached a small lagoon, 200 yards long and 30 wide, on which were
many ducks and other water-fowl. Here w r e halted for 14 hours,
and then by a n.w. and w. course returned to the camp, passing
tin ough grassy plains and patches of forest. Reached the camp
cit B*3o,
Oct, 6. Started at BTO a.m. with the whole party and steered
e. to the running brook, which was crossed at the head of the salt
water ; then proceeding up the stream f m., encamped.—(
lat. 14 40 4.) Near the brook we saw a native man and two
women, who were much alarmed at our sudden appearance, and
retreated across the plain.
Oct. 7. At 8. a.m. steered an easterly course, crossing the grassy
plain, and passed a low stony ridge, thinly wooded with small trees.
At J-40 a deep water-course, with w-ater-holes and grassv
flats. At 10-15 came to a second water-course, which w-e follow-ed
up to the e.n.e. till 11-20, when we halted at a small patch of
glass. At 1 p.m. I rode to the n. and e. to look for a more suit-
able spot for the camp, and having found a grassy flat and good
pool of water 14 m. higher up the creek, the party moved to it
at 4 p.m.
Oct. 8. —Taking Dean with me, I rode to the s. of the camp to
ascei tain the best ascent of the rocky hills which bounded the plain.
Following a small valley into the hills, after 2 hours’ ride, came to
a creek trending to the s., the valley of which afforded a practicable
line of route ; we therefore returned to the camp at noon. At
3 p.m. started with the party and moved the camp to the creek
found in the morning.
Oct. 9. —Started at 8 a.m,, accompanied by Dean, and followed
the creek through a rocky valley between sandstone ranges, the
strata of which dip to the w. at a high angle, 30° to 40°, At 10T5
VOL. XXVIII. c


came to the tide-waters of the creek, and after crossing several
stony ridges which came to its banks, at IF3O came to a small
running stream, with a patch of good grass. Here we halted for
2 hours and then returned to the camp, which was reached at
5 p.m. Mr. H. Gregory had returned with the two stray horses,
having found them about 10 m. to the N.w. of the camp, at the
reedy swamp from which they had strayed.
Oct. 10. —At 7-50 a.m. started with the party and followed down
the creek to the head of the salt water, and then by a circuit among
the rocky hills reached the running stream, and encamped at 11.
I then started in a southerly direction with Mr. H. Gregory, and,
after an hour’s ride, arrived at the Fitzraaurice River, which here
varied from 100 to 300 yards in width, the general course nearly
e. and w. The channel was full of banks and rocks, which are
dry at low water; the rise of the tide nearly 20ft. The hills
which bounded the valley of the creek we had descended terminated
in an abrupt rocky ridge, which left no passage between it and the
river; we therefore returned about a mile to the n., and after a
toilsome ascent of an hour under a scorching sun, crossed the ridge
and halted at a small spring till 2 p.m., when we proceeded up the
river, crossing two dry creeks, and after a fruitless search for a
suitable spot for a camp, there being no fresh water, we turned
towards the camp, but could not cross the range, as we everywhere
encountered steep rocks and ravines, and were glad to extricate
ourselves from the hills at 9 p.m., when we bivouacked in a
grassy flat.
Oct. 11.—Resumed the attempt to cross the range, and, after
some search, found a practicable route for the pack-horses ; passing
a small spring at 7, and reached the camp at 8 a.m. During our
absence one of the best pack animals had died, apparently from
poison. At 2 p.m. the party started to cross the range, but one
of the horses, Drummer, was so weak that he fell several times,
and we were at last compelled to abandon him. Having crossed the
hills to the Fitzmaurice River, we followed up the valley and halted
at a salt creek, 7 to 8 yards wide, there being a little green grass
on the banks.— {Cai7ip, lat. 14 3 47' 18".)
Oct. 12.—During the night the horses were several times dis-
turbed, but it was not till morning that the cause was ascertained,
when we found that they had been attacked by the alligators, and
three were severely bitten and scratched. At 8 a.m. started to
follow up the river, but the rocky hills approached so close to its
banks that there was no passage, and we had to ascend the range,
which was no easy task. After 3 hours’ severe toil, reached a
more practicable country, and at 3‘30 encamped on the bank of
the river above the influence of the tide, the fresh water forming
rapids between fine reaches of water, 50 yards wide. — (Camp< lat.
r
t


14° 51' 37".) Two of the horses had been left about a mile from
the camp quite exhausted, but at sunset were brought to the
camp.
Oct. 13.—At 7 a.m. crossed to the left bank of the river at a
stony bar, where the water formed a rapid 20 yards wide and 2 ft.
deep; then following the river up for half an hour, and altered
the course to s.s.e. At B*s crossed a running stream from the w.
At 10*30 two of the horses were completely exhausted, but having
rested them at a pool of water, one revived ; we were compelled
to leave the other. We then proceeded, but were obliged to return
to the creek a mile farther up, as several of the horses began to
fail, and though we rested till 3 p.m., the second horse was unable
to continue, and was therefore abandoned. Since these horses were
landed they have not had strength to rise without assistance, and
it has been necessary to watch them while feeding, as they often
fell dow r n from exhaustion. Continuing our route, the valley was
about 2 m. wide, with flat-topped hills hounding it on the e. and \v.
There were a few pools of water in the creek ; but the country was
poor and stony, with a few patches of grass. At 5 p.m. encamped.
{Camp, lat. 15° 1/ 10",)
Oct. 14.—Started at 6*30 and pursued a s. course till 8, when
we crossed the ridge at the head of the creek and descended some
stony gullies to the s.w., and at 10'40 halted at a small water-hole
in a creek till 3 p.m., when we recommenced the journey, and fol-
lowed a valley to the s.e. ; but finding the country in that direction
unsuited for our object, turned to the w, and reached the creek
again at 5T5, and at 6 encamped. There was abundance of water
in the creek, and the rank growth of the grass on the immediate
banks proved a great impediment to the horses. The back country
was, however, very poor and stony, thinly timbered with white gum
(Eucalyptus), of small size and nearly destitute of leaves; and
though the whole country is grassy, it was so much parched up
by the intense heat of the sun, that it presented a very barren
aspect. At 4*30 there was a heavy thunder shower. As the creek
below the camp turned to the w. and entered a deep rocky gorge
in the sandstone range, w*e steered s, at 7 a.m., crossing several
stony ridges, with small gullies and creeks trending w. At
1020 crossed the highest ridge and observed a succession of low
stony ridges occupying the space between us and Sea Range.
Descending we reached a creek, on the bank of which we halted
at 11*30. Here we caught several small fish in a deep pool in
the creek. Resuming our route down the creek at 2*30, the average
course was s.w. till 5*30, when we encamped at a large deep pool
or reach of water, I m. long and 50 yards wide, supplied by a
small stream. Great numbers of large bats were seen hanging in
the trees on the margin of the creek, some of which we shot; their
c 2
r
* >


flesh was white, but it had an unpleasant flavour. The country
during this day’s journey has not been so hilly as yesterday, and
near the camp the trees have retained a few leaves; the soil, how-
ever, shows no improvement,’being universally stony, and though
well grassed, is useless for any other purpose than feeding stock.
The gouty stem tree (Adansonia) is more frequent on the banks of
the creeks, and fig-trees prevail near the water, and Eucalypti on
the hills.
Oct . 16.—Resumed our journey down the creek at 7 a.m., the
general course s.s.w. The country became so steep and rocky,
that at 8 we left the valley and steered s., crossing several stony
hills with rocky ravines between, which were so rugged that they
were scarcely passable. At 11 sighted the Victoria River, about
6 miles below Kangaroo Point; but on attempting to descend the
range were intercepted by a deep valley, bounded by sandstone
cliff's 50 to 100 ft. high. Following the valley to the e. and n.e.,
in search of a break by which we could descend, without success,
at 3 p.m. one of the horses was so completely exhausted that he
could proceed no farther. I therefore halted the party, and was
examining the cliff to ascertain the best place for lowering one of
the party by a rope into the valley for the purpose of procuring
water from a pool which was visible 300 ft. below us, when I found
a small spring on the top of the cliff, at which we encamped. As
soon as the horses were unsaddled, Mr. H. Gregory and myself
proceeded to examine the valley to the e., but had not gone more
than a mile when we observed a column of smoke rise from the
camp, followed by a sheet of flame, which extended up the side of
the adjacent hill. We therefore returned to the camp to subdue
the fire, and, if possible, save some of the grass for the horses,
which, with great difficulty, we succeeded in doing; hut, though
checked, the fire had extended many miles over the country, and
kept us busy all night. This fire originated in a want of due pre-
caution in clearing the grass around the fire at the camp, though
the cook had been cautioned on the subject.
Oct. 17.—At 5 a.m. left the camp with Mr. H. Gregory, and
recommenced the search for a practicable descent into the valley,
and about 2m. from the camp found a break in the cliff. The
hill was so steep and rocky that it was necessary to form a path
for the horses, and while Mr. H. Gregory returned and was bringing
the party from the camp, I employed myself in filling up the chasms
with stones and removing rocks from the path, the steepness of the
declivity greatly facilitating their removal, as it required but little
force to hurl rock of several tons weight into the valley below.
Fortunately we accomplished the descent without any accident,
and reached the base of the hill at 1030 a.m. Descending the
creek which occupied the lower part of the valley for about 2 m.
*
♦


encamped at a small pool of water. T then rode to the hank of the
\ ictoria River, and ascertained that we were about 6 m. below
Kangaroo Point. Returning to the camp procured fresh horses,
and, accompanied by Mr. H. Gregory, proceeded to Kangaroo
Point, reaching the spot appointed for leaving a notice of the move-
ments of the party on board the schooner just as it became dark,
and though we found a small tree notched with an axe, there was
nothing to guide us in a farther search, and therefore bivouacked.
Oct. 18. —At daybreak recommenced our search for some memo-
randum for our guidance to the camp or vessel, but only found
five or six small trees cut with an iron axe, and the remains of a
large fire. As it was doubtful whether the vessel had proceeded
up the river, I decided on continuing our route in that direction to
some convenient spot for a camp near Steep Head, and accordingly
returned to the party. The southern face of Sea Range is very
abrupt, and surmounted by a cliff of red sandstone, 50 to 100 ft.
high, the range being the edge of an elevated table-land. The
upper stratum is hard sandstone, in horizontal beds resting on soft
shales, which appear somewhat inclined; but the outcrop was so
completely covered with fragments of the upper rocks, that no
satisfactory data could be obtained. The soil of the level land
between the Victoria and Sea Range is very poor, either sandy or
covered with fragments of rock; there is no fresh water, and the
grass is very coarse. Large flights of cockatoos came to drink at
the pools near the camp, and about 50 were shot during the day.
Oct. 19. —Started at 7 a.m. and followed the river up to Kan-
garoo Point, and then by an easterly course ascended the salt-water
creek which joins the Victoria at this point. At 4 p.m. reached
the termination of the salt water, beyond which the creek divided
into several dry channels ; in one of them there was a small pool
of fresh water, at which we encamped at 4T5 p.m. The result of
our shooting this day was 1 turkey, 1 hawk, and 29 cockatoos.
The country near the creek is well grassed, the soil a brown loam ;
but as it approaches the hills the ground is very stony and very
thinly wooded with Eucalypti, which were nearly destitute of
foliage. To the s. of the creek the country appeared to be of
somewhat better character.
Oct. 20, — At 7 a.m. steered n. 160° E. m. till 10 over a level
grassy plain, wooded with small Eucalypti and Melaleuca trees,
the soil varying from brown loam to a stony clay. Altering the
course to 190°, passed some low stony ridges, and at IP3O halted
in a dry gully to rest the horses during the heat of the day. At
3 p.m. again started, and proceeding s.w. for half an hour, camped
at a small water-hole in a sandy creek. At 4 p.m. I left the camp
with Mr. H. Gregory, proceeded to the w.s.w., reached the
hank of the Victoria at 5'45, and followed It upwards for half an


hour, when we observed a tent and boat on the opposite side of the
river. Having hobbled the horses, we crossed over to the camp,
which was established at a small spring, Mr. Elsey and two of the
men being in charge. Mr. Elsey informed me that the schooner
had grounded on the banks below Mosquito Flat, and had received
considerable damage. Fourteen of the sheep had been brought
up to the camp, and the boat was expected up that evening with
another lot of sheep. I now' ascertained that a bottle had been
buried near the marked trees at Kangaroo Point, and a pencil mark
made on one of the trees to indicate its position; but this mark
had escaped observation. In the evening Messrs. Baines and
Flood, with one man, arrived in the long boat with 12 sheep,
having lost several on the passage up the river in consequence of
detention on the shoals near the Dome. The whole stock of pro-
visions at the camp consisted of 10 lbs. pork, 10 lbs. flour, 6 lbs.
sugar, and 12 lbs. beef. I was, therefore, unable to send the
required supplies to the party in charge of the horses, and the sheep
were too poor to be fit for food. The Tom Tough reached Entrance
Island Sept. 25, and the next day anchored off Rugged Ridge.
On the 27th, in proceeding up the river, grounded on a ledge of
rocks on the south side of the river, about 6 m. below Mosquito
Flat. From the time of getting on the rocks she had leaked con-
siderably, and a large quantity of stores had been destroyed or
damaged, there having been 4 ft. water in the hold ; but, by
nailing battens and blankets over the open seams, the leaks had
been greatly reduced. Although the vessel had been got off the
rocks, she had not been sufficiently afloat to be under perfect
control, but had been gradually drifted up the river to within
2ij ra. of Curiosity Peak. The stock of water on board the
schooner being exhausted during her detention, Mr. Wilson had
sent the boat up the river to Palm Island to bring down a supply
of fresh water, but, having miscalculated the time requisite for
this purpose (the distance being 60 miles), the sheep had been
kept for several days without a sufficient supply of water, and a
great number had perished,
Oct. 21. —Proceeded down the river, with Messrs. Baines and
Flood, in the longboat; the tide being unfavourable, we only
reached Kangaroo Point.
0ct. 22. — Started at 2 a.m., and reached the Tom Tough at
11 a.m., having been delayed by the flood-tide. The vessel had
not moved during the four preceding tides, and the leaks had
been somewhat reduced. She was so deeply bedded in the sand
that, though the bank was dry at three-quarter ebb, I could not
examine her bottom ; the deck-beams, however, were strained
and broken, and it was evident that the vessel had been much
damaged by resting on her centre when the current had worked


ww 'AVrVtWSig
' Z.y. ' ■ **
North Australian Exploring Expedition.
deep holes at the head and stern. Only 55 sheep remained on
hoard, and those in a miserable condition. At 5 p.m. despatched
Mr. Flood in the gig, with a month’s provisions for the party at
the camp. 8 p.m,, the tide rose to 5 ft. on the bank, but the
schooner only just floated in the hollow in which she lay.
Oct. 23. —At 8 a.m. the tide rose to 6 ft. on the bank, and
the vessel was moved her own length towards the channel, and
when the tide ebbed at 10, settled on an even keel. The night-
tide did not rise so high as in the daytime. Landed to search for
fresh water, and found a small spring on the bank of the river at
the upper end of the stony beach 3£ m. below Curiosity Peak.
This spring is covered at high-water, but at half-tide boats can
come alongside, as there is deep water close to the bank.
Oct. 24. —Landed at 2 a.m. to procure water, and, having
opened a w r ell at the spring, filled two casks, and returned to the
vessel at 7. At 9*30 the schooner floated, and we moved her
to about 1 m. above Curiosity Peak, where she again grounded
on a bank. While afloat, the pumps had to be kept constantly
at work. With the night tide the vessel floated over the bank,
but, the breeze failing, she was swept against the shore 2i m.
above Curiosity Peak, and before the kedge could be got out the
tide fell.
Oct. 25.—The morning tide did not rise sufficiently to allow
us to cross the banks, but the schooner was warped into a better
position about a mile higher up the river. Landed the sheep,
and drove such as could walk to the waterhole 1 m. north of the
Dome, and left a party in charge, consisting of Mr. Wilson,
Dr. Mueller, Overseer Humphery, and Selby. 50 sheep were
landed, but only 44 reached the waterhole, and one of these died
in the night. The night-tide rose 8 feet, and the schooner was
moved to the right bank of the river, oft' Broken Hill, and an-
chored in the channel. Before the full moon the tides have been
highest during the day, but, as the full moon approaches, the
night-tide rises higher.
Oct. 26. —At 10 a.m. the vessel floated, and was moved
about 3 m. to the commencement of the reach below Kangaroo
Point, where she again grounded. Proceeded with Mr. Baines,
in the gig, to the sheep-camp, for the purpose of moving the sheep
across the river, but found them so weak that this arrangement
was not practicable, and I therefore returned to the schooner.
Oct. 27. —At 3 a.m. the vessel floated, and she was moved
about a mile above Kangaroo Point, and anchored in 3J fathoms.
At noon weighed, with a light breeze from w. and n. ; but a
thunder-squall from the s.e. obliged us to come to anchor 1 m.
below Sandy Island, when a change of wind enabled us to move to
the island.
i
*


Oct. 28. —At 2 a.m. weighed, and towed the schooner to the
upper end of the spit off Sandy Island, when she grounded, hut
was warped off at 4. The wind and tide were now adverse, and
we anchored in 2 fathom. There is 2 fathom in the channel past
Sandy Island, hut a reef of rocks extend from the left bank of the
river, which renders it necessary to keep close to the shoal off
the island.
Oct. 29. —At 2 a.m. weighed with the flood and towed up
the river about 4m. At 6*30 a light northerly breeze enabled
us to stem the tide, and at 9'40 the schooner was moored at the
camp, in 2 fathom close to the bank. Having obtained a supply
of water, I despatched Mr. Baines, in the longboat, to bring up
the sheep, the gig also going down to bring up the kedge and
w T arp from Alligator Island, and then to assist in bringing up the
sheep- In the evening there was a fine easterly breeze, and
the thermometer fell to 65° during the night. A few days
before our arrival, one of the kangaroo dogs had been seized by
an alligator and instantly devoured. The horses had been
brought to the camp by the ford at Steep Head, and w r ere looking
well.
m *
f i
Oct. 30. —Commenced the erection of a shed to protect the
stores, as it is necessary to land the cargo of the schooner to
effect repairs. The keelson is broken 7 ft. before the mainmast,
three of the deck-beams are broken in the centre, and the knees
are strained and the bolts drawn. There is also reason to think
that some of the floor-timbers are fractured, and also some of the
timbers at the bends.
Oct. 31. —Messrs. Wilson, Baines, and Mueller, with the
party in charge of the sheep, arrived at 7 a.m., bringing the
remains of the sheep, 26 in number, 11 having been drowned by
the sinking of the boat. Such of the party as are not otherwise
engaged are employed in erecting the store-shed. Being desirous
to examine the river above Steep Head, commenced fitting the
portable boat, but found that the heat of the climate had de-
stroyed the seams of three of the air-cells, and the boat is there-
fore unserviceable. The general character of the material of
which inflated boats are constructed precludes any effectual
repairs, as the heat of the sun decomposes the varnish with which
the canvas is covered; it first becomes soft and adhesive, and
changes to a substance like tar, which does not consolidate with a
lower temperature.
November I.—Several of the sheep escaped from the fold
last night: some have been found, but 8 are missing. Landing
maize, bran, and other stores from the schooner. Though the
thermometer stood at 100° in the shade, the westerly breeze
rendered it comparatively cool. Mr. Baines repairing the port-


able boat. Richards clearing a piece of ground for a garden near
the spring.
Nov. 2.—Continued to discharge cargo from the schooner.
At the request of the master of the Tom , examined 16
small and 4 large casks of bread, which had been damaged by
salt water. The whole of this bread was found to be totally
destroyed and unfit for use. Although the large casks had been
carefully coopered before leaving Sydney, yet the hot climate
had opened the joints, and as there was 3 ft. water in the hold of
the vessel when aground on the banks in the lower part of the
river, the bread was completely saturated. The leakage of the
schooner has been much reduced, and now only requires pumping
every six hours. The dryness of the atmosphere has increased
from 10° to 20° of evaporation, and the heat is not so oppressive,
though the mean temperature exceeds 85°. Heavy thunder-
clouds are visible on the horizon, and lightning is frequent in the
evenings, especially to the e. Since the spring tides the river
has gradually fallen, and is now 4 ft. lower than the low-water at
full and change, and it does not vary more than ft. in the 24
hours. A small spring has been found below the high-water
mark, close to the landing-place.
Nov. 3 thatching the store. Continued landing
the stores from the schooner, coopering the flour-barrels, &c.
Towards evening there was a strong breeze from the n., which
suddenly veered to the w., with thunder and a little rain. The
sheep are visibly gaining flesh, and the horses have improved, but
they are still unfit for work, the grass being very dry, and not in
a state to fatten animals.
Nov. 4 The sky was overcast in the afternoon,
with a strong n.w. breeze, and every indication of approaching
rain.
Nov. 5. —Landing stores from the schooner. General duties.
A light shower in the afternoon, and the evening cloudy. By
observed altitudes on the meridian, the latitude of the camp is
15° 34' 30" s.
Nov. 6. — Messrs. H. Gregory, Elsey, and Mueller, with the
master of the schooner and two men, proceeded up the river in
the gig, to ascertain the most convenient spot for procuring the
timber for the repair of the vessel. Men variously employed
coopering casks, fencing the garden, &c. Towards evening the
sky was overcast, and there was a slight shower of rain at 4 p.m.
The thermometer varying from 85° to 100°. Wet bulb, 73.
Barometer, 29‘90. Mosquitos are very numerous in the evening.
Received from Mr. Wilson a copy of his journal while in charge
of the party on board the Tom Tough ascending the Victoria
River. Henry Richards, in going to the well, fell among the


reeds, and a splinter entered Ins wrist, passing under the sldn for
14 inches, but no material injury has occurred, though it will
disable him for a few days.
Nov. 7. —Men employed coopering flour-cashs, fencing the
garden, completing the store, and camp duties. The party which
went up the river yesterday in search of timber for the repair
of the schooner returned in the evening, having found some suit-
able melaleuca trees on the bank of the creek below Steep Head.
The afternoon was again cloudy, with much lightning at night.
Nov. 8. —Men employed clearing away the grass and bushes
near the camp. Landing stores from the schooner. Plotting
route from Point Pearce to the Victoria River.
Nov. 9. —Party employed as before.
Nov. 10. —Party employed as before. On repacking the rice
and peas, found that 720 lbs. of rice and half a bushel of the
latter were destroyed by salt water, and much more damaged. A
great portion of the sugar is damaged, but, as it is not prudent
to open the casks, the quantity lost cannot be ascertained.
Nov. 11. —Sunday.
Nov. 12. —Mr. H. Gregory, with Shewell and Dawson,
accompanied Captain Gourlay to Steep Head, to cut timber for
the repairs of the schooner. Erected the forge, and continued the
preparation of the garden, &c.
Nov. 13. —Mr. Baines having succeeded in repairing the
portable boat, I made preparations for an excursion up the river,
as the horses were still unfit for the work of exploration, and I
hoped to be able to cross the shallows which had obstructed
Captain Stokes. Richards’s arm does not progress in a favourable
manner, and it is therefore necessary that Mr. Elsey should
remain at the camp to attend to his case. The party proceeding
up the river in the boats will consist of Mr. Wilson, Mr. Baines,
Mr. Flood, and myself. The men employed as before and the
general duties of the camp.
Nov. 14. —Party employed as before. At 3'30 I left the
camp and rode to the creek where the timber party were at
work, reaching their bivouac at 7*30. Six logs had been cut,
20 to 25 ft. long, and 12 to 14 inches square. The timber is
melaleuca, with a broad leaf (Melaleuca leucodendron ). The gum
timber is usually unsound and worthless.
Nov. 15. —Returned, with Mr. H. Gregory, to the camp at
11, and at 2 started, in the Indian rubber boat, with Messrs.
Wilson, Baines, and Flood. At 8 p.m. reached the creek near
Steep Head, and remained at the camp of the timber party for
the night.
Nov. 16. —Started at 6’30 and crossed the shallows at Steep
Plead without much difficulty, as the tide was high and the water


6to 8 inches deep. 3m. above Steep Head we saw three natives
watching us, but they did not approach. At 10 a.m. reached
“ Palm Island,” which is only a bank of shingle, with a few pan-
danus and melaleuca trees growing on it, without a single palm-
tree of any kind. One of the boats having been injured, hauled
it up for repair. Mr. Baines shot three ducks on the island.
While at our dinner a native approached the bank of the river
and called to us, and a parley commenced which was rather unin-
telligible, and when he found that he could not make himself
CJ ' # _
understood by words, resorted to the language or signs and
expressed his contempt in an unmistakeable manner. Having
repaired the leak in the boat, we again moved up the river, but
at 1 % m. came to a dry bar of rocks, over which the boats were
carried, and we passed a shallow' pool of brackish water i m. long,
to a second bar of greater breadth, and then entered a deep
reach, hut the day wars so far advanced that we took advantage of
a level rocky ledge and encamped.
Nov. 17, —Proceeded up the river about a mile, and came to a
dry bank of shingle and rocks, extending at least a mile, and over
which it w r as not practicable to carry the boats, they having
been much injured in crossing the rocky bars yesterday, the heat
of the sun having destroyed the texture of the waterproof canvas.
I therefore decided not to expend any more time on this excursion,
but return to the camp. Observed some blacks watching us from
the thick scrub, but they did not approach near enough to hold
any communication. At 2 p.m. commenced the return down the
river, and reached Palm Island after dark.
Nov. 18.—x\t 3 a.m. there w r as a slight shower of rain. At 6
proceeded down the river, and having dragged the boats over the
shingle bank at Steep Head, which was now nearly dry, reached
the creek where the timber w r as cut, and halted to procure fresh
water, and then sailed down the river, encountering a heavy
thunder squall as w r e approached the camp ; the rain continuing
throughout the night. Capt. Gourlay informed me that on the
16th three blacks had visited the party .while cutting timber ; and
that in the evening some sounds had been heard, which being
taken for the voices of the blacks, the party had taken to the boat
with great precipitation, and returned to the schooner. The
mosquitoes have nearly disappeared.
Nov. 19. —Sent a party, consisting of Phibhs, Humphery,
Shewed, Daw r son, and Selby, to assist the master of the schooner
in bringing timber down the river. Richards s arm is somewhat
better, but not progressing favourably. Fahey is also on the sick
list. The rain having moistened the grass, the horses did not
come in for water to-day. The weather continues hot, generally
90° at sunrise and 105 J at noon in the shade.
* V
4
1
i
1


iVbw. 20.—Commenced shoeing the horses, and made prepara-
tions for a journey up the Victoria, to reconnoitre the country
previous to starting for the interior.
Nov. 21. —Fahey being convalescent is employed as cook. Mr.
H. Gregory, Mr. Flood, Bowman, and Melville shoeing horses.
Dean burning charcoal for the forge. The flies are very trouble-
some, and annoy the horses so much that they will not stand quiet
to be shod, and some of the horses are nearly blind in consequence
of the flies crawling into their eyes.
Nov. 22.—Shoeing horses, fitting saddles, &c. The leaks
about 7 in. per hour, and, as the master is absent with the greater
part of the crew, I have afforded assistance from the party at the
camp to keep the vessel dry.
N0v.23. —Preparing equipment for the party proceeding up the
Victoria to explore its upper course. The grass is becoming quite
green, and water is everywhere abundant, which has caused the
horses to stray beyond the usual feeding-ground on Whirlwind
Plains.
Nov. 24. —Mr. H. Gregory and Mr. Flood brought in the stray
horses, having found them below Sandy Island. The timber party
returned with four logs of timber which are intended to strengthen
the keelson of the schooner. While at work at the creek where
the timber was procured, the party had been twice visited by the
blacks. These interviews were neither decidedly friendly nor
hostile; but they stole some small articles which had been impru-
dently left lying near one of the logs, while the party were em-
ployed elsewhere. About 10 a.m. the blacks set fire to the grass
near the camp and then retired. At 2 p.m. left the camp, accom-
panied by Mr. H. Gregory, Mr. Wilson, and Dr. Mueller, with
seven horses and 20 days’ provisions, the object being to examine
the country through which the exploring party will have to travel
on the route to the interior. At 6‘o bivouacked at Timber Creek.
{Camp 1.) In the principal channel of the creek there were many
small pools of water, and the grass was fresh and green on the
flats. Except on the banks of the river and creeks, the country is
poor and stony ; the geological structure of the country is the same
as at Sea Range ; the same bands of sandstone cliff resting on soft
shales, the strata being horizontal; but beneath the shales, chert
and a coarse silicious limestone were exposed, and fragments of
jasper are frequent. The principal trees are, white gum of small
size, box, and sterculia. The cotton-tree also is common on the
stony ridges. Though grass is abundant on every description of
soil, yet the greater part is of inferior quality, and dries up com-
pletely at this season.
■W.
Nov. 25. —Started at 5 - 45 and followed the creek to the s.e.
and s.s.e. ; it rapidly decreased in size, branching into several
A,
V


small gullies, so that we had some difficulty in finding water for
our midday halt. The flats on the hank of the creek are in some
Darts nearly a mile wide, well grassed and openly timbered. The
.fills are of sandstone, but chert and coarse limestone were frequent
on the lower ridges. At noon halted at a small pool of water.
The day was cool and cloudy, thermometer 93° at 2 p.m. At 3
resumed our journey up the creek, which soon terminated in small
gullies rising in stony ridges. As there was no appearance of
water existing to the s., the course was changed to s.e. and e., in
which direction we followed down a gully, and at 7*20 halted at a
small water-hole. ( Camp 2.)
Nov. 26. —Started at 6T5 a.m. and steered n. 70° e. and
n. 60° e. till 3 p.m., traversing a level grassy box flat extending
along the northern side of a rocky sandstone range. At 3 p.m.
reached the s.w. end of the Fitzroy Range, which is a narrow
ridge of sandstone hills 10 m. long and Ito2 m. broad. At the
north end of the range we found a small pool of water, and,
having watered the horses, pushed on towards the Victoria River
at the base of Bynoe Range ; but though the country was level,
we were so much retarded by the soft nature of the soil, that the
river was not reached till sunset. The banks of the river were
so steep that the water was inaccessible for the horses, and we
therefore encamped at a small muddy pool of rain water. ( 3.)
Our camp was about 4 m, above the farthest point reached by
Capt. Stokes, and consequently in Beagle Valley, which we had
traversed for more than 30 m., the greater part being well grassed,
and openly wooded with box, Bauhinia, and acacia. The Fitzroy
Range is almost isolated, and there is a level plain 5 or 6 m. wide
to the s.e., beyond which is a sandstone range surmounted by an
almost unbroken cliff of sandstone near the summit, which ap-
peared to be impassable.
N0v. 27. —Steering e.s.e. through grassy flats for H hours,
found that the river had turned to the northward round a steep
hill; but continuing our course crossed a low stony ridge and
again approached the river, the banks of which were so steep that
the horses could not approach the water, and therefore followed it
2 m., and then encamped on a stony bar, where the water was
easy of access. ( Camp 4.) The valley of the river is much con-
tracted by the steep sandstone hills, which come close to both
banks. In the bed of the river several fragments of jasper and
black shale were found, the latter appearing to belong to the coal
formation. A slight shower cooled the air, and the thermometer
was only 92° at sunset; the wet bulb 79°.
Nov, 28. —Started at 645 a.m. and followed the river, first e.,
then s.e. and s.w. till 10*40, when we crossed to the right bank and
halted. The valley of the river is much narrower, and does not


exceed half a mile, and is bounded by cliffs of sandstone from 50
to 300 ft. high. The waters of the river occasionally rise 100 ft,
as the marks of floods extend to the base of the cliffs. The regular
channel is about 200 ft. wide, and the water forms deep reaches,
often more than a mile long, separated by dry bars of shingle or
rock. The sandstones are thicker here than at Steep Head, but
there is no change in the geological character, except that the
chert beds are not exposed. The tracks of several natives were
observed, but they were not seen by us. At 2 p.m. resumed the
journey up the river in a general s. direction, and at 4*40 en-
camped, but had great difficulty in forcing our way through the
reeds to the water. ( Camp s.)
Nov. 29. —Left the camp at 6 a.m. and continued the route up
the river to the s. till 10’10, halted till ‘2*ls, and then pro-
ceeded till 4-45, and encamped at a small pool of rain water, the
bank of the river being so' steep and thickly covered with reeds
that the w r ater was not accessible. ( 6.) The valley of the
river is still bounded by cliffs, but as the strata are horizontal, and
the bed of the river rises, the shales are not so much exposed,
V)
I
and the alluvial banks reach to the base of the cliffs, which are so
continuous that I have not yet seen a spot where w r e could have
ascended the table land in which the valley is excavated. Several
tributary gullies have been passed, but none worthy of special
notice. Fragments of trap rock are frequent in the bed of the
river, and one specimen show r ed traces of carbonate of copper.
At 6 p.m. thermometer 92°, aneroid 29’80, at the camp 60 ft.
above the river.
Nov. 30. —Resumed our route up the river at 5'40 a.m., the
general course being s. There was no change in the character of
the country till IO’O, when the cliff's receded ; at 10‘30 halted at
a small pool in a side channel of the river. At noon the thermo-
meter 100° in the shade, aneroid barometer 29T5, 40 ft. above
the bed of the river. Starting at 2 p.m. soon entered an extensive
plain extending to the e., s., and w. Followed a large creek to s.W.
till 6T5, and encamped. (Camp 7.)
December I.—At 5*40 a.m. crossed the creek, and steered e. to
the foot of a rocky hill; but not seeing the principal channel of the
Victoria, returned to the creek and steered s.s.w. till 10, when w ; e
crossed two small creeks, in the second of which we found a pool of
water surrounded by reeds ( Typ/ia), and halted during the heat of
the day. The country traversed was first a stony ridge, on which
many small stone huts had been erected by the natives; but they
are scarcely of sufficient size for a man to enter, and the roofs were
%! nr* i
* only formed by a few pieces of wood and a little grass. Ihey
consist of a wall 3 ft. high, in the form of a horseshoe, about 3 ft.
O' 7 ,
in diameter inside; the entrances of some had been closed with
<
f


stones and afterwards partially opened ; and I can only conjecture
that as the custom of carrying the bones of their deceased relatives
prevails in other parts of Australia, it is possible that these erec-
tions are used as temporary sepulchres. After crossing this stony
ridge, entered a level plain of clay much fissured by the sun, and
in some parts covered with fragments of jasper and sandstone.
As the creek was approached, limestone prevailed, but the exposed
portion of this rock seemed to be formed by a rearrangement of
the fragments of the older rock, which was visible in the gullies.
The water at which we halted appeared to result from a spring,
and not from the retention of rain water. At 3T5 proceeded in a
westerly direction in search of the principal branch of the creek,
which we reached at 4, but found it much reduced in size, not
exceeding 15 yards in width. Followed it up for an hour, and
encamped at a small but deep pool of water, which is evidently
supplied by a spring in the limestone rock which forms the bank
of the creek. (Camp 8.)
Dec. 2. —Having filled our water bags, we left the creek at
6*40 a.m., and steered a course of n. 200° e. towards a range of hills
of jasper rock, the highest point of which we reached at 10 ; the
aneroid here stood at 29T5, thermometer 94°. 3m. to the s.w.
of this range the country rose into an elevated table land higher
than the Jasper Range. Towards this we continued our route, fol-
lowing a small watercourse which gradually turned to the e. As
the country was very dry and rocky, and there was no prospect of
finding a point where we could ascend the table land, we returned
to the waterhole at which we camped last night. (Camp 8.)
Dec. 8, — At 6 a.m. were again in the saddle, and, steering [n.
till 7’20, ascended an isolated hill of trap rock, rising abruptly in
the open plain about 200 ft. Having taken bearings of the various
ranges, steered n. 30° e. till 10*30 across a level grassy plain to
the creek, which, though much larger than at the camp, was des-
titute of water ; but following it downwards, at 10’50 halted at a
shallow pool. Judging from the height that the drift wood was
lodged in the branches of the trees, the floods rise about 50 ft.
The regular channel is 30 yards wide and sandy, but red and
green shales are exposed on the banks. A large tributary seems
to join this creek from the w., in which direction there is a consi-
derable valley extending 15 m. At 3 p.m. steered e., and passed
to the s. of a remarkable sandstone hill, which was named Mt.
Sandiman ; and at 5'30 reached the bank of the Victoria coming
from the s.s.e. ; followed it up for 1 m., ami encamped where a
ledge of rocks gave easy access to the water. ( 9.) In the
evening there was a slight shower, and a heavy thunderstorm
passed to the n.
Dec. 4. —x\t 4 - 45 resumed our journey up the river, passing


through wide grassy flats, and over a sandstone ridge covered
with triodia. From this ridge there was an extensive view of the
country to the s. and e., but no hills of greater elevation than the
sandstone table-land were visible, and for 20 ra. the valley of the
river expanded into a wide plain, thinly timbered with box trees.
Continuing a s.s.e. course through a fine grassy country, at 10
halted in a patch of green grass. The elevation of this part of
the country is not great, as the barometer stood at 29’77 40 ft.
above the river ; thermometer 101°. The soil on the bank of the
river is good and well grassed, but the inundations in the wet
season extend more than a mile on each side of the river. The
strata of sandstone, where exposed, dip to the n. ; but there is no
alteration in the character of the rock. Abundance of portulacea
grew near our halting-place, and furnished us with an agreeable
vegetable. This plant was afterwards found over the whole of
Northern Australia, and proved a very valuable article of food.
At 3*30 continued our route, and at 5*30 bivouacked, at a small
pool of rain water in one of the back channels of the river, the
banks of which were inconveniently covered with high reeds.
( Camp 10.)
Dec. s.—Continued our route up the river to the s.s.w. from
5-45 till 10’45, passing through open grassy box flats. A low
grassy range approached the right bank, and then receded. To
the w. a range of broken, hills rose about 500 ft., parallel to our
course and sm. distant. Halted in the bed of the river, which
formed fine reaches of water with dry sand bars between. Caught
several catfish and perch. Mussels are abundant; the shell is
much longer in proportion than any before seen in the lower part
of the river. At noon barometer 29’80, thermometer 104° ; at
3 p.m. barometer 29’65, thermometer 93°. At 3-30 steered s.
from the right bank of the river, which turned, to the westward;
crossed some fine grassy country, thinly timbered with box, and
at 4*50 came to a southern branch of'the river. This branch
trended to the n.e., and consequently joins the river lower down
than where we crossed, the junction not having been seen. These
two branches of the Victoria are so nearly equal in apparent size,
that it will remain for future examination to determine which is
to be considered tributary to the other. Crossing to the right bank,
we followed it upwards along the foot of the sandstone range for
half an hour, and encamped in the bed of the river. ( 11.)
Dec. 6. —The day commenced with a heavy thunder-shower,
which continued for several hours ; but at 6 a.m., the rain not
being quite so heavy, we started and proceeded along the bank of
the river to a hill 1J m. s.w. of the bivouac; ascended the hill,
but found the view obscured by the mist and rain : we could, how-
ever, see that the country to the s.w and s. consisted of flat-topped


s<andstone hills with large open valleys between them; to the e. the
view was obscured by rising ground ; while to the n. lay the vast
grassy plain we had traversed during the last two days. The
western branch of the river turned to the w.s.w. along the foot of
the sandstone ranges, its course being marked by a line of green
trees which contrasted strongly with the white grass of the open
plains on its banks. The south branch of the river appeared to
come from a valley trending s.s.e., but the mist obscured that part
of the country. As we had now examined the country sufficiently
to enable the main party to advance a whole degree of latitude
without any great impediment, and ascertained the general cha-
racter of the country and nature of the obstacles to be encountered,
w 7
and on which the equipment of the party w 7 ould in some measure
depend, we turned our steps tow r ards the principal camp, crossed
the western branch of the river at 9'40, and reached our camp of
the 4th at 340. Thermometer, 9 a.m., 74°; 6 p.m. 84°.
Dec. 7. —Resumed our journey down the river, following the
outward track from 5‘40 till 11, when we halted till 3‘25 p.m.
Thermometer at noon 102°, wet bulb 78°. Resuming our route,
crossed to the right bank of the river, and bivouacked at the ter-
mination of the plains.
Dec. 8. —At 5'45 proceeded down the right bank of the river,
which was very rocky and steep ; we therefore returned to the
left bank, and at 11 halted I m. above the bivouac of the 29th
ult. Between 2 and 3 p.m. there was a heavy thunder-shower, and
%an in. of rain fell. At 3*45 p.m. resumed our journey, and bi-
vouacked about 4 m. lower down the river.
I
A'
Dec. 9. —Followed the left bank of the river from 6 till 11 a.m.,
found the travelling less stony and interrupted by deep gullies
than on the right bank. At 3*30 resumed our route, and at 6*30
encamped.
Dec. 10. —Travelled dowm the river from 5'45 till 10, when we
halted |m. above the camp of the 27th ult. At 2 p.m. a heavy
shower cooled the air from 100° to 77°. At 3 resumed our route,
and at 6’30 camped on the level plain at the foot of the Fitzroy
Range; water being abundant in every hollow, as since w r e passed up
the river there has been heavy rain in this part of the country, and
some of the gullies were running in flood 8 ft. deep. Shot a
turkey and three black- ibis. The Fitzroy Range extends about
2 m. n. of the gorge of the Victoria River, wdnch winds round the
range to the n., and some tributary creeks seem to join from that
direction, as a valley extends several miles to the northward.
The rain does not appear to have been general over the country,
as it often occurs that, after travelling over 2 or 3 m. of green
grass where the gullies show the signs of recent floods, this beauti-
ful verdure suddenly ceases, and we again encounter a dry and
VOL. xxviii. i>


parched country which exhibits all the signs of an Australian
summer. . _ .
Dec. 11. —Left our camp at 5’45, and steering w. crossed the
low ridge of the Fitzroy Range, and, having taken bearings of the
features of the country, steered n. 260° e. over the level country
which occupies the space between Wickham Heights and the
Fitzroy Range, and named by Captain Stokes “ Beagle Valley.”
The soil of this plain is a brown clay, which in dry weather
crumbles into small pieces, but in the wet season is deep mud ; it
is, however, very fertile, and produces abundance of high grass.
The few trees which exist are Bauhinia, acacia, and small euca-
lypti. Halting from 10 till 4, changed the course to n. 245° e. ;
and after traversing a grassy box flat for 2 hours, camped at a
small watercourse with pools of water in a rocky limestone channel.
Dec. 12. — Started at 5'30, and steered n. 245° e. for
Ij hours, when we passed the high bluff of the range and
changed the course to n. 330 J e., keeping fm. to the e. of the
remarkable hill called the “ Tower” by Captain Stokes, from a
rock on the summit. The country was very rough and rocky,
though the ridge we passed over was not more than 200 ft. above
the river. Continuing a n.n.w. course, at 9*45 reached the bank
of the Victoria, which we followed on a course of 200° till 10T0,
when a large creek joined the river. This creek drains nearly the
whole of Beagle Valley, and takes its rise on the n.w. slope of
Stokes Range. The course was then westerly till 12T5, when we
halted in a grassy flat m. from the river. Marked a large
Adansonia tree “ 12 ” on the south side.
Dec. 13. —Leaving the camp at 5'30 followed the valley of the
river, crossing the ridge at back of Steep Head at 10, and halted
at Timber Creek at 11. The heavy rains which occurred in
Beadle Valley do not appear to have extended to this part of the
country, and the grass is still dry and withered. At 2'30 resumed
our route and reached the principal camp at 6 30, and found the
party all well except Richards, who was still suffering severely from
the injury to his wrist. Mr. Baines was absent, having started on
Wednesday in search of two horses which had strayed to the
westward.
Dec. 14.—Mr. Baines and Bowman returned with the stray
horses, having found them on the banks of a small river 15 m. w.
of the camp. This river, which I named the “ Baines River,” has
considerable pools of fresh water in its bed : it comes from the s.w.
and flows into the large saltwater creek above Curiosity Peak.
On one occasion Mr. Baines and Bowman had halted to rest during
the heat of the day, when they observed some blacks creeping
towards them in the high grass, but on finding that they were
seen, retired, and shortly returned with augmented numbers, and


approaclied with their spears shipped. Mr. Baines and his com-
panion having mounted their horses, galloped quickly towards
them, and the blacks retreated with great precipitation. Mr. H.
Gregory brought in the greater part of the horses, but they had
scattered so much in search of green grass that many were 10 m.
from the camp. Men employed cutting and carrying timber for
the repair of the schooner, which work progresses satisfactorily.
Computing astronomical observations for latitude, &c.
Dec. 15.—Party employed as before. One.of the mares is
reported to have foaled a fine filly. Thunder showers are fre-
quent, and the country near the camp is clothed with verdure.
Dec. 16. —Rode out with Mr. H. Gregory and Mr. Baines to
bring in sonje horses which had strayed. After several hours’
tracking they were found and brought into the camp. The horses
are now much improved, and with the exception of three which are
still very weak, are in serviceable condition, though few are capable
of carrying heavy loads or performing long journeys, but as
grass and water are now abundant for the first 100 m. of the route
towards the interior, I hope that, by travelling easy stages, the
horses will improve. Preparations are therefore being made for
commencing the journey early in January. The country being
impracticable for drays, and as sheep cannot be driven with ad-
vantage, owing to the high grass and reeds, it is necessary to con-
stitute the party so that the whole equipment can be carried by
pack-horses, to accomplish which the whole number of the party
proceeding to the interior must not exceed nine, for which the
uorses are capable of conveying five months’ provisions and equip-
ment. The remaining half of the party will have full employment
in the repair of the schooner and care of the stores, points of
vital importance to the expedition. It is therefore proposed to
make the following division of the party, which, under existing
circumstances, seems to me the most eligible. Jhe exploring
party to consist of the following persons: —Commander, A. C.
Gregory; Assistant Commander, H. Gregory; Artist, T. Baines;
Botanist, F. Mueller ; Collector, J. Flood ; Overseer, G. Phibbs ;
Farrier, R. Bowman; Harness-maker, C. Dean; Stockman, J.
-U?
f
*
f
Fahey.
The party remaining at the principal camp: —Geologist,
J. S. Wilson; Surgeon, J. R. Elsey ; Overseer, C. Humphery ;
Stockmen, Dawson, Shewell, Selby, Mac Donald, Richards, and
Melville.
Dec. 17. —Preparing maps of the late excursion up the Vic-
toria River. Shoeing horses and other preparations for the ex-
pedition into the interior.
Dec. 18.—Party employed as before.
Dec. 19.—Removed the bones from the salt pork, which is to
d 2


form part of the provisions for the exploring party, the reduction
in weight being 17 per cent. Packing flour in canvas bags con-
taining 40 lbs. and 50 lbs. each: in the centre of every bag of
flour 1 lb. of gunpowder is placed, as it is the most secure from
accidents. Shoeing horses, &c., as before. The weather has
been cool and cloudy, and it commenced to rain at 10 r.M., and
continued till daybreak.
Dec. 20 —Party employed as before. Killed one of the sheep,
which weighed 38 lbs. The weather continues showery.
Dec. 21. —Preparing for explorations as before. The river has
commenced running, but is still brackish; the weather is cloudy
with frequent showers, and the country is becoming very soft and
boggy.
Dec. 22. —Frequent heavy showers, especially at night. Mr.
Wilson and Dr. Mueller, with one of the men, went down the
river to Sea Range to procure specimens of rocks and plants. The
repairs of the schooner requiring some broad iron, I had the iron-
work of one of the drays appropriated to the purpose, as there was
no iron of a suitable size on board the vessel. Party employed
shoeing horses, fitting saddles, and general preparation of equip-
ment of the exploring party.
Dec. 23. —Two of the horses have again strayed to the west-
ward, and Mr. H. Gregory and Bowman were employed nearly
the whole day in tracking them, and succeeded in bringing them
in at night. The river is quite fresh, and running with a current
of 1 to 2m. per hour. Since the commencement of the rainy
season the general health of the party has improved, but this is
perhaps due to a reduction in the temperature and increased re-
gularity of diet, &c. Richards’s arm is, however, in a very unsatis-
factory state, resulting more from constitutional causes than the
original extent of the injury.
Dec. 24. —Preparing equipment as before. Dr. Mueller and
Mr. Wilson returned in the boat from Sea Range, and report the
river to be fresh at Sandy Island. Frequent heavy showers have
rendered the ground so soft that the horses cannot be hobbled
w'ithout danger of their getting bogged, and it is scarcely possible
to ride after them to herd them.
Dec. 25. —Christmas-day. Frequent heavy showers throughout
the day and night. Killed a sheep, of weight lbs.
Dec. 26.—Continued preparation of equipment. Fitting spare
shoes to the horses, &c. Frequent showers.
Dec. 27. —Party employed as before. This has been the first
fine day during the past week, there having been but one shower
during the 24 hours.
Dec. 28. —Packing stores, &c. The schooner was moved into
the stream, as the drift wood collected in large quantities at her


bows when moored near the bank, and could not easily be cleared
away. The water of the river is very muddy, and has risen about
6 ft. above the ordinary high-water mark; the current is Ito2 m.
per hour. In winding chronometer 2139 the chain broke, in
consequence of its being much corroded, and the force of the spring
injured it so much that I had to splice it in six places.
Dec. 29. —Preparing equipment as before, &c.
Dec. 30. —Sunday.
Dec. 31. —Preparing tracings of maps, &c. Completed the
preparations for the party proceeding to explore the interior.
January 1,1856. —Wrote to Mr. Wilson, enclosing instructions
for the guidance of the officer in charge of the principal camp on
the Victoria River. Wrote to the master of the Tom Tough ,
giving instructions relative to the repairs and movements of the
Tom Tough, &c. Having completed the arrangements for the
journey into the interior, the horses were saddled and the party on
the point of starting, when a gun was fired on board the schooner,
and the horses took fright, rushing wildly into the bush, and it was
only after a hard gallop of 2 m. that they were turned and driven
back to the camp. Many of the saddles were torn off by the
horses having run against trees; and as they had scattered very
much, it took some time to collect the loads which had fallen from
the horses, and four bags of provisions could not be found. A few
of the straps of the colonial-made pack-saddles were broken, but
no other damage was done to them; the English-made saddle
was shaken to pieces. The party were employed in the evening
repairing damages.
Jan. 2. —Completed the repair of the saddlery, &c., broken
yesterday. Two of the missing bags were found, but a heavy
shower having obliterated the tracks of the horses, two bags con-
taining sugar and sago were lost.
Jan. 3. —All arrangements being complete, the party commenced
their journey at 11 a.m., and proceeding up the river to Timber
Creek, encamped there at 3 p.m. ( 1.) The following is
a memorandum of the arrangement and equipment of the party.
The exploring party has with it—27 pack-horses, with pack-
saddles ; 3 pack-horses, with riding-saddles; 6 riding-horses, or,
in all, 36 horses, with flour, 1470 lbs.; pork, 1200 lbs.; rice,
200 lbs.; sago, 44 lbs.; sugar, 280 lbs.; tea, 36 lbs.; coffee,
28 lbs.; tobacco, 21 lbs.; soap, 51 lbs.; or in all, 3330 lbs. ;
instruments, clothing, tents, ammunition, horse-shoes, tools, &c.,
800 lbs.; saddle-bags and packages, 400 lbs.; saddles, bridles,
hobbles, &c., 900 lbs.; total, 5430 lbs. The total weight of the
equipment of the party was thus about tons, which distributed
on 30 horses, gave an average load of 180 lbs. each. Each person
had a stated number of horses in his special charge, and was


responsible for the proper care of the loads and equipment, the
saddles and loads being all marked with corresponding numbers.
A watch was constantly kept through the night, each person being
on sentry for 2 hours in regular rotation, except myself, as I had
to make astronomical observations at uncertain hours. The cook
was on watch from 2 till 4 a.m., and having prepared breakfast
the party concluded this meal before daybreak, and thus the most
valuable part of the day was not lost.
Jan. 4. —Started at 7 a.m. and followed up the creek, but Dr.
Mueller having wandered away into the rocky hills and lost him-
self, I halted at the first convenient spot, and despatched several
of the party to search for him, but it was not till 4 p.m. that the
Doctor reached the camp. ( Camp 2.) At noon there was a
shower of rain which reduced the temperature to 92°.
Jan. s.—The day broke with a heavy shower which continued
till 7*20, when it was followed by a cool breeze from the w. At
8'35 steered n. 150° e, up the valley of the creek till 11, when
crossing a low ridge we descended into Beagle Valley, and steer-
ing n. 160° e. till 240 halted at a small creek. ( 3.) The
country is now covered with fine grass, and water is abundant,
though the smaller watercourses have ceased to flow. In the
evening walked to a hill about a mile s. of the camp: it was only
150 ft. high, but gave a fine view of the distant ranges.
Jan. 6. —It rained continuously during the night, with much
thunder and lightning. At 8 steered 160° and soon came to a
small creek with water pandanus growing on its banks: this was
followed to the s.s.e. At 11 crossed it, and changed the course
to s.e,, camping at a small gully at IT3O. I then w r ent with
Mr. H. Gregory to look for a practicable ascent of Stokes Range,
and having been successful in the search returned to the camp at
6 p.m. ( Camp 4.) There are few spots where this range can be
ascended, as a line of cliffs run along the bmw of the hills, vary-
ing from 10 to 100 ft. in height. While on the hills we saw a
few blacks, but they did not approach. The day was cloudy and
cool, and cleared after sunset, which enabled me to get altitudes
for latitude.
Jan. 7. —The day again commenced with heavy showers, which
lasted till 7 a.m. At 7’30 started on a course of 120°, and reached
the foot of the sandstone range at B‘so, and the summit at 9'30.
The table land on the summit being intersected by deep gullies
trending to the s.w., we steered E. till 11'40, when we came to a
deep valley trending e.s.e. Having made the necessary obser-
vations for altitude, commenced the descent of the hills, which were
practicable in few places, as the valley was walled in by steep
pills, with cliffs of sandstone 20 to 100 ft. high, with only an oc-
casional break. At 1 p.m. reached the bottom of the valley and


encamped at a small gully. {Camp 5.) The summit of the
range is a nearly level table-land, the undulations not exceeding
100 feet; but it is intersected by deep ravines, with perpendicular
sides, which vary from 100 to 600 ft. in depth. The upper stratum
of rock is sandstone, and the soil on it very poor and sandy, pro-
ducing small Eucalypti, Hakea, Grevillia, and a sharp spiny grass
(triodia), which is the “ spinifex ” of some Australian explorers.
The character of the country is very similar to the interior of some
portions of the western coast.
Jan. 8. —Heavy rain till 7 a.m. At 7T5 started and followed
the valley to the s.s.e. and s. till 9, when it was joined by a larger
valley from the w. trending e., and in which a large creek in
high flood obstructed our course. As the water was too deep to
ford, we fixed a rope to the branch ot a tree and passed the packs
over the stream. This was accomplished at 3 p.m., and the water
having sunk considerably the horses crossed over, and we encamped
on the s. side of the creek. {Camp 6.) The valleys are well
grassed, and vary from to |m. in width, the hills rising
steeply from the base to near the summit, where they are
crowned by a cliff 20 to 150 ft. high. The summits are level
or nearly so, as the valleys are only deep ravines excavated in
the table land. The valley of the larger creek appears to
expand about 5 m. to the w. of the camp, and the hills are
rounded in their outline.
Jan . 9. —A light shower at night was followed by a cool, cloudy
morning. At 6‘50 followed down the creek to the e. and crossed
to the left bank to avoid some rocky ground. On attempting
to cross lower down, one of the pack-horses was carried down the
stream some distance by the force of the current, and the saddle-
bags were m. below. The valley contracted as we pro-
ceeded, and the cliff closed in and left no passage on the left bank,
and we had to return m. up the creek to cross to the right
bank, where our course was again obstructed by a large tributary,
which was crossed with difficulty, and then passed through the
rocky gorge of the creek, where the cliff came so close to the bank
of the creek that there was scarcely room for a horse to pass.
At 12 TO camped on the bank of the creek at the termination of
the hilly country. {Camp 7.) Ascending a rocky hill, obtained
a view of the valley of the Victoria, and ascertained that we were
on one of the branches of Jasper Creek. The afternoon and night
were showery*
Jan. 10. —At 6’30 steered s.e., leaving the creek to the lhe
country soon changed to a level plain well grassed, but owing to
the late rain very soft and muddy. At io‘2o passed the n. end
of Jasper Range* and came to a creek 15 yaids wide, trenuing
n.e. Having forded the creek encamped on the right bank.


. I*
(Camp 8.) The soil of the country traversed this day is a good
brown loam on the plains, but rough and stony on the hills. The
trees are of small size, principally box and Bauhinia. Sandstone
is the prevailing rock, sometimes passing into jasper, and also
into chert and coarse limestone. Small veins of quartz intersect
the jasper, and contain minute crystals of sulphuret of copper and
iron.
Jan. 11. —One of the mares having foaled in the night, she was
not fit for a day’s journey: we therefore remained at the camp
and employed the day in repair and adjusting
saddles and other works of an indispensable
nature. Marked a large gum-tree
N.A.E.
11 Jan. 1856.
Jan. 12.—The night was fine, with heavy dew and a light breeze
from the s. At 6-15 steered n. 150° e, over the level country
which extends along the e. side of Jasper Range. The soil is
stony, but well grassed, and the fine weather had allowed the
surface of the ground to become firm, so that the horses were not
often bogged. At 12*25 camped on a small creek between the
Fitzgerald and Jasper Ranges. ( 9.) Marked a gum-tree
at the camp “ No. 9.” The general character of the country is
good and well grassed, and well suited for stock, though not equal
to the basaltic country to the e, of the Victoria. Hard sandstone,
jasper, and coarse limestone are the prevailing rocks.
Jan. 13.—The night was cool and clear, with heavy dew; ther-
mometer 62° at sunrise. Steering an average s. course from
6 *4O till 11*25, reached the western branch of the Victoria and
encamped. ( Camp 10.) The country traversed was nearly
level, well grassed, and thinly wooded with eucalypti and Bau-
hinia. The soil brown loam with fragments of limestone. The
river was running strong, but not in flood : the greatest rise this
season had been 10 ft., and the usual flood-marks are 20 ft.
higher.
Jan. 14.—Followed the river to the w.s.*w., crossing two large
creeks from the n.w. Approaching the sandstone range on the
western side of the plain, the soil did not improve, but became
very sandy. The country is thinly wooded with box-trees and
Bauhinia of small size. Grass is abundant and good. At noon
one of the pack-horses, “ Sara, knocked up, and his load being
transferred to one of the riding-horses, he was left to rest while we
sought a suitable spot for a camp, and at 12*15 halted at a small
gully, as the bank of the river was very soft and unsafe for the
horses to approach. {Camp II.) Sent back for the horse “ Sam,”
and he was brought to the camp. Ascended the hill to the n.w.
of the camp to take bearings, but no important features of the
country were visible. In ascending the hill, the aneroid (B) fell
from 29 62 to 28*55, and on descending only rose to 28*80, the


estimated height of the hill being 300 feet. As this indicated a
change in the form of the metal, it was readjusted to the aneroid
(A) 29‘45. The continuance of fine weather and the forward
state of the grass lead to the supposition that the wet season has
already terminated, though only two months have elapsed since the
first rams. Xt is probable that the wet season is much shorter in
the interior than on the coast, and that at no great distance inland
the tropical wet season will cease altogether, as Captain Sturt, in
latitude 26°, only observed a fall of rain in August, though this
might be exceptional, as in the case of Leichhardt, who never
encountered a wet season during the journey to Port Essington.
Jan. 15.—Started at 6'45 and followed the river to the w.s.w.
The hills coming close to the bank for some miles caused the
progress to be slow and difficult. Crossed two large creeks
coming from the w.n.w., the second 70 yards wide. At 10’30
camped in a fine grassy flat. (Camp 12.) The course of the
river was now more from the south, and the valley expanded into
a plain several miles wide.
Jan. 16. —As several of the horses required a day’s rest, at
6 I started with Mr. H. Gregory to examine the country to the
southward, and followed the river through a fine grassy plain till
10, when it entered the sandstone range, and contracted the valley
to X a mile. The hills were steep, but the level ground in the
valley, except where intersected by gullies, was good travelling.
The river is much reduced in size, and the water is confined to
the smaller channels in the principal bed. The water is clear,
and has not the muddy appearance which characterizes it lower
down. The geological character of the rocks is unchanged, but
the bed of the river being less deeply excavated, the lower beds of
limestone and jasper are not so largely developed ; nor are the
summits of the hills quite so level, and large blocks of sandstone,
the remains of an upper stratum, give the country a very rugged
appearance. Returned to the camp at 6'30. In the evening
there was a heavy thunder squall with rain from the north, but
the weather cleared at midnight.
Jan. 17. —Started at 7*5 and steered a s.w. course till 10-30,
massing over a level grassy flat the whole distance, but the soil
became more sandy as we proceeded up the river. (Camp 13.)
There is very little wood of any description, and the few trees that
exist are a white stemmed Eucalyptus and a tall pinnate leaved
Acacia. The horse “Sam” is very weak, and two other horses
are lame and can scarcely travel. Since the 3rd instant the
distance travelled has not exceeded 10 miles per diem, water and
grass are everywhere abundant, and the loads not heavy, yet the
greater part of the horses appear unable to perform more work.
Jan. 18. —Some of the horses having strayed towards the last


ft!
1 1:
camp, we were detained till B'lo and then steered south for three
miles; the sandstone hills closed in with the river, and scarcely left
space to pass at the base of the steep rocks. Here the horse
“ Sam ” fell into a pool of water, and when extricated could not
stand : this accident having caused much delay, we encamped a
mile farther on, in a grassy flat (Camp 14.) In the evening
sent Bowman and Dean to bring the horse to the camp, but they
found him dead.
Jan. 19. —The night was fine with heavy dew, the temperature
73° at sunrise. Having collected the horses, at 6'45 left the
camp and followed the valley of the river on an average s.w.
course, crossing a large creek from the N.w. The valley of the
river expanded to three miles and then narrowed to one mile, and
the course nearly west till 1050, when we encamped. ( Camp 15.)
The soil of the valley is brown loam, producing abundance of
grass; but the hills, though less rocky, are more barren than lower
down the river. The character of the channel of the river has
altered, and has the appearance of a stream which continues to
run late in the season, as the channels are narrow and bordered
with Pandanus, Melaleuca, and other trees which grow near per-
manent water. The banks are of less height, and the timber
growing on them has a greater size than lower down the valley.
At 1 p.m. the thermometer was 100° and the wet bulb 76°, show-
ing 24° of evaporation.
Jan. 20. —Left the camp at 6*55, and followed the river in a
w.n.w. direction till 8 - 5, when we crossed at a ledge of rocks
which caused a fall of about 1 ft., the water being 20 yards wade
and 1 to 2 ft. deep, but above and below the river formed fine
reaches 70 yards wide. The course was now w.s.w. till 9, when the
river turned w., and at 10T0 we came to a large stony creek, at which
we encamped. {Camp 16.) The country rises gradually from the
banks of the river as it recedes, and except within the influence
of the floods is poor and stony, producing little besides triodia
and a few small gum trees and bushes. As we progress towards
the interior the rainy season seems to have been of shorter duration
and the quantity of rain less, yet the great heat has forced the
vegetation towards maturity, and many of the grasses have
already ripened their seeds, while there are numerous indications
of the dry season having set in. The wind is steadily from the s.
and s.e. and is very dry; the sky is clear and bright, and the
creeks have ceased to flow. In the afternoon rode out with Mr.
H. Gregory to examine the country, and found that the river
came through a deep gorge in the sandstone range. This gorge
is 2 m. long and 4 mile wide, the depth 400 ft. with nearly
perpendicular sides, the winter bed of the river occupying
nearly the whole breadth, and the otherwise level bottom of the


valley is intersected by dry sandy channels and long pools of
water; beyond the gorge the valley opened, but the view was
intercepted by hills.
Jan. 21.—Resumed our journey at 7-10, and following the
right bank of the river nearly w. through the gorge, at 9 entered
an open valley through which the river came from the s.w., but at
10 again entered a second defile, which, from the inclined strata of
sandstone, was almost impassable for the horses, and in crossing
some soft ground between the rocks, one of the horses fell on a
sharp stump and was so severely injured that he died in the night.
Having extricated ourselves from this defile, encamped at the foot
of a sandstone hill, the strata of which dipped 60° to the s.w.
( Camp 17.) From the summit of the hill, which was about 800 ft.
high, the country appeared more level to the s., rising into sand-
stone ranges about 10 m. to the s. The course of the river was
from w.s.w., the channel being bounded by cliffs 100 to 200 ft.
high. The general aspect of the country was wretched in the
extreme, as little besides triodia and a few small gum trees clothed
the rugged surface of the red sandstone. The weather continues
fine, with only an occasional cloud or flash of lightning in the early
part of the evening; the temperature is increasing, being 104° at
1 p.m. Some catfish and a small tortoise were caught in the river.
Jan. 22. —At 7 continued our route up the river, but to
avoid the steep ravines on its banks, made a sweep to the s., and
at noon encamped in a grassy flat on the bank of the river. (Camp
18.) The country traversed was very barren and rocky, the horses
having great difficulty in crossing the deep ravines, and many of their
shoes were torn from their feet during the day’s journey. The
highest ridge crossed was 500 ft. above the river, and the approxi-
mate of its channel is about 500 ft. above the sea level: thus the
general elevation of the table land may be considered to be 1000 ft.
above the sea level. The general course of the river being from the
w., it appears desirable to reconnoitre the country to the s.
Jan. 23.—Leaving the camp in charge of Dr. Mueller, at
6‘30 started in a southerly direction, accompanied by Messrs. H.
Gregory and Baines, taking with us 4 horses and 6 days’ rations,
&c. After clearing the deep rocky gullies near the river, we
passed over a more level country with some fine open plains
covered with excellent grass, but the intervening ridges were very
stony. -At 9’45 reached the highest part of the range, and the
country declined to the s.e., and was intersected by deep rocky
ravines trending towards a large valley, which is probably drained
by the southern branch of the Victoria River. The course was
now’ s.e., descending to the valley of a creek, through very broken
and rugged sandstone country, producing little but stunted euca-
lypti, Grevillia, acacia, and triodia. At 11T5 halted at the
\
i


N
\
creek, and resumed our route at S, following the valley to the
e.s.e. till 4-40, when it turned E. through a rocky gorge between
cliffs 150 ft. high ; but notwithstanding the dense brush of pandanus,
fallen rocks, and the deep muddy channel of the creek, we suc-
ceeded in forcing our way through the gorge, and bivouacked in
the open valley below at 5‘30, there being a fine patch of grass
in the flat, though the surrounding country is rocky and barren.
The sandstone rocks show great disturbance, and dip at all angles
and directions, so that no general direction could be determined.
The upper rocks show a new feature in a coarse conglomerate of
fragments of the lower sandstones and a few fragments of basalt;
these fragments are usually angular and often a foot in diameter;
some of the enclosed fragments of rock are rounded and water-
worn. This conglomerate forms a bed 100 ft. thick. Towards
evening the sky was cloudy, with lightning, but no rain.
Jan. 24. —At 6 crossed the creek and steered s.e. over broken
* *
sandstone ridges till 8, when we entered a plain of basaltic forma-
tion, covered with good grass, and where the ground was not
wholly composed of fragments of rock the soil was a rich black
loam. Crossing two large creeks, at 10 halted at the second.
These creeks appear to rise in a steep range of sandstone hills,
which bound the basaltic plain to the w. about 2 m. from our
track. At 3 resumed our route, traversing the basaltic plain for
14 hours, and bivouacked on a small gully. {Bivouac.) The
country on both sides of our track seems to be basaltic for several
miles, and then rises into sandstone hills with flat tops. The
basaltic rock of this plain is not of great thickness, as the sand-
stone rose in a few places above its surface and formed small
patches covered with coarse vegetation surrounded by the grassy
plain. The basalt seems to have been poured out into the valley
after it had been excavated in the sandstone, and not to have been
much disturbed subsequently. The surface is very rough and
stony, and the horses’ feet suffered much.
Jan. 25. —The night was cloudy, and it was not till after
daybreak that I could get an altitude for the latitude of our
bivouac. At 6-5 were again in the saddle and steered s.e. to a
rocky hill, which we reached at 7 ; it was of sandstone, rising about
150 ft. above the basaltic plain. From the summit the view was
extensive, but from the broken nature of the countrv to the e.
nothing could be traced of the courses of either creeks or rivers.
To the s. the basalt plain rose to a greater elevation than the
summit of the hill we were on, and was surmounted by table hills
of sandstone about 10 m. distant. To the E. and n.b. the country
appeared to consist of plains of basaltic formation, well grassed
and thinly wooded. Leaving the hill at 8, followed a dry rocky
creek to the E. and n.e. through basaltic plains with sandstone
*
♦


hills and ridges till 10’30, and halted during the heat of the day.
At this spot the bed of the creek had been cut through the basalt
into the sandstone, exposing a fine section of the junction of the
two rocks. The sandstone was much altered at the line of contact,
and having been deeply cracked the basalt had filled the fissures
of the older rock. This altered sandstone and also a white
quartz-like rock are much used by the natives for the heads of
their spears, and during this day’s journey great quantities of
broken stones and imperfect spear-heads were noticed on the
banks of the creek. At 345 recommenced our journey and
proceeded down the creek to the n.e. till 6*30 and bivouacked.
{Bivouac.)
Jan. 26. —Having ascertained that the party could be moved
across the range to the basaltic plains with advantage, we com-
menced our return to the camp by a westerly route across the
plain, which rose gently for 10 m., and was well grassed and very
thinly wooded. The soil was very stony, with fragments of altered
sandstone and basalt. On the higher parts of the plain there
were several hills of basalt, forming flat-topped ridges, trending
N. and s.: the highest of these was named Mount Sanford, and the
plains Roe Downs. The country now gradually sloped to the
Dank of the creek near the western limit of the plain, at which,
after 6 hours’ride, we halted at 1T35. The banks of the creek
are of basalt, but the sandstone is exposed in the channel, in wdiich
some of the pools were deep and permanent. At 4 resumed our
route and passed over about a mile of sandstone, then 2 m. of
basalt, and bivouacked at a small gully at the western limit of the
plain. {Bivouac.)
Jan. 27. — At 5‘30 steered n.n.w. over several ridges of sand-
stone till we struck our outward track, which was followed with
some deviations to the camp, which was reached at 2 p.m. {Camp
18.) The evening was cloudy, with a heavy thunder shower.
Dr. Mueller informed me that he had traced the river about 6 ra.
to the w.s.w., but that beyond that the direction was from n.w.,
apparently rising in a low range of hills which were visible.
Jan. 28. —Having collected the horses, at 7T5 steered s. to
the rocky creek and followed it down to the rocky gorge and
encamped. {Camp 19.) As the valley was completely walled in
by steep rocks, it appeared to be a suitable place for a depot
camp, as the horses would not be able to stray to any great
distance; and from the rapidity with which the water was drying
up, it became desirable that no time should be lost in pushing on to
the head of the Victoria, while it was practicable to cross the ranges
in which it is supposed to rise ; but as many of the horses are quite
unfit for the journey, it becomes necessary to leave them in some
convenient spot while a small party pushes on lightly eqQipped.


Jan. 29. —Preparing equipment for the party proceeding to
the interior, and making arrangements for the formation of a
depdt camp. The exploring party to consist of myself, Mr. H.
Gregory, Dr. Mueller, and Charles Dean; Mr. Baines remain-
ing at the depot in charge of the party. Selected 11 of the
strongest horses; had them re-shod ; equipped 4 with riding and
7 with pack saddles. The following provisions were packed for
the journey : —pork, 150 lbs.; flour, 300 lbs.; rice, 50 lbs.; sago,
10 lbs.; sugar, 48 lbs.; tea, 8 lbs.; coffee, 6 lbs.
Jan. 30. —Left the camp at 7‘30 and steered an average
s.s.E. course till 10*20 over stony ground, at the line of junction
of the sandstone and basalt formation, and camped at a fine creek
which came from a rocky gorge in the sandstone range to the w.
of our course. (Camp 20.) Mr. Baines and Bowman, who had
accompanied us thus far, returned to the camp, which I had
instructed them to move to this creek, as a better place for the
horses, as one of them had shown symptoms of poison, and I feared
to leave them in their present locality. A severe attack of fever,
from which I had been suffering since the beginning of the month,
precluded our proceeding farther this day, as I had at first in-
tended. At 5 p.m. it commenced raining and continued till
midnight, with incessant thunder and lightning.
Jan. 31. —I was sufficiently recovered this morning to be able
to mount my horse, and at 8 left the camp and steered s.e. hy s.
along the foot of the sandstone range, the basaltic plain extending
to the n.e. At 12*45 camped at a shallow watercourse trending
to the s.s.w. ( Camp 2l.) The whole of the country to the e. of
our track appeared to be covered with excellent grass. The
evening was showery, with continual thunder for several hours.
February 1. —Steered n. 160° e. from 6*25 till 7 30 across the
basaltic plain; then crossed a large creek, in which there were
some pools, that appeared permanent; then entered the sand-
stone country, and passed several rocky ridges. At 9'lo there
was a good view from one of the higher ridges; to the e. and n.
fine grassy plains extended almost to the horizon ; to the s. the
country consisted of sandstone range, and to the s.e. fine grassy
plains and rocky ridges appeared to alternate with each other.
Changing the course to s.e., traversed a fine plain covered with
grass, beyond which was a rocky ridge, and then a second plain,
where we halted at 11*10, as I was unable to keep on my horse
owing to a recurrence of the fever. At 2 again proceeded, and
after crossing some very rugged country with deep rocky ravines,
at length reached a large creek, at which we encamped, though
there was nothing but reeds and triodia for the horses to eat.
( Camp 22.)
Feb. 2. —Left the camp at 6 and followed the creek up for three-


quarters of a mile before we could find a crossing place ; the
course was then s.s.e. over very broken sandstone country. At
9*50 halted in a grassy valley to feed the horses, and at 2 30
resumed the journey s.e. ; crossed a sandstone ridge, and de-
scended into a wide valley, the centre of which was occupied by
a basaltic plain, at the edge of which we encamped at 3*55.
( Camp 23.)
Feb. 3. —At 6 ascended the basaltic plain and steered n. 190° e.
At 6 45 came to a large creek from the w., which joined the
Victoria River three-quarters of a m. to the e., but the deep and
rocky character of the ravine in which the river ran precluded
our approaching it, and we had to turn to the w. and descend
from the basaltic plain to the sandstone before the creek could
be passed. Continuing an average s. course, at 10T0 reached
the Victoria River, the whole channel of which did not exceed
150 yards in breadth, of which only 20 to 50 were occupied by
water, and the rest by dry rocks and gravel, overgrown with
bushes. With great difficulty we followed the river upwards, and
were compelled to follow up a tributary creek for about I m. to
cross it, and then encamped. Near this camp I saw the crested
pigeon of Western Australia for the first time since landing on
this part of the coast. ( Camp 24.)
Feb. 4. —Left the camp at 5 55 and steered nearly s. for 6
hours, and then encamped on the bank of the Victoria River, at
the end of a fine pool 70 yards wide, but at the lower end the water
was contracted into a shallow rapid 10 yards wide. (Camp 25.)
The country traversed is of basaltic formation in the valley, but the
hills are of sandstone, and rise on each side 200 to 300 feet, and
■1
the whole appearance of the country shows that there has been
little change in the form of the surface of the ground since the
basalt was poured into the valley. On the banks of a small creek
we saw a flock of tribonyx —a bird which has caused much specula-
tion as to its proper habitat, as it often makes its appearance in
immense numbers on the western coast of Australia.
Feb. s.—Started at 5*55 and steered s.w., keeping parallel to
the river at about 1 m. from it, as the creeks cut so deeply into
the rock near the river that they were impassable. At 9*20
crossed to the right bank of the river and continued a s.w. course,
but, finding the country exceedingly rough and rocky, turned n.w.
to the river, and at 11*30 camped at a fine pool of water. (
26.) In the afternoon we were visited by a sudden thunder squall;
fortunately the tents had not been set up, or they must have been
torn to pieces. The valley .of the river has contracted to about
15 m., and turns to the w., but a branch seems to come from the
s., and a second from the n.w. The country is becoming more
level, and it is difficult to ascertain the limits of the valley, as many


Gregory’* Journal of the
1 |
portions of the original tableland exist as detached hills and
ridges. Though the horses are well shod, they are becoming lame
and foot-sore from continually travelling over rough stony country ;
more than half of the last 100 miles traversed have been so com-
pletely covered with fragments of rock, that the soil, if any exist,
las been wholly concealed from sight.
Feb. 6.—Leaving the camp at 6*20, steered s. up the valley of
a large creek. At first the ground was very rocky, hut, as we
proceeded, became more level and sandy, the bed of the creek
3eing worn in the basalt, and the hills of sandstone conglomerate
rising 100 to 200 ft. Except on the bank of the creek there was
no grass, the hills being covered with triodia. Encamped in a
grassy flat at 11‘30. ( Camp 27.)
Feb. 7. —At 6‘30 resumed our route to the s.s.w., and reached
the head of the creek at 8. Ascending the tableland by an
abrupt slope our course was s. for 1 m., when the southern de-
clivity was reached, and a large shallow valley extended across
our course; beyond which a vast, and slightly undulating, plain
extended to the horizon, with scarcely a rising ground to relieve
the extreme monotony of surface. Descending by a very gentle
slope into the valley, at 9‘40 crossed a small watercourse trending
s.e., and then passed through a plain densely covered with kan-
garoo grass 7 to 9 ft. high. At 10*40 encountered the level
sandy country beyond, which was covered with triodia, small acacia,
and gum-trees, or rather bushes. Seeing little prospect of either
water or grass to the southward, turned e. to the creek, at which
we encamped at 12‘30. ( Camp 2B.) The bed of the creek was
dry except a few shallow pools of rain-water, and there had been so
little rain this season that no water had flowed down the channel.
A level grassy flat extended nearly a mile on each side of the
creek, which indicated the extent of the occasional inundations;
beyond which the country was very sandy, and covered with small
gum-trees, acacia, and triodia.
Feb. 8. —The country to the s. being so level and barren that
we could not expect to find either water or grass in that direction,
at 6 steered n. 110° e. along the course of the creek, which
turned somewhat to the n. of our track for a few miles, but at 8
again came on its banks. The country was very barren and
sandy, with small trees of silver-leaved iron-bark, acacia, and
triodia, except on the inundated flats of the creek, which were well
grassed and thinly timbered with box-trees. The course of the
creek was nearly s.e,, but the channel decreased in size and was
quite dry till 10, when we reached a fine pool that had been
filled by a tributary gully. Here we halted and shot several
ducks. At 2‘45 resumed our route, and at 3*20 came to a grassy
flat, on which the channel of the creek was completely lost. Gross-


ing the flat to the e. the country was level and sandy, and there-
fore turned to the n,, where there seemed to be a slight depres-
sion, and at 4’50 came to a shallow pool of rain-water, at
which we encamped. Frequent heavy showers during; the night,
{Camp 29.)
Feb. 9. —On winding the chronometers this morning found that
the chain of “ 2139 by Arnold ” was broken. Taking advantage of
the cool cloudy weather, we steered s. at 6 - 5 to ascertain if the
waters of the creek, after spreading on the grassy flat, collected
again. We found an outlet to the southward, but the ground ris-
ing in that direction, we observed a slight hollow to the w., for
which we steered, when it terminated on the sandy plains, and the
country became a perfect desert of red sand with scattered tufts
of triodia and a few bushes of eucalyptus and acacia. At
noon, finding it useless to proceed farther into the desert, we
turned our steps to the n.n.e., and returned to our camp of last
night. In returning we ascended a slight elevation from which
there was an uninterrupted view of the desert from e. to s.w., the
horizon being unbroken, and all appeared one slightly undulating
plain, with just sufficient triodia and bushes growing on it to hide
the red sand when seen at a distance. The day was remarkably
cool and cloudy, the temperature at noon 86°. Though the rain
had been abundant at our camp during the previous night, it had
not extended more than 5 m. into the desert, which is more re-
markable as the clouds were moving to the s.
Feb. 10. —As the horses required a day’s rest, we remained at
the camp, which enabled us to repair the saddlery and perform
other necessary work. Repaired the chronometer and also one
of the aneroids which had been broken by the motion of the
pack-horse. As there was no practicable route to the s., and the
sandstone hills to the N. seemed to diminish in elevation to the e,,
I decided on following the northern limit of the desert to the w.
till some line of practicable country was found by which to pene-
trate to the s. In selecting a westerly course I was also in-
fluenced by the greater elevation of the country on the western
side of the Victoria, and the fact that all the larger tributaries
join from that side of the valley. It is also probable that, should
the waters of the interior not be lost in the sandy desert, they will
follow the southern limit of the elevated tract of sandstone which
occupies North-Western Australia from Roebuck Bay to the Gulf
of Carpentaria, both of which points are nearly in the same lati-
tude as our present position, from which it may be assumed that the
line of greatest elevation is between the 17th and 18th parallels.
None of the rivers crossed by Leichhardt are of sufficient magni-
tude to drain the country beyond the coast range, and therefore
any stream descending from the tableland to the s. will either be
yol. xxvm. • E


absorbed in the desert or follow the southern limit of the sand-
stones, and flow into the sea to the s.w. of Roebuck Bay. There
is, however, reason to expect that as the interior of North-Western
Australia is partly within the influence of tropical, and partly the
extra tropical climates, it does not enjoy a regular rainy season, and
though heavy rain doubtless falls at times, it is neither sufficiently
regular nor general to form rivers of sufficient magnitude to force
their way through the flat sandy country to the coast.
Feb. 11. —At 6*30 proceeded up the creek, and at 12*30
camped at a shallow pool of rain-water on the flat, the channel
of the creek being quite dry. ( Camp 30, lat. 18° 15' 26 k) On
the northern side of the creek we passed a small lagoon with a
great number of ducks and other waterfowl on it. The after-
noon was cloudy with a fresh breeze from the s.e.
Feb. 12.—Three of the horses having strayed some distance,
we did not start till 7, when we steered an average course of
n. 300° e. till 11*45, when we camped at a small pool of water in
the bed of the creek, which was reduced to a small gully. (Camp
31, lat. 18° 9' 44".) For the first 4m. we traversed the grassy
flats of the creek, after which we passed over a level sandy
country, producing nothing but triodia, stunted eucalypti, and
acacia, till we again approached the creek, where the grassy flat
was nearly half a mile wide, but of inferior character.
Feb. 13. —At 6*50 followed the valley of the creek to the w.,
passing through some fine flats with high grass, but the country
generally very poor.and thinly timbered with white gum and silver-
leaved ironbark. At 10*40 halted at a small pool of water, at
the foot of a low granite ridge. ( 32, lat. 18° 11' 20")
At 3 ascended the granite hills, which rose abruptly 100 to 150
ft. above the level of the plain, and extended to the s.e. about
5 m.; to the w. the sandstones covered the granite and formed a
level tableland or plain ; and to the n. a valley trended to the
w., on the northern side of which the hills appeared to be granitic.
Returning to the camp, examined a deep ravine, and found some
small pools of water which might last nearly another month.
Feb. 14.—Leaving the camp at 6, steered an average course
n. 300° e. ; crossing the granite ridge, we entered a level sandy
country with much scrub, which was traversed till B*4o, when we
entered a wide grassy plain extending to the n.w., in which direc-
tion we steered till 2*lo, when we halted at a small muddy puddle
2 inches deep and 3 yards wide. I then rode on to search for a
better supply of water, and found a shallow pool about a mile
distant, to which the party was moved and encamped. ( 33.)
Although this pool was not 100 yards long and 6 inches deep,
large flocks of ducks, snipe, and small gulls were congregated at
it, and several thousand pigeons of a species new to us came to
5
1


drink. These pigeons keep in flocks of ten to more than a thou-
sand, feeding on the seeds of the grass on the open plains, as they
never alight in trees. They are somewhat larger than the com-
mon bronze-wing; the head is black, with a little white at the
base of the beak and behind the eye ; back, pale brown ; breast,
blue; throat, marked with white; wing, with white tips to the
feathers and a small patch of bronze ; tail, short, tip white; feet,
dull red.
Feb. 15. —At 6T5 followed a line of small trees and bushes
which grew on the lower part of the grassy plain, and indicated
the course of the water in the wet season, and at 9 came to the
head of a small creek trending n.w. Water was now abundant,
and formed large pools, and at 11T5 camped on the right bank
of the creek, at a pool im. long and 50 yards wide. (
34, lat. 17° 53' 50".) This spot seemed to be much frequented
by the natives, and large quantities of mussel-shells lay around
their fires. The plain traversed this morning was well grassed,
the soil a stiff clay loam: it extended 3to 6 m. on each side of
the track, and was bounded by wooded country, which in some
parts rose nearly 100 ft. above the level of the plain. On the
lower parts of the plain we saw the salt-bush (Atriplex) and a
species of rice, but as it was only just in ear we could not judge
of the quality of the grain. In the afternoon there was a fine
breeze from the e., which lasted till 8 p.m., the sky being cloudy.
Feb, 16.—At 6'5 resumed our journey down the creek, which
first turned w., and then s.w. At 12*20 camped at a small pool.
(Camp 35, lat. 17° 59' 40".) On the right bank of the creek,
wide grassy plains extended from 3 to 5 in. back towards a low
wooded ridge, but on the left bank the scrubby country came close
to the creek.
Feb. 17, Sunday. —As water and grass were abundant, we were
not compelled to move on in search of these requisites, and were
enabled to observe it as a day of rest.
Feb. 18. —Resumed our journey at 6*30, and steered an aver-
age s.w. course till 11, then s. till 12*25, and again camped on
the creek. ( Camp 36, lat. 18° 11' 40".) The country consisted
of wide grassy plains on the bank of the creek; beyond the plains
at 1 to 6 m, distance low wooded ridges were visible, but the
general aspect of the whole country was extremely level. A
great number of ducks and a few geese were seen on the pools in
the creek.
Feb. 19. —Commenced our day’s journey at 6, followed the
bank of the creek s. till B*ls, then s.s.w. till noon, when the course
was changed to s.s.e. to close in with the creek, but found that the
channel of the creek was completely lost on the level grassy plain.
At I*4o camped at a small puddle of muddy water as thick as
e 2
I'
*


cream with white clay. ( Camp 37.) Before the creek terminated
in the plain it spread into some large though shallow pools, which
teemed with ducks of several species, but principally the whistling
duck. The grass gradually extended to a greater breadth, and
the back country was so nearly level that it scarcely rose above
the grassy horizon, while to the s. it was so flat that the clumps
of hushes looked like islands, the grassy plain extending to the
horizon. Near one of the water-holes in the creek we surprised
a native, who was sitting at a fire with two women, who decamped
with all possible despatch. Several smokes have been observed
to the s. and s.w., which show that water must exist in that di-
rection, though it may not be sufficient for the supply of our
horses. The morning was cloudy, and at midnight there was a
heavy shower of rain. Judging from the general appearance of
the country, the waters of the creek, after spreading over the
plain, must escape to the westward, as the grass has been bent in
that direction by the current last year, but there has been so little
rain this season that the channel of the creek has not been filled.
\ ■
Feb. 20. —As it appeared that the waters of the creek trended
to the w. in the wet season, at 6*5 we steered n. 250° e., through
a level forest of box-trees with abundance of good grass, the soil
a brown loam with fragments of limestone. The shower last night
had left many shallow pools of water on the surface. At B*3o
passed a small swampy salt flat covered with salicornia, and at
9*lo came on the grassy plain, which we skirted on a w. course,
but as it turned to the n.w. changed the course to n. 320° e.
The plain narrowed to about a mile in width, and therefore crossed
it in search of a definite channel, but without success, though
there were some slight indications that during inundation the water
flowed to the n.w. At 11*50 camped at a shallow puddle of rain-
water on the n. side of the plain. (Camp 38.) From the morn-
ing’s camp till 8 the grass, though very backward, showed that
there had been sufficient rain to cause it to spring, but as we pro-
ceeded it was perfectly dry and parched up as at the end of the
dry season, showing that little or no rain had fallen this year.
The day was cloudy with thunder, and was followed by a heavy
shower at night, which prevented my ascertaining the latitude by
observation.
Feb. 21. —As we were now 3 days’ journey from any water
which could be depended on for more than a few days, and the
channel of the creek had been so completely lost on the plain that
it was uncertain whether the marks of inundation near the camp
had been caused by the creek flowing w., or a tributary flowing
to the e., I determined to attempt a s.w. course, in the hope that
should the country prove rocky, the heavy showers might have
collected a sufficient quantity of water to enable us to continue
%
4


a southerly route, and accordingly selected the most prominent
point of the rising ground to the s. of our position, and at 6*5
steered for it N. 235° e. After leaving the open plain entered
a grassy box flat, which continued to the foot of the hills, which
we reached at 8. The slope of the hills proved very scrubby,
with small eucalypti and acacia; the soil red sand and ironstone
gravel. At 9 reached the highest part of the hills for many
miles around. To the s. it was slightly depressed for 10 or 15
m., and then rose into an even ridge or plain, the whole appearing
to be covered with acacia and eucalyptus scrub; to the w. and n.
the view was more extended; the low ridge of sandstone hills to
the n. of the grassy plains extended to the w.n.w. for 30 m,,
only broken by a large valley from the n. Throughout its whole
length this range appeared, to rise 150 or 200 ft. above the plain,
and had the appearance of being the edge of a level tableland.
S. of the grassy plain (the western limit of which was not seen)
the country rose gradually to 80 or 100 ft., and presented a very
level and unvaried appearance. It was evident that our only
chance of farther progress was to follow the grassy plain to the w.
till some change in the country rendered a southerly course prac-
ticable, it being probable that some creek from the n. might join
the grassy plain, and that the channel which had been dissipated
might be reformed. At 9*30 steered N.w., and at 12*30 cleared
the acacia scrub. At 1 *3O reached the bank of the creek, which had
formed a channel 20 yards wide, with pools of brackish water ; but
we were too glad to find any water which could be used without detri-
ment, to object to it because not agreeable to the taste, and therefore
encamped. — ( Camp 39.) We have thus been a second time com-
pelled to make a retrograde movement to the n., after reaching the
same latitude as in the first attempt to penetrate the desert; but I
did not feel justified in incurring the extreme risk which would
have attended any other course, though following the creek is by
no means free from danger, as very few* of the w r ater holes which
have supplied us on the outward track will retain any water till
the time of our return. The w r eather was calm and hot in the
early part of the day, in the afternoon it clouded over, and there
was a slight shower of rain. According to our longitude by
account we have this day passed the boundary of Western Aus-
tralia, which is the 129 th meridian.
Feb. 22.—Leaving the camp at 5*40, followed the creek to the
w.s.w., and crossed a small gully from the s. —( 40.) At
11*30 camped at a fine pool of water in a small creek from the
S., close to its junction with the principal creek, which I now
named after Captain Sturt, whose researches in Australia are too
well known to need comment. The grassy plains extend from 3
to 10 m. on each side of the creek, which has a more definite


m
Y j
channel than higher up, there being some pools of sufficient size
to retain water throughout the year.
The plain is bounded on the N. by sandstone hills 100 to 200
ft. high, and there is also a mass of hilly country to the s., the
highest point of which was named Mount Wittenoom. About noon
a thunder shower passed to the E. and up the creek on which we
were encamped, and though the channel was then dry between
the pools, at 6 it was running 2 ft. deep. The grass is much
greener near this camp, and there has evidently been more rain
here, than in any part of the country s. of the Victoria yet visited.
A fresh southerly breeze in the morning, thunder storm at noon,
night cloudy, with heavy dew. .
Feb. 23. —Resumed our journey down the creek, the general
course first s.w. and then s.s.w. The channel was gradually lost
on the broad swampy flat, which was overgrown with polygonum
and atriplex, &c., and had a breadth of about a mile, being
depressed about 10 ft. below the grassy plain, which has a width
of 15 m. The hills are of less height, and the whole country so
level that little is to be seen but the distant horizon scarcely
rising above the vast expanse of waving grass. At 9‘30 entered
an open grassy box flat, and at 10’50 camped at a shallow puddle
of muddy water just sufficient to supply the horses. I walked
about a mile into the Polygonum flat, but could not find any
water, though the ground was soft and muddy in some parts.
Mr. H. Gregory, when rounding up the horses in the evening,
saw 8 blacks watching us: we therefore went out to communicate
with them, but they hid themselves in the high bushes and grass.
The night was clear, and I took a set of lunar distances, which
the cloudy weather had prevented for more than a week, though
I had been able to get altitudes for the latitude.
Feb. 24. —At 6 continued the route down the creek, which
spread into a broad and swampy flat about a mile wide, and
covered with atriplex and polygonum, the general trend s.w.
At 7'30 crossed a large water course with a dry sandy channel
coming from s.E.; no water having flowed down it this evening.
At 9 crossed to the right bank of the creek: there were many
shallow muddy hollows, and one shallow channel of running water
4 yards wide and 1 ft. deep. The largest channel was near the
w. side of the flat, but except a shallow pool it was dry. As we
advanced the country showed the effect of long continued drought,
and though the creek had some large shallow pools, the channel
was dry between them, the soil absorbing the whole of the water
which was running in it above. At 11’50 encamped at what
appeared to be the termination of the pools of water, as the channel
was again lost on a level flat. Great numbers of ducks, cockatoos,
cranes, and crows frequented the banks of the creek above the


camp, and appeared to feed on the wild rice and panicum which
were growing in considerable quantities in the moist hollows. To
the S.E. of the creek there is a level box flat which extends 2 or
3 m. back to the foot of some low sandy ridges, covered with
triodia and a few small eucalypti. To the n.w. and w. the grassy
plain extended to the horizon, with scarcely a break to inter-
rupt the even surface of waving grass.
Feb. 25.—The small number of water fowl which passed either
up or down the creek during the night indicated that water was
not abundant below our present position, and we therefore pre-
pared for a dry country, and were not disappointed; for, leaving
the camp at 6T5, we traversed a level box flat covered with long
dry grass. At 9 again entered the channel of the creek, which
was now a wide flat of deeply cracked mud, overgrown with
atriplex, which had lost all its leaves from long continued dry
weather. The flat was traversed by numerous small channels
from 1 to 2 ft. deep, but they were dry, and had not contained
water for more than a year ; there were, however, marks of former
inundations when the country must have exhibited a very different
appearance; and had it then been visited by an explorer, the
account of a fine river, nearly a mile wide, flowing through
splendid plains of high grass, could scarcely be reconciled w'ith the
facts I now have to record, of a mud flat deeply fissured by the
scorching rays of a tropical sun, the absence of water, and even
scarcity of grass. The creek now turned to the s., and we followed
the shallow channels till 12-30, when we fortunately came to a
small pool which had been filled by a passing shower, and here
we encamped. During the day a fresh breeze blew from the s.
and s.E., and the air was exceedingly warm, the thermometer 106°,
but being very dry, was not oppressive.
Feb. 26. —As the course of the creek was uncertain, we steered
s. at 5'45 across the Atriplex plain, and at 6*35 reached the
ordinary right bank of the creek, which was low and gravelly,
covered with triodia and small bushes; we then passed a patch
of green forest, and at 8 entered a grassy plain which had been
favoured by a passing shower: green grass was abundant, and
even some small puddles of water remained in the hollows of the
clay soil. At 10’50 came on the creek, which had collected into
a single channel and formed pools, some of which appeared to be
permanent, as they contained small fish. At one of these pools
we encamped at 11*10. The channel of the creek is about 15 ft.
below the level of the plain, and is marked by a line of small
flooded gum trees. The atriplex flat has ceased, and the soil is a
hard white clay producing salsola and a little grass. The morning
clear, with a moderate breeze from E, Afternoon cloudy, with a
*
J
few drops of rain at night.


m
\\
Feb. 27. —Resumed our journey down the creek at 65 on a
general course s.w. till 7T5, when it turned to the w., and formed
a fine lakelike reach of water 200 yards wide, with rocky banks
and sandstone ridges on both sides of the creek. At 11 camped
at the lower end of a fine reach trending s. The general character
of these reaches of water is, that they are very shallow and sepa-
rated by wide spaces of dry channel, the water being 10 ft. below
the running level. The country is very inferior, and the grassy
flats are reduced to very narrow limits, the hills being red sand-
stone, producing nothing but triodia and small gum trees,
j Feb. 2B. —At 6 were again in the saddle following the creek,
which had an average w.s.w. course, but the channel was soon lost
on a wide grassy flat with polygonum and atriplex. A few large
detached pools however existed, and were 50 to 100 yards wide,
and £ to i a m. long, although the dry season had reduced
them to much narrower limits than usual, as they were 8 ft.
below the level of the plain. At 11’45 camped at a large sheet
of water just above a remarkable ridge of sandstone rock on the
right bank of the creek. Ducks, pelicans, and spoonbills were
very numerous, but so wild that they could not be approached
within gun-shot. Until the present time it had been doubtful
whether the creek turned towards Cambridge Gulf, the interior,
or the coast westward of the Fitzroy River; but the first point
being now 220 nautic. m. to the N,, and the general course of
Sturt Creek s.w., such a course is not probable, and it there-
fore only remains to determine whether it is lost in the level
plains of the interior, or finds an outlet on the N.w. coast. The
careful and minute surveys of the coast from the Victoria to
Roebuck Bay show that no rivers exist of such magnitude as
Sturt Creek would attain in passing through the ranges to the
coast; nor does the generally abrupt character of the coast line
favour the supposition that any interior waters find an outlet in
this space. That the elevation of this part of the creek is suffi-
cient to enable it to form a channel to the n.w. coast is shown
by the barometric measurements already made. The dividing
ridge between the head of the Victoria and Hooker Creek is
about 1200 ft., at the head of Sturt Creek 1370, and our pre-
sent camp 1100 ft. above the sea. Thus the average fall of
Sturt Creek has been 270 ft. in 180 m., or l£ ft. per m. Now
the distance to Desault Bay (which appears the most probable
outlet) is 370 m.; and allowing an increase to 500 ra. for devia-
tions, there would be more than 2 ft. fall per m., which is sufficient
for the maintenance of a channel. Should the creek turn to the
s. and enter the sandy desert country, the waters would soon be
absorbed, especially as the wet season at the upper part of the
creek occurs at the time of the dry season in the lower part of its


course. That it does lose itself in a barren sandy country is, I
fear, the most probable termination of the creek ; and that a level
sandy country exists for many miles on each side of our route is
shown by the small number and size of the tributary water-
courses.
Feb. 29. —Leaving the camp at 5-40, traced the creek to the
s.w. for about 3 m.: it formed fine reaches of water 50 to 100
yards wide, but the channel again suddenly terminated in a level
flat covered with polygonum, atriplex, and grass. In this flat
there were some shallow pools of water. At 7*30 the creek
turned to the w., round the N. end of a rocky sandstone hill, and
was joined by a tributary gully from the n., below which point
the channel had well defined banks and a dry sandy bottom, and
long parallel water holes on each side, but very little water
remained at this time. At 9‘30 the course of the creek changed
to s. by w., and passed through a level flat timbered with flooded
gum trees; it was about a mile wide and well grassed, but com-
pletely dried up for want of rain. The back country was thinly
wooded with white gum, and rose gently as it receded, forming
sandstone hills about 100 ft. high, of extremely barren appear-
ance. At 11*45 camped at a small muddy pool which would last
only a few days longer. A strong breeze commenced early in
the day from the w. and gradually changed to s. Thermometer
109° in the coolest shade that existed.
March 1. —Our horses having strayed farther than usual in
search of better grass, we were delayed till 6*20, when we steered
a s. by w. course down the valley of the creek. Immediately
below the camp the country beyond the effect of inundation by
the creek changed to a nearly level plain of red sand, producing
nothing but triodia and stunted bushes, the level of this desert
country being only broken by low parallel ridges of drifted sand
perfectly straight, and with a direction nearly e. and w. At
11*30 camped at a fine pool of water 3 to 5 ft. deep and 20 yards
wide. That we had now entered the desert was apparent, and
the increase of temperature during the past 3 days was easily
explained; but whether this desert is part of that visited by
Captain Sturt, or an isolated patch, has yet to be ascertained ; and
the only hope is that the creek will enable us to continue our
course, as the nature of the country renders an advance imprac-
ticable except by following w r ater courses,
March 2, —Left our camp at 6*30 and steered s.w. by w.,
which soon took us into the sandy desert on the left bank of the
creek. Crossing one of the sand ridges, got a sight of a low
range of sandstone hills to the s.e., the highest of which I named
Mount Mueller, as the Doctor had been the first to discover them
while collecting plants on the sandy ridge the previous evening.


~ I#-- ' njim ' n"—fTi ii
f w
I I :
I
Gregorys Journal of the
At 10*15 again made the creek, which had scarcely any channel
to mark its course : the wide clay flat bearing the marks of pre-
vious inundation was the only indication visible. At 12-35
camped on a small muddy puddle, the grass very scant and dry.
The traces of natives are frequent. Large flights of pigeons
feed on the grassy plains, and a small flight of white cockatoos
were seen.
|]
||
March 3.—At 5'30 started and followed the creek on a general
course s.w. ; there were very irregular channels, sometimes 10
yards wide and very shallow, and then expanding into pools 50
yards wide. The sandy plain encroached much on the grassy
flats, and reduced the winter course of the creek to i a mile. At
8 the course was changed to s., and at 10*55 encamped at a small
swamp which was nearly dried up, and covered with beautiful
grass. The country differed slightly in character from that seen
yesterday, there being a few patches of white gum trees and a
few acacia with tall stems; salsola and salicornia are also
abundant, and show the saline nature of the soil.
March 4. —Left the camp at 5*50 and steered s.w. over a level
country, with shallow hollows filled with a dense growth of acacia,
and at 7‘30 struck the creek, which had a sandy channel and
narrow flats covered with salsola and salicornia. The pools were
very shallow, and gradually became salt, and at 10*15 spread out
into the dry bed of a salt lake more than a mile in diameter, and
this was connected by a broad channel of salt water with a second
dry lake 7orB m. across. As there was little chance of w j ater
ahead, and the day far advanced, we returned to one of the
brackish pools and encamped. The country passed over was of
a worthless character, and so much impregnated with salt that
the surface of the ground is often covered with a thin crust of
salt.
March s.—Started from the camp at 5*45, and steered s.s.e.
through the acacia wood to the lake, and then s. by e. across its
dry bed towards a break in the trees on the s. side; here we
found a creek joining the lake from the s.w., in which there were
some pools of rain water. We then steered e. to intersect any
channel by which the waters of the lake might escape to the south-
ward or s.E., and passing through a wood of acacia, entered the
sandy desert. As some low rocky hills were visible to the E.
steered for them, and at 2*lo halted -Jam. from the foot of the
highest, and then ascended it on foot. These hills were very
barren and rocky, scarcely 80 ft. above the plain, formed of
sandstone in horizontal strata. From the summit of this hill
nothing was visible hut one unbounded waste of sandy ridges and
low rocky hillocks which lay to the s.e. of the hill. All was one
inhospitable desert, as the flat and sandy country which could


absorb the waters of the creek was not capable of originating
water courses. Descending the hill, which I named Mount Wilson,
after the geologist attached to the expedition, we returned towards
the creek at the s. end of the lake, reaching it at 9'30 p.m.
March 6. —As the day was extremely hot, and the horses re-
quired both food and rest, we remained at the camp. Ducks were
numerous on some of the pools, but so wild that only two were
shot. The early part of the day was clear, with a hot, strong
breeze, varying from w. to s.e. At 1 p.m. there was a heavy
thunder-squall from s.e., which swept a cloud of salt and dry
mud from the surface of the dry lake; the squall was followed by
a slight shower of rain.
March 7. —As I had frequently observed that in the dry
channels of creeks traversing very level country, a heavy shower
in the lower part of its course often causes a strong current
of water to rush up the stream bed, and leave marks which would
mislead a person examining them in the dry season, it seemed
possible that this might be the case with the creek entering the
lake at its s.w. angle, as it might really be the outlet of the lake
when filled by Sturt Creek flowing into it, though in ordinary
seasons the flow of the water would be into the lake. Accordingly
I decided on following the creek to ascertain its actual course ;
and leaving the camp at 5’50, steered nearly s.w. along the
general course of the creek till 7*30, when it turned to the north,
and entered the dry bed of a lake. As the beds of the two lakes
were lower than the channel between, the water during the last
heavy rain had flowed both ways from the central part of the
channel. Having skirted the lake on the w. to intercept any
watercourses which might enter or leave the lake on that side,
we came to a large shallow channel with pools of water, some
fresh and others salt, with a broad margin of salicornia on their
banks. At 11 camped on a small pool of fresh water. The soil
on the banks of the creek is loose white sand with concretions
of lime, covered with a dense growth of tall acacia, with salsola
and a little grass in the open spaces.
March 8. —Started at 6'5, and traced the creek into the salt
lake to the w., but this was also dry-. After some search found
a creek joining on the n. side, and communicating with a
large mud plain partly overgrown with salicornia, and with
large shallow pools of water very muddy and 2 to 3 inches deep.
On the northern side this plain narrowed into a sandy creek, with
shallow pools, the flow of the water being decidedly from the
northward. At 12'15 camped at a shallow pool, near which there
was a little grass, the country generally being sandy, and only
producing triodia and acacia. Thus, after having followed
Sturt Creek for nearly 300 m., we have been disappointed in the


mt
hope that it would lead to some important outlet of the waters of
the interior. It has, however, enabled us to penetrate far into the
sandy tract of country, which may be termed the Great Australian
Desert.
March 9. —Left our camp at 6*35, and followed the creek up
for half an hour, and then steered east to Sturt Creek, which we
reached at 9*5, the country being level, sandy, and covered with
triodia and patches of acacia. We then steered a southerly
course down the creek till 11, and encamped at the large brackish
pool.
March 10. —As I had observed that a creek appeared to join
the salt lake at the n.e. angle, there yet remained a possibility
that the waters of the lake might find an outlet to the east, and
pass to the north of Mount Wilson. We therefore steered east
from the camp at 6'45, and passed close to the south side of a
small dry salt lake | m. in diameter, and then traversed a level
sandy country thickly wooded with acacia, and a few white gum-
trees. At B*ls struck a small grassy watercourse; this we fol-
lowed down to the s.s.w. to the large salt lake, close to which it
was joined by a small sandy creek coming from the east. Having
reached the bank of the lake at 10, steered south along its shore
till 11*15, when its shore trended to the w.s.w., and there was a
well defined bank without a break, to the point which had been
the limit of our examination from the southern part of the lake,
and thus determined that there was no outlet for the waters to
the east. As the whole country to the south was one vast desert
destitute of any indications of the existence of water, it was clear
that no useful results could arise from an attempt to penetrate
this inhospitable region, especially as the loss of any of the horses
might deprive the expedition of the means for carrying out the
explorations towards the Gulf of Carpentaria. I therefore de-
cided on commencing our retreat to the Victoria while it was
practicable, as the rapid evaporation and increasing saltness of the
water in this arid and inhospitable region warned us that each
day we delayed increased the difficulty of the return; and it is
even possible that we are now cut oft* from communication with
the party at the depot by an impassable tract of dry country, and
may be compelled to maintain ourselves on the lower part of the
creek till the ensuing rainy season. Returned to the creek at the
n.e. angle of the lake, and encamped. The morning was cloudy,
with a strong hot wind from e. and s.e., the night calm and
misty.
March 11. —At 6*lo left the camp, and followed the creek to
the n.n.e., but it soon spread into a number of small gullies which
drained a patch of clay land. At 7 steered north through a wood
of tall acacia growing on loose sandy soil, and entered the open


sandy plain at BTS. A few small white gum-trees were scattered
over this part of the plain, which was quite level, and covered
with triodia, which partially concealed the glaring red colour of
the sand. Observing a low but abrupt hill a little to the east of
our course, turned towards it, and ascended it at 10; its height
was less than 100 ft., and was composed of the same sandstone
which prevails over the whole country south of the Victoria. The
view was cheerless in the extreme. From N. 26° e. to n. 166° e.
the country was a level plain with small isolated hills, sometimes
grouped together, but not forming definite ranges; the even
height and peculiar table summits appear to indicate that they
are only small remaining portions of a sandstone table-land or
olain, nearly the whole of which has been removed. The stratum
nas, however, a slight dip of 1° to 2° to the east. The vegeta-
tion of this part of the country was reduced to a few stunted gum-
trees, hakea-bushes, and triodia, the whole extremely barren in
appearance. The remaining portion of the horizon was one
straight even line ; not a hill or break of any kind was visible,
and, except the narrow line of the creek, was barren and worth-
less : the red soil of the level portions of the surface being par-
tially clothed with triodia and a few small trees, or rather
bushes, rendered the long straight ridges of fiery red-sand more
conspicuous. The wind being strong, we observed several fires
along the course of the creek, and also one near Mt. Mueller to
the n.e., indicating that natives existed in that direction, and
doubtless water in the vicinity, as it was a day’s journey from
the creek. Our course was now n. 340° E., and on approaching
the creek passed through a patch of casuanna forest, which was
remarkable, as they are the only trees of this genus we had seen
since landing at the Victoria, though abundant in all other known
parts of Australia. At 1-30 reached Sturt Creek, and halted
at our camp of the 2nd of March. 49.) There was a
strong hot wind during the day.
March 12. —Resumed our route at 5'55, and steered n. 20° e.
till 8, then 40° and 60° till 1, when we encamped at a shallow pool
of water near the creek, and about 3m. above Camp 48. As the
route only traversed the level fiats of the creek, nothing worthy of
farther notice was seen. The channel being split into small hollows,
some of which retained a little water, the grass was much dried up
and limited to the flat near the creek, the more remote portions
being covered with triodia. The day was hot and nearly calm,
but at noon we were benefited by a few passing clouds, and at 6 a
dry thunderstorm cooled the air from 100° to 93°, but the tem-
perature rose to 96° at 8.
March 13. —At 5'50 steered n. 10° e., crossing the creek
several times, and at 10 turned to the n.n.e. and n.e., crossing
Si
1


K'i
Hk\
the sandstone hills round which the creek turns at a right angle,
and at 12T0 camped on the creek, near B*4o, on our track of the
29th February. Nearly all the pools of water had dried up, and
the water at the camp had become brackish; some of the pools,
however, must be permanent, as there are small fish in them. A
large party of natives appear to be moving up the creek, as fresh
fires are continually seen to the isr.E. along its course. A cool
breeze from w. to n.e. moderated the heat; the temperature at
2 p.m. 103° ; passing clouds from n.e. in the afternoon.
March 14. —Resumed our route, and followed the creek up-
wards from 5’50 till I*s, when we encamped about 3 m. s.w. of
Camp 45, at the first pool above the Atriplex flat. A short
distance above the camp we crossed a large sandy creek from the
north, which proved to be the cause of the change in the character
of the creek below that point. As our route was at a greater
distance from the creek than in tracing it down, it gave a good
opportunity of ascertaining the nature of the country beyond the
limits of the inundations of the creek. To the S.w. a vast plain,
traversed by low ridges of gravel and drift sand, clothed with
triodia and a few hakea-bushes, rose gradually from the creek;
but on the s.e. a more abrupt sandstone slope terminated in a
similar plain of somewhat greater elevation, and showed that we
were still within the limits of the desert. Moderate breeze from
?
%
n.w., changing to n.e.; passing clouds ; a light shower at 11 p.m.
March 15. —Resumed our route at 5'50, and steering n. 40° e.
1 hour into the triodia plain; then N. 60° e. till 9'20, when we
reached the first large pool in the creek, and rounding the bend
camped at one of the narrow pools above the sandstone ridge.
The waters of the larger pools had sunk from 6 to 12 inches since
we passed downwards, and almost all the smaller pools were now
dry. The morning clear and cool, with clouds and light showers
in the afternoon accompanied with thunder.
March 16.—As there was no water in the creek for the next
33 m., we filled our water-bags and prepared for an early start;
but unfortunately the horses had strayed farther than usual, which
delayed us till 7, when following nearly the outward route, we
passed close to the water-hole at Camp 43, but it was now dry.
At 1 halted under the shade of a few' acacia-trees during the heat
of the day, and resumed our route at 3, following the eastern side
of the plain through which the creek passes. The ground was
stony, and bad travelling; but as the moon was bright, we suc-
ceeded in reaching the first pool of water at 8 - 30; this was a
mile above Camp 42, the .water at which had dried up, though
4 ft. deep on the 24th Feb. The pool at which we now camped
appears to be permanent; it is 100 yards wide and 300 yards
long; the water 3 ft. deep close to the bank. Ducks were
4
V


numerous, and I shot four in the early morning. An easterly
breeze continued through the day, and as usual there were a few
clouds towards sunset. Unfortunately the dry weather has warped
the boxwood scale of the thermometer to such an extent that it
broke the tube.
March 17. —We were again delayed by several trifling circum-
stances, and did not leave the camp till 7*40; but having nearly
cleared the desert the weather was comparatively cool. Steering
an average n.e. course, traversed the wide grassy plain on the
right bank of the creek, to which the name of Denison Plains was
given. At 2 camped at a small pool in the Polygonum flat, which
was all that remained of the water which had covered the flat to
the extent of fm. last month. Our course this day showed the
great extent of the grassy plains to the n.w., as we did not see
the limit at any point in that direction. Cool breeze from e., with
thin clouds all day.
March 18.—Left the camp at daylight, and proceeded to
Camp 40 on the outward route, and halted for the remainder of
the day to rest the horses, as a heavy stage lay before us over the
dry country. Large flights of cockatoos came to the pool at this
camp, and we shot thirty-three, which were a welcome addition to
our provisions. Strong easterly breeze ; passing clouds.
March 19. —Steered n. 60° e. at 6‘35, and followed up the
course of the creek, crossing to the right bank at 9, where there
was nothing but the Polygonum flat to mark its course. At
10'30 turned nearly east, passing a large sheet of brackish water,
which appeared deep and permanent at the lower end, but shallow
at the upper part. At IP2O camped at a small pool of fresh water
in a back channel, as we were anxious to get a supply of good
water before proceeding farther, as the next three stages were
without any known water. Fresh breeze from e.
March 20.—At 5*55 steered 110°; at 6‘20 struck a small
creek with steep banks. Altered the course to 90° ; crossed two
small watercourses from the north with a little water in them in
the deeper parts of the channel. The general character of the
country box-flats and open grassy plains near the creek. At 25
entered a large grassy plain, extending n. and e. for 10 m., and
at 9T5 halted at a small watercourse, which retained a little
water in a grassy hollow, the object of halting thus early being to
enable us to start fresh in the afternoon, and, should the country
continue open, to push on through the night, by which the water
could be reached before the heat of the sun was too great for
travelling. At 3’5 resumed our route, and traversed a level
grassy plain, extending Itosm. on each side of the track. At
7 observed a native fire about 2 m. to the north, from which we
concluded that water existed at no great distance ; and at 7T5


■
I
m
were fortunate in finding a pool of rain-water in a slight depres-
sion of the plain, and encamped, but could not find sufficient wood
to boil our tea, though we were well satisfied with having abun-
dance of water.
March 21. —We were again in our saddles at 5*15, and con-
tinuing our course n. 70° e., at 6*40 reached the limit of the
grassy plains which turned to the s.e., and extended to the
horizon. We then entered a wooded country, and the soil
changed from a rich dark loam to a sandy and gravelly soil, with
fragments of sandstone; the vegetation consisted of small wdiite
gum-trees, shrubby acacia, and triodia, with a few patches of
grass. The country gradually rose till 9'20, when we came to
an abrupt descent into the valley of Sturt Creek; but the
country did not improve in character till 10 - 20, when we came to
the grassy flats. At 10 - 50 camped at a large open pool of water
in the bed of the creek. On the pool there w ere a great number
of ducks, but so wild that they could not be approached within
range of our guns. Moderate breeze from e., with light clouds
from the s.e. during the day. The weather has been so misty
for the last ten days, that I have been unable to get a good set
of lunar distances, and it is useless to observe unless under cir-
cumstances favourable to accuracy.
March 22. —5‘35 found us again travelling up the creek on a
northerly course, and at 7'20 changed the course to n.e. by n.,
and at 1T25 camped about a mile below Camp 35. The hill at
the bend of the creek proved to be basaltic, with a stratum of
sandstone conglomerate resting on the top. The pools in the
creek were much reduced, and all the small ones dried up.
March 23, Sunday. —The feed and water not being such as
would permit of our resting here, we followed up the creek nearly
on the outward track. A few miles above the camp a party of
blacks came out of the creek, and commenced a distant parley,
but on one of the party approaching, they picked up the spears
that had been secreted in the grass, and ran away into the bed
of the creek. After hours’ journey camped at the lower end
of the pool, where we had halted on the 15th February. Near
the northern bend of the creek w y e passed a fine deep pool, which
appears to retain water through the dry season. All the smaller
pools had dried up, and the larger reduced 2 ft.
March 24.—As the horses had not had a day’s rest for some
time past, we remained at the camp to refresh them, before at-
tempting to cross the dry country which divides the southern
waters from those flowing to the n.w. coast, as the nearest water
which we knew to exist was 50 m. to the e., and the country in
that direction very bad travelling. We were, however, only
80 m. in a direct line from the Depot Camp, and as that course
■ i
1
i


would take us over new country, I decided on attempting the
direct route.
March 25. — At 6-20 steered n. 40° e., and, leaving Sturt
Creek, traversed open grassy plains till 9*5, when we entered a
wooded country, with white gum trees and an undergrowth of
acacia, with triodia and patches of grass; the soil a red sandy
loam. At 11 passed to the s. of an extensive grassy plain, ex-
tending to the n.w. At 12-30 halted to ease the horses’ backs
from the loads, and resumed our route at I*4o, and at 2 crossed
a ridge of stony country, which the aneroid showed to be about
1700 ft. above the sea level, and was the highest spot yet visited
by the Expedition. At 2-20 altered the course to e., and fol-
lowed a slight depression till 4, when we came to a dry water-
course trending n.w. ; this was traced down in search of water till
6‘30 without success, and we halted for the night. The day
having been calm and very hot, the horses were rauch'distressed
for want of water; but as there was a little green grass on the
bank of the creek, they were able to feed for a few hours durino-
the night. °
March 26.—Proceeded down the creek, and at 7'20 came to a
small pool of water, which the horses emptied in the space of a
few minutes; but farther on came to a larger supply, and some of
the pools seemed to be permanent, having a belt of water pau-
danus and reeds round them ; below this the channel was dry and
sandy, but much enlarged by tributary gullies. At noon came to
a shallow pool, at which we encamped. The country through
which this creek passes is poor and stony, low hills of sandstone,
chert, and limestone rising immediately behind the narrow grassy
flats of the creek, which are fertilized by its overflow in the wet
season. The vegetable productions of the country seemed to be
limited to a few small gum trees, shrubby acacia, and triodia, with
an occasional patch of grass. At the camp the bed of the creek
was about 40 yards wide, with banks 15 ft. high, the general course
n.w., which renders it probable that it flows to Cambridge Gulf.
March 27.—At 6 left the camp, and steered a course n. 60° e.,
gradually ascending among hills of chert and sandstone till 8-20,
when we reached the level table land. The principal trees were
white gum and silver-leaved ironbark ; the soil red loam, of vary-
ing quality, well grassed, but with patches of triodia, which affects
a sandy or stony soil. The country was now so nearly level that
scarcely any rise or fall was discoverable, though the aneroid
showed slight undulation. At 1-55 halted for an hour, and at
6 camped in a patch of green grass, which enabled the horses to
feed, though they had no water. The weather was clear and hot
during the day, with a light easterly breeze, the night cloudy and
very warm.
I
I
i
?
VOL. XXVIII. F


■i
it
pi ■
■
El 1
March 28. —At s*lo resumed our course n. 60° e., through a
grassy forest of ironbark and bloodwood, with patches of small
acacia and triodia. At 7-45 entered a series of open plains
covered with high grass: these plains continued to 11, when,
passing through an open gum forest, the country declined to the e.,
and at 11* 15 came to a small watercourse, which was dry and
sandy; this was followed to the n.e. till 11*40, when it passed
through a rocky gorge in a steep sandstone ridge, which rose at
an angle of 30° to the s.w., and 40° to the n.e. —the latter being
the dip of the strata. In this rocky gorge we could see a pool ol
water, but it was quite inaccessible from that side of the ridge,
and we had to make a considerable detour to the s. before we
could descend to the plain below, and reached a fine pool of water,
at the lower end of the gorge, at which we halted and watered
our thirsty horses. As we were now only two hours’ ride from
the Depot Camp, we, after a short rest, started again at 3*lo, and
at 515 reached the Depot Camp, where we w r ere welcomed by
Mr. Baines and his party, and I was glad to find them all enjoy-
ing good health, and that the horses were in good condition. They
had, however, been somewhat annoyed by the blacks, who had
made frequent attempts to burn the camp, and also the horses, by
setting fire to the grass, and, on some occasions, had come to
actual hostilities, though by judicious management none of the
party had been injured, nor was it certain that any of the blacks
had been hurt, though it had been necessary to resort to the use
of fire-arms in self defence, and for the protection of the horses.
, March 29. —Returned our surplus provisions into store, when
we found that the pieces of pork originally 4 lbs. weight w r ere
reduced to 1 lb. each, as the long continuance of heat had
melted the whole of the fat; our ration had, therefore, been 1 lb.
of flour, a lb. of pork, 2 oz. of sugar per diem each. Mr. H.
Gregory and Bowman rode out to round up the horses.
March 30, Sunday. —The weather continues calm and cloudy,
and though the temperature is not high, the heat is very oppres-
sive.
March 31. —Examining and packing stores in readiness for the
exploration of the country to the E. of the depot. The stores
were in good condition, though the white ants had injured many
of the bags. Although, in some respects, it would be more con-
venient to move the party at once to the bank of the Victoria
before examining the country beyond, yet, as the horses are now
accustomed to the run near the depot, and the huts and stock-
yard rendered the station a more safe and convenient spot than
we could elsewhere select, it 'appeared best to leave the party at
the present camp until I had explored the country to the e., and
then move the whole party down the right bank of the river, by


which the number and magnitude of the tributaries from the e.
would be ascertained, and this was an important point with refer-
ence to the contemplated journey to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
April 1. —Preparing equipment for a light party to explore the
country to the E. of the camp. Shod 6 horses, and packed
18 days’ provisions for 4 persons. The weather continues cloudy,
with light variable winds.
April 2. —At 6*45 started from the depot with Mr, H. Gregory,'
Mr. Baines, and John Fahey, taking 6 horses and 18 days’ pro-
visions, &c. Steered e. over an undulating grassy country of
basaltic formation, with occasional ridges of sandstone ; the soil
was generally good, but very stony. I had before traversed this
country, and as the weather was very misty, with much rain,
nothing worth farther record was observed. At I*3o altered the
course to e.s.e,, and at 3*15 camped on a large creek trending
n.e., in the bed of which were large pools of a permanent cha-
racter. ( Camp a.) The hills were basaltic, but the valleys of
the creeks having been cut through this rock into the sandstone, ;
they were not of such a fertile character as the plains and
ridges. Timber was wholly absent, and only a few small trees
were seen at intervals on the hills. The morning was cloudy,
with light rain, but it cleared towards sunset.
April 3. — Resumed our route at 6*30, and steered e.s.e. to a
basaltic hill, which was reached at 7*40. From the summit a
great extent of country was visible, but there were no marked
features, as the broken ranges and isolated hills were very similar
to each other. The whole country appeared to be a basaltic
plain, with masses of sandstone rising 100 to 200 ft. above the >
general level, while the valleys of the creeks were excavated to
the depth of 100 ft. The country was well grassed, but very
stony; but this, though inconvenient to the traveller, does not
render it less valuable for pasture, as stony land always stands:
feeding better than any other. At B*2o altered the course to
nearly e., towards a low ridge of hills. The plain was well
grassed till 12*50, when the sandstone prevailed on the surface,'
and triodia replaced the grass. At I*so followed down a rocky
gully, and at 2*15 encamped. ( C b.)
April 4. —At 6* 15 left the camp, and followed the gully to the'
e.s.e. At 7 crossed a sandstone ridge, and beyond it a large;
creek from the s.w., in the bed of which there were some fine
pools of water. We then ascended to a basaltic plain, and;
altered the course to s.e. at 8; the country gradually declined to
the e., and the sandstone prevailed, but grass was abundant. At
9*40 reached the Victoria, the course from s.s.w. to n.n.e. : the
river had ceased to run, and was now only in large pools. Crossed
to the right bank, steering s. half an hour, and camped on the;
F 2


I
HP m m ■
&fr%f
Gregory’s Journal of the
bank of a creek from the s.s.e. ( Camp c.) At noon the sky was
overcast, and at 2 it commenced raining, and continued till 4'30,
accompanied by heavy thunder: heavy dew at night. After it
commenced raining the aneroid fell OTO, but rose again before it
ceased. In this part of Australia neither wind nor rain appear to
affect the atmospheric pressure to any great extent.
April 5. —The result of the rain was a thick fog this morning,
and when we left the camp at 5'50 we could not see 100 yards,
but we traversed the basaltic plain on an e. course till 7, when
the fog cleared away, and we found ourselves at the foot of some
low rocky hills of basalt, over which we travelled n. 70° e.
These hills were very rough and stony, but covered with excellent
grass. We then entered a basaltic plain, richly grassed, and less
stony than usual. At 9’30 crossed a basaltic ridge, and entered
a large valley trending to the n. and e. At 10T0 ascended a
hill about 150 ft. high, and got bearings of the ranges, &c. The
country appeared to consist of grassy hills and plains, extending
20 to 30 m. to the n. and e. In the s. a range of basalt and
sandstone hills intercepted the view. Steered e, from the hill,
and traversed an undulating country, the rocks being basalt, sand-
stone, chert, and jasper, basalt forming the higher ground, though
the jasper rested on the basalt on the banks of the creeks. At
2TO encamped on a large creek, with a gravelly channel 20 yards
wide. ( Camp d.) Fahey obtained a large quantity of mussels
from the pools in the creek, and they proved an excellent addition
to our supper, though rather deficient in flavour. The weather
was cloudy, and though the sun was occasionally visible, we could
observe neither the commencement nor end of the solar eclipse ; I
was, therefore, unable to avail myself of it for correcting the
longitude.
April 6. —Left the camp at 6*lo, and steered e. over a grassy
plain. At 7’25 crossed some wide channels from the s.e., form-
ing a large creek. At 815 turned s.e,, and followed the creek
till noon; it then turned s., and at 12T5 camped at a shallow
pool of muddy water. ( Camp e.) The creek was here divided
into several small channels, in which only a few small pools of
water remained. The whole of the country traversed this day
was nearly level, well grassed, and very open. Basalt and jasper
are the prevailing rocks.
April 7.—As the creek appeared to come from the s., and not
to have a long course, but to rise in the low sandstone ranges
which w r ere visible in that direction, it was useless to follow it
farther, and therefore steered northwards, to intercept any streams
which might join the Victoria lower down its course; and after
travelling over open grassy ridges of basalt for 6 hours, at 1225
camped at a small gully, in which there were some pools of water,


which appeared to he supplied by springs. ( f.) The
country, from 5 to 10 m. to the E. of the track, seemed open
and grassy, basalt forming the prevailing rock.
April B.—At 6 left the camp, and steered an average w.s.w.
course over an undulating grassy country of basaltic formation.
At 11’45 reached the bank of the creek, which formed fine pools
50 yards wide, with fine open grassy country on both sides, well
suited for stock. Followed the creek n. by w. till I*s, when we
encamped on the left hank. ( Camp g.) The morning was calm
and hot, but it clouded over in the afternoon, and there was a
slight shower at 3 p.m.
April 9 route down the creek in a northerly direc-
tion from 6T5 till 7'55, when we reached the junction with the
Victoria River. The river had high banks, and formed deep
reaches of water, with a dense growth of Pandanus melaleuca
and flooded gum trees in the dry portions of the channel. The
country on both banks was basaltic, and rose gradually into fine
grassy downs ; the soil very stony, but good sandstone was exposed
where the river had cut through the basalt, which is not of very
great thickness. At 235 camped on a back channel of the river, as
the principal channel was difficult of access, from the steep banks and
dense growth of the reeds. {Camp h.) Although the upper part
of the Victoria has long ceased to flow, this part of the river is
running with a strong current 10 yards wide and 6 ft. deep.
April 10.—Continued our route at 6*5, and steered northward
along the course of the river till BTO, when it turned to the n.w.
The country consisted of nearly level grassy plains of various
elevations, separated by low rocky ridges of basalt and sandstone,
the whole well grassed, except some small patches, where triodia
prevailed. At 11 altered the course to average n.w. by n., and
at T3O camped on a small gully, with a little water from a
recent shower. ( Camp i.) At 11*40 there was a shower of
rain, and the temperature was reduced from 95° to 84°.
April 11.—Started at 6*30, steering w.n.w. At first sandstone
prevailed, and triodia replaced the grass ; but at 2 m. entered
the basaltic country, which was well grassed, but very stony, and
formed flat topped hills of small elevation. The basalt appeared
to be interstratified with sandstone, which was much altered at the
line of contact. At 9*15 came on the bank of the river, which
was running strong in a deep channel, with a dense line of pan-
danus, fig-trees, flooded gum, melaleuca, and terminalia, &c., on
the banks. Followed the valley of the river n.w, till noon, and
camped at the foot of the hill which we had ascended, at the most
southern point attained in December, 1855. (Camp k.) As-
cended the hill, and took bearings as on the former occasion; the
rain had obscured the features of the country.


I
iEak
♦ . * . .m. •- ♦ ** *“ e *
April 12.—Having connected this part of our route with that
•of December last, at 6’20 commenced our return up the river,
crossing to the left hank at 7T5. The water w r as running strong,
20 yards wide, and 2 ft. deep. In examining the ford my horse
trod on the back of a large alligator, which seemed to be equally
astonished as the horse at their unexpected meeting. I then pro-
ceeded up the river 1J m., and halted for Mr. H. Gregory, whom I
had sent to examine the river lower dowm for a ford, and he
shortly after overtook us, having found a better crossing over the
river. At 4 resumed our journey, and at dusk encamped in the
bed of a large creek which joined the Victoria from s.s.w. ( 1.)
At 7 it commenced raining, and there were frequent showers
with thunder and lightning till midnight. As the creek on which
we camped seemed to come from the s.w., we followed the valley in
that direction at GAO : the hills receding, the grassy flats seemed to
extend to the banks of the Wickham and form a continuation of
Hutt Plains. The creek now came from s.s.w. and had some fine
pools of water in the channel. At 210 camped at a shallow pool
in the grassy flat, as the water in the creek was not easy of
access from the dense mass of reeds and grass on the bank.
( Camp m.) The hills which bound the valley of the creek are of
sandstone, chert, and basalt, with very few trees; the flats near
the creek brown loam, and covered with grass 5 to 9 feet high,
which greatly impeded the horses.
April 13. —The aneroid barometer was completely thrown
out of adjustment by the principal lever having been moved from
its position by a violent jerk in crossing one of the gullies.
April 14.—At 6TO resumed our journey up the creek in a
southerly direction, the valley gradually narrowing, and in one part
the sandstone rocks came close to the bank of the creek, leaving
scarcely space to pass between them and the deep pools of water.
( Camp n.) At 12'30 camped on the right bank ; the basaltic hills
appeared to turn to the s.e., and we now entered the sandstone
country. The valley of this creek appears to other the best access to
the upper part of the Victoria, as it is nearly level from Hutt Plains
to 10 40 on this day’s journey, beyond which point drays w'ould
have to ascend the hills and turn to the s.e. to reach Roe Downs,
which are the finest part of the country yet examined. A short
distance below the camp we saw several native paintings on the
rocks. They consisted of rude outlines of men, fish, and snakes,
some in red ochre and others in white clay. Mr. Baines sketched
some of the most remarkable.
► i
April 15.—At 6*15 recommenced our journey, and follow'ed
the creek, which turned to the w., and the country became so
extremely rugged that the valley was impassable, and we had to
ascend thejiills, steering s.w., across very rocky sandstone country,


to the basaltic plains, then changing the course to w.n.w. At
3‘40 camped on the bank of the creek, which was much reduced
in size. ( Camp o.) The country to the north of the creek consisted
of very rough and rocky hills of red sandstone, extremely barren
in appearance, while on the south it rose into the basaltic plains
which form Roe Downs.
April 16.—Resumed our journey at 6’45, and travelled on a
w. by n. course towards a remarkable basaltic hill, which I called
Mount Sanford, traversing a fine open grassy country till 1,
when we encamped on a creek with permanent pools of water.
( Camp p.) The rough, stony ground has rendered the horses quite
footsore, and their legs are much cut and bruised by frequent
falls over the rocks in crossing the deep ravines and rocky ridges.
April 17.—Started at 6-25, and reached Mount Sanford at
7-30, the country passed being sandstone, producing triodia and a
little grass. The hill is of basalt, with a flat top, in form nearly
a truncated cone, 150 ft. high and 300 ft. diameter at the top.
Having taken angles to the surrounding hills, descended and
steered s.w. and w. to the depot camp, which was reached at 1.
(Depot Camp.) During our absence Dr. Mueller had found full
employment in collecting the plants in the vicinity of the camp, and
the rest of the party had been occupied in the care of the horses
and duties of the camp, and I was glad to find that they had not
been again molested by the blacks.
April 18.—Preparing maps of the late route to the east of
:the depot. Party preparing for the return to the principal camp.
April 19. —Party employed as before.
. April 20, Sunday. —A fine cool breeze from the s., with
thin clouds.
' April 2l.—Several of the horses had strayed some distance
from the camp, and we did not start till 12 30, when we steered
n. by w. till 5T5, when w r e camped at a small creek in a deep
rocky valley. The country after leaving the basaltic plain
very rocky, the hills composed of chert with a superstratum of
red sandstone ; grass was abundant in the valleys, but the hills
produced little besides triodia and a few small gumtrees.
April 22. —At 6-45 steered e. 1 m. down the creek to its
junction with Depot Creek, which was followed N. and n.n.e. till
B’4o. The back country rose into sandstone hills covered with
triodia, but there were good grassy flats on the bank of the creek.
The creek then entered a rocky gorge about 100 yards wide,
with cliffs of red sandstone upwards of 100 ft. high on each side.
With some trouble we forced our way through the reeds, brush-
wood, rocks, and pools of water till 10T0, when a more open part
of the valley w r as reached. The creek now turned e.n.e., and the
wide valley was bounded by low chert hills on the N. and the


sandstone range just passed on the s. Except in the lower part
of the valley and a few patches on the hills, the country was very
poor and stony, triodia taking the place of the grass. Water was
abundant in the bed of the creek, forming large pools, between
which there was a small stream of water in the upper part of the
creek, but lower down the channel was dry between the pools.
At 1 camped on the right bank of the creek.
April 23.—Crossed to the left bank of the creek at 6*20, and
followed it n.e. 1 hour, when the creek turned e., and our course
was over stony ridges. It was now found that one of the pack-
horses had been lost in the dense thickets in the bed of the creek.
Mr. H. Gregory therefore returned to search for the lost animal,
and the party halted till 9*20, and then went on, leaving Mr.
Baines to wait on the track till Mr. Gregory came up. At 10 20
reached the Wickham river, and followed it down to the junction
of Depot Creek, which we crossed at noon, and camped in a
grassy flat about a mile lower down. At 2 Mr. H. Gregory and
Mr. Baines came into the camp, but had not been able to find
the missing horse ; at 3 Mr. H. Gregory started again with
Bowman to look for the lost packhorse.
April 24. —At 10*30 Mr. H. Gregory returned with the
packhorse lost yesterday; fortunately the horse was not carrying
a load, and though the saddle had got under its belly nothing
was injured.
April 25. —Followed the river down from 7*40 till 2*30, and
encamped. At 9*lo crossed a large tributary creek from the s.;
the country was grassy near the river, but rose into rocky hills
with flat tops at a short distance from it. Light rain from 4 a.m.
to 1 p.m., with gentle breeze from the e.
.
i
April 26. —Continued the route along the right bank of the
Wickham from 7*45 till 3*15, and encamped. The general
course e.n.e. After passing the gorge in the sandstone range,
which was very rocky and narrow, the country opened into level
grassy plains. The best line of route to the upper valley of the
Wickham is near Mount Warburton, as the sandstone hills which
form the gorge are detached. The day was cool and cloudy,
with a strong easterly breeze in the morning, and it commenced
raining at sunset.
April 27.—At 7*25 left the camp and steered e. to the
\ictoria River, but, as we could not find a fording-place, turned
N. to the Wickham, and encamped on its bank at 11*25, the bank
of the \ ictoria being so thickly covered with reeds that the water
was not accessible. In the afternoon I rode out with Mr. H.
Gregory to search for a ford, as I wished to keep on the right
bank of the river to ascertain what tributary streams joined from
the east. After 3 hours’ search found a practicable ford, and


returned to the camp after dark. In the afternoon the blacks
were heard calling on the left bank of the Wickham near the
camp, but were not seen, owing to the thick brush and trees in
the bed of the river.
April 28. —At 7*25 steered s. to the Victoria, and reached
the ford at 8*35, and at 9 had accomplished the passage of
the river with only a few slight accidents; then followed it
downwards till I*ls, and encamped. On the eastern side of
the Victoria the country was level and well grassed for several
miles back, and then rose into the sandstone range to the s. and
basaltic hills to the e.
April 29. —At 7* 10 steered ne. over a thinly wooded and
nearly level grassy, basaltic country, with low hills to the e. of
our route. At 8 altered the course to n., and traversed a fine
grassy country, with table hills of basalt resting on chert and
sandstone. Crossed one creek from the s.e., with a muddy
channel 15 yards wide. At 2 changed the course to n. 300°
e., and at 4-15 reached the bank of the Victoria, but it was too
steep for the horses to approach the water, and therefore followed
the river to the rocky ford e.s.e. from Mount JSandiman, and
encamped.
April 30.—Crossed to the left bank of the river at 7, but
one of the horses injured his leg among the rocks and the wound
had to be sewn up, which delayed us till B*2o, when we steered
n.w. to Jasper Creek, which, after much labour in forcing a
passage through the reeds, we crossed at 11*25, and at 12*55
camped on the bank of the Victoria at the commencement of the
rocky gorge through Stokes Range.
May 1. —Proceeded down the river, leaving the camp at
6*50, and at 12*15 camped a short distance above our camp of the
Bth of December, 1855.
May 2. —Continued route from 6*45 till 1, and camped 1 ra.
above the bivouac of 28th of November last.
May 3. —Resumed our journey at 6*45, and followed the
left bank of the river till 10*10, when we encamped at the spot
where we crossed the Victoria on the 28th of November. At 2
crossed the river with Mr. H. Gregory, and rode to the e. to
examine a large creek which joined the Victoria River about 2 m.
below the camp. This creek was 30 to 40 yards wide, with high
muddy banks covered with reeds and grass. The marks of floods
were 50 ft. above its present level, and the general appearance that
of a stream having a course of 40 to 50 m. The wide flat on the
left bank of the creek was covered with high grass, but the valley
was bounded by steep sandstone hills covered with triodia and
scrub. Returned to the camp at 5.
May 4. —At 6*50 left the camp, and followed the same track


Gregory’s Journal of the 1
II '
as in December last, and at 11 camped at the spot where we
had halted at noon on the 10th of December ; the flats of the
river were covered with grass 3 to 7 ft. high, which greatly im-
peded our progress. In the afternoon crossed the river, and
examined a creek which joined it about f- m. above the camp.
It proved to he of no importance, only draining a valley which
extended a few miles to the n. The ford at this camp is
good, the bed of the river about 100 yards wide, but only 20
yards were occupied by running water, which was about 1 ft, deep,
but the river formed fine deep reaches above and below.
May 5. —It being of importance that we should ascertain
whether any large branch joined the river in the short space
which remained unexamined of the right bank of the Victoria, I
proceeded, with Mr. 11. Gregory and Mr. Baines, down the right
hank to the commencement of Bynoe Range, but only found one
large creek, and that not of sufficient importance to be worthy of
special examination, as from its direction it appeared to drain the
country for about 20 m. to the n.e. This confirmed the view I
had taken of the probable result of the general dip of the sand-
stones to the e., which was that the Victoria would occupy the
eastern part of the valley, and that all the larger tributaries
would join from the westward. Returned to the camp at sunset.
May 6. —As we should have to pass this camp on the route
to the Gulf of Carpentaria, I deposited 100 lbs. of flour and a
quantity of shot, lead, horse-shoes, &c., in a cleft in the rocks and
concealed them with large stones, and then set fire to the grass to
deface our tracks. At BTS left the camp, and proceeded along
our former track till noon, and encamped on a small creek 2 m.
e.s.e. from Bynoe Range.
May 7.—Left the camp at BTO, and steered n. 240° e. over
a level country, wooded with Bauhinia, acacia, and eucalyptus,
the latter being more frequent as we advanced. At 1 the country
changed to low rocky ridges of chert and limestone. At 2
camped at a small creek trending n.w., in which a few small
muddy pools of water remained. At noon we passed a party of
five or six blacks, who shouted to us from a distance, hut would
not approach within 200 yards. They were armed with spears,
and seemed to he on their return from hunting, as the grass was
on fire to the s.
May 8.- —At 7*20 resumed our journey, and, steering w.,
crossed a fine creek with deep pools and water pandanus growing
on the banks, then traversed a very rocky country at the southern
base of the sandstone range till 11, when we came to a more level
and grassy country, consisting of chert ridges. At noon steered
n. 300° e. down the valley of a small creek, and soon entered a
deep valley, hounded on both sides by steep sandstone ranges.
I . IX ■ ■
v v


At 1 changed the course to 320°, and at 2'20 camped at a
shallow pool in the bed of the creek which was worn in the lime-
stone rock.
May 9.—At 7’30 resumed our journey down the valley to
the junction of the creek with the Victoria River, which we fol-
lowed down, crossing the ridge at Steep Head at 10 20, and
reached the Principal Camp at 3'30, where we were welcomed by
Mr. Elsey, who was in charge, Mr. Wilson being absent down
the river at the schooner, which had been laid on the shingle bank
near the “ Dome ”to complete repairs. All the men attached to
the expedition were in good health, except Henry Richards,
whose hand was still in a very unsatisfactory state, though better
than when I left in January. The crew of the schooner had not
been so fortunate, as the carpenter, John Finlay, had died, and
three of the men were so ill that they had been left at the camp
to be under the immediate care of the medical officer. This
amount of sickness is to be ascribed to the combined effects of
previous disease and the inferior quality of the provisions with
which the vessel is supplied. It appears that through damage by
salt water and want of good management, the provisions which
should have been sufficient for two years are now reduced to salt
beef of inferior quality and tea, the expedition having had to
furnish flour, rice, sugar, peas, and pork, as also medical stores
for the sick men. In consequence of the reduced number of the
crew of the Tom Tough , Mr. Wilson had found it necessary to
furnish men to assist in working the schooner, as well as to effect
repairs.
«k
s
May 10.—Much of the grass near the camp having been
burnt, I sent the horses to the creek 3 m. above the camp.
Party employed in the general duties of the camp. 29 sheep
now remain ; they are in fair condition, and average 40 to 45
lbs. The natives have been frequently at the camp in small
parties, and on these occasions were very quiet in their demeanour,
but bad made hostile demonstrations when met by small detached
parties of the expedition, and on one occasion Mr. Wilson had
deemed it necessary to fire at them, but only one of the blacks
appears to have been wounded with small shot in the arm, as he
was afterwards seen at the camp.
i
t
• May 11. —Sunday.
May 12.—Preparing maps, arranging stores, &c.
May 13. —Preparing maps of the late journey. Arranging
equipment for explorations towards the Gulf of Carpentaria.
May 14. —Preparing maps. Sifting flour, packing specimens,
burning charcoal for the forge, preparing horse-shoes, &c. At
6 p.m. Mr. Wilson returned in the boat from the Tom ,
and brought one of the boys belonging to the schooner’s crew to


'
\
the camp for medical treatment, as he was suffering from scurvy.
The Tom Tough had been moved below the shoals, and was
now moored in a secure position below Curiosity Peak; all the
leaks had been secured, and she now only makes about i an inch
of water per hour. The crew of the vessel have been so much
reduced by sickness that it will he necessary to send men on board
to assist in refitting the schooner, and procuring a supply of wood
and water. As it is necessary to replace the stores destroyed or
damaged by salt water, it appears desirable that the Tom
Tough should proceed to the Gulf of Carpentaria via Coepang
in the island of Timor, where a supply of rice and sugar can be
procured for the expedition, and the vessel will be enabled to
complete her stores. It is desirable that the land party should
refit with all possible despatch for the journey to the Gulf of
Carpentaria, in order to take advantage of the cool season, and
there is reason to expect that the horses will be sufficiently re-
cruited in strength by the end of June; I am, therefore, in hope
that the party will be able to leave the Victoria before the
expiration of the ensuing month. A small body of natives
came to the camp this morning, and after bartering a few trifles
retired.
May 15. —Continued plotting maps. Party preparing equip-
ment for the journey to the Gulf of Carpentaria. Camp duties,
and picking oakum for the schooner. Having found that the
pork had been so much reduced in weight during the last journey,
I made some experiments in the preparation of meat biscuit by
mixing the preserved beef with flour in equal quantities ; the result
was very satisfactory, and the reduction in weight by baking was
33 per cent.
May 16. —Party employed as before.
May 17. —Party employed as before.
May 18.—Sunday.
May 19. —Messrs. Wilson, Elsey, and Mueller being desirous
of proceeding up Baines River to collect specimens, &c., arrange-
ments were made for this purpose, and they proceeded in the boat
with Phibbs, Humphery, and Shewed, to the schooner. The men
were then to return to the camp with a cargo of stores, and
Messrs. Wilson, Elsey, and Mueller were to proceed up the
river in the small boat to be obtained from the schooner.
Richards is in charge of the sheep; Mac Donald cook for the
week; Bowman and Melville in charge of horses; Dean is
making saddlebags and harness; Fahey and Selby in burning
charcoal and in general camp duties.
May 20. Party employed as before. The weather continues
fine, with southerly winds.
May 21. —Party employed as before.
II
*
W V
Hkie-
~**r r *m rr- ~ t


Afar/ 22.—Party employed as before. At noon the boat
returned from] the Tom Tough with stores. Captain Gourlay
came up in the gig to the camp, and informed me that the
schooner only makes 10 inches of water per day, and that she
would be ready for sea as soon as the upper seams were caulked.
He considered her perfectly seaworthy for the purposes of the
expedition.
May 23. —Party employed as before.
May 24. —Despatched the boat to the schooner with 3 cases
of stationery, tobacco, clothing, &c. Captain Gourlay returned to
the Tom Tough. Party employed as before.
May 25.—Sunday. *
May 26.—Party employed preparing equipment for the
expedition to the Gulf of Carpentaria, &c.
May 27.—As before.
May 28. —As before.
May 29. —As before. Messrs. Wilson, Elsey, and Mueller
returned with the longboat and gig from the schooner, having
been about 30 m. up the river to the s.w. of Curiosity Peak.
Mr. Wilson brought a native in the boat from Stony Spit.
May 30. —Party employed as before, and packing stores to
be sent on board the schooner.
May 31.—Party employed as before.
June 1, Sunday.—Principal Camp on the Victoria River.
(Lat. 15° 34's. Long. 130° 22' e.)
June 2.—The party employed preparing saddlery and equipment
for the journey to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
June 3. —Mr. Baines proceeded with the boats to the Tom
Tough , which was now anchored below the shoals in the Victoria
River. Sent down sundry stores, &c., to the vessel; boat’s crew
consisting of Messrs. Phibbs and Humphery, Dawson and Selby.
The remainder of the party employed as before. Preparing maps
of the route up the Victoria River, &c., &c.
June 4. —The party at the camp employed as before, viz.
shoeing horses, stuffing saddles, and other preparations for the
journey to the Gulf of Carpentaria. Received from Mr. Wilson
a journal of his proceedings from Jan. 31 to March 3, and April 1
to May 14, 1856.
June s.—Party at the camp employed as before. Mr, Baines
returned with the gig; boat’s crew, overseers Phibbs and Hum-
phery and Dean, Dawson and Selby, also one of the seamen
belonging to the vessel. Mr. Baines informed me that on the 4th
instant he had landed early in the day from the schooner, in
company with Captain Gourlay, Dawson, and one of the seamen,
Adams, for the purpose of bartering with some blacks, about 20
in number. The natives having been allowed to approach the
i
I


boat, stole a tomahawk, and on Adams making a demonstration
of detaining one of their number till the stolen article was returned,
one of the blacks seized his gun and tried to wrest it from him,
but Captain Gourlay approaching him he ran away into the surf,
and the rest of the blacks retired : the party then returned to the
schooner. The axe was afterwards found in the water near the
spot where the boat landed.
June 6, —Party employed as before. The shoeing of the horses
progresses rapidly, Mr. H. Gregory and Bowman completing 5
horses each day, although some of the horses are very restive.
June 7. —Mr. Elsey proceeded in the gig with Phibbs, Hum-
Miery, Selby, and Adams, conveying the two sick men and boy
belonging to the crew of the schooner to that vessel. Party
employed as before, shoeing horses, baking meat biscuits, &c., &c.
Heavy showers of rain at night.
June 8, Sunday,
' June 9. —Completed shoeing the horses. Party employed
making small tents and saddle bags, fitting pack saddles, baking
meat biscuit, &c. Dr. Mueller collecting and arranging botanical
specimens.
June 10. —Party employed as before and preparing extra shoes
for the horses, &c, Mr. Elsey returned with the gig from the
Tom Tough; boat’s crew, Phibbs, Humphery, and Selby. The
sick men had reached the vessel without any serious difficulty,
although the boat had grounded on the banks and had there-
by been detained till the next tide, and they were thus exposed
for several hours in the rain.
June 11. —Party employed as before.
June 12.—Completed baking 300 lbs. of preserved beef and
300 lbs. of flour into meat biscuit, which weighed 480 lbs. when
quite dry; Gibs, of flour was added to each 6 lb. tin of preserved
beef with the whole of the fat and gravy, and 1 oz. of salt (no
water being required), the whole worked up into a stiff dough, and
baked in the ordinary form and size of sea biscuit, the whole
weight of which was 8 lbs. Thus lb. was equal to 1 lb. of
meat and 1 lb. of flour.
June 13. Mr. Baines proceeded with MM. Phibbs, Hum-
phery, and Selby in the gig to the Tom Tough , with stores not
required for the use of the camp, and to bring up soap and other
stores required for the outfit of the land party. Party at the
camp preparing equipment as before. Mr. Wilson completed and
furnished to me a sketch of the western branch of the Victoria
River. Preparing maps, &c. for transmission to the Governor-
General of Australia.
June 14. Wrote to the Governor-General of Australia report-
ing progress of the North Australian Expedition. Party employed
V v


as before. The spare set of harness were completed and fitted to
the horses.
June 15, Sunday. —The weather has become very cool and
clear, the thermometer ranging from 48° to 52° at sunrise.
June 16.—Mr. Baines returned from the schooner with the srier
_i,. , o O
and long boat, bringing the stores required to complete the
equipment of the land expedition. Party employed as before.
June 17.—Preparing copies of letters to the Governor-General
of Australia for transmission to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies. The party preparing equipment, &c., for the journey to
the Gulf of Carpentaria.
June 18.—Party preparing equipment, <&c.
June 19. —Wrote to Mr. Baines, instructing him to take charge
of the portion of the expedition which would proceed in the Tom
Tough to the Albert River. Party preparing equipment.
June 20.—Wrote to the master of the Tom Tough schooner
instructing him to proceed to Coepang for supplies, and thence
to the Albert River. Wrote to Mr. Baines two letters of
instructions. Fitted the saddles and inspected the equipment of
the party proceeding over land to the Albert River.
June 21.—At 10 a.m. left the camp on the Victoria with a
party consisting of Mr. H. Gregory, Dr. Mueller, Mr. Elsey,
Robert Bowman, Charles Dean, and John Melville, with 7 saddle
and 27 packhorses, conveying 5 months’ provisions of salt pork and
meat biscuit, and 6 months’ supply of flour, tea, sugar, coffee, &c.
26 lbs. gunpowder, 60 lbs. bullets, 100 lbs. shot, 5000 percussion
caps, &c. Proceeding up the left bank of the river, crossed
the ridge at the back of Steep Head, and at 3 - 15 p.m. camped
about | mile above it, on the bank of the river. ( I.)
June 22, Sunday. —At 7’30 a.m. left the camp, following
the river for 10 m. and then a small tributary creek for 4 m. to
the s.s.E., but the country proving very rocky returned 1 m. down
the creek and encamped at 3 p.m, ( n.)
June 23. —Left the camp at 7 a.m. and returned down the
valley of the creek to the river, and followed the Victoria to the
junction of Beagle Creek, which we ascended 5 m. and camped at
11 a.m., as there was no water on the Beagle Valley route
between this point and the bend of the Victoria at Bynoe Range,
a distance too great to be commenced at this late hour of the
day. ( Camp in.)
June 24. —Started at 7 a.m. and E., through an open box
forest nearly level and well grassed; the grass had been burnt off
by the blacks, but had shot up to a foot in height. Passed, to the
s. of the Fitzroy Range, the valley between it and Stokes Range,
very similar to Beagle Valley and about 4 ra. wide. Keeping
close to Stokes Range, passed between it and some of the outlying
X i
A


** M- - -
*«■
Gregory’s Journal of the
hills, and at 4*20 reached our old camp of the sth of May, and
found the stores we had then secreted in the rocks undisturbed.
{Camp iv.)
June 25.—Having distributed the stores left here in May
among the several packhorses, at 715 a.m. resumed our route up
the river and crossed to the right bank 2 m. above the creek we
intended to ascend, and camped at 11 A.m. {Camp v.) Marked
a large white gum-tree A* V-
June 26.—Left the camp at 7 and followed the creek upwards
to the e.s.e. for sm. The valley was about Im. wide, with fine
grassy flats, bounded by sandstone cliffs 50 to 200 ft. high, and
forming table land with deep ravines. The valley now turned to
the e, and e.n.e. Some small tributaries joined the creek from the
s.e., the sandstone cliffs disappeared, and the hills were rounded in
their outlines, rising about 300 ft. above the creek. Shallow
pools separated by dry banks of shingle and an occasional deep water
hole characterised the channel of the watercourse. At 1-30 p.m.
camped on the left bank of the creek in an open flat well grassed.
The higher land very stony and inferior. {Camp vi.)
June 27.—The temperature was lower this morning than on
any other day since we landed on the n.w. coast of Australia,
being only 41° at sunrise: there was a little dew on the grass, and
a light air from the E. At 6*30 started and followed up the
creek to the e.n.e. till 1, when we camped at a deep pool of water
20 yards wide and 200 yards long. Our attempts to procure
some fish were unsuccessful. {Camp vn.) The country consists
of low stony hills thinly wooded ; and the flats of-the creek, from i
to fm. wide, were well grassed. On the north side of the valley
a few miles back the hills rose to a greater elevation with flat
tops, some with sandstone cliffs near the summits, and others with
smooth grassy slopes: the latter from the colour of the grass
appeared to be of trap formation, and fragments of that rock were
found in the bed of the creek. Soft shales were exposed in the
gullies on the sides of some of the hills, and were overlaid by hard
grey sandstone.
June 28. —Left the camp at 7*15, and followed up the creek to
the e.n.e. till noon, when reaching the last water in its diminished
channel, camped near a steep range of sandstone hills or rather
table land. {Camp vm.) The country traversed was an un-
dulating plain of trap formation resting on grey sandstone. The
country is thinly wooded and well grassed, water abundant in the
creek below the camp, but above the channel was dry and soon
terminated in small gullies. In the afternoon ascended a hill
about | ra. n.w. of the camp: the lower part was compact dark
trap or basalt, and the summit a horizontal bed of sandstone,
250 ft. above the camp. The view to the N. was over very level
IL'


. country, occasionally interrupted by flat-topped sandstone hills,
some 30 m. distant. To the s. and s.w. a level country of trap
formation extended for 20 m., and to the E. the level table land
rose 300 ft. above the camp, and was composed of the same
strata as the hill ascended, but surmounted by a thin bed of
ferruginous conglomerate, which is the upper rock of the new red
sandstone series.
June 29. —At 6’45 left the camp with Mr. H. Gregory to re-
connoitre the country to the e. Ascending the table land steered
E. till 10T0 through a level forest of stringy bark and other
eucalypti; the soil a light gravelly loam, but well grassed. We
then steered n.e. 1 hour along a shallow watercourse, and then E.
again through the forest till 3'20, when we reached a small stream-
bed trending N.N.E. : tracing it through grassy flats which were on
fire, at 4'40 found a small pool of water, at which we halted for
the night.
June 30.—As this appeared to be a spot to which the party
could be advanced with safety, we left our bivouac at 6’50, and
returning across the table land reached the camp at 4 80.
( Camp vm.)
July 1. — At 6'40 a.m. steered an average course of 80° magt. and
reached the water-hole in the creek at 3'30 with the whole party,
and camped at our bivouac of the previous night. ( ix.)
July 2. —At 6*40 left the camp and followed the creek down to
the e.n.e. till 11. It then turned more to the northward, and was
nearly lost in wide level flats covered with high grass. The back
country a level stringy bark forest with good grass. At 2'25 the
channel of the creek was again collected into one, and we found a
water-hole 20 yards long and 4 ft. deep, at which we camped.
( Camp x.) Here we observed the fires of a party of blacks who
had camped at the water-hole the previous day. Several heaps of
mussel shells lay at intervals on the banks of the creek, though the
channel was perfectly dry, but it appears that the last wet season
has been unusually dry, and the soil has not been fully saturated,
and consequently the water-holes have dried up sooner than in
average years. Although from the geological structure of the
country we are now evidently on the table land which divides the
waters flowing to the n.w. coast from those which fall into the
Gulf of Carpentaria, yet the elevation does not exceed 800 feet.
July 3. —Starting at 7-30 a.m. followed the creek n.e. by E. to
8-35, when it was joined by a small creek from the s. Thus
increased in size, water was abundant in the bed of the creek, but
the pools were shallow, and not permanent. Grassy flats extended
a mile on each bank, beyond which was a level grassy forest of
stringy bark and bloodwood. The soil a good red loam, and in a
few spots fragments of limestone and agate were strewed over the
VOL. XXVIII. G


v * I
f ■*
Gregory’s Journal of the
surface. An occasional ridge of ironstone was crossed, on which
the grass was very inferior. At 12*45 camped in a wide grassy
flat: the grass having been burnt early in the season, had sprung up
fresh and green. ( Camp xi.)
July 4.—We were again in the saddle at 7*lo, and steering
70° magt. diverged from the creek, traversing a level stringy-bark
forest with abundance of green grass. At 8 turned n.e., the
forest become more open and the stringy-bark replaced by blood-
wood and box ; limestone was frequent and rendered the surface
very rough, and frequent depressions of the surface appeared to
result from the falling in of the roofs of caverns beneath, the
existence of which was also indicated by deep clefts and holes in
the rock, into which the surface waters flow during the rains. At
11 turned to the n., and at noon again came on the creek, which
gradually turned to the n.n.w. Limestone formed the banks, and
only one small pool of water was seen till 4*50, when we found a
little water in the sandy bed of a tributary creek from the s.s.e.,
at which we camped. (Camp xn .) On the bank of the creek we
this day saw, for the first time, the casuarina, which is so frequent
on the creeks trending towards the Gulf of Carpentaria.
July 5. —As the course of the creek was to the n. and we had
already been driven farther in that direction than was desirable,
we left the creek and followed up the tributary to the E.S.E.,
leaving the camp at 7*5 a.m. The channel was soon lost on wide
grassy flats, in one of which was a fine water-hole covered with
nymph sea, and near which a party of blacks were encamped. On
our approach the women decamped with their bags and mats,
while the men stood with their spears gazing on the strange sight
as we passed them. Continuing to follow the creek, the course of
which was only marked by the vegetation showing signs of frequent
inundations, it again formed an irregular channel in the centre of
a wide grassy box flat, and at I*3o camped at a small water-hole
in the channel of the creek. ( Camp xm.)
July 6.—The small size of the creek affording little prospect of
water nearer its source, and as Mr. H. Gregory was suffering
from a severe attack of fever which rendered travelling unad-
visable, I proceeded with Charles Dean to examine the country to
the e.s.e. Leaving the camp at 7 a.m., steered 120°. At 8
crossed a sandstone ridge covered with acacia scrub, and again
descended into the valley of the creek, passing some fine grassy
plains. At 11 ascended the table-land, and passing a belt of
acacia scrub, traversed a level flat covered with melaleuca scrub
and small trees, and at noon entered a forest of stringy bark, with
occasional patches of bloodwood, leguminous ironbark, and ster-
culia. The soil varied from brown loam to ironstone gravel, and
m a few spots the ferruginous conglomerate was exposed on the
Ek
|xN *


surface. On the loamy soil the grass was good, but on the gravel
little grew but the spiny-leaved triodia. This table-land was so
level that not the slightest declivity could be detected during the
day’s journey, which continued till 5*30, when we bivouacked
without water. By taking the precaution of letting the horses feed
on the track, and secreting ourselves after dark in the high grass,
we were able to sleep in security without keeping watch after mid-
night.
July 7. —The horses having strayed back on the track, we took
our saddles and followed their traces 2 m.,and saddling them, rode
to the northward for some miles, but not seeing any signs of water,
turned to the s.w., crossing the outward track, and at length came
to a shallow water-course trending w. A ridge of rocks confining
the channel to a narrow space, three small water-holes had been
formed, in which a little water remained. Below this the water-
course trended s.s.e., and I again turned towards the camp ; but
the night overtaking us in the stringy bark forest, we passed to the
s. of its position without observing it.
July B.—Having ascertained that we had passed to the s. of
the camp, steered n.e., and reached it at 11*20. Mr. H. Gregory
was much better, but very weak in consequence of a violent return
of the fever during my absence. A small party of blacks had
visited the camp, and bivouacked a short distance up the creek.
July 9.—Moved the camp to the water-holes 12 m. to the s.e.,
and in the afternoon rode down the creek with Mr. Elsey. —(
xiv.) It first turned s.s.e. for 14 m., and was lost on a level flat
from w'hich a channel trended to the w., which was again lost in a
level flat extending several miles to the westward. Heavy rain at
night.
July 10.—Accompanied by Mr. Elsey, I proceeded to recon-
noitre the country to the s.e. At 7*45 steered 130° mag., gra-
dually ascending the table-land, which was openly wooded with
bloodwood, box, and white gum, acacia and sterculia occasionally
appearing. The soil was a brown sandy loam, with a few ridges
of sandstone rock of a white colour. Grass had been abundant,
%
*
but was now burnt off. The small white ants’ nests, from 2to 5 ft.
high, were very numerous. At 2*40 a slight depression of the
country was observed, limestone appeared, and deep isolated hollows
were frequent. In one of these hollow's, which was 30 yards in
diameter and 15 ft. deep, there was in the centre a chasm in the
rock, 15 ft. deep and 3 ft. wide, extending to e. and w. At 3
struck a small creek trending e.n.e., with small pools of in
the channel. In following down the creek in search of a sufficient
supply of water for the horses, we passed some blacks sitting at a
fire ; but they did not take any notice of us. At 3*30 came to a
pool of sufficient size for the supply of the whole party, below which
G 2
i
v


the creek was dry. Returning to the pool we met the blacks fol-
lowing on our tracks ; but observing us they ran away, and on
being followed hid themselves. Having unsaddled the horses, we
commenced our dinner, and soon saw the blacks watching us from
their hiding places, and after some time spent in making signs,
they were induced to approach, the eldest of the party feigning to
weep bitterly till they got close to us. We then attempted to
converse with them, and they appeared to recognise some few
words of the dialect of the Victoria River. Their spears were
formed of reed, with large heads of white sandstone, and also with
wooden points for fishing. They were circumcised, and their front
teeth were entire. At 5 steered to the w.n.w. for one hour, and
bivouacked, taking the usual precautions to secure ourselves from
attack during the night.
July 11.—At 6’20 resumed our route towards the camp, which
we reached at 1 p.m., without having seen anything worthy of
further remark.
IN
I
if
I I I 1
I
r
/ ;
to
n
i • ;
I'D
8
July 12. —The grass near the camp having been burnt off, the
horses had scattered very much and could not be collected and
saddled before 10T0, when, following our track of yesterday, we
reached the pool of water at sunset. —(Camp xv.) The country
was so level, although we were crossing the water-parting between
the Gulf of Carpentaria and the n.w. coast, that the aneroid only
varied from 29‘55 to 29'62, and even of this change much was
due to the effect of temperature. The geological structure of this
part of the country differs slightly from that of the Victoria River.
The upper stratum is a bed of ironstone conglomerate, about 20 ft.
in thickness. This rests on sandstone, the upper part of which is
highly ferruginous, passing into a variegated sandstone imperfectly
stratified, and then into a compact silicious sandstone, which is
white, and breaks with a conchoidal fracture. This sandstone rests
on a hard cherty limestone similar to that of the Victoria. In this
rock many depressions occur, apparently caused by the falling of
the roofs of caverns, as there are usually deep fissures in the rock
at the bottom of these hollows, into which the surface-water runs
during rain. In some places the sandstones resting on the lime-
stone have sunk many feet below the general level, with areas
varying from 1 to 10 acres, sometimes sloping towards a central
point of depression 10 to 30 ft. below the plain, and in other cases
they have abrupt rocky banks 3 to 8 ft. high, and the bottom per-
fectly level. The level character of the country is unfavourable
for investigations of this nature, and the thickness of the strata not
easily determined ; but the collective thickness of the strata above
the limestone may be assumed at less than 100 ft. The porous
nature of the limestone precludes the existence of surface-water by
draining the whole of the upper part of the table-land, while it
*R
-


causes strong springs in the lower ground to the e., where the
limestone is exposed on the banks of Elsey Creek and the Roper
River.
July 13 {Sunday). —Leaving the camp at B*3o, proceeded down
the creek, but mistaking a tributary for the principal channel, fol-
lowed it s. for 2 hours, when it divided into many small gullies, and
we therefore returned to the main creek, and at 4*25 camped
about 3 m. n.e. of our starting point in the morning.— {Camp xvi.)
The country passed over was of a very poor character; stiff clay
flats, with melaleuca scrub, occupied the valley, while low but steep
ridges of sandstone rose to the e., and were timbered with stringy-
bark, blood wood, &e. To the s. the country seemed to rise slightly,
but was very poor and sandy. The smoke of bush-fires was visible
to the n. and s.e. Several trees near the camp had been cut with
iron axes.
July 14.—Resuming our journey at BTO, steered n.e. down the
valley of the creek, which I named Elsey Creek, after the surgeon
and naturalist of the expedition. Its course was average n.e., but
spreading into lagoons and swampy flats, was very tortuous and
irregular; then changing into a long winding reach of water, 50
to 60 yards wide, with low banks covered with reeds and tall
melaleuca trees, beyond which was a belt of pandanus growing on
the drier ground. Many small springs rose in the limestone and
ran into the creek, on the banks of which were large heaps of
mussels at the camps of the blacks. The banks of the creek and
springs were so soft and boggy, that the horses could not approach
the water to drink, and we followed the creek in vain search for a
suitable spot till 4, when we camped and watered the horses with
the leather buckets. — {Camp xvii.)
July 15. —Leaving our camp at 7TO, steered n.e. till 9 over a
level country, which appeared to be very swampy in the rainy season.
Altered the course to 10° mag. and crossed a shallow dry water-
course, which proved to be the continuation of Elsey Creek. At
11 turned to 60° mag. and shortly came on the bank of a fine
river, with banks 30 to 40 ft. high and reaches of water 50 to 80
yards wide. — {Camp xvm.) At 11*45 camped at the junction of
Elsey Creek with the river, which is, doubtless, the Roper of Leich-
hardt. The fan palm was frequent on the bank of Elsey Creek,
where it attained a height of 60 to 80 ft., with a thicker stem, and
producing a more palatable vegetable than the species growing on
the Victoria River.
July 16. —At 7*5 a.m. recommenced our journey, following down
the Roper River to the s.e. and n.e. About a mile below the
camp the limestone rocks formed a bar over which the river ran,
with a rapid current 10 yards wide and 2 ft. deep. The banks
then became low and the country very level, the overflow of the
f
i
jjA
A


river forming shallow lagoons, in which the nelumbium, or gigantic
water-lily, was first observed. A ridge of low sandstone hills came
close to the left bank, and on the right a vast level plain, covered
with high grass and reeds, extended 20r3 m. back. This plain
is evidently inundated during the wet season, though the soil was
now dry and deeply fissured by the solar heat. The river divided
into several channels full of reeds, and each with a small stream
of running water, the deep green of the vegetation along the course
of the running water contrasting strongly with the dry and withered
reeds and grass which prevailed elsewhere. Clumps of Melaleuca
leucodendron grew at intervals, and in the distance appeared like
low hills. At 2 camped at the extremity of a low basaltic ridge,
which approached the river from the s. —{Camp xix.) A range of
flat-topped hills extended to the n.k., about 8 m. distant; they
appeared wooded and 200 to 300 ft. high. Bowman rode down a
young emu, which supplied us with a meal of fresh meat.
July 17.—At 7 steered e.s.e., following the course of the river
for about a mile, when, to avoid the high reeds, the course was
altered to s.e. till BTO, and then to 100° mag. till 9’25, when we
camped on a small water-hole, there being abundance of fine green
grass. —(Camp xx.) The river appears to turn to the northward
and enter a range of hills which extend n. and s. a few miles to
the e. of the camp. The country traversed this day is all well
grassed and thinly wooded with terminalia, box, and silver-leaved
ironbark. Trap rock was frequently observed, and the soil was a
good red loam. The metallic barometer has a second time sud-
denly deviated from the aneroid barometer, and the form of the
vacuum vessel has visibly altered, the construction being too slight
to bear the jolting of the pack-horse, though one of the steadiest
has been selected to carry the instruments, and they are always
wrapped in blankets.
July 18. —As this was a suitable spot for resting the party, and
grass abundant, I rode to the s.e. with Mr. H. Gregory to look for
a route towards the head of the Wickham River. Our course was
along a valley between the trap hills to the w. and the sandstone
range to the e. At Bm. reached a creek trending n.e. Its
channel was dry and sandy ; but after some search found a small
pool of water in a side channel. Casuarina and flooded gum-trees
grew on the banks of the creek, and there was some good grass on
the flats, which were limited by steep sandstone hills, wooded with
acacia of the same species as that seen on the lower part of Sturt
Creek. After an hour’s halt at the pool of water we returned to
the camp.
July 19.—-The horses having separated much during the night,
it was 8 before they were collected and saddled. We then fol-
lowed yesterday’s route to the pool of water in the creek 8 m. s.e.
L
v.


from the camp, reaching it at 11*45. i.) The sand-
stones here show a decided dip to the w., varying from 5° to 30°;
the trap-rocks only extend about sm. from the previous camp. In
the afternoon five natives were observed watching our camp, and
on finding they were observed, came up to us, but could not be
induced to speak a single word; they soon after retired. They
had no spears, and were followed by a small dog. Their teeth were
entire, and they were circumcised. At 8 the blacks were detected
stealing into the camp, and when ordered to retire, only hid them-
selves in the grass. As it was absolutely necessary to dislodge
them from their position, 1 caused a gun to he fired in the air,
hoping that they would retreat; but they commenced to ship their
spears, and I then ordered a charge of shot to be discharged among
them, which had the desired effect, and they retired with precipita-
tion. What their object could be in approaching our camp at
night, unless for a hostile purpose, we could not, of course, ascer-
tain ; but the aboriginal Australian considers it an act of positive
hostility to approach the camp of a stranger in silence, especially
at night.
July 20. —Starting at 7*30 a.m. steered s.e, over an undulating
sandstone country, well grassed, but very stony and thinly wooded.
A low range of hills, nearly parallel to our course, lay to the s.w.,
and at 11*30 w*e camped at a fine running spring, in a very rocky
ravine in the range. —( Camp xxn.) The grass was very dry and
inferior near the hills.
July 21.—The horses had shown an unusual desire to stray from
the camp during the night, and as we had reason to expect a visit
from the blacks, they were kept close to the camp. At 6*20 steered
s.e., crossing a table-land about 250 ft. above the camp, and at 8
descended by a rocky ravine, in which was a fine spring, into a
grassy valley, which varied from a few yards to a mile in breadth,
bounded by sandstone hills, the strata of which were not well de-
fined, but appeared to have a considerable dip to the w.s.w. In
the upper part of the valley the creek was well supplied with water,
but as we advanced the channel was dry, though increased to
20 yards in breadth and 10 to 15 ft. deep. At 11*15 one of the
horses, “ Prince,” was observed to be unwell, and at I*2o a second
horse, “ Bob,” was also noticed to be suffering great pain. Having
bled them we continued our route down the creek in search of
water at which the party could halt, and found a small water-hole
at 2*20 ; but the two sick horses dropped dead about 150 yards
short of the water. Their loads had been previously removed to
the saddle-horses. —( Camp xxm.) As soon as the camp was esta-
blished, Mr. Elsey and Dr. Mueller examined the dead horses to
ascertain the cause of death, and it appeared from the state of
excessive inflammation of the stomachs that they had eaten some


«U. -- —- -2 —•
7 ■/
Gregory’s Journal of the
poisonous plant; but the food had been too much comminuted to
admit of any of the plants eaten being recognised.
July 22. —At 7*lo resumed our journey down the creek to the
e, and e.n.e., passing a fine lagoon with nelumbium growing on
the margin, and a large flock of pelicans floated on its surface. At
B*3o passed two large creeks and a second lagoon, 70 yards wide
and 300 yards long. The principal creek now turned to the n.,
and our course was along the foot of a sandstone range, 200 ft.
high, till 12*40, when altering the course to s.e., we ascended the
range and crossed a level sandy table-land covered with scrub.
Descending to the s. found a small dry water-course in an open
valley, which we followed in search of water to the n.w. till 4,
when we camped at a small pool of rain-water. —( Camp xxiv.)
July 23, —The horses had strayed so far in search of grass that
we did not start till 10*30 a.m., when, steering s.e., we crossed a
spur of the table-land which lay to the s.w. Passing several
scrubby valleys, with small water-courses trending to the n.e.,
camped at a shallow water-hole at 3*20. —( Camp xxv.) The
country was of sandstone formation and the soil very poor, mela-
leuca scrubs prevailing on the lower ground, and eucalypti, acacia,
and Grevillia on the hills. To the s.w, the hills were rocky and
with rounded outlines, but to the n.e. flat-topped and of less height.
The sandstones often dip at a considerable angle, but in no general
direction. A thin bed of ferruginous conglomerate rests on hard
grey sandstone, imperfectly stratified, beneath which shales of
various colours exist. On the exposed surface of these shales an
efflorescence of sulphate of magnesia was frequent.
July 24. —Resuming our route at 7*60, steered s.e. and ascended
a sandstone range with horizontal strata, and very abrupt on the
s.e. side. Entering a wide valley crossed two watercourses, one
of which was running apparently from springs, as several clumps
of melaleuca leucodendron grew on the slopes of the sandstone
hills, from which these water-courses came. Crossing a second
spur of the table-land, descended to a small creek with small
water-holes and narrow grassy flats, at which we encamped. The
general character of the country was very poor and scrubbv.—
(Camp xxvi.)
July 25.—At 7*lo left the camp and steered s.e., through a suc-
cession of scrubs of eucalypti, Grevillia, acacia, Jacksonia, and
Bossiwea, with occasional patches of melaleuca. At 1 crossed a
steep ridge of sandstone rocks, and gradually descended till 2*55,
when we encamped on a small gully coming from the s.e., and in
which a little water remained, and on the banks a little dry inferior
grass existed. ( Camp Xxvn.) Since leaving the Roper River
the general character of the country has been worthless, the small
size of the water-courses indicating an arid country to the s.w. of
f I


our route. Few traces of blacks have been observed, though vast
columns of smoke rise to the e. and s.e. Animals or birds are
seen. The rocky nature of the country has caused the
horses’ shoes to wear out rapidly, and the day seldom passes
without having to replace the shoes of several of the horses.
July 26.—At 8 steered s.e., soon entering a scrub of acacia,
melaleuca, Grevillia, and a few eucalypti; the soil sandy, with a
few blocks of grey sandstone. Some small dry water-courses
trended to the n. At noon crossed a large creek trending to the
s.s.e. through a very rocky valley ; the whole country became very
barren and rocky. At 2‘35 recrossed the creek, which turned to
the E. and n.e. After following it down for an hour found a small
patch of grass and encamped ; the bed of the creek was well supplied
with water in shallow rocky pools. —{Camp xxvm.)
July 27 {Sunday). —Resumed our route at 7, crossing, a very
rugged ridge of hills, in descending one of which a horse wedged
his foot into a cleft of the rock, and falling down, was only extri-
cated by beating away the rock with an axe. Fortunately, though
much bruised, there was no serious injury. With some difficulty
we extricated ourselves from these rocky ridges, and, crossing a
large creek, entered a level plain covered with melaleuca scrub.
Crossed two sandy creeks 15 and 20 yards wide, with shallow pools
of water. At noon passed a barren ridge of white sandstone hills,
and entered an open grassy plain, with clumps of melaleuca trees
indicating the existence of springs, at one of which we encamped
at 125. — {Camp xxix.) The country traversed is of a worthless
character; there is very little grass, and the soil poor and stony.
The sandstones are of grey colour, not regularly stratified ; but
where it could be ascertained the bedding is horizontal and the
laminae dip 20° to 30° to the n., but often in the opposite direction.
These sandstones are at least 200 ft. thick, and rest on soft shales
of white, brown, and green colour.
July 28.—The indifferent character of the grass having caused
the horses to stray in search of better feed, we were delayed till
B*3o, when, steering s.e., we crossed several low ridges of sand-
stone, wooded with white and mica bark gum, and thorny triodia.
In the hollow small dry watercourses trended to the n.e. and n.
At 10 20 crossed a creek 10 yards wide, with pools of water, and
at F5 a second of the same size, which, trending e., was followed
till 1-50, when a small pool of water and a patch of grass enabled
us to encamp. —{Camp xxx.) The country continues to be of a
bad description and covered with scrub, though of a more open
nature than before. The soil is more gravelly and melaleuca less
frequent; eucalypti and triodia more abundant. The rock is a
coarse grey sandstone, thick bedded, horizontal strata and lamina;
dipping to the n.e. 30° generally, but varying much: the peculiar


I
I
n
1
i . :
■
marking of the surface, resembling ripples of water, is frequent,
forming grooves 2 to 4 inches wide and half an inch deep.
July 29. —A dense fog was the somewhat unusual cause of delay
in collecting the horses this morning, as they could not he seen
more than a few yards distant. At 845 steered s.e. through scrubs
of melaleuca, acacia, Grevillia, and eucalypti. At 11 the country
was more open, and we entered a grassy plain extending 5 to 8 m.
to the e., where it was bounded by low ranges of hills, lo the s.w.
a level forest of white gum trees extended parallel to our route.
The soil was a brown clay loam, with pebbles of sandstone. A few
box and Bauhinia trees grew on the plain; the grass had been
burnt off and had sprung up quite green. At I*2o came on a large
dry creek, trending n.e. ; it had several channels 20 yards wide,
with loose sandy beds bordered with casuarina and flooded gum-
trees. Following down the creek at ITS, camped at a shallow
water-hole in one of the side channels. —( xxxi.) About
3 m. before reaching the camp, Dr. Mueller’s horse, “Monkey,”
knocked up, and was with difficulty brought to the camp. The
load of one of the pack-horses was distributed among the others,
in order to remount the Doctor, who required a very strong horse,
although perhaps the lightest person in the party.
July 30. —There being abundance of good grass at this camp,
we’Vemained this day to rest the horses and shoe them ; also to
repair harness, &c. I was glad to get a day’s rest myself, having
been 40 days in the saddle without a single day’s intermission.
Eleven of the horses were reshod.
July 31. —Leaving the camp at 7'40, steered a s.e. course.
Leaving the grassy flats of the creek, we soon entered a scrub of
melaleuca. At B’2o ascended the table-land by a gentle slope.
The country was now sandy, with much brush of acacia, Grevillia,
and Bossiwea, with triodia in the more open part of the forest,
which consisted principally of micabark gum. The prevailing rock
was ferruginous conglomerate, and hard sandstone sometimes ap-
peared. After 10 the country declined to the s., and we passed
through a belt of cypress scrub. At ITS altered the course to
e.s.e., crossed a sandstone ridge, and came on a deep valley with
sandstone cliffs on each side. With some difficulty descended and
reached a small water-course, which was quite dry; but observing
some very green trees about a mile to the n.w., at the base of the
cliffs, we turned in that direction and found a fine spring of water
flowing from the face of the cliff. Selecting a suitable spot, we
encamped at 2'3o. —(Camp xxxn.) Near this spring were several
huts, constructed in the rudest manner by heaping branches to-
gether. From the summit of the hill the view extended 30 m.
to the n.e. ; but no marked features w’ere visible, the country
only undulating slightly. The country has become more open


and travelling easier; but no other improvement has been
observed.
August 1. —At 7'30 left the camp and followed the valley to the
s. till 9*15, when a break in the sandstone cliffs which bounded the
valley enabled us to ascend the hills and pursue a s.e. course,
crossing several ridges of sandstone, the strata dipping to the w.
and becoming more shaly as we advanced. Descending into a
valley, with a dry creek 15 yards wide, the rocks on the s.e. side
were cherty limestone, alternating with thin beds of shale, the
strata dipping 20° to 30° to the w. The summits of the hills had
a thin horizontal bed of ironstone conglomerate, through which
masses of white sandstone protruded. The limestone country was
well grassed and thinly timbered with eucalypti of small growth.
At I*2o altered the course to n.e. and followed down a gully in
search of water; but though it gradually enlarged to a consider-
able creek and we continued our search till 7, were compelled to
encamp without water. —(Camp xxxm.) I walked down the
creek 2 m., but only found one moist spot, where, by digging, a
few pints of water were procured, but not sufficient to supply
ourselves.
Aug. 2. —At 6 - 5 resumed our search for water, following the
creek n.e. for two hours, and reached a small pool of muddy rain-
water, at which we encamped. —( Ca xxxiv.) The country near
the creek was very level, grassy, and thinly wooded; low hills were
visible to the s.e. and n.
Aug. 3 ( Sundag ). —The water in the pool being nearly consumed
and nothing but mud remaining, we proceeded down the creek in
search of a farther supply; but it was not till we had followed its
dry sandy channel for three hours that we attained our object, and
encamped at a small pool in one of the back channels, the principal
bed of the creek being perfectly dry. —(Camp xxxv.) The country
near the creek continues very level and well grassed, but distant
rocky hills are visible in almost every direction. In approaching
the Gulf of Carpentaria, heavy dews and fogs have become more
frequent in the mornings, when it is usually calm. About 10 a.m.
a breeze sets in from the eastward, varying from n. to s.e. At
sunset it fails calm, but commences at 8 p.m. and blows gently from
the eastward for one to two hours ; very thin clouds are frequent,
and the heat is very oppressive when they prevail. According to
my reckoning, we are now within 50 m. of the sea-coast, and there-
fore much nearer to Dr. Leichhardt’s track than I could wish ;
but however desirable a more inland route might be, it is evident,
from the small size of the watercourses hitherto crossed, that we
have been skirting the table-land which is, doubtless, a continuation
of the desert into which we followed Sturt Creek; and the small
altitude of the country in which the watercourses trending towards


the Gulf take their rise, precludes the existence of any considerable
drainage towards the interior.
Aug. 4. —The general course of the creek being northerly, and
the distance from the Mac Arthur, according to the map, only
20 m., we steered s.e. from 6’35 a.m., crossing many rocky sand-
stone ridges and hills, the strata dipping 20° to 40° to the w. At
noon, from one of the higher ridges, saw the valley of the
Mac Arthur to the s.e. Continuing our route, descended a small
dry watercourse till 4, when we reached a large creek, with a belt
of casuarina, melaleuca, and eucalypti along its banks ; the channel
was dry and sandy, about 20 yards wide, but showed the marks of
high floods. Following the creek down for three quarters of an
hour, found a small pool of water just sufficient for the supply of
the party. —( Camp xxxvi.) A quarter of a mile below the camp
a creek, 15 yards wide, joined the principal creek from the s., and,
from the general lay of the country, it was evident that we had
reached the principal channel of the Mac Arthur River of Leich-
hardt ; but though from the steepness of the banks the floods fre-
quently rise 30 to 40 ft., the creek did not bear the character of
one taking its rise any great distance inland of our track. The
country traversed is very thinly wooded with small eucalypti,
seldom more than 50 ft. high, and a few leguminous ironbark and
sterculia were scattered on the hills, with much triodia and little
grass. After crossing the highest ridge at 11, the sandstone strata
were variously inclined, but generally to the w. or n.e. at high
angles, except on the immediate bank of the Mac Arthur, where
the sandstones were horizontal. To the s.w. of our route the
country rose into stony hills of very barren aspect; to the n. the
country was wooded.
Aug. country to the s.e. being very rocky and broken,
we followed down the river, leaving the camp at 7’20, the general
course n.e* ; the sandstone hills rose abruptly from the bank of the
river, so as to leave scarcely a passage for our horses. The rock
was frequently worn away in a partial manner, leaving vertical
columns sometimes 5 ft. diameter and 30 ft. high. A few miles
below our camp we passed some pools of water, but there was no
grass near them, and we continued our route 4 hours, and
camped near some shallow pools with a patch of grass on the
bank of the river. — ( Camp xxxvn.) The river has several
channels separated by banks covered with trees, the principal one
23 yards wide at the camp, but in time of flood the side channels
carry off the greater portion of the water, which rises at times
nearly 40 ft. Large quantities of mussel shells lay at the old
camping places of the blacks along the banks of the river.
Aug. 6. —-At 7 - 25 resumed our journey on a s.e. course over a
miserable sandy country with stunted eucalypti, Grevillia, and
I
H ♦
R
B
■kvV


trlodia. At 11 reached a very rugged range of sandstone hills,
which, with much difficulty and risk to the horses, was crossed in
an e.s.e. direction; but though the distance did not exceed 3 m.
the deep ravines and steep rocks delayed us for 3 hours, and we
were glad to emerge into an open valley, in which we encamped
on the bank of a small gully with a few small water holes at
2'30.—( Camp xxxviii.) In the deep ravines of the sandstone
hills water was abundant, but quite inaccessible for the horses
from the steep and rocky nature of the banks of the watercourses.
A few small white gum trees and triodia formed the principal
vegetation. The rock is a grey sandstone with horizontal beds,
the laminae varying so much both in angle and direction, that
no general average could be ascertained ; that of the upper bed
being often the reverse of that immediately below it. The beds
of rock vary from 1 to 4 ft. in thickness, and the laminae £ to 2
inches. The grain of the rock very even and moderately fine.
Aug. 7- —Resumed our journey at 7TO a.m , on an average
e s.e. course along the foot of a rocky range of hills. At B‘3o
came on a deep rocky creek with long pools of water trending to
the n. As our horses required rest, and the country ahead
appeared very rocky and barren, we encamped.—( xxxix.)
Aug. B.— Steering a s.e. course from 6-50 a.m., crossed a sandy
table-land with mica-bark gum, and melaleuca with broad leaves :
passed a small creek with pools of water, the trend n.e. At 10
crossed a low ridge of rocks and descended into a wide valley
with melaleuca and a few box trees; and at 1*25 camped on a
large sandy creek with two channels 10 yards wide and low sandy
banks.—( Camp xl.) One of the channels was dry, but the other
had a few small pools of water in it. A line of melaleuca and
flooded gum trees marked the course of the creek through the
valley ; when in flood the water extends to 100 yards in breadth
and 10 to 15 ft. deep. The grass was inferior, but having been
burnt off, was now fresh and green.
Aug. 9. —Starting at 6 40 a.m., traversed an undulating sand-
stone country on a s.e. course till ITS, when we came to a large
dry creek; followed it to the n.n.e. till 1-50, when we found a
shallow pool at which we encamped. —( xli.) The creek
had a sandy channel with low banks, subject to flood to the
breadth of 50 to 80 yards. Pandanus, melaleuca, and flooded
gum trees grew on its banks. The country generally is poor and
stony, with mica-bark gum, blood wood, and narrow-leaved mela-
leuca. Shortly before reaching the creek the horse Monkey
knocked up, though only carrying a pack-saddle without any load
since the 30th July: I therefore left the saddle after removing
such portions of the fittings as might be of future service. A
few yards from our tents we found some spears and water vessels


L„.
Ilf
r—aaawgsv-*
Gregory’*’ Journal of the
which had heen hidden under a piece of bark by the blacks, who
were evidently out hunting, and we heard them calling to each
other in the evening, though they did not make their appearance.
The water vessels were formed by hollowing out a block of wood
in the form of a canoe, and were capable of holding 2 to 3
gallons. It was evident that they have cutting instruments of
iron and also of stone.
A
•X
Aug. 10, Sunday.— As there was a sufficient supply of water
and grass, we remained at the camp to rest the party. The
morning was cloudy, hut cleared up about 9 A.M., and I observed
a set of lunar distances. Dean brought in some jasper from a
hill Im. to the n.e. of the camp; he reported that the course of
the creek appeared to be about n. for 8 or 10 ra.
Aug. 11.—Continued a s.b. route at 7*40, ascending hills of
limestone and sandstone, with an upper bed of basalt, which on
the higher land to the s.w. was again covered by sandstone. The
basalt was much decomposed, and contained fragments of the
lower rocks. At I*so camped on a fine but small creek, with per-
manent pools of water, in a rocky channel 5 to 30 yards wide. —
( Camp xlii.) The country was well grassed and openly wooded
with box, sterculia, leguminous ironbark, and terminalia.
Aug. 12. —At 6*50 resumed a s.e. route, traversing a broken
country of limestone, chert, sandstone, and basalt, deeply cut by
dry watercourses. The grass was abundant and good, though
triodia appeared on some of the higher ridges. At 9 crossed a
small river with fine permanent pools of water in a rocky bed 10 to
30 yards wide. The floods rise 20 ft. and extend over a breadth of
70 to 100 yards; it is the largest stream bed passed since leaving
the Roper River, and probably extends 50 or 60 m. farther
inland. At 1*25 camped on a small creek trending to the n.n.e., in
which were pools of water 20 yards long and 5 ft. deep. —(
XLIII.)
Aug. 13. —Left the camp at 7 a.m. and continued a s.e. route,
crossing a succession of sandy valleys and broken sandstone ridges,
the strata horizontal, and laminae dipping to the n, and e. generally,
but sometimes opposite. The soil poor and sandy, producing
little besides white gum and triodia. At noon ascended a high
ridge from which we saw a broad valley to the s.e., beyond which
was a range of flat-topped hills, terminating abruptly at the
northern end, which bore e. by n. Descending by a rocky ravine
at I*3o reached a fine creek on which we encamped. —(
xliv.) This creek had pools of water 50 yards wide, but the
steep character of its banks caused the channel to appear larger
than if it had been in flat country. Under some large rocks Dean
found a fishing net neatly made of twisted bark, the mesh inch,
the length about 30 feet. Some fishing spears showed the marks


of iron tools having been used in their construction. The rocks
in this part of the country often contain angular fragments of the
lower strata, the limestones containing fragments of chert and
jasper, and the sandstones pieces of limestone, but I could not
detect either granite, quartz, or slate.
Aug. 14. —At 6*20 we were again in the saddle, and steering
s.e. oyer very rocky hills till 8, when we entered a fine valley
with low hills of limestone and basalt, well grassed and thinly
wooded with box and acacia. At 10 ascended a rough sandstone
range with white gum, acacia, and triodia. At 11 again descended
into a valley bounded by sandstone cliffs on the northern side, and
camped at a fine pool of water in a small creek at 12*5. —(Camp
xlv.) Several trees near this pool of water had been marked
by the natives, the bark having been removed and the wood
tainted yellow with brown spots at regular intervals, and vertical
black-waved lines. It is evident from the outlines of the hills
and general character of the country that we are travelling along
the edge of the table-land of Northern Australia, and this accounts
for the small size of the watercourses, while the abrupt and broken
nature of the hills has caused the creek to form channels of suffi-
cient size to retain water throughout the year, and the same
disruption of strata has exposed the limestones and basalt, causing
fertile patches of country, which have enabled us to traverse a
country that is otherwise barren and inhospitable in the- ex-
treme —the chief difficulty to be surmounted being the rocky
nature of the hills and ridges, which can only be traversed by
well-shod horses. It is possible that some small tracts of available
country exist between our line of route and the shores of the Gulf of
Carpentaria, but to the s. little can be expected but a barren sandy
desert, as on every occasion that the table-land has been ascended
nothing but worthless sandy country has been encountered.
Aug. 15. —Recommenced our journey at 6*35, and followed the
valley of a creek upwards to the s.e., and at 7*45 crossed the creek
below a fine pool of water, above which the creek came from the
s.w., in which direction low barren sandstone hills existed. We
then crossed several miles of level sandy table-land, and descended
at 10*20 into a deep valley trending e. This brought us to a
small creek with good water holes, where we camped at 11*30—
( Camp xlvi.) The country is very poor and rocky, thinly tim-
bered with box trees in the valleys, and white gum on the hills,
where the grass is replaced by triodia. Kangaroo are more
numerous than in any other part of Northern Australia yet visited
by the Expedition, as many as 12 to 15 being seen in the course
of a day’s journey. Early in the morning a light breeze from w.;
at 7 a.m. a fresh breeze from s.e., which lasted till 4 p.m. ; and at
sunset a light air from the w.


Aug. 16. —At 6*30 steered s.e. and followed the valley of the
creek till 8, when it turned to the n. Continuing our course
along the valley s.e., though there was now no watercourse in it,
at 11*20 came to a creek in a basaltic valley trending n.e. across
the larger valley, then crossing a ridge of sandstone and basalt
came on a second creek trending n,, in which were long pools of
water 15 to 20 yards wide. Following this creek upwards to the
s.s.e. the valley widened, but for some distance the pools of water
ceased. At 12*40 camped at a pool supplied by a spring, and a
mtch of good grass adjacent.—( xlvii.) The rock which
:brmed the hills on this day’s journey is a hard red-brown sand-
stone, the lower part thin bedded : beneath this trap or basalt has
been forced between the strata, and is exposed in the deep valleys
excavated by the creeks. The view to the n.e. from some of the
higher ridges extended 20 m. over a level, depressed country,
apparently wooded, beyond which were low ridges of hills. The
country generally is poor and stony, thinly wooded with eucalypti
and acacia, except where the basalt was exposed, and by its
decomposition formed a richer soil well covered with grass, and
very open in character.
Aug. 17, Sunday. —Grass and water being in sufficient quantity,
remained at the camp to rest the horses, though, as several of the
horses had to be shod, it was not altogether a day of rest to our-
selves. A fresh breeze from s.e. cooled the air at noon, but died
away at sunset.
Aug. 18.—Collected the horses early, but two appeared to be
much griped from eating the coarse food, and I therefore delayed
starting till 7*40, and then ascended the stony ridge to the s.e.,
and reached the table-land ; the soil was sandy, with micabark
gum, stringy bark, and bloodwood, with patches of acacia scrub.
At 10 the country was stony, with white gum acacia, with tall
stems, and triodia. Gradually ascending till the aneroid indicated
an elevation of 1100 ft., we appeared to be on a ridge parallel to
the boundary of the table-land of the interior, and at a greater
elevation. At I*2o observed a clump of melaleuca leucodendron
in a deep ravine, and steering towards it found a fine spring, with
a few acres of grass, where we encamped. —(Camp xlviii.)
Aug. 19.—At 6-45 steered s.e. and soon ascended a rocky range
of altered sandstone and basalt thinly wooded with white gum,
tall acacia, and Grevillia; triodia superseding the grass. At 7*30
the aneroid indicated the greatest altitude (1300 ft.) which we
had attained since leaving the Victoria River. From this point
the view was extensive. Towards the interior the table-land, not
being of equal elevation, appeared like a vast plain without a
single marked feature. To the n. the country appeared to con-
sist of low wooded ridges gradually decreasing in height as they
* . '


receded; s.e. our view was intercepted by broken wooded hills of
equal height with our position, while deep ravines trending to the
s. intercepted our route. I therefore altered the course to 200°
magnetic, and descended a rocky valley in which was a small
creek, which rapidly enlarged as we proceeded, and contained
some fine pools of water in rocky hollows. The hills consisted of
basalt and altered sandstone, the strata dipping 20° to 60° to the
n.w., and by the outcrop forming parallel ridges, which were
passed with great difficulty and risk. At 12"30 we extricated
ourselves from these rugged ridges and entered a level valley
extending 30 m. n.e. and s.w. Here granite rock was first seen
on the bank of the creek, which trended across the valley to the
s.e., with a broad sandy bed or series of channels extending over
a breadth of a m., quite dry and overgrown with bushes. At
4'5 reached the hills which bounded the valley to the s.e., and
the creek, entering a deep gorge, which, by concentrating its
waters, formed a fine pool of water, at which we encamped. —
(Camp xlix.) The country, after leaving the basaltic hills
where it was well grassed, was barren and worthless sand and
rock.
Aug. 20.—We left our camp at 7 a.m., and finding the valley
of the creek impassable, crossed the rocky hills in an e.s.e. direc-
tion, the country consisting of steep rocky ridges of sandstone
covered with triodia, and a few stunted eucalypti. At 3we again
came on the bank of the creek, and camped in a patch of coarse
rushes, as there was no grass for the horses. —( l.)
Aug. 21, —Leaving this miserable spot with our starving horses
followed down the creek, which had now increased to a small river
to the e.s.e., and after 2 hour’s travelling reached a small patch
of grass, at which we encamped. —( Li.) The bed of the
river is nearly dry, only a few shallow pools of water remaining
in the sandy channel, which varies from 10 to 50 yards in breadth,
with several smaller side channels, altogether occupying a breadth
of nearly 400 yards, dense clumps of melaleuca leucodendron
growing on the intervening banks of sand. Large quantities of
mica shells, some 6 inches in length, were found on the banks of
the river, in the camps of the natives. Bowman complains of an
attack of scurvy, which causes pains in his legs and swelling of
the gums.
Aug. 22.—Although our yesterday’s journey was only of 2
hours’ duration, the horses appeared very weak and fatigued
when we started at 6*45 a.m., and it was with great difficulty that
“ Boco ” and “ Monkey ” could be kept up with the party. We
were frequently compelled to leave the bank of the river and cross
steep rocky ridges of sandstone which came close to the river’s
bank. The country was very rugged and barren, producing little
VOL. XXVIII. II


besides triodla and a few stunted gum trees. The bed of the
river has increased to 400 yards in breadth, but is full of sandy
banks covered with large melaleuca and acacia trees. At T5
camped in a small patch of dry wiry grass, procuring water
from a small pool in the sandy bed of the river. —(Camp liii.)
Aug. 23. —Resuming our journey at 7T5 a.m., followed the
right bank of the river to the e.n.e, ; it soon passed between two
sandstone hills and turned to the N, Continuing our course, a
range of rocky hills compelled us to alter our route to n.n.e. to
regain the bank of the river, and by following an ana branch till
11, when it joined the principal channel, avoided the rocky
country. The river now trended n.e., and at IT3O camped in a
small grassy flat. —(Camp Liv.) The valley of the river is now
more open, but the country is very barren, with stunted eucalypti
and triodia on the hills, and melaleuca and flooded gum trees,
with a little grass, on the bank of the river. The hills have
decreased in height; the upper strata thick bedded coarse sand-
stone, with shaly sandstone beneath. Hard white sandstone exists
I- I
on some of the lower ridges.
Aug. 24, Sunday. —Although this was not a good spot for a
day’s halt, yet it was requisite that the horses should have a day’s
rest, and as it was Sunday we remained at the camp. While
collecting the horses a native woman and a child were seen in the
bed of the river, but on being approached concealed themselves
in the reeds: though the blacks set the grass on fire in several
places, during the day they were not seen,
Aug. 25. —Resumed our journey down the river at B*s a.m,,
the general course nearly e. At 2*35 camped at a pool in one
of the side channels of the river.—( liv.) The country
was now more open and level, with grassy flats along the river;
but the back country rose into low rocky sandstone hills, thinly
clothed with white gum and triodia. At noon crossed a high
ridge, from which, though the view was extensive, nothing was
visible except a range of hills 15 m. N. of our position, and which
terminated abruptly on a n.e. bearing; the rest of the country
consisted of low wooded ridges. The bed of the river is about
£ mile wide, consisting of several broad sandy channels, with
low sandy banks between, covered with melaleuca and acacia
trees. Some of the party walked down the bed of the river and
came on the camp of a party of blacks, but only one lame old
man remained, who attempted to frighten away the invaders of
his country by loud yells and exclamations of disgust.
Aug. 26. —hollowed down the river from 6*45 till I*4o, the
general course nearly e. — (Camp lv.) The country becomes
more level as we advance, and ironstone conglomerate forms low
banks to the bed of the river, which is unchanged, being dry


sandy channels. The hack country shows no improvement, and is
covered with triodia to the exclusion of grass. Some blacks were
seen on the left hank of the river, but though within hearing of
the horse-bells, did not appear to notice us.
Aug. 27. —The course of the river continues easterly, and we
followed the right bank from 7’30 a.m. till I*s p.m., when we
camped at a tine pool of water in one of the side channels, the
principal one being dry and sandy. — lyi.) The immediate
aanks of the river are openly timbered with box, flooded gum,
leguminous iron-bark, and nelia. The grass is rather scanty rand
the soil brown loam. Beyond the influence of the floods the
country was level, and broad-leaved melaleuca, chuncoa, silver-
leaved iron-bark, and dry triodia, formed the entire vegetation of
this worthless plain. Ferruginous conglomerate and sandstone
boulders are the only rock visible.
Aug. 28. —Our day’s journey commenced at 7, and following
the river’s right bank to the e.n.e. till 12*45, encamped in the bed
of the river, which was nearly 1 a m. wide from bank to bank,
the principal channel 80 yards wide, shallow, and sandy, with
small pools of water; the side channels similar, but dry, and of
less width .—(Camp lvii.) Beyond the bed of the river the banks
rose abruptly about 30 ft., and then appeared to decline as it
receded, and no higher ground was visible. The soil was a sandy
loam, with small box trees and scanty grass.
Aug. 29. —At 7*20 a.m. steered e. through level box flats, the
country gradually becoming more open and better grassed, though
still very scantily. At noon crossed some open grassy plains, and
altered the course to n.e., n.n.e., and n. At 3*20 again came on
the river, and camped at a small pool; the rest of the channel,
which exceeded m. in width, was dry, sandy, and overgrown with
large melaleuca and flooded gum trees. —( Camp lviii.) The
general character of the country is a level plain about 40 ft. above
the channel of the river, thinly wooded with box, a few bloodwood
acacia, and Bauhinia trees. The grass, though scanty, is of good
description, but at this season very dry.
Aug. 30. —At 6*50 steered e.n.e. through box flats and open
grassy plains, the course of the river nearly parallel to our route.
At 10*10 came to a large tributary from the s.: its principal
channel was 30 yards wide, with pools separated by dry banks,
but two smaller channels had running streams. After ian hour’s
delay we succeeded in crossing without more serious accidents
than resulted from some of the pack-horses falling down the banks
and wetting their loads, and getting a ducking myself, which injured
the chionometei. Water pandanus, tan palm, and casuanna
formed a belt of trees along the bank of the stream, which bore
quite a different character from that of the river above its junc-
H 2


Wm. *
tion. Continuing our route, at 12*5 came on a second running
creek, but of smaller size : this we crossed, and followed the right
bank E. till T5, when we encamped. — (Camp lxix.) Here we
observed that though the water was fresh, it was affected by the
tide, which was now at the highest springs.
Aug. 31, Sunday. —Rode down the creek with Mr. H. Gregory.
At 2 m. from the camp came to a similar creek joining it from the
s, ; the two forming a fine reach of water, which we recognised
as the Albert River of Captain Stokes. This spot between the
two creeks was the rendezvous appointed for the two sections of
the Expedition, though, from the short time which had elapsed since
leaving the Victoria, the Tom Tough could scarcely be expected to
have arrived before us. On approaching the spot we saw several
marked trees, but were disappointed in the hope that the schooner
had reached the Albert, as the marks appeared to be the names of
several seamen who seemed to have formed the crew of a boat sent
up the river by Lieut. Chiramo of H. M.’s steamer Torch. Search
was made for directions for finding any memoranda which might
have been concealed, as I at first thought it probable that the object
of the visit might be to communicate with us ; but the nature of the
inscriptions, and the absence of anything which would lead to even
a surmise of the cause of the visit, caused us to come to the
conclusion that it had no reference to the Expedition. From the
state of the ashes of the fire, and the branches which had been
cut and broken, it appeared that several weeks had elapsed, and
consequently that the Torch was not likely to be still in or near
the river. In accordance with arrangements made
with Mr. Baines I marked a tree, in order to E.
apprise him of our having arrived at the Albert, Aug. 30,
and of our prospective movements. Returning to 1856.
the camp, wrote a memorandum of the visit of the j) IG> j y D -
Expedition, and a note to Mr. Baines, informing rp -g
him that we intended leaving other memoranda at *
the junction of the salt- water arm of the river, and then continue
without delay our route towards Moreton Bay. These memoranda
were enclosed in a powder canister, and Mr. Elsey and Bowman
took them to the marked tree and buried them in a hole I had
dug for that purpose, 1 yard e. of the tree. In the afternoon I
rode over towards the Nicholson River with Mr. H. Gregory.
Crossing Beames Brook steered n.n.e. 4zi m., over level grassy
plains, with strips of box trees. As we could see 40r5 m. farther,
and no indication of the river, we returned to the camp, having
ascertained that the Nicholson River does not join the Albert,
unless many miles below the junction of Beames Brook and the
s. creek, which together form the Albert River.
Sept. 1. At 7‘40 steered e. to the s. creek, which reached at


2 m., and followed it up for an hour in search of a crossing place,
as the channel was very muddy. A suitable spot having been
found, we filled up the channel with pandanus stems and crossed
the horses without accident. Steering 2 m. e.n.e. over a level
grassy plain, with patches of box trees, we then turned n. and
struck the Albert River just at the junction of Beames Brook and
the muddy creek, and encamped m. lower down, as the water
was brackish. — ( Camp lx.) The existence of a narrow' belt of
mangrove shows that the water is often salt to the head of the
Albert River.
Sept. 2.—The water in the river being very brackish, it was
evident that no water fit for use could he procured lower dow r n if
we attempted to follow it towards the sea ; I therefore decided on
leaving the letters I had written to Mr. Baines at
this spot, and accordingly marked a tree and
buried the letters in a tin canister, stating that the
exploring party was to start the following morning
for Moreton Bay, and instructing Mr. Baines to
remain at the Albert till the 29th September,
1856, in case any unforeseen accident should
N. A. Expd t "
30 August,
1856.
Dig. 2 Y D - N
compel the party to return to the Albert within that period. Five
months’ flour, sugar, tea, &c. still remained; and as our horses would
supply the deficiency of meat, if required, we have a sufficient
supply of provisions to enable the party to reach the settled part
of New South Wales, unless extraordinary difficulties should be
encountered. Under these circumstances it did not appear prudent
to delay at the Albert River, as the arrival of the Tom Tough
might be delayed for an indefinite period.
Sept. 3. — Left our camp at 6 45 a.m. and steered e. over level
box flats and open grassy plains; at 10 came to a small creek,
which was followed i an hour to the n.e., when finding salt mud
in its channel, we steered s.e. till 5, and encamped at a shallow
pool in a large creek which trended n. —( lxi.) The country
consists of vast open level plains, separated by narrow belts of
box and chuncoa trees, the soil a brown loam, producing rather
short and dry grass. On approaching the water hole at which we
encamped, a black and three or four women, who were camped on
the other bank, climbed into the trees and remained there till dusk,
when they descended to their fires and made a great noise till
9 p.m., when they departed. This creek is probably the head of
the salt-water arm of the Albert or the Disaster River.
Sept. 4. —Continued a s.e. course through large open plains
thinly grassed; passed a dry watercourse with a small pool of
water in one of the side channels, hut the quantity insufficient for
our horses. At noon camped at a shallow waterhole in a grassy
flat. (Camp lxii.) Mr. Elsey walked \m. to the e., and came
*
«


to a river 80 yards wide, but, observing some blacks, returned to
the camp. In the evening nine blacks came towards us, and
appeared inclined to hostilities, but, after a short interview^ retired
up the river. These blacks were not circumcised, and their teeth
were perfect; they had neither ornaments nor clothing of any
kind, and only slightly seared on the back and chest. Their
spears are large and heavy, made of a single piece of hard wood ;
they are thrown by the hand, and not with the throwing-board.
The small spears for fishing were formed of reed, with a wooden
point, in the usual manner, and used with the throwing-board,
which is here flattened vertically. Clubs 2| ft. long and 2J inches
diameter throughout their length, and shields formed of a single
piece of wood 2| ft. long and 8 inches wide. The river proved
to be fresh, in detached pools, separated by rocky bars. _ It is
evidently the river taken by Dr. Leichhardt for the Albert river, a
mistake which has caused much error in the map of his route. As
it was unnamed, I called it the ii Leichhardt. The character of
the country is inferior, as the grass which covers the plains is
principally aristidia and andropogon; anthisteria exists only in
small patches. The soil is a fine brown loam.
Sept. 5. —At daybreak heard the blacks calling to each other up
the river, and while the horses were being brought in 19 blacks
came to the camp, all armed with clubs and spears. They did
not make any decided demonstration of hostility, as the approach
of the horses appeared to keep them in check, but a person unac-
quainted with their treacherous character might have thought
them friendly. When we parted at 6-50 they followed the party
to the bank of the river, and began to poise their spears, and,
while we were crossing a deep ravine, made a rush forward,
hoping to take advantage of our position, but, just as the leader
was in the act of throwing his spear, he received a charge of
small shot, which diverted his weapon, and seeing him retreat in
some degree checked the remainder. We then charged them on
horseback, and a few shot from our revolvers put them to flight
except one man, who climbed a tree, where he was left. As our
object was only to secure our safety, we did not follow up our
advantage by pursuing the fugitives. Proceeding down the river
a short distance, at 7-40 crossed to the right bank on a ledge of
flat rocks. It was here about 100 yards wide, with shallow pools
of water, the banks rising steeply 30 to 40 ft. Very little vege-
tation grew on the margin of the river, which appeared to be the
result of salt water being occasionally forced up thus far during
high tides. We now steered e. over level grassy plains, with
patches of box and chuncoa, passing a small but deep waterhole,
near which we saw two black gins. They did not appear to
notice us. At 10T0 entered an open scrub of chuncoa, and
i ]
KV U


triodia replaced the grass. At noon passed a small waterhole,
which the horses completely emptied. Altering the course to
n.e., the country was covered with melaleuca scrub, with silver-
leaved ironbark, triodia, and a little grass, but we soon re-entered
the open plains which extended to the n., and following down a
small watercourse, at 3’5 camped at a small muddy waterhole
( Camp lxiii.) on the banks of which the blacks had often en-
camped, as shown by the heaps of mussel-shells round their fire-
places. Our route has been along the southern limit of the open
grassy plains, and to the s. the country rises into low ridges and
stony plains covered with scrub and triodia.
Sept. 6. —Starting at 6 - 25 our route was average E. over a
level country of very bad quality, the soil ironstone gravel produc-
ing chuncoa, triodia, and cochlospermum (silk cotton). Towards
the latter part of the journey the country became more open and
grassy. At 12T5 camped on a large creek, but only a few shallow
pools of muddy water remained in the channel. ( lxiv.)
Sept. 7, Sunday. —Remained at the camp to rest the party.
A strong s.E. breeze blew all night, the day clear and cool, and
the air very dry. Repaired the saddlebags, which from frequent
contact with rocks and dead trees were much dilapidated.
Sept. B. —Steered e.s.e. from 6-40 till 11‘40, crossing low iron-
stone ridges and wide grassy plains with belts of box, chuncoa,
white gum, and silver leaved ironbark of small size, the grass very
inferior, and patches of triodia on the ridges. We then traversed
a level country covered with small trees and dry grass tor 2 hours;
then followed a dry watercourse to the n.n.w. for 1 hour: the
shells of large unios were abundant in the dry hollows, but no
water remained. Altered the course to E. and passed two lines
of boxtrees which crossed the plain from s. to N., and at 5‘50
camped in the plain without water: fortunately a strong breeze
had rendered the day cooler than usual. ( lxy.)
Sept. 9. —Left our waterless camp at 6'lo and steered nr.
50° E. over a level grassy plain, and at 9*40 reached a fine river
of fresh water 100 yds. wide, but very shallow ; pelicans, ducks,
and other waterfowl were very numerous, but extremely wild.
Having found a spot where the horses could approach the water
in safety, we encamped, though the grass was dry and scanty on
the immediate bank of the river, the surface of the soil having
been much furrowed and washed by the rain. {Camp lxvi.)
Small fragments of limestone and a few pebbles of quartz have
been observed on the surface of the plain for the past 20 m., and
a dark limestone rock is exposed on the bed of the river, where it
has horizontal strata. Small pieces of flinty trap or slate exist in
the gravel of the river. From its position this river must be the
Flinders River of the charts.
, r-
mr


Sept. 10. —6-40 again found us in the saddle, and crossing to
the right bank of the river followed it to the S.S.E. till 7'20, when
it turned to the s.s.w. Changing the course to e. we passed through
a fine grassy plain for 2 m. and entered an open box flat well
grassed, the soil a brown loam; this continued till 12*30, when
we entered a belt of chuncoa scrub, and at 1 reached a small
watercourse and camped at a fine water hole 50 yds. wide and
100 yds. long, with open grassy banks: the water appeared deep
and permanent. {Camp lxyii.) This water hole would render a
great extent of the fine grassy land around available for pas-
turage. In passing through the box forest we observed several
sleeping places which had been constructed by the blacks during
the wet season. They consisted of 4 stakes 2 ft. high, supporting
a frame of small sticks 5 ft. long and 2i to 3 ft. wide : from 3 to
20 were often grouped together.
Sept. 11. —At 6*20 steered e. for 1 hour through level box and
terrainalia flats with good grass and brown loam ; came to a lagoon
80 yds. wide and nearly 1 ra. long; beyond this was a creek with
small pools of water; as it appeared to come from the s.e. we
steered in that direction, but soon receded from it, as it turned to
the s.s.e. Altering the course to the southward, at noon came to
the creek, much reduced in size, melaleuca scrub and triodia
growing close to its banks, only a few shallow pools of water
remaining. At 12*25 camped at a small pool. {Camp lxviii.)
On the banks of the lagoon passed in the morning, large heaps of
mussel shells showed the spots where, from the immense collection of
them, the blacks had camped for centuries successively on the same
spots, and a well beaten footpath along the hank showed it to be
a favourite resort of the aborigines. Very few birds and no
kangaroo have been seen since leaving the Albert River. The
common flies are very troublesome from their immense numbers.
Sept. 12. —The course of the creek being from the s. and water
very scarce in it, it does not appear that we have yet reached the
streams rising in the high land at the head of the Burdekin and
Lynd Rivers. It therefore seems desirable to steer an e.n.e.
course till some stream-bed of sufficient size to retain water at this
season be found, and then to follow it up to the ranges, where only
water can be expected to exist to enable us to steer to the s.e. At
an earlier season of the year, when water is more abundant, it would
be desirable to ascend the Flinders River, and cross from its
upper branches to the head of the Clarke ; but under present
circumstances this course would be highly imprudent, and no
experimental deviations from a direct course justifiable. The
grass being scanty, the horses had scattered much, and we did not
leave the camp till 10*20, when we steered e.n.e. About a mile
from the camp passed four blacks at a pool of water: they did not
!
I


observe us till we had passed, though only 100 yds. distant and
the country very open. Our route was through level country
wooded with box, bloodwood, terminalia, Grevillia, and broad
leaved melaleuca, patches of triodia and a little grass. The soil
a hard ironstone gravel and clay. Passing several dry shallow
lagoons, came to a small dry watercourse, which we followed to
the e., and at 2TO camped at a pool of water scarcely 4 inches
deep. {Camp lxix.) Near the camp were some fine grassy flats,
but they were limited in extent and the grass was very dry.
The cool s.e. breeze has ceased, and the N. and n.e. wind is
very light and warm.
Sept. 13. —At 8-5 a.m. steered e.n.e. through box flats with
broad leaved melaleuca and a little grass. The country gradually
became more scrubby, with Grevillia, terminalia, bloodwood, and
triodia; the soil very poor, and in some parts sand and gravel.
At 2 altered the course to n., and at 5*50 came to a dry creek
in a rocky channel trending w., which we followed down till 6T5
and camped without water. ( Camp lxx.)
Sept. 14, Sunday. —At 5 50 proceeded down the creek, on a
nearly w. course, searching in the windings of the channel for
water, but without success till 10, when we found a pool of good
water, 50 yds. long and 2 ft. deep, at which we encamped. Some
blacks had recently been at this place, and their fires were still
burning. The country on the creek is very poor, with patches of
open melaleuca scrub, box, bloodwood, leguminous ironbark,
terminalia, white gum, and a few pandanus, triodia and a little
grass. The soil sandy loam and ironstone gravel. The native
bees appear to be very numerous, and great numbers of trees
have been cut by the blacks to procure the honey.
Sept. 15.—At BTS resumed our journey N. 10° e. m. over a
level country thinly wooded with box, bloodwood, melaleuca,
terminalia, Grevillia, and cotton trees, also a small tree which we
recognised as Leichhardt’s “ little breadtree,” the fruit of which
when ripe is mealy and subacid: some of the party who eat this
fruit suffered from sickness afterwards. Several dry watercourses
trending w. were crossed, and at 2*5 we camped at a small water
hole in a sandy creek 15 yds. wide. {Camp lxxi.) By enlarg-
ing the hole we obtained, though with difficulty, a sufficient supply
of water for the horses. On the flats near the creek the grass was
good, but very dry. ?
Sept. 16. —Although our horses required a day s rest, none of
our camps for several days past have afforded a sufficient supply
of water and grass for a second night. Continuing aN. 20° e. m.
course from 6*25 till 7*30, when we came to a dry creek, which we
followed e. H hours, when it decreased to a small gully ; again
steering n.n.b. passing over a level country, very poor, and with


patches of melaleuca scrub. At 2 came to a sandy creek which
we followed to the w. till 6‘5 without finding any water, and
camped in an open box flat. ( lxxii.) I then walked
down the creek, and was fortunate in finding a pool of water half
a mile from the camp, and as soon as the moon rose we drove the
horses to the water and filled our water-bags. Few parts of our
journey have been through country so destitute of animal life as
the level plains we have traversed since leaving the Flinders
River. No kangaroo, or even their traces, emu tracks very
rarely seen, and very few birds of any kind even at the water
holes. Many of the sleeping frames of the blacks have been
observed, and thousands of deep impressions of their feet in the
now dry and sun-baked clay show that during the rainy season
the extremely level nature of the country causes it to be exten-
sively inundated.
Sept. 17. —The supply of water and grass being sufficient, we
remained at this camp to refresh the horses, as they had suffered
much from the long stages.
Sept. 18.—Starting at 7, steered n. 10° e. m. till 12’30, cross-
ing an almost level country with frequent hollows which form
lagoons in the wet season; we then reached a sandy creek, in the
bed of which we searched in vain for water, but found a fine
lagoon about | m. from it, in a fine grassy flat, and encamped,
(' Camp lxiy.) The country generally is more open, with grassy
box flats ; melaleuca scrub is less frequent. As this camp appeared
suitable for a halt of a few days, I decided on availing ourselves
of the opportunity of killing one of the unserviceable horses, and
replenish our stock of meat, as also to supply the party with fresh
meat: “ old Boco,” who had not carried a pack since leaving the
Albert, and whose wandering and kicking propensities had
rendered him a very troublesome animal, was, therefore, shot,
skinned, and quartered.
Sept. 19.—The horse was cut into thin slices and hung on
ropes to dry by 10 a.m., the liver and heart furnishing the party
with an excellent dinner.
1
d
!
Sept. 20. —The night had been cloudy, but the meat dried well,
and promised to be fit to pack the following day. The weather
was hot with little wind. Reduced the ration of flour to f lb.
while fresh meat is abundant.
Sept. 21. —Resumed our journey at B‘ls, and traversed on a course
N. 40° E. m. A level open grassy country, thinly wooded with box,
bloodwood and terminalia, &c.; the soil a good dark loam, but
very wet in the rainy season. At 11 *3O came to a large creek or
river with many sandy channels, in which only a few small pools of
water remained; followed it up to the e.s.e. through fine open
grassy flats till 2‘35 p.m., and camped in the bed of the river.
11
Tvv


{Camp lxxy.) The banks of this river (which is probably the
Gilbert of Leichhardt) are well grassed, and a dense line of
melaleuca leucodendron, flooded gum, and morinda marks its
course through the plain, but being divided into many channels
its size is difficult to ascertain. Considerable quantities ot mica
are mixed with the soil on the banks, which indicates that it rises
in a country of primary formation. Two kangaroos, some small
wallaby, and also several pink crested white cockatoos were seen
near the river.
Sept. 22. —Leaving our camp at 7*25, steered N. 120° E. m.
across the plains on the left bank of the river, and at I*3o camped
at a small pool of water in the bed of the Gilbert, which is broad
and sandy, retaining very little water. ( lxxyi.) Frag-
ments of porphyry, quartz, black slate are abundant in the drifted
gravel, and mica, iserine, and minute garnets exist in the bed of
the river.
Sept. 23. —At 7-5 continued our route up the river’s left bank,
the average course s.e. by e. At 2-30 camped at a small pool
in the bed of the river. {Camp lxxyii.) The principal channel
is 200 yds. wide, and the several smaller channels occupy a breadth
of half a mile; the banks are low, and the country quite level,
thinly wooded with box trees; the grass good, but not thick; water
is very scarce except by digging in the bed of the river.
Sept. 24.—At 7 a.m. steered s.e. and at 8 crossed to the right
bank of the river, the channel 300 yds. wide, the banks about
15 ft. high, beyond which the country gradually declined, so that
when the river overflows a great extent of country must be inun-
dated. Continuing our course the river turned more to the s.
and we passed through some poor stunted forest of eucalypti
alternating with grassy box flats. At noon altered the course to
S.E. and at 12*30 camped at a chain of small lagoons in the shade
of some fine nonda trees. {Camp lxxviii.)
Sept. 25.—At 6*35 steered s.e. through an open melaleuca
scrub, the soil sandy loam thinly grassed; acacia, bloodwood,
silver leaved ironbark, and Grevillia forming open patches of wood
at intervals. At noon turned s. and at 1*35 camped at a small
lagoon, nearly dry and % a mile from the bank of the river.
{Camp lxxix.) A few hills rose close to the s.w. of the river
opposite the camp; the lower hills were grassy, and the higher
ridges wooded, but they did not exceed 500 ft. above the level of
the°plain. The bed of the river is still broad, dry, and sandy,
but the open box flats are much reduced in width, seldom exceed-
ing Im. At 5 p.m, there was a heavy squall with thunder and
lightning, followed by a cloudy night and a moderate breeze
from the s.
Sept. 26. —At 6*45 resumed our route, and following up the
/r
r


right bank of the river in a s.e. direction till 2, when we encamped
in the sandy bed of the river, procuring water from a small hole
in the sand. ( Camp lxxx.) The country on the banks of the
river consisted of box flats, some portions of which were well
grassed, but usually very poor: this extended back about half a
mile, and then changed gradually to a poor country with little
grass, and wooded with small eucalypti and melaleuca; the soil
gravel and sand. The bed of the river continued to be about
300 yds. wide, dry and sandy; and a line of flooded gum, morinda,
and melaleuca trees mark its course, the deep green foliage of
these trees contrasting strongly with that of the surrounding
country.
Sept. 27. —Steered an average S.E. course up the river from
6’40 till 1, when we encamped at some pools of water in a side
channel of the river, where it was divided by a hillock of slate
rock. (Camp LXXXI.) The country is very inferior in quality,
the flats narrowing to half a mile, with very dry and thinly scattered
tufts of grass. The bed of the river is better defined, and often
forms a single dry sandy channel 250 yds. wide : water was only
seen in it once during the day’s journey. Low rocky hills of
sandstone gradually approach the banks, and near the camp
porphyry, slate, and coarse granite formed detached hills 50 to
100 ft. high, seeming to indicate an approach to the ranges in
which the stream takes its rise.
Sept. 28, Sunday. —Walked over from the camp to a low hill
about Im. s.s.e. It was composed of granite at the base and
capped with horizontal strata of sandstone, some of the beds con-
taining large water-worn pebbles, and the superstratum highly
ferruginous. To the s. w. of this hill the rock was slate, the strata
nearly vertical, the strike N. and s., but much contorted. Large
pebbles and boulders of porphyry, quartz, slate, granite, sandstone,
and agate formed banks in the bed of the river. The country as
seen from the hill was generally level in appearance, but consisted
of numerous low ridges and hills of granite with sandstone sum-
mits. The valley of the river extended to the E. and s., and a
large branch appeared to join from the s. about 10 m. lower down,
as a valley and ranges of hills extended in that direction. The
whole country had an arid and desolate aspect, as there were no
large trees except along the principal watercourses, and many of
the hills were destitute of other vegetation than small acacias and
scrub trees, the bare rock showing through its scanty covering.
Sept. 29.—At 7*15 again steered e. up the river, the country
level and timbered with stringy bark, box, bloodwood, leguminous
ironbark, and rusty gum, the soil a red sandy loam thinly grassed.
At 10-30 came to low hills and ridges of granite and porphyry,
timbered with box, leguminous ironbark, terminalia, &c., the


grass somewhat improved. At 11 altered the course to the s., to
close in with the river, but after crossing a great number of dry
watercourses, and even steering w., only reached the bank of the
river at sunset; the channel was dry, and all tree vegetation had
disappeared: only a barren waste of sand and gravel 180 yds.
wide, with bare rocky banks, showed that it had once been a
running stream. A few small hollows in the rocks retained water
from the late rain, but not sufficient for our horses ; and though we
found a small pool in the sand, it was too small to supply the
party. At 6 camped in the bed of the river. (Camp lxxxii.)
The geological structure of the country is dissimilar to any that
we have yet traversed in North Australia. Granite, porphyry, and
slate are the prevailing rocks: the whole appear to have been
subjected to considerable disturbance, as the slate is much broken,
contorted, and in parts altered by contact with the porphyry, and
no definite strike or dip appeared to exist. The porphyry is of
red or brown colour, consisting of a grey paste with crystals of
feldspar, and angular fragments of slate and granite, sometimes
more than a foot in length. The granite contains little mica, and
the quartz is frequently arranged in rhomboidal crystals nearly
parallel to each other. It readily decomposes, and from the pre-
dominance of quartz forms a coarse gritty soil. Quartz rock
forms large beds and veins in the granite, and has a general
trend N. and s. : it contains crystals of mica, and therefore is not
likely to contain metals. In washing the sand of the river near
the camp, only a small quantity of titaniferous iron remained after
the removal of the quartz and mica.
Sept. 30. —Moved the camp about 1 m. higher up the river to
some small pools of water, and then with Mr. H. Gregory
ascended the hills to the s. of the camp. (Camp lxxxiii.) From
the highest ridge the course of the river was visible for nearly
20 m., trending first 7 m. s.s.w. and then s.s.e. : at the bend a
branch appeared to join from the W.S.W., in which direction the
country appeared very flat for 15 or 20 m., as only a few distant hills
were visible. From N. round s.E. the country was very broken and
hilly, rising highest to the N.E., but the view was limited to 8 or
10 m. s.E. a valley opened through the hills, and more distant
ranges were indistinctly seen beyond. The whole aspect of the
country was extremely barren, rock forming the principal feature.
Returning to the camp, we passed several large fig trees in full
bearing, and we collected a quantity of the fruit, which was some-
what insipid, but by boiling them with sugar and tartaric acid
formed an agreeable addition to our rice. At the camps of the
blacks near this place we found large quantities of the seed-vessels
of the sterculia, the seeds of which appear to be often eaten by
them: the fruit of the morinda is also pounded and soaked in
*
$


water, to which, when fully ripe, it imparts an agreeable flavour.
Portalaca is very abundant, and forms with us an important
addition to our dried horse-meat, and has contributed much to the
health of the party.
October 1. — Steering an average s.s.e. course from 7'40 till
2'40, camped on the right bank of the river, which first came
from the s.w. and then from S.E., throwing off two branches to the
S.w,, and was thereby much diminished and reduced to 100 yds.
in width at our camp. ( Camp lxxxiy.) Only one creek and
some small gullies joined from the E., although the country in
that direction was hilly. The bed of the river is still dry and
sandy, water being very scarce. Slate, quartz, schist, granite, and
trap are the principal rocks, and by their decomposition do not
form a soil favourable to vegetation, the country becoming more
desolate as we advance : the only trees which retain their verdure
are those on the immediate bank of the river.
Oct. 2. —The river above the camp coming from the S.S.W., it
appeared desirable to pursue a more easterly course. I therefore
started from the camp with Mr. H. Gregory to reconnoitre the
country. Steering e. 3m. over low slate hills (the strata dipping
60° to 80° s. by E.), we ascended a hill from which a range was
visible 8 to 10 m. to the E., in which a creek took its rise, and
joined the river near the camp. To the E.S.E., at the head of the
creek, a gap in the hills showed a more distant range: steering in
that direction came to the creek with a rocky and sandy bed
10 yds. wide and perfectly dry. Continuing our route ascended
the hills, which were composed of gneiss, schist, and slate, and trap
existed on the lower ridges. A large valley extended across our
course to the E., beyond which a range of flat-topped hills bounded
the horizon at 10 to 12 m. Descending to the E. the country
improved, and granite was the prevailing rock, ironbark and a few
boxtrees forming an open forest, which on some of the ridges was
well grassed, the soil a good red loam. At 2 came on a small
river bed, dry and sandy, and about 80 yds. wide. Following it
down to the s. found a small pool of water in a hollow in the sand.
Here we halted till 3’30, and then followed the river s.w., s.E., s.w.,
w., and s. At 6TO ascended a hill from which we saw that the
river turned w. and N.w., breaking through the hills and joining
the Gilbert River. Having ascertained that we were still on a
western watercourse, we bivouacked near the river without water.
Oct, 3. —At daybreak steered N.w,, crossing several rocky ridges
of hills, and at 2 reached the camp. Nothing of importance had
occurred during our absence. The horses had improved much by
the rest of two days.
Oct. 4. —At 7 - 45 left the camp, and following an average e.s.e.
course for 7 hours, reached the pool found on the 2nd instant in


the upper branch of the Gilbert River and encamped. (Camp
lxxxy.) As this route nearly coincided with that on the 2nd,
nothing was observed worthy of farther notice.
Oct. 5. —At 6*45 left the camp and followed up the valley of
the river in an e.s.e. direction for 3 m.: water was abundant in
the gullies, owing to a heavy shower some days previous. Beyond
3m. the water ceased, and the country was dry and parched. Low
hills of schist, trap, and granite formed the country near the
river; and farther back high ranges bounded the valley ‘ these
appeared to be flat-topped, and to have horizontal strata of sand-
stone on their summits. At noon the river had divided into
several small branches, and the character of the country did not
promise a supply of water within the space of a day’s journey : we
therefore returned down the river to the last water we had seen,
and encamped about 3m. n.e. of our last camp. ( lxxxyi.)
As there was little prospect of finding water again till the range
to the E. of our present position was crossed, I decided on recon-
noitring the country. Before moving the party farther, and as the
weather promised to continue fine, the horse “ Monkey ” was shot
and skinned preparatory to drying the meat during my absence.
Oct. 6. —At 6'5 left the camp with Mr. H. Gregory. Steer-
ing nearly e., crossed the s. branch of the river, and reached the
base of the higher range at 9*30; here we found a fine spring,
£ ra. s. of a remarkable hill formed of a single mass of bare rock
(porphvry), completely honeycombed by the action of the atmos-
phere. Ascending the range, which consisted of porphyry with
horizontal strata of sandstone on the summit, we continued an e.
course over rocky hills with small dry watercourses trending n.
The grass was very thin and dry, and the country openly wooded
with acacia, cypress, eucalypti, &c., none of which attain a large
size. At I*3o halted to rest the horses, and searching among the
rocks in a gully obtained about three quarts of water by scraping
in the sand. At 2*45 resumed our route, traversing a hilly
country; and at 4*15 ascended a granite hill with a sandstone
summit, from which the view was very extensive. Large valleys
seemed to join and trend from s. to n., and were bounded by
ranges except to the e., where a level plain or wide valley extended
to the horizon. In the valley a line of green trees 5 m. distant
marked the course of a creek. Descending the range we en-
countered a very rocky country with deep gullies, in one of which
we found a few gallons of water, which our horses consumed. As
there was no grass here we continued onwards till dusk, and
bivouacked in a small patch of grass by the side of a dry gully.
{Bivouac.) The country e. of the range is entirely granitic, very
thinly wooded, and scantily grassed ; the timber chiefly ironbark.
Oct. 7.— Continued an e. course at 5*50, and at 7*50 reached
*
*


112 Gregory ’s Journal of the
the large creek, which was 100 yards wide with a shallow sandy
channel; the banks low and thinly timbered with iron bark and a
few box trees; the soil poor and sandy, producing little grass.
Large casuarina and flooded gum-trees grew in the channel of
the creek, w'hich we followed down 3 m. to the n.e. without finding
any water, and only two spots where it could be procured by
digging ; we then turned up the creek and formed a well at the
most eligible spot, and procured an abundant supply of good
water. At 2*20 commenced our return route towards the camp,
and following up the spurs of the range found a practicable route
for the pack-horses. Passed the highest part of the range at 6,
and bivouacked at a small dry watercourse at 7*15 p.m. (. Bivouac .)
Oct. B.—Resumed our route at 6, and deviating to the n. of
the outward track found a small pool of water in a rocky gully,
following which downwards for a mile we came to a pool of water
sufficient for the supply of the whole party. At 10-30 reached
Bowman Spring at the foot of the range, and by digging in the
moist soil obtained a little water. As we descended to the spring,
a small party of blacks shouted to us from the summit of one of
the hills, but did not descend to us, though we halted till 12*30,
and then resumed our route, reaching the camp at 4, and found
the party all well. The horse meat was quite dry and fit for
packing. Bowman had also replaced the shoes of all the horses.
The geological character of the country gradually changes, in
consequence of the greater development of the older rock as we
proceed to the eastward. At this camp gneiss, porphyry, and
trap have superseded the slates; and, proceeding e., granite is
visible at the western base of the range ; this is covered by a thick
mass of porphyry, containing large fragments of slate, gneiss, and
granite in its lower beds, while the upper part has a fine even
grain, and is of a lighter colour. Being deeply cracked by vertical
fissures, it forms perpendicular columns of rhomboidal form re-
sembling basalt. The summits of the higher hills are formed by
horizontal beds of white sandstone, containing water-worn pebbles
of quartz, &c. Granite supersedes the other rocks on the eastern
slope of the range, and is there only occasionally interrupted by
veins of dark trap.
Oct. 9. —Prepared to start from the camp at the usual time,
but four of the horses could not be found, and owing to the rocky
nature of the ground the tracks were not discovered till late in the
evening, when tracing them some miles I found the stray animals
at sunset in a secluded valley.
Oct. 10.—This morning we were more successful in collecting
the horses, and started from the camp at 6*35. Steering an
easterly course reached the foot of the range at 10*20, and the
summit at noon. Following the previous track reached the pool


I
\ I
of water at 1, and encamped. (Camp lxxxvii.) Near this
camp the Xanthorrhoea was first seen.
Oct. 11. —Leaving the camp at 7 steered an easterly course
over a somewhat barren granitic country, timbered with cypress
and ironbark. Passed close to a hill on the highest point of the
range, which by approximate measurement rose to 2500 ft. above
the sea level: then by a spur descended the range, and reached
the well in the sandy creek at I*s, and encamped. (Camp
lxxxviii.) Having cleared out the sand and banked up the sides
of the well with stakes and brushwood, a plentiful supply of
water was obtained at about 5 ft. below the surface of the dry
channel.
Oct. 12. — At 7 steered n. 60° e. over undulating granite
country, timbered with ironbark and box, the grass scanty and
very dry. At 8*45 crossed a large creek coming from the s.; its
channel was about 100 yards wide, dry and sandy, except where
an occasional shallow pool existed ; the bank steep and 10 to 20 ft.
high. Crossing several small gullies trending n., at noon came on
a dry creek also trending northwards; on its right bank was a
level plain of cellular lava or basalt. Following the course of the
creek at L5O camped on the bank of a fine lagoon, \ m. long, 70
yards wide, and apparently about 10 ft. deep, although at the
present time much below its usual level. {Camp lxxxix.J A high
range of hills exists to the n. of this creek, and the water courses all
trend to the n.w. ; and, as our latitude is the same as the “ reedy
brook ” of Leichhardt on the s.w. side of the “ valley of lagoons,” it
is evident that these streams are not tributary to the Burdekin, but
probably form the head of the “ Lynd River.”
Oct. 13. —At 6*25 steered e. and traversed a slightly undulat-
ing granitic country, with small watercourses trending w.S.w.
Ironbark and box formed an open forest, the soil poor and gritty,
but with patches of black soil with blocks of lava on the surface.
At lids reached a small hill of lava, from the summit of which
the country appeared very level to the e. To the n.e. large hills
rose about 12 m. distant. Ranges of hills also bounded the plain
to the s., and some distant summits were visible to the s.e. Con-
tinuing an east course, lava became more frequent, and at length
formed the whole surface. At 2*30 came on several streams of
ancient lava, forming ridges of rugged rocks, which were crossed
with some difficulty. These streams of lava appear to have come
from the n. from the high land several miles distant, the thickness
varying from 20 to 30 ft. and the breadth irregular. The level
ground was lightly timbered with ironbark and box. At 5-25
turned to the s.e., following a small gully; passed a small native
well with about one pint of water in it, and the nature of the rock
prevented its being enlarged. ( Ca xc.) At 6T5 camped near
VOL. XXVIII. I


some large granite rocks, in the hollows of which 5 or 6 gallons
of water had collected during a recent shower. Walking down
the creek 1 \ m. in search of water, I found two small pools; but
the broken nature of the ground and the darkness of the night
prevented the party being moved to them till morning.
Oct. 14.—Moved the camp to the water-holes found last night
m. down the gully. ( Camp xci.) The country here is of gra-
nitic formation, undulating and moderately grassed, and wooded
with box and ironbark. The day was cloudy, but cleared at
night, and I took observations for time, latitude, and lunar
distance. Chronometer 2287 would not wind up in the morning,
and stopped during the day; but, having run down, wound up
again without difficulty.
Oct. 15.—Resumed our journey at 7‘lo, and followed the course
of the creek to the s.e. On its n.e. side was a basaltic plain, and
-Hr
the s.w. consisted of ridges of granite with sandstone on the
summits. Several small creeks joined from the s.w., and increased
the principal channel considerably. At 10 the country was
more level, and openly timbered with box, ironbark, and blood-
wood. Grass was abundant and green, owing to heavy rains,
which appeared to have been accompanied with hail, as the w.n.w.
sides of the trees were much bruised, the soil indented, and a
great portion of the leaves and small branches torn from the trees.
At 145 camped on a small tributary creek. ( Camp xcn.) The
country appears to consist of granite and mica-schist, with beds or
streams of lava, which have come from the ranges to the n. and
have advanced to different distances into the more level land.
The surface of the lava is more thinly wooded and better grassed
than the granite, but the scarcity of water and the roughness of
the surface render it less convenient for travelling. From one
of the higher ridges we had a wide but imperfect view of the
country, but the air being misty, only a few of the marked outlines
of the ranges to the n. were visible. To the e. a high hill 25 m.
distant rose beyond a level wooded country. At 6 there was a
heavy thunder-shower, which caused the gully to run for several
hours.
Oct. 16.—The rain having passed away the morning was clear
and cool, and at 6*35 we resumed our journey, steering an average
s.e. course, crossing the creek several times, and at 11 reached
the bank of the Burdekin River, which had a strong stream of
water flowing in its channel, which here is about 100 yards wide,
but full of casuarina and melaleuca trees ; the banks steep and
deeply cut with gullies. Following the river to the s.e., at 2
camped in a large open grassy flat a mile from the river, ob-
taining water from a small pool of rain-water filled by the shower
last night. ( Camp xciii.)
4»\ "X


Oct. 17. —At 6-30 resumed our journey, steering e. and s. for
two hours over level flats; then turning e. crossed a steep range
of sandstone hills, the strata nearly vertical, the strike n. and s.
Thin veins of quartz intersected the rock in every direction, and
formed a complete network. The steepness of the country com-
pelled us to turn n.e. to the river to avoid the rocky hills, and we
followed the stream to the s.e. ; the banks were high and cut by
deep gullies. At 12*30 the hills receded, and we entered some
fine flats. Here I picked up a fragment of the bone of a bullock,
and observed several trees that had been cut with iron axes ; and
as the latitude corresponds with that of Leichhardt’s camp of the
26th April, 1845, the bone doubtless belonged to the bullock he
killed at that place. At I*s camped on the bank of the river.
( Camp xciv.) The Moreton-Bay ash, poplar gum, and a rough-
barked gum tree with very green leaves, were added to the iron-
bark, bloodwood, and other eucalypti which constitute the forests,
while casuarina and melaleuca leucodendron grow in the beds of
the larger watercourses. The channel of the river is about 150
yards wide, with a small stream of water winding along its sandy
bed. Much of the running water is due to the late rain, but it
is evident that it continues to run throughout the year, as
the character of the vegetation indicates a constant supply of
water.
Oct. 18. — Continued our route at 6*25, and steering nearly e.
till B*3o, when the river turned to the s. round some sandstone
hills, crossing which we again reached the river at 10*5 flowing to
the s., with fine openly timbered flats on both banks. Steering s.
till 1 camped on the bank of the river just below a ridge of slate
rock which crossed the channel. ( xcv.) From the hills at
9 we saw a large valley joining that of the Burdekin from the
e. ; it was bounded by a steep range on tbe s., which terminated
about 2m. from the river, s.w. of our position were several flat-
topped hills, which appeared to be a continuation of the range
crossed yesterday. To the s. only a few distant hills were seen,
the view being obstructed by trees. The flats on the banks of the
river are well grassed, and openly timbered with ironbark, Moreton-
Bay ash, bloodwood, and poplar gum ; the soil varying from a
soft brown loam into which our horses’ feet sunk deeply, to a firm
black or brown clay loam. The ridges are stony, thinly grassed,
and timbered with box and ironbark. The geological features
consist of a fine-grained sandstone, interstratified with slate and
coarse conglomerates. The sandstone is intersected in every di-
rection with veins of quartz, which do not appear to enter the
slate. The dip of the strata is nearly vertical, the strike n. and
s. The whole appear to have been much disturbed and altered.
Neither granite nor trap have been observed since yesterday
I 2
*
I


VP9HB
116
Gregory’s Journal of the
morning. Consumed the last of the dried horse-meat, and in-
creased the ration of flour to 1 lb. per diem.
Oct. 19, Sunday. —Remained at the camp to rest the party.
The day was cloudy, with variable breeze from s.e. to n.e. and N. No
observations for latitude could be taken till early on Monday
morning, and even then the altitudes were imperfect. The stream
of running water in the bed of the river has increased, but is still
quite clear.
Oct. 20. —Resuming our journey at 6’40, steering s.e. through
fine grassy flats till 10, wdien we crossed the “ Clarke ” River
and altered the course to e., over well-grassed flats to the foot of
a rocky range of sandstone hills, which we reached at noon, and
ascended by a steep spur, and at 2’30 attained the highest ridge.
Here sandstone was the prevailing rock, and xanthorrhcea, silver-
leaved ironbark, and triodia formed the principal vegetation.
Descending gradually, at 3*30 reached a small creek with a patch
of good green grass on its banks, and at 3*45 halted at some small
water-holes which appeared to be permanent. ( xcvi.)
Except near the creek the country was poor and stony, with an
open forest of ironbark and box trees. The country between the
Burdekin and the Clarke appears to be of excellent quality, con-
sisting of well-grassed flats timbered with ironbark, Moreton-Bay
ash, poplar gum, and box. The “ Clarke ” about 100 # yards wide,
with a sandy bed crossed by ridges of slate rock. The banks are
60 to 80 ft. high, and the marks of last year’s floods 30 to 35 ft.;
the trees were much bent and broken by the force of the current.
More water appears to come down the Clarke during floods, but
the Burdekin has a more constant stream ; the Clarke containing
only shallow pools separated by dry sand and rocks. After
leaving the immediate vicinity of the river the country was very
poor and stony; the late rains had not extended so far, and the
grass had the dry and parched appearance which characterized the
country on the banks of the Gilbert.
Oct. 21. —At 6T5 resumed our journey and traversed an infe-
rior country of sandstone and porphyry, thinly wooded with box
and silver-leaved ironbark, triodia in a great degree superseding
the grass. In crossing one of the gullies in which were some
pools of water, Bowman’s horse fell over the bank into one of
them, and he got some severe bruises. At 10T5 came on the
river where it ran over a ledge of rocks forming a succession of
cascades, below which it spread out into a wide sheet of sand J m.
in breadth, and then turned to the s. As Bowman had fallen
some distance in the rear of the party, I selected the first suitable
spot, and at 11 encamped; shortly after which Mr. H. Gregory
came in with Bowman. ( Camp xcvn.) On the bank of the
river we saw two black gins, who climbed a tree on our
'ill
I i 11t
s
i ■'


approach, and in the afternoon came to the camp with an old man.
After some unintelligible conversation, they departed to their
camp. They had no clothing of any kind, and the only weapon
carried by the man was a throwing stick of the same form as those
used by the blacks on the southern shores of the Gulf of Carpen-
taria. The geological character of the country is sandstone, much
altered by contact with porphyry, which has been forced through
it; both the dip and strike are confused, and could not be ascer-
tained to have any general direction or angle except in the bed of
the river, where the strata dipped 10° to the n., but in the hills on
the left bank below the camp the strata were horizontal. The
river is now about 150 yards wide in the narrower parts, with a
narrow stream of water (10 to 20 yards wide) 1 foot deep, running
in a winding course through the sand, and sometimes expanding
into sheets of water occupying the whole breadth of the channel.
At 6T5 steered s. and followed the right hank of the river; for
the first hour the country was hilly on both banks, with deep
gullies ; it then became more level, and opened into well-grassed
flats : the timber box, Moreton-Bay ash, and ironbark ; the soil a
light brown sandy loam, very soft from the numerous excavations
of the funnel ant. These flats extended from Ito2 m. back, and
the country then rose into low ridges of poor land, timbered with
ironbark and box. Crossed a sandy creek coming from the w.,
and at T3O camped on the bank of the river. (Camp xcyiii.)
A short distance from the camp we surprised a black with his gin
and a child. The man climbed a tree, and the woman ran away
with the child, leaving a small water-vessel hollowed out of a
piece of wood, and a calabash full of water. The rocks near our
last camp were sandstone and porphyry ; in the only exposed
section the sandstone dipped 5° to 15° to the n. We also crossed
a hill of porphyry, which was remarkable for the regularity of its
cleavage into thick laminse, which w r ere vertical, with a strike n.
and s.; but though it had the external appearance of a stratified
rock, its structure was perfectly crystalline. About noon granite
with large plates of mica was observed in some of the gullies.
Oct. 23. —At 7 steered s.s.e. over ridges of sandstone timbered
with ironbark and thinly grassed, for the first hours ; and then
again struck the river, passing at the foot of a limestone hill, the
rock of which contained fossil shells and corals. Altering the
course to s., traversed fine open flats to Im. wide, beyond which
the country rose into low ridges of limestone. At noon basalt
appeared, covering the limestone and sandstones. The steep
slopes which bounded this rock were very rugged, hut the level
surface was well covered with black soil producing excellent
grass. At 12*55 camped in a fine grassy flat walled in by steep
basaltic rocks. {Camp xeix.) We experienced some difficulty


in watering the horses, as the banks of the river were so steep that
they frequently fell back into the water in attempting to ascend
the bank. The limestone rocks seen on this day’s journey appear
to rise from beneath the sandstone (some of which are so hard and
close grained as to have the appearance of quartz). The limestone
dips about 10° to the w., and some of the adjacent sandstones 20°
w. in well-defined strata. The basalt covers all the other rocks,
filling up the former inequalities of surface, and forming a per-
fectly level plain. Where the softer sandstones were in contact
they were only baked into a coarse, brick-like mass which had
much the appearance of having been formed from the alluvial
banks of the river.
Get. 24.—Leaving our camp at 6 steered s.s.e. over well-
grassed basaltic flats thinly timbered with ironbark, &c., the soil
a red loam. At 9 came to a large reedy lake or swamp, with
considerable patches of open shallow water, on which were great
numbers of ducks, geese and pelicans, &c. A broad and deep
stream flowed from the lake to the s.e., varying from 30 to 80
yards in width, with a broad belt of reeds along the margin,
beyond which the ground rose about 50 ft. to the level surface of
the basaltic plain. Following the various windings of the stream
till 10*35, crossed it at a ledge of basaltic rock, where it formed a
fine rapid with a vertical fall of Bor 10 ft. Beyond the running
channel a dry sandy creek ran parallel at 80 to 100 yards dis-
tance. Our course was now between the creek and the steep
rocky edge of the basaltic plain, which was too rugged for ascent
with the horses till 11*20 ; we then crossed the plain, passing to
the s. of a shallow open lake about m. in diameter. The country
was now very scrubby, with patches of grass. Altering the course
more to the e., we again entered an open ironbark forest, and at
2 crossed a dry sandy creek, beyond which the country was poor
and sandy, with pandanus growing on the ridges. On the banks
of the creek we observed the marks of a recent camp of a large
party of blacks ; and a patch of ground was cleared of grass, and
the surface scraped into ridges for a space of 30 yards long by 20
wide ; the whole was covered with foot-prints, which showed that
some ceremony or dance had been performed by a large body of
men. At 3*30 entered a dense scrub of small crooked eucalypti
and acacia, with a few sterculia or bottle trees. After losing an
hour in attempting to penetrate the scrub, we turned n. to the dry
creek and followed it down till 7, when we camped near a pool
of water; but the night was so dark that the horses could not
approach the water with safety, the bank being steep, and rendered
very slippery by a slight shower. ( Camp c.)
Oct. 25. —The grass having been recently burnt near the camp,
the horses had strayed considerably, and we did not start till 7*30,
r f;
K '
iS\T


when steering e. we soon came on the Burdekin, which turned to
the s.s.w. and s.e. The basalt rocks approaching the river, we
were compelled to cross a very rocky ridge, beyond which we
passed a deep pool of water 80 yards wide and \ m. long ; it ter-
minated in a dry stony channel which connected it with a sandy
creek which joined the river. Crossing a granite ridge we camped
in a fine grassy flat on the bank of the Burdekin; the banks were
high and steep, but the water easy of access. ( Camp ci.)
Oct. 26, Sunday. —Remained at the camp. During the day
there was a succession of showers without thunder, the clouds and
wind from the e. At 10 p.m. the rain ceased, but the night con-
tinued cloudy.
Oct. 27.—The morning was cloudy with light rain till 7, At
7'30 steered e.s.e. and e. over a fine grassy country, consisting of
granite and trap-ridges, timbered with ironbark, box, Moreton-
Bay ash, and bloodwood, the river taking a sweep to the n. of the
track, but at 10 we came again on its bank. The course was
now s. till 2*15, when we crossed a large stream bed coming from
the s.w., with a sandy and rocky channel 40 yards wide, contain-
ing small pools of water. Below the junction of this tributary the
river turned to the e. and e.n.e. We crossed several ridges of
trap, granite, and porphyry, which came down from the high land
to the bank of the river, and at 3 - 30 encamped. ( cn.)
The whole of the country traversed this day was well-grassed
except about 1 m. of Bauhinia scrub, which did not appear to be
of any considerable extent. Ironbark, Moreton-Bay asb, and
bloodwood formed the principal trees, with which the country was
openly timbered. The prevailing rock is granite intersected by
veins of dark trap, and in the latter part of the day’s journey por-
phyry and schist were observed, and concretions of lime existed
near the trap veins. The soil was a light gritty loam except on
the trap rock, where it was a rich black soil. The available
country hereabouts appears more extensive than higher up the
river. More rain had fallen in the early part of the season, and
the grass is rich and green, especially where it has been burnt off
by the fires last year.
Oct. 28. —We resumed our journey at 6*25, steering an e.s.e.
course ; but after crossing some fine grassy ironbark-ridges, entered
a dense scrub of acacia, sterculia, Bauhinia, and thorny shrubs.
Turning n., with some difficulty extricated the party from the
scrub, and then skirted it to the E. along the banks of the river
till 9TO, when the scrub receded, and fine openly-timbered iron-
bark ridges replaced the scrub. These ridges were well grassed ;
the rocks granite, trap, and porphyry. The country generally
appeared well suited for stock. No high ranges were visible.
At 2*45 camped in a fine grassy flat, part of which having been


w
m
I
B
I
,
*
I
n \ i t
■ *
L
120
Gregory’s Journal the
burnt was now covered with excellent green grass. ( Camp cm.)
The day was cool and cloudy, with light showers from the e.
The granite was fine grained and intersected by veins and masses
of trap, and in the latter part of the journey porphyry was super-
incumbent. In the scrubs, sandstone prevailed ; it was coarse
grained, and contained rounded boulders of quartz, granite, slate,
and hard sandstone.
Oct. 29. —As the river turned to the e. below the camp, at
6 - 20 steered e.s.e. and s.e. till 9*30, when we again came on it,
trending s. The country consisted of openly-timbered and grassy
ironbark ridges, but not equally good with that passed during the
last two days. The river at 10 turned to the s.e. along the foot
of some steep rocky hills of porphyry resting on granite, and at
1T45 was joined by a dry creek 20 yards wide coming from the
s.w. Our course was now e.s.e., passing with difficulty between
the river and a steep granite hill, beyond which the country
became more level and sandy, rising to the s. in long gentle
slopes scantily grassed, and timbered with bloodwood, ironbark,
Moreton-Bay ash, and poplar gum, with a few r scattered pandanus.
Many deep gullies intersected the ground, cutting deeply into the
granite beneath the soil, and rendering it very difficult and
fatiguing to traverse. A fine range of openly-wooded and grassy
hills rose from 1 to 3 m. from the left bank of the river, attaining
an elevation of from 500 to 800 ft. above the river. These hills
are probably porphyritic; they are named “ Porter Range ” on
Leichhardt’s map. At 2*45 camped on the Burdekin River.
( Camp civ.)
Oct. 30. —At 6*30 steered n. 120° e. m., but at 7 came again on
the bank of the river, which now turned s.; the country became
more rugged, and rocky hills closed in on both banks of the river,
forming a deep gorge through which it had forced a passage.
By keeping at back of some of the hills we avoided much of the
rocky ground, crossing (at noon) a high ridge, from which we had
an extensive view, extending to the junction of the Burdekin with
the Suttor River, Mount M‘Connel bearing 159° magt, and
the w. end of Porter Range 334° magt. Along range appeared
to extend from Robey Range and bound the valley of the upper
Burdekin to the n. of e., while a high range seemed to trend
n.e. from the eastern side of the Suttor Valley and turn the
course of the Burdekin to the northward. Continuing our route
nearly s.e, over several steep rocky ridges, we camped in a fine
grassy flat a quarter of a mile from the Suttor River at 150,
Mount M‘Connel bearing n. 172° e. m. (Camp cv.) About
10 a.m. we heard some blacks calling in our rear, and soon after
they came in sight, but would not allow any of the party to ap-
proach them; till one of the party cantering up towards them,
y i
It /
>■ r


some climbed the trees, when we made signs to them that it was
desirable that they should pursue an opposite course to ours, and
we then left them to descend at their convenience. The country
traversed this day was of a broken character, with deep gullies
and rocky hills near the river, but was generally well grassed and
openly timbered with ironbark and Moreton Bay ash. Granite
forms the base of the hills, and is covered by masses of porphyry,
forming hills with rocky summits of columnar structure as at the
head of the Gilbert River. A dark-coloured trap changing into
porphyry formed some of the lower ridges, and was largely deve-
loped on the bank of the Suttor River. Thin veins of calcareous
spar and quartz intersect the granite. The bed of the Burdekin
where we last saw it (1 m. above its junction with the Suttor) is
half a mile wide, with a shallow stream of water varying from 20
yards wide to the whole breadth of the channel, which was very
level and sandy. The Suttor is but a small river compared with
the Burdekin. Near the camp it formed some fine reaches of
water 100 yards wide, but of no great depth; the trees on its
banks were much broken and bent by a flood which had occurred
within the past year. Considering the number of miles we have
travelled along the banks of the Burdekin, few impediments have
been encountered, while the extent of country available for squat-
ting purposes is considerable, with the advantage of a never-failing
stream of water throughout the whole distance.
Oct. 31. —A rainy night was followed by a thick fog in the
morning, so that when we started at 6‘30 it was with difficulty that
the deep gullies on the banks of the Suttor were avoided. Steering
s.w. for 1 hour, crossed to the right bank of the Suttor River,
and then by an average s. course passed to the w. of Mount
M‘Connel, which by its isolated character and height (about 600
ft. above the valley) forms a very conspicuous landmark. It is
wooded on the summit, and has some fine patches of grass on the
slopes, with cliffs of porphyry near the upper part, this being the
prevailing rock on the right bank, while shaly rock with dark trap
and veins of calcareous spar and limestone prevail on the left bank
of the Suttor. The country on both sides is well grassed and
openly timbered with ironbark. The bed of the river is very irre-
gular and sandy, with small shallow pools of water at intervals.
At 11 the river came from the s.w., but, continuing a s. course, we
crossed some fine basaltic plains covered with excellent grass and
separated by open box-forest. At noon crossed a sandstone hill,
the base of which was porphyry. Then traversing ironbark ridges
for an hour crossed a sandy creek from the e., and at 1 encountered
the first brigalow scrub. Through this scrub we steered s.w. till
3-40 and camped on a small dry creek with a narrow grassy flat.
{Camp cvi.) Water was obtained from a small gully, where


it had lodged during a shower the previous night. The country
till we reached the brigalow scrub was well adapted for pastoral
purposes. The rocks trap, slate, and porphyry, with veins of
limestone. The brigalow grows on the detritus of a coarse con-
glomerate, the larger boulders of which lay scattered over the
surface; they consist of trap, porphyry, quartz, and sandstone,
and have the appearance of being waterworn. A range of hills,
apparently sandstone, bounds the valley to the e. from 3 to 7
m. from the river; they have no great elevation, but we did not
get a good view of them from any point on our day’s journey.
JVoo. 1. —The horses had strayed so far into the scrub in search
of grass, that it was 9*40 before they were collected and saddled.
We then steered s. and s.w. through the scrub, which gradually
became more open, and at 11T5 we again reached the river,
coming from s s.e. ; following it up, it gradually turned to s. and
s.s.w. Two creeks joined the river from the e., but neither of
any importance. The brigalow scrub came close to the bank of
the river, only leaving the narrow flats open. Of the w. side of
the river we could see little, except that it consisted of wooded
ridges and scrub. To the e., at the distance of from Ito 3 m.,
rocky hills of moderate height existed, and from their flat tops
and red cliffs near their summits evidently consisted of sandstone
in horizontal strata. Sandstone also was exposed on the bank of
the river with a dip of 30° to s. At 3'30 camped on the right bank
of the Suttor, where a fine grassy plain extended about half a mile
back, and was covered with beautiful green grass. ( cvn.)
Water was abundant, as the river had been running during the
past week, and had filled the hollows in the channel, hut had now
ceased to flow. The channel is very irregular, and consists of
from 3 to 6 small channels, which separate and rejoin each other so
as to form a complete network, with occasional isolated hollows ;
being free from scrub, the bed of the river was excellent travelling
ground, large flooded gum and melaleuca-trees affording an
agreeable shade.
Nov. 2, Sunday, —Grass and water being abundant, we enjoyed
a day of rest, remaining at the camp. Several cockatoos were
shot; they were similar in colour and form to the sulphur-crested
cockatoo of the Victoria and Gulf of Carpentaria, but larger in
size.
f
*
t \ A
Nov. 3. —Leaving the camp at 6 35, followed the river in a
southerly direction till 11, when it turned to the e., and we as-
cended a sandstone hill, from the summit of which there was a
fine view of the surrounding country. To the e. several very dis-
tant peaks and hills were visible; the most remarkable bore
n. 86° e. mag.; to the s. a low range about 30 m. distant, with
one large peaked hill, bounded the horizon, the intervening country


being very level and apparently covered with scrub; to the w.
the valley was bounded by low hills apparently of sandstone.
Although open ironbark ridges were frequent, the general charac-
ter is very scrubby, and this, combined with the scarcity of per-
manent water, will ever render the country unavailable for pas-
toral purposes. Descending the hill, steered s.e. ; crossed a fine
basaltic plain and entered an open brigalow scrub, and at 2
reached the left bank of the Suttor, which had completely altered
its character, consisting of a level grassy flat with uncertain limits,
and intersected by long water holes, which were mostly dry; the
general course from s.s.w. At 3’30 camped at a fine water-hole ;
2 m. below the camp we saw some blacks, who decamped, and
ran into the scrub. ( Camp cvni.) The country along the river
consists of open flats thinly grassed in with large patches of salt-
bush (atriplex), and openly timbered with box and flooded gum,
while ironbark, box, and brigalow acacia prevail over the rest of
the country. The marks of iron tomahawks are frequent where
the blacks have been cutting honey or opossums out of the hollow
branches of the trees.
Nov. 4. —Steering s.w. from 7-40 till B’s, the river turned
suddenly to the s.e., and, changing the course to 170° mag.,
traversed an open brigalow scrub with several shallow channels
winding through the scrub in an irregular manner. At iO‘3o
again came on the principal channel of the river, which was running
and very muddy from the effect of recent rains in the upper part
of its course. The banks are very low, and the country so level
that the floods must frequently extend more than a mile back into
the scrub, which comes close to the bank on both sides. Box and
flooded gum-trees grow along the larger channels, and box-flats
sometimes extend into the scrub. We now followed the river to
the s.s.w. through level country covered with dense brigalow,
passing only one low rocky hill on the left bank at IT2O ; at 2T5,
the river having diverged to the eastward, we altered the course
to s. ; the country was more open, and at 3 we encamped on
one of the side channels of the river, in a fine grassy box-flat.
( Camp cix.)
Nov. 5. —Steering s.e. for a quarter of an hour reached the
main channel of the river, which we followed to the s., crossing at
7*20 to the right bank; the river soon diverged to the westward,
and at 9*15 a dense brigalow scrub forced us to steer s.w. till we
again attained the bank of the river at 10‘30, and a s. course
again pursued till 1, when a s.e. course w r as again adopted in
order to close in with the river: reaching it at 4, and following
s.s.e. till 4’50, encamped on its bank on the edge of a grassy flat
of some extent. ( Camp cx.) The whole country is very level
and covered with dense brigalow scrubs, except where a sandy


plain occurred, on which triodia was more abundant than grass.
Having passed the latitude of Sir T. L. Mitchell’s last camp on the
Belyando, and thus connected his route with the explorations of
Dr. Leichhardt, I considered it no longer desirable to follow this
river upwards, and therefore decided on pursuing a south-easterly
route to Peak Downs and the Mackenzie River.
Nov. 6.—At 6*30 steered s., crossing the river, which turned
to the s.w., passing through brigalow scrub till 9, then entered a
box and Moreton Bay ash flat, in which was a small gully with
pools of rain water, near which a camp of blacks were seen, but
they ran into the scrub on our approach. At 9'30 changed the
course to s.e. towards some rocky hills, which we reached at 11:
from one of the ridges we saw several distant ranges to the west-
ward, but the intervening space of 20 to 40 miles was very flat.
Our route was now over scrubby hills of sandstone for 3 hours,
and then descending into an open flat timbered with box, blood-
wood, and Moreton Bay ash, triodia and grass growing on a sandy
loam. The flat gradually became scrubby, and at 3*30 came to
a small creek with a pool of rain water in the channel, and en-
camped in a small grassy flat, the creek trending to the n.
{Camp cxi.) In crossing the sandstone range we had an occa-
sional view of some high peaks 20 to 30 m. distant to the s. and
s.s.e., but to the e. the country was perfectly level.
Nov. 7. —The horses having kept near the camp we started at
6'5, steering s.e. The whole country appeared perfectly level,
covered with brigalow scrub, with open patches of sandy soil pro-
ducing triodia and a little grass; the timber, Moreton Bay ash
and box. Towards noon these openings became more frequent.
At I*3o passed a shallow pool of rain-water in a hollow at the
edge of a scrub. Having watered the horses, we proceeded on-
wards for about a mile, when Melville’s horse fell and rolled on
him; he was much bruised, and as the extent of injury could not
at the moment be ascertained, we returned to the pool of water
and encamped. {Camp cxn.)
Nov. B. —The supply of water being exhausted, I determined
to move on to the next suitable spot for a camp, and halt till Mel-
ville had somewhat recovered from the effect of his fall. At
7‘35 steered s.e., the country becoming more open as we advanced,
and thinly timbered with ironbark, box, Moreton Bay ash, and
blood wood. The soil a red sandy loam, full of the holes of the
funnel ant, thinly grassed and with patches of triodia. At 8-30
reached a fine creek of running water 20 yards wide, with steep
banks. The water being muddy showed it to result from recent
rain, and it probably rises in the high ranges seen to the s.s.e.
Grassy flats extend along the bank of the creek, but are backed
by brigalow scrub. Having selected a suitable spot on the right
1
;
U1 I
LI v i
A
'


bank of the creek, we camped at 8*45. ( cxm.) The
weather being fine and dry we killed the filly, which was now 11
months old and in excellent condition. By noon the animal was
cut into slices and hung up to dry. The meat was excellent, and
exactly like veal; being very juicy, a portion was slightly boiled
to facilitate the drying, and at night the meat was placed on a
frame of small sticks and a charcoal fire maintained under it by
the watch. Dean was fully employed in repairing the harness,
all the spare flour-bags being devoted to patching the saddle-bags,
which had been much torn in travelling through the scrubs.
Bowman replaced the shoes of the horses. Many of the horses
have hurt their legs in crossing the fallen trees in the scrub, and
several are very lame from this cause.
Nov. 9, Sunday. —Remained at the camp. Melville appeared
to be recovering, but is still very stiff and scarcely able to walk.
The weather was fine and warm, and the meat dried well.
Nov. 10. —At 7TO we left the camp and followed the creek for
an hour s.s.e., and then steered s.e. through open brigalow scrub,
which gradually changed to open ironbark and box flats, well
grassed. At 2 came to a broken country covered with very dense
scrub of acacia and ironbark ; deep gullies intersected the country
in every direction. At 3%30 ascended a ridge of mica schist, from
which a high range was seen to the s.w. 20 m. distant, but the
acacia scrub was so dense that the view was very imperfect.
Following down a valley to the s., s.w., w., and n.w., at 5-15
camped at a small pool of rain-water in a watercourse trending
n.w. through rich grassy ironbark flats, the hills being covered
with dense acacia scrub. (Camp cxiv.) It was evident that we
were approaching the waterparting between the Burdekin and the
Fitzroy Rivers, and hoped soon to emerge from the vast tract of
scrub which occupies the valley of the Suttor almost to the junc-
tion with the Burdekin, The acacia scrub on the ranges differs
from the brigalow of the plain, having a smoother and more
slender stem, the leaves smaller and a deeper green colour.
The soil is of a better description, producing good grass, espe-
cially in the valleys. On the plain we observed that full one-half
of the box-trees had died within the last three years, and that it
was not the effect of a bush-fire, as the old timber which lay on
the ground was not scorched.
Nov. 11. — Leaving the camp at 6*30 we steered s.e., over
ironbark ridges of a very scrubby character, with open grassy flats
in the valleys. The ridges gradually increased in height, and
at 11 the highest point was attained, from which we saw Peak
Range, about’ 30 m. to the n.e. ; to the n.w. the view was ob-
scured by wooded hills, but from n. to e.s.e. the country appeared
to consist of low wooded ridges for about 10 m., beyond which


fine, open, grassy plains extended from e.n.e. to e. along the foot
of the Peak Range : from e.s.e. to s. low wooded ranges, 10 to 15
m. distant, intercepted our view. Descending from the range,
we followed a small watercourse to the e.s.e. for nearly 2 hours,
when the watercourse being considerably enlarged turned to the
n. and at 2*30 we encamped in a fine grassy flat, obtaining water
from a pool of rain-water in a tributary gully, the larger channel
being dry. (Camp cxv.) The country generally consists of low
ridges of schist, which forms by decomposition a gravelly loam,
the gravel being derived from thin veins of quartz which inter-
sect the schist in all directions. Ironbark and tall-stemmed
acacia, with broad leaves, formed the forest, and grass was every-
where abundant. The great quantity of dead and splintered
wood lying on the ground in the brigalow scrubs traversed dur-
ing the past week has injured the horses’ legs severely, and 6
have been lamed from this cause; some so severely that they had
to be relieved of their loads.
Nov. 12. —At 7-25 steered n. 110° e. magnetic over grassy
ironbark ridges, with small watercourses trending n. At 11
entered a dense brigalow scrub, with a few large Moreton Bay
ash-trees ; the soil very poor, and derived from the decomposition
of a coarse conglomerate ; small watercourses trended to the s.
At 12'45 emerging from the scrub into an open box country, with
limestone, quartz, gravel, and soft black soil, producing rather dry
and scanty grass. At 1*45 entered an open plain well grassed,
and with limestone ridges covered with bottle-tree scrub. The
grass was good, and at this season green, but much mixed with
sal sola. The summits of Peak Range showed clearly above the
ridges, and from the remarkable cliffs which exist round the
summits of several of the hills they appeared to be capped by a
thick bed of red sandstone or porphyry. There being little pros-
pect of finding water in an easterly direction, at 4 altered the
course to s.e. The air had been very hot during the day, with a
light breeze from n. and n.e., which brought up a heavy thunder
squall and a smart shower, but the ground was so dry that the
rain was instantly absorbed. At 5 came to a watercourse trend-
ing s., but from the nature of the soil no water remained in the
channel. We followed it down till 6 30, and encamped without
water. (Camp cxvi.) About a mile from the camp we observed
a small tree marked (Aid;, and near it a large sheet of bark,
that had been cut about 2 years.
Nov. 13. —Resumed our journey at 6*30, steering s. down the
watercourse. At 7 saw some blacks, who pointed down the creek
and also into the scrub when asked by signs where water was to
be procured, but they retreated into the scrub on the approach of
the pack-horses. Proceeding onwards at 9*20 came to a pool of
I;VA.


water caused by a recent shower, and camped. {Camp cxvn.)
The country near the camp was very poor and scrubby, with large
Moreton Bay ash-trees ; the soil formed by the decomposition of
coarse sandstones and conglomerates, with intervals of trap and
schistose rock.
Nov. 14. — At 6-50 steered s.e., the creek turning to the s.
We soon entered grassy plains, with ironbark ridges, and patches
and belts of acacia scrub; trap and limestone existing in the
plains, and sandstone on the ridges. At noon, after passing
through a belt of cypress trees, entered extensive grassy downs
covered with beautiful green grass. Following a shallow water-
course we passed some blacks at a distance. The search for
water was unsuccessful till 4*20, when, finding a small pool of
rain-water, we encamped. ( Camp cxvni.) The country to the
n.e. of our track appeared very level, and the grassy downs
probably extend to the foot of Peak Range. To the s.w. it
appeared to be a fine open country for 3 to 8 m., and then rose
into wooded hills of moderate elevation, at the base of which a
creek, probably the one we last camped on, appeared to run to
s.e. If this part of the country were well supplied with water, it
would form splendid stations for the squatter, but from its low
character and geological structure permanent surface water is
very scarce, and where it does exist is surrounded by scrubby
country, which renders it almost unavailable.
Nov. 15. —Starting at 6*40 on an e.s.e. course soon entered an
open acacia scrub, with fine grassy openings clear of trees; the
soil a fine black loam, limestone, trap, and quartz pebbles occurring
on the surface in the open plains. At 9*30 entered a fine box flat,
and passed some pools of water in the creek. The flat extended
e. 3 rn., and we then entered a very scrubby tract of country, the
soil a black mould, with much salsola growing even in the thick
scrub. At 11 came on a fine creek from the n., with permanent
pools of good water, but the banks, though grassy, were covered
by an acacia scrub and a few box-trees. Changing the course to
s.e., at 12*20 came to a fine river with high grassy banks, and
several narrow deep channels, which were now full of water and
running. In consequence of the late rains it had been slightly
flooded this season, and the previous year had risen full 25 ft.
above the present level. This is the “ Mackenzie ” of Leichhardt.
The course of the river for 2 m. was e.s.e., and we crossed to the
right bank without much difficulty, the bottom being firm and the
bank sandy, though steep. Continuing to follow the river, at 2*40
camped. ( Camp cxix.) The country on the bank of the Mac-
kenzie is scrubby, with occasional open flats, with box-trees and
grass. The scrub is principally acacia. The little lemon-tree
was in full fruit, which, though only half-an-inch in diameter, was


m
U 1
I
B
r fU
j
y. %
£- m \\ ■
WJj
128
Gregory’s Journal of the
IS
I >
excellent eating when boiled with sugar. The day was cool and
cloudy, and at night it rained lightly for several hours.
Nov. 16, Sunday . —Remained at the camp. The morning was
cloudy, but cleared towards noon, and I was able to ascertain the
latitude.
Nov. 17. —Resumed our journey at 6*30 a.m., following the
Mackenzie to the s.e. through a level scrubby country till 9'45,
when we crossed a large creek from the s., which proved to be
the “ Comet River ”of Leichhardt. The whole bed of the Comet
River did not exceed 70 yards, and the smaller channel only 5 to
10 yards wide; and even below its junction the Mackenzie only
consisted of a channel 10 to 30 yards wide in the bottom of a bed
150 yards from bank to bank. Just below the junction of the
Comet River we found the remains of a camp of Dr. Leich-
hardt’s party on his second expedition. The ashes of the fire
were still visible, and a quantity of bones of goats were scattered
around. A large tree was marked thus /LJ, but a hollow in
the ground at the foot of the tree showed that whatever had been
deposited had long since been removed ; we, however, cleared out
the loose earth, but found nothing. The river now turned e.n.e,,
and our course being e. we receded from it, and at noon ascended
a rocky hill of sandstone, covered with scrub. As the country
was very scrubby to the E., we turned s. to look for water in a
small creek, which proved to be dry, and I therefore steered n. for
1 hour, and reached the bank of the river, and camped in a fine
grassy flat, openly timbered with box, flooded gum, and Moreton-
Bay-ash. ( Camp cxx.) Beyond the immediate flats of the river
the country was covered with dense scrub of acacia. Near the
camp a large flooded gum-tree was marked /|f Ifjf*) ; several years
had elapsed since the marks were cut. The day was cloudy, with
an easterly breeze; marked a tree near the camp (120 A).
Nov. 18. —The morning was cloudy, and rain commenced at 7
and continued till noon ; we, however, commenced our journey at
6 25, steering e. ; soon entered a dense scrub of acacia, box,
sterculia, and Moreton-Bay-ash, &c. Ascending to the level
country by a steep slope of sandstone, we continued our course,
and, passing a gully with water-holes which appeared permanent,
at 11'25 reached a deep creek, at which we camped at I*4o, obtain-
ing water from a small pool in its channel. ( cxxi.) To
the s.E. of the camp, about 5 m. distant, a range of hills rose
abruptly from the level country to the height of 800 or 1000 ft.;
the summits were flat, and surrounded by high cliffs of red sand-
stone.
I
L
Nov. 19.—Resuming our route at 6'30 steered E. through
dense scrubs with open patches of grassy forest; the soil a light
loam, very sandy in the open forest. Small watercourses trending


to the N. At 10 turned to the s.e. to avoid a large scrubby hill,
which lay detached from the principal range, and at 11 turned
again e. and ascended a steep sandstone hill, from which the
country to the N, and E. appeared extremely level. We then
crossed a succession of ironbark ridges, with acacia scrub at in-
tervals, and fine flooded-gum and box flats in the valleys;
casuarina and cypress grew on some of the sandy ridges, but the
country generally was well grassed. At 320 camped at a small
pool of water in a shallow watercourse trending n.e. (
CXXII.)
Nov. 20.—At 7*40 steered e. over open country, thinly tim-
bered with box and ironbark. At 10 crossed a dry creek, on the
banks of which were recent tracks of horses and cattle. At noon
we were overtaken by a heavy thunder shower, and at the same
time entered a dense scrub of brigalovv and casuarina. At 2 the
country was more open, and at 4TO camped near a small gully
with pools of water. ( Camp cxxm.) Heavy rain during the
night.
Nov. 21. —Continuing an E. course, at 650 crossed some
wooded ridges, from which ranges of hills about 12 m. to the e,
were imperfectly seen. Descending from the hills the country
was covered with very thick scrub of acacia, and the watercourses
trended to the e. and e.n.e. At 11*40 came to the Dawson River,
about 80 yards wide, with long shallow pools of water, the scrub
coming close to the bank on both sides, leaving a narrow grassy
flat. Following the river upwards to the s.e., s., and s.w., till
2*50, camped on the left bank of the river. ( Camp cxxiv.) The
flats increased in breadth as we proceeded, and extended a mile
back from the river, were beautifully grassed, and openly timbered
with box and flooded gum. The country beyond was covered
with acacia scrub. On the bank of the river we observed the
tracks of horses, and in the evening a small mob of horses passed
our camp, indicating our proximity to a station.
Nov. 22.—At 6*15 resumed our route up the river to the s.E.,
and at 8 came on a dray track, which we followed to the e.n.e.
for 2 m., and at 9*lo reached Messrs. Conner and Fitz’s station,
where we met with a most hospitable reception. (Messrs. Conner
and Fitzs Station , cxxv.) Having now reached the settled
country, and being not likely to require any great quantity of
ammunition, which from its weight was very inconvenient for car-
riage, a general survey of the equipment and stores was held, and
those portions of harness, &c., which were unfit for farther service
were condemned, and, together with 150 lbs. of shot and balls,
were left behind; this reduction of the loads of the pack horses
being absolutely necessary, as several of them were lame, and
unfit for work. One of the horses, “ Pepper-box,” had become so
VOL. XXVIII. K


H
I I
I
m
I I
very lame from a wound in the off fore foot, just above the hoof,
that I was on the point of abandoning him yesterday when we
reached the Dawson, but judging from the tracks of stock that we
were near a station, I had him driven on, and succeeded in
getting him to Mr. Conner’s station, but as he was quite incapable
of travelling farther with the party, I sold him to Mr. Conner tor
the sum of 7/-, which I considered to be his full value, and
probably more than the horse would have realized at auction
could he have been taken to Brisbane.
Nov. 23, Sunday . —Remained at Mr. Conner’s station.
Nov. 24.—Proceeded by the road in a s.e. direction, about
18 m., towards Mr. Hay’s station at “ Rannes,” and camped 1 m.
s.w. from “ Mount Leith,” w’hich I ascended, and took angles to
several ranges and hills. ( Camp cxxvi.) Nearly the whole
length of “Expedition Range” was visible, though, from the
misty state of the atmosphere, its outlines were not distinct. The
country traversed consisted first of level grassy flats, timbered
with spotted gum and box, but gradually rose into ironbark ridges
well grassed, and a few patches of scrub in some of the valleys.
The gullies trended to the s.w. The rocks consisted of a grey
micaceous schist, the strata dipping 60° to 80° to the e. Trap
veins and ridges were frequent, and formed fine grassy patches
where exposed on the surface.
Nov. 25, Mr. Hay’s Station , “Rannes” cxxvn. —Continued
our journey, following the road 5 m. s.s.e. to Mr. Hay’s station,
“ Rannes.” The country consists of fine open grassy ridges,
timbered with ironbark and box. The water courses trend w.
Trap, and slate or schist, constitute the principal rocks, and form
by their decomposition a fertile soil. “ Rannes ” station is on a
tributary of the Dawson River, which rises in the ranges to the e.
and s. The country to the base of these hills, which are 20 to 30
m. distant, is very level, with large patches of brigalow scrub, and
the creeks have very irregular channels with occasional large
water holes ; but water is generally scarce. At Mr. Hay’s I
met Mr. Wiseman, the Commissioner of Crown Lands for the
Leichhardt district, who informed me that he was not aware of any
fixed point in the district with which I could tie in the route of
the expedition ; but that some of the hills towards Port Curtis
had been fixed by Mr. M‘Cabe, the surveyor stationed at Port
Curtis, who had also measured some portion of the road from
Gladstone ; but that it would be requisite to apply to the
Surveyor-General’s Office for the documents, as he was not
furnished with any maps that would be of any service to me. In
the evening Mr. Wiseman pointed out to me the hills which were
connected with the survey of the road to Gladstone, about 40 m.
to the e. of “ Rannes,” and I decided on proceeding by the road


towards Gladstone till I could connect the route of the party
with the surveys at Port Curtis. Besides entertaining the party
in a hospitable manner, Mr. Hay furnished us with an order for
a supply of meat at his stations on the road.
Nov. 26. —At 9'30 left Mr. Hay’s station, and travelling in an
average e.n.e. direction by the road towards Gladstone, 24 m.,
camped at a sheep station. ( Camp cxxvm.) The country was
very level, only one ridge of hills being passed. Small creeks
with a few water holes trended to the w. Patches of brigalow
scrub separated open, grassy, forest land, timbered with ironbark,
box, Moreton Bay ash, and spotted gum. A low hill of porphyry
rose from the banks of the creek near our camp.
N0v. 27. —At 6’35 resumed our journey and followed the road
in an easterly direction. The country became more undulating,
with brigalow scrub to the s., and ironbark ridges to the n. At
8-30 I left the party to follow the road and steered s.e. to a steep
hill of porphyry, from which I took bearings to some of the per-
manent features of the country, and then rejoined the party, and
followed the windings of the road through the ranges, frequently
crossing a large creek with a dry stony channel and a few pools
of water. At 2 - 30 the road turned to the n.e., and I steered to
the s.e., e, and n.e., crossing a high range of hills of granite forma-
tion, and descending by steep gullies to the e., camped in a level
grassy forest at 4‘40. ( Camp cxxix.)* The prevailing rocks on the
western slope of the range were porphyry, trap, and schist; but
to the E. the slope was very abrupt, and granite prevailed. The
country was well grassed and openly timbered with ironbark, &c.
At noon it commenced raining, and there were frequent showers
during the night.
i
\
I
Nov. 28.—At 6-30 steered south for 1 hour to the foot of a
steep rocky hill called “ Mount Redshirt,” and took some bear-
ings from its southern slope, then e.s.e. hours, and came to
the road from the Burnet district to Gladstone, which we followed
in a southerly direction, crossing steep hills and deep gullies till
2'45, when we camped in a small valley with a water hole in the
gully. ( Camp cxxx.) The whole country was well grassed,
and timbered with ironbark, box, &c. The rocks granite and
trap.
Nov. 29.—At 645 resumed our route and followed the road in
a southerly direction till 2'30, when we camped on a small gully
trending to the s.w. ( Camp cxxxi.) Two small creeks were
crossed during the day, both well supplied with water and flowing
to the s.w. The whole country consisted of well grassed ridges,
timbered with ironbark and box; the rock porphyry and trap,
with a few ridges of sandstone, on which were patches of brigalow
scrub, with bottle-trees (sterculia).
K 2


I 1
I
►
Wow. 30, Sunday. —Remained at the camp. The early part of
the day was fine, but clouded over at noon, and commenced rain-
ing at sunset, with thunder and lightning.
December 1, —Following the road through a more level country,
well grassed and openly timbered with ironbark ; at 2*30 reached
a sheep station belonging to Mr. Berry, of the Burnet district.
{Camp cxxxn.) The day was clear and cool, with a fine south-
erly breeze. Obtained half a sheep from the shepherd on the
station.
Dec. 2.—Continued our route at 7*15 and reached Mr. Berry’s
station at noon, and at 2*15 camped about 7 m. lower down the
creek, which is a tributary of the Burnet. {Camp cxxxni.)
Granite is here the prevailing rock, though trap and sandstone
exist. The country consists of grassy ironbark ridges, but not
equal in quality to the country passed on previous days. Wrote
to the Colonial Secretary reporting the arrival of the North
Australian Expedition in the settled districts of New South
Wales.
Dec. 3. —Continued our route at 6*15, and passed the old police
station at “ Irelan ” at noon, and camped at 3*30 1 m. below Mr.
Archer’s station on the Burnet River. {Camp cxxxiv.)
Granite, micaceous schist, and variegated sandstone are the
principal rocks, fine ironbark ridges resulting from the former
rocks; but the sandstone forms low, scrubby, table-topped hills
destitute of grass.
Dec. 4. —At 6*30 resumed our journey and passed Mr.
Cameron’s station at noon, and reached Bouverie’s station at 3,
and encamped on the left bank of the Burnet, there being no grass
on the side where the station was. {Camp cxxxv.) Forwarded
letters to the Colonial Secretary and Captain Wickham, to Gaynduh,
by Mr. Cameron’s bullock-dray, that town being 20 m. out of the
direct line of route. Near our camp the rocks are well exposed
in the bank of the Burnet River. The lowest strata consisted of
schist, or compact sandstone full of thin quartz veins, and over-
laid by schist and thin bedded sandstone, all dipping about 40°
to e., and apparently altered by the action of trap rocks, although
1 did not observe them in actual contact.
Dec. s.—Starting at 7*lo we soon missed the road by following
a timber road which led us too much to the right, and I therefore
made the bank of the “ Boyne,” and followed it upwards, encounter-
ing much brigalow scrub. At 2 regained the road at Strathdee
station, and at 4 camped on the right bank of the Boyne. ( Camp
exxxvi.) The geological structure of the country is schists, and
slates, and sandstone : the former are intersected by numerous thin
veins of quartz; the strata appear to dip about 4(3° to the e., but
much disturbed by outbursts of trap which have altered the


djacent rocks. The general character of the country is very
similar to that on the middle Burdekin, except that brigalow
scrub takes the place of acacia and bottle-tree scrubs. A heavy
thunder shower at sunset.
Dec. 6.—Started at 7TO and followed the road till 3, and camped
at a small water hole in a watercourse trending to the w. ( Camp
cxxxvn.) The general character of this part of the Burnet district
is hilly, with ironbark and grass ; but the soil is of inferior quality
and coarse grit very frequent; water was abundant, but only in
consequence of late showers, as permanent vrater is very scarce.
Granite is the prevailing rock, but veins of porphyry are
frequent; fragments of slate and sandstone are numerous in the
channels of the creeks. As the rocks all decompose readily, they
are seldom exposed on the surface, and the geological features of
the country are not well developed.
Dec . 7, Mr. Lawson’s Station. —Left our camp at about 6*30;
and following the road for 2 hours, camped i a m. above Mr.
Lawson’s. ( Camp cxxxvm.) At Mr. Lawson’s I saw the
‘ Sydney Morning Herald,’ 24th November, in which it was stated
that the Tom Tough had sailed from the Victoria River on the
22nd July, and reached Coepang on the 25th; that she had been
found unfit for the further service of the expedition, and had been
sent to Surabaya and sold.
Dec. B.—Travelled for 7 hours by the road towards Mr. Haley’s
station, and camped on a small gully. ( Camp cxxxix.) The whole
distance travelled was grassy, with ironbark forest, &c. The rocks
schist, granite, and trap, forming ridges of moderate elevation.
Dec. 9, Mr. Haley’s Station. —Followed the road for 9 hours,
and reached Mr. Haley’s station. ( Camp cxl.) The country
consists of ironbark ridges well grassed, the soil a black or
brown loam. Granite, schist, and trap are the prevailing rocks.
The scrubs are more frequent, and very dense.
Dec. 10.—As the horses required rest and their shoes replacing,
&c., I availed myself of Mr. Haley’s hospitality, and the party
remained at the station. As this delay would afford a good
opportunity for Dr. Mueller to examine the Bunya scrubs, he
proceeded onwards to Good’s Inn for that purpose. Mr. Haley
laving kindly furnished us with fresh horses, Mr. H. Gregory
and myself accompanied him to one of the sheep stations 10 m to
the w., for the purpose of inspecting the performance of a Califor-
nian pump erected for the purpose of washing sheep. Heavy rain
prevented our return to the head station.
Dec. 11. —Returned to Mr. Haley’s head station.
Dec 12. ( Good’s Inn, cxli.) —The horses having been shod and
the harness repaired, proceeded to Good’s Inn, about 1$ ra. from
Mr, Haley’s,
4
*


I
w
I'
Dec. 13.—Continued route at 8 ; passed Mr. Scott’s station at
I, and encamped on the head of the Brisbane Elver at 3. (
Cxlii.) In crossing the watershed between the Burnet and
Brisbane Rivers the country became more densely timbered, pine
scrubs occupying the higher ridges, ironbark on the lower hills,
and spotted gum in the valleys. The soil a red or brown loam
well grassed. The valley of the Brisbane is steeper and more
broken than that of the Burnet. Trap containing water-worn
pebbles, and schistose rocks, form almost all the hills, but the
rocks being covered by a considerable thickness of gravel and soil
are seldom exposed to view.
Dec. 14, Sunday. — Continued route at 6, passed Mr. Balfour’s
station at 9, Kilkoy station at 2, and camped on a large running
tributary of the Brisbane River at 3’30. ( cxliii.)
Dec. 15.—At 5'40 continued route and passed the Darrundal
station at 9, and at 2T5 camped 2 m. from a station, the distance
from Brisbane being stated by the stockmen to be 39 m. (
CXLIV.)
Dec. 16. (Brisbane, cxlv.) —Started at 5’30 and reached
Brisbane at 2. Called on Captain Wickham, the Government Resi-
dent. Obtained the use of the police paddock for the night, and
sent 27 horses there, keeping 2in the stable. Not having funds
available to meet the contingent expenses of the exploring party
in Brisbane, and for the further passage to Sydney, &c., I applied
to Captain Wickham for an advance of 100/. from public funds in
his hands, the amount to be repaid by the commissariat to the
Colonial Government in Sydney.
Dec. VJ. —Received from the Government Resident at Brisbane
100/., being an advance for the service of the North Australian
Expedition. Wrote to the Colonial Secretary reporting the
arrival of the North Australian Expedition in Brisbane, and
requesting authority to sell the horses and other portions of
equipment not further required. Sent the 27 horses to Eagle
Farm paddock, and kept 2 horses in Brisbane.
Dec. 18.—Dr. Mueller desiring to collect some plants which
grew in the scrubs near the Glasshouse Mountains, I had 2 horses
brought up from Eagle Farm for his use. Arranging stores,
&c.
#■
♦
Dec. 19. —Dr. Mueller started for the Glasshouse Mountains
on a botanical excursion. General duties.
Dec. 20. —General duties.
Dec. 21. Sunday.
Dec. 22.—General duties.
Dec. 23.—Leaving Mr. H. Gregory in Brisbane to complete
the arrangements for the sale of the horses and equipment of the
expedition, and the payment of the men, I embarked in the


Yarrow Yarrow steamer for Sydney, accompanied by Mr. Elsey
and Charles Dean.
Dec. 24. —0n board the Yarrow Yarrow for Sydney.
Dec. 25. —Arrived in Sydney in the forenoon.
Dec. 26.—Waited on the Governor-General, and reported
generally on the proceedings of the North Australian Expedition.
Report on the Health of the North Australian Expedition . By J. E. Elsey*
Esq., Surgeon, f.r.g.s.
Sydney, 17th Feb., 1857.
Sir, —I am happy to state that the general sanitary condition of the party has
been excellent during the whole period of the Expedition.
No death has occurred, and only one accident that has produced serious
results ; and these would probably not have happened hut for the bad health
and impaired constitution of the individual at the time of the accident. With
this exception, no one has been rendered unfit for duty by ill-health.
The arrival of the party in the Victoria River, September 1855, occurred at
the most unfavourable season, when the heat was very great and the river low.
This lasted to the beginning of December, when the rainy season set in.
During this time all our party were more or less troubled with two disorders,
both fortunately more disagreeable than serious.
The one arose from a weakened and irritable state of the stomach, causing
vomiting immediately after eating, and was accompanied by a painful sense of
debility. In some instances it was very obstinate, but usually yielded to
quinine, which proved a most valuable medicine. The sickness was not
accompanied by diarrhoea.
The other was due to a relaxed state of the vessels of the eye and face. A
slight pricking sensation was felt, caused by the sudden dilatation or rupture of
the walls of the minute vessels of the eye. This was followed by rapid
effusion and swelling of the lids, and in some cases the conjunctival membrane
protruded between them. It usually lasted twelve hours, and then subsided
as rapidly as it appeared. The lips were sometimes affected in the same way,
and in one case the whole forehead was cedematous and remained so for some
days.
There were also a few cases of ophthalmia, fortunately of a very mild nature,
and not marked by the virulent inflammation which produces such dire
effects in the settled districts.
Wounds of all sorts usually healed well. This of course varied somewhat
in different individuals, and it was found necessary, where the hands were
grazed or bruised, to keep them carefully covered from the direct action of the
sun’s rays, which was found greatly to retard the healing action, and to
produce an irritable condition of the w'ounds.
There Avas no case of diarrhoea or dysenteric affection, no rheumatism, nor
any injury arising from the very considerable exposure to which Ave were
unavoidably subjected.
During our overland journey one case occurred having somewhat of an
intermittent character. It was very irregular in its attacks, and marked by
extreme nervous depression. It Avas caused, I am convinced, solely by over-
working at the forge in the full heat of the sun after living for some months
on indifferent food, and not by any miasmatic taint. It yielded slowly to
quinine.
During this journey avc also suffered from slight scorbutic taint, shown by
f
V


I
I
136 Elsey’s Report on the North Australian Expedition .
►
ii I
9 ¥
I
I
soreness and tenderness of the gums. One of our number had, in addition to
swelling of the gums, several ecchymosed patches on the feet and ankles. The
timely use of fresh horseflesh completely removed these symptoms, and pro-
duced a strengthening effect upon us all.
Our immunity from disease was doubtless in great measure due, under
Providence, to the fact that our party was chiefly composed of young men in
good health and of cleanly habits.
I have much pleasure in bearing my testimony to the cleanliness and good
order preserved by the men during the whole period, often under disadvan-
tageous circumstances, and to the readiness with which they complied with
any suggestion made to them. This especially applies to those of the party
who were for nearly 9 months confined to one spot without change of scene,
and with little recreation for body or mind.
A painful contrast to the health of our own party was afforded by the crew
of the Tom Tough , the tender to the Expedition, the majority of whom
were men of damaged constitutions. The provisions on board the schooner
were, except the bread, of most inferior quality, and deficient in quantity.
This indifferent food was doubtless the exciting cause of the diseases from
which they suffered, and to which their previous impaired health predisposed
them.
The carpenter of the schooner died in April, and, by the end of that month,
the whole of the crew except the master, mate, and one seaman, were invalided.
On their arrival at Timor, where fresh provisions were procured, they rapidly
recovered, with the exception of the man first invalided, whose disease was
complicated, and who has since died of dysentery.*
The climate of North Australia is much more regular than that of the
districts hitherto settled in the extra-tropical part of the continent, which can
hardly be said to have any fixed seasons. It is remarkable for the absence of
that humidity which is so prominent a feature of inter-tropical climates. The
effect of this excessive dryness was apparent in the absence of rich and
luxuriant vegetation, the small and stunted growth of the trees, the rareness
of ferns, mosses, and other cryptogamous plants, and the total absence of
lichens, fungi, &c. The scarcity of insect life was also remarkable.
As far as our observations extended, there seem to be three seasons in
North-West Australia, viz.: the wet season, commencing about December,
and lasting to February ; the spring, or cool season, from March to July ; and
the dry, or hot season, from August to November.
Our first arrival at the Victoria was in September. The whole country was
parched, the vegetation dried up, and bush-fires were frequent. The heat of
the day was not followed by a cool night. Though the maximum heat was not
excessive, rarely exceeding 114° Fahr., the minimum w r as very high, seldom
falling below 80° at any time, and I have known the thermometer suspended
in the air to stand at 98° at sunrise. During these months there was hardly
any dew. Lightning was constant to the E. and N.E., and was rarely absent
for six months. There were occasional thunderstorms during the month of
October.
This weather produced an enervating effect on us all, and caused the ailments
mentioned above.
The season was certainly more advanced on the coast than inland. Many
plants, which were flowering at Point Pearce in September, were found two
months later, 100 miles inland, only just springing up.
The rains commenced towards the end of November, and, by the middle of
* Mr. Baines informs me that even before their arrival at Timor the men had
much improved in health by eating the sub-acid pulp of the fruit of the gouty-
stem tree (Adansonia Gregorii). It was boiled and mixed with sugar. *


'Wilson on North-West Australia.
137
December, had fairly set in. On the 18th the freshes had raised the river
some 4 or 5 feet. From the 20th to the end of December the rain was
incessant, and on the 7th of January the river was 11 feet above its average
level. This was the greatest height attained. There were, however, indica-
tions of its being a very dry season.
The weather during this time was very oppressive, and the excessive
moisture rendered the heat most trying to our party, many of whom were
actively employed.
By the end of January the rain had almost entirely ceased, and at the end
of February the air had regained its usual dryness.
From March to July there was a constant succession of beautiful weather.
The noonday heat seldom exceeded 95°, and was tempered by a delicious S.E.
breeze, which blew uninterruptedly for nearly 5 weeks, and, with slight
intervals, for 4 months. The days were bright and cloudless, the nights clear
and cold, the thermometer generally below 50° at sunrise, sometimes below
40°. This weather had a most beneficial effect on us, and its influence was
specially felt by those of the party who were for so long a time resident in
camp at one spot, and without any active employment or exercise.
After the end of June, when the party left the Victoria, our movements
w r ere so rapid, and the climate so constantly affected by external circum-
stances, viz. elevation, proximity to the sea-coast, &c., that no general results
could be obtained.
We were in the neighbourhood of the Albert River during the same month
(August) as both Captain Stokes and Dr. Leichhardt. Our experience was
limited, but confirms their report of the excellence of the climate during this
(the cool) season; but I should expect that the same cause that produces the
mildness in the cool season, w r ould produce a contrary effect during the hot
months of the year.
I must refer to the Meteorological Journal kept by me, and now on board
the Messenger, for a more extended and detailed account of the climate of
N. W. Australia.
1 have the honour to be, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
J. R. EISEY, F.R.G.S.,
Surgeon to the N. A. Expedition.
To A. C. Gregory, Esq., Commanding
N. A. Expedition.
IT. —Notes on the Physical Geography of North-West Australia.
By Mr. James S. Wilson, Geologist to the North Australian
Expedition.*
Communicated by Sir Roderick I. Murchison, President.
Read y May 10, 1858.
Previously to the period of our expedition it was generally
oelieved that North-West Australia possessed a lofty range of
mountains, which idea was supported by a statement found in the
Journal of Dr. Leichhardt to the effect, that the portion of the
great table-land which he crossed, on his tvay from the head
* See ‘ Proceedings,’ Royal Geographical Society, p. 210, vol. ii.—Ed.
