

GRESHAM S. MATTHEWS
f*\




Mr. G. S. Matthews


-
V ;y . ,'■■■■■ '


GRESHAM
'Phis brochure is just a sun-light account of a dedicated
life—a devoted and loving husband and father, and a trusted
friend. We remember him with this philosophy:
“I shall pass through this way but once. Any good thing
that I can do or any kindness that I can show to any person,
let me do it now. For I shall not pass this way again.”


OBITUARY
It is with sincere regret that we have to record the death
of one of the country representatives on tho Association
Council. Mr. G. S. Matthews, who did not recover from the
serious operation which had been found necessary.
Mr. Matthews had been a member of the Association
for at least ten years. He conducted general storekeeping
businesses in Peterborough, Burra, Hawker, Riverton and
Gladstone with success, and built up a very fine connection.
Of late years he made his residence in the Hills, close
to Mount Lofty Station, where he purchased the residence
of the late W. B. Carr.
Residing thus close to Adelaide he was able to attend
Council meetings without difficulty, and during the time he
represented the country members his contributions to debate
were useful, far-seeing and constructive.
It is with much sorrow that his decease at the age of 60
is now recorded, and we ask his family to accept our very
deep sympathy in their loss.


BIOGRAPHICAL
(A. W. Gordon).
To the busy Port of Adelaide, about which glistened the
blue waters of St. Vincent Gulf and the white sands of the
beaches of Semaphore and Largs Bay, George Matthews, well
known throughout the district as a skilled painter, and Janet
Matthews, his wife, brought their first child who was born
at Kapunda in the year 1885 —Gresham S. MATTHEWS.
Never over-robust, Gresham had to contemplate from a
distance the games of the field, and even his school lessons,
which meant that his early education was somewhat res-
tricted. Yet abounding compensations were in store, for
imperceptibly he was being admitted into that limitless world
of meditation and reflection that enabled him in later years
to come to grips with life’s grim and hazy problems with a
tenacity, determination and vision that was to characterize
his whole life. Indeed, early did Gresham Matthews hear the
Call from on High—“ Ask anything in My Name and I will
do it”; so that the principle of the Dunkirk heroes became
firmly established in his soul —“If your knees knock, kneel
on them.” He answered fear with prayer.
In this spirit he assisted his father at the Semaphore in
the painting business, working from 7.40 a.m. to 8 p.m. six
days a week until he heard that Jas. Marshall & Co., of Ade-
laide, were in want of an assistant. He secured the position
until a country opening at Bordertown—Wyllie’s general
store —attracted him.
Then for two vears he revelled in entirely new surround-
ings, not only studying the functions of a country store, but
realising beneficially the values of the humanities and the
richness of new and varied friendships. Mr. Wyllie was a
versatile man, an accomplished musician, interested in several
outside activities —the church, the choir, the Sunday school,
and local preaching. All this captured Gresham’s imagina-
tion and fostered very deeply the above-the-average talents
he possessed, Gresham, too, was musical, having a fine bari-
tone voice which became an invaluable asset when he de-
veloned into one of the most impressive local preachers of
the Baptist Church of South Australia.
Commissioned to appoint his successor at Wylie’s Bor-
dertown s J ore, Gresham had been sought by Jas. Marshall &
Co., of Adelaide, to accept the appointment of manager of
the country order branch. In the city he enjoyed the fellow-
ship of several who proved to become his life-lone associates.
One of these, Mr. A. W. Badger, realising the business
vision and ability of Gresham, recommended a personal ven-
ture at Georgetown. One can imagine some quiet conversa-
tions and considerations with a third party on this very im-
portant project. However, arrangements were soon put in
order to take over the Georgetown business which brought to


a head a long- romance with Miss Ella Lindsay, his only love,
who became his wife and life-long co-worker and partner
in all his numerous activities.
Gresham was married in the year 1911 in the Gawler
Baptist Church, and later travelled by railcar to Georgetown
where he faced with tireless tenacity and singular success
the innumerable problems in the management of a country
store. He made a complete survey of the local district, de-
claring that he would sell anything “from a pin to a battle
ship” and was often seen either walking or cycling over rough
and unmade roads to discover the needs and wants of the
near and far residents. He secured the agencies of fertilisers
and general farm needs, and the revenue which came from
these by way of commission he set aside to keep “the home
fires burning” ; the general business made as a basis for the
fulfilment of his dream of “Country Chain Stores.”
Then the first world war broke out, which fostered a
character of remarkable versatility, as the war effort was
strained everywhere to meet heavy demands. In this Gresham
took a leading part, while at the same time he superintended
the Sunday school, was choirmaster, a member of the Literary
Society, auditor of the District Council books, and chairman
of the Northern District Baptist Association, to which posi-
tion he was again elected in 1930.
Twelve years passed away at Georgetown, happy and
eventful years they were, and with a desire of a rest period
in Adelaide he parted with his business and assisted his
brother in the city.
Mr. and Mrs. Matthews had worked hard and heroically
at Georgetown with sleep at a premium, so now they en-
joyed a real interlude.
In 1925 in the northern district of Peterborough a busi-
ness prospect loomed in sight that stirred him to say good-
bye to the city and test the dream of his imagination and
establish the first of “Matthews’ Emporiums.” The store
had been conducted by Ham & Co , and when Gresham set-
led in the residents far and near realised they now had a
citizen of business acumen, boundless energy, civic pride, and
deep religious faith and courage.
The premises, soon to become well and favourably known
throughout the North, were extensively remodelled, and hav-
ing opened an office in the City of Adelaide and anticipating
the needs of outback people of whom he made personal
friends he founded new centres at Riverton, Burra, Gladstone
and Hawker, making the name of “Matthews” a byword in
the country.
Now a golden link was to be added to the magic dream
chain. Mrs. Matthews presented her husband and home with
Alison, who was married to Mr. Claude Hepburn Marshall on
January 24th, 1948, and both are happily settled in Adelaide


daucj h tC/'
with their little mm Claudia Gresham Marshall. It was-
a thrilling and joyful event, and what Alison meant to her
“Daddy” and vice versa is beyond estimation. Alison was-
born on December 6th, 1925.
The business still continued to progress, for Gresham
worked with God, and thus a personal approach, genial and
helpful attitude, and a genuine integrity down to the least
transaction made many crooked places straight and rough
places plain. Gresham made people “trust and love him”—
that was a traveller’s version. And so life went on.
One day, however, Gresham and his wife 'lingered their
gaze on the blue hills that ranged about Mount Dofty. “From
whence cometh my strength,” they sighed. A new and rich
experience beckoned them now, and it was not long before
they acquired one of the loveliest homes in the State —“Bal-
carres,” close to the Mount Lofty Station.
There they had the joy of seeing Nature at its best, and,
with a garden under the skilful management of Mr. Syd
Smith, they gave to all who passed through Mount Lofty a
close glimpse of Nature’s mighty wonders.
A particular power and characteristic of Gresham was
his deep sense of the Presence of God, and, when he prayed,
how near he brought that divine and loving presence. Read
through his presidential addresses to the Northern District
Association; listen to the echo of his humble supplications
in the home, that was the impression he always left, and
remains the keynote of the long flow of correspondence re-
ceived when he said “goodbye.”
“Only God is a refuge for us,” he declared during World
War I, and the crisis demands with tremendous insistence
the call to prayer and service. “Wist ye not that I must be
about my Father’s business,” was his challenge throughout
every day in thought, word and deed. In his 1930 address
to the Northern District Association, as chairman, Gresham
stressed the need for courage, moral and spiritual, and to
meet every stress and strain of the limitless challenges of
war with a Christ-like and immovable faith. “Our problems
exist today,” he declared, “because there are so few willing
to face the issue. There is much useless controversy, little
constructive effort. Courage is the clarion call. It comes to
us as members of the Church to go forward with courageous-
optimism, cheerfulness, faith and love as children of God
serving in His everlasting kingdom.”
Such was the warm expression of a great soul who, pass-
ing through the Valley of the Shadow, caught the Presence
of the Great Father of us all with this prayer:
“Break Thou the bread of life to me, to me;
As Thou didst break the loaves beside the sea.
Then shall all bondage cease, all fetters fall;
And I shall find my peace, my All in All.”


GRESHAM’S PRAYERS
Always of Hope, Faith and Expectancy
O Thou who hast set the solitary in families and who
causest us to be members one of another, we thank Thee for
the eyes which gazed with maternal solicitude into our own,
for the arms which encircled us and in which we were
cradled; for the tender hands whose touch was our comfort,
and for the voice which sang with clear, sweet echoes now
drifting down the years ; for all self-forgetting faithful minis-
tries, the generous promptings of mind and heart. Bless the
mothers of today that they may minister to their little ones
with a sense of thankfulness, securing and well-being.
We pray for the mothers sitting in the glow of sunset.
May she be gladdened with frequent remembrance, and re-
turn of those she holds most dear. Grant rest to her tired
eyes and peace to her loyal heart. Bless to our remembrance
the mother whom these mortal eyes behold no more. In the
sacred recesses of recollection let her forever dwell. And in
the glow of life’s unfolding morn may we again behold her
face. Amen.
We thank Thee, O God of Love, for happy surroundings,
hopeful outlooks, abiding courage and faith in Thee.
Clear our sky. Quicken our endeavours, preserve our
patience through the shine and shadows of the hours. Freshen
our love for people, especially for young people, and our in-
terest in recurring tasks. Sustain the spontaniety of eager
endeavour. Save us from scowls, sarcasm, scoffing and ser-
vility. So guide us, O God, that food for our finest selves
may be gathered from any surroundings in which Thou dost
place us. Dignify our daily work as we accept its duties as
service with Thee. Buoy us with an enthusiasm that is conta-
geous. Brighten our faces with radiant cheerfulness. Ballast our
spirits with enduring charitableness. Blend our efforts into
brotherly co-operation. So sustain our souls that worry ceases,
that whining concludes, wasting checks, and wickedness col-
lapses. Settle us to seek sane social recreations, sweetening
fun and frolic, friendly seasons of fellowship, and gladdening
practices that contribute to a joyous heart. Shame sombre-
ness and sour speech. Teach us to cultivate gracious appre-
ciation and grateful attitudes, stop envy and check carping
criticism. Teach us these admirable traits, control our tem-
pers with a composure that meets each moment with calm-
ness. Keep us human in feelings, natural in action, loving
in association, diligent in righteousness, and altogether like
Thyself in exhibiting the winsomeness and power of the God-
like life.


So, make this day with all its experiences a broad and
sure foundation for better tomorrows. In His presence and
in His Name who taught us to pray.
Almighty God, Father of all mankind, to whom all lives
are sacred, and to whom no nation is foreign, how long hast
Thou pleaded with us to ask peace and pursue it. Thou didst
send unto us the Prince of Peace and we have rejected His
rule. Thou hast revealed unto us the ways of peace and
we have followed the paths of war. Thou madest men to
dwell together in unity. We confess our failure as brothers
of men and implore Thy forgiveness. Help us, O God, to
heal the scars of past conflict, and to free our hearts from
present fears. Disarm the minds of men, make vivid the
sinful folly of war between nations.
Thou whose Divine Son was crucified by hatred, let
the symbols of His slain body and shed blood impart to us
Thy stern and holy passion for human brotherhood. Awaken
in the leaders of the nations a firm faith in the possibility of
peace, and arouse the ranks of men to a resistless crusade for
its triumphs. Let love of country continue to grow, safe-
guarded with righteousness and illumined with world sym-
pathy. Sustain the hopes of the peacemakers and speed their
plans until they have finished the work of the heroic dead,
and fulfilled the task of Thy Holy Church through Jesus
Christ our Lord.
The Lord bless you and keep you.


THE CALL OF THE CRISIS
PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS
August, 1918.
Mr. G. S. Matthews, in the course of his presidential
address at the opening session of the Northern District Bap-
tist Association held at Laura recently, said:
The World-wide War
“The present is the hour of the world’s greatest need
and the hour of the Church’s greatest opportunity. The present
time is witnessing a wholly unprecedented crisis in the history
of our great Empire and of the whole world. We hope for a
triumphant issue and are enlisting all our energies in prepara-
tion for the titanic struggle in which the freedom of the world
and the life of the Empire is imperilled. The war, in which
Great Britain is engaged, was rendered inevitable through the
action of Germany violating the soil of Belgium, in spite of
international laws and treaties, and is a tragedy of great mag-
nitude. War is hell and one cannot conceive why people—
Christian men and women —try to bamboozle other people
into believing that war is anything else but a naked horror,
a voracious beast that rends civilisation in pieces. The ter-
mination of the conflict will not find mankind classified by
heroism; but in a world drenched with blood, full of woe
unspeakable, Europe a vast hospital graveyard with thousands
of orphaned children and widowed mothers and shattered sol-
diers; a place of hunger, misery and tears.
Recognition of God
In this motor-driven world there are too many pedes-
trian churches and the first call of the crisis is for a recog-
nition of God. Our hope is in God —“The Lord God Omni-
potent reigneth.” When men get right with God they get
right with one another. “Trust in Him all ye people. Pour
out your hearts before Him.” “God is a refuge for us.” These
are the utterances of the Psalmist and in them he strikes the
great note of faith, as it should be struck. Faith is not an
act, but an attitude; not an event, but a principle running
through all events; not a last resource, but an abiding neces-
sity. It is something distinct and separate from the present
tragic happenings, and this is why it wins its victory. The
moment trust heeds the dictation of circumstances it ceases
to be faith and becomes calculation. The “all-times trust”
is the only possible escape from these terrible times. If ever
there was a need for the recognition of God it is now.


Call to Prayer
The crisis also demands and with tremendous insistence
calls for prayer. The nation is seized with the gravity of the
present situation and is using every endeavour to prosecute
the great task it has undertaken. Everybody is on the alert
and at work, but by the church prayer is being neglected.
News comes from England that the prayer meetings, so
largely attended at the inception of the war, have fallen off
considerably and in some cases have ceased to be. In France,
however, a different condition of things exist. Her ministers,
priests and bishops are hardly out of her pulpits, and the
cathedrals and churches are thronged with worshippers. In
Australia the prayer note is not being sounded. It is spiritual
forces at work, in the hearts of men, that will decide the
victory. One with God is a victory. Loyalty to King Jesus
is essential to success, and the best way to win in this crisis
is to give Him a fuller place in the heart and life of the nation.
Call to Service
The great conflict of nations is also an imperious call to
service. The church would be a mighty force for righteous-
ness if every member of it possessed the spirit indicated in
the motto, “At it, all at it, and at it all the time.” An expert
can state how much timber, how many reeds and pipes are
in an organ, but he cannot measure or exhaust the music it
is capable of producing. Holman Hunt, in one of his paint-
ings, depicts Christ in the Temple with one hand resting
obediently in the hand of His Mother, while with the other He
is tightening the girdle for the service to which God had
called him, and saying to his Mother, “Wist ye not that I
must be about my Father’s business.” This attitude should
be the attitude of present-day Christians. With one hand
they should clasp the Father’s hand by faith, and with the
other they should tighten the girdle for service.


PRESENTATION ADDRESS.
14th May, 1923.
To Gresham S. Matthews, Esq.
Dear Sir,
In view of your impending departure from our midst,
we, the undersigned, as representing the residents of George-
town and surrounding districts, feel it incumbent upon us
thus to record our unstinted appreciation of your character
as a man, and your excellent qualities as a citizen.
Regarding affairs pertaining to the progress of the town
and district, your business acumen and sound judgment have
been of great assistance. In those matters relating to public
welfare you have served the community with distinction.
Your Christian character and thoroughness of your work
in church activities is widely recognised.
Your literary tastes, endowment and facility of speech
have made you a much valued member of our literary and
social club.
Your work as a past president and member of the In-
stitute Committee merits just appreciation.
For a number of years you have filled with marked effi-
ciency and satisfaction the office of secretary to the George-
town Rifle Club.
As a member of the committee of the Soldiers’ Memorial
Hall you rendered valued assistance.
The Georgetown Football Club also claimed your interest
as a member of its committee.
We trust your residence of eleven years in our midst
may provide you with many happy and profitable recollections.
Wishing you and your good wife God’s richest blessing,
health and prosperity in all your future movements.
(22 signatures)


THE CHURCH AND THE CHANGED TIMES
The Presidential Address of the Incoming President of the
N.D.8.A., Gresham S. Matthews, Esq.
August, 1930
We are all aware that the Church —I use the term in its
widest sense —is being called upon today to face a combina-
tion of difficult and perplexing circumstances —social, eco-
nomic, industrial, national, racial, as well as religious. There
is a mountain range of problems which seems to fill the
whole horizon. The position is inescapable; we must either
face and surmount it, or else own the fact that the Church
has not an adequate message for the world today.
The Prime Minister’s recent broadcast was inspired by
the launching of the Optimistic League and in consonance
with the occasion he strongly deprecated pessimism. At the
same time, it was emphatically stated that the need of the
hour was an optimism which was prepared to face the direst
realities with the determination to overcome them. We need
an optimistic outlook if we are to discover an answer to the
criticism which is levelled at the Church today; and if we
are gong to preach a Gospel which will heal the wounds of
the present social, national, and ecclesiastical diseases. Our
problems exist today because there are so few people willing
to face the issue. There is much useless controversy but
little constructive effort. The facts are disquieting, the por-
tents even more so; even so, we must not allow ourselves to
be stampeded. During the world conflict the victory was
won because the Allies had one cohesive purpose. What the
world needs today is a Church fired with the zeal of a united
purpose; a Church moved by the single determination of
sharing the common responsibility.
The times have changed. An era of prosperity has passed
and a period of adversity has taken its place. We are faced
with financial problems in State and Commonwealth spheres
which are unprecedented. Distressing stories of the poverty
due to lack of employment are heard on every hand. There
are scores of our young men who are doomed not to have
a decent start in life. They are spending the vital years at
the threshold of life filling their lungs with the demoralising
air of unemployment. Their whole outlook on life is becom-
ing soured. Thousands of women and children are in direst
need owing to the failure of the economic machine to function
properly.


The present situation undoubtedly constitutes a challenge
to the Church. I am proud to observe that the Church is
seeking to crystallize the sentiment of Christian charity into
methods of material assistance. Above all things the supreme
lesson we need to learn is Love. All these problems ultimately
resolve themselves into new phases of the one great problem
—that of seeing life and living it under the aspect of love. I
will not waste words with a description in detail of the changed
conditions; the trend of life around us is so depressing that it
becomes my duty to sound a more cheerful note, and suggest,
if I can, what the Church has of practical value to offer men
and women who are battling with problems that seem to defy
solution. It is not for us to bemoan the conditions of the
times and sigh for the days that are past. That is the road
to stagnation and death. Earthworms know nothing of eco-
nomic problems, but who wants to be an earthworm. Let
us boldly and fearlessly face up to our problems—they are
an inescapable portion of our inheritance, and as such we
must resolutely confront them. The challenge to the Church
is a challenge to us —the individual members. We are the
salt of the earth —the ingredient which makes food palatable
and which is almost as important as the food itself. There
is a curious verse in Job which says, “Can that which is
unsavory be eaten without salt, or is there any taste in the
white of an egg?” Here, obviously, salt stands simply for
savor in the sense of interest, and this usage is common in
Hebrew, Greek and Latin. In all these languages the word
is used for the interest and sparkle of life. It denotes that
fine quality in individuality which makes a man fine company
to himself, and then afterwards to other people. The element
which makes it essentially interesting and in virtue of which
we awake each day keen and glad to face the hours which
open up before us. This characteristic is rendered perpetually
important because of these periodic waves of depression which
creep over times and generations, changing the aspect of
everything. We are all acquainted with the cynical spirit
which makes us ask whether, after all, the striving is worth
while. There have been people who have deliberately advo-
cated this viewpoint: “The world must get worse, so what’s
the use.” Such people cultivate an inverted pride of being
miserable. “A common greyness silvers everything.” Now
this is a very serious state of affairs indeed. Just think of the
situation—-the enemies of the Church have captured the in-
terest of life. Can we believe that? Surely not! The teach-
ing of the Bible is that the one inhuman thing, the one thing
which is not permitted under any circumstances, is dullness.
Dullness is a crime against the sunrise, a betrayal of the
evening star. Life will always be difficult; it will sometimes be
painful. It will at times inevitably become dangerous, but


there is never any necessity for it to become dull. Christ’s
answer is clear as to this. We have forgotten it —some of
us, perhaps, do not know that He answered it; but He did.
Christianity was born smiling, and smiled upon the world
from its cradle with the pure joy of an holy child. Jesus
certainly believed with all his heart in life. From the lilies
of Galilee to the cross of Calvary there is not a record of one
dull hour. He emphatically taught that a man’s life might
be made interesting enough to always be worth living with-
out either unhealthy stimulus, or hair-brained optimism.
The Early Church caught this vital spirit from the
Master, and in those far-off days it was this that impressed
the world outside. Gladness and rejoicing was the rallying
note of the Church. Here is a great word for the Church
with which to cheer a drooping world. No period of the
past has provided so excellent a challenge and opportunity
to exhibit the vital spirit of Christianity. True joy is pecu-
liar to Christianity. It is not a worldly mood to be joyous.
The Church can lift the whole community as each Church
member becomes a centre from which happiness and cheer
radiate. If we let our efforts relax we are unworthy of the
purpose for which we have been called.
Perhaps the most obvious need of the present situation is
that of courage. Dr. Kelman tells us that there are three
kinds of courage:
The courage of insensibility. Inanimate nature is in this
sense fearless. The streams that glide into the dark woods
and wander on through the shadows of night see nothing
ominous in their haunted tracks. The alpine flower blooms
recklessly on the brink of an appalling abyss. If we lull our
senses to sleep we can face the most dreadful future unmoved.
There is the courage of irrationality. Some men are
bold by forgetting. They refuse to face the facts. They
face dangers as if they did not exist.
The courage we need today is the courage of conviction.
“I will fear no evil for Thou art with me.” This is the soul’s
response to God’s assurance. Instead of being alone there is
One ever at our side who seems to whisper, “Thou and I.”
We need to add to our courage born of conviction, faith.
The natural eyes see but the ominous and dark prospect.
Faith enables us to see behind the things of earth the re-
assurance of God. We need to pray as never before the
prayer: “Lord, open our eyes that we may see,” and the moun-
tain range which obscures our vision and bars our progress
will be found to be filled with the hosts of God.
And finally love, for love includes all the other virtues.
“In love, mercy and truth are met together; righteousness
and peace have’ kissed each other.” So we must develop our


capacity to love. Love is the supreme force of the universe,
for God is Love. If we could make love the motive of our
lives, a new life would emerge, the love of God manifesting
itself in man’s love for man. Can we imagine this land o*f
ours with Love enthroned without a single rival? All the
bitterness and strife would be swept away, and human inte-
rest, which modern industry has so largely and lamentably
lost, would be reclaimed. A spent and disheartened world
is waiting for guidance. The call is to us as members of the
Church to go forward with optimism, cheerfulness, courage,
faith and love to meet this unconscious desire, with a truer
and worthier exemplification of the spirit of Christian love
and unity.


EXTRACT AUSTRALIAN BAPTIST, 1935.
A homely touch was experienced at the Triennial Assem-
bly on Friday evening when, by the kindness of Mrs. Higlett,
over twenty South Australian delegates sat together at one
of the tables at tea. While this fact was noted by many, only
a few knew the significance of it until the President-General.
Rev. C. J. Tinsley, pointed out that it was occasioned by the
fact that Mr. Gresham S. Matthews, of Peterborough, S.A.,
was that day celebrating his 50th birthday, and for the assem-
bled delegates he wished Mr. Matthews “many happy returns
of the day.” The S.A. President, Rev. N. V. Hansen, fol-
lowed with a congratulatory speech, and a cake with 50
candles was secretly introduced and presented to Mr. Mat-
thews. The dignified assembly so far forgot itself that it sang
“For He’s a Jolly Good Fellow.” But Mr. Matthews is all
that. He is a very busy man as the proprietor of a business
with a number of branches in other towns, but he is an earnest
worker in many parts of his own church at Peterborough,
including the superintendency of the Sunday School. Mr.
and Mrs. Matthews, a very versatile and able couple, had a
considerable part in the organisation of the splendid series of
meetings to celebrate the Northern District Association Jubi-
lee. Mr. Matthews has been twice President of the N.D.B.A.
The S.A. delegates are very proud to be associated with such
devoted servants of Christ as Mr. and Mrs. Gresham Mat-
thews.


FROM THE AUSTRALIAN BAPTIST.
Loved Layman Passes.
The denomination in this State suffered a loss last week
in the passing of Mr. Gresham Matthews, a “personal mem-
ber” of the Union, and valued member of the Council. He
was, perhaps, best known in our northern churches, for he
spent many years in business in those areas, and was, at one
time, in membership in the church at Peterborough where
he was held in the highest esteem, serving as deacon, Sunday
school superintendent, etc. Mr. Matthews was president of
the Northern District Baptist Association in 1918 and many
■had hoped to see him occupy the Presidential chair of the
Union at no very distant date.
He married Miss Ella Lindsay, member of a well-known
Peterborough and Gawler family, and leaves a widow and one
daughter.
Having retired from active business some years ago, Mr.
Matthews resided at Mount Lofty, where, there being no Bap-
tist Church, he had thrown in his lot with the Congrega-
tionals. He always retained a deep interest, however, in the
work of his own church, and his wise counsel and kindly
judgment will be greatly missed. The interment took place
in Centennial Park Cemetery after a service of remembrance
in the Flinders Street Church. We express sincere sympathy
with members of the family.


MR. GRESHAM MATTHEWS DIES.
The Passing of a Christian Gentleman.
The residents of Peterborough and district were sorry to
learn on Saturday last that Mr. Gresham Matthews had passed
away the previous night at Wakefield Street Hospital. He
had an operation over a month ago, but never rallied very
much at all.
Mr. Matthews came to Peterborough over 20 years ago
from Georgetown, taking over the business of the late E. F.
Ham (known as Ham & Son), and soon proved himself a man
of keen business acumen, unbounding energy and an excellent
townsman, both in civic affairs and religious work. A few
years after his arrival he built the new premises, now so well
and favourably known throughout the North, established
branches at Peterborough, Riverton, Gladstone, Burra and
Hawker, with an office in the city as well. The
last few years Mr. and Mrs. Matthews, with Alison, have re-
sided at Mt. Lofty in “Balcarres,” whose lovely surroundings
and glorious garden are admired by all who travel through Mt.
Lofty.
The late gentleman was a man of outstanding ability.
Leaving school at an age when most boys nowadays are doing
the 4th grade, he had to go to work, but getting a chance later
on he attended night school and won a scholarship. He was
a man of keen business ability and determination to succeed
in life and stood very high in the opinion of Adelaide’s leading
business men, yet at all times was a thorough Christian gentle-
man who gave his time, talents and assistance to making the
world a better place for his having lived therein. Like the
Merchant of Venice, there were many occasions in his life
when he “tempered justice with mercy” and those who speak
best of him are they who have worked for him over long
periods.
Just prior to the funeral a service was conducted by the
Rev. Guy Hackworthy, M.A., M.C., at the Flinders Street
Baptist Church, who in a short, simple, beautnful way gave a
resume of the late beloved gentleman —his beauty as a hus-
band and father; his great love for things good and beautiful
and the great loss the country sustained by his death. Over
sixty cars followed the remains to Centennial Park Cemetery,
bearing eloquent testimony of the affection and regard in
which the late Mr. Matthews was held by so many.
The floral tributes were many and very beautiful indeed,
and just prior to the mourners leaving these had been ar-
ranged in the form of a huge cross —tributes of love and re-
spect shown to the memory of a fine gentleman.
To Mrs. Matthews, Alison and all relatives we extend
our deepest sympathy in their time of sadness.


RESOLUTION RE THE LATE MR. GRESHAM S.
MATTHEWS.
This meeting of the General Committee of the S.A. Bap-
tist Union learned with profound sorrow of the “Home Call”'
on the 22nd March of our former fellow-helper, Mr. Gresham
S. Matthews, and we take this occasion to express our very
deep sense of loss and our sincere appreciation of him.
We all regarded Mr. Matthews as a friend and were
always glad to be associated with him in the Christian service.
He became a member of the Council in September, 1942, and,,
in spite of ill-health, he displayed a very keen interest in all
its work. His knowledge of the ministers and churches, es-
pecially those in the North, was a considerable help in our
deliberations and his business acumen was always in evidence
in discussions. For more than five years he was a personal
member of the S.A. Baptist Union, and for more than thirty
years he was keenly interested in the work of the Northern
District Association, of which he was President on two occa-
sions. He served on the Committee of the Association for
most of the time he lived in the North and was an officer at
Peterborough and Georgetown, and at each place he gave
outstanding service as Sunday School Superintendent.
We greatly admired our late brother’s outstanding Chris-
tian character. His tact and graciousness made their impres-
sion on all and we will always remember him as a Christian
gentleman greatly devoted to his church and the Kingdom of
Christ. We will continue to pray for the consolation of his
wife and daughter and assure them of our sincere sympathy
and admiration of their loved one.
All correspondence was deeply and prayerfully appre-
ciated, but couched in very much the same terms and quite
naturally we accord them the same sincere thoughts and
“Thank you.”
(From Rev. G. Hackworthy, of Flinders Street Baptist
Church, conducting the funeral service, paid the following
tribute) ;
“His beauty as a husband and father, his great love for
things good and beautiful, is a great loss the country has
sustained by his death.”
(From the Baptist Manse, Gumeracha, Rev. Walsh) :
“His Christian humanity and friendliness impressed us
deeply.”
(From W. J. Bushell, Stock Exchange Club) :
“The Club held Mr. Matthews in very high esteem, and
officially recorded their very sincere sympathy.”
(From the Furniture Association of S.A.: Eric Blake, Sec.).
The same record is made.


(The Retail Storekeepers’ Association, The Group Buyers,
Prisoners’ Aid Association records the same thoughts:
Chaplain A. S. Badger) —-
Mr. Badger writes: “Hallowed and beautiful associa-
tions always regarded with confidence and admiration.”
Extract from letter.
(From Ernest S. Tuckwell, College Park) :
“I had a genuine affection for Gresham because of his
sterling qualities, and I feel his going from us a personal loss.
Capable, frank, sincere and of unsullied integrity, he won his
way to the well-desired success in the business world; but
more still he retained a vital interest in the work of the King-
dom of God, and while his thoughts held out he never flagged.
He made a worthy contribution to God’s Kingdom and will
be greatly missed.”
(From C. S. Mead, Medindie) :
“I have a way of estimating men by their helpfulness,
simpleness and spiritual warmth. I was attracted by his
earnestness and Christliness.”
(From Sir Edward Lucas, Medindie) :
“I held your husband in high regard. He served his day
and generation according to the Will of God. I pray that
grace and strength may be freely given.” Numbers 6, 24/5/6.
(From C. W. Noble, Whyalla) :
“We treasure the memory of such a friend, and before
the Throne of Grace we all commend him to the care of our
Heavenly Father. He was our counsellor and friend/’


GRESHAM S. MATTHEWS.
A Tribute.
Peterborough Baptist Church has a unique glory. It has,
through the years, produced or developed a striking series
of very capable laymen. It has sent many of them out to
bless other churches. One of these was the late Gresham S.
Matthews. He was always more than a decoration of any
church where he worshipped and worked. From his earliest
days at Kapunda, to his last days at Mount Lofty, his keenest
delight was in the fellowship of his church. No doubt he was
a keen and successful business man, and, as the quaint
coloured preacher said, “He knew that his Father owned land
on both sides of the river.” But his business success was
used to help him in the work dearest to his heart. He had
an unusual degree of courage. That quality enabled him to
overcome physical and educational disabilities which would
have daunted or crushed a lesser man. Who that has heard
his fine voice singing one of his favourite songs, “Just the
Same Today,” would have suspected he was singing with the
aid of only one lung ? And certainly all who have heard his
impassioned preaching and remarkable use of phrases and
words, would not have dreamed that he had so little education
in his youth.
Our friend’s service to the different churches has already
been referred to in official resolutions. I speak of this rare
soul as I found him at Peterborough. There in my day he
was a loved and trusted officer and school superintendent.
He had a compelling urgency in him, to try and grasp big
problems, and do far-reaching deeds. Some of his friends
misunderstood him; and mistook his kindness for softness;
and his forgiveness for passifism. He was a sound and sym-
pathetic counsellor. When once a friendship was formed, it
was deep, lasting and satisfying. He was not one of those
who kicked over the beehive to gather the honey. In our day
in Peterborough we ran into the “Depression.” It brought
ruin and distress to the town and district. Soon it brought
an inundation of “swaggies,” men who, like drifting wreckage,
floated about the country looking for work. They “jumped
the rattler,” as the lead trains were called. But every man
had to get to ground at the junction. The plight of these men
was pitiful. The churches, then the town, organized relief.
They built the swaggies’ shelter, and every man was given
food, shelter, clothes and sympathy. Thousands of unfortu-
nate men went through our hands. Many were ’Varsity men.
who forgot their hunger for a bit when they stepped into the
study for rations, and saw the books on our shelves. It can


now be told—seeing our friend has gone to his reward —that
one morning when he came to see me, and saw the quality of
the lead-blackened, tattered and hungry queue, that he told me
to call on him any time for help from his store. Thus it came
to pass that many a swaggie left the town, clothed and in
better frame of mind, who had come into the town three days
before in tattered despair. Thus it was that G.S.M. walked
the way of the Good Samaritan.
It was with a storm in his face that he “crossed the bar”;
but who shall deny that before now he has heard his Master
say, “Well done, good and faithful servant . . . for I was
hungry, and ye gave Me food, I was naked and ve clothed
Me.”—A.G.


Junction Print, Hamley Bridge
