

Fourth Eihtioi.
GRIEVANCES IN IRELAND:
By One of the Tolerant Majority.
1. DUBLIN BIGOTRY.
2. THE SCOURGE OF PROSELYTISM.
3. THE NORTHERN BABYLON.
4. —ALL IRELAND 0. NORTH EAST ULSTER.
5. ORANGE JUSTICES AND JURIES.
6* —PROTESTANT ASCENDANCY.
PRICE ORE PERRY
PUBLISHED BY
JAMES DUFFY & C
38 WESTMORELAND STREET,
1913.


NOTE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
THE SAITE OLD STORY.
Although the abortive trials in connection with the
brutal assaults, committed by Orangemen on Catholics and
Nationalists in Belfast, in last July and August, are still
fresh in the public mind, something about them deserves
to be placed on record here. During those two months at
least 200 assaults were committed, over 50 of which had to
be treated in hospital and in consequence 2,500 Catholics
and Nationalists were intimidated for months from going to
their work. The result of the trials before a Belfast jury
was that every Orangeman brought up was acquitted, and
the only case where there was conviction and punishment,
was that of a Catholic and Nationalist.
In addressing the jury in one case, Lord Justice Cherry
said :
“ It was a most disgraceful thing for the city of Belfast
that a respectable workingman could not come home from
his work at night and could not safely pass a group of men
of the opposite religion to himself without incurring the risk
of being attacked. ... It would be a still worse thing
and a still more disgraceful thing if after evidence of the
clearest character were given as regarded who were his
assailants, a Belfast jury would not convict them. He told
the jury that plump and plain, and, in that case, as far as he
could judge, there was evidence of identification of the
accused so clear that it was absolutely impossible to con-
ceive any clearer.”
The jury acquitted all the accused.
In another case, “having dealt with the evidence of
various witnesses, his Lordship said it appeared to be as
clear as noonday that these two men were the ringleaders
of a crowd and with their own hands —or their own feet—
assaulted or beat Maguire. They were met by what had
become rather unfortunately the usual defence of an alibi.
“ But, if in face of the evidence of identification, they
accepted the statements as to these men having been seen
in the procession, all he could say was that they could never
convict anybody. Juries who were accustomed to their
business and who minded their business would disregard
evidence of that kind. They had evidence as clear as it
could be, and it was their duty in his mind to act upon it.”
The jury acquitted both prisoners.
And these are the men who talk about civil and religious
liberty !


GRIEVANCES IN IRELAND.
BY ONE OF THE TOLERANT MAJORITY.
—♦ —
J. Dublin Bigotry.
The attitude of Irish Protestants to our Catholic people has
been all along that of a conquering to a conquered race.
Up to a generation ago we were still being trodden dowo
under the heel of tyrannical landlordism. The feeling was
well described by the late Protestant Primate of Armagh
in some verses he wrote in which he proudly styled him-
self and his followers “ Conquering colonists." .Our atti-
tude, at any rate in the matter of religion, has been, on
the contrary, one of humbleness and unobtrusiveness.
And this, strange to say, went parallel with the fierce
struggle for the land and the open and ceaseless endeavours
for Home Eule. Protestants as such have always been
treated with deference and respect, and they have utilised
this treatment freely to their own advantage. Their faults
have been condoned and glossed over, their aloofness and
insolence in social life have met with
No Retaliation.
Even in the matter of proselytism, which they are still
carrying on with reckless audacity, Catholics have ceased
for a long time to express in public the deep indignation
they feel, and have contented themselves with passive re-
sistance and vigilance. All classes of the community,
whatever religious denomination they may belong to, know
well in their hearts that the fears expressed at Protestant


synods and on political platforms of persecution in the
event of Home Rule is a political dodge for preserving the
undue share of the loaves and fishes which the Ascend-
ancy Party have so long enjoyed.
The climax to such utterances was the un-Christian
prayer offered up by the Protestant Primate at the opening
of the Unionist meeting at Belfast, a prayer the sentiments
of which were so unjust to Catholics and so calumnious as
to have drawn forth strongly-worded protests from well-
known members of his own communion, including a clergy-
man. What must have come as a terrible shock to Angli-
cans does not strike us as at all strange. We look upon the
Protestant Church in Ireland more in the light of
A Huge Business Trust,
held together for the temporal welfare of its members, than
as even an attenuated form of the religion of Jesus Christ
We can thus conceive Dr. Crozier quite naturally using
the forms of religion even when guided and directed by
other than religious motives. And I for one know that he
owes a duty to the Freemason body in Ireland, in which,
judging by the titles he possesses, the number of rites he
belongs to, and the degree up to which he has worked, he
probably exercises more influence than any other member.
Now, Ido not hold that Irish Freemasonry is anti-Christian,
though it keeps up correspondence with the Portuguese and
other Continental lodges by foreign representatives, but
all of us Catholics know that it is intensely and aggressively
against us and that as long as it is in power we have no
chance for justice. Some time ago I had the rare privilege
of perusing
The Manual of the Irish Freemasons,
and although I knew that many clergymen belonged to it
I was somewhat taken aback by seeing the Head of the
Protestant Church in Ireland figuring so largely all across
it. He seemed to possess a plurality of benefices. He was,
first of all, Senior Grand Chaplain, which might be consi-
dered more or less consonant with his spiritual dignity as


Archbishop of St. Patrick’s ancient See claimed by him,
but his name was also displayed (with a certain loss of dig-
nity) as chaplain or in some other capacity, in the lodge of
the Blue Arch, the Royal Arch, the Scottish Rite, Misraim,
and other things I cannot recollect, And what struck me
as singular was that he had been advanced to the 33rd
Degree, a distinction enjoyed by very few others, probably
by reason of the terrible nature of the oaths exacted from
candidates which they had not the courage to take. The
point of all this is that here is the Head of the Protestant
Church in Ireland exercising a predominating influence
in the Freemason Body, which is
The Inner Directing Force of the Ascendancy Party.
Could any Catholic Bishop or Archbishop be accused of
ever having played such a role 1 ? From which side, then,
might intolerance and unjust ascendancy be expected?
What is to be feared in Ireland is not Rome Rule but Free*-
mason Rule.
Who have been up to the present moment the persecu-
tors and who the persecuted in Ireland? Bigoted Belfast
and the North need not detain us. The Catholics there
have been always in a wretched position, kept out of every-
thing as they were whenever the administration, munici-
pal or otherwise, was Protestant. There was no shame
expressed, no excuse made, for this line of conduct, this
glaring injustice. When an exposure of the bigotry of the
Belfast Corporation was made some time ago, the accurate
figures of the salaries enjoyed by Catholics and Protestants
respectively given as an answer to what was a manifest
exaggeration was far more an acknowledgement of bigotry
than a refutation of it. And now, what about Dublin and
the South and West? There is bigotry everywhere of a
quieter but no less effective kind, and it is especially in
vogue amongst
The Protestants of Dublin
and those who come within the Dublin sphere of influence.


I must of course make exceptions, and I do so willingly.
Here and there you will meet with charitable and well-
disposed Protestants to whom my words will not apply,
and I believe that the exceptions are increasing and will
increase still more largely in the event of Home Rule. But
taken as a body there is a virus of quiet but determined
hostility and. bigotry running through the whole body of
Protestants in Dublin and its environs, and in most other
places of the South and West. It arises from Low Church
narrow-mindedness, such as is prevalent among the Evan-
gelical Party in England, and it is accentuated in Ireland
by historical causes which ordinary English people cannot
appreciate, but which come home to everybody here. It
is shown, felt, and seen in innumerable ways, especially
in social life. And worse still, it goes along with a good
deal of hypocrisy. What is said in presence of Catholics
is very different to what is said behind their backs. As
the latter things leak out from time to time, they are
The Cause of Bitterness
and suspicions of even the fairest professions. Hence, in
spite of freedom of intercourse, there is mutual distrust,
a certain aloofness, carefully guarded conversations, and
the impossibility of a gulf that has been successfully
bridged over in England, without compromise of religious
principle, by the exercise of good-will on both sides. The
continued use in many Irish Protestant circles of the con-
temptuous words “Papist," “Romanist," “Romish/’
“ R.C.," etc., while Catholics have no ancient nicknames
wherewith to designate their Protestant neighbours, shows
pretty clearly on which side the bad will still exists. The
only expression that Catholics use which might be inter-
preted in a contemptuous sense is that of “Black Pro-
testant." It is simply a name, however, to designate
Protestants who stand aloof from Catholics, avoid having
friendly intercourse with them, and are suspected of or
known to bear ill-will towards them. I have never heard
it used as a term of contempt; it simply indicated a fact


which we were all well used to and had to resign ourselves
to. Then, again, the
Constant Denunciation of the Catholic Clergy
and of the power of Rome, which Dublin has witnessed
as well as Belfast, and finds no parallel on our part with
regard to the Protestant ministry, is not a very obvious
way for Protestants to get into the good graces of the Cath-
olic laity or make them believe that the virus manifested .3
solely for the clergy. Ireland is by no means a book-buying
or book-reading country, and it has been lately said by Dr.
Mahaffy, with a fair share of truth, that in Ireland nobody
reads anything but the latest novel and the newspaper.
But the outrageous “ Priests and People of Ireland,”
written a few years ago by Michael MacCarthy, though
a large and highly-priced book, had an enormous circu-
lation among Protestants in every part of the country.
The book held up to contempt and derision Irish priests
and nuns, and the laity too came in for their share of
sneers. Without doubt it created a sensation, but it was
one of anger and
Disgust among Catholics,
who were well aware at the same time of the sensation of
delight with which it was devoured by their Protestant
neighbours. Priests and nuns are the sons and daughters
of Irishmen and Irishwomen, and Protestants should bear
in mind that what touches the honour of the children
touches also the honour of the parents.
Catholics have been coming into their own for many
years, and side by side with the acquisition of the land they
are strengthening their position in trades from which they
were jealously excluded in former years. But wholesale
trade is largely in the hands of their rivals, and questions
of religion enter into the competition in a manner un-
dreamed-of in England. Any Catholic commercial
traveller can tell you the difficulties he has to contend
with in this way. Even the positions given to Catholic*


by English firms trading in Ireland are made the subject
of Freemason discussion and action. If Catholics cannot
get on according to their merits and services, one great
reason is that they have to deal with
A Powerful Coalition
against them which seems to be able to hold toget-lier by
the instinct of bigotry. In certain special trades they are
greatly outdistanced for the same reason. Almost the
entire of the wholesale and an undue proportion of the
retail chemist trade of Dublin is in the hands of Protes-
tants, and some of the best known of these appear to
be of a very militant type, to judge by their continued
support of a very low anti-“ Popery ” sheet, the only one
of its kind in Ireland. It is rather remarkable to see con-
spicuous firms all of one particular trade advertising in
this paper; and it is still more remarkable that there are
very few convents of nuns in the country which have not
an account with one or other of these bigoted firms.
In connection with this trade I will here give an instance
of bigotry which took place little over a year ago in one
of those pleasant watering places situated not far from
Dublin. It has been well known for many years as a
Protestant preserve. No Catholic church was allowed to
be built in it till within a very recent period, and when at
last a site was obtained for one from the landlord, deputa-
tions from the principal residents waited on him to maK©
him break his engagement. When the church was built
A Great Hubbub
was created and angry protests made about the erection
of a bell for it. The population is of the usual type com-
mon to such places —half-pay officers, Civil Service pen-
sioners, some wealthy Dublin traders and professional men,
and a crowd of respectable widows who make ends meet
by living economically through the winter, and letting out
their houses to visitors during the summer season. The


fact that with hardly an exception this class belongs to
the favoured religion does not call for remark, but it "s
passing strange that in this village situated to the south
of Dublin all the small shopkeepers but one should also
belong to it. The result has been brought about by the
unceasing* vigilance and rigorous boycotting that is so
easily exercised in a small place where everyone is at liberty'
to pursue the gentle art of killing time. In the past in-
fants were imported from the Foundling Hospital in
Dublin, and boys and girls from the proselytising institu-
tions, that the residents might enjoy, in addition to the
other charms of the locality the unwonted luxury for the
southern portion of Ireland of having a poor Protestant
population around them; but all efforts of the kind re-
sulted in failure, and Catholics are there the hewers of wood
and the drawers of water. The Evangelical tone of the
place I do not indeed find fault with, except so far as it is
tinged with fanaticism and bigotry. I reprobate the
Distribution of Tracts to Catholic Children
returning home from school which takes place. I consider
it gross impertinence on the part of a colonel to offer a Bifre
underlined by himself to a poor woman who was offering
mushrooms to him for sale, with the injunction to bring
it back to him when she had studied the passages under-
lined. I accuse of callousness and blind prejudice the lady
who, shutting her eyes to the thousands of ragged children
near her in Dublin, regularly writes to the papers for dis-
used stockings to make into knitted garments for the poor
Protestant children attending school in the West of Ire-
land, who have no existence except in her imagination.
These instances will show the
Aggressive Attitude
of the rich leisured Protestants of the place towards their
poorer Catholic brethren, and the latter resent it. As
long as they confine themselves to their own people, the


Catholics leave them to their own devices. They do not
cast ridicule on them because they get the village butcher
to preach to them on the beach on Sunday afternoons in
summer. They regard it as a harmless pastime though it
does not appeal to intelligent people. And they do not
thrust controversy on them in any form or show contempt
for their religious practices.
Now for the instance of deliberate persecution to which
I have already referred. Last year a chemist who was
going elsewhere sold out his business and it was taken over
by a Catholic. It was a going concern and the goodwill
was a considerable asset. But the new-comer soon found
out to his cost that he had made a mistake. In a few days
after he had taken possession, his religion was made the
subject of universal comment. What presumption it was
for a “ Papist ” to have set up shop in the place and taken
over the business of a Protestant. The word went round
and the customers’ accounts were withdrawn immediately.
The poor man held on for a few months, hoping against
hope, and then
Had to Sell Out
at considerable loss. A Protestant then took over the
business and the accounts were at once renewed, some of
the customers coming into the shop to congratulate him
even while the Catholic was handing the place over to him.
All these facts appeared in an angry controversy which
took place over the incident a few months ago in the Dub-
lin papers. In the letters which appeared on the anti-
Chtholic side, the offensive word “ Papist ” was freely
used, and this fact alone goes to confirm all I have said
about the place.
No such instance of boycotting of Protestant shop-
keepers could be brought against Catholics in any part of
Ireland. They flourish in every town in the South and
"West. In fact, from a business point of view, it is an
advantage to be a Protestant in those towns. Stranger
still, they do not use the most obvious means to conciliate
the people. In most instances they never allow a Catholic
to stand behind their counters, but import all their assist-


ants from the North of Ireland or from England. And in
social life they hold themselves aloof from their Cathol'c
neighbours. Occasionally a feeble protest is made when
these firms are found out advertising for assistants in
Scotch and English newspapers, and specifying the religion
wanted, but it does not seem to affect their business in the
least. Nor do they seem to be overburthened with grati-
tude or desirous to show even common justice. They were
afforded
A Grand Opportunity
lately of testifying to the good-will of Catholics by joining
in the protest against the anti-Home Rule campaign of
calumny in England, a protest inaugurated by a number
of Protestant traders in Dublin who subscribed £75 to be
used in refuting it, but they failed to come up to the mark.
The list of names remains a very scant one, and is nearly
entirely confined to Dublin. Moreover, no protest has
been made by them against the violent diatribes which the
heads of their various churches have directed against the
Catholic clergy and the trusted leaders of the Irish people.
Cromwell s name is held in execration amongst us, and
with great reason, and we have a right to expect some
protest fiom the numerous Methodist traders who live on
our custom, when a prominent minister of their Church
dictum at their anti-Home Rule meeting that
What Ireland wants is a second Cromwell.” Seeing the
absence of protests, we must believe in deep-seated hostility
in spite of a fair business exterior. We are forced to con*
conclude that the great majority of Irish Protestants are
tolerant only so long as they have not power to be
intolerant.


2. The Scourge of Proselytism.
The New Persecution.
But it is in the widespread existence of a
subtle form of persecution of the Catholic poor,, in-
tolerance mainly shows its horrid head. It is history
which we have forgotten that many years ago our poor
people who had no visible means of subsistence were cap-
tured by agents of the Irish Government under orders from
England and sold slaves to the planters of Virginia and
Barbadoes, a kind of persecution that strikes us with horror
and loathing. Later on the Irish Government founded
Charter Schools in which the young were forcibly brought
up as Protestants though their parents were Catholics.
All these unwarrantable forms of Government persecution
have gone to the limbo of the past, but the Irish Protest--
ants, though able no longer to count on Government
support, have kept up the tradition as well as they could.
Their present methods of proselytism, carried on princi-
pally in Dublin and its environs and enjoying the patron-
age, blessing, and support of the heads of their various
Churches, are hardly less iniquitous the former.
The poor we have always with us, and it is our bounden
duty to help them. Such is the teaching of Jesus Christ,
such the instinct of humanity. In England, Protestants
find great outlets for their charity in the multitude of
Protestant poor around them and the great number of
charitable and philanthropic institutions belonging to
their own denominations. But in Ireland there is no Pro-
testant proletariat except in the North, The number of
very poor bona fide Protestants in Dublin is inconsiderable
and you will find it hard to come across any at all in the
South and West. In spite of all the persecution and brib-
ery of the past, the poor people still profess the Catholic
religion. And so, just because of the absence of poor of
their own denominations, our Protestant neighbours con-


aider themselves exempt from the great law of charity and
leave
The Support of the Poor
entirely to us. There are, I will candidly acknowledge,
charitable Protestants here and there, but the great body
of them give absolutely nothing in real charity of any kind.
Scan the lists of contributions to charitable institutions
and how few names of Protestants you will find amongst
them. They are prominent, indeed, in distress funds,, nut
such collections are of rare occurrence. But take the ordi-
nary charities of the country, which must necessarily be
Catholic as the poor themselves are Catholic—orphanages
and schools, magdalen asylums, homes for poor aged folk,
night refuges and shelters, penny dinners and other efforts
made for suffering humanity, next to no help is received
from religious denominations which have time after time
boasted that they possess more that half the wealth of the
country. Perhaps the selfish and inhumane policy they
pursue has something to say to their material progress.
Absorbed in their own narrow circle they
I 'Shut Their Eyes to the Misery Around Them
and the efforts made to relieve it, wrapping themselves up
in the empty formula, which serves them as an excuse
on numberless occasions, that they have “ their own ” to
look after. And as they have no poor of their own they
hug themselves into the comfortable belief that they are
exempt from the law of charity altogether. Like the
Pharisee in the Gospel, they are “ not like the rest of men."-
It saves the pocket considerably to regard as a sinful propa-
gation of Popery the giving of help to an institution in
which young children are brought up in the religion of
their parents or to another in which aged people are allowed
to die in the religion they have professed all their lives,
it savours of hypocrisy. This attitude is so well recog-
nised by Catholics that they seldom have the courage to ask
them to contribute to anything, and when they do con-
tribute their generosity gets praise far beyond its merits.


Catholic Lady Collector’s New Departure.
Some months ago a Catholic lady collector determined
to make a new departure. She was collecting for a day-
school situated in the slums of Dublin in which hundreds
of the poorest children received their education. The
charity was undenominational enough to set at rest any
scruples that might arise amongst contributors about sup-
porting Popery, for it was a National school which any
Protestant child had a right to enter. That none came
simply arose from the fact that the very few of that class
to be found in the city were amply provided for. So she
determined to see what she could get from the Protestants
living in those beautiful residential districts that stretc.i
along the sea shore from the city to the county Wicklow,
including the watering place from which the Catholic
chemist was expelled. Nearly all the wealth and nearly
all the fine mansions, parks, and gardens of this stretch
of country are in Protestant hands. Will it be believed
that, after spending hours every day for some weeks in
going from house to house, and sending up the book with
full printed particulars of the charity, the lady was refused
in every case except in one in which a shilling was sent
down to her ? And this was all because the charity was
known to help Catholics as Catholics, and was not a dis-
tinctly proselytising institution. Selfishness is known to
be very prevalent among the rich everywhere, but I be-
lieve that no class of people in the world have schooled
themselves so carefully in inhumanity as the wealthy Pro-
testants of Ireland. And now before passing on, let me
relate
A Touching Incident
that brings out.even in a more glaring light the selfishness
of those wealthy people. In many an instance, the Catholic
maid who opened the door for the lady collector, feeling
ashamed of the conduct of her mistress and her curt and
contemptuous refusal, insisted on giving a shilling out of
her slender resources.
Irish Protestants are very lightly taxed both as regards
religion and charity. The Episcopalians are called on for


very little, as they are in possession of invested Church
funds amounting to more than nine millions. All the Pro-
testant charities are well endowed from the past, and
require very little prSsent-day help. Judging by their
attendance at church their religion is not very much alive,
and whether it is according to the Gospel or not the wo.’ld
can judge by their lack of charity. They are very strong
on what they call “ aggressive work for the Gospel.” As
one of the speakers at the Irish Church Missions put it
lately, “ It was necessary to be aggressive in order to force
me the truths of the Gospel,” that is, the Gospel as they
understood it. So all their forces are directed to the work
of proselytising the poor Catholics by
Bribery of Every Description
All the resources at their command, all the money they
can bring themselves to part with, is spent on that
diabolical system which destroys all sense of self-respect
and true religion in the poor who come under its influence,
and paralyses the efforts maue by real philanthropists for
their social uplifting.
I have several times heard it said by Catholics, who are
always inclined to give Protestants the benefit of the doubt,
that there was only a handful of old ladies engaged in this
horrid work. The fact is that the proselytising spirit runs
through the whole body. It is not women alone, but men
in prominent positions who are active agents of it. Local
Government Board officials, Judges of the Bench, colonels
of the army, lawyers and business men subscribe to its
funds, act on its committees, and preside at its meetings.
I have collected reports of most of the Dublin institutions
of this nature, which I have before me as I write, each
bearing a long list of subscribers, and although I have not
counted the names, a moderate estimate would not put
them less than 50,000.
Some may imagine that there is a widespread ignorance
among the subscribers, that they believe their money is
devoted to purely philanthropic purposes. In answer to
which I will say that this matter was


Tested in the Most Conclusive Manner Possible.
One of the institutions referred to came rather prominently
before the notice of the public, and some letters about the
methods used in it appeared in the daily Press which
must have been seen by the subscribers. Afterwards
Memorial pointing out very clearly the disabilities suffered
by Catholics and modestly suggesting remedies was sent
round to all the subscribers and, in addition, extensively
circulated through the country among Protestants of every
denomination, who were asked to sign it. The Memorial
was presented and headed by the names of thirty-four
Catholic ladies prominent in society, ten of whom were
ladies of title. So it was issued with a certain amount of
authority behind it. But, as might have been expected
from what we know already of the nature of the Irish Pro-
testant, the Memorial fell fiat. It produced absolutely
no effect except the important one of proving the intoler-
ance of the Irish Protestant and his tendency to persecute
in the name of religion. The subscribers to whom it was
sent went on giving their subscriptions as usual. Other
Protestants to whom it was presented in various parts of
the country refused to sign it in almost every instance.
Hardly twenty names w T ere appended to it, counting all
the copies that were returned. It was a failure simply
because the Irish Protestant approves of proselytism, and
no arguments for justice or fair play will have any weight
with him against it. Herewith I give
The Full Text of the Memorial
“To the Secretary of the Committee of the Prison Gate
Mission, Blackball Place, Dublin.
“We, the undersigned, belonging to various Christian
Denominations, beg respectfully to place before the Mem-
bers of your Committee the following considerations rela-
tive to the working of your institution:
“I.—As the Prison Gate Mission was founded with the
laudable object of rescuing girls and women from a
life of sin, we believe that that object will be best
attained if, while keeping the inmates employed at


useful daily labour, their religious convictions are not
interfered with, and they are allowed full facilities
for practising those duties of religion which they re-
gard as essential to their salvation.
“2 That as the majority of the inmates and workers are
likely in the future, as they have been in the past,
to be Roman Catholics, we are of opinion that modi-
fications of the rules with regard to religious practices
are imperatively necessary,
<<3 That as attendance at Mass on Sundays and Holy
days is regarded as a religious duty—which they
cannot lawfully omit—by the Roman Catholics, who
form the vast majority of the inmates and workers
in the institution, we hold that they should be allowed
to perform tills duty on those days.
As also the reception of the Sacraments at certain
times is regarded as binding in conscience, we think
that they should not be hindered in any way from
performing this duty.
«s.—That as attendance at worship of another religious
denomination is regarded as unlawful by the Roman
Catholics inmates, being forbidden by the laws of the
Roman Catholic Church, to which they profess allegi-
ance, they should not be compelled or induced in any
way to be present at any such worship.
“6. That as the attendance of a priest during sickness
is earnestly desired by all Roman Cathilocs, and the
deprivation of this attendance is considered a great
hardship by them, we think that arrangements should
be made to afford facilities for such attendance in
future.
“7.—Also that the children in the Home, who at present
are all sent to a National School under Protestant
management should be sent to the nearest National
School under Roman Catholic management, if their
mothers so desire it.
“We put these considerations before your Committee in
the confidence that they will receive due and proper atten-
tion, and mindful of the fact that the Institution is largely
self-supporting, receiving more than £1,900 annually from


the earnings of the girls and women, we hope that the
claims on behalf of them will be dealt with in a spirit of
fair play. If this is done, we believe that, under God's
guidance, the Home will have a secure future before it of
usefulness to a class of women who stand in urgent need of
help.
“Signed:”—
The Reply from the Protestants.
It will be acknowledged that the language employed is
one of studied moderation. Nothing is said that could hurt
the most sensitive feelings. The barest essentials for
liberty of conscience are asked for. But the directors of
the institution, well aware of the ill success of the Memorial
with regard to signatures, refused to budge an inch. In
a small circular sent round to their subscribers and sup-
porters they replied that as they supplied the funds they
alone had the right to manage the place according to their
own ideas. The same iniquitous system is pursued
in a score of other institutions in and around Dublin.
Advantage is taken of the poverty and misfortune arising
from drunkenness and immorality, and no relief is given
to Catholics unless the recipient consents to go against
the dictates of conscience. The infant is taken from the
poor unmarried mother and she is constrained to allow it
to be brought up in a religion that she disapproves of. The
child is taken from the drunken father or mother, who
knows that it will be brought up to despise the religion
of its parents, and,when, as very often happens, the child
is claimed back, it is not to be found, having been spirited
away to some other part of the country. How many
family tragedies of the kind have we to record from day to
day. Tree Sunday breakfasts are provided by various
societies.
Free Sunday Teas,
shelters for men and women, labour yards, sewing classes,
coal funds, magdalen asylums, prison gate missions,
nursing medical missions, and other institu-
tions, all of which have the appearance of philanthropy,


yet in every case insist on the constraint of con-
science before the least relief is given. It is significant
that none of those who support such places ever have their
names down for a subscription for any ordinary charity.
Again, it is to be remarked that in the circulars sent out
for subscriptions not a word is said about religion. The
poverty relieved, the misfortune averted, is the subject
dwelt upon; but the question of religion is carefully kept
in the background. This dishonest practice is universal,
and the consequence is that a good deal of money is got,
sometimes even from Catholics, which would not go Lo
these institutions if their real nature was known. In addi-
tion to the purely Irish proselytising agencies,
The Irish Church Missions Society
send over £14,000 yearly, collected in England for tha
conversion of Irish Catholics, all of which money is squan-
dered and shows very poor results from any point of view.
All these subtle forms of persecution of the poor are
pursued on the plea that Irish Catholics are wallowing
superstition and require to have the Gospel preached by
them. Now, any fair-minded Protestant, who knows the
country well and is not blinded by prejudice, must acknow-
ledge that our people have the Gospel far more fully than
the masses of the poor in England. They all learn the
Catechism at school, which contains the essence of the
teaching of the Gospel. They also learn a great deal of
Bible History. In the prayer-books which are to be found
in every home and are used in church, nearly all the Four
Gospels and a great many of the Epistles are contained.
Parts of these are read for them by the priest at Mass
©very Sunday, and the sermons are based on them. But
the important thing of all is the application of Gospel
teaching, and here indeed the Catholics show in favourable
contrast to their Protestant neighbours. From all I have
said, who will appear to carry out the best the great Law
of Charity enunciated by Christ? Who will appear to
carry out as the rule of their lives the saying of Christ:
“ Bo unto others as you would wish others to do unto
you ”? I leave the decision with confidence to the reader.


3. The Northern Babylon.
How is it that the Catholics of Belfast number at pre-
sent hardly a fourth of the population, whereas thirty
years ago they made up a full third of it? The phenomenon
cannot be accounted for by the ordinary causes affecting
the natural trend of population, for Catholics notably
increase in other places faster than Protestants. Nor can
the cause of the proportionate decrease be found in the
country areas from which the city population is constantly
recruited, for these are as much, if not more, Catholic
than Protestant. If natural causes had operated freely,
the Catholics of Belfast, would now number at least twenty
thousand more than they do, and moreover, would have a
due share of tlyj large business and factories in their hands.
The reason for the present state of things is obvious to
anyone who knows Belfast even slightly. It is the deter-
mined and systematic boycott of Catholics in every walk
of life, the deliberate carrying out of the old Cromwellian
tradition. "We are inclined to attach too much importance
to the persecution endured by the Catholics at the hands
of the fanatical Orange workingmen and women. It
rouses us to just indignation and casts a lurid light on
the situation. These hooligans have succeeded better tha-'
they were ever able to accomplish before in driving many
hundreds of Catholics from the city and keeping the rest
in semi-starvation, supported up to the present by charity
from the rest of Ireland. But the real and effective work
of persecution, taking the form of ostracism, has been
done by the moneyed classes —the merchants and manu-
facturers, the official classes and the Protestant clergy.
There was a general understanding among them all that
Catholics were to be excluded from everything as far as
possible. In this great commercial city, the only business
that Catholics ever got into their hands was the retail


-sis
L n e d into olces could
-er £ get promotion g e
WMr“nTb g out tte ataost total exclusion of Catholics
f/om employment under the Corporation ate ody a partud
presentment of the truth, for the same polj
has been pursued in commercial and pro
K is S universal boycott that has left the Cathohcs so
far behind as regards wealth and position.
The worst paid work it is their lot to.™
velations about the sweating carried on in Belfast shoul
be of special interest to Catholics, because Catholic wo
“iris who are to be found in large numbers in the mills
and factories, are the principal victims of tho system.
,t not remarkable, now that we come to "f it, what
a small proportion of Catholics were doing the well-paid
work of the shipyards even before the outrages commence
Scotch and English Protestants could get work in prefe
ence to Irish Catholics. . , .
The same bigoted exclusion of Catholics from everything
worth having goes far to explain how it is that practically
all the wholesale business and great factories are in the
hands of Protestants. It is not owing on the one hand
to Protestant enterprise and on the other to Catholic re-
missness. All the forces that make for worldly success are
on the side of the former. They come in, raw lads from the
country most of them, and are allowed to ascend without
opposition the rungs of the commercial ladder. And when
they have arrived at a certain point and want to launch
out for themselves they are able to touch the secret springs
of capitalism. Banks and insurance offices are manned by
their own kind and act with them and for them as a hugs
Trust for the furtherance of Protestant interest exclu-


sively. And so they can get money and credit for their
business enterprises where it would be withheld from
Catholics, and with it build great emporiums while
Catholics have to be content with their small retail houses.
Again, it is notorious that a great number of the fires that
occur, by which so many have prospered, have been wil-
fully caused to get the insurance money. So numerous
have they been in Belfast that the premiums are 25 per
cent, higher than in other places. Where do these fires
usually take place? In Protestant concerns. And the
money is freely paid over by insurance companies manned
by Protestants and Freemasons. Many of my readers, •if
they tax their memories, will recall similar happenings in
other parts of Ireland. The huge Trust again. I will
add to the fires fraudulent bankruptcies and let my readers
draw their conclusions from their own experiences.
And the bitterest reflection for all of us is that the Pro-
testant prosperity of Belfast has been built up largely
by Catholic money deposited at 1 per cent, in the branch
offices of northern banks by Catholic farmers and others
and sent on to the city to be used exclusively for Protestant
enterprise. The tentacles stretch everywhere, sucking the
life-blood of the country to feed the northern monster.
If Catholics in retaliation were to withdraw their money
from these banks, there is no knowing the extent of the
collapse that would take place. For Belfast enterprise is
built on credit. Its wealth is artificial. It has grown
faster than its means warrant. Let its credit fail and it
must collapse. Again, though its exports are many and
its shipyards are dependent on foreign orders alone, Bel-
fast does an enormous trade in tea, wholesale groceries,
ironmongery, tobacco, linen, etc., with the rest of Ireland.
Its smooth-tongued travellers swarm everywhere, making
themselves popular in small country towns while booking
orders. If that trade were transferred to Dublin and the
South, Belfast would have to blame only its own bigotry
for the loss of it.
Its attitude to Dublin and the South is one of ill-con-
cealed jealousy and contempt. Though the Irish Indus-
trial movement has been of the greatest benefit to its pro-


ducers, it has not only taken no part in it but has refused
to reciprocate the large-minded and generous action of
the Catholics of the South in taking the whole of Ireland
within their purview. On the contrary, Belfast merchants
repudiate all Irish manufactures not made in their own
city. So like surly dogs, they have taken all they could
out of the Irish Industrial movement and are unwilling
to give anything in return.
The situation was never so acute for the Catholics of
Belfast as it is at present. The Protestant element is all
bound together against them and the rest of Ireland.
Merchants and shop-assistants and workingmen are joined
in Unionist clubs and march together as comrades. The
motive is of course not only a continuance but an advance
of P-otestant ascendancy. Putting aside other points of
view, let us see how they regard Home Rule from the
standpoint of business. “ We’re business men, you know.”
Protestant Belfast has done splendidly under the Union
which fostered Protestant Ascendancy and depressed
Catholics. By the unjust preferential system it has pur-
sued, by the secret operations of its huge Protestant Trust,
it has gathered riches to itself and controls the trade of
an ever increasing area. It hopes to oust Dublin in time
from its position as premier city. Now under Home Rule
it fears that the eyes of Catholics may be opened which
have been hitherto blinded by its unbounded self assur-
ance; that they may break up that huge Trust which is
running the railways, banks and insurance offices of the
North in its exclusive interest; that they may retaliate
and combine for mutual defence; that they may transfer
to Catholic banks and Catholic enterprises the money that
is blindly allowed to help the advance of their declared
enemies ] that they may wake up to business enterprise*
and insist on a fair representation in banking and other
financial concerns. And it fears that the bubble of Belfast
prosperity and superiority may burst, “ We’re business
men, you know.”


4. All Ireland v. North East Ulster.
A general business boycott, interfering with the
ordinary course of trade, is a discrimination made against
the traders of a particular country or locality, on other
grounds than business. Questions of price, quality of
goods and convenience are put aside for the moment to
gain a particular end. It is an economic war in which
there are sacrifices and losses on both sides. It may be
dictated for national or for religious reasons and in either
case there is nothing against human or divine law in it.
It is a legitimate form of warfare well known and put in
practice in countries supposed to be unprogressive. When
Bengal was about to be partitioned against the wishes of
the people a general boycott was declared on British goods.
Later on when the Chinese were displeased with certain
action taken by the United States, a general boycott was
declared by Chinese merchants on American goods. Every
strike of the working classes for higher wages is of the
nature of a boycott in which present losses are borne for
the sake of future gain. The prohibitive tariffs of certain
foreign countries are a partial boycott of foreign manu-
factures for the protection of native industries. Here
again sacrifices are made by the consumers of foreign goods
for the sake of the general welfare of the country. Now
for some time past it is pretty well known that a boycott
of Belfast goods is being carried out in the South and
West. Captain Craig brought under the notice of the
House of Commons a “ black list ” he got hold of, which
was being circulated amongst Catholic traders and was
made up of the names of a number of Belfast Unionist
firms. It also, it appears, gave certain hints about not
dealing with such. Whether the list had much to do with
the growth of the boycott is hard to say. The natural
supposition is that it sprung- up spontaneously from the


indignation felt all over the country at the Belfast out-
rages These outrages were brought home to the people
very forcibly when they had to send their subscriptions to
the collections made everywhere to save the victims froi
starvation. Surely our people would have b ee n dead to
feeling if under such circumstances, coupled with the tact
that the outrages received no public condemnation in Bel-
fast from the commercial or professional classes, they had
allowed the course of Belfast trade to run as smoothly as
ever in Catholic districts. But the Belfast men are enraged
at having lost any business at all. They want to run with
the hare and hunt with the hounds. They profess not to
be able to understand why they are not received with open
arms by the Catholics of the South and West and the
dastardly deeds of Belfast overlooked as if they had never
happened. Why could not Catholics continue to treat
them from the standpoint of business and that alone as
they did all along? , , _
That the boycott has assumed large proportions and has
become a serious problem for them appears from a recent
leading article in the “ Belfast Evening Telegraph (Nov-
ember 13th), a paper which knows how to play the game
of double-face better than any Belfast trader. For it has
a special edition for Catholic towns, with the virulen
articles of the True Blue type, so dear to the Orangeman s
heart, replaced by others oi quite a harmless character.
The article in question begins: —-
“ It was once a boast of politicians that in this country
no man was made a victim in trade or private life
because of the political opinions which he chershed.
How nicely this doctrine sounds in the mouth of a Bel-
fast Orangeman with all the shameful history of his savage
and intolerant Society behind him and the presently
bigotry of his city making it a byword over Europe and
America. The insincerity of the article is apparent from
the fact of its never mentioning Religion, as if there was
question of politics only, though the world knows that
hatred of Religion is at the bottom of Belfast intolerance
and is the key to its political action and extravagances.


In the following extract the cloven foot appears :—«
“ The ordinary business procedure of the country was
interfered with in order that a wholly unjustifiable
and savage crusade should be waged against an en-
tire city, because of the misconduct, real or alleged,
of a few who had in a moment of exasperation lost
self-control and behaved badly.”
This is the usual Belfast palliation of the outrages which
drove from their work more than 2,000 Catholic workers
and of numberless other savage instances of intolerance
that we hear nothing about. It is amusing to note the
enormous difference of the measure applied by Northern
self-righteousness to Southern shortcomings from that
meted out to its own delinquencies. It may be hailed as
the most recent exemplification of the Parable of the mote
in the brother’s eye. The refusal of the Catholic traders
to deal with Belfast firms in retaliation for the outrages
is an “unjustifiable and savage crusade,” while the out-
rages themselves, which have aroused the indignation of
all rightnjinded men outside the bigotted city, are ex-
plained away as “ the misconduct, real, or alleged, of a
few in a moment of exasperation.”
The article has another surprise for us. It furnishes us
with a lesson in toleration—from where do you think ?
from the much maligned city of Belfast itself. So now,
ye Southern traders, listen to this;
“ They [the Belfast Unionist employers] exhibit their
breadth of mind and toleration by continuing to
give employment to thousands of Nationalists, not-
withstanding the black list and notwithstanding the
fact that their representatives have been refuse!
business.”
First of all, we should like to see this fact verified in
its entirety, for we have heard of numbers of quiet dis-
missals having taken place within the last few months, by
reason rather of the Covenant than of the Boycott. How-
ever, grant that there have been no dismissals, what does
the argument amount to? Because, forsooth, the Pro-


testant employers have not immediately dismissed in
a fit of rage their Catholic employees, on being re-
fused business in the South and West, ‘ they exhibit
breadth of mind and toleration.” A sorry argument
indeed, but we suppose the best that can be brought
forward to make black look white. Belfast intolerance
is too large and complicated a system to be disposed
of so easily. It is not the growth of a day nor con-
fined to a single class. It runs through all the parts of
the body politic. How is it that the Catholics of Belfast are
mostly engaged in the lowest forms of labour ? How is it
that all the rich employers are Protestants'? How is it
that all the warehouses, large shops and factories are in
the hands of Protestants and that the Catholics employed
in them occupy only the lowest positions ? It is accounted
for by the systematic intolerance carried on for genera-
tions against the “ papishes.” Catholics have never had
any chance in commercial life in the Northern Babylon.
Whatever their talents or industry or long service they
could not hope to rise to a commanding position in the
firms run by men so distinguished for “ breadth of mind
and toleration.” Hence their general poverty and abject
dependence on Protestant masters at the present day.
The anomalous commercial ascendancy of Belfast, taken
in conjunction with its open hostility to everything
National and Catholic, should be a subject of serious
thought for Catholic traders throughout the country.
This home of bigotry, alien in its ways of thought to Ire-
land and alien even to the present century, has succeeded
in making itself a great distributing centre of English and
Scotch wares for a large area of the Catholic provinces,
wiiich could just as easily be warehoused in and dist-.i-
buted through Dublin. Its commercial prosperity depends
on the goodwill of the Catholic Provinces, while they are
quite independent of Belfast. That fact ought to be fully
appreciated by our people. The writer of the article in
the “ Belfast Evening Telegraph ” speaks of coercion
brought on shopkeepers not to deal with Northern travel-
lers under threats of a boycott of customers, and com-
plains of this as “ unjust, un-Irish, and unbusinesslike.”


It would be hard to prove that any coercion of the kind
has taken place but if it has it could be defended. The
shopkeeping class is in all countries the most upright,
stable, and virtuous of the population. But it does not
see far and is inclined to look to present gains too exclu-
sively, The justice of the boycott has been already dealt
with. As to its being “ un-irish ”we cannot but smile
at seeing that plea coming from a Belfast Unionist. That
it is “unbusinesslike” is true, but business principles
have often to be put aside for the nonce in the pursuit of
national or religious ideals.
If Belfast continues with stupid obstinacy to flout the
aspirations of the people of Ireland and to treat the
Catholics who have their home in it as helots, it must
expect retaliation. The recent outrages have had the good
effect of opening the eyes of our people, who are beginning
to feel their growing strength, to the deplorable state of
things in that city as regards their co-religionists. It would
not be at all surprising if the boycott, begun on such just
grounds, gradually effected a large transfer of business to
the Metropolis which we hope to see before long the seat
of the Home Government of the country and the radiating
centre of religious and civic life.
Suppose, on the advent of Home Rule, that the frenzied re-
solutions refusing to pay taxes to a Parliament in Dublin
are put into practice with “ grim and dour ” Northern de-
termination. Very well. Then suppose that the Nationalists
and Catholics refuse with Southern amiability and politeness
to have any business relations with the recalcitrant city and
quickly withdraw their accounts from the Northern Banks.
If the absolute deadlock that will ensue will be “unjust,
un-Irish, and unbusinesslike " on one side it will be just
as much on the other. Suppose then, as a further stage
in this economic warfare, that the Belfast Unionist em-
ployers dismiss all their Catholic employees. While that
would mean an immediate calamity for the workers it
would be a real catastrophe for the city itself. The workers
could not be replaced for a long time and meanwhile
factories would close down, bankruptcies ensue, shop-
keepers would lose their customers and landlords their


rent, while the great volume of business would force its
way into other channels. Ireland would be able to receive
and absorb the great majority of the workers, just as she
was able a century ago to give new homes to the 7,000
Catholics barbarously driven out of County Armagh by the
Orangemen. If there is to be war, our Catholic workers
will be able to face the sacrifices and hardships involved
in it, just as our peasants faced hardship and want during
the Land War, and will receive generous help from the
rest of the country and from our kith and kin beyond the
seas —but Belfast will be a city of the past.
5, Orange Justices and Juries,
At the present crisis, while the Orangemen of the North
are straining every nerve to defeat the just aspirations of
the vast majority of the people of Ireland, Doctor Cleary s
book on “ The Orange Society," published by the Catholic
Truth Society of England, ought to be in great request in
this country. The work was so much appreciated in Aus
tralia, where it first appeared, that it went through ten
editions in a short time. It gives an authentic history of
this baneful society, explains its constitution and aims and
clearly shows its primary object to be the preservation of
hateful Protestant Ascendancy. That this Ascendancy
means not only the monopoly of place and power for the
educated members belonging to its body but also immunity
from the penalties of the law for the rank and file of its
brutal and uneducated followers, whenever there is ques-
tion of the dastardly outrages committed on Catholics,
which by its very principles it encourages, is proved to
the hilt by the author, as may be judged from the follow-
ing extracts taken from the work:
In 1814 Judge Fletcher delivered his great Charge to
the Wexford Jury. In the course of it he said: “In this
respect [the administration of the Law in Ireland] I have


found that those societies called Orange societies have pro-
duced most mischievous effects, and particularly in the
North of Ireland. They poison the very fount of justice;
and even some magistrates under their influence have in
too many instances violated their duty and their oaths.”
Referring to the riotous behaviour of the Orange yeo-
manry at fairs and markets, Judge Fletcher continues:
“ Murders have been repeatedly perpetrated [by the armed
yeomen] on such occasions, and though legal proceedings
have ensued, yet, such have been the baneful consequences
of these associations, that under their influence petty juries
have declined upon some occasions to do their duty. These
facts have fallen under my own view. When he [an
Orange witness] swears he is a loyal man, he means;
* Gentlemen of the Jury, forget your oaths and acquit the
Orangemen.’ ”
In his evidence before the Parliamentary Select Com-
mittee of 1835, Mr. John Gore, a Protestant and stipen-
diary magistrate in Ulster, described the Orangemen as
violent opponents of the law in the North; blamed the
Orange magistracy for thwarting the forces of the Crown
in the discharge of their duty; and condemned their
method of administering justice as leading to well-
grounded suspicion of partiality. Mr. James Sinclair,
another Ulster Protestant Magistrate, after forty years’
experience on the Bench, deposed that the Orange justices
were “ a very bad part ” of the population of the North.
r - Kernan, a barrister of note, with over thirty years’
experience of Ulster courts, testified that the Orange
society had injured the administration of justice “ very
materially.” ” The verdicts, he said, “ were generally,
in cases between Orangemen and Catholics, contrary to
the judge’s charges as well as contrary to the evidence.
In all cases, civil and criminal, between Protestant and
Catholic, justice is positively denied to the Catholic.”
The Report of the Belfast Riots Commission of 1886
contains a Memorial presented to the Lord Lieutenant by
the Catholic inhabitants of that chief centre of Orange
activity. The Memorial in question maintained that one
of the causes of the Belfast riots was “ a well-grounded


conviction on the part of the Orangemen that law-breakers
on their side would have comparative immunity from pun-
ishment when brought before the local justices.''
In their Report the Belfast Royal Commissioners of 1857
show that many of the city police were Orangemen and
give what they term ‘ ‘ startling evidence ’ ’ of the parti-
ality of the force for their brethren of the Sandy-row mob.
At that time out of 190 members of the city police only
six or seven were Catholics. One of these Orange police
was asked by the Commissioners: “You would not have
the slightest sympathy for a brother Orangeman" [rioter]?
“ Of course I would," he answered, “ and I will not deny
it."
There were three methods of work—some proper to
magistrates, others to jurors—which were acted upon with
such frequency and regularity that they may fairly be
regarded as part of a settled plan.
These were:
1. —Refusing to receive informations or to issu-*
warrants against Orange misdemeanants and crimi-
nals ; permitting them to abscond or otherwise
shielding them from arrest or molestation.
2. —Acquitting Orange misdemeanants and criminals
in the face of clear evidence of their guilt, against
the directions of judges, etc.; in civil cases, giving
verdicts or entering judgments in favour of the
Orange parties to a suit, in the face of evidence,
law and equity.
3. —Condemning Catholics to imprisonment and other
forms of punishment without trial or without suf-
ficient evidence of their guilt, or in the face of clear
evidence of their innocence.
One William Gabbett, an Orange magistrate, was re-
sponsible for keeping eighteen or twenty Catholics in
prison for three weeks without any committal or without
any cause having been assigned for their detention. He
was severely reprimanded by the Attorney General and
the victims of his tyranny were immediately set at liberty.
In the previous year this man Gabbett signalised himself


in the case of the King at the prosecution of McCusker
versus Alexander Coulter and others, by discharging a
party of Orange yeomen who had been legally and formally
committed by two other magistrates on a charge of capital
felony. In this case as in the others the aggrieved persons
were Catholics. Commenting on Gabbett’s action in the
matter, the “Edinburgh Review” said: “For this he
would have been removed from the Bench but for his con-
nection with the great Orange chieftain, Lord Enniskil-
len.” Tim Orange yeomen were afterwards tried and
acquitted by a jury of their brethren, the miscarriage of
justice in this instance being so flagrant that the case was
brought under the notice of the House of Commons.
Hall, an Orangeman, was charged with having entered
a Catholic church and stolen vestments. The case was
tried at Enniskillen before Judge Fletcher and an Orange
jury. The prisoner, who wore an Oronge ribbon on his
breast, pleaded guilty. The judge told the jury that they
had nothing to try, as the prisoner’s admission was in
point of law sufficient to warrant his conviction. The
jury immediately returned a verdict of “ not guilty.”
Well as he knew the ways of Orange juries, Judge Fletcher
was not prepared for this. “ Thank God, gentlemen,”
said he, “ that is your verdict not mine.”
In the seventies, a number of Orange rioters were placed
upon their trial before Lord Justice Barry at the Derry
Assiz3s. The evidence pointed plainly to a conviction.
The jury, however, was composed of “ good men in bad
times.” They returned a verdict of “ not guilty.” “ Gen-
tlemen,” said the Lord Justice, “ that may be your verdict
but I venture to say you will not find twelve sane men who
heard the evidence in this court to agree with you.”
During the summer of 1886 Orange disturbances broke
out on a large scale in the county of Tyrone. A Catholic
policeman, named O’Neill, was subsequently brought up
for trial before the county court Judge, Sir F. Brady,
and a jury of “ the right sort,” charged with having as-
saulted one of the Orange rioters. The evidence was of
such a nature that the judge—Protestant and anti-Nation-
aiist as he was—directed the acquittal of the accused.


The jury, however, convicted him. Whereupon the judge
remarked : “ I will accept that as the verdict of the jury.
I will say no further. But I have not the slightest notion
of punishing a man on such evidence. Gentlemen, you are
discharged.”
In the same year 1886 Lord Salisbury’s Government
took the Orange Party under its wing for the sake of the
support which the lodges gave it on the burning question
of Home Rule. It proved its friendship to the brethren
by sending the Belfast rioters to be tried by their con-
freres, the jurors of Tyrone. Not a single Orange juror
was challenged by the Crown at these Omagh trials. In
one case two Orangemen were returned for the murder of
a soldier of the West Surrey Regiment and of a head
constable. One of the prisoners was put upon his trial
twice. The evidence on both occasions pointed unmistak
ably to his guilt. At the close of the first trial, Judge
Lawson practically told the jurors that they had violated
their oaths. “You are bound,” said he, “to find a ver-
dict (of guilty). And there is no question in the case or
doubt at all. You are bound to take the law from me.
The fact has been proven before and there is no alternative
but the one.” The jury still refused to convict. At the
second trial Judge Lawson addressed the jurors in even
plainer terms. “ The juror,” said he, “ who would vio-
late his oath under circumstances, such as surround this
case, is a man I look upon as second in guilt only to the
man whose case he has been investigating.” Again the
jury refused to convict and to this day the foul murders
remain unavenged.
These extracts will give some idea of the nature of this
valuable and deeply interesting work of Doctor Cleary’s.
It is cram full of facts of the kind which have such an in-
timate connection with the present crisis. From what
has been laid out here the reader will be able to judge
why the Orange Faction have such an abhorrence of the
very idea of a Home Parliament in Dublin. It would be
able to curb their insolence, to punish their crimes and
break down their unjust Ascendancy.


6. What is Protestant Ascendancy?
The Oath of Loyalty taken by the Orangemen, accord-
ing to their rules of 1800, was as follows :
“I, A. 8., do solemnly and sincerely swear, of my
own free will and accord, that I will, to the utmost of
my power, support and defend the present King,
George the Third, his heirs and successors, so long as
he or they support the Protestant Ascendancy.”
Protestant Ascendancy was clearly explained in a mani-
festo issued in 1792 by the Protestant Lord Mayor,
Sheriffs, Commons, and Citizens of Dublin to their
eo-religionists in Ireland. It is given in a work by the
Orange writer, Musgrave, and contains the following lines .
“ And that no doubt may remain of what we under-
stand by the words Protestant Ascendancy, we have
further resolved that we consider the Protestant
Ascendancy to consist in :
“A Protestant King of Ireland,
“ A Protestant Parliament,
“ A Protestant Hierarchy.
“ Protestant Electors and Government,
“ The benches of justice,
“ The army and the revenue,
“ Through all their branches and details, Protestant,
“ And this supported by a connexion with the
Protestant realm of Great Britain.”
The Belfast News-Letter of Aug’ust —, 1913, the present
year of grace, makes no concealment of the same intolerant
spirit and shows that ascendancy over Catholics is of the
very essence of Orang-eism. It says:—“ Live in peace and
harmony with all men certainly,but clip the wing's of Rome
by keeping - her apostate Church and slaves in their proper
places. The Papist makes a g"ood hewer of wood and drawer
of water: he is servile to baseness, his Church teaches him
that, but he makes the most tyrannical of masters at the
instigation of the black-coated big'ots who own him body
and soul.”
Printed by James Duffy & Co., Ltd., at 61 & 62 Great Strand Street
and 70 Jervis Street, Dublin.


THE CASTLEDAWSON LIE.
The story of a wanton attack on women and children by
Hibernians at Castledawson, on June 29, was industriously
circulated as the cause of and excuse for the outrages in
Belfast. A lurid account of this affair was given by Rev.
Mr. Barron to the Northern Whig, and appeared in that
paper on July the Ist. He said ;
“ In a moment the Hibernians were in the middle of our
children with their pikes, fighting and stabbing right and
left. They also used bludgeons and threw stones.”
Later on, Lord Winterton, quoting from information
supplied by him, said: —
“ Many of our people have been stabbed with pikes,
women and children mainly.”
Yet on August 7, the same reverend gentleman wrote to
The Times: —
“So far as I know no woman or child was struck or
stabbed, but many of them suffered from shock and fright.”
At the subsequent trial Judge Wright said “ What had
been absolutely proved in that Court was that no injury
had been inflicted on woman or child, and he was glad to
hear that proved in Court. It detracted so much from the
seriousness of the charge, and they were glad to think that
nothing so dastardly or unmanly had taken place.”
Yet the Presbyterian Assembly and the Orangemen still
profess to believe the charge, and hold up Rev. Mr. Barron
as a much-maligned individual.


Some Facts about Proselytism.
It has been recently shown from the annual reports of
the Bible and Souper Societies that is spent on
proselytism in Ireland every year. Of this enormous sum
,£30,000 is devoted to outdoor preaching - , distribution of
Bibles and other forms of Protestant religions propaganda;
,£lO,OOO goes to free Sunday breakfasts, night shelters,
refuges, medical missions, etc., as an aid to perversions;
on getting hold of Catholic children from drunken
parents and of illegitimate infants and bringing them up
in Protestant nurseries and “birds’ nests.”
The actual results of the expenditure are that about
1.000 Catholic children are being brought up Protestants,
1.000 more are under Protestant influences in the day
schools, and about 1,000 men and women who take the
bread of the Soupers and consent to join with them in
their prayers are in danger of losing their faith. The
work is now concentrated in the city and county of Dublin,
having proved a complete failure in Connemara and other
places, in spite of the efforts of a small army of preachers
and Bible readers and the expenditure of millions of money.
Proselytism is a running sore on our country not only
because so many are lost to the faith but because the
system promotes pauperism, encourages immorality and
undermines all religious principle. It destroys self-respect,
weakens parental responsibility and is a direct incentive to
the worst forms of hypocrisy.
St. Brigid’s Orphanage, the Schools of the Holy Faith
and the Sacred Heart Home were all founded to check the
ravages of this monster and they have been doing noble
work. The Lady Hibernians of Dublin have given much
help for the last few years. Recently two other societies
have been founded to fight the Soupers and as none of
these agencies can be worked without abundant means it
would be an act of charity, patriotism and religion to send
them some help.
