

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE,
Hobart, Tasmania,
JANUARY 8, 1892.
PROCEEDINGS OF SECTIONS.
Section
Anthropology.
7. —GROUP MARRIAGE AND RELATION-
SHIP.
LORIMER FISON, M.A.,
Fellow of Queen's College, University of Melbourne ,




Section Ct.
7.—GROUP MARRIAGE AND RELATIONSHIP.
By LOHIMER FISON, M.A., Fellow of Queen’s College,
University of Melbourne.
In Mr. Edward Westermarck’s recent w r ork on “ The
History of Human Marriage” (Macmillan, 1891) the follow-
ing passage occurs :—“ Most anthropologists who have
written on prehistoric customs believe that man lived in a
state of promiscuity, or ‘ communal marriage,’ but this
hypothesis is essentially unscientific.” There is a confusion
here between “promiscuity” and “communal marriage.”
The two things are quite distinct the one from the other, and
I shall endeavour in this paper to show r what communal
marriage really is, touching as briefly as possible on certain
controversial matters which cannot be kept out of the subject.
It will clear our way in the beginning if we define our
terms. First of all, my friend and fellow-worker Mr.
Howitt and myself long ago found it advisable to drop the
term “ communal marriage ” altogether because of its mis-
leading tendency, and to substitute “ group marriage ” for it.
Then, again, the word “ marriage ” itself has to be taken
in a certain modified sense. It does not mean in this
connection all that it means in our own society. It does not
necessarily imply actual giving in marriage or cohabitation ;
what it implies is a marital right, or rather a marital qualifi-
cation, which comes by birth. Certain groups of males are
born with this qualification as regards certain groups of
females; every male of a group has the qualification with
regard to every female of what we may call the com-
plementary group, subject however, to stringent restrictions
which prevent intercourse between individuals who are “ too
near in blood.”
I will now endeavour to show what these groups are, and
how they come to be determined. In the year 1866 my
deeply lamented friend, the late Hon. Lewis H. Morgan, of
Rochester, New York, found among the Iroquois tribes a
“ system of relationship for the designation and classification
of kindred,” w hich he then supposed to be “ unique,” as well
as “ extraordinary in its character.” Subsequently, to his


great surprise, he found precisely the same system among the
Ojibwas and other Alongkin tribes. Further investigations,
prosecuted with the help of the Smithsonian Institution and
the U.S. Government, revealed the same system among the
tribes of southern India. I myself, making inquiry for Mr,
Morgan (to whom I was then a stranger) at the request of
Professor Goldwin Smith, discovered it in the South Seas
among the Fijifins, Tongans, and other tribes: it was found
among many other peoples, and in 1868 the Smithsonian
Institution published Mr. Morgan’s collected tables of terms
of relationship, with his remarks upon them in what has been
justly called “ a truly magnificent volume,” entitled
“ Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human
Family.” The system, thus discovered, in what is called
“ The Classificatory System of Relationship.”
Although, on looking at one of Mr. Morgan’s tables —
which extend to relationship such as that of “my mother’s
mother’s mother’s sister's daughter’s daughter’s daughter's
daughter—the system appears to be complicated in the extreme ;
it is nevertheless quite simple, and easy to be understood.
The key to it is shown in the following diagram :
1 Sister 2 Sister 3 Sister 4 EGO (Male) 5 Brother 6 Brother
7 Husband 8 Husband 9 Husband 10 Wife 11 Wife 12 Wife
13 Son 14 Dr. 16 Son 16 Dr. 17 Son 18 Dr. 19 Son 20 Dr. 21 Son 22 Dr. 23 Son 24 Dr.
Group A.
Group B.
The diagram shows three brothers and their three sisters,
with a son and a daughter to each of them.
According to our own system Nos. 21, 22, 23, 24, are first
cousins to Nos. 19 and 20, and marriage between them is not
prohibited; but the classificatory system makes all these
numbers brothers and sisters, and no connubium between
them is permitted. No distinction whatever is made between
own brothers and sisters and what we have called, for the sake
of convenience, tribal brothers and sisters. Nos. 19 and 20
are own brother and sister, but they are tribal brother and
sister to Nos. 21, 22, 23, 24.
So also, according to our system, Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 16
are first cousins to Nos. 17 and 18; but the classificatory
system makes them all brothers and sisters.
According to our system Nos. 21, 22, 23, and 24 call No.


4 my uncle, and No. 10 my aunt; but according to the
elassificatory system they call No. 4 ray father, and No. 10
my mother.
So also No. 13, 14, 15, and 16 call No. 3my mother, and
No. 9 my father.
Here then we have two distinct groups, marked on the
diagram Group A and Group B, each of which is composed
of “ tribal brothers and sisters,” the individuals being not all
of them brothers and sisters according to our own system.
If the diagram be continued to the next generation, it will
be seen that these groups enlarge, but their construction
remains the same to the remotest generation.
Taking now the other relationships, we find that Nos. 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, and 18 address Nos. 4,5, and 6 by a term
which, in Mr. Morgan’s tables, is rendered uncle, and Nos.
10, 11, 12 by a term which is rendered aunt; but these terms
really mean father-in-law and mother-in-law resspectively,
or rather “ the father or the mother of a person who is eligible
for marriage with me.” So also do Nos. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
and 24 address Nos. 1,2, 3, and 7,8, 9.
Hence we see that in these two sets of tribal brothers and
sisters we have two distinct intermarrying groups, neither of
which can marry within its own bounds. In other words,
the groups are exogaraous, and they have connubium one
with the other.
It must, however, be distinctly understood that, as I said
before, there are restrictions which .prevent marriage between
persons too near in blood. Thus, where 1,2, and 3 are
own sisters to 4,5, and 6, there can be no intermarrying
between their children, because, as the natives say, they are
“ too near; ” but when those males and females are only
tribal brothers and sisters, sufficiently far removed from the
direct line, the marriage rite may accrue. The Fijians, for
instance, say “They are veilathini (brothers and sisters) it is
true, but their fraternity is far away.”
Mr. J. F. M‘Lennan, whose theory was opposed to Mr.
Morgan’s discovery, accounted for the elassificatory system
by denying that its terms have anything to do with relation-
ship, and asserting that it is only “a system of addresses,”
No one but a theorist, determined to stick to his theory, per
fas aut nefus , could have hit upon such an explanation, and
yet it has been adopted by several anthropologists. Setting
aside the absurdity, which lies on the very face of it, in the
supposition that savage and barbaric tribes in all parts of the


world took the trouble to invent so elaborate a system merely
for the purpose of addressing one another by its terras, and
that independently one of another they all managed to in vent
the same system, the following considerations are quite
enough to refute Mr. M‘Lennan’s explanation :
1. If the classificatory terms have nothing to do with
relationship, then the tribes who use them have no terms of
relationship at all, for they have none other.
2. There are tribes—the Tongans for instance—who have
the classificatory system, but who do not use its terms in
addressing one another.
3. The terms carry with them all the rights and all the
duties which are usually connected with them. Thus there
are “ tribal brothers and sisters,” who are not related at all
according to our own system, and yet intercourse between
them would be looked upon with abhorrence and punished
by death. Can any reasonable man believe that this would
be regarded as a capital offence if the relationship between
the parties were not felt to be a real one ?
4. The whole system can be shown to be the necessary
outcome of the exogamous intermarrying divisions which are
found among savage tribes in all parts of the world.
The Groups in Australia.
We may now examine those divisions as they present
themselves to us among the Australian aborigines.
Throughout nearly all the tribes from one end of the
continent to the other there run two great intermarrying
divisions, each having a distinctive title, which is probably in
every case a totem, and which is borne by every one of its
members. Every man, for instance, in the Darling River
country is either Kilpara or Mukwara— i.e., either Eagle-
hawk or Crow—so also is every woman. Among the
Kamilaroi,* or Kamilrai, every member of the tribes is either
Dilbe or Kupathin. A Dilbe man cannot marry a Dilbe
woman ; he must go to the Kupathins, every female of whom
on his own level in the generation is his possible wife, as far
as the primary divisions are concerned, though we shall see
by and by that his matrimonial choice is restricted. So also
a Kupathin man cannot marry a Kupathin woman ; he must
get a Dilbe.
* Kamilaroi. —This was the Rev. W. Ridley’s rendering of the word, but
his ear was not to be depended upon for catching the correct sounds of the
native words.


This is as if-—to put the thing in a familiar form—all the
people of Hobart, and indeed of all Tasmania, were made up
of Smiths and Browns. No Smith can marry a Smith ; no
Brown can marry a Brown. Mr. Smith must look out for
a Miss Brown ; Mr. Brown must go courting to a Miss
Smith ; but all the Misses Smith are eligible to him. and he
may get as many of them as he can ; they are all of them
his potential wives. Now, if the whole community be thus
divided, it is evident that there must be a very large number
in each class between -whom there is no relationship at all
according to our own notions ; but the notions of the savage
differ from ours, and to him all the young Browns are tribal
brothers and sisters, and if young Brown takes to himself
any Miss Brown, however remote from him she may seem to
us to be, the ivhole division will be filled with horror, and the
two offenders will be put to death, or at all events very
severely punished. So real is this relationship to the savage,
that in the Duke of- York Island, as the Rev. George Brown
informs me, when the two divisions are Pikalaba and Mara-
mara, when a woman has twins, if they be of the same sex
they are suffered to live, but if they be a boy and a girl they
are killed as soon as they are born as offenders against the
exogamous rule. Marriage with the savage is not a contract
between two individuals; it is a natural state into which he
is born, and therewith he has to be content.
Maternal Descent. —Before we go any farther, it is necessary
to point out that in most, though not in all, of the Australian
tribes, descent is reckoned through the mother, not through
the father, a rule which is of very wide prevalence. The
effect of this—still keeping to our homely illustration—may
be shown by the followingdiagram :—(M=male, F=female).
The husbands are above the line, their wives below.
Smith (M). Brown (M).
Brown (F).
Smith (P).
Brown (M). Brown (P).
Smith (M). Smith (F).
Smith (F). Smith (M).
Brown (P). Brown (M).
Smiths. Browns.
Browns. Smiths.
Descent being through the mother, Smith’s children are


Brown’s, and Brown’s children are Smith’s. In the next
generation things come round again on the “ spear ” side, but
never on the “ spindle ” side. It will be seen that Smith’s
son’s children are Smiths, but his daughter’s children are
Browns.
Now, it must be remembered that the Smith of the
diagram represents all the Smith of the same sex and on the
same level in a generation ; so also Brown represents all the
Browns, Each name represents a group—or rather two
groups—one male and one female—and the relationships
shown in the diagram are taken by every member of the
respective groups. It is not that a particular Smith is the
husband of a particular Brown, but that all the Smith males
on his level are the husbands, or at least the potential husbands,
of all the Brown females on the same plane in the generation—
that is to say, a group of Smith males is the husband of a
group of Brown females, and all the relationships which flow
from this view of a marriage come upon the groups in the
successive generations. This is what we mean by Group
Marriage, and we need not point out that it is very different
from actual promiscuity.
It must be borne in*mind that this marriage, as I have
already stated, does not necessarily imply actual cohabitation.
It is not that all the men of one group actually cohabit with
all the women of another group, though even that would not
be absolute “ promiscuity,” but that towards all those women
every one of them has a marital right, which may, or may
not, be exercised according to other circumstances which
have to be taken into account.
These circumstances in actual life place many restrictions
upon the man who wants a wife, but nevertheless his right is
something more than a mere theoretical one. For instance, in
the Cooper’s Creek country, if a native visit a tribe other
than his own, and his hosts wish to be hospitable, he will be
furnished with a temporary wife from a group which corre-
sponds with that which intermarries with his in his own tribe.
That this is an established custom is proved by the fact that
the natives have signs in their gesture language for an offer
of, and a request for that accommodation.
It is evident from this arrangement that, under the two
divisions, a man has a marital right over half of the females
in the community, but this right is restricted by other regu-
lations. The two primary groups subdivide, their sub-


division curtails his right, and other restrictions also come
upon him. We may now examine these subdivisions and
observe their effect upon the laws of marriage and descent.
The four classes of the Kamilaroi. —Some of Australian
subdivisions are peculiar, and at first sight not a little puzzling,
in their laws of descent. The Kamilaroi classes, Dilbe
and Kupathin, for instance, subdivide as follows :
Dilbe, into Ipai and Kumbu.
Kupathin, into Muri and Kubai.
The marriage rite is now restricted. Ipai can no longer
marry any Kupathin girl to whom he may take a fancy;
he must marry a Kupathin-Kubai. Muri can no longer
marry any Dilbe girl he likes: he must marry a Dilbe-Kumbu.
Hence, we see that a man’s choice is now shut up to one-
fourth of the girls of his period.
The law of descent is peculiar. Ipai, for instance, marries
Kubitha*--that is to say, a woman of the Kubia class —that
being the feminine termination. Ipai’s children are of the
Kupathin class after their mother, but they are not of their
mother’s sub-class; they take the name of the other sub-class
in her division—that is to say, they are not Kubai like their
mother, but Muri.
***##*#**
An Ipai man marries a Kubai girl—their children are
Muri, A Kubai man marries an Ipai girl—their children are
Kumbu. A Kumbu man marries a Muri girl—their children
are Kubai. A Muri man marries a Kumbu girl—their
children are Ipai. Or, to use all the names:—
Ipai marries Kubitha—their children are Muri and
Matha.
Kumbu marries Matha—their children are Kubai and
Kubitha.
Muri marries Butha—their children are Ipai and
Ipatha.
Kubai marries Ipatha—their children are Kumbu and
Butha.
At the risk of incurring ridicule, I will once more use our
homely illustration in order to make this quite clear. Say that
the Smiths (= Dilbe) divide into Smythes and Smithsons,
answering to Ipai and Kumbu, and the Browns (= Kupathin)
* The feminine terms take somewhat contracted forms— c.g., Ipaitha con-
tracts into Ipatha ; Muritha into Matha Kumbutha into Butha; Kubaitha
into Kubitha.


into Brownings and Bransons, answering to Muri and Kubai.
Then the marriages and descents may be shown by the fol-
lowing diagram :
Smith Brown
Smythe (M.) Smithson (M.) Browning (M.) Branson
Branson (F.) Browning (F.) Smithson (F.) Smythe (P.)
Brownings Bransons
Smythes
Smithsons
From this it is evident that the law of both marriage and
descent remains unaltered as far as the two primary divisions
aie concerned, excepting that the choice of marriage is
restricted. All the children of the Smiths are still Browns
after their mothers ; all the children of the Browns are still
Smiths. But Smythe’s children are not Bransons after their
mother; they are Brownings ; Smithson’s children are not
Biownings after their mother; they are Bransons; and so
also with the other division,
I he effect of this curious regulation, whatever its intention
may have been, is to put further marital restriction upon those
who are too near in blood, and the reasonable presumption
is that its intention may be inferred from its effect.
The four subdivisions are still further divided into totems,
Lmu, Bandicoot, Black Snake, &c., belongingto Dilbe;
Kangaroo, Opossum, Iguana, &c., belonging to Kupathin.
JNo man can marry a woman of his own totem, nor of any
totem in his own division* and the child takes the totem of
its mother, not of its father. Say, for instance, that Dilbe—
pai Emu marries Kupathin—Kubitha—lguana, his son is
Kupathin—Mari—lguana.
Marriage is still further restricted by local considerations.
Ihe tribes are divided locally into what Mr. Howitt and
myself have called Hordes for want of a better term, and
many of these forbid marriage within their own bounds.
Ibis is as if a Hobart Smythe were compelled to go to
Launceston for his Miss Branson, and a Launceston Brown-
ing had to seek his Miss Smithson in Hobart. And, further,
tie elders of the tribe would meet in solemn conclave to
decide whether there were any bar between him and the lady
o his choice, owing to nearness of blood arising out of
hut ™*™, U n d ® xcept ]°” t 0 this rule in °ne tribe in New South Wales,
but we could not hear of it anywhere else.


former marriages, or to blood feud, or any other cause ; so
that although the range of matrimonial right is a very wide
one, the actual fruition of that right may be shut up within
quite narrow bounds.
But how often soever the primary divisions may be sub-
divided, and whatever other restrictions may be placed upon
matrimonial choice, it is evident that, as I have said else-
where,* they consist of certain homogeneous groups; and,
taking each group as a unit, it will be seen that the relation-
ships between group and group are precisely those which
would arise and continue between individuals among our-
selves if marriage were between certain first cousins—
between the children of a man and those of his sister—and
continued from generation to generation between pairs of
their descendants. The groups represented by those cousins
are found in many tribes at the present day ; the terms of
kinship appropriate to them are in constant use ; and if,
taking the groups as single units, we examine the relation-
ship of any one group to another, we find that the term
proper to that degree is used between all the members of the
groups. Hence the terms of relationship, as they are now
heard in daily use, point out the groups, and the groups,
taken as units, explain the raison d'etre of the terms. In
these tribes marriage and relationship are conceived, not as
between individual and individual, but as between group and
group. The group is, in fact, the social'unit.
It appears strange to me that, though the existence of the
group as the social unit among savage tribes has been so long-
seen and acknowledged in other matters, it should still be so
vehemently denied with regard to marriage and relationship.
Land tenure and inheritance are based upon it; it is seen in
succession to office where there is hereditary succession, and
blood feud proclaims it aloud. If the group be struck any-
where, every member of it feels the stroke, and burns to
avenge it. If then it be the group, not the individual, that
holds land, that inherits, that is qualified to succeed to office,
that strikes and is struck, what difficulty is there in the way
of our accepting the fact that it is the group that marries and
is given in marriage ? And if group marriage be accepted,
group relationship follows as a matter of course.
* Kamilaroi and Kurnai.
WILLIAM GRAHAME, JUN.,
ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA,


4ifeuo
K U? ( K{
