

THE ABORIGNAL QUESTION
IN QUEENSLAND.
HOW
IT IS
BEING
DEALT
WITH.
A STORY
OF
LIFE
AND
WORK.
THE CITY PRINTING WORKS, 111 QUEEN STREET, BRISBANE.


L
i
>^<A
Dulascpiphoijs oi)d o©r)alioi)s
======
Which are much required, in Aid of the
General Work of the Missions dealt
with in this book, may be sent to the
Secretaries of the various societies.
CHURCH OF ENGLAND ABORIGINAL MISSIONS.
FRASER ISLAND—Rev. S, C Harris, Diocesan Registry, Ann
Street, Brisbane, or the Superintendent,
Fraser Island, Maryborough.
YARRABAH—Rev, E. R. Cribble, Yarrabah, Cairns, North Queensland.
KARLPARLGOO—The Right Rev. The Bishop of Carpentaria,
Thursday Island.
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF AUSTRALIA MISSIONS.
MAPOON (On the Batavia River) —Rev. N. Hey, Missionary.
WEIPA (On the Embley River) —Rev. Ed. Brown, Missionary.
Communications in connection with the work should be addressed to
Rev. W. Sweyn Macqueen, Clayfield, Brisbane.
NEUENDELTELBEN LUTHERAN MISSION SOCIETY.
CAPE BEDFORD MISSION STATION—)
BLOOMFIELD MISSION STATION— J
Rev. Schwarz, Cape Bed-
ford, near Cooktown.
DEEDING CREEK MISSION STATION—Mr. W. H. Foote, Hon.
Sec. Ipswich, or Rev. Roberison, Deebing
Creek, Ipswich.




Family Life, Fraser Island,


A Proclamation to the Natives issued in 1816 by Governor Davey of Tasmania,
In the Sydney Art Gallery.


THE ABORIGINAL PROBLEM
IN QUEENSLAND.
HOW IT IS BEING DEALT WITH.
BY WM. LEES,
A STORY
OF
LIFE AND
WORK
UNDER thc
NEW ACTS
Editor “ Queensland Country Life,”
Etc., Etc.
Brisbane :
The City Printing Works,
jii Queen Street.


A Southern
Queensland
Native
on ! Poor heart!
Bleed on and ache
Who cares if you throb and sigh ?
Who cares, tho’ your soul be bathed in tears?
Who cares, tho’ you hunger and die?
Tho’ the fires of hope, poor spirit,
Be cold within your breast,
Like the grey and fire-spent lava,
Or the rock on summit crest—
Who cares ?


The Last of the Tribe


THE ABORIGINAL PROBLEM
IN QUEENSLAND.
HOW It l 5
BEING
DPALT WITH.
HE condition of life under which the aboriginals of Queensland
live, is a subject which from the earliest days of the colony has
received considerable attention from men and women with
humanitarian principles. From time to time efforts have been
/’v made to guide such remnants of the race to the better phases of
civilisation, or, at least, to protect them from those evils in other
races, by the adoption of which, the aboriginal race of this
continent is being rapidly annihilated.
The first records date as far back as 1838. Dr. Lang, in 1836,
made application to the New South Wales Government for
assistance towards establishing a German Presbyterian Mission
to the aboriginals at Moreton Bay. After some demur the Govern-
ment promised a sum equal to what might be raised by private
subscription. In Wm. Coote’s “ History of Queensland,” it states
that was granted by the Imperial Govern-
ment, and became available under the then
existing immigration laws of N.S. Wales. When
Dr. Lang went Home, he visited Germany and
arranged at Berlin for the selection of twenty
persons, clergy and laity, who consented to join
in the undertaking, and on the 13th August,
1837, the “ Minerva,” Captain McAusland,
brother-in-law to Dr. Lang, left Greenwich, the
birthplace of Dr. Lang, for Sydney, having,
among her 230 emigrants chosen by Dr. Lang,
the above party of missionaries for Moreton Bay.
The ship arrived in Sydney on Thursday, 25th
January, 1838, and on March 20th the Rev.
Chris. Eipper, and fourteen of his companions,
left in the “ Isabella ” for Moreton Bay, the Rev.
Mr. Schmidt and the remainder of the party
following on the next opportunity. A moderate
quantity of land was set aside by the Government about seven miles
from Brisbane, at a place for a long time known as “ German
Station,” now Nundah, and then, under circumstances of much
hardship, and sometimes of absolute privation, the Mission
commenced its work. Success does not appear to have met their
efforts to bridge the great gulf lying between the two races, and we
read that in 1842 the New South Wales Government withdrew
their small grant. The following year one of the clerical heads
left, and his colleague followed a year after. The lay missionaries
retained their position, and, being assisted by three new ones, sent
Hon. J. F. G.
Foxton,
Home
Secretary
for
Queensland.


out in 1844, made such efforts as were practicable, either in their
original intention or in visiting their white neighbours. In time a
prosperous white settlement arose, and some of our most useful
colonists have descended from these pioneers of Christianity.
In 1842 the Roman Catho-
lic Archbishop of Sydney, Dr.
Folding, endeavoured to estab-
lish a mission to aboriginals
at Dunwich, on Stradbroke
Island, but apparently no
beneficial results followed, and
it was subsequently aban-
doned.
In the early fifties Wm.
Ridley, missioner to the ab-
originals and philanthropist,
spent a considerable time
among the blacks in the
vicinity ot Brisbane, and also
in the far interior, in efforts
for their advancement. He
subsequently became editor
of the Empire, Sir Henry
Parkes’ paper in Sydney.
After this time the colo-
nists and legislatures appear
to have been too busy in
matters of more immediate
concern to attend to the civi-
lisation of a race whom they
believed—owing to the many
thefts and murders committed
A Native Haunt Scrub near Cairns.
by them—were best wiped out of existence; and from the records
it does not appear as if much were done to assist the race until
1864, when the Herbert Ministry passed a bill to aid, by grants of
land, any bona fide attempts which might be made by missionary
societies or other persons to improve the moral and material con-
dition of the aborigines.
On the 4th July, 1865, the Governor (Sir G. F. Bowen,
G.C.M.G.), in Council, decided to endeavour to obtain a trained
missionary to the aborigines in Queensland, and, apparently as a
result of enquiries, a letter dated 26th January, 1866, was received
from the Rev. W. J. Bullock, Secretary to the Society for the
Propogation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, stating “that the
Society had appropriated a sum of £soo per annum for a missionary
who should reside at Somerset, Cape York—then the most northern
settlement in Queensland, —or other place suitable, and to grant
for one year to an industrial schoolmaster.” Those sent out
were the Rev. F. G. Jagg and a Mr. Kennett. The former was
given the Custom-House building at Somerset, Cape York, as
quarters, and Mr. Kennett, after teaching an Orphan School in


Brisbane for a short time, went north and occupied one of the
cottages at Somerset.
In the early seventies, Rev. Edward and Mrs. Fuller, Primitive
Methodists, opened a mission for the aborigines at Fraser Island.
They were there a year or two, and afterwards went up to Hinchin-
brook Island. His work was never subsidised either by the
Government or by his own denomination, but he received much
material assistance from the Footes of Ipswich.
About the same time the Governor appointed five gentlemen
as commissioners for the amelioration of the condition of the
aborigines—Bishop Hale; Hon. A. C. Gregory, M.L.C., and Mr.
Win. Landsborough —both old explorers; Mr. W. L. G. Drew,
Registrar-General; and Mr. G. J. Graham, a one-time Minister for
Lands.
A Royal Commission was appointed (May 26th, 1876) to
investigate the condition of the aboriginals, and from the report it
appears that in May, 1875, Mr. Geo. F. Bridgeman had established
camps for natives at Goonenbery, on Sandy Creek, six miles south
of Mackay, and at Carrobay, and Tullaboi, each some four miles from
Goonenbery. Upwards of £6OO had been provided for the help of
these stations by the Government, which were established for the
purpose of collecting together the blacks, and as centres from which
parties of natives could be drawn for work by those desiring such
help. The stations only lasted some three or four years.
Further north, at Bowen and Townsville,
local committees did what they could for blacks
in want of food, and at Bribie Island, Moreton
Bay, Mr. Thos. Petrie, in 1877, established a
home for mainland blacks. At Townsville, an
educated Polynesian named Sam Tadrane for
several years kept a school at his place, where
some twenty young aboriginals were taught—
a grant of being made to this man as an aid.
The Rev. D. McNab, a Roman Catholic
priest, in the seventies, took a keen interest in the
aboriginal question, and raised considerable dis-
cussion upon the question of the rights of abori-
ginals to lease or to hold land. He lodged three
applications for land on behalf of aboriginals, but
they were shelved. At the instigation of Father
McNab and the Hon. F. C. Wood, in 1877, the
Sir Horace
Tozer,
Agent-General
for
Queensland.
Hon. John Douglas, then Minister for Lands, and always a friend
of the blacks, gazetted a reserve for aboriginals at Durundur, in
area 2,130 acres, and granted towards the establishment.
There were some 200 aboriginals upon the reserve at first, the Rev.
McNab being in charge, the trustees being Hon. H. C. Wood,
Mr. F. V. Nicholson, and Mr. R. J. Smith, Crown Lands
Commissioner—Mr. Peter McLean taking Mr. Smith’s position
after the latter’s death. An income was derived from the sale
of grazing rights and sale of cattle, and the Police Department
paid for three years £6O per aqnqm for the lea.se of a portion.


Much dissatisfaction appears to have existed in the neighbourhood
in respect to the station, and an effort was made in 1878, by
the residents thereabout, to have the reserve cancelled, but it was
not until 1885 that this was done, the land being then proclaimed a
Police Reserve. The money to the credit of the trust was placed
to the trustees’ credit for the general relief of aboriginals, and in
1899 the sum remaining, ss. 3d., was transferred to the
“ Durundur Reserve for Aboriginals ” account. The well-meant
and kindly efforts of Rev. McNab do not appear to have been
successful, but the premises he laid down a quarter of a century ago
respecting the causes of the decrease of the natives, still hold good,
and are worth repeating. Writing to the Hon. J. Douglas from
Kenilworth Station, Upper Mary River, he stated that “ this
decrease is due from violence, precarious diet, intoxicating liquors,
exposure during inclement weather, polyandry among themselves
and promiscuous intercourse of their women with Europeans, and
diseases introduced by Europeans; ” and advocated the setting
apart of reserves where white men would not be allowed, and upon
which the blacks should be kept.
In 1881 the police received instructions to remove all half-castes
in the colony to Brisbane for education, but this apparently entailed
too much friction and trouble, and the order was in February, 1882,
rescinded.
In 1888 the Rev. D. Mathews, of Malooga Mission fame, created
considerable interest by his pretentions toward the establishment of
an Aboriginal Mission at the Glass Mountains, some 45 miles north
of Brisbane, and a strong deputation waited upon the late Sir. J. R.
Dickson on 9th May, 1888, in support of the scheme. The Minister,
always cautious in new ventures, referred the matter for report to
Mr. A. Meston, and the suggestion came to a sudden end. The
Rev. Mathews was subsequently arrested in New South Wales for
obtaining money under false pretences in connection with the
supposed Malooga Mission.
In the eighties there was a distinct revival in mission work, and
stations were established at the Bloomfield River (Lutheran), Cape
Bedford (Lutheran), and Marie Yamba, Mackay (Lutheran), while,
in 1891, the Batavia (Moravian-Presbyterian) Mission Station was
opened, followed by Yarrabah (Church of England) Mission, each of
which, with Fraser Island (Church of England) Mission, Durundur,
Deebing Creek and Barambah Stations, are hereafter dealt with
separately. In addition to these efforts, it is as well to remember
that amidst the callous indifference that the blacks have met with,
the most unselfish kindness to the aboriginals was, and is still,
practised by large numbers of individual colonists throughout
Queensland, and it was with a knowledge of this strong support to
his initial efforts that Sir Horace Tozer, then Home Secretary,
commenced action towards the amelioration of the condition of the
aboriginals of Queensland, which efforts have been so ably seconded
by the officers in charge of the Acts passed, and continued with
perhaps even more kindly determination, by the present Horae
Secretary, the Hon. J. F. G. Foxton.


THE CONDITION
OF THE
ABORIGINALS.
SHE various efforts of missionary enterprise among Queensland
aboriginals having given scarcely any practical results, and
the conditions of the blacks becoming worse and worse each
year, the Home Secretary, Sir Horace Tozer, in 1896 instructed Mr.
A. Meston, well-known in connection with the aboriginals, to furnish
a special report upon the working of the Mission Stations and the
various other centres where food was supplied to aboriginals,, and to
make an investigation into the cause of the troubles between natives
and whites in the Cape York Peninsula. The journey for this
purpose took four months, and the particulars of the journey and
the recommendations are contained in an interesting report.!
Mr. Archibald
Meston,
Southern
Protector of
Aboriginals.
Owing to the complaints that were made by
squatters and others, strongly reflecting upon the
efficiency of the native police, the Commissioner
of Police, Mr. W. E. Parry-Okeden, also pro-
ceeded to Cape York in October, 1896, after the
return of Mr. A. Meston, to make a thorough
investigation, and, in spite of the time of year being
very unsuitable for a minute examination, he was
able to return to Brisbane after visiting the chief
centres, and to present a very complete report.*
Mr. Meston went West the same year as far
as the Warrego, and to the Gayndah district, to
ascertain the number of the aboriginals and their
condition, and to advise concerning the best system
of protection and improvement.
Dr. W. E. Roth, a biological student while at Magdalen Col
i e g e unc j er p ro fessor Moseley, Naturalist on H.M.S. “ Challenger,’’
ar| d Professor Lancaster, Director South Kensington Museum, and
a fellow-student of Professor Baldwin Spencer, had from almost
the first of his arrival in Queensland taken an interest in the
autochthonous population of the State, and while subsequently medi-
cal officer at Boulia, where he went in 1893, and at Cloncurry and
Normanton, he had exceptional opportunities of studying the natives
in the North-west of Queensland. This gentleman furnished a
mass of valuable information relative to the question, as also did a
number of police magistrates, inspectors, constables, and gentlemen
resident in various parts of Queensland.
f “ A Report on the Aboriginals of Queensland," by A Meston, Special Commissioner,
Government Printing Office, Brisbane.
* “ Report on the North Queensland Aborigines and the Native Police,** with appen*
dices, !«., Qovermpent Printing Oflioe, Brisbane, 1897.


These reports are little else than a continued tale of licentious-
ness, debauchery, disease, and general degradation of the natives,
wherever white men or a'iens had come in contact with them —a
shameful record of disgraceful actions such as tingle the cheeks of
Dr. Roth, B.A.,
M.R.C.S.,etc.,
Northern
Protector of
Aboriginals.
any with a particle of whiteness within them. So
soon as the reports and recommendations were in
his hands, the Home Secretary, Sir Horace Tozer,
commenced the preparation of the special legisla-
tion which became law in the Session of 1897, and
in January, 1898, a systematic effort was com-
menced to place the Queensland aboriginal in a
position creditable alike to a sense of national
justice and common humanity. The Govprnor-
in-Council was authorised, under the new Act, to
appoint Aboriginal Protectors to see that the
provisions of the Act were duly carried out, and
on January 10th, 1898, the following chief officers
were gazetted:—Mr. W. E. Parry-Okeden, Com-
missioner of Police, Aboriginal Protector for the
Colony; Mr. Archibald Meston, Protector for the Southern
Division . and D r. w. E. Roth, 8.A., M.R.C.S., Eng., L.R.C.P.,
Lon., Protector for the Northern, North-western, and Central
Division. Subordinate to these, local Protectors were appointed,
an( j t^e severa i superintendents of the Mission Stations and reserves
were made officers for the purpose of the Act, as also were officers
of police and civil servants occupying authoritative positions.
Subsequently an alteration was made, and the Acts are now
administered by two laymen—the Northern and Southern Protectors
—who are guided by, and carry into execution, all instructions and
orders of the Home Secretary (the Hon. J. F. G. Foxton), and
in all matters report to him direct. The Northern Protector’s
(Dr. W. E. Roth) headquarters are at Cooktown, the area over
which he holds jurisdiction extending from Mackay and Boulia
northwards as far as Thursday Island, and westwards as far as the
Northern Territory. The Southern Protector’s (Mr. A. Meston)
headquarters are at Brisbane. The district under his supervision
includes all South and Central Queensland, north to Broadsound,
and west, including Aramac and Muttaburra, to the Diamantina.
All south of this line to New South Wales, and west to the South
Australian border, is under his jurisdiction. Both these officials
are assisted by local Protectors (civilian as well as police), the latter
receiving material aid from Mrs. Frew, the local Protectress at
Brisbane and surrounding Petty Sessions Districts, who is
responsible for the welfare of the Aboriginal Girls’ Home in the
capital city.
The Northern Protector, who regularly issues an annual report,
has special instructions to collect all information regarding the
ethnology of the native population. The results of his scientific
investigations are being published in the form of Bulletins, of which
at least two are issued annually as Parliamentary Papers. The
first three already printed deal respectively with “ String and Qther


Forms of Strand,” “ The Language of the Endeavour River
Tribes,” and “ The Search for Food.”
It was scarcely to be expected that those residents of the colony
who had lived under, and encouraged a system which, although
degrading alike to blacks and whites, had been the practised rule
since the early days, would tamely allow the stringent provisions of
the Act to be put into force without a protest, and the Protectors’
position at first was no sinecure. Thanks, however, to the hearty
co-operation of the police, who had a full knowledge of the evils
existing, but -had scarcely any authority to deal promptly and
humanely with the evil previous to the passing of this Act; to the
many high-class men who heartily desired an alteration in the
disgraceful state of affairs, and to the definite support of the
Ministers in charge of the Act—Sir H. Tozer and his successor, the
present Home Secretary, the Hon. J. F. G. Foxton, both of whom
apparently come of a particularly stiff-necked race where injustice
is concerned—the initial difficulties are being overcome, and each
month the position of the aboriginal is becoming improved. The
passing of the amending Act of 1901 will tend to further strengthen
the hands of those in authority, and bring to pass that change which
has been long called for, and which sets an example to other States,
notably South Australia, in her dealing with the Northern Territory
blacks, and to Western Australia.
The Mission Stations under the new regime, with noble-minded
men imbued thoroughly with the old missionary spirit, which
seemingly in the midst of the greatest materialism of any age still
lives and obtains means to send out its envoys, will undoubtedly
become great factors in the future welfare of the blacks.
These Stations receive a certain annual grant from the
Government which, though small—miserably small for the national
character of the work—is a good aid, and with the sums provided
by the missionary societies, constitutes the fund for the work
undertaken.
Northern
Native
Children.


THE SOUTHERN
QUEENSLAND
ABORIGINALS.
«R. A. Meston, when examined by the Legislative Council
anent the Aboriginals’ Protection and Sale of Opium Bill in
October last, gave the following opinions:—When the 1897
Act came into force it dealt chiefly with reserves and removal
from reserves of those aboriginals whose conditions make it
desirable for their own sake that they should be taken some-
where where they would receive proper care and attention.
More particularly in the beginning we dealt with aboriginals
and half-castes more or less living in improper surroundings
in camps, and under degrading conditions. Those were
removed and brought down to the coast, some to the reserves,
and the girls were put under the charge of a matron in Brisbane who
was under the control of the protectress. These girls were sent out
to suitable mistresses. I think between sixty and seventy have
been sent out up to the present time, and all, with the exception of
two or three, have given satisfaction. . Some sixteen or seventeen
were sent toi. the Magdalen Asylum at Wooloowin, an institution
which exercises'' marvellous control over them. They also have
done remarkably well, have been sent out, and have given complete
satisfaction to their mistresses. Those girls cost the State nothing
whatever. They paid their way by the labour they did, such as
washing, ironing, and laundry work-generally. Those at service
receive from 2s. 6d. to 10s. and 12. 6d. a week. So much is given
to them and the balance is banked to their credit. If one of those
girls gets married, her accumulated wages are available, and the
same if she prefers to go on a reserve. I have removed about 237
men from different parts of the West. I would like the Committee
to understand that no aboriginals are ever taken away from employ-
ment. Whenever they are employed and properly attended to they
are left there. Many station-holders treat their blacks with great
consideration, and during the late drought the lives of hundreds of
blacks were saved by being fed by the station-holders, when the
white people had considerable difficulty in feeding themselves. For
that they are entitled to every credit. Every station employing
aboriginals fed a large number who were dependent upon those who
were employed. In some cases they did not get much wages, still
the State was saved the cost of feeding them, which would other-
wise have been the case. Those who got wages used to spend the
most of it on the rest of the camp; in that way they gave away
nearly the whole of their wages. One serious evil we have to deal
with is opium. In my opinion opium has been responsible for the
deaths of a xooo aboriginals within the last ten years. In one camp


on the Maranoa 18 out of 36, or 50 per cent., died from that cause
in six months. When an aboriginal takes to opium he is useless.
It is said that on some stations the blacks are given opium in order
to retain them, and that unless they are given opium they will go
elsewhere. If all squatters were to refuse to give it there would be
no chance of their getting it except from the Chinamen, and from
white men, some of whom are much worse than Chinamen. They are
more cunning and insidious in their ways. To give the Committee
an idea of the opium used, I may state that in one district alone
worth goes into use, and in another £'2ooo worth every year.
This is entirely consumed by the aboriginals, although whites are
taking to the habit in increasing numbers. In my own division alone
during the last twelve months there have been seventy-eight opium
prosecutions, with fines inflicted amounting to £1220. The Treasury
issued licenses to certain Chinese in different parts of the colony to
sell opium, and this formed a loophole for
indiscriminate traffic in it. As a squatter
on the Maranoa said, everywhere in the
West opium is as common as sugar. The
blacks get opium, and they are dying in
scores all over the West on that account.
There is no possibility of doing any good
with the aboriginals who are scattered
about in isolated parties or single in-
dividuals over such an enormous territory.
We can only deal with them effectually by
placing them on reserves. It was said
by some persons that the transfer from
the Western part of the colony to re-
serves on the coast would be fatal to
them. Well, the first experiment cer-
tainly dispels that belief. Over no blacks
have been on the Durundur Reserve for
nearly eighteen months, and during the
whole of that time there has been only
one death, and that was attributable to the
man taking cold on the night of the
An
Educated
Half Caste.
corroboree at Government House. It has nothing to do
with the climate. The climate has agreed with them
in a remarkable manner. The death-rate is a surprising
contrast to that on the other stations, where the blacks are
in their own territory. These Western aboriginals are quite
content at Durundur. They are under our own supervision, and we
can do some good with them, and I would only advise leaving in
the West those aboriginals who are in service with people who look
after them properly. In a very short time there will be very few blacks
left in the West. The aboriginal death-rate of Queensland for the
last ten years, or rather the actual decrease, appears to me to have
been 500 annually, and if that rate continues, I place the period of
their extermination at about fifty years ahead. When Queensland was
first occupied the total population of aboriginals was at least


2<50,060, whereas now it is about 25,000. In the Southern and
Central division I would estimate that there are between 8000 and
9000. The great majority live in the Northern district.
I have received every encouragement from the Home Secretary,
and every possible assistance from the police. lam only in favour
of bringing those blacks from the West who are not employed, and
who are roaming about demoralised and are doing no good for them-
selves or anyone else. Ido not bring down any of the blacks who
are in employment on any account. The Western blacks are about
the best working blacks I have ever had to deal with.
By Hon. A. Norton : In your report did you bring under the
Minister’s notice those statements you have made about the large
number of deaths from opium, and the large supplies of it obtained
surreptitiously ? I did. I made special reference to it. I dealt
fully with the whole question.
By Hon. A. Heron Wilson : Is it the best opium they get ?
Some few get good opium who can afford it. Otherwise it is opium
which has been used by the Chinese or adulterated largely. It is
called charcoal opium. When under its influence, especially in
winter, they will lie anywhere, and they catch cold and are gone in
a few days.
By Hon. A. Norton; Have you heard instances of blacks
suffering from influenza or pneumonia? Yes. Pneumonia is a very
common complaint.
Do you think the death-rate arising from their sleeping in their
wet clothes is as great as that from opium ? No.
With regard to the present Bill, I agree with the whole of its
provisions, recognising that the administrators of the Act require to
act very judiciously with regard to the administration of some of the
clauses, which might be intolerable if they were severely carried
out. Take, for instance, the clause which prevents marriages
without a permit from a protector. That is a very proper clause.
I have a strong aversion to the intermixture of the black and white
races ; and, without express instructions from the Home Secretary,
I would never sanction a marriage of that kind.
Fraser Island
Native Band.
Under
Mr. Kitchen.


THE NORTH QUEENSLAND
ABORIGINALS.
f V
■"( j 'HE following article upon the “ Aboriginal Natives, Their
State and Treatment,” chiefly dealing with those from
Mackay, lat. 22 0 northward, was contributed by Dr. W. E.
Roth, the Northern Protector of Aboriginals, to the pages of the
Queensland Official Year Book just issued, and though compiled at
short notice, demonstrates fully the high values of the work carried
on by this officer:—
“ The whole object of the Queensland Aboriginals’ Protection
Act of 1897, and the Amending Bill of 1901, is to promote the welfare
and ameliorate the condition of the blacks, to end hitherto-existing
abuses, and to prevent their recurrence in the future. First and
foremost, let the public be once and for all assured that the regime
of the native police is now a thing of the past. One of the first acts
which followed the appointment of the Present Commissioner of
Police, some six years ago, was the issue of distinct orders, which
have been implicitly obeyed, that the aboriginals were to be treated
on humanitarian lines, with the result that since then not a single
“dispersal,” i.e., by bullet, has taken place.
Where the advance of white settlement has destroyed the
hunting-grounds of the aboriginals, the Government has provided
feeding-stations at various centres in the Northern districts, this
food distribution being in the hands of responsible and reliable
people. In other cases, relief in the form of tobacco, etc., is granted
for conciliatory and other purposes. Such relief, however, is mainly
intended for the very young, for the very old, or for those who,
incapacitated by disease, etc., are unable to follow the various kinds
of employment which may be offered them by the white settlers.
Something between £6O and £yo monthly is thus spent cn this
item alone.
Blankets were distributed last year (1901) in the Northern
district to a total of 5597 aboriginals (2582 men, 2200 women, .''o4
children under sixteen years of age, n unspecified) at 56 diffeic nt
centres. These Government blankets are specially branded, and
their possession by other than aboriginals constitutes a penal offence.
Of course, they are supplied only to blacks not in employment, and
even then only to the sick, the very young, and the very old; it
has been found inadvisable for the sound and healthy adults, and
“ myalls ” not already accustomed to them, to be thus provided,
especially as in the large majority of cases these articles are not
retained, but utilised for trade and barter. The blanket returns
compiled by the Government Storekeeper, furnish opportunity of
making certain deductions with regard to population and vital
{statistics, Fop instance, for every one of the 5597 blacks who are


thus known, it is a very fair estimate to reckon that there are two
who are not known (i.e., 11,194), making a total of about 16,800
aboriginals in that portion of the State lying north of 22° latitude.
Again, amongst the blacks who have received the bounty, the fact
of the number of children (804) being but a third of the total number
of adults of either sex (2582 and 2200), or one-seventh of the total
adult population under review (5597), bears silent testimony to the
terrible rate at which the native must be disappearing.
As to the principle of establishing reserves for the blacks where
they could live in their primitive state, the details of a scheme have
now arrived at such maturity that its practical execution, in the
hands of the Minister, is almost completed. The natives are not to
be forcibly removed from their homes, but large reserves are to be
proclaimed in those unoccupied areas of Country (in the Peninsula
and Gulf coasts) where the blacks already are. This action ot
forming large reserves has been in part necessitated by the fact that
of the 690 square miles comprised by the 13 Northern aboriginal
reserves already gazetted in past years, not 200 are really suitable
for the purpose. In those cases where Mission Stations happen to
be connected with the reserves (i.e., Batavia River, Embley River,
Cape Grafton, Cape Bedford, Andromache, Bloomfield River,
Deebing Creek, Durundur, Fraser Island, and Gayndah) the
Missionaries in charge have been appointed Superintendents of such
reserves under the 1897 Aboriginals’ Protection Act.
The Government do not for one moment intend feeding the
whole native population, which is estimated at not less than -30,000.
Where at any given centre —and
they were not a few—it was
found that the relief supplied all
the aboriginals’ wants, the fact
came into prominence that such
a distribution was only acting
in the way of pauperisation, with
the sure result that the Govern-
ment would be compelled to
make the temporary relief a
permanent charge. The old
ones had no incentive to hunt for
their native foods, while the
young ones, as they got older had
no ambition, or pressure brought
upon them either to obtain it for
themselves, or to seek employ-
ment among the settlers, who
would willingly give them work.
It was, therefore, far preferable
that the rations supplied by
Government should prove less
A Home Made
Windmill,
Mapoon
Mission
Station.
sufficient than ample, and it has been accordingly gradually
decreased in those localities where there still remains an abundance
of native foods,


A Gulf
Baby.
During the past two
years, a system has been in-
augurated in the North of
deporting aboriginal criminals
to Fraser Island with very
encouraging results, so much
so that, removed from their
old haunts and associations,
they have become law-abid-
ing and useful citizens. The
majority of such cases refer
to so-called “crimes” com-
mitted, as a rule, in the exer-
cise of tribally-recognised laws
and customs, and committed
by blacks 'on blacks. The
absence of suitable interpre-
ters, the generally unreliable
nature of aboriginal evidence,
and the heavy expense to the
State, without adequate re-
sults, are facts which all
militate against the present
method of bringing such cases
before the Courts. Even if
a conviction is obtained, the
ultimate return of the savage
to his native country is
fraught with danger on ac-
count of the imprisonment not
being regarded by him in the
light of any punishment.
Furthermore, the protection
of the blacks must not be
carried out at any risk to the
safety of the Europeans, and accordingly, where the presence of any
particular aboriginal has proved a source of possible danger to the
white population, his removal to, and detention in, another district
is sanctioned by the Minister. Otherwise, all aboriginal crimes are
dealt with by laws identically applicable to Europeans.
There is no flogging, and no forcible indenture to white em-
ployers. If the whites wish to employ aboriginals they have to obtain
permits as to whether the would-be employers are trustworthy and
reliable. The permit having been obtained, agreements are next
entered into, but in no case does the agreement extend for a period
longer than six months on the boats, or twelve months on land.
The agreement which is perfectly voluntary is, however, com-
paratively stringent, and provides, amongst other things, for the
maintenance of the employee during sickness. On the other hand,
if the agreement for hiring is drawn up in accordance with the
regulations, etc., warrants can be issued in cases where they would


be issued against servants under the Masters' and Servants' Act.
Of course, without proper legal process, the police are not now-
allowed to bring back any runaways, etc. On the whole, the
insistence of agreements is conducive of a great deal of good, not only in
enabling the blacks to get redress where necessary, but also in
tending to destroy the long-cherished and still prevalent idea
amongst many whites of their having any “vested interests ” in the
aboriginals. Furthermore, the agreement is a protection to many
station managers and other employers of native labour, in that their
“ boys,” when properly signed on, cannot now be decoyed away by
their neighbours, unless the latter wish to run
A
Peninsula
Native.
the risk of rendering themselves liable to a
prosecution for “ harbouring,” which now
carries heavy penalties in its train.
Again, the whites are not allowed to re-
move blacks out of a Petty Session’s District
without a permit from the local Protector, and
then only on entering into bonds and sureties
for their return within limited periods —a
twelve-month at the most —of aboriginals when
removed from one district to another, or to be-
yond the State, will gradually put a stop to an
abuse that has apparently been going on un-
checked for years past. Blacks were repeatedly
left stranded in places far distant from their
homes,-* and in man/ cases the Government was put to the
expense of-;bringing them bask.
The interests of aboriginals employed on the boats in the
pearl-shelling and beche-de-mer industries, and in which there were
many and great abuses, are carefully watched over by the Thursday
Island (local) Protector, Mr. G. H. Bennett, who is also an Inspector
of Fisheries. A similar appointment is held by the Northern
Protector, and the master of the Government ketch, the “Melbidir,”
stationed at Cooktown, patrols the whole northern littoral, both
Gulf and Eastern coast, at least twice during the year. The
presence of children under puberity, and of women, is absolutely
forbidden now in these pearling and beche-de-mer boats. The
wages of the aboriginal crews have also to be paid in full, i.e.,
without any deductions whatever, at the shipping office, where they
are in most cases handed over to the local Protectors, or other
officials specially authorised, who see that the monies are spent to
the best and most useful advantage. Even in cases of death, or
alleged desertion on the boats, the wages have to be paid now up to
the time of death, etc., to the local shipping office. This regulation
will do much to minimise an injustice which is believed to have
been at one time very prevalent:—the employer, when the time was
about expired, forcing the boys to desert, and then pocketing the
wages.
No marriages of female aboriginals with others than aboriginals
are now allowed to be celebrated without permission from a
Protector specially authorised to give it by the Minister. This step


has been rendered necessary from the fact that the probability that
•most, if not all, of these marriages were contracted to defeat the
provisions of the Aboriginals’ Protection Act of 1897. Cases
occurred where men of bad character, upon being warned against
harbouring or' employing native females, deliberately married
them, and so defied the Protectors. It was considered a grave
breach of the moral law that if an aboriginal woman were already
married, according to the recognised native rites and customs she
should be allowed to marry, under British law, any other person—
alien or European—without proper and full enquiry being made as
to the possibility of any wrong being inflicted on her tribal
husband.
With regard to sickness and disease, a matter on which the
Northern Protector has fully reported to the Minister, much requires
to be done, and that by segregation only. The majority of deaths
are due to opium, alcohol, syphilis, and consumption. The stringent
measures which have lately been passed for the punishment of
purveyors of narcotics and stimulants will probably prove of very
great benefit in dealing with the first two causes; furthermore, the
increased duty of thirty shillings per pound instead of 20/- on the
opium will also exert good influence. The danger with this latter
drug is that it is apparently becoming indulged in by Europeans.
Except where already in service under proper agreement, all
full-blooded and half-caste children—especially the girls—are
Landing Place and Coconut Plantation. Cape Bedford.


gradually being drafted into the Mission Stations on the authority
of the Minister, or on the order of the local Magistrates, to the
(Mission) Reformatories, every child of an aboriginal woman being
-a “ neglected ” child under the Reformatories’ Act.
Owing to the many abuses under which the autochthonous
population.of adjoining States continues to suffer, various expressions
of opinion have appeared in the public Press as to the advisability
of federating all aboriginal interests under the Commonwealth.
The difficulty of making the question a federal one is enhanced,
however, by the fact that three of the Federated States —Tasmania
(with no aboriginals), Victoria and New South Wales (with
comparatively few) —cannot be expected to make the pecuniary
sacrifices necessary for carrying the project into execution. On the
other hand, the remaining States might well follow the example
now set by Queensland in her dealings with her native population.”
Group of Cape York Natives at Mapoon Mission Station.
The following is a list of aboriginal reserves in Queensland
■with their respective areas ;
Box Hill, No. 4 and 5 runs, near Georgetown, each 1,280 acres.
Cherbourg (Burnett District) ... ... ... 6,926 . „
Birdsville (Gregory South District) ... ... 6 „
Bluff Downs and Southwick Runs (North Kennedy
District) ... ... ... ... ... 70,400 ~
Batavia River (Cook District), Mapoon Mission
Station ... ... ... ... ... 64,000 „
Embley and Mission Rivers (Cook District),
Weipa Mission Station ... ... ... 128,000 ~
Hammond Island (Torres Strait)... ... ... 1,280 ~
Pitt (Cardwell) ... ... ... ... ... 32,000 ~
Andromache River (Kennedy District), Marie
Yamba Mission Station ... ... ... 19,200 ~
Trinity and Sophia (Cairns), Yarrabah Mission
Station ... ... ... ... ... 48,000 ~
Endeavour and Prvde (Cape Bedford), Hope
Valley Mission Station ... ... ... 50,000 „
Clerk, Bloomfield River Mission Station ... 16,000 ~


Boggy Creek Run (Laura River) 16,000 acres-
Kelsey (Bowen) ... ... ... ... 76 „
Moonbi, Fraser Island Mission Station .., ... 27,520 ~
Purga (Ipswich) | • 41 „
Purga (IpswichUDeebing Creek Mission Station 43 „
Purga (Ipswich)j 112 „
Undullah and Goolman (Flinders Peak, Ipswich) 1,300 ~
Goolman (Flinders Peak, Ipswich) ... ... 300 ~
Durundur (Caboolture) ... ... ... ... 2,140 „
Although this area is large, the amount of good land therein is
miserably small; in fact, it appears to have been the practice to
Fraser Island
Aboriginals
at Dinner in
the Open.
reserve the most useless land for
the purpose named, and one is
glad to learn that under the new
regime steps are being taken to
alter this regrettable state of
affairs.
In Queensland there are alto-
gether ten reserves which are being
used as central homes for abori-
ginals. P'our of these are in the
South and the rest in the
Northern portion of the State.
Eight of these are in charge of
religious denominations, while
Durundur, near Caboolture, is in
charge of officers in direct connec-
tion with the Home Secretary’s office. Hitherto the Missions to the
blacks have not been a success, but with the passing of the Aboriginals’
Protection Act, the appointment of special officers for the purpose
of securing due performance of the Act, the co-operation of the
Home Secretary, the placing of some authority under the Act in the
hands of the various heads of the Missions, and making a money
grant for the feeding of the aboriginals, a much better condition of
things is coming to pass, and with the several changes that are to
be made, a bright future is undoubtedly in store for these pioneers
of Christianity and their martyr-like work and efforts.
In addition to these home centres, there are a number of places
in the North and where food and medical comforts are distributed.
There were 7,444 blankets distributed form 151 centres to g,ior
persons last year in the Central and Southern Divisions.


THE MISSION STATIONS.
SHE principle which generally obtains in regard to the State
aid to the Mission Stations is that the Government subsidises
them with an annual grant of money, varying in each case
according to the number of aboriginals relieved or maintained.
This subsidy does not exceed in any case the sum of £lOO per
annum, and the money is applicable exclusively to procuring food
and necessaries for the aboriginals themselves, the Missionaries and
their assistants being paid and maintained by the various religious
organizations under whose auspices they are established. In one
or two instances, the grant has been temporarily increased for
special purposes.
If the school at a Mission Station is conducted on lines similar
to those which obtain in connection with the ordinary provisional
schools throughout the State, the Government (in addition to the
Mission subsidy) pays the salary of the teacher. Religious instruc-
tion is permitted in these schools, but with this exception, the system
of teaching is the same as that adopted at the ordinary State schools,
and they are subject to Government inspection. All of the Southern
Missions have availed themselves of this assistance, and with excel-
lent results. None of the Mission inmates, male or female, are ever
allowed out into service; they all have to work for the common
good; they ultimately marry their own colour, and settle down to a
life of usefulness, happiness, and comfort. Three of the Mission
Stations—Yarrabah, Mapoon, and Deebing Creek—have been pro-
claimed Industrial Schools under the Reformatories’ Act.
SOUTHERN QUEENSLAND.
THE FRASER ISLAND MISSION STATION.
SOGIMBAH MISSION STATION is on the west side of
Fraser Island, opposite to Woody Island, some 65 miles
south from the Sandy Cape Lighthouse, and near the mouth
of Bogimbah or Mitchell’s Creek. About 200 miles north of
Brisbane, at the mouth of the Mary River, seven miles inland, is
the old kauri pine plantation which many years ago was commenced
by the present Surveyor-General, Mr. A. McDowal, as an effort
towards re-foresting the island ; arid on the eastern side of the island,
about 45 miles over, is Indian Head, the most eastern point of
Australia.


On February 24th, 1897, Mr. A. Meston, under Instructions
from the Government, removed by the “Llewellyn” to Fraser
Island, 51 dirty, ragged, diseased and wretched remnants of the old
Wide Bay tribes. They had camped in and around Maryborough
Mr. J. D.
Anderson,
Superintendent
Fraser
for years, and had reached a deplorable stage of
degradation, being completely demoralised by drink,
opium, disease, and intermittent periods of semi-
starvation ; all were addicted to using opium,
while some of them had used it for years. Out of
105 living near Maryborough in 1895, it is stated
that 39 died within two years from the above
causes. Mr. George Stupart, a leading merchant
and old resident of Maryborough, wrote to Sir
Horace Tozer in that year praising highly the
efforts that were being made towards the ameliora-
tion of the condition of the blacks. He stated that
by this he (Sir Horace Tozer) was removing a
stain from off the history of the colony. The first
settlement was at White Cliffs, under the charge
of Mr. Harold Meston, who had charge of the
Station for just three years, but in August, 1897,
it was removed to its present position. From time to time further
additions were made to the population from various parts of
Southern Queensland, and on December 21st, 1899, Mr. Meston
reported that there were 137 aboriginals on the island (of whom 16
were half-castes), from 25 different localities—6l men, 51 women,
16 boys, 5 girls, and 4 children. The condition of the Settlement,
however, does not appear to have been satisfactory to the authorities,
and his experience of the highly successful methods of dealing with
the blacks on the Mission Stations at Yarrabah and Mapoon, induced
the Honorable J. G. Foxton to make a radical change in the
administration of the Settlement on Fraser Island. The attempt
to reclaim the blacks, simply by separation from whites, had not
been wholly successful, and it remained to see how much further
Christian influences could go. •
On his return to Brisbane, the Home Secretary made advances
to the various religious bodies in the community with a view to their
taking over the whole charge of the Settlement, the Government
being pledged to subsidise the work by a yearly grant for rations
and the salary of a school teacher. The matter was first discussed
by the Executive Committe of the Australian Board of Missions,
the Archbishop of Sydney taking a keen interest in the opening
afforded to the Church for missionary work, and subsequently by
the Brisbane Diocesan Board of Missions. As a result of the latter
meeting, two members of the Board, the Rev. G. H. Frodsham and
Mr. G. Day, went down to the Settlement, and in consequence of
their report the Board determined to take over the chaige of the
Settlement if they could find a man sufficiently earnest and strong
to change the existing state of affairs and “ to guide a childlike and
yet debauched people aright.” After a prolonged search throughout
Australia two men were sent, Messrs. Kitchen and Irwin of the


Church Mission, to take charge of the Island for the Brisbane
Diocesan Board of Missions, from February ist, 1900. At the same
time an urgent appeal was sent to the Rev. E. R. Gribble to come
quickly and advise the Board as to the best methods upon which
they should mould the future of the important work that they had
undertaken. Mr. Gribble at once responded to the call made upon
him, and arrived on Frazer Island at the close of the second week
of the new administration. On his arrival he at once took the power
out of the hands of the troopers, centreing it for the time in himself.
He removed the children from the camp to the Mission House,
started a school, arranged daily services, and commenced a system
of rationing similar to that used at Yarrabah, that is, giving the
rations to the married women instead of to batches of people, as
heretofore. He described the great “ curse of the Island ”as idle-
ness, and with characteristic energy commenced to destroy the curse
Fraser Island Mission Station—A Group of Aboriginals.
A Company or Native (Mission) Irregulars at the Hear.
by setting the people to work at felling trees, splitting palings,
building and painting huts, or otherwise improving the Station
property. Recreation was not neglected, and the whole Settlement
was made to live by rule. Mr. Gribble also explored part of the
Island, and came to the conclusion that a large amount of it could be
well used for raising cattle and horses. Many of the blacks are
experienced station hands, and there was subsequently stock upon
the Island which was procured by the Board. He also thought
that other industries could be developed, and the position of the
people much improved.
The position of the Fraser Island Mission is as follows : —lt is
under the sole control of the Brisbane Board of Missions (Arch-
deacon Rivers being Warden of the Mission and Rev. Harris
Secretary), who are responsible to the Government for the well-
being of the blacks upon it. The Government have undertken to
pay £SOO a year for “ rations ” and a school teacher’s salary, which
represents less than per head per day. They have also


undertaken to build a school-house, girls’ and boys’ dormitories,
and to repair the existing buildings. The subsidy represents
the cost to the Government of the old administration, and,
considerable as it seems, it has to be supplemented by the Church
if the work of the Mission is to be well done and the people
taught to regard the Station as a home in which they should take
the deepest interest and pride.
The Ven. Archdeacon Rivers has up to recently been acting as
Warden of the Mission. Mr. J. D. Anderson is in charge as
Superintendent, and has as assistant Mr. D. E. Webber. The
girls’ and children’s quarters are in charge of Mrs. Gribble, late of
Yarrabah, Cairns and Warenesda, Gascoyne River, W.A. The
latter lady’s daughter, Miss E. M. Gribble, is teacher.
A Mission
Girl.
Mr. Anderson is a native of Leeds, England. Coming to
Queensland about 10 years ago, he entered missionary work in
1896, first at Brisbane, then in connection with the Melanesian -
Mission in the Isis Scrub. He took over the Rev. P. Williams’s
work among Kanakas in Bundaberg later on, and then, after a
considerable period of work in the Upper Burnett District, came to
Fraser Island. That he is well suited to the work at Fraser Island
is evident on every side, and with the able and experienced
assistance of Mrs. and Miss Gribble, will bring it to greater success
than even has so far been attained. This will require much more
help from the general and, we believe, generous public, and also
from the Government beyond the per head per day that is
present allowed,


tAßLY in November last year I was able, thanks to the good
■ L ' courtesy of Captain Boult, the Harbour Master at Maryborough!
to journey as far as Bogimbah by the s.s. “ Llewellyn,” Captain
Evans. The latter was exceedingly kind and communicative, and
what with the stories of the
early days on the Mary
River and the Sandy Straits,
and the further back stories
of the Black Sea during the
war in the Crimea, the time
passed rapidly. Mr. Ander-
son was journeying down,
and gave me much informa-
tion of the work he was
engaged in. We reached
Sandy Straits shortly after
lunch, and steaming north-
Fraser
Island
Mission
Station.
eastward, dropped anchor off .the Mission Station early in the
afternoon. The ship’s boat took us to the Ions; spit of sand,
from where a number of waiting aboriginals came through the
surf to carry us ashore. A splendid specimen of a man took me
upon his shoulders ashore, but it gave me rather a shock to
learn that he was a murderer deported here from the far North,
and that one or two more who had similar crimes to their charge
were busy carrying my inoffensive companions and the goods and
chattels ashore. I walked the mile to the Mission Ridge in a
particularly subdued frame of mind, not removed even when
informed by Mr. Anderson that they were among the best boys
upon the Station. Missionary enterprise had a personal interest
while I was on Fraser Island.
Fraser or Great Sandy Island is 100 miles in its greatest length
north and south, and in breadth about 15 miles. The western side,
where the Mission is situated, faces the Great Sandy Straits, with
its Islands —Woody, Little Woody, Pickrine, Tuch, Mangrove,
Walsh, Hooker, Turkey, Moonboom, and others —dotted, emerald-
hued, about this splendid strait. The eastern side faces the Pacific
Ocean, and has a magnificent hard beach, stretching, with scarcely
a break, from the southern point of the Island for almost 80 miles to
Indian Head. A series of sandy hills flank the eastern shore, some
of great height; while here and there on the Island are hills of
greater height, such as Boomerang Hill, F. by X. of the Mission
Station, 630 feet high, and Leading Hill, about the centre of the
Island. There are some good patches of grazing land, and here and
there smaller areas suitable for agriculture, but as the name implies,
the Island is chiefly sand and sandy loam. There are also patches
of peat bog lying adjacent to the creekside, while at different points
are magnificent vine scrubs, from which, in years gone by, much
timber was obtained—pine,. blackbut, turpentine, etc. The fresh-
water lakes are noticeable both in number and size on the Island.
At the northern end are fifteen, ranging from those a mile or so
across to immense sheets of water five miles long and a mile wide,


while towards White Cliffs and on the eastern side of the Island are
several large lakes. For many years Mr. Aldridge, an old Mary-
borough identity, had a cattle station on the Island, but now the
only residents are the lighthouse keepers at Sandy Cape and Hook
Point, some half a dozen timber-getters near White Cliffs, and the
fast-growing Mission Station.
The Mission buildings are on a high ridge flanking the beautiful
sandy beach. During 1900 the Government erected a commodious
school-house, matron’s quarters, and women’s dormitory, which,
with the buildings previously occupied by the telegraph operator,
an old store-house, and blacks’ gunyahs and huts, constituted the
buildings at the Station when Mr. Anderson took charge in January,
1901. Since then, a men’s dormitory has been commenced by the
blacks, using split cypress pine, outbuildings have been erected, with
fowl, calf and goat yards, a stockyard capable of holding 30 head of
cattle or of being used for breaking in horses, and fully three acres
of ground for gardening purposes have been stake-fenced. The
clearing around the Station is fully 20 acres, and attention will
shortly be paid to an area of peaty ground about 10 acres close to
the Station, which, by draining, should become very fertile.
Cocoanut trees do not seem to thrive well, while the efforts that
have so far been made to make cultivation a success have of neces-
sity been small owing to the time required to. prepare and fence the
ground. Huge trees yet lying across the fenced-in garden are too
damp to burn, the latter due chiefly to the rain that so often visits
the Island. I consider that the assistance of two or three men with
a knowledge of bushcraft, farming, and gardening to set things
upon a fair basis, and the aid of the Department of Agriculture in
analysing the various soils in proximity to the Station, with the
co-operation of expert advisers, w r ould, with the aid of Mr. Anderson
and his boys, make a wonderful difference to the Settlement, and
place it upon an almost independent footing.
In spite of the heavy work
entailed in bringing a large
number of planks from the boat,
half a mile, upon their backs to
the Station, the camp did not
omit their regular nightly cor-
roboree, which was kept up
until near midnight. Previously,
however, the evening service
(or, more appropriately, Even-
song) was held in the school-
house. The attendance is not
compulsory, but strongly en-
joined, and the forms were well
filled by men, women and
Sawn
Timber
for Building
Just Landed
from the s.s
Llewellyn.
children, who were divided, Quaker meeting like, with males on one
side and females on the other, representatives of tribes from Norman-
ton and Cairns to Maryborough and the Darling Downs being there.
All attended carefully to the services, but one could see that the


children were very much interested, their eyes and teeth glistening
in the lamp-lit church as they turned their polished faces towards
the preacher, at responses or hymns, which latter they sang with
Building
Erected by
Aboriginals in
Course of
Construction.
pleasing unity and melody.
Upon the Station were
70 males, 52 females, child-
ren —21 boys and 25 girls—
total, say, 168. The mar-
ried people live in gunyahs
near by the Superinten-
dent’s house, the single men
in a building together, and
the women and children
in the women’s dormitory
adjacent to the matron’s
house. The next day we
had an opportunity of
learning the day’s routine,
and noted the cleanliness
around and the willingness
of all to carry out the
instructions ; that there
should be some sullenness
could be understood, but
this was only among the old men and women, and not against those
m charge, but against the restraint imposed by the system, which is
not only unavoidable, but, under the circumstances, imperative. At
6 the rising bell sounds, at 7 a.m. the serving is given out, and I
was called into the store to see the rations given out to the married
couples. The ration consists of flour, sugar, tobacco, beef, treacle,
onions, rice, tea, and maize meal; the latter is prepared on the
Station by the men. I noticed all of these stores were of good
quality, the flour especially being the best brand in the markets.
After breakfast the boys are drawn up in a double row near the
store and tobacco is given out, while advantage is also taken to
issue the day’s orders ; everything is done in a methodical manner,
and although steady work is required, the boys are carefully
managed, so that a too-continuous demand is not made upon their
energies, never too prominent.
The following is the day’s time-table:—
а. p.m.
б. Rising bell 12.15 Dinner
6.30 Morning Service 1.0 Staff dinner
7.0 Serving out of rations 2.0 School
7.30 Staff breakfast 4.0 Men’s school and classes
8.0 Dormitories’ breakfast 5.0 Tea
8.30 Tobacco serving 7.0 Evening Service
g.o Work and school 8.0 Classes and drill
12.0 Cease work


There is a military squad that I saw perform evolutions with
Snider rifles in an exceedingly creditable manner, smart and soldier-
like in every way. A band is in course of formation, there being
already six performers under Mr. Anderson and more learning, and
also there are several excellent draughts players. One great want,
however, is the periodical visit of a medical officer, an omission
which much surprised me, considering the state of ill-health in which
some of the blacks arrive. Something like £6 is annually spent in
medicines, which is paid by the Board of Missions. The cost of a
visit of a medical officer is, I understand, £~j ios. per visit, which is
a somewhat prohibitive charge, although, if the whole 170 are
examined, a particularly small amount for professional services.
The Mission is urgently in need of an American organ. It is easy
to imagine what a great difference an instrument would make
in the conduct of the daily Services and on other occasions.
What is also required is a dray, carpenter’s tools, tanks, and last,
but by no means least, cast-off clothing for the men and children.
One of the suggestions of Mr. Anderson in regard to the children
could well be noted. Growing up as they are among older associates
who are experienced in the evils of life, there is the greatest likeli-
hood of a contaminating influence being perhaps unconsciously
brought into their lives. To prevent this, and yet not to deprive
the parents of their children, is the problem, and Mr. Anderson
considers that, if Little Woody Island across the Straits, and oppo-
site the Station, could be used as a Station for rearing the children,
a great deal of good would accrue.
After sharing the hospitality of Mrs. Gribble and her daughter,
who were exceedingly kind during the short stay we made upon the
Island, we sailed across the Strait in the Mission whale boat with
her crew of five Fraser Island natives. These were as intelligent a
set of boys as could be got together. We were tacking the whole
way over, and, for seven
hours, song and corroboree
and joke followed from
them continually. It was a
little startling to hear a
song from “ Maritana,”
rendered musically correct,
from the lips of a black-
fellow, followed by an
Irish song by another with
the *• swatest of brogues,”
and then an aboriginal
corroboree chant in which
all joined.
Married
Aboriginals’
Huts,
Fraser Island
At 6 o’clock we beached opposite King’s Hotel, Pialba, and
staying at that comfortable hostelry the night, returned to Mary-
borough by the morning’s train, thoroughly pleased with our trip in
every detail, and heartily endorsing the praise that is given by all to
Mr. Anderson, the matron, Mrs. Gribble, and the assistants for the
able manner in which they are coping with the' many difficulties
inherent in a situation of that kind.


ITg\EEBING GREEK ABORIGINAL MISSION is about
five or six miles from Ipswich, at the head of the small
creek which gives it its name. The area of soil suitable for
agricultural purposes is limited, and what there is is not of the best.
This difficulty is being now overcome by the purchase of more
suitable agricultural land, although at a distance from the home-
stead.
When the Mission was commenced, Ipswich, like nearly all
other towns in Queensland, was frequented by lazy, dirty, drunken
blacks, thin, ragged, and miserable. To-day the appearance of
these selfsame blacks shows a vast improvement. A glance at the
Deebing Creek Aboriginal Mission.
General View of the Home, showing Inmates and their Cottages.
photo, taken at the Home (which we are enabled to reproduce by
the courtesy of the Hon. Secretary, Mr. W. H. Foote) will reveal a
lot of healthy, plump, contented aboriginals, decently clothed, well
behaved, and all habitually sober, with the exception of about half
a dozen old incorrigibles. The total number at the Home last year
was 173, the daily average being 139. Considering the nomadic
habits of these people, this daily average is very gratifying indeed.
There were three marriages, five births, and ten deaths, six of these
being from an epidemic of influenza, to which these people seem
peculiarly susceptible. The general health is very good indeed, and
the same may be said of the conduct of the blacks. Intoxicants are


rigorously excluded, and it is only by the aid of “ mean whites " that
this wise regulation is ever infringed.
There is a school at the Home, presided over by Miss Bain,
with an enrolment of 52 scholars. The report of the Committee
for last year says “ The work in the school has been of a very
gratifying character. The report of the late examination, by the
School Inspector, speaks well for the work of both teacher and
scholars.” Farming is undertaken on a small scale, and vegetables,
etc., for home use, to the value of were raised last year, besides
forage valued at £2l for the milking herd. Besides the above, eggs
and milk for home use were produced, the latter in large quantities.
Improvements at the Home, to the value of £BO, were carried out,
besides contracts for outsiders, £65 55., paid for in cash and cattle,
and £ys worth of improvements on some grazing land in return for
five years’ grazing right of same. In addition, work valued at
was done at Barambah, near Kilkivan, where another Mission Home
is being established under the control of the Committee.
The Home possesses 261 cattle, valued at the natural
increase of which is almost sufficient to keep the inmates in animal
food, the quantity so used last year being valued at 10s.
Each of the huts is the home of one family, the head of which
has probably had the most to do in its erection, and who takes pride
in making it as comfortable as he can. The women keep the houses
spotlessly clean, and the growth of a wholesome family life is very
gratifying. An amusing example of this is supplied by the books of
an Ipswich firm, of which the following is a true copy, the names
only having been altered, for obvious reasons: —
Mr. William Blue (aboriginal),
Deebing Creek Mission Home.
Bought of Greene and Browne.
1901.
Dec. 24 —Balance on perambulator • £ — 10 o
It may be of interest to add that the account was settled in due
course.
The following extract from the Annual Report speaks fer
itself The religious meetings, of which there have been 150,
have been well attended, and some have given clear evidence, in
amended lives, that they have not been brought under these influences
in vain. The Sabbath School has been attended by all the children,
and by many of the adults, who manifest in this way a desire after
knowledge which is very cheering.”
It only remains to add that the Committee take the deepest
interest in the work of the Mission ; and that the Chairman (Rev.
Peter Robinson), the Hon. Secretary (Mr. W. H. Foote), and the
Superintendent and Matron (Mr. and Mrs. T. Ivins) are to be
congratulated on the success which has so far attended their efforts
qn behalf of a long-neglected race.


SURUNDUR ABORIGINAL STATION is some 15 miles
west from Caboolture, on the North Coast Railway Line,
and is an area of 2,140 acres of good grazing and agricul-
tural land. On the flat, a short distance from the homestead, there
is from one to three feet of rich loam, overlying a sandy clay and
gravel subsoil. There is abundance of good land for, all crops, and,
taken all round, the Station is considered to possess excellent advan-
tages for the purpose to which it is now being put. At first, there
was considerable opposition by the residents to the establishment
of a Station in this locality, but this has now all passed away, the
excellent behaviour of the natives allaying all cause of fear. It may
be stated here that there is no record of blacks from any Reserve or
Mission Station in Queensland having given any serious trouble to
the settlers in a district.
Mr. A. Meston first formed the Station here with a number
of blacks from the far West, who were in a demoralised condition, a
special trip being one where 63 destitute men, women and children
gathered at Thargomindah and walked to Cunnamulla Railway
Station to come to Durundur. In all his reports Mr. Meston refers
to the demoralised condition of the numerous blacks in Southern
Queensland, a condition the Home Secretary, the Hon. J. F. G.
Foxton, Dr. Roth, his assistants, and the Missionaries are success-
fully fighting to prevent extending in North Queensland.
Mr. Harold Meston was in charge of the Durundur Station
until September, 1901, when he was appointed Protector for
South-west Queensland. Mr. and Mrs. A. Tronson, of Mary-
borough, were then placed in charge—a position they still hold.
The cost on the Station is about is. per week for the
male blacks, and is. 1 for the women, which sum covers cost
of flour, tobacco, tea, sugar, beef, etc. The blacks at first are a
little homesick, but this soon passes away, and with the regular
food and work, and the kindness meted to them, become quite
contented and happy on the Station. The men are much sought
after by employers in the district surrounding, and during the twelve
months to July, 1901, earned a sum of ys., or individually
from 7s. 6d. to 15s. per week. The blacks are by nature com-
munistic, and spend most of the money earned upon the Station.
In October last there were 26 men, 19 women, 3 boys, 9 girls, and
1 baby there, a number having been taken to the new Station,
Barambah, on the Burnett River, near Gayndah.
'jP>ARAMBAH RESERVE FOR ABORIGINALS is about
ligj 50 miles south from Gayndah on the Burnett River, and is
J in area 6,926 acres. It is used at present as a centre to
which aboriginals can be sent or make their home, and from which
those settlers desiring aboriginal help can obtain it. This is a
branch of Deebing Creek Mission, under the management ot
the same Committee,


END FEMALE ABORIGINAL HOME.—A diffi-
culty early presented itself in regard to those aboriginal
women near Brisbane who required attention previous to
going to a Station, and those on their way via Brisbane to such
Stations. For their accommodation and help while in the capital
city, a property was purchased in July, 1900, at West End, and
opened as a Home for Female Aboriginals. This is now, on the
advice of Mrs. A. Meston, who was the first Protectress, under Mrs.
Frew, and has proved of the utmost value. Kind, considerate, and
firm, the lady in charge—not without many difficulties—has
managed to win the regard of all those placed in her care, and to
smooth the paths of her charges. In addition, a number of half-
caste children have entered the Magdalen Asylum and the St,
Vincent’s Orphanage,
Yarrabah Mission House.


Yarrabah
Mission
Station.
THE MISSION STATIONS
(CONTINUED).
NORTHERN QUEENSLAND.
fARRABAH MISSION STA-
TION, which is also a Refor-
matory under the Act, is
about 10 miles from Cairns, on the
shore of the west side of False Bay,
looking north across Trinity Bay.
It stands on the Cape Grafton aboriginal reserve, which
extends from Trinity Bay, south to the Mulgrave River, and from
the sea coast west to the top of the Malbon-Thompson Range
and the Bell Peaks, in area about 80 square miles, and is undoubtedly
the best aboriginal reserve in Australia. It possesses boundless
fishing resources, an abundant supply of excellent water, a large
area of good agricultural land, and is favoured with a very healthy
climate. It is also isolated from all white settlers by a jungle-clad
range, and forms an ideal reserve for aboriginals. It was selected
for this latter purpose about 18 years ago by Mr. A. Meston and
Mr. R. T. Hartley, then Police Magistrate at Cairns. The Mission
was commenced in the early nineties by the late Rev. Mr. Gribble,
who, with his wife (now at Fraser Island Mission Station), devoted
his life to missionary work among the aboriginals of the continent.
For many years he was in charge of the Warenesda Mission Station
on the Gascoyne River, Western Australia, and those who know of
the brutal treatment meted out to the blacks in the north-west of
that State will appreciate the great difficulties this noble-hearted
Missionary had to contend with. But the hardships he had endured
served but to call out the warrior spirit, and shortly after coming to
Queensland, we find him establishing the then only Church of
England Mission to the natives at the foot of the Murray-Prior
Range. He died amidst those he loved and had worked for
unceasingly, living long enough in his new home to see the seed he
had planted grown into a sturdy plant, and which, under his son’s
care, has never drooped nor weakened, but grown steadily day by
day. After the sad end of the Rev. Mr. Gribble, his wife removed
with her daughter to the Fraser Island Mission, there to continue the
noble work to which all her life she has been devoted. The Yarrabah
Mission is now in charge of their son, the Rev. E. R. B. Gribble,
iyho has made the Mission an admirable success, a continued


increase of aboriginals to the settlement being noted, and the
natives in the adjacent districts coming more and more to look upon
Yarrabah as a home. The same difficulties met with at other
Stations adjacent to a town were met with here, as elsewhere, until
the new Acts were passed, and a Minister at once kind and firm
administered the new regulations. With such support, the evils
are slowly passing away, and with their absence, the Missions will
flourish. The Yarrabah population now stands at about 200, there
being an attendance at the school of from 70 to 95 children daily,
and an advanced class has been commenced for a number who have
progressed well in their studies. A singing class meets every
Monday evening, and a sewing class on Mondays and Fridays. A
novel method of creating an interest in the welfare of the settlement
has been in the appointment of a number of senior men as a govern-
ing body. Together with the Missionaries, twelve aboriginals form
the “ Government,” the sittings of which constitutes a police court,
which is presided over by a “ King,” who signs the minutes. This
King is John Barlow Menmurray, who is the hereditary chief of the
local (Yarrabah) Gunganji tribe.
Whitsunday Passage, between Mackay and Bowen, where a few
Aboriginals still exist.
% -TOPE VALLEY MISSION STATION, Cape Bedford, is a
Lutheran Station on the south side of Cape Bedford, 14
miles north of Cooktown by water, or 30 miles by land ;it
was established in 1886 by the Neuendetteslend Lutheran Mission
by the Rev. Flierl. The next year the latter went on to his original
destination, New Guinea, and was succeeded at Cape Bedford by
Carl A. Meyer, who had been eleven years in charge at Kopperamana
Mission Station, Cooper’s Creek, Central Australia. The latter
shortly after went to the Bloomfield Mission Station, and Messrs.
Pflazer and Mr. Schwarz came to Cape Bedford. Afterwards the Rev.
Poland joined Schwarz, and ultimately the sole control was left in
the hands of Mr. Schwarz, the Rev. Poland taking charge at the
Bloomfield.
The society referred to spent upwards of £6OOO between the
years, 1886 to 1898. At -the commencement the Queensland


Cape
Bedford
Mission
House
been eminently useful. Some 60 or 70
natives frequent the Station, and up-
wards of 34 children are daily taught
in the school house under the charge
of Mrs. Schwarz and her sister, Miss
Lucy Allen. This Station being so
close to Cooktown, where much shipping
goes in and out to the pearling and
beche-de-mer grounds, should be one of
the most important, and no doubt, as the
new Act comes to be better known, both
among whites, blacks, and aliens, the
Mission will progress, and the awful tales
of depravity, demoralisation, and foul
outrage which have been in constant
repetition for years past, will cease.
The 'Rev. Schwarz is spoken of
as an able man, of great refinement
and linguistic ability, and of strong will
power; in every way an ideal man for
the position he so well fills. He
possesses the respect and confidence of the aboriginals through-
out the district.
the latter year, however, assistance was renewed.
Like unto most of the Mission Stations, the site, so far as soil
is concerned, was ill-chosen, and a difficult future was entered upon
so far as cultivation was concerned, the locality being chiefly
unpromising bare rock and drift sand. However, several hundred
of cocoanut trees which were planted flourish, and owing to their
thriving so well, their cultivation upon a large scale has been decided
upon; and also several acres are under cultivation with potatoes,
corn, sugar-cane, rice, bananas, etc., the Rev. Schwarz succeeding in
raising seven tons of potatoes, two tons of sugar-cane, one and a half
acres of bananas, half a ton of rice, with mangoes and corn. A
fishing net and cutter were supplied by the Government, and have
Government undertook to
erect a house and store,
twenty iron huts for the
blacks, fence in 10 acres,
supply tools, seeds, a
boat, and provisions for
12 months if the Mission
was continued. The
Government gave re-
newed assistance of £\o
per month in 1888, and
the following years a grant
of per annum. This
afterwards ceased, and
from 1893 to 1898 no
grant was allowed. In
At
Cape
Bedford.


Mapoon
Church.
(phLOOMFIELb MISSION STATION is at the head of the
ilgj Bloomfield River, some six miles from the sea. It is about
J 30 miles south of Cooktown direct, but owing to the detour
necessitated by crossing the coast
range, is by road some 53 miles.
The settlement was commenced
in 1886 by Mr. L. G. Bauer,
who was appointed superinten-
dent by the Government, but
in the following year the
Lutheran Missionary Council of
South Australia took over the
charge, receiving considerable
Goverment assistance. The Rev.
Poland, for many years at Cape
Bedford with the Rev. Schwarz,
is now in charge there, and with
his linguistic ability and experi-
ence, will no doubt add to its
past worth. It is intended in
the future to transfer children of
school age at this Station to the
Cape Bedford Mission, thus obviating the necessity of employing a
schoolmistress at the Bloomfield.
SAPOON
MISSION
STATION
is near the mouth
of the Batavia
River on a sheltered
bend about a mile
from Port Musgrave
Bay, which lies on
the west side of
Cape York Penin-
sula, about 120
miles south from
Thursday Island.
The Mission was
commenced under
Moravian auspices,
with the support
and co-operation of
the Federal Assem-
bly of the Presby-
terian Churches of Australia. The first Missionaries were the Revs.
Hey and Ward, who arrived in November, 1891. The position is
School House
and Church,
Mapoon,


considered both unhealthy and unproductive, and any attempt to
cultivate in the low places, where some fair soil is to be found,
releases gases from the vegetable mould beneath, which induce fever.
Weipa
Mission
Station.
Mrs. Foxton
Planting
Tree s.
the Missionaries, the indefatigable local
Protector, Mr. G. H. Bennett, and last,
but by no means least, to the aid of the
blacks themselves. Mr. J. T. Embly,
surveyor, a first authority upon this
part of Cape York, stated in a paper
read before the R.G.S. of Queensland :
“As I am in a position to speak from
experience regarding the condition of
the natives before the establishment
of the Mapoon Mission Station and
their present position, I am pleased to
be able to say that the improved
change in the young natives is very
marked, and shows the result of patient
work and kindness on the part of good Christian people.”
w jf e an d Mrs. Ward, who attend to the school and to the training
of the female portion of the community. A great difficulty is
created by the visits of a lawless class of whites and coloured
men, engaged in beche-de-mer and pearl-shell industries in the
Torres Straites, who for years kidnapped those whom they
required, either male or female, along the tract of coast known
as the Seven Rivers, between the Jardine and Batavia Rivers.
This has, however, been almost all done away with, thanks to the co-
operation of efforts of the Northern Protector, Dr. Roth, the Govern-
ment Resident at Thursday Island (the Hon. John Douglas, C.M.G.),
The Missionaries have
suffered considerably from
this, and to it is attri-
buted the sad death of
Mr. Ward, who died in
harness in January, 1895,
giving his life for his phil-
anthropy. His grave is
within a dozen yards of
the Mission School house.
Since his death the Sta-
tion has been in sole
charge of Mr. Hey, a man
with great energy of cha-
racter, very courageous,
and with the firm, self-
possessed, kindly nature
so essential to deal suc-
cessfully with the abori-
ginal. Assisting him in
the noble work are his
Native Men’s
Quarters,
Mapoon.


The wreck of the “ Kanahooka,” in 1896, and the guidance,
by blacks, of the survivors to this Mission Station, was in
itself a speaking testimony of the influence of the Mission among
blacks, who before were of the most savage nature, due to the
unscrupulous treatment meted to them by the recruiters. As an
assistant, Mr. Hey had Harry Price, a native of Tahiti, and a great
deal of the Mission’s success (says Rev. Hey) is due to his fidelity,
sagacity, and tact. He received a salary of £6O per annum, a sum
defrayed by the students of Ormond College, Melbourne. This
valuable help died last year. The natives are all kept
busy improving the Station, only those unable to work receiving
food without some return being exacted.
These improvements now consist of two large gardens, in which,
after considerable labour, irrigation, and seaweed as manure, various
fruits and vegetables have been raised. Two forty-acre paddocks
have been fenced, rail and wire, milking sheds and drafting yards,
a home-made windmill for irrigation purposes, and a small sawmill
erected, and about 12 acres of swamp have been reclaimed and partly
planted with bananas, and a commencement made with clearing
scrub for planting fruit trees. Almost all of the Station buildings,
Mission House, native cottages, and out-buildings have been
erected, under the supervision of the superintendents, by native
help. There are upwards of 400 aboriginals under the supervision
of the Mission, of which about 200 have settled down in the
neighbourhood of the Station, the remainder come and go, spending
their time in visiting other tribes or in hunting or fishing.
These are chiefly Mapoon, Batavia River, and Port Musgrave
blacks, but remnants of the once “ wild ” groups belonging to the
Pennefather River, Duyphen Point, Mission River, Pine River, and
Albatross Bay have now made Mapoon their home, and it is
impossible for visitors to distinguish these “ wild ” ones from the
quiet Mapoon blacks.
On the Station all the domestic duties are performed by gins,
including baking and cooking. A great contrast is observable
between the girls who have gone through the Mission routine and
those still in their semi-wild state ; the former are far healthier,
comparatively free from disease, and are, of course, preserved from
too early and (what appears to us) unnatural marriage. There is no
trouble with the old people. Mr. Hey speaks the Mapoon dialect,
and settles all disputes by appealing to their sense of right. He also
arranges marriages. No young man can get a wife till he has by his
behaviour proved to Mr. Hey he is deserving. He must then
build a house of approved material and design, and otherwise make
provision. The young couple then get a bag of flour, etc., and
start fairly in married life. It can well be said that between this
Mission and the Weipa Mission Station fully 1000 natives are
influenced for good. This Station has now been proclaimed a
Reformatory under the Industrial Schools’ Act, to which
neglected aboriginal children can be sent.


#EIPA MISSION STATION is to the south of the Batavia,
and lies to the west of Duyphen Point, about 17 miles up
the Embley River on the north bank. This is also carried
on by the Moravian Presbyterian Mission, and is under the charge
of the Rev. E. Brown, who, after spying out the land in 1896, took
up his duties in
1898, and the Sta-
tion has, like the
Batavia Mission,
already proved its
worth. This Sta-
tion served some-
what as an object -
lesson to the
Home Secretary,
the Hon. J. F. G.
Foxton, when on
his memorable
trip in 1898 around
the settlement of
far Northern
Queensland, af-
fording him an op-
Missioners’
Quarters
Weipa
portunity of seeing
the raw material upon which the Missionaries have to work. The
presence of Mrs. Foxton on that occasion will be remembered by
the mango trees which she planted there, as also by the naming of
the Station, by the native name Weipa, on that occasion.
ARIE YAM BA, Lutheran Mission Station, is about half-way
JjlAa 1 between Mackay and Bowen, on the south bank of the
Andromache River, a stream with steep banks, which,
rising near the Normanby Goldfield, joins the O’Connor River
which falls into Repulse Bay. The Station is on fairly good black
soil country, and is in charge of the Rev. Mr. C. Freiboth, who has
been there some three and a half years.
A considerable quantity of ground is farmed, and no inconsider-
able improvement has been made in the way of buildings, stock, and
general cultivation. The buildings consist of a neat six-roomed
house (with kitchen, etc., underneath) wherein reside Mr. and Mrs.
Freiboth, their two children, and two aboriginal girls. The two
small detached slab buildings adjacent are the school-house and the
aboriginals’ dining-room. The stock consists of some seventeen
pigs, twenty-eight horses, and forty cattle, these latter constitute the
remnant of some 150 which the Mission owned previous to the tick
visitation. There are neatly fenced yards with piggery,
stables, harness-room, milking-shed, etc. In addition to being
occupied in out-door work the children are taught arithmetic, reading,
and writing, and Scripture catechism is taken in hand twice weekly.


An adult half-caste woman lends considerable help in the school.
Two great drawbacks in connection with this Mission are the small
number of blacks in the districts adjacent and the proximity of the
white settlement. The latter demoralising influence has been met
to a large extent in constituting Mr. Freiboth a superintendent under
the Act; the scarcity of natives is, however, a larger question, and
the Government have under consideration their removal to one of
the more northern Mission Stations.
The Anglicans have in contemplation the formation of a
Mission Station in the neighbourhood of the Mitchell or Nassau
Rivers, Cape York. Bishop White, Bishop of Carpentaria, intends
to visit the locality this year to inspect the sites.
The Presbyterians are taking steps to open another branch at
the mouth of the Archer, while the Anglicans propose securing a
site at the mouth of the Mitchell, further down the Gulf coast, for
similar purposes.
In 1897 Inspector Lamond strongly recommended the country
on the Edward River, N-.W. of the Musgrave Police Station, as a
locality well fitted for a Mission Station, there being plenty of good
land, permanent water, and grass.
On the Mulgravo River, North Queensland,


Brisbane :
The City Printing Works,
hi Queen Street.
mcmii.


Brisbane :
City Printing Works,
hi Queen Street.
i g 02.
