

THE LAND LAW
VICTORIA,
(AUSTRALIA.)
THE HON. GAVAN DUFFY,
MINISTER OF PUBLIC LANDS.
COX AN D WYMAN. PRINTERS, GRRAT QUEEN STREET.
W. H. SMITH & SON, 186, STRAND;
ABD
21, LOWER SACKVILLE STREET, DUELIN.
1862


THE LAND LAW
OF
VICTORIA,
(AUSTRALIA)
BY
THE HON. GAVAN DUFFY,
MINISTER OE PUBLIC LANDS.
LONDON:
W. H. SMITH & SON, 186, STRAND;
AND
21, LOWER SACKYILLB STREET, DUBLIN.
1862,


THE
LAND LAW OF VICTORIA.
[While the Land Act of 1562 was still before Parliament I received
inquiries and suggestions in relation to it, from time to time, which left
no doubtupon ray mind that the measure was imperfectly understood,
oven by many of those who took an active interest in its success. It is
now law, and those who desire to avail themselves of it are liable, T
fear, to fall into similar confusion if they are left to grope out its pro-
visions from the technical phraseology of an Act of Parliament, This
consideration, and a fixed conviction that the new law furnishes the
certain moans of stimulating industrial enterprise in many now direc-
tions, and of restoring to settled pursuits that security without which
they languish, have induced mo to undertake my present task, I
propose to furnish such a plain statement of its main provisions as may
afford intelligible guidance to our busy population, and to the anxious
immigrants whom we are recruiting from other countries. X will
describe at the same time the regulations and arrangements made with
a view of carrying the law promptly into effect, which to be useful must
bo widely known. As the tract addresses itself in part to new. comers,
it will bo necessary occasionally to state facts, and .to specify reasons
for alterations in the law which have been long familiar to our own
population. If I anticipate the questions which a prudent and intelli-
gent man, intending to settle, would he certain to ask for himself, my
purpose will bo accomplished.]
The Land Act of 1863 repeals all former laws, as well as all
Orders in Council and Regulations having the force of law, under
which tho public territory has hitherto been sold, granted, leased,
or licensed.
It furnishes, however, new and minute instructions, and creates
adequate powers for alienating and otherwise disposing of, the
territory for the future.
The first and main object p.t whjch tlm, new law is.
give “ increased facilities for' the settlement ”of the people.' Its
provisions in this respect are such, that our own. population, will
not only obtain for the future the best agricultural land with as
A 3


little difficulty as any article of common use can be bought in
open market, hut such as will enable the most industrious of our
countrymen in Europe, if they employ them, to raise themselves
to permanent comfort and independence.
Though this colony has been named Australia Eolix from its
fruitfulness, the soil is not uniformly good, but, on the contrary,
presents startling contrasts of richness and sterility. Under the
new law, all the prime arable land, instead of being sold in largo
estates, as has commonly happened heretofore, will be reserved
in the first instance for actual settlers who undertake to cultivate
or improve their farms, Ey careful inspection, the unsold lands
entitled to be admitted into this class have been found not to
exceed ten millions of acres.* These lands have been delineated
ou a large map, which is deposited in the Parliament House, and
it is forbidden to sell them hereafter except in (what Ims been
named) Agricultural Areas. The method and conditions of sale
in an agricultural area will be presently stated ; but
it is to be noted that, the Hand Law of no other country in the
world guides the intending settler to the best laud by a provision
of this nature, which selects it out and places it in store for his
special use. And such a precaution was perhaps nowhere more
necessary than in Victoria. Eov several years after the gold
discovery the public lauds were sold only in a partial and grudg-
ing spirit, which rendered a large agricultural settlement impos-
sible: more recently, when the territory was “unlocked,” a
considerable portion of the lands offered for sale was of inferior
quality; and this inferior portion commonly fell to the share
of the industrious settler —the auction system (which then pre-
vailed) enabling the capitalist to make certain of obtaining what-
ever he chose to select. * Since October, 1860, a more liberal law
(known as the Nicholson Land Sales Act) has been in operation;
but certain defects in the structure of the Act have enabled its
best provisions to be systematically evaded.
Mode of Settlement in an Agricultural Area.
An agricultural area is a district of arable land consisting
generally of from twenty to thirty thousand acres, surveyed into
convenient farms. The extent of an area will consequently be
* The quantity reserved amounts to ton millions ami a half, but necessarily
includes some Inhaler 301],


nearly identical with that of the United States’ surveys, called
“ townships.” Within three months of the passing of the Act
(passed 18th June, 1862), a hukhrbd and mjot such abbas
will be proclaimed open for selection. They are situated near
the gold-ilelds, the railways, the chief towns, the seaports, and
other centres of population, and amount in all to more than four
millions of acres; or neatly as much land as has been purchased
in the colony since its first settlement a quarter of a century ago.
And this quantity will be kept up by fresh surveys from year to
year. The land offered for occupation in no other country that
I have any knowledge of possesses the same advantages of easy
access, and nearness to the already settled districts.
A map exhibiting the general position of these hundred and
fifty areas will be sold for a penny at every land-office, custom-
house, and post-office, in "Victoria. A larger and more elaborate
map, printed in colours, on which the land already sold, the land
proclaimed open in the four millions, and the km) reserved for
future proclamation are separately shown, may bo purchased at
the same places.*
The mode of settlement in an agricultural area is so simple
that an immigrant landed for a day it is presumed may compre-
hend and adopt it as easily as the oldest resident.
When an area is proclaimed open, a plan of it will be pub-
lished at a nominal price, showing the size and position of the
various farms. The size will vary from 40 to 640 acres, which
are the limits both ways. An intending settler, having gone on
the ground and made his selection, may send in his application to
tho Land Officer (in a printed form which will be supplied to
him at the Laud Office) for any allotment or allotments he
chooses, not exceeding 640 acres. Tho application must he
accompanied by a declaration (the form of which will also be
supplied at the Land Office) that he is over twenty-one years of
age, that he is domiciled (that is, resident) in Victoria, that he
selects the land for Ms own use and benefit, and not as agent
for any other person. If the intending settler be a woman, she
must declare that she is not a married woman, or, if a married
woman, that she is judicially separated according to the laws in
force in Victoria. The object of this declaration is to impede
speculators who have hitherto defeated the intention of the law by
* The price of the'coloured map ia seven shillln£--s and sixpence* the price,
hi both cases, bc:nis merely the prime cost to the State.


taking up land in large quantities in the names of their wives,
infant children, and- dependents.
Every selector must appear personally before tho Land
Officer. The system of acting through agents (of which such
improper use is said to have been made by speculators
under the Nicholson Land Bales Act) has been entirely
abolished, a change which will prove a most effectual barrier to
land-jobbing.
If there be no competitor for the same farm, the applicant
will be declared tho selector, and put into immediate possession.
It there be one or more competitors who have applied for the
same farm between the hours of nine and four o’clock on the
same day, they will draw lots in tho presence of the Land Officer,
in a manner prescribed by regulations, and devised to secure
perfect fair play. They will draw from, a box counters of the
same size, form, and material, marked with the letters of the
alphabet; the person who draws the letter nearest the beginning
of tho alphabet to be the successful competitor, and to be put
into possession. But the large quantity of land thrown open at
one time renders much competition improbable, except inrare oases.
The selector must, however, in the first instance pay to the
Land Officer the purchase-money, or tho purchase-money and
rent, of his allotments. Under the Nicholson Land Sales Act —
the most liberal to the actual settler that has hitherto existed—■
the upset price of land was ono pound an acre; but the selector
could, at his option, pay the purchase-money for one-half his
farm, and rent the other moiety at one shilling an acre for seven
years, and at the end of his lease, or during its currency, pur-
chase the rented land at one pound an acre. When there wore
two or more competitors for the same farm, it was set up by
auction among them, and has sometimes been run up to £G and
£7 an acre; and over the whole operation of the Act, country
lauds which were competed for reached an average of £l.los. M.
an acre. Under the new law the selector can either pay for his
farm at £1 an acre, and receive the title forthwith—-and in no
case, it must bo remembered, can the pioe he any higher than
an acre; or he may pay for one half of it, and rent the
second moiety for eight years at a hall'-a-orown an acre (or
a little over a halfpenny a week); but the rent will be computed
as annual instalments of the purchase-money, so that at the end
of eight years the land will become his nropertv, without an y


payment for the second moiety of his farm beyond the annual
rent of 3s. 6d. an acre. Thus he will secure his land without
delay or uncertainty; and the immigrant, before taking ship in
Europe, can ascertain beyond doubt the exact price of such
a farm as he desires to obtain.
It has been computed that the credit granted for half the
purchase-money oyer eight years, practically reduces the price of
the land to sixteen shillings an acre; and as one year’s wages of
the most unskilled labourer, at the lowest rate which has pre-
vailed since the discovery of gold, is sufficient to pay the purchase-
money and the first year’s rent of a farm of eighty acres, it will
be seen that a homestead is rendered accessible to every resident
in Victoria. Land is in some countries nominally cheaper; but
the surplus of a year’s wages, after paying for the necessaries of
life, will not, it is believed, purchase so much land fit for agricul-
tural settlement in any other country iu the world.
When onfc-eighth of an agricultural area (or less than 4,000
acres iu moat cases) is selected, the Governor in Council is
empowered to grant double the quantity of land, as commons,
for the selectors resident in the area; when one-fourth (or about
7,000 acres) is - selected, the remainder of the area, or three
times the quantity selected, will be thrown open. This com-
monage will ho under the control of the residents, for the
exclusive use of their cattle and sheep; and the commonage
fees must he expended on local improvements. It has long been
Contended, that farming, to bo prosperous, on the scale of other
pursuits in a gold country, requires abundant grazing rights near
at hand to the farm, and such profitable auxiliary employment
as the rearing of sheep or swine. The settlers in an agricultural
area will have the advantage of feeding their stock at their own
doors, on terms and conditions to be regulated by managers
elected by themselves; and this privilege wisely used means the
production of meat, milk, butter, and cheese, for the farm at a
nominal cost.
Disposal of the Land Fund.
The purohase-money, and rent of the land, will of course go
into the Public Treasury; but it is a distinguishing feature of the
new law, that the hulk of it will return to the district in profit-
able expenditure.! flu America the Laud Eund was long em-
ployed to pay the public debtj.and),bear the cost of war. In all


the British, colonies it is added to the general revenue, But in
Victoria a more generous course has been adopted; after defraying
the cost of survey, one-fourth of the Land Bund from all sources
will henceforth he expended on paying the passage of immi-
grants, to keep supplied the labour market, from which the
facility of obtaining land will no doubt operate as a constant
drain. The new settlers, in common with the rest of the com-
munity, can, on payment of a small sum in the colony, nominate
their relatives or skilled labourers “ at home,” and the State will
pay the bulk of the passage-money of the persons nominated.*
Bor the first nine months of every year, the assisted immigrants
must bo selected from England, Ireland, and Scotland, in pro-
portion to the population of these countries. Bor the other
three months, the fund is open to be distributed, under regula-
tions voted annually by Parliament. A certain proportion, it
may bo presumed, will be expended hi bringing from Germany,
Italy, Branoe, and the Peninsula, the relatives and nominees of
tile Continental population settled among ns; or other persons
capable of teaching those light and genial industries of Southern
Europe for which our soil and climate are so singularly pro-
pitious.
Two-fourths more of the Land Bund will be expended on
the great highways of communication, and on local roads and
bridges, in order to render markets accessible to these new
centres of agricultural industry. Hitherto there has been no
fixed practice by which any proportion of the funds drawn from
the sale of land in a district was spent on local objects. The
rule now stated of investing half the proceeds in.permanent
improvement is one which it is proposed to render compulsory
on the Executive by embodying it in a District Councils Bill,
* Subjoined are the Regulations for the year 1862. The passage of an adult
costs the State about ctfHj of which it pays the balance over the sum
required to be contributed by these regulations. It is estimated that
night thousand persons will he brought out under the vote of the present
year.
“The following sums shall be payable in advance, with respect to persons
nominated In Victoria, who shall be British subjects, free from any mental or
bodily defect, and of good character.
Sex. Under 12. 12 and under 40. 40 and upwards.
Male ...... m <£0
Female .. £'A j£'4


which will place its expenditure in the bands of the settlers
themselves; a sure method to foster that local interest in their
own affairs which is the basis of patriotism.
Checkss on Monopoly.
It has been stated that the selector in an agricultural area
must make a declaration (equivalent to an affidavit)*' that the
land selected is for his own use and benefit, But if any one
shall be found to disregard the penalties of perjury by taking
up land as agent or trustee for another, or in excess of the
quantity allowed by law, there is a remedy at hand. Any
other person who desires to select the allotment in question
may, within a month, make an application for it in the usual
way (already described), as if it were still unseleoted, accom-
panied by a notice to the Land Officer (in a form appended to
the Act) that the law has been evaded. The sheriff of the
district will then, on notice from the Land Officer, summon the
parties before him, and submit the ease to a jury of four, over
which he shall preside, and the decision of a majority of them
shall be final and conclusive, The questions the jury are
empowered to try are
(1.) Whether the defendant did or did not select, either in
his own name or in the name of others, more than six
hundred and forty acres of land within a period of
twelve calendar months.
(3.) Or whether, at the time of snob selection, the defen-
dant was or Was not an infant, or a married woman
not having obtained a decree for judicial separation
binding according to the laws in force in Victoria.
(3.) Or a person not domiciled in Victoria.
(4.) Or a trustee for snob infant or married woman as
afotesaid, or person not so domiciled.
(5.) Or whether he was or was not the first selector in
point of time.
(6.) Or agent for any other person.
If the finding be for the plaintiff, he shall be declared the
selector of the land in dispute ; and the defendant shall forfeit
the purchase-money he has already paid in his attempt to evade
• To make a false statement la the declaration is a misdemeanour under the
Act} and consequently punishable by lino and imprisonment.


the law, unless the Governor shall, in doubtful cases, specially
remit it. And costs, not to exceed £lO, may bo awarded to the
person in whose favour the questions are decided.
These precautions seem sufficient for their object. The actual
settlers in an area will have the earliest opportunity, and be in
the best condition, to detect impostors. And the pastoral
tenants, as a class, will now have an interest, not in evading,
hut in preventing any evasion of the law; for those whose runs
lie in tiro ton millions of acres reserved for agricultural settle-
ment, but outside tho four millions first proclaimed, will neces-
sarily desire to prevent any unfair absorption of the land, which
must be speedily replaced out of their own squattages; and the
entire class hold tho advantages conceded to them by this Act,
on tho implied condition that the compromise between con-
tending interests, which the Act embodies, shall be fairly carried
out for all.
It must bo noted that the restriction of the size of farms to
fldiO acres applies only to land in agricultural areas (that is, to
land of the first quality, of which there is a limited supply), and
that oven in these areas tlie settler may add 610 acres to his
property every year; and after three years the Government are
empowered, but not compelled, to sell the unseleoted land by
auetibri, in such larger quantity ns they may deem fit. They
may also sell by auction, from time to time, the land of any
selector who fails to pay his annual rent.
Concessions to the Existing Farmers.
As the price of land is reduced by the new law below the
standard which Ims hitherto prevailed, two important conces-
sions have been made to existing landowners.
Under the Nicholson Land Sales Act, a hundred and thirty
thousand acres of country laud are held upon lease by persons,
oaoli of whom purchased only a moiety of his farm, and leased
the second moiety at one shilling an store, with a right of pre-
emption (that is, a right to buy it -without competition) at £1
an acre, Those lessees will be permitted, to surrender their
existing lenses, and take out new ones for the term of eight
years, on the samo condition as selectors in an agricultural
(iron. Under these leases the annual rent of half-a-crown an
aero will, as already stated, bo credited as an instalment of the
purchase-money, till tho whole is paid off by the time the lease
expires. But they must apply for this privilege within twelve


months of the passing of the Land Act, or before the 18th
day of June, 1863.
The larger class of farmers, who bought their land at auction,
and often at an exorbitant price, during the last twenty years,
have an 'equivalent advantage granted to them. They will he
permitted to lease an “ allotment,” not exceeding in extent their
purchased land, in the same manner as selectors in an agricul-
tural area, or as the farmers last mentioned. But they cannot
select less than forty acres —no smaller “allotment” of agricul-
tural land being surveyed—or more than three hundred and
twenty acres, that being the largest, quantity capable of being
leased by any class of selectors. This right is not transferable,
idie selector having to niahe the ordinary declaration, that he
does not act as agent or trustee for any other person. And, in
order not to confer a double privilege on the same individual,
no one is authorized to enjoy this advantage who selects in an
agricultural area in the usual way within twelve months, or who
lias leased land under the Nicholson Land Sales Act. To guard
against fraud, the applicant must, in the first instance, submit
his title deeds for the perusal of a solicitor nominated by the
Governor in Council, who, if lie approve of the title, will grant
a certificate that the applicant is seised at law of (or, if it be
mortgaged, that he possesses the equity of redemption over) the
hind in question. Costs in pertain cases, and a moderate fee in all
oases, on a scale fixed by the Governor in Council, must.be paid
for this investigation of .title. But if the applicant holds a
Crown grant, or if he takes the precaution to bring his farm under
the operation of the Real Property Act, the fee will he nominal.
Every settler in an agricultural area, to whichever of the
classes specified he belongs, is bound, within twelve months,
to cultivate one acre in ten of his allotment, enclose it with a
substantial fence, or erect a habitable dwelling; failing which,
lie is liable to a penalty of five shillings an acre* to be recovered
by any person authorized by the Board of Land and "Works.
Personal residence is not rendered compulsory, because it was
fell;, that many mercantile and professional men, to whom
residence, would be impossible, will desire to secure a section
of the best agricultural land for a home in after years, while
it is still available, and that so valuable a class ought not to he
excluded.
A section (one scjn&re mile) of each, area ■will os reserved lor
A. 3


public purposes, in order that churches, schools, savings banks,
mechanics’ institutes, courts, post-offices, public gardens, baths,
markets, and other agencies oi civilization, may in good time
follow tiro settler.
Such are the main conditions of agricultural settlement under
the Land Act of 1863; and, with such conditions, it may be
assumed that rural industry will be prosecuted for the future
under singularly favourable auspices. The fear sometimes
expressed, that this Act was not calculated to facilitate a largo
settlement of the people, will bo seen to have been chimerical.
On the other hand, the more recent alarai lest persons should
be induced, by undue facilities, to undertake a pursuit that will
not repay them, is. I believe, equally ill founded. The soil of
Victoria yields wheat and the principal cereals, in a proportion
to the area cultivated, which is not exceeded in any part of the
universe; and for breadstuffs there is a market in the manu-
facturing countries of Europe, constantly extending and prac-
tically insatiable. These data will enable us to compute the
probable development of agriculture with some confidence.
Experienced farmers have no doubt that when the labour market
is more regularly supplied under the new law, and machinery
more systematically employed (by districts co-operating in the
purchase and use of it, for example), all the corn Australia can
export will find a profitable market in Europe*
And as regards other crops, it must be remembered that wo
are not at the end, but almost at the beginning, of experiments
an the capability of the country. On the' territory between
Hobson’s Hay and the Murray it is certain that nearly all the
products of temperate or tropical regions can bo grown. Yet,
of tbo gold, wool, bides, and corn raised by our industrious
population, a proportion equal to three millions and a half
pounds sterling, or nearly £350 each for every landowner in the
colony, is still sent annually to Europe, or to the neighbouring
colonies for necessaries-—or luxuries which have become neces-
saries to a civilized community—all capable of being grown on
• An experienced merchant, whom I consulted ns to the probable saving
that might; bo effected by a reduction of freight and mercantile charges, says
—“ My inquiries lead me to the conclusion that in doing a regular trade
with England in grain, to an extent that would evoke fair competition, a
return of about bs. (id. is the most that could be relied on ; this is, of course,
calculating the value in England to bo the same as at the date of account
sales quoted in the South Australian Advertiser, Upder very favourable
circumstances ns, Bfh miffhf. bo realized without any advance In English price
that, T think, Is the very outside. H


Description.
. Value, i860.
Value, 186l.
Difference
in favour of
I860.
Arrowroot .. .. ..
£.
2,515
2,186
Biscuits
D,D‘lO
3,770
6,171
Bran
33,0H
434,631
26,509
7,405
Butter
822,088
212,545
Cheese
OO.ian
79.129
17,356
6,762
Chicory
18,438
11,6-6
Meal
17,848
1,916
15,932
Nuts ami Almonds ..
0,580
6,427
227,069
■1,102
Oilman’s Stores
275,540
47,074
Onions
5,704
1,050
•1,084
Potatoes
59,135
20,740
32,395
Preserves
28,163
23,226
4,937
Provisions
242,600
158,067
84,623
Tobacco.. .. -, ..
247,402
189,158
58,244
Cigars
Oa.fiai
48,"05
13,856
Snuff . • • • <• n
359
328
31
Total ..
a?!,547,199
4^1,028,838
40518,963
Description.
Value, 1800.
Value, ififil,
Difference
in favour of
1801.
Difference
in favour of
1800.
Spirits—Brandy
2S3,S85
s&\
250,840
2,389
Cordials
‘1,003
a,741
..
1,322
Gin ..
101,0-12
123,525
1,380
21,583
of Wine
aas
858
Perfumed
9,118
0,534
3,654
"Whisky
'10,010
21,316
25,294
Other Spirits ..
18,003
10,810
1,256
Sugar, Raw ..
67,026
0,054
8,084
47.371
Refined
8,479
506
..
Unfloserlbed ..
000,084
785,343
185,261
4 ,
Wine ,,
231,036
235,431
3,825
Bottled Beer ..
80(1,782
245,283
81,400
Draught Deer..
80-1,7/0
256,015
48,755
Candles ..
292,9-15
36-1,310
71.374
Cider ami Perry
2,707
827
1,880
Oil
101,098
103,55?
5,474
•*
Total
t£'2,330,3"3
our own soil. I hayo examined the latest and still unpublished
Custom-house return of articles of this nature, and I subjoin
extracts which show a sum of £3,463,169 expended in the
year ISBI.
Imports in 1860 and 1861.
Other Imports during 1880 and 1861.


It will be seen that many of these articles ate beinig produced
in rapidly increasing quantities in the colony; and if it be pro-
bable that others could not be profitably grown at existing wages,
on capital borrowed at the average rate of interest in Victoria,
and expected to yield the average return, we are not entitled to
assume that this difficulty is more than temporary, or applies to
household as well as to hired labour. When the feverish desire
to grow rich of a sudden, which belongs to the first stage of
development in a gold country, is replaced by the contented
enjoyment of the labours and pleasures of country life, under a
genial sky, on the husbandman’s own freehold, among corn-
fields and vineyards, where he expects to live and die, the diffi-
culty will disappear. Speaking of farmers like these, a con-
tinental statesman, long familiar with the class of peasant
proprietors, and the complete sense of security which inspires
their lives, has declared that “ such men will obtain from the
same surface ten times, a hundred times, a thousand times more,
than the paid labourers of a great proprietor,” New immi-
grants at least, who have exchanged the discomfort and depen-
dence which belong to the condition of an agricultural labourer
in England, or of an Irish or Scotch tenant-farmer, for the
ownership of soil purchased at less than the ordinary year’s rent
“ at home,” and capable of producing all the familiar crops, and
many others which they knew only as unattainable luxuries, will
take joyful possession of the independence tendered to them;
And if our own population have been rendered somewhat exact;
iug hy past prosperity, men who have carried their skill and
industry over half the globe, and contributed to found a new
State, the centre of wealth and civilization, under conditions
which have scarcely a parallel in human history, will not bo
frightened hy the temporary toil and privations incident ttj
creating a now homo in “ the bush s ” from exchanging a life of
uncertainty-and dependence in great towns for madly occupa-
tion and permanent security. Under our southern sky the pri-
vations are nominal, compared to those cheerfully borne by the
pioneer who plants his homestead in the prairies or backwoods
of America* or among the frozen swamps of Canada and Nova
Scotia.
NEW Industries.
Next to the settlement of the people in agricultural districts
the new law aims to stimulate individual enterprise; and with


tins view leases of land suitable for particular industries are to be
granted hereafter at a moderate or nominal rent. It is provided
that when any person desires to make a vineyard) or oliveyard, or
mulberry or. hop plantation, or to establish, permanently any
nseful plant, or industrial enterprise, or process, which was not
previously generally known and used in Victoria, if he make
application (in a prescribed form) for any Grown lands required
for such purpose, a lease of the lands sought, not exceeding-
thirty acres, may be granted for any term not exceeding thirty
years. The rent is to be such sum as may bo deemed reasonable
by the Governor in Council in each case; and if the conditions of
the iease he complied with (the main condition being- the suc-
cessful establishment of the industry in question), the lessee
will have the right to purchase the fee-simple any time after live
years at one pound an acre. If, however, the conditions be not
complied with, the lease will bo voidable. Those leases way be
granted on any portion of the public estate; and will, in fact, be
granted wherever the situation is peculiarly adapted for the
intended industry. But no occupation of lands of an exceptional
value, or calculated unnecessarily to interrupt other industries,
where land equally fit is to be found elsewhere, will be per-
mitted.* To prevent any abuse of so large a power, the notice
of application, specifying in each ease the particular land sought,
must be published in the Government Gazette for four weeks
before the lease is granted; the conditions must afterwards bo
laid before Parliament; and not more than one hundred such
leases can be issued in one year. The plantation of even a much
smaller number, however, than a hundred new enterprises an-
nually would speedily produce magical results, in the increase of
employment and the diffusion of wholesome luxuries in the com-
munity, as well as in setting the hands of the aged, the maimed,
and the young to work on employment suitable to their years or
condition. Tho class of industrial enterprises contemplated
embraces not only hops and similar aromatic plants, olives, and
vines, but hemp, flax, and tobacco fields, cider 'orchards, brandy
farms, sugar and rice fields, and tea plantations; and the Act
plainly myites individual knowledge and enterprise to point out
other legitimate applications of the principle. Within a week of
* One of Hie earliest RppliauUoiiß was for a lease of thirty acres of Studlcy
Park for a mulberry farm 1 This lease, if granted, would confer the pro-
erapthm of the land at rffao; the actual value being about jtflMOO,


the new law coming into force, several proposals under it were
addressed to the Board of Land and Works, chiefly by foreigners
who did not know that a special form was required by tho Act.
This form, however, can now be obtained at every Laud Office in
tbe colony. I have stated that a portion of the immigration vote
will be expended in bringing out labourers skilled in the industries
of Southern Europe; but it is confidently stated that there are
already amongst us men entitled to demand nearly all the leases
issuable in tho present year. I have heard of Americans familiar
with the culture of cotton (for which tho Murray district has
been pronounced to be well adapted); Ulstermen trained to grow
and dress flax (for which the demand is practically as inex-
haustible as that for cotton or wool); Eronohmon who have
made mulberry plantations and cmidueted serioioole establish-
ments in their own country; Italians skilled in expressing the
oil of the olive, that " mine over ground,” as it bus been called ;
Belgians who have manufactured sugar from beetroot; and Cali-
fornians who have manufactured from sorghum saocaraium both
sugar and syrup, of which many millions of gallons arc consumed
annually in tbe United States; and Chinese reared upon tea
plantations,'* who, I am assured, are either prepared to plant, or
would not be unwilling to co-operate with others in planting,
these industries on our soil. How far those sanguine anticipa-
tions will be realized in practice remains to be seen; but at least
this facility of obtaining suitable land without purchase will
produce an immediate effect in developing our wine trade, which
is destined some day to rival our export of wool in value and
profit. As the State is about to establish reformatories and
shelters for orphans, than perhaps some of the experiments, least
promising in immediate profit, might be properly made in the
first instance; the land and labour costing nothing. Individual
enterprise will do the rest.
* u I have had an interview with Mr. Kong 1 Mong j he is of opinion that tho
tea-plant would grow well in this colony. There are Chinamen hero well able
to superintend plantations. He lately took two intelligent Chinamen to the
Botanic Gardena, who, as persona qualillctl to give uu opinion on such a
point, stated that the plants were growing well, and that tea could bo grown
in this colony with success (good tea could not he made from Dr. Mueller’s
plants, because tho leaves were too old). Mv, Kong Mong would, perhaps,
have some difficulty in procuring skilled labour at a moment’s notice, but he
is certain that there are numerous skilled labourers scattered throughout the
country. He is of opinion that the growing of tea would prone remunerative.
The labour, he says, is not so great as is generally supposed, and little
children can be taught to prepare the leaves.”— Letter quoted on the second
reading of the Land MU.


We have done so little yet to acclimatize Indian corn that we
may, perhaps, regard as “ a useful plant nut generally known,”
that wonderful cereal which is the prime resource of the settler
in the American prairie, furnishing him in succession with a
delicious vegetable, household bread, dainty pudding, and whole-
some spirits; a cereal of which six hundred millions of bushels
are produced annually, and which has founded cities larger and
more populous than have sprung from our gold-fields.
The extent of land capable of being granted for any of these
purposes (thirty acres) has been complained of as too small, but
without reason. Cider, hops, and flax, for example, we have
most of ns seen habitually grown on smaller farms; and a friend
has furnished me with the following particulars in relation to
some of the other enterprises;—
The Mulberry (for silk) and the Olive (for oil). —In the southern
parts of Europe the properties are very small, so small that they gave
occasion for that saying of Tocquevillo—“ Grinding the land into the
impalpable powder of democracy.” Many of the landowners own only
one acre or two acres. In tho Genoese territory the land is rooky and
hilly, but the south aspect is favourable to tho growth of wine and oil;
in general tho farms are only six acres in extent. Lands in these dis-
tricts bring such incredible rents as ;620 or d 324 per acre. For the
Mulberry, twelve acres are considered a good property; of course these
twelve acres would be made up of patches of suitable ground occurring
over a much larger area.
J Beet-root. —In 1828 the produce of sugar from Beet-root in Europe
was 7,000 tons; in 1851 it was 180,000 tons. The produce of sugar
from this plant is increasing greatly in Germany, Belgium, and France.
I cannot learn accurately the size of tho Beet-root farms, but in
a country (France) where 150 acres are called a largo estate, and where
farms of from 10 to 20 acres prevail, it is not likely that they are very
large. France produces annually about 60,000 tons of Beet-root sugar,
or fully one half of tho entire consumption.
Imphee. —One aore of Irapheo will yield from one to two tons
of sugar. Thirty acres would therefore produce sugar worth about
jGI,OOO.
Wines. —The costly Clos Vouyoot is grown on a farm of only SO
acres. The liomant'e Conti is grown on about six acres and a half.
The “ Hermitage,” tho most famous vineyard In the Cite dulihine,
is only 350 acres altogether.
Tea. —The area of a Tea Farm varies greatly. A Tea Farm at
Kosilla, not far from Almornh, the chief town of Kamdon, occupies an
area of 34 acres. Another of the tea plantations in the Himalayas, the
Guddowli plantation, in Paorio, in Eastern Gurheval, is considerably
larger. There are about 5,000 plants per acre.


IV here there are competitors for a lease of this class the
has generously provided that the person, who first
introduces into Victoria, for commercial purposes, “tho plant,
enterprise, or process,” iu respect to which a lease rs sought,
will tie entitled to a preference, provided such introduction took
place within sis mouths of bis application, and is proved to tbe
satislucliim of tins .Board of Laud and Works.
Existing Industries.
Additional facilities have been granted for prosecuting the
industrial enterprises which already exist amongst us, A loose
el any urea nut exceeding six hundred and forty acres may be
grunted fur a period of thirty years for the purpose of mining for
any metal or mineral except gold, and such lease may now be
framed In confer rights, either on or below (or both on and
below) the surface. Louses to mine for coal, lignite, and kaolin
were grouted during the last year under the late law, and Parlia-
ment has recently voted a sum. of £I,OOO, in addition to former
votes, in aid of local enterprise to, "prospect” cool fields known
In exist in Urn Geelong, Portland, and South Gipps Laud dis-
tricts. Our coal country occupies an area of three thousand
square miles,—more than four times that of the great Northum-
berland coni fields. Tbo conditions of mining lenses are regulated
by an order in Council, which secures to the minor fair advan-
tages, and above all that freedom from encroachment indis-
pensable to 'success. The annual rent of mineral lands is fixed
at two shillings an aero, and two per cent, on tbo value of the
mineral or metal at the mouth of the mine, and power is reserved
to this lessen to work more than one mineral or metal on certain
reasonable conditions. Our mineral riches are various and ex-
tensive j hut l lio gold fields by their blase of success have
obscured these minor lights. Wo possess, in addition to ooal
and lignite, tin, antimony, iron-ore, silver, and several valuable
earths and clays, of excellent quality and in great abundance.
When there is more than one applicant for the same land, the
first discoverer of the metal or mineral (as in the case of tho first
introducer of tho plant or process) has a right to a lease of this
class; or, if there lie no discoverer, the first applicant.
Lenses of three acres, for a term not exceeding seven years,
may also ha granted for various useful purposes. The rent, must


not be loss than £5, and is ordinarily £10; kit in Certain cases,
suck as , sites for inns and stores, abattoirs and salt, manufac-
tories, it mounts to £25 ; and for pimts and patent slips, -varies
with the circumstance's of the case. The present scale, wherever
there is any change, is a reduction upon that in force previous to
the passing of the new law. The purposes are ;
Tor obtaining and removing stone or earth.
Tor sites of inns, stores, smithies, bakeries, or similar
buildings in thinly populated districts.
Tor sites, of bathing-houses, bathing-places, bridges, ferries,
toll or punt houses.
Tor sites of tanneries, or factories, or saw or paper mills.
Tor sites of quays and landing-plages, or for sites for-the
depositing of materials.
Tor sites for ship and, boat-building or repairing.
For the working of mineral springs.
Tor the manufacture of salt.
And also for obtaining guano, which is found in several islands
off our coast; in the case of this last lease an area may be
granted of whatever extent is considered necessary. "Valuable
salt lakes exist, in the western district, and are being partially-
worked ; but there is room for great development in this enter-
prise, salt to the value of £60,000 being still imported annually.
The necessity for licensing land for factories and mills arises
chiefly from the -practice of not selling frontages to the larger
rivers.
It must be noted that all these leases are voidableat any time
if the lessee fails to use the laud for the purposes for which it is
granted.
An annual license at a reasonable fee may also be granted in
oases where temporary occupation is deemed sufficient, for any of
these purposes for which leases issue; and also for any of the
following purposes:—
To search for any metal or mineral except gold.
To cut, dig, and take away any live of dead timber, bark,
gravel, stone, limestone, salt, guano, shell, seaweed, sand,
loam, brick, or other earth.
To occupy the site of fishermen's residences and drying
grounds.
To occupy the sites of fellmongering establishments, slaugh-
terhouses, brick or lime kilns.


To cut and construct, or to deepen, widen, clean, repair, or
otherwise improve any race, drain, dam, or reservoir.
To erect pumps; or
,To collect ballast.
The timber licenses are chiefly for the purpose of cutting posts,
rails, and firewood, and gathering bark; the difficulty of carriage
rendering our noble forest trees almost unavailable. But as
some of the best soil of tbe colony is occupied with timber of
groat commercial value, the time cannot he distant when a
timber trade will be founded, beginning on the Plenty and
Landenong Ranges, in Bullarook Eorest, or on the shores of
Cape Otway.
Such, is the system of licensing our public lands for individual
enterprises; and it would be difficult to name any country which
affords greater facilities and incentives to industry than this
system furnishes.
Commons for Towns, Gold Fields, and Farmers.
Before the passing of tlie Nicholson Land Sales Act there was
no power to grant land for tbe purpose of commons, and the
population of the gold-fields had to rely exclusively upon the
forbearance of the neighbouring squatters for the privilege of
depasturing their milch cows and working bullocks or horses.
The privilege was often frankly conceded; sometimes peremp-
torily refused, according to the temper of the individual squatter.
A few of the towns were permitted by the Government to use
their unsold suburban lands for pasturage; but the farmers were
entirely without similar accommodation, and were subject, in
many cases, to the most vexatious and oppressive system of
impounding. The Land Sales Act made liberal provision of
commonage for all these classes ; but ns it was only carried after
a protracted contest between the two Houses of Parliament and
numerous and hasty alterations, its provisions were often con-
fused and contradictory, and in no instance more so than in the
sections relating to commons. No power was taken to protect
them from intrusion, by impounding strange cattle. In the case
of the,gold-fields commons there was no provision for levying
fees proportionate to the quantity of stock depastured; an
essential check against the monopoly of them by a few indi-
viduals. Land inside their own boundaries could not be granted


as commons to towns. And the scanty provisions for local
•management entirely broke down in practice, In relation to
farmers’ commons there was a more serious difficulty. It was
provided that commonage not exceeding a certain area, at a
certain distance, might he granted to such of the farmers of a
district as cultivated at least one-fourth of their purchased land.
-By this provision, the owner of forty acres, who cultivated ten,
was entitled to commonage, hut the owner of 610 acres, who
cultivated 150, was not entitled. The difficulties of the case
might well have puzzled the best judgment what to do. What
i;he late Government determined to do was to ignore the pro-
visions of the Act and grant commons without requiring any
substantial fulfilment of either the preliminary or posterior con-
ditions. Large commons were accordingly granted; but they
necessarily remained without any effectual management or
control, and in many cases unoccupied.
The now law has corrected all these errors and deficiencies.
AH the existing commons are preserved, with the right to
increase, diminish, alter, or abolish them according to public
necessity. The right of granting new commons is preserved.
It is provided that “ When any Crown land remains unsold in
or within five miles of any municipal district, or upon or within
five miles of any gold-field, or in or within five miles of any town,
not contained in any municipal district, or within any agricultural
area of which at least one-fourth part has been selected, the
Governor in Council may proclaim such land to he a municipal
common or a gold-fields common or a town common or a farmers’
common respectively as the case may be,”
The persons entitled to commonage are the householders of
any mnnicipal district, all holders of miners’ rights or business
licenses, all householders of any town, and all selectors in an
agricultural area, or their heirs or assigns who are resident on
the land selected, and the landowners resident within five miles
of a farmers’ common.
The commons, in eaoh case, are to bo governed by three
managers, who shall have the power of making rules to deter-
mine the number of cattle which each person may depasture, and
the fees to be paid; and of appointing and paying herdsmen;
and these managers shall enjoy the authority of Crown Lands
Commissioners, enabling them to impound intruding cattle. The
fees, after paying necessary expenses, are to be spent on local


objects for the benefit of the district; wider the control of the
Municipality, Mining Board, or other , duly constituted local
authority; the latter phrase being meant to provide for District
Councils taking similar control whenever they shall be esta-
blished by law. The managers, who must not receive any
remuneration for their services, are to bo elected by the Muni-
cipal Council or Mining Board, as the case may be, in respect
to town and gold-fields commons; and in respect to farmers’
commons (until a District Councils Act is in operation), they
are to be appointed and removed by the Board of Land and
Works, who have also the power to appoint and remove the
managers of town commons in oases whore there is no munici-
pality. And as the boundaries of, existing town and gold-fields
commons often touch, producing trouble .and confusion among
the commoners, power is given to amalgamate them by procla-
mation.
The Board will use this power only to make sure that the
wishes of the commoners are fairly carried out. Whore a public
meeting, summoned by advertisement, recommends managers
with a tolerable unanimity, they will ho appointed. They will
be required, however, as they have control of tho fees, to give
a guarantee of a moderate amount for the due disposal of them
according to law. It is estimated that a sura of £20,000 will he
available for local purposes from commonage fees generally; the
receipts and disbursements of which must bo duly audited and
published in the QazaUe.
With a view to the comfort and health of tho gold-fields there
is a provision authorising the issue of dairymen’s licenses to
those persons who supply them with milk and butler; and
another provision with a kindred object, authorizing tho issue
of licenses to butchers to depasture cattle intended for slaughter
on town or gold-fields commons.
On farmers’ commons authority is now for the first time
given to permit tho depasturing of sheep; and tho managers may
set aside, if they think proper, a special portion of tho commons
for this purpose, Intrusion is strictly prohibited. Any person
infringing the rules or regulations of a common, or unnecessarily
disturbing tho cattle, is liable to a penalty not exceeding £S
for the first offence, and not exceeding £2O for subsequent
offences.
Some of the districts have already proceeded, to elect their


managers, or to move the Board of Laud and Works in the
matter, and the advantage of commons will be fairly tried for the
first time.
Pastoral Licenses-
I now pome to speak of the country occupied for pastoral
purposes by the Crown tenants, ordinarily called squatters;
Last year it amounted to thirty-five millions and a half of acres.
The present law, as we have seen, selects ten and a half of those
thirty-five millions and a half, as laud to be reserved for agricultural
settlement. And these ten millions and a half are so pre-eminently
the best for all purposes, that they have fed more stock and paid
more assessment to the public treasury than the remaining twenty-
live millions.* The present distribution of the entire colony will
he best understood from the table on page 2d.
Out of the ten jnillions of acres of agricultural land more than
four millions will be proclaimed open for selection immediately,
leaving thirty-one millions and a half in pastoral occupation for
the present year; to be gradually reduced by further surveys
and proclamations (out of the balance of the ten millions) as
public necessity requires them. But the pastoral land is not
itself withdrawn from the control of the State for the purpose
of sale and settlement or of mining, or of any of the licenses
for industrial enterprises already specified. These licenses, oh
the contrary, will issue exclusively upon pastoral land; pro-
specting upon it for mining purposes is more effectually secured
by law than ever it was before; and if there he any public
necessity to justify the sale of any portion .of it, the Government
are debarred from selling it by no impediment whatever. Tip
to the 18th of September, 1860, land for agricultural settlement,
or for any other purpose, could only be sold by public auction ;
and any portion of these twenty-five millions of acres can still be
sold by auction precisely as all land was formerly sold. More-
over, sales of it must he made at least once a quarter during the
currency of the new Act ; and whatever land passes under the
auctioneer’s hammer and remains unsold can be taken up by the
first applicant. On this point, therefore, there will, I trust, be
ho further possibility of misapprehension.
Horses. Cattle. Sheep.
* Stock depastured on the ten millions .. 14,053 288,696 a,015,498
Stock depastured on the remainder of the
public territory .. .. .. .. 9,587 188,fi4fi 2,026,127


Total Area.
Mountain
Ranges.
Malice
and other
Scrubs.
Lakes,
Morasses.
"Unavailable at
present.
Area of
Colony made
available
npto present
time.
Acres.
Acres .
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Acres.
Land sold previously to the passing
of the ‘ * Land Act, 1862
4,728,000
....
....
4,728,000
Land leased under the Nicholson
“ Land Sales Act,” with right of
130,000
1,600,000
....
....
130,000
1,600,000
Lands under Squatting License in
1862, -and stocied, including the
ten millions and a half of acres re-
served for agricultural settlement .
35,579,760
*750,000
*1,000,000
....
*1,750,000
33,829,760
Lands under Squatting License in
7.205,400
1,130,000
4,230,000
402,000
5,360,000
5,177,000
1,846,400
Unoccupied Waste Lands. . . *
6,400,000
4,345,000
430,000
Total Area of Colony. ...
55,514,160
6,225,000
1 5,660,000
402,000
12,287,000
43,357,160
'
...
vaUahle Darts of stocked runs.
Surveyor- General.
C. W. LIGAR.
• These quantities are made up of the unavailable parts of stocked runs.
2nd July, 1562.


But the Legislature having provided so amply for agricultural
settlement, have disposed of tho public grasses (not the land)
of the remainder of the territory in the manner most profitable
to the State and to individual industry. They have provided
that the existing “Runs” shall continue to be let for pastoral
purposes on a yearly license; which license, however, shall issue
uninterruptedly (unless Parliament otherwise provides) for eight
years from the Ist of January, 1863.* The pastoral tenants
have hitherto paid to the public treasury a quarter of a million
a year in rent for their runs and assessment on their stock, the
assessment being paid on the number of stock actually fed, as
ascertained by sworn returns. And they have contributed to
tho national wealth a sum of nearly three millions a year; two
millions being the value of wool exported, and nearly one mil-
lion the value of-beef and mutton brought to market or killed
for domestic use.f Parliament was of opinion that their con-
tributions to the national wealth and their contributions to the
revenue may both be materially increased; and the new law
is framed to produce this result. The assessment on Hie stock
actually fed is abolished, and each run will now he assessed on
the number of stock it is capable of carrying. The necessary
consequence will he, that the pastoral country will, as speedily
as practicable, be stocked to its full grazing capability. Some of
the runs are inordinately large, and this new arrangement will
tend to their subdivision. Ten runs, on an average, have been
annually subdivided of late years, hut an increased assessment
will quicken the operation in respect of all runs carrying more
than twenty thousand sheep. The present distribution of the
pastoral holdings will be seen from the subjoined table, which it
must be remembered, however, includes the runs within the ten
millions of acres.
• The exact tenure to be given to the pastoral tenants was long a party
questlonj but the actual difference of . opinion was trifling. The leader
of the Opposition proposed to give them live years from January, 1862; one
of his former colleagues in office proposed seven years 5 the Act gives nine
years.
t Value of mutton and beef brought to market in all parts of
Victoria in ifiGl, about.. .. ,^824,400
..... Cattle to the value of 31,339
Killed for private use Vgi lee p to the valneof .. .. *. .• 78,008


No.
of Kuns.
Number of Sheep assessed In 186.1.
71
Under 500 sheep
170
Over 500 and less than 2,000 sheen.
227
„ 2,000
„ 5,000 „
207
„ 5,000
„ 10,000 „
Ml
i, 10,000
,, 15,000 „
70
„ 15,000
„ 20,001) „
h-i
» 20,000
„ 25,000 „
Ifl
„ 25,000
„ 30,000 „
12
„ 30,001)
„ 4U,QOO „
4
„ 40,000
„ 50,000 „
1
„ 50,000
1,029
When the runs are stocked with cattle, the
equivalent number of sheen 1ms been
stated.
All the runs will, in the course of the present year, be valued
anew by the Board of Laud and Works; and each one bo sub-
jected to a rent estimated at the rate of Bd. for every sheep, and
2s. for every head of cattle it is capable of carrying. But in no
case must a run he estimated as being capable of carrying a less
quantity of stock than -was depastured on it in the year 1861,
unless a portion of it has been since sold, or leased, or proclaimed
a common, or otherwise withdrawn from the licensee. The inode
of valuation contemplated by the Act is, that the rhna in each
pastoral district shall be divided into four classes; ranging from
fourth up to first, in proportion to tho number of sheep to the
hundred acres, a run is capable of feeding, When the valuation
of a district is completed, the Board will insert in the Govern-
ment Gazette a schedule of the rents determined upon, which
will bo binding on the pastoral tenant in each case, unless ho
gives notice within two months of his intention to appeal. If
he appeals, ho timst lodge £BO towards tho satisfaction of costs
in case ho fails to obtain a reduction of rent beyond one-tenth of
the proposed amount. Minute directions are furnished for tho
appointment of three sworn arbitrators (one Warned by tho
squatter, one by the Board, and one by the nearest County
Court Judge), who are empowered to hear and determine tho
case. The question to be tried will, in almost every instance, bo
simply whether the ran has heed placed id the proper class; the
proper class being a fact, ,in most oases, as exactly known in a
squatting district as the relative value of a lead is known on a
gold-field. Thus the squatter is protected against an oxor-


hitant rent, by the power of appeal. On the other hand, the
State is protected against the possibility of the Board of Land
and Works fixing too low a rent, by the power being reserved to
increase it at any time within twelve months;—at the instance of
Parliament or otherwise.
As a set-off for the increased assessment contemplated by the
Act, the squatter receives the tenure already specified, and
another concession long sought. When he proves to the satis-
faction of the Board of Land and Works that the grazing capa-
bility of his run would be increased by making a substantial fence
or permanent reservoir for water, he will be authorised to make
it; and if the land on which it is situated shall be sold, proclaimed
a reserve or common, or be leased under the Act, he will be
entitled to receive a portion of the fair cost of making snob
fence or reservoir, deducting one-tenth of the cost for every year
he lias enjoyed it before it is taken away. In ten years the
improvement will become the property of the State, and, in
the case of the reservoirs, will tend essentially to prepare the
country for population. But no licensee of a fun situated in the
ten millions of acres will he entitled to the benefit of this
provision.
The first gainers by the arrangement will be the industrious
classes. It has been estimated that the sum spent on labour
under it will amount to £IOO,OOO a year for several years to come.
Nearly one-half of the runs are insufficiently watered, and, con-
sequently, insufficiently stocked, during the summer months ; and
immediate efforts will certainly he made to supply this deficiency.
It is probable that dams, wells, or reservoirs will he constructed
on four hundred runs in all, at an average expenditure of £l5O
each. Though the interior is so ill supplied with permanent
water at present, the rain-fall is greater than in many European
countries, and the eye of the intelligent traveller is constantly
attracted by natural basins and water-courses, where, by a
moderate expenditure, lakes and reservoirs might he made.
Eenoing is only of permanent or public value because it will
immensely increase the grazing capability of the public lands.
The quantity of stock will be doubled; and in the end probably
quadrupled, by exteribr fencing and the partial division of runs
into paddocks. An average of twenty miles of fencing erected
on one-half the runs outside the ten millions, at an average


cost of £SO a mile, would make an important addition to the
labour fund for the next four or Jive years.
Another source of employment springing from this division of
the. Act is “ringing” trees—that is, killing trees by stripping
the bark in a narrow ring round tho trunk. Though it is not
one of the “improvements” recognised by, the Act, the new
tenure will probably encourage squatters to undertake it, on runs
(of which there are many) smothered with timber, which starves
the grasses by obstructing the, sun’s light and consuming the
nutritive property of the soil. It is alleged that several hundred
persons will find profitable employment on this work; and open
the way for further employment—for with better grasses and
more sheep necessarily come more shepherds in tho field, more
draymen on the road, and more agricultural labourers to supply
their wants.
When it is remembered that the rent derived from, the public
lands, will bo spent on immigration and in permanent public
improvements, it will bo seen, I think, that this division of the
new law, like those previously described, aims to develop the
resources and encourage the industry of the country.
NEW Runs.
In the table allowing the present disposal of the Colony, cited
above, thirteen millions and a half of acres are described ns
nnstoeked or unoccupied waste lands. The seven millions of
nnstoeked country were almost all let on license in 18(30 and
1801; the,remainder has never been let; but under the new law
may be exposed to auction in runs capable of currying all the
yeor round not more than 5,000 sheep.or 1,250 head of cattle.
The mode provided for disposing of those new runs is, that the
Board shall value them and fix the rent accordingly, mid; then
submit them to public auction; tho person who bids the highest
premim, in addition to the rent, in each case being entitled to
receive the license., To encourage hardy adventurers to under-
take this ■unoccupied country, tho license may continue for any
“ period not exceeding fourteen years,” and tho tenant is protected
against losing his run by sale, not more than one-fourth of it
being liable to bo sold during the currency of (lie license. He
is also scoured tho right of .purchasing 320 acres, containing his


improvements at the rate of £1 an acre ; or if this privilege he
not conceded to him (in case of the land proving auriferous, for
example) he shall be entitled to compensation for his buildings,
yards, and similar improvements, not, however, in any ease to
exceed £5OO.
It is provided also that the holder of a license for any portion
of the seven millions of acres of unstooked country, may have
the advantage of these liberal terms by surrendering his present
license within twelve months and accepting a new one, at a rent
fixed by the Board, for so much of his ran as will carry 5,000
sheep, or their equivalent in cattle, all the year round. Many of
the licensees of S CO and ’6l will avail themselves of this privilege,
and the result will ho to throw open to competition a considerable
portion of land which they must relinquish, in order to reduce
their present large runs to the extent contemplated by the
Act.
This unoccupied country opens up so wide a field for pastoral
enterprise by now men of small capital, that it becomes a
question of the highest importance to ascertain the character
and value of that portion of the territory. The fact of its being
unstocked suggests the probability that it was not worth occupy-
ing; but it is certain that those who have obtained licenses set
a considerable value upon them, and that many others are anxious
to participate in the advantage. The land lies chiefly in Gipps
Laud and the Wimmeta district, but partially elsewhere. An
official report in relation to the bulk of it lying in these districts
estimates the ultimate value highly.
"That portion of the waste land which lies in the east is at present
rendered unavailable and useless by the density of the timber and
scrub, but is most abundantly supplied with water, and favoured by a
climate eminently adapted to the growth of grasses. It requires the
destruction of the scrub and much of the timber to render it capable of
feeding stock. The soil is the game as in many other parts of the
country, which, from having the scrub and trees removed by natural or
artificial means, is now producing an abundance of pasture.
" The north-western portion is mostly covered by a dense scrub, lias
no permanent wafer on its surface, and requires for its development
the sinking of wells, the construction of dams and tanks, and the
destruction of the scrub. By these means much of it may bo rendered
a very healthy district for sheep.”
As regards Gipps Laud I may also quote an extract from a


report furnished by a gentleman long resident there, and expe-
rienced on the subject:—
“The waste lands in this district comprise a large extent of country
covered with heathy scrub, with a little grass scattered among the
heath. Some portions of this country arc occupied by wild cattle, the
progeny of stock which, from tho difficulty of collecting and attending
to them, became wild. Tho habits of aattlo render them unsuited for
tho improvement of such country, inasmuch ns they wonder widely
over tho land, and do not by close feeding destroy tho scrub as sheep
do. X contemplate, therefore, the eventual occupation of such country
by sheep, but even this could not bo accomplished without the
destruction of the scrub by burning, and afterwards sowing artificial
grasses. There must, therefore, necessarily bo n period at the com-
raencoment of such an undertaking when the occupation would ho
altogether unprofitable. No one, therefore, would enter upon it unless
there were time allowed for tho occupant to reap a return for his
outlay. But I know persons who are diaposod, under favourable
conditions, to venture upon such undertakings.
“As an illustration of tho improvement that may bo effected in tho
way I have described, I may adduce tho results of Mr. Mcllafflo'a
occupation of Philip Island, which was formerly covered with dense
scrub, and in that state valueless, but now affords growing for thirty
thousand shoop, and according to some authorities would soil for more
than tile average price of Crown lands. Largo portions of similar
country are also included in tho boundaries of several runs in Gippa
Land, and t apprehend when a settlor has to pay rant for land which
lie cannot now obtain any return from, ho will ho glad to avail
Himself of tho power provided in tho Laud Bill of subdividing his
run and giving up the'occupation of such portions, which might then
bo lot upon lease in tho same way as is provided for land hitherto
unoccupied.”
It is said Alpacas, and tho same tribe generally, would thrive
on some of tho poorest and wildest of this country. And I
believe at least one projector will try a Hook of the ordinary goats
bred in, the colony; trusting to bo well paid by the bides, and
the fat obtained by boiling down.
Several hundred runs selected from this country will bo sub-
mitted to auction before tho close of tho present year; on each
of which, I believe, au industrious man may find tho beginning of
sure prosperity.
In addition to the powers which I have already described, the
Act contains provisions on various minor subjects. Tho right of
granting land for public purposes is preserved and extended j the


Governor is authorized to withdraw any land from sale, and to
prohibit the lolling of timber in particular places; the privilege
of travollors, holders of minora’ rights, and prospectors for gold,
l;o depasture their cattle on Crown lands, is saved; the licenses
for runs are declared to bo forfeited by non-payment of rent; tho
power to enforce forfeitures and penalties incurred under the
Nicholson. Land Sales Act is preserved 5 and it is provided that
no occupier of land for pastoral purposes shall be entitled to
any compensation by reason of the Land Act being' hereafter
repealed or altered. And finally, the Act itself is to continue in
foroo only to tho 81st of December, 1870, except for the pur-
pose of fulfilling engagements or proseouting civil or criminal
proceedings commenced under it.
With respect to carrying this law into effect, it only remains
to be said that tho hundred and fifty agricultural areas, com-
prising four millions of acres, will bo thrown open for selection
in successive batches, during August and September next.
Their exact position may bo seen on the maps of which I have
already spoken; but proclamations containing minute informa-
tion in relation to each area, will begin to issue before the close
of the present month of July. Tho intending settler ought to
soo tho land for himself before selecting; and if he bo a recent
immigrant ho ought, perhaps, in most oases, to select only after
ho has obtained some experience by working for a time on a
farm. Tho proper district in which to make his selection will
depend mainly upon the nature of tho industry he has in view.
If be proposes to himself to cultivate grain crops, he will seek
tho open basaltic plains, free of stones; and practical experience
affirms that land wooded with “ligktwood,” or “blaokwood,”
and “rod gum,” indicates suitable soil. If green crops for
dairy cattle and swine, ho will find what bo seeks in the Wannon
country, and in tho elevated and moist district extending some
miles on each side of tho main dividing range, in the alluvial soil
of the Upper Yarra, and tho limestone districts of Gipps Land.
Tor maize, the low densely wooded jungles in the eastern portion
of Gipps Land (where the cabbage palm begins to appear) bavo
been pronounced eminently suitable; and for the dwarf species,
called Cobbett’s corn, Villiers, Mornington, Normanby, and the
alluvial lands of tho Upper Murray. Wine-making ought to be
tried wherever the grape will ripen; the subtle conjunction of


soil and climate on which the special qualities of good wine
depend being capable of being ascertained only by experiment;
the predominating rooks and soils of Yictoria, however, corre-
spond with those which in other parts of the globe have produced
the most renowned vineyards. And wherever black or chocolate
soil, resting on a strong subsoil, such as prevails round Kilmore,
Kyneton, Ballaarat, or Tower Hill, can still bo discovered, what-
ever class of agricultural industry the selector meditates, lie may
safely settle upon it; and in several of the areas (some of them
lying in a position where the markets of Melbourne or Ballaarat
are tolerably accessible) such soil may bo found.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LANDS,
Jufy m, 1802.


APPENDIX.
Soils and Crops.
Having- consulted several skilful and experienced agricul-
turists with a view to obtain more accurate information than I
possessed in relation to soils and crops in Victoria, I subjoin a
few of the Queries and Answers, which I doubt not will prove
useful to intending settlers. Where the same question is
answered by several persons, the answers are distinguished by
numbers.
I. What description of soils in Victoria have you found to be
the beat adapted for the cultivation of cereal crops, and in what
districts of the colony are such soils most frequently met with?
jlnswers. —(l.) Black vegetable mould and alluvial soils. In
Gipps Land, Western Port, the slope of the coast ranges, ex-
tending from Winohelsea, by Colae, towards Warrnambool; the
Warrnambool district generally; and the Wannon. I may also
add volcanic soils, where free of stones, such as in the neighbour-
hood of Mount, House.
(3.) Near Melbourne soils of this nature occur in the follow-
ing portions of the agricultural areas, viz.: —Balnarring, near
Western Port; the highest slopes of the Corhanwarrabool
Ranges; and the ranges near the sources of Steele’s Creek;
The extent of this soil at Balnarring is not great, and the land is
heavily timbered, but the great facility for transporting produce
therefrom to Melbourne by shipment at Western Port or the
Dromana Jetty, would more than counterbalance the cost of
clearing the land, the more especially as much of the timber so
cleared would bo saleable.
11. If au intended settler proposed to himself, in connection
with agriculture, to keep cattle and sheep upon the natural
grasses, in what district would you advise his settlement ?
If he desired to direct his attention to the cultivation of


artificial grasses ant! green crops for cuttle, in connection with
agriculture, in what district P
Answers. —(l.) Anywhere south of the Grampians, if the farms
were of sufficient area. Mixed husbandry of this kind is, in my
opinion, the only system suitable to this or any other thinly
peopled country, where, from the great distance from market, a
large portion of the produce, too bulky .to be transported, must
be consumed by stock on the farm and put into the more
exportable shape of wool and fat stock.
In answer to the second port of the question. Artificial
grasses are most easily propagated near the sea-board, where the
climate is moist, and could be raised in most of the districts
referred to in answer to question 1.
(3.) The green crops produce well in alluvial and volcanic
soils'; artificial grasses luxuriating especially in the moistev soils,
although of an inferior quality.
(3.) With reference to the first portion of the query, the
Wauuon district would bo well suited for combined agricultural
and pastoral pursuits. In the Ararat and Pleasant Creek dis-
tricts,- wherein numerous small isolated patches of good land
occur in the midst of a wide extent of country available for pas-
toral purposes only, I think the combined pursuits in question
might bo advantageously carried on.
With reference to the second portion of the query, I may
mention the richer lands in the parishes of Bungnreo, Doan,
Glenlyon, Eedesdale, Newham, Buynton, North Springfield, &c,;
also the volcanic soils near Western Port, and the basaltic and
calcareous soils in tlm Belfast and Gipps Land districts.
111. If tire intending settler wishes to grow groin and root crops
in connection with a dairy, and with the feeding of pork thereon,
where would you adviso him to, settle f And please to state if
bacon from swine fed on roots and grain on a largo scale promisee
to pay.
Answers. (1.) Gipps Land, Western Port, or the Warrnambool
district. I have no doubt if conducted on a large scale, under
skilful management, it would bo very remunerative.
(3.) The question of market must enter largely into the con-
sideration of the first portion of this query. The feeding of
swine in connection with a dairy establishment, conducted by a


person with a family able to assist in the management thereof,
and suitably situated as to market, would be likely to pay.
(S.) Great advantage is derived in reaving swine iu Australia,
if the farm be contiguous to a swamp, wherein the swine can
obtain much food. In New South Wales I have seen at a
station many hundreds of pigs kept in fair condition by being
merely allowed to ran in the swamps and brushes contiguous to
the station, so that when tlie corn was harvested, a very few
weeks’ confinement in styes, with a supply of farinaceous food and
roots, sufficed to render them thoroughly fat. When running
loose in the swamps they were easily kept iu command by throw-
ing down at nightfall, near the homestead, a few beet-roots or
pumpkins, for which the pigs would hasten to scramble on the
sound of a.horn by the swine-herd.
XV. Whether the-cultivation of maize may be profitably carried
out on a largo scale, and if so, in what districts.
Answers.— (l.) It may be profitably cultivated on warm rich
soils (especially) the volcanic, as green food for dairy stock, and
for tho production of bacon with the corn,
(3.) On the rich alluvial soils on the banks of rivers ontheeasteru
coast of Australia, crops of maize are annually produced, which,
as regards quantity and, quality, are not surpassed in any part of
America; consequently, maize is the staple crop of the small
farmers located near these rivers. In Victoria there is very
little soil similar to that found on the banks of these rivers, as
the latter soil contains an unusually large proportion of those
elements of fertility derived from vegetable decomposition, and
is maintained in a state of exuberant richness, notwithstanding
continual cropping with maize, in consequence of the fertilizing
effects of periodical floods. The quick-growing dwarf variety of
maize could bo advantageously cultivated, in rich deep soils, in
Morniugton, Villiers, and the Tipper Murray district.
V. What is the relative yield of beet-root in this country com-
pared with England and France ?
Answers.—{ l.) lam not aware, but have no doubt that, sub-
ject to equal management, we can produce any vegetable suited
to a temperate climate, in as great luxuriance and abundance, as
any country in the world.
(3,) Beet-root has not been grown, to any great extent in this


colony ; but, as far as tbo experience of the growth of this crop
mid mangold wurzel has been observed, the produce is at least
equal to that of the United Kingdom.
(3.) In New South Wales, the yield of mangold wurzel on
alluvial soils is, in my opinion, greater than in Europe.
VI. What extent of a farm would yon recommend to an intend-
ing settler for the various kinds of cultivation ?
Ameer, —The extent of a farm must be measured by the
capital possessed by the intending settlor. If without a work-
ing family, four pounds per acre will be sufficient; if with a
working family, from two to three pounds per aero, according to
the number and strength of the members.
VII. In some portions of Victoria there are some very rich
marsh lands, whoso levels are such as to admit of the drainage
of such lauds. Do yon think that, near centres of population,
such lands could bo advantageously made available for cultiva-
tion by the adoption of an economical system of drainage ?
Answers. —(1.) Decidedly, if conducted economically.
(3.) Some reedy swamps were successfully reclaimed some
years ago on the Hunter River, in New South Wales.
(3.) Whenever land can be drained it will repay the outlay.
Many such marches as those referred to offer, when drained,
great facilities for covering them with artificial grasses, with a
very small amount of labour.
COX AND WYMAN, PRINTERS, GREAT QUEEN STREET, RONDOS.
